==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Time Sensitive Networking: Monitoring and
Management
Paulius Preibys (s181324)
Supervisors:
Henrik
Wessing,
Michael
Stübert Berger, Voica Gavriluț
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
DTU Fotonik
Department of Photonics Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
DTU Fotonik
Ørsteds Plads, bygning 343
2800 Kgs Lyngby
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Today’s application field of time sensitive communication is wide and ever growing.
Ranging from next generation industrial automation envisioned in Industry 4.0, to
advances in automotive industry and mobile communication.
A common denomi-
nator in all of the application areas is the need to achieve higher optimisation and
eﬀiciency levels of the underlying infrastructure, thus reducing associated costs of
implementation and operation, and empowering further gains within the respective
field.
Deterministic communication networks often rely on static, predetermined con-
figuration, based on application requirements known a priori.
In some cases, e.g.
large systems with variable traﬀic conditions and requirements, static and offline con-
figuration is ineﬀicient, limiting and costly. The introduction of standardised time
sensitive communication, based on the ubiquitous Ethernet (IEEE TSN), facilitates
researchers and the industry to envision, design and study systems enabling dynamic
run-time (online) configuration mechanisms for time sensitive networks.
This paper focuses on providing the required input (network operational data) for
IEEE TSN (re)configuration and verifying the health and status of the network and
its services. A monitoring framework, adhering to standardised TSN configuration
models is proposed. Furthermore, a functional monitoring system, using YANG data
models and NETCONF configuration protocol for communication between central
and remote nodes, gathering key time sensitive traﬀic characteristics, is introduced
and its design covered in detail.
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors, Henrik, Michael and Voica for supervision and
ideas discussed throughout the project.
I’d also like to say thanks to my colleagues at Comcores, especially Kim, Alek-
sander, and, again, Voica, for showing ways out of possible dead ends and discussing
topics relevant to the work done.
Finally, thanks to my family and my friends, who have kept my spirits up even
through the strange times during which this thesis was written.
==PAGE:5==
Terms & Acronyms
Terms
Terms flow and stream are used interchangeably and describe a time sensitive data
flow (unless specified otherwise), which is defined by a set of requirements to the
network.
Term client traﬀic is used to describe the useful traﬀic traversing the network.
An opposite to client traﬀic is OAM traﬀic, which is only used for internal network
operation, administration and maintenance purposes. An example of client traﬀic
could be a TSN flow between a talker (e.g. a sensor) and a listener (e.g. a controller).
An example of OAM traﬀic could be active probe frames used to measure link delay.
Term real-time systems, refers to the type of digital systems, in which correct
system behaviour is achieved if computation results are correct and delivered at a
particular time instance (deadline). Such systems can be further classified to hard
and soft.
In hard real-time systems, if the deadline is missed, the computational
result has no further use, and severe consequences can be expected. In soft real-time
systems, the result remains relevant even after the deadline has passed [1]. Hard real-
time systems are also referred to as safety-critical real-time systems, signifying
the impact errors can cause. As an example, a railroad crossing can be analysed - if
a red light is not lit up a reasonable amount of time before the train crosses, severe
consequences are almost guaranteed [1].
Terms TSN talker and TSN listener refer to a source of TSN stream and a
destination of a TSN stream, respectively.
Terms NETCONF client and NETCONF server refer to a NETCONF en-
abled network device and a NETCONF remote management entity, respectively.
Acronyms
OAM
Operation, Administration & Maintenance
PDU
Protocol Data Unit
TSN
Time Sensitive Networking
MEG
Maintenance Entity Group
MEP
MEG End Point
==PAGE:6==
Acronyms
iv
BE
Best Effort
TSN
Time Sensitive Networking
IEEE
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
TT
Time-Triggered
AVB
Audio Video Bridging
CBS
Credit Based Shaper
TAS
Time Aware Shaper
GCL
Gate Control List
PTP
Precision Time Protocol
gPTP
Generalised Precision Time Protocol
BMCA
Best Master Clock Algorithm
GM
Grand Master (in context of PTP)
FDV
Frame Delay Variation
TAI
Temps Atomique International (International Atomic Time)
SRP
Stream Reservation Protocol
MVRP
Multiple VLAN Registration Protocol
MSRP
Multiple Stream Registration Protocol
MRP
Multiple Reservation Protocol
MMRP
Multiple MAC Reservation Protocol
UNI
User Network Interface
CNC
Central Network Configuration
CUC
Central User Configuration
RPC
Remote Procedure Call
HSR
High-availability Seamless Redundancy
PRP
Parallel Redundancy Protocol
LLDP
Link Layer Discovery Protocol
NIC
Network Interface Card
PTP
Precision Time Protocol
BPF
Berkeley Packet Filter
API
Application Programming Interface
NAPI
New API
==PAGE:7==
Acronyms
v
FCS
Frame Check Sequence
FPV
Frame Period Variation
PPS
Packet Per Second
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Summary
i
Acknowledgements
ii
Terms & Acronyms
iii
Terms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acronyms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Contents
vi
List of Figures
viii
List of Tables
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Goals & Contribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Relevant Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Technology Overview
5
2.1
Time Sensitive Networking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Network and Traﬀic Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Time Synchronisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Time Sensitive Networking Traﬀic
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5
Frame Replication and Elimination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Time Sensitive Network Management
20
3.1
Time Sensitive Network Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Network Management Protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4
Time Sensitive Network Monitoring
30
4.1
Time Sensitive Network Monitoring Objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2
Monitored Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.3
Monitoring Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.4
Time Sensitive Network Monitoring Entities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
==PAGE:9==
Contents
vii
5
Time Sensitive Network Monitoring Framework
40
5.1
Methods for Monitored Metric Calculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.2
YANG Data Model for TSN Monitoring Information . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.3
Monitor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.4
Collector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6
Testing & Verification
55
6.1
YANG Model Testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.2
Test Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.3
Monitoring Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
7
Time Sensitive Network Monitoring Use-cases
66
7.1
Triggering Reconfiguration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
7.2
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
7.3
Providing Baseline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
7.4
Self-configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
8
Conclusion
69
8.1
Further Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
Bibliography
71
A
tsn-mon YANG Model
75
B
Monitoring Performance
79
C
Source Code
83
==PAGE:10==
List of Figures
2.1
a) A physical network, consisting of three switches (SW1, SW2, SW3) and
four end-nodes (EN1, EN2, EN3, EN4); b) Formal network element notation 8
2.2
a) Streams S1 and S2; b) Formal stream element notation . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
gPTP peer delay measurement procedure. Adapted from [28] . . . . . . .
11
2.4
gPTP synchronisation procedure. Adapted from [28] . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5
Frame transmission controlled by gate control list. Adapted from [30]
. .
14
2.6
Frame selection for transmission based on 802.1Qav CBS. Adapted from [9] 16
2.7
Frame replication use case. Source: [33] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.8
Ethernet R-TAG. Tag format, encoding and decoding is described in IEEE
802.1Q [35]. Adapted from: [33] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.1
Layered view of SRP building blocks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Stream reservation procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Fully distributed network configuration model. Adapted from [7] . . . . .
24
3.4
Centralised network/distributed user configuration model. Adapted from [7] 25
3.5
Fully centralised TSN configuration model. Adapted from [7] . . . . . . .
26
3.6
Conceptual NETCONF layers. Adapted from [37]
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.1
A high level passive monitor function diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2
A high level fully centralised TSN configuration model with integrated mon-
itoring capabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.1
UML style tsn-mon YANG model diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.2
Frame capturing and monitored metric extraction processes and respective
data exchange depicted graphically . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.3
Sysrepo subscription callback function depicted graphically
. . . . . . . .
52
5.4
Entities used in monitor implementation and their relations . . . . . . . .
52
5.5
Collector processes and their processed data.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.1
Test setup used for testing TSN monitoring system performance. . . . . .
57
6.2
Monitored metric values at 10 PPS, 10 % sampling rate and no additional
delay introduced.
Top graphs show stream bitrate and period observed
at the source and destination monitors, while the bottom graphs show ob-
served delay, delay jitter, and frame period jitter . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
==PAGE:11==
6.3
Monitored metric values at 10 PPS, 10 % sampling rate and 10ms delay
introduced. Top graphs show stream bitrate and period observed at the
source and destination monitors, while the bottom graphs show observed
delay, delay jitter, and frame period jitter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6.4
Traﬀic generated by NETCONF polling from the collector towards the mon-
itor at 10 PPS and 10% sampling rate. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.5
Monitored metric values at 100 PPS, 10 % sampling rate and no additional
delay introduced.
Top graphs show stream bitrate and period observed
at the source and destination monitors, while the bottom graphs show ob-
served delay, delay jitter, and frame period jitter . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
6.6
Observed delay at 100 PPS, 10 % sampling rate and 10ms delay introduced 63
6.7
Traﬀic generated by NETCONF polling from the collector towards the mon-
itor at 100 PPS and 10% sampling rate. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6.8
Traﬀic generated by NETCONF polling from the collector towards the mon-
itor at 10000 PPS and 1% sampling rate (top) and at 10000 PPS and 10%
sampling rate (bottom). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
B.1
Number of measurements for frame delay at 1000 PPS and 10 % sampling
rate
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
B.2
An example measurement at 1000 PPS rate and 10 % sample rate. The
top graph displays values for average frame period and the bottom graph
displays measurement number per second . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
B.3
An example measurement at 2500 PPS rate and 10 % sample rate. The
top graph displays values for average frame period and the bottom graph
displays measurement number per second . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
B.4
An example measurement at 5000 PPS rate and 10 % sample rate. The
top graph displays values for average bitrate and the bottom graph displays
measurement number per second . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
List of Tables
2.1
Overview of published TSN standards. Adapted from [9] . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.1
A list of monitored metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Deterministic communication, requiring stringent timing guarantees is used in vari-
ous fields where distributed computing is employed extensively and timely execution
of the algorithms used is key. Examples of application areas where use of determin-
istic communication is often met include avionics, automotive control systems and
industrial automation networks. Such systems are often described as real-time safety-
critical applications, reflecting their need for fault tolerance, high dependability and
strict timeliness. Only a handful of communication protocols are able to fulfill the
stringent requirements posed by applications of such criticality [2].
In time, requirements of real-time safety-critical applications grew and encom-
passed more than reliability and timeliness. Need for high bandwidth connections,
increasing system complexity and number of network nodes, coupled with emergence
of Ethernet in Information Technology, spurred the development of Ethernet exten-
sions, enabling real-time communication.
Specialised Ethernet based technologies,
such as AFDX, TTEthernet, EtherCAT have been the most prominent real-time pro-
tocols used since the turn of the century [3]. In addition to enabling high bitrate,
multi-hop communication, Ethernet based solutions minimise the need for propri-
etary equipment, reducing solution cost and promise higher levels of homogeneity,
being able to carry traﬀic of different criticality over the same network.
In recent years, IEEE has formed a Time Sensitive Networking Task Group (pre-
viously Audio Video Bridging Task Group), where real-time features are being stan-
dardised and included as a part of IEEE 802.1, holding the promise of greater device
interoperability and further increased use of off the shelf equipment, compared to
the previously mentioned specialised industry standards. Timed transmission gates,
frame preemption, per stream filtering & policing and frame replication are some of
the already standardised features enabling reliable, bounded delay and jitter data
delivery.
The static nature of real-time Ethernet currently deployed dictates that static
offline configuration of transmission paths and schedules, computed based on traﬀic
information known a priori, is mostly used. Any change in network configuration dur-
ing run-time often requires manual intervention and interruptions in service operation.
In some time sensitive networks, e.g. large systems with variable traﬀic conditions
and requirements, heterogeneous traﬀic types and the need to add new nodes on the
fly, static and offline configuration is limiting and ineﬀicient [4].
Moreover, man-
ual human configuration, especially if performed with high frequency, is a potential
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Goals & Contribution
2
source of critical errors. Adding to that, current trends in the industry suggest dy-
namic configuration, ability to add new network nodes or new time sensitive traﬀic
streams in a ’plug and play’ fashion is a must for future real-time networks (e.g. Fog
computing in industrial deployments [5]). Thus, a switch to dynamic-automatised-
online configuration model is envisioned [6]. As a possible implementation model, a
centralised approach to real-time network (re)configuration and management is often
discussed and introduced in TSN group IEEE standard 802.1Qcc [7].
Determinism and time awareness in the network add significant complexity to
the otherwise well defined network tasks such as determining route availability, dy-
namic route selection, resource allocation and runtime configuration. Nevertheless,
researchers have already demonstrated the feasibility of runtime IEEE TSN configu-
ration based on the centralised network management model [8] [5]. In such approach,
network-wide knowledge of configured time-sensitive services, their operational sta-
tus, performance characteristics should be known at all times to take full advantage
of the centralised, dynamic TSN configuration and management model. For instance,
currently configured service status or changed link propagation delay can be used to
trigger network configuration events. Likewise, baseline network performance infor-
mation, such as its topology, link delays, etc. is required as an input to any algorithms
used in configuration generation. The topic of TSN monitoring is seldom discussed,
despite its importance in assuring eﬀicient dynamic configuration process.
1.1
Goals & Contribution
In this thesis, aspects of time sensitive network monitoring will be examined with an
emphasis on a centralised approach, where gathered monitoring data is expected to
provide network-wide intelligence to be used in the next steps of network control.
Network characteristics to be monitored, methods for their extraction, collection
and correlation are to be determined. Furthermore, the application of the gathered
monitoring data in subsequent run-time network control, such as transmission sched-
ule composition, path selection and configuration propagation will be considered.
Finally, an example framework, implemented according current TSN standard
and research guidelines, together with conclusions made in the thesis is provided.
The framework includes local traﬀic monitors, to be used in tandem with TSN end
systems, a YANG model for monitor data, a central collector, where the gathered
network-intelligence is concentrated, and a connection in between.
As a function
demonstration, all entities involved are implemented as software applications.
1.2
Relevant Work
To ease the reader into the subject of time sensitive networking, multiple introductory
articles exist, overviewing both the history of real-time communication and current
developments within the field [9], [10]. For industry specific overviews, one can refer
==PAGE:14==
1.2 Relevant Work
3
to [3] for industrial automation and [11], [12] for automotive industry. An analysis of
a TSN use case in mobile communication is provided by the authors in [13]. Consumer
electronics use cases and audio/video bridging are well covered in [14].
Key to comprehending issues of TSN configuration & management is the under-
standing of schedule composition and routing problem of time-sensitive networks, as
it vividly illustrates the question as to why online configuration practices are not triv-
ial or directly transferable from telecommunication networks. Multiple works exist
focusing on scheduling problems for real-time Ethernet, however, in this thesis, the
focus is on IEEE TSN networks. Craciunas et. al. propose a set of constraints and
algorithms to be used for IEEE 802.1Qbv networks and provide respective evalua-
tion [15]. Gavriluț et. al. propose a method to solving joint routing and scheduling
problem, which takes into account the requirements of multiple TSN traﬀic classes
[16].
Centralised approach to IEEE TSN management is commonly identified as a
preferable solution for future networks.
There is a number of publications where
models for centralised configuration are proposed and evaluated. Henneke [17] et. al.
provide an overview regarding centralised approach to real time network configura-
tion. Requirements for future real time networks and their centralised management
are established. The authors list time sensitive network monitoring as one of the key
requirements, however none of the analysed publications focus on this subject.
Gutierrez et. al. [6] propose a framework for self-configuring IEEE TSN networks
utilising a learning module, capable of identifying the parameters of TSN streams by
monitoring the stream patterns. NETCONF & YANG are proposed for configuration
propagation and OPC-UA for propagating TSN stream information.
Gerhard et. al. [18] propose a IEEE TSN centralised configuration framework
using OpenDaylight network controller, simplified scheduling & routing algorithm,
NETCONF protocol & YANG data models for schedule configuration in devices and
OPC UA for propagating TSN stream information.
Nayak et. al. [19] propose TSSDN, a slightly different approach to the schedul-
ing problem.
Authors are able to demonstrate, using a centralised configuration
model, an eﬀicient dynamic time sensitive network configuration model by limiting
the scheduling task only to end systems, i.e. the network nodes do not make use of
transmission schedules.
Raagaard and Pop et. al. [8] [5] propose a centralised configuration model ar-
chitecture for an industrial fog computing use case, able to handle large runtime
configuration problems. NETCONF & YANG are used for configuration propagation
and OPC-UA for propagating TSN stream information.
The available works on time sensitive network monitoring are scarce. Gutierrez
et. al. [20] introduce a framework enabling learning of periodic traﬀic parameters.
The article covers extraction of periodic traﬀic properties through traﬀic monitoring.
A simulation verifying the proposed methods is also provided. The primary purpose
of the traﬀic monitoring framework described is to automatise configuration transla-
tion from unsynchronised networks to synchronised. The article does not introduce
possible implementation models and is limited to simulation.
==PAGE:15==
1.3 Structure
4
1.3
Structure
The rest of this thesis follows the following structure:
• Chapter 2 introduces network and traﬀic models used throughout the thesis and
provides an overview of relevant concepts and technologies within IEEE TSN
and network monitoring.
• Chapter 3 overviews Time Sensitive Network management concepts and tech-
nologies.
• Chapter 4 introduces objectives of time sensitive network monitoring and pro-
vides a discussion on network monitoring aspects specific to TSN.
• Chapter 5 presents methods to be used in retrieving desired network character-
istics and overviews the TSN monitoring framework, including used tools, and
implementation details.
• Chapter 6 provides an overview of the implemented framework’s function, in-
cluding test cases and performance characteristics.
• Chapter 7 provides an insight on possible uses of the monitoring framework in
subsequent steps of network management and configuration.
• Chapter 8 concludes this thesis, discusses achieved objectives and further en-
hancements.
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 2
Technology Overview
In this chapter, key transmission mechanisms of TSN and concepts relevant to time
sensitive network monitoring and management are discussed. First, a broad overview
of IEEE TSN and its application areas are given. Then, a network and traﬀic model
is introduced to aid in further analysis of TSN features. Next, relevant TSN features
are overviewed in greater detail.
2.1
Time Sensitive Networking
IEEE 802.1 Time Sensitive Networking (TSN) set of standards specifies features
adding deterministic capabilities to IEEE 802 networks. Standardisation effort’s main
goals are to provide zero congestion loss, low, bounded latency and delay variation
guarantees for multi-purpose Ethernet networks - meaning that both a collection of
time sensitive streams and best effort traﬀic can be effectively transported over the
same network.
Its beginnings can be traced to IEEE Audio Video Bridging Task Group (AVB-
TG), where, as the name suggests, the work was focused on extending Ethernet
to support lossless bandwidth with an upper delay limit for professional audio and
video streaming.
AVB-TG achieved its goals by introducing standards for Layer
2 synchronization service (802.1AS), stream reservation protocol (802.1Qat) and a
credit based traﬀic shaper algorithm (802.1Qav). Success of AVB spurred interest in
possible further additions to the 802.1 standard base, to cater for the rising bandwidth,
criticality and time sensitive requirements within the fields of industrial, automotive
and mobile communication.
Standardised features, within a market of previously
mostly proprietary and costly solutions also hold the promise of reduced costs in
terms of equipment acquisition and highly improved interoperability between different
manufacturer solutions.
New standardization efforts, stemming from AVB-TG, encompassed features in
greater area of application than audio and video streaming, e.g. strict on-time delivery
(as opposed to upper delay bound of AVB), larger topologies (AVB is limited to 7
hops in-line), lower latency guarantees, improved control capabilities, etc., thus, the
AVB-TG was renamed to Time Sensitive Networking Task Group (TSN-TG) in order
to better reflect the work done.
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Network and Traﬀic Models
6
Currently, TSN application areas are focused within industrial automation, auto-
motive communication and mobile fronthaul networks. Tight control loops of indus-
trial automation networks, working over multiple hops between controllers, actuators
and sensors, require the kind of services TSN is being designed to offer - very low
packet loss, low and bounded latency and jitter data transfer. Thus, paired with
intelligent management & control frameworks, TSN is expected to play an important
role in further industrial network evolution [3], [21], [5].
Similarly, TSN applications in automotive industry are becoming increasingly
prominent.
As high-end in-car multimedia, camera based driver aid systems (e.g.
lane departure warning, traﬀic sign recognition, etc.)
are evolving from state-of-
the-art nice-to-haves to daily necessities, vehicular communication networks grow in
complexity and size (wiring harness can be up to the third heaviest and most expen-
sive car component [22]). IEEE TSN capabilities to carry traﬀic of various classes and
mixed criticality is appealing in attempts to add more functionality while reducing or
maintaining the complexity of the communication system. Furthermore, car software
and hardware is becoming more flexible and is often upgraded during its lifetime,
thus dynamic TSN management capabilities (reconfiguring data streams, their paths,
reliability options, etc.) are likely to spur TSN adoption [12]. Trends in the indus-
try (such as autonomous driving) point to further rapid increase in demand for high
bandwidth, extremely low packet loss, low bounded latency and jitter communication
[22]. Automotive communication industry is already employing Ethernet extended
by AVB standards [11] and further adoption of TSN features is imminent.
Among current discussions in 5G evolution are the proposals to further split the
physical radio equipment on communication towers (RRH) and their baseband signal
processing equipment (BBU), with the latter being pooled in centralised locations to
achieve processing, power consumption, resource use and allocation gains (C-RAN
architecture). The network interconnecting remote radios with baseband processing
units is commonly referred to as the fronthaul network. The requirements on the fron-
thaul network for bandwidth, delay and delay variation are highly dependent on the
way protocol stack is split between the RRH and BBU (functional split) [23]. Lower
layer splits pose extremely stringent timing requirements, making fronthaul networks
one of the key areas for TSN application. Multiple studies have been undertaken to
verify the plausibility of using Ethernet enhanced by TSN features in fronthaul with
promising results [24][25][26].
IEEE TSN-TG has published a standard including
design guidelines for Ethernet fronthaul implementation [27].
Table 2.1 lists currently published IEEE TSN and AVB standards. In the following
chapters, TSN traﬀic classes and the key TSN standards with an emphasis on TSN
management will be discussed.
2.2
Network and Traﬀic Models
The proposed monitoring routines discussed in this thesis are to be applied to any
given TSN network.
In order to generalise the calculations required, an abstract
==PAGE:18==
2.2 Network and Traﬀic Models
7
Standard
Title
Type
IEEE 802.1Qbu
Frame Preemption
Inc. in IEEE 802.1Q-2018
IEEE 802.1Qbv
Enhancements for Scheduled Traﬀic
Inc. in IEEE 802.1Q-2018
IEEE 802.1Qca
Path Control and Reservation
Inc. in IEEE 802.1Q-2018
IEEE 802.1Qch
Cyclic Queuing and Forwarding
Inc. in IEEE 802.1Q-2018
IEEE 802.1Qci
Per-Stream Filtering and Policing
Inc. in IEEE 802.1Q-2018
IEEE 802.1CB
Frame Replication and Elimination
for Reliability
Standalone Standard
IEEE 802.1CM
Time Sensitive Networking for Fronthaul
Standalone Standard
IEEE 802.1Qcc
Stream Reservation Protocol (SRP)
Enhancements and Performance Improvements
IEEE 802.1Q-2018 Amendment
IEEE 802.1Qcp
YANG Data Model
IEEE 802.1Q-2018 Amendment
IEEE 802.1AS
Timing and Synchronization for Time-Sensitive
Applications in Bridged Local Area Networks
Standalone Standard
IEEE 802.1Qat
Stream Reservation Protocol
Inc. in IEEE 802.1Q-2011
IEEE 802.1Qav
Forwarding and Queuing Enhancements for
Time-Sensitive Streams
Inc. in IEEE 802.1Q-2011
IEEE 802.1BA
Audio Video Bridging (AVB) Systems
Standalone Standard
Table 2.1: Overview of published TSN standards. Adapted from [9].
network and application model is introduced. A similar notation to the one used in
related academic literature (e.g. [20], [16], [15]) is used to describe the system model.
The network topology is defined as an undirected graph G = (V, E), consisting of
vertices vi, which represent end nodes and switches (∀vi ∈V , SWi ∪ENi = V ), and
ordered edges, connecting a pair of vertices ((vi, vj) ∈E), which represent full-duplex
links. Additionally, each link of the network is characterised by a set of attributes
< [vi, vj].d, [vi, vj].b, [vi, vj].q >, where d is the physical propagation delay on the
medium, b is link bitrate and q is the number of queues available for scheduled traﬀic
on the link. Figure 2.1 depicts a small bridged network (a)) consisting of 3 switches
(SW1, SW2, SW3), 4 end nodes (EN1, EN2, EN3, EN4) and respective element
notation (b)).
Traﬀic over the defined network originates at an end node, traverses a predeter-
mined path, consisting of links and switches (e.g. p1 = {EN1, SW1, SW3, EN4}), and
terminates at another end-node. IEEE TSN traﬀic is defined in streams Si, which
is a cyclic transmission of a single or multiple Ethernet frames and is characterized
by a set of attributes < vsrc
i
, Vdst
i
, Ti, e2ei, e2ei,j, Pi >, where vsrc
i
is the source end
node (talker), Vdst
i
is a set of destination nodes (a stream can have more than one
listener), Ti is the period of the stream, e2ei is the maximum end to end latency that
each frame of the stream can experience for any listener of the stream, e2ei,j is the
maximum latency for a particular listener vj ∈Vdst
i
and Pi is the payload transported
during each period. If the payload is greater than Ethernet MTU, it is fragmented
into multiple frames.
Stream Si can be further split to stream instances Sk
i (Si = {Sk
i , Sk+1
i
, Sk+2
i
,
..., Sk+n
i
}). Stream instance consists of a set of frames transmitted in a single stream
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Time Synchronisation
8
SW1
SW2
SW3
EN1
EN2
EN3
EN4
Element
Notation
Physical network topology
Network nodes (end nodes and switches)
Full-duplex network links
Link characteristics
a)
b)
Figure 2.1:
a) A physical network, consisting of three switches (SW1, SW2, SW3)
and four end-nodes (EN1, EN2, EN3, EN4); b) Formal network ele-
ment notation.
period (Sk
i = {f k
ij, f k
ij+1, ..., f k
ij+m}). Each frame is associated with a set of observable
properties, including, but not limited to, frame length (in bytes), transmission and
reception timestamps (< [f k
im].L, [f k
im].ttx, [f k
im].trx >). As a requirement, frames of
the same stream must follow a sequential order, i.e. [f k
i1].ttx < [f k
i2].ttx. A graphical
representation of two stream examples and their respective notation is given in figure
2.2. Finally, as streams can be forwarded along different paths of the network, a set
of observed frames at each switch or end node is likely to be different and is defined
as ZSWi.
Traﬀic and network models introduced in this section are used in the remainder of
the thesis to aid in TSN feature analysis and introduction of the network monitoring
methods used.
2.3
Time Synchronisation
A large part of TSN features require network wide time synchronisation.
For in-
stance, scheduled transmission requires that individual device port schedules start at
the same time across the network, which would be impossible to determine without
synchronisation. Adding to that, it is more than likely that the applications using
TSN also require synchronisation.
For this purpose, 802.1AS (also referred to as
’generalised PTP’ (gPTP)), a profile of a broader Precision Time Protocol (PTP),
==PAGE:20==
2.3 Time Synchronisation
9
t
(EN1, SW1, SW3, EN4)
(EN3, SW2, SW1, EN2)
f1
t
f2
f3
f1
f2
f3 f4
f5 f6
a)
b)
Stream
Stream properties
Figure 2.2:
a) Streams S1 and S2; b) Formal stream element notation.
defined in IEEE 1588, is used. It must be noted that some processes of 802.1AS
time synchronisation are media dependent (e.g. transport of synchronisation). While
procedures for multiple media are described in the standard, in this section, only
Ethernet synchronisation is discussed.
The gPTP protocol has three main components of operation - best master clock
selection, time distribution and link propagation delay measurement. gPTP uses the
Best Master Clock Algorithm (BMCA) to select a device to be the single source of
timing for the network (or more precisely gPTP domain), the Grand Master (GM).
gPTP domain boundaries are determined by participating node capabilities - i.e. all
nodes in the domain are gPTP capable and are able to exchange synchronisation
information with their neighbours.
All GM capable devices in the gPTP domain
send advertisements of their capabilities to neighbouring GM capable devices. The
capability advertisement includes information used to determine the ’best’ clock -
a configurable priority of the GM, fields describing the clock quality and a MAC
address. Intermediate network nodes evaluate the advertisements and forward only
the ’best’ one received. Once a potential GM receives a ’better’ advertisement, it
stops transmitting its own advertisements. In turn, if a GM capable device does not
receive any ’better’ advertisements than that of its own, after a certain period of time
(announce timeout interval), it will decide that it is the Grand Master clock. The
selected GM continues to periodically transmit its advertisement, which is monitored
by the slave nodes. If, for any reason, the current GM fails to send advertisements, a
new GM is elected following the same procedure.
The selected GM is responsible for periodically sending out timing information
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Time Synchronisation
10
across the network (8 times per second by default).
Similarly to a spanning tree
protocol, the BMCA draws a topology tree, where each device has slave, master and
passive ports (used to break synchronisation loops). Each downstream device (from
the GM’s perspective) receives synchronisation information on the slave port and
relays it via the master port. The synchronisation information is adjusted on each
device along the path to accommodate the propagation delay and residence times
experienced. Consequently, the downstream device is able to synchronise its time to
the GM.
Each device participating in the gPTP synchronisation process is required to mea-
sure physical propagation delay to all neighbours directly connected to gPTP enabled
ports. A delay measuring mechanism depicted in figure 2.3 is used for that purpose.
Here, assuming a full duplex point-to-point link, delay measurement is done on a per-
link basis by both end-nodes independently and periodically. The measurement is
initiated by a Pdelay_Req message, which is timestamped with an egress timestamp
(t1) and directed to the link neighbour. The link neighbour receives the measure-
ment request, generates its ingress timestamp (t2), and sends a response message
Pdelay_Resp. The response includes the ingress (t2) timestamp of the Pdelay_Req
and the egress timestamp (t3) of Pdelay_Resp. The initiating node receives the re-
sponse message and generates its ingress timestamp (t4). If generating timestamp t3
and including it into Pdelay_Resp message is not possible, a followup message is used
to transport timestamp t3 to the initiator. Using the described timestamps, two key
time periods can be defined - residence time at the responder as t3 −t2 and round trip
time at the initiator as t4 −t1. The link propagation delay can then be calculated as
given in equation 2.1.
Propagation delay = round trip time −residence time
2
(2.1)
Due to frequency differences between the initiator and the responder local clocks,
a correction ratio must be used to get both periods with reference to a common
timescale. The local clock frequency ratios of link neighbours are also determined
during the Pdelay message exchange.
As the reference time (time of the GM), propagation delay of all gPTP domain
links and peer local clock frequency ratios are known, synchronisation can be achieved.
All devices (other than the grandmaster) receive periodical Sync messages, followed by
Follow_Up messages on their slave ports. These messages transport synchronisation
information, including the GM time (at generation of a particular instance of the
Sync message) and corrections to the GM time required up to the current node
(determined using link delay and peer local clock frequency ratios, updated at each
network node traversed). Upon receiving these messages, the gPTP domain device
can compute the current synchronised time and relay the required information further
downstream. Since gPTP requires each node of the gPTP domain to compute and
propagate downstream adjustments to the time (propagation delay and residence
time), all nodes must be gPTP capable.
==PAGE:22==
2.3 Time Synchronisation
11
t1
t2
t3
t4
Delay measurement initiator
Delay measurement responder
Pdelay_Req
Pdelay_Resp
Pdelay_Resp_Followup
Timestamps known by 
the initiator:
t1
t1, t2, (t3), t4   
(t3)
(t3-t2)
Residence   time
(t2-t1)
Propagation delay
Figure 2.3: gPTP peer delay measurement procedure. Adapted from [28].
gPTP synchronisation procedure is exemplified in figure 2.4. Here, three gPTP
domain nodes are visualised (EN1, SW1, EN2). First, EN1 sends a Sync message
from its master port to SW1 slave port (at t1). As described earlier, the Sync is
followed by a Follow_Up message. The Follow_Up includes:
• the GM time (at generation of this particular instance of the SYNC message);
• time correction (chosen to satisfy relation t1 = GM time + time correction);
• cumulative peer local clock frequency ratio;
Next, SW1 generates a timestamp t2 upon receiving the Sync message. At this point,
node SW1 can determine the GM time at local time t2 (synchronise) (GM time +
correction time + link [EN1, SW1] delay). SW1 needs to relay the synchronisation
information towards EN2 via its master port. To do so, information in the Follow_Up
must be updated accordingly, i. e. GM time is not altered, but the time correction is
updated to include link [EN1, SW1] delay and residence time at SW1 (t3 −t2). Note
that cumulative frequency ratio is also updated and used to reference interval mea-
surements to a common timescale. EN2 receives the Sync and Follow_Up messages
and the same process is repeated until the last node is reached.
It must be noted, that to achieve the synchronisation accuracy required by the
gPTP protocol, the required timestamps are usually generated in hardware, thus
measurement accuracy is not affected by node’s CPU load, CPU interrupt latency,
other network traﬀic, etc.
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Time Sensitive Networking Traﬀic
12
t2
t3
EN1
SW1
SYNC
(t3-t2)
Residence
time
(t2-t1)
Propagation 
delay
EN1
EN2
Slave port
Master port
FOLLOW_UP
SYNC
FOLLOW_UP
Figure 2.4: gPTP synchronisation procedure. Adapted from [28].
With regard to TSN monitoring & management, gPTP provides an example of
computation of an import network performance metric, link delay, and exemplifies
the possible accuracy of time related measurements.
2.4
Time Sensitive Networking Traﬀic
One of the key goals for TSN is the ability to carry traﬀic classes of varying criticality
requirements. In fact, TSN enhances Ethernet by adding deterministic capabilities
to a best-effort network, while maintaining the quality of non-TSN streams (as long
as there is enough capacity). It is known, that different traﬀic types of TSN networks
have interdependent performance characteristics [29], thus understanding of traﬀic
types carried in TSN and their differentiation is important to TSN monitoring and
management. In this section, an introduction to the main TSN traﬀic types, along
with a brief overview on their forwarding mechanics will be given.
2.4.1
Time-Triggered Traﬀic
Time-Triggered (TT) traﬀic type is of the highest criticality and supports applications
that have the most stringent requirements for bounded latency and jitter. Its time-
triggered forwarding mechanism ensures fully deterministic temporal behaviour of
TT Ethernet frames.
A prerequisite to TT traﬀic is a common timescale in the
==PAGE:24==
2.4 Time Sensitive Networking Traﬀic
13
network.
IEEE 1588 profile, described previously, is used for network node clock
synchronisation.
Temporal determinism of TT traﬀic is ensured by the use of Gate Control Lists
(GCLs) and a time-aware shaper (TAS), defined in IEEE 802.1Qbv [30]. In TSN,
time triggered frame forwarding operates on a per queue basis - frames arriving at a
port are placed to the desired queues based on their stream identification, determined
using mechanisms defined in IEEE 802.1Qci and discussed in later sections of the the-
sis. Each queue is associated with a two-state transmission gate, which is either open
(allowing transmission from the associated queue) or closed (blocking transmission
from the associated queue). The gate control list specifies the timing of transmis-
sion gate state changes for all of the port’s queues, creating protected time slots for
high priority traﬀic. GCLs are predetermined as a part of network configuration and
constraints are introduced to the GCL composition (scheduling) task to fully ensure
deterministic forwarding - i.e. forwarding schedules of each network device are com-
posed in a way ensuring suﬀicient resource availability, correct frame order, latency
and jitter requirements.
A time-aware shaper operates based on the GCL and selects frames for transmis-
sion if the following conditions are met:
• the transmission medium is available;
• transmission gate status of the queue where the frame resides is open;
• the frame can be fully transmitted until the next queue closing event.
Therefore, only certain queues (determined by the GCL) are allowed to transmit at
any given point in time, and, naturally, only one TT traﬀic queue should be allowed
transmission at a single point in time to guarantee resource availability. Gate control
lists are cyclic - the schedule specified is periodically repeated (GCL’s period is often
called a hyperperiod). Determining the length of the hyperperiod is a scheduling task
but it is typically set to the least common multiple of all TT stream periods (to allow
for a stream’s instance to be transmitted at least once during the GCL cycle). By
composing and using GCLs in a coordinated manner across the time sensitive network
nodes, a protected ’transmission channel’ can be reserved for time triggered traﬀic.
Figure 2.5 provides a simple visualisation of periodic TAS function based on gate
control lists on a single port. Here, at time instance t0 transmission gates are closed
for queues 7 and 6, and open for queue 0.
If multiple queues are in state open,
transmission selection algorithm (for instance, strict priority) determines from which
of the open queues frames are transmitted. GCL hyperperiod in this case is t0-t4.
Even though, as mentioned, frame can only be selected for transmission if it can
be fully transmitted until the queue is closed, there are implementations where frame
transmission time cannot be determined ’on the fly’.
For instance, to determine
the transmission time of a frame on the outgoing port, its length in bytes must be
known, and such information is only available if ’store-and-forward’ switching is used.
Thus, in implementations using ’cut-through’ switching frame transmission time is
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Time Sensitive Networking Traﬀic
14
Transmission selection
Queue for 
traffic class 
#7
Transmission 
Gate
Closed
Queue for 
traffic class 
#6
Transmission 
Gate
Closed
Queue for 
traffic class 
#0
Transmission 
Gate
Open
t0
CC...O
t1
CO...C
t2
OO...C
t3
OO...C
t4
CO...C
t5
CC...O
t6
CO...C
t7
OO...C
Port GCL
Hyperperiod
Transmission 
Selection
Transmission 
Selection
Transmission 
Selection
Figure 2.5: Frame transmission controlled by gate control list. Adapted from [30].
not known and this approach cannot be used, meaning additional mechanisms must
be introduced in order to ensure the integrity of the protected TT time slot. These
additional mechanisms are often referred to as ’TSN integration modes’.
’Guard bands’, during which no transmissions can occur, of a maximum sized
frame transmission length can be added before the start of a TT traﬀic class time
slot. In this case, it is guaranteed that a TT frame transmission will not be delayed,
however a sizeable portion of available link capacity is wasted. For instance, if MTU
is 1500 bytes, and link speed is 10 Mbit/s, a ’guard-band’ of 1.2ms must be added
before each TT transmission window.
Another alternative is to use frame preemption, defined by IEEE 802.1Qbu [31].
This mechanism allows classifying frame priority levels (and consequently port queues)
to ’express’ and ’preemptable’.
If an ’express’ frame arrives, transmission of ’pre-
emptable’ frames can be interrupted and the ’express’ frame transmitted. Instead
of dropping the ’preemptable’ frame, 802.1Qbu implementation resumes its transmis-
sion once ’express’ frame is transmitted and the receiver is capable of rebuilding the
preempted frame from fragments. Multiple configuration possibilities with varying
results exist if frame preemption is used in tandem with TT 802.Qbv transmission
mechanism. However, it can be understood intuitively that by using frame preemp-
tion, the previously introduced ’guard band’ can be at least reduced to the largest
non-fragmentable frame transmission time, in which case, the maximum guard band
on a 10 Mbit/s link is 108µs (maximum non-fragmentable frame).
After the TT
window closes, preemptable traﬀic can be processed again. Simon et. al. provide
a comprehensive analysis of how various combinations of 802.1Qbv and 802.1Qbu
==PAGE:26==
2.4 Time Sensitive Networking Traﬀic
15
impact traﬀic temporal characteristics [5g_simon]. It must be noted that frame
preemption feature can be used without 802.1Qbv and without time synchronisation
to drastically improve frame delay variation in a network which carries a significant
amount of preemptable (BE) traﬀic [5g_simon].
2.4.2
Audio Video Bridging Traﬀic
AVB traﬀic transmission is controlled by a credit based shaper (CBS) defined in
IEEE 802.1Qav [32]. AVB stream classes are determined by the use of priority values
carried in frame VLAN tag. Each AVB traﬀic class is assigned a queue in the switch.
The shaper determines frame’s eligibility for transmission based on the amount of
credit available for a particular queue. If the amount of credit is positive or zero,
transmission is allowed, if it is negative, transmission is not allowed. Initial amount
of credit available for a queue is zero.
During AVB frame transmission, credit is
removed from queue’s credit ’bucket’. Credit is added to the bucket if it is negative
and no AVB stream frames are transmitted. If there are no queued AVB frames while
credit is being increased, its value is set to 0 but credit is not capped in case there are
some AVB frames being queued. If the queue transmission gates are closed, the credit
is frozen. Transmission class parameters ’send slope’ and ’idle slope’ determine the
rate at which credits are removed and added to the queue’s bucket. The values of the
’send’ and ’idle’ slopes need not be configured directly and are determined based on
AVB traﬀic specification and physical connection properties (traﬀic class dependent
measurement interval, reserved bytes over that interval and port transmission rate).
Figure 2.6 provides a visual example of frame transmission coordinated by a credit
based shaper. Here, at time t0 AVB queue credit is 0 and an AVB frame f1 is selected
for transmission. While it is being transmitted, credit is reduced at a rate defined
by ’send slope’ parameter. At time t1, frame f1 transmission finishes and credit is
negative. AVB frame cannot be selected for transmission. Credit is increased at rate
defined by ’idle slope’. Once credit reaches 0, AVB frame f2 transmission can start (t2).
Credit is once again reduced until frame f2 transmission is finished (t3). Another AVB
frame cannot be transmitted, as credit is negative but there is BE traﬀic to transmit
(t4 −t5). While best effort traﬀic is transmitted, AVB credit is being increased at a
rate defined by the ’idle slope’. Since there is an AVB frame (f2) queued, credit value
could increase beyond 0. In period t6 −t7 AVB queue transmission gate is closed and
credit is frozen. As the gate reopens (t7), credit continues to increase until 0 and the
queued AVB frame f3 can be transmitted (t8 −t9).
There are multiple effects of using a CBS. First, lower priority traﬀic classes are
not starved, as their transmission is allowed while AVB stream credit is negative.
Secondly, a CBS removes traﬀic bursts as the frames are spread out in time.
In
turn, queues become shorter and worst case delays bounded. Strict resource alloca-
tion frameworks make sure that network congestion is avoided. As no network wide
transmission schedules need to be generated for AVB traﬀic, the configuration effort
required is much lower compared to TT traﬀic, and worst case delay guarantees can
==PAGE:27==
2.5 Frame Replication and Elimination
16
t
Queue for AVB traffic class A
Queue for BE traffic
TT
CBS Credit
Transmission
t0
t1
t2
t3
t4
t5t6
t7
Idle slope
Send slope
t8
t9
f1
f2
f2
f3
Figure 2.6: Frame selection for transmission based on 802.1Qav CBS. Adapted from
[9].
still be provided (albeit not as stringent). This particular AVB property makes it
more suitable to dynamic traﬀic conditions.
2.4.2.1
Best Effort Traﬀic
Best effort traﬀic type is the ’traditional’ Ethernet traﬀic.
No timing guarantees
can be provided and only best effort service is provided.
It must be noted, that
transmission selection can still be based on defined frame priorities.
This traﬀic
type is best used in cases where timeliness of transmitted messages is of secondary
importance compared to achieved performance.
2.5
Frame Replication and Elimination
Appealing to the nature of safety-critical real-time applications, IEEE 802.1CB stan-
dard introduces a feature enabling high level of reliability (very low packet loss rates)
- frame replication and elimination.
Procedures described by this standard allow
stream frames to be replicated and sequenced at the source, sent over multiple dis-
joint network paths and joined and re-separated at multiple location. Upon any join,
replicas are separated using the sequence numbers and eliminated.
Example stream replication use case is given in figure 2.7. Here, the stream origi-
nates at Node 1 and terminates at Node 6. A composite stream, containing multiple
==PAGE:28==
2.5 Frame Replication and Elimination
17
replicas traversing multiple paths is called a compound stream. Child streams within
a compound stream are called member streams. In this case, the compound stream
is made of four member streams. At Node 1, stream frames are sequenced, replicated
and sent over disjoint paths to stream join locations (recovery functions) at Node
2 and Node 3. At both join locations member streams Stream 1 and Stream 2 are
joined, replicas are eliminated using the frame sequence numbers and the remaining
frames copied onto new member streams Stream 3 and Stream 4 (frame sequence
numbers are unaltered). Streams are once again joined, removing the replicas at the
destination, Node 6. In this use case, replication increases reliability drastically, as
the stream is protected against all one link failures, and against 16 of possible 21 two
link failures [33].
Sequence generation
Sequence recovery
Node 1
Node 2
Node 4
Node 3
Node 5
Node 6
Stream 1
Stream 2
Stream 3
Stream 4
Figure 2.7: Frame replication use case. Source: [33].
IEEE 802.1CB describes in detail a set of functions enabling frame replication
and elimination.
Of particular interest to network monitoring and management
are functions enabling stream and frame identification. Stream identification func-
tion relies on information carried within the Protocol Data Unit (PDU) to gen-
erate a stream_handle, an integer uniquely identifying a stream.
The generated
stream_handle is local to the system where it has been generated and is not carried
in the PDU as a data field or otherwise across the network. Such stream identification
property requires that the stream_handle generation strategy is consistent across all
network nodes. IEEE 802.1CB defines four possible stream identification strategies,
based on differing fields of the PDU:
1. Null Stream identification - examines frames’s destination MAC address and
==PAGE:29==
2.5 Frame Replication and Elimination
18
VLAN ID;
2. Source MAC and VLAN Stream identification - examines frame’s source MAC
address and VLAN ID;
3. Active Destination MAC and VLAN Stream identification - examines and over-
writes frame’s destination MAC address and VLAN ID. Priority parameters of
the frame are also overwritten;
4. IP stream identification - examines PDU’s destination MAC address, VLAN
ID, source and destination IP addresses, DSCP value, L4 protocol and source
& destination ports.
Stream identification function is an important feature of TSN outside of frame repli-
cation and network management as well, as it is used by other TSN features, e.g.
per-stream filtering and policing [34].
Frames of a particular stream are identified via the help of a sequencing function.
The sequencing function operates per one stream_handle and sequences the frames
belonging to the stream. The sequence_number parameter is a 16 bit integer, mean-
ing the sequence space is limited to 216 frames. The sequence_number is reset if
the maximum sequence number is reached (65535) or the sequence number reset is
triggered by an external event. In order for the sequenced frames to be identifiable
outside of the local system, the frame sequence_number must be carried in the frame
header field - for instance, a redundancy tag (R-TAG) can be added to the Ethernet
frame for this purpose (figure 2.8). Alternative tagging possibilities described in the
standard include HSR sequence tag and PRP sequence trailer.
Octet
0
1
2
3
4
5
EtherType
(0xF1C1)
Reserved
(all 0)
sequence_number
(0-65535)
Figure 2.8: Ethernet R-TAG. Tag format, encoding and decoding is described in
IEEE 802.1Q [35]. Adapted from: [33].
Stream identification function paired with frame sequencing function allows to
uniquely identify a TSN frame along the path it traverses, which is a desirable prop-
erty in most passive network monitoring scenarios. It must be noted, that the time
period over which the frame can be identified unambiguously has to be considered.
For instance, for a high bitrate stream, e.g. 10 Mbit/s, where frame size is 500 bytes,
==PAGE:30==
2.5 Frame Replication and Elimination
19
the sequence number space is exhausted in ∼26 seconds. Thus, in a scenario where
frames are captured over a longer period than 26 seconds, frames can no longer be
identified unambiguously unless some additional measures are taken or assumptions
made.
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3
Time Sensitive Network
Management
Network management methods currently employed or foreseen to be used in TSN are
introduced in this chapter. A brief introduction to specific management protocols is
also given.
3.1
Time Sensitive Network Configuration
End-to-end provisioning and reservation of resources required by a TSN stream across
the network is one of the key requirements for delivering the timing guarantees of
TSN and having zero congestion loss. This process is governed by the Stream Reser-
vation Protocol (SRP), first introduced in IEEE 802.1Qat standard [36] as one of the
key puzzle pieces enabling AVB. SRP is an advanced reservation protocol, thus, in
addition to providing the means to reserve the required resources for a given stream,
SRP also selects a path to be used for stream transmission, provides a maximum
end-to-end latency to be expected on the selected path, reports a reservation failure
reason if it occurs, and more.
With the expansion of TSN outside of audio/video applications and introduction
of new TSN features, such as time aware traﬀic shapers, improvements to the SRP
protocol were needed. In 2018, IEEE 802.1Qcc standard [7] was published describing
such improvements, including alternative configuration methods.
In this section, an overview of the ’original’ SRP, along with its enhancements
introduced later is provided.
3.1.1
Stream Reservation Protocol
Stream Reservation Protocol is built using Multiple MAC, Multiple Vlan and Multiple
Stream Reservation Protocols (MMRP, MVRP and MSRP). Underlying protocol to
all of the reservation protocols mentioned is the Multiple Reservation Protocol (MRP).
The MRP defines generic procedures of participating node attribute registration to
other participating nodes. Specifics of registered attributes and their propagation
==PAGE:32==
3.1 Time Sensitive Network Configuration
21
across the network are defined by ’higher-layer’ protocols, referred to as MRP appli-
cations (i.e., MMRP, MVRP and MSRP). Building blocks of the Stream Reservation
Protocol are visualised in figure 3.1. Further on, contribution of these protocols to
SRP operation is provided, rather than an in-depth overview of procedures of each of
these protocols individually.
MRP
MMRP
MVRP
MSRP
SRP
Figure 3.1: Layered view of SRP building blocks.
SRP guarantees adequate resources (and, thus, timing characteristics) for a given
stream by requiring stream talkers to complete resource reservation procedure prior
to transmission of AVB traﬀic. A key requirement for a reservation to succeed is
that all bridge ports along the stream path are consistently configured in terms of
AVB features and all ports are participating in gPTP synchronisation.
Segments
of network where this requirement is fulfilled are called SRP domains. To establish
boundaries of an SRP domain, domain messages defined by the MSRP protocol are
exchanged by neighbouring nodes, determining whether MSRP is running, and gPTP
state information of the neighbour port is checked to determine gPTP status. If it is
determined that both MSRP and gPTP are operational on the port, it is deemed to
be part of the SRP domain, thus able to carry AVB traﬀic. If a port is not a part
of SRP domain, it is not able to carry AVB traﬀic or participate in the reservation
process.
Resource reservation in SRP is achieved by requiring the talkers (sources) to adver-
tise their AVB streams across the network and the listeners (destinations) to react to
the received advertisements by subscribing to the streams destined to them. This pro-
cess is described by the MSRP protocol. Talkers advertise their streams by flooding
talker advertise messages on all ports belonging to the SRP domain. Advertisement
messages include stream identification attributes, its traﬀic class, traﬀic specification
and accumulated worst-case latency for the traversed path. Stream traﬀic specifica-
tion is provided in terms of maximum frame size and maximum number of frames per
class measurement interval. Accumulated latency is incremented at each hop using
worst-case node residence time (traﬀic class dependent) and propagation delay expe-
rienced on the link connected to the output port. Each node along the path of the
advertisement message evaluates whether the required bandwidth resources can be
supported. If any of the traversed nodes determine that stream requirements cannot
be supported, the talker advertise message is changed to a talker failed message, which
includes failure reason (in form of standardised error codes) and failure location (in
==PAGE:33==
3.1 Time Sensitive Network Configuration
22
form of bridge ID) and forwarded further. Once the talker advertise message reaches
the listener, accumulated worst-case latency can be evaluated if it is acceptable or,
for instance, the resulting value could be exposed to higher layer applications. Note,
that none of the talker messages invoke any resource reservations, as they serve only
an evaluation purpose.
If the listener desires to subscribe to the stream, it sends a listener ready message
back towards the talker. In case the listener receives a talker failed message, a listener
asking failed message is sent. If the stream is multicast (destined to multiple listeners),
a situation might arise where not all listeners are able to transmit a listener ready
message, in which case network nodes send a listener ready failed message. Resources
are reserved (CBS shaper parameters adjusted) at each traversed hop as the listener
ready or listener ready failed message makes way back towards the talker. Once the
talker receives a listener ready or listener ready failed message, and both the talker
and the listener belong to the stream’s VLAN, it may begin stream transmission.
In case VLAN configuration is not consistent, MVRP protocol is used to configure
VLAN the desired VLAN across the network automatically.
MMRP protocol use is optional and and limited to cases where there is a need to
limit propagation of talker advertise messages to smaller areas than the SRP domain.
This feature is defined as talker pruning in IEEE 802.1Qat.
SRP protocol operation is exemplified in figure 3.2. Here, talker EN1 transmits a
talker advertise of a multicast stream S1, destined to listeners EN2 and EN3. SW1
evaluates if stream requirements can be met and floods the advertisements on ports
belonging to the SRP domain. SW1 and SW2 also flood the advertisements, however
SW4 and SW5 are not part of the SRP domain. SW3 evaluates, that it cannot meet
stream requirements, thus changes talker advertise message to a talker failed message.
As talker advertise message reaches listener EN2, it responds with a listener ready
message and a MVRP VLAN request message, requesting to configure the VLAN
specified in talker advertise message. Talker failed message arrives at listener EN3,
consequently, it transmits a listener asking failed message.
SW1, SW2 and SW3
forward the unicast listener and VLAN request messages towards the talker, SW1
and SW2 also perform resource reservation and VLAN configuration upon receiving
the listener ready message. SW1 forwards all unicast messages to the talker ES1 and
additionally adds a Listener ready failed message, as both listener ready and listener
asking failed messages were received. Upon receiving the listener ready message and,
if required, joining the specified VLAN ES1, can start transmitting stream S1 frames.
The above described procedures enable dynamic configuration and a ’plug-and-
play’ operation of AVB based networks, greatly simplifying network management
procedures.
3.1.2
Enhancements to Stream Reservation Protocol
Enhancements to the SRP protocol, described in IEEE 802.1Qcc, define an interface
between time sensitive applications and network components, include alternative man-
==PAGE:34==
3.1 Time Sensitive Network Configuration
23
ES1
ES2
ES3
Talker advertise
Talker advertise
Talker advertise
Talker failed 
Listener ready
Listener asking failed 
Listener ready 
Talker advertise 
Listener asking failed 
Listener ready 
Listener asking failed 
Listener ready failed
MVRP VLAN request
MVRP VLAN request
MVRP VLAN request
Non SRP domain
Positive/negative 
resource evaluation
Resource reservation
SW1
SW3
SW2
SW4
SW5
Figure 3.2: Stream reservation procedure.
agement models and introduce procedures for configuring TSN features introduced
after AVB (e.g. frame preemption or time-aware shapers). Issue of applying network
configuration on a per stream basis is also addressed, and stream identification func-
tion from 802.1CB, discussed in the previous chapter, is used for that purpose. The
standard also includes higher level overview of TSN management, and gives examples
of possible management technologies.
3.1.2.1
User Network Interface
IEEE 802.1Qcc introduces the concept of a User Network Interface (UNI), which is
used to exchange TSN configuration information between TSN users (talkers and lis-
teners) and the network (time-sensitive switches or other network equipment). Con-
figuration information provided by TSN users defines stream requirements for the
network (e.g. bandwidth, maximum latency or number of disjoint paths required),
but does not provide any instructions on how these requirements should be fulfilled
by the network. Network side of the interface interprets user provided configuration,
and having a view of network node capabilities and capacities, configures the net-
work accordingly. The UNI is also used to exchange status of configuration, e.g. if
for some reason a TSN stream could not be admitted and network nodes configured,
talker is informed of the failure. No particular mandatory means or methods for UNI
implementation are provided, but rather configuration information to be exchanged
over the interface is specified.
Note, that previously described Stream Reservation Protocol is an example of
==PAGE:35==
3.1 Time Sensitive Network Configuration
24
a UNI, as it is used to exchange configuration information between TSN users and
network equipment, and, consequently, provide optimal network configuration.
Information carried across the UNI bears significant importance to this thesis, as
it provides a formal description of TSN stream properties and requirements, which
can be used in verifying TSN stream performance. For instance, talker information
sent in stream configuration request includes stream period, maximum size of frames
and maximum number of frames to be transmitted during the stream period - stream
characteristics, which, when observed, can indicate stream performance.
As configuration information to be exchanged is separated from implementation
methods and protocols, alternative network management architectures can be intro-
duced. The way UNI is used in wider perspective, i.e., network management, deter-
mines the architecture of a TSN monitoring framework.
3.1.2.2
Fully Distributed Model
In the fully distributed TSN configuration model, UNI information propagates di-
rectly over the TSN network. TSN users advertise their stream information to the
nearest TSN switches, which propagate the information further across the network.
TSN nodes evaluate configuration information received and perform required configu-
ration actions locally, without involving any centralised entities. Previously described
procedures used in SRP are an example of a fully distributed configuration model. Us-
ing the fully distributed model, only CBS features of TSN networks can be configured,
as others require wider network knowledge or different access to TSN bridge managed
objects. Figure 3.3 exemplifies the fully distributed network configuration model.
T
L
UNI 
information
UNI 
information
UNI 
information
UNI 
information
Figure 3.3: Fully distributed network configuration model. Adapted from [7].
3.1.2.3
Centralised Models
Scheduled transmission adds considerable complexity to network configuration. Com-
position of transmission schedules is a computationally complex task - in some cases,
it is combined with a routing task and complexity of required computations is even
more increased. Thus, if time-triggered traﬀic is used, centralised configuration com-
position is beneficial, as less processing resources are required at distributed network
nodes. Full knowledge of the network and available resources when computing the
==PAGE:36==
3.1 Time Sensitive Network Configuration
25
schedules can also result in more eﬀicient network utilisation (e.g. streams may be
spread out more evenly across the network, while conforming to stream requirements).
Additionally, network wide view of available resources at a centralised location also
opens up possibilities for dynamic schedule & route recalculation. To address these
issues and possibilities, centralised TSN configuration models are introduced, in IEEE
802.1Qcc nomenclature - Centralised network/distributed user and fully centralised
models.
Centralised network/distributed user TSN configuration model (see figure 3.4)
maintains the UNI between the network switches and TSN users. TSN talkers adver-
tise stream configuration requirements to the network switches, which in turn forward
the advertisements to a newly introduced entity, the Centralised Network Configu-
ration (CNC). The CNC uses remote management procedures to discover network
topology and node capabilities, and uses this information, paired with the stream ad-
vertisements to configure the network. Here, talkers and listeners need not participate
in the network configuration process. The standard does not specify a protocol to
be used for remote management but examples provided include SNMP, RESTCONF
and NETCONF.
T
L
UNI 
information
UNI 
information
UNI 
information
UNI 
information
Centralized Network
Configuration
UNI information 
exchange
Management 
connections
Figure 3.4: Centralised network/distributed user configuration model.
Adapted
from [7].
Fully centralised TSN configuration model centralises both network configuration
and stream information exchange (see figure 3.5). A new entity, Central User Con-
figuration (CUC) is added. CUC discovers all end stations (talkers & listeners) and
their capabilities (related and unrelated to TSN). Information exchange between end
stations and the CUC is not specified by the IEEE 802.1Qcc standard, however it
==PAGE:37==
3.1 Time Sensitive Network Configuration
26
specifies some mandatory information to be exchanged - size of end user traﬀic, 802.1
capabilities, and port information. Using this information, end user of the CUC is
expected to design the desired communication streams manually or automatically
(e.g. pair discovered sensors to respective discovered actuators). Once the required
streams are known, stream configuration information can be exchanged over the UNI,
which now resides between CNC and CUC. CNC configures the network in the same
manner as in the previously described centralised network/distributed user configura-
tion model. After network configuration, success/failure of configuration is signalled
over the UNI, and CUC eventually configures end stations for stream transmission.
T
L
UNI 
information
Centralized Network
Configuration
UNI information 
exchange
Management 
connections
Centralized User
Configuration
Figure 3.5: Fully centralised TSN configuration model. Adapted from [7].
All TSN features can be configured using both centralised configuration models.
3.1.2.4
Configuration Information
Among the enhancements introduced by 802.1Qcc, is the extension of switch manage-
ment objects to accommodate resource reservation by remote management. Managed
objects added at network nodes include propagation delay and node residence time
information. To be more precise, physical link propagation delay values for all node
ports (participating in gPTP domain) and node residence time for all node port pairs
(participating in gPTP domain) must be available. These values are needed in time
sensitive feature configuration. For instance, once network configuration for a partic-
ular stream is done, worst case accumulated latency for its frames must be reported
back to TSN talkers/listeners (in all configuration models) - to calculate the worst
==PAGE:38==
3.2 Network Management Protocols
27
case latency both the propagation delay of all traversed links and residence time of
all bridges along the path are needed.
3.2
Network Management Protocols
IEEE TSN standardisation does not specify mandatory network management proto-
cols to be used. However, there is a general consensus among researchers on preferred
technologies, as well as exemplary mentions in the standards. In this section, key fea-
tures of the protocols proposed for TSN management are introduced.
3.2.1
NETCONF, RESTCONF & YANG
NETCONF [37] is an advanced network management protocol introduced to create
a more programmatic and interoperable network management interface. It utilises
widely used secure transport protocols carried over TCP, such as SSH or TLS, mean-
ing configuration messages (or operational data) are transported reliably. Remote
procedure call (RPC) layer, residing ’on top’ of the transport layer, provides mecha-
nisms for encoding NETCONF messages. NETCONF defines a set of basic network
information manipulation and retrieval commands, such as <get-config> or <edit-
config>, that are used as RPC messages but the protocol also allows for custom
operation definition. Device configuration or operational information conceptually re-
sides in the content layer and is represented as structured XMLs. While NETCONF
standard itself does not specify a mandatory structure (schema) for the manipulated
information, YANG data modeling language was designed specifically to adhere to
the specifics of NETCONF. See figure 3.6 for a visualisation of conceptual NETCONF
layers.
SSH, TLS, ...
<get>, <get-config>,
<edit-config>, ...
Secure transport
Messages
Operations
Content
<rpc>, <rpc-reply>
Configuration, 
operational data
<notification>
Notification data
Figure 3.6: Conceptual NETCONF layers. Adapted from [37].
An important feature to NETCONF is its support of multiple configuration data-
stores - startup (device configuration used immediately after boot up), running (con-
figuration active at a given point in time) and candidate (non-active configuration
which can be committed to running at any point). This distinction enables editing
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Network Management Protocols
28
any of the configurations separately. Paired with the confirmed commit, rollback and
lock NETCONF capabilities, datastore distinction allows for network wide transac-
tional configuration. For instance, if a TAS transmission schedule to be configured at
any number of devices failed at at least one of them, network wide transaction can
be cancelled, configurations rolled back and the network left in a fully defined state.
NETCONF also distinguishes between configuration and operational data - which im-
proves configuration readability and simplifies distinction between configurable and
operational parameters. To aid NETCONF users in reading state or configuration
data of the device, an XPath filter can be used to specify the desired XML branches.
Initial NETCONF standardisation specified only sessions established from the
NETCONF client (i.e., remote manager) to the NETCONF server (i.e., network de-
vice).
Recently an addition has been made, specifying a NETCONF ’Call Home’
feature, allowing network devices to register to the remote management entity (i.e.
NETCONF client). This feature is desirable in cases there devices are often power-
cycled (to register automatically to the remote management system), or, for instance,
aid in deploying new networks.
NETCONF notifications define mechanisms needed to inform a remote manage-
ment entity of any events at the local device. A set of base events are described in
NETCONF standardisation - notifying of a configuration change, for instance. Mech-
anisms for creating custom notification are also present. If a NETCONF client wishes
to receive notifications, it must first subscribe for a desired event stream. While notifi-
cations are important in monitoring device state (e.g. one could subscribe to an event
signalling bridge port state change), current NETCONF standardisation lacks sup-
port for a ’push’ based operational data collection mechanism, which could be used
to collect more data than an event notification. YANG push feature, currently a pro-
posed standard, describes mechanisms for pushing datastore information, periodically
or on-change. This feature might be desirable in some monitoring scenarios, where,
for instance, data from a NETCONF server is required at the NETCONF client as
soon as possible after data becomes available, or, for some reasons, polling is not
desirable. In TSN context, an example of such feature could be made in case of time
triggered monitoring. For instance, if traﬀic monitoring is activated at a selection of
network devices at a particular time specified based on a common synchronised time
scale and is supposed to run for a certain time interval, YANG push messages could
be used by network nodes to transfer the resulting measurements to the collector as
soon as the monitoring period is over, as opposed to waiting for a polling event from
the central collector.
There are cases, where network management is preferred to be performed from
a web based application (e.g. easier implementation, suitable for simpler devices).
For such situations, RESTCONF [38], a sister protocol of NETCONF, can be used.
RESTCONF is transported over HTTPS protocol, and its messages are formatted in
JSON instead of XML. RESTCONF maintains only a subset of NETCONF capabil-
ities, thus protocols should be chosen in care. For instance, RESTCONF does not
support previously described network wide transaction based configuration mecha-
nism.
==PAGE:40==
3.2 Network Management Protocols
29
YANG data modeling language [39] was designed specifically to model network
configuration and to be used in tandem with the NETCONF protocol. YANG data
modules and their instances are human readable, clearly organised, hierarchical and
expandable. Human readability is ensured by using textual names for all entities of
YANG modules. Module organisation is aided by informational statements, such as
revision, description or organization. Key elements of a YANG module’s tree-like
structure are leaves, containers and lists. A leaf is a lowest level element carrying a
value of a specified data type (e.g., uint32 (unsigned 32 bit integer)). A list of same
type leaves can be defined via leaf-list. Containers and lists are higher layer struc-
tures holding multiple leaves, leaf-lists or other containers or lists. Groupings and
typedefs can be used to introduce custom sets or related parameters or new type def-
initions. Data elements can have constraints enforced on them, for instance, config
false constraint makes it clear that the data element carries only state data. Cus-
tom NETCONF operations or notifications can be defined using rpc and notification
statements, respectively. Modularity of YANG data modules is achieved by using
statements like import and augment, allowing data model designers to import other
YANG modules or augment existing ones with user specific information.
One of the greatest possible gains of NETCONF/RESTCONF and YANG is in-
creased device interoperability which can be achieved by using common data models.
Multiple standardisation bodies publish standard YANG modules for various net-
working technologies. IEEE has also published a couple of YANG modules for TSN
feature configuration, including a tsn-types module structuring UNI information de-
scribed previously.
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 4
Time Sensitive Network
Monitoring
In this chapter of the thesis, time sensitive monitoring objectives are introduced,
followed by design considerations of the monitoring system.
4.1
Time Sensitive Network Monitoring Objectives
As discussed in previous chapters, runtime (re)configuration of time sensitive networks
is discussed widely in the industry and research as a needed addition to current TSN
technology group, in order to increase network eﬀiciency and usability (e.g. enable
TSN to be used in fog computing scenarios).
A central location, having network-
wide knowledge, used to create needed network configuration and introduce network
changes is seen as a key component in runtime configurable time sensitive networks.
To build the network-wide knowledge multiple procedures are needed. Network topol-
ogy information and device capabilities are expected to be discovered using LLDP
(Link Layer Discovery Protocol).
Some operational data, e.g.
link status, faults,
etc., can be collected using traditional network monitoring practices (polling or event
notifications of specific managed objects). Another piece of the puzzle required is per-
formance monitoring of configured streams, which is the focus of this thesis. Through
stream performance verification, the following objectives should be achieved:
1. provide required information for currently configured stream performance veri-
fication;
2. provide input to routing and scheduling algorithms, e.g.
as reconfiguration
triggering events;
3. provide additional information on current network status, e.g. percentage of
link bandwidth used for TSN streams.
In order to accomplish the set objectives, multiple design choices have to be made
in the monitoring framework design process and will be discussed in the following
sections.
==PAGE:42==
4.2 Monitored Metrics
31
4.2
Monitored Metrics
To accomplish objectives listed in section 4.1, a set of monitored metrics that can
be used to verify configured stream performance is required. One way of defining
the set of metrics is to investigate the information carried across the UNI (User Net-
work Interface). According to the TSN configuration procedures discussed in previous
chapters, information exchanged across the UNI can be split to three groups - talker,
listener and status. Talker information group provides information on the source of
the stream, stream transmission characteristics and stream specific source require-
ments for the network. Having this information, multiple metrics can be established:
• stream interval - stream instance periodicity, i.e. talker specifies a period of
time over which stream’s bitrate specification cannot be exceeded. In TT traﬀic
types, the interval can be seen as a period between allocated time slots (and,
thus, stream instances). In other traﬀic types, it should be viewed as a ’sliding
window’ interval over which a stream cannot exceed its bitrate specification.
• maximum number of frames and maximum frame size that can be transmitted
over a single specified interval.
• transmission selection type - talker specifies whether a credit based shaper, time
aware shaper or a strict priority mechanism is used. Depending on this value,
a set of metrics monitored can be adjusted. For example, if the talker specifies
that a credit based shaper is used, there is no need or possibility to monitor
time aware shaper specific metrics.
• talker jitter - talker specifies the maximum transmission jitter from the given
transmission offset (introduced below).
• maximum stream latency that any frame of the stream can experience. It is
specified as time from the beginning of transmitter’s interval to the listener
receiving the frame.
Information in the listener group specifies listener’s interface capabilities and re-
quirements to the network. Similarly to the talker group, requirements include max-
imum stream latency, which is specific to the listener. In case of a multicast stream,
the maximum latency provided by the talker represents the largest latency of all
stream listeners. Therefore, listener provided maximum latency is a more accurate
boundary value when evaluating end-to-end stream latency.
The status information group contains network’s reply to talker and listener on a
request for stream configuration. In addition to reporting configuration status, and,
if necessary, failure codes, network reports the expected latency for any frame of the
stream, and talker transmission offset. Talker transmission offset, in TT traﬀic type
streams, specifies time of talker transmission with a reference to the start of talker
transmission interval. As it is possible to determine start of any transmission interval
==PAGE:43==
4.3 Monitoring Methods
32
in a synchronised network, transmission offset can also be monitored and verified
against the value provided by the network.
In addition to analysing stream information exchanged by talker, listener, and
the network, some performance metrics can be found in real-time systems literature.
Kopetz in [1], highlights the negative impact of latency jitter to real-time systems due
to its uncertain nature. Along with minimal latency, the author places latency jitter
as the two key indicators of real-time communication system performance quality. It
is also worth remembering, that providing low, bounded latency and low jitter is
one of the goals of TSN. Generally, latency jitter should be a small fraction of total
latency, and jitter tolerance boundaries should be specified by applications using the
communication system. Evaluation of frame end to end latency and latency jitter
require network synchronization - however, in cases then a common timescale is not
available, Gutierrez et al. propose evaluating stream jitter by taking into account
frame inter-arrival times at one node of the network, i.e. define jitter as variation in
frame periodicity rather than delay [20].
To summarise, the list of monitored metrics used in this thesis is drafted by using
stream specifications given in 802.1Qcc amendment and performance indicators of
real time systems found in relevant literature. A summary of all monitored metrics
is given in table 4.1 along with a brief description of evaluation goal.
Metric
Objective
1.
Stream interval
Verify if stream periodicity is maintained end-to-end (TT traﬀic type).
2.
Stream bitrate
Verify if a talker meets traﬀic specification provided at the time of configuration.
3.
Stream latency
Verify if stream latency requirements are upheld (can be compared against
maximum latency specified by talker/listener and accumulated latency reported
by the network).
4.
Transmission offset
Verify if talker transmission offset falls within the transmission offset specified
by the network +- transmission offset jitter ’promised’ by the talker (TT traﬀic type).
5.
Transmission offset jitter
Verify if talker transmission offset jitter falls within the transmission offset jitter
’promised’ by the talker (TT traﬀic type).
6.
Stream latency jitter
Verify if stream latency jitter falls within user specified acceptable jitter range.
7.
Stream frame inter-arrival
jitter
Verify if stream frame inter-arrival jitter falls within user specified acceptable
jitter range. Talker transmission offset jitter can also be verified.
Table 4.1: A list of monitored metrics.
4.3
Monitoring Methods
An important aspect to consider for any network monitoring system is the choice or
appropriate combination of active and passive methods of collecting network opera-
tional/state data.
4.3.1
Active Monitoring
Active monitoring method requires ’probes’ to be transmitted over the observed seg-
ment of the network. The monitoring data can be collected by inspecting the trans-
==PAGE:44==
4.3 Monitoring Methods
33
mission characteristics of the injected traﬀic (e.g.
delay, loss, jitter, throughput).
Likewise, some monitoring specific data can be inserted into the probe along the path
travelled (e.g. probe arrival times at each hop). Active monitoring method enables
network characteristic evaluation (comparison against a threshold value) in a ’con-
trolled experiment’ environment, allowing for high precision through tailored probes
for the task at hand.
An example of active monitoring using special probes has already been introduced
in this thesis when discussing synchronisation mechanics. The delay measurement
mechanism of 802.1AS sends specialised Pdelay_Req and Pdelay_Resp messages and
uses retrieved information (timestamps) to calculate propagation delay of all network
links belonging to a gPTP domain. In this case, the measured link characteristic is a
physical link property, thus the resulting value is accurate and applicable to any type
of traﬀic. However, if the measured characteristic depends on traﬀic and network
properties, e.g. frame size or link utilisation, results gained using active probes can
only be used to approximate (infer) the desired metric. For instance, a TT traﬀic
probe stream can be scheduled, transmitted and its performance evaluated using a
set of metrics (e.g. from table 4.1). The results cannot be directly applied to any
other TT streams but they can be used to approximate other TT stream performance
on the same path and of the same traﬀic specification.
Active monitoring probes have to be inserted and captured at known locations of
the network to be able to attribute any measurements performed using the probes to
a specific link, path, service, etc. For instance, for a direct measurement of propaga-
tion delay over a path (set of links), an active probe has to be inserted at the first
node of the path and retrieved at the last one. The same kind of a set up is required
if transmission characteristics for a network service need to be inferred from active
probe measurements. Consequently, in order to monitor a diversely positioned set of
entities, a separate measurement is required for each one and the amount of injected
traﬀic is proportional to the number of monitored entities. If a strategy of monitoring
low granularity entities, such as a network service (e.g. an AVB stream), is employed,
distribution of monitoring traﬀic is likely to form hotspots (e.g. on network back-
bone links) and volume of the injected probes can rise rapidly, especially in case of
multicast services (e.g. multiple TSN listeners per talker), causing scalability issues.
Thus, end-to-end active monitoring will not be considered further. High granularity
active monitoring, i.e. per link, on the other hand, has predictable distribution and
maximum volume of monitoring traﬀic.
Metric composition technique can be used to infer performance metrics of a ser-
vice/path by composing higher granularity measurement statistics, thus tackling scal-
ability issues of service level active monitoring. Metric composition is done using a
composition function which processes high granularity measurements based on metric
characteristics and outputs a metric applicable to low granularity entity, such as a
path or a service. For instance, a one-way delay composition function, described in
RFC 6049 [40], sums average finite delays of links of a particular path to obtain total
path delay. A similar approach is used in TSN configuration, where link propagation
delays and node residence times are summed to report accumulated latency is the re-
==PAGE:45==
4.3 Monitoring Methods
34
source reservation process. In centralised configuration models described in 802.1Qcc,
it is expected that network nodes will make link propagation delays and node resi-
dence times (per port pair) accessible for remote management to enable accumulated
latency calculation at the CNC. The previously mentioned gPTP delay measurement
process is expected to be the provider for these values, thus providing the required
baseline latency information to the scheduling & routing algorithms.
An inherent feature of high granularity monitoring is the ability to localize faults.
For example, if a monitored link displays an increased delay, the network operator can
immediately isolate the spacial location of the fault with high accuracy. In comparison,
if end to end monitoring is deployed in this scenario, the operator would notice an
increased delay for a service or a path and would then have to take additional, in
most cases complex and/or time consuming action to isolate the faulty segment.
4.3.2
Passive Monitoring
Using passive network monitoring method, network operational characteristics are
derived by performing non-intrusive direct measurements on existing network traﬀic.
Passive monitors are set up at select network locations and capture desired network
traﬀic. Gathered samples are used to extract relevant characteristics, such as arrival,
transmission times, data unit size, etc.
Then, if required, monitoring data from
multiple monitors can be transported to a centralized location for further analysis,
for instance, frame delay calculation over the network segment between monitors.
The passive monitoring method holds multiple advantages over the active one
discussed previously. Non-intrusive measurements made directly apply to sampled
client traﬀic, as opposed to actively obtained measurement results, where merely
a basis for estimating client traﬀic performance is provided. Additionally, passive
monitoring does not require any OAM traﬀic to be inserted on the network path for
the purpose of measurement. Some traﬀic overhead is added in order to transport
local, per node measurements to a central location and will be discussed in this
section. These key advantages lead to passive monitoring methods being well suited
for end-to-end stream performance verification.
Challenges posed by passive monitor design are related to overall solution scala-
bility. Primary processing of captured frames/packets must be eﬀicient and minimal
due to the rate at which new data units arrive.
Temporary storage for captured
traﬀic (or retrieved data fields) must also be considered. Network load induced by
monitoring data transportation to the centralised location can also be significant thus
care must be taken to minimize it. Finally, monitoring data processing at the cen-
tralised location should also be as eﬀicient as possible to be able to retrieve user traﬀic
characteristics (such as delay) as quickly as possible.
At a high level, a passive network monitor can be described as an entity, observing
a flow of PDUs and selecting desired PDUs to be further analysed based on a pro-
vided set of rules. After analysing, the passive monitor generates a report containing
information gathered from the selected PDUs (e.g. select data fields, or timestamps
==PAGE:46==
4.3 Monitoring Methods
35
extracted) and exports it to a central collector for further analysis if required. A fig-
ure representing the layout of monitor functions is given in figure 4.1. Each function
block of the passive monitor is further described below.
Passive Network Monitor
PDU Selector
Selection 
rule 1
Selection 
rule 2
Selection 
rule N
Observed 
PDU Flow
Analyser
PDU Property 1
PDU Property 1
PDU Property 2
PDU Property N
Reporter
PDU Property 1
PDU 1 Report
PDU Property 1
PDU 2 Report
PDU Property 1
PDU N Report
Export API
Collector
Selected 
PDUs
Figure 4.1: A high level passive monitor function diagram.
PDU Selector’s
function is to select desired PDUs for further analysis. For in-
stance, the selector’s rule set could be designed to pick frames belonging to a partic-
ular stream and then sample every second frame. Selector’s role is detrimental for
monitoring solution scalability, as it allows to reduce the number of PDUs used in the
analyser (compared to all observed PDUs), the number of reports exported by the
reporter and consequently the scale of processing tasks required at the collector. As a
result, processing tasks both at the local monitors and central collector take less time
and require less resources in terms of processing and memory. On the other hand, a
lower selection frequency (sampling rate) results in less accurate and representative
measurement results for the parent population, thus an acceptable trade-off must be
made. PDU Selection strategies can be divided in the following main categories (in
accordance with [41] and [42]):
• deterministic selection - PDUs are selected based on a deterministic function,
e.g. picking every n −th PDU, or PDUs arriving at specified intervals of time.
• random selection - PDUs are selected randomly with a given probability.
Both random and deterministic selection processes are started using a selection
trigger. Multiple types of selection triggers can be used to select the PDU, for instance,
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Monitoring Methods
36
the already mentioned packet count based trigger, where every n −th arrived PDU
is selected. Another option is the packet content based trigger, where selection is
done by directly comparing a PDU header field against a required value, or applying
a hashing function to immutable observed PDU fields and selecting the ones where
hashing results fall within a specified range. In this case, every PDU must be analysed
before selection, thus more processing resources are required. Time-based trigger can
also be used, where selection is triggered at certain points in time. The selection
triggers can be concatenated to sample the desired traﬀic.
PDU selection for TSN networks
narrows the choice of feasible sampling strate-
gies. First, as discussed, the key purpose of TSN passive monitoring is performance
verification of configured TSN streams. Thus, the set of rules in the PDU selector
must be able to differentiate between TSN streams, distinguish TSN streams from
non-TSN traﬀic and select frames accordingly.
Favourably, the stream identifica-
tion function (see section 2.5) defines mechanisms to identify TSN streams by using
information in frame/packet header. Therefore, a packet content based selection trig-
ger must be used.
Secondly, as stream frame latency is one of the metrics to be
monitored (see table 4.1), sampled frame data from multiple, synchronised network
monitors must be correlated. Furthermore, it must be ensured that PDUs selected at
the first network monitor are also selected at the second one, thus deterministic frame
selection must be used. If frame replication is used (see section 2.5), all frames in-
clude a unique sequence number, which could be used in deterministic content based
sampling. If frame replication is not used, previously mentioned hashing function
approach can be employed to select frames in a reproducible fashion.
Analyser’s
function is to extract the desired information from the sampled frame.
Required properties of frames, based on the list of monitored metrics (see table 4.1),
include frame size (for bitrate calculation) and frame timestamps (further discussed
in section 4.4).
Reporter
must be able to format the data provided by the analyser. As discussed
in 3.2, YANG data modeling language is used and foreseen to be used in the future for
modeling TSN configuration and state data. To ease TSN monitoring system integra-
tion in a wider TSN configuration framework, the monitor should also employ YANG
to model TSN monitor data. While no YANG model is currently standardised to be
used for describing TSN operational data, some models exist that can be augmented
for that purpose.
Export API
must be able to respond to requests for monitoring information from
the central collector and/or initiate monitoring information transfer to the central
collector. As discussed in 3.2, NETCONF is seen as the most suitable option for
TSN configuration.
Thus, same as in reporter’s case, the TSN monitor’s export
==PAGE:48==
4.4 Time Sensitive Network Monitoring Entities
37
API should use NETCONF to ease monitoring system integration with the TSN
configuration framework.
4.3.3
Summary
To summarise, active monitoring methods are unfeasible in end-to-end service moni-
toring, however are very well suited to perform high granularity measurements. Met-
ric composition technique can be used to infer characteristics of lower granularity
entities. This process is well suited to link/path delay calculation. Link propagation
delay and node residence times (per port pair) are expected to be provided by the
synchronisation protocol used, thus this measurement process is out of scope for the
TSN monitoring system.
Passive monitoring methods are well suited to end-to-end network service moni-
toring, as reliable results can be achieved by performing measurements using client
traﬀic. Passive monitoring is used in this thesis to monitor network metrics listed in
table 4.1.
4.4
Time Sensitive Network Monitoring Entities
In this section, entities involved in time sensitive network monitoring are introduced
and their integration in centralised TSN configuration models discussed.
Firstly, a set of distributed network monitors is needed to collect frame information
required in metric evaluation process. These distributed monitoring entities will be
further referred to simply as source monitors or destination monitors, depending on
their topological location and relation to a monitored stream. Monitor function is
described in section 4.3.2. In short, it must be able to observe traﬀic, select a sample
population of all observed frames, extract desired properties of the frames, and be
able to relay processed data to the central collector. In this thesis, the monitor is a
software module, with the only ’special’ requirement to hardware being the capability
to provide hardware frame arrival and/or transmission timestamps.
Monitor topological placement has an effect on accuracy of monitored metric
calculation. As end-to-end frame latency must be evaluated, sampling frames as close
to the source and destination of the stream is desired, otherwise additional corrections
must be made to resulting values. In other metric evaluation, any number of hops
between the stream source or destination and source or destination monitor adds
an uncertainty in evaluating talker behaviour or network induced metric variations.
Three options of monitor placement can be distinguished:
• Integrated to the talker and listener devices. TSN talkers and listeners are part
of the gPTP domain and used interface cards have TSN capabilities. This place-
ment option allows the most accurate end-to-end measurements as frames are
sampled at the source and destination interfaces of the stream. As a drawback,
no intermediate along-the-path measurements can be made.
==PAGE:49==
4.4 Time Sensitive Network Monitoring Entities
38
• Integrated to network devices (see figure 4.2). In this case, network monitors at
the first and last hop of the stream should be configured to monitor the given
stream. Corrections to end-to-end latency measured can be made by adding the
first and final hop propagation delay value provided by the gPTP protocol. As
locations of TSN talkers/listeners might not be known or change during network
operation, all network devices should have the monitor integrated. Thus, as a
side bonus, intermediate along-the-path monitors could be configured to report
measurements (e.g. in troubleshooting or evaluation scenarios).
• As separate devices. In this case, monitors are implemented on separate hard-
ware and are connected to first and last hop network switches. Port mirroring
is configured on the network switches, enabling traﬀic to be observed at the
monitors. Monitors must also be gPTP capable devices. End-to-end latency
values can be corrected by taking into account link delay values and switch resi-
dence times. As a drawback, this solution provides the lowest level of accuracy.
However, it might be useful in brownfield deployments or evaluation purposes.
Secondly, a centralised location for monitor data collection is required. The cen-
tralised location will be further referred to as the collector. Collector must be able to
retrieve TSN operational data from monitors by polling or receiving push based data
transactions. Next, it must be able to perform required processing actions (e.g. end-
to-end latency calculation), and relay stream monitoring data to further consumers,
for instance, a monitoring data display or a routing & scheduling algorithm. An ex-
ample fully centralised model topology with network monitors integrated to network
switches is given in figure 4.2.
TSN monitoring configuration procedures should integrate to current TSN con-
figuration procedures. A YANG model for configuration information carried on the
UNI interface is introduced in 802.1Qcc amendment. Configuration flow of the fully
centralised model can be split in four groups - talker and listener discovery, which is
the responsibility of the CUC, stream information exchange between the CUC and
the CNC, network topology and device capability discovery and network configura-
tion, which are responsibilities of the CNC. For the integrated topological placement
scenarios, ideally, the mentioned YANG model should be augmented to represent
stream monitoring status. For instance, when the stream is built at the CUC, an
additional configuration value should indicate whether the stream should be moni-
tored. Similarly, during network device discovery, devices with an integrated mon-
itoring module should report monitoring capability among other reported interface
capabilities. This knowledge of stream monitoring requirements and network device
monitoring capabilities would allow stream monitoring configuration to be included
in stream configuration procedures introduced in 802.1Qcc.
==PAGE:50==
4.4 Time Sensitive Network Monitoring Entities
39
EN1
EN2
Centralized Network
Configuration
Collector
Centralized User
Configuration
SW1
SW2
SW3
M
M
M
CUC information 
exchange
TSN monitoring information 
exchange
TSN configuration information 
exchange
M
TSN monitoring module
Figure 4.2: A high level fully centralised TSN configuration model with integrated
monitoring capabilities.
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 5
Time Sensitive Network
Monitoring Framework
In this chapter, process of TSN monitoring framework implementation, according
to the design guidelines drawn up in previous chapters, is detailed. First, methods
for retrieving monitored metrics determined in section 4.3 are introduced.
Then,
a YANG data model used to model network monitoring information is described.
Finally, implementation details of both the collector and the monitors are discussed.
5.1
Methods for Monitored Metric Calculation
5.1.1
Frame Timestamps
To increase measurement accuracy, care must be taken then selecting which frame
timestamps should be used. Multiple frame timestamping options exist. Some net-
work interface cards offer support for generating timestamps upon frame arrival or
transmission based on an internal NIC clock. These hardware generated timestamps
are more accurate than software timestamps generated in the kernel (or in userspace)
[43]. Thus, hardware timestamps should be used. Secondly, timestamp ’direction’
should be chosen to represent stream direction. For instance, if monitors are inte-
grated at the talker/listener, source monitor should use transmission timestamps and
destination monitor reception timestamps. In monitored metric calculation methods
presented below, a receiving timestamp is used in all cases (rx), however the same
calculations can be performed using transmission timestamps (tx), or timestamp ’di-
rection’ should be adjusted based on monitor integration type.
5.1.2
Stream Period, Bitrate and Inter-Arrival Jitter
A key characteristic to a scheduled stream is its cyclic transmission and the period
in which the cycle is repeated. Stream period measurement goal is to verify if the
periodicity of stream instances is compliant with the interval requirement posed by the
stream’s talker. In order to measure the stream Si period, a network monitor, placed
==PAGE:52==
5.1 Methods for Monitored Metric Calculation
41
in the stream’s path pk
i must capture all the frames f k
i belonging to the respective
stream and record the frame arrival ([f k
i ].trx) or transmission ([f k
i ].ttx) times at the
monitor. Then, the recorded timestamps of two neighbouring frames can be used to
calculate the stream Si period TSi as:
TSi = [f k
i ].trx −[f k−1
i
].trx
(5.1)
Transmission jitter at the source node (ideally known and declared by the talker),
and variation in processing delays at intermediate network nodes introduce a certain
amount of variation in the measured stream period. Thus, the stream period must
be calculated as an average over a large enough number n of stream instances:
TSi = 1
n
n
∑
k=1
[f k
i ].trx −[f k−1
i
].trx
(5.2)
Additional complexity to period measurements is added if multiple frames (e.g. f k
ij
and f k
ij+1) are carried in a single stream instance Sk
i . In such case, two sequentially
captured frames can be from the same stream instance, thus the same method for
stream period calculation (equation 5.2) must not be used. IEEE 802.1Qcc standard
notes, that in case a stream instance does have multiple frames, they must be trans-
mitted in a burst, one immediately after the other (separated only by the interframe
gap of the medium). Having that in mind, stream period calculations should be pre-
ceded by a conditional check to verify that the frame arrival times used in calculation
are associated with frames from adjacent (and not the same) stream instances. One
example of such conditional check can be expressed as in equation 5.3, where it is
verified that the time gap between sequentially captured frames is greater than the
transmission time of the larger frame in the pair, thus larger than the interframe gap
over any medium, ruling out the possibility of frames belonging to the same stream
instance. Frames meeting the condition can be used for period calculations.
([f k
i ].trx −[f k−1
i
].trx) > max([f k−1
i
].L, [f k
i ].L)
LinkBitrate
(5.3)
As proposed by Gutierrez et. al. in [20], stream jitter can be evaluated by using
frame period variation (FPV). For this purpose, subsequent period measurement
values can be used (equation 5.4). Similar to period calculation, period variation
values are also averaged over a large enough number n of stream instances.
FPV = T m
Si −T m−1
Si
(5.4)
A pseudo-code example for stream period and stream period variation calculation
procedure is given in algorithm 1. At algorithm 1 lines 2 - 5, if no previous frame was
==PAGE:53==
5.1 Methods for Monitored Metric Calculation
42
previously captured, current frame arrival time is used as the first point in time for
period calculation. As the next captured frame is analysed, condition check at line 7
is performed to verify that the currently analysed frame and the previously analysed
frame belong to separate stream instances. If the conditional check is passed, period
is calculated. Additional variables track the count of periods calculated and their sum
value needed for average period calculations. Further, period variation is calculated
using the same logical steps as in period calculation. If the analysed frame belongs to
the same stream instance as the previously analysed frame, period calculation function
returns. At lines 23 - 32, if measurements for the specified number of instances are
collected, average values are calculated and saved.
If traﬀic is not strictly periodic (e.g. AVB streams), or to complement period
measurements, stream’s bitrate over a certain time interval can be measured. Lengths
of frames arriving in the measurement interval, defined by the timestamp of the
starting frame and a certain number of stream periods (i.e. meeting condition 5.5),
should be accumulated. The resulting data size transferred during the measurement
interval can then be used to find the average data size carried during a single interval
and compared against the value declared by the talker.
[f i
k].trx < ([f start
k
].trx + NumberOfPeriods ∗T)
(5.5)
A pseudo-code example for stream bitrate calculation procedure is given in algo-
rithm 2. At algorithm 2 lines 2 - 5, starting point of bitrate measurement is fixed
and bits carried by the first analysed frame in the period accumulated. As frames
arrive, their timestamps are evaluated to check whether they fall within the bitrate
calculation period at line 7. If analysed frame belongs to the period, its length in
bits is accumulated. Otherwise, bitrate is calculated, the result saved and bitrate
calculation period reset at lines 10 - 12.
5.1.3
Frame Delay and Frame Delay Variation
As mentioned, end to end frame delay calculations must be performed at a central
location, where frame arrival/transmission timestamps are available from source and
destination monitors. Moreover, the sets of frames selected by the two monitors must
overlap (i.e. Zvsrc
i
Si
∩Zvj
Si ̸= ∅, vj ∈Vdst
i
) and the larger the set intersection is, the more
eﬀicient delay calculations can be achieved (ideally Zvsrc
i
Si
= Zvj
Si, vj ∈Vdst
i
). Given
the two overlapping sets of frames and their respective arrival times, individual frame
delay can be calculated using the equation below:
Di,j = [Zvj.f k
i ].trx −[Zvsrc
i
.f k
i ].trx, vj ∈Vdst
i
(5.6)
Using the individual frame delay values, multiple statistical operations can be
performed, such as getting the average, minimum and maximum delay values of
==PAGE:54==
5.1 Methods for Monitored Metric Calculation
43
Algorithm 1 Average stream period and period jitter calculation
Require: ti = [f k
i ].trx, Li = [f k
i ].L, B = LinkBitrate, N = NumberOfPeriods
Ensure: AverageStreamPeriodSi, AverageStreamPeriodV ariationSi
1: procedure Calculate
average
stream
period
and
period
varia-
tion(tm, Lm)
2:
if tm−1 = 0 then
3:
tm−1 ←tm
4:
Lm−1 ←Lm
5:
return
▷No previous frame
6:
end if
7:
if tm −tm−1 > max(Lm−1, Lm)/B then
8:
TSi ←tm −tm−1
9:
ti−m ←tm
10:
TSisum ←TSisum + TSi
11:
TSicount ←TSicount + 1
12:
if T m−1
Si
= 0 then
13:
T m−1
Si
= TSi
▷No previous measurement
14:
else
15:
FPVSi = |T m−1
Si
−TSi|
16:
FPVSisum = FPVSisum + FPVSi
17:
FPVSicount = FPVSicount + 1
18:
T m−1
Si
= TSi
19:
end if
20:
else
21:
return
22:
end if
23:
if TSicount = N then
24:
TSiavg = TSisum/TSicount
25:
TSicount = 0
26:
TSisum = 0
27:
FPVSiavg = FPVSisum/FPVSicount
28:
FPVSicount = 0
29:
FPVSisum = 0
30:
Write(TSiavg ∈AverageStreamPeriodSi)
31:
Write(FPVSiavg ∈AverageStreamPeriodV ariationSi)
32:
end if
33:
return
34: end procedure
==PAGE:55==
5.1 Methods for Monitored Metric Calculation
44
Algorithm 2 Average stream bitrate calculation
Require: tm = [f k
i ].trx, Lm = [f k
i ].L, TSi = [Si].Ti, N = NumberOfPeriods
Ensure: AverageStreamBitrateSi
1: procedure Calculate average stream bitrate(tm, Lm)
2:
if tstart = 0 then
3:
tstart ←tm
4:
Lacc ←Lm
5:
return
▷Starting point previously unset
6:
end if
7:
if tm < (tstart + N ∗TSi) then
8:
Lacc ←Lacc + Lm
9:
else
10:
BSiavg = Lacc/(N ∗TSi)
11:
Write(BSiavg ∈AverageStreamBitrateSi)
12:
tstart ←0
13:
end if
14:
return
15: end procedure
the sample population investigated, however such statistical operations are left out
of calculations performed at the collector in order to optimize performance. Once
frame delay is calculated, its values can be used to calculate frame delay variation
(FDV). Here, the same FDV calculation method as in ITU-T Y.1731 Ethernet OAM
[44] recommendation is used (equation 5.7). An additional condition to the FDV
calculation is that the delay values used are measured using same length frames (due
to differences in transmission delay).
An example of a delay and delay variation
calculation procedure done at the central location (collector) for reported sets of
frames is given in algorithm 3. Here, the process loops through all observed frames
at the destination monitor and calculations are performed for each frame that was
observed at both the source and destination monitors.
At algorithm 3 lines 2-6,
frame delay is calculated by finding the same frame in both source and destination
monitor observed frame sets, and using frame timestamps to calculate the delay as in
equation 5.6. Frame delay variation is calculated (algorithm 3 lines 7 -15) similarly
to frame period variation calculations in 1. Finally, analysed frame data is deleted
from observed frame sets.
FDV = Dm −Dm+1
(5.7)
Frame sampling for the delay calculations must be included in operations per-
formed at local monitors, for instance in stream period or bitrate calculations. An
example of frame selection is given in algorithm 4.
==PAGE:56==
5.1 Methods for Monitored Metric Calculation
45
Algorithm 3 Frame delay calculation
Require: Zvsrc
i
Si
∩Zvj
Si ̸= ∅, vj ∈Vdst
i
Ensure: Zvsrc
i
Si
∩Zvj
Si = ∅, vj ∈Vdst
i
, FrameDelaySi, FrameDelayV ariationSi
1: procedure Calculate frame delay and delay variation(ti, Li)
2:
for f k
i ∈Zvj
Si ̸= ∅, vj ∈Vdst
i
do
3:
Find [f k
i ].trx in Zvsrc
i
Si
4:
Find [f k
i ].trx in Zvj
Si, vj ∈Vdst
i
5:
Calculate delay Df k
i = [Zvj.f k
i ].trx −[Zvsrc
i
.f k
i ].trx, vj ∈Vdst
i
6:
Write(Df k
i ∈FrameDelaySi)
7:
if Dm−1
f k
i
= 0 then
8:
Dm−1
f k
i
= Df k
i
9:
Dm−1
f k
i
size = [f k
i ].L
▷No previous measurement
10:
else
11:
if [f k
i ].L = Dm−1
f k
i
size then
12:
FDV = |Dm−1
f k
i
−Df k
i |
13:
Write(FDV ∈FrameDelayV ariationSi)
14:
Dm−1
f k
i
= Df k
i
15:
end if
16:
end if
17:
Delete [Zvj
Si.f k
i ] and [Zvi
Si.f k
i ]
18:
i ←i + 1
19:
end for
20:
return
21: end procedure
Algorithm 4 Frame sampling
Require: f k
i
Ensure: ZSi
1: procedure Select frames for delay calculation(f k
i )
2:
if f k
i meets SamplingCondition then
3:
Write(f k
i ∈ZSi)
4:
end if
5:
return
6: end procedure
==PAGE:57==
5.2 YANG Data Model for TSN Monitoring Information
46
5.1.4
Transmission Offset and Transmission Offset Jitter
Transmission offset is a parameter passed to time aware talkers, specifying a time
value by which talker transmissions should be offset from the start of their stream
periods. In a synchronised network, time aware talker stream periods are aligned to
a common time scale, for instance, if IEEE 802.1AS synchronisation is used with the
PTP timescale, the first interval begins at 1 January 00:00:00 TAI [7]. Then, the
start of the current interval can be found by using equation 5.8. N in equation 5.8 is
the smallest integer for which the relation 5.9 is true. In this case, it is assumed that
CurrentTime is the synchronised arrival time of the examined frame. Talker jitter
can also be calculated by using subsequent transmission offset values. An example
of transmission offset and transmission offset jitter calculation is given in algorithm
5. Here, transmission offset is calculated at line 2. Note, that the division operation
used here is integer division and fractional part of the result is not used. At lines
4 - 9 transmission offset jitter is calculated in a similar manner as delay and period
variations.
StartOfCurrentInterval = N ∗StreamPeriod,
(5.8)
StartOfCurrentInterval ≥(CurrentTime −StreamPeriod)
(5.9)
Algorithm 5 Transmission offset calculation
Require: f k
i , (f k
i /[Si].Ti) ∈W
Ensure: TransmissionOffsetSi, TransmissionOffsetJitterSi
1: procedure Calculate Transmission Offset(f k
i , TSi = [Si].Ti)
2:
toffset = [f k
i ].trx −(([f k
i ].trx/[Si].Ti) ∗[Si].Ti)
3:
Write(toffset ∈TransmissionOffsetSi)
4:
if tm−1
offset = 0 then
5:
tm−1
offset = toffset
▷No previous measurement
6:
else
7:
toffsetJitter = tm−1
offset −toffset
8:
Write(toffsetJitter ∈TransmissionOffsetJitterSi)
9:
tm−1
offset = toffset
10:
end if
11:
return
12: end procedure
5.2
YANG Data Model for TSN Monitoring Information
A YANG data model, tsn-mon, was created to model the operational data, consisting
of values for the introduced monitored metrics. The model imports the YANG model
==PAGE:58==
5.3 Monitor
47
introduced in 802.1Qcc, ieee802-dot1q-tsn-types [45] and a draft YANG model ieee802-
types [46] and reuses some data element types defined. tsn-mon creates a hierarchical
structure for TSN monitoring data. The root element is a list of all observed streams,
where each stream in the list is identified by its ’stream-id’. Stream ID value data type
is imported from ieee802-dot1q-tsn-types and conforms to its specification in 802.1CB
standard.
Each observed stream has a list of ’measurement sets’. A measurement set list
element (identified by ’set-id’) encloses monitoring data gathered. A measurement
set list allows quantifying monitoring data if required. For instance, if time based
periodic sampling is used, measurement data collected during period A and period
B, can be placed in measurement sets 1 and 2. Another example of quantified sam-
pling could be packet content triggered, count based sampling period - e.g. sample
an X number of frames after frame with ID Y has arrived at the monitor. In this
case, if measurement set IDs and sampling periods are synchronised across all stream
monitors, data at the collector can be correlated between measurement sets, as op-
posed to all monitoring data retrieved from the monitors. In addition to potentially
reducing correlation processing time, in case frame sequence number is used for frame
identification, sampling periods can be adjusted to avoid duplicating frame IDs.
Each measurement set has containers for all monitored metrics observed at a
monitor and sampled frame information. All containers have a config false parameter
associated, to signify that respective data instances represent operational data. The
containers further enclose a list for all measurements made or frames sampled. A
list element of a monitored measurement, for instance stream bitrate, has a leaf
node holding measurement value and a container for measurement timestamp. The
timestamp container uses PTP format timestamp modelled in ieee802-types. Sampled
frame data node has two timestamps associated with it - transmission and reception.
While both timestamps cannot be present at the same time, distinction between them
is important to measurement accuracy as discussed previously.
A UML graph of the described tsn-mon yang model is given in figure 5.1. Full
YANG model, along with an example instance is added in appendix A.
5.3
Monitor
Requirements for a passive network monitor were introduced in section 4.3.2. In this
section, implementation details of the network monitor, inline with the requirements,
are described.
5.3.1
Sampling Network Traﬀic and Extracting Monitored Metrics
First, the monitor must be able to observe network traﬀic on a given network interface.
Depending on the device type used, multiple options for this task exist. In monitor
implementation described in this thesis, commodity hardware and Linux operating
system is used, thus available tools for this platform will be discussed.
==PAGE:59==
5.3 Monitor
48
Figure 5.1: UML style tsn-mon YANG model diagram.
5.3.1.1
Available Options
Probably the most established network packet capture toolkit available is the open-
source libpcap, initially released in 1990s, and, at the time of writing, the latest stable
version introduced in 2019. It provides means to capture network traﬀic destined for,
or passing through (using promiscuous interface mode), a given network interface.
The capture process is performed in the Linux kernel - as a frame arrives at the
device’s network card, an interrupt is generated (alternatively NAPI device polling
is used) and the network card driver processes the frame. The frame is copied from
a network card buffer to kernel managed memory. If libpcap is used, an additional
copy is made to a PF_PACKET socket buffer (socket created by application using
libpcap). Moreover, packet filtering is also done in the kernel - BPF (Berkeley Packet
Filter) style filters can be attached to the used socket and allow only packets matching
the filter to reach userspace application layers. Another option is libpfring, allowing
higher speed packet capture by using NAPI interrupt polling and circular buffers.
Alternatively, one could choose to write a packet capturing application from ground
up, without using any existing libraries.
It was decided to use the libpcap library due to its extensive C API documentation,
simplicity and the fact that its capabilities are suﬀicient for this particular use case.
==PAGE:60==
5.3 Monitor
49
5.3.1.2
Implementation
The packet capture setup using libpcap requires multiple steps, which are described
briefly below:
• Create a packet capture handle for desired interface(s);
• Set capture options:
– promiscuous mode, allowing to capture packets not addressed to the se-
lected interface;
– immediate mode, instructing libpcap to deliver packets to the user applica-
tion as soon as possible, without buffering;
– timestamp type, indicating type of timestamp used.
In this case, used
interfaces support adapter_unsynced timestamp type, which is a times-
tamp generated at the network card (instead of OS kernel) and the clock
is unsynchronised to host clock.
– timestamp precision, indicating whether nanosecond or microsecond preci-
sion timestamps are used. Nanosecond precision is used in this case.
• Activate the capture handle;
• After activating the capture handle, the BPF capture filter can be compiled and
associated with the capture handle. The filter used must be composed based on
TSN stream identification policy used, and the values identifying the stream. In
this implementation, it is assumed that the null stream identification strategy
is used, identifying a stream based on destination MAC address and VLAN ID.
Once the described options are set, the capture can start. A loop capture function is
used, which returns after capturing a certain number of packets. The loop capture
function must be provided a callback function to handle packet captures. In this im-
plementation, the callback function, upon being called, retrieves frame ID, timestamp,
frame size and places the recovered frame information in a raw frame buffer. After
the loop function exits, the handle to the raw frame buffer is placed in a measurement
queue, and the capture loop restarts, now placing captured frame information in a
newly allocated raw frame buffer.
A parallel processing thread continuously checks if there are any raw frame buffer
handles in the measurement queue. If there are, a measurement function is invoked
and the raw frame buffer handle passed as an argument. The measurement function
analyses all frame information from the raw frame buffer, and performs measurements
according to methods introduced in section 5.1. In this thesis, it is assumed that the
frames are always sequenced, thus frames for delay measurement at the collector
are sampled based on their sequence number. Results for each metric are buffered.
After processing all frame information, the measurement function frees the raw frame
buffer.
A graphical representation of the above described processes is given in figure 5.2.
==PAGE:61==
5.3 Monitor
50
Captured frames
Raw frame buffer
Raw frame 
buffer 
handle
Extract 
required 
data
Captured frames metadata
Frame capture loop
Raw frame 
buffer 
handle 1
Raw frame 
buffer 
handle 2
Raw frame 
buffer 
handle 3
Raw frame 
buffer 
handle N
Frame capture loop starts, resulting frame  metadata is placed in a newly allocated raw frame buffer.
Frame capture loop exits after capturing X frames. Raw 
frame buffer handle is placed a measurement queue. The 
capture process immediately restarts using a newly 
allocated raw frame buffer
Extract monitored 
metrics using 
frame metadata
Period buffer
Period jitter buffer
Bitrate buffer
Offset buffer
Offset jitter buffer
Sampled frame buffer
Raw frame buffer 
Raw frame 
buffer 
handle
Measurement loop analyses raw frame metadata, extracts required metrics, samples frames and 
places the results in newly allocated measurement buffers and frees the analysed raw frame buffer. 
Measurement buffer handles are placed in processed measurement buffer. Measurement loop is 
called for all raw frame buffers.
Measurement loop
Period  buffer 
handle
Period jitter  
buffer handle
Bitrate  buffer
 handle
Offset  buffer
 handle
Offset jitter
buffer handle
Sampled frame
buffer handle
Processed measurement buffer
Figure 5.2: Frame capturing and monitored metric extraction processes and respec-
tive data exchange depicted graphically.
5.3.2
NETCONF Server, YANG Datastore and YANG Parser
Once the monitored metric values are retrieved and frames needed for delay calcula-
tion sampled, the monitor must be able to relay the information to the collector. As
discussed in previous chapters, the TSN monitoring information should be modelled
using a YANG data model and exchanged over the network using NETCONF proto-
col. Therefore, a NETCONF server and YANG datastore are needed at the monitor.
==PAGE:62==
5.3 Monitor
51
Additionally, to format the data according to the used data model, a YANG parser
library is needed.
5.3.2.1
Available Options
Netopeer2 NETCONF server, Sysrepo YANG datastore and libyang YANG parser
library are a set of interdependent and standard compliant NETCONF and YANG
open-source tools. All of the listed tools are developed in C programming language
and expose a C API. Netopeer2 uses Sysrepo as its configuration data store. libyang is
used by both to validate and parse data exchanged according to the used YANG model.
Sysrepo can also be used to exchange operational data using sysrepo subscription API.
Along with the toolkit, reasonably detailed documentation is provided. Additionally,
the project is actively maintained and a fair share of useful information can be found
in bug reports, bug fixes, etc.
Other commercial tools exist (e.g. Conf-D from Tail-f or YumaPro from Yuma-
Works). However, for this implementation, alternative tools were not examined as
Netopeer2-Sysrepo pairing provides all needed functionality, is open-source and rea-
sonably documented.
5.3.2.2
Implementation
As discussed, currently, only NETCONF polling is supported, thus TSN monitoring
data is exchanged over the network once a <get> request is received from the collector.
For this purpose, the monitor must subscribe for providing operational data for any
of the monitored streams. Subscription can be done by providing an XPath filter
to the desired data node - in this case, it should be a path to ’stream’ node of the
tsn-mon YANG model. The sysrepo subscription API requires a callback function
to be provided and called once a request for the subscribed data node is received.
In this use case, the callback reads the processed measurement buffer and parses
all found monitoring data to build a data tree based on the used YANG model.
To build the data tree, functions from the libyang library are used.
All sysrepo
subscription events are handled in a separate thread by default, thus any ongoing
capturing or measurement loops can continue in parallel. Once the callback returns
with the appropriate results (valid YANG document), Netopeer2 can respond to the
received <get> request using information provided by the callback function. The
above described process is pictured graphically in figure 5.3.
5.3.3
Summary
To summarise, frames enter the monitor through a packet capture mechanism (PDU
selector in figure 4.1), for which libpcap C library is used.
Then a measurement
function analyses the raw frames, calculates the monitored metrics and samples frames
for further calculations at the collector (Analyser in figure 4.1). The resulting data is
then formatted according to the YANG model used once a NETCONF <get> request
==PAGE:63==
5.3 Monitor
52
Sysrepo callback function
Processed measurement buffer
Parse all measurement buffers found
 in the processed measurement buffer,
return a valid YANG data tree . 
Period buffer
Period jitter buffer
Bitrate buffer
Offset buffer
Offset jitter buffer
Sampled frame buffer
Period  buffer 
handle
Period jitter  
buffer handle
Bitrate  buffer
 handle
Offset  buffer
 handle
Offset jitter
buffer handle
Sampled frame
buffer handle
As the callback is invoked, ​ monitored metric data from the 
processed measurement buffer (this buffer holds handles 
to the separate metric buffers created in the measurement 
loop) is parsed into a YANG data tree conforming to tsn-
mon YANG model. Once parsed, separate metric buffers 
are freed. Netopeer2 server can now issue a NETCONF 
<reply> to the initiating <get> request
<get> request received 
for an observed stream 
data node
Netopeer2 server builds and issues a
NETCONF <reply> containing monitored
metric data and sampled frame data.
Figure 5.3: Sysrepo subscription callback function depicted graphically.
for it is received. Sysrepo operational data subscription API and libyang C library
are used for this process (Reporter in figure 4.1). Finally, Netopeer2 server is used to
receive NETCONF <get> request and send NETCONF <reply> responses (Export
API in figure 4.1). The above entities and their relations are depicted in figure 5.4.
`
netopeer2
monitor
C API
sysrepo
YANGs
Config. Data
Network interface
OS kernel
libpcap
Figure 5.4: Entities used in monitor implementation and their relations.
==PAGE:64==
5.4 Collector
53
5.4
Collector
Collector is used to retrieve TSN monitoring data from the monitors, and perform
calculations which require data correlation, such as frame delay and delay jitter. Here,
a NETCONF client is needed to exchange information with a NETCONF server at
the monitor and an API to export resulting data to any further entities.
In this
implementation, monitoring data is only exported for visualisation and inspection
purposes.
Netopeer2 NETCONF server used at the monitors is based on libnetconf2 C library,
where NETCONF functions are implemented. For easier integration, libnetconf2 is
used at the collector to construct a NETCONF client. No other specialised libraries
or tools are required at the collector.
5.4.1
Implementation
First, the collector must periodically poll the monitors. Separate threads are used to
collect information from different monitors. libnetconf2 library functions are used to
initiate NETCONF sessions, send the <get> request for the appropriate data node
(signified by a XPath filter), and receive the corresponding reply.
If no errors occurred and the received reply contains monitoring data, libyang
library functions are used to read the NETCONF reply data tree and parse the re-
trieved values.
Each stream per monitor is allocated a buffer for each monitored
metric and one more buffer for sampled frame information. Once the data is parsed,
it is placed in these buffers. Delay calculation function runs in a separate thread,
and, as long as there are sampled frames in stream source and destination sam-
pled frame buffers, the delay calculation thread looks for matching frames (based
on frame sequence number) and calculates frame delay and delay jitter. Resulting
values are placed in per stream frame delay and frame delay jitter buffers. In this
implementation, measurement values are exported to an influxdb database instance,
and displayed using a grafana graphing server. Thus, another thread is used that
continually checks measurement buffers for any new measurements to be exported to
the database. A graphical representation of the collector processes described above
is given in figure 5.5.
==PAGE:65==
5.4 Collector
54
Monitoring data retrieval 
threads
Construct NETCONF
<get> RPC
Send NETCONF
<get> RPC
Wait for NETCONF
<reply> RPC
Parse NETCONF
<reply> RPC
Wait polling period
Source bitrate buffer
Source period buffer
Source period jitter  buffer
Source offset buffer
Source offset-jitter buffer
Destination bitrate buffer
Destination period buffer
Destination period jitter  buffer
Destination offset buffer
Destination offset-jitter buffer
Source sampled frames  buffer
Destination sampled frames  buffer
Delay buffer
Delay jitter buffer
Find matching 
frames
Calculate delay
Calculate delay 
jitter
Invalidate matched
pair
Delay  calculation thread
Export thread
Read measurement 
buffers till empty
Export data
Figure 5.5: Collector processes and their processed data..
==PAGE:66==
CHAPTER 6
Testing & Verification
The test process of the designed time sensitive network monitoring system is described
in this chapter. First, the designed YANG model is tested. Then, a test bench built
for testing monitor and central collector entities is introduced. Finally, live traﬀic
monitoring is tested using various traﬀic bandwidths and monitoring parameters,
confirming monitored metric calculation, NETCONF and YANG based information
exchange and collection at the central collector. Testing was done on platforms not
using any TSN forwarding mechanisms, thus this framework is used to pave the way
for future TSN monitoring testing.
6.1
YANG Model Testing
YANG models can be verified using pyang tool. Running command line tool pyang and
specifying tsn-mon.yang YANG model as input does not print any output, which is
the expected behaviour for a correct model. pyang tool can be used for other purposes
too, for instance, printing a YANG schema tree in text format, or generating UML
graphs as provided in figure 5.1.
6.2
Test Setup
In order to be able to proceed with any monitoring system tests, a test bench needed
to be built. In fully software TSN monitor implementation, the testing setup was built
using Linux virtualisation and containerisation. The following entities are required
to build the test setup used:
• traﬀic generator.
As mentioned, the test setup does not use any TSN for-
warding mechanisms. However, the traﬀic generated should maintain periodic-
ity configured. Additionally, traﬀic generator must allow for simple change of
packets-per-second transmitted and packet customisation, in order to be able
to sequence transmitted frames.
• an emulated network. An emulated network is needed in the test setup to route
the generated traﬀic through and introduce a desired frame delay.
==PAGE:67==
6.2 Test Setup
56
• virtual entities to run the collector and the monitors.
TRex traﬀic generator was used for generating traﬀic streams. This generator
allows granular design of test traﬀic streams - user can configure multiple streams
and their transmission order, stream packet contents are also fully adjustable, by
adding/removing any protocol headers, filling the headers and data fields with desired
values. User can also set the desired packet transmission rate. The TRex generator
is run in an Ubuntu server 20.04 virtual machine (VM), VM port used for injecting
traﬀic is bridged to a physical interface on the host machine. The test stream used
contains 360 byte, 802.1Q tagged UDP packets, where frame sequence number is
incremented for each new packet and is encoded in the first 16 bytes of the data field.
Packet per second transmission rate was adjusted in different test runs.
Mininet with Linux bridges was used for network emulation. The emulator is also
run in an Ubuntu server 20.04 VM. Topology used contains two Linux bridges, SW1
and SW2 connected by a single 100Mb/s, adjustable delay link. SW1 is connected
to the traﬀic generator and SW2 is connected to the physical interface used by des-
tination monitor container. Both connections are made using bridged interfaces. It
should be noted that for the bridges to forward traﬀic correctly additional configura-
tion steps are needed, such as setting up required VLAN processing and adding static
forwarding data base entries.
Source monitor node runs on the physical host directly and monitors traﬀic in
promiscuous mode. To run the monitor, host must have Sysrepo and Netopeer2 server
installed. Sysrepo and Netopeer2 require libyang and libnetconf2 libraries installed.
tsn-mon YANG model must be installed in Sysrepo, additionally, models imported
by tsn-mon, i.e. ieee802-dot1q-tsn-types and ieee802-types, must be placed in Sysrepo
YANG model path. Once the models are installed, NETCONF server and the monitor
application can be started.
Destination monitor node runs on a ’privileged’ Ubuntu 18.04 Docker container.
Privileged containers run as a root user from host machine perspective, thus all op-
erations from the container requiring physical host machine resources are allowed. It
is connected to the same physical interface as SW2 using a macvlan driver. Use of a
macvlan instead of a regular bridge allows the container to use the network interface
as if it was directly connected to it. Same requirements as for the source monitor
regarding Sysrepo and Netopeer2 apply to the destination monitor.
Finally, the collector also runs on a Ubuntu 18.04 Docker container. Here, only
libyang and libnetconf2 libraries must be installed and the collector application can
be started. Collector accesses the monitor nodes through a separate docker container
network (an interface of which is also present on the physical host machine).
In
addition, collector monitoring information can be exported to influxdb and grafana
instances running on another Ubuntu server 20.04 VM.
It must be noted, that in this implementation all IP addressing, interface nam-
ing and XPath filtering values are ’hard-coded’ and must be set before compilation.
Ideally, collector and monitor applications should be updated to set the mentioned
settings using dynamic configuration procedures in future implementations.
==PAGE:68==
6.3 Monitoring Testing
57
A topology of the test setup is given in figure 6.1. Here, the yellow arrows indicate
injected test stream traﬀic and direction.
enp0s31f6.23
enp0s31f6.24
Arch Linux  Host OS
Ubuntu 18.04 Container
Destination monitor
(Sysrepo + netopeer + 
stream frame analysis)
Source monitor
(Sysrepo + netopeer + stream frame 
analysis)
Ubuntu 18.04 Container
Collector
(Sysrepo + netopeer + 
monitor data analysis)
TRex
Traffic Generator
Ubuntu Server 
20.04 VM
Ubuntu Server 20.04 VM
Mininet Network Emulation
SW1
SW2
macvlan
Figure 6.1: Test setup used for testing TSN monitoring system performance..
6.3
Monitoring Testing
Using the test setup described above, TSN monitoring system was tested using var-
ious test traﬀic packet per second (PPS) rates, delay values and monitor sampling
==PAGE:69==
6.3 Monitoring Testing
58
and polling rates. In this evaluation, the sampling rate equals the averaging period
for monitoring measurements, for instance, if the sampling rate is 10%, monitored
metric values (e.g. bitrate) reported are an average of 10 measurements. Evaluated
characteristics include the amount of NETCONF traﬀic exchanged, measurement
correctness and measurement registration.
In the first test run, a 10 PPS rate was used with 5 second polling intervals
and 10 % sampling rate. As mentioned, the test stream consists of 360 byte UDP
packets (including frame check sequence(FCS)), thus the expected bitrate is 28.8
kb/s and the expected stream period is 100 ms. libpcap functions capture the frames
without the FCS, thus the expected bitrate is reduced to 28.48 kb/s. Using these
test stream settings, it is expected that the collector will produce 1 measurement
for each monitored metric and sample one frame per second. First, test traﬀic was
run through the emulated network without additional introduced delay (graph 6.2),
and, in the second run the link delay was introduced and set to 10 ms (graph 6.3).
Here, as TSN time aware shapers are not used, transmission offset is not monitored.
The metric values are in tune with the expected ones, e.g. period is observed to be
≈99.99ms, bitrate ≈28.5kb/s. Delay measurements also reflect the expected values
- when no additional delay was introduced a delay of ≈150µs is registered, when
a 10ms delay was introduced, delay values of ≈10.15ms are registered. Naturally,
introduction of delay does not have an effect on monitored bitrate or period.
Observed values cannot be expected to be an exact match of traﬀic generator
parameters for multiple reasons.
First, the emulated network utilises best effort
forwarding, where no transmission guarantees are provided. This means that queueing
times at network nodes are not bounded and affected by contention for resources and
network congestion among frames to be transmitted over a specific interface, which
results in varying delay, period, delay variation and period variation values. Secondly,
and in this test case, more importantly, as the setup is virtualised and run on a single
physical host, all entities involved (emulated network, traﬀic generator, monitors
and the collector) share the same processing resources which introduces additional
variances in packet processing times at Linux bridges used and inaccuracies at the
traﬀic generator.
This effect can be seen in period jitter graph, where it can be
noticed that period jitter is smaller at the source node than at the destination node,
reflecting transmission variances introduced at the emulated network.
Traﬀic generated as a result of NETCONF exchanges between monitors and the
collector was also observed.
Figure 6.4 shows traﬀic distribution in time.
Peaks
every 5 seconds indicate the polling period at which collector polls the source and
destination monitors. The Y axis scale shows bits per second and the X axis shows
time of measurement. A single peak is ≈145kb/s, meaning that each poll of a single
monitor generates ≈72.5kb of monitoring data including protocol overhead. Spread
out over the five second polling period, this value results in ≈14.5kb/s per monitor,
which is approximately 50 % of observed stream traﬀic.
The same tests were repeated using a 100 PPS stream, 5 second polling intervals
and 10 % sampling rate.
The packets used remain the same, thus the expected
bitrate as captured using libpcap is 284.8 kb/s, while period is expected to be 10ms.
==PAGE:70==
6.3 Monitoring Testing
59
Figure 6.2: Monitored metric values at 10 PPS, 10 % sampling rate and no addi-
tional delay introduced. Top graphs show stream bitrate and period ob-
served at the source and destination monitors, while the bottom graphs
show observed delay, delay jitter, and frame period jitter.
No additional delay was introduced. Using these settings for the test stream, it is
expected that the collector will produce 10 measurements for each monitored metric
==PAGE:71==
6.3 Monitoring Testing
60
Figure 6.3: Monitored metric values at 10 PPS, 10 % sampling rate and 10ms delay
introduced. Top graphs show stream bitrate and period observed at
the source and destination monitors, while the bottom graphs show
observed delay, delay jitter, and frame period jitter.
and sample 10 frames per second. Similar tendencies as in previous test run can be
observed - the monitors register bitrate and period values representative of the test
==PAGE:72==
6.3 Monitoring Testing
61
Figure 6.4: Traﬀic generated by NETCONF polling from the collector towards the
monitor at 10 PPS and 10% sampling rate..
stream. A graph for the described test case is given in figure 6.5. An additional
test run was made with an introduced delay - as expected the graph displaying delay
shifted by 10ms (figure 6.6).
It should be noted, that at this measurement and
sampling rate (10 measurements for each metric and 10 sampled frames per second,
resulting in 80 values per second from both monitors), gaps can be seen on the graphs
due to the fact that exporting mechanisms between the collector and influx database
can no longer keep up with the input rate. Thus, in order to confirm measurement
registration, a function writing the results to simple files is added. Moreover, as the
bitrate increases, more and more processing resources are required by the test setup
- which is reflected by increased variation in monitored metric values.
As expected, it can be observed that NETCONF traﬀic is also greater compared
to a lower bitrate test stream (see figure 6.7). In this case, a single peak is ≈850kb/s,
meaning that each poll of a single monitor generates ≈425kb. Spread out over the
five second polling period, this value results in ≈85kb/s per monitor, which is ap-
proximately 30 % of subject traﬀic. It can be observed, that while the traﬀic bitrate
and consequently measurement rate increased was increased tenfold, NETCONF traf-
fic rate only increased ≈6 times, indicating a non linear relation between observed
traﬀic quantity and resulting monitoring traﬀic quantity.
The same tests were conducted for 1000, 2500, 5000, and 10000 PPS rates. Sam-
pling rate, polling period and link delay were fixed at 10 %, 5 seconds and 10 mil-
liseconds respectively. As mentioned, process of exporting measurements from the
collector to the influx database is too slow for measurement rates of 80 per second
and higher, thus for verification, function writing measurements to text files was used.
By analysing the resulting files offline, it can be confirmed whether all measurement
values are representative of the test stream and whether all measurement values were
==PAGE:73==
6.3 Monitoring Testing
62
Figure 6.5: Monitored metric values at 100 PPS, 10 % sampling rate and no addi-
tional delay introduced. Top graphs show stream bitrate and period ob-
served at the source and destination monitors, while the bottom graphs
show observed delay, delay jitter, and frame period jitter.
registered. At 1000 PPS, the collector is able to collect the expected number of mon-
itored metric values, i.e. 100 per second per metric. However, delay calculation is no
==PAGE:74==
6.3 Monitoring Testing
63
Figure 6.6: Observed delay at 100 PPS, 10 % sampling rate and 10ms delay intro-
duced.
Figure 6.7: Traﬀic generated by NETCONF polling from the collector towards the
monitor at 100 PPS and 10% sampling rate..
longer stable due to lack of eﬀiciency in current delay calculation mechanism, mainly
in finding the frame pairs in two sets of observed frames quickly enough for the buffers
not to be overrun and unambiguous frame identification using frame sequence num-
bers maintained. Graphs resulting from offline result analysis are added to appendix
B. Similar results can be observed for 2500 and 5000 PPS rates. At 10000 PPS, Sys-
repo callback function times out and values can no longer be retrieved by the monitor.
If all frames are captured correctly, measurement rate coming from a two monitors
observing a stream of 10000 PPS and sampling at 10 % is 8000 measurements.
Intuitively, traﬀic overhead can be reduced by reducing the frame sampling rate
and measurement averaging intervals. As an example, NETCONF overhead traﬀic at
10000 PPS, 10 and 1 % sampling rate is given in figure 6.8. Here, ≈4Mbit of traﬀic
==PAGE:75==
6.4 Summary
64
is generated per polling interval per single monitor, meaning that each poll generates
≈800Kb/s of traﬀic at 1 % sampling rate. At 10 % sampling rate, as stated before,
sysrepo callback often times out, thus non-uniform NETCONF traﬀic can be observed.
However, it can be seen that a single peak, which represents traﬀic from one monitor
is ≈40Mb/s, which is ten times larger if compared to the 1 % sampling rate case.
While reducing sampling rate affects the accuracy of resulting measurements, it was
shown in [47] that highly accurate measurements can be retrieved using 5% sampling
rate.
Comparing these results with the results in 6.7, one can observe that the NET-
CONF traﬀic is ≈10 times larger, as is the measurement rate in the compared cases
(in 100 PPS and 10 % sampling rate, 10 measurements per metric and 10 sampled
frames per seconds are registered, in 10000 PPS and 1 % sampling rate 100 measure-
ments per metric and 100 sampled frames are registered). Thus, it indicates that the
non-linear relation between observed traﬀic bitrate and resulting NETCONF traﬀic
evident at low observed traﬀic bitrates is no longer true at higher observed traﬀic
bitrates.
6.4
Summary
Monitoring system function was verified and performance tested. YANG model verifi-
cation reported no errors and the model was subsequently successfully used to model
monitoring information and structure it for NETCONF protocol exchanges. Monitors
successfully performed the required measurements (i.e. period, period jitter, bitrate)
and sampled frames at multiple packet per second rates tested. The collector was
able to retrieve the monitoring data and perform delay and delay jitter calculations
for packet per second rates below 1000 PPS (at 10% sampling rate). Traﬀic induced
by monitor polling was also evaluated, and shown that reducing sampling rate and
increasing measurement averaging periods reduces overhead traﬀic as expected.
==PAGE:76==
6.4 Summary
65
Figure 6.8: Traﬀic generated by NETCONF polling from the collector towards the
monitor at 10000 PPS and 1% sampling rate (top) and at 10000 PPS
and 10% sampling rate (bottom)..
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 7
Time Sensitive Network
Monitoring Use-cases
The demonstrated TSN monitoring system function provides means to verify TSN
stream performance using technologies that are widely recognised and expected to
play a key role in TSN configuration and management. Use of these technologies in
design of monitoring system enhance interoperability among entities involved in TSN
management framework. Through this interoperability, the monitoring system can
be fully integrated to the TSN management framework and its usability increased.
Primary target and use-case for the TSN monitoring system is to determine whether
TSN stream timing requirements are met, and to verify that TSN streams are not
misbehaving and staying true to their traﬀic descriptions (fulfilling one of the require-
ments for future real time networks raised by Henneke et. al. in [17]). By passively
monitoring TSN stream performance, the monitoring system verifies whether the
stream transmission characteristics meet the goals set by the CUC or distributed
user configuration entities. The collected information can be further used in network
management and four possible use-cases are introduced in this chapter. All use cases
discussed stem from system’s performance verification capabilities.
7.1
Triggering Reconfiguration
One way to use the data provided by the TSN monitoring system is to act upon
any abnormalities observed in stream performance characteristics. For instance, if
unacceptable end-to-end performance degradation of a stream is registered, the mon-
itoring system, more precisely, the collector, could be configured to send an alarm to
the CNC. The CNC, given it supports dynamic reconfiguration, upon receiving the
alarm, tries to reconfigure the stream along other available stream paths and, if the
accumulated latency is reported to be acceptable, triggers the new configuration. As
a result, a stream with degraded performance can be re-routed and continue operation
at acceptable performance levels.
Alarming capability could be added to the collector by following the same imple-
mentation models used in this thesis. The current tsn-mon YANG model should be
augmented to include notifications related to alarm events and collector functionality
==PAGE:78==
7.2 Evaluation
67
should be expanded to include a NETCONF server and a YANG datastore to create
a ’northbound’ API.
7.2
Evaluation
Technologies introduced in chapter 2 are only a subset of all new functionalities intro-
duced by TSN standard group. The number of configuration options and combina-
tions using TSN functions is large. Simon et. al. highlight that depending on traﬀic
patterns and TSN tools used achievable timing characteristics can vary a significant
amount [24]. Simulation tools, such as open-source NeSTiNg TSN simulator [48], can
aid in making a choice of TSN technology combination to use at design phase. How-
ever, simulation tools cannot aid in testing real traﬀic characteristics on networks
that are in deployment or already deployed. Paired with test TSN talkers/listeners
the proposed TSN monitoring system can aid in evaluating whether the chosen TSN
functionalities and strategies provide the desired results. For this purpose, monitors
integrated in test TSN talkers/listeners or monitors introduced as separate devices
would be the most suitable options.
7.3
Providing Baseline
The collected stream performance data can be used to improve configuration decisions
made by the CNC and increase network eﬀiciency. For instance, if an addition of a new
stream S3 requires re-routing of previously configured streams S1 and S2, the CNC
could choose the stream with the largest end-to-end latency ’budget’ to be re-routed,
based on the difference between end-to-end latency reported by the TSN monitoring
system and the latency boundary set by the listener. This simple addition to the re-
configuration process could increase successful configuration percentage (reduce the
number of configuration attempts before an acceptable solution is found).
7.4
Self-configuration
TSN self-configuration is discussed by Gutierrez et. al. in [6]. The authors propose a
method to automatically configure networks, which are not based on TSN technology
or, are TSN based but use distributed configuration models. A key component in the
proposed self-configuration framework is a network monitor. Here, the monitor learns
traﬀic characteristics and reports the findings to a central location. Based on the
findings (e.g. the list of monitored metrics in table 4.1), the central entity constructs
TSN based configuration reflecting the observed time sensitive streams. NETCONF
is chosen to be used as the communication protocol between the monitors and the
central entity. Monitor implementation proposed in this thesis could be used for the
traﬀic learning capability required by the authors in the discussed work, as the list
==PAGE:79==
7.4 Self-configuration
68
of monitored metrics in 4.1 is descriptive of TSN stream requirements and ’promises’
to the network.
==PAGE:80==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
Centralised time sensitive network management opens the door for runtime TSN
(re)configuration, a network property which is often introduced as a requirement for
future real-time, safety critical networks. Standardisation efforts, such as 802.1Qcc
standard amendment, describe centralised management procedures, define managed
objects that enable remote configuration of TSN features and introduce respective
YANG data models. Research community is actively proposing frameworks and meth-
ods to enable dynamic TSN configuration. To improve the quality of configuration
decisions and verify configured TSN stream performance, a TSN monitoring system,
proposed in this thesis, could be used.
The proposed TSN monitoring framework is based on technologies widely recog-
nised as most suitable for time sensitive network management - NETCONF pro-
tocol and YANG data modeling language. The list of monitored metrics was com-
posed based on standardised information exchanged in TSN configuration process, i.e.
stream requirements and ’promises’ to the network. Furthermore, some additions to
the monitored metric list were made based on relevant literature. Traﬀic is passively
monitored and desired frame metadata is extracted at network monitors, placed at,
or near (depending on monitor placement mode), the stream talker and listener. The
monitor samples frames and performs calculations for monitored metrics. Sampled
frame metadata and monitored metric values are transported to the collector, where
end-to-end delay is calculated and all monitored metric data prepared for further
use. Implementation of the project relies on open source C libraries for all entities
involved.
Multiple tests were performed using software network monitors and a virtual test
setup. Proposed YANG model was verified and shown to be correct. The monitoring
system was shown to perform the desired functions of observing network traﬀic, sam-
pling frames according to a specified sampling percentage and calculate monitored
metric values.
Resulting monitor data was shown to be collected successfully by
the collector via periodic NETCONF based polling. Further, the data was correctly
parsed at the collector and exported to a graphing entity. Finally some example use
cases introduced highlight how the TSN monitoring system could be used in TSN
network control.
==PAGE:81==
8.1 Further Work
70
8.1
Further Work
Before enhancing the proposed TSN monitoring system, a test setup should be created
using TSN features and the current monitor implementation introduced as separate
devices.
While the implementation of the monitors or the collectors need not be
changed, its precision could be evaluated more accurately. Following a TSN based
testing, the following improvements could be introduced:
• reduce overhead traﬀic induced by NETCONF polling;
• optimise currently used Sysrepo callback function to be able to process more
monitoring data before timing out;
• improve delay calculation mechanism to remain stable at higher bitrate;
• introduce functionality for packet count or time based periodic traﬀic sampling;
• introduce push based information exchange between the monitors and the col-
lector;
• create an API for monitoring system interaction with the CNC.
==PAGE:82==
Bibliography
[1]
H. Kopetz. Real-time systems: design principles for distributed embedded appli-
cations. Springer Science & Business Media, 2011.
[2]
J. Rushby. “A Comparison of Bus Architectures for Safety-Critical Embedded
Systems”. In: Springer-Verlag, 2001, pages 306–323.
[3]
M. Wollschlaeger, T. Sauter, and J. Jasperneite. “The Future of Industrial Com-
munication: Automation Networks in the Era of the Internet of Things and
Industry 4.0”. In: IEEE Industrial Electronics Magazine 11.1 (2017), pages 17–
27.
[4]
M. Schmidt, R. Obermaisser, and C. Wurmbach. “Dynamic Resource Allocation
of Switched Ethernet Networks in Embedded Real-Time Systems”. In: Informa-
tion Technology in Biomedicine. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2019,
pages 353–364.
[5]
P. Pop et al. “Enabling Fog Computing for Industrial Automation Through
Time-Sensitive Networking (TSN)”. In: IEEE Communications Standards Mag-
azine 2.2 (2018), pages 55–61.
[6]
M. Gutiérrez et al. “Self-configuration of IEEE 802.1 TSN networks”. In: 2017
22nd IEEE International Conference on Emerging Technologies and Factory
Automation (ETFA). 2017, pages 1–8.
[7]
IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks–Bridges and Bridged
Networks – Amendment 31: Stream Reservation Protocol (SRP) Enhancements
and Performance Improvements. IEEE Std 802.1Qcc. 2018.
[8]
M. L. Raagaard et al. “Runtime reconfiguration of time-sensitive networking
(TSN) schedules for Fog Computing”. In: 2017 IEEE Fog World Congress
(FWC). 2017, pages 1–6.
[9]
J. L. Messenger. “Time-Sensitive Networking: An Introduction”. In: IEEE Com-
munications Standards Magazine 2.2 (June 2018), pages 29–33.
[10]
N. Finn. “Introduction to Time-Sensitive Networking”. In: IEEE Communica-
tions Standards Magazine 2.2 (June 2018), pages 22–28.
[11]
L. L. Bello. “Novel trends in automotive networks: A perspective on Ether-
net and the IEEE Audio Video Bridging”. In: Proceedings of the 2014 IEEE
Emerging Technology and Factory Automation (ETFA). 2014, pages 1–8.
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
72
[12]
S. Samii and H. Zinner. “Level 5 by Layer 2: Time-Sensitive Networking for Au-
tonomous Vehicles”. In: IEEE Communications Standards Magazine 2.2 (2018),
pages 62–68.
[13]
T. Wan and P. Ashwood-Smith. “A Performance Study of CPRI over Ether-
net with IEEE 802.1Qbu and 802.1Qbv Enhancements”. In: 2015 IEEE Global
Communications Conference (GLOBECOM). 2015, pages 1–6.
[14]
M. D. Johas Teener et al. “Heterogeneous Networks for Audio and Video: Using
IEEE 802.1 Audio Video Bridging”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE 101.11 (2013),
pages 2339–2354.
[15]
S. S. Craciunas et al. “Scheduling Real-Time Communication in IEEE 802.1Qbv
Time Sensitive Networks”. In: Proceedings of the 24th International Conference
on Real-Time Networks and Systems. RTNS ’16. Brest, France: Association for
Computing Machinery, 2016, pages 183–192.
[16]
V. Gavriluţ et al. “AVB-Aware Routing and Scheduling of Time-Triggered Traf-
fic for TSN”. In: IEEE Access 6 (2018), pages 75229–75243.
[17]
D. Henneke, L. Wisniewski, and J. Jasperneite. “Analysis of realizing a future
industrial network by means of Software-Defined Networking (SDN)”. In: 2016
IEEE World Conference on Factory Communication Systems (WFCS). May
2016, pages 1–4.
[18]
T. Gerhard et al. “Software-defined Flow Reservation: Configuring IEEE 802.1Q
Time-Sensitive Networks by the Use of Software-Defined Networking”. In: 2019
24th IEEE International Conference on Emerging Technologies and Factory
Automation (ETFA). 2019, pages 216–223.
[19]
N. G. Nayak, F. Dürr, and K. Rothermel. “Incremental Flow Scheduling and
Routing in Time-Sensitive Software-Defined Networks”. In: IEEE Transactions
on Industrial Informatics 14.5 (2018), pages 2066–2075.
[20]
M. Gutiérrez et al. “Learning the parameters of periodic traﬀic based on net-
work measurements”. In: 2015 IEEE International Workshop on Measurements
Networking (M N). October 2015, pages 1–6.
[21]
D. Bruckner et al. “An Introduction to OPC UA TSN for Industrial Communi-
cation Systems”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE 107.6 (2019), pages 1121–1131.
[22]
S. Brunner et al. “Automotive E/E-architecture enhancements by usage of ether-
net TSN”. In: 2017 13th Workshop on Intelligent Solutions in Embedded Systems
(WISES). 2017, pages 9–13.
[23]
L. M. P. Larsen, A. Checko, and H. L. Christiansen. “A Survey of the Functional
Splits Proposed for 5G Mobile Crosshaul Networks”. In: IEEE Communications
Surveys Tutorials 21.1 (2019), pages 146–172.
[24]
C. Simon, M. Maliosz, and M. Mate. “Design Aspects of Low-Latency Services
with Time-Sensitive Networking”. In: IEEE Communications Standards Maga-
zine 2.2 (2018), pages 48–54.
==PAGE:84==
Bibliography
73
[25]
T. Wan and P. Ashwood-Smith. “A Performance Study of CPRI over Ether-
net with IEEE 802.1Qbu and 802.1Qbv Enhancements”. In: 2015 IEEE Global
Communications Conference (GLOBECOM). 2015, pages 1–6.
[26]
D. Chitimalla et al. “5G fronthaul-latency and jitter studies of CPRI over eth-
ernet”. In: IEEE/OSA Journal of Optical Communications and Networking 9.2
(2017), pages 172–182.
[27]
IEEE Standard for Local and metropolitan area networks – Time-Sensitive Net-
working for Fronthaul. IEEE Std 802.1CM-2018. 2018.
[28]
G. M. Garner and H. Ryu. “Synchronization of audio/video bridging networks
using IEEE 802.1AS”. In: IEEE Communications Magazine 49.2 (2011), pages 140–
147.
[29]
L. Zhao et al. “Timing Analysis of AVB Traﬀic in TSN Networks Using Network
Calculus”. In: 2018 IEEE Real-Time and Embedded Technology and Applications
Symposium (RTAS). 2018, pages 25–36.
[30]
IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks – Bridges and Bridged
Networks - Amendment 25: Enhancements for Scheduled Traﬀic. IEEE Std
802.1Qbv. 2016.
[31]
IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks–Bridges and Bridged
Networks – Amendment 26: Frame Preemption. IEEE Std 802.1Qbu. 2016.
[32]
IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks–Virtual Bridged Local
Area Networks – Amendment 12: Forwarding and Queuing Enhancements for
Time-Sensitive Streams. IEEE Std 802.1Qav. 2009.
[33]
IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks–Frame Replication
and Elimination for Reliability. IEEE Std 802.1CB. 2017.
[34]
IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks–Bridges and Bridged
Networks – Amendment 28: Per-Stream Filtering and Policing. IEEE Std 802.1Qci.
2017.
[35]
IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks – Bridges and Bridged
Networks. IEEE Std 802.1Q. 2018.
[36]
IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks–Virtual Bridged Local
Area Networks – Amendment 14: Stream Reservation Protocol (SRP). IEEE Std
802.1Qat. 2010.
[37]
R. Enns et al. RFC 6241 Network Configuration Protocol (NETCONF). IETF
RFC 6241. 2011.
[38]
M. Bjorklund, A. Bierman, and K. Watsen. RFC 8527 RESTCONF Protocol.
IETF RFC 8527. 2017.
[39]
M. Bjorklund. RFC 7950 The YANG 1.1 Data Modeling Language. IETF RFC
7950. 2016.
[40]
RFC 6049 Spatial Composition of Metrics. IETF RFC 6049. 2011.
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
74
[41]
RFC 5474 Packet Selection and Reporting. IETF RFC 5474. 2009.
[42]
K. Claffy, G. Polyzos, and H.W. Braun. “Application of Sampling Method-
ologies to Network Traﬀic Characterization”. In: SIGCOMM Comput. Com-
mun. Rev. 23.4 (October 1993), pages 194–203. issn: 0146-4833. doi: 10.1145/
167954.166256. url: https://doi-org.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/10.1145/
167954.166256.
[43]
Y. Li et al. “A study of precision of hardware time stamping packet traces”. In:
2014 IEEE International Symposium on Precision Clock Synchronization for
Measurement, Control, and Communication (ISPCS). 2014, pages 102–107.
[44]
G.8013/Y.1731. Operations, administration and maintenance (OAM) functions
and mechanisms for Ethernet-based networks. ITU-T. 2015.
[45]
ieee802-dot1q-tsn-types. IEEE Std 802.1Qcc. 2018. url: https : / / github .
com/YangModels/yang/blob/master/standard/ieee/published/802.1/
ieee802-dot1q-tsn-types.yang.
[46]
ieee802-types. 2019. url: https://github.com/YangModels/yang/blob/
master/standard/ieee/draft/802.1/Qcw/ieee802-types.yang.
[47]
T. Zseby. “Deployment of Sampling Methods for SLA Validation with Non-
Intrusive Measurements”. In: (January 2002).
[48]
J. Falk et al. “NeSTiNg: Simulating IEEE Time-sensitive Networking (TSN) in
OMNeT++”. In: 2019 International Conference on Networked Systems (Net-
Sys). 2019, pages 1–8.
==PAGE:86==
APPENDIX A
tsn-mon YANG Model
1
2
module tsn-mon {
3
4
namespace "urn:tsn-mon";
5
prefix "tsn-mon";
6
7
import ieee802-dot1q-tsn-types {
8
prefix "tsn-types";
9
}
10
11
import ieee802-types {
12
prefix "types";
13
}
14
15
organization
16
"DTU";
17
18
description
19
"Yang model for TSN monitoring operational data. Data elements
model performance metrics of TSN streams";
20
21
revision 2020-06-05 {
22
description
23
"Third draft";
24
}
25
26
grouping stream-info {
27
28
leaf stream-id {
29
type tsn-types:stream-id-type;
30
}
31
list measurement -set {
32
config false;
33
key set-id;
34
leaf set-id {
35
type uint16;
36
description
37
"Set ID identifying set of monitoring results";
38
}
39
container stream-monitor-data-intervals {
40
config false;
41
list monitored-intervals {
42
leaf interval {
==PAGE:87==
A tsn-mon YANG Model
76
43
type uint64;
44
description
45
"Simplified stream period representation.";
46
}
47
container measurement -time {
48
uses types:ptp-time-grouping;
49
}
50
51
}
52
}
53
container stream-monitor-data-interval-jitters {
54
config false;
55
list monitored-interval-jitters {
56
leaf interval-jitter {
57
type uint32;
58
units "nanoseconds";
59
description
60
"Monitored inter arrival jitter";
61
}
62
container measurement -time {
63
uses types:ptp-time-grouping;
64
}
65
66
}
67
}
68
container stream-monitor-data-bitrates {
69
config false;
70
list monitored-bitrates {
71
leaf bitrate {
72
type uint64;
73
units "bits/second";
74
description
75
"Monitored average bitrate of the stream";
76
}
77
container measurement -time {
78
uses types:ptp-time-grouping;
79
}
80
81
}
82
}
83
container stream-monitor-data-offsets {
84
config false;
85
list monitored-transmission -offsets {
86
leaf offset {
87
type uint32;
88
units "nanoseconds";
89
description
90
"Monitored transmission offset";
91
}
92
container measurement -time {
93
uses types:ptp-time-grouping;
94
}
95
96
}
97
}
==PAGE:88==
A tsn-mon YANG Model
77
98
container stream-monitor-data-offset-jitters {
99
config false;
100
list monitored-transmission -offset-jitters {
101
leaf offset-jitter {
102
type uint32;
103
units "nanoseconds";
104
description
105
"Monitored transmission offset";
106
}
107
container measurement -time {
108
uses types:ptp-time-grouping;
109
}
110
111
}
112
}
113
container stream-monitor-data-frames {
114
config false;
115
list frames {
116
key frame-id;
117
leaf frame-id {
118
type uint16;
119
description
120
"Frame ID uniquely identifying the frame
within the captured set";
121
}
122
container timestamp-rx {
123
uses types:ptp-time-grouping;
124
}
125
container timestamp-tx {
126
uses types:ptp-time-grouping;
127
}
128
}
129
}
130
}
131
}
132
container observed-streams {
133
description
134
"Streams observed by the monitor";
135
list stream {
136
key stream-id;
137
uses stream-info;
138
}
139
}
140
}
.
1
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
2 <observed-streams xmlns="urn:tsn-mon-v2">
3
<stream>
4
<stream-id>00-00-00-00-00-23:00-01</stream-id>
5
<measurement -set>
6
<set-id>81</set-id>
7
<stream-monitor-data-frames>
8
<frames>
==PAGE:89==
A tsn-mon YANG Model
78
9
<frame-id>800</frame-id>
10
<timestamp-rx>
11
<seconds-field >1596230155</seconds-field>
12
<nanoseconds -field >497774833</nanoseconds -field>
13
</timestamp-rx>
14
</frames>
15
</stream-monitor-data-frames>
16
<stream-monitor-data-intervals>
17
<monitored-intervals>
18
<interval >99895476</interval>
19
<measurement -time>
20
<seconds-field >1596230156</seconds-field>
21
<nanoseconds -field >396864282</nanoseconds -field>
22
</measurement -time>
23
</monitored-intervals>
24
</stream-monitor-data-intervals>
25
<stream-monitor-data-bitrates>
26
<monitored-bitrates>
27
<bitrate >28508</bitrate>
28
<measurement -time>
29
<seconds-field >1596230156</seconds-field>
30
<nanoseconds -field >396864282</nanoseconds -field>
31
</measurement -time>
32
</monitored-bitrates>
33
</stream-monitor-data-bitrates>
34
<stream-monitor-data-interval-jitters>
35
<monitored-interval-jitters>
36
<interval-jitter >49533</interval-jitter>
37
<measurement -time>
38
<seconds-field >1596230156</seconds-field>
39
<nanoseconds -field >396864282</nanoseconds -field>
40
</measurement -time>
41
</monitored-interval-jitters>
42
</stream-monitor-data-interval-jitters>
43
</measurement -set>
44
</stream>
45 </observed-streams>
.
==PAGE:90==
APPENDIX B
Monitoring
Performance
Figure B.1: Number of measurements for frame delay at 1000 PPS and 10 % sam-
pling rate.
In figure B.1, it can be seen that measurement mechanism is unstable and does not
register any values at some time intervals. This is due to implementation ineﬀiciencies
at finding frame pairs from two observed frame sets. At some time intervals, the
expected number of measurements is registered (100)
Using the test setup described in the thesis, the observed frame period at 1000
PPS is expected to be 1 ms. At measurement averaging period of 10 frames, mea-
surement number per second registered is expected to be 100. The monitor registers
the expected amount of measurements and the measured period is representative of
==PAGE:91==
B Monitoring Performance
80
Figure B.2: An example measurement at 1000 PPS rate and 10 % sample rate.
The top graph displays values for average frame period and the bottom
graph displays measurement number per second.
the expected value (see figure B.2).
Using the test setup described in the thesis, the observed frame period at 2500
PPS is expected to be 400 µs. At measurement averaging period of 10 frames, mea-
surement number per second registered is expected to be 250. The monitor registers
the expected amount of measurements and the measured period is representative of
the expected value (see figure B.3).
==PAGE:92==
B Monitoring Performance
81
Figure B.3: An example measurement at 2500 PPS rate and 10 % sample rate.
The top graph displays values for average frame period and the bottom
graph displays measurement number per second.
Using the test setup described in the thesis, the observed bitrate at 5000 PPS is
expected to be 14.24 Mbps. At measurement averaging period of 10 frames, measure-
ment number per second registered is expected to be 500. The monitor registers the
expected amount of measurements. Most of the measured bitrate values fall within
the expected range however some values are not representative of the stream (see
B.4). While inaccuracies might be induced by resource contention in the test bed,
==PAGE:93==
B Monitoring Performance
82
Figure B.4: An example measurement at 5000 PPS rate and 10 % sample rate. The
top graph displays values for average bitrate and the bottom graph
displays measurement number per second.
averaging every 10 frames can also be too granular at this rate.
==PAGE:94==
APPENDIX C
Source Code
Source code is added to the thesis submission in an archived file. A brief description
of all file contents is included in the archive. Source code can also be requested at
s181324@student.dtu.dk.
==PAGE:95==
==PAGE:96==
