==PAGE:1==
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat ana-
logues or sustainable protein-rich food product
Master Thesis
June, 2020
By
Stephanie Michelsen
==PAGE:2==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Biotechnology and
Biomedicine, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the
degree Master of Science in Engineering in Biotechnology, MSc Eng in Biotechnology.
Stephanie Michelsen - s200387
Signature
26 / 6 / 2020
Date
ii
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Climate change is becoming a major threat to our planet, and thereby us. One big contrib-
utor to climate change is the food system, in fact, globally, animal agriculture is responsible
for more greenhouse gases than all the world’s transportation systems combined. Beef
is more resource-intensive to produce than most other kinds of meat, generally animal-
based foods are more resource-intensive than plant-based foods. Beef requires 20 times
more land and emits 20 times more greenhouse gas emissions per gram of edible pro-
tein than common plant proteins, such as beans and tofu. In order to save the planet,
the world’s meat consumption must be decreased and replaced largely with plant-based
diets. Although there are many efforts to do so with the development of novel products,
changing diets and more sustainable lifestyles - it is not enough. The demand for meat
is continuously increasing globally, and has been for decades. In addition, undernour-
ishment and starvation is a growing problem as food production will need to feed the 10
billion people expected to inhabit the planet by 2050. The majority of current agricultural
practices and feed production systems are not sustainable and are also not viable nor
efficient in terms of nutritive yield.
This project aims to develop a viable business venture that would tackle the problems
mentioned above. To do so, this project explores the potential for legume-based meat
analogues or sustainable protein-rich food products in Denmark as an alternative to the
current meat-rich diets. The project has been facilitated by an entrepreneurial approach,
which has promoted a flexible process and the development of a detailed solution. Explo-
ration of legume-based meat analogues and protein sources has been conducted through
a literature review as well as through analyses in the meat-analogue market. Through the
entrepreneurial approach customer validation and consumer journey studies were con-
ducted as well as a storytelling and marketing exploration. With the combination of theo-
retical frameworks and a practical entrepreneurial approach the project presents a holistic
evaluation of the potential of such a business venture.
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
iii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
Robin van Oorschot
Postdoc, Centre for Technology Entrepreneurship
DTU Entrepreneurship
Entrepreneurial Supervisor
Thank you to Robin for making this thesis a possibility for me and for aiding me
in exploring my startup idea as a thesis project. The feedback and teachings
Robin provided me with have been crucial to the success of this thesis and
have also served as a huge learning opportunity for me, in particular in areas
that were new to me coming from a natural sciences background.
Birthe P Møller Jespersen
Lektor, Chemometrics and Analytical Technology, Institut for Fødevareviden-
skab (KU Food)
Technical Supervisor
Thank you to Birthe for making this thesis possible and for aiding me in my
project by providing me with her technical insights and expertise within food
science and legumes. Birthe’s knowledge within these fields have been pivotal
in this project and has strengthened the viability such a product.
Thomas Mathiasen
Scientific Officer, Innovationsfonden
Thank you Thomas for serving as external censor for this thesis project
Customer Validation and Customer Journey Participants
Study Participants
Thank you to all the 200+ individuals that participated in the two studies for this
project. Without the input from so many individuals this project would not have
been possible.
Fonden For Entreprenørskab
Thank you to Fonden For Entreprenørskab and Tuborgfondet for believing me
and my idea by awarding me 18.000DKK to explore my startup idea. And thank
you to the selection committee for providing me with valuable feedback on my
idea.
Ryan Bethencourt
Co-founder and CEO at Wild Earth
Thank you to Ryan Bethencourt and the entire Wild Earth team for giving me
the opportunity to intern at Wild Earth. Throughout this internship I was inspired
both personally and professionally to make an effort to promote a positive im-
pact on our planet. My time with Wild Earth inspired the idea of this thesis topic
and I am forever grateful to the insights I learned.
Mogens Kilstrup
iv
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:5==
Associate Professor DTU Bioengineering
Thank you to Mogens Kilstrup for aiding me in the process of setting up my
thesis project and for promoting my learning opportunities by doing so.
Christopher Workman
Associate Professor DTU Bioengineering Department of Biotechnology and
Biomedicine
Thank you to Christopher Workman for providing insightful feedback and sug-
gestions to my startup idea.
DTU Skylab
Thank you to the DTU Skylab team for providing students with opportunities
to explore entrepreneurship and for considering me for their Skylab Ignite pro-
gram.
Markus Klinger
Head of Alternative Protein at Novozymes
Thank you to Markus Klinger for providing insightful feedback and suggestions
to my startup idea.
Plougman Vingtoft Patent Attorneys
Thank you to Plougman Vingtoft Patent Attorneys for helping me understand
the process of patenting and trademarking in the food sector. The feedback in
regards to my business idea was helpful in understanding the strategy of the
product development.
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
v
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Prologue
1
1.1
Scope of project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Introduction
2
2.1
The History of Meat
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Agricultural Developments and the Environment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.3
The Meatless Revolution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.4
The Alternative Protein Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.5
The Plant-based Meat Analogue Industry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Entrepreneurial
6
3.1
Customer Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
Customer Journey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.3
Story . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4
Technical
30
4.1
Legumes Introduction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.2
Comparison Of Different Legumes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.3
Processing Methods Of Legumes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5
Epilogue
40
5.1
Conclusions and Implications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.2
Limitations and Suggestions for Future Perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Bibliography
45
A Appendix
51
A.1 Customer Validation Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
A.2 Sharing of Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
This page has been intentionally left blank.
vi
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:7==
1
Prologue
1.1
Scope of project
This paper conveys the research conducted as part of the entrepreneurial master thesis at
The Technical University of Denmark as part of the program in Biotechnology. This work
was conducted in collaboration with The FOOD department at The University of Copen-
hagen, Denmark. The objective of this project is to explore consumer opinion and devel-
opment of legume-based meat analogues and sustainable high-protein foods in Denmark
to evaluate the opportunities for such a start-up business. The goal is to introduce a new
food product to the Danish markets, that will satisfy the demand for meat while lowering
the environmental burden. The learning objectives for this project are divided into two
parts; entrepreneurial and technical.
• The main entrepreneurial learning objectives are:
– Customer Validation: explore methods that are best suited to understand who
the customer/consumer/user of my product is.
– Customer Journey/Timeline: understand and map the whole customer journey
of the complex process around consuming plant based meat.
– Story: Explore different methods suitable to create the marketing story of my
product.
• The main technical learning objectives are:
– Understand the advantages and disadvantages by using legume proteins for
food.
– Compare lupin, pea and soy protein in nutritional value and other characteris-
tics.
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
1
==PAGE:8==
2
Introduction
2.1
The History of Meat
Animal sourced foods date back 400 million years to our scavenging hominin ancestors
(Mann 2018). According to bio-anthropological studies, the human diet evolution can be
broken down into three phases. The first phase involved the change from a diet consisting
mainly of unprocessed plant foods to a diet incorporating food-processing techniques and
significant amounts of meat. This shift happened about 1.5 million years ago. However,
meat in this period was likely the result of scavenging rather than hunting. The second
phase is characterized by the switch from animal meat scavenging to deliberate animal
hunting. This shift dates back to about 700,000 years ago. The third phase in the human
diet evolution began about 100,000 years ago when modern climate, vegetation and fauna
appeared. Here a change from food collection to food production happened. Humans
began to deliberately produce and process foods for nutrition rather than scavenge, hunt
and collect food (Kiple and Ornelas 2000). However, it is worth noting that different means
and approaches to studying the history of our ancestors diet will yield different conclusions.
In the book Meat-Eating and Human Evolution, Stanford and Bunn compare well-known
studies and literature on the role of meat in human evolution. Here they conclude that
hominid diets mainly consisted of plants, but that there is compelling evidence that meat
had a major role in making us human. With insufficient evidence, we can only speculate
how and why humans began to include considerable amount of meat in their diets. It is
however known that environment and hunting skills were the major dictating factors in the
amount of meat our ancestors consumed. For some groups it remained an occasional
and marginal part of the diet, but for many other groups it had a significant part in the
energy intake (Smil 2000). The availability of food sources dictating human diet is further
supported by the differences in domestication of animals and the agricultural development
in differently tempered regions. The earliest signs of crop cultivation date back to 8000-
9000 years ago to South America. In this time period agriculture spread quickly in the
warmer-tempered regions with crops such as rice, lentils and other grains. But in colder
regions, where grains were harder to cultivate, domesticated animals served as the main
source of nutrition (Gorlinski and Staff n.d.). Today agriculture looks much different.
2.2
Agricultural Developments and the Environment
With the technological revolution, chemical advances and biological modification agricul-
ture was revolutionized during the 19th and 20th century (Paarlberg n.d.). Today, world
average per capita availability of food for direct human consumption is, in principle, suffi-
cient to keep everyone well feed with a 2,770 kcal/person/day diet. However, the world’s
food supply is not evenly distributed as approximately 2 billion people suffer from under-
nourishment, mainly due to poverty, while 2 billion people are consuming more than the
recommended 2,000-2,500 kcal/person/day (Nikos and Jelle 2012). Moreover, the UN
projects that the world population will grow from the current 7.7 billion to 9.7 billion by
2050 (UN data n.d.). It is therefore evident that agricultural yield and food production will
need to further increase to satisfy the growing demand. However, agriculture is already
one of the greatest environmental threats we are facing (Tilman et al. 2001). In addition,
agricultural lands already occupy one third of the world’s ice-free land area, making it the
largest biome of our planet (Ramankutty et al. 2008). Consequently, to sustain the 9.7
2
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:9==
billion people expected to inhabit the planet by 2050 new or alternative methods of food
production are needed.
Overall, the world’s food production is responsible for approximately 26 percent of the
global green house gas (GHG)emissions. Breaking down the GHG emissions, 52 percent
comes from livestock production and 29 percent from crop production for human food, the
rest can be distributed within supply chain. In terms of. land use, 77 percent of agricultural
land is used for livestock: meat and dairy. The other 23 percent is used for the production
of crops for human consumption. (Our Wold in Data based on FAO). These numbers
quickly illustrate the meat-dominated use of the planet’s resources. One could easily
assume, perhaps from our meat-containing ancestral diet, that meat is more nutritious
than crop foods and that the environmental burden associated with it, is therefore justified.
However, humans need nutrition, not necessarily meat (E. N. Anderson n.d.). Crops such
as legumes are great alternatives to meat as they are also rich in protein and offer many
other nutritional benefits such as high fiber content and low in cholesterol and saturated
fats (Röös et al. 2018). Furthermore, the GHG production of meat, such as beef is 44
times higher per kg produced than per kg produced of legumes (Clune, Crossin, and
Verghese 2017). In addition, multiple health benefits have been associated with lower
meat-intake (Crowe et al. 2011). Evidently, many consumers are limiting their meat intake
and switching their dietary habits to more plant-based options.
2.3
The Meatless Revolution
The idea of a meat alternatives is nothing new. In fact, the earliest reference to tofu
appears in the Chinese Anecdotes, Simple and Exotic dating back to 965. Here ”doufu”
(Chinese for tofu) appears and is referred to as ”mock lamb chops”. In 1852 meat alterna-
tives are mentioned in the Western World, through the invention of a vegetable sausage.
14 years later the term ”substitute for meat” is first used in English along with the intro-
duction of tofu and miso (History of Meat Alternatives n.d.). Since then, meat analogues
and alternatives have come a long way. In 2017 the global meat substitute market was
valued at 4 billion USD, and by 2026 it is expected to double to 8 billion USD (Allied Market
Research). The significant growth in the meat substitute market could be due to various
different factors. One of the big influences could be environmental and climate change
awareness. In general, the public’s perception and awareness of climate change has in-
creased. A study done by Brechin and Bhandari explored the worldwide perceptions of
climate change. In the last 10 years more countries have become better aware of climate
change, the effect of burning fossil fuels and greenhouse gases. Furthermore, between
all the countries studied, on average 81 percent believed that climate change would have
a big effect on the types of food we produce (Brechin and Bhandari 2011).
As stated above, the meat industry contributes heavily to the emission of GHG. Therefore,
as the public is becoming more aware of how their actions and choices affect the environ-
ment more choose to limit their meat intake. Another big reason that consumers choose
to remove meat from their diets is for health reasons. Several studies have demonstrated
nutritional and health benefits with consuming vegan and vegetarian diets. A study done
by Bradbury and colleagues demonstrated that vegans had lower body mass index (BMI)
and lower serum total cholesterol compared to meat-eaters and vegetarians (Bradbury
et al. 2014). In addition, vegetarians have lower blood pressure (Pettersen et al. 2012)
and a 30 percent lower chance of diverticular diseases (digestive conditions affecting the
colon) compared to meat-eaters (Crowe et al. 2011). Another other big incentive for con-
suming more plant-based and avoiding meat is ethics. In fact, ethical concerns is one
of the biggest reasons people choose to adapt a vegan lifestyle (Radnitz, Beezhold, and
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
3
==PAGE:10==
DiMatteo 2015). It is also important to note that religious reasons for abstaining from cer-
tain animal products represent a great percentage of vegetarians and vegans. Religious
dietary restrictions are common across borders and history. Dietary adaptions such as
Halal, Kosher and Hindu have such a big following that they have been embedded into
institutional knowledge, networks and practices, and this in return, affects the market. For
instance, in 1995 the first fully Kosher McDonald’s opened, in Jerusalem (Fischer 2016).
Although these religions are not all vegan or vegetarian, religion plays a role in many
people’s diet. Consumer views on protein are shifting, and food manufacturers are taking
note. However, the vegan and vegetarian market is not simply about avoiding certain
foods. It is increasingly becoming more scientific and innovative, and more about offering
the consumer something they thought they could not have.
2.4
The Alternative Protein Development
Plant-based is not the only protein source responsible for the growing interest in meat
alternatives. Alternative proteins is a term broadly used to cover plant-based and food
technology alternatives to animal protein. The interest for alternative protein foods has
evolved greatly over the past 15 years, with vegan food being the most popular food and
beverage search query, growing at a 16 percent compound annual growth rate (CAGR)
since 2004 (Bashi et al. 2019). The alternative protein field can be divided into four major
groups; plant protein, insects, mycoprotein and cellular agriculture (Jeremy Coller Foun-
dation). Cellular agriculture is a technology which allows for the production of meat and
other agricultural products from cells cultured in a bioreactor, rather than harvested from
an animal (Mattick 2018). Examples of cellular agriculture include Clara Foods, a San
Francisco-based biotech start-up producing egg white proteins in bioreactors without the
use of chicken nor eggs. Another example is Memphis Meats who are producing ”cul-
tured meat”. Cultured meat is a the process of culturing animal cells (such as cow muscle
cells) in bioreactors with the aim to produce real meat, without the animal (Sexton, Gar-
nett, and Lorimer 2019). However, cell-based meat is far from being available on grocery
shelves as the field is relatively new and is tackling technical and up-scaling challenges.
Mycoprotein is a source of fermented protein made from filamentous fungi. It is used in
many foods due to its nutritional benefits such as high protein and fiber content. Due to
the filamentous nature of mycoprotein, it is also extremely well suited for meat-like tex-
tures (Finnigan 2011). An example of a mycoprotein company is Quorn. Quorn develops
nutritious, sustainable and meatless foods using mycoprotein. Insects are not new to the
human diet, but are mainly seen as a ”primitive” food in developing countries. However,
certain insects are very protein rich and can provide a sustainable alternative to meat
(Huis 2013). Some have even been shown to contain all essential amino acids (Ekpo
2011). In December 2019 a 3.5 year project focused on enabling insect production in
Denmark for food and feed purposes, was completed. The University of Copenhagen
project, inVALUABLE, received more than 26 million Danish kronor and showcased the
importance in exploring alternative protein sources. The last and most well-established
group is plant proteins, with the most popular sources being soy and pea (Bashi et al.
2019). The alternative protein market is growing fast and will most likely provide sustain-
able solutions to the future food security crisis. Plant-based protein alternatives to meat,
specifically meat analogues will be the focus of this project and other alternative proteins
will not be discussed further.
4
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:11==
2.5
The Plant-based Meat Analogue Industry
As stated earlier, the idea of meat analogues is nothing new. However, with improved
technologies, newer research and shifting consumer interests companies are now able to
develop much more advanced meat analogues. Although food extrusion has existed since
the 1940’s, research on high moisture cooking extrusion processes in the 1990’s lead to
new possibilities to texturize proteins into fibrous structures, mimicking muscle meat (Wild
et al. 2014). Furthermore, research on flavor and taste have enabled researchers to better
imitate meat and produce more successful products.
Two great examples of successful plant-based meat analogues are the two big US-based
rival companies Beyond Meat and Impossible Foods. Beyond Meat’s pea-based meat
analogues landed them 72 million USD in funding, along with Bill Gates as one of their
celebrity investors (Sexton, Garnett, and Lorimer 2019).
Impossible Foods meatless
”beef” is soy-based and has confused and baffled vegans with its very meat-like flavor,
appearance and texture. The secret behind its success is the patent-protected addition
of heme. Heme is what allows for the meat-like flavor and aroma, as well as the color-
changing characteristic of uncooked and cooked meat (Ci et al. 2017). To date, Impossible
Foods have raised more than 387 million USD, and they have successfully released the
Impossible Whopper together with Burger King (Sexton, Garnett, and Lorimer 2019). Al-
though consumers now have access to these options and more, only 5 percent of US
adults consider themselves vegetarian, and even fewer vegans (GALLOP 2019). Fur-
thermore, in Denmark the number is even smaller. According to a study done in 2017 by
Dansk Vegetarisk Forening (DVF) and Coop Analyse, only 2.5 percent of Danes consider
themselves vegetarian. Contrary, the same study showed that 58 percent of Danes wish
to eat less meat. It is evident that there’s a gap between will and action to consume less
meat and more plant-based.
This project sets out to explore and evaluate the opportunities and consumer opinion
with legume-based meat analogue food products in Denmark. This project comprises
two parts; an entrepreneurial part and a technical part. Within the entrepreneurial part
activities entail the exploration of methods best suited to understand who the consumer
of such a product is. In addition, this project seeks to understand and map the consumer
journey of the process around consuming plant-based meat analogues. And lastly, within
the entrepreneurial part, the project sets out to explore different methods suitable to create
and tell the marketing story of the product. Within the technical part, an investigation
of advantages and disadvantages of using legume-based protein for food applications
will aid in the understanding of opportunities with such food products. Furthermore, this
project aims to compare soy, pea and lupin proteins and their nutritional values along with
other characteristics as well as the effect of extrusion on plant proteins.
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
5
==PAGE:12==
3
Entrepreneurial
The entrepreneurial activities entail the exploration of methods best suited to understand
who the consumer of a legume-based meat analogue product is. In addition, this project
seeks to understand and map the consumer journey in the process around consuming
food and explore where plant-based foods or new sustainable high-protein foods would
fit in this journey. And lastly, within the entrepreneurial part, the project sets out to explore
different methods suitable to create and tell the story behind the product.
3.1
Customer Validation
This section explores the potential customers of legume-based meat analogues in Den-
mark. To asses potential customer base it was necessary to better understand consumer
dietary habits and interest in plant-based meat analogues. To address this, I conducted a
survey. The survey was in the form of an online questionnaire and was sent out through
various platforms such as by e-mail, online forums and to multiple Facebook groups to
obtain insights from a broad demographic. ”Consumer Survey on Food Products” was the
title of the survey and responses from 212 participants were collected. A total of 29-34
questions were asked depending on the consumer’s dietary restrictions. For more details
of the survey, see appendix.
3.1.1
The Danish Consumers
In order to asses consumer interest in consuming more plant-based food and less meat
it was necessary to understand the current dietary habits of consumers. Depending on
whether or not consumers were non-vegetarian/meat-consumers or vegetarian/vegan the
questionnaire was different to allow for more insight as to why the different populations
choose to/choose not to consume meat. Although the plant-based population can provide
interesting insights, this project is mainly focused on the opinion and dietary habits of
meat-consumers and their view on transitioning towards a more plant-based diet. For this
reason the data analysis and interpretation in this project will be focused on the meat-
consuming population.
6
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:13==
Figure 3.1: Piechart illustrating the distribution of three diet/eating habits: vegan (yellow),
vegetarian (red) and non-vegetarian/flexitarian (blue) as percentages of the total study
population.
The survey showed that majority of consumers consider themselves non-vegetarian, rep-
resented as 88 percent of the population (Figure 3.1). 4 percent consider themselves
vegan and 8 percent vegetarian. This number is higher than the 2017 Coop Analyse
study which stated that 2.5 percent of Danes considered themselves vegetarian. This
increase in vegetarians could be the result of multiple things such as an actual increase
in vegetarians or differences in sample populations and variation. It is important to note
that the amount size of the population in the Coop Analyse Study was not disclosed but
that it likely differs from the sample size in my study, this should be taken into considera-
tion when interpreting the results. It is possible that the overall number of vegetarian and
vegans have increased, but the majority of the Danish population still consume meat, and
do so quite often.
Figure 3.2: Piechart illustrating the distribution of how often individuals consume meat.
Rarely (green), some days (yellow), everyday (blue) and most days (red) as percentages
of the total study population.
Among the meat-consuming population, 44 percent consume meat most days (4-6 days
a week), 28 percent consumes meat every day and 25 percent consume meat on some
days (1-3 days a week) (Figure 3.2). This means, although there are many meat-eaters
in Denmark, most do not consume meat every day. Furthermore, although only 8 percent
consider themselves fully vegetarian, many consumers are increasingly reducing their
meat intake. In addition, the overall interest in vegetarianism and veganism has increased
tremendously, close to a three-fold increase, over the past five years in Denmark (Figure
3.3).
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
7
==PAGE:14==
Figure 3.3: Graph illustrating the increasing interest in vegetarian (blue) and vegan (red)
in Denmark measured as searches in Google search engine in Denmark’s region from
2015-2020.
This increasing interest in vegetarianism and veganism in Denmark is supported by results
from the questionnaire. When non-vegetarians were asked if they wished to lower their
meat intake and consume more plant-based an astonishing 48 percent responded with
yes (Figure 3.4).
Figure 3.4: Piechart illustration the distribution of the desire to eat more plant-based foods
and less meat with options no (red) maybe (yellow) and yes (blue) as percentages of the
total study population.
8
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:15==
48 percent is a very significant amount and quite surprising. It means that of the meat-
consuming population, almost half wish to eat less meat and more plant-based. It seems
natural to then ask oneself ”If half of the population want to consume less meat and eat
more plant-based, then why are only 8 percent vegetarian?” ”Why aren’t people switch-
ing to plant-based, if it seems like that’s what they want to do?”. These questions were
important to address. The survey aimed to answer these by asking the population as to
why they consume meat. (Figure 3.5) shows the reasoning for consuming meat according
to how often the consumer consumes meat, as a percentage of the population in each
group.
Figure 3.5: Bar chart illustrating the reasons meat-eaters consume meat based on how
often they consume meat (every day, most days, some days, rarely and on occasion) with
options taste (blue), health (red) and. habit (yellow). Study group individuals were able
to select more than one reason for consuming meat which is why the total population in
each group adds up to >1.
As observed, the major reasoning behind consuming meat, across all groups is taste.
Meat-eaters enjoy the taste of meat and this is likely the reason they have a hard time
switching to. plant-based foods. Many also believe that meat is healthy for them, and
for some it is simply habit. It is interesting to notice that as we move towards the occa-
sional meat-eaters, less and less believe that meat is healthy. This could indicate that
the reasoning behind consuming less meat, is the increasing evidence that it may not
be as healthy as previously presumed and the consumer’s awareness of this. Perhaps
consumers are generally becoming more aware of their health and well-being as well as
how their dietary habits that can affect these. To better understand who the consumers
wanting to consume less meat are, an analysis looking at frequency of consuming meat
compared to the desire to eat less meat was made.
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
9
==PAGE:16==
Figure 3.6: Bar chart illustrating consumers’ desire to consume less meat and more plant-
based with options yes (blue) maybe (red) and no (yellow), as a percentage of each groups
population, with group being how often they consume meat (every day, most days, some
days, rarely, on occasion).
As expected it is mainly the consumers already limiting their meat intake (the flexitarians)
that desire to consume even less meat and more plant-based. However, even in the
consumers that eat meat daily, about a third want to decrease their meat intake. This
was rather surprising to me as I find that number high compared to what I had expected.
Imagine if it was possible to aid the 47 percent of the total population that want to decrease
their meat intake. If you could offer a product that would make the transition easy and
tasteful, you would be able to truly make a big change. Imagine the environmental, health
and ethical benefits this would have. To better understand consumers motivation behind
wanting to limit their meat consumption the survey asked consumers to write why they
would/would not want to adapt a more plant-based diet.
10 Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:17==
Figure 3.7: Bar chart illustrating the top three reasons for consumers wanting to consume
more plant-based and less meat as a percent of the population that want to consume less
meat and more plant-based. Study group individuals were able to select more than one
reason for consuming meat which is why the total population in each group adds up to
>1.
The most common reason of wanting to consume less meat and more plant-based was
environmental reasons, followed by better health incentives and lastly, better animal wel-
fare (Figure 3.7). These results agree with the increasing environmental awareness ob-
served with the public (Brechin and Bhandari 2011). Consumers were also asked whether
or not they had tried plant-based meat analogues and what their opinion of them were.
The overall consensus was that of the consumers who had tried them (71 percent) con-
sumers did not feel favorably towards them. Many had issues with the flavor, or the ”imi-
tation”/”pretending to be something it is not” aspect of plant-based meat analogues. The
full survey as well as all responses of the consumer survey can be found in the appendix.
3.1.2
A Call For A New Product
In order to aid the Danes’ in their desire to reduce their meat intake and consume more
plant-based there may therefore be a need for a new product. A new product could be a
plant-based meat analogue with superior qualities compared to the ones currently offered.
Perhaps one that had taste as equally satisfying as real meat, or even better. The new
meat-analogue could also use a different plant or legume base, offering desired qualities
such as changes in fat content or amount of additives. Personally, having tried multiple
meat analogues such as Beyond Meat and Impossible Foods’ burgers, I have a hard time
seeing the potential for a meat analogue to taste more similar to meat. Impossible Foods’
patented heme formulation which allows for such a meat-like taste, that it has confused
many of my vegan friends. The only room for improvement I see, would be to decrease
additives or increase the nutritional value of these products. However, I fear that doing so
would compromise the taste.
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
11
==PAGE:18==
Another option which would answer the Danes’ wish to lower their meat intake, and sat-
isfy their crave for meat, could be to create a ”hybrid” product that combined real meat
with plant protein. Consider a mix consisting of 60 percent ground beef, and 40 percent
legume-based ground meat analogue. With a product like this, you would have the real
meat flavor from the meat, which is what consumers desire. You would also lower the
meat consumption by 40 percent, in theory as you have substituted with legume protein.
The product would also not itself ”imitate” something it is not. I believe such a hybrid could
be the answer to the Danes’ wishes. Furthermore, if you consider the current options with
meat and meatless food products, and compare it to the consumers habits and desires
you find a discrepancy. Of the meat-eaters, 72 percent are flexitarians, meaning they do
not consume meat daily and have a more ”flexible” diet. The market however is very bi-
nary, offering only either completely meatless or meat. Why is that? There is no product
allowing consumers to continue to be flexible, on a meat-containing diet. A hybrid prod-
uct would allow consumers to decrease their meat intake, while still consuming meat and
make the market less binary and more inclusive. In addition, this would allow consumers
to gradually transition away from meat and towards plant-based, if so desired, rather than
an ”all or nothing” scenario.
3.1.3
The New Norm: Blends And Hybrids
After researching the idea of a plant-meat hybrid I discovered that this was not a new
concept. Although the idea to mix in vegetables in meat to cut down price and make it
more plentiful is not new at all, technological advancements have made it possible for
very sophisticated ”hybrids”. An example of such is The Better Meat Company, an Amer-
ican B2B company that develops formulations to produce better meat. I had a chance to
engage with The Better Meat Company founder and CEO Paul Shapiro during The Cul-
tured Meats Symposium; a conference focused on the future food. Paul, a vegan himself
holds a realistic view on the plant-based movement. Although there are great plant-based
meats, they only represent about 1 percent of the market. Consumers desire to consume
meat, and increasingly so, yet this is putting a massive strain on our planet and its re-
sources. This is where The Better Meat Company comes in. By blending real meat with
plant protein, you can satisfy consumers’ demand while relieving the environmental bur-
den, securing food sustainability and improving health. Paul shared with me that they
already have many of their formulations on shelves in US grocery markets, but it’s not al-
ways obvious that the products are ”hybrids”. As an example, he told me about a chicken
nugget product which through the use of The Better Meat Company’s formulation, was
30 percent plant-based. The chicken nuggets were labeled as ”Nuggets Plus”, not as a
”hybrid” product. This was a marketing decision from the chicken nugget manufacturer,
to not discourage or confuse consumers with a foreign term such as ”hybrid” or ”blended”
but rather use positive, health-promoting adjectives to encourage sales. This marketing
or storytelling is something that we will explore in a later section.
Another example of a hybrid product is American B2C company, Raised and Rooted.
Raised and Rooted is an expansion of food industry giant Tyson Foods. The expansion
was announced in June 2019 making it a rather new initiative. Raise and Rooted’s product
line currently consists of two products; plant-based chicken nuggets and a hybrid beef
patty. The burger patty is 80 percent Angus Beef and 20 percent plant protein, mainly pea
protein isolate. Raised and Rooted are marketing their hybrid product mainly from a health
perspective, highlighting the reduction in calories and saturated fats and the high protein
content compared to a 100 percent Angus Beef patty. This again is a marketing decision,
and perhaps for the American consumer, health promoting benefits of consuming less
12 Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:19==
meat and more plants is the more convincing reason to do so. With Danish consumers
however, the environmental benefits seem to be more convincing (Figure 3.7). Again, this
is something that will be covered in the ”Story” chapter of this project.
Based on the responses in the consumer survey I strongly believe that meat-plant-hybrid
products have a huge potential to not only satisfy consumers’ demand but also disrupt
the food industry as a whole. Both Raised and Rooted and The Better Meat Company
have seen tremendous growth, just within the first year of operating. The Better Meat
Company quadrupled their revenue in just the first year. It is of course important to note
that these companies are based in the United States and that they cannot directly predict
the future of such a product in Denmark. They can however, be used as an example to
demonstrate that there is a demand and potential for such a product. In Denmark however,
no such ”hybrid” product exists. ”Why not?” one might ask oneself. The Danes are beyond
environmentally conscious when it comes to transportation, architecture and recycling,
reusing and reducing. But what about the elephant in the room? The tremendous amount
of meat per capita that we consume. From the survey we can conclude that consumers
are aware that consuming meat is not environmentally sustainable, and that the main
reason for consuming meat - is taste. Consumers are increasingly wanting to reduce
their meat intake, but the taste of meat is making it difficult for them to do so. With a plant-
meat hybrid the crave for meat would be satisfied, but the environmental impact could be
greatly reduced compared to consuming pure meat. I believe there is great opportunity for
such a hybrid product on the Danish market. To better asses who the consumer of such a
product would be, we need to better understand the different consumer profiles that exist.
It is imperative to gain an understanding of who the consumers of hybrid products will be.
To do so we will explore customer journeys from different groups and gain insights into
when the decision on whether or not to buy such a product will be made, and to understand
potential obstacles and struggles consumers could have with such a novel product. This
will be covered in the next section.
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
13
==PAGE:20==
3.2
Customer Journey
For the customer journey I wanted to understand peoples’ journeys, experiences and
thought processes of planning, purchasing, cooking, eating and consuming food. My
intention was to then imagine my product as part of their journeys and to realize potential
obstacles and advantages with my product. To do this, I made a simplistic outline (Figure
3.8) of what a general customer journey may look like.
Figure 3.8: Outline illustrating a simplistic overview of a general customer journey and
timeline within food planning, purchasing, eating, cooking and consuming
Here I included five points and steps I believe are included in most customers’ journeys
along with the potential to add more steps. For each of the five general steps I included
points of what each step should include in terms of discussion points and questions that
should be answered. The customer journey was conducted as an interview with individ-
uals. Contrary to the questionnaire in the customer validation section, which aims to get
an overview and draw conclusions from a large population, this customer journey focuses
on the single customer and aims to get an in-depth understanding of the individual jour-
ney customers experience with their diet. Although the population size had to be smaller,
I wanted to get diverse perspectives and I therefore interviewed seven individuals from
different demographics, with different diets who I believed would have significantly differ-
ent customer journeys. This study was designed to serve as both an exploration and a
confirmation study. To do so I designed the study in two parts; I gave four of the par-
ticipants the customer journey outline prior to the interview, while the other three did not
see the outline at all. Each interview took approximately 30 minutes and was conducted
more so as an open discussion rather than a formal interview to ensure that participants
felt accepted and heard as well as to allow for the incentive for participants to add more
points and steps to their journeys, that I may not have previously considered. I wanted to
ensure that the customer journey be an accurate representation of individuals and that it
captured the overall emotion and view they had to their journeys.
Below are graphic illustrations representing overviews of the eight individual customer
journeys (Figure 3.9-3.15).
14 Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.9: Kirsten’s Customer Journey
Kirsten is a 56 year old female who identifies as mainly vegan. Her journey begins with
inspiration. She seeks out new things and looks for new recipes on the internet, TV, books
and from restaurants. She stays very organized when grocery shopping and follows her
list. She goes to multiple locations and tries to prioritize foods with longer expiration dates.
When she cooks she follows a recipe and stays very organized. She likes to have a nice
set table when eating and cleans up right after finishing her meal. After she has reflected
on her meal she will write notes on the recipe to improve it for next time she makes it. If you
wanted to place the product in Kirsten’s customer journey it would need to be introduced
prior to her writing her grocery list. A possibility to do so would be to make television or
social media feature showcasing the product in a appealing dish.
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
15
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.10: Nikita’s Customer Journey
Nikita is a 27 year old female who identifies as an omnivore. She tries to buy food for an
entire week and tries to buy few ingredients to avoid waste and make cooking simple. She
enjoys grocery shopping and in particular loves to be inspired. She enjoys in-store tasting
and can easily be persuaded to try new things and she likes to support local produce.
Nikita likes to have instructions when cooking and if she is cooking for guests or a special
occasion she likes to spend a lot of time preparing a meal. She values a nice presentation
of her food, she prefers her meals to look appetizing. During and after consuming her
meal, Nikita reflects a lot on her food. Although her opinion of the meal and its ingredients
does reflect future purchases, she always stays open to trying new things. As Nikita does
not strictly follow a list you could introduce the product at a later point compared to Kirsten.
You could host a product-tasting in a grocery store to inspire Nikita to try the product.
16 Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.11: Mona’s Customer Journey
Mona is an 83 year old female who identifies as an omnivore. She rarely plans her meals
unless she is having guests over or if there is a special occasion. She tries to make
her meals delicious and somewhat healthy. She makes a grocery list that she follows
when she goes grocery shopping. She likes to stick to brands she knows and has a
sense of trust with them. Mona really loves cooking and makes it a whole experience
by listening to music and having a glass of wine while she cooks. She only follows a
recipe if she is making something for the first time, but usually follows recipes by memory.
Mona loves food and makes what ”she knows she likes”. She only reflects on her meal
if its a new recipe she has not tried before. Mona is an elderly female more set in her
ways, it is therefore harder to introduce and integrate a new product into her customer
journey. Having a good product is not enough, Mona will likely need more convincing.
One possibility to do so however could be to use an emotional and social approach, and
perhaps have her children or grandchildren introduce it to her through a joint cooking
experience or a dinner.
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
17
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.12: Jens’ Customer Journey
Jens is a 55 year old male and he described his diet as omnivorous while open to plant-
based. Jens’ customer journey begins before he plans what to eat when he considers
his own beliefs and lifestyle choices. This really stood out in Jens’ journey. When Jens
does plan he likes to plan his meals for the entire week and likes to satisfy his cravings
while considering his health. He does not write a grocery list and keeps an eye open for
good deals. When he cooks he does not follow a recipe and likes to keep it simple. Jens
does not find himself getting hungry, he mostly eats to satisfy his cravings and he values a
”fullness” feeling after consuming his meal. Jens is alike Nikita in the sense that he does
not plan too much and keeps an open mind further along in the customer journey. An
option to introduce Jens to the product would also to be to introduce it in store. Perhaps
a tasting or a very good deal would convince him to try the product.
18 Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.13: Amadeo’s Customer Journey
Amadeo is a 30 year old male who defines his diet as omnivorous. Amadeo tries to
plan his meals for an entire week. He likes to eat less processed foods as he believes
they are unhealthy. Amadeo shops in higher end grocery stores as he values high quality
foods. When he shops he tries to minimize potential food waste and tries to avoid impulse
purchases. Amadeo enjoys cooking and usually cooks without a recipe. He likes to make
foods that are habit to him and prepares meals for the entire week (meal prep). Portion
control is something Amadeo considers when eating as he fears that he will overeat if he
does not control his portions. Upon eating and after finishing his meal, Amadeo reflects on
his meal and considers possible modifications that will improve the meal for the next time
he cooks it. Amadeo falls in between the polar ends of customer journeys. To introduce
at the product to Amadeo it would most likely need to be at his planning step or prior to
it. Here a an advertisement on social media would likely reach him and perhaps with a
convincing story persuade him to try the product.
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
19
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.14: David James’ Customer Journey
David James is a 38 year old man that identifies as an omnivore. David James does not
really plan his meals, rather he has overall considerations about his diet. David James
values a balanced, varied and healthy diet. He also takes into consideration his room-
mates preferences when cooking as they often eat together. When he goes shopping,
David James is not very focused and gets easily distracted. He also acts a lot on impulse
and cravings and can easily fall for a good deal when he sees it. David James does not
enjoy cooking. He does not use any recipes, but instead cooks from memory. He is a fast
eater that loves food and feels that he needs meat in his meal in order to feel a sense of
fullness. David James does not reflect too much, and keeps it very simple; if he liked it -
he will cook it again, if not - he will not cook it again. David James is much like Jens and
Nikita as in he does not plan and remains open-minded far into his journey. However,
David James does not enjoy cooking much and focuses a lot on convenience, it could
therefore be hard to convince him to try the product. An approach to introduce the prod-
uct to him could be to have a great deal with great advertising in a spot not to be missed
in his grocery store. This would make it rather convenient for him and hopefully convince
him to try it.
20 Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.15: Kristoffer’s Customer Journey
Kristoffer is a 25 year old male who considers himself an omnivore but likes to incorpo-
rate plant-based foods in his diet. He likes to use multi-purpose ingredients that are highly
nutritious and are easy to work with. Kristoffer enjoys being inspired and if he sees some-
thing that looks delicious he will try to find a recipe on how to make it. When he is cooking
for himself he wants it to be simple and fast, but when he cooks for guests or together with
friends he likes a challenging and intricate recipe. Kristoffer is fast at grocery shopping
and does not make any impulse purchases. When he cooks the experience depends on
the purpose of the meal, if it is for himself or others. When he uses a new recipe for the
first time he likes to stick to the recipe before making any modifications. Kristoffer eats
mainly out of necessity and hunger, not so much because he is craving something de-
licious. Kristoffer is like Kirsten, more plant-based and also follows a grocery list. Like
with Kirsten, an approach to reach Kristoffer could be to do some televised or social me-
dia marketing while also offering a good first-time-purchase discount, as Kristoffer is also
budget-concerned.
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
21
==PAGE:28==
As seen in Figures 3.9-3.15, the customer journeys can vary quite a bit. These journeys
are so individual that it may be hard to fit a new, rather unusual product into all those jour-
neys. Some individuals are more open to trying new products whereas others follow strict
grocery lists that they make beforehand. The strategy for introducing a new product into
customers journeys will therefore depend on who you are trying to sell to. For individuals
that write grocery lists that they stick to when shopping (ex. Kirsten, Mona, Amadeo and
Kristoffer) you would need to introduce them to the product sometime before they go to
the store, and even before they write the grocery list. Here you could for example, make
a TV commercial or a social media marketing strategy to reach and hopefully convince
consumers to try the product next time they go to the store. For customers that are more
open to be inspired in-store or look for good deals and aren’t strictly following a grocery
list (ex. Nikita, Jens and David James) you could try to host in-store tasting and/or have
a first-time-purchase offer with a big discount. This could incentivize those customers to
give the product a chance. But how would you know which customer to prioritize?
As I was conducting these interviews I realized that this legume-beef hybrid product falls
far outside the norm and could be considered as a new idea and potentially disruptive
one in the food sector. This made me think of the theory of diffusion of innovation. The
diffusion of innovation theory is a theory by sociologist E.M Rogers that seeks to explain
how people respond to and adopt new ideas.
Figure 3.16: Diffusion of Innovation Theory Curve. Source: startuptips.com
There are five groups in total: the innovators who adopt first because of excitement over
novelty and feeling unconstrained by social norm, then there are the early adopters (also
known as opinion leaders) that adopt because of a measured appraisal that an innova-
tion’s advantages outweigh its disadvantages, then there are the late majority and lag-
22 Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:29==
gards that adopt because they feel social pressure to do so (Dearing and Cox 2018).
When new ideas are introduced it can be particularly hard for people to adopt to them. In
the marketing book Crossing the Chasm, Geoffrey A. Moore explores how the diffusion
if innovation model has significantly impacted high tech entrepreneurship. Here he intro-
duces ”the chasm” between the early adopters and the early majority, and explores ways
in which to cross the chasm using marketing tools. This is the hardest transition Moore
argues, and probably the reason why many new innovations fail to diffuse. Moore argues
that a marketer should focus on one group of customers at a time and use the previous
group as a base, and with enough momentum this could create a bandwagon effect.
Figure 3.17: Crossing the Chasm: Diffusion of Innovation Theory Curve. Source: re-
searchgate.net
I was personally first introduced to this theory during my internship with Wild Earth - a
biotechnology company producing vegan, fungi-based pet food. Here CEO, Ryan Bethen-
court explained to me that ”you cannot sell a brand new product/idea to everyone, it’s
simply impossible. You have to focus on one group - the early adopters first, and then
the rest will follow”. From a startup perspective this is valid as resources are limited and
you therefore physically cannot focus on every group at one time. As seen in the cus-
tomer journey analysis; everyone is different. You cannot target everyone at the same
time, when everyone differs so vastly. Innovators are a small group of venturesomeness
people who seek new ideas and are less integrated into social groups. In the customer
journey, it seems as though there are no innovators. Nikita and Jens would most likely fit
in the early adopters group. They are more integrated into the social system and are also
open to new ideas. In their customer journeys they expressed a curiosity for new food
products and an openness to step away from their ”normal” diet. Nikita and Jens con-
veyed a sense of adventurousness with their diet. Kirsten, Amadeo and Kristoffer likely
fall in the main majority group. Although Kirsten is mainly plant-based, she still has more
set values and ways and would be less likely to try new foods than early adopters. Kirsten,
Amadeo and Kristoffer all try to and mostly do stick to their list of groceries and adhere to
their normal diet, but will occasionally be inspired to try new things. David James would
fall within the late majority group. Although he does not follow a list and still gets dis-
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
23
==PAGE:30==
tracted by deals in the store he was a bit stubborn in his preferences and views. Lastly
in the laggards we would have Mona. Mona is older and with age we do tend to become
more stubborn in our ways. However, Mona explained that she only makes things she
has made before and that she knows she likes. The only time Mona will experiment is on
special occasions for guests. With 83 years, Mona is rather set on her likes and dislikes
as well as her opinion on health and food.
Although the customer journey only includes a small population it is able to confirm the
hypothesis that based on the individuals you wish to target, the way to do so should be
different. For some, it could be in-store, for others it could be through the TV or social
media, before they write their grocery list.
From the customer journeys and the interviews I had with the seven different individuals I
was able to place them in the various groups in Rogers’ Diffusion of Innovation model. By
then applying Moore’s arguments on how to ”cross the chasm” and have lasting impact
with a new idea, it seems evident to focus on the early adopters. As a startup with limited
resources and likely from a cost-benefit analysis as well, it is in no way feasible nor efficient
to target all groups. Consumers such as Nikita and Jens are consumers that know what
they want in their diet (ex. healthy, sustainability, nutrition etc.) but are open to what
the source and food products may be. They are consumers that are not very set in their
ways and instead actively seek to be inspired and are eager to find new products. They
are also individuals that are well integrated in social groups and have the potential to
persuade/convince others to try new products as well. Based on Nikita and Jens’ customer
journeys it seems that in order to best target early adopters the ideal place to introduce my
hybrid product would be at a grocery store. If successful, and as resources and means
grow, the marketing strategy could change to focus on the next group in the Diffusion of
Innovation model. Although exposure and introduction to my product is crucial, so is the
story behind it. This will be further discussed in the following section.
24 Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:31==
3.3
Story
The story of of my idea; the plant-based meat hybrid product has changed vastly through-
out the course of this project. I decided to name it LessMeat, as it’s not meatless - it simply
has less meat. In this section the evolution of the storytelling, influenced by the studies
and findings in this project will be explored.
The initial idea for a plant-based meat hybrid food product came to me during my internship
at the biotech startup Wild Earth. Here I was working alongside very passionate people in
a vegan workplace and was inspired by their individual efforts to making the planet more
sustainable and ethically responsible. As I looked with admiration to them, I was met with
my own confrontation on my personal dietary habits and philosophical standpoint - what
was I doing to push the lever in the right direction? How was I contributing to improving
sustainability? I began researching the implications of meat consumption as well as the
dietary habits in various countries and cultures. I quickly learned of the significant toll
the meat industry has on the environment. To my surprise, and quite contradicting, I also
found that the amount of the world’s population that identifies as vegan is incredible small.
In addition, the demand for meat continues to increase. Furthermore, although Denmark
is considered a very sustainable and green-minded country, to my surprise, we consume
a significant amount of red meat per capita. Realizing this paradox of the pressing need
to lessen the consumption of meat, and the increasing demand for meat alarmed me. It
did, however, also seem like a great entrepreneurial opportunity for a business venture
solving this paradox.
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
25
==PAGE:32==
3.3.1
The First Story
The first attempt to tell the story of the plant-beef hybrid was made prior to both the cus-
tomer validation and the customer journey studies. The first story was therefore solely
based on my own views and assumptions in regards to what the important selling points
would be. This story is seen in the box below.
It’s no news that climate change is becoming a major threat to our planet, and
thereby us.
One big contributor to climate change is the food system, in fact,
globally, animal agriculture is responsible for more greenhouse gases than all
the world’s transportation systems combined. Beef is more resource-intensive to
produce than most other kinds of meat, and animal-based foods overall are more
resource-intensive than plant-based foods. Beef requires 20 times more land and
emits 20 times more greenhouse gas emissions per gram of edible protein than
common plant-based proteins, such as beans and Tofu.
If we want to help save our planet we should decrease our meat consumption and
replace it with plant-based diets, and many people are doing so.
However, the
demand for meat is increasing globally, and has been for decades. How are we
supposed to satisfy the growing demand for meat, and at the same time reduce the
consumption of it?
LessMeat is a plant-protein and meat hybrid ground food product.
With a novel
composition Lessmeat offers consumers a sustainable ground beef product with less
meat and more nutrients, reducing the environmental impact of meat consumption
whilst offering better nutrition. We have taken meatless and turned it into LessMeat
- giving consumers what they crave, while being more sustainably responsible and
providing better nutrition.
As much as we encourage and support plant-based diets, we respect that it is not for
everyone. It can be hard to transition to a new diet. With LessMeat, consumers can
enjoy delicious ground beef, supplemented with vegetable nutrients and fibers - for
a healthier, more sustainable meat product.
As seen in this story, there is a great focus on the environmental impact, which was later
found to be the main reason consumers are wanting to transition to more plant-based
foods (Figure 3.7). Although this initial storytelling does convey the environmental im-
portance of changing our habits, it has very little focus on other aspects such as taste,
nutritional value and convenience. It may also seem less appealing to consumers who
are not as concerned about the environment. If the product aims to appeal to as many
consumers as possible, it needs to appeal to these customers as well. Upon analyzing
the data in the customer validation questionnaire it became evident that taste was in fact
the most important reason for consumers eating meat. Taste and mouthfeel did not have
a huge focus in the first storytelling draft, this was changed in the second story.
26 Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:33==
3.3.2
The Second Story
With the aim to make the story more appealing to meat-lovers, a second draft was made
as seen in the box below.
Climate change is becoming a major threat to our planet, and thereby us.
One
big contributor to climate change is the food system, in particular the meat indus-
try.
Beef is more resource-intensive to produce than most other kinds of meat,
and animal-based foods overall are more resource-intensive than plant-based foods.
Surely we want to help save our planet. Decreasing our meat consumption and
replacing it with a more plant-based diet can greatly reduce the environmental stress
on our planet. Unfortunately, many plant-based foods lack the mouthfeel and taste
of real meat.
LessMeat is a new plant and meat hybrid ground food product. With a novel compo-
sition it offers consumers a more sustainable ground beef product with less meat and
more nutrients, reducing the environmental impact of meat consumption whilst offer-
ing better nutrition and the same great taste of meat. We have taken meatless and
turned it into LessMeat - giving consumers what the meat they crave, while being
more sustainably responsible and providing better nutrition. With LessMeat, con-
sumers can enjoy delicious ground beef, supplemented with vegetable nutrients and
fibers - for a healthier, more sustainable meat product with a satisfying mouthfeel,
taste and smell.
The second story is more appealing to the meat-loving population rather than appealing
mainly to the environmentally-concerned population. In addition there is more focus on
the overall positives of the product rather than the negatives of general meat consumption.
Flavor and mouthfeel of the product are also discussed more in this story. As previously
mentioned, these were points found to be of significant importance after analyzing the
customer validation study. Upon comparison of the first and the second story, the second
is more positive and promoting than the first one which is more confronting and perhaps
considered partly negative. Following the customer journey study additional edits were
made, and a third story was written,
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
27
==PAGE:34==
3.3.3
The Third and Final Story
Following the realization that the product at first need not target as large of a consumer
group as possible, but rather focus on the early adopter group of consumers the story
was modified additionally to attempt to convince this group (Nikita and Jens) to give the
product a try. The third story can be seen in the box below.
Climate change is becoming a major threat to our planet, and thereby us. One big
contributor to climate change is the food system, in particular the meat industry.
Beef is more resource-intensive to produce than most other kinds of meat, and
animal-based foods are in general more resource-intensive than plant-based foods.
Decreasing our meat consumption and replacing it with a more plant-based diet
can greatly reduce the environmental stress on our planet.
Unfortunately, many
plant-based foods lack the mouthfeel, taste and smell of real meat.
LessMeat is a new plant and meat hybrid ground food product. With a novel com-
position it offers consumers a more sustainable and a healthier ground beef product
with less meat and more nutrients. It reduces the environmental impact of meat
consumption whilst offering better nutrition and great taste.
LessMeat is cooked
just like regular beef and is ready to eat within 15 minutes and without the need
of extra preparation. We have taken meatless and turned it into LessMeat - giving
consumers what the meat they crave, while being more sustainably responsible and
providing better nutrition.
With the new LessMeat product, consumers can enjoy delicious ground beef, supple-
mented with vegetable nutrients and fibers - for a healthier, more sustainable meat
product with a satisfying mouthfeel, taste and smell.
The third story is not exceedingly different from the second. Based on Nikita and Jens’
(the early adopters) customer journeys the story was modified to include an increased
emphasis on the cooking process and the novelty of the product, as they both expressed
the importance of having simple food preparation as well as excitement over new prod-
ucts. The environmental section remains in the final story as it is the main driving force
for consumers wanting to consume less meat and more plant-based (based on data from
customer validation study). Contrary to the first story, the third one is much shorter and
more direct. It does not include as much information on the environmental impact of the
meat industry and it focuses more on the product itself. To asses the viability of the sto-
ries and compare them I asked Jens and Nikita which story they preferred and why. Jens
preferred the first and the third story. He appreciated the detailed background in the first
story, and was convinced to try the product by the more informative and motivating prod-
uct description in the third story. Nikita preferred the third story and appreciated that the
section on environmental impact had been shortened, while still conveying the importance
of having such considerations. In addition, Nikita felt that the third story was better able
to describe the product in a simple and exciting way than the two first stories.
As seen in the three stories, they vary quite a bit. The initial vision behind the start-up idea
is presented in the first story. Following the customer validation and the customer journey
studies, the story was modified to incorporate the conclusions and feedback received from
the studies. The third and last story was modified to target the early adopters as that would
be the first marketing strategy for the start-up venture. As the startup would develop, the
28 Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:35==
story most likely would as well. The story would perhaps change depending on the target
audience and the channel used to reach that audience. However, as a startup with limited
resources and with the strategy to reach the early adopters the third story is the story that
would be used to kick-off the product. In conclusion of the entrepreneurial section of this
project it is now known that based on the customer validation, there is a potential market
for the LessMeat product. From the customer journey it became evident that the way in
which to target customers differs vastly based on their individual journeys. It was also
concluded that early adopters such as Nikita and Jens are a good starting target group.
Lastly in the story section, the storytelling of the LessMeat product was edited along with
the conclusions made from both studies resulting in a final story that would be the one
first told to introduce the product. In addition to the entrepreneurial section, a technical
investigation of the viability of a legume-based meat analogue or sustainable high protein
food product was made. The technical section will be introduced in the following section.
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
29
==PAGE:36==
4
Technical
4.1
Legumes Introduction
Legumes are plants in the Fabaceae. Fabaceae is a large family of shrubs, herbs, climbers
and trees and includes more than 17,000 species Krings2008GuideMountains and are
cultivated on 180 million hectares (Graham and Vance 2003). Legumes account for 27
percent of the worlds crop production and are grown throughout the world, in both warmer
subtropical climates and in colder climates (Allen 2012). They often have unusual flowers
structures, podded fruits and most of the species have the ability to form nodules with
rhizobia (Graham and Vance 2003). This nodule-forming ability is important for nitrogen
fixation.
4.1.1
Nitrogen Fixation
Fixed nitrogen concentration is a limiting factor for plant growth. Nitrogen fixation is the
process in which atmospheric nitrogen is converted into ammonia. This process is es-
sential to life and can happen biologically with microorganisms or synthetically, using
methods such as the Haber-Bosch process (Postgate J. et al. 1998). The Haber-Bosch
method uses high temperature and pressure, as well as a catalyst to produce ammonia
from nitrogen gas. The ammonia is then converted into ammonium sulfate fertilizer. The
Haber-Bosch process was inaugurated in 1913 and unquestionably transformed agricul-
ture (Travis 2018). However, although effective, the Haber-Bosch method does not come
without its trade-offs. The Haber-Bosch method consumes large amounts of fossil fu-
els and releases significant amounts of greenhouse gasses into the atmosphere (Razon
2014).
In biological nitrogen fixation, solar energy is responsible for ”forcing” nitrogen to combine
with hydrogen to form ammonia. In some plants, particularly legumes this happens in
the roots or nodules, in symbiosis with nitrogen-fixing bacteria referred to as rhizobia,
in the soil (Lindström, Aserse, and Mousavi 2015). In fact, legumes in association with
rhizobia are responsible for most of the biologically fixed nitrogen (Freiberg et al. 1997).
The nitrogen-fixating process in rhizobia is an enzymatic one, catalyzed by the enzyme-
complex nitrogenase. The discovery of this symbiotic relationship led to the beginning
of rhizobial inoculation at the end of the 19th century (Franche, Lindström, and Elmerich
2009). Rhizobial inoculation is an agricultural practice which allows for rapid colonization
of host rhizobia which in turn can lead to higher nitrogen content in plants which can greatly
influence the yield (Zhang et al. 2011). In addition, the legumes’ ability to collaborate with
rhizobia in nitrogen fixation has lead to the cultivation of ”winter legumes” in crop rotation
to fertilize the ground and increase the yield of summer crops (Karpenstein-Machan and
Stuelpnagel 2000). This natural fertilizing ability as well as nutritional benefits has made
legumes more favoured in today’s agriculture.
4.1.2
Nutritional Legumes
Legumes constitute a large source of nutrition and dietary protein for the world’s popu-
lation and are are used as both feed and food, accounting for 27 percent of the worlds
crop production (Allen 2012). Legumes are nutritionally significant due to their relatively
high protein content and their richness in calories, vitamins and certain minerals. Fur-
thermore, legumes are able to fulfil the essential amino acid requirement of a human,
30 Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:37==
with the exception of S-containing amino acids (Iqbal et al. 2006). As a result, with the
probable food security crisis the world could face by 2050, legumes and their nutritional
quality are even more so significant in combating this. In agreement, interest in legumes
in food formulations has grown in developed countries. In developing countries, legumes
have a long history in human diet. In India, for example, legumes have historically been
a common component in dishes, in fact, today more than half of the Indian population
consume legumes every day (Agrawal and Ebrahim 2013). In addition, African countries
have long consumed legumes such as cowpea and various beans as inexpensive protein
sources, compared to meat (Chibarabada, Modi, and Mabhaudhi 2017). Legumes have
great potential as sturdy, inexpensive and high nutritional quality protein sources but are
surprisingly not as common in developed countries. Nutritional quality of food proteins can
be termed as ”biological value”, ”protein efficiency”, ”protein digestibility” or ”net protein
utilization” and is determined by the composition of essential amino acids and digestibility
(Young and Pellett 1994). Although digestibility of plant proteins are in general lower than
digestibility of animal proteins (Young and Pellett 1994), legumes are some of the protein-
richest foods, with dry-weight protein content of up to 40 percent, comparable to meat at
up to 25 percent (Rebello, Greenway, and Finley 2014). Legumes may therefore be able
to fully or partially substitute the current meat consumption and thereby greatly reduce the
amount of GHG emissions. It is noteworthy to mention that as the legume family is very
large, there are great variances in the nutritional quality of different legumes. To be able to
fully substitute meat using legumes, it is important to understand the differences between
them to ensure proper nutrition. This will be further explored in the following section.
4.2
Comparison Of Different Legumes
To understand which legumes would be suitable as meat substitutes or for formulation
of meat analogues, a comparative analysis between the more common meat-substituting
legumes (pea and soy) and a less common legume (lupin) was done.
Soybean
Soybeans provide a great relatively inexpensive source of nutrition and can have ben-
eficial functional characteristics when incorporated into various foods(B. P. Singh, Vij,
and Hati 2014). Along with these functional characteristics, soybeans can have health-
promoting benefits. In 1999 the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in the USA approved
the health claim that soy protein reduces the risk of coronary hearth disease. Furthermore,
soy protein consumption can lower the blood cholesterol levels (Henkel 2000). In addi-
tion to health-promoting benefits, soybeans are high in protein and contain all essential
amino acids (P. Singh et al. 2008), making them potential substitutes for animal protein.
Soybean however, is not only used as meat substitutes in products such as tofu (Yang
and A. T. James 2013), they are also used in various food products ranging from products
such as milk substitutes (soy milk) (Liu et al. 2018) to protein supplementation (Bertelsen
et al. 2018) and as hardstock in producing fat bases (Ribeiro et al. 2009). The continu-
ously expanding food applications of soybean may be the reason for its growth in demand.
Soybean production in Europe has increased by a factor of 17 in the last fifty years, with
the greatest increase happening during the past seven years (FAOSTAT). It is noteworthy
to mention that as over seventy percent of the soybeans grown in the US are used for
animal feed, and the rest is divided between human food production, oil production and
other (USDA). Therefore, as the production of livestock increases, so does livestock feed.
The majority of soybean production is in the United States, South America and Southeast
Asia (FAOSTAT)
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
31
==PAGE:38==
The exact composition of soybean can vary depending on factors such as season, variety,
cultivation and location (Tsukamoto et al. 1995). On average however, on dryweight basis,
soybeans are composed of approximately 40 percent protein, 35 percent carbohydrates,
20 percent lipids and 5 percent ash (Lokuruka 2011), (FAO). Three important composites
to mention in soybeans are trypsin inhibitors, isoflavones and phytic acid (R. L. Anderson
and Wolf 1995). Trypsin inhibitors inhibit the protease trypsin (KUNITZ 1946), which is
required to break down proteins, making them available for absorption. Isoflavones are
compounds gaining interest due to their anti carcinogenic properties (Hyun et al. 2012)
as well as other health-promoting properties (Zubik and Meydani 2003). Phytic acid acts
as an anti-nutritional agent by preventing the bioavailability of micronutrients and min-
erals (Gupta, Gangoliya, and N. K. Singh 2013). Some of these compounds can have
undesired effects, in human diet, soybeans are commonly not consumed directly but are
processed to yield soybean protein products. Heat and other processes are used to elim-
inate anti-nutritional and allergenic compounds such as the ones mentioned above and
other undesired constituents (Natarajan et al. 2007). Commonly, soybean products exist
as four major types; concentrates, flours, isolates and texturized protein (Gilani and Lee
2003). The nutritional quality and composition of soybean protein products can however
vary depending on the food processing method used.
Pea
Peas are an accessible, inexpensive source of protein, carbohydrates, minerals and vi-
tamins and have long been used in feed and food. Following soybean, peanuts and dry
beans, peas rank fourth in the world’s production of legumes (FAO). Benefits of pea culti-
vation is that they act as valuable intercrops in rotation of common crops such as barley
and oat and that they can be simply harvested using machinery (Ratnayake, Hoover,
and Warkentin 2002). Peas are mainly cultivated in North America, Asia and Australia
(FAOSTAT).
Pea protein content varies between variety, season and environment but in general dry,
dehulled peas contain about 25 percent protein, 68 percent carbohydrates, 5 percent
lipids and 2 percent ash (Reichert and MacKenzie 1982). Like soybean, peas can also
have various health benefits when incorporated into the diet. In a study, Marinangeli
and colleagues demonstrated that foods containing yellow pea flour could aid with man-
agement of diabetes 2 through altering the postprandial glucose response (Marinangeli,
Kassis, and Jones 2009). Pea flour has also been used in bread-making to increase
nutritional value as well as to promote weight-loss through increased satiety (Lunde et
al. 2011). Furthermore, peas contain phenolic compounds which act as antioxidants to
reduce cellular stress (Montserrat Dueñas, Estrella, and T. Hernández 2004)(Agieszka
and Ewa 1979). However, as with soybeans and many other legumes, peas also contain
anti-nutritional factors. Among these are alpha-galactosides, trypsin inhibitors and phytic
acid (Vidal-Valverde, Frias, A. Hernández, et al. 2003). As mentioned above, trypsin in-
hibitors interfere with the degradation of proteins and phytic acid prevents bioavailability
of micronutrients and minerals. Alpha-galactosides can cause reductions in dietary net
energy by interfering with the degradation of nutrients and can cause flatulence. How-
ever, it is debatable whether alpha-galactosides are anti-nutritional or nutritional as they
also serve as functional prebiotics to promote gut health (Martínez-Villaluenga, Frias, and
Vidal-Valverde 2008). As with soybean, peas are commonly processed or pre-treated
in processes such as soaking, cooking and dehulling to reduce anti-nutritional factors
(Wang, Hatcher, and Gawalko 2008). Another potential treatment of peas is germination;
Vidal-Valverde and colleagues found that germination in peas affected nutritional and anti-
32 Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:39==
nutritional factors, observed as an increased vitamin concentration and the elimination of
alpha-galactosides (Vidal-Valverde, Frias, Sierra, et al. 2002).
Lupin
Lupin is a sturdy, protein-rich, nutritious and inexpensive crop that is not yet being utilized
to its full potential. Lupin cultivation is much less common compared to pea and soybean
cultivation which may be due to the fact that it is not commonly used for human consump-
tion. In 2018 only 1 million tonnes of lupin were produced, compared to 13 million tonnes
of pea and 350 million tonnes of soybean (FAOSTAT). However, recently lupin seeds have
gained increasing interest as an added ingredient in baked goods, in dairy products and
in fermented foods, mainly due to its potential health-benefits (Villarino et al. 2016). Lupin
is mainly produced and processed in Australia, with smaller productions in northern Asia
and Europe (FAOSTAT). There are over 170 species in the Lupinus genus (Drummond
et al. 2012), with white lupin, yellow lupin and narrow-leafed lupin being European-native
(Lucas et al. 2015).
Lupin is an old crop but was not commonly cultivated due to its bitter taste cause by al-
kaloids. However, once it was discovered that prolonged soaking would rid the alkaloids,
it quickly became more popular (Murphy-Bokern, Stoddard, and Watson 2017). Today,
lupin seeds are commonly boiled for 30 minutes to remove alkaloids (Narasinga Rao and
Rahma 1984) or in the case of lupin protein isolate, they are eliminated during processing
(Sousa et al. 1996). In addition to treatments, German plant breeders have developed
alkaloid-free lupin termed ”sweet lupin”. Lupin seed composition can vary depending on
species, location and cultivation but in general they are composed of approximately 45
percent carbohydrates, 35 percent protein, 10 percent fiber, 8 percent fat and 2 percent
ash (Tizazu and Emire 2010). In addition to this, lupin seeds also contain various phyto-
chemicals such as phenolic compounds (M. Dueñas et al. 2009) and phytotserols (Rumiy-
ati, Jayasena, and A. P. James 2013) which can have health-promoting properties. Like
most legumes, lupin also contain anti-nutritional components such as phytic acid, trypsin
inhibitors and saponins, however, in lupin these are generally present in lower concen-
trations compared to other legumes (Kohajdová, Karovičová, and Schmidt 2011). Due to
its high quality protein, health benefits and potential for sustainable production, lupin has
more recently been considered as the future protein crop in Europe (Lucas et al. 2015).
To further asses the viability of these legumes as sustainable protein-rich food products
a comparative study was done to analyze the advantages and disadvantages of soy, pea
and lupin. This will be discussed in the following section.
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
33
==PAGE:40==
4.2.1
Comparative Analysis
In order to asses the viability of pea, soy and lupin as protein sources in meat analogue
products a comparative analysis was made for nutritional value, cultivation and applica-
bility. However, when discussing nutrition and dietary requirements it is important to first
establish an understanding of the requirements and the terminology involved. The World
Health Organization (WHO) and the Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Na-
tions (FAO) together released a report on protein and amino acid requirements. In this
report, basic concepts and guidelines concerning diet has been explained. The concepts
and requirements below are based on this report (HOLT and SNYDERMAN 2007).
Metabolic demand: Metabolic demand is the demand for amino acids and protein re-
quired to maintain structure and function of the body. Note, that this demand changes
throughout an individual’s lifetime during growth, and varies with lifestyle as well as dur-
ing special situations such as pregnancy or lactation.
Proteins and Amino Acids: Amino acids are the ”building blocks of life” and make up
proteins. Proteins are virtually responsible for every bodily function making life possible.
Amino acids constitute a basic amino group, an acidic carboxyl group and an organic
functional R group. The R-group determines the amino acid. Amino acids are constantly
transformed to meet the metabolic demand.
Nitrogen balance: The metabolism and transformation of amino acids is roughly charac-
terized by nitrogen balance. As proteins and amino acids are being degraded, oxidized,
synthesized or excreted a certain intake of amino acids must be met through diet. Al-
though a complex system, it is based on this nitrogen cycle, the required amino acid
intake is defined to maintain health. For adults, the FAO and WHO recommend a daily
intake of 105mg nitrogen per kilograms body weight or 0.66g protein per kilograms body
weight.
Digestibility of dietary protein: Digestibility refers to the balance of amino acids across
the intestines. The term is based on the idea that the difference in amino acid intake
and losses across the intestines provide a measurable of the degree of digestibility and
absorption of food protein. However, this measurable has its limitations.
Protein quality and PDCAAS Protein quality is a measure of protein bio-availability which
comprises digestibility, chemical integrity and metabolism of a food. It can be difficult to
determine, particularly for humans which is why the protein digestibility corrected amino
acid score (PDCAAS) approach was developed. PDCAAS is the digestibility of a food
multiplied by its amino acid scores. The amino acid score determines the effectiveness of
absorbed dietary nitrogen to meet the essential amino acid requirement at a safe protein
intake level. The higher the PDCAAS score, the higher the quality of the protein. A
PDCAAS score of 1 is the highest and 0 is the lowest.
This means that in order to asses the various legumes’ potential for a meat analogue
product, they must meet the average metabolic demand, be high in protein and ideally
provide all essential amino acids needed for a healthy nitrogen balance. The proteins
must also be digestible as compared to meat. And finally as an overall score, the PDCAAS
should be within the range of conventional meat products, in order to provide a feasible
alternative.
34 Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:41==
Amino Acid
Soya
Peaa
Lupinb
Beefc
Histidine*
2.5
2.4
3.6
4.2
Isoleucine*
4.9
4.4
4.9
5.7
Leucine*
5.6
7.6
6.4
9.1
Lysine*
5.6
6.7
4.8
9.7
Methionine*
1.4
0.9
0.3
3.4
Phenylalanine*
5.5
5.7
3.7
4.6
Threonine*
3.9
3.8
3.4
5.0
Tryptophan*
1.3
0.9
0.8
1.4
Valine*
5.1
4.9
4.6
6.6
Alanine
4.5
5.4
4.9
6.3
Arginine
7.8
6.4
10.2
7.0
Aspartic acid
11.8
11.9
11.9
5.7
Cysteine
1.2
1.0
0.6
1.4
Glutamic acid
20.5
16.4
19
6.8
Glycine
4.4
4.0
6.6
4.6
Proline
4.9
4.4
7.0
4.4
Serine
5.2
5.4
4.1
4.9
Tyrosine
3.9
4.0
4.0
4.0
Table 4.1: Protein amino acid composition (gram/100g protein) of pea, soy and lupin
protein isolates and beef.
Sources:
a J. Liu et.
al 2019 b L. Muranyi et.
al 2016 and El-Adaway et.
al 2001
c G. Wu et. al 2016 *Essential amino acids
Pea, soy and lupin protein isolate contain all the essential amino acids (Table 4.1), how-
ever, the extraction method used can affect the relative amino acid composition (El-Adawy
et al. 2001). When compared to soy, pea and lupin protein isolate, beef is approximately
40 percent higher in the amount of essential amino acids. However, the legumes are sig-
nificantly higher in glutamic acid and aspartic acid. High concentrations of glutamic acid
and aspartic acid is common in all pulses (Margier et al. 2018).
Source
Soy
proteina
Pea
proteina
Lupinb
Beefc
PDCAAS
0.98
0.89
0.81*
0.92
Protein content
(percentage)
40d
25e
35f
32
Energy (Kcal) per
100g of raw
mature
seeds/beefg
446
81
1741
188
Table 4.2: PDCAAS, Protein content (percentage) and Energy (Kcal)/100g raw mature
seeds/beef for soy protein, pea protein, lupin and beef
Sources:
a S. Rutherfurd et.
al 2015 b H. Erbersdobler et.
al 2017 c J. Hoffman
et. al 2004 *PDCAAS from legume, not protein isolate. d M. Lokuruka et al. 2011 e R.
Reichert et al. 1982 f H. Tizazu et. al 2010 gT. Chibarabada et. al 2017
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
35
==PAGE:42==
Soy, pea and lupin are all comparable to beef, in fact soy protein has a higher PDCAAS
(Table 4.2) than beef (Rutherfurd et al. 2015) (Erbersdobler, Barth, and Jahreis 2017)
(Hoffman and Falvo 2004). Lupin protein isolate PDCAAS was not possible to find, which
is why the PDCAAS for lupin seeds is included instead. The PDCAAS for lupin protein
isolate would likely be higher as it would have a higher protein concentration and purity.
Protein content in all legumes are comparable to beef, with lupin and soy having the high-
est protein concentration. In conclusion, all three legumes have a promising PDCAAS and
are comparable to beef, making them potential meat substitute protein sources. As men-
tioned earlier, in the meat analogue industry, most legumes are processed in some way
before being incorporated into a final product. Along with the various processing meth-
ods, the nutritional profile of the legumes composition changes. This will be discussed in
the following section.
4.3
Processing Methods Of Legumes
Over the past 16 years consumers have increasingly grown interested in healthy foods
(Figure 4.1). And as the interest in healthy foods grow, so does the amount of misconcep-
tions and contradicting views as to what is a healthy food and what is not. According to the
study in the entrepreneurial section, some consumers are concerned about the amount
of processing that foods have been through and prefer less processed foods.
Figure 4.1: Graph illustrating the increasing interest in healthy food measured as searches
in Google search engine worldwide from 2005-2020
36 Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:43==
As the scope of this project is to understand the viability of legume-based meat ana-
logues in Denmark, it is therefore important to assess how such a product would be
processed and what effect the processing would have on the nutritional value of the
product to address the possible concerns and misconceptions consumers may have of
processed foods. Although in some cases, processed foods may be less healthy than
non-processed, the opposite can also be true. As mentioned previously, legumes often
need some kind of treatment or processing in order for us to fully utilize their nutrition.
Additionally, extrusion often increases the nutritional value of legumes through increased
digestibility, biodegradability and decreased anti-nutritional factors (Table 4.3). Many of
these test (Table 4.3) were done in animals or in-vitro, but the overall trend across the
methods and legumes is that extrusion increases the nutritional value.
Legume/
protein
source
Treatment
Method
Result
Source
Common
Bean flour
Extrusion
In-vitro
digestibility test
Increased starch and
protein solubility and
decreased anti-nutritional
factors compared to raw
common bean flour
Batista
et al.
2010
Lupin Seed
crude
protein
Extrusion
In-vivo
degradability test
in sheep
Increased nutrivitive value
by increased crude
protein escape and crude
protein digestibility
compared to raw lupin
seed crude protein
Rémond
et al.
2003
Pea Protein
Extrusion
In-vitro
digestibility test
Significantly increased
protein digestibility
compared to raw pea
protein
Alonso
et al.
2000
Soybean
meal
Extrusion
In-vivo amino
acid digestibility
test in broiler
chicks
Increased amino acid
digestibility compared to
non-extruded soybean
meal. Extrustion
processing also increased
food conversion rate
Jahanian
et al.
2016
Ground
Pea seeds
Extrusion
Mineral content
measurement in
flour, diet and
feaces in rats
using atomic
absorption
spectrometry
Increased mineral
absorption compared to
raw ground pea seeds
Alonso
et al.
2001
Table 4.3: Effect of extrusion on various legume sources
In the next section the advantages and challenges in the cultivation of these legumes will
be investigated to better understand the viability of such legume-based meat analogues,
being cultivated in Denmark or northern Europe.
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
37
==PAGE:44==
4.3.1
Yield And Cultivation
As mentioned earlier, soy, pea and lupin are all high in protein and contain all of the
essential amino acids. However, the cultivation practices and yield varies between the
legumes. This is important to consider when assessing the feasibility of using the legume
in a meat analogue product in Denmark.
The yield of soy, pea and lupin depends on various factors such as species, location
and cultivation practice but lupin and soy’s potential protein yield is more than 2,000kg of
protein per hectare, which is much higher than that of beef (Table 4.4) (Linnemann and
Dijkstra 2002). This is partially due to the edible portion of animals (beef) being as low as
50 percent of the total body mass (Reynolds, Crompton, and Mills 2011). In legumes, the
edible range is much higher (90+ percent). Another reason to the low yield of beef per
hectare land is that land used for feed must be taken into consideration (Broom 2019).
Source
Yield (kg/ha)
Protein content of useful
product (percent)
Maximum potential protein
yield (kg/ha)
Soy
2,000-6,000
40
2,400
Pea
3,000-5,000
25
1,250
Lupin
3,000-5,000
33-40
2,000
Beef
37-406
17
69
Table 4.4: Product yield per hectare, percent useful protein of source and maximum
potential total protein yield per hectare of soy, pea, lupin and beef
Sources: Adapted from A.Linneman et. al 2002 and C. Reynolds et. al 2011
38 Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:45==
Water use and cultivation conditions
Beyond land use and yield, it is also important to consider other factors such as water
use and required cultivation conditions to understand which legume would be suitable for
cultivation in Denmark or northern Europe. Soy is the least water use efficient legume,
with a water use efficiency (WUE) range of 1.16-2.8 (Table 4.5). Soybean consumes a
lot of water, approximately 3 times more than pea and lupin (Chibarabada, Modi, and
Mabhaudhi 2017). In regards to temperature range, pea is the most adaptable but lupin
is the most unusual. Lupin is able to grow at temperatures ranging from -7 to 15 degrees
Celsius (again, note that this can vary with species). From a temperature and water use
perspective it is clear that pea and lupin are most feasible for cultivation in Denmark. In a
one year cold-susceptibility and frost study, P. Annicchiarico and colleagues showed that
lupin had much higher cold susceptibility than pea (Annicchiarico 2017). This means that
with Denmark’s cold winters, lupin may be a more promising crop compared to soy and
pea. However, pea has a much shorter and faster growth cycle, which should also be
taken into consideration.
Source
Water use
(mm)
Water use efficiency (WUE)
(kg dry matter ha−1 mm−1)
Temperature
range
Min-Max
(°C)
Growth
cycle
(days)
Soy
598-690
1.16-2.80
10-25
120-130
Pea
177-266
6-15.9
5-22
55-75
Lupin
178-272
2.1-8.5
-7-15
116-130
Table 4.5: Water usage, temperature range and growth cycle (days) required for cultiva-
tion pea, soy and lupin
Sources: Adapted from T. Chibarabada et. al 2017
Comparison Conclusion
Taking all factors into consideration; Amino acid profile, PDCAAS, yield and cultivation
method, pea and lupin have the potential for excellent meat analogues or sustainable
high-protein food products. All three legumes are comparable to beef as indicated by
their amino acid profile (Table 4.1) and mainly, their PDCAAS (Table 4.2). The biggest
advantage in using such legumes over meat (beef) is the tremendous increase in po-
tential protein yield per land use(Table 4.5). When comparing the three legumes with
each other, the optimal meat analogue-base depends greatly on desired attributes. Soy-
beans are the most commonly cultivated, making them more accessible, and they are
also highest in protein concentration. However, soybeans are not as water use efficient
as pea and lupin. Pea has a short growth cycle and a broad temperature range, but has
the lowest protein concentration. Lupin is high in protein, has high yield but is not as
commonly cultivated which can make it a challenge to access. This however, from an en-
trepreneurial perspective can also be seen as a huge opportunity. Using a less common
ingredient makes it more novel which can be an advantage in terms of product develop-
ment, patenting as well as marketing. With the findings in the technical section, along with
applying an entrepreneurial approach, I would therefore choose to explore lupin further
as a source for the meat analogue or sustainable high-protein food product. The overall
conclusions and relations between the studies in this project will be discussed further in
the next section.
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
39
==PAGE:46==
5
Epilogue
5.1
Conclusions and Implications
5.1.1
The Conclusion on Meat Analogues and Hybrids
As a startup with the aim to produce a more sustainable, nutritious and delicious meat-
analogue or meat-plant-hybrid, the nutritive characteristics and the novelty of lupin makes
it the most interesting legume to pursue. Pea is also a great option as it is equally nu-
tritive and can also be grown locally. The novelty of lupin in a meat-analogue/hybrid
product however, will likely raise more excitement in consumers. This novelty will likely
attract consumers in the early adopters and innovator groups in the Diffusion of Innova-
tion model who are already on the lookout for new disruptive ideas. The high potential
protein yield of pea, soy and lupin compared to beef per hectare, as seen in the compara-
tive analysis, is also a great point to include in the storytelling to illustrate the sustainable
advantage the LessMeat product would have. In both the entrepreneurial studies and the
technical/scientific research it is evident that the world and its population will move to-
wards more plant-based diets. Scientific research shows that consuming great amounts
of meat (mainly beef) is much more resource-depleting and resource inefficient in terms
of protein yield compared to legumes. It is also seen in the entrepreneurial findings that
consumer behavior and consumer mindsets are increasingly interested in healthier and
more sustainable food products. It can also be seen that although interest in plant-based
foods are increasing, so is the consumption of meat. This incoherent gap between what
is needed and desired; consume more plants and less meat and as to what is actually
happening; increased demand for meat creates a challenging paradox. It seems that cur-
rently the market offers mainly all-or-nothing scenarios where consumers choose between
consuming meat or plant-based - and the consumer opinions are not necessarily all-or-
nothing. There is no way for consumers to ”meet in the middle” and be more sustainable
while still consuming the foods that they enjoy and would otherwise miss in plant-based
foods. A product like LessMeat would allow consumers to either transition slowly towards
more plant-based foods, or give them yet another food option that can satisfy the de-
mand for meat and the need for increased sustainability. Based on the findings in this
report a product like LessMeat is sensible from both an entrepreneurial and a technical
perspective.
5.1.2
The Individual, Emotional and Traditional Standpoint
While conducting interviews for the customer journey analysis, as well as through casual
conversation on food-habits and dietary preferences I learned that the relationship individ-
uals have with food is a very unique and an emotional one. Individuals do not necessarily
have a rational approach to their diet and food intake. Emotions, religion and traditions
play a huge role in our diet. As I was conducting interviews, I learned that many people
had never truly examined and evaluated their diet. Many consume foods that they feel
comfortable with, foods they have grown up eating. The majority of the participants had
never been asked the questions I asked them about their diet and had therefore never
really thought about the decisions they make (or do not make) in regards to what they
eat. Moreover, all the individuals I interviewed really enjoyed reflecting on my questions
and having these discussions during the interview. In some individuals it even seemed as
though they had an Aha-moment in which they realized that perhaps some of the decisions
40 Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:47==
they make consciously or subconsciously are not aligned with their beliefs. It seemed to
also become more evident to individuals that although consuming food is a vital necessity,
they do have great decision-making power and influence in their choices when it comes to
food. Many of the foods we consume are tied to our traditions and emotions. From a so-
ciological perspective, these revelations are very interesting and worth exploring further.
However, from an entrepreneurial perspective, it may mean that although not impossible,
it may be very difficult to disrupt such an emotion-based, tradition-based and individual
behavior. These considerations and revelations are very insightful and are also some-
thing I did initially not initially expect to learn from this project. I found it very meaningful
and motivating to learn this.
5.2
Limitations and Suggestions for Future Perspectives
This project has proven to be a much more intricate and complex story than initially an-
ticipated. This thesis was conducted throughout six months and has explored both an
entrepreneurial and a technical perspective of the potential of legume-based meat ana-
logues or sustainable high-protein food products in Denmark. These six months and the
investigations done has led to several reflections which will be discussed below.
5.2.1
If You are Going to Fail, Fail Fast
Throughout this project, multiple studies were made to understand the viability of the Less-
Meat product and the approach on how to market it and tell the story behind it. Although
the studies resulted in great findings and insights that can aid the start-up in both prod-
uct development and business development, the most valuable and reliable data and
feedback will come once the product is launched. Individuals may respond to surveys
and interviews in ways that seem more socially desirable. This means that although con-
sumers may like to think they are environmentally concerned with their purchasing power,
they may not be when the time comes to spending their money in a grocery store. The
best way to test the product’s viability would therefore be to try to sell it and see if indi-
viduals actually purchase it. During my internship at Wild Earth I was able to pitch my
idea to the executives and obtain feedback on it. One interesting feedback I received was
that if you’re going to fail, fail fast. The idea here is that if possible, it can be beneficial
to try out an idea as soon as possible, before spending too much time and too many re-
sources on it. In case the idea is not viable it is not strategic to before testing it, spend too
many resources on it, or spend too much time aiming at perfecting it. Instead one should
rather allow the money and the purchasing power of the consumer speak. I found this
very insightful and it made me consider the possibilities my product would have to do this;
test it out. A possibility would be to showcase it in grocery stores, as mentioned in the
customer journey section, or at festivals (ex. Roskilde festival which already has collab-
orations with DTU) and have consumers try the product as a smaller tasting experience -
and then have the option to purchase a full size meal, or the product itself to take home
and cook. This would allow me to rapidly gain a lot of data and feedback on the product,
make possible adjustments and create an overview of the viability of the product, without
major expenses. Being able to do such a tasting or a consumer study focus group of the
product would be very insightful and it is something I would like to have included had I
had a prototype. This would have required time in the lab which was unfortunately not
possible due to the current circumstances.
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
41
==PAGE:48==
5.2.2
The Future is Plant-based
Through my research in this project I have truly become aware of how unsustainable con-
suming meat (mainly red meat) is for the planet. Although this has been a known fact
for a long time, the data I found in scientific literature and public databases made it even
clearer to me. As the climate crisis and the issue of food security continues to threaten
our planet and our livelihood it is becoming more evident that a simple way to decelerate
or prevent this is through more sustainable dietary habits. Unfortunately, through my cus-
tomer validation survey and upon further research I believe that transitioning the world’s
population towards entirely plant-based diets is unattainable at this time. The demand for
meat continues to increase and as observed in the studies, it is hard to change people’s
diet. Furthermore, many societies rely on meat for a healthy economy. An abrupt and
complete switch to plant-based diets is not the solution. The solution is to reduce the
amount of meat consumed, and there are many ways to do so - one being with LessMeat.
I believe that in the future, meat (red meat in particular) will become more of a luxury
and a rare occasion ingredient rather than an everyday standard in modern cultures and
alternative sustainable and high-protein foods will become more common.
5.2.3
When Scientific Meets Social Greater Things Happen
This project has challenged me in ways I had not initially anticipated. Having a scientific
background in the natural sciences I have been used to very strict methods and proce-
dures when it comes to conducting research and analyzing and interpreting data. I have
been taught to avoid making assumptions and let the data speak for itself. Furthermore,
when analyzing and concluding from data I have commonly been taught to be very criti-
cal with my own research and findings, and ensure I have all the controls and have kept
variables constant before concluding anything. In this thesis this method was something
I was confronted with. With this project and the two entrepreneurial studies I have had to
make assumptions based on the limited amount of data I had available. I have also had
no way of keeping variables constant in my studies, and in no way have I been able to
have triplicates, which is crucial for any scientific study. I have had to use my social and
emotional skills to understand the study group participants and thereby extract data. I
have made assumptions and overall conclusions from smaller populations and still I have
been able to conclude valuable findings. This less rigid research method was at first a
challenge for me, but it has been immensely valuable and insightful. The value of be-
ing able to speak in-person with potential end-users of your product or idea is invaluable
and very rewarding. I have very much enjoyed this bigger sense of freedom and less
rigid structure while conducting research and studies for this project. The combination
of having a scientific/technical approach as well as an entrepreneurial and the methods
included in the two has been such a blessing of a learning outcome and one I had not
initially anticipated. This is something I will bring with me in my future work. I think it is
worth to consider when doing research in a scientific topic that is later meant to yield a
product that will have an end-user. I believe including an entrepreneurial/social/emotional
aspect to scientific studies would result in much more valuable insights and ultimately,
better products and more efficient product development pipelines.
5.2.4
LessMeat Has Potential
During this project I wanted to not only determine the viability of the product LessMeat but
also test my own ability to tell the story and sell the idea. Throughout the project I have
had many discussions and conversations with friends, family and professionals in which
I have had to present and ”pitch” my idea. By doing so, I not only gained insights and
42 Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:49==
feedback, but I also became more inspired with the idea myself. Often when introducing
my thesis project, people first frowned at the idea of a mix of plant-based and meat, and
seemed skeptic. However, upon further explanation and information about the idea, af-
ter my pitch, people often became very excited on the project. From this I learned that
the product would be met with skepticism as it is novel and unusual, however, it will also
be met with excitement once people learn more about what it is. The story is therefore
very important to the product. In addition to casual discussions and conversations about
my project, I also wanted to test my ability to raise funds for my idea. Again, if you are
going to fail, fail fast. I therefore decided to apply for a startup verdensmål/sustainable
development goals grant/Mikrolegat from Fonden for Entreprenørskab. Here early-stage
and idea-stage startups are able to apply for funding of up to 25.000DKK (or 50.000DKK
with CRV). The verdensmål-legater are designed for startups that have a focus in one of
the sustainable development goals. I made a written application as well as a video pitch
and applied. I was awarded 18.000DKK to develop a prototype and obtain patent/trade-
mark protection for my idea. This was a huge confidence boost in myself and my idea.
Unfortunately due to the Coronavirus pandemic, and along with working full-time on my
thesis, it has been difficult to actually to spend the 18.000DKK and take my idea further.
I did however learn even more about how to pitch both my idea and in general, how to
raise money for a startup. I also learned that there is excitement for new products and
that there is room for innovation in the plant-based, meat-analogue and the new hybrid
food sector.
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
43
==PAGE:50==
Figure 5.1: LessMeat Mikrolegat Grant Award
From Fonden For Entreprenørskab
44 Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
El-Adawy, T. A. et al. (2001). “Nutritional potential and functional properties of sweet
and bitter lupin seed protein isolates”. In: Food Chemistry 74.4, pp. 455–462. ISSN:
03088146. DOI: 10.1016/S0308-8146(01)00163-7.
Agieszka, TROSZYŃSKA and CISKA Ewa (1979). “Phenolic Compounds of Seed Coats
of White and Coloured Varieties of Pea (Pisum sativum L.) and Their Total Antioxidant
Activity”. In: Czech J. Food Science 20.1, pp. 15–22.
Agrawal, Sutapa and Shah Ebrahim (2013). “Association between legume intake and self-
reported diabetes among adult men and women in India”. In: BMC Public Health 13.1.
ISSN: 14712458. DOI: 10.1186/1471-2458-13-706.
Allen, L. H. (2012). “Legumes”. In: Encyclopedia of Human Nutrition 3-4, pp. 74–79. DOI:
10.1016/B978-0-12-375083-9.00170-7.
Anderson, E. N. (n.d.). Everyone Eats: Understanding Food and Culture.
Anderson, R L and W J Wolf (1995). “Compositional changes in trypsin inhibitors, phytic
acid, saponins and isoflavones related to soybean processing.” In: The Journal of nutri-
tion 125.3 Suppl, 581S–588S. ISSN: 0022-3166. DOI: 10.1093/jn/125.3{\_}Suppl.581S.
URL: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7884537.
Annicchiarico, Paolo (2017). “Feed legumes for truly sustainable crop-animal systems”.
In: Italian Journal of Agronomy 12.2, pp. 151–160. ISSN: 11254718. DOI: 10.4081/ija.
2017.880.
Bashi, Zafer et al. (2019). “Alternative proteins: The race for market share is on”. In: McK-
insey & Company August, pp. 1–11.
Bertelsen, Anne S. et al. (2018). “Bitter taste masking of enzyme-treated soy protein in
water and bread”. In: Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture 98.10, pp. 3860–
3869. ISSN: 10970010. DOI: 10.1002/jsfa.8903.
Bradbury, K. E. et al. (2014). “Serum concentrations of cholesterol, apolipoprotein A-I and
apolipoprotein B in a total of 1694 meat-eaters, fish-eaters, vegetarians and vegans”.
In: European Journal of Clinical Nutrition 68.2, pp. 178–183. ISSN: 14765640. DOI:
10.1038/ejcn.2013.248.
Brechin, Steven R. and Medani Bhandari (2011). “Perceptions of climate change world-
wide”. In: Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change 2.6, pp. 871–885. ISSN:
17577799. DOI: 10.1002/wcc.146.
Broom, Donald M. (2019). “Land and water usage in beef production systems”. In: Animals
9.6, pp. 1–13. ISSN: 20762615. DOI: 10.3390/ani9060286.
Chibarabada, Tendai P., Albert T. Modi, and Tafadzwanashe Mabhaudhi (2017). “Ex-
pounding the value of grain legumes in the semi- and arid tropics”. In: Sustainability
(Switzerland) 9.1. ISSN: 20711050. DOI: 10.3390/su9010060.
Ci, U S et al. (2017). Affecting the Flavor and Aroma. Vol. 2. ISBN: 9781439836835.
Clune, Stephen, Enda Crossin, and Karli Verghese (2017). “Systematic review of green-
house gas emissions for different fresh food categories”. In: Journal of Cleaner Pro-
duction 140, pp. 766–783. ISSN: 09596526. DOI: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.04.082. URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.04.082.
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
45
==PAGE:52==
Crowe, Francesca L. et al. (2011). “Diet and risk of diverticular disease in Oxford cohort
of European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC): Prospective
study of British vegetarians and non-vegetarians”. In: BMJ (Online) 343.7817, pp. 1–
15. ISSN: 09598146. DOI: 10.1136/bmj.d4131.
Dearing, James W. and Jeffrey G. Cox (2018). “Diffusion of innovations theory, principles,
and practice”. In: Health Affairs 37.2, pp. 183–190. ISSN: 15445208. DOI: 10.1377/
hlthaff.2017.1104.
Drummond, Christopher S. et al. (2012). “Multiple continental radiations and correlates
of diversification in lupinus (leguminosae): Testing for key innovation with incomplete
taxon sampling”. In: Systematic Biology 61.3, pp. 443–460. ISSN: 10635157. DOI: 10.
1093/sysbio/syr126.
Dueñas, M. et al. (2009). “Germination as a process to increase the polyphenol content
and antioxidant activity of lupin seeds (Lupinus angustifolius L.)” In: Food Chemistry
117.4, pp. 599–607. ISSN: 03088146. DOI: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2009.04.051. URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2009.04.051.
Dueñas, Montserrat, Isabel Estrella, and Teresa Hernández (2004). “Occurrence of phe-
nolic compounds in the seed coat and the cotyledon of peas (Pisum sativum L.)” In:
European Food Research and Technology 219.2, pp. 116–123. ISSN: 14382377. DOI:
10.1007/s00217-004-0938-x.
Ekpo, K E (2011). “Effect of processing on the protein quality of four popular insects con-
sumed in Southern Nigeria”. In: Archives of Applied Science Research 3.6, pp. 307–
326.
Erbersdobler, Helmut F, Christian A Barth, and Gerhard Jahreis (2017). “Legumes in hu-
man nutrition Nutrient content and protein quality of pulses”. In: 64.9, pp. 140–144. DOI:
10.4455/eu.2017.038.
Finnigan, T.J.A. (2011). Mycoprotein: origins, production and properties. Woodhead Pub-
lishing Limited, pp. 335–352. DOI: 10.1533/9780857093639.335. URL: http://dx.doi.org/
10.1533/9780857093639.335.
Fischer, Johan (2016). “Markets, religion, regulation: Kosher, halal and Hindu vegetari-
anism in global perspective”. In: Geoforum 69, pp. 67–70. ISSN: 00167185. DOI: 10.
1016/j.geoforum.2015.12.011. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.geoforum.2015.12.011.
Franche, Claudine, Kristina Lindström, and Claudine Elmerich (2009). “Nitrogen-fixing
bacteria associated with leguminous and non-leguminous plants”. In: Plant and Soil
321.1-2, pp. 35–59. ISSN: 0032079X. DOI: 10.1007/s11104-008-9833-8.
Freiberg, Christoph et al. (1997). “Molecular basis of symbiosis between Rhizobium and
legumes”. In: Nature 387.6631, pp. 394–401. ISSN: 00280836. DOI: 10.1038/387394a0.
GALLOP (2019). “Nutrition and food”. In: Federation proceedings 17.2. ISSN: 00149446.
Gilani, G S and N Lee (2003). “Sources of Food-grade Protein”. In: pp. 4873–4879.
Gorlinski, Gini and Britannica Educational Publishing Staff (n.d.). The History of Agricul-
ture.
Graham, Peter H and Carroll P Vance (2003). “Update on Legume Utilization Legumes :
Importance and Constraints to Greater Use”. In: Plant Physiology 131.March, pp. 872–
877. ISSN: 00320889. DOI: 10.1104/pp.017004.872.
Gupta, Raj Kishor, Shivraj Singh Gangoliya, and Nand Kumar Singh (2013). “Reduction of
phytic acid and enhancement of bioavailable micronutrients in food grains”. In: Journal
of Food Science and Technology 52.2, pp. 676–684. ISSN: 09758402. DOI: 10.1007/
s13197-013-0978-y.
46 Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:53==
Henkel, J. (2000). “Soy. Health claims for soy protein, questions about other components.”
In: FDA consumer 34.3, pp. 13–15. ISSN: 03621332.
History of Meat Alternatives (n.d.).
Hoffman, Jay R. and Michael J. Falvo (2004). “Protein - Which is best?” In: Journal of
Sports Science and Medicine 3.3, pp. 118–130. ISSN: 13032968.
HOLT, L. E. and S. E. SNYDERMAN (2007). “Protein and Amino Acid Requirements of
Infants and Children.” In: Nutrition abstracts and reviews 35, pp. 1–13. ISSN: 00296619.
Huis, Arnold van (2013). “Potential of Insects as Food and Feed in Assuring Food Se-
curity”. In: Annual Review of Entomology 58.1, pp. 563–583. ISSN: 0066-4170. DOI:
10.1146/annurev-ento-120811-153704.
Hyun, Jiye et al. (2012). “Isoflavones inhibit the clonogenicity of human colon cancer cells”.
In: Bioorganic and Medicinal Chemistry Letters 22.8, pp. 2664–2669. ISSN: 0960894X.
DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2012.03.027. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bmcl.2012.03.027.
Iqbal, Amjad et al. (2006). “Nutritional quality of important food legumes”. In: Food Chem-
istry 97.2, pp. 331–335. ISSN: 03088146. DOI: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2005.05.011.
Karpenstein-Machan, Marianne and Reinhold Stuelpnagel (2000). “Biomass yield and ni-
trogen fixation of legumes monocropped and intercropped with rye and rotation effects
on a subsequent maize crop”. In: Plant and Soil 218.1-2, pp. 215–232. ISSN: 0032079X.
DOI: 10.1023/A:1014932004926.
Kiple, Kenneth F and Kriemhild Conee Ornelas (2000). The Cambridge World History of
Food. Vol. 1.
Kohajdová, Zlatica, Jolana Karovičová, and Štefan Schmidt (2011). “Lupin composition
and possible use in bakery - A review”. In: Czech Journal of Food Sciences 29.3,
pp. 203–211. ISSN: 12121800. DOI: 10.17221/252/2009-CJFS.
KUNITZ, M. (1946). “Crystalline soybean trypsin inhibitor.” In: The Journal of general phys-
iology 29, pp. 149–154. ISSN: 00221295. DOI: 10.1085/jgp.29.3.149.
Lindström, Kristina, Aregu Amsalu Aserse, and Seyed Abdollah Mousavi (2015). Evolution
and Taxonomy of Nitrogen-Fixing Organisms with Emphasis on Rhizobia. DOI: 10.1002/
9781119053095.ch3.
Linnemann, Anita R. and Dolf Swaving Dijkstra (2002). “Toward sustainable production of
protein-rich foods: Appraisal of eight crops for Western Europe. Part I. Analysis of the
primary links of the production chain”. In: Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition
42.4, pp. 377–401. ISSN: 10408398. DOI: 10.1080/20024091054193.
Liu, Rui et al. (2018). “Fabricating soy protein hydrolysate/xanthan gum as fat replacer in
ice cream by combined enzymatic and heat-shearing treatment”. In: Food Hydrocolloids
81, pp. 39–47. ISSN: 0268005X. DOI: 10.1016/j.foodhyd.2018.01.031. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.foodhyd.2018.01.031.
Lokuruka, MN (2011). “Effects of processing on soybean nutrients and potential impact on
consumer health: An overview”. In: African Journal of Food, Agriculture, Nutrition and
Development 11.4. ISSN: 1684-5358. DOI: 10.4314/ajfand.v11i4.69170.
Lucas, M. Mercedes et al. (2015). “The future of lupin as a protein crop in Europe”. In:
Frontiers in Plant Science 6.September, pp. 1–6. ISSN: 1664462X. DOI: 10.3389/fpls.
2015.00705.
Lunde, Marianne S.H. et al. (2011). “Variations in postprandial blood glucose responses
and satiety after intake of three types of bread”. In: Journal of Nutrition and Metabolism
2011. ISSN: 20900724. DOI: 10.1155/2011/437587.
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
47
==PAGE:54==
Mann, Neil J. (2018). “A brief history of meat in the human diet and current health implica-
tions”. In: Meat Science 144.February, pp. 169–179. ISSN: 03091740. DOI: 10.1016/j.
meatsci.2018.06.008. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.meatsci.2018.06.008.
Margier, Marielle et al. (2018). “Nutritional composition and bioactive content of legumes:
Characterization of pulses frequently consumed in France and effect of the cooking
method”. In: Nutrients 10.11, pp. 1–12. ISSN: 20726643. DOI: 10.3390/nu10111668.
Marinangeli, Christopher P.F., Amira N. Kassis, and Peter J.H. Jones (2009). “Glycemic
responses and sensory characteristics of whole yellow pea flour added to novel func-
tional foods”. In: Journal of Food Science 74.9, pp. 385–389. ISSN: 00221147. DOI:
10.1111/j.1750-3841.2009.01347.x.
Martínez-Villaluenga, Cristina, Juana Frias, and Concepción Vidal-Valverde (2008). “Alpha-
galactosides: Antinutritional factors or functional ingredients?” In: Critical Reviews in
Food Science and Nutrition 48.4, pp. 301–316. ISSN: 10408398. DOI: 10.1080/10408390701326243.
Mattick, Carolyn S. (2018). “Cellular agriculture: The coming revolution in food produc-
tion”. In: Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 74.1, pp. 32–35. ISSN: 19383282. DOI: 10.
1080/00963402.2017.1413059. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/00963402.2017.1413059.
Murphy-Bokern, Donal, Frederick L. Stoddard, and Christine A. Watson (2017). “Legumes
in cropping systems”. In: Legumes in Cropping Systems, pp. 1–256. DOI: 10.1079/
9781780644981.0000.
Narasinga Rao, M. S. and E. H. Rahma (1984). “Effect of Debittering Treatment on the
Composition and Protein Components of Lupin Seed (Lupinus termis) Flour”. In: Journal
of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 32.5, pp. 1026–1030. ISSN: 15205118. DOI: 10.
1021/jf00125a020.
Natarajan, Savithiry et al. (2007). “Proteomic and genomic characterization of Kunitz
trypsin inhibitors in wild and cultivated soybean genotypes”. In: Journal of Plant Physi-
ology 164.6, pp. 756–763. ISSN: 01761617. DOI: 10.1016/j.jplph.2006.05.014.
Nikos, Alexandratos and Bruinsma Jelle (2012). “World agriculture towards 2030/2050:
the 2012 revision.” In: Journal of Surgical Oncology No. 12-03.1, pp. 1–140. ISSN:
10969098. DOI: 10.1002/jso.2930300113.
Paarlberg, Don Paarlberg Philip (n.d.). The Agricultural Revolution of the 20th Century.
Pettersen, Betty J. et al. (2012). “Vegetarian diets and blood pressure among white sub-
jects: Results from the Adventist Health Study-2 (AHS-2)”. In: Public Health Nutrition
15.10, pp. 1909–1916. ISSN: 13689800. DOI: 10.1017/S1368980011003454.
Postgate J. et al. (1998). Nitrogen Fixation(￿￿￿￿), pp. 71–112. ISBN: 9783319577135.
DOI: 10 . 1007 / 3418{\ _ }2016{\ _ }12. URL: http : / / www . mendeley . com / research /
functionalization-n2-mid-late-transition-metals-via-nn-bond-cleavage%0Ahttp://link.
springer.com/10.1007/3418_2016_12.
Radnitz, Cynthia, Bonnie Beezhold, and Julie DiMatteo (2015). “Investigation of lifestyle
choices of individuals following a vegan diet for health and ethical reasons”. In: Appetite
90, pp. 31–36. ISSN: 10958304. DOI: 10.1016/j.appet.2015.02.026. URL: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.appet.2015.02.026.
Ramankutty, Navin et al. (2008). “Farming the planet: 1. Geographic distribution of global
agricultural lands in the year 2000”. In: Global Biogeochemical Cycles 22.1, pp. 1–19.
ISSN: 08866236. DOI: 10.1029/2007GB002952.
Ratnayake, Wajira S., Ratnajothi Hoover, and Tom Warkentin (2002). “Pea starch: Com-
position, structure and properties”. In: Starch/Staerke 54.6, pp. 217–234. ISSN: 00389056.
DOI: 10.1002/1521-379X(200206)54:6<217::AID-STAR217>3.0.CO;2-R.
48 Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:55==
Razon, Luis F. (2014). Life cycle analysis of an alternative to the haber-bosch process:
Non-renewable energy usage and global warming potential of liquid ammonia from
cyanobacteria. DOI: 10.1002/ep.11817.
Rebello, C. J., F. L. Greenway, and J. W. Finley (2014). “A review of the nutritional value of
legumes and their effects on obesity and its related co-morbidities”. In: Obesity Reviews
15.5, pp. 392–407. ISSN: 1467789X. DOI: 10.1111/obr.12144.
Reichert, Robert D. and Samuel L. MacKenzie (1982). “Composition of Peas (Pisum
sativum) Varying Widely in Protein Content”. In: Journal of Agricultural and Food Chem-
istry 30.2, pp. 312–317. ISSN: 15205118. DOI: 10.1021/jf00110a024.
Reynolds, C. K., L. A. Crompton, and J. A.N. Mills (2011). “Improving the efficiency of en-
ergy utilisation in cattle”. In: Animal Production Science 51.1, pp. 6–12. ISSN: 18360939.
DOI: 10.1071/AN10160.
Ribeiro, Ana Paula B. et al. (2009). “Zero trans fats from soybean oil and fully hydro-
genated soybean oil: Physico-chemical properties and food applications”. In: Food Re-
search International 42.3, pp. 401–410. ISSN: 09639969. DOI: 10.1016/j.foodres.2009.
01.012. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foodres.2009.01.012.
Röös, Elin et al. (2018). “Less meat, more legumes: Prospects and challenges in the
transition toward sustainable diets in Sweden”. In: Renewable Agriculture and Food
Systems September. ISSN: 17421713. DOI: 10.1017/S1742170518000443.
Rumiyati, Vijay Jayasena, and Anthony P. James (2013). “Total Phenolic and Phytosterol
Compounds and the Radical Scavenging Activity of Germinated Australian Sweet Lupin
Flour”. In: Plant Foods for Human Nutrition 68.4, pp. 352–357. ISSN: 09219668. DOI:
10.1007/s11130-013-0377-6.
Rutherfurd, Shane M et al. (2015). “Protein Digestibility-Corrected Amino Acid Scores and
Digestible Indispensable Amino Acid Scores Differentially Describe Protein Quality in
Growing Male Rats”. In: The Journal of Nutrition 145.2, pp. 372–379. ISSN: 0022-3166.
DOI: 10.3945/jn.114.195438.
Sexton, Alexandra E, Tara Garnett, and Jamie Lorimer (2019). “Framing the future of
food: The contested promises of alternative proteins”. In: Environment and Planning E:
Nature and Space 2.1, pp. 47–72. ISSN: 2514-8486. DOI: 10.1177/2514848619827009.
Singh, Brij Pal, Shilpa Vij, and Subrota Hati (2014). “Functional significance of bioactive
peptides derived from soybean”. In: Peptides 54, pp. 171–179. ISSN: 01969781. DOI:
10.1016/j.peptides.2014.01.022. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.peptides.2014.01.022.
Singh, Preeti et al. (2008). “Functional and edible uses of soy protein products”. In: Com-
prehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety 7.1, pp. 14–28. ISSN: 15414337.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1541-4337.2007.00025.x.
Smil, By Vaclav (2000). Should We Eat Meat?: Evolution and Consequences of Modern
Carnivory.
Sousa, I. M.N. et al. (1996). “Hydrodynamic Characterization of Lupin Proteins: Solubility,
Intrinsic Viscosity, and Molar Mass”. In: Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry
44.10, pp. 3018–3021. ISSN: 00218561. DOI: 10.1021/jf950516f.
Tilman, D. et al. (2001). “Forecasting agriculturally driven global environmental change”.
In: Science 292.5515, pp. 281–284. ISSN: 00368075. DOI: 10.1126/science.1057544.
Tizazu, H and SA Emire (2010). “Volume 10 No. 8 August 2010 CHEMICAL COMPOSI-
TION, PHYSICOCHEMICAL AND FUNCTIONAL PROPERTIES OF LUPIN (Lupinus
albus) SEEDS GROWN IN ETHIOPIA”. In: Food Engineering 10.8, pp. 3029–3047.
Travis, Anthony S. (2018). Nitrogen Capture. ISBN: 9783319689623. DOI: 10.1007/978-
3-319-68963-0.
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
49
==PAGE:56==
Tsukamoto, Chigen et al. (1995). “Factors Affecting Isoflavone Content in Soybean Seeds:
Changes in Isoflavones, Saponins, and Composition of Fatty Acids at Different Temper-
atures during Seed Development”. In: Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 43.5,
pp. 1184–1192. ISSN: 15205118. DOI: 10.1021/jf00053a012.
UN data, based on (n.d.). Our World in Data.
Vidal-Valverde, Concepción, Juana Frias, Amelia Hernández, et al. (2003). “Assessment
of nutritional compounds and antinutritional factors in pea (Pisum sativum) seeds”. In:
Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture 83.4, pp. 298–306. ISSN: 00225142.
DOI: 10.1002/jsfa.1309.
Vidal-Valverde, Concepción, Juana Frias, Isabel Sierra, et al. (2002). “New functional
legume foods by germination: Effect on the nutritive value of beans, lentils and peas”.
In: European Food Research and Technology 215.6, pp. 472–477. ISSN: 14382377.
DOI: 10.1007/s00217-002-0602-2.
Villarino, C. B.J. et al. (2016). “Nutritional, Health, and Technological Functionality of Lupin
Flour Addition to Bread and Other Baked Products: Benefits and Challenges”. In: Critical
Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition 56.5, pp. 835–857. ISSN: 15497852. DOI: 10.
1080/10408398.2013.814044.
Wang, Ning, David W. Hatcher, and Eugene J. Gawalko (2008). “Effect of variety and
processing on nutrients and certain anti-nutrients in field peas (Pisum sativum)”. In:
Food Chemistry 111.1, pp. 132–138. ISSN: 03088146. DOI: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2008.
03.047.
Wild, Florian et al. (2014). “The evolution of a plant-based alternative to meat: From niche
markets to widely accepted meat alternatives”. In: Agro Food Industry Hi-Tech 25.1,
pp. 45–49. ISSN: 20354606.
Yang, Aijun and Andrew T. James (2013). “Effects of soybean protein composition and
processing conditions on silken tofu properties”. In: Journal of the Science of Food and
Agriculture 93.12, pp. 3065–3071. ISSN: 00225142. DOI: 10.1002/jsfa.6140.
Young, Vernon R. and Peter L. Pellett (1994). “Plant proteins in relation to human protein
and amino acid nutrition”. In: American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 59.5 SUPPL. ISSN:
00029165. DOI: 10.1093/ajcn/59.5.1203S.
Zhang, Yun Zeng et al. (2011). “Effects of rhizobial inoculation, cropping systems and
growth stages on endophytic bacterial community of soybean roots”. In: Plant and Soil
347.1, pp. 147–161. ISSN: 0032079X. DOI: 10.1007/s11104-011-0835-6.
Zubik, Ligia and Mohsen Meydani (2003). “Bioavailability of soybean isoflavones from
aglycone and glucoside forms in American women”. In: American Journal of Clinical
Nutrition 77.6, pp. 1459–1465. ISSN: 00029165. DOI: 10.1093/ajcn/77.6.1459.
50 Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:57==
A
Appendix
A.1
Customer Validation Study
The customer validation study was made in Google Forms and was designed so that
depending on individuals’ dietary habit (vegan, vegetarian or carnivore) they were taken
to different forms to continue the questionnaire. The full consumer survey form can be
seen below.
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
51
==PAGE:58==
6/19/20, 2:09 PM
Consumer Survey on Food Products
Page 1 of 16
https://docs.google.com/forms/u/0/d/1BVsZvQxGHI1LJeFc04PhTRZ9Vn19-qLlS3fVjtmEPRs/printform
1.
Male
Female
Non-binary
Other/prefer not to disclose
2.
3.
Other:
Student
Professional
Retired
Consumer Survey on Food Products
This form was developed as part of a Master thesis studied at the Technical University of Denmark in collaboration with 
The FOOD department at the University of Copenhagen. The purpose is to better understand consumer view on new food
products, current diets and the views on shifting to more sustainable diets.
Your participation is greatly valued and will be included as part of a research project. 
Responses are anonymous.
Upon submission of the form you will be able to enter a draw to win a 500DKK gift card to GoGift.com.
Thank you
* Required
What gender do you identify as? *
How old are you? *
What best describes your current main occupation? *
52 Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:59==
6/19/20, 2:09 PM
Consumer Survey on Food Products
Page 2 of 16
https://docs.google.com/forms/u/0/d/1BVsZvQxGHI1LJeFc04PhTRZ9Vn19-qLlS3fVjtmEPRs/printform
4.
Computers and Technology
Health care
Education and Social Services
Arts and Communication
Business and Finance
Architecture and Civil Engineering
Natural sciences
Law
5.
Other:
Folkeskole
High School (Gymnasie)
Bachelor degree
Master degree
Phd
6.
Other:
Single
In a relationship
Married
What best describes your !eld of expe"ise? *
What is the highest level of education you have completed? *
What is your marital/family status? *
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
53
==PAGE:60==
6/19/20, 2:09 PM
Consumer Survey on Food Products
Page 3 of 16
https://docs.google.com/forms/u/0/d/1BVsZvQxGHI1LJeFc04PhTRZ9Vn19-qLlS3fVjtmEPRs/printform
7.
Living in student dorm
Living alone
Living with roommates/housemates (bofællesskab)
Living with partner/spouse
Living with children
8.
9.
Diet
How do you deane your diet
10.
None
1-2 meals a week
3-5 meals a week
6-9 meals a week
More than 10 meals a week
What is your living status? (Select all that apply) *
What is your nationality? *
In which country do you live? *
How many non-home cooked meals do you eat in a week (ex. Take-out, restaurant, catered lunch etc.)
54 Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:61==
6/19/20, 2:09 PM
Consumer Survey on Food Products
Page 4 of 16
https://docs.google.com/forms/u/0/d/1BVsZvQxGHI1LJeFc04PhTRZ9Vn19-qLlS3fVjtmEPRs/printform
11.
Online
Budget-friendly (ex. Aldi)
Mid-range (ex. Føtex)
Higher-end (ex. Irma)
12.
Not at all
1
2
3
4
5
I love it
13.
Where do you normally purchase your food? *
Do you enjoy cooking food? *
On average, how much time do you spend cooking/preparing each meal? *
I don't eat
this meal
This meal is pre-
made/take-
out/catered
Less than
10
minutes
Between
10-30
minutes
Between
30-60
minutes
Between 60-
120 minutes
More
than 2
hours
Breakfast
Lunch
Dinner
Breakfast
Lunch
Dinner
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
55
==PAGE:62==
6/19/20, 2:09 PM
Consumer Survey on Food Products
Page 5 of 16
https://docs.google.com/forms/u/0/d/1BVsZvQxGHI1LJeFc04PhTRZ9Vn19-qLlS3fVjtmEPRs/printform
14.
Other:
Gluten-free
Lactose intolerance
Kosher
Halal
None
15.
Other:
Keto
Paleo
Raw
Low carb
Weight-loss diet
None
16.
Articles (ex. Forbes, Berlingske etc.)
News channel (ex. DR1, TV2, BBC)
Social media sites (ex. Facebook & Instagram)
Blogs
Scientiac literature (ex. peer-reviewed Nature papers)
Search engines (ex. Google)
I do not search for information about nutrition and diet
Do you have any of the following dietary restrictions? (Select all that apply) *
Have you tried any of the following diets? (Select all that apply)
From which source do you mainly obtain information about nutrition and diet? (Select up to two) *
56 Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:63==
6/19/20, 2:09 PM
Consumer Survey on Food Products
Page 6 of 16
https://docs.google.com/forms/u/0/d/1BVsZvQxGHI1LJeFc04PhTRZ9Vn19-qLlS3fVjtmEPRs/printform
17.
Non-vegetarian/iexitarian (contains meat)
Vegetarian (contains no meat)
Vegan (contains no animal product)
Flexitarian Diet
18.
Every day
Most days (4-6 days a week)
Some days (1-3 days a week)
Rarely (few times a month)
On occasion
19.
Other:
I think it tastes good
I think it's healthy for me
It is a habit for me
I don't know how to cook without meat
General View on Diet
How would you de!ne your normal diet/eating habits? *
How o#en do you eat meat? *
Why do you eat meat? (Select all that apply) *
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
57
==PAGE:64==
6/19/20, 2:09 PM
Consumer Survey on Food Products
Page 7 of 16
https://docs.google.com/forms/u/0/d/1BVsZvQxGHI1LJeFc04PhTRZ9Vn19-qLlS3fVjtmEPRs/printform
20.
Not at all (I don't think about it too much)
1
2
3
4
5
Very (I care a lot about what I eat)
21.
Other:
I plan my meals ahead of every week
I plan them a day ahead
I plan right before going to the store
I don't plan, I go to the store and get what I feel like eating
In general, how concerned are you about your diet/eating habits? *
In general, how do you plan your meals? *
58 Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:65==
6/19/20, 2:09 PM
Consumer Survey on Food Products
Page 8 of 16
https://docs.google.com/forms/u/0/d/1BVsZvQxGHI1LJeFc04PhTRZ9Vn19-qLlS3fVjtmEPRs/printform
22.
Rank the variables according to impo"ance to you when you purchase groceries *
Not Important (I don't care
about it)
Neutral
Important (I care
about it)
Very Important (I care a lot
about it)
Taste
Appearance
Cost
Sustainability
Animal cruelty
Organic
Local
Seasonal
Nutritional value
Cooking/preparation
time
Taste
Appearance
Cost
Sustainability
Animal cruelty
Organic
Local
Seasonal
Nutritional value
Cooking/preparation
time
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
59
==PAGE:66==
6/19/20, 2:09 PM
Consumer Survey on Food Products
Page 9 of 16
https://docs.google.com/forms/u/0/d/1BVsZvQxGHI1LJeFc04PhTRZ9Vn19-qLlS3fVjtmEPRs/printform
23.
24.
Very unfavorable
1
2
3
4
5
Very favorable
25.
Yes
No
Maybe
Would you pay more for these factors in your food products/groceries? *
Yes
No
Better taste
More sustainable
Animal cruelty-free
Organic
Locally sourced
Seasonal
Higher nutritional value
Lower cooking/preparation time
Better taste
More sustainable
Animal cruelty-free
Organic
Locally sourced
Seasonal
Higher nutritional value
Lower cooking/preparation time
How would you feel about a ground meat product that had less fat and more protein? *
Would you like to eat more plant-based and less meat? *
60 Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:67==
6/19/20, 2:09 PM
Consumer Survey on Food Products
Page 10 of 16
https://docs.google.com/forms/u/0/d/1BVsZvQxGHI1LJeFc04PhTRZ9Vn19-qLlS3fVjtmEPRs/printform
26.
27.
Yes
No
28.
29.
Very unfavorable
1
2
3
4
5
Very favorable
30.
Not likely at all
1
2
3
4
5
Highly likely
Meat-free Diet
Why do you want to/not want to eat more plant-based? *
Have you tried plant-based meat alternatives? *
What is your opinion on plant-based meat alternatives? *
How would you feel about a product that blends real meat with plant protein? *
How likely is it that you would purchase a product that combined real meat and plant protein? *
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
61
==PAGE:68==
6/19/20, 2:09 PM
Consumer Survey on Food Products
Page 11 of 16
https://docs.google.com/forms/u/0/d/1BVsZvQxGHI1LJeFc04PhTRZ9Vn19-qLlS3fVjtmEPRs/printform
31.
Not at all (I don't think about it too much)
1
2
3
4
5
Very (I care a lot about what I eat)
32.
Other:
I plan my meals ahead of every week
I plan them a day ahead
I plan right before going to the store
I don't plan, I go to the store and get what I feel like eating
In general, how concerned are you about your diet/eating habits? *
In general, how do you plan your meals? *
62 Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:69==
6/19/20, 2:09 PM
Consumer Survey on Food Products
Page 12 of 16
https://docs.google.com/forms/u/0/d/1BVsZvQxGHI1LJeFc04PhTRZ9Vn19-qLlS3fVjtmEPRs/printform
33.
Rank the variables according to impo"ance to you when you purchase groceries *
Not Important (I don't care
about it)
Neutral
Important (I care
about it)
Very Important (I care a lot
about it)
Taste
Appearance
Cost
Sustainability
Animal cruelty
Organic
Local
Seasonal
Nutritional value
Cooking/preparation
time
Taste
Appearance
Cost
Sustainability
Animal cruelty
Organic
Local
Seasonal
Nutritional value
Cooking/preparation
time
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
63
==PAGE:70==
6/19/20, 2:09 PM
Consumer Survey on Food Products
Page 13 of 16
https://docs.google.com/forms/u/0/d/1BVsZvQxGHI1LJeFc04PhTRZ9Vn19-qLlS3fVjtmEPRs/printform
34.
35.
36.
Yes
No
Would you pay more for these factors in your food products/groceries? *
Yes
No
Better taste
More sustainable
Animal cruelty-free
Organic
Locally sourced
Seasonal
Higher nutritional value
Lower cooking/preparation time
Better taste
More sustainable
Animal cruelty-free
Organic
Locally sourced
Seasonal
Higher nutritional value
Lower cooking/preparation time
Why have you chosen a meatless diet? *
Have you tried plant-based meat alternatives? *
64 Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:71==
6/19/20, 2:09 PM
Consumer Survey on Food Products
Page 14 of 16
https://docs.google.com/forms/u/0/d/1BVsZvQxGHI1LJeFc04PhTRZ9Vn19-qLlS3fVjtmEPRs/printform
37.
38.
Very unfavorable
1
2
3
4
5
Very favorable
Final
section
In this section you have the freedom to express your opinion on the current food industry and current as well as 
future food products.
39.
40.
If yes, which plant-based alternatives have you tried? *
How would you feel about a product that blends real meat with plant protein? (Even if not for own
consumption) *
What is impo"ant to you in terms of ingredients in food products? (What do you want to see/what do
you not want to see?) *
What is impo"ant to you when trusting/choosing food companies (fødevarevirksomheder)? *
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
65
==PAGE:72==
6/19/20, 2:09 PM
Consumer Survey on Food Products
Page 15 of 16
https://docs.google.com/forms/u/0/d/1BVsZvQxGHI1LJeFc04PhTRZ9Vn19-qLlS3fVjtmEPRs/printform
41.
42.
43.
YES!
No, thanks
Draw entry
Please write your e-mail to enter draw
44.
This content is neither created nor endorsed by Google.
Describe your ideal food company with three words *
How do you see the future of food? What would you like to see in the future of food? *
Do you want to enter the draw to win a gi# card of 500DKK to GoGi#.com? *
Please enter your e-mail to enter the draw of a 500DKK gi#card to GoGi#.com *
 Forms
66 Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:73==
6/19/20, 2:09 PM
Consumer Survey on Food Products
Page 16 of 16
https://docs.google.com/forms/u/0/d/1BVsZvQxGHI1LJeFc04PhTRZ9Vn19-qLlS3fVjtmEPRs/printform
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
67
==PAGE:74==
A.2
Sharing of Results
The customer validation Google Form was then shared in multiple channels such as vari-
ous Facebook groups (DTU students, KU students, other Danish University groups, Food
enthusiast groups, diet groups) and it was shared with friends and family. More than
200+ individuals participated in the study. The study population had a median age in the
early twenties. It consisted mainly of. students and the population was mainly female. All
results can be seen in the overview below.
Consumer Survey on Food Products
212 responses
Publish analytics
What gender do you identify as?
212 responses
Male
Female
Non-binary
Other/prefer not to disclose
70.8%
29.2%
68 Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:75==
How old are you?
212 responses
0
22
26
30
34
38
44
49
54
59
66
0
10
20
30
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
2 (0.9%)
2 (0.9%)
2 (0.9%)
8 (3.8%)
8 (3.8%)
8 (3.8%)
14 (6.6%)
14 (6.6%)
14 (6.6%)
18 (8.5%)
18 (8.5%)
18 (8.5%)
24 (11.3%)
24 (11.3%)
24 (11.3%)
22 (10.4%)
22 (10.4%)
22 (10.4%)
15 (7.1%)
15 (7.1%)
15 (7.1%)
19 (9%)
19 (9%)
19 (9%)
12 (5.7%)
12 (5.7%)
12 (5.7%)
3 (1.4%)
3 (1.4%)
3 (1.4%)
2 (0.9%)
2 (0.9%)
2 (0.9%)
5 (2.4%)
5 (2.4%)
5 (2.4%)
5 (2.4%)
5 (2.4%)
5 (2.4%)
5 (2.4%)
5 (2.4%)
5 (2.4%)
5 (2.4%)
5 (2.4%)
5 (2.4%)
3 (1.4%)
3 (1.4%)
3 (1.4%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
2 (0.9%)
2 (0.9%)
2 (0.9%)
2 (0.9%)
2 (0.9%)
2 (0.9%)
2 (0.9%)
2 (0.9%)
2 (0.9%)
4 (1.9%)
4 (1.9%)
4 (1.9%)
3 (1.4%)
3 (1.4%)
3 (1.4%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
2 (0.9%)
2 (0.9%)
2 (0.9%)
4 (1.9%)
4 (1.9%)
4 (1.9%)
2 (0.9%)
2 (0.9%)
2 (0.9%)
3 (1.4%)
3 (1.4%)
3 (1.4%)
2 (0.9%)
2 (0.9%)
2 (0.9%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
3 (1.4%)
3 (1.4%)
3 (1.4%)
2 (0.9%)
2 (0.9%)
2 (0.9%)
3 (1.4%)
3 (1.4%)
3 (1.4%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
2 (0.9%)
2 (0.9%)
2 (0.9%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
2 (0.9%)
2 (0.9%)
2 (0.9%)
2 (0.9%)
2 (0.9%)
2 (0.9%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5
1 (0.5
1 (0.5
What best describes your current main occupation?
212 responses
Student
Professional
Retired
PhD Student
sub teacher/aide
Unemployed
Unoccupied
Graduate - looking for at joob
1/3
27.8%
62.3%
What best describes your field of expertise?
212 responses
Computers and Technology
Health care
Education and Social Services
Arts and Communication
Business and Finance
Architecture and Civil
Engineering
Natural sciences
Law
19.8%
18.9%
9%
11.8%
9.4%
9.9%
18.4%
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
69
==PAGE:76==
What is the highest level of education you have completed?
212 responses
Folkeskole
High School (Gymnasie)
Bachelor degree
Master degree
Phd
Phamacist
High school diploma and som…
certificate
1/3
18.4%
37.7%
31.6%
What is your marital/family status?
212 responses
0
25
50
75
100
Single
In a relationship
Married
75 (35.4%)
75 (35.4%)
75 (35.4%)
94 (44.3%)
94 (44.3%)
94 (44.3%)
43 (20.3%)
43 (20.3%)
43 (20.3%)
70 Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:77==
What is your living status? (Select all that apply)
212 responses
0
50
100
150
Living in student dorm
Living alone
Living with roommates/
housemates (bofæl…
Living with partner/spouse
Living with children
38 (17.9%)
38 (17.9%)
38 (17.9%)
44 (20.8%)
44 (20.8%)
44 (20.8%)
36 (17%)
36 (17%)
36 (17%)
106 (50%)
106 (50%)
106 (50%)
35 (16.5%)
35 (16.5%)
35 (16.5%)
What is your nationality?
212 responses
Danish
Dansk
Danish
American
danish
American
Indian
USA
DK
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
71
==PAGE:78==
In which country do you live?
212 responses
DK
Denmark
Dennark
France
Norway
Singapore
US
United States
Usa
dk
0
50
100
150
4 (1.9%)
4 (1.9%)
4 (1.9%)
9 (4.2%)
9 (4.2%)
9 (4.2%)
5 (2.4%)
5 (2.4%)
5 (2.4%)
120 (56.6%)
120 (56.6%)
120 (56.6%)
18 (8.5%)
18 (8.5%)
18 (8.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
3 (1.4%)
3 (1.4%)
3 (1.4%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
2 (0.9%)
2 (0.9%)
2 (0.9%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
3 (1.4%)
3 (1.4%)
3 (1.4%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
4 (1.9%)
4 (1.9%)
4 (1.9%)
13 (6.1%)
5 (2.4%)
5 (2.4%)
5 (2.4%)
4 (1.9%)
4 (1.9%)
4 (1.9%)
2 (0.9%)
2 (0.9%)
2 (0.9%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
2 (0.9%)
2 (0.9%)
2 (0.9%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
3 (1.4%)
3 (1.4%)
3 (1.4%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%
1 (0.5%
1 (0.5%
Diet
How many non-home cooked meals do you eat in a week (ex. Take-out,
restaurant, catered lunch etc.)?
212 responses
None
1-2 meals a week
3-5 meals a week
6-9 meals a week
More than 10 meals a week
19.8%
42.9%
26.9%
72 Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:79==
Where do you normally purchase your food?
212 responses
Online
Budget-friendly (ex. Aldi)
Mid-range (ex. Føtex)
Higher-end (ex. Irma)
33%
60.4%
Do you enjoy cooking food?
212 responses
1
2
3
4
5
0
25
50
75
100
12 (5.7%)
25 (11.8%)
39 (18.4%)
81 (38.2%)
55 (25.9%)
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
73
==PAGE:80==
On average, how much time do you spend cooking/preparing each meal?
Breakfast
Lunch
Dinner
0
50
100
150
I don't eat this meal
I don't eat this meal
I don't eat this meal
This meal is pre-made/take-out/…
This meal is pre-made/take-out/…
This meal is pre-made/take-out/…
Less than 10 minutes
Less than 10 minutes
Less than 10 minutes
Do you have any of the following dietary restrictions? (Select all that apply)
212 responses
0
50
100
150
200
Gluten-free
Lactose intolerance
Kosher
Halal
None
Vegan
Vegetarian
Soy intolerance
i don’t eat predatory fish
No pork
Diary free
Nut allergies
No pig meat
Eggs, soy
Dialysis diet
Eggs
Keto
Allergies
6 (2.8%)
6 (2.8%)
6 (2.8%)
23 (10.8%)
23 (10.8%)
23 (10.8%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
3 (1.4%)
3 (1.4%)
3 (1.4%)
169 (79.7%)
169 (79.7%)
169 (79.7%)
4 (1.9%)
4 (1.9%)
4 (1.9%)
3 (1.4%)
3 (1.4%)
3 (1.4%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
74 Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:81==
Have you tried any of the following diets? (Select all that apply)
211 responses
0
50
100
150
Keto
Paleo
Raw
Low carb
Weight-loss diet
None
Yeast Free
Intermittent fasting
16/8 diet
I lift weights and follow
my macros (40…
Plant based
vegan
Intuitive Eating
Intermittent fasting
Sense Scandi
No sugar and sweets
Vegansk
20 (9.5%)
20 (9.5%)
20 (9.5%)
13 (6.2%)
13 (6.2%)
13 (6.2%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
55 (26.1%)
55 (26.1%)
55 (26.1%)
58 (27.5%)
58 (27.5%)
58 (27.5%)
117 (55.5%)
117 (55.5%)
117 (55.5%)
2 (0.9%)
2 (0.9%)
2 (0.9%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
From which source do you mainly obtain information about nutrition and
diet? (Select up to two)
212 responses
0
25
50
75
100
Articles (ex. Forbes,
Berlingske etc.)
Social media sites (ex.
Facebook & Inst…
Blogs
Scientific literature (ex.
peer-reviewe…
I do not search for
information about n…
36 (17%)
36 (17%)
36 (17%)
9 (4.2%)
9 (4.2%)
9 (4.2%)
45 (21.2%)
45 (21.2%)
45 (21.2%)
27 (12.7%)
27 (12.7%)
27 (12.7%)
58 (27.4%)
58 (27.4%)
58 (27.4%)
98 (46.2%)
98 (46.2%)
98 (46.2%)
53 (25%)
53 (25%)
53 (25%)
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
75
==PAGE:82==
How would you define your normal diet/eating habits?
212 responses
Non-vegetarian/flexitarian (
contains meat)
Vegetarian (contains no meat)
Vegan (contains no animal
product)
5 days vegetarian 2 days meat
on avarage
Carnivore (contains meat)
8%
86.8%
Flexitarian Diet
How often do you eat meat?
185 responses
Every day
Most days (4-6 days a week)
Some days (1-3 days a week)
Rarely (few times a month)
On occasion
24.3%
43.2%
28.6%
76 Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:83==
Why do you eat meat? (Select all that apply)
185 responses
0
50
100
150
I think it tastes good
I think it's healthy for me
It is a habit for me
Small portions of lean
protein from mea…
i feel more full after
eating meat
There are certain recipes
in which I th…
My canteen do not offer
vegetarian dich…
I don't know how to cook
a hearty meal …
protein
For the protein
Do not get hungry as
quickly after a me…
Convenience
Protein requirements
When it is served in
social settings. I…
I like variety and the
possibilty to ea…
I know how to cook
without meat, but st…
Dinner and brealfast i no
problem, but …
137 (74.1%)
137 (74.1%)
137 (74.1%)
78 (42.2%)
78 (42.2%)
78 (42.2%)
83 (44.9%)
83 (44.9%)
83 (44.9%)
19 (10.3%)
19 (10.3%)
19 (10.3%)
2 (1.1%)
2 (1.1%)
2 (1.1%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
77
==PAGE:84==
General View on Diet
In general, how concerned are you about your diet/eating habits?
186 responses
1
2
3
4
5
0
20
40
60
80
11 (5.9%)
22 (11.8%)
64 (34.4%)
55 (29.6%)
34 (18.3%)
In general, how do you plan your meals?
186 responses
0
20
40
60
I plan my meals ahead of
every week
I plan right before going to
the store
this varies often.. most
times i make a…
I eat what I have bought
beforehand. No…
I plan according to what we
have at hom…
Food is usually made by
some one else a…
I always think a lot about
my diet and …
When not planned ahead I
plan depending…
41 (22%)
41 (22%)
41 (22%)
55 (29.6%)
55 (29.6%)
55 (29.6%)
53 (28.5%)
53 (28.5%)
53 (28.5%)
26 (14%)
26 (14%)
26 (14%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
1 (0.5%)
78 Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:85==
Rank the variables according to importance to you when you purchase
groceries
Taste
Appearance
Cost
Sustainability
0
50
100
Not Important (I don't care about it)
Not Important (I don't care about it)
Not Important (I don't care about it)
Neutral
Neutral
Neutral
Important (I care about it)
Important (I care about it)
Important (I care about it)
Very
Very
Very
Would you pay more for these factors in your food products/groceries?
Better taste
More sust…
Animal cru…
Organic
Locally so…
Seasonal
Higher nut…
0
50
100
150
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
79
==PAGE:86==
How would you feel about a ground meat product that had less fat and
more protein?
180 responses
1
2
3
4
5
0
20
40
60
80
7 (3.9%)
4 (2.2%)
4 (2.2%)
4 (2.2%)
48 (26.7%)
63 (35%)
58 (32.2%)
Would you like to eat more plant-based and less meat?
186 responses
Yes
No
Maybe
32.3%
20.4%
47.3%
80 Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:87==
Why do you want to/not want to eat more plant-based?
180 responses
Sustainability
I eat a plant based diet with small portions of protein from animal products
Taste
I like meat
Smag og konsistens
I like eating meat
Healthy and better for environment
Jeg spiser allerede ret sjældent kød. Der er intet galt i at spise kød 3-4 gange om ugen.
Kylling og især Nsk og skaldyr er super sundt.
To support the animal quality of life and own health
Have you tried plant-based meat alternatives?
186 responses
Yes
No
27.4%
72.6%
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
81
==PAGE:88==
What is your opinion on plant-based meat alternatives?
186 responses
They frequently contain unhealthy ingredients
Horrible
It's good
Like it
Smager specielt
I do not like the taste and consistency
Was not close enough to the real thing, then I would rather eat a vegetable that is not
trying to be something it is not
Kunne aldrig drømme om at spise plantebaseret kød. Men jeg kan godt lide fx.
soyayoghurt og havremælk.
How would you feel about a product that blends real meat with plant
protein?
186 responses
1
2
3
4
5
0
20
40
60
80
17 (9.1%)
38 (20.4%)
61 (32.8%)
40 (21.5%)
30 (16.1%)
82 Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:89==
How likely is it that you would purchase a product that combined real meat
and plant protein?
184 responses
1
2
3
4
5
0
20
40
60
37 (20.1%)
35 (19%)
49 (26.6%)
33 (17.9%)
30 (16.3%)
Meat-free Diet
In general, how concerned are you about your diet/eating habits?
26 responses
1
2
3
4
5
0
5
10
15
1 (3.8%)
1 (3.8%)
1 (3.8%)
3 (11.5%)
3 (11.5%)
11 (42.3%)
8 (30.8%)
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
83
==PAGE:90==
In general, how do you plan your meals?
26 responses
0
2
4
6
8
I plan my meals ahead of
every week
I plan them a day ahead
I plan right before going to
the store
I don't plan, I go to the
store and get…
Generel idea before the
store but might…
8 (30.8%)
8 (30.8%)
8 (30.8%)
8 (30.8%)
8 (30.8%)
8 (30.8%)
5 (19.2%)
5 (19.2%)
5 (19.2%)
4 (15.4%)
4 (15.4%)
4 (15.4%)
1 (3.8%)
1 (3.8%)
1 (3.8%)
Rank the variables according to importance to you when you purchase
groceries
Taste
Appearance
Cost
Sustainability
0
5
10
15
Not Important (I don't care about it)
Not Important (I don't care about it)
Not Important (I don't care about it)
Neutral
Neutral
Neutral
Important (I care about it)
Important (I care about it)
Important (I care about it)
Very
Very
Very
84 Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:91==
Would you pay more for these factors in your food products/groceries?
Better taste
More sust…
Animal cru…
Organic
Locally so…
Seasonal
Higher nut…
0
10
20
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Why have you chosen a meatless diet?
26 responses
Meat started to fall very heavily on my stomach and its giving me digestion problems.
Environmental reasons
Klima
Animal cruelty + sustainability
born to it, chose to stay vegetarian
Vegetarian person
Ethical, environment, climate and health. in that ordee
Sustainability, cruelty free and healthy
Sustainability
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
85
==PAGE:92==
Have you tried plant-based meat alternatives?
26 responses
Yes
No
7.7%
92.3%
If yes, which plant-based alternatives have you tried?
26 responses
Some Norwegian versions of vegan burgers mostly
I eat beans and other legumes but not on a daily basis
Hakket vegetabilsk kød
quorn - not a big fan
way too many, but not my primary focus: I eat meatleass, I do not need substitution for
meat
No
Beyond meat and naturli.
Beyond Meat, Vegan cheese
Naturali
86 Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:93==
How would you feel about a product that blends real meat with plant
protein? (Even if not for own consumption)
26 responses
1
2
3
4
5
0
5
10
15
13 (50%)
6 (23.1%)
2 (7.7%)
4 (15.4%)
1 (3.8%)
1 (3.8%)
1 (3.8%)
Final section
What is important to you in terms of ingredients in food products? (What do you
want to see/what do you not want to see?)
212 responses
.
Clean, additive free
Nothing
-
?
Less additives
Mærkelige tilsætningsstoffer og fyldstoffer
I usually make most things from scratch, so it's not something I notice
Ingredienslisten må gerne være relativ kort
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
87
==PAGE:94==
What is important to you when trusting/choosing food companies
(fødevarevirksomheder)?
212 responses
.
Price
How well they treat their employees
Ethics
Reputation
I don't know
Helst dansk
Knowing their hygene is good
At det er god kvalitet
Describe your ideal food company with three words
212 responses
?
Labor Unions, Clean and reasonable prices
.
Dansk, lokalt og gennemsigtigt med ingredienser
. . .
Tasty, green, fresh
Lækkert, kvalitet og bæredygtigt
Organic local clima-responsible
cheap, eco-friendly, healthy
88 Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:95==
How do you see the future of food? What would you like to see in the future of
food?
212 responses
Lab grown meat
.
Our Seafood is toxic and we are losing species. Clean Mercury from Nsh
Dont know
Less meat
Naturligt
Less co2 emission
ved ikke
More vegetables less meat
Do you want to enter the draw to win a gift card of 500DKK to
GoGift.com?
212 responses
YES!
No, thanks
19.8%
80.2%
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
89
==PAGE:96==
Draw entry
Please enter your e-mail to enter the draw of a 500DKK giftcard to GoGift.com
170 responses
199sm@apoteket.dk
kortbaek.cecilie@gmail.com
sign4080@gmail.com
simon.fejerskov@hotmail.com
henriette.sandbeck@gmail.com
tine@elisiussen.com
chelsey_corum@hotmail.com
baunehoej11@gmail.com
chrollan@gmail.com
90 Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
==PAGE:97==
This page has been intentionally left blank.
Exploration of consumer opinion and potential using legume proteins for meat analogues or sustainable
protein-rich food product
91
==PAGE:98==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Søltofts Plads, Bygning 221
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.bioengineering.dtu.dk
