==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Department of 
Wind Energy 
Master Report 
 
 
 
Uncertainties in the assessment of remaining wind turbine 
lifetime 
 
 
 
Georgios Kostopoulos 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0401 
July 2020 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
Author: Georgios Kostopoulos 
Title: Uncertainties in the assessment of remaining wind turbine lifetime 
 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0401401 
July 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical University of Denmark 
with a unique integration of research, education, innovation and public/private 
sector consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities develop new 
Project period:  
February – July 2020 
 
ECTS: 30 
 
Education: Master of Science 
 
 
Supervisor: 
Nikolay Krasimirov Dimitrov 
DTU Wind Energy 
 
Nicolai Cosack 
Martin Kühn 
Rambøll 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Remarks: 
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark. 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
DTU Wind Energy
Department of Wind Energy
Technical University of Denmark
DTU Lyngby Campus
Nils Koppels Alle
Building 403
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 2525
communication@windenergy.dtu.dk
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
i
Abstract
The project was developed by the master student Georgios Kostopoulos in collaboration
with the Carl von Ossietzky University of Oldenburg (UniOL), the Technical University
of Denmark (DTU) and the Offshore Wind Energy Department’s Asset Management
team of the Danish consultant engineering group Ramboll Group A/S.
The master thesis is about studying the uncertainty of the remaining useful lifetime
(RUL) of an onshore wind turbine for the fatigue loads that act upon its main load bear-
ing critical components. The critical components of the wind turbine that were studied,
as well as the fatigue load cases that were investigated on the thesis were defined. A
fatigue load case is a certain fatigue load mechanical/structural that acts on a wind
turbine component and wears it out as time passes.
LACflex was used as the generic aeroelastic simulation tool for modelling the onshore
wind turbine and for the calculation of the fatigue loads. The uncertainty of the fatigue
loads was estimated and the RUL was calculated for each of the wind turbine’s critical
components for different uncertainty scenarios. The uncertainties of the various RUL
values for the investigated components were estimated and the RUL of the wind turbine
after the sensitivity analysis for the different uncertainty scenarios was derived.
A sensitivity analysis was performed for the wind turbine for the uncertainty assess-
ment for the various uncertainty sources that had been defined. The 2 main uncertainty
sources that were investigated during the thesis were the environmental conditions un-
certainties that are considered as the input data uncertainties and the generic aeroelastic
model uncertainties.
The input data uncertainties that were investigated are the wind speed and turbulence
intensity uncertainties, which were assessed at first individually and then by combining
their probability distributions. Their combined effect was studied by convolution of the
probability distributions. The model uncertainty was investigated by implementing var-
ious blade models. For the uncertainty assessment 2 different methods were used during
the sensitivity analysis with the first being the analytical investigation of the generic
aeroelastic model and the second being the empirical methodology that is suggested in
the IEC 61400.
The generic wind turbine model that was selected was an 1.8 MW wind turbine with
a rotor diameter of 80 m and a tower height of 90 m, while having a design lifetime of
20 years and it was chosen to be representative for a typical wind turbine of the period
2000-2005. The research study from where these results were derived is analytically
presented in the Appendix section of the thesis.
==PAGE:5==
ii
Acknowledgements
Thanks are given primarily to my father that throughout all the challenges, difficulties
and hardships that I faced in my life until this point both personal and academic he
was there to support me. He helped me develop and to evolve into the better version of
myself. I highly appreciate him for this, as I respect and cherish his values with which
he raised me. Together my father and I, we proved wrong the high probability of risk of
failure that was inherent to my development and started early on in my life, as well as
those that believed in it. In the end we pulled through and achieved for me to become
an engineer with 1 Bachelor and 3 Master level titles that have been granted by Danish,
German and Greek universities.
Behind his help and my conviction to pursue this route was our future aspiration to
contribute to society and help in the fight of my generation that is none else than solv-
ing the environmental issues, satisfy electricity demand with renewable energy sources
with wind playing a crucial role and combating climate change. These are values that
are cherished in my family and in which my father believes in & supported during his
political career as MEP in the European & Greek Parliament. And I am grateful that
he paved the path of my engineering education, so that at the end of my life I will be
able to look behind and witness the cumulative positive impact of my family to the Earth.
I would like to acknowledge the support of Pinelopi Konstantaki that she was there for
me since my birth and raised me to be a man with values, resilient & adventurous spirit
and dreams. Her guidance and support were always crucial for me and she gave me
wings in difficult times by showing me that the sky is the limit. Also, I appreciate Geor-
gios Konstantakis overtime support as he taught me how to be a man of adventure &
creation, he developed my critical mindset, my engineering curiosity, my love for the sea
and taught me how to look at the stars, while harnessing the strongest winds & highest
waves. The late 2017 departed Aristotelis Konstantakis has a special place in my heart
as he was always a role model and a guardian angel that I will always remember and
treasure, as he was the one insisting on me developing continuously in my life, aiding
me by letting open the doors of his house & heart and diving with me on equal terms
in some of the most interesting & meaningful discussions of my life, while teaching me
how to have open horizons and significantly improved my sense of humour.
At this point, I would like to give my thanks to Dr. Ing. Nicolai Cosack for the oppor-
tunity that he gave me to do this thesis under his supervision with the Offshore Wind
Energy Department of Ramboll in Hamburg and being a mentor that was available to
support me during my thesis. I highly appreciated his engineering insight & industry
experience that helped me develop a better sense around wind energy and get special-
ized in the field of wind turbine’s lifetime assessment. His guidance was crucial for the
successful completion of my thesis and in difficult points he was able to smooth out
the edges. Also, I want to give my thanks to the Project Engineer Marie-Antoinette
Schwarzkopf that she was always there to support my thesis development, offer me her
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
iii
guidance on the topics and providing me during our meetings with continuous advice
on the various issues that I had to face.
I am grateful to my professors Dr. Ing. Martin Kühn and Dr. Ing. Nikolay Krasimirov
Dimitrov for their continuous guidance and support throughout my master and my Mas-
ter Thesis experience with their continuous feedback on the development and the future
actions that had to be taken for my improvement as an engineer.
At last, I would like to give my thanks to my programming mentors Konstantinos Missios,
Pim Jacobs and Michalis Katsaras that helped me to develop almost from scratch my
skills in Matlab & Python and stood by my side in this challenging journey as friends.
Hopefully, this friendship will only sharpen after the master and during our engineering
careers.
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Contents
iv
0.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
0.2
Research Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1
Lifetime Extension
5
1.1
Generic Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2
Uncertainties Handling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3
Guidelines Typical Approaches
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.4
IEC Approach - Empirical Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2
Introduction to Uncertainty
21
2.1
Gaussian Distributed Uncertainties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.2
Lognormal Distributed Uncertainties
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.3
Uncertainty Numerical Calculation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.4
Uncertainty Sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.5
Uncertainty Distributions & Combination
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3
Fatigue Load Analysis in Remaining Useful Life (RUL) Assessment
33
3.1
Fatigue Loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.2
Design Loads
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.3
Site-Specific Loads
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.4
Lifetime Estimation & RUL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4
Generic Aero-elastic Model (LACflex)
43
4.1
Wind Turbine Specifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.2
Environmental Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.3
Blade Model Specifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5
Uncertainties in Remaining Useful Lifetime (RUL) Assessment
57
5.1
ECUs - Wind Speed (WS) Uncertainty RUL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.2
ECUs - Turb. Intensity (TI) Uncertainty RUL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
5.3
WS & TI Uncertainty Comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
5.4
Blade Model (BM) Uncertainty RUL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
5.5
Combination of WS & TI Uncertainties RUL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
==PAGE:8==
Contents
v
5.6
IEC Empirical Methodology RUL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
5.7
BM, WS & TI RUL Unc. Combination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
6
Conclusions & Recommendations
99
6.1
Comparison of Input Data Uncertainties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
6.2
Vulnerable to Failure WTG Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
6.3
Blade Model Uncertainty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
6.4
Distribution of Uncertainties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
6.5
Combination of Uncertainties
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
6.6
IEC Empirical methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
6.7
Further Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
Bibliography
104
7
Appendix
111
7.1
Aging Wind Turbine Statistics Report
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
7.2
RUL Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 134
8
STATEMENT OF AUTHENTICATION
139
==PAGE:9==
vi
==PAGE:10==
0.1 Introduction
1
0.1
Introduction
This master thesis is being done in the context of a planned IEC technical specification
and its outcome will provide a first insight on the uncertainty of the wind turbine life-
time estimation topic and enrich current knowledge.
The master thesis consists of the following 3 parts for which a structure part and a
research part is being included for improved understanding and navigation of the thesis
from the reader:
1) Sensitivity study on the importance of certain environmental data on es-
timated remaining life of wind turbine components.
Structure
This study is being presented in Chapter 5 of the thesis, where the impact of these
parameters is investigated and explored for the different wind turbine components. In
section 5.1 the Wind Speed (WS) uncertainty RUL impact is investigated and in section
5.2 the Turbulence Intensity (TI) uncertainty RUL impact is investigated. Both are part
of the environmental condition uncertainties (ECUs). The wind speed and turbulence
intensity uncertainties are compared in section 5.3 and their combined effect on the
wind turbine RUL is being shown in 5.5 sub-chapter. In section 5.4 the impact of the
blade model uncertainty in the RUL is presented. In section 5.7 the combined effect of
the wind speed, turbulence intensity and blade model uncertainties in the RUL of the
onshore wind turbine is investigated and analyzed.
Research
This part is directly linked with the research objective of studying the environmental
conditions uncertainty and on how they impact the remaining lifetime of the wind tur-
bine. Also, the research objective of how combination of different uncertainties affects
the wind turbine remaining lifetime is investigated in this part. Lastly, this part is linked
with the research objective of uncertainty of blade properties and the RUL impact of im-
plementing various wind turbine blade models under identical environmental conditions.
2) Investigation of the effect of uncertainty in model data and environmental
conditions.
Structure
Similarly to the sensitivity, the uncertainty effect investigation can be found in the
sub-chapters of Chapter 5 of the thesis with the respective results for each case justi-
fying the investigation. Also, in sub-chapter 2.4 of Chapter 2 the uncertainty sources
==PAGE:11==
2
Contents
are theoretically thoroughly explained, so that the reader will develop his/her overall
knowledge on uncertainties. Supplementary, the reader will obtain a basic background
on what uncertainty sources are investigated in the thesis and for the reasons behind
this decision.
Research
The different sources of uncertainties research objective is the one that is being ex-
plored in this part of the thesis, while evaluating their importance on how the onshore
wind turbine components RUL is impacted by those and elaborate on that is of utmost
significance.
3) Evaluation of a simplified approach proposed in the draft of the IEC 61400-
28 technical specification for the incorporation of uncertainties into the esti-
mation of RUL.
Structure
This evaluation of the simplified approach that is the IEC empirical methodology is
at first theoretically presented in the sub-chapter 1.4 of Chapter 1 and its results are
analyzed in the section 5.6 of the thesis.
Research
In this part for the uncertainty and the RUL results that are dervied a comparison
is made between the analytical methodology that is the use of the generic aeroelastic
model of LACflex and the IEC empirical methodology.
In the aeroelastic model that will be used in the thesis fatigue load analysis scenarios are
simulated, afterwards the Remaining Useful Lifetime (RUL) is calculated for the onshore
wind turbine & the respective uncertainty assessment occurs. A sensitivity analysis is
performed and iteratively this procedure is being repeated. Although, all these aspects
of the project are explored in more detail in the next sections, a first overview of their
core characteristics is being mentioned in this part.
At first it should be stated that the design lifetime of a wind turbine is specified either
in the permits document or in the type certificate of the wind turbine that is provided
by the manufacturer. The design lifetime for wind turbines that have been constructed
until 2005 is 20 years and for those constructed after 2005 can typically either be 20 or
25 years.
The fatigue load analysis is performed by using a generic aeroelastic model, for simulating
the stresses on the critical components for structural integrity (e.g. bolts, connections,
blades etc.) of the wind turbine and their remaining structural reserves are calculated
==PAGE:12==
0.1 Introduction
3
at the end of the design lifetime. This checks the wind turbine’s structural integrity
during its lifetime. On top of that as the actual wind conditions of the selected wind
site should be weaker than the designed wind conditions, the corresponding lifetime will
exceed the design lifetime. This means that there is the potential of the wind turbine
to produce for a certain amount of time electricity after the 20 years period that can
possibly translate to additional financial gains for the wind farm project. Also, it could
mean that in case the maintenance costs are high there may not be much benefit to
operate the wind turbine for a longer period of time and repowering could be an option.
This should be decided in Life-Time Extension (LTE) assessment of the wind farm by
the operator.
For the aforementioned reason if the LTE is approved, the wind farm investment in
practice can be more profitable for the owner, the financial institution that has financed
the project via various investment instruments. In the end the country & consumers
receive green electricity, as well as the environment is impacted positively by the fact
that a renewable asset operates for more years than were originally planned.
At this point it should be mentioned that ideally the structural reserves should always
ensure the target reliability level that was applied for the design of the turbine. How-
ever, due to the fact that wind turbines are usually designed according to standardised
type IEC classes that correspond to a representative wind climate, which means that is
expected for the duration of the wind turbine lifetime to be extended as the site wind
conditions usually are more benign. The difference between the site specific lifetime and
the design lifetime is the Remaining Useful Lifetime (RUL) that is the end product of
the fatigue load analysis.
The uncertainty assessment is a holistic analysis that starts before the fatigue load anal-
ysis with the selection of the initial parameters that are going to be used for it. It
continues during the fatigue load analysis by defining the uncertainties either of the
environmental condition or/ and of the wind turbine model via an iterative method
of - individual parameter uncertainty investigation - until a sufficient result is being
derived. Finally, it concludes with the assessment of the RUL uncertainty & with an
estimation of the uncertainty synergistic influences that took place during the procedure.
Conclusively, the end point of this project will be an analytical assessment of the ma-
jor uncertainties that play a significant role in the estimation of the RUL uncertainty
through a sensitivity scenario analysis. This is based on the analytical fatigue analysis
methodology that has been mentioned that will provide clear results regarding which
are the principal contributors of uncertainties when the lifetime of a wind turbine is
being assessed. The results derived from the analytical method will be compared with
the results of the empirical method that the draft IEC 61400-28 standard includes in its
annex.
==PAGE:13==
4
Contents
0.2
Research Objectives
In this section the research objectives of the master thesis are explained in a brief man-
ner. The MSc thesis research objectives are to determine the fatigue loads (aerodynamic
& structural loads) through simulation on an aero-elastic model, to derive their respec-
tive uncertainty and afterwards to calculate from those the lifetime uncertainty of an
onshore wind turbine. The results of the analytical assessment are always subjected
to uncertainty. These are due to uncertainties in the input data (site conditions) and
the generic wind turbine model applied, among others. While the uncertainty may be
known in some cases (wind conditions), assumptions have to be made for others.
In practice, a detailed assessment of uncertainties is often omitted. Conservative as-
sumptions are made during the assessment without taking the effort to quantify their
effect on the result. The IEC has established a working group that among others, dis-
cusses several methods to assess uncertainties in a qualitative and quantitative way in
preparation of a new standard (IEC 61400-28).
The master thesis will investigate the effect of uncertainties on life time assessment and
test different approaches to include uncertainties in the assessment in practice. For this
purpose, a generic wind turbine model and typical onshore site conditions will be applied.
Besides the qualitative assessment discussed in the IEC working group, a quantitative as-
sessment based on convolution of probability density functions will be applied. Practical
test will be carried out considering uncertainties in the most important environmental
conditions as well as for the modeling of at least one major wind turbine component, e.g.
a rotor blade.
A number of several topics will be investigated for the lifetime uncertainty of the wind
turbine to be specified under different scenarios.
• The different sources of uncertainties need to be determined and evaluate their
degree of importance for the onshore wind turbine case that is examined.
• The uncertainty of relevant environmental conditions (e.g. wind speed & turbu-
lence intensity) and the impact of their uncertainty on the wind turbine lifetime
will be evaluated.
• The uncertainty of blade properties and impact of their uncertainty on the RUL
of the wind turbine will be evaluated by implementing various blade models under
identical environmental conditions.
• The combination of different uncertainties needs to be examined on how it affects
the wind turbine lifetime.
• Comparison of the analytical method’s with the IEC empirical method’s uncer-
tainty & RUL results.
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 1
Lifetime Extension
The lifetime extension (LTE) of the wind turbines is the procedure that is followed by
the wind farm operators, owners and in general wind energy stakeholders that they own,
supervise or manage wind turbines that allows them to investigate the possibility of
extending the operation of wind energy assets by a certain amount of time that usually
varies and can be in the margin of 2-10 years. Then a certain investigation and evalua-
tion of the wind turbines should take place to distinguish between those wind turbines
that can continue to operate and those that either cannot continue to operate due to
the chronic accumulation of fatigue loads and the non existence of load reserves or due
to the fact that extending their lifetime is not profitable.
The lifetime extension (LTE) occurs in case fatigue load reserves have remained in the
wind turbine after its lifetime that can be either 20 or 25 years, depending on the year
of construction. If the LTE is considered due to the load reserves and financially is
deemed to be profitable in the longterm, then it is decided to extend the lifetime of
the wind turbine. The need of the wind turbine to be considered for LTE is performed
by a wind energy expert in lifetime extension assessment & strategy. An LTE assess-
ment procedure is followed that can be done by various different methods according to
the guidelines that will be mentioned below in the relevant section, but can roughly
be distinguished in the empirical methodology & analytical methodology for the LTE
investigation.
In the LTE chapter the generic models with which the analytical LTE investigation is
performed are mentioned, the uncertainties handling is analyzed, as well as the guide-
lines typical approaches are referred.
The IEC empirical methodology is mentioned
specifically in this chapter. The IEC method is one of the methodologies that is being
suggested in the new IEC61400-28-2019 standard, as it introduces a more simplified
application with the help of scaling factors that are called penalty levels. From this
assessment the accuracy of the empirical IEC method will be evaluated.
1.1
Generic Models
The generic models that are used for the LTE investigation are aeroelastic models in
which the aeroelastic simulations and calculations occur. A generic model is a generic
structure that allows for a range of different projects the reuse of the same simulation
==PAGE:15==
6
1 Lifetime Extension
software and is a development of the model library concept. [20] The generic aeroelas-
tic models or codes in broad use are the Horizontal Axis Wind turbine simulation Code
(HAWC2) aeroelastic code, the FAST primary Computer-Aided Engineering (CAE) tool
for simulating the coupled dynamic response of wind turbines aerodynamic model that
is an open software provided by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL)
and the LACflex aeroelastic model that is a Loads, Aerodynamics and Control (LAC)
of wind turbines engineering tool, which is the one that is used in this thesis.
The HAWC2 can model both onshore & offshore wind turbines and is used to calcu-
late the wind turbine response in time domain and it specializes among others in pitch
& active stall controlled wind turbines, detailed BEM aerodynamic model that includes
dynamic stall models, skew inflow, shear effects on the induction, dynamic inflow model
& near wake model, wind turbulence & wake models and extends in offshore support &
floating structures. [17]
In FAST the wind turbine can be modeled either onshore or offshore and has at its
disposal aerodynamic & hydrodynamic models for offshore structures, control & electri-
cal system (servo) dynamics models and structural (elastic) dynamics models to enable
coupled nonlinear aero-hydro-servo-elastic simulation in the time domain. Also, FAST
allows the analysis for pitch or stall regulation, rigid or teetering hub, upwind or down-
wind rotor and lattice or tubular tower. [18]
The LACflex aerodynamic model that is based on FLEX 5 code that has been widely
used by the wind energy industry and can be used for wind turbine modelling, load case
setup, time series simulation and post processing. The aerodynamic loads on the blades
are calculated using the BEM theory, while mechanical, electrical and control systems
are modeled in separate modules and can easily be customized according to the users
needs. [19]
The generic aeroelastic models are used for simulating the aerodynamic and structural
loads of the wind turbine and can be utilised to assess the wind turbine loads for de-
sign and verification purposes. For already commissioned wind turbines these generic
aeroelastic models can also be used for comparison purposes between the design and site
specific loads.
1.2
Uncertainties Handling
The uncertainty investigation will take place during the thesis will focus on two subjects
with the first being the environmental conditions and the second being the model pa-
rameters. The uncertainty investigation aims on revealing how the uncertainty of the
RUL is affected from the uncertainty of other input parameters.
==PAGE:16==
1.2 Uncertainties Handling
7
The uncertainty sources that consist of the environmental condition and the model pa-
rameter uncertainties are explained in Chapter 2 and here are briefly mentioned, as they
are presented from the uncertainties handling scope. From the environmental conditions
the average wind speed and turbulence intensity will initially be investigated, as their
contribution to the RUL uncertainty according to previous scientific research and wind
energy industry experience is deemed as important. From the model parameters the
blade properties uncertainty will be investigated on how it affects the RUL uncertainty
by implementing different blade models in the LACflex wind turbine simulation.
It
should be noted that for the blade properties uncertainty the environmental conditions
are going to be identical to the ones that have been defined from the environmental
conditions uncertainty (ECUs) investigation.
More specifically, in the remaining lifetime assessment project, which presents the core
of this thesis, the uncertainties of certain parameters were handled in a very specific
way.
This was to ensure the accuracy of the results and this way of managing and
implementing the different uncertainties of the generic aeroelastic model of LACflex is
presented below.
1.2.0.1
Wind Speed Uncertainty
The wind speed uncertainty was handled in a unique way. At first a table of uncertain-
ties was created for low, medium and high level of uncertainty and different percentiles
for the average wind speed that represents the p50 percentile were included. It is as-
sumed that the wind speed uncertainty follows a normal Gaussian distribution and that
the wind speed with the highest probability of occurrence is the P50 wind speed, which
corresponds to the average wind speed u and a 50 % probability.
The percentiles are consisted of the different probabilities for which the uncertainties of
the parameter that is researched (e.g. wind speed) needs to be calculated. The prob-
abilities that are included in this study are the P10, P30, P70 and P90 probabilities
that correspond to the 10 %, 30 %, 70 % and 90 % probability. This signifies that for
example the wind speed value for the P70 probability occurs 70 % of the time and that
70 % of the time this wind speed is not exceeded.
For this probability to be computed the cumulative distribution function (CDF) was
used that its equation is given by
FX(x) =
Z x
−∞fX(x′) dx′
(1.1)
Pr[x1 ≤X ≤x2] = Fx(x2) −Fx(x1)
(1.2)
For the CDF the NORMDIST(′name′, µ, σ, TRUE) command in Excel was used that
returns the cumulative distribution function (CDF) for the one-parameter distribution
==PAGE:17==
8
1 Lifetime Extension
family specified by ’name’, evaluated for the mean value µ and the standard deviation
σ. The TRUE logic parameter dictates if the CDF or PDF probability is going to be
estimated for the statistical values that have been provided.
In Table 1.1 the wind speed uncertainty values for the 3 different levels of uncertainty
for the wind speed are being presented and the probability that is derived from the CDF
function is shown that corresponds to each percentile. Also, the standard deviation
that was chosen for each level of uncertainty is included, which were chosen by doing
literature study research and consulting both the academic knowledge of the professors
and the wind energy industry expertise of the consultants in Ramboll.
For the onshore wind turbine of the thesis, the 0.15 m/s is the lower uncertainty level
and the 0.30 m/s is the higher uncertainty level of the wind speed uncertainty. The
reasoning behind this assumption was that although lower and higher uncertainties than
these uncertainty levels can be found, they were considered out of the normal wind speed
regime that can be found in an average onshore wind site. The probability of lower or
higher uncertainty levels than these values to occur often, was considered less likely. A
justification for these wind speed std values would be that the <0.15 m/s values would
correspond to a flat terrain with a uniform wind flow that its wind regime is well known
and the wind speed >0.30 m/s values would correspond to a complex terrain with high
turbulence that its wind regime is not well known due to lack of data.
Table 1.1: Wind speed uncertainty levels for the different percentiles.
Percentile
Wind Speed - Low Uncertainty
CDF Probability
Std
Units
(m/s)
(0-1)
(m/s)
P10
7.42
0.10
P30
7.53
0.30
P50 - Mean
7.61
0.50
0.15
P70
7.69
0.70
P90
7.80
0.90
Percentile
Wind Speed - Medium Uncertainty
CDF Probability
Std
Units
(m/s)
(0-1)
(m/s)
P10
7.33
0.10
P30
7.50
0.30
P50 - Mean
7.61
0.50
0.22
P70
7.73
0.70
P90
7.89
0.90
Percentile
Wind Speed - High Uncertainty
CDF Probability
Std
Units
(m/s)
(0-1)
(m/s)
P10
7.23
0.10
P30
7.45
0.30
P50 - Mean
7.61
0.50
0.30
P70
7.77
0.70
P90
8.00
0.90
==PAGE:18==
1.2 Uncertainties Handling
9
1.2.0.2
Turbulence Intensity Uncertainty
In Table 1.2 the turbulence intensity (TI) uncertainty values for the 3 different levels of
uncertainty for the TI are presented, as well as the derived probability from the CDF
function that corresponds to each percentile. Similarly to the wind speed the standard
deviation that was chosen for each level of uncertainty is included that was determined
through research and after meetings with the Ramboll supervisors, as well as receiving
feedback from the academic knowledge of the professors.
For the onshore wind turbine of the thesis, the 0.010 is the lower uncertainty level
and the 0.020 is the higher uncertainty level of the TI uncertainty.
The reasoning
behind this assumption was that although lower and higher uncertainties than these
uncertainty levels can be found, they were considered out of the normal wind speed
regime that can be found in an average onshore wind site. The probability of lower
or higher uncertainty levels than these values to occur often, was considered less likely.
The TI 0.01 value are representative for turbines at a well-known, simple sites, while
0.02 could be representative for less known sites with high complexity. It should be
noted that the TI inside wind farms is influenced by wind farm and wake effects. The
uncertainty of turbulence in this thesis therefore does not include uncertainty of the
ambient TI only, but also considers uncertainty related to wind farm and wake effects.
Table 1.2: Turbulence Intensity (TI) uncertainty levels for the different percentiles.
Percentile
Turbulence Intensity -
CDF Probability
Std
Units
Low Uncertainty (−)
(0-1)
(−)
P10
0.1375
0.10
P30
0.1448
0.30
P50 - Mean
0.1500
0.50
0.010
P70
0.1553
0.70
P90
0.1630
0.90
Percentile
Turbulence Intensity -
CDF Probability
Std
Units
Medium Uncertainty (−)
(0-1)
(−)
P10
0.1308
0.10
P30
0.1422
0.30
P50 - Mean
0.1500
0.50
0.015
P70
0.1579
0.70
P90
0.1693
0.90
Percentile
Turbulence Intensity -
CDF Probability
Std
Units
High Uncertainty (−)
(0-1)
(−)
P10
0.1247
0.10
P30
0.1397
0.30
P50 - Mean
0.1500
0.50
0.020
P70
0.1606
0.70
P90
0.1760
0.90
==PAGE:19==
10
1 Lifetime Extension
1.3
Guidelines Typical Approaches
The guidelines that were studied during the thesis that were related with the lifetime
extension of wind turbines were many and the research itself was extensive. Mainly
the guidelines from the 3 different countries of Netherlands, Germany and Denmark
were researched and the companies & organizations were 6 in total. Analytically, the
guidelines that were researched were from DNV GL, UL, Bundesverband WindEnergie,
the Dutch Electromechanic Committee, Megavind and the Danish government. This
helped to have an overall view of how the stakeholders of the wind energy industry were
addressing the lifetime extension issue throughout the years and what were their recom-
mendations to the wind farm owners and involved parties. In this section most of the
guidelines are summarized with reference to their most important aspects around the
lifetime assessment and on how they tackle the wind turbines (WTGs) lifetime extension
(LTE) problem.
The most important conclusion that can be derived from those Guidelines is that they
function as recommendations that include qualitative information that stems out from
the experience of the wind energy industry and in their majority they don’t consist of
quantitative methodologies of how to determine the lifetime extension (LTE) of the wind
turbine.
1.3.1
DNV GL Guidelines
The DNV GL guidelines provides us with the standard of ’Lifetime extension of wind
turbines’ and the service specification of ’Certification of lifetime extension of wind tur-
bines’. In those documents DNV GL specifies that the extension of the lifetime can be
applied to all types of wind turbines with methods that are always according to the
current state of the art and that the main focus is towards the the load transferring
components and assemblies responsible for the structural integrity of the wind turbine.
[2] [3] DNV GL certifies wind turbines or/and wind farms that are eligible for lifetime
extension and do that according to certain assessment methodologies for all of the wind
turbine that are all based in a combination of an analytical part and a practical part,
which assumes a basis of 20 years as the design lifetime of the wind turbine.
Also,
it should be mentioned that a certain assessment scope is investigated and that means
that certain mechanical & structural components of the wind turbine are assessed, which
consist the critical components of the wind turbine and can be seen in Figure 3.4 on
Chapter 3. [2] [3]
More specifically, the analytical part includes 3 different methodologies, the simplified,
the detailed and the probabilistic approach. The simplified approach is used when the
original wind turbine design documentation is not available and compares the original
design conditions with the site’s environmental conditions. [2] [3] The detailed approach
that is a deterministic approach is used when access to the wind turbine original docu-
==PAGE:20==
1.3 Guidelines Typical Approaches
11
mentation is possible and takes into account the environmental conditions at the specific
site, the extended lifetime of the wind turbine and the verification of all loads. [2] [3]
The probabilistic approach uses stochastic methods in the assessment of the structural
integrity and in this approach the uncertainty in the models and the model inputs are
possible to be characterized by appropriate probability distributions. [2] [3]
The analytical part is followed by the practical part that is an assessment through inspec-
tions of the wind turbine that takes into account the maintenance/ operational history
and the engineering field experience that has been built throughout the years around
this type of wind turbine. [2] [3]
1.3.2
Danish Government & Megavind Guidelines
In the governmental Danish guidelines that is in the form of an Executive Order a
technical certification scheme is being implemented that specifies that the certification
of the wind turbines is different for different wind turbines.
For those with a rotor
diameter more than 40 m2 they should include a minimum of requirements and have a
more detailed certification, whereas the wind turbines with a rotor area between 5 m2 &
40 m2 have less requirements to take into account and the wind turbines with less than 5
m2 are exempted from certification. [5] This gives an overview that different approaches
should be followed regarding the lifetime extension of wind turbines of different power
output. [5]
However, all the wind turbines should have a service inspection that should be completed
on the basis of fixed specifications and regular intervals for regular service of the wind
turbine and if it operates for longer period than its design lifetime it should be subject
to extended service. For wind turbines that have operated for longer than their design
lifetime except the service inspection they must provide in addition an inspection and
assessment of the structural parts in relation to the wind turbine’s continued operation.
[5] The audits of the wind turbine should be done by a certified company. [5]
The extended service inspections of wind turbines according to the Danish guidelines
should implement the following requirements that are shown in Table 1.3, which include
the visual inspection of the components:
Table 1.3: Inspection to WTG components subject to extended service [5] [6].
WTG components
Inspection Issues
Frequency
Machine Frame
Cracks
Annually
Bolted Joints
Braking Systems
Annually
Main Shaft (especially Trunnion Bearing)
Dents & Rust
Annually
Yaw Bearing & Yaw System
Wear & Bearing amount of play
Annually
Tower & Tower Welds
Cracks
Annually
Tighten Bolts in Joints (especially Blades)
Loosened Bolts
Annually
Foundation
Concrete Cracks & Water Intrusion
Annually
Foundation Bolts
Rust & Wear
Annually
Blades
Cracks
Every 3 years
==PAGE:21==
12
1 Lifetime Extension
The Megavind guidelines was created around the end of the turbine’s operational
life, life extension and decommissioning that urges the inspection of the wind turbine
components to ascertain their structural integrity and risk of failure.
A strategy is
suggested that determines the potential lifetime extension solutions that is driven by a
component-by-component analysis. [6] The maintenance history and component failure-
modes should also be considered, so that the annual probability of failure of certain
components will be acceptable, which is combined with inspection requirements & rec-
ommendations for a feasible LTE to occur. [6] The LTE strategy that Megavind suggests
is based on 4 levels of data that are shown in Figure 1.1 and affect the ability to deter-
mine possible lifetime extensions, which are based on the available information of the
WTG’s design parameters and operational measurements. [6]
Figure 1.1: Megavind scenarios for the RUL assessment. [6].
More specifically, Megavind’s detailed model based life prediction method that is ex-
plained below can be made only with a dedicated measurement database. This method
of determining the RUL involves a target annual probability of failure/ annual reliability
level that implies that the wind turbine or WTG component structure will fail when the
design load reaches a limiting level that is compared with the design material resistance.
[6] Also, the WTG’s structural design is based on assumed uncertainties in environmen-
tal conditions, material parameters & design models that are used to create the partial
safety factors, which are multiplied with the design load & material strength levels. [6]
This may allow life extension of wind turbine components as the severity of the assumed
uncertainty might be less than estimated. [6]
Another part of the RUL calculation method according to Megavind is a risk analysis
that quantifies the likelihood of failure, its impact and the possibility of detecting the
failure prior to its occurrence, which can be done as part of a Failure Mode Effect Anal-
ysis (FMEA) or even as part of an inspection and planned maintenance. [6] Afterwards,
the annual probability of failure is estimated and is compared with the annual proba-
bility of failure. Last but not least, a probabilistic analysis on the structural condition
==PAGE:22==
1.3 Guidelines Typical Approaches
13
and the impact of possible material degradation on the structure’s fatigue limit state
together with an assessment of the site specific component loads that is based on the
WTG’s operational history & measured wind conditions leads to the RUL evaluation.
[6]
1.3.3
Bundesverband WindEnergie (BWE) Guidelines
According the Bundesverband WindEnergie (BWE) guidelines require an individ-
ual analysis and assessment of possible risks that might occur during operation with
both the load side and the resistance side of the WTG’s components being considered.
BWE has an analytical and a practical part and lifetime extension (LTE) is possible only
if both of these parts confirm that is safe to proceed to an LTE. [7] It should be noted
that the practical part should be verified by additional structural analysis that takes
into account the standards and guidelines and the analytical part should be supported
by additional representative tests at the tower and an inspection for the foundation. [7]
At this point it should be highlighted that the BWE guidelines are one of the most
analytical and extensive guidelines that were studied during the thesis. [7]
The BWE guidelines include in great detail the analytical part and so here only the
method of load determination will be covered and not the input parameters, the wind
turbine model and the site wind conditions that are presented in the analytical part.
The loads at each representative component are calculated by using a simulation soft-
ware and the determined stresses are summarised as a load spectrum according to their
significance. [7] The simulation can occur either with a generic model according to the
current numerical methods or with an exact structural model for the entire wind turbine
meets the requirements for current models and is state of the art. Also, advanced meth-
ods for lifetime determination can be applied like the fractured mechanical method. [7]
Supplementary, the practical part is an onsite wind turbine inspection with its main
focus being the wind turbine assessment according to the results of the analytical part
based on the actual condition by identifying the WTG’s weak points and it should be
mentioned that safe operation beyond the design lifetime can be ensured by periodical
inspections. [7] Possible damage and risks that is possible to lead to component failure
can be detected when the inspection occurs. The most important aspects of the practical
part are the defects and hazards due to aging, wear and fatigue, the individual load level
of the wind turbine and the type specific risks that is an analysis of the weak points. [7]
1.3.4
UL Guidelines
In the UL guidelines is specified that the wind turbine in order to proceed to lifetime
extension the wind turbine should comply with the external conditions (e.g. site to-
pography, measurement equipment, wind speed & direction, turbulence etc.) and the
operational conditions requirements (e.g. load transient events, power production data,
maintenance data, onsite grid data, control system data etc.). Also, they should comply
==PAGE:23==
14
1 Lifetime Extension
with the requirements of the wind turbine model, the RUL and the risk analysis, which
are the ones that will be briefly analyzed, as these are the requirements that are of direct
importance for the RUL calculation. [4]
More specifically, the wind turbine model focuses on the wind turbine simulation model
generation and validation for LTE use that should include the change in controller pa-
rameters and in external environmental conditions (e.g. soil properties etc.). Also, it
includes the aerodynamic model & structural model validation, as well as it includes a
load evaluation. [4] The load evaluation part of the LTE requests that the load simula-
tion model is validated by load measurements. For the RUL of a wind farm the LTE
requests that is calculated by the representative sample of the wind turbines RUL in
each cell and for each wind turbine is the minimum RUL of all the individual compo-
nents of this exact wind turbine. [4] The inspection part of the LTE requests that the
wind turbine should be inspected for its critical components health condition and its
functioning with a certain minimum of 10 wind turbine components being assessed for
their damages. Supplementary, during an LTE inspection aside from the components
are evaluated: [4]
• Overall wind turbine condition
• Wind turbine operation
• Safety & control systems
• Test of all operating states
• Personnel safety aspects
• Maintenance logs
• SCADA data
Lastly, in the risk analysis the uncertainties are identified in the calculation of the RUL
and for this reason the accuracy of the simulation data shall be taken into account
to calculate the safe operation of a wind farm based on the RUL. Also, failure modes
shall be derived based on the wind farm history and the operation condition, as well
a justification to increase the confidence level on accuracy should be included in the
report. [4] In the end a risk analysis procedure should be implemented that includes
a severity level in the scale from 1-10 for each failure mode and a confidence level on
accuracy in the scale from 1-10 shall be selected from the user. [4] From this procedure
the RPN number is calculated (RPN=(Severity) x (Confidence Level)) and the RPN
should always be less than 50 for any failure mode, which is the way to keep in check
the uncertainties in the uncertainty assessment that is performed with this method. [4]
==PAGE:24==
1.4 IEC Approach - Empirical Methodology
15
1.4
IEC Approach - Empirical Methodology
The International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) empirical methodology that is
studied in this thesis is based on the new standard that is potentially being launched in
the following year and is the IEC 61400-28-2019: Wind Turbine Generation Systems -
Part 26-4 Through Life Management & Life Extension of Wind Farms. [16] The super-
visor of the master thesis Dr. Nicolai Cosack is part of the working group in the IEC
Technical Committee 88 of 2019 that created an d edited this version of the standard
that is about the lifetime managements and lifetime extension of onshore wind turbines.
[16]
The IEC empirical methodology accuracy assessment relative approach for the analytical
assessment of the wind turbine lifetime is presented and analyzed below in the following
parts.
1.4.1
Uncertainty Sources
The IEC empirical methodology includes an analytical assessment of the wind turbine
lifetime that is a relative approach with accuracy assessment that considers uncertain-
ties. [16] The accuracy assessment can function for the relative approach, but also an
absolute approach can be chosen if proper modifications are introduced. [16] In an an-
alytical assessment for calculating the RUL there are various uncertainty sources that
can be divided into the input data uncertainties and the analysis model related uncer-
tainties. According to the IEC the parameters that are inserted in such an assessment
are the input data uncertainty U, the sensitivity W, the model uncertainty M and the
importance/ confidence level I. [16]
The input data uncertainty U is divided in 4 different uncertainty categories with
1 indicating Low uncertainty and 4 indicating High uncertainty. [16] The uncertainty
category can be determined by calculating the coefficient of variation (CoV) that is
defined as the ratio of the standard deviation and the mean value. The ratio should
have a value no greater than 30%, as the uncertainty of input data should be limited
especially if the model is highly sensitive to them (see Table 1.4). [16]
Table 1.4: Coefficient of Variation (CoV) Uncertainty Categories [16].
CoV
Uncertainty Category
Uncertainty Risk Description
<10 %
1
Low
10 to 20 %
2
Low-Medium
20 to 30 %
3
Medium-High
>30 %
4
High
The model sensitivity W is a measure of how strong the remaining lifetime is affected
by an input parameter. [16] For each data parameter the input analytical model life-
==PAGE:25==
16
1 Lifetime Extension
time output sensitivity Wi ranges between 1 and 4 indicating the low & high sensitivity
respectively. The IEC standard recommends that engineering judgement based on ex-
perience of running the lifetime assessment model. [16]
The model’s agreement with the inspection reports & known failures among others, the
model’s validation agreement with load measurements and the features of the model if
combined consist the model uncertainty M that ranges between 1 (Low uncertainty)
and 4 (High uncertainty). [16]
The user to be able to estimate the model’s uncertainty M he/she should validate the
model against the available data and information, so that the model will be correctly
predicting the validation data. The model’s importance/ confidence level Ii should
be considered as it is the indicator of how accurately the validation data are predicted for
a specific failure mode and ranges in 4 categories from 1-4 (Low-High) for each available
validation data parameter. [16]
1.4.2
Accuracy Assessment Number (AAN)
At first for each failure mode and each input data parameter that has been chosen
by the user, he/she should assess the data uncertainty Ui and the model sensitivity
Wi. Also, the importance/ confidence level Ij and the related model uncertainty Mj
should be determined for each available and relevant validation parameter j. [16] The
weighted input data uncertainty ˆU and the weighted model uncertainty ˆ
M can
be calculated by implementing (1.3). [16]
ˆU =
v
u
u
t
P
i U 2
i · W 2
i
P
i W 2
i
,
ˆ
M =
v
u
u
t
P
j M 2
j · I2
j
P
j I2
j
(1.3)
After the classification procedure has been completed the Accuracy Assessment Number
is being determined from the 4x4 matrix shown in Figure 1.2 with the explanation of
the RUL uncertainty results being analytically presented at the right side of the matrix.
Generally it should be noted that an AAN number higher than 12 is not acceptable
as it has a very high uncertainty & inherent risk, so the user should go back to the
uncertainties and implement a mitigation uncertainty procedure. Also, the higher the
AAN number the less trustworthy are the results of the lifetime assessment and the
higher their uncertainty. [16]
==PAGE:26==
1.4 IEC Approach - Empirical Methodology
17
Figure 1.2: Accuracy Assessment Number (AAN). [16].
After having an AAN number the user for this number should go to Figure 1.3 and
determine the AAN level that is called also load increase factor γ. [16]
Figure 1.3: Accuracy Assessment Number (AAN) & AAN Level. [16].
==PAGE:27==
18
1 Lifetime Extension
1.4.3
AAN & AAN Level Example
At this point an example of the Accuracy Assessment Number (AAN) and the AAN Level
is presented, so that the reader will have an idea of how the IEC empirical methodology
can be used in an engineering application. [16]
For explaining the AAN part of the IEC empirical methodology, we assume that the
model is close to perfect and hence the AAN for the model is equal to 1. The input data
is subjected to some uncertainty and also the remaining life time is sensitive to input
data that is subjected to uncertainty. Hence, and AAN of 3 is derived.
Figure 1.4: Example of the Accuracy Assessment Number (AAN). [16].
So with an Accuracy Assessment Number (AAN) of 1 for the model uncertainty and of
3 for the Turbulence Intensity input data uncertainty we proceed to the AAN level table
that is shown in Figure 1.5 and for that AAN combination value an AAN level of 1.05
is being assigned. [16]
==PAGE:28==
1.4 IEC Approach - Empirical Methodology
19
Figure 1.5: Example of the Accuracy Assessment Number (AAN) & AAN Level. [16].
For this AAN level the load increase factor γ has been assigned. Afterwards the load
increase factor γ is multiplied with the site specific loads that have been derived for
the different wind speed uncertainties uncertainty levels and percentiles (P10, P30, P70,
P90). The equation is shown in (1.4). [16]
Loadssite,increased = Loadssite · γ
(1.4)
It should be mentioned that the IEC empirical methodology implementation stops at
this point. From that point the Remaining Useful Lifetime (RUL) estimation procedure
of the fatigue load analysis part occurs that is explained in the 3rd Chapter of the thesis.
==PAGE:29==
20
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 2
Introduction to Uncertainty
The uncertainties can be described either from a normal (Gaussian) distribution if they
follow such a distribution and is the simplest case of uncertainty distribution that can
occur or there are the cases of those uncertainties that cannot be described by Gaussian
distribution. In such a case they follow a different distribution, which for this thesis it
was a lognormal distribution. So these were the 2 distributions that were investigated.
At this point it should be highlighted that more types of distributions could have been
investigated if more time was available. However, the normal and lognormal distribu-
tions worked sufficiently for the various uncertainties that were investigated.
The uncertainties divide into Type A and Type B uncertainties, with the first being eval-
uated statistically & defined by repeated observations, which are analyzed in Evaluation
of measurement data Guide to the expression of uncertainty in measurement (GUM)
and the second being everything else that causes uncertainty. In a project the most
important step is to identify the crucial for the project uncertainties.
2.1
Gaussian Distributed Uncertainties
The uncertainty of a parameter is the range in the measured value that can deviate
positively or negatively from it. In the case of a wind speed value u it can be described
as ureal = u ± U, where U is the uncertainty of the wind speed. It should be made
clear that there is a probability of the wind speed lying in a particular value inside this
range. [21] In Figure 2.1 the value of a parameter can be seen together with its inherited
uncertainty that lies in the range and with the probability that corresponds to each
individual value of the uncertain parameter being illustrated on the graph. Also, the
best estimate of the parameter B is displayed at the peak of the Gaussian distribution.
[21]
==PAGE:31==
22
2 Introduction to Uncertainty
Figure 2.1: Uncertainty probability. [21].
In general the errors that are quantified don’t contribute to uncertainty, whereas the er-
rors that cannot be quantified are those that can cause uncertainty. [21] As uncertainty
can be considered the expression of the likely distribution of the unknown errors that
we are not able to quantify. [21]
At this point it should be underlined the importance of the coverage factor (k) of the
uncertainty, which means that when an uncertainty of a parameter is mentioned it should
be accompanied from a coverage factor or confidence interval that shows the probability
that the uncertainty refers to. [21] A coverage factor k of 1 refers to 1 standard deviation,
a coverage factor k of 2 refers to 2 standard deviations that is used usually on calibration
certificates and a coverage factor k of 3 refers to 3 standard deviations and is used when
it is needed to be very sure about the uncertainty. [21]
==PAGE:32==
2.2 Lognormal Distributed Uncertainties
23
Figure 2.2: Coverage factor/ confidence interval k normal distributions. [21].
2.2
Lognormal Distributed Uncertainties
During the thesis logonormal distribution was found to be a very good fit for the Tur-
bulence Intensity (TI) uncertainty for the wind turbine components. The normal dis-
tribution fit didn’t function for the TI uncertainty but only for the Wind Speed (WS)
uncertainty.
The lognormal distribution is a continuous probability distribution of a random variable
with its logarithm being normally distributed. [28] Due to the fact that the X random
variable is lognormally distributed the Y variable Y = ln(X) is normally distributed.
[28] This signifies that due to Y is normally distributed then the exponential function
of Y has a lognormal distribution X = exp(Y ). In the case of this thesis X corresponds
to the wind speed, when only individual wind speed uncertainty is investigated and Y
corresponds to the RUL of the components of the wind turbine. [28]
In Figure 2.3 the graph of the lognormal distribution is being shown together with its
relationship with the normal distribution. [28] If it is assumed that Y = µ + σ · Z
is normally distributed, we know that the X = eY is lognormally distributed.
[28]
This connection is shown in Figure 2.3 with the upper distribution being the lognormal
and the other being the normal distribution. It illustrates that the P50 value of both
==PAGE:33==
24
2 Introduction to Uncertainty
distributions is at the peak of the curve in the normal distribution, whereas in the
lognormal distribution case it is located at the lower right side of the curve’s peak. [28]
Figure 2.3: Lognormal distribution comparison with normal distribution. [28].
2.3
Uncertainty Numerical Calculation
The various ways for numerical calculating the uncertainties are presented in this section.
For the standard uncertainty ustandard the (2.1) can be used, where U is the parameter
(e.g. wind speed 8 m/s), unc is the uncertainty in percentage (e.g. 3 %) and k is the
coverage factor (e.g. 2). [21]
ustandard = U · unc
k
(2.1)
The equation for calculating the combined standard uncertainty Uc,standard is given by
(2.2), which in this case depends on 3 input uncertainties U1, U2 and U3. [21]
Uc,standard =
q
U 2
1 + U 2
2 + U 2
3
(2.2)
For combining uncorrelated or independent uncertainties, uc,uncor is given by (2.3), where
the uncertainties are considered as independent, u(xi) is the standard uncertainty of the
xi variable that works as an input and ∂f/∂xi are the influence coefficients. As can
be seen from (2.3) they are added in quadrature multiplying by an influence coefficient.
[21]
u2
c,uncor =
N
X
i=2
 ∂f
∂xi
!2
· u2
i (xi)
(2.3)
==PAGE:34==
2.4 Uncertainty Sources
25
For combining correlated or dependent uncertainties, uc,cor is given by (2.4), where the
uncertainties are considered as dependent, u(xi) is the standard uncertainty of the xi
variable that works as an input and r(u(xi), u(xj)) is the correlation coefficient of the
two uncertainties. [21]
u2
c,cor =
N
X
i=1
 ∂f
∂xi
!2
· u2(xi) + 2 ·
N−1
X
i=1
N
X
j=i+1
∂f
∂xi
· ∂f
∂xj
· u(xi) · u(xj) · r(u(xi), u(xj)) (2.4)
2.4
Uncertainty Sources
The uncertainty in the measurements or model simulations that are completed can lie
in all of the parameters that are involved in the calculations. It is important to mention
that not every parameter has the same uncertainty and for that reason each one of those
parameters plays a different role into shaping the total uncertainty, as the uncertainty
influence to the output parameter that in this thesis is the RUL differs for each param-
eter. The main goal is for the researcher to unveil these dependencies and influences of
the different uncertainties that contribute to the total uncertainty like how it is done in
the context of this thesis. To be able for the engineer to be closer to the real conditions,
more uncertainty sources should be investigated as well as the model uncertainty should
be explored in greater detail.
In the case of this thesis the environmental conditions/ input data uncertainties and
the model/ generic aeroelastic model parameters are the 2 main uncertainty groups that
contribute to the overall uncertainty, which are tracked and documented from analysing
the uncertainty of the RUL and is monitored how this is altered after each uncertainty
adjustment. As in this thesis the aeroelastic simulations in the generic model of LACflex
are the main way of implementing the analytical study for determining the uncertainty.
2.4.1
Environmental Conditions/ Input Data
Uncertainties
The wind turbine operates in a specific wind regime with certain characteristics and this
is the first group of uncertainty sources that should be investigated. The environmental
condition parameters for an onshore wind site that can contribute to the uncertainty of
the generic aeroelastic model can be seen below:
• wind speed
• wind direction
• turbulence intensity
• wind shear
==PAGE:35==
26
2 Introduction to Uncertainty
• air density
• yaw error
• inflow angle/ slope
For offshore wind sites aside from the aforementioned environmental condition param-
eters, the rest environmental condition parameters with their respective uncertainties
that could be implemented in a similar project but implemented offshore are shown
below:
• significant wave height
• wave frequency
• wind-wave misalignment
• wave spectrum
For this thesis the environmental conditions is the one of the two groups of uncertainty
sources in the LACflex generic aeroelastic model and there are many environmental con-
dition parameters that can contribute to the wind turbine’s RUL uncertainty as men-
tioned above. The wind speed and the turbulence intensity are the two environmental
conditions or input data uncertainties parameters that will be investigated, as these two
contribute the most to the overall RUL uncertainty than the rest of the environmental
conditions (wind direction, air density etc.).
2.4.1.1
Wind Speed
At first it is reminded that the Wind Speed (WS) is investigated in the thesis regarding
its uncertainty contribution as an environmental condition/ input data uncertainty to
the overall RUL uncertainty of the different wind turbine components.
The wind speed and its distribution is one of the most important environmental condi-
tion that its uncertainty is investigated at the context of the thesis, as it is the parameter
that dictates the fatigue loads that the wind turbine experiences. The Reynolds decom-
position equation that is given by (2.5) describes that the measured time series of wind
velocity is the sum of the mean wind velocity with the fluctuation part of the wind
velocity for any given moment, where u is the average value and u′ is the fluctuation.
[23]
u = u + u′
(2.5)
In Figure 2.4 the wind speed time series of the Hovsore wind speed data is illustrated
with both the average wind speed u and measured wind speed u being depicted, which
allows for the Reynolds decomposition equation (2.5) to be visualised.
==PAGE:36==
2.4 Uncertainty Sources
27
Figure 2.4: Wind speed time series of the Hovsore wind speed data. [23].
For calculating the mean (µ=u) and the standard deviation (σ) of the wind speed the
following two equations can be used.
u = µ = 1
N
N
X
i=1
ui,
σ2 = 1
N
N
X
i=1
(ui −µ)2
(2.6)
The Weibull wind speed distribution is derived by utilizing the 2 equations of (2.7). [9]
F(U) = 1 −exp
 
−
U
C
k!
,
C =
Uavg
Γ(1 + 1/k)
(2.7)
The wind speed is Weibull distributed for the range that it operates and an example is
shown for the Hovsore wind site in Denmark in Figure 2.5 for 2 different approximation
methods of the Weibull fit. [23]
Figure 2.5: Weibull distribution of the Hovshore wind speed data. [22].
==PAGE:37==
28
2 Introduction to Uncertainty
For the thesis the wind speed as shown from the Weibull pdf was divided in wind speed
intervals of 2 m/s. For the 20 years fatigue load analysis that should be studied that in
its duration the wind turbine (WTG) experiences the respective load cycles, the wind
speed history of 106 10-minute time intervals for this period are reduced to a few dozens
characteristic periods when the wind speed intervals of 2 m/s are used. [9]
2.4.1.2
Wind Direction
The wind direction isn’t investigated in the thesis regarding its uncertainty contribution
as an environmental condition/ input data uncertainty to the overall RUL uncertainty
of the different wind turbine components. To simplify for the problem of the direction
of the wind speed, it is sometimes assumed that wind originates from a single direction
that is not realistic. Although there is a dominant wind direction from where the wind
blows throughout the year for a specific wind site, there are though multiple directions
from where the wind can blow. After all there is a deviation even in the measurements of
an 1 hour wind data set, making the wind direction difficult to predict in the short-term.
The different wind directions that act on the WTG together with the respective dis-
tribution and the uncertainty that this has, can affect significantly the results of the
WTG’s RUL uncertainty. As mentioned the wind speed doesn’t originate from only
one wind direction, but its origin fluctuates between different wind directions at a given
period of time. For this reason the wind direction of a wind site can be described from
a distribution. The wind direction origin can be accurately depicted in a wind rose that
is capable of illustrating the probability of each wind direction occurring for a certain
time series that is more than a year. The wind direction fluctuation is depicted in a
wind rose for the Weibull distributed wind speed range that it operates & an example
is shown in Figure 2.6 for the Sprogo wind site for a measurement at 70 m height.
Figure 2.6: Wind rose of the Sprogo wind direction data. [22].
==PAGE:38==
2.4 Uncertainty Sources
29
2.4.1.3
Turbulence Intensity
At first it is reminded that the Turbulence Intensity (TI) is investigated in the thesis
regarding its uncertainty contribution as an environmental condition/ input data uncer-
tainty to the overall RUL uncertainty of the different wind turbine components.
The turbulence intensity is another important environmental condition parameter that is
intensively investigated. The Turbulence Intensity I/ Degree of turbulence is estimated
from (2.8) that is the division of the standard deviation of the wind speed fluctuation
σu′ with the mean wind speed u. [14] In a situation without any flow fluctuations, the
turbulence intensity would be equal to zero. [14]
I = σu′
u =
σu
U(z)
(2.8)
It is known that in a flat terrain the turbulence in the wind flow is represented by the
standard deviation of the wind speed and can be described from the equations shown in
(2.9) for a 3D coordinate system. [14]
σu = Au∗, σv = 0.75σu σw = 0.5σu
(2.9)
For the standard deviation of the horizontal wind speed σu with A=2.5 then the turbu-
lence intensity is as shown in (2.10). [14]
I =
σu
U(z) =
1
log(z/z0)
(2.10)
The turbulence intensity I value is used in the creation of a 3-dimensional stochastic
wind field that is moved through the rotor with a characteristic mean advection speed
according to Taylor. [9] For generating the turbulence that is utilized from the LACflex
simulation model, the Kaimal spectrum is implemented that is for flat open terrain,
which is what we have assumed for the wind turbine terrain. [9]
The Kaimal spectrum SWind was created by using the formulation given in Equation 2.11
for a certain time period. For example for the design load case the spectrum was calcu-
lated for a wind climate with an average wind speed of Vave = 8.5 m/s and a Turbulence
Intensity of Iref = 0.15 (l=340.2 m) according to the IEC IIA wind turbine class. [9]
SWind = 4 · I2
ref · Vave · l

1 + 6 ·
f·l
Vave
5/3
(2.11)
The turbulence in general is produced with 2 different mechanisms, with the first being
the convection mechanism that occurs due to thermal effects when the relatively warm
surface of the Earth heats the colder atmosphere and in this way turbulence is generated
and enhanced by conversion of potential thermal energy to kinetic energy. [14] The
second mechanism being the wind shear that is analyzed below, which is translated that
the wind speed increases with the height or decreases as closer to the surface the wind
speed is. The warm air moves vertically and mixes with the cold air and from this
procedure the turbulence of the atmosphere is being generated. [14]
==PAGE:39==
30
2 Introduction to Uncertainty
2.4.1.4
Wind Shear
At first it should be mentioned that the wind shear is not investigated in the thesis
regarding its uncertainty contribution as an environmental condition/ input data uncer-
tainty to the overall RUL uncertainty of the different wind turbine components.
The wind shear dU/dz in general can be described as the phenomenon that the wind
speed increases with the increase of the height above the surface. The warmest the
surface in comparison with the surrounding air the stronger is the wind shear in an area
at a given time period. [14] The wind shear dU/dz is involved in the equation formula
of the power law as shown below in (2.12), from where the power law exponent α can
be estimated. [14]
U(z) = Uref
 z
zref
!α
⇐⇒αpower
law
= log(U2/U1)
log(z2/z1)
(2.12)
For the logarithmic law the equation formula that can be used for estimating the power
exponent α and is derived by equating the wind shear expression of the power law &
log-law at a height zref is (2.13). [14] This gives us an understanding of how the wind
shear is involved and is interconnected with the estimation of the wind speed at a certain
height. [14]
αlog
law =
1
log(zref/z0)
(2.13)
2.4.2
Model Parameters Uncertainties
The model parameters that contribute to the aeroelastic model’s uncertainty is the blade
that is mounted on the wind turbine that can be altered with the implementation of a
different blade model, the controller of the wind turbine that among other things dic-
tates its yawing for harnessing the wind or mitigating the fatigue loads throughout its
life and the tower characteristics that the wind turbine has that can also be altered by
a different tower model implementation. Also, there are some other parameters that
belong to the model parameter uncertainty group and are not mentioned here like the
wind turbine model that is used and can be changed if the user decides it, but it changes
the whole uncertainty problem.
For this thesis the model parameters is the other main source of uncertainty in the
LACflex generic aeroelastic model with the model parameter in focus will be the blade
model that will be used in the simulations.
==PAGE:40==
2.4 Uncertainty Sources
31
2.4.2.1
Blade Model
The blade model that is used in the generic model strongly influences the uncertainty
of the wind turbine calculations and henceforth the RUL uncertainty. For this reason
different blade models are implemented in the generic aero-elastic model of LACflex to
investigate how the RUL uncertainty is affected. For this reason the blade model is
investigated in the context of this thesis in the RUL uncertainty estimation.
The different blade models will have different blade characteristics being used. The Tip
Speed Ratio λ (TSR) of the blade that is given by (2.14) is the one blade characteristic
that is altered in the simulations. The respective values and results are documented in
Chapter 4, where the LACflex model is being explained analytically. It is mentioned
that the TSR is the ratio of the Blade Tip Speed and the Wind Speed.
λ = ω · R
u
(2.14)
In the thesis will be used 3 different blade models with them differentiating by the TSR
ranges that have been selected for them. Also, the chord length and the twist of the
blade is being altered for the blade models. In Figure 2.7 it can be seen the profile of
the blade for the with its characteristic parameters being illustrated.
Figure 2.7: Wind turbine blade profile. [27].
2.4.2.2
Tower Model
In the same manner the tower model can be altered that also is important in shaping
the overall RUL uncertainty. Different tower models can be used to investigate the effect
on the uncertainty influence in the generic aero-elastic model. The tower model is not
considered part of the uncertainty investigation that is implemented during the thesis.
==PAGE:41==
32
2 Introduction to Uncertainty
2.5
Uncertainty Distributions & Combination
In the thesis as it is shown in the results section the combination of uncertainties is
being done for the Wind Speed (WS) and Turbulence Intensity (TI) uncertainty. The
approach to this problem was to first identify what distributions work better for each
uncertainty and component of the wind turbine, which is being assessed by seeing how
well the fit of the distribution fits the component’s RUL for the different percentiles
(P10, P30, P50, P70, P90). If the fit of the distribution does not fit well then another
distribution is being chosen. In this thesis as mentioned just the normal and lognormal
distributions were investigated. There is a possibility for more distributions to be tested
to see if the fitting will improve.
The way that the combination was done in the thesis was visual, so for the different
components the Wind Speed (WS) uncertainty curve and the Turbulence Intensity (TI)
uncertainty curve were plotted and then their combination was plotted via a convolution
method.
Analytically, the convolution of distributions occurred with the use of the
Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF) with the CDF equations been shown in (2.15).
[14]
FX(x) =
Z x
−∞fX(x′) dx′,
Pr[x1 ≤X ≤x2] = Fx(x2) −Fx(x1)
(2.15)
The CDF was used for the convolution of the two individual WS & TI uncertainties
for which we had derived their probability density function (pdf) fits for a lognormal
distribution for each of them and then we had derived their convoluted pdf. Afterwards
the cumulative sum of the convoluted pdf is estimated for calculating the convoluted
CDF and in the end the convoluted RUL is being calculated with the help of the CDF
and the percentiles as inputs.
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 3
Fatigue Load Analysis in
Remaining Useful Life (RUL)
Assessment
In this chapter the fatigue load analysis is being described with the different steps being
involved in the procedure that apply in general, but also the specifics that were applied
in the thesis for the onshore wind turbine are being analytically presented.
3.1
Fatigue Loads
The fatigue load analysis is being completed by the use of the LACflex generic aeroelastic
model that enables coupled non-linear aero-servo-elastic simulation in the time domain
for a three blade horizontal axis rotor wind turbine with an onshore or an offshore
modelling capability depending on the case. In general a fatigue load analysis consists
of the following steps:
• A 3 dimensional turbulent wind field generation by knowing the wind speed char-
acteristics (mean wind speed, standard deviation (std) & min-max)
• Critical cross section force time histories calculation on the different wind turbine
components and its conversion to stress time histories. This step is omitted if
fatigue loads are derived instead of stress.
• Stress bins generation by rainflow counting implementation and derivation the
number of cycles for each mean stress & stress range
• For the predicted operational hours at a certain wind speed scale up the corre-
sponding number of cycles and the procedure should be repeated for all of the
wind speeds
• All stress cycles should be added, the stresses should be factored and the partial
fatigue damage should be calculated for each combination of mean stress, stress
range & number of cycles
• Investigation of how much each component’s partial fatigue damage exceeds the
design fatigue damage of the wind turbine
==PAGE:43==
34
3 Fatigue Load Analysis in Remaining Useful Life (RUL) Assessment
3.1.1
Rainflow Counting (RFC)
Rainflow Counting (RFC) is the methodology that is used to calculate the Damage
Equivalent Loads (DELs) that apply to the different components of the wind turbine.
In other words the Rainflow Counting (RFC) is the method that determines the number
of fatigue cycles present in a load time history, with a fatigue cycle being the load-
ing and unloading of a certain mechanical part like the wind turbine component that
with enough repeated cycles weakens and eventually fails. [30] Although in the thesis a
Ramboll in-house Python tool was used, it is important to mention the general process
behind the RFC method. [30]
The RFC method is used for all of the components of the wind turbine that have been
chosen to be studied.The Rainflow method has the ability to count the stress cycles,
while dividing them into stress ranges and it counts only once each part of the stress
time series history. [29]
The RFC method is utilised for the stress & damage calculation and is consisted of several
parts with the first being the stress history of the component that is under fatigue stress,
afterwards the stress range histogram is created by filtering the stress ranges, then the
S-N curve is being derived and the Miner sum that calculates the damage Dfat concludes
the procedure, which are explained below. In Figure 3.1 the RFC method procedure is
shown and the different stages that were just analyzed are visually presented. [29]
Figure 3.1: Rainflow count of stress ranges procedure. [29].
For a given stress history the equivalent load is defined as the stress range σ, which by
neq cycles yields the same damage. The damage is calculated by (3.1) as shown below
with m being the Wohler exponent of the material that consists the component of the
wind turbine that is investigated. [29]
D =
neq
N · σeq
= neq
N ∗·
σeq
σ∗
m
⇐⇒Dtot =
X
i
ni
N ∗·
 σ
σ∗
m
(3.1)
The equivalent load for each component of the wind turbine can be calculated by (3.2).
[29]
σeq = σ∗·
 N ∗· Dtot
neq
! 1
m
(3.2)
==PAGE:44==
3.1 Fatigue Loads
35
Lastly, the Rainflow method if the Python tool wasn’t doing the stress cycles estimation,
basically the engineer should position vertically the stress time series and then assume
that there is water falling from the beginning of the plot down to the next peaks or
troughs as is shown in Figure 3.2.
[29] The principle of the RFC method is being
displayed in the figure, but the full explanation is not included in the thesis. Generally
the rainflow initiates in each peak of the stress time history and drips down, but if it
initiates at a minimum and it should stop when it comes across another minimum that
is more negative than the initial minimum. [29] In a similar manner if the rainflow starts
at a maximum it should stop when it comes across a maximum more positive than the
maximum from where it started. And the rainflow always stops when it encounters rain
from a roof above it. [29]
Figure 3.2: Rainflow Counting (RFC) Method. [29].
3.1.2
Damage Equivalent Loads (DELs)
The Damage Equivalent Loads (DELs) are the representative loads that act upon the
wind turbine. The fatigue loads that a wind turbine receives during its lifetime are
immense in number, so for this reason a representative Damage Equivalent Load is cal-
culated for each of the wind turbine’s component. This represents under a single load
value the accumulation of fatigue load cycles that the wind turbine has gone through
and has damaged it for the bending moment of interest for which the rainflow analysis
has been performed. As was briefly mentioned for the DELs to be derived the Rainflow
Counting (RFC) method was used and is basically a method that counts the fatigue
load cycles that the wind turbine has been exposed to and it returns a representative
==PAGE:45==
36
3 Fatigue Load Analysis in Remaining Useful Life (RUL) Assessment
DEL value.
The Damage Equivalent Loads (DELs) are calculated by (3.3) for both the design load
case and the site specific load case.
DEL = LDEL =
X  
DELi · Ni
Nref
· wi
!m
(3.3)
3.1.3
S-N Curves
The S-N curves that were developed in 1842 are plots that have the stress σ of the
material on the y-axis and the number of cycles N until the failure of the material that
is studied on the x-axis and both the x & the y axis are displayed in a logarithmic scale.
By knowing the fatigue loads history for each component of the wind turbine the Miner’s
rule can be used for calculating the accumulated fatigue damage Dtot that is calculated
by (3.1) and the fatigue life of each wind turbine component. [31]
The S-N curve to be created for a given material a testing machine that applies cyclic
fatigue loads to a material of certain dimensions is used. Basically in an experimental
setting a cyclic stress time history is applied until the moment a crack that is a partial
failure or a complete failure occurs in the material that is tested and the procedure
should be repeated for the various stress levels. [31] The outcome of this procedure is
the S-N curve for this specific material. [31]
3.1.4
Critical Components
At this point it should be mentioned that the wind turbine components that are in-
vestigated in the fatigue load analysis are the critical mechanical and/or structural
components of the wind turbine that can lead to failure due to the fatigue loads acting
on them and wearing them out. [2] [3] These critical components are fatigue load dom-
inated, which means that they act as the main fatigue load bearing components. The
aim is to calculate their structural reserves at the end of lifetime. In Table 3.1 most
of the load bearing critical components of the wind turbine are presented that are data
according to the DNVGL ”Lifetime extension of wind turbines” guidelines.[2] [3]
==PAGE:46==
3.1 Fatigue Loads
37
Table 3.1: Load bearing critical components of the wind turbine [2] [3].
Machinery Components
Foundation
Main Shaft
Gearbox
Grouted connection
Main Bearing housing
Torque Arm
Embedded Steel section
Main Shaft bearing
Yaw System
Anchor Bolt connection
Main Frame
Bolt connections
Slab Foundation
Rear Frame
Pitch system
Pile Foundation
Hub
Spinner & Nacelle cover
Tower
Control & Protection System
Electrical Equipment
Door
Control Software
Generator
Segments
Braking Systems
Lightning Protection
Connections
Sensors
-
The critical load bearing components that are going to be assessed during the thesis
are the ones presented in Table 3.2 and were chosen as they were deemed to be the
most important for the wind turbine from a fatigue perspective and because the time
limitation of the thesis.
Table 3.2: Assessed load bearing critical components of the wind turbine.
Machinery Components
Blade Roots
Connections
Blade Bolts
Hub-Main Shaft (H-MS)
Nacelle-Tower (N-T)
Tower-Foundation (T-F)
At this point the different sections of the onshore wind turbine that is studied in the
master thesis are presented below and only for these sections the RUL assessment has
occurred.
• R: Connection of the Hub & Drivetrain (Main Shaft part)
• S1: Blade Section that Rotates (Pitch-Blade Root on the Blade Side)
• B1: Blade Section that Doesn’t Rotate (No Pitch-Blade Root on the Hub side)
• S1 & B1: Wind Turbine Blade
• N & K: Connection between the Tower & Nacelle - Nacelle Yawing Tower Top &
Fixed Tower Top
• N: Tower Top Rotating Part of the Yaw Coordinate System (Nacelle side)
• K: Tower Top Fixed Part (Tower side)
==PAGE:47==
38
3 Fatigue Load Analysis in Remaining Useful Life (RUL) Assessment
• F: Connection between the Foundation & the Tower
• F21: Tower at a height of 21 m from the Tower Foundation
• F42: Tower at a height of 42 m from the Tower Foundation
• F63: Tower at a height of 63 m from the Tower Foundation
Figure 3.3: Wind turbine components used in the RUL assessment. [26].
The reason why there are structural reserves is that the wind turbine is designed for a
specific wind turbine class according to the IEC standard that are shown in Figure 3.4
and under these conditions the wind turbine should last 20 years.
==PAGE:48==
3.1 Fatigue Loads
39
Figure 3.4: IEC wind turbine classes [25].
Lastly, the wind turbine drivetrain is consisted from the components that can be seen
in Figure 3.5 with the most important ones being the hub, main bearing, main shaft,
gearbox, brake, generator shaft, generator and bed plate which are all displayed. [32]
Figure 3.5: Wind Turbine Drivetrain Layout [32].
3.1.5
Fatigue Load Cases
The fatigue load cases that are investigated in the thesis during the aeroelastic simula-
tions can be seen in Table 3.3. The load cases act on the 3 blades of the wind turbine
(S1, S2 & S3), to the nacelle (N) & main shaft (R) and to the tower top (K) & tower
bottom/ tower foundation (F).
Table 3.3: Examined Fatigue Loads.
Blades (S1, S2 & S3)
Nacelle & Main Shaft (N & R)
Tower (K & F)
MxS1
MxS2
MxS3
MxN
MxR
MxK
MxF
MyS1
MyS2
MyS3
MyN
MyR
MyK
MyF
MzS1
MzS2
MzS3
MzN
MzR
MzK
MzF
==PAGE:49==
40
3 Fatigue Load Analysis in Remaining Useful Life (RUL) Assessment
• MxS1, MxS2 & MxS3: The bending moments that act on the 3 different blades
of the wind turbine on the x-axis. The same applies for the y & z-axis.
• MxN: The bending moment that acts on the nacelle of the wind turbine on the
x, y & z-axis.
• MxR: The bending moment that acts on the main shaft of the wind turbine on
the x, y & z-axis.
• MxK: The bending moment that acts on the tower top of the wind turbine on
the x,y & z-axis.
• MxF: The bending moment that actos on the tower bottom/ tower foundations
of the wind turbine on the x, y & z-axis.
3.2
Design Loads
Design loads are the aerodynamic fatigue loads that the wind turbine receives from its
operation during its lifetime according to the IEC class that has been chosen to follow
and it dictates the maximum fatigue loads that the wind turbine can reach at this life-
time period uncder certain IEC environmental conditions. This lifetime period is called
design lifetime and it is either 20 years for wind turbines that have been manufactured
earlier than 2005 and it is 25 years for most of the wind turbines that have been manu-
factured after 2005.
The most important thing to mention is that the design loads are decided before the
construction of the wind turbine prior to the manufacturing procedure, so they are a
theoretical concept that should never be reached during the operation of the wind tur-
bine. If the design loads are exceeded during the operation of the wind turbine due to
the fact that the wind turbine operates for many years then there is the possibility of
partial or complete failure of the wind turbine, as the design loads are possible to be
exceeded and this can lead to a catastrophic failure.
The design loads were used in the generic aeroelastic model of LACflex as a reference,
so that the derived design loads will work as the baseline that will be compared with
the different site-specific loads according to the various uncertainty scenarios that have
been run for.
==PAGE:50==
3.3 Site-Specific Loads
41
3.3
Site-Specific Loads
Site-specific loads are the aerodynamic fatigue loads that the wind turbine received from
its operation during its lifetime and is able to withstand as they are smaller fatigue loads
than the design fatigue loads. The site-specific conditions are the ones that determine
how big the site-specific fatigue loads are going to be and how fast a wind turbine com-
ponent and the whole wind turbine is going to fail after its design lifetime has passed.
So it is mandatory that always must be applied that LoadSite < LoadDesign.
In other words the site-specific loads are the loads that exist in reality at the wind site
that has been chosen and under the wind regime where the wind turbine operates. The
environmental conditions that have been measured at the wind site are the ones that are
used in the generic aeroelastic model of LACflex in our case for deriving the site-specific
loads.
3.4
Lifetime Estimation & RUL
The lifetime estimation occurs after the fatigue load analysis is complete by calculating
the remaining useful lifetime (RUL) of the wind turbine components and ultimately the
RUL of the total wind turbine. It should be underlined that the RUL of the total wind
turbine is determined by the RUL of the wind turbine component that has the smallest
RUL out of all the components before any component replacement is being done. This is
what dictates the RUL and the lifetime extension (LTE) of the wind turbine is estimated
from that, which is a procedure and a logic that is being displayed in Figure 3.6.
Figure 3.6: Wind projects lifetime extension procedure [2] [3].
The RUL estimation is being explained in this part. At first the Damage Equivalent
Loads (DELs) are calculated by (3.3) that has been mentioned above for both the design
load case and the site specific load case. Afterwards, the ratio of the site specific case
==PAGE:51==
42
3 Fatigue Load Analysis in Remaining Useful Life (RUL) Assessment
with the design load case is calculated as shown in (3.4).
ratiom =
 DELsite
specific
DELdesign
!m
(3.4)
The actual lifetime of the wind turbine component is calculated by (3.5).
LifetimeActual = 1/ratiom · LifetimeDesign
(3.5)
In the end the RUL is calculated by simply subtracting the actual lifetime from the
design lifetime of the wind turbine component and this reveals the RUL, as is shown in
(3.6). It is a positive number calculated in years, when the wind turbine component will
fail after the design lifetime and is negative when the component will fail prior to the
design lifetime.
RUL = LifetimeActual −LifetimeDesign
(3.6)
The RUL of all the components for all the different sensitivity scenarios is being esti-
mated and the RUL of the wind turbine for each underlined scenario is being found and
the result is interpreted according to the uncertainty assumptions that have been made.
3.4.1
RUL Example
An example of the procedure that could be followed in reality is presented in this subsec-
tion with the ± term being the uncertainty of the RUL estimation. A wind owner during
the 15th year of the wind farm operation considers of proceeding to lifetime extension.
The certification company inspects the current status of the wind turbine and after an-
alytical assessment of the fatigue loads with a generic aeroelastic model estimates the
remaining stress reserves of the wind turbines. The design lifetime of the wind turbine
is 20 years in total.
The produced results show that the wind turbine will be able to operate for 11 years
more (RUL=11 years ± 4 months), so for a total of 26 years ± 4 months. But the
company informs the owner that in case the gearboxes of the wind turbines are being
changed the RUL can extend to 22 years ± 4 months for a total of 37 years ± 4 months.
The decision for the gearboxes replacement is being selected, as the most cost efficient
strategy and the wind farm is being decided to be decommissioned after 21 years and 7
months of operation, so that the wind site can be delivered back to the government in
its original state.
Additionally for the wind turbines to be safely decommissioned, as there will be some
small stress reserves that will have remained and they will allow the wind turbines safe
decommission during a period of 4 months that will be the summer season with lower
winds & bigger days, which will allow the wind turbine technicians to speed up the
decommission process.
==PAGE:52==
CHAPTER 4
Generic Aero-elastic Model
(LACflex)
The generic aeroelastic model of LACflex is the model that has been used throughout
the thesis and it is based on the FAST 5 aeroelastic code and is designed to model
dynamic behaviour of horizontal axis wind turbines. LACflex is an integrated software
package for load calculations of onshore & offshore wind turbines and is consisted of
the of Windows-based front end that controls the inputs and outputs to the calculation
modules. [19] It should be mentioned that the core module of the program is FlexCore
that is an aeroelastic simulation module. [19]
LACflex runs in time domain and produces time series of simulated loads and deflections.
More specifically, the aerodynamic loads on the blades are calculated using the Blade
Element Momentum Method including dynamic stall and wake models. [19] And the
structural dynamics are modeled using relatively few but carefully selected degrees of
freedom by using shape functions for the deflections of the tower and the blades while
using stiff bodies connected by flexible hinges to model the nacelle, rotor and main shaft.
[19] The mechanical, electrical and control systems are modeled in separate modules and
are possible to customized according to the user’s engineering assessment.[19]
LACflex operates with batch execution that makes the computational speed faster than
real time that is an advantage as a complete load basis complying with the IEC easily
amounts to 1000-2000 distinct design load cases. [19]
In the master thesis it will be used for estimating in the various critical components the
stress reserves [19] and by defining those, it is possible to calculate the Remaining Useful
Lifetime (RUL) of the onshore wind turbine in our case. A sensitivity analysis will be
implemented and different related scenarios of the wind turbine model will be tested, so
that the uncertainty influence of the examined parameters will be determined. Below
the environmental conditions that have been used in the LACflex simulations, as well
as the model parameters are analytically explained.
==PAGE:53==
44
4 Generic Aero-elastic Model (LACflex)
4.1
Wind Turbine Specifications
At first it should be stated that the blade length, the tower height and the power output
of the wind turbine were chosen by doing a research around aging wind turbines. This
research study was summarized in the ”Aging Wind Turbine Statistics Report”
that is included in the Appendix of this thesis for the reader to be able to study it if
he/she desiress.
More specifically, the wind turbine generator (WTG) specifications are presented in the
following table. In Table 4.1 can be seen the technical specifications of the onshore wind
turbine that was used in the thesis, which was implemented for the Design Load Baseline
model, as well as for the Site-specific Load Baseline model and its sensitivity scenarios
variations.
Table 4.1: Wind Turbine Generator (WTG) Specifications for the LACflex model [19].
Onshore WTG Specifications
Rotor
Power Output (MW)
1.80
Rotor Overhang (m)
3.70
Rotor Swept Area (m2)
5026.55
Max Twist
11.10
Rotor Diameter (m)
80.00
Chord length at
2.08
Blade Length (m)
38.51
2/3 blade length (m)
Drivetrain & Nacelle
Drivetrain Gear Ratio
87.97
Nacelle Yaw Rate (deg/sec)
0.00
Nacelle Yawing
No
Nacelle Yaw Slipping (sec)
No
Pitch System & Tower
Pitch System Type
1st Order Model
Max Negative Rate (deg/sec)
-8.00
Max Pitch Angle (deg)
90
Communication Delay (sec)
0.10
Max Pitch Rate (deg/sec)
8.00
Frequency (Hz)
50
Min Pitch Angle (deg)
-5.00
Tower (m)
86.07
Controller
Cut-in Wind Speed (m/s)
4.00
Rated Wind Speed (m/s)
12.00
Cut-out Wind Speed (m/s)
25.00
Max Cut-in Wind Speed (m/s)
25.00
The wind turbine components that were studied are shown in the figures below. These
different wind turbine components were modelled in LACflex for representing the onshore
wind turbine as good as possible in a simulating model. The dynamics of the different
components of the wind turbine are modelled and the different parameters that are
studied for each component are analyzed and explained.
==PAGE:54==
4.1 Wind Turbine Specifications
45
4.1.1
Rotor Dynamics
The rotor dynamics can be seen in Figure 4.1, where the values that are assigned in the
1st & 2nd blade flapwise moment together with the 1st & 2nd edgewise blade bending
moment are respectively shown. Also, these blade bending moments can be seen how
they act along on each blade of the rotor on the 3D plane.
Figure 4.1: Wind Turbine Rotor in LACflex [19].
==PAGE:55==
46
4 Generic Aero-elastic Model (LACflex)
4.1.2
Main Shaft Dynamics
The main shaft of the wind turbine is shown in Figure 4.2 on how it was modeled and
on what moments act on the main shaft and gradually wear it out. The rotation of the
main shaft component on the x-axis and the shaft torsion are the parameters that were
selected for modeling the main shaft.
Figure 4.2: Wind Turbine Main Shaft in LACflex [19].
4.1.3
Nacelle Dynamics
The nacelle dynamics are presented in Figure 4.3, where the values for the yaw rotation
and the tilt rotation that were implemented in the LACflex model can be seen together
with their 3D plane representation and their values were selected to be the ones shown
in the figure.
==PAGE:56==
4.1 Wind Turbine Specifications
47
Figure 4.3: Wind Turbine Nacelle in LACflex [19].
4.1.4
Tower Dynamics
In Figure 4.4 the values for the tower dynamics of the tower 1st & 2nd moment at the
downwind side and the 1st & 2nd moment at the lateral side are shown, as well as the
3D application on the tower is illustrated.
Figure 4.4: Wind Turbine Tower in LACflex [19].
==PAGE:57==
48
4 Generic Aero-elastic Model (LACflex)
4.1.5
Foundation Dynamics
The foundation dynamics are displayed in Figure 4.5 for the LACflex models in the 3D
domain, which for the translation on the x-axis applied on the downwind loading of the
foundation, the translation on the y-axis applied on the lateral loading of the foundation
and the translation on the z-axis applied on the vertical down loading of the foundation.
Also, the rotation that applies on the tower foundation in the x, y & z axis due to the
overturning moments that are applied at the wind turbine being taken into account on
the foundation dynamics.
Figure 4.5: Wind Turbine Foundation in LACflex [19].
4.2
Environmental Conditions
For determining the environmental conditions of the onshore wind turbine, different
approaches were followed. Analytically, the wind speed environmental conditions were
determined by using the New European Wind Atlas for investigating various wind sites
in North Germany on a micrometeorological scale and creating a representative wind
site. The wind direction was provided by the Ramboll supervisor Dr. Nicolai Cosack
for a typical wind site in North Germany and the turbulence intensity was determined
according to a Python tool that was used taking into account the representative wind
speed of North Germany.
==PAGE:58==
4.2 Environmental Conditions
49
4.2.1
Environmental Conditions - Wind Speed
The design wind speed conditions and the site-specific wind speed conditions are be-
ing presented in this part of the environmental conditions. These are the wind speed
conditions that there were used in the LACflex generic aeroelastic model.
4.2.1.1
Environmental Conditions - Design Baseline Wind Speed
At first the IEC wind class that was used for the design wind regime is shown in Figure 4.6
and is what defined the IEC standard framework that the onshore wind turbine is going
to operate in for the design fatigue loads baseline case.
Figure 4.6: Design Baseline Wind Class in LACflex.
The design wind speed is presented in this subsection and it is the baseline of the thesis
for comparing the fatigue loads and the RUL of the different site-specific scenarios with.
Figure 4.7: Design Baseline Weibull curve in LACflex.
==PAGE:59==
50
4 Generic Aero-elastic Model (LACflex)
4.2.1.2
Env. Conditions - Site-Specific Baseline Wind Speed
The IEC wind class that was used for the site-specific wind regime is shown in Figure 4.8
and is what defined the IEC standard framework that the onshore wind turbine is going
to operate in for the site-specific fatigue loads baseline case.
Figure 4.8: Site-specific Baseline Wind Class in LACflex.
In this subsection the site-specific wind speed conditions are being analytically pre-
sented, as well as the rationale of the process that was followed for them to be defined
is explained. The wind speed was defined by utilising the New European Wind Atlas
(NEWA) that was launched on June 2019 and a representative wind site for North Ger-
many was determined with that procedure. The New European Wind Atlas (NEWA)
was utilised to derive a representative wind regime in North Germany. For this to occur
a dozen wind sites were selected and the results are shown below. Both the mesoscale
meteorology and the micrometeorology of each wind site has been recorded. Only the
micrometeorological conditions are presented in detail, as these are the conditions that
influence the operation of an onshore wind turbine on a micrometeorological scale, which
the LACflex generic aeroelastic model needs as inputs to perform the simulation.
The micrometeorology of a wind site, refers to the environmental conditions of the wind
site that act on a micro level. This includes the meteorological environmental conditions
at the location of interest and at a certain range around it that can range between 1-25
km depending on the assessment that is taking place. Most of the time the microm-
eteorological parameters that are studied don’t exceed the 2.5-5.0 km radius from the
wind turbine/ wind farm location that corresponds to a total distance of 5.0-10.0 km.
Micrometeorology gives us a concrete understanding of the microclimate of a specific
location.
For the micrometeorology of the wind site to be derived as it was mentioned the respec-
tive NEWA Micro tool was used. The micrometeorological area that was selected for
all of the wind sites is approximately of 10 km radius or a total distance of 20 km. For
creating the representative wind site to be defined 12 different wind sites were selected
and it was tried to have various wind sites across North Germany that will be used. The
different wind sites were selected for various terrains in North Germany, which were
field, coastal, countryside inland, close to a city etc.
==PAGE:60==
4.2 Environmental Conditions
51
This leads us to the results that describe the environmental conditions in the micromete-
orology of the wind site. The wind characteristics of the micrometeorology of the dozen
wind sites are shown in Table 4.2.
Table 4.2: Micrometeorology of the 12 wind sites in North Germany.
Location
Average Wind
Average Power
Weibull A
Weibull k
City/ Town
Speed Range (m/s)
Density (W/m2)
parameter
parameter
100 m Height
Bremen
6.45
7.62
312
495
7.27
8.67
1.99
2.32
Rinteln
6.39
8.2
278
793
7.11
10.53
1.76
2.25
Wittenberge
6.59
7.62
271
454
7.41
8.61
2.26
2.51
Altentreptow
7.18
7.95
390
520
8.17
9.27
2.29
2.47
Nortrup
7.24
7.74
388
493
8.18
8.90
2.21
2.40
Gransee
6.53
7.62
259
454
7.23
8.58
2.21
2.50
Greven
7.13
8.02
370
510
7.97
8.99
2.11
2.26
Friedeburg
7.47
8.05
224
352
6.12
9.16
1.66
2.13
Dorum
7.37
9.69
424
953
8.26
10.87
2.12
2.40
Hamwedel
7.62
8.11
456
540
8.52
9.38
2.31
2.51
Husum
7.89
9.62
505
870
8.89
10.86
2.25
2.46
Duderstadt
5.81
9.10
251
856
7.01
10.31
1.69
2.22
Representative
6.97
8.28
344
607.50
7.68
9.51
2.07
2.37
In Table 4.3 the wind characteristics of the representative wind site for the micrometeo-
rological wind conditions are presented and these are the environmental wind conditions
that are used in the LACflex generic aeroelastic model. The representative wind regime
that was used and seen below was also assessed by the Ramboll supervisor and its
environmental conditions were deemed as typical for North Germany.
Table 4.3: Micrometeorology of the North German representative wind site at 100 m
height.
Location
Average Wind
Average Power
Weibull A
Weibull k
City/ Town
Speed Range (m/s)
Density (W/m2)
parameter
parameter
Representative
7.63
475.75
8.59
2.22
The representative wind speed that was presented in Table 4.3 together with the Weibull
parameters provide us with the following Weibull curve. The Weibull distribution of the
representative wind site for the site-specific condtions is shown in Figure 4.9 were except
the Weibull curve in LACflex model, it is also shown the operational hours of each wind
speed range.
==PAGE:61==
52
4 Generic Aero-elastic Model (LACflex)
Figure 4.9: Site-specific Baseline Weibull curve of the representative wind site in
LACflex.
4.2.2
Environmental Conditions - Wind Direction
The wind direction that has been used in the LACflex generic aeroelastic model is being
presented in this part of the thesis for both the design load baseline and the site-specific
load baseline. The big difference between the design fatigue loads baseline and the site-
specific fatigue loads baseline is that the design baseline case is one-directional, whereas
the site-specific baseline is multi-directional.
4.2.2.1
Env. Conditions - Design Baseline Wind Direction
The design wind direction that was used for the design fatigue load baseline model is
used in LACflex was one-directional from the North wind direction for having a
viable reference for the design case to be compared with the site-specific cases.
4.2.2.2
Env. Conditions - Site-Specific Baseline Wind Direction
In Table 4.4 the wind direction with the respective frequency of occurrence that is the
probability of the wind direction to be occurred throughout the year are presented for
==PAGE:62==
4.2 Environmental Conditions
53
the site-specific conditions that have been chosen from the research that was completed
at the duration of the thesis.
Table 4.4: Wind direction frequency of occurrence for the Site-specific conditions..
Orientation
Wind Direction
Frequency of Occurrence
Units
(deg)
(%)
North (N)
0
18
North-East I (NE I)
30
12
North-East II (NE II)
60
8
East (E)
90
6
South-East I (SE I)
120
6
South-East II (SE II)
150
6
South (S)
180
6
South-West I (SW I)
210
6
South-West II (SW II)
240
6
West (W)
270
6
North-West I (NW I)
300
8
North-West II (NW II)
330
12
Total
0-360
100
The wind rose that has been created based on the data of Table 4.4 is displayed in
Figure 4.10 and shows that the north wind direction is the dominant one. It should
be noted that the south-western wind direction is the most common wind direction for
Germany, but the north direction was chosen for the simplification of the processing of
simulation data. This rotation of wind direction does not influence the findings in this
thesis.
Figure 4.10: Site-specific Baseline wind rose conditions.
==PAGE:63==
54
4 Generic Aero-elastic Model (LACflex)
4.2.3
Environmental Conditions - Turbulence Intensity
The Turbulence Intensity (TI) is the most important environmental condition in terms
of how much its uncertainty contributes to the overall RUL uncertainty results, which
is analyzed and explained in the results section of the thesis. The Kaimal spectrum is
being used for the turbulence in the onshore wind turbine LACflex model.
4.2.3.1
Env. Conditions - Design Baseline Turbulence Intensity
The turbulence for the design fatigue load baseline model is shown in Figure 4.11, where
0.18% Turbulence Intensity value was used according to the IEC Wind Class that has
been mentioned, which is based on the IEC Edition 2.
At this point it should be
made clear that the IEC Edition 2 with 18% Turbulence Intensity is the same with the
IEC Edition 3 with 16% Turbulence Intensity. So the Turbulence Intensity that it was
desirable to be used was a 16% Turbulence Intensity in the Design Load Baseline Case,
which in LACflex for the IEC Edition 3 is shown as reference turbulence intensity and
this is how it should be considered after this point.
Figure 4.11: Design Baseline Turbulence conditions.
==PAGE:64==
4.2 Environmental Conditions
55
4.2.3.2
Env. Conditions - Site-specific Baseline Turbulence Intensity
The turbulence for the site-specific fatigue load baseline model is shown in Figure 4.12
and IEC Edition 3 is used with a reference turbulence intensity of 0.15%.
Figure 4.12: Site-specific Baseline Turbulence conditions.
4.2.4
Baseline Environmental Conditions
The wind speed & turbulence intensity settings for the LACflex generic aeroelastic model
for the Design Baseline & the Site-specific Baseline are shown respectively in Table 4.5.
Table 4.5: Turbulence Intensity (TI) Settings for the LACflex model Design & Site-
specific conditions.
Baseline Load Cases
IEC Edition
Mean Wind
Reference
Weibull
Weibull
Edition
Speed (m/s)
TI (Iref) (%)
A (-)
k (-)
Design Loads
2nd
8.50
0.16
9.59
2.00
Site-specific Loads
3rd
7.63
0.15
8.59
2.22
==PAGE:65==
56
4 Generic Aero-elastic Model (LACflex)
4.3
Blade Model Specifications
The Blade model that is applied in the thesis has the following specifications that are
presented in Table 4.6 and these are used for running the simulations.
Table 4.6: Blade Model (BM) Specifications.
Baseline
Blade
BM Uncert-
Chord Length
Design
Load Cases
family
ainty Cases
at 2/3 blade length (m)
Target
Design Ref.
1
BM A1
2.08
Power optimized
4aNorth P50
Site Ref.
1
BM A2
1.60
Load optimised
Site
2
BM A3
1.59
Load optimised
Site
2
BM A4
1.99
Power optimised
Site
3
BM A5
1.40
Load optimised
Site
3
BM A6
1.75
Power optimised
==PAGE:66==
CHAPTER 5
Uncertainties in Remaining
Useful Lifetime (RUL)
Assessment
In this chapter the uncertainties in the Remaining Useful Lifetime (RUL) are presented
and analyzed together with the assessment that was implemented to derive the uncer-
tainties calculation.
The Environmental Condition Uncertainties (ECUs), which are
the Wind Speed (WS) uncertainty, the Turbulence Intensity (TI) uncertainty and their
combined (WS & TI) uncertainty effect are analytically researched. Also, the the Blade
Model (BM) uncertainty is being estimated and assessed. Furthermore, the IEC Em-
pirical Methodology is being implemented individually for the Wind Speed uncertainty
and the combination of the Wind Speed uncertainty with the Turbulence Intensity un-
certainty and the overall results are studied. At the end the Blade Model uncertainty is
combined with the Wind Speed & Turbulence Intensity uncertainties and the assessment
of the procedure, as well as the outcome are presented.
According to the IEC Empirical Methodology the input data uncertainties are the En-
vironmental Condition Uncertainties, which means that the wind speed and turbulence
intensity uncertainties are part of that category. Aside from those parameters the wind
shear α and air density ρ for example among others can be considered input data un-
certainties. In the IEC methodology the model uncertainties are also included and this
can be the blade model uncertainty that is investigated or the wind turbine model, the
controller model etc.
It is reminded that the Remaining Useful Lifetime (RUL) results in years is the number of
years on top of the design lifetime of the onshore wind turbine, which has been specified
to be 20 years for the wind turbine that is used in the thesis.
==PAGE:67==
58
5 Uncertainties in Remaining Useful Lifetime (RUL) Assessment
5.1
ECUs - Wind Speed (WS) Uncertainty RUL
The wind speed uncertainty table as mentioned at the first chapter is shown for the differ-
ent percentiles (P10, P30, P70, P90) for the different uncertainty levels (Low, Medium,
High) that corresponds to the respective wind speed standard deviations 0.15 m/s, 0.22
m/s and 0.30 m/s. It is reminded that the standard deviation is the way to introduce
the uncertainty in the calculations and the different percentiles of the wind speed are
estimated with the Cummulative Distribution Function (CDF).
Table 5.1: Wind speed uncertainty levels for the different percentiles.
Percentile
Wind Speed - Low Uncertainty
CDF Probability
Std
Units
(m/s)
(0-1)
(m/s)
P10
7.42
0.10
P30
7.53
0.30
P50 - Mean
7.61
0.50
0.15
P70
7.69
0.70
P90
7.80
0.90
Percentile
Wind Speed - Medium Uncertainty
CDF Probability
Std
Units
(m/s)
(0-1)
(m/s)
P10
7.33
0.10
P30
7.50
0.30
P50 - Mean
7.61
0.50
0.22
P70
7.73
0.70
P90
7.89
0.90
Percentile
Wind Speed - High Uncertainty
CDF Probability
Std
Units
(m/s)
(0-1)
(m/s)
P10
7.23
0.10
P30
7.45
0.30
P50 - Mean
7.61
0.50
0.30
P70
7.77
0.70
P90
8.00
0.90
In general in the plots of the RUL against the wind speed uncertainty or the turbulence
intensity uncertainty, the different uncertainty levels are illustrated.
The low uncer-
tainty level is indicated with blue dots, the medium uncertainty level is indicated with
orange dots and the high uncertainty level is indicated with green dots. The P50 most
probable value is indicated with a red dot in all of the plots and this is the most probable
RUL and wind speed U & turbulence intensity I value for the wind speed uncertainty
& the turbulence intensity cases.
The procedure that was followed to derive the RULs was to use the percentile values
from for each uncertainty’s distribution, then we run the load simulations and the the
fatigue loads were calculated.
==PAGE:68==
5.1 ECUs - Wind Speed (WS) Uncertainty RUL
59
5.1.1
WS Uncertainty- All WTG Components RUL
In this subsection of the Wind Speed (WS) uncertainty the Remaining Useful Lifetime
(RUL) for all of the different components of the wind turbine are presented. All of the
wind turbine components are presented individually. As later the thesis focuses only on
specific components and the RUL is going to be presented only in tables. So the RUL
results are presented for the different wind turbine components, which are shown in the
following figures.
5.1.1.1
Blade Bolts, Main Shaft (Wohler=4) & Blade (Wohler=10)
At first in Figure 5.1 the RUL for the blade bolts (S1 & B1) and in Figure 5.3 the main
shaft (R) are shown for the 4th wohler exponent, as they are made from steel material.
Figure 5.1: WTG RUL of the Blade Bolts component (S1 & B1), steel Wohler=4.
Also, the RUL of the whole blade (S1 & B1) that is shown in Figure 5.2 is made from
glass fiber material that corresponds to the 10th wohler exponent. It is observed that
the RUL of the blade bolts ranges from 2 years up to 4.5 years, whereas the RUL of
the main shaft ranges from 17.5 years and exceeds the RUL of 35 years. The blade as a
whole ranges from 17.19 years to 30.87 years.
==PAGE:69==
60
5 Uncertainties in Remaining Useful Lifetime (RUL) Assessment
Figure 5.2: WTG RUL of the Blade component (S1&B2), glass fiber Wohler=10).
The blade bolts by far have a smaller RUL than the main shaft, which means the blade
bolts are going to fail first. Afterwards, the blade as a whole is going to fail next and in
the end the main shaft will fail, if just these 3 wind turbine components are compared.
Figure 5.3: WTG RUL of the Main Shaft (R) component (steel, Wohler=4).
==PAGE:70==
5.1 ECUs - Wind Speed (WS) Uncertainty RUL
61
The total lifetime of the blade bolts and the blade are illustrated in Equation 5.1 and
the total lifetime of the main shaft can be seen in Equation 5.2. The total lifetime
is reminded it that is the sum of the design lifetime with the RUL: Lifetimetotal =
LifetimeDesign + RUL.
LifetimeWohler=4
BladeBolts = 21.92 −24.51 years, LifetimeWohler=10
Blade
= 37.19 −50.87 years
(5.1)
LifetimeWohler=4
R
= 37.31 −56.10 years
(5.2)
5.1.1.2
Tower Top: Nacelle Side (Yawing) & Tower Side (Fixed)
The tower top’s nacelle side (N) and tower side (K) is being presented in this part, which
are both illustrated in Figure 5.4. The nacelle side at tower top (N) is the yawing part
at the top of the wind turbine tower, which is lead by the yaw coordinate system of the
wind turbine. This signifies that the fatigue moments and loads at the tower top origi-
nate from the movement/ rotation of the nacelle, so that the rotor of the wind turbine
will be able to track the wind direction as efficiently as possible and harness the wind.
The movement of the nacelle when it is rotating causes significant fatigue loading that
decreases the structural reserves and henceforth the RUL of the tower top. The lifetime
for the N component is between 38.56 years and 58.18 years.
The tower side of the tower top (K) is the non-rotating part at the top of the wind turbine
tower, so it is the fixed tower top fatigue loading that dominates in this component. This
side of the tower top has the influence of the fixed bottom of the tower that withstands
the rotation of the nacelle, so the fatigue loading differs than the nacelle side of the
tower top. The lifetime for the K component starts from 82.06 years and reaches as high
as 124.74 years.
==PAGE:71==
62
5 Uncertainties in Remaining Useful Lifetime (RUL) Assessment
(a) Nacelle side-Tower Top Rotating Part of the Yaw Coordinate System (N)
(b) Tower side - Tower Top Fixed Part (K)
Figure 5.4: WTG RUL of the individual N and K components (steel, Wohler=4).
The total lifetime of both the N & K components is shown in Figure 5.5 and ranges
from 38.56 years and 58.18 years. It is highlighted that the N & K RUL of both the
==PAGE:72==
5.1 ECUs - Wind Speed (WS) Uncertainty RUL
63
components is calculated from minimum RUL value of the nacelle side (N) and the tower
side (K), so the N & K RUL is the same as the RUL of the N component, which is the
one that dictates the lifetime of the wind turbine’s tower top. It is logical for the nacelle
side (N) component to be the component that determine the lifetime of the tower top
as is the one that experiences the most fatigue loads in comparison with the tower side
(K) component that is fixed.
Figure 5.5: RUL of the N & K: Connection between the Tower & Nacelle - Nacelle
Yawing Tower Top & Fixed Tower Top wind turbine components (steel,
Wohler=4).
5.1.1.3
Tower Foundation (F) & Tower Section at 21 m Height
The tower foundation (F) and the tower section at 21 m height (F21) are displayed in
Figure 5.6. For the F component the total lifetime is between 43.74 years & 58.79 years
and the total lifetime of the F21 component is between 43.15 years and 56.79 years. The
values of the F & F21 components differ, but they are very comparable.
==PAGE:73==
64
5 Uncertainties in Remaining Useful Lifetime (RUL) Assessment
(a) Tower Foundation (F)
(b) Tower section at a 21 m height above the Tower Foundation (F21)
Figure 5.6: WTG RUL of the F & F21 Tower components (steel, Wohler=4).
==PAGE:74==
5.1 ECUs - Wind Speed (WS) Uncertainty RUL
65
5.1.1.4
Tower Sections at 42 m & 63 m Height
The tower section at 42 m (F42) is presented in Figure 5.7 and at 63 m (F63) height
is presented in Figure 5.8 for which the total lifetime ranges from 44.93 years to 59.48
and from 50.98 years to 68.83 years respectively. As it can be observed from the total
lifetime ranges the F42 component is going to fail earlier than the F63 component.
Figure 5.7: F42 RUL Tower section at 42 m height from Foundation (steel, Wohler=4).
Figure 5.8: F63 RUL Tower section at 63 m height from Foundation (steel, Wohler=4).
==PAGE:75==
66
5 Uncertainties in Remaining Useful Lifetime (RUL) Assessment
5.1.1.5
All Wind Turbine Components
In this subsection the RUL of all of the wind turbine components is presented in Fig-
ure 5.9 and in general it can be observed from the plot the following order of RUL values,
which range from the bigger to the smaller as it is shown below:
RULWohler=4
F63
> RULWohler=4
42
> RULWohler=4
F
> RULWohler=4
21
> RULWohler=4
F21
> RULWohler=4
N&K
>
RULWohler=4
R
> RULWohler=10
Blade
> RULWohler=4
Blade Bolts.
It is mentioned that the RUL value of the whole blade that is made from glass fiber and
is described from the 10th Wohler exponent that is not included in Figure 5.9, as this
plot is for the 4th Wohler exponent that describes a material made of steel.
Figure 5.9: RUL of all wind turbine components (steel, Wohler=4).
In this last figure of the wind speed uncertainty cases, the normalized RUL is presented
against the wind speed for each one of the components of the wind turbine and the
relation between the RUL that was previously explained can be observed on the plot. It
is highlighted that in Figure 5.10 the slope of each component’s RUL line is an indicator
of the sensitivity of the RUL, so the smallest the RUL is for a component the steepest
is its slope.
==PAGE:76==
5.1 ECUs - Wind Speed (WS) Uncertainty RUL
67
Figure 5.10: Normalized RUL of all wind turbine components (steel, Wohler=4).
==PAGE:77==
68
5 Uncertainties in Remaining Useful Lifetime (RUL) Assessment
5.1.1.6
WS Unc. - All Wind Turbine Components RUL Results
The analytical results of the RUL for the 4th Wohler exponent are shown in Table 5.2.
It is mentioned that the blade bolts that are made of steel and the blade made of glass
fiber are also included in Table 5.2 for direct comparison of their RULs.
Table 5.2: Wind Speed (WS) Uncertainty: All of the wind turbine components RUL
results.
All WTG Components Remaining Useful Lifetime - RUL (years), Wohler=4
WS Uncert-
Blade Bolts
Blade
Main
Tower Top
Tower
ainty Cases
(Wohler=4)
(Wohler=10)
Shaft R
N & K
Foundation F
Low P10
3.79
27.06
30.56
32.38
34.40
Low P30
3.40
24.93
27.56
29.24
32.05
P50
3.14
23.68
25.75
27.37
30.58
Low P70
2.87
22.35
23.90
25.45
29.08
Low P90
2.52
20.52
21.45
22.89
27.11
Medium P10
4.13
28.98
33.22
35.17
36.49
Medium P30
3.50
25.55
28.40
30.12
32.70
P50
3.14
23.68
25.75
27.37
30.58
Medium P70
2.74
21.54
22.87
24.36
28.28
Medium P90
2.25
18.99
19.52
20.87
25.55
High P10
4.51
30.88
36.10
38.18
38.80
High P30
3.68
26.49
29.73
31.50
33.75
P50
3.14
23.68
25.75
27.37
30.58
High P70
2.61
20.96
22.07
23.53
27.61
High P90
1.92
17.19
17.32
18.56
23.74
In Table 5.3 the tower section RUL values are being displayed for a direct comparison
of the RUL value for the wind speed uncertainty case. Generally, it can be observed
that the first section of the tower that is going to fail is the tower section at 21 m height
(F21) as it has the minimum RUL values and right after the tower foundation (F) is
going to fail.
==PAGE:78==
5.1 ECUs - Wind Speed (WS) Uncertainty RUL
69
Table 5.3: Wind Speed (WS) Uncertainty Tower wind turbine components RUL re-
sults.
Tower Remaining Useful Lifetime - RUL (years), Wohler=4
WS Uncert-
Tower
Tower Part 21
Tower Part 42
Tower Part 63
ainty Cases
Foundation F
m Height F21
m Height F42
m Height F63
Low P10
34.40
32.82
35.24
43.62
Low P30
32.05
30.69
32.97
40.82
P50
30.58
29.35
31.54
39.08
Low P70
29.08
27.98
30.09
37.30
Low P90
27.11
26.20
28.18
34.96
Medium P10
36.49
34.69
37.25
46.09
Medium P30
32.70
31.27
33.59
41.59
P50
30.58
29.35
31.54
39.08
Medium P70
28.28
27.27
29.31
36.35
Medium P90
25.55
24.79
26.67
33.12
High P10
38.80
36.79
39.49
48.83
High P30
33.75
32.22
34.61
42.84
P50
30.58
29.35
31.54
39.08
High P70
27.61
26.66
28,67
35.56
High P90
23.74
23.15
24.93
30.98
==PAGE:79==
70
5 Uncertainties in Remaining Useful Lifetime (RUL) Assessment
5.2
ECUs - Turb. Intensity (TI) Uncertainty RUL
From the environmental condition uncertainties (ECUs) the Turbulence Intensity (TI)
uncertainty RUL results are included in this subsection with the analytical plots and
results being presented below. In Table 5.4 for the 3 turbulence intensity uncertainty
levels (Low, Medium, High) their respective values of turbulence intensity for the differ-
ent percentiles are shown, which were determined for the standard deviations (std) that
were chosen.
Table 5.4: Turbulence Intensity (TI) uncertainty levels for the different percentiles.
Percentile
Turbulence Intensity -
CDF Probability
Std
Units
Low Uncertainty (−)
(0-1)
(−)
P10
0.1375
0.10
P30
0.1448
0.30
P50 - Mean
0.1500
0.50
0.010
P70
0.1553
0.70
P90
0.1630
0.90
Percentile
Turbulence Intensity -
CDF Probability
Std
Units
Medium Uncertainty (−)
(0-1)
(−)
P10
0.1308
0.10
P30
0.1422
0.30
P50 - Mean
0.1500
0.50
0.015
P70
0.1579
0.70
P90
0.1693
0.90
Percentile
Turbulence Intensity -
CDF Probability
Std
Units
High Uncertainty (−)
(0-1)
(−)
P10
0.1247
0.10
P30
0.1397
0.30
P50 - Mean
0.1500
0.50
0.020
P70
0.1606
0.70
P90
0.1760
0.90
As for the wind speed uncertainty the different color variations apply for the various
turbulence intensity uncertainty levels, low indicated with blue color, medium indicated
by orange & high uncertainty level by green and the most probable percentile that is
P50 is a red dot.
5.2.1
TI Uncertainty - WTG Components RUL
At this part are presented only the most representative wind turbine components for
the RUL, which are those that have the smallest RUL and affect directly the overall
WTG lifetime. Due to the fact that it would require to present a big number of plots
that is the reason that only the blade bolts (S1 & B1. Wohler=4), blade (S1 & B1.
==PAGE:80==
5.2 ECUs - Turb. Intensity (TI) Uncertainty RUL
71
Wohler=10), tower top (N & K) and main shaft (R) are presented for the turbulence
intensity uncertainty. The RUL of all the other wind turbine components are presented
analytically in Table 5.5.
5.2.1.1
Blade Bolts (Wohler=4) & Blade (Wohler=10)
The blade bolts (steel, Wohler=4) and the blade (glass fiber, Wohler=10) RUL results
are shown and compared in Figure 5.11 and Figure 5.12.
Figure 5.11: RUL of the Blade Bolts component (steel, Wohler=4).
Based on these two plots the lifetime of the blade bolts ranges from 20.76 years to 25.52
years and the lifetime of the blade ranges from 22.74 years to 66.69 years.
Figure 5.12: RUL of the Blade component (glass fiber, Wohler=10).
==PAGE:81==
72
5 Uncertainties in Remaining Useful Lifetime (RUL) Assessment
The lifetime and RUL results of the TI uncertainty show the same as the ones from the
WS uncertainty that indicates that the blade fail after the blade bolts failure.
5.2.1.2
Main Shaft & Tower Top (Wohler=4)
The main shaft (R) and the tower top (N & K) that includes both the nacelle side and the
tower fixed side of the tower are presented in Figure 5.13 and Figure 5.14 respectively.
Figure 5.13: RUL of the Main Shaft (R) component (steel, Wohler=4).
Figure 5.14: RUL of the Tower Top (N&K) components (steel, Wohler=4).
==PAGE:82==
5.2 ECUs - Turb. Intensity (TI) Uncertainty RUL
73
It is mentioned that the shape of the TI curves is different compared to the WS results,
as they are not represented by a straight line. This was important for not choosing a
normal distribution in the next stages of the thesis.
From the RUL plots is derived that the lifetime of the main shaft is between 26.38 years
& 82.04 years and lifetime of the tower top is between 25.67 years & 93.21 years.
It is observed from the lifetime results that the main shaft is more likely to fail earlier
than the tower top of the wind turbine.
5.2.2
TI Unc. - All Wind Turbine RUL Results
In the following table (see Table 5.5) all of the turbulence intensity RUL results for the
various uncertainty levels and percentiles are included for the critical components of the
wind turbine.
Table 5.5: Turbulence Intensity (TI) Uncertainty: All of the wind turbine components
RUL results.
Remaining Useful Lifetime - RUL (years), Wohler=4
WS Uncert-
Blade Bolts
Blade
Main
Tower Top
Tower
ainty Cases
(Wohler=4)
(Wohler=10)
Shaft R
N & K
Foundation F
Low P10
4.34
34.54
40.57
45.31
44.80
Low P30
3.64
27.99
31.32
34.07
35.87
P50
3.14
23.68
25.75
27.37
30.58
Low P70
2.63
19.52
20.67
21.52
25.52
Low P90
1.94
14.25
14.53
14.54
19.02
Medium P10
4.09
32.09
37.21
41.10
41.67
Medium P30
3.87
30.19
34.44
37.71
38.66
P50
3.14
23.68
25.75
27.37
30.58
Medium P70
2.39
17.65
18.50
19.01
23.20
Medium P90
1.35
10.27
10.25
9.84
14.81
High P10
5.52
46.69
62.04
73.21
67.45
High P30
4.12
32.39
37.57
41.59
42.03
P50
3.14
23.68
25.75
27.37
30.58
High P70
2.15
15.86
16.32
16.58
21.13
High P90
0.76
2.74
6.38
5.67
11.07
In Table 5.6 the tower section RUL values are being displayed for a direct comparison of
the RUL value for the turbulence intenisty uncertainty case. The same conclusion can
be made as the one that was observed for the wind speed uncertainty case. The first
section of the tower that fails is the tower section at 21 m height (F21) as it has the
smallest RUL values and right after the tower foundation (F) fails.
==PAGE:83==
74
5 Uncertainties in Remaining Useful Lifetime (RUL) Assessment
Table 5.6: Turbulence Intensity (TI) Uncertainty Tower wind turbine components RUL
results.
Tower Remaining Useful Lifetime - RUL (years), Wohler=4
TI Uncert-
Tower
Tower Part 21
Tower Part 42
Tower Part 63
ainty Cases
Foundation F
m Height F21
m Height F42
m Height F63
Low P10
44.80
43.18
46.78
58.31
Low P30
35.87
34.69
37.67
46.07
P50
30.58
29.34
31.54
39.08
Low P70
25.52
24.46
26.57
33.08
Low P90
19.02
18.69
20.34
25.09
Medium P10
41.67
40.02
43.14
53.23
Medium P30
38.66
37.32
40.06
49.44
P50
30.58
29.34
31.54
39.08
Medium P70
23.20
22.45
24.18
30.29
Medium P90
14.80
14.65
16.14
19.87
High P10
67.45
64.37
69.59
85.99
High P30
42.03
40.37
43.66
53.66
P50
30.58
29.34
31.54
39.08
High P70
21.13
20.47
22.31
27.62
High P90
11.07
11.03
12.15
15.46
5.3
WS & TI Uncertainty Comparison
After individually presenting individually the uncertainties a comparison between the
wind speed and turbulence intensity uncertainty is being made in this section for the
reader to have of the impact of each uncertainty. In Table 5.7 the total lifetime for the
main shaft (R) can be seen that the wind speed & turbulence intensity difference be-
tween the minimum total lifetime values is −41.43% and for the maximum total lifetime
values is 31.62%.
It is observed that the turbulence intensity uncertainty influences significantly the total
lifetime uncertainty for the main shaft and increases the uncertainty margin. The same
applies for the other wind turbine components that are presented below.
Table 5.7: Wind Speed (WS) & Turbulence Intensity (TI) Uncertainty RUL results
comparison of the Main Shaft (R) component.
Total Lifetime (years)
Main Shaft R component (steel, Wohler=4)
Total Lifetime (years)
WS min
TI min
WS max
TI max
37.31
26.38
56.10
82.04
Difference (%)
-41.43
31.62
==PAGE:84==
5.3 WS & TI Uncertainty Comparison
75
The total lifetime for the tower top (N & K) in Table 5.8 shows that the wind speed
& turbulence intensity difference is immense between the minimum total lifetime values
−50.21% and for the maximum total lifetime values is 37.58%. It is obvious that the
turbulence intensity uncertainty influence is big and the uncertainty margin is more than
20% for both the min & max.
Table 5.8: Wind Speed (WS) & Turbulence Intensity (TI) Uncertainty RUL results
comparison of the Tower Top (N & K) components.
Total Lifetime (years)
Tower Top N & K component (steel, Wohler=4)
Total Lifetime (years)
WS min
TI min
WS max
TI max
38.56
25.67
58.18
93.21
Difference (%)
-50.21
37.58
The total lifetime for the blade bolts (S1 & B1) and the blade in Table 5.9 and Table 5.10
respectively show the same results as the previous components. The wind speed & tur-
bulence intensity difference is comparable to the N & K components. For the minimum
total lifetime values the difference is −5.59% for the blade bolts & −63.54% for the
blade and for the maximum total lifetime values is 3.96% for the blade bolts & 23.73%
for the blade.
Table 5.9: Wind Speed (WS) & Turbulence Intensity (TI) Uncertainty RUL results
comparison of the Blade Bolts (S1 & B1) components.
Total Lifetime (years)
Blade Bolts S1 & B1 component (steel, Wohler=4)
Total Lifetime (years)
WS min
TI min
WS max
TI max
21.92
20.76
24.51
25.52
Difference (%)
-5.59
3.96
Table 5.10: Wind Speed (WS) & Turbulence Intensity (TI) Uncertainty RUL results
comparison of the Blade (S1 & B1) components.
Total Lifetime (years)
Blade S1 & B1 component (glass fiber, Wohler=10)
Total Lifetime (years)
WS min
TI min
WS max
TI max
37.19
22.74
50.87
66.70
Difference (%)
-63.54
23.73
For the foundation (F) the total lifetime minimum values have a difference of wind
speed & turbulence intensity uncertainty of −40.78% and the total lifetime maximum
values have a difference of WS & TI uncertainty of 32.76&. This again shows that the
turbulence intensity uncertainty provides a bigger uncertainty margin.
==PAGE:85==
76
5 Uncertainties in Remaining Useful Lifetime (RUL) Assessment
Table 5.11: Wind Speed (WS) & Turbulence Intensity (TI) Uncertainty RUL results
comparison of the Foundation (F) component.
Total Lifetime (years)
Foundation F component (steel, Wohler=4)
Total Lifetime (years)
WS min
TI min
WS max
TI max
43.74
31.07
58.80
87.45
Difference (%)
-40.78
32.76
Overall, it was observed that the turbulence intensity uncertainty for all of the com-
ponents of the wind turbine has big uncertainty margin between the minimum and
maximum total lifetime values. The turbulence intensity uncertainty dominates over
the wind speed uncertainty, which indicates that the turbulence intensity uncertainty
contributes more significantly to the RUL uncertainty than the wind speed uncertainty.
5.4
Blade Model (BM) Uncertainty RUL
The Blade Model (BM) uncertainty is individually studied and assessed in this section,
so that the distribution for each wind turbine component will be derived. This will allow
to describe the RUL uncertainty distribution of the different components and witness
its behaviour. The normal distribution was used for the Blade Model’s uncertainty, as
it was considered that was sufficient for the Blade Model uncertainty and it was known
that could be described accurately by that. The average value (mean) and the standard
deviation (std) of each component’s RUL was used to derive its normal distributed curve
and the values are shown in Table 5.13.
In Table 5.12 the fatigue loads ratio of the various blade models that were implemented
is shown. In total in this thesis 6 different Blade Models (BM) were implemented, which
shows that on top of the initial blade model for which its wind speed and turbulence
intensity uncertainties were studied, 5 more blade models were created and implemented.
==PAGE:86==
5.4 Blade Model (BM) Uncertainty RUL
77
Table 5.12: Blade Model (BM) Uncertainty: All of the wind turbine components ratio
of fatigue loads results.
Ratio of Fatigue Loads (k−), Wohler (W)=4
Load
BM Uncert-
Blade
Blade
Main
Tower Top
Tower Fou-
ainty Cases
Bolts (W=4)
(W=10)
Shaft R
N & K
ndation F
Blade Model Uncertainty
Site
BM A1/
0.9492
0.8705
0.8131
0.7398
0.7929
4aNorth P50
Site
BM A2
0.9578
0.9478
0.8291
0.7401
0.7978
Site
BM A3
0.9687
0.8815
0.8525
0.7683
0.8114
Site
BM A4
0.9641
0.8835
0.8465
0.7702
0.8040
Site
BM A5
0.9658
0.9653
0.8507
0.7627
0.7974
Site
BM A6
0.9624
0.8774
0.8466
0.7665
0.7993
The RUL of the major wind turbine components for the Blade Model uncertainty is
presented in Table 5.13.
Table 5.13: Blade Model (BM) Uncertainty: All of the wind turbine components RUL
results.
Remaining Useful Lifetime - RUL (years), Wohler (W)=4
Load
BM Uncert-
Blade
Blade
Main
Tower Top
Tower Fou-
ainty Cases
Bolts (W=4)
(W=10)
Shaft R
N & K
ndation F
Site
BM A1
3.14
23.68
25.75
27.37
30.58
Site
BM A2
2.65
7.91
22.32
26.87
29.37
Site
BM A3
1.72
9.09
17.86
19.13
26.12
Site
BM A4
1.82
26.77
18.96
19.34
27.85
Site
BM A5
2.19
5.88
18.93
19.70
29.47
Site
BM A6
2.21
10.08
18.93
19.51
29.01
Site
Mean
2.29
13.90
20.34
21.99
28.73
Site
Std
0.53
8.93
3.09
3.98
1.55
In Figure 5.15 the RUL of the main shaft for the BM uncertainty is shown. For the
LACflex simulations of the different blade models is observed that the RUL ranges from
19-26 years.
==PAGE:87==
78
5 Uncertainties in Remaining Useful Lifetime (RUL) Assessment
Figure 5.15: Main Shaft (R) Normal Distribution of the Blade Model Uncertainty
(steel, Wohler=4).
The tower top N&K can be seen in Figure 5.16 from which is observed that the normal
distribution fit is more broad than the main shaft’s.
This signifies that the N&K
component has longer lifetime and its RUL according to the LACflex simulations that
we run range from 20 to 27 years, which verifies that.
Figure 5.16: Tower Top (N & K) Normal Distribution of the Blade Model Uncertainty
(steel, Wohler=4).
The blade bolts are shown in Figure 5.17 and it can immediately noticed that the distri-
==PAGE:88==
5.4 Blade Model (BM) Uncertainty RUL
79
bution fit is narrower, which means that the lifetime of the component is significantly
lower than the other components. It is already known from the wind speed and turbu-
lence intensity uncertainties that the blade bolts are the first to fail, which is verified
for the Blade Model uncertainty as well. From the LACflex simulations the blade bolts
RUL ranges between 2-3 years tops.
Figure 5.17: Blade Bolts (S1 & B1) Normal Distribution of the Blade Model Uncer-
tainty (steel, Wohler=4).
==PAGE:89==
80
5 Uncertainties in Remaining Useful Lifetime (RUL) Assessment
The Blade is presented in Figure 5.18 and the normal distribution is broad with the
RUL for the LACflex simulations ranging from 10 to approximately 24 years.
Figure 5.18: Blade (S1 & B1) Normal Distribution of the Blade Model Uncertainty
(glass fiber, Wohler=10).
Finally, the foundation of the wind turbine RUL is presented in Figure 5.19, where is
shown that the foundation is going to fail after many decades, meaning 25-35 years of
wind turbine operation after its design life has been exceeded. The RUL range that
derived from the LACflex simulations results were between 29 and 31 years.
Figure 5.19: Foundation (F) Normal Distribution of the Blade Model Uncertainty
(steel, Wohler=4).
==PAGE:90==
5.5 Combination of WS & TI Uncertainties RUL
81
5.5
Combination of WS & TI Uncertainties RUL
The RUL results for the Wind Speed (WS) uncertainty and the Turbulence Intensity
(TI) uncertainty cases are combined, so that the combined WS-TI uncertainty will be
determined. The procedure that will be followed is presented below, which shows how
different uncertainties are combined and how is derived the distribution of their com-
bined effect.
It should be stated as basic background theory for the combination of uncertainties
for the convolution method that is used for combining the WS & TI and WS, TI &
Blade Model (BM) uncertainties. The convolution approach is possible only when the
underlying distributions are independent of each other.
5.5.1
Distribution Identification
First, distributions have to be identified that can represent the percentiles of RUL de-
rived for the wind speed and turbulence intensity uncertainties. In case of the blade
model uncertainty this is not required. As discussed in the previous section the proba-
bility for RUL for blade uncertainty are assumed to be normally distributed.
In Figure 5.20 the Wind Speed (WS) & Turbulence Intensity (TI) uncertainty cases are
shown for the main shaft (R) and the tower top (N & K) of the wind turbine for the
low & high uncertainty levels. Identification of suitable distributions is done by fitting
distributions to the RUL percentiles and graphical inspection. The PPF and CDF plots
are shown below. From these plots it was concluded that RUL percentiles of the R
and N&K components for the low uncertainty could be represented well by a normal
distribution, while for the the high turbulence uncertainty is represented better by a
lognormal distribution.
By applying the PPF and CFD for the various wind turbine components it is noticed that
the low uncertainty level is well aproximated by a normal distribution fit and the high TI
uncertainty level is only well depicted by a lognormal distribution fit. Supplementary,
although the WS uncertainty distribution is not presented here, it is mentioned that
the fit of a normal distribution is a good approximation for both the low and high WS
uncertainty levels.
==PAGE:91==
82
5 Uncertainties in Remaining Useful Lifetime (RUL) Assessment
Figure 5.20: TI uncertainty cases PPF & CDF distributions for the Main Shaft (R)
& the Tower Top (N & K) components for the Low & High Uncertainty
Levels (steel, Wohler=4).
At first it should be clarified when two different uncertainties are combined, how it is de-
cided which distributions will be used to be able to combine them in the end. The most
important as mentioned is to recognize the distribution for each individual uncertainty.
In Figure 5.21 the WS & TI uncertainty cases are shown for the main shaft (R) of the
wind turbine for the low & high uncertainty levels. From the plots of the main shaft (R)
it can be concluded that for the low uncertainty level the WS & TI uncertainties can be
fitted with a normal distribution, whereas for the high uncertainty level the WS & TI
uncertainties should be fitted necessarily with a lognormal distribution.
Additionally, is noticed that for the WS uncertainty the normal distribution fit works well
for both the low and high uncertainty levels. This indicates that the normal distribution
can be used for the WS uncertainty and the lognormal distribution can be used for the
TI uncertainty of the main shaft. In case of combining the uncertainties of the main
shaft component two options are available with the first being the combination of a
normal distributed WS uncertainty & a lognormal distributed TI uncertainty and the
second being the combination two lognormal distributions for these two uncertainties.
==PAGE:92==
5.5 Combination of WS & TI Uncertainties RUL
83
Figure 5.21: WS & TI uncertainty cases PPF & CDF distributions for the Main Shaft
(R) component for the Low & High Uncertainty Levels (steel, Wohler=4).
==PAGE:93==
84
5 Uncertainties in Remaining Useful Lifetime (RUL) Assessment
In Figure 5.22 the PPF and CDF plots are shown for the WS & TI uncertainty cases
of the Blade Bolts. It is observed that both for the WS & TI uncertainties the normal
distribution & lognormal distribution are very good fits.
(a) Wind Speed (WS) uncertainty case: Blade Bolts (S1 & B1)
(b) Turbulence Intensity (TI) uncertainty case: Blade Bolts (S1 & B1)
Figure 5.22: Blade Bolts PPF & CDF distributions for the WS & TI uncertainties for
the High Uncertainty Level (steel, Wohler=4).
==PAGE:94==
5.5 Combination of WS & TI Uncertainties RUL
85
Similarly, the PPF & CDF plots of the Blade are shown in Figure 5.23 and the WS & TI
uncertainty cases are described well by both of the normal & lognormal distributions.
(a) Wind Speed (WS) uncertainty case: Blade (S1 & B1)
(b) Turbulence Intensity (TI) uncertainty case: Blade (S1 & B1)
Figure 5.23: Blade Bolts PPF & CDF distributions for the WS & TI uncertainties for
the High Uncertainty Level (glass fiber, Wohler=10).
==PAGE:95==
86
5 Uncertainties in Remaining Useful Lifetime (RUL) Assessment
5.5.2
Combination of RUL Uncertainties & Distributions
From the distribution identification analysis that was completed above it is understood
that for combining the WS & TI uncertainties of the Blade Bolts and the Blade either
the normal distribution or the lognormal distribution can be used for both of them, as
they approximate well the uncertainties.
For the rest of the wind turbine components, when their uncertainties are combined it
was chosen to use lognormal distributions for both the WS & TI uncertainties. However,
it would have been possible for most of the components to combine a normal distribu-
tion fit for the WS uncertainty and a lognormal distribution fit for the TI uncertainty.
Although the normal distribution fit of the WS uncertainty is not as ideal sometimes
for some components and in these cases the lognormal distribution fit could provide
slightly more accurate results. And this is the reason why the combination of lognormal
distributions for the two uncertainties was chosen.
5.5.2.1
Combination of Normal Distributed Uncertainties
The Blade Bolts and Blade components WS & TI uncertainties are combined by using
their normal distribution fits for both of these uncertainties. It should be mentioned that
the lognormal distributions could have been used to combine the WS & TI uncertainties.
In Figure 5.24 the WS & TI uncertainties of the Blade Bolts for the high uncertainty WS
& TI levels are shown with their normal distribution fits. The wind speed RUL curve
is indicated with blue that is named RUL wind speed, the turbulence intensity RUL
curve is shown with orange that is named RUL TI and the combined effect of these two
uncertainties is indicated with green color that is named RUL stdev. The uncertainties
combination RULstdev is based on the standard deviations summation that is given by
(5.3).
σpdf =
q
σ2
WS + σ2
TI
(5.3)
Also, the green vertical line is the most probable RUL value that is the P50 percentile
and the yellow and red vertical line are the IEC empirical methodology’s AAN (Accuracy
Assessment Number) penalty levels of 1.05 and 1.10 respectively. The IEC empirical
methodology is discussed and analyzed in another subsection of this chapter.
The explanation that was just given for the Blade Bolts from Figure 5.24 applies as it
was mentioned for all of the other combination of uncertainties plots that will be pre-
sented for the other wind turbine components. Also, always the standard deviations of
the individual uncertainties are illustrated on every plot and the high uncertainty level
for both the WS & TI uncertainties will be selected.
The main takeaways from Figure 5.24 is that the turbulence intensity uncertainty con-
tributes much more than the wind speed uncertainty and that is the reason why their
combined effect deviates from the turbulence intensity uncertainty curve, but not as
==PAGE:96==
5.5 Combination of WS & TI Uncertainties RUL
87
much due to the fact that the wind speed uncertainty influence is much less. This con-
clusion of course is the same for all of the plots that combine the WS & TI uncertainties
for the rest of the wind turbine components. Also, the RUL distribution range for the
Blade Bolts is from -4 years to 10 years.
The negative RUL that is shown in Figure 5.24 is due to the fact that the Normal
distribution is used. In a wind turbine the design lifetime can’t be less than 0 years as
then the design is flawed, which occurs if you have a RUL of less than 20 years.
Figure 5.24: Combination of the High WS & High TI uncertainties for the Blade Bolts
(steel, Wohler=4).
For the Blade wind turbine component that is displayed in Figure 5.25 the RUL range
of the distribution is much bigger than the one from the Blade Bolts starting from -20
years and going up 70 years, which signifies that the Blade fails further in the future
and its probability of failure spreads out across many years.
==PAGE:97==
88
5 Uncertainties in Remaining Useful Lifetime (RUL) Assessment
Figure 5.25: Combination of the High WS & High TI uncertainties for the Blade (glass
fiber, Wohler=10).
5.5.2.2
Combination of Lognormal Distributed Uncertainties
The combined effect of the wind speed and turbulence intensity uncertainties are pre-
sented in this part for the combination of lognormal distribution fits that have been
selected for the two individual uncertainties that are examined. All the other compo-
nents of the wind turbine that are made from steel (Wohler=4) are going to be presented
here and it was chosen to combine their lognormal distributed fits instead of the normal
distributed fits, as they provide us with improved accuracy for the combined wind speed
& turbulence intensity uncertainty.
In general when the wind speed (WS) and turbulence intensity (TI) uncertainties are
combined the uncertainty combination that results is a curve fit has an increased un-
certainty. In the plots that follow, the turbulence intensity uncertainty has the higher
uncertainty of the two. Their combined result is a significantly higher uncertainty than
both of those. In the plot the curve of the combined WS & TI uncertainties that is the
green curve is the combined effect lognormal distributed fit of both these two uncertain-
ties and the curve is lower than the individual uncertainties curves, which shows that
the uncertainty is higher. Supplementary, it can be noticed that the combination is a
positively skewed curve representation.
Analytically, in Figure 5.26 the wind speed (WS) and turbulence intensity (TI) un-
==PAGE:98==
5.5 Combination of WS & TI Uncertainties RUL
89
certainties are combined for the main shaft (R). It is noticed that the probability of
failure is similar to the turbulence intensity (TI) uncertainty. The difference is that the
RUL of the main shaft has slightly increased probability to reach higher values than 40
years and in the range approximately between 7-30 years the distribution is more broad,
which states that the RUL values have an increased range. For the main shaft the higher
probability of occurrence is for the RUL between 10 and 38 years.
Figure 5.26: Main Shaft (R) Lognormal Distribution of the High WS & High TI Com-
bined Uncertainties (steel, Wohler=4).
The tower top (N & K) can be seen in Figure 5.27 and similar behaviour with the one
for the main shaft can be noticed. The distribution of the combined uncertainties is
even broader than for the main shaft as the curve reaches much higher RUL values. The
higher probability of occurrence is for the RUL between 10 and 45 years.
==PAGE:99==
90
5 Uncertainties in Remaining Useful Lifetime (RUL) Assessment
Figure 5.27: Tower Top (N & K) Lognormal Distribution of the High WS & High TI
Combined Uncertainties (steel, Wohler=4).
The Tower Foundation (F) is presented in Figure 5.28 where it can be seen that the
higher probability of occurrence is similar to the tower top with the RUL being slightly
higher. The RUL range for higher probability of occurrence is from 10 to 50 years.
Figure 5.28: Tower Foundation (F) Lognormal Distribution of the High WS & High
TI Combined Uncertainties (steel, Wohler=4).
==PAGE:100==
5.6 IEC Empirical Methodology RUL
91
The Tower Section at 42 m height (F42) is shown in Figure 5.29 as an example of
how this tower section is affected by the combined effect of wind speed and turbulence
intensity. The RUL range for higher probability of occurrence is almost the same as for
the foundation.
The other tower sections F21 & F63 are not presented as this would be an excess of
information for the scope of this thesis.
Figure 5.29: Tower Section at 42 m Height (F42) Lognormal Distribution of the High
WS & High TI Combined Uncertainties (steel, Wohler=4).
5.6
IEC Empirical Methodology RUL
The IEC empirical methodology has been analytically explained in Chapter 1 of the
thesis, so it is advised for the reader to return to that chapter to go through it before
studying its results. The IEC method has been implemented throughout the thesis only
for the wind speed uncertainty case and then for the combined uncertainty effect of the
Wind Speed (WS) and Turbulence Intensity (TI) case. It should be mentioned that the
IEC empirical methodology was implemented for both the Blade Bolts and the Blade.
5.6.1
IEC Method - Wind Speed Uncertainty RUL
In Figure 5.30 the wind speed uncertainty case for the Blade Bolts of the wind turbine
are presented together with the IEC empirical methodology that was implemented for
==PAGE:101==
92
5 Uncertainties in Remaining Useful Lifetime (RUL) Assessment
this case. In this part it is explained what procedure was followed for the implementa-
tion of the IEC method and the results are interpreted.
When studying the wind speed and turbulence intensity uncertainty alone, it was as-
sumed that the wind turbine model is perfect. In this case the model uncertainty is low
and only the input data can be subjected to higher uncertainty. From Figure 1.5 it can
be seen that the IEC penalty level values that can be assigned are either 1.00, 1.05 or
1.10. That is the reason that in Figure 5.30 the IEC penalty levels values 1.05 & 1.10
were used and also some lower than the < 1.05 value were tested as well, although they
are not suggested from the IEC.
The blue line in Figure 5.30 is the regression line of the low, medium and high uncertainty
levels for the wind speed uncertainty with the equation being: y = −3.3539 · x + 28.69.
The yellow line is the extension of the blue line and that was necessary to be done, so
that it would be possible to see where the cross-section of this line with the red line of
the IEC empirical methodology different AAN penalty levels was going to be.
The fact that the IEC empirical method penalty levels cross the regression line’s ex-
tension so far from the blue line is a strong indicator that the IEC methodology can
potentially result in very conservative RUL estimates for the wind speed uncertainty
case. The underlying reason why the IEC empirical methodology doesn’t work for this
uncertainty case is because it is about a single input data uncertainty that is not realistic
to begin with. The distributions get wider when several uncertainties are combined that
has also shown in the previous chapter.
Figure 5.30: Wind Speed (WS) uncertainty case for the Blade Bolts (steel, Wohler=4).
That would make the penalty levels be closer to the blue regression line and this is
==PAGE:102==
5.6 IEC Empirical Methodology RUL
93
understood from the fact that the 1.05 AAN uncertainty penalty level is closer to the
regression line. This means that as the IEC penalty level value decreases it approxi-
mates better the wind speed standalone uncertainty. This was tested by implementing
different IEC penalty levels lower than 1.05 with the values tested being 1.01, 1.03 and
1.04 and this exact behaviour was witnessed for the 1.01 penalty level value that is was
located at the lower edge of the blue regression line.
This shows that the lower IEC penalty level can approximate the high uncertainty of the
wind speed uncertainty. This verifies what was mentioned that the IEC method works
at least for multiple input data uncertainties (e.g. combined WS & TI uncertainty etc.),
when it is assumed that the generic aeroelastic model that is used has the lowest possible
uncertainty.
Also, can be interpreted that for a single input data uncertainty like the wind speed
probably a new AAN penalty level number smaller than 1.05 should be suggested for
the low input data uncertainty that ranges between 1 −2 for a low model uncertainty of
1. For combination of many input data uncertainties the penalty levels will reach closer
to the blue line and as the model uncertainty is not considered Low = 1 then the same
behaviour will occur.
5.6.2
IEC Method - WS & TI Uncertainty RUL
The IEC method was implemented for both the Blade Bolts and the Blade, but as the
plots are similar only the Blade Bolts plots of combined WS & TI uncertainties are
presented for the low & high uncertainty levels. This means that the low uncertainty
case was derived by the low WS uncertainty that was combined with the low TI uncer-
tainty and the high uncertainty case was derived by the high WS uncertainty that was
combined with the high TI uncertainty.
It is observed from Figure 5.31 that for the low uncertainty case the vertical lines of the
AAN penalty levels of 1.05 & 1.10 shows that the IEC empirical method is not working
so well for the combination of low uncertainties. If the IEC empirical methodology was
working well, we should have seen the penalty levels being closer to the P50 value, as
this would indicate that at least they represent one of the percentiles.
==PAGE:103==
94
5 Uncertainties in Remaining Useful Lifetime (RUL) Assessment
(a) Low Uncertainty Level Case: Blade Bolts (S1 & B1)
Figure 5.31: Combination of the WS & TI uncertainties for the Blade Bolts (steel,
Wohler=4).
(a) High Uncertainty Level Case: Blade (S1 & B1)
Figure 5.32: Combination of the WS & TI uncertainties for the Blade Bolts (steel,
Wohler=4).
==PAGE:104==
5.6 IEC Empirical Methodology RUL
95
For the high uncertainty case from Figure 5.32 the IEC empirical methodology shows
an improved behaviour, as the penalty levels are in the curve area. The IEC AAN 1.10
penalty level is at the verge of the curve, which is an indicator that it can function as the
P90 percentile in case the environmental condition uncertainties (ECUs) were higher.
Similarly, the IEC AAN 1.05 penalty level is close to the P20 percentile and provides
us with realistic results showing that the IEC method works for the high uncertainty case.
So it can be concluded that the IEC empirical methodology can potentially result in
very conservative RUL estimates for low wind speed and turbulence intensity cases, but
it functions for high uncertainty cases of the wind speed and turbulence intensity. If
the wind site is located in a complex terrain the results of the IEC methodology provide
improved results.
==PAGE:105==
96
5 Uncertainties in Remaining Useful Lifetime (RUL) Assessment
5.7
BM, WS & TI RUL Unc. Combination
The Blade Model (BM) uncertainty together with the Wind Speed (WS) & Turbulence
Intensity (TI) uncertainties are combined and the overall outcome is analytically docu-
mented in this last section of the thesis uncertainty assessment. It should be mentioned
that the plots that are presented here have sketched on them the vertical lines of the
penalty levels 1.05, 1.10, 1.15 & 1.20 of the IEC. This provides us with an insight of
how the IEC behaves when combining 3 different uncertainties and to what percentile
approximately they correspond to.
From Figure 5.33 is observed for the main shaft (R) that the Blade Model (BM) uncer-
tainty has the lowest uncertainty and the Turbulence Intensity (TI) uncertainty has the
highest uncertainty. The combined uncertainty of WS, TI & BM is the red line that is
broader and the combination of all 3 uncertainties with its RUL mainly ranges between
5 and 40 years, while the curve is positively skewed similarly to the two uncertainties
combination of WS & TI.
Supplementary, the different penalty levels of the IEC are displayed on the figure and it
can be seen that the 1.05 and 1.10 penalty levels have a reasonable behaviour, whereas
the 1.15 and 1.20 penalty levels cannot be used so easily as a rough depiction of the
uncertainty.
Figure 5.33: Main Shaft (R) Lognormal Distribution of the High WS & High TI Un-
certainties and Blade Model Combined Uncertainties (steel, Wohler=4).
==PAGE:106==
5.7 BM, WS & TI RUL Unc. Combination
97
The tower top (N & K) can be seen in Figure 5.27 and for the combined effect uncertainty
has approximately a main RUL range between 5 and 35 years, while the TI uncertainty
has still the biggest contribution and the BM uncertainty has the smallest contribution
to the overall combined uncertainty.
For the IEC penalty levels it can be witnessed the as for the main shaft with the 1.05
and 1.10 provide us with an approximation of the RUL with a percentile closer to the
P50 values, whereas the 1.15 and 1.20 penalty levels provide us with percentiles moved
further away from the P50 value and closer to the P90.
Figure 5.34: Tower Top (N & K) Lognormal Distribution of the High WS &
High TI Uncertainties and Blade Model Combined Uncertainties (steel,
Wohler=4).
The Tower Foundation (F) is presented in Figure 5.28 and the main RUL range is approx-
imately between 5 and 45 years. The combined total uncertainty is influenced primarily
by the TI uncertainty, right after from the WS uncertainty and in the end from the BM
uncertainty. Aside from the F42 the other tower sections F21 & F63 aren’t presented
as this wouldn’t be possible due to that the thesis would have extended significantly.
The IEC penalty levels still present the same behaviour as previously but this time the
1.15 and 1.20 penalty levels are moved further away closer to the curve’s edges.
==PAGE:107==
98
5 Uncertainties in Remaining Useful Lifetime (RUL) Assessment
Figure 5.35: Tower Foundation (F) Lognormal Distribution of the High WS &
High TI Uncertainties and Blade Model Combined Uncertainties (steel,
Wohler=4).
The Tower Section at 42 m height (F42) is shown in Figure 5.29 as an example of how
this tower section is affected by the combined effect of wind speed, turbulence intensity
and blade mode. For the F42 component the results are similar to the tower foundation.
Figure 5.36: Tower Section at 42 m Height (F42) Lognormal Distribution of the High
WS & High TI Uncertainties and Blade Model Combined Uncertainties
(steel, Wohler=4).
==PAGE:108==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusions &
Recommendations
The analytical uncertainty assessment that was implemented in this thesis for the onshore
wind turbine (WTG) and the Remaining Useful Lifetime (RUL) and its components lead
us to the main conclusions that are presented below.
6.1
Comparison of Input Data Uncertainties
The comparison between the wind speed and turbulence intensity uncertainty showed
that the turbulence intensity uncertainty is the dominant input data uncertainty and
the influence of the turbulence intensity uncertainty in the RUL results is much bigger
than the influence of the wind speed uncertainty in the RUL results.
The variations from low to high input data uncertainty both for the wind speed and
turbulence intensity uncertainty shows that the RUL range increases as the uncertainty
changes from the low to the high uncertainty scenario. This can be observed from the
minimum and maximum values of the RUL if these two cases are compared.
6.2
Vulnerable to Failure WTG Components
The component that usually dictates the RUL, which occurs in this thesis as well and
henceforth the total lifetime of the wind turbine is the blade. This only applies if the
wind farm owner replaces the bolts of the blade soon after the 20th year of the total
lifetime, when the design lifetime is 20 years.
The remaining life time of the blade is usually lower compared to other components.
The tower and foundation have the largest lifetime, because the design loads are derived
under the assumption of uni-directional wind speed.
==PAGE:109==
100
6 Conclusions & Recommendations
6.3
Blade Model Uncertainty
The main conclusions of the blade model uncertainty is being presented in this section.
The blade model uncertainty is less important than the wind speed and turbulence in-
tensity individual uncertainties and also has a different sensitivity than those two. From
the results it was shown that in the Blade Model uncertainty the lower ratio between
the Design Loads & Site Loads is the one that determines the low uncertainty. Supple-
mentary, the A1 & A2 blade models are more sensitive to wind speed and turbulence
intensity uncertainty.
Additionally the design objectives were verified and achieved as it can be seen from the
results that were calculated. Analytically, the blade models were created with higher
energy yield or lower fatigue loading in mind, as for example the A5 was created for
lower fatigue blade & foundation loads and the A6 was created for higher energy yields.
The blade model that has the higher loads gives you higher energy yields.
6.4
Distribution of Uncertainties
The distributions of uncertainties that were applied in the thesis were the normal and
lognormal distributions. The wind speed RUL uncertainty can either be described well
from a normal distribution or a lognormal distribution with the normal distribution not
working sometimes so well for some wind turbine components. The lognormal distribu-
tion of the wind speed uncertainty is working well for all of the wind turbine components.
The turbulence intensity RUL uncertainty can be described well only from a lognormal
distribution, as the normal distribution isn’t a good fit for most of the wind turbine
components in the high uncertainty case. The normal distribution is a good fit for the
turbulence intensity uncertainty only for the blade bolts (steel, Wohler=4) and for the
blade (glass fiber, Wohler=10).
==PAGE:110==
6.5 Combination of Uncertainties
101
6.5
Combination of Uncertainties
The combination of uncertainties that was implemented throughout the thesis was about
combining individual uncertainties that were normally and lognormally distributed. From
this research it was found out that the turbulence intensity uncertainty that was lognor-
mal for most of the wind turbine components was combined with a lognormal distribu-
tion for the wind speed uncertainty. It should be noted that the wind speed uncertainty
could have been chosen to be described from a normal distribution fit.
Also, the research that it was performed showed that for the blade bolts and the blade
components a normal distribution can be used for both the wind speed and turbulence
intensity uncertainty and this was how the combination of these uncertainties occurred
for these two components.
6.5.1
Uncertainty Investigation
The Turbulence Intensity (TI) uncertainty that is used in the thesis is really a high
uncertainty, which is defined as such due to the fact that the turbulence at a wind site is
usually not measured throughout the years, even if there are wind turbines that operate
for many years.
6.5.2
Site Investigation - WS, TI & BM Uncertainties
The low WS & low TI uncertainty shows that this scenario when is combined with the
blade model uncertainty is representative of the North Germany flat terrain wind site
that it was mainly investigated in this thesis.
The high WS & high TI uncertainty when combined with the blade model uncertainty
is representative of a complex terrain wind site, which wasn’t the focus of this thesis.
A site that is in a flat terrain is a wind site that its wind conditions are typically known
very well. A site that its wind conditions are typically are not known very well is in a
complex terrain.
The high WS uncertainty and especially the high TI uncertainty as it was mentioned
refers to a complex terrain, so the combination of those two uncertainties can represent
the real wind conditions of a big wind farm with different wind turbine types or a wind
farm surrounded by forest that has a lake in near proximity.
==PAGE:111==
102
6 Conclusions & Recommendations
6.6
IEC Empirical methodology
The IEC empirical methodology is structured to take into account multiple input data
uncertainties (e.g. wind speed, wind shear, turbulence intensity). Furthermore, the IEC
method defines penalties to be applied on the RULs. As a consequence, application of
the penalty factors at sites with low uncertainty can give very conservative estimates
of the RUL. Even application of the lowest AAN factor may give a very conservative
estimate of remaining life time in this case, especially for the blade and the blade bolts.
The IEC AAN penalty levels table (see Figure 1.3) is recommended to have a smaller
range of numbers. Initially it ranges between 1.00-1.35, so it is recommended to range
between 1.01-1.30. Also its resolution or steps between each penalty level to be smaller,
which would mean to have in the end something like the following suggested values: 1.01,
1.03, 1.05, 1.10, 1.15, 1.20, 1.25 & 1.35.
Supplementary, it should be mentioned that in general the IEC method is structured in
such a way to behave better with the high uncertainty cases than with the low uncer-
tainty cases, which was verified in this thesis. More specifically, the standard deviation
is the uncertainty and it was used in the thesis for the wind speed for which it was 0.30
m/s and for the turbulence intensity for which it was 0.02. After this study the wind
speed and turbulence intensity standard deviations are considered to be on the lower end
of high uncertainty according to the IEC method. So in general higher uncertainty level
ranges for the input data uncertainties work in favor of the IEC empirical methodology.
In case the TI uncertainty is 0.01 the IEC empirical methodology works well, if there is
<0.01 then the IEC empirical methodology is conservative.
If the input data are of low uncertainty then the penalty levels would correspond to high
percentile values and if the input data are of high uncertainty levels it would correspond
to low percentile values.
In this part the IEC penalty levels are briefly analyzed on how they behaved for each
component of the wind turbine. For the blade bolts (S1 & B1, steel - Wohler=4) the IEC
penalty levels are very conservative and not applicable, so we end up with over conserva-
tive estimates of lifetime uncertainty. For the blade (S1 & B1, glassfiber - Wohler=10)
the IEC penalty levels can be used with caution. If the uncertainties are very large they
give results in the range of typical range of uncertainties. For the main shaft (R) it is
justified to apply the IEC penalty levels for the low and high uncertainty case. For the
other wind turbine components N&K, F, F2, F42 & F63 the IEC penalty levels behave
in a similar manner as in the case of the main shaft.
Overall, it is concluded that for the IEC penalty levels it can be very difficult to choose
reasonable factors, as in reality many more uncertainty sources both input data uncer-
tainties and model uncertainties exist in actual wind site conditions of existing or future
wind farm projects.
==PAGE:112==
6.7 Further Research
103
6.7
Further Research
Research could be implemented in the future to repeat the same load simulations and
derive the RULs for various different purposes. The effect of a complex terrain wind
site conditions could be explored and how the overall uncertainties are influenced by that.
Secondly, the IEC method can be implemented for higher uncertainties than the chosen
ones and how it functions in case the wind site is more difficult, like being on a steep
mountain side, close to another wind farm, in a forest or having in close proximity bod-
ies of water like rivers or lakes and how all of these site characteristics can affect the
uncertainty problem.
Also, the model uncertainties are recommended to be researched in greater detail, as
they are able to provide the feedback that is needed to understand better what role they
play in the overall combined uncertainty. For example the model controller uncertainty
and the tower model uncertainty of the wind turbine are interesting aspects of the overall
model uncertainty source.
==PAGE:113==
104
==PAGE:114==
Bibliography
[1]
Authors, Date of Publish: Document Title, City & Country, Responsible Organi-
zation Date of Publish, (Accessed: Month & Year of Access) Website_URL_for_
the_pdf_file_where_the_reader_can_refer_to_if_available
Guidelines
[2]
DNV GL AS, 2016: Standard DNVGL-ST-0262 Lifetime extension of wind tur-
bines, Oslo Norway, DNV GL 2016, (Accessed: January 2020) https://rules.
dnvgl.com/docs/pdf/DNVGL/ST/2016-03/DNVGL-ST-0262.pdf
[3]
DNV GL AS, 2016: Service Specification DNVGL-SE-0263 Certification of life-
time extension of wind turbines, Oslo Norway, DNV GL 2016, (Accessed: Jan-
uary 2020) https://rules.dnvgl.com/docs/pdf/DNVGL/SE/2016-03/DNVGL-
SE-0263.pdf
[4]
UL, 2018: UL 4143 Standard for Wind Turbine Generator - Life Time Ex-
tension (LTE), Illinois US, UL 2018, (Accessed:
January 2020) https://
standardscatalog.ul.com/standards/en/standard_4143_1
[5]
Promotion of Renewable Energy Act (Danish government) 2013:
Exec-
utive
Order
No.
73
on
a
technical
certification
scheme
for
wind
tur-
bines,
Copenhagen
Denmark,
Danish government 2013,
(Accessed:
Jan-
uary 2020) https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/Vindenergi/2013_05_07_
teknisk_bkg_engelsk_oversaettelse_070513.pdf
[6]
Megavind 2016:
Strategy for Extending the Useful Lifetime of a Wind
Turbine, Copenhagen Denmark, Megavind 2016, (Accessed:
January 2020)
https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/Forskning_og_udvikling/strategy_
for_extending_the_useful_lifetime_of_a_wind_turbine_2016.pdf
[7]
BWE-Bundesverband WindEnergie 2017: Basic Principles for Performing an As-
sessment and Verification of the Lifetime Extension of Onshore Wind Energy Con-
verters (BPW), Berlin Germany, BWE-Bundesverband WindEnergie 2017, (Ac-
cessed: January 2020) https://www.wind-energie.de/fileadmin/redaktion/
dokumente/publikationen-oeffentlich/arbeitskreise/weiterbetrieb/
Grundsaetze_Weiterbetrieb_04.2017_V6.3_final.pdf
==PAGE:115==
106
Bibliography
[8]
Nederlands Elektrotechnisch Comité 2016: NPR 8400 Principles and technical
guidance for continued operation of onshore wind turbines,
Delft Nether-
lands, Nederlands Elektrotechnisch Comité 2016, (Accessed:
January 2020)
https://docplayer.nl/116175620-Nederlandse-praktijkrichtlijn-npr-
8400-en-principles-and-technical-guidance-for-continued-operation-
of-onshore-wind-turbines.html
Academic Literature
[9]
Herman Frederik Veldkamp 2006:
phD thesis dissertation - Chances in
Wind Energy A Probabilistic Approach to Wind Turbine Fatigue Design,
Delft University of Technology Netherlands, TU Delft Library 2006, (Ac-
cessed: January 2020) https://repository.tudelft.nl/islandora/object/
uuid%3Af4a46812-8ad7-44e7-a04b-3e43d4e67fe4
[10]
Nicolai Cosack 2010: phD thesis dissertation - Fatigue Load Monitoring with
Standard Wind Turbine Signals, University of Stuttgart Germany, University
of Stuttgart Library 2010, (Accessed:
January 2020) https://d-nb.info/
1009926721/34
[11]
Ashim Giyanani 2013:
Master
thesis
-
A
concept
study
on
the
esti-
mation
of
occurrence
probability
of
wind
turbine
fatigue
loads
result-
ing
from
uncertainty
in
site
conditions,
Delft
University
of
Technology
Netherlands,
TU Delft Online Library 2013,
(Accessed:
January 2020)
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/265647292_A_concept_
study_on_the_estimation_of_occurrence_probability_of_wind_turbine_
fatigue_loads_resulting_from_uncertainty_in_site_conditions
[12]
Juan Pablo Murcia, Pierre-Elouan Réthoré, Nikolay Dimitrov, Anand Natarajan,
John Dalsgaard Sørensen, Peter Graf & Taeseong Kim 2017: phD thesis disserta-
tion - Uncertainty propagation through an aeroelastic wind turbine model using
polynomial surrogates, Department of Wind Energy, Technical University of Den-
mark (DTU) Denmark, Aalborg University Department of Civil Engineering &
National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL), Renewable Energy International
Journal 2018; Vol.119, pp. 910-922, (Accessed: January 2020) https://sfx.aub.
aau.dk/sfxaub?sid=pureportal&doi=10.1016/j.renene.2017.07.070
[13]
Lisa Ziegler, Elena Gonzalez, Tim Rubert, Ursula Smolkaa & Julio J. Melero
2017: phD thesis dissertation - Lifetime extension of onshore wind turbines: A
review covering Germany, Spain, Denmark, and the UK, Ramboll Wind, NTNU
Department of Civil and Transport Engineering, CIRCE – Universidad de
Zaragoza & Doctoral Training Centre in Wind and Marine Energy Systems, Uni-
versity of Strathclyde, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 2018; Vol.82,
pp. 1261-1271, (Accessed:
January 2020) https://www.researchgate.net/
publication/320557607_Lifetime_extension_of_onshore_wind_turbines_
A_review_covering_Germany_Spain_Denmark_and_the_UK
==PAGE:116==
Bibliography
107
[14]
Jacob Berg, Jakob Mann, Mark Kelly & Morten Nielsen 2017: Scientific Book:
Micro meteorology for Wind Energy, Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
Wind Energy 2018
[15]
New European Wind Atlas (NEWA) 2020: New European Wind Atlas Map, Eu-
ropean Commission, European Union NEWA 2020. (Accessed: February 2020)
https://map.neweuropeanwindatlas.eu/
IEC Standard
[16]
IEC Technical Committee (TC) 88 2019: IEC 61400-28-ED1:
Wind Energy
Generation Systems - Part 28 Through Life Management & Life Extension of
Wind Power Assets (Draft Version), International Electrotechnical Commission
(IEC) 2020, (Accessed:
May 2020) https://www.iec.ch/dyn/www/f?p=103:
38:14357358786788::::FSP_ORG_ID,FSP_APEX_PAGE,FSP_PROJECT_ID:
1282,23,101700
Generic Models
[17]
Mette Bischoff Kristiansen 2020: HAWC2 Aeroelastic Model DTU Riso Campus,
DTU Wind Energy 2020, (Accessed: March 2020) http://www.hawc2.dk/hawc2-
info
[18]
Jason Jonkman, Ph.D. 2020: FAST - An aeroelastic computer-aided engineering
(CAE) tool for horizontal axis wind turbines, National Wind Technology Center
2020, (Accessed: March 2012) https://nwtc.nrel.gov/FAST
[19]
LAC engineering A/S 2012: LACflex Technology - Aero-elastic Simulation Pro-
gram, Woodhead Publishing 2020, (Accessed: March 2020)
Other
[20]
David J. Murray-Smith 2012: View on Science Direct Modelling and Simulation of
Integrated Systems in Engineering 1st Edition - Issues of Methodology, Quality,
Testing and Application, Woodhead Publishing 2012, (Accessed: March 2020)
https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/engineering/generic-model
[21]
Mike Courtney 2019: Course 46400: Measurement Technique in Wind Energy-
Introduction to Measurement Uncertainty, Technical University of Denmark
(DTU) Wind Energy 2019
[22]
Konstantinos Missios & Georgios Kostopoulos 2018: Introduction to Micromete-
orology: Assignment 1, Technical University of Denmark (DTU) Wind Energy
2018
[23]
Konstantinos Missios & Georgios Kostopoulos 2018: Introduction to Micromete-
orology: Assignment 3, Technical University of Denmark (DTU) Wind Energy
2018
==PAGE:117==
108
Bibliography
Websites
[24]
Wikipedia 2020: Uncertainty Quantification, Wikipedia 2020, (Accessed: March
2020) https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uncertainty_quantification
[25]
LM Wind 2020:
What is a wind class?, LM Wind Power 2020, (Accessed:
April 2020) https://www.lmwindpower.com/en/stories-and-press/stories/
learn-about-wind/what-is-a-wind-class
[26]
ALTEN 2020:
Design of onshore wind turbines, ALTEN Group 2020, (Ac-
cessed:
May 2020) https://www.alten.com/sector/energy-environment/
design-of-onshore-wind-turbines/
[27]
Peng William W., Venkanna B.K., Turton, R.K., Rama, S.R. & Yahya S.M. 2020:
Blade solidity, Wikipedia 2020, (Accessed: May 2020) https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Blade_solidity
[28]
Johnson Norman L, Park Sung Y., Bera Anil K et. al. 2020: Log-normal distribu-
tion, Wikipedia 2020, (Accessed: May 2020) https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Log-normal_distribution
[29]
Henrik Bredmose 2020: 46211 Offshore Wind Energy: Rainflow counting Lifetime
fatigue Presentation, DTU Wind Energy 2020, (Accessed: January 2020)
[30]
SIMCENTER Community Article 2019:
Rainflow Counting, SIMCENTER
SIEMENS 2019, (Accessed: April 2020) https://community.sw.siemens.com/
s/article/rainflow-counting
[31]
SIMCENTER Community Article 2019: What is a SN-Curve?, SIMCENTER
SIEMENS 2019, (Accessed: April 2020) https://community.sw.siemens.com/
s/article/what-is-a-sn-curve
[32]
Shawn Sheng, William La Cava et. al 2011:
Technical Report:
Wind Tur-
bine Drivetrain Condition Monitoring During GRC Phase 1 and Phase 2
Testing, National Renewable Energy Laboratory 2011, (Accessed: April 2020)
https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Typical-utility-scale-wind-
turbine-drivetrain_fig5_255248098
==PAGE:118==
Bibliography
109
Aging Wind Turbine Statistics Report
[33]
Danish Energy Agency (DEA) 2020:
The Master Data Register of Wind
Turbines:
Data
on
operating
and
decommissioned
wind
turbines,
Min-
istry of Climate,
Energy and Utilities,
Denmark DEA 2020. (Accessed:
February 2020) http://windmonitor.iee.fraunhofer.de/windmonitor_en/
3_Onshore/2_technik/4_anlagengroesse/
[34]
Keiler & Haeuser 2018:
Turbine Size, Fraunhofer & Federal Ministry for
Economic Affairs and Energy, Germany Wind Monitor IEE 2018. (Accessed:
February 2020) http://windmonitor.iee.fraunhofer.de/windmonitor_en/
3_Onshore/2_technik/4_anlagengroesse/
[35]
Diffendorfer, J.E., Compton, R.W., Kramer, L.A., Ancona, Z.H. & Norton,
Donna 2015:
The U.S. Wind Turbine Database:
Onshore Industrial Wind
Turbine Locations for the United States to March 2014, United States Geo-
logical Survey, United States USGV 2014. (Accessed: February 2020) https:
//www.sciencebase.gov/catalog/item/55c4aa9be4b033ef52106e2f
[36]
Thomas Ackermann, Lennart Soder 2002: An overview of wind energy-status
2002, Royal Institute of Technology, Department of Electric Power Engineer-
ing Electric Power Systems, Stockholm Sweden Renewable & Sustainable En-
ergy Reviews 2002. (Accessed: February 2020) https://www.deepdyve.com/lp/
elsevier/an-overview-of-wind-energy-status-2002-P60b7iHf3N
Wind Turbine Models
[37]
Lucas Bauer & Silvio Matysik 2018: Wind Turbine Datasheet Specifications:
Bonus - B62 1.3 Wind Turbine Models 2018. (Accessed: February 2020) https:
//en.wind-turbine-models.com/turbines/1348-bonus-b62-1300
[38]
Lucas Bauer & Silvio Matysik 2011: Wind Turbine Datasheet Specifications:
Nordex - N60 Wind Turbine Models 2011. (Accessed: February 2020) https:
//en.wind-turbine-models.com/turbines/77-nordex-n60
[39]
Lucas Bauer & Silvio Matysik 2016: Wind Turbine Datasheet Specifications:
Siemens - SWT-1.3-62 Wind Turbine Models 2016. (Accessed:
February
2020) https://en.wind-turbine-models.com/turbines/1457-siemens-swt-
1.3-62
[40]
Lucas Bauer & Silvio Matysik 2018:
Wind Turbine Datasheet Specifica-
tions:
NEG
Micon
-
NM
72C
1.5
Wind Turbine Models 2018. (Ac-
cessed:
February 2020) https://www.thewindpower.net/turbine_en_487_
neg-micon_nm72-1650.php
[41]
Lucas Bauer & Silvio Matysik 2013: Wind Turbine Datasheet Specifications: GE
- 1.5S Wind Turbine Models 2013. (Accessed: February 2020) https://en.wind-
turbine-models.com/turbines/565-ge-general-electric-ge-1.5s
==PAGE:119==
110
Bibliography
[42]
Lucas Bauer & Silvio Matysik 2013: Wind Turbine Datasheet Specifications: GE
- 1.5SLE Wind Turbine Models 2013. (Accessed: February 2020) https://en.
wind-turbine-models.com/turbines/655-ge-general-electric-ge-1.5sle
[43]
Lucas Bauer & Silvio Matysik 2012: Wind Turbine Datasheet Specifications:
NEG Micon - NM 72 1.65 Wind Turbine Models 2012. (Accessed:
Febru-
ary 2020) https://en.wind-turbine-models.com/turbines/151-neg-micon-
nm-72c-1500
[44]
Lucas Bauer & Silvio Matysik 2015: Wind Turbine Datasheet Specifications:
Vestas - V66 1.75 Wind Turbine Models 2015. (Accessed:
February 2020)
https://en.wind-turbine-models.com/turbines/1292-vestas-v66-1.75
[45]
Lucas Bauer & Silvio Matysik 2015: Wind Turbine Datasheet Specifications: Ves-
tas - V80 1.8 Wind Turbine Models 2015. (Accessed: February 2020) https:
//en.wind-turbine-models.com/turbines/1350-vestas-v80-1.8
[46]
Lucas Bauer & Silvio Matysik 2014: Wind Turbine Datasheet Specifications: Ves-
tas - V90 1.8 Wind Turbine Models 2014. (Accessed: February 2020) https:
//en.wind-turbine-models.com/turbines/971-vestas-v90-1.8
[47]
Lucas Bauer & Silvio Matysik 2013: Wind Turbine Datasheet Specifications:
Gamesa - G87 Wind Turbine Models 2013. (Accessed: February 2020) https:
//en.wind-turbine-models.com/turbines/548-gamesa-g87
[48]
Lucas Bauer & Silvio Matysik 2013: Wind Turbine Datasheet Specifications:
Clipper - C93 Wind Turbine Models 2013. (Accessed: February 2020) ttps:
//en.wind-turbine-models.com/turbines/508-clipper-c93
[49]
Lucas Bauer & Silvio Matysik 2015: Wind Turbine Datasheet Specifications: Ves-
tas - V90 3.0 Wind Turbine Models 2015. (Accessed: February 2020) https:
//en.wind-turbine-models.com/turbines/603-vestas-v90-3.0
==PAGE:120==
CHAPTER 7
Appendix
In the appendix at first the report that was created during the thesis and aided on choos-
ing the right blade length, tower height and power output of the onshore wind turbine
is presented.
Additionally, the results of the LACflex simulations are presented for all of the onshore
wind turbine components in analytical tables.
7.1
Aging Wind Turbine Statistics Report
In the context of the master thesis a research about wind turbines overall and aging
wind turbines in particular was performed, so that the technical specifications of the
wind turbine model that will be used in the LACflex aero-elastic model, as well as an
overall understanding of the European & North American wind energy market will be
achieved. For this to be done a statistical assessment was implemented, so that the
necessary information will be derived and the 4.0.1 version of the Python programming
language was used.
The goal of this research was to investigate which were the common wind turbine power
output/ rated power & geometry that was using in the period 2000-2005, as this is the
timeframe of interest for the thesis, since the wind turbines from that era will reach their
end of life & will be examined for Lifetime Extension (LTE) in the following years dur-
ing the period 2020-2025. For this reason these wind turbines will be representative for
the academic & wind energy industry objectives that this master thesis wants to achieve.
The data sets that were used for the research were for Denmark [33], Germany [34] and
the United States [35] and were available for a long-term time period for each one of those
countries. More specifically, the Danish data were available in the period 01/06/1978-
20/12/2019 and were in total 6251 data, the German data were available since 1998
until 2018 and the United States data were available for the period from 1981 to 2014
and were 46201 data in total. It should be mentioned that the Danish & United States
data refer to still commissioned wind turbines for the year that these data were recorded,
collected & analyzed, which is January 2020 for Denmark and 2014 for the United States.
The German data were updated in 2018 and they refer to the wind turbine market in
Germany as a whole, without distinguishing between Commissioned & Decommissioned
==PAGE:121==
112
7 Appendix
wind turbines. [34] For Denmark and the United States the data for the decommissioned
wind turbines throughout the year can be found available on the same websites ([33],
[35]).
7.1.1
Data Investigation
The data from Denmark and the United States for the still commissioned wind turbines
in 2020 & 2014 respectively for the two countries are investigated and eventually filtered,
so that the results for the aging wind turbine research could be derived.
7.1.1.1
Denmark
In the case of Denmark the data didn’t require much of filtering, as they were already in
a good state that allowed a direct assessment. For this reason the 2000 - 2005 data that
were used were 1321 or 21.13 % in total from all the 40 years of available data and from
those the results of the analysis that are presented below were derived. In Figure 7.1
the data for Denmark for the still commissioned in 2020 wind turbines are shown.
Figure 7.1: 1981-2014 data in Denmark for still commissioned in 2020 wind turbines.
==PAGE:122==
7.1 Aging Wind Turbine Statistics Report
113
7.1.1.2
United States
In the case of the United States most of the data were in a manageable state but a
significant portion required to be excluded or edited, so that they would be able to be
processed afterwards and a small number decided to be excluded. Most of the data it
was decided that it was better to include them in our statistical assessment, as they
still contained useful information for our research. For these reasons the commissioned
& decommissioned data were separated in the commissioned dataset that is going to
be investigated and filtered in the next steps. It is mentioned that the US data of the
commissioned & decommissioned wind turbines are shown in Figure 7.2 (a) and the
commissioned wind turbines together with the unknown data are shown in Figure 7.2
(b).
(a) Commissioned & decommissioned WTGs
(b) Commissioned & unknown WTGs
Figure 7.2: Initial 1981-2014 wind turbine data in the US prior to filtering.
Analytically, the US wind turbine data that were edited had the issue that the first
or initial year of operation either wasn’t included or it was specified as range of years,
which were corresponding to 7220 data in total and represented 15.63 % of the whole
US commissioned wind turbine dataset. The cases with the unknown year data were
not taken into account that corresponded to 477 data in total and represented 1.03 % of
the US commissioned wind turbine dataset, but the data with the range of years were
sliced into yearly data. This means that all of the data that were included in this range
of years were sliced into as many yearly batches as those years were. For example if
the year period was from 1981-1995 then the data were separated in 15 different year
batches of roughly equal data size. In Figure 7.3 the US data are presented after all the
filters that were discussed applied on them.
==PAGE:123==
114
7 Appendix
Figure 7.3: Filtered 1981-2014 data in the US for still commissioned in 2020 wind
turbines.
This assumption of splitting the year in equal size data batches, we are aware that
might create some statistical deviation from the reality, but it was deemed better than
completely excluding the data. Supplementary, there were many entries in all of the
other parameters in the US data that contained -99999 values, which were replaced to
not be taken into account with NaN values for improved data handling in Python.
Henceforth, the 2000 - 2005 US data that were used, were 5578 or 12.07 % in total from
all the 33 years of available data and from those the results of the analysis that are
presented in the following sections were derived.
7.1.2
Longterm Statistical Data Analysis
The plots based on the German & US data from 1998-2018 & 1981-2014 respectively are
presented in this section for an overall understanding & overview of the German & US
wind energy markets will be established by the reader. The data that had been analyzed
refer to the wind turbines in Germany that were last updated in 2018 and in the US
energy market that were erected in the period 1981 to 2014 and they were still erected
in 2014 when the data were updated.
==PAGE:124==
7.1 Aging Wind Turbine Statistics Report
115
7.1.2.1
Germany 1998-2018 & 2000-2005 Assessment
At first it should be clarified that the plots for Germany that have been used below were
taken from the Wind Monitor website and they weren’t created by the student like the
rest of the plots of the wind energy market data analysis of Denmark & US. [34]
The technical characteristics and specifications of the wind turbines in Germany for the
period 1998-2018 are presented in Figure 7.4 and Figure 7.5. It can be clearly seen that
there is a continuous trend of the the rotor diameter & hub height increasing through-
out this 20 year period that is depicted in Figure 7.4. More specifically, in the period
2000-2005 the tower/ hub height is shown to vary between 72 m to 88 m and the rotor
diameter to be in the range of 58 m to 75 m.
Also, between 2004 to 2008 a plateau can be witnessed that shows that the wind turbine
development when it comes down to the size due to technology advances and regulations
it has halted temporary. The reason behind that plateau was that the 2.0 MW-3.0 MW
wind turbines were fairly new and had not broadly used from the industry. So there
was the need from the companies to wait for the technology to get more mature over a
certain period of time and for the wind turbines of that size to be proven to be more
reliable, before they could be mass produced & mass installed in wind sites.
Figure 7.4: Development in Germany of wind turbine dimensions in 1998-2018 [34].
In Figure 7.5 the trend of the continuous increasing installed capacity in Germany is
shown for 1998 to 2018 and the year of introduction of each different type of rated power
wind turbine can be seen clearly on the plot. Between 2000-2005 the 1.0-2.0 MW wind
turbines were the vast majority of the wind energy market, with the 2.0-3.0 MW wind
turbines start been introduced in this period. Also, the 0.5-1.0 MW were a significant
portion of the market.
==PAGE:125==
116
7 Appendix
Figure 7.5: WTG installed capacity cumulated depicitation in Germany in 1998-2018
[34].
7.1.2.2
United States 1981-2014
The technical characteristics and specifications of the wind turbines in the United States
are presented in this section for the case of the Commissioned WTGs. The technical
specifications of the wind turbines that are analyzed are the following:
• Blade length (m)
• Rotor diameter (m)
• Total height (m)
• Tower height (m)
• Power output (MW)
• Tower type/ foundation
==PAGE:126==
7.1 Aging Wind Turbine Statistics Report
117
Blade Length & Rotor Diameter The blade length and rotor diameter sizes that
had been used in the wind turbines in US between 1981-2014 can be seen in Figure 7.6.
(a) Blade length (m)
(b) Rotor diameter (m)
Figure 7.6: WTG blade & rotor sizes in 1981-2014.
Total & Tower Height The total height and tower/ hub height that had been used
in the wind turbines in US between 1981-2014 can be seen in Figure 7.7.
(a) Total height (m)
(b) Tower/ Hub height (m)
Figure 7.7: WTG total & tower heights in 1981-2014.
==PAGE:127==
118
7 Appendix
A zoomed in version of the total height & tower height plots is provided in Figure 7.8,
so that the reader will be able to distinguish the trend of the wind turbines with lower
heights.
(a) Total height (m)
(b) Tower/ Hub height (m)
Figure 7.8: WTG total & tower heights in 1981-2014 (Zoomed).
Power Output & Tower Type The power output that had been used in the wind
turbines in US between 1981-2014 are shown in Figure 7.9 together with the different
tower types/ foundations.
(a) Power Output (MW)
(b) Tower Type/ Foundations
Figure 7.9: WTG power outputs & tower types in 1981-2014.
==PAGE:128==
7.1 Aging Wind Turbine Statistics Report
119
7.1.3
2000-2005 Data
The plots based on the US & Danish data from 2000-2005 are presented in this section for
an overall understanding & overview of these two wind energy markets will be established
by the reader. Also, the 2000-2005 is the time period that is of particular interest for
the master thesis, as these are the wind turbines that are going to be decided if they will
participate in a Lifetime Extension (LTE) in the period 2020-2025. This is the reason
why this section has been explained and analyzed more than the previous one, as the
Conclusion section is strongly based on it. It should be mentioned that Germany is not
included here, as it has been analyzed for the period 2000-2005 in the previous section.
7.1.3.1
Denmark
The technical characteristics and specifications of the wind turbines in Denmark are
presented in this section for the case of the Commissioned WTGs. The technical speci-
fications of the wind turbines that are analyzed are the following:
• Rotor diameter (m)
• Tower height (m)
• Power output (MW)
Rotor Diameter The rotor diameter sizes that had been used in the wind turbines in
Denmark between 2000-2005 are shown in Figure 7.10. Analytically, as the figure shows
the rotor sizes from 42 to 55 m were dominant in Denmark in this time period with the
80 to 85 m rotors to consist also a significant part of the market.
Figure 7.10: WTG rotor diameter in 2000-2005.
==PAGE:129==
120
7 Appendix
Tower Height The tower heights that had been used in the wind turbines in Den-
mark between 2000-2005 is shown in Figure 7.11. The tower or hub heights of the wind
turbines varied in the range of 42 to 50 m. And there was quite an important number of
wind turbines with tower heights from 68 to 72 m height. The tallest hub heights arose
up to 80 m.
Figure 7.11: WTG tower height in 2000-2005.
Power Output The power output that had been used in the wind turbines in Den-
mark in the period 2000-2005 is shown in Figure 7.12. The power output of the wind
turbines that were broadly used were ranging between 500 kW/ 0.5 MW to 1000 kW/
1.0 MW, so they refer to small wind turbines.
As the master thesis focuses on the wind turbines that are going to reach the end of
their lifetime by 2020-2025 and beyond in most of the wind energy markets, these smaller
wind turbines are of less importance. As most of them have reached or are about to
reach their end of lifetime. Even for those smaller wind turbines in this range that will
not reach their end of lifetime soon, the interest to include them in lifetime extension
plans is low, as there are not high financial returns from such an action. This means
that wind turbine installations of bigger power output are of more interest to the wind
energy industry due to that factor. The next most popular power output that was used
at the time is the 2.0 MW, the 2.3 MW, the 1.3 MW and the 1.5 MW wind turbines.
==PAGE:130==
7.1 Aging Wind Turbine Statistics Report
121
Figure 7.12: WTG power output in 2000-2005.
Top 5 WTG Manufacturers The top 5 manufacturers that had been selling the
most wind turbines in Denmark in the period 2000-2005 can be seen in Figure 7.13. It
can be witnessed that the Danish manufacturers are dominant in Denmark as expected
with some of them now being former Danish manufacturers that have been merged from
SIEMENS in the case of BONUS in 2004 and from Vestas in the case of NEG Micon in
2004 as well. NEG Micon had the most installed wind turbines in those years, but with
lower power output models & Vestas was the second in line. The German Nordex had
a significant portion of the Danish market at the time.
Figure 7.13: Top 5 WTG manufacturers in Denmark in 2000-2005.
==PAGE:131==
122
7 Appendix
Top 5 WTG Models of the Top 5 WTG Manufacturers The top 5 wind
turbines of the top 5 manufacturers that had been selling the most in Denmark in the
period 2000-2005 can be seen in Figure 7.14. The NEG Micon with the NM 48/750 &
NM 52/900 and Vestas with the V47 wind turbine models, were the most installed wind
tubines at the time.
Figure 7.14: Top 5 WTG models of the Top 5 WTG manufacturers in Denmark in
2000-2005.
7.1.3.2
United States
The technical characteristics and specifications of the wind turbine market in Denmark
for the commissioned WTGs in the period 2000-2005 is analyzed in the following subsec-
tions. Blade Length & Rotor Diameter The different blade lengths and the different
sizes of the rotor diameter of the various wind turbines for the period 2000-2005 is shown
below in Figure 7.15. The dominant blades are the ones with 35 to 42 m length and the
23 m blades are the best sellers. Similarly, the rotors with diameters 47 to 50 m, 60 to
62 m and 70 to 72 m are the most popular. A big portion of the market belongs to the
78 to 82 m rotors.
==PAGE:132==
7.1 Aging Wind Turbine Statistics Report
123
(a) Blade length (m)
(b) Rotor diameter (m)
Figure 7.15: WTG blade & rotor sizes in 2000-2005.
Total Height & Tower Height The total height and tower/ hub height that were
used in the wind turbines in US between 2000-2005 are shown in Figure 7.16. For the
total height the 98-100 m wind turbines are the majority with the 75 m total height
coming second. An important portion of the market belongs to the 112 to 122 m total
height wind turbines. For the tower/ hub height the 65 to 72 m towers and 80 m height
towers are the vast majority of the market. In less percentages come next the 48 to 50
m and 58 to 60 tower heights.
(a) Total height (m)
(b) Tower/ Hub height (m)
Figure 7.16: WTG total & tower heights in 2000-2005.
Power Output & Tower Type The power output that had been used in the wind
turbines in US in the period 2000-2005 is presented in Figure 7.17 together with the
different tower types/ foundations. The dominant power output for the US wind energy
market is the 1.5 to 1.65 MW wind turbines with the 0.6-0.7 MW wind turbines coming
afterwards with smaller market share. As for the tower types / foundations that are
used in US almost all of them are monopoles.
==PAGE:133==
124
7 Appendix
(a) Power Output (MW)
(b) Tower Type/ Foundations
Figure 7.17: WTG power outputs & tower types in 2000-2005.
Top 5 WTG Manufacturers The top 5 manufacturers that had been selling the
most wind turbines in US in the period 2000-2005 are shown in Figure 7.18. The 1st
manufacturer in US at the time was Vestas with General Electric (GE) coming closely
being the 2nd and Mitsibushi is the 3rd in the order with significantly less market share.
Figure 7.18: Top 5 WTG manufacturers in Denmark in 2000-2005.
==PAGE:134==
7.1 Aging Wind Turbine Statistics Report
125
Top 5 WTG Models of the Top 5 WTG Manufacturers The top 5 wind
turbines of the top 5 manufacturers that had been selling the most in Denmark in the
period 2000-2005 can be seen in Figure 7.19. Reflecting the top 5 manufacturers trend
the best seller wind turbine in US was at that time the V47 wind turbine, with the
GE-1.5S & the GE-1.5SLE coming 2nd & 3rd respectively. It should be noted that the
2 GE models if they summed up they exceeded in numbers the Vestas V47 wind turbine
model.
Figure 7.19: Top 5 WTG models of the Top 5 WTG manufacturers in US in 2000-2005.
7.1.4
Wind Turbines Exceeding Design Lifetime
In this part from the US & Danish data the histograms for the wind turbines that have
exceeded their design lifetime are created. The design lifetime for the onshore wind
turbines before 2005 was 20 years. The wind turbines that had a 25 year design lifetime
started to arise after 2005. A similar analysis like previously is being done for this part
and the interest is to quantify the wind turbine portion that have managed to exceed
its design lifetime and if it is possible to determine their characteristics.
The Danish data have been updated in 2019, so the wind turbines that are still in
operation in 2019 and have exceeded their design lifetime are those that have been
initially commissioned between 1978-2000. The US data have been updated in 2014, so
the wind turbines that are still in operation in 20014 and have exceeded their design
lifetime are those that have been initially commissioned between 1981-1994. The 1995
year is included as well.
==PAGE:135==
126
7 Appendix
7.1.4.1
Danish data 1978-2000
For the Danish data the 1978-2000 period is being analyzed and the results are presented
below.
Figure 7.20: WTG rotor sizes in Denmark in 1978-2000.
Figure 7.21: WTG hub heights in Denmark in 1978-2000.
==PAGE:136==
7.1 Aging Wind Turbine Statistics Report
127
Figure 7.22: WTG power output in Denmark in 1978-2000.
Figure 7.23: Top 5 manufacturers WTG in Denmark in 1978-2000.
==PAGE:137==
128
7 Appendix
7.1.4.2
US data 1981-1995
For the US data the 1981-1995 period is being analyzed and the results are presented
below.
Figure 7.24: WTG rotor sizes in US in 1981-1995.
Figure 7.25: WTG hub heights in US in 1981-1995.
==PAGE:138==
7.1 Aging Wind Turbine Statistics Report
129
Figure 7.26: WTG power output in US in 1981-1995.
Figure 7.27: Top 5 WTG manufacturers in US in 1981-1995.
==PAGE:139==
130
7 Appendix
Figure 7.28: Top 5 models of the Top 5 WTG manufacturers in US in 1981-1995.
7.1.5
Conclusion
In this section of the Danish, German & US wind turbine statistics the overall results
and conclusions are shown in tables. The recommended design of the wind turbine that
will be used in the master thesis will be the outcome of the analysis of the tables of
each country, where the typical wind turbines are analytically presented. Also, the most
popular top wind turbine models of the top manufacturers of the 2000-2005 era are
analyzed. In the end from the analytical tables, the wind turbine models study and the
thesis objectives the wind turbine characteristics will be decided, which the wind turbine
that will be implemented in the LACflex generic aero-elastic model is going to have.
7.1.5.1
Denmark, Germany & US Typical Wind Turbine Generators
The typical wind turbines of each country are going to be presented & analyzed. The
outcome of this analysis will be Table 7.4 that includes the average of all typical wind
turbines that represent each one of the 3 countries that had been researched during the
thesis.
For Denmark in Table 7.1 the basic characteristics of a typical wind turbine of the
period 2000-2005 can be seen, which was resulted from an extensive analysis of the
derived histograms that were created & presented in the previous sections.
==PAGE:140==
7.1 Aging Wind Turbine Statistics Report
131
Table 7.1: Data Based Danish Typical WTG (2000-2005).
Rated Power (MW)
Rotor Diameter (m)
Tower Height (m)
1.00
54
52
2.00
82
70
For Germany in Table 7.2 the basic characteristics of a typical German wind turbine of
the period 2000-2005 can be seen that was concluded from the data derived from the
histograms of the Wind Monitor IEE website.
Table 7.2: Data Based German Typical WTG (2000-2005).
Rated Power (MW)
Rotor Diameter (m)
Tower Height (m)
1.00
58
71
2.00
73
89
For the United States in Table 7.3 the basic characteristics of a typical German wind
turbine of the period 2000-2005 can be seen, which as for Denmark it was the result of
an extensive investigation of the histograms presented in the previous sections.
Table 7.3: Data Based USGV Typical WTG (2000-2005).
Rated Power (MW)
Rotor Diameter (m)
Tower Height (m)
1.20
60
66
1.60
72
80
From the Danish, German & US typical wind turbines that were presented in Table 7.1,
Table 7.2 & Table 7.3 it can concluded that a representative wind turbine for the generic
wind turbine model that will be implemented for our aero-elastic simulations in LACflex
will have a power output from 1.4 to 1.5 MW, a rotor diameter between 62-67 m & a
tower height in the range of 68-72 m. The average values of all the typical wind turbines
are shown in Table 7.4.
Table 7.4: Average of the 3 Countries Typical WTGs (2000-2005).
Rated Power (MW)
Rotor Diameter (m)
Tower Height (m)
1.50
66
71
7.1.5.2
Popular Onshore Wind Turbine Models Investigation
In this subsection an investigation of the specific wind turbine models that have been
used between 2000 to 2005 in the wind energy markets of Denmark, Germany and US is
being completed for the most popular onshore wind turbine models of these 3 countries.
For this reason the top manufacturers of that era in those countries were located and
==PAGE:141==
132
7 Appendix
the top wind turbines that were using in the range of 1.3 to 2.0 MW power output were
included as representative of that era. Also, for the reader understand the market, the
onshore wind turbines that exceeded the 2.0 MW power output and then at that time
maxed at 3.0 MW have been included for a brief comparison with the smaller power out-
put models. It should be stated at the time that the dominant onshore wind turbines
had a power output of 1.0-2.0 MW and with the 2.0 MW models be in a very limited
availability from the manufacturers, as not enough confidence had been built from the
wind energy industry at that time.
Supplementary, the tower heights & rotor diameters had started to increase in the 2000-
2005 period as the onshore wind turbines could not be erected on the coastal areas that
had been broadly occupied by previous wind energy projects. Therefore the trend was
for the wind turbines to move further inland, where more turbulent wind was encoun-
tered & lower wind regime could be found. This signified that the tower heights had to
increase to harness less turbulent & more steady wind, while the rotor diameters had to
increase in size, so that they will produce similar amounts of electrical energy out of the
wind in sites that had lower wind.
In Table 7.5 the most popular WTG models in Denmark, Germany & US in the 2000-
2005 period & resulted from our research are presented with the respective codes used
in Table 7.6.
Table 7.5: 2000-2005 Wind Turbine Models.
WTG Model
Code
WTG Model
Code
Bonus - B62 1.3 [37]
B62
Vestas - V66 1.75 [44]
V66
Nordex - N60 [38]
N60
Vestas - V80 1.8 [45]
V80
Siemens - SWT-1.3-62 [39]
S62
Vestas - V90 1.8 [46]
V90-1.8
NEG Micon - NM 72C 1.5 [40]
NM72C
Gamesa - G87 [47]
G87
GE - 1.5S [41]
GE-S
Clipper - C93 [48]
C93
GE - 1.5SLE [42]
GE-SLE
Vestas - V90 3.0 [49]
V90-3
NEG Micon - NM 72 1.65 [43]
NM72
-
-
==PAGE:142==
7.1 Aging Wind Turbine Statistics Report
133
The parameters of the WTG models that were found during the country research that was performed are presented in
Table 7.6. The WTG models are a result of the most frequently used WTGs that Denmark, Germany and US were using
between 2000-2005.
Table 7.6: Data Based Analytical Table with all of the Wind Turbine Models (2000-2005).
WTGs
RD
THOs
SA
RP
PD
PD
Max RS
TS
U in
cut
URated
U out
cut
Units
(m)
(m)
(m2)
(MW)
(W/m2)
(m2/W)
(U/min)
(m/s)
(m/s)
(m/s)
(m/s)
1.3 MW
B62
62
68/80/90
3019
1.3
430.60
2.32
19.0
62
3.0
15
25
N60
60
60/65/69/85
2827
1.3
459.78
2.17
19.2
60
2.5
15
25
S62
62
68/90
3019
1.3
430.60
2.32
19.0
62
3.0
14
25
Mean
61
-
2955
1.3
440.01
2.27
19.1
61
2.8
14.7
25
1.5 MW
NM72C
72
64/80/98
4072
1.5
368.41
2.71
17.3
65
3.0
13
20
GE-S
70.5
64.7/80/85/100
3904
1.5
384.26
2.60
22.2
82
4.0
13
25
GE-SLE
77
61.4/64.7/80/85
4657
1.5
322.12
3.10
20.4
82
3.5
12
25
Mean
73
-
4204
1.5
356.76
2.80
20.0
76
3.5
12.7
23.3
1.65-1.8 MW
NM72
72
70/93
4072
1.65
405.25
2.47
-
-
5.0
14.5
25
V66
66
60/67/78
3421
1.75
511.52
1.95
24.4
84
4.0
16
25
V80
80
60/67/78
5027
1.80
358.10
2.79
16.8
70
4.0
15
25
V90-1.8
90
80/95/105
6362
1.80
282.94
3.53
14.9
70
3.5
12
25
Mean
77
-
4657
1.75
375.81
2.66
18.7
74.7
4.1
14.4
25
2-3 MW
G87
87
67/78/100
5945
2.00
336.43
2.97
19.0
87
4.0
13
25
C93
93
80
6793
2.50
368.03
2.72
15.5
75
4.0
12.5
25
V90-3
90
80/105
6362
3.00
471.57
2.12
18.4
87
4.0
15
25
Mean
90
-
6362
2.5
392.98
2.54
17.6
83
4.0
13.5
25
Data parameter abbreviation explanation: WTGs: Wind Turbine Generators, RD: Rotor Diameter, THOs: Tower/ Hub Height Options, SA: Swept Area, RP: Rated
Power, PD: Power Density, Max RS: Maximum Rotor Speed, TS: Tip Speed, Uin
cut: Cut-in Wind Speed, URated: Rated Wind Speed and Uout
cut : Cut-out Wind Speed.
==PAGE:143==
134
7 Appendix
7.1.5.3
LACflex Wind Turbine Model
In this last section the wind turbine model that has been selected for the LACflex generic
aero-elastic model and will be implemented during the simulations is presented. The
chosen wind turbine is the result of the aforementioned research and analysis, while its
justification is influenced from the intended goals that the thesis is desired to achieve
that are closely related to the IEC and the wind energy industry upcoming needs that
will arise in the following years around the lifetime extension (LTE) of wind turbines.
The selected wind turbine is representative of the 2000-2005 era in both the European
& North American markets and there is strong similarity with wind turbine models that
will be investigated for lifetime extension in the 2020-2025 period.
In Table 7.7 the chosen wind turbine with its technical specifications is presented. It was
decided to be an 1.8 MW model as it is right in the middle of the models of the era and
it is slightly bigger than the typical wind turbine. However, after 2005 the 2.0 MW wind
turbines started to be installed more broadly, so this makes an 1.8 MW onshore wind
turbine a good starting point and a good match for the thesis. Also, the rotor diameter
was decided to be 80 m as the rotor diameter of that era was slightly smaller, but the
trend in the following years after 2005 was for the rotor size to continue on increasing.
Lastly, the tower height was chosen to be 90 m that is bigger than the average height,
because the wind turbines started to become taller the following years and is more of a
typical height for onshore installations.
Table 7.7: LACflex Wind Turbine Model.
Rated Power (MW)
Rotor Diameter (m)
Tower Height (m)
1.80
80
90
7.2
RUL Results
The results of the LACflex generic aeroelastic model simulation and the post-processing
procedure with the Python tools are shown for the 4th and 10th Wohler exponent in the
Appendix section.
The calculated loads are presented analytically for all of the wind turbine components
except the tower in Table 7.8 and the Remaining Useful Lifetime is similarly presented
in Table 7.9.
==PAGE:144==
7.2 RUL Results
135
Table 7.8: All of the wind turbine components ratio of fatigue loads results.
Ratio of Fatigue Loads (−), Wohler (W)=4
Load
Uncert-
Blade
Blade
Main
Tower Top
ainty Cases
Bolts (W=4)
(W=10)
Shaft R
N & K
Wind Speed Uncertainty
Site Ref.
4aNorth P50
0.9492
0.8705
0.8131
0.7398
Site
WS Low P10
0.9408
0.8585
0.7930
0.7214
Site
WS Low P30
0.9459
0.8660
0.8053
0.7326
Site
WS Low P70
0.9528
0.8753
0.8215
0.7474
Site
WS Low P90
0.9575
0.8823
0.8334
0.7584
Site
WS Medium P10
0.9367
0.8520
0.7829
0.7121
Site
WS Medium P30
0.9445
0.8639
0.8017
0.7294
Site
WS Medium P70
0.9546
0.8784
0.8264
0.7520
Site
WS Medium P90
0.9614
0.8883
0.8434
0.7676
Site
WS High P10
0.9321
0.8459
0.7727
0.7027
Site
WS High P30
0.9423
0.8605
0.7963
0.7244
Site
WS High P70
0.9563
0.8806
0.8303
0.7556
Site
WS High P90
0.9661
0.8956
0.8556
0.7788
Turbulence Intensity Uncertainty
Site
TI Low P10
0.9357
0.8195
0.7580
0.6827
Site
TI Low P30
0.9435
0.8495
0.7900
0.7157
Site
TI Low P70
0.9552
0.8926
0.8374
0.7646
Site
TI Low P90
0.9635
0.9255
0.8724
0.8006
Site
TI Medium P10
0.9385
0.8294
0.7689
0.6942
Site
TI Medium P30
0.9408
0.8376
0.7785
0.7041
Site
TI Medium P70
0.9580
0.9034
0.8489
0.7766
Site
TI Medium P90
0.9709
0.9527
0.9017
0.8303
Site
TI High P10
0.9232
0.7660
0.7027
0.6246
Site
TI High P30
0.9381
0.8284
0.7677
0.6928
Site
TI High P70
0.9610
0.9155
0.8614
0.7891
Site
TI High P90
0.9786
0.9792
0.9331
0.8622
Blade Model Uncertainty
Site
BM A1/4aNorth P50
0.9492
0.8705
0.8131
0.7398
Site
BM A2
0.9578
0.9478
0.8291
0.7401
Site
BM A3
0.9687
0.8815
0.8525
0.7683
Site
BM A4
0.9641
0.8835
0.8465
0.7702
Site
BM A5
0.9658
0.9653
0.8507
0.7627
Site
BM A6
0.9624
0.8774
0.8466
0.7665
==PAGE:145==
136
7 Appendix
Table 7.9: All of the wind turbine components RUL results.
Remaining Useful Lifetime - RUL (years), Wohler (W)=4
Load
Uncert-
Blade
Blade
Main
Tower Top
ainty Cases
Bolts (W=4)
(W=10)
Shaft R
N & K
Wind Speed Uncertainty
Site Ref.
4aNorth P50
3.1385
23.6839
25.7536
27.3691
Site
WS Low P10
3.7918
27.0656
30.5645
32.3761
Site
WS Low P30
3.3964
24.9344
27.5642
29.2449
Site
WS Low P70
2.8722
22.3541
23.9022
25.4463
Site
WS Low P90
2.5246
20.5167
21.4541
22.8947
Site
WS Medium P10
4.1327
28.9769
33.2229
35.1751
Site
WS Medium P30
3.5042
25.5529
28.4046
30.1203
Site
WS Medium P70
2.7365
21.5440
22.8714
24.3659
Site
WS Medium P90
2.2493
18.9882
19.5195
20.8662
Site
WS High P10
4.5148
30.8766
36.0973
38.1771
Site
WS High P30
3.6817
26.4896
29.7319
31.5005
Site
WS High P70
2.6149
20.9652
22.0680
23.5307
Site
WS High P90
1.9249
17.1950
17.3166
18.5561
Turbulence Intensity Uncertainty
Site
TI Low P10
4.3441
34.5439
40.5726
45.3145
Site
TI Low P30
3.6394
27.9910
31.3233
34.0746
Site
TI Low P70
2.6322
19.5252
20.6753
21.5199
Site
TI Low P90
1.9405
14.2469
14.5284
14.5379
Site
TI Medium P10
4.0884
32.0948
37.2087
41.0984
Site
TI Medium P30
3.8758
30.1866
34.4389
37.7097
Site
TI Medium P70
2.3912
17.6548
18.5016
19.0065
Site
TI Medium P90
1.3541
10.2691
10.2481
9.8449
Site
TI High P10
5.5201
46.6954
62.0399
73.2114
Site
TI High P30
4.1173
32.3906
37.5743
41.5899
Site
TI High P70
2.1484
15.8567
16.3242
16.5805
Site
TI High P90
0.7644
2.7398
6.3765
5.6719
Blade Model Uncertainty
Site
BM A1
3.1385
27.0656
30.5645
27.3691
Site
BM A2
2.6540
7.9103
22.3198
26.8691
Site
BM A3
1.7234
9.0932
17.8622
19.1384
Site
BM A4
1.8244
26.7676
18.9565
19.3441
Site
BM A5
2.1926
5.8792
18.1921
19.6979
Site
BM A6
2.2078
10.0856
18.9337
19.5064
For the tower and its various tower sections the calculated loads are presented analyti-
cally in Table 7.10 and its Remaining Useful Lifetime is presented in Table 7.11.
==PAGE:146==
7.2 RUL Results
137
Table 7.10: Tower wind turbine components ratio of fatigue loads results.
Tower Ratio of Fatigue Loads (−), Wohler=4
Tower Foundation F and Tower Sections at
21 m (F21), 42 m (F42) & 63 m (F63) height
Load
Uncert-
Tower
Tower
Tower
Tower
ainty Cases
Found. F
Section F21
Section F42
Section F63
Wind Speed Uncertainty
Site Ref.
4aNorth P50
0.7929
0.7979
0.7892
0.7628
Site
WS Low P10
0.7786
0.7844
0.7757
0.7488
Site
WS Low P30
0.7873
0.7925
0.7839
0.7572
Site
WS Low P70
0.7989
0.8035
0.7949
0.76863
Site
WS Low P90
0.8072
0.8111
0.8027
0.7767
Site
WS Medium P10
0.7713
0.7776
0.7688
0.7417
Site
WS Medium P30
0.7849
0.7903
0.7816
0.7549
Site
WS Medium P70
0.8023
0.8065
0.7980
0.7718
Site
WS Medium P90
0.8140
0.8175
0.8091
0.7833
Site
WS High P10
0.7637
0.7703
0.7615
0.7342
Site
WS High P30
0.7810
0.7867
0.7780
0.7511
Site
WS High P70
0.8050
0.8091
0.8006
0.7746
Site
WS High P90
0.8223
0.8251
0.8168
0.7914
Turbulence Intensity Uncertainty
Site
TI Low P10
0.7453
0.7501
0.7397
0.7101
Site
TI Low P30
0.7735
0.7776
0.7674
0.7418
Site
TI Low P70
0.8141
0.8189
0.8095
0.7835
Site
TI Low P90
0.8461
0.8479
0.8391
0.8161
Site
TI Medium P10
0.7546
0.7598
0.7502
0.7229
Site
TI Medium P30
0.7641
0.7686
0.7596
0.7326
Site
TI Medium P70
0.8248
0.8285
0.8203
0.7941
Site
TI Medium P90
0.8706
0.8716
0.8625
0.8416
Site
TI High P10
0.6915
0.6978
0.6874
0.6591
Site
TI High P30
0.7535
0.7586
0.7487
0.7218
Site
TI High P70
0.8350
0.8384
0.8292
0.8050
Site
TI High P90
0.8957
0.8960
0.8881
0.8661
Blade Model Uncertainty
Site
BM A1
0.7929
0.7979
0.7892
0.7628
Site
BM A2
0.7978
0.8054
0.7905
0.7648
Site
BM A3
0.8114
0.8246
0.8041
0.7787
Site
BM A4
0.8040
0.8097
0.7961
0.7721
Site
BM A5
0.7974
0.8070
0.7885
0.7669
Site
BM A6
0.7993
0.8061
0.7930
0.7704
==PAGE:147==
138
7 Appendix
Table 7.11: Tower wind turbine components RUL results.
Tower Remaining Useful Lifetime - RUL (years), Wohler=4
Tower Foundation F and Tower Sections at
21 m (F21), 42 m (F42) & 63 m (F63) height
Load
Uncert-
Tower
Tower
Tower
Tower
ainty Cases
Found. F
Section F21
Section F42
Section F63
Wind Speed Uncertainty
Site Ref.
4aNorth P50
30.5792
29.3494
31.5441
39.0808
Site
WS Low P10
34.4053
32.8173
35.2457
43.6202
Site
WS Low P30
32.0490
30.6878
32.9708
40.8232
Site
WS Low P70
29.0761
27.9822
30.0862
37.2999
Site
WS Low P90
27.1062
26.1964
28.1802
34.9640
Site
WS Medium P10
36.4899
34.6969
37.2541
46.0906
Site
WS Medium P30
32.6960
31.2701
33.5932
41.5909
Site
WS Medium P70
28.2801
27.2675
29.3212
36.3542
Site
WS Medium P90
25.5473
24.7865
26.6753
33.1165
Site
WS High P10
38.7967
36.7911
39.4896
48.8279
Site
WS High P30
33.7465
32.2213
34.6089
42.8380
Site
WS High P70
27.6123
26.6575
28.6717
35.5631
Site
WS High P90
23.7409
23.1505
24.9304
30.9780
Turbulence Intensity Uncertainty
Site
TI Low P10
44.8007
43.1838
46.7859
58.3146
Site
TI Low P30
35.8689
34.6914
37.6742
46.0658
Site
TI Low P70
25.5224
24.4647
26.5711
33.0798
Site
TI Low P90
19.0207
18.6947
20.3368
25.0885
Site
TI Medium P10
41.6750
40.0224
43.1456
53.2301
Site
TI Medium P30
38.6565
37.3163
40.059
49.4439
Site
TI Medium P70
23.2028
22.4484
24.1771
30.2887
Site
TI Medium P90
14.8062
14.6520
16.1410
19.8684
Site
TI High P10
67.4534
64.3721
69.5914
85.9925
Site
TI High P30
42.0274
40.3751
43.6590
53.6653
Site
TI High P70
21.1350
20.4722
22.3112
27.6225
Site
TI High P90
11.0699
11.0296
12.1465
15.4598
Blade Model Uncertainty
Site
BM A1
30.5792
27.5409
31.5441
39.0808
Site
BM A2
29.3731
23.2531
31.2248
38.4678
Site
BM A3
26.1209
26.5347
27.8369
34.4016
Site
BM A4
27.8541
27.1607
29.7911
36.2784
Site
BM A5
29.4698
27.3533
31.7359
37.8111
Site
BM A6
29.0068
26.8654
30.571
36.7649
==PAGE:148==
CHAPTER 8
STATEMENT OF
AUTHENTICATION
Erklärung:
Hiermit versichere ich, dass ich diese Arbeit selbständig verfasst und keine anderen als
die angegebenen Quellen und Hilfsmittel benutzt habe. Außerdem versichere ich, dass
ich die allgemeinen Prinzipien wissenschaftlicher Arbeit und Veröffentlichung, wie sie in
den Leitlinien guter wissenschaftlicher Praxis der Carl von Ossietzky Universität Olden-
burg festgelegt sind, befolgt habe.
Confirmation / Statement of Authentication:
I hereby confirm that this Master Thesis with the title ’Uncertainties in the assessment
of remaining wind turbine lifetime’ is entirely my own work. I confirm that no part of the
written submission has been copied from either a book or any other source, including the
internet, except where such sections are clearly marked as quotations, and the sources
have been correctly identified within the text or in the list of references. Moreover, I
confirm that I have followed the guidelines of good scientific practice of the University
of Oldenburg (“Leitlinien guter wissenschaftlicher Praxis der Carl von Ossietzky Univer-
sität Oldenburg“) and the Technical University of Denmark (DTU).
Location: Burchardstraße 13, 20095 Chile House Hamburg
Date: 03/07/2020
Signature: Georgios Kostopoulos
==PAGE:149==
140
==PAGE:150==
==PAGE:151==
