==PAGE:1==
hhTechnical
hhUniversity of
hhDenmark
Analysis of additional power as well as
infrastructure requirement by Denmark to
attain 50% renewable energy share by 2030
Focus on wind as an energy source
A thesis submitted in fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of
Master of Science in Environmental Engineering, DTU Environment
August 8, 2020
Author:
Ushma Ahuja
Supervisor:
Anders Damgaard
==PAGE:2==
c
==PAGE:3==
DTU Environment
Department of Environmental Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
DTU Environment
Bygningstorvet
Bygning 115
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
info@env.dtu.dk
www.env.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Project Plan
Following is the project plan submitted within a month of starting the Master’s thesis.
The final document has been created by observing the objectives framed at the initial
phase of the study.
• The project will focus on evaluating the energy gap that needs to be fulfilled
between the current renewable energy sector as compared to what would be
required in order to meet the goals set by Denmark for 2030. Denmark has
decided to reduce its carbon-based fuel emissions by switching to renewable
energy, thereby incorporating at least 50% of renewable based energy into its
energy grid by 2030. The alternate/ greener/ renewable energy will be a mix of
various sectors including wind, solar, bio, hydro, heat pumps and geothermal.
• The transition to cleaner energy would mean investment in infrastructure that
will support the energy requirements. This raises the concern about net infras-
tructure cost and additional emissions that will be caused while setting up the
source/equipment for energy generation. Also touching upon the resource angle
i.e., excess amount of resources that need to be used in order to come up with
something that is green/sustainable in terms of infrastructure (exploitation).
For example, in the case of wind turbines, looking at different LCA studies and
characterizing the different resources that will be contributing to the develop-
ment.
• Through this report, different LCA studies will be analyzed (for respective
energy sectors) to find suitable trajectories that can be considered in order to
obtain the best possible outcome. After assessing the findings, a sector-wise
split up will be devised which would present the best way to move forward.
• Lastly, the comparative concept of achieving green economy with respect to
fossils used to build these renewable infrastructures will be looked into. For
example, UNs (Copenhagen based) project rollout for the oil sector, where a
sharp increase in oil needs is observed even though the goal set for 2030 is less
than 10 years away.
==PAGE:5==
ii
==PAGE:6==
Executive Summary
Harnessing energy through natural intermittent resources is gaining momentum in
order to limit the release of greenhouse gas emissions to the atmosphere.
With
widespread application of renewables, decarbonisation of the energy sector is antici-
pated to be a crucial step for creating a sustainable future. Policies like ”Sustainable
Development Scenario” which aims to attain net zero CO2 in terms of energy emission
by 2070, are forming the basis of transformation. Europe in general has adapted poli-
cies and laws to support the same and is actively exploring the potential of renewable
energy sources like hydro, wind, biomass, solar and geothermal.
Denmark is reportedly way ahead of many European countries and aims to at-
tain a carbon neutral society by 2050. In a span of 25 years (from 1990 to 2016),
the country recorded a 74% decrease in its carbon footprint resulting from electricity
production. At present, renewable energy production constitutes more than 40% of
the gross energy consumption of the country and by 2030, Denmark expects to incor-
porate 50% of renewable energy on its power grid. The mentioned renewable share
will include the demands of sectors like electricity, transport, heating and industry.
To achieve reliability within the renewable sector a combination of limiting resources
like bioenergy and waste, with plentiful renewables like wind and solar will be im-
plemented. Owing to the long coastline and relatively flat landscape, wind energy
will be a dominant source of greener alternative. In order to meet the defined tar-
gets, approximately 1̃3,000 MW of additional capacity will have to be installed and
operational by 2030. Together with the existing production and specified additional
requirements, the wind industry will be providing Denmark with 50 TWh of energy
by the end of 2030.
As both onshore and offshore sources have the potential of expansion, 3 scenarios
have been constructed with three different capacities for both sources. Based on the
existing and upcoming turbine models 8, 11 and 14 MW capacity for offshore and
3.6, 4.3 and 10 MW for onshore has been selected. A mix of the these capacities has
been formulated in order to evaluate the optimal production share of sea and land
based turbine. This mix has been further analyzed to find out the infrastructural
consequences to the environment, in the form of iron consumption and CO2 & COD
emission. Iron consumption and CO2 emissions are found to be higher for offshore
turbines, thus implying a carbon intense establishment process for an offshore plant.
Moreover, through the analysis it has also been found that resource extraction and
end of life are the two high impact phases that define the environmental affects caused
by the turbine.
==PAGE:7==
iv
Executive Summary
By evaluating varied shares of onshore and offshore based energy contributions
to the power grid, an ideal scenario for the coming years has been devised. Going
forward, this scenario indicates the offshore share to be between 50 to 75% and that
of land based between 25 to 50%. According to which Denmark will be looking at
adding between 1,424 to 2,849 onshore turbine. Higher number of onshore turbines
apart from consuming and producing more resources and emissions, also requires
land. Bringing into focus the important aspect of siting. Due to land constrictions,
the possibility of generating offshore energy turns out to be a more viable option.
With 567 to 788 turbines required for providing 50 to 75% offshore energy generation,
the sector has the ability to bring down excessive land use. Therefore, establishing
the correct balance between onshore and offshore infrastructure keeping in mind the
production capacity becomes crucial.
==PAGE:8==
Preface
This thesis was researched and prepared at the Department of Environment, Technical
University of Denmark. The report submitted is in fulfillment of the requirements for
acquiring a two-year Master’s degree in Environment Engineering.
The content of this thesis analyzes Denmark’s renewable energy requirements for
2030, with the aim of attaining a 50% renewable energy based power grid. At the
end, 3 different scenarios are evaluated which deal with varying shares of onshore and
offshore energy contribution. Throughout the study, special focus has been placed on
wind as a source of renewable energy due to its abundance in the Danish context. The
report can be divided into three parts: energy consumption patterns of the country,
analysis of the wind sector (onshore and offshore) including emission production and
resource consumption during the life cycle of wind turbines and lastly inclusion of
wind energy in the national power grid.
Being an Environmental Engineering student, the topic of this study has been very
inspiring for me. Upcoming technologies and innovations have the potential to predict
sustainable energy trends and this master’s thesis has tried shed some light about the
same. Denmark’s reputation and efforts to incorporate greener alternatives is well
known but the planning that goes behind it may not be as evident to the public.
Through my work I aspire to explain the relevance of renewable energy in layman
terms.
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
August 8, 2020
Ushma Ahuja
==PAGE:9==
vi
==PAGE:10==
Acknowledgements
I would like to start by extending my sincerest gratitude towards my supervisor Dr.
Anders Damgaard, whose invaluable insights and knowledge of his field and beyond
have resulted in the inception of this study. The open door policy, timely meetings
and thorough feedback of my work have given me a deeper perspective about my
work and most importantly moulded me into a better engineer. I highly appreciate
his continuous guidance and support throughout my journey.
I would also like to thank my family for creating a warm and encouraging at-
mosphere with their kind words, love and patience.
My friends from school and
bachelor’s who were always up for virtual gatherings during the pandemic, thank you
all for the fun times. Having thanked my Indian friends, it would be unfair for me to
not mention the international set of friends I made during my time at DTU who have
inspired me with their experiences and stories. And most importantly, I would like
to express my heartfelt thanks to my boyfriend for being a breath of fresh air when
my stress levels shot through the roof.
Lastly, I would like to thank the institution of DTU and my fellow Environmental
Engineering colleagues who made me believe that if we all did our share, the world
can become a better place indeed.
==PAGE:11==
viii
==PAGE:12==
Contents
Project Plan
i
Executive Summary
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
Contents
ix
Abbreviations
xi
Glossary
xiii
List of Tables
xv
List of Figures
xvi
1
Introduction
1
2
Background and Literature
5
2.1
Global Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
European Union
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Denmark
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Methodology
15
3.1
Consumption Patterns and Future Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Wind Energy and LCA Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Danish Power Grid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Renewable Energy Demands
19
4.1
Renewable Share . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2
Overview of Additional Energy Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5
Wind as an Energy Source
27
5.1
Grid Integration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2
Wind Turbines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
==PAGE:13==
x
Contents
5.3
High Impact Life Cycle Stages
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6
Wind Energy on the Danish Power Grid
41
6.1
Proposed Grid Scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.2
Resource and Emission Consequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.3
Siting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
7
Discussion
53
8
Conclusion
57
9
Bibliography
59
A Appendix
65
A.1 Appendix A- Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
A.2 Appendix B- Renewable Energy Demands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
A.3 Appendix C- Wind as a Source of Energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
A.4 Appendix D- Wind Energy on the Danish Power Grid . . . . . . . . .
67
==PAGE:14==
Abbreviations
Abbreviation
Description
CO2
Carbon Dioxide
COD
Chemical Oxygen Demand
DEA
Denmark’s Energy Agency
DECO18
Denmark’s Energy and Climate Outlook 2018
DSO
Distribution System Operators
EC
European Council
EEA
European Environmental Agency
EoL
End of Life
ETS
Emission Trading System
EU
European Union
kWh
Kilowatt hour
LCA
Life Cycle Assessment
LCIA
Life Cycle Impact Assessment
MW
Megawatt
PV
Photo Voltaic
RES
Renewable Energy Share
RES-DH
Renewable Energy Share for District Heating
RES-E
Renewable Energy Share for Electricity
RES-I
Renewable Energy Share for Industry
RES-T
Renewable Energy Share for Transport
SDS
Sustainable Development Scenario
TSO
Transmission System Operator
TWh
Terawatt hour
==PAGE:15==
xii
==PAGE:16==
Glossary
A glossary has been provided taking into consideration the readers convenience. Im-
portant policies and definitions can be found here in case clarity is not established in
the text:
• Gross electricity generation is represented as the production of electricity
from plants using different types of fuels and is measured at the outlet of the
main transformer. These fuel sources can range from coal, oil, nuclear, natural
gas to renewables like solar, wind, hydro, biomass, geothermal and waste [EEA,
2018].
• 450 Scenario represents a set of policies that are implemented on a global scale
to limit the increase in global average temperatures to 2°C and the chances of
success are assumed to be 50% consistent with the goal [IEA, 2019].
• Non-ETS sector comprises of the transport, agriculture, most of the produc-
tion and waste management sector [Klimarådet, 2017].
• Element of transition are climate-friendly changes being adapted by Den-
mark within their production and consumption needs in order to cut down on
greenhouse gas emissions [Klimarådet, 2017].
• Within the electricity sector, transmission system operator (TSO) is re-
sponsible for handling the transmission of power from generation units to re-
gional electricity distribution system operator (DSO), who then develop-
s/operates/maintains a transmission line for distribution of wind power to the
vicinity [EWEA].
==PAGE:17==
xiv
Glossary
==PAGE:18==
List of Tables
2.1
Renewable electricity generation in EU, for 2005 and 2016 [EEA, 2015] . .
10
2.2
Elements of transition with major emission reduction potential [Klimarådet,
2017] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.1
Energy production for electricity requirements of 2030 . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Energy consumption by the transport sector in 2017 and 2030 . . . . . . .
24
4.3
Energy production for transportation requirements of 2030
. . . . . . . .
24
4.4
Energy production for heat requirements of 2030 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.5
Energy production for industry requirements of 2030 . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.6
Aggregate energy production requirements by all sectors for 2030 in MW
26
5.1
CO2 produced to generate 1 MWh of electricity through different energy
sources [EWEA]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Amount of energy produced by wind turbines (%), corresponding to the
net production total of electricity supply in Denmark [DEA Statistics, 2020] 30
5.3
Resource consumption of offshore and onshore turbines having different
capacity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.4
Air emissions caused by offshore and onshore turbines having different
capacity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.5
Water emissions caused by offshore and onshore turbines having different
capacity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.6
Global warming potential of different onshore and offshore wind turbines
throughout their life cycle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.7
Breakdown of material composition used to produce an offshore wind tur-
bine [MaterialUse, 2018] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.8
End of life treatment of different materials used in a wind turbine (data
compiled from [Irving, 2016 and VestasWind, 2006]) . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.1
Energy generation potential of different renewable sources based on their
capacity factors by 2030 [Trent, 2014, Lavidas, 2020, Europe, 2018] . . . .
42
6.2
Evolving offshore capacity and annual energy production of Siemen Gamesa’s
wind turbines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.3
Overview of 3 different scenarios under consideration, with different per-
centages of onshore and offshore share . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.4
Shortlisted onshore and offshore capacities for wind grid analysis . . . . .
46
==PAGE:19==
6.5
Amount of turbines required to fulfil scenario demands based on varying
contribution of shortlisted capacities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.6
Iron consumed and CO2 & COD emissions produced during the life cycle
of different turbines
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.7
Total Iron resources consumed and CO2 & COD emissions produced ac-
cording to defined cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
List of Figures
2.1
Source of energy production in EU, from 2005 and 2016 . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.1
Source of energy consumption in Denmark over the last decade (Appendix
A.2) [DEA Statistics, 2020]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Monthly (Jan-April) comparison of energy consumption in Denmark, for
2019 and 2020 (Appendix A.2) [DEA Statistics, 2020]
. . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3
Source of energy consumption in Denmark predicted for the coming years
(Appendix A.2) [DECO, 2019]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.4
Renewable energy shares for 2020-30 (Appendix A.2) [DECO, 2019]
. . .
22
5.1
Offshore wind turbine trend over two decades in Denmark (Appendix A.3)
[DEA overview, 2020]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.2
Active turbines in Denmark and their collective capacities (Appendix A.3)
(as of May 2020 [DEA overview, 2020])
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.3
Representation of an offshore wind turbine [Gamesa] . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.4
Environmental impacts caused by different life stages presented in the form
of global warming contribution (g CO2 eq/kWh) for an offshore turbine
[Gamesa]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Not a long time ago, our energy resources and power production was entirely depen-
dent on the fossil industry, and to a large extent it still is. Domination of coal, oil
and natural gas in the energy and transport sector powered the industrial revolution
for more than a century [Azar and Schneider, 2002].
These anthropogenic activi-
ties caused an imbalance of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, leading to warming
of Earth’s temperatures [EIA, 2020; Wuebbles and Jain, 2001]. The disturbances
were not just limited to global warming, thereby influencing regional and local en-
vironmental concerns like air pollution, ozone depletion, deforestation, acidification
of freshwater resources and many more [Dincer, 2000]. As scientists started digging
deeper into the alterations of the global climate, it became clear that non-fossil based
alternatives had the potential of being the future of energy generation.
In the recent years, advancement in technologies and considerable amount of re-
search has emphasised the advantages of renewable alternatives. These alternatives
have the capacity to limit the release of greenhouse gas emissions by harnessing sus-
tainable sources such as water (hydro), solar, wind, geothermal, wave, biomass, etc.
Additionally, the power generated through these naturally available resources can be
utilized in many sectors including vehicle application, domestic as well as industrial
purposes, navigation and aeronautical applications, as well as replacement of conven-
tional sources for power generation [Dincer, 2000; Dincer and Rosen, 2005; Midilli
et al., 2006].
In foresight, decarbonisation of the energy sector is anticipated to be a crucial
step for creating a sustainable future. Thus, making it high on the agenda of many
international organizations and taking the centerstage in most of the worlds leading
economies, including Denmark. The importance of switching to greener options has
also been recognised in developing countries, where 80% of the worlds population re-
sides [Ountries et al., 2002]. The interdependency of energy and resources on social,
environmental and economic betterment, makes it important to develop a sustainable
model, thus promoting a circular economy. Ideally, a transition towards sustainable
energy focuses on reducing impacts on natural habitats, minimizing emission to the
environment, availability and supply of sustainable resources and economic reason-
ability [Dincer, 2000]. Moreover in 1987, the World Commission officially coined the
definition for sustainable development as, ”The development that meets the needs of
the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own
needs”, guiding the worlds attention towards a common future [UN, 1987].
==PAGE:21==
2
1 Introduction
Denmark, when it comes to decarbonisation, is one of the EU member states
which is working progressively to cut down on its carbon footprint. Within a span
of 25 years i.e., 1990 to 2016, Denmark has recorded a 74% decrease in their carbon
intensity resulting from electricity production [EEA, 2015]. According to directives
defined by the EU in 2009, 30% of the Danish electricity load, by the end of 2020, was
to be derived from renewables [Danish Energy Agency, 2018]. This milestone was ful-
filled before the said time frame and an ambitious goal about achieving an extended
target was announced in 2016. The announcement saw the Danish government tak-
ing this step forward and making a decision of producing 50% of the required energy
through renewable sources for the entire country, by 2030 [Danish Government, 2016].
Furthermore, with the aim of achieving zero CO2 emissions resulting from electricity
production in the longer run, the government has introduced policies and subsidies
encouraging the use of renewables. While short-term regulations are specific to in-
vestments and institutionalizing collaborations, long-term regulations aim to attract
new initiatives [Danish Energy Agency, 2018].
Currently in the Danish context, estimations of reduction are already established
however what lacks is the approximation of extent of emissions that will arise as a part
of the process. For instance, as renewables are incorporated into the energy system
additional emissions will be evident for fulfilling infrastructural requirements. These
emissions will be generated from the industry, service and transportation sectors in
order to lay the foundation for building a carbon neutral nation.
The process of
transition will also have an impact on the natural resources available, land use to set
up renewable energy farms and freshwater availability, to name a few.
In order to navigate through such pressing issues, this master’s thesis will act
as an analytical guide for the reader. This will be done by investigating Denmark’s
potential to reach its sustainability targets by 2030, through answering the following:
• Evaluating the energy gap between the current renewable energy sector and
the targeted ”50% renewable energy grid” to be achieved by 2030. Hereafter,
special emphasis will be placed on wind energy due to its dominance in the
Danish renewable market.
• Analyzing the net emissions that will be generated while setting up the infras-
tructure for energy generation, through available LCA studies.
• Assessment of exploitation of resources that will be required to build additional
turbines to achieve the sustainable energy model, through available LCA stud-
ies.
• Finding a suitable mix of wind energy grid that can be considered in order to
obtain the best possible outcome with minimum damage to the natural resources
and atmosphere.
• Potential onshore and offshore contribution to the renewable sector split up will
be devised, which would present the best way to move forward.
==PAGE:22==
1 Introduction
3
The report is structured to give some context about the growing energy needs
and historic data in Chapter 2- Background.
This section talks about the global
projections then narrows down to highlight the European situation and finally ad-
dresses Denmark’s policies. After which, the Methodology (Chapter 3) explains the
process through which information was gathered and data was analyzed using excel
tools. From here onwards the chapters elaborate on the objectives of the reports.
Chapter 4 on Renewable Energy Demands, addresses the historic consumption pat-
terns of Denmark as well as the requirements for additional renewable energy within
various sectors. This is followed by Chapter 5, which focuses on Wind as a Source of
Energy. Both onshore and offshore generation patterns are discussed in this section,
along with turbine production factors (through LCA studies). The previous topics
and findings are then combined together in Chapter 6 where additional demands
required for meeting 2030 target are discussed and 3 scenarios are elaborated upon.
The results are then collectively elaborated on in the discussion section (Chapter 7).
Finally, Chapter 8 puts forward some findings and suggestions as conclusion.
==PAGE:23==
4
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 2
Background and
Literature
As the world processes the adverse effects of non-renewable fossil resources on the
present day environment and humankind, making a shift towards renewables is tak-
ing the lead. Researchers all around the globe are exploring methods to minimize
the impacts on the environment and optimize the efficiency of naturally existing
substitutes. Fortunately, in a diverse geographical context like ours, energy can be
generated by a varied spectrum of options, depending on the abundance of resource
available in the surrounding [Dincer and Rosen, 2005]. For example, in Denmark,
local wind farms located near the shore often contribute towards the national power
grid, thus create job opportunities for the masses living in remote areas and giving
rise to small businesses [DEA].
Over the years, electricity generation has become less carbon intensive. There has
been a significant decrease in the amount of CO2 emissions from public electricity
production for every kWh of gross electricity produced which is measured at the
production outlet. This is due to the fact that renewables have been finding their way
on to the market by providing cleaner energy. In 2016, renewable electricity in Europe
constituted almost 29% of the gross electricity generation, which has been possible
because of the ground breaking developments in the research sector concerning storage
issues and improved efficiencies. Apart from a technical perspective, renewables are
also a boon to the economy. Inclusion of renewables as an energy source ensures
reliable supply of energy and a somewhat stable price range. Unlike the oil market
where drastic fluctuations are a common sight which ultimately lead to unstable
economies [EEA, 2016; EEA, 2018].
The following sections will summarize the developments taking place around the
world, European Union’s policies and Denmark’s approach.
2.1
Global Overview
Society at large, is paving the path towards climate consciousness and a change in
mindset with heightened urgency can be observed globally. From climate strikes led
by students, to the European Parliament announcing climate emergency in Europe
[European Parliament, 2019], these are just a few examples of actions resulting from
==PAGE:25==
6
2 Background and Literature
public pressure [Maersk, 2020]. Outcomes of such uprisings are impactful as laws
are getting stricter in terms of CO2 tax increases, compensation for climate damages
and mandatory sustainability education. Regulations banning single use plastic and
phasing out fossil fuel cars are also appealing to the consumer ethics.
Besides activism based contributions, public also plays an important role in deter-
mining the demand for green energy. Their requirements and consumption patterns
are important to develop a potential energy model. Increase/decrease in forecasts
for population density influences planning and investments in the renewable sector.
Information as such also exposes new challenges, for instance 1.3 billion of the world’s
population will not have access to electricity by 2030, indicating lack of infrastructure
and outreach in the energy sector [Birol, 2010]. To understand the current situation,
the sections below give an overview of where we stand today as a society with respect
to the energy needs.
2.1.1
Growing Energy Needs and Challenges
An important aspect when it comes to energy generation and consumption is the fast
paced development of cities around the world. Along with planning, commissioning
and designing, the architecture of a growing city comes from the extensive use of
resources. Be it fuel for transportation or minerals for construction, all of these have
an energy intensive process of extraction and can produce high amounts of emissions
during their life cycle (or sometimes end of life). Once cities are developed, the process
of inhabitation, provision of utilities and maintaining the standard of living comes into
play. These necessities are crucial for the well functioning of a society, taking up a high
amount of power from the grid. For example, in 2018, 1/5th of energy consumption
worldwide was due to extreme weather conditions, as scorching summers increased
the load on cooling and freezing temperatures pushed up the heating needs. Over the
years the energy intensity rates are flattening, with less improvements or upgrades in
technology. In 2018, the energy used per economic activity went down to 1.2% from
almost 2.4% in 2010. Lack of improvements in the energy efficiency technologies are
a major cause of concern as they are predicted to bring down the energy intensity
by 3% annually.
Similarly, strategic designing, utilization and alternative end of
life scenarios can increase the material efficiency, which can help curb the emissions
produced from the material production sector (a term used to promote an efficient
life cycle, from designing to recycling, of materials like plastic, steel, cement, paper,
aluminum, etc.).
With focus shifting towards sustainable electric cars, the oil utilization for pas-
senger cars paves way for renewable and hydrogen based electricity sources. Thus
phasing out a substantial amount of fuel consumption by 2040. Despite emphasis
on greener energy sources by 2030, United States will be responsible for the increase
in global oil and gas production by 85% and 30%, respectively. The shale products
will be exported around the world, making US an indirect contributor to the rise in
emission values. Indicating a long path ahead before shifting to a circular economy
==PAGE:26==
2.1 Global Overview
7
[IEA, 2019].
On a positive note, populous Asian countries (mainly India and China) are gradu-
ally taking the lead in renewable energy production by optimizing their exploitation
of natural resources to power almost 36% of the world population [UN-DESA, 2019].
Renewable sectors like wind and solar are expected to bloom due to technical advance-
ments and cost efficiencies, thus making China and India responsible for producing
more than half of the additional renewable power by 2040, on the global market [IEA,
2019].
However, as the expansion of the renewable sector continues to take place, more
energy will be produced and hence new challenges will surface. Starting from the
development of storage facilities due to the inconsistency and fluctuations of power
generation through renewable sources. Which will be followed by a market for grid
integration of new energy generation units to the power grids. And finally protection
of the data privacy of consumers of the industry.
2.1.2
450 Scenario and Sustainable Development Scenario
The 450 scenario of 2009 represents a set of policies that are implemented on a global
scale to limit the increase in global average temperatures to 2°C and the chances of
success are assumed to be 50% consistent with the goal [IEA, 2019]. According to the
450 scenario, by 2030, zero carbon fuels (i.e., having no net greenhouse gas emissions)
will represent a third of worlds primary sources of energy demand [Birol, 2010]. Some
of these are already an integral part of the energy and transportation market, the
classics being biofuels, hydrogen (for fuel cells), and electricity generated through
renewables [EESI].
Owning to drastic developments, alternatives are catching up
with (and in some countries taking over) the conventional fuels. For example, the
efforts of commercializing biofuels in the next generation vehicle models or improving
the efficiency on combustion engines. Such alternate and improved technologies will
contribute towards 56% reduction in emissions by 2030, relative to 2007. With a
stringent policy adherence and focus on sustainable energy at a global level, it will
be possible to generate 60% of electricity through renewables, nuclear and CCS by
2030 [Birol, 2010]. Due to the slow paced results of 450 scenario in 2019 an updated
version of the 450 scenario was introduced, known as the Sustainable Development
Scenario (SDS). SDS was in alignment with the Paris agreement and emphasised on
the global transformation of the energy system by 2050 in order to comply with the
Sustainable Development Goals. SDS in comparison to 450 scenario looks at higher
than expected CO2 emission stand point, which means the reduction in emissions will
have to be reinforced to a great extent. Additionally, SDS aims to attain net zero
CO2 in terms of energy emission, 30 years prior by 2070 as compared to what was
initially decided in the 450 scenario. And most importantly, energy generation source
in the SDS is adapted to be majorly dependent on wind and solar power instead of
450’s carbon capture technology and nuclear power [IEA, SDS, 2019].
==PAGE:27==
8
2 Background and Literature
2.2
European Union
2.2.1
2030 Climate and Energy Strategy
In October 2014, new policy frameworks for climate and energy were agreed upon
by the European Commission. These policies were specific to the period between
2020-2030, aimed at actions that would create a competitive, secure and sustainable
environment for the EU energy system. This entire structure of reforms and policies
was ultimately coined as the basis of the new global climate change agreement [EC,
2014; European Council, 2017]. As per the framework, 4 crucial agreements were
finalized keeping in mind the long term goals for 2050 i.e., an 80-95% greenhouse gas
reduction in comparison to 1990. And since a reduction of such high value demands
investment in new and improved technology, the 2030 targets are set as a milestone
(stated below) [EC, 2014]:
• A 40% reduction of greenhouse gas emissions by 2030 in comparison to the
emission levels of 1990.
• At least 27% of EU’s energy consumption to be derived from renewable sources
by 2030.
• At least 27% improvement in energy efficiency by 2030.
• Coorperation between member states for completion of 15% of electricity inter-
connection targets by 2030.
2.2.2
Carbon Intensity
In the recent years, carbon intensity has been decreasing rapidly owning to the invest-
ments in improved technologies and the increase in efficiency of new infrastructure.
According to data, generation of electricity was responsible for the production of
296 gCO2/kWh across EU in 2016.
This value was 44% less as compared to the
gCO2/kWh generated in 1990. The countries dependent on heavy fossil based fuels
for their electricity production had a higher carbon intensity contribution as compared
to the countries which had incorporated renewables or nuclear energy into their na-
tional electricity grid. The range of variation has been extremely wide with Estonia
producing 821 gCO2/kWh as compared to Sweden who produced 13 gCO2/kWh in
2016 [EEA, 2015].
2.2.3
EU ETS
The EU Emissions Trading System (ETS) also played an important role in curbing
the greenhouse gas emissions by implementing a cap and trade system. Under this
scheme, a set amount of allowances are available on the market for companies to
avail, allowing EU to monitor and limit the emissions to the atmosphere. Companies
==PAGE:28==
2.2 European Union
9
and industries that are a part of this system can utilize their emission allowance or
trade them with other companies for a value. This tactic forces them to utilize their
allocated share meticulously or risk paying hefty fines. The cap on allowed emissions
keeps on getting smaller over time, thus forcing companies to invest in cleaner low
carbon energy.
At present, EU ETS covers 45% of greenhouse gas emissions produced by EU
member states, Iceland, Norway and Liechtenstein. These emissions, often referred
to as sectors, consist of measured and verified carbon dioxide (CO2), nitrous oxide
(N2O) and perfluorocarbons (PFCs) that are emitted due to power and heat, commer-
cial aviation, metal production, oil refineries, and many other chemical production
activities. By 2030, the EU-ETS is speculated to have cut down 43% of the emis-
sions from these sectors as compared to the emissions generated in 2005 [European
Commission].
2.2.4
Electricity Production Sources
Following the commencement of implementation of the 2030 Climate and Energy
Strategy, in 2016, the European Environmental Agency (EEA) summarized the pro-
duction potential of different sources of energy that indicated a 107% increase in
renewable sources from 2005 (14%) to 2016 (29%).
This noticeable shift towards
renewables can be attributed to the rise in prices of fossils on the global market, poli-
cies and regulations introduced by EU and it’s members to support an environmental
transition and an increase in efficiency to deliver renewable energy [EEA, 2015].
Figure 2.1: Source of energy production in EU, from 2005 and 2016
==PAGE:29==
10
2 Background and Literature
Even though nuclear energy is classified by the EC as one of the four main routes
on the 2050 energy roadmap, a 13% decrease can be seen from Figure 2.1 [EC, 2014].
This steady decrease is linked to the aftermath of the Fukushima mishap that occurred
in 2011, after which many member countries decided to decommission existing nuclear
plants by 2022. While a few countries like Spain and Switzerland have banned the
construction of new plants altogether. In contrast some countries are also planning to
increase their nuclear production and/or have plans to construct new nuclear facilities
[EEA, 2015]. Considered to be a highly hazardous source, nuclear energy nonetheless
has a reputation of being a clean source of energy, provided necessary safety and
maintenance measures are observed.
The other major sources contributing towards the renewable grid are categorised
below. From the Table 2.1, the exponential increase in wind and solar can be observed
2.1.
Table 2.1: Renewable electricity generation in EU, for 2005 and 2016 [EEA, 2015]
Source
/Year
2005
2016
Hydro
68%
37%
Wind
15%
32%
Biomass
15%
19%
Solar
0%
12%
Geothermal
1%
1%
2.3
Denmark
2.3.1
Population and Social Aspects
According to population predictions provided by Statistics Denmark [Statistics Den-
mark Population, 2020], the population of Denmark in the first quarter of 2020 was
5,822,763. The projected population for 2030 will be approximately 6,073,724 i.e., an
increase of 0.04% over a 10 year mark [Statistics Denmark Projections, 2020]. This
is in contrast to the 0.14% increase in the world population by 2030 as compared to
2020 [UN SDG]. Even though the trend of increase in Denmark is not as high as some
of the developing countries, it will ultimately be responsible for the intense energy
demands which will be required to fulfil the lifestyle of its citizen [Dincer, 2000].
2.3.2
DECO18
In 2018, Denmark released DECO18, a technical assessment tool to analyse how
the country’s energy consumption and production will evolve over the years leading
up to 2030. DECO18 lays out Denmark’s annual energy pattern and monitors its
==PAGE:30==
2.3 Denmark
11
growth with respect to the existing measures and policies. This planning tool plays an
important role in assessing the progress of new initiatives that are introduced to meet
the climate policy targets. The model being used is built by accumulating trends and
energy supply assumptions of 23 European countries [Danish Energy Agency, 2018].
Currently, Denmark is functioning on a frozen policy scheme, where no new energy
and climate related policies can be introduced. This implies that the regulations that
are already decided upon are considered to be at the center of the assessment about
future trends in the energy sector.
However, fuel prices, economic growth of the
country and advancements in technology plays an important role in estimating the
probable trends and these fluctuating factors may cause unforeseen variations in the
future. Hence, a new Energy and climate outlook report is structured every year.
Within the renewable targets for Denmark, set under EU directives, the country
is bound to have a 30% renewable share by 2020 which includes a 10% renewable
share in the transport sector and a reduction of 20% greenhouse gas emission in the
non-ETS sector (transport, building, waste and agricultural), relative to 2005. It has
also been estimated that Denmark will be able to reduce an additional 12.5 million
CO2 equivalent emission by 2020 [KEFM, 2020].
With EU allowing flexibility for its member states to reduce their emissions within
a 0-40% range targets, Denmark is to see a 39% reduction by 2030. This high reduc-
tion target is relative to 2005.
Denmark is reportedly way ahead of the transition targets set by the EU and
the government is aiming to attain a carbon neutral society by 2050. In order to
attain a carbon neutral economy, the country has highlighted the importance of the
energy supply and transport sector to be dependent on renewables.
The reason
behind this decision is that since these industries are the major source of emissions,
targeting them would bring down the fossil based energy generation significantly.
Correspondingly, this will strengthen Denmark’s reputation by the country moving
towards a sustainable and greener economy, with profound focus on development of
environmental technologies and eventually leading to job creation for the advancement
of the renewable sector [KEFM, 2020].
The national government has also set a goal to fulfil 50% of Denmark’s energy
demands through renewables by 2050 [Danish Government, 2016]. And as a starting
point, Copenhagen and Aarhus, the two largest cities of Denmark are scheduled to
become carbon neutral by 2025 and 2030, respectively [Aarhus, 2020; KBH Klimaplan,
2010; København, 2012].
This will be done by introducing some climate friendly
changes referred to as ”elements of transition” which will be specific to production
and consumption of energy. The 8 most important element of transitions (referred
in Table 2.2) will have a major contribution towards eliminating 12.4 million tonnes
of CO2 equivalent between 2021 and 2030. It is important to note that the elements
mentioned are a part of the non-ETS sector, which have a high potential of reduction
in order to reach the 2030 targets.
However, as the Danish Energy Agency has
estimated the required reduction to be around 13.4 million tonnes of CO2 equivalent,
Denmark may fall short on the deliverables if more elements of transition do not come
into play [Klimarådet, 2017].
==PAGE:31==
12
2 Background and Literature
Table 2.2:
Elements of transition with major emission reduction potential [Kli-
marådet, 2017]
Elements of Transition
Potential for emission reduction
(in million tonnes of CO2 eq.)
Individual heat pumps
3.3
Energy efficiency improvements in production
2.6
Electric cars
2.2
Energy renovation of buildings
1.4
Acidification of manure
1.0
Large heat pumps
0.9
Solar heating
0.8
Gas in heavy transport
0.2
Example of Copenhagen has been elaborated below.
With the capital region
of Denmark leading as an example, a similar reduction plan will be implemented
throughout the country.
2.3.3
Copenhagen
For Copenhagen’s 2025 CO2 neutral scenario, the comparison is drawn with the
emissions produced in 2010. The reductions within the energy production sector will
rely on power being generated through windmills, waste and biomass fired plants, and
will result in :
• CO2 neutral district heating provided by biomass and geothermal energy, specif-
ically from the Amager and Avedør plants.
• Biomass and wind based energy production for the city of Copenhagen, as the
peaks and loads of production capacity compliment each other. It has also been
indicated that the energy generated through wind and biomass will exceed the
city’s electricity consumption.
• Stricter sorting norms for household and business plastic waste.
This is to
prevent the waste that could have been recycled ending up in the combustion
chamber. Thus curbing the carbon emissions resulting from plastic burning.
• And lastly, utilizing organics for producing biogas through proper collection
and treatment.
In terms of mobility, the city will promote biking and public transportation
through massive infrastructural investments. Biker will have access to well developed
lanes and public transport will transition from fossil fuels to biofuels and electric-
ity. Improving traffic management through optimization and mobility planning will
further result in CO2 reductions.
==PAGE:32==
2.3 Denmark
13
Consequently, low energy building designs incorporated with solar panels, im-
proved street lighting, efficient construction techniques will bring down almost 20,000
tonnes of CO2.
==PAGE:33==
14
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 3
Methodology
The methodology adapted for building the chapters of this thesis have been consistent
in terms of information sources. Since there is a significant level of co-relation between
chapters, the tools and information used throughout the text is often linked together
in different parts of the report. In the sections below, the approach used for addressing
different objectives i.e., chapters has been elaborated on.
3.1
Consumption Patterns and Future Requirements
The methodology applied to evaluate the energy gap, included an analysis of EU
directives and how they correspond with respect to Denmark’s progress. Simulta-
neously, thorough literature review based on reports of many danish agencies and
international organizations was also carried out. Following which, a detailed techni-
cal and historical analysis of energy consumption patterns was done using numerical
data provided in the form of text, tables and figures.
Scientific papers were also
accessed through google scholar and subsequently relevant data was extracted, either
through appendices, background material on which the report was built on or the re-
sults of the study. All such external sources have been cited within this report. Data
accumulated through the mentioned process was then inserted into MS Excel. While
working on excel, a major part of the data was processed by drawing comparisons
between similar sets of data, hence making it a comparative tool to work on. These
comparisons were done between years, sources of energy and existing trends, to name
a few.
With respect to the future trends and renewable energy demands, results from
the gathered data were co-related to the information provided on Danish Energy
Agency’s page [DEA overview, 2020; DEA Statistics, 2020]. This has been carried
out by factoring in the imports and production of electricity for Denmark, and then
comparing the results with consumption patterns of the country. The SHARE tools
provided by eurostats was also used in assessing the share of renewable sources on
the energy grid [Eurostat].
Furthermore, IDAs Klimasvar: Transport- og energiløsninger 2030 [Vad et al.,
2020] was taken as a reference for additional energy requirements where electricity,
transport, industry and heating needs for 2030 have been looked into. The energy
production capacity has then been evaluated for 2020 and 2030, thus showing the
additional energy demands that pose as a gap at present.
==PAGE:35==
16
3 Methodology
3.2
Wind Energy and LCA Studies
Since wind energy details of Denmark are recorded by the energy authority, the
chapter focusing on wind energy has been built based on the updated data provided
by the Danish Energy Agency (DEA). This information in the form of text and excel
spreadsheets has been accessed through their web page and has been considered to
be reliable and accurate. Apart from the DEA, previously conducted studies on wind
as a renewable source of energy have been referred to in order to understand the
wind turbine commissioning pattern. Simultaneously, wind energy production has
also been differentiated based on onshore and offshore generation. The information
that has been gathered about wind resources has been analyzed according to the
location of the wind turbines, with emphasis on their production capacity, trend of
increase in turbines and the energy output. In line with the objectives of the report
stated earlier, a co-relation between energy production and turbines has been made.
This is done by looking at the number of active turbines and corresponding capacity
production, for both onshore and offshore entities.
To account for the resource consumption and emission trends that arise due to set-
ting up the infrastructure for Denmark’s wind energy industry, previously conducted
LCA studies were evaluated. This led to a comparison between a 2 MW and 3 MW
capacity turbine with respect to their resource consumption and air & water emis-
sion data. Furthermore, through LCA studies, life cycle stages having the highest
impacts have been identified and elaborated upon. The LCA studies considered for
this analysis have been shortlisted from credible sources. However it is possible that
due to advances in technology, the efficiency of turbines has improved over time and
the emissions and resources from an LCA study of a 3 MW turbine would vary in
newer models.
3.3
Danish Power Grid
By evaluating IDAs Klimasvar and Energinet’s predictive trend for 2030, total energy
requirements to achieve 50% renewable energy on the national grid has been found
out. Based on this information, the total wind energy share as part of the integrated
renewable mix is calculated by using capacity factors and annual power generation
capacity of wind turbines.
Consequently, predictions for additional wind turbine infrastructure were made
according to the production capacity of existing turbine models. Furthermore, newer
and improved models for both onshore and offshore energy generation were researched
about and few upcoming turbine capacities that would provide optimum energy were
selected for additional energy production. The turbine capacities selected have then
been classified under 3 proposed scenarios which reflect their likeliness of contribution
to the national power grid. These scenarios vary according to the capacities, location
and share of production on the grid, ultimately totaling up to the predicted energy
requirements of 2030. Once the pattern of annual energy production has been estab-
==PAGE:36==
3.3 Danish Power Grid
17
lished, the resource consumption and emission production values for turbines that
have been found through existing literature, is upscaled. It should be noted that the
data retrieved for the 3 MW turbine has been used to calculate resource consumption
and emission production for higher capacities.
The data set built through previous sections has been utilized in this part of
the thesis to combine the findings of existent energy gap, wind energy demands and
LCA studies for turbines. All the data has been been processed through combining
different excel spreadsheets can be found in the appendix for detailed calculations.
==PAGE:37==
18
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 4
Renewable Energy
Demands
One of the major reasons why the current energy gap exists is because transition-
ing from a conventional to an alternate greener source of energy requires time to be
developed, keeping in mind performance consistency and economic feasibility. Inter-
mittent sources like wind and solar PV, even though available in abundance, have a
tendency to fluctuate depending on geographical conditions. In a case as such, it be-
comes risky to depend on climatic conditions to deliver on the demands of the entire
country. Similarly, bioenergy and waste can be considered successful contributors
with a potential for expansion but these sources alone can not substitute fossil fuels.
Since, they are not capable of providing enough energy to meet the ever growing
demands of a developed nation like Denmark. Therefore, to achieve reliability within
the renewable sector it is important to combine the limiting resources like bioenergy
with plentiful renewables like wind and solar. The flexibility of extracting energy by
alternating sources when needed gives rise to a more stable grid [Vad et al., 2015a].
A careful mix of energy sources on the grid have hence been driving the renewable
energy share of Denmark upwards for the past decade, which is expected to continue
increasing.
Figure 4.1: Source of energy consumption in Denmark over the last decade (Appendix
A.2) [DEA Statistics, 2020]
==PAGE:39==
20
4 Renewable Energy Demands
Over the past years, Denmark’s dependence on fossil based energy especially coal
and natural gas, has been decreasing annually (Figure 4.1). The steep decrease in
coal consumption has been due to advanced electricity and district heat generation
technologies that are replacing coal based power plants with biofuels. However, the
extent of oil usage has not followed the same trend, on the contrary its consumption
has started to increase again since mid 2018s for energy production. Waste on the
other hand has been observed to produce constant amount of energy since 2018 (with
very less or even negligible fluctuations for over the years) [DEA Statistics, 2020].
Figure 4.2: Monthly (Jan-April) comparison of energy consumption in Denmark, for
2019 and 2020 (Appendix A.2) [DEA Statistics, 2020]
==PAGE:40==
4 Renewable Energy Demands
21
According to the recorded data of energy production for consumption purposes,
annual improvements over monthly production can be noticed. It can be observed
from Figure 4.2 that under similar climatic conditions the amount of natural gas, coal
and oil are being substituted by renewable energy variants. 1
When these monthly statistics are expanded to project a scenario for 2030, con-
sidering the frozen policy scheme is observed and no new measures are introduced,
then the renewable sector can be seen to have a marginal domination over the total
energy produced for consumption (Figure 4.3). Parallely, coal based energy is esti-
mated to come down to 17 PJ, which is almost equivalent to the energy generated by
waste. By 2030, coal use will be limited to the cement industry and one power plant
[DECO, 2019]. Similarly, substituting natural gas with biogas will gradually limit its
consumption to 9% of the total energy consumed.
Figure 4.3: Source of energy consumption in Denmark predicted for the coming years
(Appendix A.2) [DECO, 2019]
To elaborate on the renewable sector of the energy grid, the following section will
address the expectations from 2030.
1A representation of monthly production in Figure 4.2 has been analysed because an identi-
cal pattern of climatic data is assumed to exist during annual cycles. For example variations in
temperature, wind speed, cloud cover, sunlight exposure and precipitation can be averaged on a
monthly basis and the similarities of such occurrences over the years results in season. These factors
when taken into consideration justify the comparison of intermittent sources of energy produced in
consecutive years.
==PAGE:41==
22
4 Renewable Energy Demands
4.1
Renewable Share
By the end of 2019, renewable energy in Denmark constituted 35% of the gross
energy consumption [DEA Statistics, 2020], already surpassing the EU 2020 target of
achieving 30% renewable energy. Denmark’s total renewable share (RES) including
electricity, transportation as well as heating and cooling in 2020 is projected to be 41%,
i.e., 1.36 times as much as the initial target. (excel results share 2018-EUROSTAT).
Figure 4.4: Renewable energy shares for 2020-30 (Appendix A.2) [DECO, 2019]
The RES can be divided into 4 categories, which differ in requirements according
to their own targets.
Together these sector (Electricity, Transport, Heating and
Industry) are responsible for delivering on the 50% renewable criteria. As indicated
in Figure 4.4, it is estimated that by 2030 the RES will account for 54% of the overall
supply. This forecast stands correct only if the renewable sectors like wind, solar,
biomass keep on flourishing as expected, along with developments in storage and
efficiency technology [DECO, 2019].
In the following sections, every RES is analyzed in detail along with adequate
requirements to reach the 2030 target.
4.1.1
Electricity
Consumption of electricity, including grid losses, will be equivalent to 122 PJ in 2030.
A major part of which will be produced through either wind turbines, solar panels
or wave energy, additionally coal power will be phased out by biomass sources. In a
==PAGE:42==
4.1 Renewable Share
23
situation like this, relying on uniform production through these sources will pose to
be a challenge, as discussed earlier. Hence, flexible integration by regulating biomass
based energy and exchange between of surplus energy EU countries to balance out
the deficient time period will be crucial. Based on historic data, the peak hour load
on the electrical grid has been around 6000 MW, which will continue to be so if 10%
savings in energy efficiency is implemented by 2030 [Vad et al., 2020]. To ensure clean
electricity is available to cover the peak hour load in Denmark, around 9,360 MW
of addition production capacity will be required, out of which 56% will be provided
through wind turbines (Table 4.1). A small part of the total production will also
be delivered through wave power however, in case wave technology fails to meet the
requirements then additional wind energy will compensate for it.
Table 4.1: Energy production for electricity requirements of 2030
Source
Production capacity by 2020
Production capacity by 2030
Wave power
Experimental
130 MW
Solar PV
1,000 MW
5,000 MW
Wind Turbines
onshore
4,200 MW
4,800 MW
offshore
2,000 MW
6,630 MW
According to the current calculations, it is excepted that the rate of electricity
generation through renewables will surpass the rate of electricity consumption by
2028 (Figure 4.4). Furthermore, expansion of commercial offshore wind and solar PV
farms will have a huge impact on the production capacity with Denmark producing
109% of renewable energy for consumption purposes by the end of 2030. Additionally,
if a decision to replace older wind turbines with newer models that are more efficient
comes into play then the trend will alter and a steeper increase in production will be
noticed [DECO, 2019].
4.1.2
Transport
As electrification of passenger cars is expected to boom with 22% of new cars being
electric by 2030, the excess production of electricity post 2028 can then be redirected
towards the transportation sector. Thus helping the mobility sector to function at 19%
renewable energy by 2030, which is almost double when compared to 2020. By 2030,
300,000 electrical and hybrid cars will be taking over the road of Denmark, bringing
down the fossil fuel consumption from 95% to 92% over the span of 13 years. The
decrease in fuel corresponds to improved fuel efficiency and expansion of the electric
vehicle industry, even though the number of vehicles on the road will be increasing.
Along with electrification of cars, first generation biofuels will correspond 4% towards
energy consumption in the transport sector by 2030. Biofuels are expected to have the
potential for expansion in the longer run, as 9.8 PJ of energy will be derived from them
[DECO, 2019]. Together, such alternatives are aimed to bring down gasoline use in
cars from 102 PJ (2020) to 59 PJ (2030) [Vad et al., 2020]. Additionally, an upcoming
==PAGE:43==
24
4 Renewable Energy Demands
electrofuel technology involving electrolysis of CO2 to liquid hydrocarbon fuels is
also being researched [Christopher, 2010]. Application of which can provide 9.8 PJ of
energy for cars and vans by 2030, same as biofuels. However in hindsight, its execution
would requires large amounts of electricity for electrolysis, which would still be less
than its production value. In total, the transport sector will be consuming 7.5 PJ of
electricity by 2030 and these requirements will partially be met by existing renewable
energy (wind) and biofuels. The 7.5 PJ of energy mentioned is in addition to the
electricity requirements indicated in section 4.1.1 above. For reference, comparison
of energy consumption is given in Table 4.2.
Table 4.2: Energy consumption by the transport sector in 2017 and 2030
Year
Energy consumed by transport sector
% overall energy consumption
2017
218 PJ
34%
2030
223 PJ
33%
Road transport will correspond to 74% of the total energy (transport) require-
ments of 2030, of which 47% will be passenger cars. Energy efficiency technologies,
combustion engine improvements and electrification of cars, vans and truck will hence
play an essential role in bringing down the energy consumption numbers. The avi-
ation sector will be responsible for 20% of total energy (transport) consumption by
2030 relying largely on jet fuel (oils). Furthermore, air (aviation) and water (ship-
ping) transport due to its international dependence will not be the sole responsibility
of Denmark to look into. To bring down the use of fossils in the transport sector,
unanimous efforts from all EU member states will be required.
Table 4.3: Energy production for transportation requirements of 2030
Source
Purpose
Production capacity required
Wind Turbines
Electrification of vehicles and electrofuel production
2700 MW
4.1.3
Heat
The current net district heating demand is estimated at 181 PJ. Upcoming renovation
models for older buildings and new constructions have taken into account reduction
in heat consumption which will bring down 12% of energy requirements [Lund and
Mathiesen, 2014]. Existing oil and gas boilers will be replaced with individual/district
heat pumps and electric boilers, which will generate 11% heating by 2030 (up from
1% in 2017). These heat pumps will operate on renewable energy, specifics shown in
Table 4.4 and it will also be possible to redirect excess heat energy generated from
other sectors into the heating sector. Integrating the existing grid with energy that
is considered waste from electrolysis, data centers and industries will cut down on
additional generation. After incorporating the saving over the period of 10 years, by
2030, an increase of just over 8 PJ is expected.
==PAGE:44==
4.1 Renewable Share
25
Table 4.4: Energy production for heat requirements of 2030
Source
Purpose
Production capacity required
Wind Turbines
Individual heat pumps
800 MW
Large district heat pumps
500-600 MW
Solar PV
Individual homes
8-9 PJ
District heating
6-7 PJ
Geothermal
District heating
500 MW/ 13-14 PJ
4.1.4
Industry
Industry requirements in this context includes businesses, agriculture, fishery, con-
struction, manufacturing, service sectors, data centers and drilling operations in the
North Sea. In 2030, energy consumption by industries will reach 199 PJ, compared
to 5 PJ in 2015. Since industries are extensively dependent on electricity, 108 PJ of
the total energy will be electricity based. Most of the electricity consumption will
occur to operate and cool off new data centers and will be accounting for 25 PJ of
energy consumption [Vad et al., 2020], which represents 80% of the increase in elec-
tricity share from 76 PJ. 75 PJ of the remaining energy will be directly extracted
from fossils, making it a demanding sector which will account for 38% of the total
energy consumption by 2030 [Vad et al., 2020]. These growing needs of the industry
sector will partially be fulfilled by expanding the renewable energy generation which
will account for 13% of the final energy requirements in 2030.
Table 4.5: Energy production for industry requirements of 2030
Source
Purpose
Production capacity required
Wind Turbines
Replacement of natural gas on drilling platforms
300 MW
==PAGE:45==
26
4 Renewable Energy Demands
4.2
Overview of Additional Energy Requirements
Table 4.6 gives an overview of additional capacity production requirements to fulfil
energy demands in all the sectors discussed above. The aggregate production require-
ments for 2030 are categorized according to renewable sources. It can be noticed
that wind energy, which includes both onshore and offshore production, dominates
the renewable sector. Therefore, in the following Chapter 5, wind energy of Denmark
will be discussed in detail.
Table 4.6: Aggregate energy production requirements by all sectors for 2030 in MW
Source (MW)
vs. sector
Wave
Solar
Wind
(avg. onshore & offshore)
Geothermal
Electricity
130
4000
5230
-
Transport
-
-
2700
-
Heat
-
540
1350
500
Industry
-
-
300
-
Total
130
4540
9580
500
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 5
Wind as an Energy
Source
The European Wind Energy Association published a scenario which estimated that
wind turbines having a cumulative capacity of 323 GW will be installed and functional
by 2030. The energy generated through these turbines will play an import role in
reaching the 27% renewable energy targets for Europe. Of the total wind energy, 78%
will be produced through onshore turbines and the remaining 22% through offshore.
The said capacity will be able to power 30% of European electricity needs by providing
888 TWh of energy. The Baltic Sea will provide an opportunity to produce 9 GW
of offshore energy, making it the second largest offshore wind basin in all of Europe
[Europe, 2017]. This is where Denmark features in with its perfect location having
the North Sea on one side and the Baltic Sea on the other, thus experiencing strong
winds all around the year. The long coastline and relatively flat landscape provides
ample of space to conveniently set up wind farms [Naturstyrelsen].
Wind stands out as a source of energy generation among the other renewable
energy sources due its production capacity in Denmark.
With 2,742 MW energy
generated by wind, as on 7th July, 2020, it covers almost 80% of the electricity
generation of the country [Wind Denmark]. Therefore emphasising on wind energy-
both onshore and offshore- will be the primary motive of the report.
Production of energy through onshore wind turbines can be traced back to 1970s.
With time it proved to be a cost-effective alternative in the longer run when compared
to other energy production technologies, including coal fired plants [Wind Energy
Denmark]. Soon it was fulfilling a third of the electricity requirements of Denmark
and therefore expansion was vital to meet the demands. Since, wind farms take up
a lot of land due to their enormous structures, in 2002 the first large scale offshore
wind farm with a capacity of 160 MW was set up to overcome land limitations [DEA
facts].
Gradually over the years the number of offshore wind turbine setup has increased
drastically. Where there were 41 offshore wind turbines in 2000, 20 years later the
number has increased to 558 in Denmark.
Hence, providing the country with an
approximate energy capacity of 1,700 MW in 2020, which represents a 97% increase
in capacity since 2000 (Appendix A.3) [DEA overview, 2020].
==PAGE:47==
28
5 Wind as an Energy Source
Figure 5.1: Offshore wind turbine trend over two decades in Denmark (Appendix
A.3) [DEA overview, 2020]
This increase can be attributed to the fact that many onshore wind turbines
that are installed usually have less generation capacity when compared to offshore.
Therefore, even though setting up a wind farm at sea is more expensive and energy
intensive, the power yielded through it is relatively more. The offshore wind farms
around Denmark thrive on the ideal climatic conditions where strong and stable wind
speeds are in abundant. Moreover, the shallow water levels around the coastline make
it possible to have a structure with a sturdy foundation erected to tackle the harsh
climate of the sea [Agency, 2017]. Another advantage of investing in offshore is its
return in terms of emissions due to its capacity to eliminate around 2,000 tonnes of
CO2 equivalent for every MW produced when compared to a conventional source of
energy production [Danborg, 2013].
Relying on wind also bears economic benefits, as producing power through tur-
bines does not require the use of fuel and depending on the fluctuating market of
fossils is not a major concern. This advantage over coal based energy makes wind
power a cheaper source of electricity production in the time to come, which has the
potential to bring down the price of electricity (gradually) once infrastructural costs
are reimbursed. Additionally, taxes corresponding to CO2 emissions produced, once
polluting limits are reached are extremely hefty. As shown in Table 5.1, the amount
of carbon emissions released when using coal and gas for energy production can pile
up when electricity is to be generated for masses, hence using an almost zero CO2
emitting source brings down the cost of producing power [EWEA].
==PAGE:48==
5 Wind as an Energy Source
29
Table 5.1: CO2 produced to generate 1 MWh of electricity through different energy
sources [EWEA]
Source
Production of Electric Energy
CO2 released
Coal
1 MWh
1 tonne
Gas
1 MWh
0.5 tonnes
Wind
1 MWh
̃ 0 tonne
With an addition of three new offshore wind farms before 2030, the offshore fleet
is expected to improve its production capacity in terms of efficiency and consistency.
As an example, Thor- an offshore wind farm commissioned to start operating between
2024-27, will have the minimum and maximum capacity of 800 MW and 1,000 MW,
respectively. Such high capacity wind farms will influence the share of wind energy
on the national grid [Energistyrelsen, 2019].
On an average onshore wind farms have a lower production capacity (on an av-
erage between 2-3 MW), which can generate 6 million kWh annually. To put it into
perspective, it is enough to cover the electricity demands of 1,500 average households.
Following the same trend Thor alone, when it operates at the maximum capacity,
would be able to power an approximate of 930,000 households per annum [Europe,
2017]. Irrespective of the increase in offshore turbines, the onshore industry will keep
on contributing a generous share of wind energy, as can be seen from the data till 2020
(Figure 5.2). This is due to the ease of construction on land by local businesses. Even
though the number of turbines located onshore will be halved by 2030, their produc-
tion capacity is expected to be a double of what it is today [WindDenmark(facts)].
Increase in turbine capacity can be attributed to the improvements in technical effi-
ciencies and reduction in power losses through grid integration.
Figure 5.2: Active turbines in Denmark and their collective capacities (Appendix A.3)
(as of May 2020 [DEA overview, 2020])
==PAGE:49==
30
5 Wind as an Energy Source
As per the wind energy production figures, a total of 6,252 wind turbines account-
ing for an installed capacity of 6,115 MW were active in 2018. These turbines (both
onshore and offshore) contributed to 48% of the net electricity production total of
Denmark by supplying 13,902 GWh of energy (Appendix A.3).
Table 5.2: Amount of energy produced by wind turbines (%), corresponding to the
net production total of electricity supply in Denmark [DEA Statistics, 2020]
Year
% Wind Energy
2015
51
2016
44
2017
50
2018
48
2019
57
These numbers have a high possibility of growing as innovations in the offshore
sector are progressing. One such example is that of a floating turbine, which once
active would have the potential to capture high wind speeds further away from the
shore. Along with gaining access to oceanic wind currents, it would also bring down
the construction cost and resources used during the process [IEA, 2019].
5.1
Grid Integration
Till 1990s, the energy generated by wind turbines, be it individually owned or wind
farms, was incorporated within Denmark’s power system through 100 kV or less volt-
age distribution grids. However, as the generated power began to increase, it became
impossible to transmit the same through a voltage grid that was as low as 100 kV.
Hence later in the decade, wind farms situated offshore which produced large volumes
of energy were connected to a higher grid. As the existing grid was designed for an
outflux of power from the power plants to the consumers, the model had to be mod-
ified by the transmission system operator (TSO) before connecting all wind farms
to the electric grid at the right voltage [DEA]. The TSO is responsible for handling
the transmission of power from generation units to the electricity distribution system
operator (DSO), who then develops a transmission line for distribution of wind power
to the vicinity [EWEA]. Due to the fact that wind energy is harnessed in widespread
and often remote locations, the grid connections need to be located near the genera-
tion sources, ideally near the shore or sea. Additionally, having an interconnection
which allows supply security during peak hour integration is advantageous for wind
to be considered as a reliable power source. Setting up an uninterrupted grid despite
the challenges thus provides a continuous transmission that can be helpful in bring
down the energy prices in the market and promote a competitive system. Considering
a grid of such caliber runs successfully, Denmark will have the largest share of wind
in its national grid in all of Europe [Europe, 2017].
==PAGE:50==
5.2 Wind Turbines
31
The current transmission grid is owned by TSO and is operated for transmissions
for 400 kV. These transmission lines are undergrounded and cover a distance of 2,900
km for better reach and minimum visual overlapping.
This move ensures better
integration of wind energy to the national power grid and has the potential to expand
its capacity depending on the real time energy production. A centralized connection
also ensures smooth import and export of power with neighbouring countries like
Norway, Germany and the Netherlands [DEA; Sea, 2019].
5.2
Wind Turbines
Wind turbines while operating produce zero emissions however, extraction of raw
materials for manufacturing, installation related energy, transportation, maintenance,
decommissioning and end of life disposal is a resource and energy intensive process.
Nonetheless, after factoring in the amount of energy taken up by the practices from
cradle to grave, a modern wind turbine can breakeven (in terms of energy input)
within a year (in some case 3-6 months) of its functioning [DEA]. And hence, during
its life time of almost 25 years a wind turbine can produce up to 80 times more energy
than it consumes [EWEA].
Functional requirements of turbines differ according to their location, size, average
wind speeds they encounter over the year and many other factors [Garrett, 2019]. Due
to this, equalizing the energy generated, resource consumed or emissions produced
by turbines which have different capacities and purposes is not feasible. Therefore,
while analysing emissions and resources from various LCA studies in the following
sections, production capacities will be evaluated based on their location. This will
act as a benchmark for understanding the difference in impacts caused by onshore
and offshore facilities.1
5.2.1
Analysis of LCA studies
Life cycle assessments (LCA) are aimed to recognize the environmental impacts as-
sociated with the products throughout their lifetime. In this case the primary focus
will be on the life cycle inventory (LCI) of wind turbines, which includes input and
output of flows required for manufacturing and operating the turbine. These flows
are crucial to the product system under considerations as they can quantify the ma-
terial being used for manufacturing and maintenance, the by-products formed during
operation phase and products left to be managed at the end of the life by disposal
or recycling. Flows like such can be categorized in terms of emissions to the environ-
ment or resources that are extracted or classified as waste [Garrett, 2019; Rosenbaum,
2018].2
1It should be noted that the values indicated through LCA interpretations in the text may be
tweaked in calculations according to turbine capacities or power outputs.
2The results obtained from an LCA study can be interpreted and utilized for comparative as-
sessments, product improvements or many other purposes, however in the context of this report the
==PAGE:51==
32
5 Wind as an Energy Source
The data used for inventory analysis has been extracted from the LCA studies
conducted by companies like Vestas and Siemens on different models of turbines
manufactured by them. Moreover a comparative LCA study of onshore and offshore
wind turbines carried out in the US context has also been considered. The functional
unit of the analysis can be defined as ”1 kWh electricity produced through onshore
and offshore wind turbines that have different capacities”. The resource consumption
and emissions presented in following section take into consideration the entire life
cycle of the turbine including, extraction, manufacturing, transportation, installation,
operation/maintenance, disassembly and end of life [Garrett, 2019].3
5.2.1.1
Resource Consumption
LCI of onshore and offshore structures having the capacity of 2 and 3 MW was
extracted from Elsam, 2004 and Vestas, wherein cumulative resource consumption
during an average turbines life cycle was analyzed. The said data has been presented
in the Table 5.3 and represents the consumption according to the energy generated
in kWh.4
LCA studies on wind turbines will be used to evaluate emissions and resources.
3The assessments were conducted on the software SimaPro, using the Impact 2002+ method.
4It can be noticed from Table 5.3 that a few components present in a 3 MW turbine are not found
in its 2 MW counterpart, this can be due to the economical factor of producing a lower capacity
turbine as compared to the monetary resources available to manufacture a relatively bigger capacity
turbine.
==PAGE:52==
5.2 Wind Turbines
33
Table 5.3: Resource consumption of offshore and onshore turbines having different capacity
Offshore
Onshore
Resource Consumption
Quantity (g/kWh)
Resource Consumption
Quantity (g/kWh)
2 MW
3 MW
2 MW
3 MW
Water (fresh)
7.00E+01
4.93E+01
Water (fresh)
7.20E+01
5.12E+01
Crude oil, fuel
1.17E+00
6.30E-01
Crude oil, fuel
1.25E+00
5.41E-01
Hard coal
7.90E-01
7.40E-01
Hard coal
6.86E-01
6.43E-01
Crude oil, raw material
4.60E-01
-
Crude oil, raw material
0.00E+00
-
Natural gas, fuel
3.90E-01
3.75E-01
Natural gas, fuel
3.00E-01
4.20E-01
Iron
4.10E-01
4.19E-01
Iron
2.10E-01
4.00E-02
Brown coal, fuel
2.20E-01
-
Brown coal, fuel
2.20E-01
-
Calcium carbonate (CaCO3)
1.80E-01
-
Calcium carbonate (CaCO3)
1.50E-01
-
Aluminium
2.00E-02
1.10E-02
Aluminium
1.50E-01
5.00E-03
Zinc
8.00E-03
4.10E-02
Zinc
4.00E-03
1.30E-02
Lead
7.00E-03
3.00E-03
Lead
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
Copper
4.00E-03
9.00E-03
Copper
2.00E-03
4.00E-03
Stone
0.00E+00
5.50E-02
Stone
3.39E+00
3.53E+00
Calcium
0.00E+00
-
Calcium
1.00E+00
-
Quartz sand
-
3.35E-01
Quartz sand
-
5.88E-01
Lignite
-
3.24E-01
Lignite
-
3.44E-01
Limestone
-
1.26E-01
Limestone
-
9.60E-02
Sodium Chloride
-
5.10E-02
Sodium Chloride
-
8.40E-02
Clay
-
3.10E-02
Clay
-
5.40E-02
Manganese
-
1.00E-02
Manganese
-
1.20E-02
Chromium
-
0.00E+00
Chromium
-
2.00E-03
Total
7.37E+01
5.25E+01
Total
7.94E+01
5.76E+01
==PAGE:53==
34
5 Wind as an Energy Source
It can be noticed that irrespective of the location, water is the most consumed
resource. This high value can be traced back to manufacturing and production of raw
materials and electricity which requires large amount of water during their production.
Water is followed by coal, oil and natural gas, which act as the primary sources of
energy production for various processes.
Apart from being an energy source, oil
has other crucial applications as well, eg. to be used as a raw material to obtain
plastics and epoxy used for the production of turbine blades, and its application as a
transformer oil. Among metals, iron is the primarily used metal resource which is also
used (along with limestone) to produce steel that makes the tower. Quartz iron can be
associated with production of cast iron components for the hub and nacelle (refer to
Figure 5.3 for visual representation). Uses of zinc are limited towards metallizing the
steel tower and foundation of offshore turbines for protection purposes. Aluminium
constitutes the base of transformer and cable stations for the offshore plants, however,
for onshore, it is used within the nacelle and cables. The use of stone and limestone
is more evident in onshore turbines due to its requirement for a concrete foundation
at the base of the steel tower [Elsam, 2004; Vestas].
Figure 5.3: Representation of an offshore wind turbine [Gamesa]
5.2.1.2
Air and Water Emissions
The data for air and water emissions in Table 5.4 and 5.5 suggests that on an average,
turbines located onshore yield lower emissions when compared to their offshore coun-
terparts. The reason behind this is the resource intensive process of establishing an
offshore facility. Construction of an offshore facility requires more energy extensive
resources that are directed towards laying a sturdy foundation and a transmission
system, thus emitting more during the manufacturing stage. Moreover, the offshore
transportation included in the analysis also takes into account the large distances
between the location of turbine in shallow waters and the manufacturing location at
the port [Chipindula et al., 2018]. However, it can be noticed that the difference in
==PAGE:54==
5.2 Wind Turbines
35
emissions is between 10 to 12% which is very low in a g/kWh scale [Wagner et al.,
2011].
Table 5.4: Air emissions caused by offshore and onshore turbines having different
capacity
Offshore
Onshore
Air emission
Quantity (g/kWh)
Air emission
Quantity (g/kWh)
2 MW
3 MW
2 MW
3 MW
4.2 MW
CO2
7.62E+00
5.23E+00
CO2
6.83E+00
4.64E+00
7.14E+00
CO
2.60E-02
1.99E-02
CO
2.23E-02
8.13E-03
4.21E-03
NOx
5.80E-02
2.06E-02
NOx
5.86E-02
1.77E-02
2.14E-02
SO2
2.20E-02
2.15E-02
SO2
2.21E-02
2.18E-02
1.40E-02
CH4
5.57E-03
-
CH4
4.04E-03
-
-
N2O
2.28E-04
1.73E-04
N2O
2.28E-04
1.82E-04
-
Hg
5.28E-08
-
Hg
5.13E-08
-
-
NH3
8.92E-06
-
NH3
1.05E-05
-
-
HCl
-
1.21E-04
HCl
-
1.80E-04
-
N2
-
1.03E-04
N2
-
7.26E-05
2.11E-01
H2
-
9.48E-05
H2
-
1.56E-04
-
H2S
-
7.45E-05
H2S
-
3.18E-05
-
Mn
-
7.02E-05
Mn
-
2.04E-05
-
VOC
1.08E-04
1.25E-02
VOC
4.43E-05
1.47E-02
2.04E-02
Total
7.73E+00
5.31E+00
Total
6.94E+00
4.70E+00
7.41E+00
Table 5.5: Water emissions caused by offshore and onshore turbines having different
capacity
Offshore
Onshore
Water emission
Quantity (g/kWh)
Water emission
Quantity (g/kWh)
2 MW
3 MW
2 MW
3 MW
Tot-N
3.64E-05
2.58E-06
Tot-N
2.13E-05
1.46E-06
COD
3.12E-04
2.41E-03
COD
2.26E-04
2.57E-03
Tot P
-
3.20E-08
Tot P
-
2.93E-08
Total
3.48E-04
2.41E-03
Total
2.47E-04
2.57E-03
5.2.2
Global Warming Potential
Contrary to other non-renewable sources of energy generation, wind energy is a clean
fuel with no release of air pollutants or toxic substances and zero waste or water
pollution while operating, besides maintenance. Furthermore, even if global warming
potential (GWP) for wind turbines (inclusive of all life stages) are analyzed (Table
5.6), the environmental impacts are exceptionally less as compared to fossils [EWEA].
With fossils like coal and natural gas emitting 990 g CO2-eq/kWh and 530 g CO2-
eq/kWh, respectively [Treyer K., 2013], GWP of wind turbines is almost 100 times
lower. Due to such high differences in carbon emissions, wind energy in EU alone will
==PAGE:55==
36
5 Wind as an Energy Source
be responsible for a decrease of 382 mil. tonnes of CO2 by replacing fossils till 2030
[Europe, 2017].
In many case studies, it has been seen that greenhouse gases emitted by higher
capacity turbines are lower than the ones from a low capacity wind turbine. This
can also be noticed from the offshore data provided in Table 5.6. Since two different
studies have been compared, a distinctive difference between a higher capacity and
lower capacity turbine from the same study can be observed. Here a 6 MW offshore
turbine has a 40% lower GWP than a turbine with a 4 MW capacity. A similar trend
was observed by Kadiyala et al. and it was contemplated that the GWP emission
factor varies inversely to the capacity of the turbine under consideration.
Table 5.6: Global warming potential of different onshore and offshore wind turbines
throughout their life cycle
Onshore
Turbine Type
Turbine Capacity
GWP
(gCO2 eq/ kWh)
Year of study
Source
Hypothetical
2.3 MW
5.84
2018
Chipindula et al., 2018
Siemens
2.3 MW
6
2015
Irving, 2016
Siemens
3.2 MW
5
2015
Irving, 2016
Vestas
4.2 MW
7.3
2019
Garrett, 2019
Offshore
Turbine Type
Turbine Capacity
GWP
(gCO2 eq/ kWh)
Year of study
Source
Hypothetical
2 MW
9.49
2018
Chipindula et al., 2018
Hypothetical
2.3 MW
6.49
2018
Chipindula et al., 2018
Siemens
4 MW
10.9
2015
Irving, 2016
Siemens
6 MW
7.8
2015
Irving, 2016
The importance of considering the GWP of onshore and offshore turbines will be
used in the following chapter when an ideal energy grid is evaluated.
==PAGE:56==
5.3 High Impact Life Cycle Stages
37
5.3
High Impact Life Cycle Stages
Overview of the life cycle suggests that resource extraction and end of life (EoL) are
the two phases that define the final impacts produced by a wind turbine. These have
been discussed in the following sections to realize the importance of limiting emissions
in these stages to achieve considerable reductions in the overall LCI.
Figure 5.4: Environmental impacts caused by different life stages presented in the
form of global warming contribution (g CO2 eq/kWh) for an offshore turbine [Gamesa]
5.3.1
Resource Extraction and Materials
Majority of the emissions can be traced back to the initial stages of raw material ex-
traction and production according to specifications or refinement. This phase in a life
cycle happens to be the most environmentally impactful stage, contributing between
70 to 80% towards the climate impact category for both onshore and offshore wind
turbines [Irving, 2016]. Irrespective of the resource requirements, wind technology
has the ability to compensate for the CO2 produced and energy consumed during its
entire life cycle within a year, and even earlier for onshore turbines [Chipindula et al.,
2018].
Wind turbines can be divided into two main parts, the foundation (onshore) or
tower (offshore) and the blades. While most of the tower structure is made out of
steel and foundation is concrete, the blades are a combination of fiberglass, polymers
or epoxy resin. The specifics can be found in the Table 5.7. It can be seen that iron
and its alloys are the most abundantly used components and Table 5.3 shows that it
requires anywhere between 0.04 to 0.5 g of iron to produce one kWh of energy. When
energy sources for production of a steel tower are factored in, the amount of resources
consumed to produce a turbine can go up to 15-20 g/kWh, which is almost 30% of
the total resources consumed, making it a substantial resource [Irving, 2016].5
5The values used for calculation are of a 3 MW offshore wind turbine.
==PAGE:57==
38
5 Wind as an Energy Source
Table 5.7: Breakdown of material composition used to produce an offshore wind
turbine [MaterialUse, 2018]
Component
Average amount contribution
Steel and Iron
>85%
Aluminium and alloys
1% <x <1.7%
Copper and alloys
0.5% <x <0.9%
Polymers
2.5% <x <4%
Glass/Carbon composites
4% <x <9%
Electronics
0.5% <x <1%
Lubricants and fluids
0.3% <x <0.5%
The materials summarized in Table 5.7 are majorly used for capital infrastructure
with an exception of a fraction which may be used during maintenance. The split up
hence opens up the opportunity for improvement of material in terms of durability or
finding alternatives which can play a significant role in reducing environmental im-
pacts across many other renewable energy sources as well [Germany and Infi, 2011].
A start has been made by recycling elements of decommissioned turbines and incor-
porating them into the supply chain. Such end of life treatment of resources has the
potential to save 20-30% of greenhouse gas emissions that are already a part of the
resource extraction emissions mentioned above [Irving, 2016].
5.3.2
End of Life
Depending on the techniques of manufacturing and branding of turbines, resources
can be used in various ratios and proportions. The materials that are left behind,
once a wind turbine reaches the end of its life cycle, can usually be categorized
into resource mention in Table 5.8. These main materials follow similar patterns of
landfilling, incineration or recycling to serve as raw material in other industries.
Table 5.8: End of life treatment of different materials used in a wind turbine (data
compiled from [Irving, 2016 and VestasWind, 2006])
Material Type
% Treated
Treatment method and uses
Steel and Iron
90
Recycled as raw material for the market
(remaining landfilled)
Aluminium and alloys
55.1
Recycled as raw material for the market
(remaining landfilled)
Copper and alloys
90
Recycled as raw material for the market
(remaining landfilled)
Polymers
100
Incineration or landfill
Glass/Carbon composites
100
Landfilled
Concrete
50-50
Landfill and recycle as crushed gravel
EoL follows a very consistent strategy of disassembly and disposal, irrespective
of the capacity, model or size of turbines. Due to this reason, limiting the release of
==PAGE:58==
5.3 High Impact Life Cycle Stages
39
emissions during the EoL phase can improve the environmental impacts caused by
the turbine. One significant method is by targeting the steel and iron components
that are used to form the tower.
These components represent more than 80% of
the entire structure and recycling the steel towers to manufacture new models will
bring down emissions by eliminating the energy required for extraction of metal and
manufacturing steel towers [Chipindula et al., 2018].
==PAGE:59==
40
==PAGE:60==
CHAPTER 6
Wind Energy on the
Danish Power Grid
In order to meet the target of 50% fossil free energy on the power grid, Denmark
will see a massive input from the renewable sector, specifically the wind industry.
To cater for the country’s increasing demands and hopefully surpass them, Denmark
is set to unveil four high capacity wind farms ranging from 600 MW to 1000 MW
within the next 10 years. Among the planned four, three will be built on the sea
bed having a combined capacity of 2.4 GW. Apart from the aforementioned planned
projects, a unique approach to capture the energy potential of North Sea winds is
also being considered as a viable option and is still in its initial phase of planning.
This will be done by building an artificial island in the sea which will be surrounded
by offshore wind turbines and it’s collective capacity would extend up to 10 GW. An
unconventional project like such will not only generate a massive energy influx but
will also eliminate the need to clear up vast areas of space near or on land. These
projects are expected to be funded by the government as well as the private sector,
categorizing it as the need of the hour and guaranteed investment outcome [Murray,
James, 2020].
Wind industry, particularly offshore when implemented over a longer time period
and sited carefully has the ability to supply the required energy to run the entire
world. Its capacity to energy conversion factor is higher than solar PV and onshore
sources. European Union energy market in 2018 indicated that the technical offshore
wind potential was 33,844 TWh, whereas the electricity demand was a mere 2,884
TWh [IEA, 2019]. However, in order to maintain a consistent and stable grid that is
able to fulfil the demands of all the discussed sectors, relying solely on wind power
will not be a viable option. An integrated mix of renewable and non renewable energy
for the Danish system is required [Energinet, 2015].
Roughly 38% of the total wind energy produced in 2019 came from offshore sources,
with sea based turbines producing up to 18% of the total electricity generation in
2019 as compared to 14% in 2018 [Murray, James, 2020]. As discussed in Chapter 5,
wind energy is expected to represent a share of approximately 9580 MW capacity for
meeting the energy demands of sectors like electricity, heating, transportation and
industry. This accounts for a 35% increase in wind power, compared to the existent
capacity (Appendix A.4).
However according to real scenario data, the established capacity of a wind turbine
==PAGE:61==
42
6 Wind Energy on the Danish Power Grid
is not fully met due to inconsistencies in the speed of wind and dependency on a
fluctuating resource. For example, when the wind speeds are halved, the production of
energy goes down by a factor of an eighth, indicating the steep decrease in production
capacity with variability in wind speeds. Therefore, capacity factors are introduced
to take into account the uncertainties while calculating the annual power generation
capacity of wind turbines.
This factor on an average is estimated to be around
30%, i.e., 30% of the actual capacity of a turbine is being utilized to produce energy
[WindWatch]. 1,2
Applying this capacity factor to the combined total of the previously discussed
turbine capacity (9580 MW), the following output can be achieved:
9580MW ∗365days ∗24hours ∗30% = 25, 176, 240MWh/year = 25.17TWh/year
(6.1)
In a similar manner, energy generation potentials of other sources are also cal-
culated for reference. Averaged capacity factors relevant for other sources of energy
generation can be found in Table 6.1:
Table 6.1: Energy generation potential of different renewable sources based on their
capacity factors by 2030 [Trent, 2014, Lavidas, 2020, Europe, 2018]
Sources
Capacity factors
Production capacity
requirements
Energy generation
potential
Wind
Onshore
22%
9580 MW
25.17 TWh/year
Offshore
37%
Solar PV
20%
4540 MW
7.95 TWh/year
Geothermal
70%
500 MW
3.06 TWh/year
Wave/Tidal
26-32%
130 MW
0.34 TWh/year
Total
14750 MW
36.53 TWh/year
Based on data predictions about the renewable sector by Energinet, additional
support in term of production capacity will be required. The following sections will
elaborate on the energy demands and how to achieve them.
6.0.1
Additional Support
Electricity needs in particular will be met by the renewable sector’s expansion and
its integration on the Danish power grid. However, forced exports and a 3.6 TWh
limit on imports for more than 50 TWh of wind, wave and solar power production
might alter the actual power outage and cause electricity imbalance [Vad et al., 2020].
Moreover, Energinet predicts that renewable energy based electricity consumption
1It is important to note that the energy production values specified in Chapter 5 have been
deduced according to the capacity factor of 26% due to larger share of onshore turbines.
2The capacity factor has been calculated based on an average of onshore (22%) and offshore
(37%) capacity of European wind turbines in 2018 [Europe, 2018].
==PAGE:62==
6 Wind Energy on the Danish Power Grid
43
will be around 60 TWh by 2030, of which 50 TWh will be provided through wind
turbine [Energinet, 2015].
The planned capacity (9580 MW) will be providing 25.17 TWh of energy annually
till 2030, which will be in addition to the 16 TWh energy production as of 2019.
Hence, bringing the wind share up to approximately 41 TWh by 2030 [Wind Record
Denmark, 2019] (Appendix A.3). In a scenario like such, power needs will fall short
by 9 TWh, which if not provided by additional wind capacity or other clean resources
will be have to be compensated through fossils.
In order to produce the extra 9 TWh energy by 2030, either 4669.98 MW of
additional onshore capacity or 2776.75 MW of additional offshore capacity will be
required to meet the 50 TWh target.3. Or it could also be a mix of both onshore
and offshore energy where the average capacity would be around 3424.65 MW. Based
on this situation- considering a combination of landbased and offshore power grid is
established- the capacity requirements will jump up from 9580 MW to around 13,000
MW.
6.0.2
Existing and Upcoming Capacity Infrastructure
As of May 2020, the maximum capacity of a single onshore turbine in the trial phase
was 10 MW, established by Siemens in Feb 2020 followed by a 9.5 MW capacity
onshore turbine manufactured by Vestas which was set up in Jan 2020 [“Osterild
DK”, 2020]. Apart from these, the onshore fleet of operating turbines since 2015
have been generating energy at a capacity ranging from 10 kWh to 8 MW (refer to
excel sheet provided as attachment for more information).
Similarly, the maximum capacity output of a single offshore turbine operating on
the waters of Denmark has been 8.3 MW. 49 such turbines were established to build
a wind farm by Vestas in December 2018, at the Esbjerg seabed. Since 2018, no new
offshore based turbines have been commissioned however, trials for new and improved
technologies are underway that will have higher capacity to generation ratio.
For example, Siemens Gamesa in 2019 launched a new model for an 8 MW offshore
wind turbine with an improved capacity factor of 48.5%. 1000 units of the model are
expected to enter the market by 2020 [Gamesa; Siemens (8MW), 2020]. Similarly,
Siemens has been continuously designing new and improved offshore technology, of
which a 11 MW and 14 MW model is under development which will have the potential
to produce considerably more energy than their 8 MW turbine4 . Details of these are
summarized in Table 6.2
3The the capacities are calculated using the capacity factors specified in Table 6.1
4The annual energy production is derived through improved capacity factors discussed in the
following text and Table 6.4
==PAGE:63==
44
6 Wind Energy on the Danish Power Grid
Table 6.2:
Evolving offshore capacity and annual energy production of Siemen
Gamesa’s wind turbines
Capacity
Annual Energy
Production
Year of Commercial
Production
Sources
8 MW
34,000 MWh
2020
Gamesa; Siemens (8MW), 2020
11 MW
47,600 MWh
2022
Product11MW; Siemens (11MW), 2020
14 MW
59,500 MWh
2024
Product14MW; Siemens (14MW), 2020
These upcoming products have the potential to meet the requirements for 2030,
considering investments from government and private sector continue. Furthermore,
in a futuristic scenario if a transition of 50 TWh wind energy can be achieved by
2030 then Denmark would be just 22 TWh away from attaining the classic wind
scenario where dependence on oil and gas during peak load hours would be replaced
by biomass and thermal energy [Energinet, 2015; Memorandum, 2016].
Based on the existing and upcoming turbine models and their different capacity
ratings, a few scenarios pertaining to a mixed grid have been presented in the following
section.
These scenarios aim to create an energy system using different mixes of
onshore and offshore capacities
==PAGE:64==
6.1 Proposed Grid Scenarios
45
6.1
Proposed Grid Scenarios
According to the data gathered from the previous sections, it has been deduced that
approximately 1̃3,000 MW of additional capacity will have to be installed and opera-
tional by 2030, in order to meet the targets set for 2030. Since the total capacity is a
mix of both onshore and offshore production, respective share on the power grid can
differ based on individual turbine capacities.
In this section however, 3 scenarios based on the location of the turbine are anal-
ysed, specifics can be seen in Table 6.3. The scenarios considered are fragmented
according to the collective capacity of 13,004.65 MW or 50 TWh energy requirements
for 2030.
Table 6.3: Overview of 3 different scenarios under consideration, with different per-
centages of onshore and offshore share
Scenario 1
Location
% Share
on the Grid
Generation Capacity
(MW)
Annual Energy Produced
(MWh)
Offshore
40%
5201.86
20,000,000.00
Onshore
60%
7802.79
30,000,000.00
Scenario 2
Location
% Share
on the Grid
Generation Capacity
(MW)
Annual Energy Produced
(MWh)
Offshore
50%
6502.325
25,000,000.00
Onshore
50%
6502.325
25,000,000.00
Scenario 3
Location
% Share
on the Grid
Generation Capacity
(MW)
Annual Energy Produced
(MWh)
Offshore
75%
9753.488
37,500,000.00
Onshore
25%
3251.163
12,500,000.00
The scenarios have been shortlisted based on the historic onshore and offshore
energy contribution to the wind sector. As mentioned in the text earlier, 38% of
the wind energy produced in 2019 was through offshore resources and this number is
expected to grow in representation in the near future. Due to this reason, Scenario
1 was selected as a base situation which more or less indicates the current situation.
Scenario 2 shows an ideal case of 50-50 mix, which is a highly likely scenario given
the expansion of the offshore sector. Lastly, Scenario 3 constitutes a more ambitious
mix, which if achieved has the potential to produce relatively efficient power due to
higher capacity factors of offshore turbines.
The selected scenarios are further expanded based on the capacity contribution as
sub-scenarios. For this analysis, 3 different capacities are evaluated for both onshore
and offshore, specified in Table 6.4.
==PAGE:65==
46
6 Wind Energy on the Danish Power Grid
Table 6.4: Shortlisted onshore and offshore capacities for wind grid analysis
Location
Shortlisted Capacity
(MW)
Capacity
Factor
Annual Energy production
(MWh/year)
Offshore
8
0.48
34,000
11
0.49
47,600
14
0.48
59,500
Onshore
3.6
0.22
6,938
4.3
0.22
8,287
10
0.22
19,272
The capacities specified in Table 6.4 are assumed to be the only commercially
available capacity of turbines which will be used in Denmark to attain 50 TWh
energy by 2030. Hence, these have been combined in different percentages in Table
6.5 to evaluate the best possible path to reach the 2030 wind energy targets.
Based on the percentage contributions of capacities, 5 sub-scenarios (which will be
referred to as Cases) are devised. Cases A, B and C will look at the offshore split up
and Cases D and E will look into onshore possibilities. These cases will ultimately be
used to calculate the required number of additional turbine infrastructure to comply
with the demands.
Even though a limited number of cases have been analyzed in Table 6.5, these
hypothetical split up cases can become the basis of prediction for material utilization
and correspondingly, emission production.
==PAGE:66==
6.1 Proposed Grid Scenarios
47
Table 6.5: Amount of turbines required to fulfil scenario demands based on varying contribution of shortlisted capacities
Location
Case
Shortlisted Capacity
(MW)
% Contribution to
the Total Output
Corresponding Energy
Produced (MWh)
Capacity requirement
(MW)
No. of Turbines required
acc. to contribution
Scenario 1 (40% offshore -60% onshore)
Offshore
Case A
8
30%
6,000,000.00
1,411.76
176.47
11
50%
10,000,000.00
2,310.92
210.08
14
20%
4,000,000.00
941.18
67.23
Case B
8
20%
4,000,000.00
941.18
117.65
11
40%
8,000,000.00
1,848.74
168.07
14
40%
8,000,000.00
1,882.35
134.45
Case C
8
40%
8,000,000.00
1,882.35
235.29
11
30%
6,000,000.00
1,386.55
126.05
14
30%
6,000,000.00
1,411.76
100.84
Onshore
Case D
3.6
30%
9,000,000.00
4,669.99
1,297.22
4.3
50%
15,000,000.00
7,783.31
1,810.07
10
20%
6,000,000.00
3,113.33
311.33
Case E
3.6
30%
9,000,000.00
4,669.99
1,297.22
4.3
60%
18,000,000.00
9,339.98
2,172.09
10
10%
3,000,000.00
1,556.66
155.67
Scenario 2 (50% offshore -50% onshore)
Offshore
Case A
8
30%
7,500,000.00
2,647.06
220.59
11
50%
12,500,000.00
4,332.98
262.61
14
20%
5,000,000.00
1,764.71
84.03
Case B
8
20%
5,000,000.00
1,764.71
147.06
11
40%
10,000,000.00
3,466.39
210.08
14
40%
10,000,000.00
3,529.41
168.07
Case C
8
40%
10,000,000.00
3,529.41
294.12
11
30%
7,500,000.00
2,599.79
157.56
14
30%
7,500,000.00
2,647.06
126.05
Onshore
Case D
3.6
30%
7,500,000.00
1,945.83
1,081.02
4.3
50%
12,500,000.00
3,243.05
1,508.39
10
20%
5,000,000.00
1,297.22
259.44
Case E
3.6
30%
7,500,000.00
1,945.83
1,081.02
4.3
60%
15,000,000.00
3,891.66
1,810.07
10
10%
2,500,000.00
648.61
129.72
Scenario 3 (75% offshore -25% onshore)
Offshore
Case A
8
30%
11,250,000.00
2,647.06
330.88
11
50%
18,750,000.00
4,332.98
393.91
14
20%
7,500,000.00
1,764.71
126.05
Case B
8
20%
7,500,000.00
1,764.71
220.59
11
40%
15,000,000.00
3,466.39
315.13
14
40%
15,000,000.00
3,529.41
252.10
Case C
8
40%
15,000,000.00
3,529.41
441.18
11
30%
11,250,000.00
2,599.79
236.34
14
30%
11,250,000.00
2,647.06
189.08
Onshore
Case D
3.6
30%
3,750,000.00
1,945.83
540.51
4.3
50%
6,250,000.00
3,243.05
754.20
10
20%
2,500,000.00
1,297.22
129.72
Case E
3.6
30%
3,750,000.00
1,945.83
540.51
4.3
60%
7,500,000.00
3,891.66
905.04
10
10%
1,250,000.00
648.61
64.86
==PAGE:67==
48
6 Wind Energy on the Danish Power Grid
6.2
Resource and Emission Consequences
To evaluate the resources consumed and emissions produced while generating 50 TWh
through wind turbines by 2030, the 3 MW model developed by Vestas has been up-
scaled [Vestas]. The reason behind building a study based on a 3 MW turbine is
it’s affinity in terms of average onshore turbines around Denmark. As discussed ear-
lier, onshore wind turbine capacities are much lower than their offshore counterparts,
with a few exceptions. Denmark’s onshore sector has over 2000 turbines operating
under the capacity of 1 MW since 2000, of which 1160 turbines have a capacity of
10 kW. These low capacity turbines have a small set up which is usually built by
locals. Following this the capacity range of 3-4.3 MW constitutes a significant part
to the power grid with 630 turbines been commissioned in the last two decades [DEA
overview, 2020]. Due to significant representation and verified LCA analysis of a 3
MW turbine, the model stands out to be credible for up-scaling.
From the LCA studies specified in Chapter 5, it can be noticed that the resource
consumption category comprises of many materials like water, coal, natural gas, cop-
per, lead, etc.
Similarly for air & water emissions, the emitted components are
widespread. Therefore, in order to evaluate the resources consumed and emissions
produced during the life cycle of selected turbines (Table 6.4), specific substances and
components will be considered. This is done to understand how certain substances
and components vary according to variation in turbine capacities. Overview of total
resources consumed and emissions produced during the life cycle of turbines having
different capacities can be found in the Appendix A.4
For resource consumption, iron has been chosen as it is the primarily used metal
during manufacturing. As for air emissions, CO2 has been monitored owing to its
GWP standardization and lastly for water emissions, Chemical Oxygen Demand
(COD) has been considered.
The Table 6.6 presents the amount of iron (for re-
source consumption), CO2 (for air emissions) and COD (for water emissions) used
throughout the life cycle of different turbines.
Table 6.6: Iron consumed and CO2 & COD emissions produced during the life cycle
of different turbines
Location
Capacity
Iron Consumption
(kg/year)
CO2 Emissions
(kg/year)
COD Emissions
(kg/year)
Offshore
8 MW
37,989
474,187
219
11 MW
73,129
912,809
421
14 MW
116,342
1,452,197
669
Onshore
3.6 MW
333
38,630
21
4.3 MW
475
55,114
31
10 MW
2,570
298,074
165
Through Table 6.6, it can be observed that iron consumption for offshore turbines
is much higher than onshore facilities, as the tower established on the seabed is made
of iron and steel. It can also be noticed that a 10 MW onshore turbine produces
==PAGE:68==
6.2 Resource and Emission Consequences
49
59% less CO2 every year when compared to an 8 MW offshore turbine, indicating the
carbon intensive process of establishing an offshore plant.
For further evaluation, the kg/year consumption and emissions values specified
in Table 6.6 are finally correlated with the number of turbines required for every
scenario and case specified in Table 6.5. The resulting values are thus the total iron
consumption and CO2 & COD emission in kg/year and can be found in Table 6.7.
The values highlighted in bold are the optimal cases which indicate minimum
material usage (iron) and emission production (CO2 and COD) for generating energy
within each scenario. For example, to produce 50 TWh of power where contribution
of offshore is 40% and onshore is 60% i.e., Scenario 1, the best wind mix would be
that of:
Offshore (30% * 8 MW + 50% * 11MW + 20% * 14 MW) +
Onshore (30% * 3.6 MW + 50% * 4.3MW + 20% * 14 MW)
.
When comparing Case D and E (onshore variation), it can be noticed that even
though the consumption of resources and emissions produced are higher for Case D
in all scenarios, the number of turbines that will be required are less than the ones in
Case E. The difference in consumption and emission patterns is seen to be marginal
(around 10%) and so is the difference in turbines. However, apart from considering
the amount of input and output (in terms of resources and emissions) that defines
the life cycle of an onshore turbine, another important aspect to factor in is its siting.
Which means that to combat 10% of iron used or CO2 produced or COD released
in water, 6% more turbines will have to be constructed i.e., additional land resource
will be required to produce the same amount of energy (Siting concerns are further
elaborated in the next section- 6.3).
As for the analysis of offshore variation (Case A, B and C), Case B in all scenarios
gives the lowest turbine count but the highest kg/ year consumption and emission
results. For scenario 1 and 2, Case A seems to be optimal as the consumption and
emission numbers are the least. Even the turbine numbers when compared to the
lowest (among Case A, B and C) project an increase of 34 and 42 turbines, for scenario
1 and 2 respectively. However, while considering scenario 3, it can be noticed that
Case B seems to be optimal. This is due to the number of turbine increase to 63 when
Case A is chosen, which is a very high number for infrastructural and land resources.
In which case, kg/year of resource and emissions is considered as a secondary influence.
==PAGE:69==
50
6 Wind Energy on the Danish Power Grid
Table 6.7: Total Iron resources consumed and CO2 & COD emissions produced according to defined cases
Cases
No. of turbines
as per scenario and case
Total Iron
Consumption (kg/year)
Total CO2
Emissions (kg/year)
Total COD
Emissions (kg/year)
Scenario 1
Case A
454
29,888,667
373,073,333
171,913
Case B
420
32,402,667
404,453,333
186,373
Case C
462
29,888,667
373,073,333
171,913
Case D
3,419
2,092,000
242,672,000
134,411
Case E
3,625
1,864,000
216,224,000
119,762
Scenario 2
Case A
567
4,681,785,000
473,041,338
215,125
Case B
525
5,075,580,000
512,829,862
233,219
Case C
578
4,681,785,000
473,041,338
215,125
Case D
2,849
2,510,748,667
204,971,231
112,074
Case E
3,021
2,237,110,667
182,632,110
99,860
Scenario 3
Case A
851
7,022,677,500
709,562,007
322,687
Case B
788
7,613,370,000
769,244,793
349,829
Case C
867
7,022,677,500
709,562,007
322,687
Case D
1,424
1,255,374,333
102,485,616
56,037
Case E
1,510
1,118,555,333
91,316,055
49,930
==PAGE:70==
6.3 Siting
51
6.3
Siting
Another major factor to be considered while planning to establish a wind farm is the
area that wind turbines requires to operate. Land resource plays an important role
in determining the size, location and therefore the production capacity of turbines.
Depending on the location of a turbine and wind speeds experienced at the given
location, the power generation may vary and can be a crucial element to cause fluctu-
ations on the power grid. The siting of turbines is conducted based on a combination
of details like availability of wind speeds, distance from residential areas, availability
of maximum area, noise and shadow casting factors, preservation of fish and bird
species, grid transmission, installation ease, landscape and agricultural interests and
many more. Therefore, assessment and planning of location is a priority driven task
which involves the inputs from many governing bodies [DEA].
Siting criteria for onshore and offshore turbines differ in terms of planning ap-
proach and designated areas. In the case of onshore siting, municipalities and Min-
istry of Environment are involved in planning the legal, administrative and strategic
actions. Whereas, for offshore siting the Energy Agency gets to make the call. Despite
having the authority to permit land use for wind farm construction often, potential
sites can become out of bounds due to environmental impact assessment screening,
negative reaction through public consultation or purely based on economic feasibility
[Cetinay et al., 2017].
Onshore turbines that are less than 25 m high are classified as household turbines
and are excluded from the Danish strategic planning system. While onshore turbines
have a cap of 150 m, beyond which special permission are required by municipalities.
In general, a distance of 4 times the height needs to be observed between a turbine
and nearby building while erecting a structure. Additionally, a minimum distance of
1 to 1.7 times the height of a turbine should be out of bounds due to safety purposes.
And most importantly, distance between two onshore turbines should not be less than
28 times the height, failing which special assessments (like landscaping) have to be
carried out [Anker, 2020].
For offshore, there are no minimum distance requirements between each turbines,
however, legal frameworks differ for nearshore and deepwater wind farms with the
nearest shallow water turbine to be situated almost 4 to 8 kms away from the shore.
Due to availability to space, the Ministry for Climate, Energy and Building holds the
authority to block certain areas for construction of wind farms [Anker, 2020]. Ideally,
a distance between 2 to 14 km needs to be observed for offshore turbine placement
due to the technical aspect of wind recovery distances [Ejling et al., 2005].
==PAGE:71==
52
==PAGE:72==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
The process of finding a suitable mix of wind energy for the Danish power grid has
been analyzed through this thesis by addressing the existent gap in Denmark’s energy
consumption needs. The importance of wind energy in the upcoming power demands,
stands out in comparison to solar, wave and geothermal sources. Being surrounded
by the Baltic sea on one side and the North Sea on the other, the geographical
location of Denmark provides the country with strong wind speeds all year long. The
exemplary topography with flat lands, stretching from one part of the country to the
other further intensifies the opportunity to exploit an interminable natural resource.
Thereby making it compelling to explore the flourishing onshore and offshore energy
sector.
As highlighted earlier, the process of turbine siting is an important factor that
has the potential to influence power production. Together with limited restrictions
on space availability in shallow and deep waters and higher operating capacities of off-
shore turbines, the sea opens up opportunities for expansion [Anker, 2020]. Nonethe-
less, onshore representing almost 61% of the production capacity in 2019, continues
to dominate Denmark’s wind energy production (Appendix A.3).
With annual wind energy production of 41 TWh being planned, of which 60% is
already under operation, Denmark is not far away from delivering on its promised
target of 50 TWh wind energy to attain a 50% renewable energy grid by 2030. Striking
a right balance between onshore and offshore production- assuming the infrastructure
efficiencies do not drastically change from what they are right now- could ensure that
the additional 9 TWh is smoothly transitioned into the power grid.
While factoring in the economical requirements of setting up the infrastructure,
onshore turbines are considered to be a more reasonable option. Moreover, construct-
ing offshore infrastructure is a relatively time consuming process due to less control
over the condition and location of site. Hence, even though expecting a high share
of offshore power sounds attractive, it might not be easily achievable. However, in
the longer time frame a global scenario with offshore as the dominant source of wind
energy will be possible. This will be due to the rise in need for wind energy that will
result in an increase in manufacturing of turbines, thus bringing down the market
prices with new competitors entering the market [EWEA].
==PAGE:73==
54
7 Discussion
The 3 scenarios discussed in Chapter 6, even though built on calculated assump-
tions, have the ability to grasp the production intensity of the wind industry. Through
analysing varied shares of sea and land based energy contributions to the power grid,
an ideal scenario for the coming years has been devised. With respect to the data
derived through the analysis, an ideal scenario going forward would see the offshore
share to be between 50 to 75% and that of land based between 25 to 50% (i.e., higher
than scenario 2 but lower than scenario 3). This energy is assumed to be provided
through shortlisted capacities that are used to calculate infrastructural demands (Ta-
ble 6.4). Considering the next 10 years will see an expansion on the lines of the above
mentioned scenario range, Denmark will be looking at adding between 1,424 to 2,849
onshore turbine. The capacity share of which will consist of 30% turbines having 3.6
MW production capacity, 50% having 4.3 MW and 20% having the highest capacity
of 10 MW till date. This would result in utilizing an area that would comply with the
siting regulations i.e., distance betwen turbines = 28 * height of the turbine [Anker,
2020]. As reference, for setting up the minimum and maximum number of 150 m
turbines, it would require around 17,039,299 and 34,090,564 kms of land, respectively
[Renewable, 2017]. Due to land constrictions, the possibility of generating offshore
energy through maximizing its capacity turns out to be a viable option despite eco-
nomical reasons discussed earlier. With 567 to 788 turbines required for providing 50
to 75% of total wind energy through offshore generation, the sector could bring down
excessive land use. Meanwhile, having the capacity share of 20-30% 8 MW turbines,
40-50% 11 MW turbines and 20-40% highest capacity turbine of 14 MW.
From an LCA point of view, in order to produce the same amount of energy, more
number of higher capacity turbines consume less resources and produce less emissions
when compared to setting up lower capacity turbines. Moreover, higher number of
turbines would mean more land use leading to space exploitation. Therefore, estab-
lishing a scenario for onshore wind production which delivers optimal energy without
intensively utilizing land resource while limiting emissions and material use is a chal-
lenge. Consequently, as per the wind energy data evaluated in Chapter 5 and the
findings of LCIA discussed in Chapter 6, the impacts of additional infrastructure
establishment are more prominent for offshore turbines. This can be linked to the
strong foundation that needs to be set up amidst the sea, which requires extensive
steel and iron resources to establish. When comparing the resources consumed and
emissions produced with the number of turbines required, a balance would have to
be established, as simultaneous optimization of both categories will not be possible
according to the results of Table 6.7.
In hindsight, the emissions produced and resources consumed during the life cycle
of a turbine will be compensated in the form of energy production within a year of
its operation. Furthermore it can also be argued that during the lifetime of a turbine
it will generate cleaner energy which will replace conventional fossil generated power.
This will eventually bring down the total fossil resources consumed even after factoring
in the resources required for manufacturing wind turbines.
Hence, possibility of adding 50 TWh worth of power to the grid by 2030 will not
be beyond reach, considering gradual execution is driven by strong logistical planning.
==PAGE:74==
7 Discussion
55
Challenges
Planning of an improved and sustainable energy system is majorly driven by tech-
nical aspects like bring down consumption through energy savings, improvements in
production efficiency and finding replacement to fossils through viable energy sources.
As development of improved turbine models with efficient capacity factors are already
underway and the sea has proved to be a resourceful commodity, special focus on trans-
mission lines needs to be placed. Seamless integration of renewable energy on the
power grid with minimum grid losses and highest possible level of energy conversion
is crucial. Since distribution and transmission are the key while basing the energy
needs of a country on alternate resources, the costs of implementing integration will
have to be made competitive. This could be done by broadening the already existing
fossil based energy integration model. With hassle-free compatible integration and
storage facilities, reliable supply will be maintained hence providing the provision to
deal with peak hour loads [Energinet, 2015; Lund and Mathiesen, 2014].
Another major change can be implemented through improvements in the EoL
process and resource consumption pattern. Both these stages have the potential of
bringing down the life cycle impacts of turbine production and therefore go hand in
hand. With more disassembled material getting redirected towards manufacturing
units, the raw resources utilized will go down. Moreover, having low emission alter-
natives assessed for existing materials will further reduce the impacts. In parallel, as
renewable energy flourishes it will be used to power the extraction and manufactur-
ing phases which will result in a circular energy system that will eliminate certain
materials and emissions.
On a positive note, due to Denmark’s size, its energy requirements are much lower
than many developed nations of the world. Having a smaller population to cater for
when the country’s renewable energy share amounts to 40% of the total energy con-
sumption in 2020, is beneficial. In an scenario as such, creating public awareness
about sustainable alternatives helps regulate healthy competition within the renew-
able market as it is not faced with public backlash that usually results in interruption
of projects. This is more often done through educational training’s at a very young
age or even through media coverage about such projects. Political assertion about
promoting renewable energy generation through incentives and subsidies also goes a
long way, and with a well informed public, the mandates concerning greener actions
have a high potential of becoming frontrunners. Lastly, it becomes easier to monitor
the progress through evaluation tools when the society prioritizes sustainable living
[Dincer, 2000].
==PAGE:75==
56
==PAGE:76==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
This thesis has evaluated the consumption patterns of Danish energy system and has
calculated the additional energy requirements to fulfil the target of attaining 50%
renewable energy by 2030. With wind being the most important sources of renewable
power production, the country will rely on it to produce 50 TWh of energy by 2030.
The existing power generation capacity along with additional requirements for
major sectors (electricity, transport, heating and industry) amounts for 41 TWh of
energy production. Thus leaving a 9 TWh gap to fill before 2030. To do so onshore
and offshore sources will be required to contribute 25-50% and 50-75%, respectively.
The higher share of offshore will be crucial in reducing the load on land resources
for setting up onshore turbines. Moreover strong wind speeds and therefore higher
production capacity will drive the expansion of sea-based energy industry. The de-
pendence on offshore power will be accompanied by some shortcomings, since its
corresponding infrastructural requirements will be responsible for more resource con-
sumption and emission production in kg/year than onshore. However in retrospect,
the returns through annual energy production of selected offshore capacities (8, 11,
14 MW) will be almost twice as much as the energy produced through a 10 MW on-
shore turbine. 1,424 to 2,849 additional onshore turbines will be manufactured and
established due to convenience of construction on land, of which 3.6 MW capacity will
constitute for 30% of the total onshore share, followed by 50% of 4.3 MW turbines.
The lower turbine capacity for onshore is attributed to the weaker wind speeds on
land as compared to the intensity of wind blowing at the sea.
The extraction of materials for manufacturing of a turbine and its end of life
management will have the ability to bring down the emission potential and excessive
resource consumption.
Recycling and reusing disassembled components like iron,
aluminium, copper and their alloys will thereby limit the global warming contribution
of wind turbines.
It can be argued that Denmark has a very ambitious vision with regards to re-
ducing their carbon footprint. However, as initial targets to reduce dependency on
fossils are met, the room for improvement gets tighter, hence narrowing down the
recourse of optimization. For the country to continue on this journey and achieve
their set targets, research and development of highly efficient transmission lines for
integration will be required. This will not only limit grid losses but will also ensure
stable supply of power and reliability on wind energy. Along with this, investments
in offshore infrastructure with updated capacity factors will be the key to limit land
exploitation and hence can act as the starting point for improvement going forward.
==PAGE:77==
58
==PAGE:78==
CHAPTER 9
Bibliography
Aarhus, K. (2020). Klimaplan 2016-2020.
Agency, D. E. (2017). Danish Experiences from Offshore Wind Development. https:
/ / ens . dk / sites / ens . dk / files / Globalcooperation / offshore{\ _ }wind{\ _
}development{\_}0.pdf
Anker, H. T. (2020). Mapping of the legal framework for siting of wind turbines –
Denmark Helle Tegner Anker Marie Leer Jørgensen. https://ifro.ku.dk/
english/staff/?pure=files{\%}2F143884872{\%}2FIFRO{\_}report{\_
}239.pdf
Azar, C., & Schneider, S. H. (2002). Are the economic costs of stabilising the atmo-
sphere prohibitive, 42, 73–80.
Birol, F. (2010). World Energy Outlook 2009, (January).
Cetinay, H., Kuipers, F. A., & Guven, A. N. (2017). Optimal siting and sizing of wind
farms. Renewable Energy, 101, 51–58. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2016.
08.008
Chipindula, J., Sai, V., & Botlaguduru, V. (2018). Life Cycle Environmental Impact
of Onshore and Offshore Wind Farms in Texas, 1–18. https://doi.org/10.
3390/su10062022
Christopher, R. (2010). Recycling CO 2 into Sustainable Hydrocarbon Fuels : Elec-
trolysis of CO 2 and H 2 O.
Danborg, N.-E., Frede; Clausen. (2013). Offshore wind energy in the South Baltic
Region – challenges and opportunities Publication. https://backend.orbit.
dtu.dk/ws/portalfiles/portal/57802137/South{\_}Baltic{\_}OFFER.pdf
Danish Energy Agency. (2018). Denmark’s Energy and Climate Outlook 2018: Base-
line Scenario Projection Towards 2030 With Existing Measures (Frozen Pol-
icy). www.ens.dk
Danish Government. (2016). For et friere, rigere og mere trygt Danmark.
DEA.
DEA facts. Facts about wind power [Accessed on 22/03/2020].
DEA overview. (2020). Overview of the energy sector [Accessed on 22/03/2020].
DEA Statistics. (2020). Annual and monthly statistics [Accessed on 03/07/2020].
DECO. (2019). Denmark’s Energy and Climate Outlook 2019. https://ens.dk/sites/
ens.dk/files/Analyser/deco19.pdf
Dincer, I. (2000). Renewable energy and sustainable development: A crucial review.
Renewable & sustainable energy reviews, 4(2), 157–175. https://doi.org/10.
1016/S1364-0321(99)00011-8
==PAGE:79==
60
9 Bibliography
Dincer, I., & Rosen, M. A. (2005). Thermodynamic aspects of renewables and sustain-
able development. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 9(2), 169–189.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2004.02.002
EC. (2014). 2030 energy strategy [Accessed on 22/06/2020].
EEA. (2015). Overview of electricity production and use in EU, 25.
EEA. (2016). Overview of electricity production and use in Europe, Indicator Speci-
fication.
EEA. (2018). Overview of electricity production and use in Europe, Indicator Assess-
ment.
EESI. Alternative low / no carbon fuels by environmental and energy study institute
[Accessed on 22/06/2020].
EIA. (2020). Energy sources have changed throughout the history of the united states
[Accessed on 28/02/2020].
Ejling, S., Frandsen, S., Barthelmie, R., Pryor, S., Larsen, S., & Højstrup, J. (2005).
The necessary distance between large wind farms offshore - study The nec-
essary distance between large wind farms offshore - study. https://backend.
orbit.dtu.dk/ws/portalfiles/portal/7711064/ris{\_}r{\_}1518.pdf
Elsam, V. D. (2004). Life Cycle Assessment of offshore and onshore sited wind farms.,
(March).
Energinet. (2015). Energy Concept 2030 – Summary.
Energistyrelsen. (2019). Thor offshore wind farm tender, 2018–2019. https://ens.dk/
en/our-responsibilities/wind-power/ongoing-offshore-projects/thor-offshore-
wind-farm
Europe, W. (2017). Wind energy in Europe: Scenarios for 2030, (September).
Europe, W. (2018). Wind energy in Europe in 2018. https : / / windeurope . org /
wp - content / uploads / files / about - wind / statistics / WindEurope - Annual -
Statistics-2018.pdf
European Commission. Eu emissions trading system (eu ets) [Accessed on 22/06/2020].
European Council. (2017). The 2030 climate and energy framework [Accessed on
22/06/2020].
European Parliament. (2019). The european parliament declares climate emergency
[Accessed on 29/06/2020].
Eurostat. Shares tool [Accessed on 22/06/2020].
EWEA. Wind energy’s frequently asked questions [Accessed on 10/07/2020].
Gamesa, S. A clean energy solution – from cradle to grave Assessing the performance
of a Wind Turbine, Environmental Product Declaration.
Garrett, P. (2019). Life Cycle Assessment of Electricity Production from an onshore
V150-4 . 2 MW Wind Plant November 2019 Authors : Priyanka Razdan ,
Peter Garrett Vestas Wind Systems A / S.
Germany, O. H., & Infi, D. (2011). Wind Energy.
IEA. (2019). World energy outlook 2019, flagship report-november 2019 [Accessed on
02/05/2020].
IEA, SDS. (2019). World energy model scenario analysis of future energy trends
[Accessed on 05/08/2020].
==PAGE:80==
9 Bibliography
61
Irving, S. (2016). application Life cycle assessment of onshore and offshore wind energy
: from theory to application. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.07.058
Kadiyala, A., Kommalapati, R., & Huque, Z. (2017). Characterization of the life
cycle greenhouse gas emissions from wind electricity generation systems. In-
ternational Journal of Energy and Environmental Engineering, 8(1), 55–64.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40095-016-0221-5
KBH Klimaplan. (2010). Kbh 2025 klimaplan -Energiforbrug.
KEFM. (2020). Climate initiatives in denmark [Accessed on 02/05/2020].
Klimarådet. (2017). Transition towards 2030. https://klimaraadet.dk/en/rapporter/
transition-towards-2030.
København. (2012). Kbh 2025 klimaplanen.
Lavidas, G. (2020). Selection index for Wave Energy Deployments ( SIWED ): A
near- deterministic index for wave energy converters. Energy, 196, 117131.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2020.117131
Lund, H. Ã., & Mathiesen, B. V. (2014). Heat saving strategies in sustainable smart
energy systems, 04, 3–16.
Maersk. (2020). What are different signals telling us about the future ?, (March).
MaterialUse, V. (2018). Material Use Turbines 4 MW Platform Turbines, 3–6.
Memorandum, E. (2016). Energy scenarios for 2030, (October).
Midilli, A., Dincer, I., & Ay, M. (2006). Green energy strategies for sustainable devel-
opment. Energy Policy, 34(18), 3623–3633. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.
2005.08.003
Murray, James. (2020). Denmark’s wind power vision to make its electricity sector
fossil-free by 2030 [Accessed on 23/07/2020].
Naturstyrelsen. Offshore Wind Farms and the Environment. https://naturstyrelsen.
dk/media/nst/Attachments/havvindm{\_}korr{\_}16nov{\_}UK.pdf
Osterild DK. (2020), 21129. https : / / www . thewindpower . net / scripts / fpdf181 /
windfarm.php?id=21129
Ountries, C, Martinot, E., Chaurey, A., Lew, D., Moreira, R., & Wamukonya, N.
(2002). R ENEWABLE E NERGY M ARKETS IN D EVELOPING. https:
//doi.org/10.1146/annurev.energy.27.122001.083444
Product11MW. Power for generations The SG 11 . 0-200 DD : Power for Genera-
tions. https://www.siemensgamesa.com/en-int/-/media/siemensgamesa/
downloads/en/products-and-services/offshore/brochures/siemens-gamesa-
offshore-wind-turbine-brouchure-sg-11-0-200-dd.pdf
Product14MW. The winds of change have never been stronger The SG 14-222 DD
: Powering change. https://www. siemensgamesa.com/en- int/- /media/
siemensgamesa/downloads/en/products-and-services/offshore/brochures/
siemens-gamesa-offshore-wind-turbine-brouchure-sg-14-222-dd.pdf
Renewable, G. (2017). GE Renewable Energy GE’s 3 MW Platform.
Rosenbaum, R. K. (2018). Life Cycle Assessment.
Sea, D.-N. (2019). New Danish calls for offshore wind farm tenders. Information
on the Thor offshore We welcome you Investment opportunities in offshore
==PAGE:81==
62
9 Bibliography
wind, (October). https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/Vindenergi/offshore{\_
}wind{\_}tendet{\_}thor{\_}marketing.pdf
Siemens (11MW). (2020). Sg 8.0-167 dd offshore wind turbine [Accessed on 27/07/2020].
Siemens (14MW). (2020). Sg 8.0-167 dd offshore wind turbine [Accessed on 27/07/2020].
Siemens (8MW). (2020). Sg 8.0-167 dd offshore wind turbine [Accessed on 27/07/2020].
Statistics Denmark Population. (2020). Population in denmark [Accessed on 28/02/2020].
https://www.dst.dk/en/Statistik/emner/befolkning-og-valg/befolkning-og-
befolkningsfremskrivning/folketal
Statistics Denmark Projections. (2020). Population projections in denmark [Accessed
on 28/02/2020]. https://www.dst.dk/en/Statistik/emner/befolkning-og-
valg/befolkning-og-befolkningsfremskrivning
Trent, G. F. B. A. (2014). Solar PV Capacity Factor Insights and Comments. http://
www.theravinaproject.org/TheRavinaProject-SolarCapacityFactor0712.pdf
Treyer K., B. C. (2013). Life cycle inventories of electricity generation and power
supply in version 3 of the ecoinvent database—part I: electricity generation.
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007\%2Fs11367-013-0665-2#citeas
UN. (1987). Report of the World Commission on Environment and Development : Our
Common Future Acronyms and Note on Terminology Chairman ’ s Foreword.
UN-DESA. (2019). United nations, department of economic and social affairs, pop-
ulation dynamics, world population prospects 2019. https://population.un.
org/wpp/Download/Standard/Population/
UN SDG. Un projects world population to reach 8.5 billion by 2030, driven by growth
in developing countries [Accessed on 28/02/2020].
Vad, B., Roth, S., & Zinck, J. (2015a). Aalborg Universitet IDA ’ s Energy Vision
2050 A Smart Energy System strategy for 100 % renewable Denmark Søgaard
; Drysdale , Dave ; Connolly , David ; Østergaard , Poul Alberg.
Vad, B., Roth, S., & Zinck, J. (2015b). Aalborg Universitet IDA ’ s Energy Vision
2050 A Smart Energy System strategy for 100 % renewable Denmark Søgaard
; Drysdale , Dave ; Connolly , David ; Østergaard , Poul Alberg.
Vad, B., Zinck, J., & Ridjan, I. (2020). IDA ’ s Climate Response - Transport and
energy solutions 2030.
Vestas. Life Cycle Assessment of offshore and onshore sited wind power plants based
on Vestas V90-3.0 MW turbines, year = 2006, (March).
VestasWind. (2006). Life cycle assessment of electricity produced from onshore sited
wind power plants based on Vestas V82-1.65 MW turbines, 1–77.
Wagner, H.-J., Baack, C., Eickelkamp, T., Epe, A., Lohmann, J., & Troy, S. (2011).
Life cycle assessment of the offshore wind farm alpha ventus. International
Journal of Energy and Environmental Engineering, 36(1), 2459–2464. https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0360544211000594?via\
%3Dihub
Wind Denmark. Production right now [Accessed on 08/07/2020]. https://winddenmark.
dk/vindkort
Wind Energy Denmark. Why wind energy? [Accessed on 08/07/2020]. https : / /
winddenmark.dk/tal-fakta/hvorfor-vindenergi
==PAGE:82==
9 Bibliography
63
Wind Record Denmark. (2019). Wind energy record 2019 [Accessed on 23/07/2020].
WindWatch. https://www.wind-watch.org/faq-output.php
Wuebbles, D. J., & Jain, A. (2001). Concerns about climate change and role of fossil
fuel use. Fuel Processing Technology, 71(2), 99–119. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0378-3820(01)00139-4
==PAGE:83==
64
==PAGE:84==
APPENDIX A
Appendix
All the data that has been used in this thesis is compiled into an excel sheet that
has been submitted along the report. The tables provided below are for the readers
convenience, and contains data that is directly linked to the values mentioned in the
text. For better understanding or cross evaluation please refer to the excel sheet.
A.1
Appendix A- Background
Data used for source of energy production in 2005 and 2016 (for Figure 2.1)
A.2
Appendix B- Renewable Energy Demands
Data used for source of energy consumption in Denmark (for Figure 4.1)
==PAGE:85==
66
A Appendix
Data used for monthly (Jan-April) comparison of energy consumption in Denmark,
for 2019 and 2020 (for Figure 4.2)
Data used for source of energy consumption in Denmark predicted for the coming
year (for Figure 4.3)
Data used for Renewable energy shares for 2020-30 (for Figure 4.4)
==PAGE:86==
A.3 Appendix C- Wind as a Source of Energy
67
A.3
Appendix C- Wind as a Source of Energy
Data used for offshore and onshore wind turbines and capacity in Denmark (for Figure
5.1 and 5.2)
A.4
Appendix D- Wind Energy on the Danish Power
Grid
Data used for calculating the 35% increase. This data is extracted from the previous
table (wind turbines and capacity)
==PAGE:87==
68
A Appendix
Overview of total resources consumed and emissions produced during the life cycle
of turbines having different capacities
==PAGE:88==
==PAGE:89==
