==PAGE:1==
Generative Networks for Modelling
the Sound Field in a Room
Master’s Thesis
DTU Engineering Acoustics
Dept. of Electrical Engineering - Acoustic Technology
By Xenofon Karakonstantis - s182154
Supervised by
Efren Fernandez-Grande
Jonas Brunskog
Diego Caviedes Nozal
==PAGE:2==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Acoustic Technology section of the
Department of Electrical Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in
partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of physics and computation.
Approved by:
Efren Fernandez Grande - Associate Professor - Dept. of Electrical Engineering
Signature
Jonas Brunskog - Associate Professor - Dept. of Electrical Engineering
Signature
Diego Caviedes Nozal - Doctor - Dept. of Electrical Engineering
Signature
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
i
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The necessity of efficiently and accurately modelling the acoustics of enclosures is becoming
increasingly evident in several scientific areas, with recent advancements made in acoustic
computation amongst others, showing promising results. Yet, these models are still far
from perfect as most physically informed models come with a large computational load,
while others offer a rapid estimation of the soundfield at the cost of accuracy. As seen
in multiple other fields, enhancing any physical prediction or estimation task can be
successfully accomplished with the use of Artificial Neural Networks (ANN). This thesis
aims at introducing a data-driven method that can aid in demanding applications which
require a broad-band soundfield estimation or the soundfield in a room based on certain
acoustic characteristics. It is shown that improvements in testing and estimating acoustic
environments can be made by exploiting the properties of Room Impulse Responses
(RIR) and the use of Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) in many acoustic-related
problems. Given a specific training set, these networks learn to generate new data with
the same statistical properties as the training set while simultaneously retaining many
indistinguishable qualities from their real counterparts. Although the use of ANNs and
GANs in the visual/image domain has seen success in a vast number of problems, only
recently have ANNs seen prominence within the field of acoustics. Therefore the novelty of
this approach is demonstrated by utilising the statistical and physical properties of RIRs
together with state of the art acoustic computation methods.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
ii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors Efren Fernandez-Grande and Diego Caviedes Nozal
and Jonas Brunskog for their valuable help and advice throughout the course of this thesis.
I would also like to thank my friends and family, especially Christina, for putting up with
my whining over these past months. It turns out thesis writing is not that simple.
Special thanks goes to Samuel Arturo Verburg Riezu whose willingness to help in any
way allowed for this thesis to be completed. Finally, I would like to thank Alexandros
Roumpelakis for always being an enthusiastic conversationalist and an encouraging friend.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
iii
==PAGE:5==
NOMENCLATURE
Nomenclature
Abbreviations
ADAM Adaptive Moments Algorithm
ANN
Artificial Neural Network
cGAN Conditional GAN
CNN
Convolutional Neural Network
DFT
Discrete Fourier Transform
DL
Deep Learning
EDC
Energy Decay Curve
FFT
Fast Fourier Transform
GA
Geometrical Acoustics
GAN
Generative Adversarial Network
GP
Gradient Penalty
ISM
Image Source Method
LASSO Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator
MAC Modal Assurance Criterion
MLP
Multi-layer Perceptron
MLS
Maximum Length Sequences
MSE
Mean Sum-of-Squares Error
NMSE Normalised Mean Square Error
ReLU Rectified Linear Unit
RIR
Room Impulse Response
SI-SDR Scale Invariant Signal-to-Distortion Ratio
SNR
Signal-to-Noise Ratio
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
iv
==PAGE:6==
SPL
Sound Pressure Level
SRMR Speech-to-Reverberation Modulation Energy Ratio
STFT Short-time Fourier Transform
WGAN Wasserstein GAN
Symbols
δ(.)
Kroenecker delta function
λ
Lagrangian relaxation parameter - numerical optimisation
H
Sensing matrix - plane wave expansion
k
Wavenumber vector
K
Kurtosis
Ψ
Binary permutation matrix - compressed sensing GAN
A
Sensing matrix - compressed sensing GAN
ω
Angular frequency
θ
Generator network weights
n
Noise vector
p
Sound pressure vector
xc
Plane wave coefficients - plane wave expansion
xG
Generated data vector
xreal
Real data vector
yrec
Reconstructed impulse response
ytruth Ground truth impulse response
z
Latent vector - Input to G(.)
C50
Clarity 50 ms
D(.)
Discriminator or Critic network
D50
Definition 50 ms
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
v
==PAGE:7==
Fs
Signal sampling frequency
G(.)
Generator network
J(.)
Cost function
KL
Kullback-Leibler divergence
T30
Reverberation time
W1
Wasserstein Distance
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
vi
==PAGE:8==
CONTENTS
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
2
2
Theory
5
2.1
Analysing the Soundfield in a Room . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Room Impulse Responses
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Geometrical Acoustics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Plane Wave Expansion - Wavenumber Transformation . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.5
Deep Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.6
Compressed Sensing and Generative Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.7
Chapter Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3
Methodology
29
3.1
Room Impulse Response Synthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2
Parametrisation of Conditional GAN for Room Acoustics
. . . . . . . . . .
36
3.3
Bandwidth Extension of Reconstructed RIRs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.4
Chapter Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4
Results and Evaluation
50
4.1
WaveGAN Inference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.2
Room Impulse Response Synthesis with a Conditional GAN . . . . . . . . .
59
4.3
Room Impulse Response Bandwidth Extension . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
4.4
Chapter Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
5
Discussion
101
5.1
WaveGAN Inference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
5.2
Conditional GAN in Room Acoustics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
5.3
Extending Band-limited Room Impulse Responses
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
6
Conclusions
104
7
Future Review
105
Bibliography
106
A Cycle consistent GAN
114
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
vii
==PAGE:9==
B Soundfield Reconstruction
118
B.1
Reconstructed Soundfields . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118
B.2
Reconstructed Room Impulse Responses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
C Synthesised Impulse Responses
124
C.1
Phase Shuffle (WaveGAN) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
C.2
Bandwidth Extended Frequency Responses
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
1
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
1
Introduction
Modelling the soundfield in simple rooms is a process that most commonly requires
analytical, closed form solutions. These yield results with a high degree of accuracy at
frequencies where the sound pressure satisfies the Helmholtz equation [1]. Modelling
the soundfield at high frequencies or in convoluted enclosures is a difficult task, usually
requiring heavy numerical computation or exploiting statistical aspects of sound propagation.
Employing geometrical aspects of a room in conjunction with certain physical aspects of
sound propagation can also lead to a fairly valid approximation of the sound field at high
frequencies. A model that can provide a meticulous estimate at all frequencies is something
that has concerned acousticians for decades [2].
Having the ability to accurately model a soundfield is vital for multiple applications. This
is seen in architectural acoustics [3] real-time audio rendering in virtual environments and
games [4, 5], the assessment of noise propagation in workrooms [6] or the impact that
sound propagation in a room has when regarding education [7] among others.
Typically these analyses are performed based on simulations (i.e. geometrical acoustics (GA)
methods such as the Image Source Method (ISM) [8, 9] or ray-tracing techniques, [10–14],
acoustic radiosity [15, 16], combinations of GA methods [17, 18] or numerical predictions
using methods such as the finite element method (FEM) [19, 20], the boundary element
method (BEM) [21, 22], the finite-difference time-domain method (FDTD) [23] or analytic
models and certain hybrid methods [24]). Otherwise the soundfield is obtained based on
experimental measurements, most commonly using an array of transducers which enables
to capture the spatio-temporal properties of the sound field (i.e. soundfield reconstruction
via volumetric sampling [25, 26]).
All of the aforementioned methods are fairly reliable, with each method showing distinct
proficiency in particular problems. The competence each individual method exhibits
does not necessarily compensate for each methods’ limitations. Regarding simulations for
example, wave-based or analytic methods are extremely accurate at low and occasionally mid
frequencies, due to their ability to accurately model scattering and diffraction phenomena
[27]. Be that they are very expensive computationally at high frequency modelling and
require extensive knowledge of the topology and acoustic properties of boundaries, which are
often not available and can be unreliable. This complication usually leads to a combination
of e.g. numerically solving the wave equation for low and mid frequencies (possibly up
to the Schroeder frequency) and using GA methods such as ray-tracing for the high
frequency analysis. On the other hand, ray-tracing is not accurate at low frequencies,
due to the strong modal presence in rooms and the underlying assumptions of non-wave
based propagation. Another important drawback of the above simulations is that the
uncertainty in the input data often leads to biased (often meaningless) predictions as
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
2
==PAGE:11==
opposed to soundfield reconstruction techniques, which do not require knowledge of the
source and boundary conditions of a room. However, these experimental methods also show
limitations. They provide a high degree of accuracy up to a certain frequency limit usually
defined by the acoustic characteristics of the room with respect to sparsity (e.g. spatial or
modal sparsity / reverberation), or the physical limitations with respect to discretisation of
space (e.g. transducer array / loudspeaker array resolution). After these upper frequency
limits, severe artefacts can occur.
The motivation behind this thesis is to examine the use of deep learning (DL) and GANs
for acoustic analysis problems in rooms. Hence, the purpose is two-fold: on the one hand it
examines GANs as a means to generate realistic RIRs in numerical simulation frameworks,
and on the other hand to examine the reconstruction of corrupted experimental data by
alleviating some of the artefacts associated with measurement approaches (with an emphasis
on spatial sampling). These data-driven methods can learn the complex relationships
between features and desired labels or actions, or between features themselves [28]. The
main requirement is that the amount and quality of available data must be sufficient
enough to generalise over the model. The learning process can be guided by “hand-crafted”
features (supervised) to incorporate knowledge of the way sound behaves in a room, with
respect to the ambient conditions (i.e. under normal conditions the static pressure and
temperature p0 = 101.3 kPa and T0 = 20°C respectively). As GAN based research has
proliferated in recent years [29], their potential in modelling soundfields becomes evident
when considering their adaptability to problem-specific scenarios as seen in abundance (i.e.
Cycle consistent GANs [30]). These ANNs can often indistinguishably model the data they
are trained on, and at the same time generate new, unseen variations.
Undoubtedly, the use of neural networks under the veil of acoustics has many applications.
Such applications can be seen in acoustic source localisation with the use of neural networks
[31–36], speech dereverberation [37] and source separation [38] among others. Similarly,
GAN-based research exists in abundance for image processing and less for audio processing.
Some examples of the latter can be seen in speech bandwidth extension [39], speech
recognition [40] as well as speech generation [41] and timbral audio manipulation [42].
These do not however examine the direct applications on room impulse responses rather
than attempt to generalise on audio and speech signals.
In order to build upon this line of literature, this thesis proposes the use of ANNs to:
(a) synthesise room impulse responses with the use of a GAN and evaluate the results
acoustically
(b) condition the GAN on knowledge of RIR acoustic parameters to examine the extent
of which it can learn based on acoustic information
(c) examine its capabilities when used within the framework of an acoustic inverse
problem
Therefore, the present thesis will follow a structured approach to introduce DL techniques
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
3
==PAGE:12==
to room acoustics within the confines of generative modelling, an area of interest that is
under-examined as it involves state of the art algorithms and an ongoing field of research.
Therefore the thesis is organised as follows: first, the theory involved in the generative
approach to room acoustics is presented in chapter 2. Fundamental concepts of room
acoustic analysis and modelling are given in sections 2.1 and 2.2 while the methods used
to generate the much needed RIR data are presented in section section 2.3 respectively.
The process of soundfield reconstruction from scarce measurements is presented in section
section 2.4. In sections 2.5 and 2.6 DL and generative modelling concepts are introduced in
order to avoid confusion when using the problem specific terminology. This establishes the
necessary grounds for adversarial learning with the use of RIRs. Chapter 3 involves the
specific methodology adhered to in order to carry out the implementation, the results of
which are presented in chapter 4. Each section of the aforementioned chapters corresponds
to a partially independent application using generative modelling. Those of the inference
of RIRs, conditioning the GAN on prior (acoustic) knowledge and finally, extending the
bandwidth of aliased RIR reconstructions. Hence, they can be read either in chronological
order or in order of the corresponding application. Chapter 5 focuses on comprehending
the results which lead to the conclusions that be drawn from the analysis in chapter 6.
Finally, further suggestions to expand the present study are made in chapter 7 which serves
as an epilogue to the thesis.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
4
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
2
Theory
This chapter describes the theoretical background necessary to synthesise and predict the
sound field in a room. While there are certainly many generative algorithms capable of
high level feature representation, those of GANs are amongst the most successful, it is
therefore interesting to utilise them to model sound pressure distributions as a function of
time (RIRs).
In the following sections a physical description of the behaviour of sound pressure in a room
is delineated, in accordance to predetermined room properties. Moreover, a description
of how the sound pressure as a function of time can be represented in the form of a RIR
and the information that can be deduced from the RIR are established. Furthermore, an
introduction is given to the concept of soundfield reconstruction from a finite measurement
array by means of plane wave expansion. Finally, the fundamental concepts of an ANN in
conjunction with adversarial learning is introduced, preparing the reader for the approach
that is to follow.
2.1
Analysing the Soundfield in a Room
This section is meant to briefly introduce the analytical and statistical methods used for
the purpose of describing sound propagation in rectangular enclosures. The section begins
by presenting the description of the modal superposition of sound fields at low frequencies
and follows with a brief description of diffuse sound fields.
2.1.1
Modal Analysis
The variation of sound pressure in any rectangular room or cavity, excited by any amount
of sources s can be described by the wave equation [43],
∇2p(r, t) −1
c2
∂2p(r, t)
∂t2
= s(r, t),
(2.1)
where p(r, t) is the sound pressure observed at location r and time t, ∇2 describes the
Laplacian operator with respect to spatial coordinates and c is the speed of sound in m/s.
The term s(r, t) represents a distribution of sources, assuming the room is excited by one
or many sources.
In the case of rigid walls and a harmonic analysis with angular frequency ω = 2πf and the
wave number k = ω/c, (2.1) can be defined its time-independent form
∇2ˆp + k2ˆp = ˆs ,
(2.2)
which describes the inhomogeneous Helmholtz equation. In case of no source excitation,
(ˆs = 0) eq. (2.2) corresponds to the eigenvalue problem in a rectangular room, otherwise
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
5
==PAGE:14==
known as the homogeneous Helmholtz equation, where k corresponds to the eigenvalue
of the Laplacian ∇2ˆp. Assuming rigid walls and no losses from the medium, then the
boundary conditions of (2.2) can be written as [1]
∇ˆp · ˆn = 0 ,
(2.3)
rendering the expression for the pressure gradient ∇ˆp equal to zero at the boundaries.
The solution to the inhomogeneous Helmholtz equation can be described by the Green’s
function in an enclosure of volume V as
p(k, r) = G(r, r0) = −1
V
X
m
ψm(r)ψm(r0)
k2 −k2m
,
(2.4)
such that the enclosure is excited by a point source of constant volume acceleration,
ˆs(r, r0) = −δ(r −r0) ,
(2.5)
where r and r0 correspond to the source and receiver locations respectively, τm is the time
constant of the mth mode that accounts for its temporal decay, k is wavenumber of the
excitation frequency and km is the wavenumber at the natural frequencies (eigenvalues).
The functions ψm correspond to the eigenmodes of the homogeneous Helmholtz equation.
For a rectangular enclosure and assuming cartesian coordinates, these have the closed form
of
ψN(x, y, z) = √ϵnxϵnyϵnzcos
nxπx
lx

cos
nyπy
ly

cos
nzπz
lz

,
(2.6)
where nx, ny and nz are the non-negative integers determining the eigenfunction values
for each dimension, ϵnx, ϵny, ϵnz correspond to normalisation factors and lx, ly, lz are the
dimensions of the enclosure. The eigen-frequencies fN take the form
fN = c
2
snx
lx
2
+
ny
ly
2
+
nz
lz
2
.
(2.7)
2.1.2
Diffuse Sound Field
The diffusivity of a room has many interpretations, however in this section the so-called
‘pure-tone’ model is adopted [1]. Assuming a sound field is considered diffuse, it consists of
mutually incoherent plane waves coming from all directions with the form
ˆp(θ, φ) =
C
√
4π ej(ωt−kxx−kyy−kzz)
(2.8)
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
6
==PAGE:15==
and
ˆp(θ, φ) = C
√π coskzz ej(ωt−kxx−kyy)
(2.9)
near the walls, where C normalised by
√
4π or √π is the amplitude of the respective
wave, ω is the angular frequency and kx, ky, kz correspond to the components of the
wavenumber vector expanded in spherical coordinates [1]. This leads to an expression for
the mean-square pressure of
p2
rms = |C|2
2

1 + sin2kz
2kz

,
(2.10)
implying the existence of a standing wave when the variable normal to the boundaries z is
less than half a wavelength from the boundary. What characterises diffuse sound fields
is a uniform sound pressure distribution (spatial diffusion or homogeneity) and uniform
incident intensity distribution (directional diffusion or isotropy) [44].
2.2
Room Impulse Responses
Any two points in an enclosure may be considered as the input and output terminal of an
acoustic transmission system. Assuming the acoustic transmission system is linear and
time-invariant then the acoustic properties of the system can be entirely characterised by
its impulse response or otherwise, the output signal which is the response to an impulsive
input signal represented by the Dirac function δ(t). The response cannot precede the
excitation signal of the enclosure and thus, must be causal. If the acoustic enclosure is
that of a room then if the RIR h(t) is known, any output signal sout(t) can be obtained
with respect to its input sin(t) as
sout(t) =
Z ∞
−∞
sin(τ)h(t −τ)dτ = sin(t) ∗h(t),
(2.11)
where ∗denotes the convolution operation. It should be noted that eq. (2.11) follows the
commutative property and sin can be time flipped in exchange for the impulse response h.
The RIR is also filtered by the source and the receiver, meaning the true RIR is obtained
by deconvolving these responses from the measured response. In practice, pseudo-Gaussian
noise in the form of maximum length sequences (MLS) and linear or exponential sine
sweeps are used as an excitation [45]. This is due to the straight-forward process of
obtaining the cross-correlation between the input and output signals of an FFT-analyser
in the case of MLS, and the ease of applying a time reversed deconvolution filter (in the
frequency domain) when using a swept sine technique. MLS signals usually require an
averaging of periodic repeats of the excitation to reduce the effect of noise and loudspeaker
non-linearities. Hence, pink noise and exponential sweep are preferred as they have have
power spectral densities that are inversely proportional to frequency, favouring a greater
signal to noise ratio in the low frequencies.
The RIR can be shown to contain all information about the acoustics of a room between a
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
7
==PAGE:16==
given source position and receiver position. The acoustic pressure as a function of time at
a certain point in a room emitted from a broadband source, is generally considered to be
an interchangeable term with the RIR, so long as the acoustic transducer used has been
calibrated to acoustic pressure. This can be expressed as
p(t) = 1
sh(t)
(2.12)
where s represents the sensitivity of the microphone in conversion from instantaneous
pressure to voltage. However, this is only true on the grounds that the both source and
receiver are omni-directional.
Within the framework of room acoustics, the reverberation in a room is the result of sound
reflected numerous times at the room boundaries. This means that a listener can notice
the direct sound as well as a series of delayed reflections. This is demonstrated in the
energy response of Figure 2.1
Figure 2.1: The energy response of a room plotted against time
The direct sound of a RIR, largely determines the perceived direction of sound incidence.
The boundary reflections are delayed due to the longer path of sound propagation. These
early reflections are vital for speech intelligibility, the clarity of music, the impression of
the auditory source width and their presence enhances the perceived loudness. The late
reflections (t ≥[50 −80] ms) mostly epitomise the reverberation of the response and are
considered diffuse.
Objective parameters which characterise the room and can be determined by analysing its
response include the reverberation time, strength, clarity, the speech intelligibility among
others. Analysing these parameters allows for a detailed description of the acoustic energy
in the room.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
8
==PAGE:17==
2.2.1
Room Acoustic Parameters
Usually the term ‘room acoustic parameters’ refers to the subjective evaluation of the
acoustic qualities which are derived from the impulse response of the room. These measures
allow for a characterisation of e.g. the ease of speech comprehension (otherwise known
as speech intelligibility) or the disturbance caused due to high energy reflections in the
response. They are used quite often to evaluate an acoustic enclosure under the precedence
that measures such as those mentioned previously are more important that the modal
analysis of the room. The parameters considered here were specifically chosen as the most
relevant to this thesis, therefore only the following few will be mentioned. However, they
are amongst the most prominent room descriptors as defined in the ISO 3382-1 standard.
Definition D50
Definition is an acoustic parameter obtained from the early energy of an RIR which
conventionally describes the speech intelligibility of the room. It can be defined as
D50 =
 Z 50ms
0
h2(t)dt
. Z ∞
0
h2(t)dt

∗100%
(2.13)
where both integrals must include the direct sound, the arrival of which at the observer
determines at the time t = 0. D will be 100 % if the impulse response does not contain
any components with delays in excess of 50 ms. It implies that RIRs with most of their
components less than t0 = 50 ms will be more intelligible for speech as a percentile of
empirically measured articulation tests [6].
Clarity C50
Clarity is a quantity which is formally similar to definition but intended to characterise the
transparency of music in a concert hall however is also used to describe speech intelligibility.
The typical ranges of clarity is from -5 to +5 dB. In some cases a small change in the
arrival time of a strong reflection may result in a significant change in the value of C50
however it is still deemed highly reliable to categorise the suitability of concert halls and
auditoria. Clarity can be defined as
C50 =
 Z 50ms
0
h2(t)dt
. Z ∞
50ms
h2(t)dt

dB
(2.14)
where the numerator defines early energy of the response power, up to 50 ms (occasionally
80 ms), while the denominator defines the late, decaying energy of the RIR.
Reverberation Time T 30
Often considered the most important of the subjective parameters, reverberation refers
to the gradual sound decay after the sudden stop of a sound source or after an impulsive
sound. Factors that affect the reverberation in a room regard absorptive area in the room,
the room size and scattering objects among others. The measure often used to describe
reverberation is the reverberation time T60 referring to the time it takes for the initial
sound source pressure level to decay by 60 dB. When a diffuse sound field is assumed
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
9
==PAGE:18==
typically this is estimated with Sabine’s equation,
T = 0, 163 V
Sα ,
(2.15)
where V is the volume of the room under examination, S is the area of the wall surfaces,
α is the average absorption coefficient. This holds approximately true when α ≪1. In
practice reverberation time is estimated from the sound decay after an impulsive excitation,
hence, from the energy of components of an impulse response. The ‘integrated impulse
response’ introduced by Schroeder [46] consists of the following steps:
Assuming p(t) is RIR or measured sound pressure as a function of time,
• integration of the reversed in time energy p2(t),
• subtracting the energy components according to their delay until the direct sound
component.
The first can be realised by the following relation,
E = h2(t < 0) =
Z ∞
0
p2(τ)dτ ,
(2.16)
while the latter corresponds to
h2(t) = E −
Z t
0
p2(τ)dτ =
 Z ∞
0
p2(τ)dτ −
Z t
0
p2(τ)dτ

=
Z ∞
t
p2(τ)dτ ,
(2.17)
where h2(t) corresponds to the Energy Decay Curve (EDC). Assuming that the background
noise of the measurement is known, Lundeby et al. [47] point out a method to apply a
correction to the decay curve that has been underestimated. This is done by determining
the starting point of the integration t1 as the intersection between the horizontal line
through the background noise and a sloping line through a representative part of the
squared RIR in a logarithmic scale so that the energy decay is estimated as
E =
Z t
t1
p2(τ)d(−τ) + C ,
(2.18)
where C corresponds to the correction factor between t1 and infinity. Usually it is assumed
that C follows an exponential decay with the same rate as the RIR decay between t0 and
t1, where t0 is the time corresponding to a level of 10 dB higher than the amplitude at t1.
A linear regression is then performed on the estimated EDC’s for each fractional octave
(1/3) band-passed RIR and T60 is estimated as the time value of this line when the decay is
−60 dB. It should be noted however, that in most cases due to a high level of background
noise, the decay is usually approximately linear up till a value of −30 dB, sometimes less.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
10
==PAGE:19==
Therefore T60 can be estimated as two times the value at T30 or three times the value at
T20, etc.
2.3
Geometrical Acoustics
Broad-band RIR simulation is usually limited to combinations of analytical and numerical
models at low frequencies and stochastic - geometrical models at high frequencies. The
approach of geometrical acoustics is justified whenever the dimensions of the room and its
boundaries are large compared to the wavelength.
Hence, complex phenomena such as diffraction, occlusion other complex losses are not
included in this model. It should be noted that the broad class of acoustical modelling
named ‘Geometrical Acoustics’ is extended a lot further than the brief reference to the
methods used in this thesis. Hence, this serves as an overview exclusively of the methods
that were used in the simulation process.
2.3.1
Image Source Method
Figure 2.2: An example of image sources (up to third order) corresponding to a source
placed in the corner of the room
The concept behind the algorithm of the Image Source Method (ISM) is that the sound
field due to a point source in a half-space bounded by a rigid wall is equal to the sound field
without the wall but with the addition of a symmetrically (to the original source) placed
point source (image source). This assumption is valid on the basis that Equation 2.3 is
satisfied at the boundaries of the room. Allen and Berkley [48] proved that the formulation
of infinite image sources in a room with rigid boundaries is equivalent to Green’s function
by formulating a time-domain solution such that the pressure in a room measured at a
position r = (x0, y0, z0) driven by a point-image- source at position r0 = (x, y, z) can be
described by
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
11
==PAGE:20==
p(r, r0, t) =
8
X
p=1
∞
X
r=−∞
1
4π|Rp −Rr|δ

t −|Rp −Rr|
c

,
(2.19)
with the summation is carried out for the vectors Rp = (x ± x0, y ± y0, z±, z0), denoting
distance from the original source (r −r0) and from the the image (r + r0) and the vectors
Rr = 2(nLx, lLy, mLz), (where n, l, m ∈Z+) denoting the growing distance of each new
image for room dimensions (Lx, Ly, Lz). This corresponds to a two times four point source
summations as the images for 2 dimensions (4 walls) also have images that are accounted
for from the ceiling.
Most simulation software applies the modified non-rigid wall case of this method
p(r, r0, t) =
1
X
p=0
∞
X
r=−∞
β|n+q|
x1
β|n|
x2 β|l+j|
y1
β|l|
y2β|m+k|
z1
β|m|
z2
4π|Rp −Rr|
δ

t −|Rp −Rr|
c

,
(2.20)
where p = (q, j, k) and r = (n, l, m) are integer vectors (for six summations over p with
n, l, m ∈[0, 1]) and where Rp is now Rp = (x + (2q −1)x0, y + (2j −1)y0, z + (2k −1)z0).
The terms βx1 · · · βz2 are the wall reflection coefficients where e.g. the wall x1 corresponds
to the wall with a normal vector parallel to the x-axis and passes through the origin.
Similarly, x2 denotes the wall that has a normal vector parallel to its corresponding axis
but does not pass through the origin. The Kroenecker delta function δ(t) is modelled with
the use of a fractional delay filter (windowed sinc function) that introduces a global delay
in the RIR of the form,
δ(t) =





1
2

1 + cos

2πt
Tw

sinc(t)

if −Tw/2 ≤t ≤Tw/2
0
otherwise
,
(2.21)
with Tw being a parameter that controls the width of the sinc function. It should be noted
that this method has been expanded multiple times to incorporate more complex room
models and precision (e.g. arbitrary room shape [9]).
2.3.2
Ray Tracing
The main principle of ray-tracing is to cast rays from a sound source, reflect them, and
register valid paths. Provided the medium is homogeneous, an infinitesimally small part of
a spherical wave generated by a point source in the room can be analysed as a ray (much
like optics). The ray is considered lossless as long as the environment is stationary and
anechoic but most modern algorithms incorporate air attenuation by reducing the ray’s
energy according to the flight distance and the attenuation coefficient.
The rays are usually emitted from the source according to a pre-defined distribution
or randomly (Monte-Carlo simulations). However due to the fact that there are many
variants of ray-tracing it should be noted that this work uses deterministic ray-tracing
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
12
==PAGE:21==
in conjunction with the ISM. Hence, whenever a ray hits a wall, a reflection occurs, and
the ray continues in a new direction based on a random angle incidence scheme which
occasionally incorporates scattering by finite objects. The ray is attenuated whenever it
hits a wall according to predefined wall absorption coefficients calculated or measured
with diffuse-field assumptions. The wall reflection history is compared to that of the ISM
(visible) sources and an “audibility” check of specular reflections is performed by checking
the indices of a wall list. This list is cross-referenced with the image source locations,
listing each image source contribution once only. It is beyond the scope of this thesis to
provide a comprehensive overview of the various ray-tracing models, thus, the reader is
encouraged to read the available literature [5, 6].
2.4
Plane Wave Expansion - Wavenumber Transformation
The general solution to the three dimensional homogeneous Helmholtz equation (2.2) with
unknown boundary conditions can be expressed in terms of a sum of plane waves [43],
otherwise known as plane wave expansion,
p(k, r) =
L
X
i=1
P(ki)e−jki·r ,
(2.22)
where P(ki) corresponds to the wavenumber spectrum of the ith wavenumber vector
ki = (kxi, kyi, kzi) with k2
i = k2
xi + k2
yi + k2
zi. The exponential term corresponds to a
plane/evanescent wave basis however this analysis is only concerned with propagating
waves such that k2 ≥k2
x + k2
y. This can be considered as analogous to disregarding abstract
diffraction phenomena in favour of generalisation and far-field approximation.
The pressure field in Eq. (2.22) is approximated as a finite summation over L plane waves
with a wavenumber vector uniformly distributed over the surface of a sphere. Assuming it is
sampled at M positions, with M ∈Z+, then it can be expressed as the linear transformation
p = Hxc;
H =


e−jk1r1
e−jk2r1
· · ·
e−jkLr1
...
...
...
...
e−jk1rM
e−jk2rM
· · ·
e−jkLrM

,
(2.23)
where p ∈CM, represents the complex-valued measurements at M microphone positions
of a discretised n-dimensional space (n ∈{1, 2, 3}), H ∈CM×L is the transfer matrix,
consisted of M × L plane-wave basis functions and xc ∈CL corresponds to the L unknown
plane-wave coefficients.
This expression leads to the formulation of an ill-posed problem when typically the
measurements are less than the number of coefficients (M < L). The solution to this
problem, the task of recovering the unknown coefficients xc, is then obtained in terms of
convex optimisation.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
13
==PAGE:22==
The fundamental form of this optimisation problem takes on the form of [49]
min
xc ||xc||p
s.t.
p = Hxc ,
(2.24)
where || · ||p is the lp vector norm,
||xc||p =
 X
i
|xi|p
1/p
.
(2.25)
The most common adaptations of this form of convex optimisation in acoustics leads to
the Titkhonov regularisation (l2 norm) in its Lagrangian form
min
xc {||Hxc −p||2
2 + λ||xc||2
2} ,
(2.26)
where λ is the regularisation parameter that weights the bias term (norm penalty). This
leads to the “least-squares” closed form solution
xc = HH(HHH + λI)−1p ,
(2.27)
where I is the identity matrix and the superscript H refers to the Hermitian transpose. In
the case where λ is zero, Similarly, the l1-minimisation problem in its Lagrangian form is
carried out with LASSO regression as
min
xc {||Hxc −p||2
2 + λ||xc||1} ,
(2.28)
when spatial or temporal sparsity is exploited. This is usually done under the veil of
compressive sensing [50]. Theoretical guarantees of the reconstruction of x rely on the
incoherence of the columns of the sensing matrix H and that H satisfies the conditions
inherent from the Restricted Isometry Property (RIP) or the related criteria (e.g. Restricted
Eigenvalue Condition - REC) [51].
Regularisation with the l1 norm usually yields coefficients that promote sparsity, a fact
that is particularly useful when analysing frequencies in rooms where the modal overlap
is not especially high. This leads to an improved reconstruction [26] where the l2 norm
is sub-optimal. For example, oblique modes in a shoe-box room can be decomposed
into a mere eight interfering plane waves with distinct directions assuming the boundary
conditions satisfy equation (2.3) [1]. The sound field in damped rooms are particularly
straightforward to reconstruct due it consisting of fewer interfering plane waves than more
reverberant rooms. This also however, elicits uncertainty above the Schroeder frequency,
or the frequency at which the modal overlap is significantly high and the sound-field is
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
14
==PAGE:23==
considered to be isotropic in behaviour. In other words, the sound field is diffuse with
many interfering plane waves. The Schroeder frequency can be described by the relation,
fsch = 2000
r
Trev
V
,
(2.29)
where Trev is the reverberation time of the room and V is the volume of the room. Above
this frequency most of the plane wave coefficients cannot be considered to be equal to zero
when the room is lightly damped, thus the assumption of plane wave sparsity does not
necessarily hold true. Simply put, a big challenge for reconstruction is the small spatial
fluctuations of sound pressure level, a characteristic of high frequencies. Nonetheless, other
forms of sparsity can be exploited such as e.g. when the sources rendering the sound field
are sparse [52].
On the other hand, the l2 norm promotes smoothness in the plane wave coefficients,
in terms of minimum energy, but does this at the expense of angular resolution of the
incoming waves. This often leads to higher errors at low frequencies as the l2 norm is more
prone erroneous measurement noise and outliers. Of course, it is also common that these
regularisation methods are used in conjunction which takes the form of e.g. locally sparse
assumptions (block-based) as seen in [53].
Finally, further errors are introduced, independent of regularisation choice, when the
wavelength is comparable to the spacing of the transducers used in the measurement array
(measurement vector p). This phenomenon, often called spatial aliasing, will be analysed in
detail in section section 4.1.3, where it becomes evident that it is very difficult to overcome
the physical limitations inherent in the measurement process.
2.5
Deep Learning
It is without a doubt that computational methods used for prediction and pattern recog-
nition in recent years have enabled wide advances in the automated data processing
capabilities across many fields. These methods are broadly termed Machine Learning and
involve the use of algorithms set to automatically detect and utilise patterns found in data.
They are often divided in two major categories, supervised and unsupervised learning. The
former method regards the use of labelled or conditioned (in the Bayesian sense) input
and output pairs to perform the predictive mapping, while the latter does not use labelled
data and relies on the recognition of patterns among the input data to predict the output.
Some of the most well established machine learning methods used for prediction are those
associated with the term DL. This regards the use of ANNs with a certain depth [28], as
will be elucidated in the following subsections.
2.5.1
Artificial Neural Networks
As opposed to other machine learning methods, ANN’s have a fixed number of adaptive
basis functions or parametric forms with parameters that are adapted during training.
The most basic form of a neural network is the feed-forward neural network or multi-layer
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
15
==PAGE:24==
perceptron (MLP). According to the universal approximation theory [28], a feed-forward
network with a linear output layer and at least one hidden layer with any activation
function (e.g. logistic sigmoid) can approximate any Borel measurable function from one
finite-dimensional space to another with any desired nonzero amount of error, given that
the hidden units are sufficient.
A feed-forward MLP is comprised of multiple layers of logistic regressors (rather than
perceptrons which serve as binary classifiers). The models are referred to as feed-forward
because of the way information is structured to flow from inputs to outputs while transi-
tioning through certain hidden layers which perform an additional transformation of the
data. The first of such transformations occurs on the input variables of the network with
M linear combinations as such
αj =
M
X
i=1
w(1)
ji xi + b(1)
j0 ,
(2.30)
where αj corresponds to the output or activation of the jth unit of the first layer and w(1)
ji ,
b(1)
j0 are the weights and biases of the first layer respectively. Similarly the output a node
corresponding to the second layer can be expressed as,
αk =
M
X
j=1
w(2)
kj zj + b(2)
k0 ,
(2.31)
where k = 1, ..., K and K corresponds to the total number of outputs. The ANNs learns
these parameters which when followed by a fixed non-linear function (activation function),
it is able to represent the feature space in an affine space.
Activation Functions
The activation function provides a non-linear transformation to an otherwise linear model
described by Equation 2.30.
These transformations can be expressed in the form of
zj = h1(αj) where h(.) denotes the activation function. Similarly, y(2)
k
= h2(ak), which
amounts to an output of the two layer ANN which can be seen in Figure 2.3.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
16
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.3: A two layer artificial neural network. The input, hidden and output variables
are represented by nodes, and the weight parameters are represented by links between the
nodes and the activations are implicitly applied after each node.
It is useful to express this relation in matrix form so as to interpret it layer by layer,
y = h(α) = h(WTz) + c.
(2.32)
This describes an affine transformation from a vector x to a vector h, so an entire vector of
bias parameters c is needed. It should be mentioned however that the activation function
is applied element wise for each output αj. The most common activation functions include
the softmax, the sigmoid, the hyperbolic tangent, and the rectified linear units (ReLU).
From those, ReLU is the conventional choice, defined as,
g(z) = max{0, z}.
(2.33)
Because ReLU are nearly linear, they retain many linear properties, making the network
easy to optimize with gradient-based methods while also allowing to generalise well [28].
This way, the complete network can be defined as,
f(z; W, c, w, b) = wTmax{0, WTz + c} + b.
(2.34)
Due to the fact that ReLUs cannot learn via gradient-based methods on examples for
which their activation is zero, other variations such as a leaky ReLU may be preferred.
The leaky ReLU is defined as,
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
17
==PAGE:26==
h(z, α)i = max(0, zi) + αimin(0, zi)
(2.35)
where αi is a hyper-parameter usually fixed to a small scalar value (e.g. 0.01).
Cost Function
In most cases, the parametric model of a network follows a distribution as p(y|x , w) which
can be described by the principle of maximum likelihood. This means that a typical cost
function used to train the model is the cross-entropy between the training data and the
model’s predictions. Given the target vectors y = [y1, . . . , ym] ∈RK×M and the input
features x, the average cross-entropy J and weight estimate are given by,
J(w) = −Ex,y∼ˆpdata

log pmodel(y|x)

.
(2.36)
Another basic approach to the problem of determining the network parameters is to
minimise the mean sum-of-squares error (MSE) function combined with a gradient descent
method. Hence, given the training data corresponding to the input vectors xn where
n = 1, . . . , N as well as the target vectors yn, the task at hand regards the minimisation of
the cost function
J(w) = argmin
J
E

∥ˆy(xn, w) −yn∥2

,
(2.37)
where the bias term b is implicit and ∥.∥2 corresponds to the l2 norm or Euclidean
distance. The l1 norm of the difference, or mean absolute error (MAE), can also be used
in Equation 2.37. However, both MSE and MAE can often lead to poor results when used
with gradient-based optimisation where other cost functions are preferred.
The total cost function used to train a neural network will often combine one of the primary
cost functions with a regularisation term (e.g. Tikhonov, LASSO). However, in ANN the
parameter norm penalty is chosen in a way so that it penalises only the weights of the
affine transformation at each layer and leaves the biases unregularised.
Back-Propagation
Back-propagation refers to the method for numerically computing the gradient of the cost
function with respect to the parameters. What follows after that regards the learning
scheme (e.g. stochastic gradient descent). The input x provides the initial information
to the network, which is then propagated up to the hidden layers and eventually to the
output. This produces the target ˆy and a scalar cost J(w) where the network follows a
procedure called forward-propagation. Oppositely, the information must flow from the
cost backward through the network so as to compute the cost gradient and consequently,
perform the optimisation task. In order to calculate the derivative of the cost function
∇J(w) back-propagation must be utilised so as to find optimal weights ˆw [54], depending on
the optimisation scheme, or more commonly the weight updates. A common optimisation
scheme is that of stochastic gradient descent. The basic iterative step for the gradient
descent scheme is written as,
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
18
==PAGE:27==
wr
j(new) = wr
j(old) −η∇J(wr
j(old))
(2.38)
where η is defined as the learning rate or step-size (which can also be iteration-dependent).
The term back-propagation refers only to the method for computing the gradient. However,
there are many different versions of the back-propagation algorithm depending on factors
such as network architecture, optimisation and the type of cost function. For more on
back-propagation the reader is referred to [28, 54].
Optimisation
The optimisation task involved in ANN concerns finding the parameters w of a neural
network that significantly reduce a cost function J(w), which includes a performance
measure evaluated on the entire training set and also additional regularisation terms. A
typical loss function with respect to a target y can be written as,
J(w) = Ex,y∼ˆpdataL(f(x; w), y),
(2.39)
where L is the per-example loss function, f(x, w) is the predicted output when x is the
input and ˆpdata is the empirical distribution. Equation 2.39 introduces a generalisation
error due to the fact that ˆpdata is a finite training set. In order to approximate the true
underlying distribution pdata, one must minimise the empirical risk,
Ex,y∼ˆpdata

L(f(x; w), y)

= 1
m
m
X
i=1
L(f(x(i); w), y(i)),
(2.40)
where m is the number of training samples. The empirical risk minimisation acts as a
pillar to optimisation tasks in deep learning and is not directly used. Hence, in practice
optimisation algorithms such as stochastic gradient descent are used (Equation 2.38), where
the term stochastic refers to the expectation in Equation 2.40 being computed using one
or more examples at a time (as opposed to deterministic gradient methods which use the
entire training set). The size of the training examples used in the computation process is
referred to as minibatch. Minibatch sizes can be influenced by a variety of factors such
as the fact that a larger batch provides a more accurate estimate of the gradient or that
small batches have a regularising effect to the network weights [55].
Assuming that training samples from ˆpdata are used only once, the gradient of the loss with
respect to the parameters for a minibatch x(i) is,
ˆg = 1
m∇w
X
i
L(f(x(i); w), y(i)),
(2.41)
where x and y are now both discrete variables. It can be seen that updating w in the
direction of ˆg performs stochastic gradient descent on the generalisation error. This however
is the ideal case and holds only for the first epoch of training. The details of the stochastic
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
19
==PAGE:28==
gradient descent algorithm can be found in [28, 54].
The optimisation scheme requires a fine tuning of certain hyper-parameters amongst which
is the learning rate of the model parameters (η in Equation 2.38). Due to the fact that
the gradient is more sensitive in certain directions rather than others, the learning rate
can be automatically adapted during training in order to mitigate the problem of gradient
divergence. Popular algorithms that adapt the learning rates of model parameters are
AdaGrad [56], RMSprop [57] and Adam [58]. Amongst the aforementioned optimisation
algorithms, this work uses the Adam algorithm exclusively. Adam, derived from “adaptive
moments”, is similar to RMSprop in that the gradient accumulation is an exponentially
weighted moving average rather than the squared average (as in AdaGrad) so it can
converge rapidly after finding a locally convex “bowl”. However it differs by adding a
momentum hyperparameter to the rescaled gradients and includes bias corrections to the
estimates of both first and second order momentum coefficients (negative gradient acts
as a force - second order - moving through parameter space with a certain velocity - first
order - and viscous drag). Furthermore, optimisation strategies (e.g. batch normalisation)
can be utilised in order to adjust the performance of the optimisation process.
2.5.2
Convolutional Neural Networks
Convolutional neural networks, or CNNs, are a specialised kind of neural network for
processing data that has a known grid-like topology [28] (e.g. images, time-series data).
The term convolution refers to the weighted average operation at every moment, expressed
in discrete terms,
s(n) = (x ∗w)(n) =
X
α
x(α)w(n −α),
(2.42)
S(i, j) = (I ∗K)(i, j) =
X
m
X
n
I(m, n)K(i −m, j −n),
(2.43)
where s(t) corresponds to the 1D case, S(i, j) to a 2D matrix and in the context of a
network w or K (the kernel) needs to be a valid probability density function and zero
for all negative arguments and x or I is defined as the input for the 1D and 2D case
respectively [28]. Equations 2.42 and 2.43 can also be expressed commutatively. Many
neural network libraries implement a related function to the convolution operation, namely
cross-correlation. Cross-correlation is the same as convolution but without flipping the
kernel (w or K) with respect to the input (x or I). This leads to the terms,
s(n) = (x ∗w)(n) =
X
α
x(n + α)w(n),
(2.44)
S(i, j) = (I ∗K)(i, j) =
X
m
X
n
I(i + m, j + n)K(m, n),
(2.45)
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
20
==PAGE:29==
being labelled convolution. This is usually carried out by applying a linear operator to the
input or kernel in the form of a Toeplitz matrix and a doubly block circulant matrix for
the 1D and 2D instances respectively. For example, the output Y of a 1D convolutional
layer associated with the kernel W and the input signal x, can be written as
Yout = Wx =


w1
w2
w3
· · ·
wn
· · ·
· · ·
0
0
w1
w2
w3
· · ·
wn
· · ·
· · ·
0
0
0
w1
w2
w3
· · ·
wn
· · ·
· · ·
0
...
...
...
0
· · ·
w1
· · ·
wn−2
wn−1
wn
0
0
0
· · ·
w1
· · ·
wn−2
wn−1
wn
0
0
· · ·
w1
· · ·
wn−2
wn−1
wn




x1
x2
x3
...
xm−2
xm−1
xm


,
(2.46)
where wi corresponds to the ith filter of the kernel W that has been transformed by
a Toeplitz operator and zero padded. With this representation, the backwards pass or
back-propagation of the error can be obtained by multiplying the loss with WT. This
operation also corresponds to “downsampling” the signal from a m-dimensional vector to
an n-dimensional vector due to the kernel W being of size n. Oppositely a transposed
convolution operation would “upsample” the input signal y from an n-dimensional vector
to a m-dimensional vector as such
Xout = WTy
(2.47)
The above equations express a convolutional layer with a unitary stride s, the “hop-size”
of the convolutional kernel. When the stride s > 1, zeros must be inserted between input
samples, which makes the kernel move around at a slower pace than with unit strides.
Both convolution and transposed convolution operations in the following applications are
applied for s > 1 while maintaining the input to output analogy both ways. This means
that each transposed convolution layer upsamples its input by a factor of s while each
convolution layer downsamples by s.
Furthermore, convolutional networks usually have sparse interactions (or sparse weights)
as can be seen in (2.46), which is realised by making the kernel smaller than the input,
allowing to store fewer parameters, which both reduces the memory requirements of the
model and improves its statistical efficiency.
Parameter sharing, which refers to using the same parameter for more than one function in
a model, further reduces storage requirements. The particular form of parameter sharing
used in CNNs causes the layer to have a property called equivariance to translation meaning
that if the input changes in a certain way, the output changes in the same way. In the
case of an audio transformed by a spectrogram, it can be represented by a 2D tensor with
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
21
==PAGE:30==
different rows corresponding to different frequencies and different columns corresponding
to different points in time. Using convolution in the time or in frequency makes the model
equivariant to the respective domain.
2.5.3
Generative Adversarial Networks
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) are typically consisted of two networks, namely:
a generator and a discriminator. The basis of their function is a theoretical scenario in
which the generator network must compete against an adversary, the discriminator. The
most established method of implementing these two models is with neural networks, but
they can be implemented with any form of differentiable system that maps data from
one space to the other (e.g. kernel methods). The generator network directly produces
samples G(z; w(G)) while the adversary (discriminator) attempts to distinguish between
samples drawn from the training data ˆpdata and samples drawn from a latent variable space
pz. It does this by emitting a probability value given by D(x; w(D)) which indicates the
probability that x is a real training example, drawn from ˆpdata rather than a fake sample
drawn from pg.
Learning within the confines of GANs, is formulated as a zero-sum game where a value
function V (w(G), w(D)) acts as the pay-off of the discriminator and −V (w(G), w(D)) as the
pay-off of the generator. Both networks attempt to maximise their pay-off which leads to
the following relation at convergence,
G∗= argmin
G
max
D
V (G, D),
(2.48)
which is usually redefined as a minimax game between generator and discriminator.
The original minimax game as proposed by Goodfellow et al. [59], involves the following
objective function,
V (w(G), w(D)) = Ex∼pdatalogD(x) + Ez∼pz(z)log(1 −D(G(z))),
(2.49)
where logD(x) is the cross-entropy between [1
0]T and [D(x)
1 −D(x)]T. Similarly
log(1−D(G(z))) represents the cross-entropy between [1
0]T and [D(G(z))
1−D(G(z))]T.
For a fixed generator network G, the optimal discriminator is given by
D∗
G(x) =
pdata(x)
pdata(x) + pg(x),
(2.50)
meaning that Equation 2.49 can be reformulated as
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
22
==PAGE:31==
J(G) = max
D V (D, G) = Ex∼pdata[logD∗
G(x)] + Ez∼pz[log(1 −D∗
G(G(z))]
= Ex∼pdata[logD∗
G(x)] + Ex∼pg[log(1 −D∗
G(G(x))]
= Ex∼pdata

log
pdata(x)
pdata(x) + pg(x)

+ Ex∼pg

log
pg(x)
pdata(x) + pg(x)

.
(2.51)
If pg = pdata and consequently, D∗
G(x) = 1
2, it follows that J(G) = −log(4). By subtracting
the last expression from J(G) = V (D∗
G, G) it follows that [59]
J(G) = −log(4) + KL

pdata


pdata + pg
2

+ KL

pg


pdata + pg
2

(2.52)
where KL is the Kullback-Leibler divergence. The KL divergence and the Jenson-Shannon
(JS) divergence between two probabilistic distributions p(x) and q(x) are,
KL(p||q) =
Z
p(x) logp(x)
q(x)dx,
(2.53)
JS(p||q) = 1
2KL

p

p + q
2

+ 1
2KL

q

p + q
2

.
(2.54)
Hence, Equation 2.52 can be written as
J(G) = −log(4) + KL

pdata


pdata + pg
2

+ KL

pg


pdata + pg
2

= 2JS(pdata||pg) −log(4)
(2.55)
The Jensen–Shannon divergence between two distributions is always non-negative, and zero
if they are equal. Since J∗= −log(4) is the global minimum of J(G), the only solution is
pg = pdata, so that the generative model perfectly replicates the data distribution.
Due to the fact that optimising D to completion can lead to overfitting, the training process
alternates between k steps of optimising D and one step of optimising G so that D is
maintained near its optimal solution, if G changes slowly enough.
In effect, (2.49) can result in a vanishing gradient problem early in training since G does
not necessarily perform well, resulting in an easy discrimination of generated samples from
D. This can be attributed to the saturation of the term log(1 −D(G(z))). To combat this,
minimising log(D(G(z))) is preferred over the latter when training G, which heuristically
has proven to provide stronger gradients and more stable training [59]. However, even this
modified non-saturating GAN has limitations [60].
In practice, GANs represent a limited family of pg distributions via the function G(z; wg).
The optimisation occurs for wg rather than pg itself. This in turn does not allow for a
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
23
==PAGE:32==
significant theoretical justification but relies on the noteworthy performance of ANNs along
with modern computational resources.
Due to the notoriously unstable training of GANs in general, many variants have been
conceived which prove to be extremely effective in a range of generational problems. This
work employs only certain GAN variants, those of the Wasserstein GAN (WGAN) with
a gradient penalty (WGAN-GP), the conditional GAN (cGAN) and the cycle-consistent
adversarial network (CycleGAN).
Wasserstein GANs
The Wasserstein-1 (W1) distance, otherwise known as Earth-Mover distance, is the greatest
lower bound (infimum) for any transport plan between points x and y,
W(Pr, Pg) =
inf
γ∈Π(Pr,Pg)E(x,y)∼γ[∥x −y∥]
(2.56)
where Π(Pr, Pg)) is the set of all joint distributions γ(x, y) whose marginals are respectively
Pr and Pg. The term γ(x, y) is typically referred to as the “mass” required to transport
from x to y in order to transform the distributions Pr into the distribution Pg. Fittingly, W1
is the cost of the transportation plan. Intuitively, it is usually described as the minimum
cost of turning one pile of dirt into another pile of dirt by accounting for the amount of dirt
that needs to be moved times the mean distance it has to be moved. Thus, this analogy
fits well for describing the cost of transforming one distribution to the other.
Under valid assumptions it can be shown that W(Pr, Pg) is continuous everywhere and
differentiable almost everywhere which may not be the case for JS divergence when dealing
with distributions of low-dimensional manifolds. Arjovski et al. [61] establish this matter
and introduce the Wasserstein GAN. The WGAN value function is constructed using the
Kantorovich-Rubinstein duality,
W(Pr, Pg) =
sup
∥f∥L≤1
Ex∼Pr[f(x)] −Ex∼Pg[f(x)]
(2.57)
where the supremum is over all the 1-Lipschitz functions of f : X →R. A differentiable
function is 1-Lipschitz if and only if it has gradients with norm at most 1 everywhere. The
minimax game with the W1 metric is thus defined as
J(G) = min
G
max
D∈D Ex∼pdata[D(x)] −E˜x∼pg[D(˜x)]
(2.58)
where D is the set of 1-Lipschitz functions, Pr ≡pdata and Pg ≡pg are the data and model
distributions respectively and pg is defined by ˜x = G(z), z ∼p(z). The WGAN value
function results in a critic function (D is now titled a critic as it does not classify) whose
gradient with respect to its input is better behaved than its typical GAN counterpart,
making the optimisation of the generator easier. Heuristically, Arjovski et al. [61] observe
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
24
==PAGE:33==
that the WGAN value function appears to correlate with the generated sample quality,
which is not the case for GANs with the JS metric.
In order to enforce the Lipschitz constraint on the critic, the weights of D are clipped so
as to lie within a compact space [−c, c] with c being a heuristically derived constant. The
set of functions satisfying this constraint is a subset of the k-Lipschitz functions for some k
which depends on c and the critic architecture. This however may also lead to optimisation
difficulties resulting in the WGAN critic failing to converge. Gulrajani et al. [62] propose
the use of a gradient penalty to enforce the Lipschitz constraint by directly constraining
the gradient norm of the critic’s output with respect to its input. The objective function
can be defined as
J(G) = E˜x∼pg[D(˜x)] −Ex∼pdata[D(x)] + λ Eˆx∼pˆx[(∥∇ˆxD(ˆx)∥2 −1)2]
(2.59)
where λ is a penalty coefficient (often set to λ = 10) and the constraint with a penalty
on the gradient is enforced on ˆx ∼pˆx, which typically represents randomly weighted
interpolated samples between the real and generated domains. The interpolated samples
are drawn such that
ˆx = αG(z) + (1 −α)x
for
0 ≤α ≤1 ,
(2.60)
where α is randomly sampled from a uniform distribution. This method shows improved
performance over weight clipping WGANs and many other GAN variants. It is shown
the Wasserstein distance has the properties that it is continuous and differentiable and
continues to provide a linear gradient, even after the critic is well trained as opposed to
other GANs.
The W1 metric also has implications when working with audio waveforms and more
specifically when accounting for a temporal structures. For example, comparing two audio
signals with the same frequency content by taking the MSE between samples in the time
domain is not a very robust measure, since the difference would rely entirely on the phase
between the signals. In contrast, W1 is more sensitive to the underlying geometry structure
of samples and more robust to noise/outliers [63].
Conditional GANs
GANs can be extended to a conditional model if both the generator and discriminator are
conditioned on some extra information y. This could be any kind of auxiliary information,
such as class labels or data from other modalities. Mirza et al. [64] introduce these
conditional GANs by feeding y into both the discriminator and generator as additional
input layer, usually in the form of a joint hidden representation. The class label y (a scalar
integer encoded variable) takes the form of a one-hot encoded vector, representing the class
value as a new binary variable for each unique integer value.
The objective function of the two-player minimax game in (2.49) becomes
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
25
==PAGE:34==
J(G) = min
G
max
D
V (D, G) = Ex∼pdata logD(x|y) + Ez∼pz(z) log(1 −D(G(z|y))).
(2.61)
2.6
Compressed Sensing and Generative Models
As briefly mentioned in section 2.4, the goal of compressed sensing is to reconstruct a
sparse signal from a small number of linear, incoherent measurements [51]. The underlying
structure of a signal has a coincise representation in a certain transform domain where it
is sparse. A decomposition like this is considered sparse if most of the coefficients are zero.
If the dictionary is chosen well, in other words, if it contains elementary waves/signals that
are specific to the reconstruction considered in a given problem, then the sound field or
the signal to be reconstructed is a combination of a small number of basis functions used.
This process involves reconstructing an unknown signal x ∈Rn from observations y ∈Rm
of the form
y = Ax + n ,
(2.62)
where A ∈Rm×n represents the dictionary or the a sensing matrix of m measurements
and n basis functions and n ∈Rm is the measurement noise.
Hence, traditional compressed sensing [51] dictates that one can precisely reconstruct a
continuous signal from a sparse representation containing fewer samples than what the
Nyquist condition requires. However, sparse decomposition can be formed with more
sophisticated algorithms or for more structured problems as when reconstructing impulse
responses, sound fields or in another context, images. This is precisely what Bora et al.
[65] accomplish with the use of a GAN similar to that which is implemented in this thesis.
This was achieved with theoretical guarantees similar to standard compressed sensing but
without employing structural sparsity at all. Instead, the problem supposes that the vectors
to be reconstructed lie near the range of a generative model G : Rk →Rn i.e. mapping
a low dimensional vector zto a high dimensional output G(z) where z is deemed to be a
sparse representation of the output G(z). The guarantees lie on the grounds of assuming
that G is L-Lipschitz, then roughly O(kd log L) random Gaussian measurement suffice to
reconstruct the (incomplete) measured signal using any typical d-layer generative network
as a prior. Assuming G = G∗is a fully trained generator network, this can be formulated
as,
ˆz = arg min
z
∥AG(z) −y∥2
2 ,
(2.63)
where A ∈Rm×n represents a sensing matrix, z ∈Rk is the latent variable/input to G
with k being its dimension and y ∈Rm corresponds to the measurement vector. As long
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
26
==PAGE:35==
as gradient descent finds a good approximate solution to the objective, the output of G(z)
will be almost as close to the true coefficients x as the closest possible point in the range
of G. The notation in (2.63) is that which is used in [65] and adopted for coherence.
As the GAN typically imposes an isotropic Gaussian prior on z. Thus z is proportional to
the negative log-likelihood under this prior. Hence, a bias term is added to measure the
relative importance of the prior so that the objective becomes
min
z {||AG(z) −y||2
2 + λ||z||2
2} ,
(2.64)
Although this forms a non-convex problem, optimisation is straightforward since G rep-
resents a differentiable function that back-propagates the error to the generator network
with stochastic gradient descent in order to find the unknown basis or signal G(ˆz). The
apparent benefits of this process are that as opposed to common forms of compressed
sensing (e.g. LASSO), it requires much fewer measurements to acquire meaningful in-
formation from the unknown coefficients. However, due to stochastic gradient descent
being prone to find local solutions (convex bowls) it almost certainly reaches a plateau
in the optimisation even when the measurements are non-trivial. This could lead to a
less meaningful reconstruction when the generator is required to synthesise samples well
out of its span. Hussein et al. [66] propose a method to mitigate the issues that arise
from this reconstruction process by introducing a domain-adaptive approach, namely the
Image-adaptive GAN-based reconstruction.
Under this scheme, the measurement vector is constrained to lie in the range of G while
at the same time the trained generator’s parameter weights are further tuned to enforce
consistency with the observed measurement data. This leads to the joint optimisation
objective that takes the form,
ˆz, ˆθ = arg min
z,θ
∥AG(z; θ) −y∥2
2 ,
(2.65)
where θ denote the weights of the generator network G which initialised as θ(0) = θ∗
G
corresponding to the weights of a fully trained generator network as in equation (2.63).
The latent vector z is initialised as ˆz in accordance to the optimisation problem of equation
(2.64) to better condition the optimisation problem as a two-step scheme. The addition of
post processing techniques in the form of back-projecting the estimator ˆx ≡G(ˆz; ˆθ) onto
the affine subspace ARn = y [66] or a regularisation term in the form of the total variation
semi-norm of the generator signal ˆxG [67] (for 2d variables) are used to slightly improve
the reconstruction.
2.7
Chapter Overview
The purpose of this chapter is to introduce the concepts and tools that are used in order
to carry out the three main goals of this thesis.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
27
==PAGE:36==
First, the analysis of soundfields in rectangular enclosures is introduced as a combination
of harmonic functions / waves, with a closed form solution at low frequencies. Above
the Schroeder frequency, the sound field is described by random, incoherent waves and is
considered diffuse. These concepts are mostly used to clarify the terminology used and
justify the approach.
The room impulse response is introduced as a means to describe the response of the room’s
steady-state excitation. It is seen that an RIR is typically described by three distinct parts,
the direct wave, the early reflections and the late reflections. The latter are usually diffuse
and define the reverberation time in a room, or the time it takes for the energy to decay
by 60 dB SPL. Other room descriptors such as the clarity or definition are also introduced
as auxiliary energetic information deduced from the RIR which usually describe speech
intelligibility in rooms.
The concept of describing the soundfield in a room as the sum of a finite amount of plane
waves is introduced. When decomposing these plane waves into uniform directions and
given the sound pressure measured in various points of the room, one can recover the
unknown amplitudes which define the plane wave energy as an optimisation task. Typically
this is constructed as an ill-posed problem where the number of plane waves is much greater
than the number of measured positions.
Finally, topics regarding artificial neural networks are discussed such as the convolutional
network architecture, optimisation and back-propagation algorithms etc., so as to arrive at
generative adversarial networks. GANs are a specialised ANN configuration which are used
to synthesise signals based on a certain data distribution, composed of a generator network
and a critic network (when the Wasserstein distance is used as an objective function).
These networks take part in a minimax game where each tries to maximise their pay-off,
with the critic penalising the generator for generating samples that stray far from the
underlying data distribution it is meant to model. In this thesis, this is accomplished with
the Wasserstein distance or the cost of transforming the generator distribution pg to the
data distribution pdata in terms of optimal mass transport. Intuitively, and when regarding
RIRs, this can be thought of as generating a fake RIR such that it looks like it came from
the real data distribution. The real RIRs have certain structural characteristics (e.g. direct,
early and late impulses) that the generator seeks to emulate.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
28
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
3
Methodology
The purpose of this chapter is to delineate the problem specific details of the thesis. To
begin with, a problem formulation is devised in accordance to the underlying task. Hence,
the first goal is that of synthesising RIRs with the use of a convolutional GAN which
exploits structural details of the sound energy distribution across time. Adversarial learning
allows the network to properly represent RIRs and generate near plausible examples of
them which can then be used in a range of different acoustic-related problems. Following
this a parametric room acoustic GAN is designed, tested and demonstrated in order to
illustrate the capabilities of the network to generate impulse responses according to desired
acoustic conditions. This in turn can then be used to create e.g. controlled samples for
testing purposes as is demonstrated further on with examples quantifying the intelligibility
of generated responses. Finally, the issues that arise with spatial sampling of a soundfield
with a finite array are illustrated and analysed, to then demonstrate how a GAN can be
used to mitigate these issues or greatly improve the computational time to reconstruct a
broad-band RIR.
3.1
Room Impulse Response Synthesis
As previously stated, the initial goal of this thesis was to generate RIRs with the use of an
ANN. Therefore, the following generative method is deemed to be previously undetermined
such that, to the best of the authors knowledge, there exists no literature which attempts
to directly model room impulse responses with a generative model and deduce acoustic
information from them.
In order to accomplish this, a model that can learn to represent structural information
gained from impulse responses is necessary. This structural information is physically
represented as the phases and amplitudes of decaying spherical waves at a certain point in
space over time. On the other hand, as a signal, it is a series of impulses with varying phases
and amplitudes. These variations of acoustic pressure over time can easily be obtained
analytically or numerically at low frequencies but many mid and high frequency properties
are left in obscurity. However, it can be seen that these details are easily “captured” by
convolutional filters when observed in abundance.
The architecture of a CNN ensures that the learned “filters” produce the strongest response
to temporal variation of pressure. When stacking many of these convolutional layers one
can obtain multiple non-linear filters that become increasingly global over the temporal
axis. Small, local windows of the RIR are first represented from the filter responses then
from those, larger windows can be represented and from those even larger areas, etc. In
addition, due to parameter sharing (as discussed in subsection 2.5.2) the model is not prone
to over-fit the data and the computational cost is greatly reduced when in comparison to
fully connected networks. Thus, the CNN when trained as a generative model, is required
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
29
==PAGE:38==
to carry out the transformation of a random, Gaussian input to a meaningful output
capable of characterising a linear, time-invariant system such as a room. It does this by
“playing” the adversarial mini-max game described in subsection 2.5.3.
The choice of representing the data/input as the waveform signal of the RIRs rather than
a “hand-crafted” feature space or transformation (e.g. spectrogram) becomes evident when
the outcome is perhaps indistinguishable from a measured and real representation of a
response. However, careful pre-processing is required so that the GAN evaluates the data
as equally significant, similarly valued and coherent in ways that are typical of RIRs. This
is described in section section 3.1.2.
It becomes apparent that the data must be carefully selected in order to represent a large
sample-size of RIRs so that the model can be considered to achieve generalisation over
rooms and their impulse responses. This of course is a nontrivial task as the amount of
available data is scarce when comparing to e.g. images of celebrities or cats and dogs as is
most commonly seen in the generative network literature.
3.1.1
Forming an RIR Database
The process of generating samples with a GAN requires a substantial amount of data as
the data used in image generation GANs is typically within the range of a few thousands
of images to tens of thousands of images. Of course one can expect better results with
more data and more representations of the underlying domain that the network is trying to
represent, but it is difficult to quantify exactly how much data is needed for this procedure,
hence, the motto of this thesis is “the more, the merrier”.
With this in mind, two data-sets were formed to synthesise RIRs in within the generative
framework, one with real data gathered from various, freely available academic sources and
another with simulated data using the Image Source Method described in subsection 2.3.1.
Real RIR Data
As stated previously, one of the two data-sets consists of real room impulse responses from
a range of available resources intended for academic and research use. These sources are
the following:
• 175 RIRs measured at DTU - Acoustic Technology. This database is mainly composed
of RIRs measured with a 3-channel array in the lecture room known as ‘019’ for
various source positions but includes sporadic RIRs measured throughout DTU also
• 14 + 70 RIRs from both a single channel and a 5-channel cruciform array in five
different acoustic environments taken from the ‘ACE corpus’ [68]
• 2325 RIRs from the ‘BUT Speech@FIT Reverb Database’ [69] measured in 9 different
acoustic environments for 5 loudspeaker positions on average
• 468 RIRs consisted of single channel measurements taken from the ‘Isophonics’ Room
Impulse Response Data Set [70]. The measurements are made in various positions of
3 different acoustic environments
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
30
==PAGE:39==
• 227 selected RIRs from the ‘MIRaGe’ RIR database [71] for various microphone and
loudspeaker positions and for three different reverberation times
• 72 RIRs from the ‘MARDY’ database [72] comprised of an 8 channel array response
for various source-array positions and for two different wall absorption values
• 169 selected RIRs from the ‘GRAS’ database [73] consisted of three different rooms
with varying source receiver positions.
This amounts to a total of 3520 RIRs. It should be noted that there are obvious discrep-
ancies between databases, e.g. some databases have deconvolved the loudspeaker response
from the measured RIR to reduce the influence it has on the measurement, while others
have not. Similarly, some databases have used MLS white-noise as an excitation signal
while others have used the swept-sine technique. However, the most obvious discrepancy
is the different transducers used for each database where some could be omni-directional
while others might have e.g. a cardiod directivity pattern. This is not necessarily an issue
for this application as it gives the GAN the much needed variance in the data in order
to gain the ability to generalise. In other words, the greater the variance in the data, the
greater the span of the generated data, the more realistic the responses might seem. This
is true assuming that the data is representative of the underlying truth, that the RIRs
accurately represent (to a certain degree) the sound pressure in the rooms that they were
measured in.
ISM RIR Data
Simulations were carried out with the ISM in order obtain a significant amount of data,
worthy of training the data-hungry GAN model. All of the simulations where carried out
with Pyroomacoustics package [74] with the Python scripting language1. This resulted in
the following database,
• RIRs was generated for 60 different rooms, 50 of which were “shoebox” rooms and
10 of which are arbitrarily shaped
• Room dimensions Lx, Ly are uniformly distributed values between [3, ..., 7] m, z
(height) is between [2.6, ..., 4] m
• Reflection coefficients of wall are estimated in accordance to Sabine’s equation
(eq. (2.15)) for a reverberation time of uniformly distributed values in the range
[0.2, ..., 2.5] s
• Source location placed in corner (0.1, 0.1, 0.1) or (Lx −0.1, Ly −0.1, 0.1) or placed
on tangential nodal lines as (Lx/2, 0.1, 0.1) , (0.1, Ly/2, 0.1)
• Receivers vary in location based on a rectangular plane defined by the coordinates
(Lx/4, Ly/4), (3Lx/4, Ly/4), (3Lx/43Ly/4), (Lx/43Ly/4), placed at a random height
within the range of [1.2, . . . , 2] m, corresponding to a total of 896 receivers in each
room with a spacing of approximately ∆x = ∆y = 0.1 m
1Pyroomacoustics Documentation : https://pyroomacoustics.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
31
==PAGE:40==
• The maximum order of image sources was set to be MIS = 12
• After this limit, the diffuse response was modelled with a deterministic ray-tracing
technique assuming that the receivers have a diameter of approximately 0.05 m
This resulted in data-set consisted of 53760 RIRs. An example of a simulated room can
be seen in fig. 2.2.
Figure 3.1: Example of a simulated room with the ISM, the RIRs of which are to be used
as data for the GAN. The plane marked with multiple ‘×’ corresponds to the receivers
while the source can be seen in the bottom right corner, marked as a blue dot.
3.1.2
Data Pre-Processing
In order for the GAN to train efficiently, it is crucial to set-up a streamline procedure
where it is fed the training data in a processed and random manner.
To accomplish this, first the RIR database goes through a pre-processing step where each
RIR is downsampled (decimated) to a new sampling frequency of Fs = 16 kHz. This was
chosen on the basis that most of the data was already sampled at the same sample rate.
The decimation happens by taking uniformly spaced intervals of the samples (e.g. 1 new
sample for every 2 initial samples) and applying an anti-aliasing filter corresponding to the
new Nyquist rate. The RIRs are requantised from their 16-bit integer representation to
32-bit floating point values so the network can process them. The RIRs are all zero-padded
in the time domain so they become equal in length to a predefined RIR size determined by
the hyperparameter d as can be seen in table 3.1, which controls the amount of filters to
be used in each layer of the network. In the experiments carried out, the RIR size is 16384
samples.
Furthermore, the RIRs are then normalised by their maximum value so as to lie within the
range of −1 to 1 as these are typically the ideal processing values of the network.
During the training procedure, all of the RIRs are indexed so that for each epoch (a whole
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
32
==PAGE:41==
cycle through the full training dataset), the RIRs are randomly selected and part of the
analysis only once, with no overlapping instances.
The GAN used to model the RIRs, namely WaveGAN, which is a combination networks
similar to that of a CNN (critic) and a transposed CNN (generator), is introduced in the
following subsection.
3.1.3
WaveGAN
In order to carry out the adversarial synthesis of RIRs a model capable of generating
waveforms must be employed. To this end, a WaveGAN was created which is able to
generate audio samples similar to the desired data structure on which it is trained. This
ANN architecture was introduced by Donahue et al. [41] which is based on a DCGAN
(Deep Convolutional GAN) [75] with the adaptation of 1D convolutions and transpose
convolutions in the place of the respective 2D layers as the purpose of WaveGAN is to
synthesise audio rather than images.
WaveGAN carries out the affine transformations directly on the raw-waveform of the audio
samples rather than a transformed feature space as is usual in deep learning applications.
Although Donahue et al.
also introduce a SpecGAN for this purpose, evidently the
results show that operating on the raw waveform is much more beneficial. This becomes
apparent as most perceptually-informed spectrograms (e.g. short-time Fourier transform,
Mel spectrogram, etc.) are non-invertible, and result in degraded estimations of signals
since the most capable algorithms [76] or even learned inversion models [77] introduce
unwanted artefacts.
Figure 3.2: 1-d transpose convolution operations in the WaveGAN. Each transpose convo-
lution layer uses a 25-length filter with an upsampling factor (stride) of 4. The samples of
the generated RIR are “filled-in” by the convolutional filter.
The model is consisted of a generator network and a discriminator network, much like any
other GAN. The generator G can be considered a “deconvolutional encoder” network of one
fully connected (FC/Dense) layer and five 1D transpose convolution layers with a kernel
size of 25 samples. An illustration of the transpose convolution operation of the WaveGAN
can be seen in Figure 3.2. Each layer is followed by a a ReLU activation function apart
from the FC layer for which it is omitted and the final convolutional layer which typically
requires a hyperbolic tangent (tanh) activation. The latent variable z ∈Rk is a random
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
33
==PAGE:42==
Gaussian variable N(0, 1) selected to be of dimensions [n, k] where n denotes the batch
size parameter and k the size of the vector. The model and the selected parameter sizes
are depicted in Figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: The WaveGAN generator G(z).
The input z follows a standard normal
distribution N(0, 1). A description of each layer operation and output is denoted. The first
dimension in each layer description corresponds to the mini-batch size n while the second
and third correspond to the number of features and the number of filters respectively. The
parameter d controls the model size in time domain samples while the parameter c defines
the number of channels that the generator should output.
In the same context, the discriminator network D follows an architecture similar to that of
a “convolutional decoder”. Similarly, it consists of five 1D convolutional layers and one FC
layer with each followed by a Leaky ReLU activation units. The exception here is the input
layer which does not require an activation and the final hidden layer can be considered to
be followed by a linear activation, as it is omitted here also. The configuration can be seen
in Figure 3.4
Figure 3.4: The WaveGAN discriminator D(x). The input can either be the generator
output G(z) or a sample from pdata (xreal). The final hidden layer typically outputs the
probability of the input sample to be either real or fake (D(xreal) or D(G(z))).
Hereon the discriminator will be named ‘critic’ as the adversarial network follows the
Wasserstein cost function and calculates the W1 distance between a real RIR and a
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
34
==PAGE:43==
synthesised RIR while all the operations are performed for a time-domain signal.
Intuitively speaking, the process that the generator undergoes involves the gradual upsam-
pling of each layers transpose convolutional response since each layers neurons’ (transposed
convolution filters) are ‘spatially’ connected to a local region of the (yet) unfiltered and
compressed input. These connections are local in the time domain but global in the ‘depth’
domain. First, the input is “stretched” to the length of the desired output by adding zeros
to the beginning and end of the input signal. The amount of transposed convolution filters
are specified as a depth hyperparameter (third column in each layer description of Figures
3.3 and 3.4) which perform a strided transposed convolution operation on the zero-padded
input according to the defined receptive field of each filter. For example, if the receptive
field of the filters is equal to F = 25 and a specified amount of depth is given to these
filters (e.g. dfilt = 128 then for an input size of Ninput = 1024 samples, each of the dfilt
filters will be connected to the same 25 samples of the input. Assuming the stride is s = 4,
this process will then produce an output size of Noutput = 4096 essentially four times the
input. This application-specific operation can be calculated as
Noutput = s(Ninput −1) + F −2Pz ,
(3.1)
where Pz corresponds to the amount of zeros used in the padding procedure. Noutput in
terms of Figure 3.3 refers to the second dimension of each layer description, otherwise
referred to as “features”.
The convolution operations performed by the critic can be perceived as the opposite
procedure, or rather, downsampling the input signal at each convolutional layer such that
the output size is
Noutput = Ninput −F + 2Pz
s
+ 1 .
(3.2)
The critic is gradually downsampling the signal by acquiring each layers’ output until
it represents the scalar value of the 1-Lipschitz function D(x) and its expected value
approximates the W1 distance.
If Lcritic and Lgenerator represent the respective loss that is back-propagated to each network
then this amounts to:
• Lcritic = [average critic score on real RIRs] - [average critic score on fake RIRs] + λ
[gradient penalty]
• Lgenerator = - [average critic score on fake RIRs]
The hyper-parameters used throughout the WaveGAN experiments in this thesis are
summarised in tables 3.1 and 3.2.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
35
==PAGE:44==
Filters/Depth (d)
Stride (s)
Zeros Padded (2Pz)
Kernel Receptive Field (lk)
Mini-Batch (n)
Channels (c)
64
4
21
25
64
1
Table 3.1: The architecture hyper-parameters used for the WaveGAN implementation. The
mini-batch size n is used only during the training procedure
RIR length
D learning rate (ηD)
G learning rate (ηG)
D updates per G iteration
Gradient penalty weight λgp
16384
0.0002
0.0002
5
10
Table 3.2: The training hyper-parameters used for the WaveGAN implementation.
WaveGAN also utilises a “phase shuffle” function which is meant to tackle the “checker-
board artifacts” that deconvolutional (transpose convolution) layers exhibit [78]. The
phase shuffle function allows for random perturbations of each layers activations phase
by a predefined amount of samples in order to reduce the amount of rejected samples by
the critic. In the case of audio generation, this occurrence appears in the end product as
periodic spectral aliasing, since the spectrum of the generated audio can display peaks at
multiples of the sample rate of each layer. This can lead to the critic trivially rejecting
samples synthesised by the generator network due to the samples containing these artefacts.
It should be noted that this operation was not used in the following experiments as the
results where not satisfactory. Results with the use of the phase shuffle operation are
displayed in fig. C.1 of appendix C.1.
3.2
Parametrisation of Conditional GAN for Room
Acoustics
As described in section 2.5.3, a conditional GAN is best used when the model objective
follows a supervised approach. It is beneficial for many models, to include prior knowledge
of the specific problem in the form of conditional information. For example, if a generative
model is used to generate samples of acoustic wave propagation, a condition that would
make sense would be that of frequency or direction of propagation, or boundary conditions,
etc. In this framework, the network of section 3.1.3 generates RIRs so it is reasonable
to condition it on information that can be extracted from the energy in each individual
response. By obtaining the RIRs corresponding to specific room characteristics, many
possibilities regarding the analysis or auralisation of rooms arise.
The energy information in an impulse response is usually quantified in several ways but
the values that correspond to this information are deterministic. Hence, it is easy to gain
room descriptors like reverberation time, clarity and definition from each individual RIR
if this process is streamlined such as in section 3.1.2. By adopting most of the network
architecture that described in the previous section, 3 conditional GANs are introduced
that generate RIRs based on average T30, C50 and D50 values.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
36
==PAGE:45==
3.2.1
Data Processing
Following the same steps as those of section 3.1.2 the data is streamlined into files of size
16384 samples with a sampling frequency of Fs = 16 kHz. This corresponds to RIRs of
a little over a second in length however, similarly to the default WaveGAN, it can be
extended to larger lengths with more channels.
During the previous process, the room descriptor of interest is calculated for each individual
RIR in the data set. According to this value (e.g. T30) a class label is given to the RIR
in the form of a one-hot encoded vector. This class value depends on the partitioning of
the data according to the room descriptor. For example, if the data consists of 5 RIRs
with average T30 values corresponding to [0.3, 0.35, 0.29, 0.65, 0.7] s, then it can easily be
partitioned in to two classes, those with reverberation time of approximately 0.3 s and
those with approximately 0.7 s. Thus, the partitioning scheme largely depends on the
information and is best utilised when the data is uniformly split (equal amount of data for
each category/class) so that the network has enough data to learn the representation of
the desired response.
The values of each descriptor are calculated in fractional octave bands (1/3 for C50, D50
and 1/1 octave bands for T30) the values of which are further averaged to finally obtain the
mean descriptor used to classify the network. Specifically, this is accomplished as such:
• T30mid values extracted from RIRs.
T30mid =
1
Nfc
1250Hz
X
fc=400Hz
T30[fc]
(3.3)
• C50 values extracted from RIRs.
C50 =
1
Nfc
4kHz
X
fc=125Hz
C50[fc]
(3.4)
• D50 values extracted from RIRs.
D50 =
1
Nfc
4kHz
X
fc=125Hz
D50[fc]
(3.5)
,
where fc are the centre frequencies of either 1/1 octave bands or 1/3 octave bands and Nfc is
the number of bands. The RIRs are filtered with a zero-phase, FIR, 6th order Butterworth
band-pass filter. It is more sensible to use the real RIRs as described in section 3.1.1 as
these represent real rooms and not simulated rooms such as those with the ISM. The
resulting room parameter distribution can be seen in fig. 3.5.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
37
==PAGE:46==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.5: Room descriptor distribution of RIRs in the data-set regarding (a) T30mid (b)
Average C50 and (c) Average D50. The data presented is grouped into 80,100 and 100 RIR
intervals / bins for T30, C50 and D50 values respectively.
It becomes evident that the data is particularly non-uniform and one can easily distinguish
the different rooms. Ideally the data would be continuous in all three descriptors allowing
the GAN to learn the underlying RIR representation for each class equally. This could be
a significant detail for the results of any application. However, by partitioning the data
into the correct amount of classes, this under-represented data could possibly assist in
preventing the model of overfitting.
Displaying the data in this way also allows for an approximately equal distribution into
separate classes. Thus, the classes are selected so that the data is not equally represented
in its parameter value range but rather the quantity of RIRs that are represented for each
grouping is approximately equal. This leads to the class association of table 3.3 where the
data is split into 10 classes (numbered from 0 to 9)
T30 class
T30mid range [s]
C50 class
E[C50] range [dB]
D50 class
E[D50] range
0
(0, 0.4]
0
(-∞, -20]
0
(0, 0.2]
1
(0.4, 0.5]
1
(-20, -10]
1
(0.2, 0.3]
2
(0.5, 0.6]
2
(-10, -5]
2
(0.3, 0.4]
3
(0.6, 0.65]
3
(-5, -3]
3
(0.4, 0.5]
4
(0.7, 0.9]
4
(-3, -1]
4
(0.5, 0.6]
5
(0.9, 1.05]
5
(-1, 1]
5
(0.6, 0.7]
6
(1.05, 1.1]
6
(1, 3]
6
(0.7, 0.8]
7
(1.1, 1.3]
7
(3, 5]
7
(0.8, 0.9]
8
(1.3, 1.9]
8
(5, 10]
8
(0.9, 0.95]
9
(1.9, + ∞)
9
(10, + ∞)
9
(0.95, 1)
Table 3.3: Room parameter classes and their range defined for the conditional GAN
supervision. With the labels specified in the respective ‘class’ column, the GAN is able to
learn the association of a specific RIR and e.g. its reverberation time within a specified
range.
Once these classes are extracted for each of the RIRs in the data-set, the input vector is
formed containing both the ground truth of these classes in the data and a random latent
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
38
==PAGE:47==
variable. This is to be used along with the real data to train the critic as its objective is to
now classify the correct classes, apart from estimate the W1 score.
3.2.2
Network Configuration
The conditional GAN architecture is identical to the WaveGAN with the exception that for
both generator and critic, an extended input is formed as a concatenated vector of z and
y. This serves as a channel for the generator network to establish the “type” of RIR to
reconstruct as y is randomly selected from the range of class labels along with the latent
vector. It is evaluated from the critic on the quality of the synthesised RIR (W1 distance)
but also if it represents the class it is associated with.
On the other hand, the critic is evaluated on its ability to correctly estimate the Wasserstein
distance between the fake and real RIR distributions on a class basis (e.g. the W1 distance
RIRs of the same class). This means that the critic’s job has become more difficult as it
cannot necessarily distinguish RIRs from different classes in the beginning.
The configuration of the conditional GAN model can be seen in fig. 3.6.
Figure 3.6: Conditional WaveGAN configuration using the Wasserstein distance. The
variable w corresponds to the critic network weights while the variable θ to the generator
network weights and n corresponds to the batch size.
The hyper-parameters values used to train the GAN are the same as those used in
section 3.1.3 and can be seen in tables 3.1 and 3.2. The T30 network is trained for 3000
epochs while the C50 and D50 networks are trained for 2800 epochs each.
Metrics of Evaluation
As it is necessary to carry out some form of evaluation of the synthesised responses two
methods are devised for this purpose. It is well known that there is no general consensus on
how to evaluate GANs [79] but several methods exist for the mainstream image generation
networks. These usually involve a second classifier ANN trained on tens of thousands of
images which evaluates the performance of the GAN’s generated images, a process quite
cumbersome for this application.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
39
==PAGE:48==
Ideally the synthesised responses could be evaluated perceptually with a subjective listening
test in a controlled environment, however this was also difficult to pursue due to the COVID-
19 outbreak. In spite of this, the method introduced is perceptually informed such that:
• RIRs are inferred for each class condition (total of 10 RIRs) for each GAN inference
/ realisation
• Semi-anechoic “female” speech recording of the Harvard word lists [80] is used as a
reference
• The RIRs are convolved with samples from the speech which is then evaluated
according to its Speech-to-Reverberation Modulation Energy Ratio (SRMR)
The SRMR was a measure initially proposed for a ‘non-intrusive quality and intelligibility
estimation of reverberant and dereverberated speech’. It does this by estimating the ratio
between the energy in higher to lower modulation frequencies in a speech signal which is
then used to predict speech intelligibility. This is based on the fact that the modulation
energy of clean anechoic speech is typically concentrated in lower frequencies, from 2 to
20 Hz, with a spectral peak at 4 Hz while noisy and reverberated environments contain
temporal envelopes with higher frequency components [81].
The quantity is obtained by an algorithm where initially the input speech signal is separated
into 23 channels by a gammatone filterbank, the bandwidth of which is in accordance to
the Equivalent Rectangular Bandwidth (ERB) scale. The filter centre frequencies range
from 125 Hz to half the sampling frequency. The signal envelope is extracted for each
channel then each envelope is further separated into eight overlapping modulation bands
with centre frequencies logarithmically spaced between 4 and 128 Hz. For each channel,
the power spectral density (PSD) is obtained in 256-ms Hamming sliding window frames
with 32-ms shifts. Finally, the SRMR corresponds to the ratio of the average modulation
energy content in the first four modulation bands (3 to 20 Hz) to the average modulation
energy content available in the last four modulation bands (20 to 160 Hz). This can be
described by
SRMR =
P4
k=1
P23
j=1
PM
m=1 Ej,k(m)
P8
k=5
P23
j=1
PM
m=1 Ej,k(m)
,
(3.6)
where k, j are the indices of the modulation band and gammatone filter banks respectively,
while E(m) is the energy of the mth analysis window.
The normalised SRMR, which is an updated version of the original metric (reduced
modulation frequency ranges, the dynamic range of the modulation energies is limited to
30dB of the peak average energy) is shown to be highly correlated to speech intelligibility
and provide an accurate estimate of it [82].
To further analyse diffuseness characteristics of the generated RIRs, the kurtosis of each
response is examined. Kurtosis generally indicates the peakedness in an RIR and becomes
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
40
==PAGE:49==
higher when the evaluation range contains extreme events (high energy peaks) [83]. Kurtosis
can be defined as
K = E[p −µp]4
σ4p
−3 ,
(3.7)
where p is the pressure value over time (RIR) while µp the mean value of the pressure over
a specific time interval and σp is the standard deviation for the same time interval. An
RIR is approximately Gaussian when the sound field is diffuse and the kurtosis of Gaussian
variables is zero. Defrance and Polack [84] propose using kurtosis to determine the mixing
time of the RIR, or the time after which the soundfield becomes diffuse. Jeong [83] on
the other hand, averages the kurtosis over the short time window between the onset of
the RIR (set to 10 ms) and 100 ms, to determine a value that is highly correlated to the
Sabine absorption coefficient (see eq. (2.15)). Within the extent of this thesis, it is used to
measure the consistency of the synthesised responses and diffuse qualities the responses
might resemble. Similar to [83], the kurtosis is calculated for a band-limited response (125
Hz to 4 kHz) with a sliding window of 20 ms with a hop size of 5 ms (at Fs = 16 kHz).
Only the first 150 ms of the response are considered while the onset of the response is
considered to be 10% point of the first peak. The average kurtosis over the first 100 ms of
the response is denoted as K10−100ms.
3.3
Bandwidth Extension of Reconstructed RIRs
While section 2.6 acts as an overview generative models within the framework of compressed
sensing, this section provides the problem-specific details regarding the extent to which
spatial aliasing can affect reconstructed soundfields (section 3.3.1). Furthermore, a method
to extend the bandwidth of heavily aliased impulse responses with the use of a GAN is
introduced an discussed in section 3.3.3.
3.3.1
Spatial Aliasing in Soundfield Reconstruction Problems
As previously described in section 2.4, analytical methods of sound field reconstruction and
prediction are based on the synthesis of a soundfield in the spatial Fourier domain, i.e., they
involve decomposition into plane-wave or harmonic functions. Though these techniques
offer an accurate representation of a soundfield, artefacts originating from spatial aliasing
notably occur, depending on the intervals between transducers. Hence, the frequency
characteristics of the interpolated or extrapolated RIRs recovered by this method are
greatly affected due to the spatial discretisation caused by the use of the measurement
aperture. This is usually called the “coloration effect” and is also particularly evident
in reproduction techniques such as Wave Field Synthesis or Ambisonics [85] due to the
discretisation of space with a finite loudspeaker array. These systems are able to reproduce
frequencies up to the spatial Nyquist frequency determined by the transducer intervals.
Consider an 1d array of microphones with a spacing of ∆x, in order to correctly synthesise
the soundfield it is necessary to sample the spatial domain twice as often as the highest
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
41
==PAGE:50==
frequency fmax in the measurement, or the Nyquist frequency. This leads to the Nyquist
criterion for the wavenumber domain with kNyq defined as,
kNyq = 2kmax = 2πfmax
c/2
= 2π
∆x .
(3.8)
When sampling above kNyq regular erroneous wave fronts are created. These wave fronts
have an unwanted propagation direction and are superimposed with the synthesised wave
fronts corresponding to the true sound field [43].
These artefacts can usually be compensated for perceptually by employing psychoacoustics
[86] while their affect can be reduced based on certain assumptions made on the soundfield
[87].
In order to illustrate the effects of spatial aliasing and further mitigate the issues it creates,
a soundfield reconstruction problem was adapted from [26]. The authors were kind enough
to provide the measured data for a spherical array in a damped room, the description and
analysis of which is given in the following subsection.
3.3.2
Reconstruction of the Soundfield in a Room
Due to difficulties that have arisen with the COVID-19 pandemic, the procedure of
measuring data was at large restrictive. Luckily, due to the valuable support of the authors
of [26], an analysis on the effects of spatial band limitations was carried out as a data set
was provided in order to perform soundfield reconstruction in a damped room. Furthermore,
this allows for a demonstration of compensating for band-limited signals with the use of
networks such as that of section 3.1.3 as will be seen in section 3.3.3.
In [26] the soundfield reconstruction problem is consisted of two rooms, one lightly damped
and one damped, however the following analysis is composed of the latter only. As the
authors prove, a more reliable reconstruction can be accomplished in damped rooms as
previously mentioned in section 2.4 due to the sparsity of propagating plane waves.
Measurement Array
These measurements were performed with the use of a Universal Robots - UR5 robotic
arm2, which was used to simulate a spherical array consisted of 97 transducers. The
-hypothetical- array has a radius of α = 0.5 m, with its centre placed 1.6 m above the
floor. As the authors mention, the points on the array correspond to the uniform sampling
of the sphere at 128 points, discarding 31 points near the base of the UR5 that were not
accessible due to the presence of the base. Furthermore, the 97 measurements on the
spherical surface were combined with five measurements inside the sphere’s volume to
create an array robust to the zero crossings of the Bessel function. This amounts to a total
number of M = 102 measurements, which acts the complete data-set. The authors point
out that RIRs were also measured in a dense grid of 709 equally spaced points in a circle
of the same radius at the equator of the sphere. This last set serves as the “ground truth”
2UR5 : https://www.universal-robots.com/products/ur5-robot/
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
42
==PAGE:51==
of the following applications.
Within the confines of this thesis the set is used to emulate the physical limitations that
one can encounter when applying these techniques. Following the appropriate algebraic
transformations such that both eqs. (2.26) and (2.28) invoke an l2 and l1 regularisation
respectively, the soundfield on the circular plane stated previously as “ground truth” is
reconstructed up to f = 2 kHz. From this, two RIRs are reconstructed, one within the
interior of the sphere (interpolated) and one from the exterior of the sphere (extrapolated).
The experimental configuration can be visualised in Figure 3.7 although it should be noted
that this serves as an initial array to the following experiments.
Figure 3.7: Adapted array configuration from [26]. The tinted circular plane corresponds
to the 709 reference points, otherwise stated as “ground truth”.
The array configurations used in the experiments are derived from the initial array displayed
in fig. 3.7 by removing elements in a uniform manner. This is done to maintain uniformity
in the measurements and to derive approximations of the Nyquist frequencies for each
array, indicating where the results are expected to be aliased. This analysis is described in
detail in section 4.3.1.
Room Characteristics
The damped room to which the data-set RIRs correspond is typically used for the listening
evaluation of loudspeakers as it complies with the IEC standard 268-13. Its dimensions are
7.5 × 4.74 × 2.8 m3 while the T30 values are given in octave bands as shown in Table 3.4.
It should be noted that the room has absorption panels on the ceiling and the walls and
carpet on the floor, effectively damping some mid and high frequencies.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
43
==PAGE:52==
fc [Hz]
125
250
500
1k
2k
4k
T30 [s]
0.5
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
Table 3.4: Reverberation time of damped room in 1/1 octave bands.
The source of excitation in the room was a logarithmically swept sine [20 −20k] Hz with a
duration of 10 s. As the documentation states, the equipment used was a Dynaudio BM6
loudspeaker and a Brüel & Kjær free field microphone.
Similar to [26] the number of plane waves N used in the dictionary was kept constant to a
value of N = 700 so that no truncation errors are introduced up to 2000 Hz. Hence, the
wavenumber vectors were randomly sampled on the surface of a sphere using a uniform
pseudo-random generator3 as it was able to represent all the required directions of arrival.
The regression regarding the soundfield reconstruction was carried out using sci-kit learn
[88] linear model module4 and a 5-fold cross-validation was carried out for the best λ
parameter value controlling the regularisation (see eqs. (2.26) and (2.28)).
Metrics of Evaluation
Two measures where used in order to evaluate the performance of the reconstruction, those
of the normalised mean square error (NMSE) and the modal assurance criterion (MAC).
The NMSE can be defined as
NMSE = 10log10
"
1
M
M
X
m=1
|pm −ˆpm|2
|pm|2
#
,
(3.9)
where pm, ˆpm are the measured and estimated sound pressure for position rm ⊆ΩM
respectively. The NMSE corresponds to an average estimate of the error over the circular
plane ΩM. The MAC can be defined as
MAC =
pHˆp
2
(pHp)(ˆpHˆp)
,
(3.10)
which evaluates the extent of spatial similarity, ranging from 0 (maximally dissimilar) to 1
(identical).
The results of this process will be seen in the next chapter.
3.3.3
Extending the Bandwidth of Aliased RIR Estimates
Once the reconstructed RIR yrec is recovered from the soundfield reconstruction problem,
it immediately becomes evident that even when the soundfield is sparse, the RIR is heavily
aliased at high frequencies. This is due to physical limitations caused by the discretisation
of the aperture used to sample the soundfield.
3numpy.random.uniform : https://docs.scipy.org/doc/numpy-1.15.0/reference/generated/numpy.random.
uniform.html
4sklearn.linear_model : https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/classes.html#module-sklearn.linear_model
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
44
==PAGE:53==
This can potentially be compensated for, when yrec is used in the setting of a compressed
sensing problem as described in section 2.6. Since yrec is accurately represented as a
“low-passed” version of the true RIR ytruth, one can construct an ideal low-pass filter as
a linear operator with a truncated Fourier series. If Yrec denotes the frequency response
obtained by reconstructing the soundfield up to a certain frequency then this transformation
takes the form,
Yrec = ΨAˆxG + n;
A =


1
1
· · ·
1
1
e−j2π/N
· · ·
e−j2π(N −1)/N
...
...
...
...
1
e−j2π(N −1)/N
· · ·
e−j2π(N −1)2/N


,
(3.11)
where A ∈CNG×NG corresponds to a square DFT matrix, Ψ ∈{0, 1}Ms×NG is a binary
permutation matrix constructed from random rows of an asymmetric identity matrix
and ˆx corresponds to the generator network’s G(z) output. The vector n corresponds
to additive Gaussian noise. The randomly selected Ms samples of Yrec are uncorrupted
by the spatial aliasing described in the previous subsection and NG corresponds to the
time-domain samples of ˆxG. For reasons of clarity, hereon it will be assumed that Ψ has
been incorporated into AΨ ∈CMs×NG so that Yrec = AΨˆxG.
Hence, by using the generator network as a prior estimator, optimising for its weights θ and
latent vector z and randomly sampling its Fourier coefficients such that they are unique
(f < fNyq) a full-band RIR can be found from just a few random samples. This is because
the generator network G(z) ≡ˆxG has NG −Ms degrees of freedom to estimate the high
frequency response based on the constraints applied on the low frequency reconstruction.
Again, to the best of the author’s knowledge, this is the first time that a GAN has been
used in this context. Thus, there exists no literature to support the convergence to a
global solution to this problem, apart from that briefly mentioned in section 2.6, meant to
guarantee convergence for recovery from noisy i.i.d. measurements of images. However,
this does fall along the lines of traditional compressed sensing, that of reconstructing a
signal from a randomly sampled and sparse basis summation.
In practice, AΨ can be obtained from random permutations of a Fast Fourier Transform
(FFT) operator on ˆxG for computational purposes. This procedure can be visualised in
fig. 3.8.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 3.8: Random permutations of FFT(ˆxG) ≡AΨˆxG
Similarly, other linear operators can be applied to obtain an estimate of the unaliased
RIR. With that in mind, a short-time Fourier transform (STFT) operator was also used
by applying a time-frequency (TF) mask on the STFT of ˆxG. This can be seen in fig. 3.9.
The FFT size used in the following experiments is NFFT = 1024, a Hann window of the
same size is used as the analysis window and a hop-size of Nhop = 256 is used to form the
STFT of both yrec and ˆxG.
Figure 3.9: Random permutations of STFT(ˆxG) obtained by applying a TF mask. Above
frequency bin 125, the measurement is deemed to be aliased so no information is used for
the reconstruction in this region.
Optimisation
As mentioned in section 2.6 the process involves first finding a good representation within
the span of G(z) by finding ˆz ≈z∗as seen in eq. (2.64). Once this has converged, the
algorithm follows a new optimisation task, that of the joint optimisation of the weights θ
of G and the latent variable z which is described by eq. (2.64) but reformulated so that
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
46
==PAGE:55==
it includes a regularisation term. In the case of the FFT bandwidth extension this is
formulated as
min
z,θ {||AΨG(θ; z) −Yrec||2
2 + λFFT ∥G(θ; z)∥1} ,
(3.12)
where ∥G(θ; z)∥1 has been added to promote sparsity in the RIR due to the sparse, early
reflections and highly damped room. In the case of the STFT the optimisation becomes
min
z,θ {||STFTΨ
 G(θ; z)

−STFTΨ
 yrec

||2
2 + λSTFT
STFTΨ
 G(θ; z)

2} ,
(3.13)
where the term STFTΨ(.) serves as a linear operator of the randomly permuted STFT as
seen in fig. 3.9. The l2 regularisation was preferred in this case as the discrete frequencies
are it displayed better results.
To carry out the optimisation, stochastic gradient descent with an ADAM optimiser was
used (see section 2.5.1) for all cases, including the first step of finding z∗. This makes the
outcome very sensitive to initialisation which is why the authors of [65] mention restarting
the algorithm several times and deducing the best convergence rate (e.g. the lowest error).
The hyperparameters of the whole algorithm are summarised in table 3.5. It should be
noted that additive white noise of an SNR equal to 40 dB was used in the experiments,
represented by the vector n.
Algorithm Step
1. obtain ˆz ≈z∗
1. obtain ˆz ≈z∗
2. obtain ˆz ≈z∗and ˆθ ≈θ∗
2. obtain ˆz ≈z∗and ˆθ ≈θ∗
Linear Operator
FFT
STFT
FFT
STFT
Learning Rate : η
0.1
0.01
0.0001
0.0001
Regularisation weight : λ
0.01
0.01
0.001
0.0001
Table 3.5: Hyper-parameter values of the RIR band-width extension algorithm for both
linear operators used and for both steps of the algorithm. Step 1 refers to only optimising
the latent space while step 2 refers to the joint optimisation of latent space and the network
weights where the learning rate applies for both variables.
During the experiments, the first step of the optimisation process is run for 600 iterations
while the second step is run for 150 iterations.
Metrics of Evaluation
To evaluate the performance of the band-width extension algorithm two measures are used
that quantify the divergence of the synthesised, full-band response ˆ
xG from the ground truth
ytruth. First, the scale invariant signal-to-distortion ratio (SI-SDR) is used as it is deemed
to be a robust measure of error, even when used to train neural networks, it outperforms
the mean-square error [89]. It is typically used in the evaluation of source-separation
algorithms. The SI-SDR can be defined as,
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
47
==PAGE:56==
SI-SDR = 10log10


 ˆsTs
∥s∥2 s

2
 ˆsTs
∥s∥2 s −ˆs

2

,
(3.14)
where ˆs and s correspond to the estimated and true signal respectively and ∥.∥corresponds
to the l2 norm. The SI-SDR ensures that the residual of ˆs and s is orthogonal to the target
ˆs. This way it penalises discrepancies between the compared signals in a more robust way
than e.g. the “vanilla” SDR.
Similarly, the Pearson product-moment correlation coefficients are calculated as,
Rij =
Cij
p
CiiCjj
,
(3.15)
where Cij correspond to the ith row and jth column of the covariance matrix Csˆs of the
two signals. This metric measures how the two signals co-vary over time and indicate the
linear relationship as a number between −1 (negatively correlated) to 0 (not correlated) to
1 (perfectly correlated).
3.4
Chapter Overview
This chapter discusses the procedure which was followed to:
• form the RIR database to be used for training the GAN model
• define and construct the GAN model (WaveGAN) using the W1 distance as an
objective function. The architecture and hyper-parameters are also defined and
further discussed
• pre-process the database and group the data according to room descriptor class values,
which then corresponds to training data used for the conditional GAN (cGAN)
• define the cGAN for average (over octave bands) T30, D50 and C50 values to generate
RIRs based on the specified class condition, while the cGAN network configurations
are further discussed
• introduce the concept of bandwidth extension of corrupted / band-limited RIRs with
a compressed sensing GAN (using a GAN as a prior in a regression problem)
• establish the soundfield reconstruction problem of a spherical array in a damped
room and the spatial aliasing that occurs due to the finite limitations of the array
• define the algorithm used in terms of compressed sensing GANs, to predict the
extended bandwidth representation of the aliased reconstructions corresponding to
the damped room - spherical array problem
• introduce the linear operators (DFT, SFTF) and the hyper-parameters used to
perform the regression and predict the broad-band responses.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
48
==PAGE:57==
For each of the foregoing, a set of metrics used to evaluate the results is introduced and
adopted in the next section. As each step requires a different form of evaluation, these
metrics are selected to best demonstrate the performance of reconstructed soundfields and
impulse responses or the respective predicted impulse responses with the use of the specified
GAN model. In conclusion, two main models are adopted, one trained with real data
and another trained with ISM (simulated) data. The former is used for all three main
applications (GAN RIR inference, conditional GAN - room descriptor RIR inference and
bandwidth extension) while the latter is used in all but the conditional GAN set-up.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
49
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND EVALUATION
4
Results and Evaluation
This section contains the results of all of the experiments described in chapter 3. Much
like the aforementioned chapter, it is structured in a way to present the results of each
experiment independently while maintaining a holistic overview of the topic. First the
results and process RIR synthesis with a GAN are presented and analysed. Furthermore,
the results of the parametrised conditional GAN on room acoustics parameters are presented
and evaluated. Finally, the limitations of spatially aliased measurements are demonstrated
while the process of extending the bandwidth of these measurements is shown. Each
resulting network was constructed, trained and inferred with the Tensorflow 2.11 API on a
NVIDIA Tesla V100 (16GB) GPU unit on DTU’s high performance computing cluster2.
4.1
WaveGAN Inference
In this section the RIR generation capabilities of the network described in section 3.1.3 are
established. As previously outlined, the network follows the W1 distance, a metric that
is more robust to noise/outliers, especially in the case of a time-series signal such as an
RIR. Although both real and ISM RIR models were trained significantly long (more than
3 days), the ISM RIR model is trained longer than the real RIR model due to the training
data in the former being more than 10 times the that of the latter.
4.1.1
Training
By looking at the Wasserstein distances of each model and the individual factors one can
get an idea of the training procedure and the quality of the synthesised samples. For
example, the fig. 4.1 shows the W1 distances for each component of the real RIR model.
By looking at the D(G(z)) and D(x) costs (figs. 4.1a and 4.1b respectively), it becomes
evident that both are converging to a global minimum and maximum respectively, of
W1 = −1. This can be considered the equilibrium where the real and fake samples become
virtually indistinguishable by the critic. However it seems that the model could be trained
slightly more as it has not yet reached this state of equilibrium. Furthermore it looks like
the generator is ‘winning’ in the min-max game of eq. (2.58) as the ‘fake’ W1 distance
of fig. 4.1a is converging faster to this global minimum. This possibly suggests that the
learning rate of the generator should be reduced.
1Tensorflow 2.1 API : https://www.tensorflow.org/versions/r2.1/api_docs/python/tf
2DTU HPC: https://www.hpc.dtu.dk/
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
50
==PAGE:59==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.1: Wasserstein distance for each factor of the total cost function for the real
RIR model, consisted of (a) Discriminator loss (real): D(x), (b) Discriminator loss (fake):
D(G(z)), (c) Generator Loss: −D(G(z)), (d) Gradient penalty: D(ˆx).
On the other hand, when looking at the W1 distances of the ISM RIR model fig. 4.2,
it becomes clear is that there is less variance in the data. The W1 distances show less
fluctuation and the model seems to be converging much more steadily (with the exception
of the spike at 0.25 × 105 iterations). This is to be expected as simulated data cannot
be as ‘noisy’ and inconsistent as real RIRs gathered from various sources. Similarly, the
fake RIR W1 distance seems to be converging to a global minimum of W1 = 1 (fig. 4.2a)
however the real W1 (fig. 4.2b) distance seems to be converging to a global maximum of
W1 = −2. This shows that both critic and generator networks are improving, ‘pushing’
the W1 distance towards their own objective. The results will depend on which of the two
converge faster as will be seen in the total adversarial cost of fig. 4.3.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
51
==PAGE:60==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.2: Wasserstein distance for each factor of the total cost function for the ISM
RIR model, consisted of (a) Discriminator loss (real): D(x), (b) Discriminator loss (fake):
D(G(z)), (c) Generator Loss: −D(G(z)), (d) Gradient penalty: D(ˆx).
More details can be deduced when looking at the total adversarial cost of both models as
seen in fig. 4.3. As the goal for the generator is to minimise the adversarial cost, it becomes
apparent that for the real RIR model (left) after about 0.4 × 104 iterations it starts to
generate more plausible results. As the training progresses, the critic becomes better at
distinguishing the real and fake distributions as the cost value increases. The same can be
said for the ISM RIR model’s (right) critic, as the adversarial cost slowly progresses toward
W1 = −1. However it is not clear what caused the spike at approximately 0.25 × 105
iterations, most likely this was a sample in the real data or the generated samples that
caused the critic to destabilise as it might not have been expecting this type of sample. As
this is expected when training GANs, the gradient penalty term (see figs. 4.1d and 4.2d) is
exactly meant to stabilise the process when irregular activity is observed. It guarantees
that the function is differentiable and that there is a useful gradient. In any case, as long
as the W1 is moving toward zero, the training is useful. This is true on the basis that
the W1 distance represents the distance between real and fake distributions. Given that
neither G or D networks have overfit the data then the smaller the W1 distance, the more
plausible the results will be.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
52
==PAGE:61==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.3:
Adversarial (WGAN-GP) cost J(G, D) = min
G
max
D∈D Ex∼pdata[D(x)] −
E˜x∼pg[D(˜x)] of (a) real RIR model and (b) ISM RIR model.
4.1.2
Generated Room Impulse Responses
The simplest way to evaluate the performance of the GAN is to determine whether it is
doing it’s job, that of generating diverse RIRs. During training, several “check-points” of
the models are saved. When the training begins, a latent vector z is generated and kept
constant throughout the whole training process. This is done to visualise the training
progression over the synthesised RIRs.
Figure 4.4: Real-RIR model generated impulse responses. From left to right: Generated
RIR, early reflections. From top to bottom: Constant z for 0, 1000, 2000 3000 epochs of
training
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
53
==PAGE:62==
When examining the RIRs generated from the real RIR model, it becomes apparent that
the generator does not take long to learn fine structure of a real impulse response. Figure
4.4 reveals this as from 1000 epochs the impulse response direct component is clearly
evident while smaller, early reflection components start forming. Seemingly the generator
goes through a cycle where the energy in the generated response is initially low (1000
epochs), then more pronounced (2000 epochs) and slightly lower again (3000 epochs). The
reflections in this example are not very protuberant however if one looks closely to the
right plots (early reflections), many reflections are in distinct positions in time throughout
the training procedure. This is even more evident with the ISM RIR model seen in fig. 4.6.
Ostensibly, this shows that the latent variable z is a compressed version of the RIR which
changes with the network weights, which themselves act as filters over the response.
Investigating the frequency responses of fig. 4.5 corresponding to the real RIR model, the
low frequency peak at 70 Hz is common in both 2000 epochs and 3000 epochs. Similarly
other common peaks and notches can be identified in both responses. The phase also stays
approximately the same.
Figure 4.5: Real-RIR model generated frequency responses. From top to bottom: Constant
z for 0, 1000, 2000 3000 epochs of training
Figure 4.6 displays an RIR generated from the GAN trained on ISM data. Interestingly,
the generator can synthesise (visually) plausible RIRs quite early on (100 epochs). It
should be noted however, that the epochs here are longer than the real RIR model, as the
total training data is more numerous. Additionally, it seems to start to regularise the total
energy in the synthesised RIR as training continues. It appears to have already settled on
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
54
==PAGE:63==
where the early reflections will be in the RIR since from 1000 epochs and possibly earlier,
there are several distinct reflections before 25 ms. These are also fairly visible in the early
reflections for 100 epochs.
Figure 4.6: ISM-RIR model generated RIRs. Left to right: Generated RIR, early reflections.
From top to bottom: Constant z for 0, 100, 1000, 3000 epochs of training.
When observing the frequency responses of the generated ISM model RIRs fig. 4.7, some
of the peaks and notches corresponding to room modes start to form from early on in the
training. This is mostly evident in the frequencies below 100 Hz. Intriguingly enough, some
of the notches start to appear at 100 epochs, disappear at 1000 epochs only to reappear
again at 3000 epochs. This can be seen e.g. for a few notches between 200 and 300 Hz.
It is clear that at 3000 epochs, the response is less noisy with less of a phase decay. Also
interesting, is the dip in ‘sound pressure’ which starts forming at 1000 Hz. As it is visibly
starting to form at 1000 epochs, it could be said that the critic is rejecting generated
samples that have a high peak at, and around, 1000 Hz and the generator is trying to
compensate for it. These peaks are seen at 0 epochs, for the same region of around 1000
Hz.
These peaks are most likely formed by discontinuities formed from the convolutional filters
as will be analysed in the following subsection.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure 4.7: ISM-RIR model generated frequency responses. From top to bottom: Constant
z for 0, 100, 1000, 3000 epochs of training.
4.1.3
Spectral Aliasing from GAN Layers
It can be seen that the transposed convolution layers in the WaveGAN network can cause
aliasing in the synthesised signal, due to discontinuities at the convolutional filter edges. To
put this in context, it can be compared to the typical form of aliasing due to upsampling
by an integer factor in the time domain. A signal of length N is upsampled by a factor ns
when adding ns −1 zeros between each sample of the original signal. Then a smoothing
kernel (ideal low-pass filter) is applied to interpolate the new samples. This causes ripples
in the frequency domain since it corresponds to filtering with a sinc function, namely,
spectral leakage. It involves the cumulative increase of the frequency coefficients which are
multiples of the new sampling frequency as replicas of frequency bins are created which
“fold-over” during the analysis.
Feature Length (Nf)
Time Resolution Nf/Fs [s]
Frequency Resolution Fs/Nf [Hz]
Aliased Frequency FsNf/N [Hz]
16384
1.024
0.9765625
16000
1024
0.064
15.625
1000
512
0.032
31.25
500
256
0.016
62.5
250
128
0.008
125
125
64
0.004
250
62.5
Table 4.1: Aliasing frequencies according to the input/feature length in transpose convolu-
tional layers. Here, N = 16384 represents the signal length or input to the generators first
transpose convolutional layer. Fs = 16 kHz corresponds to the signal’s sampling frequency
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
56
==PAGE:65==
The difference in this case is that the filtering that occurs involves transposed convolutional
filter weights, hence, multiple (according to the stride) convolutional kernels for each
feature. Each layer upsamples its input by a factor ns (in this instance ns = 4) and the
aliased frequencies add up in accordance to the input/feature sizes Nf. An indication of
the frequencies at which this is expected to occur is given in Table 4.1. However, these
effects could be tapered so long as the network learns that the periodic peaks are in fact
artefacts and not part of the training samples.
For instance, a trained generator network was given 1000 different impulses at randomly
varying time instances, the sample rate of which is Fs = 16 kHz. The output of the network
was then averaged over the 1000 realisations, the results of which can be seen in Figure 4.8
. There are clearly visible peaks are in agreement with discrete multiples of the frequencies
fa = 62.5, 125, 250, ... Hz. This is due to the fact that after each transposed convolution
operation, the effective bandwidth is extended while folding over frequencies above the
limit defined by the input size.
Figure 4.8: Output of the generator network averaged over 1000 realisations for a random
impulse input - G(δ[n −n0]). The frequency response shows clear peaks at frequencies
f = (62.5, 125, 187.5, 250 ... 62.5n) Hz, ∀n ∈Z
It is clear that real room transfer functions (RTF) rarely exhibit periodic high peaks in
this manner. While this may be evident in the form of comb-filters such as when near-field
diffraction phenomena occurs due to objects within the room or when sweeping echoes are
apparent in the room (commonly occurring in ISM simulations) due to its geometry [90],
the assumption made here is that the generated RTFs are closer to realistic conditions.
Thus, the discriminator network rightfully rejects any out-of-the-ordinary responses in
favour of generalisation. This is displayed in fig. 4.9 where the the same generator network,
when given the standard input of z ∼N(0, 1), tapers most of these artefacts and produces
more plausible results.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure 4.9: Output of the generator network averaged over 1000 realisations for a Gaussian
input - G(z). The effects of transposed convolution layer aliasing have been mitigated as
the generator has learnt to suppress these artefacts.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
58
==PAGE:67==
4.2
Room Impulse Response Synthesis with a Conditional
GAN
This section focuses on the technique described in section 3.2, that of using a conditional
GAN to synthesise RIRs with conditional information inferred from the energy in the RIR.
In this regard, three GANs are trained, similar to the network of the previous section,
conditioned on average T30, C50 and D50 values respectively. The analysis is split into two
separate sections, one regarding objective features of the synthesised RIRs and another
certain subjective features that are deduced when the RIR is convolved with speech.
Emphasis is given to the T30 GAN as the synthesised responses have qualities that are
easily identifiable.
Figure 4.10: Average T30mid values for 50 realisations of each class with its corresponding
standard deviation.
4.2.1
Objective Analysis of Room Descriptor Networks
The T30 network is trained with conditions regarding the reverberation time of each RIR
as its name implies. In that respect, 10 classes were created which incorporated RIRs with
a reverberation time of increasing order. These classes can be seen in table 3.3.
This GAN shows that in the conditional set-up, the generator network is able to learn to
synthesise RIRs based on energy decay. To demonstrate this, the generator was produced
50 realisations for each class label, the average T30mid values of which can be seen in
fig. 4.10.
As expected, the classes with the most relaxed conditioning (e.g. classes 0, 8, 9) show the
highest standard deviation. These classes have the broadest range in terms of T30 values
(class 0 : (0, 0.4] s, class 8 : (1.3, 1.9] s, class 9 : (1.9, +∞) s) showing that for better
accuracy, more austere conditioning is required. It also makes sense to examine several of
the generated RIRs individually, according to their class. Classes 2, 5 and 8 were arbitrarily
selected to asses the quality of generated RIRs and can be seen in figs. 4.11, 4.13 and 4.15.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
59
==PAGE:68==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.11: The (a) mean impulse response and (b) corresponding frequency response of
50 realisations for class 2 of the T30 network. The impulse responses have reflections that
are densely spaced in time, while the frequency response shows quite smooth behaviour up
to approximately 600 Hz, suggesting RIRs corresponding to a fairly small room.
Figure 4.12: Kurtosis of class 2 for 50 realisations. Average kurtosis K10−100ms = 0.51.
Low average kurtosis suggests dense, incoherent and low energy reflections.
It becomes evident that for low T30 valued classes (e.g. class 2) the average reflection
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
60
==PAGE:69==
density in the early response ( < 100 ms) is quite prominent. The mean response shows the
roughness of what resembles Gaussian distributed impulses. The high degree of variance
of reflections indicates this. The reflections densely spaced like this is typical of small
rooms with low levels of reverberation. This can also be deduced from the mean frequency
response where which is not very rough in the low frequencies, displaying a low modal
overlap.
Furthermore, it seems that the generator network is capable of producing a broad range of
RIRs for the specified T30 values as can be seen superimposed in the background. This can
be a desired quality in many acoustic scene testing applications or statistical analyses of
room soundfields.
The kurtosis of the generated response (fig. 4.12 displays a fairly constant value over time
(up to 200 ms suggesting that the average response is a largely damped. This can also be
deduced from the low average kurtosis for the first 100 ms, as the reflections are dense and
there are not many high energy peaks throughout the generated responses.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.13: The (a) mean impulse response and (b) corresponding frequency response
of 50 realisations for class 5 of the T30 network. As the early reflections are less densely
spaced, the mean impulse response approaches zero. This suggests a larger room size.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
61
==PAGE:70==
Figure 4.14: Kurtosis of class 5 for 50 realisations. Average kurtosis K10−100ms = 0.63.
The lower values at approximately 150 ms may indicate a mixing time of the diffuse field
transition.
When examining the responses of class 5 displayed in fig. 4.13a, it becomes apparent that
the energy in the early part of the response is less dense than the response of class 2
(fig. 4.11a). This is to be expected in slightly larger rooms where the walls are spaced
further apart. This can also be seen in the frequency response of fig. 4.13b where in
comparison to the corresponding response of class 2, the high frequency energy is more
homogeneous and the modal overlap is higher, indicating a more ‘diffuse’ sound field.
The kurtosis in this case, is expectedly higher on average than class 2 as the reflections are
also less dense and more coherent. It can be seen in fig. 4.14 that the mean kurtosis tends
toward zero around 150 ms. Interestingly, this may indicate the average diffuse ’mixing
time’ of the responses. The reflections become more incoherent after this point as the
descending kurtosis points out. Furthermore, the average early kurtosis K10−100ms = 0.63
implies more aberrant early reflections for this class as it is higher in value than e.g. that
of class 2 (K10−100ms = 0.51).
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
62
==PAGE:71==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.15: The (a) mean impulse response and (b) corresponding frequency response of
50 realisations for class 8 of the T30 network. The responses indicate that they correspond
to a larger room than the two previously examined classes.
Figure 4.16: Kurtosis of class 8 for 50 realisations. Average kurtosis K10−100ms = 0.76.
The kurtosis is fairly constant until it declines rapidly after 175 ms, possibly indicating
diffusivity.
Finally, with the same underlying principles as before, it can be said that both the impulse
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
63
==PAGE:72==
Figure 4.17: Normalised mean square pressure p2
rms standard deviation of generated
responses for the three examined classes over frequency. Since the variance of p2
rms in a
room is inversely proportional to the modal overlap, the generator learns to model .
and the frequency responses indicate that they correspond to larger rooms than the two
previous classes. This is evident from the early reflection spacing in fig. 4.15a, as the
peaks are spread out the mean impulse response is forced closer to zero. Similarly, when
examining the frequency response of fig. 4.15b, it is clear that at the high frequencies the
modal overlap is significantly higher, with indications also of a lower Schroeder frequency.
This can be said on the basis that the average frequency response of fig. 4.15b exhibits
many more fluctuations than e.g. the corresponding responses of class 2 and 5, from much
earlier on in terms of frequency.
On average the kurtosis is the highest for this class. This is to be expected for more sparse
early reflections and is typical for larger rooms. Again, the kurtosis tends toward zero
after approximately 175 ms, only this time it drops off significantly. It cannot be said that
generated responses have a mixing time directly or correspondingly, a Schroeder frequency,
however it seems the generator has learnt to model rooms and not just a random time
series. Furthermore, the energy seems to be more deterministic as the reflections appear to
stand out clearly in time until they reach a ‘diffusive’ state. This is suggested by the fairly
constant kurtosis between 50 and 150 ms.
The notion of diffuseness of the generated RIRs can be further reinforced when looking at
the class standard deviation of mean square pressure p2
rms. The longer the reverberation
time of a room, the more rapidly its sound field will change as a function of the frequency.
This is based on the fact that the variance of the mean square pressure is inversely
proportional to the modal overlap [1, p. 150]. The generated responses indicate this with
increasing frequency as seen in fig. 4.17 assuming that the class statistics correspond to
spatial statistics. Hence, it is seen the modal overlap increases with increasing class (and
reverberation time) as the standard deviation of the mean square pressure decreases.
It should be noted that the direct components of classes 5 and 8 (impulse responses seen
in figs. 4.13a and 4.15a) indicate a slight bias of either positive or negative phase. The
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
64
==PAGE:73==
mean response shows a ‘preferred’ initial phase for the direct wave in both cases. This
is most likely due to the fact that the loudspeaker response is common for several of the
responses in the real-RIR data set with the same reverberation time. This may force the
generator to learn an RIR representation, the phase of which has been directly influenced
by a certain type (or types) of source.
To examine the success of the class conditioning on reverberation time, a single RIR is
randomly selected from each class ensemble to examine its reverberation time in the octave
bands of 400 Hz to 1250 Hz. The energy decay curves of these RIRs can be seen in fig. 4.18.
The energy decay is increasing over time proportionally to each class conditioning. This is
the case for each frequency band regardless of the fact that the classes were conditioned on
an average T30 value rather than in each respective octave band.
Figure 4.18: Energy decay curves of randomly selected RIRs in the specified 1/3 octave
bands, generated for each class. The curves show a clear increase in the late energy in
accordance to specified class label.
The reverberation times of the 50 realisations for each RIR class and respective frequency
band can be seen in fig. 4.19, where the variance of reverberation time is slightly higher
at the lower frequency bands. The exception to this is class 5 which shows more variance
in the last two frequency bands (higher frequency). More variance in the lower bands is
to be expected as modal activity is more significant in lower frequencies, increasing the
spatial uncertainty. In this case, it corresponds to variance in reverberation time for the
respective bands of the generated responses.
When examining the results of the C50 network (fig. 4.20), it is clear that although the
mean C50 value lies within the specified class (with the exception of class 0), the clarity
values are typically higher in the low frequency bands. Low frequencies are more vital for
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
65
==PAGE:74==
speech intelligibility and since this descriptor resembles or hints at the aforementioned
measure, it is likely that the early reflections are dominated by the low frequencies when
the response is deemed intelligible. On the other hand, class 0 is intentionally incorrect as
the data for this class was clearly underrepresented (as can be seen in the class distributions
of fig. 3.5b and table 3.3). Even though the network cannot resolve this class (the results
do not resemble an RIR) it does not affect the generation process in other classes.
Similarly the D50 network (fig. 4.21) is in agreement with the predefined classes with the
most extreme cases present in the respective boundary classes (class 0 and class 9). Again
it can be seen that the low frequencies are typically higher in definition demonstrating that
the network is able to quantify the relevance of the specific subjective measure in the RIRs.
The performance for each class is reflected in the available data for the respective class
as can be seen in e.g. class 9, where a large amount of data (fig. 3.5c) was characterised
with the definition value of 1. This means that the data (real RIRs) of this class do not
have any reflections above 50 ms and are most likely, extremely damped. Hence, this is
emulated in the synthesised responses.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
66
==PAGE:75==
Figure 4.19: T30 values for each class in 1/3 octave bands over 50 realisations of G. The
results are in agreement with the specified classes while also showing qualities that real
RIRs show (e.g. larger variance at low frequencies).
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
67
==PAGE:76==
Figure 4.20: C50 values for each class in 1/3 octave bands over a single realisation of G.
The results are in agreement with the specified classes and the higher levels of clarity are
typically in low frequencies, which are more crucial for speech intelligibility.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
68
==PAGE:77==
Figure 4.21: D50 values for each class in 1/3 octave bands over a single realisation of G.
The results are in agreement with the specified classes while the network seems to be able
to quantify the rationale behind the definition values of the response, producing RIRs of
similar type.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
69
==PAGE:78==
4.2.2
Intelligibility Analysis of Room Descriptor Networks
As this analysis limited to measures that correlate well to speech intelligibility as a substitute
of a subjective listening test, the normalised SRMR metric can reveal a lot regarding the
perceptual qualities of the synthesised responses.
When examining the spectrogram of the generated responses (T30 network), in some cases
low energy artefacts may be present as artificial noise in the late part of the response. This
can typically be tapered with the use of a window function (see fig. 4.22), to eliminate these
unwanted artefacts that may be perceptible as a low frequency delay in the synthesised
responses. These artefacts are most likely due to edge effects in the transposed convolution
upsampling procedure.
Figure 4.22: A normalised Hann window with size equal to 2 times the RIR taps is applied
to the zero-padded synthesised RIRs to eliminate any artefacts present in the late part.
As a reference, speech obtained from semi-anechoic recordings of the Harvard word list
are used. The speech signal is convolved with each individual synthesised response class
to quantify the perceptual relevance of the RIRs. The reference speech can be seen in
fig. 4.23.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
70
==PAGE:79==
Figure 4.23: “Harvard word list one”: anechoic speech reference to be convolved with
synthesised RIRs for speech intelligibility metrics.
When convolved with randomly selected realisations of each class, the typical ‘smearing’
effect of applied reverberation on speech immediately becomes evident. Figure 4.24 displays
this for four selected classes (2,4,6,8). Interestingly, the offset of the plosive ‘t’ at exactly one
second is still fairly clear, even for class 8. The smearing obviously affects higher frequencies
more than mid and low frequencies but it becomes apparent that the speech signal still
keeps its fundamental / structural dynamics across frequency, even if reverberation is very
pronounced.
On the other hand, class 6 shows evidence of filtering from the synthesised RIR, as a lot of
the mid and high frequency energy has been dissipated. This leads to a ‘nasal’ coloration
of the acoustic signal which is however characteristic of some rooms with high frequency
absorption. It should be reminded that due to the stochastic nature of the network, the
generated responses can vary in frequency content.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
71
==PAGE:80==
Figure 4.24: Spectrograms of convolved reference speech with synthesised RIRs for four
different classes. The T30 displayed for each class corresponds to the average reverberation
time of the synthesised response.
The SRMR can reveal the extent to which the speech signals are intelligible. As such
the 50 realisations that were generated as previously stated where used to quantify this.
As expected, the SRMR decreases with class and thus, increasing reverberation time,
characterising the speech signals as less intelligible. This can be seen in fig. 4.25 where the
mean SRMR value for each of the 50 realisations of each class is displayed. The anechoic
speech is expectedly, highly intelligible according to its SRMR ranking with the mean
value of low T30 classes not falling far behind. The variance in the generated response
SRMR is higher for lower T30 classes than those of higher reverberation as in some cases
speech-critical bands may be more affected by strong and unwanted early reflections than
others. This demonstrates the variety of the generated responses, even on a class specific
base. Furthermore it shows that even if the responses are fake or synthesised, they are still
intelligible and perceptually informed.
This is further indicated when comparing the SRMR of the responses generated by the
C50 and D50 networks displayed in figs. 4.26 and 4.27. Typically both C50 and D50 are
used as indicators of intelligibility in meeting rooms, auditoria, etc. Higher levels indicate
less energy in the late part of the responses. This usually means that the speech signal
will be more intelligible as the disruptive early reflections (> 50 ms) and late reflections
(> 80 −100 ms) affect speech greatly. The average values of C50 and D50 seem to correlate
well with the respective SRMR values, suggesting both intelligible synthesised responses
and qualities that are evident in real RIRs or real acoustic environments.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
72
==PAGE:81==
It should be noted that both the C50 and the D50 networks were trained slightly less (2800
epochs) than the T30 network (3000 epochs). The performance of all three networks could
improve with more training.
Figure 4.25: SRMR calculated for 50 realisations of G over each class. Higher SRMR
correlates to higher speech intelligibility, demonstrating that the synthesised responses can
be very intelligible at low reverberation times.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.26: The (a) SRMR and (b) average definition scores for a single realisation
of generated D50 network responses. It can be seen that the values are correlated, a
characteristic that implies the ‘naturalness’ and perceptual validity of the synthesised
responses
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
73
==PAGE:82==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.27: The (a) SRMR and (b) average clarity scores for a single realisation of generated
C50 network responses. The measures show a correlation over class, which implies the
‘naturalness’ and potentially the perceptual validity of the synthesised responses
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
74
==PAGE:83==
4.3
Room Impulse Response Bandwidth Extension
This section is meant to first illustrate the breadth of spatial aliasing on reconstructed
impulse responses. First the soundfield is recovered on the reference plane for uniformly
decimated measurement arrays as described in section 4.3.1, the results of which are
presented and analysed in section 4.3.2. Subsequently, a method to improve the temporal
bandwidth of the reconstructed responses is portrayed in section 4.3.3, in some cases
showing an improvement even in the reconstruction band of 0 to 2 kHz.
4.3.1
Decimating the Measurement Array to Induce Spatial Aliasing
As described in section 3.3.2 the initial array has a spherical configuration consisted of
97 transducers on the surface of the array and 5 transducers on the reference plane to
avoid singularities introduced in the middle of the sphere. This array was constructed with
the use of a robot arm (UR5) with the measurement positions uniformly spaced over the
surface of the sphere.
In order to emulate the physical limitations that one can encounter when applying soundfield
reconstruction techniques, a decimation process of the initial array Ainit composed of a
total of M = 102 measurements as seen fig. 3.7 is carried out. This procedure is as follows:
• A number Mnew corresponding to the amount of transducers on the spherical array
is specified
• A new set of points corresponding to Mnew are mapped out on to the surface of a
sphere of the same size as Ainit, quasi-uniformly placed by use of a Fibonacci lattice
[91], hereon denoted as Aqu
• The K-nearest neighbours3 of each (hypothetical) transducers’ coordinates in Aqu
are found corresponding to the existing coordinates in Ainit, leading to a new,
experimental (subset) array of Aexp
The outcome of the above process can be seen in fig. 4.28 for 4 subsets of of Ainit. The
purpose of this type of decimation is get an estimate of fmax, or the maximum frequency
that can be reconstructed accurately without aliasing artefacts.
3scipy.spatial.KDTree : https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.spatial.KDTree.html
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
75
==PAGE:84==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.28: Four subsets Aexp of the initial array Ainit plotted (a) in spherical coordinates
and (b) over the surface of a sphere. The decimation process is such that the aperture
maintains some uniformity. The transducers are slightly elevated (positive elevation angle)
due to the UR5 base.
Due to the fact that each subset Aqu of the initial array Ainit is approximately uniform then
planar assumptions can be made in local regions of the spherical surface. The euclidean
distances of each pair of transducers is calculated and the average of the 7 smallest of these
pairwise distances is approximated as the uniform interval ∆r between the transducers.
The values of these distances as well as the approximation of the aliasing frequencies (here
denoted as fNyq) can be seen in fig. 4.29 both the constructed experimental arrays Aexp
and for the Fibonacci lattice Aqu. It can be seen that they are in agreement showing this
scheme does indeed approximate uniformity and thus, a Nyquist rate.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
76
==PAGE:85==
Figure 4.29: Average transducer distance (yellow) and the corresponding Nyquist frequencies
fNyq (blue) of experimental (Aexp) and quasi-uniform (Aqu) apertures. Since the transducers
are equidistantly placed in Aqu, it follows that the experimental array Aexp is also uniformly
distributed.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
77
==PAGE:86==
4.3.2
The influence of Spatial Aliasing on Soundfield Reconstruction
As described in section 3.3.1, one can reconstruct the soundfield in any particular source-free
plane, by projecting recovered plane-wave coefficients on the aforementioned plane via a
specifically designed sensing matrix. This sensing matrix, contains the directions of arrival
of each plane wave used in the reconstruction, for each position on the grid that is defined
by the plane. In this context, plane wave coefficients were obtained by decomposing the
soundfield acquired by the spherical measurement array and it’s decimated equivalents,
then projecting these coefficients onto the ground-truth plane in order to reconstruct the
soundfield there.
From the previous procedure, impulse responses corresponding to points on the reference
plane can be recovered by either interpolation or extrapolation of the soundfield. As
the interpolated RIR is typically a more accurate reconstruction than its extrapolated
counterpart, both regularisation methods (l2 and l1 norms) are expected to perform better
than when performing the extrapolation. This is largely due to the fact that the effective
aperture size (spherical volume radius) is finite with the extrapolated point sitting close to
its limits, a region which is more susceptible to aliased plane waves. This becomes evident
when examining the reconstructed soundfield on the “ground truth” plane. The frequency
of 650 Hz (fig. 4.30) is selected as an example to illustrate this, since it lies close to the
aliasing frequencies of each measurement array. The reconstructed soundfields for each
regularisation scheme and their relative errors as a measure of divergence from the original
soundfield are displayed in figs. 4.31 and 4.32 respectively. The symbol M displayed over
each reconstruction indicates the number of transducers used in each array.
Figure 4.30: Original “ground truth” soundfield at 650 Hz
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
78
==PAGE:87==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.31: Reconstructed soundfields with two regularisation schemes: (a) Titkhonov
(l2) regularisation , (b) LASSO (l1) regularisation. Decreasing the number of transducers
on the array heavily affects the quality of reconstruction.
Neither of the regularisation methods are immune to the array decimation process as both
examples are heavily aliased even from more than half the original amount of transducers.
This is especially evident when examining the relative error of the reconstructed soundfields
in fig. 4.32. It seems that the l1 norm can provide slightly higher accuracy in its estimates
when the spherical array is still fairly intact. From M = 64 elements, the quality of the
reconstruction starts to decline rapidly.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
79
==PAGE:88==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.32: Relative error of reconstructed soundfields with two regularisation schemes: (a)
Titkhonov (l2) regularisation , (b) LASSO (l1) regularisation. The spatial error increases
with decreasing the amount of transducers used in the array.
When reconstructing the soundfield for a broad range of frequencies (i.e. 0 to 2 kHz) the
MAC of fig. 4.33 can illustrate the problem of aliasing quite well. Four array configurations
are selected that can represent this effect, and the soundfield is reconstructed for the
aforementioned band.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
80
==PAGE:89==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.33: The MAC for both (a) Titkhonov (l2) and (b) LASSO l1 reconstructions
as a function of frequency. The four arrays demonstrate the decay in the soundfields’
spatial similarity at the estimated aliasing frequencies fa for each array. Reconstructing
above the Schroeder frequency fsch does not affect the results as opposed to the “fold-
over” directions kNyq represented by fa. The denoted Nyquist frequencies correspond to
fa = 390, 540, 720, 980 Hz accordingly.
Above each estimated fold-over frequency where the plane wave directions kNyq cannot be
uniquely resolved, the MAC begins to decline. In some cases, the LASSO reconstruction
cannot even be recovered as it fails to converge. This could be improved possibly with
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
81
==PAGE:90==
a better regularisation parameter λ, which would correspond to the background noise
level as seen in [26]. However within the scope of this thesis, the reconstruction is simply
a demonstration of the physical ‘cut-off frequency’ that is imposed upon the process.
Interestingly, the l1 can lead to an improved reconstruction as seen for f = 1250 which is
greatly improved over the corresponding l2 reconstruction at the same frequency.
The same can be deduced when looking at the NMSE of individual frequencies as a function
of the number of transducers in fig. 4.34. For the frequencies below the corresponding
fa the NMSE shows an improvement when increasing the number of transducers, while
the frequencies well above fa are not improved at all. Lower frequencies (e.g. 125 Hz)
can be affected by measurement noise, as seen in the l2 case, which is more susceptible
to this kind of error as the direction of arrival k is miscalculated. Furthermore, it can
be seen that at some frequencies, adding more information becomes redundant or the
reconstruction seems to be favoured by measuring at specific positions as the error is higher
than expected. However, it is evident that there is a general monotonic decrease with
increasing measurements for the frequencies that are not affected by spatial aliasing.
Figure 4.34: The NMSE of single frequency values as a function of the number of transducers
in the array.
Aliased frequencies (above fa) are represented as dashed lines.
These
frequencies are not affected by an increase in measurements as they are well above the
Nyquist rate.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
82
==PAGE:91==
In the following subsections the interpolated and extrapolated responses are examined
individually. For all reconstructed responses a frequency resolution of approximately 4 Hz
is used (equivalent to a FFT size of 4096 at Fs = 16 kHz).
Interpolated RIRs
The interpolated frequency responses for both l2 and l1 norm regularisation schemes are
displayed in figs. 4.35a and 4.35b. It can be seen that in the case of the l2 norm, response
is reconstructed for every discrete frequency value, independent of measurement array, as
opposed to the l1 norm reconstruction. This is due to the lack of spatial sparsity at high
frequencies where the modal overlap is significantly higher. However, the sound pressure
level seemingly decays rapidly after the Nyquist frequencies defined for each array. This
trend is more evident with decreasing array order, suggesting that the problem relies too
heavily on the regularisation to converge when the available information is limited. It
cannot resolve high pressure fluctuations and either smooths out the solution (l2 norm) or
pushes it to zero (l1 norm) This can also affect the bandwidth extension process as will be
seen in the following subsection.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
83
==PAGE:92==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.35: Interpolated (a) Titkhonov (l2 norm) and (b) LASSO (l1 norm) reconstructed
frequency responses for four measurement arrays with decreasing transducer order. The
“ground-truth” is displayed with a grey colour in the background. The reconstruction with
l2 norm is smoother than the respective l1 norm reconstruction and it is able to reconstruct
for every discrete frequency value, independent of measurement array.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
84
==PAGE:93==
The corresponding RIRs are heavily ‘coloured’ with decreasing order of array elements as can
be seen in the equivalent l2 norm RIRs fig. 4.36. It should be noted that the reconstructed
RIRs are band-limited as opposed to the ground truth seen in the background. A similar
behaviour is observed in the l1 reconstruction as can be seen in figs. B.6 and B.7 of
appendix C.1.
Figure 4.36: Reconstructed interpolated RIRs with l2 norm. From left to right: Full RIR,
early reflections. From top to bottom: Decreasing order of transducers in measurement
array. The ‘colouration’ of the RIRs is more severe with decreasing order of array elements.
Extrapolated RIRs
Similarly to the interpolated RIRs the reconstruction seems to be ineffective for the
respective extrapolated responses at frequencies above the Nyquist rate of each array
(fig. 4.37). Although the l1 reconstruction is slightly more accurate along frequency, at
M = 37 and M = 23 the reconstruction degrades rapidly with increasing frequency. Again,
the algorithm is unable to converge in several cases. Similarly, the l2 norm amplitude
decays proportionally to the respective array components.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
85
==PAGE:94==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.37: Extrapolated (a) Titkhonov (l2 norm) and (b) LASSO (l1 norm) reconstructed
frequency responses for four measurement arrays with decreasing transducer order. The
“ground-truth” frequency response is displayed with a grey colour in the background. The
reconstruction with l2 norm is smoother than the respective l1 norm reconstruction and
it is able to reconstruct for every discrete frequency value, independent of measurement
array.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
86
==PAGE:95==
The ‘colouration’ of the reconstructed RIRs seems more severe in this case with decreasing
array element order. Figure 4.38 displays this for the l2 reconstructed responses with
similar behaviour present in the l1 equivalent.
Figure 4.38: Reconstructed extrapolated RIRs with l2 norm. From left to right: Full RIR,
early reflections. From top to bottom: Decreasing order of transducers in measurement
array. The ‘colouration’ of the RIRs is more severe with decreasing order of array elements.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
87
==PAGE:96==
4.3.3
Using a Compressed Sensing GAN to Extend Band-limited
Impulse Responses
As described in section 2.6, extending the bandwidth of an aliased estimate of an RIR is
a two step scheme. First, it requires an optimisation with respect to the latent vector z
which act as the compressed state of the RIR mapped via the non-linear function G(z).
As soon as this converges to a minimum, a joint optimisation is carried out for both the
latent vector z and the generator network weights θG. This can be visualised in figs. 4.39
and 4.40. The reconstructed signals Yrec can be used as an input to this system by defining
a cut-off frequency for the low-pass filter AΨ. With the use of stochastic gradient descent
and following the two step algorithm, it should converge to a representation of the original
full-band RIR (ytruth ≡x∗
G).
Although the MSE for the CS-GAN (fig. 4.39) does converge, it reaches a local minimum
in which the gradient fails to provide significant information for the signal recovery. This
is most likely due to the generator network’s G limited span. It cannot represent the
frequency response Yrec accurately as the reconstructed signal (interpolated or extrapolated
frequency response) has certain characteristics which G has not seen. For example, the
decay in amplitude and phase as seen in the l2 regression of figs. 4.35a and 4.37a or the
sharp notches of figs. 4.35b and 4.37b. These are not real signals and they have been
(re)constructed in a way which G cannot fully recover. Still, it is a good initialisation of z
for the optimisation that takes place next.
Figure 4.39: The CS-GAN mean square error ∥Yrec −AΨG(z)∥2 for an l2 norm recon-
structed frequency response Yrec with M = 64 elements.
Under the following scheme, the network weights are optimised (along with the latent
vector) to allow the generator to a) adapt to the signal domain by enforcing a constraint
on the generation process and b) recover the latent variable z that best fits the data.
Consequently it is able to reconstruct the low frequencies entirely as seen in the MSE
depicted in fig. 4.40 which converges to zero. This allows the generator to ‘interpret’ the
high frequencies (above the cut-off) as what should be a full-band response. However, there
is a risk of overfitting the data (Yrec) as will be seen in the following results.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
88
==PAGE:97==
Figure 4.40: The DA-GAN mean square error ∥Yrec −AΨGθ(θ; z)∥2 for an l2 norm
reconstructed frequency response Yrec with M = 64 elements.
The result of the previously depicted optimisation (M = 64 elements), as well as the
corresponding predictions for M = 102, 37 and 23 elements can be seen in figs. 4.41a
to 4.41d. It should be noted that throughout this subsection the ‘predicted’ responses refer
to those generated by the GAN, while the ‘reconstructed’ and the ‘original’ responses refer
to the l2 soundfield reconstruction and ground-truth responses respectively.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
89
==PAGE:98==
(a) M = 102 array elements, fc = 980 Hz
(b) M = 64 array elements, fc = 720 Hz
(c) M = 37 array elements, fc = 540 Hz
(d) M = 23 array elements, fc = 390 Hz
Figure 4.41: Original Ytruth, predicted XG and reconstructed Yrec (l2) frequency responses
of interpolated RIR for four spherical arrays in decreasing element order. The (black)
dashed line denotes the cutoff frequency fc of the low pass filter AΨ. The predicted
response can occasionally overfit on the the reconstructed response, which becomes evident
with a lower cut-off frequency.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
90
==PAGE:99==
The responses of fig. 4.41 correspond to the DFT sensing matrix AΨ with the prior xG
corresponding to the network trained on real RIRs. Other combinations are examined
as will be seen further in this section. For reasons of brevity, only the reconstructed
interpolated response as described in section 3.3.2 will be used to delineate the results of
the algorithm.
The decay in the predicted responses at frequencies above the cutoff indicate signs of
overfitting. The network is sensing a (slowly) decaying phase and amplitude from the
reconstructed responses and reproducing this behaviour, as this is what is required of it.
It is being “asked” to predict the extended bandwidth RIR of the previously reconstructed
response, which is inherently error prone.
Heuristically, many approaches exist that can circumvent this issue, with the obvious
choice being a proper regularisation and perhaps exploiting temporal or spatial information
from the measurement array. The latter was examined, by introducing high frequency
coefficients randomly from the existing measured sound pressure. This did not produce
any significant improvements and was left out of the analysis. However, further research in
this direction is necessary.
On the other hand, regularising with a penalty of ∥G(θ; z)∥1 did seem to improve the
results in general. This is to be expected as this is a compressed sensing problem and
regularising with the generated impulse response promotes the spatial sparsity inherent in
the problem, that of a highly damped room. Further, an argument can be made of the
sparsity in the RIRs early reflections which is typical in mid-sized or large rooms.
The decaying high frequencies are well illustrated when observing the frequency responses
of the true RIR ytruth (interpolated response) and the predicted RIR xG for an array
consisted of M = 64 elements (figs. 4.42a and 4.42b respectively).
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
91
==PAGE:100==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.42: Interpolated frequency responses corresponding to (a) ground truth Ytruth
and (b) predicted XG responses for M = 64 array elements.
With the cutoff frequency at fc = 720 Hz, the predicted response indicates that this decline
in sound pressure level, starts to occur earlier than expected. The network is predicting a
faster decay with the result of underestimating the both phase and amplitude. Lowering
the cutoff frequency may improve results but it limits the available information which could
also lead to inferior results. It should be noted that below 60 Hz there are slight differences
which are due to the reconstruction of the previous sections. This can be attributed to
measurement noise or outliers from the previous regression problem regarding soundfield
reconstruction.
It makes sense to evaluate the performance of the predicted and reconstructed RIRs
against the true RIR. In order to achieve this, all three RIRs were low-pass filtered with
the same 6th order Butterworth filter with a cutoff of 2 kHz. This is a necessary step
as the reconstructed response yrec has a bandwidth of the same amount. Figure 4.43
shows both the reconstructed response yrec (top) and the predicted response xG (bottom),
overlain on the true response ytruth of the interpolated position. It can be seen that the
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
92
==PAGE:101==
generator network reduces some of the erroneous energy caused by the spatial aliasing
while still maintaining a fair degree of correlation to the true RIR. When compared to
the reconstructed response, both the SDR and the correlation coefficient indicate an
improvement with respect to the ground truth.
Figure 4.43: Band-limited ([0-2] kHz) reconstructed responses yrec (top) and predicted RIR
xG (bottom) for M = 64 array elements depicted for the whole response (left) and early
reflections (right) with the real RIR model. The original band-limited response (ytruth) is
displayed in the background (black). Band-limited signal metrics: SDRyrec = −0.02 dB,
SDRxG = 1.01 dB. Pearson corr. coeff. : Ryrec = 0.71 , RxG = 0.75. The synthesised RIR
is improved when compared to the reconstructed RIR in terms of correlation and error
within the band of 0 to 2 kHz.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
93
==PAGE:102==
(a) M = 102 array elements, fc = 980 Hz. SDRxG = −5.93 dB, RxG = 0.45.
(b) M = 64 array elements, fc = 720 Hz. SDRxG = −5.18 dB, RxG = 0.48.
(c) M = 37 array elements, fc = 540 Hz. SDRxG = −7.95 dB, RxG = 0.37.
(d) M = 23 array elements, fc = 390 Hz. SDRxG = −10.83 dB, RxG = 0.28.
Figure 4.44: Original ytruth and predicted xG impulse responses of interpolated RIR for
four spherical arrays of decreasing element order. The generator can synthesise meaningful
RIRs even when the information is limited (e.g. low cutoff) and highly aliased. The amount
of aliasing present in the reconstructed responses affects the prediction significantly.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
94
==PAGE:103==
The early reflections of the synthesised, full-band impulse responses for each examined
array configuration can be seen in fig. 4.44. The results demonstrate that the generator
is able to synthesise an RIR even from notably limited information (as seen for the case
of M = 23 elements). It is expected that some colouration will still remain, proportional
to the aliased, low frequency constraints of the reconstructed responses yrec. However,
by decreasing the cutoff fc, the information of available to the network is limited, also
limiting its ability to predict the extent of damping in the room and consequently, the
impulse response. Hence the performance of the generator network is influenced by two
main factors, the input response quality and the cut-off frequency of the DFT low-pass
filter.
The results can vary significantly, depending on the initialisation of the algorithm (e.g.
step 1) and the degree to which the network might overfit the reconstructed responses yrec.
Hence, the depicted results are not necessarily the best or worst performing predictions,
but instead offer an attestation of the network’s capabilities.
Using a model trained on simulated data
Interestingly, using the network trained on ISM RIRs as analysed in section 4.1.1 can also
provide better results than the reconstructed response in terms of the evaluation metrics.
This can be seen in fig. 4.45. Clearly, the synthesised response is closer to the ground truth
within the examined bandwidth.
Figure 4.45: Band-limited reconstructed responses yrec (top) and predicted RIR xG
(bottom) for M = 64 array elements with the ISM RIR model, depicted for the whole
response (left) and early reflections (right). The original band-limited response (ytruth) is
displayed in the background (black). Band-limited signal metrics: SDRyrec = −0.02 dB,
SDRxG = 0.38 dB. Pearson corr. coeff. Ryrec = 0.71, RxG = 0.72. The synthesised RIR
outperforms the reconstructed RIR in terms of correlation and error within the band of 0
to 2 kHz.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
95
==PAGE:104==
The full-band response of the previous prediction can be seen in fig. 4.46. The ISM RIR
model seems to be more prone to overestimating several initial reflections. This can be
attributed to the fact that the ISM as a simulation, is applying a linear absorption to
each reflection rather than a frequency dependent absorption. It is typical to see these
‘overestimated’ peaks in the simulated data also. Apart from the obvious choice, of applying
frequency dependence in the absorption coefficients of each specular reflection during the
simulation, this could be improved by applying higher levels of additive noise to the training
data. This way, the noise floor and thus, the variance of the RIR taps increase, lowering
the average reflection amplitude.
Figure 4.46: Original ytruth and predicted xG impulse responses of interpolated RIR with
G corresponding to a model trained with simulated (ISM) data for M = 64 elements. The
generator demonstrates an adequate prediction of ytruth when trained with the ISM data.
Full-band signal metrics: SDRxG = −7.13 dB. Pearson corr. coeff. RxG = 0.40.
The fact that one can recover variants of the reconstructed impulse response with the
ISM RIR model demonstrates the importance of the training data. The ISM RIR model
was trained with more than 10 times more data than the real RIR model. It has a much
larger span and thus, a larger probability to predict the correct response. Consequently,
using a GAN trained on simulated data can be beneficial.
However, apart from the
previously mentioned miscalculation, it does become evident that there is slight bias toward
components with a positive phase. This can be seen in both responses of figs. 4.46 and 4.48
where most of the components are above zero. Again, this is a trait of the simulated data
since the wall impedance is real valued and hence, not affecting the phase of the reflected
wave.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
96
==PAGE:105==
Figure 4.47: Band-limited reconstructed responses yrec (top) and predicted xG (bottom)
for M = 34 array elements with the ISM RIR model, depicted for the whole response (left)
and early reflections (right). The original band-limited response (ytruth) is displayed in the
background (black). Band-limited signal metrics: SDRyrec = −1.28 dB, SDRxG = −2.73
dB. Pearson corr. coeff. Ryrec = 0.64, RxG = 0.58. The synthesised RIR is comparable to
the reconstructed RIR in terms of correlation and error within the band of 0 to 2 kHz.
Figure 4.48: Original ytruth and predicted xG impulse responses of interpolated RIR with
G corresponding to a model trained with ISM data for M = 42 elements. The generator
demonstrates a fairly accurate prediction of the ytruth when trained with the ISM data.
Full-band signal metrics: SDRxG = −8.71 dB. Pearson corr. coeff. RxG = 0.35.
Using a STFT transformation
Using a different basis such as an STFT has the benefit of allowing temporal information
to be incorporated in the model. This can be beneficial in this particular circumstance
as the ringing artefacts due to spatial aliasing are mainly present in the time domain
response. This can be seen in figs. 4.49 and 4.50 where the ringing artefacts have been
reduced at the cost of deviations in the frequency response. The cutoff frequency in this
case is representative of the frequency bin within which the discrete frequency value fc lies.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
97
==PAGE:106==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.49: (a) Original Ytruth, predicted XG, reconstructed Yrec frequency responses
with fc = 720 Hz and (b) predicted xG and original (ytruth) RIRs using an STFT operator
for M = 64 elements. Full-band signal metrics: SDRxG = −7.88 dB, Pearson corr. coeff.
RxG = 0.37. The STFT operator may improve ringing artefacts at the cost of a slight
deviation in the low frequency response.
The STFT seems to mitigate the overestimation of the reflections immediately after the
direct component at t = 0 s. These reflections can most likely be attributed to diffracted
waves from the robot arm in the array data. The regression (soundfield reconstruction) in
the previous subsection, does not correctly reconstruct these reflections as the robot arm is
not part of the problem. Evanescent waves have been discarded meaning that diffraction is
discarded, leading to clear errors. The network in turn, usually interprets this as a strong
wall reflection. This is evident many other predictions using the DFT sensing matrix (e.g.
figs. 4.44c, 4.44d, 4.45 and 4.48 respectively.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
98
==PAGE:107==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.50: (a) Original Ytruth, predicted XG, reconstructed Yrec frequency responses with
fc = 980 Hz and (b) predicted (xG) and original RIRs (ytruth) using an STFT operator
for M = 102 elements. Full-band signal metrics: SDRxG = −4.97 dB, Pearson corr. coeff.
RxG = 0.49. Using the STFT operator improves overestimated early reflections.
The STFT operator works quite well to interpret the band-limited signal, providing a
correlation coefficient of 0.49 with a measurement corresponding to M = 102 transducers
(fig. 4.50).
However, due to the regularisation term ∥STFT{Gθ(θ; z)}∥2 used in the
optimisation, the result includes a slightly higher noise-floor. This becomes apparent when
comparing the SDR values of the respective predicted responses when M = 64, with a
DFT operator (SDR = −5.18 dB, fig. 4.44b) and with an STFT operator (SDR = −7.88
dB, fig. 4.49b). This can also be deduced visually by looking at the decay of the respective
RIR envelopes.
4.4
Chapter Overview
This chapter presents the results of using a GAN (WaveGAN) trained on RIR data within
the domain of room acoustics. First, a WaveGAN is trained using to carefully formed
RIR databases, one containing gathered RIRs from freely available academic resources and
another simulated with the image source method. The Wasserstein distance is illustrated
for each of the trained models while the training progression of the generator network is
shown via fixed latent vector, synthesised impulse responses. The problem of aliasing from
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
99
==PAGE:108==
transposed convolution layers is discussed and demonstrated by removing the first layer of
the generator network and using a random Kroenecker delta function as an input. The
output of the network displays periodic peaks corresponding to the various convolutional
filter sizes.
A conditional GAN (as a modified WaveGAN) is successfully trained, conditioned on
average T30, C50 and D50 values. Emphasis is given to the T30 GAN with the mean
impulse and frequency responses examined for specific classes over an ensemble of 50
realisations of the network output. The kurtosis is also used to indicate the diffuse qualities
typically evident in real data. All three networks (T30, C50 and D50) display results that
are very much aligned with real room impulse responses. The section is completed with
the intelligibility analysis performed using the SRMR metric. This analysis shows that the
generated RIRs can be quite intelligible while maintaining the properties that differentiate
the speech intelligibility of one room over the other.
The final section concerns the results of the soundfield reconstruction with a spherical
array and the bandwidth extension of the aliased-reconstructed RIRs. First the array
decimation procedure is described which involves maintaining the uniformity of the array
while removing some of its elements. This is done to obtain an estimate of the frequencies
above which severe aliasing occurs. The results of reconstruction with this constraint are
presented, demonstrating the effect of spatial aliasing due to finite arrays. Interpolated
(within the array) and extrapolated (out of the array) RIRs are recovered in one position
each, which are to used as an input to the bandwidth extension algorithm. It is shown that
the accurate prediction of broad-band responses depends on the quality of the reconstruction
(input) as well as the cut-off frequency of the operator used to perform the regression. Two
models are used, one trained on real data and another trained on simulated data (ISM),
with the results indicating that a broad-band response can be predicted with both models.
Two operators are used (DFT, STFT) with the STFT displaying improved results.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
100
==PAGE:109==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
5
Discussion
5.1
WaveGAN Inference
Emulating room impulse responses is made possible by employing a GAN model that can
synthesise the properties that make the RIR unique. This process faces many challenges,
such as the artefacts introduced by the upsampling process as described in section 4.1.3, or
the lack of representative training data or properly maintained training data. However,
most of these issues can be averted when a database is properly structured an the GAN
training process does not develop any misguided deviations.
As GANs are data-hungry networks, they require massive amounts of samples to ensure
that they produce plausible results. It can be seen that simulated data in the form of
a combination of image source method and ray tracing can be used in this procedure,
producing a network that can be used in a variety of applications. Combining these RIRs
with real, measured RIRs would allow for a data augmentation scheme that would most likely
produce improved results. More robust methods can also be used to synthesise responses to
be used as data for the GAN such as e.g. the finite element method. Nevertheless, the results
indicate that over 3000 real room impulse responses and similarly 50000 simulated room
impulse responses were seemingly adequate for the present applications which demonstrate
the proof of concept.
Similarly, as many GAN variants exist, the literature regarding generative networks shows
that high resolution models can apply a degree of realism that is almost indistinguishable
from the true data-type (e.g. progressive GANs [92]). This would most definitely increase
both accuracy and the bandwidth of the previously established applications. It should be
borne in mind that the WaveGAN can be increased in both size (extended to bandwidth)
and channels. Improving network architectures (GAN variants) however, corresponds to
changing the training procedure in way that improves their performance. With that in
mind, one could potentially generate higher order, spatial impulse responses with a great
degree of accuracy. As seen, the aforementioned network then has a considerable range of
application (e.g. Ambisonics).
With the foregoing, it can be seen that the GAN can accurately model RIRs corresponding
to a variety of rooms. More importantly, it becomes evident that a convolutional network
is ideal for this type of modelling as the resulting, learnt filters efficiently produce locally
correlated reflections in time. The latent vector z acts as a compressed version of the
RIR with the generator as its mapping function. Moreover, the Wasserstein distance is
proven to be an excellent cost function pushing the filter weights closer toward the RIR
distribution without having to rely on the small variations in the phase of the RIR.
Finally, section 4.1.3 exhibits the aliasing that takes place due to transpose convolution
filters. This effect is unavoidable but as is demonstrated, the influence it has is greatly
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
101
==PAGE:110==
reduced due to the ability of the generator network to learn to suppress it. This ability is
most likely inherent from the W1 distance and the critic’s ability to correctly approximate
this statistic.
It punishes the generator for not producing what should be, samples
distributed like an impulse response.
5.2
Conditional GAN in Room Acoustics
The conditional GAN network described in section 3.2 can be regarded as a tool when one
is in need of acoustic environments with certain characteristics. As indicated in section 4.2,
the generated responses contain many plausible aspects, that can be manipulated for e.g.
virtual acoustic environments, testing speech processing or direction of arrival algorithms,
etc. The limitations in this method emerge from the proper conditioning of the available
data. Without applying the appropriate prior knowledge of a desired acoustic domain the
network will fail to perform. This was seen with the C50 network’s first class (0) (fig. 4.20),
which was unable to produce meaningful results due to a lack of data within the class
conditioned ranges.
Therefore, it becomes apparent that a network can produce room impulse responses in
accordance to the desired energetic qualities of the responses. This can be extended to
frequency or individual reflections (e.g. room size, source-receiver positions). The criteria
which is selected depends on the available data, the gathering of which is perhaps the most
daunting task of all. However, large scale measurements of this type are common, together
with modern hardware and the increasing capacity of digital storage, this becomes less
arduous.
It can be observed that the generator network learns to model the RIR based on indirect
spatial cues such as room size. It makes this association by observing the temporal energy
distribution in the response. This way it can determine how the individual reflections
should be placed to emulate a room of particular energy decay. Similar indications are
seen in the generated frequency responses where higher modal overlap becomes apparent
by increasing the reverberation time of the synthesised response. As such, it would be
interesting to see a GAN generate transducer array responses (multiple I/O channels) as
a function of reverberation or other types of room descriptors. Furthermore, the SRMR
of the speech signal convolved with the generated responses shows that the synthesised
responses can also be quantified in terms of speech intelligibility. The perceptual validity
requires more in-depth research however this analysis shows a clear correlation of the
normalised SRMR value (and thus, speech intelligibility) to each individual RIR class room
descriptor value.
5.3
Extending Band-limited Room Impulse Responses
As per section 4.1.3, it becomes evident that the reconstruction of impulse responses
is typically limited to the resolution of the measurement aperture. It is nontrivial to
circumvent the physical constraints introduced by the discretisation of space. With this
in mind, it is demonstrated that a GAN can be used increase the bandwidth from the
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
102
==PAGE:111==
Nyquist rate onward. However, the network’s performance is in itself subject to the physical
limitations of the aperture. With less array elements, the reconstruction contains less
useful information (lower Nyquist rate) causing the generator to deteriorate in efficiency.
Despite this, it does manage to increase the available bandwidth by several octaves, even
with a 23 element array.
Furthermore it should be noted that using a model trained with simulated data can
produce reasonable results. The simulations carried out did not account for complex
valued wall impedance, leaving the phase of the propagating waves unaffected with each
reflection. However, even with this limitation it is seen fig. 4.45 that the generator learns
to invert the phase of the individual reflections when trying to match the band-limited
response, reconstructed from the measurement array of section 3.3.2. This demonstrates
the importance of a strong prior in these types of problems (i.e. a better trained model
with stronger RIR associations) and of the influence of the training data.
Using different linear operators that can introduce different information to the problem
shows particularly useful. The STFT operator demonstrates that by incorporating tempo-
ral information, many erroneous reflections or reflections discluded from the analysis (e.g.
diffracted waves) can be suppressed, at the cost of deviations in the frequency domain. It
would be interesting to see other basis functions or linear operators used in this problem
(e.g. Wavelets, Mel-frequency cepstral coefficients) which could potentially lead to an
improved prediction and robustness. However the STFT provided a fairly well correlated
(Rx = 0.49 for M = 102 element array) full-band estimate to the true impulse response
showing great potential for future applications.
All of the examined methods showed that the use of a GAN prior can provide improved
results when compared to the reconstructed signal within the same frequency range (0 -
2) kHz. The proposed methods can be used in a variety of room acoustic simulations or
predictions where the obtained sound pressure is band-limited. For example, the estimation
of a broad-band RIR for methods which are limited by finite meshing (e.g. FEM/BEM -
six elements per wavelength). The estimation time is approximately three minutes with the
resources described in section 4.1.3 and can be improved with a more efficient algorithm.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
103
==PAGE:112==
CHAPTER 6. CONCLUSIONS
6
Conclusions
A novel method to synthesise RIRs with the use of generative adversarial networks is pro-
posed and evaluated objectively, showing promising results for a variety of acoustics related
problems. It is shown that synthesising RIRs with a GAN has many practical applica-
tions such as enhancing band-limited RIRs or generating controlled acoustic environments.
Although a subjective evaluation is not conducted, an objective measure that is highly
correlated with speech intelligibility is employed, indicating that the generated responses
are perceptually relevant and can be compared to real impulse responses. Furthermore, the
synthesised responses reveal qualities that are typically present in real impulse responses,
indicating in turn, that the generator network is learning to model rooms and not simply
stochastic signals.
It is demonstrated that these networks can be used within the context of acoustical inverse
problems since they impose a strong prior and are flexible for optimisation tasks. As this
research area is unexplored within the domain of acoustics, several heuristically deduced
optimisation tasks were demonstrated, proving that the generator network is capable of
recovering band-limited RIRs and approximating their high frequency distribution.
Several drawbacks exist within this framework, with the most obvious being data limitation
and network architecture capabilities. However, the error introduced by the latter can
easily be precluded by utilising GAN models with more advanced architectures and feature
processing techniques. Several GAN models exist that can improve the quality of the
generated samples. On the other hand, data constraints are possibly the most common of
shortcomings in deep learning techniques overall, where intense research is made to curb
this problem (e.g. transfer learning, availability of online resources, etc.). Finally, due to
the stochastic nature of the proposed algorithms, the results can vary slightly. A single
inference of e.g. the bandwidth extension algorithm will not provide identical results to
the next inference. Improvements can be made here with additional constraints that are
i.e. acoustically informed and provide a better framework for the RIR synthesis.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
104
==PAGE:113==
CHAPTER 7. FUTURE REVIEW
7
Future Review
The existing framework of GANs in room acoustics can be extended to a variety of problems.
Using high resolution architectures such as those of progressive GANs [92] can improve
the frequency resolution of the signals generated, as well as mitigate artefacts that are
conceived during the training process. Furthermore, a subjective analysis in the form of a
listening test should be conducted to evaluate the performance based on human auditory
perception.
GANs have been used in speech recognition, enhancement and dereverberation tasks [93, 94]
but are limited to speech processing, rather than investigating the acoustic environments
themselves. Hence, similar approaches can be examined for RIRs. This analysis can
be extended to binaural room impulse responses (BRIR) head related impulse responses
(HRIR) and higher order spatial impulse responses (B-format RIRs, Ambisonics, etc.), all of
which are highly valued within the domain of acoustic signal processing. Other approaches
could concern the synthesis of RIRs based on source positioning, effectively inverting the
problem of acoustic source localisation. This would most likely benefit acoustics research
in virtual reality environments.
Regarding soundfield reconstruction, one could directly train a GAN on plane wave
coefficients to be used as a prior to the ill-posed problem described in section 2.4 which
would most likely provide improved results in both frequency and angular resolution.
This would substitute the classic regression problems used such as LASSO or Titkhonov
minimisation and has quantifiably produced improved results in image recovery algorithms
[65, 66]. As simulating plane waves is an easy task, data limitation would not be a problem
for this GAN.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
105
==PAGE:114==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bibliography
[1]
Finn Jacobsen. Fundamentals of General Linear Acoustics. 2013. ISBN: 3715652438.
[2]
Michael Vorländer. “Recent Progress in Room Acoustical Computer Simulations”. In:
Building Acoustics (1997). ISSN: 20598025. DOI: 10.1177/1351010X9700400401.
[3]
Zora Kalkandjiev and Stefan Weinzierl. “The Influence of Room Acoustics on Solo
Music Performance: An Empirical Case Study”. In: Acta Acustica united with Acustica
99 (May 2013). DOI: 10.3813/AAA.918624.
[4]
Iana Podkosova, Michael Urbanek, and Hannes Kaufmann. “A hybrid sound model
for 3D audio games with real walking”. In: ACM International Conference Proceeding
Series. 2016. ISBN: 9781595930361. DOI: 10.1145/2915926.2915948.
[5]
Vorländer Michael and Michael Vorländer. Auralization. Fundamentals of Acous-
tics, Modelling, Simulation, Algorithms and Acoustic Virtual Reality. 2008. ISBN:
9783540488293. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-540-48830-9.
[6]
Heinrich Kuttruff and Eckard Mommertz. “Room acoustics”. In: Handbook of Engi-
neering Acoustics. 2013. ISBN: 9783540694601. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-540-69460-1_10.
[7]
W. Yang and J. S. Bradley. “Effects of room acoustics on the intelligibility of speech in
classrooms for young children”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America
(2009). ISSN: 0001-4966. DOI: 10.1121/1.3058900.
[8]
Jont B. Allen and David A. Berkley. “Image method for efficiently simulating small-
room acoustics”. In: Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 65.4 (1979), pp. 943–
950. ISSN: NA. DOI: 10.1121/1.382599.
[9]
Jeffrey Borish. “Extension of the image model to arbitrary polyhedra”. In: Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America (1984). ISSN: NA. DOI: 10.1121/1.390983.
[10]
A. Krokstad, S. Strom, and S. Sørsdal. “Calculating the acoustical room response by
the use of a ray tracing technique”. In: Journal of Sound and Vibration (1968). ISSN:
10958568. DOI: 10.1016/0022-460X(68)90198-3.
[11]
Dirk Schröder and Alexander Pohl. “Modeling (Non-)uniform scattering distributions
in geometrical acoustics”. In: Proceedings of Meetings on Acoustics. 2013. DOI:
10.1121/1.4800288.
[12]
U. Stephenson. “Comparison of the mirror image source method and the sound
particle simulation method”. In: Applied Acoustics (1990). ISSN: 0003682X. DOI:
10.1016/0003-682X(90)90070-B.
[13]
M. L. Mehta and K. A. Mulholland. “Effect of non-uniform distribution of absorption
on reverberation time”. In: Journal of Sound and Vibration (1976). ISSN: 10958568.
DOI: 10.1016/0022-460X(76)90438-7.
[14]
Claus Lynge Christensen and Jens Holger Rindel. “A new scattering method that
combines roughness and diffraction effects”. In: Forum Acusticum Budapest 2005: 4th
European Congress on Acustics. 2005. ISBN: 9638241683. DOI: 10.1121/1.4788035.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
106
==PAGE:115==
[15]
N. Korany, J. Blauert, and O. Abdel Alim. “Acoustic simulation of rooms with
boundaries of partially specular reflectivity”. In: Applied Acoustics (2001). ISSN:
0003682X. DOI: 10.1016/S0003-682X(00)00075-X.
[16]
Eva-Marie Nosal, Murray Hodgson, and Ian Ashdown. “Improved algorithms and
methods for room sound-field prediction by acoustical radiosity in arbitrary polyhedral
rooms”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America (2004). ISSN: 0001-4966.
DOI: 10.1121/1.1772400.
[17]
Jens Holger Rindel, Gry Bælum Nielsen, and Claus Lynge Christensen. “Diffrac-
tion around corners and over wide barriers in room acoustic simulations”. In: 16th
International Congress on Sound and Vibration 2009, ICSV 2009. 2009. ISBN:
9781615677368.
[18]
Georgios I. Koutsouris et al. “A combination of the acoustic radiosity and the image
source method”. In: 41st International Congress and Exposition on Noise Control
Engineering 2012, INTER-NOISE 2012. 2012. ISBN: 9781627485609.
[19]
Takeshi Okuzono et al. “An explicit time-domain finite element method for room
acoustics simulations: Comparison of the performance with implicit methods”. In:
Applied Acoustics (2016). ISSN: 1872910X. DOI: 10.1016/j.apacoust.2015.10.027.
[20]
Jieyi Jiang, Kunpeng Huang, and Yuezhe Zhao. “Calculating room acoustic param-
eters by finite element method”. In: 2011 International Conference on Consumer
Electronics, Communications and Networks, CECNet 2011 - Proceedings. 2011. ISBN:
9781612844572. DOI: 10.1109/CECNET.2011.5769206.
[21]
Álvaro Campos et al. “Fast Boundary Element simulations for complex geometry
bidimensional enclosures”. In: In Proceedings of the CILAMCE; Avila, S.M., Ed.;
ABMEC: Brasilia, Brazil. 2016.
[22]
Vicente Cutanda Henríquez and Peter Møller Juhl. “OpenBEM - An open source
boundary element method software in acoustics”. In: 39th International Congress on
Noise Control Engineering 2010, INTER-NOISE 2010. 2010. ISBN: 9781617823961.
[23]
Konrad Kowalczyk and Maarten Van Walstijn. “Room acoustics simulation using
3-D compact explicit FDTD schemes”. In: IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech and
Language Processing (2011). ISSN: 15587916. DOI: 10.1109/TASL.2010.2045179.
[24]
Alex Southern et al. “Room impulse response synthesis and validation using a hybrid
acoustic model”. In: IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech and Language Processing
(2013). ISSN: 15587916. DOI: 10.1109/TASL.2013.2263139.
[25]
Efren Fernandez-grande. “Sound field reconstruction in a room from spatially dis-
tributed measurements”. In: Proceedings of the 23rd International Congress on
Acoustics (2019).
[26]
Samuel A. Verburg and Efren Fernandez-Grande. “Reconstruction of the sound field
in a room using compressive sensing”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America (2018). ISSN: 0001-4966. DOI: 10.1121/1.5042247.
[27]
Tapio Lokki, Alex Southern, and Lauri Savioja. “Studies on seat dip effect with 3D
FDTD modeling”. In: Proceedings of Forum Acusticum. 2011.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
107
==PAGE:116==
[28]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. http://www.
deeplearningbook.org. MIT Press, 2016.
[29]
A. Creswell et al. “Generative Adversarial Networks: An Overview”. In: IEEE Signal
Processing Magazine 35.1 (2018), pp. 53–65.
[30]
Jun Yan Zhu et al. “Unpaired Image-to-Image Translation Using Cycle-Consistent
Adversarial Networks”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Computer Vision. 2017. ISBN: 9781538610329. DOI: 10.1109/ICCV.2017.244. arXiv:
1703.10593.
[31]
Haiqiang Niu et al. “Deep-learning source localization using multi-frequency magnitude-
only data”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America (2019). ISSN:
0001-4966. DOI: 10.1121/1.5116016. arXiv: 1903.12319.
[32]
Sharath Adavanne et al. “Sound Event Localization and Detection of Overlapping
Sources Using Convolutional Recurrent Neural Networks”. In: IEEE Journal on
Selected Topics in Signal Processing (2019). ISSN: 19324553. DOI: 10.1109/JSTSP.
2018.2885636. arXiv: 1807.00129.
[33]
Ryu Takeda and Kazunori Komatani. “Discriminative multiple sound source local-
ization based on deep neural networks using independent location model”. In: 2016
IEEE Workshop on Spoken Language Technology, SLT 2016 - Proceedings. 2017.
ISBN: 9781509049035. DOI: 10.1109/SLT.2016.7846325.
[34]
Ning Ma, Guy J. Brown, and Tobias May. “Exploiting deep neural networks and head
movements for binaural localisation of multiple speakers in reverberant conditions”.
In: Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the International Speech Communication
Association, INTERSPEECH. 2015.
[35]
Soumitro Chakrabarty and Emanuel A.P. Habets. “Multi-Speaker DOA Estimation
Using Deep Convolutional Networks Trained With Noise Signals”. In: IEEE Journal
on Selected Topics in Signal Processing (2019). ISSN: 19324553. DOI: 10.1109/JSTSP.
2019.2901664. arXiv: 1807.11722.
[36]
Laureline Perotin et al. “CRNN-Based Multiple DoA Estimation Using Acoustic
Intensity Features for Ambisonics Recordings”. In: IEEE Journal on Selected Topics
in Signal Processing (2019). ISSN: 19324553. DOI: 10.1109/JSTSP.2019.2900164.
[37]
Ori Ernst et al. “Speech dereverberation using fully convolutional networks”. In:
European Signal Processing Conference. 2018. ISBN: 9789082797015. DOI: 10.23919/
EUSIPCO.2018.8553141. arXiv: 1803.08243.
[38]
Aditya Arie Nugraha, Antoine Liutkus, and Emmanuel Vincent. “Multichannel audio
source separation with deep neural networks”. In: IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio
Speech and Language Processing (2016). ISSN: 23299290. DOI: 10.1109/TASLP.2016.
2580946.
[39]
Sen Li et al. “Speech Bandwidth Extension Using Generative Adversarial Networks”.
In: Apr. 2018, pp. 5029–5033. DOI: 10.1109/ICASSP.2018.8462588.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
108
==PAGE:117==
[40]
D. Haws and X. Cui. “Cyclegan Bandwidth Extension Acoustic Modeling for Auto-
matic Speech Recognition”. In: ICASSP 2019 - 2019 IEEE International Conference
on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP). 2019, pp. 6780–6784.
[41]
Chris Donahue, Julian McAuley, and Miller Puckette. “Adversarial audio synthesis”.
In: 7th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2019 (2019),
pp. 1–16. arXiv: 1802.04208.
[42]
Jesse Engel et al. “Gansynth: Adversarial neural audio synthesis”. In: 7th International
Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2019. 2019.
[43]
Earl G. Williams and J. Adin Mann. “Fourier Acoustics: Sound Radiation and
Nearfield Acoustical Holography ”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America (2000). ISSN: 0001-4966. DOI: 10.1121/1.1289662.
[44]
Cheol Ho Jeong. “Diffuse sound field: Challenges and misconceptions”. In: Proceedings
of the INTER-NOISE 2016 - 45th International Congress and Exposition on Noise
Control Engineering: Towards a Quieter Future. 2016.
[45]
Angelo Farina. “Simultaneous Measurement of Impulse Response and Distortion”. In:
108th Audio Engineering Society Convention (2000).
[46]
M. R. Schroeder. “Integrated-impulse method measuring sound decay without using
impulses”. In: Journal of the Acoustical Society of America (1979). ISSN: NA. DOI:
10.1121/1.383103.
[47]
A. Lundeby et al. “Uncertainties of measurements in room acoustics”. In: Acustica
(1995). ISSN: 1610-1928.
[48]
Jont B. Allen and David A. Berkley. “Image method for efficiently simulating small-
room acoustics”. In: Journal of the Acoustical Society of America (1979). ISSN: NA.
DOI: 10.1121/1.382599.
[49]
Efren Fernandez-Grande and Angeliki Xenaki. “Compressive sensing with a spherical
microphone array”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 139.2 (2016),
EL45–EL49. ISSN: 0001-4966. DOI: 10.1121/1.4942546. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1121/1.4942546.
[50]
Peter Gerstoft et al. “Introduction to compressive sensing in acoustics”. In: The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America (2018). ISSN: 0001-4966. DOI: 10.1121/
1.5043089.
[51]
David L. Donoho. “Compressed sensing”. In: IEEE Transactions on Information
Theory (2006). ISSN: 00189448. DOI: 10.1109/TIT.2006.871582.
[52]
Efren Fernandez-Grande, Angeliki Xenaki, and Peter Gerstoft. “A sparse equivalent
source method for near-field acoustic holography”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America 141.1 (2017), pp. 532–542. ISSN: 0001-4966. DOI: 10.1121/1.
4974047.
[53]
Angeliki Xenaki, Efren Fernandez-Grande, and Peter Gerstoft. “Block-sparse beam-
forming for spatially extended sources in a Bayesian formulation”. In: The Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America (2016). ISSN: 0001-4966. DOI: 10.1121/1.4962325.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
109
==PAGE:118==
[54]
Sergios Theodoridis. Machine Learning: A Bayesian and Optimization Perspective.
Academic Press, 2015.
[55]
D. Randall Wilson and Tony R. Martinez. “The general inefficiency of batch training
for gradient descent learning”. In: Neural Networks (2003). ISSN: 08936080. DOI:
10.1016/S0893-6080(03)00138-2.
[56]
John Duchi, Elad Hazan, and Yoram Singer. “Adaptive subgradient methods for online
learning and stochastic optimization”. In: Journal of Machine Learning Research
(2011). ISSN: 15324435.
[57]
Geoffrey E. Hinton, Nitish Srivastava, and Kevin Swersky. “Lecture 6a- overview
of mini-batch gradient descent”. In: COURSERA: Neural Networks for Machine
Learning (2012).
[58]
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Lei Ba. “Adam: A method for stochastic optimiza-
tion”. In: 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015 -
Conference Track Proceedings. 2015. arXiv: 1412.6980.
[59]
Ian J. Goodfellow et al. “Generative adversarial nets”. In: Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems. 2014.
[60]
Martin Arjovsky and Léon Bottou. “Towards principled methods for training genera-
tive adversarial networks”. In: 5th International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions, ICLR 2017 - Conference Track Proceedings. 2019. arXiv: 1701.04862.
[61]
Martin Arjovsky, Soumith Chintala, and Léon Bottou. “Wasserstein generative
adversarial networks”. In: 34th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML
2017 1 (2017), pp. 298–321.
[62]
Ishaan Gulrajani et al. “Improved training of wasserstein GANs”. In: Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 2017-Decem (2017), pp. 5768–5778. ISSN:
10495258. arXiv: 1704.00028.
[63]
Ning Zhang, Junchi Yan, and Yuchen Zhou. “Weakly supervised audio source sep-
aration via spectrum energy preserved Wasserstein learning”. In: IJCAI Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence. 2018. ISBN: 9780999241127. DOI:
10.24963/ijcai.2018/636. arXiv: 1711.04121.
[64]
Mehdi Mirza and Simon Osindero. “Conditional Generative Adversarial Nets”. In:
(2014), pp. 1–7. arXiv: 1411.1784. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1411.1784.
[65]
Ashish Bora et al. “Compressed sensing using generative models”. In: 34th Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2017 2 (2017), pp. 822–841. arXiv:
1703.03208.
[66]
Shady Abu Hussein, Tom Tirer, and Raja Giryes. “Image-Adaptive GAN Based
Reconstruction”. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence
34 (Apr. 2020), pp. 3121–3129. DOI: 10.1609/aaai.v34i04.5708.
[67]
Sayantan Bhadra, Weimin Zhou, and Mark A. Anastasio. “Medical image reconstruc-
tion with image-adaptive priors learned by use of generative adversarial networks”.
In: 2020. ISBN: 9781510633919. DOI: 10.1117/12.2549750. arXiv: 2001.10830.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
110
==PAGE:119==
[68]
James Eaton et al. “Estimation of Room Acoustic Parameters: The ACE Challenge”.
In: IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio Speech and Language Processing (2016). ISSN:
23299290. DOI: 10.1109/TASLP.2016.2577502.
[69]
I. Szöke et al. “Building and evaluation of a real room impulse response dataset”. In:
IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing 13.4 (2019), pp. 863–876.
[70]
R. Stewart and M. Sandler. “Database of omnidirectional and B-format room impulse
responses”. In: 2010 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing. 2010, pp. 165–168.
[71]
Jaroslav Cmejla et al. “MIRaGe: Multichannel Database Of Room Impulse Responses
Measured On High-Resolution Cube-Shaped Grid In Multiple Acoustic Conditions”.
In: ArXiv abs/1907.12421 (2019).
[72]
J Y C Wen et al. “Evaluation of Speech Dereverberation Algorithms using the
MARDY Database”. In: Proc. Intl. Workshop Acoust. Echo Noise Control (IWAENC)
(2006).
[73]
Lukas Aspöck et al. GRAS - Ground Truth for Room Acoustical Simulation. 2018.
DOI: 10.14279/depositonce-6726. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.14279/depositonce-6726.
[74]
Robin Scheibler, Eric Bezzam, and Ivan Dokmanic. “Pyroomacoustics: A Python
Package for Audio Room Simulation and Array Processing Algorithms”. In: ICASSP,
IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing - Pro-
ceedings. 2018. ISBN: 9781538646588. DOI: 10.1109/ICASSP.2018.8461310. arXiv:
1710.04196.
[75]
Alec Radford, Luke Metz, and Soumith Chintala. “Unsupervised representation learn-
ing with deep convolutional generative adversarial networks”. In: 4th International
Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2016 - Conference Track Proceedings.
2016. arXiv: 1511.06434.
[76]
Daniel W. Griffin and Jae S. Lim. “Signal Estimation from Modified Short-Time
Fourier Transform”. In: IEEE Transactions on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Process-
ing (1984). ISSN: 00963518. DOI: 10.1109/TASSP.1984.1164317.
[77]
Jonathan Shen et al. “Natural TTS Synthesis by Conditioning Wavenet on MEL
Spectrogram Predictions”. In: ICASSP, IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing - Proceedings. 2018. ISBN: 9781538646588. DOI: 10.
1109/ICASSP.2018.8461368. arXiv: 1712.05884.
[78]
Augustus Odena, Vincent Dumoulin, and Chris Olah. “Deconvolution and Checker-
board Artifacts”. In: Distill (2017). DOI: 10.23915/distill.00003.
[79]
Ali Borji. “Pros and cons of GAN evaluation measures”. In: Computer Vision and
Image Understanding (2019). ISSN: 1090235X. DOI: 10.1016/j.cviu.2018.10.009.
arXiv: 1802.03446.
[80]
“IEEE Recommended Practice for Speech Quality Measurements”. In: IEEE Transac-
tions on Audio and Electroacoustics 17.3 (1969), pp. 225–246. URL: %5Curl%7Bhttps:
//www.cs.columbia.edu/~hgs/audio/harvard.html%7D.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
111
==PAGE:120==
[81]
Tiago H. Falk, Chenxi Zheng, and Wai Yip Chan. “A non-intrusive quality and
intelligibility measure of reverberant and dereverberated speech”. In: IEEE Transac-
tions on Audio, Speech and Language Processing 18.7 (2010), pp. 1766–1774. ISSN:
15587916. DOI: 10.1109/TASL.2010.2052247.
[82]
Joao F. Santos, Mohammed Senoussaoui, and Tiago H. Falk. “An improved non-
intrusive intelligibility metric for noisy and reverberant speech”. In: 2014 14th Inter-
national Workshop on Acoustic Signal Enhancement, IWAENC 2014. 2014. ISBN:
9781479968084. DOI: 10.1109/IWAENC.2014.6953337.
[83]
Cheol-Ho Jeong. “Kurtosis of room impulse responses as a diffuseness measure for
reverberation chambers”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America (2016).
ISSN: 0001-4966. DOI: 10.1121/1.4949365.
[84]
G. Defrance and J. D. Polack. “Measuring the mixing time in auditoria”. In: Proceed-
ings - European Conference on Noise Control. 2008. DOI: 10.1121/1.2934368.
[85]
Jens Ahrens and Sascha Spors. “Timbral Coloration in High Resolution Sound Field
Reproduction Due to Spatial Bandwidth Limitation”. In: 2009.
[86]
Tim Ziemer and Rolf Bader. “Implementing the radiation characteristics of musical
instruments in a psychoacoustic sound field synthesis system”. In: 139th Audio
Engineering Society International Convention, AES 2015. 2015.
[87]
Shoichi Koyama, Naoki Murata, and Hiroshi Saruwatari. “Sparse sound field decom-
position for super-resolution in recording and reproduction”. In: The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America (2018). ISSN: 0001-4966. DOI: 10.1121/1.5042215.
[88]
F. Pedregosa et al. “Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python”. In: Journal of Machine
Learning Research 12 (2011), pp. 2825–2830.
[89]
Jonathan Le Roux et al. “SDR - Half-baked or Well Done?” In: ICASSP, IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing - Proceedings.
2019. ISBN: 9781479981311. DOI: 10.1109/ICASSP.2019.8683855. arXiv: 1811.02508.
[90]
Enzo De Sena et al. “On the modeling of rectangular geometries in room acoustic
simulations”. In: IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio Speech and Language Processing
(2015). ISSN: 23299290. DOI: 10.1109/TASLP.2015.2405476.
[91]
Álvaro González. “Measurement of Areas on a Sphere Using Fibonacci and Latitude–
Longitude Lattices”. In: Mathematical Geosciences 42.1 (2009), p. 49. DOI: 10.1007/
s11004-009-9257-x. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11004-009-9257-x.
[92]
Tero Karras et al. “Progressive growing of GANs for improved quality, stability, and
variation”. In: 6th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2018
- Conference Track Proceedings. 2018. arXiv: 1710.10196.
[93]
Ke Wang et al. “Investigating generative adversarial networks based speech derever-
beration for robust speech recognition”. In: Proceedings of the Annual Conference of
the International Speech Communication Association, INTERSPEECH. 2018. DOI:
10.21437/Interspeech.2018-1780. arXiv: 1803.10132.
[94]
Chris Donahue, Bo Li, and Rohit Prabhavalkar. “Exploring speech enhancement with
generative adversarial networks for robust speech recognition”. In: ICASSP, IEEE
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
112
==PAGE:121==
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing - Proceedings.
2018. ISBN: 9781538646588. DOI: 10.1109/ICASSP.2018.8462581. arXiv: 1711.05747.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
113
==PAGE:122==
APPENDIX A. CYCLE CONSISTENT GAN
A
Cycle consistent GAN
Cycle consistent GANs are typically used for image-translation problems where the goal is
to learn the mapping between an input image and an output image using a training set of
aligned image pairs. Within the scope of adversarial networks this is a popular task with
many GANs attempting to generated images according to “style” specifics of the target
domain. This is usually done in a supervised setting where a paired data-piece {xi, yi}N
i=1
is used so as to translate image xi to the domain of yi and vice-versa.
Zhu et al. [30] perform an image-to-image translation task with the use of unpaired training
data so that the source set {xi}N
i=1, x ∈X and a target set {yi}N
i=1, y ∈Y do not directly
correspond as in a pair. The main assumption is that there is some underlying relationship
between the domains (e.g. two different renderings of the same underlying scene) so the
CycleGAN is attempting to learn that relationship.
With that in mind, one can formulate a problem with room impulse responses as one
mapping to the other and vice-versa. Given a set of monaural RIRs corresponding to
domain X and B-format RIRs to domain Y respectively, the CycleGAN performs a mapping
G : X →Y such that the output ˆy = G(x), x ∈X, is an acoustic mapping of RIRs
y ∈Y by an adversary trained to classify ˆy apart from y. Furthermore, [30] utilises the
property of ‘cycle consistency’ where a translator maps X to Y such that G : X →Y and
second translator maps Y to X such that F : Y →X, then G and F should be inverses
of each other, and both mappings should be bijections. The objective can be fulfilled by
training both networks G and F simultaneously and adding a cycle consistency loss that
encourages F(G(x)) ≈x and G(F(y)) ≈y, as well as the adversarial loss between domains.
Additionally, a term that regularises the generator to be near an identity mapping when
real samples of the target domain are provided as the input to the generator is introduced
as a means to preserve the original the identity of the original domain (acoustic reflections,
amplitude, phase, of the RIR, etc.), namely the ‘identity loss’.
The cycle consistency loss can be defined as
Lcyc(G, F) =
E
˜x∼Px
hF(˜x) −x

1
i
+
E
˜y∼Py
hG(˜y) −y

1
i
,
(A.1)
while the identity loss can be defined as
Lid(G) =
E
˜y∼Py
hG(y) −y

1
i
.
(A.2)
Finally the objective function of the CycleGAN results in,
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
114
==PAGE:123==
Figure A.1: A Simplification of the CycleGAN architecture. Network G attempts to
generate B-format RIRs G(x) ∈Y , while generator F attempts to generate monaural RIRs
F(y) ∈X. Both results are evaluated by the respective domain critic (DX and DY ).
L(G, F, DX, DY ) = LGAN(G, DY , X, Y ) + LGAN(F, DX, Y, X) + λLcyc(G, F) ,
(A.3)
where DX and DY refer to the discriminator (critics) networks for each of the respective
domains, LGAN refers to the adversarial loss (W1 loss) while the use of the identity loss is
optional and is not necessarily included.
Within the scope of this thesis, a variant of the CycleGAN was employed to generated
unpaired B-format room impulse responses from monaural room impulse responses. Unfor-
tunately the results were too corrupted by the aliasing caused in the transpose convolution
layers as described in section 4.1.3. This is due to the critic networks being trained as
patchGAN discriminators, which essentially means it evaluated the generated samples in
non-overlapping temporal windows rather than as a whole. This in turn does not provide
global information to either of the critic networks (DX or DY ), allowing generated samples
from GX and GY respectively, to continue generating these corrupted RIRs.
As the initial results where promising, some examples where included (figs. A.2 and A.3 to
illustrate the results and the problem at hand. The CycleGAN is promising for such an
application but requires adjustment if it is to carry out this ‘inverse’ task.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
115
==PAGE:124==
(a) Example 1 - Top row: monaural RIR (X domain). Bottom row: B-format RIR (Y domain).
(b) Example 2 - Top row: monaural RIR (X domain). Bottom row: B-format RIR (Y domain).
(c) Example 3 - Top row: monaural RIR (X domain). Bottom row: B-format RIR (Y domain).
Figure A.2: Three examples of the early training stage with a monaural RIR input and B-
format RIR output (W,X,Y,Z channels). The CycleGAN is promising but its architecture
needs adjustment for an acoustic signal.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
116
==PAGE:125==
(a) Example 1
(b) Example 2
(c) Example 3
Figure A.3: Zeroth order B-format channel (W) of each of the previous generated examples.
The spectral aliasing from the transp. convolution layers is severe due to the critic (D)
network architecture.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
117
==PAGE:126==
APPENDIX B. SOUNDFIELD RECONSTRUCTION
B
Soundfield Reconstruction
This appendix entry illustrates the reconstructed soundfields and the relative error at
various frequencies for the problem described in section 3.3.2. The entry is split in two
parts, one regarding the reconstruction of the whole soundfield for independent frequencies
and another regarding the reconstruction of impulse responses in individual positions with
both regularisation methods (as explained in the aforementioned section).
B.1
Reconstructed Soundfields
The following section displays results for f = 250 Hz and f = 1000 Hz for the soundfield
reconstruction problem described in sections 3.3.2 and 4.3.1 for both regularisation schemes
used (e.g. Titkhonov, LASSO).
(a)
(b)
Figure B.1: Original soundfields at frequencies (a) f = 250 Hz and (b) f = 1000 Hz.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
118
==PAGE:127==
(a)
(b)
Figure B.2: Reconstructed soundfields with (a) Titkhonov and (b) LASSO regularisation
schemes at frequency f = 250 Hz.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
119
==PAGE:128==
(a)
(b)
Figure B.3: Relative error of reconstructed soundfields with (a) Titkhonov and (b) LASSO
regularisation schemes at frequency f = 250 Hz
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
120
==PAGE:129==
(a)
(b)
Figure B.4: Reconstructed soundfields with (a) Titkhonov and (b) LASSO regularisation
schemes at frequency f = 1000 Hz. For M = 23 the algorithm is unable to converge (e.g.
find a solution).
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
121
==PAGE:130==
(a)
(b)
Figure B.5: Relative error of reconstructed soundfields with (a) Titkhonov and (b) LASSO
regularisation schemes at frequency f = 1000 Hz. For M = 23 the algorithm is unable to
converge (e.g. find a solution).
B.2
Reconstructed Room Impulse Responses
This section displays the reconstructed impulse responses using LASSO regression which
were excluded in the main analysis for reasons of brevity.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
122
==PAGE:131==
Figure B.6: Reconstructed impulse responses at interpolated position with LASSO regression
using M = 102, 64, 37, 23 element arrays.
Figure B.7: Reconstructed impulse responses at extrapolated position with LASSO regres-
sion using M = 102, 64, 37, 23 element arrays.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
123
==PAGE:132==
APPENDIX C. SYNTHESISED IMPULSE RESPONSES
C
Synthesised Impulse Responses
This appendix entry displays synthesised impulse and frequency response by the GAN
generator, from all of the applied GAN methods (e.g.
WaveGAN, conditional GAN,
bandwidth extension GAN).
C.1
Phase Shuffle (WaveGAN)
Figure C.1: WaveGAN with the phase shuffle operation at 1400 epochs of training. Phase
shuffle is meant to prevent the critic network from easily discarding generated samples
with ease, however it does not perform well with RIRs.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
124
==PAGE:133==
C.2
Bandwidth Extended Frequency Responses
Below, synthesised frequency responses are depicted in accordance to the reconstructed
response and array order they are fitted against (e.g. Yrec for M = 102, 64, 37, 23 elements).
The responses correspond to Ytruth (fig. C.2), predictions (XG) using a DFT operator
with a model trained on real data (fig. C.3), predictions (XG) using a DFT operator with
a model trained on ISM data (fig. C.4) and predictions made using the model with an
STFT operator trained on real data (fig. C.5).
Figure C.2: Ground truth of interpolated frequency response Ytruth.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
125
==PAGE:134==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure C.3: Predicted frequency responses of interpolated position and l2 regression of
array with (a) M = 102, (b) M = 64, (c) M = 37 and (d) M = 23 elements, synthesised
with real RIR model and a DFT operator.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
126
==PAGE:135==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure C.4: Predicted frequency responses of interpolated position and l2 regression of
array with (a) M = 102, (b) M = 64 and (c) M = 37 elements, synthesised with ISM RIR
model and a DFT operator.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
127
==PAGE:136==
(a) Predicted response XG for M = 102 array elements, corresponding to l2 norm reconstruction.
(b) Predicted response XG for M = 37 array elements, corresponding to l2 norm reconstruction.
Figure C.5: Predicted frequency responses of interpolated position and l2 regularisation,
with STFT operator for array with (a) M = 102 and (b) M = 64 elements, synthesised
with the real RIR model.
Generative Networks for Modelling the Sound Field in a Room
128
==PAGE:137==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 352
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tl. 4525 1700
www.act.elektro.dtu.dk
