==PAGE:1==
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet sur-
face characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3
satellites
Master Thesis
July, 2020
By
Louis Schweisthal
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at DTU Space.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of computer science and
physics.
Louis Schweisthal - s181737
Signature
Date
ii
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In recent decades, changes of global climate have had a profound effect on the cryosphere
and in particular on polar glaciers. These glaciers, such as those in Greenland, have an
important role in the global climate regulation via their low albedo, drive major currents by
pouring fresh water into the ocean and are a major contributor to the sea level rise. Mod-
eling the mass loss of those glacier is an important part in quantifying all of those effects.
However, glaciers present a variety of snow and ice facies, that behave very differently
depending on temperature, amount of snow fall and amount of snow melt. Describing
and mapping snow facies over all polar glaciers is therefore primordial. In this project,
we study previous methods to use remote sensing from passive microwave and radar
satellites to map these facies, propose new methods to classify them and propose new
methods to assess the quality of those classifications.
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Louis Schweisthal, Msc Mathematical Modeling and Computation, DTU
Sebastian Bjerregaard Simonsen, Senior Researcher, DTU Space
Thesis Supervisor
Baptiste Vandecrux, Post Doctoral Researcher, GEUS
Thesis Supervisor
iv
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Previous work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Research objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Data Sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory
3
2.1
Remote Sensing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Snow and ice physics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Methods
7
3.1
Data download and preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Filtering useful data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.4
Rasterification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.5
Comparison to other datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4
Results and comparison
11
4.1
Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
4.2
Cluster characterisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4.3
Membership score and confidence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.4
Comparison to previous geographical knowledge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.5
Comparison to Firn Aquifer data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.6
Comparison to Ice Slab data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
5
Discussion
21
5.1
Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.2
Cluster characterisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.3
Confusion between classes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.4
Comparison to previous geographical knowledge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5.5
Comparison to Firn Aquifer and ice slab and data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.6
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
6
Conclusions
25
Bibliography
27
A Results and figures
29
B Code source
46
B.1 Permutation of classes to maximize similarity with Envisat classes . . . . . 46
B.2 Data preprocessing and filtering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
B.3 Rasterification algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
v
==PAGE:8==
B.4 Rasterification algorithm for classes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
vi
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Context
The study of the Greenland ice sheet is an important tool to understand the effect of climate
changes over the cryosphere and the sea level. Greenland is one of the two large body
of the continental cryosphere with Antarctica. It has an important role in the regulation of
climate with the low albedo of ice-covered areas [Paterson 2010].
The study of the changes in thickness and mass balance of the ice-sheet is important to
understand the effect of climate on the glaciers and evaluate the mass loss of glaciers in
the sea and therefore their effects on sea level rise.
An approach to the study of the mass balance of the ice-sheet is to study the topography
of the bedrock and of the surface ice-layers in order to compute the volume of ice in the
glacier. This is possible via radar altimetry that allows to compute topological maps of
larges areas (such as all of Greenland) with remote sensing instruments on-board satel-
lites.
This approach allows to measure the ice-flow from satellite data [Rémy, Shaeffer, and
Legrésy 1999] and get valuable insight on the movement of the glacier. Unfortunately,
the precision of radar altimeters have been shown to have limitations [Brenner, DiMarzio,
and Zwally 2007] because of how different snow facies interact with the wave of the radar
altimeter. Depending on the nature of the top layer of the glacier and depending on the
surface features, the wave penetration and return wave shape can influence the ranging
of the satellite.
Therefore determining the nature and properties of the ice and snow in the different layers
of the glacier on all its surface is central to help modeling the ice flow, correct altimetry
measurement and gain insight on the modification of the ice-sheet.
1.2
Previous work
The idea of subdivising glacier into different snow facies was originally conveiced by Ben-
son in his thesis [Benson 1962], based on ground observation of the Greenlandic ice-
sheet.
Based on the classification of Benson and previous work on the study of the ice sheet
using satellite data, the paper of N.Tran et al [Ngan et al. 2008] introduced a way to
cluster snow facies according to its response to passive microwave and radar satellite,
namely using Envisat WMR and RA data. This paper introduced features derived from
the satellite data and used a known unsupervised classification algorithm to produce a
classification of the ice sheet.
Their work was later adapted to Sentinel-3 data (Envisat’s successor) and the classifica-
tion was added directly into the publicly available products of Sentinel-3.
This project is heavily based on the work of N. Tran al, first by reproducing the results
given by the Sentinel-3 products, then by introducing new features not originally available
for Envisat.
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
1
==PAGE:10==
1.3
Research objectives
The goal of this study is to further characterized the classification of snow facies with radar
remote sensing as done in previous work, and improved upon it if possible. In particular,
the original paper [Ngan et al. 2008] does not take into account the radar response wave-
form into the classification, that could carry a large amount of information on the surface
and subsurface features, as well as on the properties of the medium the wave passed
through. The questions this study will attempt to answer include:
• What do the categories from the original classification correspond to?
• Can waveform information (slope coefficients of the waveform, peakiness, etc) im-
prove the classification (in term of robustness and characterisation of the classes)?
• Can the classification be used to detect other features, in particular sub-surface
features such as firn aquifer and ice slabs locations?
• How robust is the classification?
In order to answer these objectives, we will first present an overview of the needed back-
ground and previous work. Then the methods to reproduce the original classification and
choosing and adding extra features will be presented. Finally our results will be presented
and discussed, and the classification compared to other dataset of ice-sheet features.
1.4
Data Sources
The main source of data used in this study is the scihub portal of the ESA. It provides all
public products of the Copernicus program, in particular of the Sentinel satellites. Details
on how to access the data is available in the scihub User Guide [ESA 2020]. We exclu-
sively used data from the SRAL instruments of the Sentinel-3A and Sentinel-3B satellites.
Two other sources of data have been used to compare our results to ground features.
Both data sources are derived from the Operation IceBridge of NASA, but we did not
used the raw data from this program directly in this study.
The first data source is a map of firn aquifer in Greenland [Miège et al. 2016]. The data is
available on the Arctic Data Center website of the NSF [C. M. al 2016].
The second source is a map of ice slabs in Greenland [MacFerrin et al. 2019]. The data
is available on the figshare platform [M. M. al 2020].
All data used in this study is publicly available. The data can be automatically fetched
with the provided code.
2
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
==PAGE:11==
2
Theory
2.1
Remote Sensing
Remote sensing is the collection of methods and technologies used to collect and process
data about an object at a distance. In the domain for Earth Observation, it usually refers
to satellite imaging and data collection.
There is wide variety of methods and applications of satellite remote sensing for Earth Ob-
servation. In this study, the altimetry instruments of ESA’s Envisat and Sentinel-3 satellites
are used. Those instruments are, as their name suggest, used for altimetry, i.e. the mea-
sure of distances between the satellite and the ground. It is used in oceanography for
the study of waves and tides, and in ground observation to determine altitude and the
characteristics of the ground.
2.1.1
Radar Altimeter
A RADAR (RAdio Detection And Ranging) is an active instrument that sends a radio wave
towards a target and uses the time delay, frequency shift and wave shape of the reflection
of the wave on the target to compute the distance, speed and other characteristics of said
target.
A radar altimeter is a radar instrument specially designed to measure the distance be-
tween a satellite and the ground.
The data gathered by the instrument is also influenced by atmospheric perturbations and
the properties of the ground (roughness, geometric shape and dielectric properties). This
kind of instrument can therefore be used to measure some properties of the ground. This
is the main use of this instrument in this study.
The Radar collects a delay return wave, and from this data and some suppositions on the
ground and atmospheric properties, computes a series of parameters. This estimation of
parameters is called re-tracking, and the methods used can depend on the type of surface
studied (ocean, ice/snow, ground, etc).
The backscatter coefficient is computed from the power received Pr with the formula:
σ0 = PrR3 sin θi
G2(θi)Cr
and is linked to the properties of the ground. The re-tracking algorithm uses the data from
radar return from different frequencies to correct from atmospheric perturbations during
the re-tracking process.
Brown 1977 Legrésy and Remy 1997 ACRI-ST IPF 2019a ACRI-ST IPF 2019b ACRI-ST
IPF 2019c
2.1.2
MicroWave Radiometer (MWR)
Contrary to the Radar Altimeter, the microwave radiometer is an passive microwave in-
strument. This means that the instrument does not emit any radio waves, but simply
observes the natural radar emissions and reflections from the Earth surface.
The intensity of the microwave light collected is converted into brightness temperature.
Brightness temperature is the temperature of a black body radiating at the corresponding
intensity.[Harrington 1994]
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
3
==PAGE:12==
According to Planck’s law, the intensity of the emission of a black body is Iν = 2hν3
c2
1
e
hν
kT −1.
So the brightness temperature can be computed with Tb = hν
k ln(1 + 2hν3
Iνc2 )−1.
Brightness temperature however does not correspond to the actual temperature of the
ground or air, since neither ice or snow can be sensibly considered a black body. Also,
for a black body the brightness temperature does not depend on the frequency (it is the
actual temperature of the body). That is not the case for most observations. For this
reason, is can be useful to see the average or ratio between brightness temperatures at
different frequencies.
The average brightness temperature over several frequencies might be considered as a
baseline temperature. Note that it is not necessarily the actual temperature of the object.
The ratio of brightness temperature between two frequencies shows the deviations from
the black body model for those two frequencies.
Both of these parameters depend on the temperature and nature of the body studied.
2.1.3
Orbital characteristics
It is assumed that the reader understand the basic of orbital mechanics and space tech-
nologies. However the basic vocabulary and the particularities of low earth orbit satellites
will be reminded here.
A satellite in orbit will have an orbit time, corresponding to the time to make one turn
around the Earth. Satellites in low earth orbit have an orbit time of around a couple of
hours (1h41 in the case of Sentinel-3).
The satellite will have a circular or ellipsoidal orbit around the Earth, but it is to be noted
that since the Earth rotate at its own speed below the satellite, the path traced by the point
on the surface of the Earth at nadir (below directly) of the satellite might not be a circle of
even a closed line. This line is often called the track.
In the case of non-equatorial orbits, a track usually refers to the ground path of half an
orbit, for the Northern most to the Southern most point of the orbit (the descending track)
and vice-versa (the ascending track).
As mentioned before, the track is not necessarily a closed loop, even after many orbits.
However, for Earth Observation missions, it is useful to setup the satellite in order to have
a closed loop, so that the satellite repeats the same path after a given period. This period
is called a cycle period, and is a multiple of the orbit period. The number of the orbit within
the cycle is called the relative orbit number.
This means that every cycle period, the satellite will go over the same points and therefore
produce data that can be compared in between cycles. For this reason, maps showing
data for a single cycle will often be used. Note that a cycle can span over several days
(27 days in the case of the Sentinel-3 missions), so those maps are not a snapshot of
data for at single time but a patchwork of data over several days.
2.1.4
Projections and map making
Maps are useful for displaying geographical data, but the are also limited in many ways.
The main problems of maps is that they distort the shapes on the surface of the Earth
so that it can fit on a flat plane. Maps will either distort angles (and therefore shapes) or
area, or both.
4
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
==PAGE:13==
2.2
Snow and ice physics
2.2.1
Snow and ice classification
The classification of snow facies in glacier was first conceived by Benson in his thesis
[Benson 1962] . His work was based on ground observations and samples taken in Green-
land. The idea behind his work is to classify the ice and snow found in a glacier depending
on the altitude and temperature of the glacier. Benson’s model supposes regular snow fall
in winter with melting of the snow in the lower (and hotter) part of the glacier in summer.
The glacier is then separated into zones depending on the amount of melt and the effect
of the melt on the snow and ice of the glacier.
Figure 2.1: Snow facies of glacier according to Benson (fig 15, p 49)
The figure 2.1 shows the different zones envisioned by Benson. Each zone has a different
amount of melt in the summer.
The highest and coldest zone is the dry-snow zone. This zone does not encounter any
melt. The layer of snow fallen in the year stays in place during the summer, and is covered
by new snow fall the next year.
The percolation zone starts to encounter snow melt but in small quantities. The melt
water percolates into the snow and, depending on the temperature, either stays liquid in
the snow because of surface tension or refreezes into ice lenses.
The wet-snow zone (or soaked facies) is saturated by melt water. The water then flows
down-slope and the glacier loses part of the mass gained by the snow fall.
Finally, the ablation zone is the zone where all the firn from the winter melts in summer,
leaving only the bare ice of the glacier by the end of summer. In the ablation zone, the
glacier is loosing more mass by melt than it is gaining with snow fall.
2.3
Data analysis
2.3.1
Fuzzy C-means
The K-mean algorithm (from which the fuzzy C-means algorithm is derived), is a clustering
algorithm. Aclustering algorithm allows to assign a cluster Sk to each point xi (i < n) given
an objective function or a heuristic.
K-mean has as objective the minimization of the within cluster variance.
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
5
==PAGE:14==
arg min
S
K
X
k
X
xi∈Sk
xi −µk2
(2.1)
Where µk is the mean of all points in cluster k.
The algorithm has multiple variations to try to minimize this objective, the most known
being the naive k-mean algorithm (or Lloyd’s algorithm). It work by computing the center
(mean µk) of each cluster, then re-clustering the data according to those new centers (a
point is assigned the cluster of the closest center).
The Lloyd algorithm is an heuristic, and therefore does not always converge to the solution
of the problem stated above.
Fuzzy C-mean (FCM) [Bezdek 1981] is a variation of this algorithm. The main difference
is that instead of assigning each point to only one cluster, each point has a membership
score wik in each cluster.
As in the K-mean algorithm, the FCM algorithm updates the centroids from the points
membership with the formula:
ck =
P
i
wm
ikxi
P
i
wm
ik
(2.2)
And then the point membership from the centroids:
wik =
1
P
j
(xi−ck2
xi−cj2 )
2
m−1
(2.3)
where m is a fuzzyness hyper parameter: a higher m will mean lower membership values
and therefore higher ”fuzzyness”.
It can be noted that when m tends to 1, the weight wik tends to either 0 or 1, corresponding
to Lloyd algorithm. m is usually set to 2 by default.
The FCM algorithm has the advantage of giving a ”fuzzy” classification, so points that are
near the boundary of clusters can be detected and deal with, either to exclude them or to
extract them to study the cluster boundaries.
6
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
==PAGE:15==
3
Methods
3.1
Data download and preprocessing
The ESA Earth Observation mission have a platform to share product with end users. This
platform, the Copernicus Scihub [ESA 2020], has a lot of functions and tools.
The main tools used in this project are the dhub web platform, that allows to search and
download product files, by geographic area, date, satellite platform, instrument, process-
ing level, etc. It is a very intuitive platform its low speed makes it difficult to use at a large
scale (for example to search and download several years of data on an area the size of
Greenland).
Another problem that arises is the quantity of information needed in the downloaded files.
ESA provides product files for each track, each instrument family and processing level.
Both SRAL and MWR instrument are considered the same family (under the SRAL file-
name) but it is needed to select the tracks that pass over Greenland. Since only a part of
the track goes above Greenland, and only part of the instrument’s data is useful, a large
amount of the data downloaded is not needed.
Figure 3.1: Structure of a product archive
The structure of a product archive is shown in fig. 3.1. Since the waveform can be used
in this project, the enhanced measurement file is required. The other files are included in
the enhanced file and therefore are not needed.
Fortunately, ESA also provide an API, using among other technologies the OData API
[OData] protocol. The OData API allows to open archives and only download the file of
interest, significantly reducing the amount of data to download. But unfortunately, there
is not way to quickly filter tracks that go over the zone of interest.
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
7
==PAGE:16==
But since the satellite has a cycle, it is possible to select the relative orbit numbers that
goes over Greenland for a single cycle and re-use the same relative orbit number for
different cycles. The relative orbit number can be manually gathered from the dhub web
platform and by selecting the area of interest.
After collecting the relative orbit number, the catalogue of all available files is downloaded,
the files of interest are filtered (using the orbit number), then the archive is opened and
the files downloaded using the OData API.
Those steps have to be done twice, once for each satellite (Sentinel-3 A and Sentinel-3
B). The total data for the tracks over Greenland for both satellites corresponds to about
800Go of memory.
The download and processing of the file catalogue is done by the files src/utils/download_
catalogue.sh and src/utils/process_catalogue.py. The download of the files is done
by src/utils/process_products.py--download.
3.2
Filtering useful data
The track files contain all the data necessary for the project but also have a number of
unnecessary fields and a lot of data points outside the area of interest. In order to reduce
the data on disk and accelerate the loading time, the data is filtered and repackaged in
new files.
Filtering unnecessary fields is straight forward, the files are opened and only the fields
used (time, position of the satellite and data fields) are kept. Filtering points outside the
area of interest (Greenland ice-sheet) is more difficult. One of the problems is that the
coastline is especially intricate, so coastline files might not be precise enough. Also some
islands should be included if possible. For this reason, two filtering techniques are applied.
First the maritime border of Greenland is used to filter all data outside Greenland territory
but this included a large amount of sea. Then the snow facies classification provided by
ESA with the product is used to only filter the ice and snow region of Greenland. This
allows to make sure that only points of interest for the study are kept, but it also means
that some points might be excluded if the classification is not precise enough.
After this filtering, the data is repackage in hdf files per satellite and cycle number. The
total data is significantly reduced to only 2.4Go.
3.3
Classification
The data is now ready to be used. In order to use the fuzzy c-means algorithm, features
must be chosen. The classification is based on [Ngan et al. 2008]. In this paper, the
writers selected 4 customized features: 2 based on the radiometer measurements and 2
from the altimetry measurements. Those features are:
• Average temperature brightness: average of the temperature brightness between
the 2 radiometer frequencies (23.8 and 36.5 GHz). tbavg = (tb238 + tb365)/2.
• Temperature brightness ratio: ratio of temperature brightness between the 2 ra-
diometer frequencies (23.8 and 36.5 GHz). tbratio = tb238−tb365
tb238+tb365 .
• Sigma 0 for the Ku altimetry band noted σKu
• Difference between the sigma 0 of the Ku and C band. ∆σ = σKu −σC
Note that the original paper worked with Envisat data, so the C band was replaced with
the S band, according to the bands available on the Envisat Radiometer.
8
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
==PAGE:17==
3.4
Rasterification
Remote sensing data from radars and radiometers are usually published in a tabular form.
This means that the data products are tables including columns for coordinates of the data
points (time, latitude and longitude) and columns for different kind of data.
This form of data is more consistent with the way the data is collected (a point correspond
to one measurement of the satellite) but it makes data difficult to use for several reasons.
First, data points very close in space will not have exactly the same coordinates. Even
though the orbits of Earth Observation satellites are setup to have cycles that repeat the
same path over time, coordinates might still change slightly for each cycle. This can make
comparing the evolution of a given point difficult since gathering the data for a single point
over different cycles is not really possible. Secondly, scattered points do not allow to study
areas, or give insight about the entirety of the Greenland ice-sheet.
Raster images can solve these problems. Raster images are made of evenly spaced
pixels, like images captured by a camera. The process of converting tabular data into
raster images will be called rasterification. Raster image are very useful to measure areas,
comparing data over time but also have draw backs. Rasterification is done by putting the
data into bins. Each bin is defined by a temporal and spatial segment. The data in the bin
is then averaged (or for classes the most common class is taken). This means that there
is a large loss of information because of an approximation of data.
The choice of the size of these bins are important. A good choice for the temporal window
is the cycle period. This allows all raster images to have some data points in the same
places, therefore helping comparing data over time. However, cycles are pretty long (27
days for Sentinel-3), so raster made over this period will have pixel with data up to 27
days older than others. This means that this kind of raster will not help understanding
short term changes.
The choice of the spatial dimensions of the bin can be chosen to be larger that the maxi-
mum distance between tracks. This prevents to have empty pixels between tracks, which
would make measurements of areas easier and the total area will add up to the total area
of the ice-sheet. The spatial dimension should also be as small as possible to have better
resolution of the map and lose less data.
But because the orbits is nearly polar, the distance between tracks near the poles is much
smaller that the distance between the tracks near the equator. Therefore the density of
data is much larger at high latitudes. In practice, the spatial resolution was chosen to
slightly smaller than the larger distance between tracks at the south of Greenland. This
means that the resolution is maximized while having only a few pixels with no data in the
Southern part of Greenland.
3.5
Comparison to other datasets
The characterisation of classes with the data used for the classification and the geographic
location of the classes is useful. However it might not allows to properly verify the claims
made about such classes. Ideally, those claims about the classes must be confronted
with other sources of data that were not used in the classification, either from ground
measurement or other kind of remote sensing data.
This study focuses on two remote sensing datasets derived from the Operation IceBridge
(IOB). This mission is an airborne low frequency radar operated by NASA. The goal of
this program is to bridge the gap between the 2 version of the ICESat satellites and bring
more data with better resolution to contextualize the satellite data.
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
9
==PAGE:18==
Airborne radars have the advantage of being able to use lower frequency radar that would
be absorbed or perturbed by the atmosphere if used from space but that have higher
penetration in the ice and particularly snow. This is done by the Accumulation Radar (AR)
instrument aboard the planes of the NASA’s Airborne Sciences Program.
Previous research has manage to identify several ice and snow feature from this data.
The paper [MacFerrin et al. 2019] identified ice slabs using this data and comparing it to
Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR). They produced a map of ice slabs with their respective
thickness over the flight path of different IOB flights.
Another paper [Miège et al. 2016] uses similar techniques and data to identify firn aquifer
on IOB flight path. They produced a map of firn aquifer and their depth across the flight
paths.
Both firn aquifers and ice slab have the advantage of staying relatively constant across
multiple years and the mechanism of their formation is well known. This way, by know-
ing that these specific features exist in a region, we can compare the different classes
over time in this region to understand if the classes computed correspond to the known
mechanism of formation and lifetime of this features.
10
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
==PAGE:19==
4
Results and comparison
4.1
Classification
The Fuzzy C-means algorithm is unsupervised, therefore the exact meaning of the classes
is unknown. However the classes can be compared with prior knowledge about the ice
sheet and about the interaction of radar wave with the different types of snow.
Benson defined the different snow facies of glaciers. Those facies include dry snow,
percolation zone, wet snow and ablation zone.
The paper [Ngan et al. 2008] based its interpretation of the classification on the Benson
facies, according to the geographic localisation of the classes and the centroid locations.
For example, 2 classes are primarily located in the high altitude center of Greenland, a
zone known to have dry snow. Therefore those classes have been identified as dry snow
zone. The paper attempts to do so for all of its classes.
Our classification includes extra data about the waveform of the radar response of the
ice below. Namely, the slope of the trailing and leading edges and the peakiness of the
waveform. This allows us to enrich the classification and compare it to the previous work.
The original classification has been re-implemented with the data of Sentinel-3 for the
year 2017. Our improved classification has been implemented with the same data.
In order to help with comparing the 2 classification and the previous work on Envisat,
the numbering and colors of the classes from the re-implementation and from our own
classification have been aligned with the classes from the original study. This was done
by finding the permutation of the numbering of the classes that maximize the number of
co-occurrence between the Envisat classes with the same number (see algorithm B.1).
Figure 4.1
The confusion matrix (figure 4.1) shows how often the classification with the original
method and our classification give the same class (on the diagonal) or a different class.
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
11
==PAGE:20==
4.2
Cluster characterisation
This section compares the differences between the two classification and the differences
in between classes.
In the two classifications, all classes have similar frequencies in the data, except the class
3 that was, as mentioned before, split between class 3 and 0 in the new classification (see
figures 4.2 and 4.3).
Figure 4.2: Frequency of our classes
Figure 4.3: Frequency of original classes
The simplest way to characterise the clusters are by representing the centroids of each
cluster. The centroid of a cluster in FCM is the average of the points for each feature
weighted by the membership score of the points.
The centroid locations (figures 4.4 and 4.5) are plotted according to the normalized fea-
tures (with the mean and standard deviation of each feature over the dataset).
Since the centroid locations are normalized, if all centroids are near zero for a given fea-
ture, then this feature has a small impact on the classification. Centroids for the features
12
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
==PAGE:21==
Figure 4.4: Centroid location of the original classification
Figure 4.5: Centroid location of our classification
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
13
==PAGE:22==
in common between the 2 classification are very similar and significant. On the contrary,
the features specific to the new classification has a low impact on the classification.
4.3
Membership score and confidence
The clustering algorithm used is the Fuzzy C-Means (FCM). This algorithm, as explained
in the theory section, outputs for every data point a membership score for each class. This
way, the algorithm explicits its confidence that a given data point is in a given class. While
only the most likely class is used in most of our study, those membership scores can be
very useful to characterize the clusters. It can be used to exclude points that cannot be
confidently classified or identify the classes that can be confused with each other.
The first use of the membership score is therefore to identify the points that are not clas-
sified with certainty. This is done in two steps: creating a metric from the scores that
measure how confident the algorithm is in its classification, and choosing a threshold on
this metric below which the classification is considered unreliable.
An approach could be to just choose the score as a metric, but it introduced multiple
problems. First of all, the score of the FCM algorithm is not a probability but a measure
of distance between the point and the centroids. This means that depending of the size
of the cluster, and how close the clusters are from each other, the score of the top class
can vary widely. The solution to this problem is to use the difference ratio between the
two most likely classes. Because it is a ratio, it is not as sensitive to the absolute value of
the score. Also, by measuring the difference of score between the first and second most
likely classes, it effectively measures the sensitivity of the classification (between those
two classes).
ratio = score1−score2
score1+score2
Once the metric is chosen and computed on all data points, a threshold must be chosen.
Since, once again, the metric is not a probability of misclassification, the threshold must
be chosen empirically. In order to achieve this, the cumulative distribution of the metric is
plotted, and the percentage of points that should be below the threshold is chosen.
Figure 4.6: Cumulative distribution of the metric ratio
This threshold will be used in the later analysis. Data points below the confidence thresh-
old will be classified as ”Rejected for low threshold” instead of their respective classes.
4.4
Comparison to previous geographical knowledge
Snow facies of the Greenland ice-sheet were studied by Benson in his thesis [Benson
1962]. He defined the different snow facies and drew a map of those facies using ground
14
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
==PAGE:23==
measurements and field expeditions.
Figure 4.7: Distribution of facies on the Greenland ice-sheet. Benson’s thesis (fig48 p153)
The map made by Benson (figure 4.7) can be compared to the classifications made from
Sentinel-3 data. Benson only provides an overall map, without showing seasonal change.
But from our classifications from Sentinel, it is possible to see the changes over time.
Figures 4.8 and 4.9 show the map of the two classifications for 2 cycles (during the winter
and summer 2019).
Both classifications seem to have classes that clearly delimit the dry snow area (pink and
red for the original classification, pink, red and blue for the new one). The other classes
cannot be easily matched to snow facies. The paper Ngan et al. 2008 labeled the classes
(original classification). They defined the dark blue class as the ablation zone, light blue
as percolation, green as wet snow and purple as intermediate dry/percolation. But some
feature do not seem to fit the expected behavior of the ice-sheet.
For example, this classification shows a dry snow zone on the south-west coast, west of
the ablation zone, and on a zone that was a percolation zone in the winter. This does not
seem to fit the behavior of the ice sheet since dry snow occurs in zones where the ice
does not melt in summer and stays dry over the winter.
4.5
Comparison to Firn Aquifer data
An important part of estimating the effectiveness of unsupervised clustering is to com-
pared said classes with ground observations or with maps of some features made from
physical models and remote data. Many studies focus on such features, from ground
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 4.8: Classification of cycle 40 from 2019-01-02 to 2019-01-29 (winter 2019)
Figure 4.9: Classification of cycle 46 from 2019-06-14 to 2019-07-11 (summer 2019)
16
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
==PAGE:25==
observations or airborne data. These studies are limited in spatial and temporal scope
though, since the missions needed to collect the data are expensive and cannot cover a
lot of ground in a given time. So the datasets produced by these studies are very limited
in space and time compared to satellite data.
In this study, we focus on two datasets of underground features. The first dataset used is
a map of the firn aquifers produced by [Miège et al. 2016]. This paper uses 2 data sources
to produce maps of the firn aquifer in Greenland.
The first data source of the paper is the airborne radar mission by the NASA OIB (Opera-
tion IceBridge) during the years 2010 to 2014. Operation IceBridge is NASA program for
the study of the Greenland ice-sheet that works to complete remote satellite data. The
platform for the program is a modified Lockheed P-3 Orion fitted with multiple instruments.
The instruments of interest for the study of the firn aquifer are the Accumulation Radar
(AR), a radar with a center frequency of 750MHz and bandwidth of 300MHz and the Multi-
channel Coherent Radar Depth Sounder (MCoRDS), used at the 195MHz frequency.
The second data source are the measurement taken by a 400MHz Ground Penetrating
Radar (GPR) from GSSI, using a snowmobile or skis for mobility.
Those two data sources allowed them to infer the presence of an firn aquifer and measure
the depth of the water table. Since firn aquifer do not move a lot during seasons, the firn
aquifers detected during the OIB campaign are expected to still exist. For this reason, the
map of the firn aquifer is supposed fixed over time and all OIB campaigns are plotted on
a single map and compared to more recent data
Figure 4.10: Firn aquifer on Operation IceBridge flight path
In order to compare the OIB data with the Sentinel-3 data, the firn aquifer map is rasterified
with the same grid as the Sentinel-3 data.
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
17
==PAGE:26==
The classes given by our two classification over the cycles are then compared on the
zone with and without aquifer (but always on the OIB flight-path, where data about the firn
aquifer has been collected). This produces 4 stackplots: original classes on OIB flight-
path without aquifer, original classes with detected aquifer, new classes on OIB flight-path
without aquifer and new classes with detected aquifer.
Figure 4.11: Stackplot of the original classes with and without firn aquifer
This stack plot shows the variation of the classes in the zone with and without firn aquifer.
Since we consider that firn aquifer are still forming at those locations, our hypothesis is that
this variation of classes correspond to the known steps of formation of the firn aquifers.
4.6
Comparison to Ice Slab data
Previous research [MacFerrin et al. 2019] have also used the NASA’s IceBridge airborne
accumulation radar to detect ice slabs on the flight path of the mission.
This research have produced a dataset of the regions with ice slab below the surface.
Since ice slab do not tend to move a lot between years, the dataset is compared to data
available with the Sentinel-3 satellite. This allows to compare the unsupervised clustering
with the detected ice slabs.
Similarly to the study of the regions with firn aquifers, two stackplots were produced: one
of the regions on the OIB flight path but without ice slabs and one of the regions where
ice slabs have been detected. Similarly, we also expect the classes to correspond to the
known process of formation of ice slab.
18
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4.12: Stackplot of the our classes with and without firn aquifer
Figure 4.13: Ice slabs on Operation IceBridge flight path
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 4.14
Figure 4.15
20
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
==PAGE:29==
5
Discussion
5.1
Classification
The confusion matrix between the old and new classification is mostly diagonal with a few
exceptions. Notably, the class 3 from the original classification (identified as dry snow
zone II) is split into classes 0 and 3 of our classification and the class 0 (identified as the
ablation zone) is merged with the class 2 (wet snow).
The splitting of the dry snow zone is not necessarily significant since it can just be a new
dry snow zone, but the merging of ablation and wet snow zone is very interesting, since it
suggest that one of the 2 classification cannot properly make the difference between the
ablation zone and wet snow zones.
The find out exactly which classification is wrong and when, the classes must be more
deeply characterized.
5.2
Cluster characterisation
Interpreting the centroids can be difficult because of the various effects that change the
response of ice and snow to the radar wave and it’s microwave emissions. Among other
effect, the radar response depend on the dielectric properties of the ice and snow at
the different frequencies (which is itself highly dependent on the density, and therefore
water content, of the ice or snow). But it’s also affected by the geometry of the medium.
Small scale surface features, such as sastrugi (centimeter scale features caused by wind
erosion of snow) or snow dunes can change the backscatter coefficient and the shape of
the waveform.
5.3
Confusion between classes
The membership score has been used to identify the data points which were not classified
with certainty. However, in the form presented, it does not give any information on which
classes are being confusion with each other.
A way to find which classes are similar to the classifier is to measure the co-occurrence
of the first class (the class assigned by the classification) and the second class (the class
with the second highest membership score). The second class is available since the FCM
algorithm outputs membership scores for all classes.
The co-occurrence matrix is measured for all points in the year 2018 (used for the clus-
tering).
The co-occurrence matrix presents some interesting features. It could be expected for the
matrix to have a symmetry: it would mean that if a class A often has class B as second
class, then class B often has class A as second class. It would make sense if the class
centroids are close. The symmetry is visible in the matrix but it is not a perfect symmetry.
This could be explained by a bias toward some classes, or simply by how the centroids
of each class is distributed in the feature space.
A good part of this plot can be explained by the position of the centroids (see fig 4.5). For
instance, the class closest to the means for all features would be class 5 (purple), and
it is the class where the co-occurrences are the most spread out between classes. Also
class 1 and 2 (light blue and green) have centroids that are pretty much polar opposites,
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 5.1
and therefore have no co-occurrences. But the geometry of the centroids do not explain
everything, since the position of 2 centroids might allow these classes to co-occur but it
does not mean that data points exist in the regions of feature space where they do. For
example, class 2 and 3 (green and pink) have centroids that are pretty close to each other
and yet have no co-occurrence. This means than the classification is confident in which
class to chose even though the centroids are close.
5.4
Comparison to previous geographical knowledge
The snow facies as describe by Benson provide a good idea of what to expect from the
classification. Benson described the snow facies on a single glacier, with increasing tem-
perature on the down slope of the glacier. This means that dry snow is to be expected
at high altitude. Then with decreasing altitude percolation, wet snow and ablation zone
will be found. This was the main argument in the original classification [Ngan et al. 2008]
to label the classes. The dry zone area are very clear on the map since dry snow cov-
ers most of central Greenland. Seasonal variation is also a good clue to the nature of
the classes. Classes more frequent in summer are more likely to represent wet snow or
percolation zone since melting occurs mostly in summer.
It must also be noted that the geographical consistency of the classes is a good clue to
the quality of the classification. Indeed, the clustering algorithm has no information about
the geographical location and time of each data point and direct data about the altitude
or weather. Therefore, spatially and temporally consistent classes are an indicator of
the quality of the classification. For both classifications central Greenland are consistent
in space and time, points near each other in space and time are usually given the same
class, and the boundaries of each zone is clear. Near the coast however, the classification
is not as neat. Many close points have very different classifications and the classes of a
given point can change radically over time. This is an indication that our methods are not
very efficient near the coast. This can be due to a greater variety of snow and ice near
the coast, or to the smaller number of points in those regions, giving them a lesser weight
in the classification.
22
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
==PAGE:31==
5.5
Comparison to Firn Aquifer and ice slab and data
The study of the classes in the regions with firn aquifer and ice slabs can give valuable
insight on the classification, by comparing the given classes to known features of the ice
sheet.
In this case, the original classification and our classification behave very differently, show-
ing deep differences in the two similar approaches.
The original classification shows a variability of the classes over firn aquifer depending on
the season.
5.6
Future work
Many methods have been tried during this project but have not been discussed because
of a lack of results or time. For instance, in order to increase the amount of information
given by the waveform for the classification, a Variational Auto-Encoder was trained to
reconstruct the waveform after a reduction of dimensionnality. This method worked quite
well: most waveform where properly reconstructed, the embeddings found seemed to
be correlated with known waveform metrics, and the number of embedded dimensions
seemed to be at a minimum. However the method was not kept in the final work because
of the difficulty of explaining the embedding in a physical way, and their relation to the
snow facies classification. This could be a route for future work.
Also, the clustering made here have a bias toward the northern part of Greenland. Indeed,
because of orbital mechanics, the density of data points is greater in the northern part of
Greenland. This have not been taken into account because it probably only have a small
effect of the final classification, but it could be corrected with a appropriate weighting of
the data points.
Finally, so much can be done with unsupervised clustering. A much more effective way
would be to work from models of the snow facies and their interaction with the radar waves
from the remote sensing satellite. Unfortunately few studies are available on the precise
modeling of the different types of snow facies and even less on the electromagnetic prop-
erties of those facies. These studies could be of great help to interpret the result of remote
sensing data, with less space for interpretation and more reliable results.
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
23
==PAGE:32==
24
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
==PAGE:33==
6
Conclusions
This project re-implemented previous classification of snow facies from remote sensing
data, added new data to the classification and compared the results with other datasets.
It has been shown that the addition of waveform metrics only marginally changes the
classification, and it is unclear with classification is superior. The lack of clear reference
for the classification means it mainly based on the interpretation of the classes.
The comparison to other dataset such as firn aquifer or ice slab data shows the limits of
the interpretation of the classes given in previous work.
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
25
==PAGE:34==
26
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
==PAGE:35==
Bibliography
Paterson, Kurt Cuffey W. S. B. (May 2010). The Physics of Glaciers, 4th edition.
Rémy, Frédérique, Philippe Shaeffer, and Benoît Legrésy (Dec. 1999). “Ice flow physical
processes derived from the ERS-1 high-resolution map of the Antarctica and Green-
land ice sheets”. In: Geophysical Journal International 139.3, pp. 645–656. ISSN: 0956-
540X. DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-246x.1999.00964.x. eprint: https://academic.oup.com/gji/
article-pdf/139/3/645/6005769/139-3-645.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-
246x.1999.00964.x.
Brenner, A. C., J. P. DiMarzio, and H. J. Zwally (2007). “Precision and Accuracy of Satellite
Radar and LaserAltimeter Data Over the Continental Ice Sheets”. In: IEEE Transactions
on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 45.2, pp. 321–331.
Benson, Carl S (1962). Stratigraphic studies in the snow and firn of the Greenland ice
sheet. Tech. rep. Cold Regions Research and Engineering Lab HANOVER NH.
Ngan, Tran et al. (Nov. 2008). “Snow Facies Over Ice Sheets Derived From Envisat Active
and Passive Observations”. In: IEEE T. Geoscience and Remote Sensing 46, pp. 3694–
3708. DOI: 10.1109/TGRS.2008.2000818.
ESA (2020). ESA Copernicus scihub User guide. URL: https://scihub.copernicus.eu/
userguide/WebHome (visited on 06/11/2020).
Miège, Clément et al. (2016). “Spatial extent and temporal variability of Greenland firn
aquifers detected by ground and airborne radars”. In: Journal of Geophysical Research:
Earth Surface 121.12, pp. 2381–2398.
al, C. Miege (2016). Firn aquifer data. URL: https : / / arcticdata . io / catalog / view / doi :
10.18739/A2985M (visited on 06/11/2020).
MacFerrin, Mike et al. (2019). “Rapid expansion of Greenland’s low-permeability ice slabs”.
In: Nature 573.7774, pp. 403–407.
al, M. MacFerrin (2020). Ice slab data. URL: https://figshare.com/articles/Greenland_Ice_
Slabs_Data/8309777 (visited on 06/11/2020).
Brown, G (1977). “The average impulse response of a rough surface and its applications”.
In: IEEE transactions on antennas and propagation 25.1, pp. 67–74.
Legrésy, Benoı t and Frederique Remy (1997). “Altimetric observations of surface char-
acteristics of the Antarctic ice sheet”. In: Journal of Glaciology 43.144, pp. 265–275.
ACRI-ST IPF, ESA EUMETSAT (July 2019a). Sentinel-3 Level 2 SRAL MWR Algorithm
Theoretical Baseline Definition. Tech. rep. S3MPC.CLS.PBD.005. ESA.
– (July 2019b). Sentinel-3 Level 1b SRAL Algorithm Theoretical Baseline Definition. Tech.
rep. S3MPC.CLS.PBD.003. ESA.
– (July 2019c). Sentinel-3 Level 1b MWR Algorithm Theoretical Baseline Definition. Tech.
rep. S3MPC.CLS.PRB.004. ESA.
Harrington, Richard F. (Apr. 1994). Conceptual Radiometer Design Studies for Earth Ob-
servations From Low-Earth Orbit. Tech. rep. NASA Contractor Report 458. NASA. URL:
https://ntrs.nasa.gov/archive/nasa/casi.ntrs.nasa.gov/19940024595.pdf.
Bezdek, James (Jan. 1981). Pattern Recognition With Fuzzy Objective Function Algo-
rithms, pp. 235–239. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4757-0450-1.
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
27
==PAGE:36==
28
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
==PAGE:37==
A
Results and figures
[TODO: readability A.3] [TODO: remove pyplot titles]
Figure A.1: Scatter plot of 2 parameters at once for every couple of parameters
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure A.2: Distribution of parameters per class for our classification
Figure A.3: Frequency of the second most probable class for our classification.
30
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
==PAGE:39==
Figure A.4: Original classes over the year 2018 on a line over Greenland
Figure A.5: Our classes over the year 2018 on a line over Greenland
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure A.6: Stackplot of the original classes with ice slabs, with firn aquifer, and with
neither and on IOB flight path
32
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
==PAGE:41==
Figure A.7: Stackplot of our classes with ice slabs, with firn aquifer, and with neither and
on IOB flight path
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure A.8: Map mosaic of the original classes per cycle (part 1/2)
34
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
==PAGE:43==
Figure A.9: Map mosaic of the original classes per cycle (part 2/2)
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure A.10: Map mosaic of the our classes per cycle (part 1/2)
36
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
==PAGE:45==
Figure A.11: Map mosaic of the our classes per cycle (part 1/2)
Figure A.12: Normalized difference of score between the 1st and 2nd most probable class
for our classification.
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure A.13: Score distribution for our classification
Figure A.14: Score distribution for each of our classes
Figure A.15: Score distribution for each 2nd most probable of our classes
38
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
==PAGE:47==
Figure A.16: Score distribution for both classification
Figure A.17: Raster image of classificatioj score for each cycle of 2018
Figure A.18: Median, 1st and 3rd quantile score for the 1st and 2nd most probable class
for our classification
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure A.19: Waveform samples from Sentinel-3A SRAL instrument
40
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
==PAGE:49==
Figure A.20: Waveform samples from Sentinel-3A SRAL instrument
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure A.21: Mean waveform from Sentinel-3A SRAL instrument
42
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
==PAGE:51==
Figure A.22: First 2 dimension of the TNSE transform of the all data points (including
waveform data)
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure A.23: First 2 dimension of the TNSE transform of the all data points (excluding
waveform data)
44
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
==PAGE:53==
Figure A.24: Correlation matrix of all parameters
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
45
==PAGE:54==
B
Code source
The section includes important samples of the code used in this project.
The full code in available on Github.
B.1
Permutation of classes to maximize similarity with
Envisat classes
This algorithm finds the best permutation of classes in order to have classes as similar to
Envisat classes as possible.
It takes the matrix mat as input, containing the number of co-occurence between the
Envisat and an other classification.
It outputs bestperm, giving the permutation maximizing the co-occurence of classes with
the same number.
1
# mat: co-ocurence matrix with no permutation of class numbering
2
max_co_occ = 0
3
for perm in itertools.permutations(range(6)):
4
perm_mat = coo_matrix(([1] * 6, (range(6), perm))).A
5
co_occ = np.sum(mat * perm_mat)
6
if co_occ > max_co_occ:
7
max_co_occ = co_occ
8
best_perm = perm
9
best_perm_mat = perm_mat
Listing B.1: Permutation of classes
B.2
Data preprocessing and filtering
This code collects and filters data from the raw products downloaded from ESA to get only
the fields of interest above the Greenland ice-sheet.
The code showed here has been simplified by removing some debugging, performances
and optional features. Full code is available in the Github project (in src/utils/preprocess_
products.py).
1
def preprocess_file(filename , area_of_interest):
2
"""Preprocess data for a track file.
3
4
:type filename: string
5
:param filename: path to file to process
6
7
:type area_of_interest: shapely.geometry.shape Object
8
:param area_of_interest: Geographical Area to filter
9
10
:rtype: Dataframe
11
"""
12
# Open enhanced measurements file
13
rootgrp = Dataset(filename , "r", format="NETCDF4")
14
15
# Size of 1Hz data
16
n_01 = rootgrp.variables["time_01"][:].size
17
18
46
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
==PAGE:55==
19
# Check quality flags
20
mask = np.zeros(n_01, dtype=np.bool)
21
mask = mask | (rootgrp.variables["tb_238_quality_flag_01"][:] == 1)
22
mask = mask | (rootgrp.variables["tb_365_quality_flag_01"][:] == 1)
23
24
# Filter geographic data: filter all data outside Greenland maritime
border
25
geo_mask = get_coord_mask(rootgrp.variables["lon_01"][:], rootgrp.
variables["lat_01"][:], area_of_interest)
26
mask = mask | geo_mask
27
28
# Add data masks
29
mask = mask | rootgrp.variables["time_01"][:].mask
30
mask = mask | rootgrp.variables["lat_01"][:].mask
31
mask = mask | rootgrp.variables["lon_01"][:].mask
32
mask = mask | rootgrp.variables["tb_238_01"][:].mask
33
mask = mask | rootgrp.variables["tb_365_01"][:].mask
34
mask = mask | rootgrp.variables["ice_sheet_snow_facies_flag_01_ku"][:].
mask
35
36
# Filter if the ice_sheet_snow_facies is not set
37
mask = mask | (rootgrp.variables["ice_sheet_snow_facies_flag_01_ku"][:] ==
0)
38
39
# Reduced index to filter unwanted data
40
indexes_01 = np.where(~mask)[0]
41
42
# Return empty dataframe is not data is kept.
43
if indexes_01.size == 0:
44
return pandas.DataFrame()
45
46
# Reducing arrays before downsampling for performance
47
time_01 = rootgrp.variables["time_01"][indexes_01]
48
lat_01 = rootgrp.variables["lat_01"][indexes_01]
49
lon_01 = rootgrp.variables["lon_01"][indexes_01]
50
tb_238_01 = rootgrp.variables["tb_238_01"][indexes_01]
51
tb_365_01 = rootgrp.variables["tb_365_01"][indexes_01]
52
ice_sheet_snow_facies_flag_01_ku = rootgrp.variables["
ice_sheet_snow_facies_flag_01_ku"][indexes_01]
53
54
# Collects waveform data
55
waveform_20_ku = rootgrp.variables["waveform_20_ku"][rootgrp.variables["
index_first_20hz_meas_01_ku"][indexes_01], :]
56
waveform_20_c = rootgrp.variables["waveform_20_c"][rootgrp.variables["
index_first_20hz_meas_01_c"][indexes_01], :]
57
58
# Load data into python and downsamples 20Hz data.
59
# Downsampling is done by taking the first sample in the 1Hz cycle
60
sig0_leading_edge_ice_20_ku = rootgrp.variables["
sig0_leading_edge_ice_20_ku"][rootgrp.variables["
index_first_20hz_meas_01_ku"][indexes_01]]
61
width_leading_edge_ice_20_ku = rootgrp.variables["
width_leading_edge_ice_20_ku"][rootgrp.variables["
index_first_20hz_meas_01_ku"][indexes_01]]
62
slope_first_trailing_edge_ice_20_ku = rootgrp.variables["
slope_first_trailing_edge_ice_20_ku"][rootgrp.variables["
index_first_20hz_meas_01_ku"][indexes_01]]
63
slope_second_trailing_edge_ice_20_ku = rootgrp.variables["
slope_second_trailing_edge_ice_20_ku"][rootgrp.variables["
index_first_20hz_meas_01_ku"][indexes_01]]
64
peakiness_1_20_ku = rootgrp.variables["peakiness_1_20_ku"][rootgrp.
variables["index_first_20hz_meas_01_ku"][indexes_01]]
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
47
==PAGE:56==
65
peakiness_2_20_ku = rootgrp.variables["peakiness_2_20_ku"][rootgrp.
variables["index_first_20hz_meas_01_ku"][indexes_01]]
66
67
sig0_leading_edge_ice_20_c = rootgrp.variables["sig0_leading_edge_ice_20_c
"][rootgrp.variables["index_first_20hz_meas_01_c"][indexes_01]]
68
width_leading_edge_ice_20_c = rootgrp.variables["
width_leading_edge_ice_20_c"][rootgrp.variables["
index_first_20hz_meas_01_c"][indexes_01]]
69
slope_first_trailing_edge_ice_20_c = rootgrp.variables["
slope_first_trailing_edge_ice_20_c"][rootgrp.variables["
index_first_20hz_meas_01_c"][indexes_01]]
70
slope_second_trailing_edge_ice_20_c = rootgrp.variables["
slope_second_trailing_edge_ice_20_c"][rootgrp.variables["
index_first_20hz_meas_01_c"][indexes_01]]
71
peakiness_1_20_c = rootgrp.variables["peakiness_1_20_c"][rootgrp.variables
["index_first_20hz_meas_01_c"][indexes_01]]
72
peakiness_2_20_c = rootgrp.variables["peakiness_2_20_c"][rootgrp.variables
["index_first_20hz_meas_01_c"][indexes_01]]
73
waveform_qual_ice_20_ku = rootgrp.variables["waveform_qual_ice_20_ku"][
rootgrp.variables["index_first_20hz_meas_01_c"][indexes_01]]
74
75
sig0_leading_edge_ice_20_plrm_ku = rootgrp.variables["
sig0_leading_edge_ice_20_plrm_ku"][rootgrp.variables["
index_first_20hz_meas_01_c"][indexes_01]]
76
width_leading_edge_ice_20_plrm_ku = rootgrp.variables["
width_leading_edge_ice_20_plrm_ku"][rootgrp.variables["
index_first_20hz_meas_01_c"][indexes_01]]
77
slope_first_trailing_edge_ice_20_plrm_ku = rootgrp.variables["
slope_first_trailing_edge_ice_20_plrm_ku"][rootgrp.variables["
index_first_20hz_meas_01_c"][indexes_01]]
78
slope_second_trailing_edge_ice_20_plrm_ku = rootgrp.variables["
slope_second_trailing_edge_ice_20_plrm_ku"][rootgrp.variables["
index_first_20hz_meas_01_c"][indexes_01]]
79
peakiness_1_20_plrm_ku = rootgrp.variables["peakiness_1_20_plrm_ku"][
rootgrp.variables["index_first_20hz_meas_01_c"][indexes_01]]
80
81
82
# Downsample 20Hz data
83
sig0_ice_sheet_01_ku = downsample(rootgrp , indexes_01 , "
sig0_ice_sheet_20_ku", "index_1hz_meas_20_ku")
84
sig0_ice_sheet_01_c = downsample(rootgrp , indexes_01 , "sig0_ice_sheet_20_c
", "index_1hz_meas_20_c")
85
86
# Close file as all data is loaded into python
87
rootgrp.close()
88
89
# Create new mask for downsampled data
90
mask = sig0_ice_sheet_01_c.mask | sig0_ice_sheet_01_ku.mask
91
92
# Reducing index
93
indexes_01 = np.where(~mask)[0]
94
95
# Return empty dataframe is not data is kept.
96
if indexes_01.size == 0:
97
return pandas.DataFrame()
98
99
## Return all fields of interest
100
df = pandas.DataFrame({
101
"time_01": time_01[indexes_01],
102
"lat_01": lat_01[indexes_01],
103
"lon_01": convert_eastward_lon(lon_01[indexes_01]),
104
"tb_238_01": tb_238_01[indexes_01],
48
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
==PAGE:57==
105
"tb_365_01": tb_365_01[indexes_01],
106
"ice_sheet_snow_facies_flag_01_ku": ice_sheet_snow_facies_flag_01_ku[
indexes_01],
107
108
"sig0_ice_sheet_01_ku": sig0_ice_sheet_01_ku[indexes_01],
109
"sig0_ice_sheet_01_c": sig0_ice_sheet_01_c[indexes_01],
110
111
"sig0_leading_edge_ice_20_ku": sig0_leading_edge_ice_20_ku[indexes_01
],
112
"width_leading_edge_ice_20_ku": width_leading_edge_ice_20_ku[
indexes_01],
113
"slope_first_trailing_edge_ice_20_ku":
slope_first_trailing_edge_ice_20_ku[indexes_01],
114
"slope_second_trailing_edge_ice_20_ku":
slope_second_trailing_edge_ice_20_ku[indexes_01],
115
"peakiness_1_20_ku": peakiness_1_20_ku[indexes_01],
116
"peakiness_2_20_ku": peakiness_2_20_ku[indexes_01],
117
"waveform_qual_ice_20_ku": waveform_qual_ice_20_ku[indexes_01],
118
119
"sig0_leading_edge_ice_20_c": sig0_leading_edge_ice_20_c[indexes_01],
120
"width_leading_edge_ice_20_c": width_leading_edge_ice_20_c[indexes_01
],
121
"slope_first_trailing_edge_ice_20_c":
slope_first_trailing_edge_ice_20_c[indexes_01],
122
"slope_second_trailing_edge_ice_20_c":
slope_second_trailing_edge_ice_20_c[indexes_01],
123
"peakiness_1_20_c": peakiness_1_20_c[indexes_01],
124
"peakiness_2_20_c": peakiness_2_20_c[indexes_01],
125
126
"sig0_leading_edge_ice_20_plrm_ku": sig0_leading_edge_ice_20_plrm_ku[
indexes_01],
127
"width_leading_edge_ice_20_plrm_ku": width_leading_edge_ice_20_plrm_ku
[indexes_01],
128
"slope_first_trailing_edge_ice_20_plrm_ku":
slope_first_trailing_edge_ice_20_plrm_ku[indexes_01],
129
"slope_second_trailing_edge_ice_20_plrm_ku":
slope_second_trailing_edge_ice_20_plrm_ku[indexes_01],
130
"peakiness_1_20_plrm_ku": peakiness_1_20_plrm_ku[indexes_01]
131
})
132
133
# Save waveform data
134
df = df.join(pandas.DataFrame(waveform_20_ku[indexes_01 , :]).add_prefix("
waveform_20_ku_"))
135
df = df.join(pandas.DataFrame(waveform_20_c[indexes_01 , :]).add_prefix("
waveform_20_c_"))
136
137
return df
Listing B.2: Data preprocessing
B.3
Rasterification algorithm
This algorithm converts tabular data into an averaged raster map.
1
def rasterify(data, lon_field , lat_field , field, res_km=25):
2
"""Transforms a dataframe with longitude and latitude data to a raster map
.
3
:param data: Dataframe with data
4
:param lon_field: Name of the field with longitude
5
:param lat_field: Name of the field with latitude
6
:param field: Name of the field with data, or array with data.
7
:param res_km: Approximate size of each pixel in km. Default: 25km
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
49
==PAGE:58==
8
9
Note: the resolution is approximate because the projection will deform
shapes and areas.
10
"""
11
# If the field is a string , get the field from the dataframe.
12
# Otherwise it's supposed to be an array with the data
13
if isinstance(field, str):
14
field = data[field].to_numpy()
15
# Get the projection defined in the drawGreenland function
16
m = drawGreenland(data, lon_field , lat_field , field)
17
datalon = data[lon_field].to_numpy()
18
datalat = data[lat_field].to_numpy()
19
20
# Get the size of the raster image
21
maxidx , maxidy = (math.ceil((m.xmax - m.xmin) / (res_km * 1000)), math.
ceil((m.ymax - m.ymin) / (res_km * 1000)))
22
23
# Create image and set to NaN
24
raster = np.empty((maxidx, maxidy))
25
raster_count = np.ones((maxidx , maxidy))
26
raster[:, :] = np.nan
27
28
# Fill the raster.
29
# If multiple point are in the pixel, will return the average.
30
# If no point are in the pixel, will return NaN
31
for i in range(len(datalon)):
32
x, y = m(datalon[i], datalat[i])
33
idx = int((x - m.xmin) / (res_km * 1000))
34
idy = int((y - m.ymin) / (res_km * 1000))
35
if 0 <= idx < maxidx and 0 <= idy < maxidy:
36
if np.isnan(raster[idx, idy]):
37
raster[idx, idy] = field[i]
38
else:
39
raster[idx, idy] += field[i]
40
raster_count[idx, idy] += 1
41
42
return raster / raster_count
Listing B.3: Rasterification
B.4
Rasterification algorithm for classes
This algorithm converts tabular classes into two raster maps. The first map gives the most
common class, the other count each class.
1
def rasterify_classes(data, lon_field , lat_field , field, res_km=25):
2
"""Return a raster with a channel with the count of each class and a
raster with the most common class.
3
:param data: Dataframe with data
4
:param lon_field: Name of the field with longitude
5
:param lat_field: Name of the field with latitude
6
:param field: Name of the field with data, or array with data.
7
:param res_km: Approximate size of each pixel in km. Default: 25km
8
9
Note: the resolution is approximate because the projection will deform
shapes and areas."""
10
# If the field is a string , get the field from the dataframe.
11
# Otherwise it's supposed to be an array with the data
12
if isinstance(field, str):
13
field = data[field].to_numpy()
14
15
# Get the unique classes
50
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
==PAGE:59==
16
unique_classes , _ = np.unique(field, return_counts=True)
17
18
# Get the projection defined in the drawGreenland function
19
m = drawGreenland(data, lon_field , lat_field , field)
20
datalon = data[lon_field].to_numpy()
21
datalat = data[lat_field].to_numpy()
22
23
# Get the size of the raster image
24
maxidx, maxidy = (math.ceil((m.xmax - m.xmin) / (res_km * 1000)), math.
ceil((m.ymax - m.ymin) / (res_km * 1000)))
25
26
# Create image and set to 0
27
raster = np.zeros((maxidx , maxidy , unique_classes.shape[0]))
28
29
# Fill the raster.
30
# The raster has one channel for each class. Each channel count the number
of occurences
31
for i in range(len(datalon)):
32
x, y = m(datalon[i], datalat[i])
33
idx = int((x - m.xmin) / (res_km * 1000))
34
idy = int((y - m.ymin) / (res_km * 1000))
35
if 0 <= idx < maxidx and 0 <= idy < maxidy:
36
c, = np.where(unique_classes == field[i])
37
raster[idx, idy, c[0]] += 1
38
39
# Set to NaN when no data has been collected in any channel for the given
pixel.
40
raster[np.all(raster == 0, axis=2)] = np.nan
41
42
# Create a raster with the most common class for each pixel.
43
raster_class = raster.argmax(axis=2)
44
raster_class = raster_class.astype(float)
45
raster_class[np.all(np.isnan(raster), axis=2)] = np.nan
46
47
return raster, raster_class
Listing B.4: Rasterification of classes
Remote sensing of Greenland ice sheet surface characteristics using Sentinel 3 satellites
51
==PAGE:60==
In recent decades, changes of global climate have had a profound effect on the cryosphere and in
particular on polar glaciers. These glaciers, such as those in Greenland, have an important role in
the global climate regulation via their low albedo, drive major currents by pouring fresh water into the
ocean and are a major contributor to the sea level rise. Modeling the mass loss of those glacier is
an important part in quantifying all of those effects. However, glaciers present a variety of snow and
ice facies, that behave very differently depending on temperature, amount of snow fall and amount
of snow melt. Describing and mapping snow facies over all polar glaciers is therefore primordial. In
this project, we study previous methods to use remote sensing from passive microwave and radar
satellites to map these facies, propose new methods to classify them and propose new methods to
assess the quality of those classifications.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
compute.dtu.dk
