==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Environmental Engineering
MASTER THESIS
Modelling of interactions within the
soil-vegetation-atmosphere continuum in a coﬀee
plantation in Costa Rica
Author:
Ioanna Maria Pateromichelaki
Supervisors:
Monica Garcia (DTU)
Ana Mar´ıa Dur´an Quesada (UCR)
August 2020
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
The sustainability of agricultural production is one of the main challenges at a global
scale, especially under scenarios of a changing climate. The United Nations’ Sustainable
Development Goals call for the implementation of strategies that can increase resilience
of agricultural systems against rising threats and minimise the impacts of agricultural
production on the environment. Agroforestry -the incorporation of trees within an agricul-
tural production system- is one of the strategies that have been proposed to increase the
resilience of production systems. One of the ways of looking into these impacts is by the
quantiﬁcation of energy exchange between the atmosphere and the biosphere, in a way to
estimate water and carbon footprints of agricultural production. For an eﬀective planning
of the most adequate adaptation measures, monitoring of biophysical processes in the ﬁeld
is essential. However, the requirement of monitoring at a ﬁne temporal resolution can be
too costly for small and medium scale producers, especially in the context of a developing
country. Therefore, the need for fairly simple and operational modelling, coupled with
data widely accessible at a low cost becomes imperative. Satellite remote sensing can be
used in order to derive information on these complex vegetated systems but usually comes
with a temporal resolution that is too coarse to capture all the ﬂuctuations of biophysical
parameters. The challenge of an operational modelling approach is to successfully depict
these ﬂuctuations by incorporating satellite information and other data with ﬁne temporal
resolution.
This master thesis is focused on the interactions between the soil-vegetation-atmosphere
continuum in terms of energy, water and carbon exchanges in a commercial coﬀee planta-
tion in Costa Rica. Costa Rica has long had a tradition in coﬀee production, with coﬀee
being produced mainly at a small scale, emphasising on quality more than quantity of
production. Additionally, the country fosters and prioritises environmental protection by
implementing a system of compensations to producers for the provision of ecosystem ser-
vices, such as enhancement of biodiversity, water conservation and carbon assimilation.
The main objective of this project was to assess the application of the Soil Vegetation
Energy TraNsfer (SVEN) model developed by Wang at al. (2019b) in the context of a
coﬀee monoculture system within a tropical environment. The model combines a light-use
eﬃciency (LUE) model for prediction of gross primary productivity (GPP) with the remote
sensing Priestley Taylor Jet Propulsion Laboratory ET model, incorporating the ”force-
restore” method for prediction of ground heat ﬂux and surface temperature (Ts) as well as a
simple water balance bucket model to simulate soil water dynamics. The model uses stan-
dard meteorological observations combined with remote sensing data in order to predict
energy, water and carbon ﬂuxes both at a half-hourly and a daily time scale. The model
parameters related to biome and soil characteristics were derived from look-up tables and
other studies. The model’s accuracy in predicting sensible (H) and latent heat (LE) ﬂuxes,
net radiation (Rn), Ts and GPP was assessed using micrometeorological observations from
1
==PAGE:3==
an Eddy-Covariance (EC) ﬂux tower. In particular for Ts, validation was performed using
the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) land surface temperature
satellite product.
The results on a daily scale showed that SVEN model was able to eﬃciently predict H (R2
of 0.55 and RMSE of 21.94 W · m−2) and LE (R2 of 0.39 and RMSE of 19.34 W · m−2)
ﬂuxes and performed especially well with regards to net radiation (R2 of 0.77 and RMSE
of 34.41 W · m−2). The model captured well trends in Ts and GPP but the statistical
signiﬁcance of the ﬁtting was low (R2 of 0.25 and 0.09 and RMSE of 1.15 gC ·m−2 ·d−1 and
2.13 ◦C for GPP and Ts respectively). The model performed better on a half-hourly time
scale than on a daily time scale (R2 was 0.49. 0.78, 0.87 and 0.25 for H, LE, Rn and GPP
respectively). This was especially optimistic for the perspective of applying the model for
optimisation of management practices at the farm level. Additionally, the model’s vali-
dation indicated perspective for it to be used for simulations of scenarios of ﬂuctuations
in terms of radiation, temperature and rainfall and assist in the planning of mitigation
strategies against climate change.
The validated model was used in order to assess the eﬀect of changes in photosynthetically
active radiation received by the coﬀee plants as those occur in an agroforestry produc-
tion system where coﬀee is cultivated under shade. Using in-situ measurements of solar
radiation, the radiative forcing of the system was adapted to the conditions under shade
and the eﬀect on Ts, GPP and soil water storage (SWS) was quantiﬁed. An average de-
crease of 3.74 ◦C in daily Ts was predicted. The average daily decrease in GPP was 2.47
gC · m−2 · d−1 and the average daily increase in SWS was 4.41 mm. The respective cu-
mulative changes in GPP and SWS during an annual cycle were 907 gC · m−2 and 1,620
mm. This simulation was a ﬁrst step for the estimation of changes that occur within the
soil-vegetation-atmosphere continuum under shaded conditions. For a more accurate esti-
mation of the eﬀect of shade both on coﬀee and on the overall water and carbon budgets,
micrometeorological observations and an adapted set of parameters would be required.
2
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This master thesis was conducted as a collaboration between the Technical University of
Denmark (DTU), the University of Costa Rica (UCR) and La Hilda Estate of the Santa
Eduviges Group. It is part of a Masters’ degree in Environmental Engineering by the
Technical University of Denmark as well as part of the Climate-KIC Master Label pro-
gramme, provided by the European Institute of Innovation and Technology (EIT), body of
the European Union. The main activity related to the thesis was conducted in the Central
Valley of Costa Rica.
This project could not have been carried out without the guidance and support of my
supervisors, Monica Garcia, Associate Professor at DTU and Ana Mar´ıa Dur´an Quesada,
Professor at UCR. Their help has been valuable to me in order to tackle the challenges that
arose during the course of this project and advance both academically and professionally. I
would like to sincerely thank them both for giving me the opportunity to work in a project
that was especially interesting and intriguing to me and for making sure I could gain the
maximum possible from this learning process.
Furthermore, I would like to thank Mariano Vargas of La Hilda Estate for welcoming me in
the coﬀee plantation under complicated circumstances and for providing valuable informa-
tion for the realisation of this project. I would like to thank both him and the University of
Costa Rica for giving me the opportunity to have a fruitful interaction with the people of
the coﬀee plantation, gaining an understanding that goes beyond the content of this project.
Moreover, I would like to acknowledge Jose Miguel Alfaro and Cristian Porras of UCR
that provided help and guidance during ﬁeld work, as well as Helber Guill´en for an excel-
lent collaboration through the in-situ measurements. Additionally, I would like to thank
Hongxiao Jin of DTU for his help with regards to satellite data. It should be noted that
instrumentation during ﬁeld work was provided by the project C0454 whose Principal In-
vestigator is PhD Marco Gutierrez, while soil sampling and analysis were performed by
PhD Cristina Chinchilla.
Finally, I would like to thank the UCR International Oﬃce (OAICE) for facilitating my
stay in Costa Rica as well as Climate-KIC for funding my stay abroad and making this
project possible.
3
==PAGE:5==
Nomenclature
Greek alphabet
α
PT coeﬃcient, empirical ratio of potential ET to equilibrium potential ET
∆
Slope to saturation-to-vapor-pressure curve
γ
The psychrometric constant
λEc
Latent heat ﬂux from transpiration
λEi
Latent heat ﬂux from evaporation of intercepted water
λEs
Latent heat ﬂux from evaporation of soil water
λET
Latent heat ﬂux of evapotranspiration
λ
Latent heat of vaporisation
σ
The Stefan-Boltzmann constant
ε
Surface emissivity
Latin alphabet
AFS Agroforestry systems
ALB Surface albedo
CWS Canopy water storage
EC
Eddy Covariance
ET
Evapotranspiration
fAPAR Fraction of absorbed PAR
fg
Green canopy fraction
fIPAR Fraction of intercepted PAR
fM
Plant moisture constraint
fSM
Soil moisture constraint
fTa
Air temperature constraint
fV PD
Vapor pressure deﬁcit constraint
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
GPP Gross primary productivity
4
==PAGE:6==
G
Ground heat ﬂux
HES Hydrological environmental services
H
Sensible heat ﬂux
kPAR extinction coeﬃcient of PAR
kRn
extinction coeﬃcient of Rn
LAI
Leaf Area Index
LE
Latent heat ﬂux
LUC Land Use Change
LUE Light-Use Eﬃciency
LWin Longwave incoming radiation
LWout Longwave outgoing radiation
MAPE Mean-absolute-percentage error
NDVI Normalised Diﬀerence Vegetation Index
NEE Net ecosystem exchange
n
Cloud fraction
PARc PAR intercepted by the canopy
PAR Photosynthetically active radiation
PA
Precision agriculture
PS
Air pressure
P
Precipitation
Re
Ecosystem respiration
RH
Relative air humidity
RMSE Root-mean-square error
Rnc
Net radiation intercepted by the canopy
Rns
Net radiation reaching the soil
Rn
Net radiation
RS
Remote sensing
SDGs Sustainable development goals
SM
Soil moisture
SR
Simple ratio vegetation index
SVAT Soil Vegetation Atmosphere Transfer
SVEN Soil Vegetation Energy traNsfer
SWin Shortwave incoming radiation
5
==PAGE:7==
SWout Shortwave outgoing radiation
SWS Soil water storage
Ta
Air temperature
Ts
Land surface temperature
To
Optimal air temperature for vegetative growth
WS
Wind speed
WUE Water use eﬃciency
6
==PAGE:8==
Contents
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Sustainability of Agricultural Production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Aspects of Coﬀee Production
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Agroforestry as a Strategy to Increase Resilience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Coﬀee Production in Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.5
Remote Sensing Applications for Agriculture - Precision Agriculture . . . .
8
1.6
Project Drivers and Objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2
Materials and Methods
12
2.1
Study Site and Data Description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.1.1
Meteorological and climatic data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.1.2
Field campaigns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.1.3
Estimation of canopy height . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.2
NDVI from Remote Sensing Satellite Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.3
Soil-Vegetation, Energy, water and CO2 traNsfer Model (SVEN) . . . . . .
24
2.3.1
Model description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.3.2
Model parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
2.3.3
Model assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
2.3.4
Aspects of model simulation under shade . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3
Results and Discussion
38
3.1
Results of Field Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.1.1
Leaf area index in-situ measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.1.2
Shortwave radiation budget under sunlit and shaded conditions
. .
38
3.2
SVEN Model’s Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.2.1
Validation on a daily time scale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.2.2
Validation on a half-hourly time scale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.3
Model Robustness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.3.1
Light extinction coeﬃcient . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.4
Model Simulation Under Shade
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4
Conclusion
51
==PAGE:9==
List of Tables
2.1
Estimation of coﬀee plants’ height in the site under sun. Growth rates based
on (Charbonnier et al., 2013). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.2
Description of SVEN model input data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.3
Equations used to derive vegetation indices and variables related to light
interception by the canopy in SVEN model.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
2.4
Description of SVEN model parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.1
Estimation of leaf area index in the plot under sun with direct (defoliation)
and indirect methods. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.2
SVEN model’s performance on half-hourly and daily time scales. . . . . . .
45
3.3
Change in model outputs for a change in kPAR from 0.5 to 0.36. . . . . . .
47
8
==PAGE:10==
List of Figures
1.1
UN Sustainable Development Goals with high relevance to agricultural pro-
duction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Evolution of coﬀee production and harvested area in Costa Rica. Source:
(FAO, 2020) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1
Annual cycle of monthly precipitation (mm) and average air temperature (◦
C). Data averaged between 2009 and 2020. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2
Location of coﬀee plantation La Hilda in Costa Rica (right) and locations
of the two experimental plots (left). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
Selected plots in La Hilda study site and locations of solar radiation and
LAI measurements; (left) plot under shade and (right) plot under sun.
. .
14
2.4
Monthly values of meteorological parameters at the site from 2009 to 2020;
(left) monthly precipitation values (mm) and (right) monthly min, max and
average values of air temperature. Data derived from the Davis Vantage
Pro2 Plus meteorological station at the site. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5
Davis Vantage Pro2 Plus meteorological station used to derive meteorolog-
ical data at the site.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.6
Instrumentation installed at the Eddy-Covariance ﬂux system.
left: LI-
7200/RS CO2/H2O Gas Analyser and LI-7550 Analyser interface unit and
right: ultrasonic anemometer, LI-7700 CH4 Gas Analyser, temperature and
relative humidity sensors. Source: LI-COR Biosciences
. . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.7
Diurnal cycle of radiation components, 15th of March, 2020 . . . . . . . . .
17
2.8
Diurnal cycle of radiation components, 21st of May, 2020 . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.9
Half-hourly values of cloud fraction (n) and incoming longwave radiation
(LWin) for the whole study period.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.10 Instrumentation used at the ﬁeld campaigns. left: The LAI2200C Plant
Canopy Analyser used for the estimation of leaf area index.
right: LI-
200R Pyranometer and LI-1500 Light Sensor Logger for interception of solar
radiation. Source: https://www.licor.com/env/
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.11 Comparison of NDVI indices as derived from L-1C product increased to
simulate L-2A and original L-2A product.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.12 NDVI values for the study site ”under sun” as derived from the reﬂectances
obtained through Sentinel-2, product L-1C, post-processed to simulate BOA
reﬂectances. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
9
==PAGE:11==
2.13 Overview of land-surface processes simulated by SVEN model (SWin: in-
coming shortwave radiation, SWout: outgoing shortwave radiation, LWin:
incoming longwave radiation, LWout: outgoing longwave radiation, Rn: net
radiation, G: ground heat ﬂux, Ts: surface temperature, Td: deep soil tem-
perature, H: sensible heat ﬂux, P: precipitation, λE: latent heat ﬂux, λEi:
latent heat ﬂux of the intercepted water, λEc: latent heat ﬂux of transpira-
tion, λEs: latent heat ﬂux of soil evaporation, CWS: canopy water storage,
SWS: soil water storage, Qinf: inﬁltration, Qper: percolation, R: surface
runoﬀ, GPP: gross primary productivity), derived from (Wang et al., 2019b)
25
2.14 Overview of SVEN model three modules, sub-models implemented in each
one and respective outputs.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.15 Overview of SVEN model inputs, initial conditions, parameters and outputs
as implemented in this study. Inputs from meteorological, satellite or ﬁeld
data. Parameters based on look-up-tables or other studies. (adapted from
Wang et al., 2020, in preparation) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.1
Diurnal cycle of total incident radiation as received by the LI-200R Pyra-
nometer under sun and underneath the shading canopy on the 14th of May.
39
3.2
Diurnal cycle of total incident radiation as received by the LI-200R Pyra-
nometer on the 12th (left) and the 13th (right) of May. Sensors placed above
and underneath the coﬀee plants under sun and under shade respectively. .
40
3.3
Comparison between simulated and measured values of sensible heat ﬂuxes,
H (W m−2) on a daily scale along with ﬁtting statistics. . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.4
Comparison between simulated and measured values of latent heat ﬂuxes,
LE (W m−2) on a daily scale along with ﬁtting statistics. . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.5
Comparison between simulated and measured values of evapotranspiration,
ET (mm) on a daily scale along with ﬁtting statistics. . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.6
Comparison between simulated and measured values of net radiation, Rn
(W m−2) on a daily scale along with ﬁtting statistics. . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.7
Comparison between simulated surface temperature Ts (◦C) and derived
from MODIS satellite data on a daily scale along with ﬁtting statistics. . .
42
3.8
Comparison between simulated and measured values of gross primary pro-
ductivity, GPP (gC · m−2 · d−1) on a daily scale along with ﬁtting statistics.
43
3.9
Averaged daily cloud fraction, n, during the validation period, as derived
from NASA satellite data. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.10 Scatter plots of observed vs. simulated half-hourly values of sensible heat
ﬂux (top left), net radiation (top right), latent heat ﬂux (bottom left) and
evapotranspiration (bottom right).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.11 Leaf area index as estimated in the SVEN model for two diﬀerent values of
light extinction coeﬃcient, kPAR=0.5 and kPAR=0.36, and comparison with
measured in the ﬁeld LAI through defoliation and the LAI2200 method. . .
46
3.12 Change in model predictions of surface temperature (Ts), gross primary
productivity (GPP) and soil water storage (SWS) on a daily time scale for
a reduction of shortwave incoming radiation to 10% of its original value. . .
49
1
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Sustainability of Agricultural Production
Agricultural production accounts for a signiﬁcant fraction of greenhouse gas emissions at
a global scale, with the cumulative impact of agriculture and Land Use Change (LUC) ac-
counting for almost 25% of all anthropogenic emissions (Bennetzen, 2016). Furthermore,
agriculture is responsible for a series of other environmental impacts, ranging from soil
erosion and degradation, pollution of freshwater resources and eutrophication of freshwa-
ter bodies and coastal areas. According to the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, several
environmental eﬀects can be related to human land-use activities such as agriculture. Some
examples include decrease in biodiversity as well as impacts on local climate regulation due
to changes in land cover and albedo that can alter precipitation patterns. Furthermore,
agricultural activities cause rise in ﬂood and drought risks through loss of wetlands, forests
and mangroves and changes in water cycle through water diversion for irrigation purposes
(Hauschild et al., 2018). These hydrological environmental services (HES) become even
more important in the context of the humid tropics, where surface ﬂuxes are often very
large (G´omez-Delgado et al., 2010). Moreover, the decline of biodiversity in production
systems disrupts ecological interactions, increasing the dependency of agricultural produc-
tion to external inputs (Souza et al., 2012).
Since most of the agricultural production is currently performed on a global scale, optimi-
sation of the production processes can have a signiﬁcant eﬀect on minimizing emissions of
greenhouse gases and other contaminants, as well as reducing water footprint of diﬀerent
types of commodities. Complementary, the increasing need for food security and eﬀects of
climate change on production systems call for sustainability and resilience in food produc-
tion (Vezy et al., 2020). The systematic changes that are needed are not easy to implement,
especially since economical as well as socio-political aspects are deeply embedded in the
current state of aﬀairs. Trade-oﬀs between economic sectors and environmental services,
such as the water-use for irrigation in contrast to hydropower production, can pose sig-
niﬁcant barriers to the calls for sustainability in agricultural production. However, these
transformations become more imperative under the stress of a changing climate.
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) were adopted in 2015 by all United Nations’
member states, as part of The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (UN, 2020). Sev-
2
==PAGE:13==
eral of the SDGs can be directly or indirectly related to agricultural production including
SDG 1 ”No poverty”, SDG 2 ”Zero hunger”, SDG 6 ”Clean water and sanitation”, SDG
12 ”Sustainable consumption and production”, SDG 13 ”Climate action”, SDG 14 ”Life
under water” and SDG 15 ”Life on land” (see Figure 1.1). The Food and Agriculture
Organisation of the United Nations (FAO) has deﬁned overarching principles and required
actions in order to foster change in the direction of those goals. Their strategy is based
upon protection of natural resources, value addition in food systems enhancing resilience
of communities and ecosystems as well as improving livelihoods and fostering inclusive
economic growth (FAO, 2018). The implementation of those principles includes soil health
and land restoration, protection of water resources and management of water scarcity, pro-
tection of ecosystem functions and biodiversity, adaptation to climate change and increase
in resilience against various shocks, as well as diversiﬁcation of production and income.
Focus is given on ”climate smart” agriculture, as well as on the provision of information on
the best available techniques by implementing systematic use of information and communi-
cation technologies (ICT). A series of FAO-relevant SDGs indicators have been established
in order to quantify the advancements in each of the targets set. According to FAO, it is
important to increase resilience of agricultural systems by transitioning towards integration
of diverse elements, boosting biodiversity and ecosystem services.
Figure 1.1: UN Sustainable Development Goals with high relevance to agricultural
production.
With the mindset of moving towards integrated and resilient production systems, agro-
forestry seems like a strategy that can have signiﬁcant beneﬁts. Agroforestry is any land-
use system, practice or technology, where woody perennials are integrated with agricultural
crops and/or animals in the same land management unit, in some form of spatial arrange-
ment or temporal sequence (Atangana et al., 2014). With the introduction of trees within
crops it is intended to sustain and diversify production with the objective of increasing
social, economic and environmental beneﬁts. Perennial crop based agroforestry systems
(AFS) are quite widespread practice across the tropical highlands and speciﬁcally for cash
crops such as coﬀee (Atangana et al., 2014).
Agroforestry can provide a cost-eﬀective
solution against climatic stress and food security that becomes especially signiﬁcant for
small farmers that are even more exposed to risk from extreme events (Lin, 2007). It has
been noted that - more complex - natural systems are able to handle biotic and abiotic
3
==PAGE:14==
stress more readily compared to over-simpliﬁed agricultural systems (Lin, 2007). Among
the asserted beneﬁts of AFS is their resilience against pests and diseases, as opposed to
uniform monocultures that tend to be more susceptible to insects (Reddy, 2017). Further
information on the beneﬁts of AFS for coﬀee production are presented in Paragraph 1.3.
1.2
Aspects of Coﬀee Production
Coﬀee is a high value agricultural product which is produced in about 80 tropical countries.
It is estimated that 125 million people depend on it for the livelihoods in Latin America,
Africa and Asia (Krishnan, 2017). Coﬀee is produced in a variety of agricultural systems,
ranging from traditional rustic coﬀee that is grown under a forest canopy to intensive coﬀee
agriculture without any shade cover. Although traditional methods of coﬀee cultivation
consist of shaded production systems, market pressure for increased yield has spurred a
transition to systems of coﬀee monoculture (Jha et al., 2014; Takahashi and Todo, 2014).
At the same time, this shift to coﬀee monoculture is associated with an increased use of
synthetic agrochemicals such as pesticides, fertilizers, herbicides or fungicides (Jha et al.,
2014).
The coﬀee variety that has traditionally been cultivated in Costa Rica is C. arabica L.
(Arabica coﬀee) (Rausch, 2005). Arabica coﬀee grows best at middle to high elevations
(600 - 2,000 meters) and exhibits maximum photosynthetic rate at moderate temperatures
and higher shade levels (Jha et al., 2014). Optimal temperature range for Arabica coﬀee
is 18 - 21 ◦C, with tolerable extremes ranging from 15 - 30 ◦C. Studies have shown that
temperatures above 20 - 24 ◦C can signiﬁcantly impede the levels of net photosynthesis
and almost eliminate it completely at 34 ◦C. Above 23 ◦C, the development and ripening of
fruit are accelerated, leading to loss of quality, while below 18 ◦C, growth is depressed (Lin,
2007; Krishnan, 2017). Coﬀee is typically rain-fed and for C. arabica an annual rainfall of
1,400 - 2,000 mm is considered optimal (Krishnan, 2017).
Fungi is the major driver of diseases in coﬀee plants (eg., coﬀee leaf rust, brown eyespot,
coﬀee berry disease), primarily aﬀecting C. arabica. Coﬀee leaf rust has been the main
disease in Latin America, causing loss of harvest by 10 - 70 % in several countries during an
outbreak of the disease in 2012 - 2013. Intensiﬁcation of coﬀee production came through
several initiatives during the 70’s and 80’s period (such as the ICAFE in Costa Rica), im-
plementing reduction of shade cover, more dense planting and subsidy of agrochemicals, in
order to increase yield. This came at the same time as a prevention measure against diseases
aﬀecting the plants, with the implementation of supposedly disease-resistant, high yielding
varieties at a dense planting pattern. Nonetheless, no clear correlation between low shade
covers and high yields has been exhibited, while intermediate shade levels (approximately
35 - 50%) have shown to provide the highest yields, achieving a balance between optimal
temperature and photosynthetic rates (Jha et al., 2014). As a matter of fact, the eﬀect
of shading alone has been demonstrated to be beneﬁcial for the quality of coﬀee beans,
leading to increased bean size and recognisable improvements in taste. This positive eﬀect
was decoupled from other beneﬁts of shading systems such as root interactions or nutrient
cycling (Muschler, 2001). Furthermore, studies have associated coﬀee diseases mainly to
4
==PAGE:15==
the presence of humidity more than the incidence of shade, while shade has been shown to
act as a shielding element, creating windbreaks and slowing the horizontal spread of coﬀee
leaf rust spores (Jha et al., 2014; Krishnan, 2017).
Specialty coﬀee is ”made from exceptional beans grown only in ideal coﬀee-producing
climates; they tend to feature distinctive ﬂavors, which are shaped by the unique charac-
teristics of the soil that produces them” (Donnet, 2007). Elements such as plant variety,
altitude, soil composition, fertilizer use, shade, cultivation and harvesting methods, all
account for associating the characterisation of specialty (or gourmet) to a coﬀee prod-
uct. Consequently, specialty coﬀee is not only associated to high-quality beans but also
to sustainability as well as social responsibility practices. These are validated through the
establishment of a series of certiﬁcation standards, such as the Fair Trade label, organic
labels, the Smithsonian’s Bird Friendly certiﬁcation of the Rainforest Alliance Certiﬁed,
all of which come with diﬀerent requirements in terms of use of agrochemicals, water and
soil conservation practices and incidence of shade trees among others (Jha et al., 2014).
1.3
Agroforestry as a Strategy to Increase Resilience
Global warming is predicted to have a signiﬁcant eﬀect on coﬀee production due to the
shrinking of areas suitable for cultivation. Locality analysis and bioclimatic modelling were
performed for indigenous Arabica coﬀee and estimated a reduction in suitable growing ar-
eas ranging between 65% and almost 100% by the year 2080 (Davis et al., 2012). Similarly,
climate scenarios predicted that the rising temperatures are expected to render large areas
unsuitable for coﬀee production by 2050 (Souza et al., 2012). As temperatures rise, coﬀee
planting needs to move upslope by 300 - 400 m in order to compensate for the increase in
temperature (Jha et al., 2014). These predictions are added to the market pressures that
has led the farmers to the intensiﬁcation of production practices.
Systems of monoculture, compromise ecosystem services, among other, due to the fact
that they lead to fragmentation of the forest canopy and disruption of habitats of diﬀerent
species (Souza et al., 2012). Given the fact that a lot of coﬀee growing regions are in close
proximity to protected areas and biodiversity hotspots, the connectivity and biological
corridors that diversiﬁed systems of coﬀee production can provide becomes increasingly
important. For example, migratory birds often use shaded farms when moving between
tropical and temperate regions, while pollinators such as bees and butterﬂies use these
corridors to migrate between fragmented forest areas (Jha et al., 2014).
Agroforestry systems have been largely considered as an eﬀective strategy against some of
the above-mentioned growing concerns. The diversity of these systems enhances resilience
of crops against climate change and can be applied as an adaptive strategy against mi-
croclimatic extremes. In fact, the amount of shade cover has been directly related to the
mitigation of variability of microclimate and soil moisture (Lin, 2007; Souza et al., 2012).
Trees within the agroforestry system enhance the production of biomass, input of plant
residues and litter residence time in the system. As a result, they improve soil structure,
soil moisture and nutrient content as well as health of microorganisms (Souza et al., 2012).
5
==PAGE:16==
At the same time, organic litter produced by shading trees decreases the need for additional
fertilization of the crops (Rueda et al., 2014). Agroforestry systems have a potential to
contribute to the conservation of tree species diversity in tropical ecosystems. Furthermore,
other groups of ﬂora and fauna like birds, insects, fungi and reptiles have been found to be
more abundant in complex agroforestry systems, even compared to forests (Souza et al.,
2012). Meta-analyses regarding ecosystem services provided by coﬀee production systems
have shown positive eﬀect of shade on ecosystem services in 58% of pollination studies,
60% of the pest-control studies, 100% of the climate regulation studies and 93% of the
nutrient cycling studies (Jha et al., 2014).
The eﬀect of agroforestry systems to both carbon and water footprints of the production
process can be signiﬁcant as well. A study demonstrated the potential for additional 53
- 55 tons of carbon sequestration per ha of scant-shade coﬀee systems in aboveground
biomass. Converting 10% of unshaded systems (reference year 2014) to even scant-shade
ones could contribute with 1.6 billion tons of additional carbon sequestrated in the phy-
tomass (Jha et al., 2014). In a study performed in an agroforestry system shaded with
the N2-ﬁxing legume tree species Inga densiﬂora, an increase of net atmospheric GHG
removals by 10.76 ± 1.98 Mg CO2 eq ha−1 year−1 was calculated. In fact, carbon seques-
tration was found to be more that two times higher in the agroforestry system compared to
the monoculture one while the net GHG absorption rate was 4 times higher (Hergoualc’h
et al., 2012). Additionally, the introduction of trees in agricultural systems can potentially
act as a biomass energy provider, substituting fossil fuels and mitigating CO2 emissions
(Hergoualc’h et al., 2012). It should be noted that part of carbon sequestration in AFS
systems is related to the increase in diﬀuse radiation that increases light use eﬃciency, com-
bined with decrease in total radiation that reduces saturation of photosynthesis and canopy
temperature (Charbonnier et al., 2013). However, the relative contribution of changes in
radiation and of other sources (N2 ﬁxation, soil structure and biological changes) to the
additional carbon sequestration is not clear.
Although coﬀee plants show a signiﬁcant resilience to climatic variations that are charac-
teristic of tropical regions, they are sensitive to variability within the weather conditions.
Furthermore, although a period of drought is part of the plant’s physiological growing cy-
cle, an extended period of water stress can have a signiﬁcant eﬀect on it (Lin, 2007). The
main eﬀects of trees on coﬀee physiology are related to decreased wind and temperature
ﬂuctuations, increased relative air humidity as well as changes in aerodynamic roughness
of the canopy. As a result, leaf-to-air vapor pressure deﬁcit is reduced allowing for longer
stomatal opening without the proportional increase of transpiration (DaMatta et al., 2007).
The beneﬁts of shade increase as the environment for coﬀee cultivation becomes less favor-
able. It seems that shade provides its greatest beneﬁt for plants growing in sub-optimal
conditions and heat-stressed growing regions (Lin, 2007; Jha et al., 2014). The presence of
shade cover in the coﬀee plots has a minimizing eﬀect on the ﬂuctuations of soil moisture
and solar radiation (Lin, 2007). However, the eﬀect of shade on gross primary productiv-
ity, soil moisture and evapotranspiration dynamics is not necessarily straightforward. A
study conducted in coﬀee agroecosystems in the Brazilian Rainforest region (Souza et al.,
2012) showed a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in monthly averaged maximum temperatures between
sun-lit coﬀee systems and agroforestry systems. Coﬀee under sun presented 5.4 ◦C higher
daily temperature on a monthly average compared to agroforestry systems and 6.3 ◦C
compared to reference forests (Souza et al., 2012). Nonetheless, no signiﬁcant diﬀerence
6
==PAGE:17==
was identiﬁed between agroforestry and monoculture systems in terms of surface soil (0 -
10 cm) properties such as total organic carbon, microbial carbon, nitrogen mineralization
and microbial respiration (Souza et al., 2012).
Economic beneﬁts are also very signiﬁcant to be disregarded.
Based on an evaluation
of pest control services as $75 per ha and pollination services as $56 per ha, ﬁnancial
beneﬁts for a 10% conversion could amount to $2.3 billion and $1.7 billion respectively
(Jha et al., 2014). Not to mention that the use of fertilizers, biocides and other chemicals
can constitute a signiﬁcant fraction of the total cost of coﬀee production. Percentages as
high as 54% of total cost have been reported at full-sun coﬀee plantations in Brazil (Souza
et al., 2012). Moreover, inquiries with farmers have veriﬁed that the implementation of
agroforestry systems resulted in higher quality of the produced coﬀee thus leading to higher
market prices (Souza et al., 2012). It has been demonstrated that establishing shade coﬀee
certiﬁcation (such as the one provided by the Rainforest Alliance) has had signiﬁcant
positive eﬀects on forest conservation eﬀorts. Moreover, the certiﬁcation induced 15 - 20
% increase in the price of coﬀee for the producers, which furthermore explains the fact
that it was more eﬀective for small-holder, poorer farmers (Takahashi and Todo, 2014).
It has been demonstrated that initiatives of eco-certiﬁcation contributed to an increase of
the tree cover and ecosystem connectivity in coﬀee-growing regions. Certiﬁed coﬀee farms
increased their tree coverage compared to the non-certiﬁed ones (Rueda et al., 2014). It
should be noted that Rainforest Alliance certiﬁcation requires a shade-tree coverage within
the range 40 - 70 % (Rueda et al., 2014). Therefore, added value exist for coﬀee under
shade, but eco-certiﬁcation labeling should go hand in hand with accountability of beneﬁts
in terms of improved quality, water use and carbon sequestration.
1.4
Coﬀee Production in Costa Rica
Coﬀee is a commodity closely associated with the cultural identity of Costa Rica. The cul-
tivation of coﬀee was introduced to the country during the 18th century and it developed
as an important agricultural export starting in the 1840s (Rausch, 2005). The climatic
conditions and morphology of Costa Rica are well suited for coﬀee cultivation, especially
in the Central Valley of the country. Although coﬀee production in Costa Rica has declined
in numbers during the last years, maintaining the high quality of its export as well as its
reputation for excellent coﬀee is a prime concern of the Costa Rican state. Furthermore,
it is a way for a small nation to maintain its place in the saturated world market (Rausch,
2005). Coﬀee production in Central America is predominantly performed by small-holder
farmers which represent 85% of all producers, while at the same time controlling 18% of
coﬀee production lands (Jha et al., 2014).
During the last decades, increased land prices due to urbanization as well as the expansion
of high-yield agriculture, that resulted in a drop in coﬀee prices, have caused a signiﬁ-
cant abandonment of marginal agricultural lands in Costa Rica. The increase in urban
wages has additionally contributed to this tendency (Jha et al., 2014). In Costa Rica,
coﬀee monoculture expanded in the most favorable areas such as the Central Valley, with
altitudes of 1,000 – 1,300 m and mean temperatures of < 22 ◦C. However, in lower lying
7
==PAGE:18==
areas (altitude < 700 m, mean air temperature > 24 ◦C) poorly suited for monoculture,
C. arabica is grown under the shade of trees, taking advantage of microclimate that is
created underneath the canopy, beneﬁting the crop. Nowadays, coﬀee monoculture and
AFS represent 40% and 60% of coﬀee cultivation in Costa Rica, respectively (Hergoualc’h
et al., 2012). That comes as a result of a 50% loss of shaded coﬀee (and shade trees) in
the process of conversion to sun coﬀee, pasture, or other crops that occurred between 2000
and 2009 (Jha et al., 2014). At the same time, Costa Rica has dropped from its position
as the 13th coﬀee exporter globally for 2017, to the 21st place during the last trimester of
2019 (ICO, 2020). Figure 1.2 gives an overview of the evolution of coﬀee production in
Costa Rica during the period from the 60’s until today.
Figure 1.2: Evolution of coﬀee production and harvested area in Costa Rica. Source:
(FAO, 2020)
1.5
Remote Sensing Applications for Agriculture -
Precision Agriculture
The ﬁrst step to achieve sustainable farming practices that can be certiﬁed and branded
as such, is to have proper accountability of diﬀerent aspects of coﬀee production. Produc-
tivity rates, quantiﬁcation of ecosystem services such as carbon sequestration, water use
or temperature regulation are diﬀerent parameters that need to be estimated and can help
to understand and communicate the impacts of farming on the environment either under
sunlit or shaded conditions. Remote sensing can be used as a tool for the quantiﬁcation of
some of those parameters, using widely available satellite information to estimate charac-
teristics of vegetated areas.
Plants contain biochemicals such as chlorophyll, water, protein, lignin, and cellulose. The
estimation of biochemical properties of plants is essential in order to quantify their phys-
iological processes such as photosynthesis, transpiration and reaction to stress and con-
sequently, understand ecosystem functions at diﬀerent scales (Liang et al., 2012). Since
8
==PAGE:19==
the traditional methods for the estimation of these parameters are often destructive and
time-consuming, remote sensing techniques can provide an economical alternative that can
be applied on large scales (Gu et al., 2018). The biochemicals contained in plants absorb
electromagnetic radiation in diﬀerent wavelengths due to the diﬀerences in their elemental
composition and chemical structures (Liang et al., 2012). At the same time, biophysical
constituents like leaf angle distribution, leaf area index or canopy structure also modify
the interaction of the plant with electromagnetic radiation. These spectral properties of
vegetation can therefore, be used in order to estimate the biochemical and biophysical
characteristics of plant foliage.
Remote sensing products can provide information on vegetated surfaces on a variety of
spatial and temporal scales but at the same time, accuracy of the retrieved information
diﬀers among available products. As a result, ﬁeld measurements, though time-consuming
and expensive, are often used to provide validation of the models’ results. Its applications
for agriculture have established a certain level of knowledge and technological advance-
ments. The interest for agricultural applications is growing at an exponential rate starting
from the 90’s and especially since 2013 (Weiss et al., 2020). Besides aspects such as yield
optimization or protection against rising threats, remote sensing can be used in order to
quantify and regulate the provision of environmental services withing the ﬁeld of agri-
culture. Diﬀerent management aspects such as fertilization practices and other types of
chemical treatment, irrigation, pruning patterns or crop rotations, all interact with and
aﬀect the complex environment of an agricultural ﬁeld. Remote sensing techniques can be
applied with the purpose of soil and water conservation, carbon sequestration or enhance-
ment of biodiversity (Weiss et al., 2020).
Precision agriculture or precision farming or site-speciﬁc management is a management
strategy which is customizing the inputs in water and chemicals (e.g. pesticides, insecti-
cides or sun-blocking chemicals) based on georeferenced information on the condition of
the crop, by integrating characteristics of the soil, vegetation and the climatic conditions
(Alves Varella et al., 2015; Reddy, 2017). Applications in the area of precision farming
require a certain detail in terms of spatial and temporal resolution. For example, data
derived from Sentinel-2 satellite images can fulﬁll these requirements, introducing a ﬁne
spatial scale (decametric) and high revisit frequency (usually on a ﬁve-day basis), facilitat-
ing the crop growth monitoring at a farm level (Weiss et al., 2020). Since detailed monitor-
ing and ﬁeld measurements at a high frequency are especially costly and time-consuming,
robust models that are able to predict elements such as yield and biomass production come
with signiﬁcant economic beneﬁts for the farmers (Alves Varella et al., 2015; Weiss et al.,
2020). It has been estimated that, through introducing precision agriculture, pesticide use
can be reduced by 8-10% (Reddy, 2017). As research on the ﬁeld is advancing, low-cost,
portable solutions for small-scale farmers are being developed, customising application of
fertilizers to the condition of each plant, reducing both economical and environmental cost
resulting from heavy fertilization practices (Putra, 2020). At the same time, operational
products for the prediction of water use eﬃciency and gross primary productivity (GPP) of
the crops can be a signiﬁcant tool for farmers for the minimisation of irrigation costs, the
prediction of yield and the branding of their products in terms of biodiversity conservation
and water or carbon footprints.
Earth observation (EO) data have been used in various applications for the prediction
9
==PAGE:20==
of GPP, evapotranspiration (ET) and soil water dynamics. This is done either in ”top-
down” or ”bottom-up” modelling approaches incorporating remote sensing products such as
albedo, land surface temperature and vegetation indices (Wang et al., 2018). ”Top-down”
approaches have the advantage of treating the canopy as a whole using eﬀective parameters
and avoiding the complexity of ”bottom-up” approaches that require detailed information
on the structural and biophysical characteristics of the canopy.
A lot of research has
focused on the application of satellite observations on the estimation of GPP (Running
et al., 2004), ET (Garc´ıa et al., 2013; Gu et al., 2018; Mu˜noz-Villers et al., 2020) or soil
moisture (SM) (Carlson et al., 1995; Sandholt et al., 2020). However, as remote sensing
provides snapshots of the ﬂuxes between the atmosphere and land surface, methods for
interpolation are explored (Wang et al., 2018). At the same time, use of Unmanned Aerial
Systems (UAS) is expanding with the advantages of low cost, high spatial resolution and
high revisit times (Wang et al., 2019a).
With all the current advances both in modelling approaches and remote sensing products,
the challenge that remains is the eﬃcient coupling of operational products that are able to
capture energy, water and carbon dynamics at a ﬁne temporal resolution with the minimal
cost.
1.6
Project Drivers and Objectives
In order to optimise coﬀee production by introducing solutions adapted to the local soil
and climatic conditions, the underlying ecophysiological processes within the soil-plant-
atmosphere continuum need to be properly quantiﬁed and understood. More speciﬁcally,
quantiﬁcation of GPP can be used to estimate yield, SM and ET estimates can be useful to
minimize water budgets and information on surface temperature (Ts) can help understand
feedback eﬀects on the above mentioned parameters. This can be implemented by a com-
bination of traditional observations (automated weather station and soil moisture gauges)
with advanced techniques such as Eddy-Covariance towers, sap ﬂow measurements, leaf
and canopy measurements as well as information obtained from Remote Sensing satel-
lite products. Eventually, the goal is to simplify monitoring at the farm level through
applications that depend on meteorological data and remote sensing, minimising the op-
erative costs for producers. By incorporating high technology and sophisticated scientiﬁc
methodologies into coﬀee production, several beneﬁts can be obtained. Besides optimisa-
tion of crop management practices, Costa Rican coﬀee can both maintain its place as a
high-quality, sustainably produced product, but also get established as one that stands for
climate change resilience, carbon and water footprint optimisation.
This project focuses on two main objectives. Firstly, the applicability of a Soil Vegeta-
tion Atmosphere Transfer (SVAT) model for the cultivation of coﬀee in the setting of the
central highlands of Costa Rica is to be evaluated. The model is to be applied using a
combination of remote sensing satellite information, ﬁeld measurements and meteorological
variables during the transition from the dry to the wet season in a commercial plantation
in Costa Rica. The model’s performance under the speciﬁc conditions will be validated
through micrometeorological observations and in-situ measurements. The model outputs
comprise radiation components (sensible and latent heat ﬂux, net radiation), Ts, SM, GPP
10
==PAGE:21==
ET. Measurements of radiation components and CO2 ﬂuxes derived from a micrometeoro-
logical tower will be used for the model validation. Furthermore, the model’s eﬃciency in
diﬀerent temporal scales (half-hourly and daily) is to be evaluated, identifying its possibil-
ities and limitations.
The second objective is to use the calibrated model from the ﬁrst objective to explore the
impact of change in shortwave radiative forcing of the canopy, as this occurs under shaded
conditions. In-situ measurements of solar radiation will be used in order to adapt the
radiative forcing from the initial system of coﬀee monoculture to that of an agroforestry
production system. The simulated changes in GPP, Ts dynamics and soil water storage
(SWS) will be quantiﬁed. Impacts of changes in diﬀuse radiation and additional potential
eﬀects of shade will not be addressed. The goal is to quantify the eﬀects and potential ben-
eﬁts of growing coﬀee under shade (agroforestry) in terms of water use eﬃciency (WUE),
carbon footprints and radiation budgets. The results will be relevant for the company ”La
Hilda Estate” as part of its strategy to increase resilience of its production under scenarios
of climate change and invest in sustainable practices that have both environmental and
economic beneﬁts.
11
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 2
Materials and Methods
2.1
Study Site and Data Description
The study site is located in the central valley of Costa Rica, in the area of Po´as volcano,
at an altitude of 1,200 m. The experimental site is part of the research project ‘Devel-
opment and innovation for sustainable production and resilience of coﬀee agro-ecosystems
under Climate Change scenarios’ which is a multidisciplinary initiative that brings together
physicists, agronomists, plant physiologists and coﬀee farmers. Two plots with diﬀerent
characteristics and management practices have been chosen within an area of 440 hectares
of ”La Hilda” coﬀee plantation. Within this area, around 310 ha are cultivated with cof-
fee and a signiﬁcant part of the remaining territory consists of a protected forested area,
forming part of a biological corridor facilitating species migration. As part of an project
monitoring the biodiversity in the area, inventories of insects and crop pollinators, as well
as diﬀerent bird species are regularly compiled. Furthermore, the plantation is part of the
Rainforest Alliance certiﬁcation program. C. arabica coﬀee has been cultivated in parts of
the plantation since the 90’s.
Figure 2.1: Annual cycle of monthly precipitation (mm) and average air temperature
(◦C). Data averaged between 2009 and 2020.
The climate in the area is tropical wet according to the K¨oppen-Geiger Climate Classi-
12
==PAGE:23==
ﬁcation (Peel et al., 2007). An average temperature of 20.5 ◦C and an average annual
rainfall of 2,500 mm/year were recorded at the site during the period from 2009 to 2020.
The average monthly variation in temperature and rainfall during this period can be seen
in Figure 2.4. The soil order in the region is andisols, suborder of ustands, while the soil
texture at the site is loam, according to the USDA Textural Classiﬁcation. The main wind
direction in this location is Northeast (NE).
Figure 2.2: Location of coﬀee plantation La Hilda in Costa Rica (right) and locations
of the two experimental plots (left).
The ﬁrst experimental plot (10◦05’15.2”N 84◦14’07.0”W), deﬁned as the plot ”under sun”,
expands at an area of 5 hectares and is planted as a coﬀee monoculture. The distance
between the plants is 1 m in the direction from West to East and 2 m in the direction from
North to South, resulting in a planting density of 4,350 plants per ha. Coﬀee plants of the
Sarchimor variety were planted at the beginning of 2016 and currently (May 2020) have
an average height of 1.8 m. The coﬀee is mainly rain-fed but irrigation may be applied
once per year towards the end of the dry season to induce ﬂowering of the coﬀee plants. In
this plot, irrigation was applied once so far, on the 27th of March 2019. A total amount of
170 mm/m2 of water was applied within 5 hours and with an irrigation eﬃciency of 75%,
the amount of water reaching the soil was 127.5 mm/m2. An average amount of fertilizers
of 300 - 400 kg/ha is applied annually. A micrometeorological tower (Eddy-Covariance,
EC) was installed in the plot in 2019, retrieving micrometeorological parameters, CO2 and
energy ﬂuxes locally. The tower’s reference height is 4 m.
The second experimental plot (10◦05’44.1”N 84◦13’54.9”W) is deﬁned as the plot ”under
shade” and expands at an area of around 2 hectares, as can be seen in Figure 2.3. Coﬀee
plants of the Caturra variety were planted in this plot in diﬀerent planting years and
have long reached maturity. The coﬀee plants do not follow a strict planting pattern or
management practice, which can be deducted also by the highly variable height of the coﬀee
13
==PAGE:24==
Figure 2.3: Selected plots in La Hilda study site and locations of solar radiation and
LAI measurements; (left) plot under shade and (right) plot under sun.
plants and of the distances between them. A wide variety of shading trees are incorporated
in this plot, most of which were planted during the 70’s and thus have reached maturity
and signiﬁcant height, producing dense shade at parts of the plot. The percentage of shade
cover was estimated from satellite images and is around 60 - 70 %. The coﬀee in this plot
is only rain-fed and no additional irrigation is applied. The fertilization rate is about half
of the fertilization rate in the plot ”under sun”, about 150 - 170 kg/year.
2.1.1
Meteorological and climatic data
Meteorological data
The majority of input data for this model were derived from a meteorological station and
an EC ﬂux tower. A Davis Vantage Pro2 Plus meteorological station is installed in the
center of the coﬀee plantation and records data since 2009. The monthly amount of rainfall
as well as the maximum, minimum and average temperatures at the site for the measuring
period can be seen in Figure 2.4.
The system is equipped with barometer to measure atmospheric pressure, sensor for solar
and UV radiation, an anemometer for wind speed and direction, sensors for temperature,
relative humidity and dew point and a tipping bucket system to measure precipitation.
14
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.4: Monthly values of meteorological parameters at the site from 2009 to
2020; (left) monthly precipitation values (mm) and (right) monthly min, max and
average values of air temperature. Data derived from the Davis Vantage Pro2 Plus
meteorological station at the site.
The observations were obtained on a half-hour time resolution. The reference height for
the wind speed measurements was 10 m. Due to technical issues, some data were found
missing from the time series. In most cases, these gaps were at an order of magnitude of 2
- 3 hours and no longer than 5 hours and the total percentage of missing data was 1.2 %
of the initial data series. Therefore, linear interpolation was applied for gap ﬁlling taking
into account physical restrictions (eg. SWin was kept as 0 before sunrise). The set-up of
the meteorological station can be seen in Figure 2.5.
Figure 2.5: Davis Vantage Pro2 Plus meteorological station used to derive meteoro-
logical data at the site.
15
==PAGE:26==
Eddy-Covariance ﬂux tower data
Furthermore, an Eddy-Covariance (EC) ﬂux tower was installed in the middle of the under
sun study site in 2019 in order to derive a series of micrometeorological variables. The
Eddy-Covariance method is widely used to acquire gas ﬂuxes and derive heat, water and
greenhouse gases exchange between an ecosystem and the atmosphere (Burba and DJ,
2010). The ﬂux tower is equipped with the LI-COR 7200/RS enclosed CO2/H2O Gas
Analyser for CO2 (µmol · s−1 · m−2) and water vapor gas exchange (mmol · s−1 · m−2)
measurements and the LI-COR 7700 Open Path CH4 Analyzer along with the LI-7550
Analyzer Interface Unit (LI-COR Biosciences, 2019b). The system directly measures net
radiation (Rn, in W/m2) and indirectly estimates latent (LE, in W/m2) and sensible (H,
in W/m2) heat ﬂuxes as well as evapotranspiration (ET, in mm) using EC calculation
techniques.
Figure 2.6: Instrumentation installed at the Eddy-Covariance ﬂux system. left: LI-
7200/RS CO2/H2O Gas Analyser and LI-7550 Analyser interface unit and right:
ultrasonic anemometer, LI-7700 CH4 Gas Analyser, temperature and relative hu-
midity sensors. Source: LI-COR Biosciences
An ultrasonic anemometer is used to measure wind speed and direction coupled with a
temperature and relative humidity sensor. Furthermore, a ”bucket” rain gauge is used for
derivation of precipitation values and a pyranometer is used for the acquisition of short-
wave radiation and a net radiometer for net radiation. Moreover, soil heat ﬂuxes (G, in
W/m2), soil surface temperature (Ts, in K) and soil moisture (SM, in m3/m3) are derived
from a HUKSE heat ﬂux soil sensor (Hukseﬂux Thermal Sensors). Flux densities were
measured and aggregated to an average time of 30 min, from the EC collected 10 Hz time
series raw data. The Tovi R⃝Data Analysis software (LI-COR Biosciences) was used for
the post-processing of the measured data. The reference height for the measurements at
the ﬂux tower was 4 m. The period in which EC data were recorded was interesting since
it gave the possibility to capture the transition from the dry to the wet season and its
eﬀect on the radiative budget. Figures 2.7 and 2.8 contain the diurnal cycles of the main
16
==PAGE:27==
radiation components (sensible heat, H, latent heat, LE, ground heat ﬂux, G, and net
radiation, Rn) for two days in 2020 with diﬀerent meteorological conditions; the 15th of
April was a dry day with an average relative humidity of 45% while the 21st of May was
the most rainy day of the available dataset with 76% average relative humidity and 6.2 cm
of precipitation. It can be seen how the overall budget of net radiation is decreased from
the dry to the rainy season and also the diﬀerences in the dissipation of energy as sensible
and latent heat. Although the two days had the same average daily temperature (22 ◦C),
the increase in humidity and evaporative ﬂuxes during the 21st of May gave the high latent
heat ﬂux and decreased sensible heat.
Figure 2.7:
Diurnal cycle of radiation
components, 15th of March, 2020
Figure 2.8:
Diurnal cycle of radiation
components, 21st of May, 2020
Gross primary productivity
The Gross primary productivity (GPP) of the coﬀee canopy was estimated based on EC
data processing techniques making use of the CO2 ﬂuxes obtained by the ﬂux tower. GPP
is derived as the diﬀerence between the ecosystem respiration (Re) and the net ecosystem
exchange (NEE), as in Eq. 2.1. The data derived from the EC ﬂux tower are used in order
to derive NEE as in Eq.2.2, where ρa is the air density and w′c′ is the CO2 covariance.
GPP = Re −NEE
(2.1)
NEE = ρa · w′c′
(2.2)
For the estimation of ecosystem respiration, the algorithm used by Reichstein (2005) was
implemented. The daytime ecosystem respiration was extrapolated from the night-time
ﬂux partitioning, as in Eq. 2.3.
Re(T) = Rref · e
E0(
1
Tref −T0 −
1
T −T0 )
(2.3)
17
==PAGE:28==
where E0 (activation energy parameter) is able to vary and is ﬁtted following the Lloyd
and Taylor (1994) exponential regression model. The reference temperature (Tref) was set
to 15 ◦C and the regression parameter (T0) was ﬁxed constant at -46 ◦C. The temperature-
independent level of respiration (Rref) was determined using the same regression model
(Lloyd and Taylor, 1994) by ﬁxing all parameters except Rref.
Longwave incoming radiation (LWin)
Longwave incoming radiation (LWin) was not directly measured but derived from a com-
bination of meteorological parameters and satellite data, more speciﬁcally air tempera-
ture, dew point temperature (Tdew) and the cloud cover fraction. The Konzelmann et al.
(Juszak and Pellicciotti, 2013; Konzelmann et al., 1994) empirical parameterisation was
implemented for the calculation of emissivity, under clear-sky and cloudy conditions, as can
be seen in Eq. 2.4-2.7. Eq. 2.4 gives the air emissivity under clear-sky conditions, where
ea is the water vapor pressure (in Pa) and Ta is the screen air temperature (representative
of the lower atmosphere), in Kelvin.
εcs = 0.23 + 0.484 ·
 ea
Ta
1/8
(2.4)
Eq. 2.5 gives the water vapor pressure, calculated from meteorological data and speciﬁcally,
from the dew point temperature (Tdew, in ◦C) (FAO, 2009).
ea = e0(Tdew) = 0.6108 · exp
 17.17 · Tdew
Tdew + 273.3

(2.5)
Emissivity under cloudy conditions (εa) was calculated according to Konzelmann et al.
(1994) from Eq. 2.6, where a = 2 and b = 0.952. Cloud fraction, n, time series was
produced with the Giovanni online data system, developed and maintained by the NASA
Goddard Earth Sciences Data and Information Services Center (GES DISC) on an hourly
temporal resolution and converted to half-hourly values (Acker and Leptoukh, 2007).
εa = εcs · (1 −na) + b · na
(2.6)
Finally, LWin was derived using the Stefan-Boltzmann equation (Eq. 2.7) for a grey body
(Juszak and Pellicciotti, 2013) where the screen level air temperature Ta is given in K and
σ is the Stefan-Boltzmann constant (σ = 5.67 ·10−8 W m−2 K−4).
LWin = εa · σ · T 4
a
(2.7)
As can be seen in Figure 2.9, almost continuous cloud coverage is observed during the wet
season from May to November, with some decreasing tendency observed during July and
August that represents the ”dry” part of the wet season. Accordingly, this is the period in
18
==PAGE:29==
Figure 2.9: Half-hourly values of cloud fraction (n) and incoming longwave radiation
(LWin) for the whole study period.
the year in which we have generally higher values of longwave incoming radiation due to
enhanced atmospheric emissivity under overcast conditions (Juszak and Pellicciotti, 2013).
2.1.2
Field campaigns
Besides the automated stations recording data regularly throughout the study period, addi-
tional variables were measured during a series of ﬁeld campaigns and used either for model
calibration or validation. Speciﬁcally, Leaf-Area-Index and attenuation of solar radiation
have been measured.
Shortwave radiation budget under sunlit and shaded conditions
A LI-200R Pyranometer (LI-COR Biosciences, 2020b) was used in order to derive infor-
mation on radiative budgets in coﬀee plants under diﬀerent conditions. The purpose was
to retrieve data on the attenuation of solar radiation, within the shaded plot, in order to
estimate the eﬀect of shade on the interception of radiation that reaches the coﬀee plants.
Since shading trees were not uniformly distributed within the plot, the amount of radiation
reaching each plant can vary signiﬁcantly (Charbonnier et al., 2013, 2017). In total, three
diurnal cycles of total radiation (direct and diﬀuse) were recorded, each one with a diﬀerent
objective. Firstly, radiation was recorded on top and below a coﬀee plant fully exposed to
the sun, on the 12th of May, 2020, from 9:18 to 16:58. Moreover, a second location was
19
==PAGE:30==
chosen on the 13th of May, this time within the shading canopy. One sensor was placed on
top and one below of a coﬀee plant and radiation was recorded from 9:20 to 17:35. Finally,
a location under dense shade was chosen in order to derive a diurnal cycle of interception of
solar radiation, as an ”extreme value”. The diurnal cycle of global incoming solar radiation
was retrieved on the 14th of May, from 9:37 to 18:04. Two sensors were adjusted above two
diﬀerent coﬀee plants, one beneath the shading canopy and one in a location not aﬀected
by shade throughout the day. The locations within the plot under shade can be seen in
Figure 2.3. Data of radiation in the range of 400 - 1100 nm were retrieved with a frequency
of 1 Hz and stored on a LI-1500 Light Sensor Logger (LI-COR Biosciences, 2020a). The
instrumentation used can be seen in Figure 2.10. The three diﬀerent locations were chosen
in order to gain an understanding of the diﬀerent ways in which radiation is intercepted
both by coﬀee plants and shading trees, either under full sun exposure or within a shading
canopy. In this sense, an estimation of the radiation budget of coﬀee plants under shaded
conditions could be achieved.
Figure 2.10: Instrumentation used at the ﬁeld campaigns. left: The LAI2200C Plant
Canopy Analyser used for the estimation of leaf area index. right: LI-200R Pyra-
nometer and LI-1500 Light Sensor Logger for interception of solar radiation. Source:
https://www.licor.com/env/
Leaf area index
A series of campaigns have taken place at the site for the estimation of coﬀee leaf-area-index
(LAI) using both direct and indirect methods. LAI is deﬁned as the ”total one-sided green
leaf area per unit of ground surface” and is an important structural property of vegetation
(Liang et al., 2012). LAI is important to determine since it inﬂuences the radiative transfer
process of sunlight through the canopy. It can be measured directly by collecting of all
the plant’s leaves and measuring their area or indirectly making use of the radiometric
characteristics of the canopy and the interception of light by it.
Furthermore, it can
be estimated from remotely sensed data using empirical correlations to vegetative indices
among other methods. Four diﬀerent methods have been applied in this study site. Firstly,
20
==PAGE:31==
LAI was measured directly through defoliation of 3 plants in each case, three times between
December 2019 and April 2020. Furthermore, people at the ﬁeld have received training in
order to perform visual estimation of the index. Finally, two indirect optical methods were
applied; ceptometers and the LAI2200 method. The optical methods calculate canopy
light transmittance in order to derive LAI making use of the Beer-Lambert law (Liang
et al., 2012). In Eq. 2.8, Qi is the below-canopy photosynthetic active radiation (PAR),
Q0 is the average total incoming PAR and kPAR is the light extinction coeﬃcient. The LI-
COR LAI-2200C Plant Canopy Analyser (LI-COR Biosciences, 2019a) was applied using
diﬀerent protocols of vertical and horizontal placing of the sensor and diﬀerent viewing
angles (45◦or 90◦). Several plants within the studied plot were measured and an average
LAI was derived. For the plot under sun LAI was measured in 7 points, distributed around
the site as can be seen in Figure 2.3. For the plot under shade, LAI was measured in 11
points around the plot, as can be seen in Figure 2.3. In each chosen location, 2 ”A” readings
of radiation were taken on top and 12 ”B” readings at the bottom and along the radius of
each sampled plant. In order to obtain the most representative value possible, coﬀee plants
with diﬀerent height and leaf density were chosen and with a distribution varying between
plants exposed to full sun and plants under full shade. The instrumentation used at this
study can be seen in Figure 2.10 and the derived values of LAI are presented in Chapter 3.
LAI = −ln ( Qi
Q0
)/kPAR
(2.8)
2.1.3
Estimation of canopy height
Due to lack of direct measurements of the height of coﬀee plants throughout the study
period, the height of coﬀee plants was determined taking into account ecophysiological
properties of the coﬀee plants from literature. The curve of coﬀee growth was calibrated
taking into account in-situ observation of the height of the plants (period of February to
May 2020).
In regions with regular distribution of rain and small temperature ﬂuctuations, such as
Costa Rica, growth periodicity of coﬀee branches seems to be mainly determined by the
small variations in solar radiation (DaMatta et al., 2007). For defruited trees, a maximum
rate of branch growth of ∼2.2 mm/d was reported for arabica coﬀee in Southeastern Brazil.
Vegetative and reproductive growth show some sort of competition and therefore vegetative
growth and fruit development occur in diﬀerent stages throughout the phenological cycle
(DaMatta et al., 2007). In the case of this plantation, ﬂowering is induced by irrigation
towards the end of the dry season and fruit ripening is accelerated with the ﬁrst rains of the
rainy season (around April - May). DeMatta et al. (2007) measured growth rates varying
on a monthly basis and averaging to a yearly growth rate of 0.7 mm/d. On the other
hand, Charbonnier et al. 2013 measured a signiﬁcant correlation between age of coﬀee
plants and crown height. Due to reasons of proximity and similarity in climatic conditions
and management practices between the latter plantation and this study site, as well as for
reasons of simplicity, these annual growth rates were applied here. The speciﬁc growth
rates and relevant heights can be seen in Table 2.1. It was assumed that the initial height
during planting (beginning of 2016) was 0.40 m.
21
==PAGE:32==
Table 2.1: Estimation of coﬀee plants’ height in the site under sun. Growth rates
based on (Charbonnier et al., 2013).
Month - Year
Growth rate (cm/d)
Height calc. (cm)
Jan 2016
0.12
40
Dec 2016
0.12
84
Dec 2017
0.085
115
Dec 2018
0.07
140
Dec 2019
0.075
168
Apr 2020
0.065
176
The calculations based on the reported growth rates, resulted to a crown height of 176
cm at the end of April 2020. The in-situ indicative measurements at the study site gave
an average plant height of 1.80 m which is very well correlated to the estimated height.
Therefore, low error margins (< 0.30 m) are expected at the simulation of the coﬀee height
throughout the study period.
2.2
NDVI from Remote Sensing Satellite Data
Remote sensing reﬂectance data was acquired from the Copernicus Sentinel-2 mission of
the European Space Agency (ESA). The data comes with a high revisit time ranging from
10 days at the equator with one satellite to 5 days with two satellites conﬁguration under
cloud-free conditions. However, for the ﬁrst half of 2016 the revisit period was one month
and for the second half of 2016, reﬂectances were recorded every 20 days. Two diﬀerent
products are available through Sentinel-2; Level-1C gives the Top-Of-Atmosphere (TOA)
reﬂectances in cartographic geometry while Level-2A gives the Bottom-Of-Atmosphere
(BOA) reﬂectances in cartographic geometry. Both products come in 100 km by 100 km
squared ortho-images in UTM/WGS84 projection and there is one tile per spectral band
(ESA, 2015). Product L-1C is available since January 2016 while processed reﬂectances of
the L-2A product are available starting from December 2018. L-2A is derived after correc-
tion of L-1C product for atmospheric, adjacency and slope eﬀects. Sentinel-2 data come
with a spatial resolution of 10, 20 or 60 m for diﬀerent spectral bands. More speciﬁcally, 4
bands are available at a 10 m resolution, 6 bands at 20 m and 3 bands at a 60 m resolution.
Figure 2.11: Comparison of NDVI indices as derived from L-1C product increased to
simulate L-2A and original L-2A product.
22
==PAGE:33==
Vegetation indices are used to measure biomass intensity based on the spectral behavior
of living vegetation (Campbell and Wynne, 2011). Diﬀerent components of growing veg-
etation come with diﬀerent spectral responses; while chlorophyll absorbs red light (R),
mesophyll tissues reﬂect infrared radiation (IR) and thus the IR/R ratio can be used as an
indication of photosynthetic activity and plant biomass. At the same time, non-vegetated
surfaces do not show this diﬀerence in spectral response giving lower values of the IR/R
ratio. The Normalised Diﬀerence Vegetation Index (NDVI) that was used in this study is
expressing the contrast between the radiation in the red and near infrared (NIR) spectral
ranges and is derived by Eq. 2.9. The B4 (665 nm) and B8 (842 nm) bands of Sentinel-2
products were used, representing the spectral reﬂectances in the red and near-infra-red
regions, both of which come at a 10 m spatial resolution. The eﬀect of clouds on the
calculation of NDVI was considered as well. Clouds have a relatively higher ”boosting”
eﬀect on red than on near-infra-red reﬂectances and this results in underestimated NDVI
values under overcast conditions (Schlundt et al., 2011). According to the Sentinel-2 prod-
uct speciﬁcations, the brightness threshold for the red (B4) band is 0.07, under which the
images are considered cloud-free. On the other hand, for reﬂectance higher than 0.25 the
pixel is considered as cloudy with the values in-between representing linear distribution
of the possibility for cloudy conditions. In this study, points with B4 reﬂectance above
the threshold of 0.15 were excluded from the dataset. Consequently, a linear interpolation
was applied between the derived NDVI values. Due to the amount of images that would
have to be processed to derive the L-2A product for the whole period between 2016-2018,
the L-1C level product was used here, adapted to eﬃciently represent BOA reﬂectance.
Comparing the available data of the two products, NDVI derived from L-2A was found to
be 14% [± 8%] higher than NDVI from L-1C on average. This factor was used to adapt
the NDVI from L-1C that was used as an input in this model. The comparison between
the processed L-1C and original L-2A products can be seen in Figure 2.11 while the full
NDVI series used as input can be seen in Figure 2.12.
NDV I = NIR −V IR
NIR + V IR = B8 −B4
B8 + B4
(2.9)
Figure 2.12: NDVI values for the study site ”under sun” as derived from the re-
ﬂectances obtained through Sentinel-2, product L-1C, post-processed to simulate
BOA reﬂectances.
Looking at Figure 2.12, an increasing tendency can be observed, as expected, for the ﬁrst
two years after planting (2016 - 2018). After that, a certain periodicity is established,
partially following the phenological cycle of the coﬀee plants. A peak is observed at the
beginning of the year, followed by a decrease in the value of NDVI during the ﬁrst months
23
==PAGE:34==
of the year (January – April), due to leaf shedding during the dry season. Furthermore,
a recovery can be seen during the rainy season starting from May and continuing until
July or August. Right after that, a steep decline can be observed, possibly related to the
competition occurring between plant growth and fruit ripping, which is occurring at this
point. Another reason could be related to some “underestimation” of NDVI during the
rainy season due to overcast conditions, as previously explained. Finally, the increasing
tendency is resumed and continues until the end of the year and the harvest (usually
between November and January).
2.3
Soil-Vegetation, Energy, water and CO2 traNsfer
Model (SVEN)
2.3.1
Model description
The Soil-Vegetation, Energy, water and CO2 traNsfer model (SVEN) is a dynamic model
simulating canopy radiation, energy, water and carbon ﬂuxes and vegetation dynamics.
The model is derived from the combination of diﬀerent sub-models; the joint Priestley-
Taylor Jet Propulsion Laboratory ET (PT JPL-ET) model and a light-use eﬃciency GPP
model, a model for the derivation of ground-heat ﬂux applying the ’force-restore’ method
and a water balance ’bucket’ model. The model is making use of remote sensing satellite
products and locally acquired meteorological data in order to simulate changes in evapo-
transpiration ( ET), Gross Primary Productivity (GPP), Net Radiation (Rn), soil moisture
(SM) and surface temperature (Ts) at half-hourly time steps. On overview of the land-
surface processes that are simulated by SVEN can be seen in Figure 2.13.
The model is structured as the integration of three modules; the surface energy balance
module, the water balance module and the CO2 ﬂux module. The data that is used as input
to the model comprise, but is not limited to, incoming shortwave radiation (SWin), incom-
ing longwave radiation (LWin), air temperature (Ta), relative humidity (RH), atmospheric
pressure (Ps), wind speed (WS), precipitation (P), canopy height (hrough) and NDVI. LWin
was indirectly derived from meteorological parameters, as described in Paragraph 2.1.2.
Canopy height was estimated combining ecophysiological parameters of coﬀee plants from
literature and site-speciﬁc management practices, as described in Paragraph 2.1.3.
As
mentioned in Paragraph 2.2, NDVI was derived from Sentinel-2 satellite data. Linear in-
terpolation was applied between satellite derived values. The rest of the above-mentioned
input data (SWin, Ta, RH, Ps, WS and P) was acquired through a meteorological station
installed at the site. The input data of SVEN model are summarised in Table 2.2.
24
==PAGE:35==
Figure 2.13: Overview of land-surface processes simulated by SVEN model (SWin:
incoming shortwave radiation, SWout: outgoing shortwave radiation, LWin: incom-
ing longwave radiation, LWout: outgoing longwave radiation, Rn: net radiation, G:
ground heat ﬂux, Ts: surface temperature, Td: deep soil temperature, H: sensible
heat ﬂux, P: precipitation, λE:
latent heat ﬂux, λEi:
latent heat ﬂux of the in-
tercepted water, λEc: latent heat ﬂux of transpiration, λEs: latent heat ﬂux of soil
evaporation, CWS: canopy water storage, SWS: soil water storage, Qinf: inﬁltration,
Qper: percolation, R: surface runoﬀ, GPP: gross primary productivity), derived from
(Wang et al., 2019b)
Surface energy balance module
This module incorporates the surface energy balance equations with the ’force-restore’
method (Noilhan and Planton, 1989) in order to estimate surface temperature and ground
heat ﬂux. The instantaneous surface energy balance is used in order to derive the net
radiation (Rn, in W/m2) as can be seen in Eq. 2.10.
Rn = SWin −SWout + LWin −LWout = (1 −ALB)SWin + (1 −ε)LWin −εσT 4
s
(2.10)
Where SWin is the incoming shortwave radiation (W/m2), SWout is the outgoing shortwave
radiation (W/m2), LWin is the incoming longwave radiation (W/m2), LWout is the outgoing
longwave radiation (W/m2), σ is the Stefan-Boltzmann constant (5.670367 10−8 W m−2
K−4) and Ts is the surface temperature (K). Surface albedo, ALB, is given by Eq. 2.11
and 2.12, based on the simple ratio vegetation index (SR). Surface emissivity, ε, is given
by Eq. 2.13 based on an empirical relation to NDVI (Van De Griend and Owe, 1993).
ALB = 0.28 −0.14 exp (−6.08/SR2)
(2.11)
SR = (1 + NDV I)/(1 −NDV I)
(2.12)
25
==PAGE:36==
Table 2.2: Description of SVEN model input data
Variable description
Notation
Unit
Source
Incoming shortwave radiation
SWin
W/m2
meteorological data
Incoming longwave radiation
LWin
W/m2
empirically estimated from meteo data
Air temperature
Ta
◦C
meteorological data
Relative humidity
RH
%
meteorological data
Wind speed
WS
m/s
meteorological data
Atmospheric pressure
Ps
kPa
meteorological data
Precipitation
P
mm/ 0.5 h
meteorological data
Normalised Diﬀerence Vegetation Index
NDVI
-
Sentinel-2, L-1C, processed
Canopy height
hrough
m
literature & in-situ observation
ε =





0.986,
(NDVI > 0.608)
1.0094 + 0.047 ln (NDV I),
(0.131 < NDVI < 0.608)
0.914,
(NDVI < 0.131)
(2.13)
The net radiation reaching the surface is dissipated as sensible, latent and ground heat
ﬂuxes. Eq. 2.14 is describing the surface energy balance, calculating the change in heat
storage dS
dt (W · m−2). Latent heat ﬂux, λE, is calculated through the PT-JPL model (see
Water Balance Module), sensible heat ﬂux, H, is calculated from the temperature gradient
between air and the surface (see Eq. 2.19) and the ground heat ﬂux, G, is calculated from
the ’force-restore’ method (Noilhan and Planton, 1989). All the ﬂuxes are given in W ·m−2.
dS
dt = SWin −SWout + LWin −LWout −H −λE −G
(2.14)
The diﬀerent components of the ’force-restore’ method can be seen in Eq. 2.14. It es-
sentially describes the regulating eﬀect of the deep soil temperature in assimilating the
heat that reaches the soil surface. As the temperature of the deeper layer, Td, generally
ﬂuctuates less compared to the surface soil temperature, Ts, a gradient (Ts - Td) is created
between the two terms. Both the soil gradient and the forcing of the atmosphere through
the sum of heat ﬂuxes (Rn - λE - H) act at the interface between the atmosphere and soil
and this combination determines the resulting surface temperature.
dTs
dt = CT(Rn −λE −H) −Cd(Ts −Td)
(2.15)
dTd
dt = ω(Ts −Td)
(2.16)
1
CT
=
1 −fc
Csat(SWSmax
SWS )
b
2 ln 10 +
fc
Cveg
(2.17)
Cd = 2πω
(2.18)
In the above equations, CT is the force-restore thermal coeﬃcient for surface heat transfer
(K · m2 · J−1). The parameter ω is the frequency of oscillation 1/24 (h−1) and Cd is the
26
==PAGE:37==
diurnal periodicity based on ω (h−1). Csat is the force-restore thermal coeﬃcient for satu-
rated soil (K · m2 · J−1) and Cveg is the respective coeﬃcient for vegetation (K · m2 · J−1).
b is the slope of the retention curve of the force-restore thermal coeﬃcient and fc is the
fractional cover of vegetation and is assumed equal to fIPAR (fraction of photosynthetically
active radiation intercepted by the canopy). SWSmax is the maximum soil water storage
(m3) and SWS is the actual soil water storage.
As already mentioned, Eq. 2.19 is used to determine the sensible heat ﬂux (W ·m−2) based
on the temperature gradient between soil surface and air. ρ is the air density (kg · m−3),
Cp is the speciﬁc heat capacity of air (J · kg−1 · K−1) and ra is the aerodynamic resistance
for heat transfer (s · m−1). The dissipation of energy as sensible heat ﬂux is determined
by aerodynamic resistance posed to the horizontal wind speed by the canopy structure.
Eq. 2.20 gives the aerodynamic resistance to turbulent transport under neutral conditions,
raN. Where hc is the canopy height (m), d is the zero displacement height (m) and z is
the velocity reference height (m). z0m is the aerodynamic roughness length for momentum
(m). zoh is the aerodynamic roughness length for the heat transfer (m). u is the horizontal
wind velocity at reference height (m · s−1). kB−1 is accounting for the diﬀerence between
the aerodynamic and radiometric temperatures and in this model has constant value of
2.3. k is the von Karman constant (0.4).
H = ρ · Cp(Ts −Ta)/ra
(2.19)
raN =
ln z−d
z0m ln z−d
z0h
k2u
(2.20)
d = 0.67hc
(2.21)
z0m = 0.1hc
(2.22)
z0h =
z0m
exp kB−1
(2.23)
Furthermore, the aerodynamic resistance is corrected for the atmospheric stability as shown
in Eq.
2.24.
Ψm is the stability correction factor for momentum.
Ψh is the stability
correction factor for sensible heat ﬂux.
For unstable conditions (negative temperature
gradient), the stability correction factors are less than 1.0 and the correction reduces the
resistance and enhances turbulence, while for stable conditions they are greater than 1.0
and the correction increases the resistance and suppresses turbulence.
ra = raN · Ψm · Ψh
(2.24)
For unstable conditions (RiB ≤0), the Eq. 2.25 applies
Ψh = Ψ2
m = (1 −15RiB)−1/2
(2.25)
27
==PAGE:38==
For stable conditions (0 ≤RiB < 0.2), Eq. 2.26 is applied
Ψh = Ψm = (1 −5RiB)−1
(2.26)
RiB =
( g
Ts) · ∂Ts/∂z
(∂u
∂z )2
(2.27)
RiB is the bulk Richardson number, g is the gravitational acceleration.
The following Figure 2.14 summarises the structure of the three modules implemented in
SVEN model, their sub-models and the outputs of each one.
Figure 2.14: Overview of SVEN model three modules, sub-models implemented in
each one and respective outputs.
Water balance module
The water balance module is combining the Priestley-Taylor Jet Propulsion Laboratory ET
(PT-JPL ET) model with a simple ’bucket’ model representing the upper soil column in
order to derive ET, soil water components and surface runoﬀ. The PT-JPL model makes
use of the Priestley-Taylor equation (Priestley and Taylor, 1972) in order to derive the
potential evapotranspiration and ecophysiological variables are used in order to estimate
actual evapotranspiration. Equations 2.29, 2.30 and 2.31 are used to derive the components
of ET, namely evaporation of intercepted water (Ei), plant transpiration (Ec) and soil water
evaporation (Es).
λET = λEi + λEc + λEs
(2.28)
28
==PAGE:39==
λEi = fwet · α · ∆/(∆+ γ) · Rnc
(2.29)
λEc = (1 −fwet) · fg · fM · fTa · α · ∆/(∆+ γ)Rnc
(2.30)
λEs = fSM · α · ∆/(∆+ γ)(Rns −G)
(2.31)
In the above equations, λET is the latent heat ﬂux of total evapotranspiration (W · m−2),
λEi is the latent heat ﬂux of evaporation of intercepted water (W · m−2), λEc is the latent
heat ﬂux of transpiration (W ·m−2) and λEs is the latent heat ﬂux of soil water evaporation
(W · m−2). The ﬂuxes are constrained by limiting environmental conditions which are
expressed in the equations through a series of factors varying between 0 and 1 and indicating
the relative reduction of potential evapotranspiration. The factor fwet is indicating the
relative surface wetness and is used to partition evaporation of intercepted water and
plant transpiration.
The fraction of active transpiring canopy is expressed through fg,
namely the green canopy fraction, while fM expresses the plant moisture constraint and
is given by Eq.2.32.
The factor fTa is the plant temperature constraint and indicates
the temperature limitation of photosynthesis. Finally, fSM is the soil moisture constraint.
∆is the slope of the saturation vapor pressure versus temperature curve and γ is the
psychrometric constant. The parameter α is the ratio between potential evapotranspiration
and equilibrium potential evapotranspiration and has a suggested empirical value of 1.26
in the PT-JPL model. G represents the ground heat ﬂux and Rnc and Rns the net canopy
and soil net radiation ﬂuxes respectively.
fSM = θe
(2.32)
Eq. 2.33 is used to derive fwet from CWS which is the actual canopy water storage (mm)
and CWSmax which is the maximum canopy water storage (mm). The maximum possible
amount of intercepted water, CWSmax, is calculated as 0.2 LAI kg ·m−2 (Dickinson, 1984).
fwet =
CWS
CWSmax
(2.33)
The prognostic Eq. 2.34 is used to estimate CWS, where fc is the fractional vegetation
cover, assumed to be equal to fIPAR. Rainfall P and evaporation of intercepted water Ei
are given in m ·s−1.
dCWS
dt
= fc · P −Ei
(2.34)
Eq. 2.35 gives the eﬀective rainfall, Pe as the diﬀerence between precipitation and the
change in canopy water storage. In comparison to the original model, additional water is
applied through irrigation in this plantation, in order to induce ﬂowering. This was treated
as an additional input, I, in the calculation of eﬀective rainfall.
Pe = P + I −dCWS
(2.35)
29
==PAGE:40==
Subsequently, the ”bucket” model is applied in order to estimate water balances within
the surface soil reference column. Essentially, a simple water balance is applied in order
to determine the inﬁltration Qinf and percolation Qper rates, as well as the surface runoﬀ
R. While the soil is not saturated (while soil water storage, SWS, is below its maximum
value, SWSmax), the inﬁltration rate is equal to the eﬀective rainfall.
Qinf = Pe
(2.36)
dSWS
dt
= Qinf −Ec −Es −Qper
(2.37)
On the other hand, after maximum soil capacity is exceeded, SWS equals SWSmax and
surface runoﬀoccurs, as described by Eq. 2.38 and 2.39.
Qinf = Ec + Es + Qper
(2.38)
R = Pe −Qinf
(2.39)
In order to calculate the percolation of water through the soil, the Mualem model (Mualem,
1976) for hydraulic conductivity of unsaturated soils is applied, assuming uniform vertical
hydraulic gradient, as described by eq. 2.40.
Qper = Ks ·
p
θe · (1 −(1 −θ(1/(1−1/n))
e
)(1−1/n))2
(2.40)
θe = θ −θr
θs −θr
(2.41)
θ =
SWS
SWSmax
θs
(2.42)
Where Ks is the saturated hydraulic conductivity (m · s−1), n is a ﬁtting parameter de-
pending on the pore size, θ is the volumetric soil moisture (m3 · m−3). θe is the eﬀective
soil moisture (m3 · m−3), θs is the saturated soil moisture (m3 · m−3) and θr is the residual
soil moisture (m3 · m−3).
CO2 ﬂux module
The third module of SVEN is the CO2 ﬂux module which is used to estimate GPP through
a light-use eﬃciency (LUE) model (Wang et al., 2018). The environmental and ecophysi-
ological constraints for canopy transpiration of the PT-JPL model are applied in order to
estimate carbon assimilation rates. As Monteith (1972) suggested, LUE models assume
that plants optimize carbon gain based on the total photosynthetically active radiation
30
==PAGE:41==
(PAR). As explained in Wang et al. (2019b), GPP is calculated through Eq. 2.43, tak-
ing into account the constraints that are used in order to derive plant transpiration (as
described in the Water Balance Module) and an additional constraint referring to the
photosynthetically active canopy.
Speciﬁcally, LUEmax is the maximum value of LUE
(gC · MJ−1) for the speciﬁc canopy type. PARc is the photosynthetically active radiation
intercepted by the canopy and is derived from the Beer Lambert law, using the extinction
of PAR through the canopy. fg is the green canopy fraction, fM is the constraint for plant
moisture, fTa is the constraint due to air temperature and ﬁnally fV PD is the vapor pressure
deﬁcit constraint representing the stomatal opening adjustment due to atmospheric water
saturation deﬁcit. Eq. 2.44 to 2.47 describe how these constraints were derived.
GPP = LUEmax · PARc · fg · fM · fTa · fV PD
(2.43)
fg = fAPAR
fIPAR
(2.44)
fM =
fAPAR
max(fAPAR)
(2.45)
where fAPAR is the fraction of PAR absorbed by the vegetation cover and fIPAR is the
fraction of PAR intercepted by the vegetation cover (Fisher et al., 2008).
fTa = 1.1814 · [1 + e0.3(−To−10+Ta)]−1 · [1 + e0.2(To−10−Ta)]−1
(2.46)
where Ta is the air temperature and To is the optimal temperature for plant growth which
in the original SVEN model was calculated as max( PAR ·f APAR ·T a / VPD) (Fisher et al.,
2008). In this study, optimal temperature was retrieved from literature for coﬀee and was
set to 19.5 ◦C (Lin, 2007; Krishnan, 2017).
fV PD =
1
1 −V PD/D0
(2.47)
where D0 is the empirical coeﬃcient for VPD and is equal to 15 hPa (Leuning, 1995).
The way PAR is intercepted by the vegetation cover depends on the structural character-
istics of the canopy; i.e. the density of planting, the open space between planting rows and
the density of the leaves in each plant. The way PAR is distributed between the canopy
and the soil depends on the leaf area index (LAI) as well as on the light extinction coeﬃ-
cient (kPAR) (Liang et al., 2012). In SVEN, the calculation of LAI is based on an empirical
relation to NDVI, derived from satellite reﬂectance data. NDVI is used to estimate the
fraction of PAR intercepted by the whole canopy while the soil adjusted vegetation in-
dex (SAVI) is used to calculate the fraction of PAR absorbed by green vegetation (Huete,
1987). This aspect of the model deserves further development since most of the vegetation
variables (fAPAR, fIPAR, albedo and LAI) are derived from NDVI, which makes the model
sensitive to inaccuracies in NDVI estimation. In this study, accuracy of the LAI estima-
tion was assessed using in-situ measurements. Finally, LAI is used in order to distinct the
amount of net radiation received by the canopy to the amount received by the soil. Table
2.3 summarises the equations relating radiation and vegetation indices that apply for the
31
==PAGE:42==
SVEN model.
Table 2.3: Equations used to derive vegetation indices and variables related to light
interception by the canopy in SVEN model.
Variable
Description
Equation
Reference
PARc
PAR intercepted by the
canopy
PARc = PAR - PARs
(Ruimy et al., 1999)
PARs
PAR for the soil
PARs = PAR · e−kP ARLAI
(Ruimy et al., 1999)
Rnc
Net radiation for the canopy
Rnc = Rn - Rns
(Fisher et al., 2008)
Rns
Net radiation for the soil
Rns = Rn · e−kRnLAI
(Fisher et al., 2008)
LAI
Leaf area index
LAI = - ln (1 - fIP AR) / kP AR
(Ruimy et al., 1999)
SAVI
Soil Adjusted Vegetation
Index
SAVI = 0.45 NDVI + 0.132
(Huete, 1987)
fAP AR
Fraction of PAR absorbed by
green vegetation cover
fAP AR = 1.4 SAVI - 0.05
(Fisher et al., 2008)
fIP AR
Fraction of PAR intercepted
by total vegetation cover
fIP AR = 1.0 NDVI - 0.05
(Fisher et al., 2008)
2.3.2
Model parameters
The SVEN model requires a series of parameters that can be derived either from literature
and look-up tables for similar soil texture and biome types or calibrated using in-situ mea-
sured or remotely sensed data. These parameters are either related to soil characteristics
or to vegetation dynamics and the way they aﬀect the attenuation of radiation through
the canopy. The ﬁrst set of parameters is related to the soil texture and determine the
dynamics of water storage and drainage in the ‘bucket’ model, as well as the eﬀect of the
heat gradient in the ‘force-restore’ method. The Mualem model (Mualem, 1976) for hy-
draulic conductivity of unsaturated soils was used to derive the characteristics of water ﬂow
through unsaturated media based on the pore size. Ks is the hydraulic conductivity of the
saturated soil (mm · h−1), n is the water retention ﬁtting parameter of the Mualem model,
θr is the residual volumetric soil moisture (m3 · m−3) and θs is the saturated volumetric
soil moisture (m3 · m−3). Finally, SWSmax is the maximum soil water storage (mm water/
m soil).
For the implementation of the ’force-restore’ method, the following parameters deﬁned the
thermal properties of soil and vegetation; Csat is the force-restore thermal coeﬃcient for
saturated soil (K·m2·J−1), Cveg is the force-restore thermal coeﬃcient for vegetated surface
(10−6 · K · m2 · J−1) and b is the slope of the retention curve for the force-restore thermal
coeﬃcient. In the original SVEN model, Csat, Cveg, b and SWSmax were calibrated using
32
==PAGE:43==
Table 2.4: Description of SVEN model parameters
Parameter
Description
Value
Unit
Range
Reference
Csat
The force-restore thermal
coeﬃcient for saturated soil
4.111
K · m2 · J−1
[3, 15]
Noilhan &
Planton (1989)
b
The slope of the retention
curve for the force-restore
thermal coeﬃcient
5.39
[-]
[4.05,
11.4]
Noilhan &
Planton (1989)
Ks
The inﬁltration rate of the
saturated soil
10.40
mm · h−1
[0.2, 297]
Carsel &
Parrish (1988)
n
Water retention ﬁtting
parameter of the Mualem
model
1.56
[-]
[1.09,
2.68]
Carsel &
Parrish (1988)
θr
Residual volumetric soil
moisture
0.065
m3 · m−3
[0.034,
0.100]
Carsel &
Parrish (1988)
θs
Saturated volumetric soil
moisture
0.43
m3 · m−3
[0.36,
0.46]
Carsel &
Parrish (1988)
SWSmax
Maximum soil water storage
262.5
mm water/
m soil
Kufa &
Burkhardt
(2013); Ministry
of Agriculture
B.C. (2015)
Cveg
The force-restore thermal
coeﬃcient for vegetated surface
5
10−6 · K ·
m2 · J−1
[1, 10]
assumed, Wang
et al. (2018)
LUEmax
Maximum light use eﬃciency
1.2
g C m−2
MJ−1
[0, 5]
Charbonnier
(2013); Zhou et
al. (2015)
α
Empirical ratio of potential ET
to equilibrium pot. ET
1.26
[-]
Fisher et al.
(2008)
kP AR
Extinction coeﬃcient of PAR
0.5
[-]
Ruimy et al.
(1999)
kRn
Extinction coeﬃcient of net
radiation
0.6
[-]
Fisher et al.
(2008)
To
Optimum plant growth
temperature
19.5
◦C
[-]
Lin (2007);
Krishnan (2017)
instantaneous measurements of Ts and SM derived from Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS)
campaigns. In this study, however, for reasons of computational simplicity this data was
derived from literature and look-up tables based on vegetation type and the soil texture
type. Speciﬁcally, Ks, n, θr and θs were all derived from look-up tables for ’loam’ soil
texture (Carsel and Parrish, 1988). Similarly, Csat and b were also derived from look-up
tables as proposed by Noilhan and Planton 1989 based as well on soil texture. Two factors
contributed to the level of SWSmax; the available water storage capacity which depends
on soil texture (175 mm/m soil for loam) and the eﬀective rooting depth for the plants
which for coﬀee was 1.50 m (Ministry of Agriculture, 2015; Kufa and Burkhardt, 2013). A
maximum water storage of 262.5 mm was derived. Cveg was encountered in a wide range
of values (from 10−6 to 10−3 K · m2 · J−1) in literature based on the type of vegetation and
its heat insulating properties (Calvet et al., 1998; Noilhan and Planton, 1989; Noilhan and
Mahfouf, 1996). Due to the inconsistency in the encountered data, the range ([1−10]·10−6
33
==PAGE:44==
K · m2 · J−1) set for the SVEN model by Wang et al. (2018) was maintained and a middle
value was assumed, taking into account that the rather abstract wide range of parameters
in literature indicated low signiﬁcance of the parameter.
Figure 2.15: Overview of SVEN model inputs, initial conditions, parameters and
outputs as implemented in this study. Inputs from meteorological, satellite or ﬁeld
data. Parameters based on look-up-tables or other studies. (adapted from Wang et
al., 2020, in preparation)
The last set of parameters are related to the speciﬁc canopy type and the way it aﬀects
processes such as evapotranspiration from the canopy and the attenuation of solar radia-
tion by the plants. Parameter α is the empirical ratio of potential ET to ET at equilibrium
conditions. The value of 1.26 that was given to the parameter in the original PT-JPL
model (Priestley and Taylor, 1972) was maintained in SVEN model and ET was down-
regulated through a series of ecophysiological constraints, as explained above (Fisher et al.,
2008). The optimum plant growth temperature, To (◦C) was derived from literature about
coﬀee plants’ ecophysiology (Lin, 2007; Krishnan, 2017) and the value of 19.5◦C was used
for this study. The parameters kPAR and kRn refer to the extinction coeﬃcients for PAR
and net radiation respectively. In the original SVEN model they were set to 0.5 and 0.6
respectively, adjusted for a willow forest and a temperate beech forest (Fisher et al., 2008).
For this study, it was assumed that for permanent vegetation with complete vegetation
cover the same extinction coeﬃcients could apply. Subsequently, the model’s sensitivity
to kPAR was tested and is presented in Paragraph 3.3.1. Finally, the value of maximum
light use eﬃciency LUEmax was based on literature sources (Charbonnier et al., 2013; Zhou
et al., 2015). LUEmax is an important parameter deﬁning the level of carbon assimilation
by the canopy and consequently, GPP. However, diﬀerent estimations on diﬀerent types
of canopies come with a wide range of values and therefore a calibration to the model
conditions can signiﬁcantly improve model’s performance in assessing GPP. Zhou et al.,
(2015) assessed a wide variety of biomes on a global scale and suggested LUEmax of 1.19
g · C · MJ−1 for sunlit leaves and 4.81 g · C · MJ−1 for shaded leaves in agricultural crops.
On the other hand, Charbonnier (2013) looked at coﬀee plantations in Costa Rica and es-
34
==PAGE:45==
timated a value of 1.05 g ·C ·MJ−1 for coﬀee plants in open areas and a range of [1.2−1.6]
g · C · MJ−1 under shade. Taking into account all available data and the fact that even in
cultivation of coﬀee under sun not all parts of the plant are fully exposed to the sunlight,
a LUEmax of 1.2 g · C · m−2 · MJ−1 was chosen for this study.
The model’s input data, initial conditions, parameters and outputs are schematically de-
picted in Figure 2.15.
2.3.3
Model assessment
The model’s accuracy was assessed both on a half-hourly and on a daily time scale. The
radiation and water ﬂuxes derived from the EC ﬂux tower were used for that purpose.
Validation of the model was performed for the period from the 19th of December 2019 until
the 13th of May 2020. Values of sensible (H) and latent heat (λE) ﬂuxes, net radiation
(Rn), evapotranspiration (ET) and gross primary productivity (GPP) were used for the
assessment. Due to technical issues that occurred during the measuring period, data were
found missing from the EC time series and gap-ﬁlling was applied under speciﬁc criteria.
More speciﬁcally, on a daily scale, if no more than 30% of half-hourly values were missing
within one day, linear interpolation was used for gap-ﬁlling, otherwise that day’s values
were excluded from the dataset. The linearly interpolated data was 3% of the initial 0.5
hourly values. Furthermore, the reliability of the EC data was assessed with regard to the
energy balance closure problem (Culf et al., 2004). In principle, the sum of sensible and
latent heat ﬂuxes should be equal to the diﬀerence between the net radiation and ground
heat ﬂux, as H + λE = Rn - G. However, this is rarely the case, due to inaccuracy in the
individual in-situ measurements. The relative residuals were calculated as in Eq. 2.49 both
on half-hourly and daily scales and observations with RE greater than 30 % were excluded
from the datasets. Overall, during the validation period, 16% of half-hourly values and
11% of daily values were removed using number of LE observations as a reference.
RE(%) = Rn −H −λE −G
Rn
(2.48)
Since very few observations of ground heat ﬂux (G), soil moisture (SM) and surface tem-
perature (Ts) were available, it was not possible to validate these parameters through the
EC data. However, the simulated Ts was validated using satellite data derived from the
Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) Terra platform (NASA, Earth-
data). The MOD11A2 product was used, giving the 8-day averaged value of land surface
temperature, on a 1 km spatial resolution. The 8-day average is derived from clear-sky days
so Ts is expected to be overestimated during overcast conditions. Daytime and nighttime
Ts bands were derived and averaged since, for Costa Rica, hours of daytime and nighttime
are almost equal with little variation within the year. Of course, interpolation of Ts values
on a half-hourly scale would not be possible, therefore the model’s eﬃciency in estimating
surface temperature was assessed on a daily scale alone.
35
==PAGE:46==
The eﬃciency of the model in estimating the above mentioned parameters was quantiﬁed
through statistical metrics such as the root-mean-square error (RMSE, eq. 2.49), coeﬃcient
of determination (R2, eq. 2.50) and mean-absolute-percentage error (MAPE, eq. 2.51).
RMSE =
v
u
u
t 1
N ·
N
X
i=1
(OBSi −SIMi)2
(2.49)
R2 =
 N
X
i=1
(OBSi −OBS) · (SIMi −SIM)
!2
N
X
i=1
(OBSi −OBS)2 ·
N
X
i=1
(SIMi −SIM)2
(2.50)
MAPE = 1
N ·
N
X
i=1
|OBSi −SIMi|
|OBSi|
(2.51)
Additionally, an aspect of the model’s robustness was assessed looking at the way it handles
the attenuation of photosynthetically active radiation. This was estimated by looking at
the choice of ﬁxed value for the light extinction coeﬃcient, kPAR. Although the value of
kPAR from the original SVEN model was used for this study, values can vary for diﬀerent
types of biome (Ruimy et al., 1999). kPAR is correlated to LAI through the equation that
can be seen in Table 2.3. Therefore, the LAI estimates derived from ﬁeld measurements
were used for the calibration of the parameter. Subsequently, the eﬀect of this change on
the model outputs was quantiﬁed in absolute terms (change in each one of LE, Rn, ET,
SM and Ts compared to their values for the original value of kPAR). Finally the eﬀect of
this change on the model’s eﬃciency was quantiﬁed by looking at the change in RMSEs
and R2.
2.3.4
Aspects of model simulation under shade
One of the signiﬁcant diﬀerences between a monoculture and an agroforestry production
system is the amount of solar radiation that is available to the coﬀee plants. At the same
time, one of the most determining characteristics of AFS canopies is their spatial hetero-
geneity. Aspects such as biomass density, canopy height, leaf-area-index and consequently
vegetation indices such as NDVI vary signiﬁcantly within the area under study. A full
representation of the conditions within an AFS system comes with signiﬁcant challenges
that exceed the scope of this study. For that reason, a simpliﬁed approach was followed
here, focusing on the solar radiation aspect of coﬀee production under shade.
Once the model was calibrated for sunlit conditions, a simulation was performed decreas-
ing SWin radiation to the extent it is expected to reduce under shaded conditions. The
idea was to assess purely the eﬀect of changes in the total amount of radiation received
by the plants and not in its quality (diﬀuse light). This is the just the ﬁrst step in the
36
==PAGE:47==
representation of a shaded system and the aim was to derive conclusions in terms of dif-
ferences in dissipation of energy, water and carbon budgets between the two production
systems. This was implemented making use of ﬁeld measurements of global solar radia-
tion (direct and diﬀuse radiation). The details of the ﬁeld campaigns were described in
Paragraph 2.1.2. Diurnal cycles of global radiation above and underneath coﬀee plants
either fully exposed to the sun or underneath the canopy were received. The objective of
these measurements was to derive information on the extinction of radiation by the coﬀee
plants under sunny and shaded conditions. Additionally, the extinction of incident radi-
ation by the shading tree was derived by measuring radiation on top of two coﬀee trees,
one under shade and one under sun. Subsequently, the model was run adjusting the in-
coming shortwave radiation to the level of radiation reaching the coﬀee plants under shade.
Selected outputs were compared to the model outputs from the plot under sun on a daily
basis. Speciﬁcally, the average daily change in surface temperature (Ts), soil water storage
(SWS) and gross primary productivity (GPP) were quantiﬁed. Additionally, the cumula-
tive change in soil water storage and carbon assimilation were calculated.
37
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 3
Results and Discussion
3.1
Results of Field Measurements
3.1.1
Leaf area index in-situ measurements
The results of the leaf area index (LAI) measuring campaigns can be seen in Table 3.1.
Defoliation, as a direct method, was considered as the most accurate one and therefore, the
eﬃciency of the indirect methods was assessed based on the comparison with defoliation.
On that base, it can be observed that visual estimation and the ceptometer methods, both
seem to underestimate the index compared to the one derived from defoliation. On the
other hand, the LAI2200 method was slightly underestimating LAI when a viewing angle
of 90◦was used, while overestimating LAI when a viewing angle of 45◦was used. Overall,
the LAI2200 (90◦viewing angle cap) was the most accurate.
Table 3.1: Estimation of leaf area index in the plot under sun with direct
(defoliation) and indirect methods.
Method
Date
Visual
estimation
Ceptometer
A
Ceptometer
B
LAI2200
ver 90◦
LAI2200
hor 90◦
LAI2200
ver 45◦
LAI2200
hor 45◦
Defoliation
03/12/2019
3.1 ± 0.2
3.4 ± 0.6
4.0 ± 0.4
4.7 ± 0.6
5.0 ± 0.6
6.1 ± 0.2
04/02/2020
4.1 ± 0.5
4.2 ± 0.9
4.8 ± 0.3
4.3 ± 0.
7.4 ± 0.6
6.7 ± 1.5
5.1 ± 0.4
08/04/2020
3.9 ± 0.7
15/05/2020
8.1 ± 0.9
3.1.2
Shortwave radiation budget under sunlit and shaded con-
ditions
The diurnal cycle of total incident radiation was retrieved using a LI-200R Pyranometer
on the 14th of May from 9:37 until 18:04. Sensor #1 was placed on top of a coﬀee plant
not aﬀected by shade and Sensor #2 was placed on top of a coﬀee plant underneath the
38
==PAGE:49==
shading tree. As can be seen in Figure 3.1, measured radiation levels were signiﬁcantly
reduced for the interval between 11:30 and 14:30, due to high cloud coverage. This can also
be seen by the steep changes in the curve of radiation during the diurnal cycle. Indeed,
an average cloud fraction of n = 0.82 was retrieved from satellite data during that day.
The intervals from 9:37 to 11:30 and from 14:30 to 17:30 were used in order to derive the
fraction of incident radiation reaching the coﬀee plants underneath the shading canopy. On
average, 10.25% of total radiation reached the top of the coﬀee plants which correspond
to an average fraction of photosynthetically active radiation intercepted by the shading
canopy (fIPAR) of 0.89.
Figure 3.1: Diurnal cycle of total incident radiation as received by the LI-200R Pyra-
nometer under sun and underneath the shading canopy on the 14th of May.
Figure 3.2 contains the diurnal cycles of global radiation retrieved on the 12th (left) and
13th (right) of May. On the 12th of May, sensors were placed on top and underneath a
coﬀee plant, fully exposed to the sun. An average fIPAR of 0.92 was calculated. On the
13th of May, sensors were placed on top and underneath a coﬀee plant located under shade.
An average fIPAR of 0.67 was calculated.
The comparison between the two cases was
interesting since it provided information on how the attenuation of radiation by the coﬀee
plants changed between the two systems. In shaded conditions, not only lower levels of
PAR reach the coﬀee plants but the fraction of radiation intercepted is expected to change
as well. It should be noted, however, that this is an indication of change in fIPAR and not
absolute value since measurements were conducted in diﬀerent coﬀee plants and diﬀerences
in vegetation density and amount of biomass can be expected.
39
==PAGE:50==
Figure 3.2: Diurnal cycle of total incident radiation as received by the LI-200R Pyra-
nometer on the 12th (left) and the 13th (right) of May. Sensors placed above and
underneath the coﬀee plants under sun and under shade respectively.
3.2
SVEN Model’s Performance
3.2.1
Validation on a daily time scale
The variables used for model assessment were available for diﬀerent periods in time, as ex-
plained in Paragraph 2.3.3. The model outputs of H, LE, Rn, ET and GPP were validated
both on a half-hourly and on a daily scale, while Ts was validated on a daily time scale
alone, making use of satellite data. Plots of the modelled time series and their validation
on a daily basis as well as scatter plots of observed vs. simulated values are given in Figures
3.3 to 3.7. The root-mean-square errors (RMSE) for daily H, LE, ET, Rn, GPP and Ts
were 21.94 Wm−2, 19.34 Wm−2, 0.68 mm, 34.41 Wm−2, 1.15 gC · m−2 · d−1) and 2.13
◦C respectively. The coeﬃcient of determination R2 on a daily time scale was calculated
as 0.55, 0.39, 0.39, 0.77, 0.25 and 0.09 respectively. The mean-average-percentage error
(MAPE) on a daily scale was 66%, 30%, 30%, 22%, 59% and 7% respectively. Based on
these results, SVEN model showed a good performance in predicting net radiation on a
daily scale, while performed fairly well in simulating both sensible and latent heat ﬂuxes.
On the other hand, gross primary productivity and surface temperature were not predicted
equally eﬃciently.
As it can be seen from Figure 3.3, sensible heat ﬂux tends to be overestimated, especially
during the beginning of the validation period (December to February). This could be re-
lated to an overestimation of the surface temperature due to failure to capture in detail
the components of the force-restore method. At the same time, latent heat ﬂux tends to
be underestimated during the same period and overestimated during the end of February
- beginning of March. Although the simulation was able to capture the general trends of
the variables quite well, it seems that some parameters were maybe not calibrated cor-
rectly. One possible explanation is that kPAR and kRn were not accurately estimated or
that the correlation between NDVI, fIPAR and LAI did not capture all the energy dy-
namics properly. The estimation of NDVI from satellite data is expected to contain some
40
==PAGE:51==
Figure 3.3:
Comparison between simulated and measured values of sensible heat
ﬂuxes, H (W m−2) on a daily scale along with ﬁtting statistics.
error as well. More speciﬁcally, it is probable that the benchmark of red reﬂectance set
to sort out cloudy conditions was not accurately estimated, which would have resulted
in an underestimation of NDVI during cloudy days. Indeed, looking more closely at the
steep drops in NDVI values and the model’s performance during those days, some cor-
relation was identiﬁed. During the validation period, low NDVI values were observed on
the 1st of January, on the 26th of January, on the 2nd of February and on the 15th of May.
Looking at Figure 3.4, it can be seen these points coincided with an underestimation of LE.
Moreover, the lower values of LE during the dry season can be related to an overestimation
of the environmental and ecophysiological constraints that are used to down-regulate po-
tential evapotranspiration. At the same time, an underestimation of the same constraints
during the wet season would account for the simulated increase in LE. For example, opti-
mal plant growth temperature was retrieved from literature about Arabica coﬀee in similar
climatic conditions and altitude, but actual value could deviate from literature for the site-
speciﬁc conditions and for the speciﬁc variety in the plot under study. Of course the exact
same patterns were observed for evapotranspiration and are presented in Figure 3.5 to give
a more tangible reference of the changes in water budgets. This observation was interesting
since it showed that the model’s behavior changed during the transition from the dry to
the wet season.
Figure 3.4: Comparison between simulated and measured values of latent heat ﬂuxes,
LE (W m−2) on a daily scale along with ﬁtting statistics.
The trade-oﬀbetween latent and sensible heat ﬂuxes could be the reason for the signiﬁ-
cantly better performance of the model in predicting net radiation (R2 = 0.77), as can be
41
==PAGE:52==
Figure 3.5: Comparison between simulated and measured values of evapotranspira-
tion, ET (mm) on a daily scale along with ﬁtting statistics.
seen in Figure 3.6. In any case, the small sample of daily values for the validation of this
parameter reduces the signiﬁcance of this correlation.
Figure 3.6: Comparison between simulated and measured values of net radiation, Rn
(W m−2) on a daily scale along with ﬁtting statistics.
Figure 3.7: Comparison between simulated surface temperature Ts (◦C) and derived
from MODIS satellite data on a daily scale along with ﬁtting statistics.
Figure 3.7 depicts the correlation between simulated values of Ts and those derived from
MODIS satellite data for the period from October 2017 to May 2020.
It seems that
the model captured the general trend of seasonal variation of surface temperature with
growing tendency during the dry season and gradual reduction during the wet season.
However, the model failed to give a signiﬁcantly high correlation (R2 was 0.09) between
observed and simulated values. Speciﬁcally, the model tends to overestimate Ts in the
42
==PAGE:53==
majority of the cases and especially during the cooling phase (from June to November).
This comes in accordance with an overestimation of sensible heat by the model that was
already mentioned. Two diﬀerent possible explanations could apply. On one hand, higher
cloud coverage during this period of the year could interfere with the model’s performance
and/or the satellite estimation of Ts. Indeed, as already mentioned, Ts estimation from
MODIS is based on clear-sky observations and therefore is expected to be biased towards
sunny conditions and fail to capture ﬂuctuations that are expected during the wet season.
On the other hand, since satellite estimation is based on 8-day averaged temperature
values on a coarse spatial resolution (1 km), low accuracy can be expected.
Another
reason for uncertainty comes from the estimation of parameter Cveg, which accounts for
the thermal storage properties of vegetation. Underestimation of Cveg would overestimate
the insulating properties of vegetation and thus overestimate Ts during the cooling phase
while underestimate it during the heating phase.
Figure 3.8: Comparison between simulated and measured values of gross primary
productivity, GPP (gC · m−2 · d−1) on a daily scale along with ﬁtting statistics.
The validation of gross primary productivity did not show a good ﬁt between the modelled
values and those derived from EC data. However, the RMSE of 1.15 g ·Cm−2 ·d−1 was not
considered particularly high, especially taking into account the large variations in carbon
assimilation levels under diﬀerent lighting conditions and part of the phenological cycle.
DaMatta et al. (2007) have reported coﬀee tree rates of net CO2 assimilation at levels of
4 - 11 µmol · m−2 · s−1 with a photosynthetic capacity under saturating light conditions
that can reach up to 30 - 40 µmol · m−2 · s−1. Similarly, Rodriguez et al. (2011) calculated
photosynthetic rates for coﬀee during vegetative growth (faster from April till July-August
and slower after that until November) at a level of 12.25 µmol·m−2 ·s−1 which can even be
doubled during the fruiting period (in our case from May until harvest). These numbers
come in agreement with the 0.5 hourly values obtained from the SVEN simulation, where
an average of 5 - 10 µmol · m−2 · s−1 was observed, with peaks reaching up to 20 - 25
µmol · m−2 · s−1. Another signiﬁcant aspect in the estimation of GPP is the parameter
of LUEmax as already discussed in Paragraph 2.3.2. LUEmax diﬀers between clear-sky and
cloudy conditions (Wang et al., 2018) and diﬀuse radiation tends to increase the LUE of
plants. This is translated into a diﬀerent response of the plants to the levels of incoming
PAR; under diﬀuse conditions, GPP is increasing more steeply for every unit of increase
in PAR, while under sunny conditions GPP is less aﬀected by the increase in PAR. In that
sense, and since the value of LUEmax was kept stable in this study, GPP can be expected to
be underestimated during the wet season (April-May in this dataset) that cloudy conditions
prevail. Indeed, looking both at Figures 3.8 and 3.9, model tends to underestimate GPP
in the periods with high cloud coverage (April-May).
43
==PAGE:54==
Figure 3.9: Averaged daily cloud fraction, n, during the validation period, as derived
from NASA satellite data.
3.2.2
Validation on a half-hourly time scale
The calculation of the model’s statistics on a half-hourly time scale showed a better cor-
relation between simulated and observed values than the daily scale for all model outputs
except for sensible heat. More speciﬁcally, the coeﬃcient of determination R2 was calcu-
lated as 0.49, 0.78, 0.78, 0.87 and 0.25 for H, LE, ET, Rn and GPP respectively. The
respective RMSEs were 97.86 W · m−2, 80.24 W · m−2, 0.06 mm, 111.23 W · m−2 and 4.47
µmolC·m−2·s−1 and the MAPEs were 76%, 28%, 33%, 23%, as can be seen as well in Table
3.2. The higher RMSEs observed in this time scale for the energy ﬂuxes are attributed to
the greater variation of parameters’ values during a diurnal cycle and are not visible when
averaged on a daily value. The scatter plots with the observed vs. simulated values for H,
Rn, LE and ET can be seen in Figure 3.10.
The improved performance observed on a sub-daily scale is especially interesting since it
indicates that the model could potentially be used by producers for an eﬀective optimization
of crop management practices. Nonetheless, it should not be disregarded that some bias
may exist in this time scale due to the sorting process of the data used for validation.
Since EC energy-closure residuals could not be calculated for the complete dataset (since
not all ﬂuxes were available at all times), only those values with high residuals (> 30%)
were excluded. This means that some ”outliers” could still be found within the datasets
used for validation and in that case, those would have a greater inﬂuence on a daily scale
compared to the half-hourly one due to the size of the sample of observations (N) in each
case.
As a general comment, the high residuals observed in the EC dataset probably
accounted for some decline in the model’s eﬃciency. A stricter sorting of residuals could
clarify the extent of this contribution. For example, a sorting of RE > 20% of Rn instead
of 30% or a sorting of values with a closure error, [(LE + H) / (Rn - G)], within the range
0.7 - 1.3 could be applied.
44
==PAGE:55==
Figure 3.10: Scatter plots of observed vs.
simulated half-hourly values of sensible
heat ﬂux (top left), net radiation (top right), latent heat ﬂux (bottom left) and
evapotranspiration (bottom right).
Table 3.2: SVEN model’s performance on half-hourly and daily time scales.
Time
scale
Statistics
H
LE
ET
Rn
GPP
Ts
Half
hourly
N
3516
3516
3516
520
4617
[-]
RMSE
97.86
W · m−2
80.24
W · m−2
0.06 mm
111.23
W · m−2
4.47 µmolC ·
m−2 · s−1
[-]
R2
0.49
0.78
0.78
0.87
0.25
[-]
MAPE
(%)
76
28
33
23
[-]
[-]
Daily
N
86
84
84
30
91
90
RMSE
21.94
W · m−2
19.34
W · m−2
0.68 mm
34.41
W · m−2
1.15
gC·m−2·d−1
2.13 ◦C
R2
0.55
0.39
0.39
0.77
0.25
0.09
MAPE
(%)
66
30
30
22
59
7
45
==PAGE:56==
3.3
Model Robustness
3.3.1
Light extinction coeﬃcient
The model’s accuracy in estimating LAI through the proposed correlation between vege-
tation indices and the fraction of photosynthetically active radiation (fPAR) was assessed
using the ﬁeld measurements of LAI. More speciﬁcally, the defoliation and LAI2200hor90◦
values were used in order to calibrate the LAI times series, through determination of the
most suitable value for the light extinction coeﬃcient. The calibrated value of kPAR =
0.36 was derived based on the defoliation measurements, that are considered to be the
most accurate. The calibrated LAI was 0.9 ± 0.4 units higher on average and at times
up to 1.8 units higher that the one initially calculated in the model. This underestima-
tion of LAI by the model resulted to an underestimation of canopy water storage since
CWS = 0.2 · LAI (Dickinson, 1984). This in turn would have an eﬀect on the estimation
of energy ﬂuxes and water dynamics, and especially on the estimation of latent heat ﬂux
through an underestimation of the evapotranspiration of intercepted water.
Figure 3.11: Leaf area index as estimated in the SVEN model for two diﬀerent val-
ues of light extinction coeﬃcient, kPAR=0.5 and kPAR=0.36, and comparison with
measured in the ﬁeld LAI through defoliation and the LAI2200 method.
Subsequently, the sensitivity of the model to the kPAR parameter was assessed by calcu-
lating the average change in the models’ outputs. The mean (¯x) change and standard
deviation (σ) were calculated for each of the outputs of sensible heat (H), latent heat (LE),
net radiation (Rn), evapotranspiration (ET), soil moisture (SM) and surface temperature
(Ts) and both for the half-hourly and daily time scales. The results are presented in Table
3.3. It can be seen that, as expected, H and LH were somehow sensitive to the change of
kPAR while Rn, SM and Ts were almost not aﬀected by the change of the parameter. Since
H was slightly decreased and LE increased, Rn was technically unaﬀected. The model’s
low sensitivity to kPAR was veriﬁed by the calculation of change in model statistics which
are not presented in detail for reasons of redundancy. Only insigniﬁcant improvement in
the model’s ﬁtting was observed (in the range of 0.01 increase of R2) while the ﬁtting of H
was actually slightly worsened (0.04 decrease in R2).
Values of kPAR for coﬀee derived from literature were found to vary signiﬁcantly depending
46
==PAGE:57==
Table 3.3: Change in model outputs for a change in kPAR from 0.5 to 0.36.
Time scale
Statistics
H
(W · m−2)
LE
(W · m−2)
Rn
(W · m−2)
ET
(mm)
SM
(%)
Ts
(◦C)
¯x
-4.86
5.67
0.78
0.00
-0.03
-0.12
Half
hourly
σ
9.37
13.69
1.89
0.01
0.06
0.30
¯x
-4.87
5.65
0.78
0.20
-0.03
-0.12
Daily
σ
2.03
2.27
0.38
0.08
0.06
0.06
on local conditions and values ranging from 0.24 to 0.93 were retrieved from diﬀerent sources
(Costa et al., 2019). The great variability of the parameter (expected to occur even in very
homogeneous plots of coﬀee monoculture) coupled with the model’s low sensitivity to this
parameter, both indicate that a ﬁxed value can indeed be used without compromising the
model’s eﬃciency. LAI is both dependent on kPAR and the fraction of photosynthetically
active radiation intercepted by the canopy (fIPAR). A potential subsequent step could
be to assess the model’s robustness by re-evaluating the estimation of fIPAR and fAPAR
through their correlation to vegetation indices NDVI and SAVI respectively (look at Table
2.3).
3.4
Model Simulation Under Shade
As explained in Paragraphs 2.3.4 and 3.1.2, only a fraction of the available solar radiation
was expected to reach the plants underneath the shading canopy. As reported by DaMatta
et al., (2007) leaves within the coﬀee canopy and especially those in the interior of the
crown of the trees may be receiving as little as 1.5% of full solar radiation. As calculated
for the location chosen for this study, only 10% of total radiation reached the top of the
coﬀee plants. This was implemented in a simpliﬁed way in the model, modifying the input
of shortwave incoming radiation retrieved by the meteorological station to the 10% of its
original value.
The eﬀect of this change to model outputs was quantiﬁed by looking at the prediction
of land surface temperature (Ts), gross primary productivity (GPP) and soil water stor-
age (SWS) on a daily time scale. Daily average values of Ts showed a decrease of 3.74
◦C(±1.68◦C) during the validation period (Oct 2017 to May 2020). Additionally, air tem-
perature would be expected to decrease as well underneath the shading canopy (Charbon-
nier et al., 2013; Lin, 2007; Souza et al., 2012) which was not considered in this simulation
of conditions in the plot under shade. Souza et al. measured up to a 6 ◦C lower temper-
atures in coﬀee under shading canopy compared to coﬀee in monoculture systems. This
change would further decrease the derived Ts which in terms has an eﬀect on the dissi-
pation of heat in the ’force-restore’ method and on water budgets through evaporation of
intercepted water and soil transpiration. As can be seen in Figure 3.12, an interesting
observation is that Ts seems to have a minimized variation under shaded conditions. It
would make sense that lower heat ﬂuxes can be better regulated by the soil and vegetation
storing properties, minimizing extremes.
47
==PAGE:58==
Furthermore, carbon assimilation levels were quantiﬁed looking at the daily change in GPP
during a yearly cycle (May 2019 to May 2020). The average daily decrease of GPP was
2.47 gC · m−2 · d−1 (±0.87 gC · m−2 · d−1 ). The cumulative decrease throughout a yearly
cycle was 907 gC · m−2. It is expected that such a high decrease in PAR would have a
signiﬁcant decrease in carbon assimilation by the coﬀee plants, as predicted by the model.
However, additional aspects are important to consider under this complex production sys-
tem. Firstly, GPP is greatly aﬀected by the rate of light use eﬃciency as expressed by the
parameter LUEmax in the SVEN model. As explained in the study by Charbonnier et al.
(2017), the reduction of fAPAR that can be observed in AFS can be partially compensated
by an increase in the light-use eﬃciency, which is in turns reducing the diﬀerence in net
primary productivity between shaded and non-shaded plants. More speciﬁcally, although
the presence of shade trees reduced irradiance reaching the coﬀee trees by 60%, light use
eﬃciency was increased by 50%, therefore net primary productivity was not signiﬁcantly
aﬀected by the presence of shade trees. This is due to increase in diﬀuse radiation under
shaded conditions as well as a decrease in plant respiration, both increasing LUE (Char-
bonnier et al., 2013). As plant respiration is temperature-dependent, lower temperatures
observed under the shading canopy would be expected to decrease leaf respiration. On
the other hand, LUEmax is enhanced under diﬀuse lighting conditions since saturation of
photosynthetic activity is avoided and diﬀuse light tends to have deeper penetration in
canopies (Wang et al., 2018). Additionally, looking at the AFS canopy as a system, it is
important to consider the contribution of shade trees to the rate of carbon assimilation.
In fact, an increase in ecosystem productivity per area of crop has been associated with
agroforestry systems (Charbonnier et al., 2017).
Finally, soil water dynamics were quantiﬁed looking at the simulated soil water storage
during a yearly cycle (from May 2019 to May 2020). An average daily increase in soil
water storage of 4.41 mm (±3.24 mm) was observed during this period and a cumulative
increase in available water of 1,620 mm/m2 during a yearly cycle. To put this amount
into perspective, it’s interesting to note that the total amount of water supplied in the plot
under sun as irrigation in order to induce blossoming was 170 mm/m2. Since soil water
dynamics are directly aﬀected by parameters such as rooting depth and vegetation cover-
age, it is highly unlikely that the total change in SWS would be available to coﬀee plants
and a proportion would be consumed by shade trees. These interactions are of course too
complex to be accurately simulated with this simpliﬁed approach and parameters such as
Cveg and SWSmax would have to be reconsidered in order to adjust the simulation to an
AFS system. Interestingly enough though, study in a coﬀee AFS depicted the complemen-
tary use of available water by coﬀee plants and shading trees due to the fact that reference
rooting depth was diﬀerent for the two species (Mu˜noz-Villers et al., 2020). While coﬀee
plants mainly retrieved water from the top layer of the soil, shading trees with deeper roots
were able to retrieve water from deeper soil layers.
As already mentioned, the complexity of AFS is particularly hard to handle in a modelling
concept without making important simpliﬁcations. Nonetheless, these simpliﬁcations can
often compromise the validity of the derived results, especially when it comes to parame-
ters that, under these complex systems, tend to be highly correlated. At the same time,
feedback eﬀects are observed as shading canopy alters the microclimate, aﬀecting air tem-
perature, pressure and wind speed locally, which in turns are determining factors for the
48
==PAGE:59==
Figure 3.12: Change in model predictions of surface temperature (Ts), gross primary
productivity (GPP) and soil water storage (SWS) on a daily time scale for a reduction
of shortwave incoming radiation to 10% of its original value.
energy and water budgets in the ecosystem. Radiation budgets play a crucial role for the
functioning of the system but at the same time, several factors are aﬀecting the reﬂectance
of a plant canopy making it hard to quantify with accuracy. Besides the method of data
acquisition aﬀecting the recorded reﬂectance, canopy geometry, soil structures (e.g. soil-
beds) and shade, all aﬀect the quantiﬁed output (Alves Varella et al., 2015). This spatial
heterogeneity is even more evident in AFS canopies. Canopy reﬂectance comprises sev-
eral components such as the proportion of sun-lit and shaded vegetation, as well as the
proportion of sun-lit soil and vegetated soil and the contribution of each one of them de-
pends on the management of the crop and the planting scheme, the age of the plants and
the geometry of the sensor (Alves Varella et al., 2015). Consequently, comparison of the
reﬂectances (and accordingly vegetation indices derived from these reﬂectances, such as
NDVI) between parcels of a crop may not be indicative of the conditions of the plants. In
that sense, although it could be expected that an AFS canopy would have a higher NDVI
than a monoculture, this is not always the case, since diﬀerent types of vegetation come
with varying reﬂective properties.
49
==PAGE:60==
Summarising the above, it becomes evident that the implementation of SVEN model into
an AFS comes with some additional requirements. In principle, the model’s simplicity
in terms of required input data comes in certain contradiction with the complexity of
these systems. To be more speciﬁc, although standard meteorological observations and
widely available satellite data are needed as inputs to the model, more precise micro-
meteorological observations would be required for an accurate representation of conditions
within the shaded canopy. As studies have shown, air temperature, relative humidity and
radiative forcing could be signiﬁcantly altered underneath the shading canopy (Lin, 2007;
Charbonnier et al., 2013; Souza et al., 2012). Additionally, canopy height usually presents
high spatial heterogeneity and that alone can be quite challenging from a modelling per-
spective, compromising the accurate estimation of radiative ﬂuxes.
The modelling complexity described above exceeds the scope of this master thesis and
consequently a simpliﬁed approach was chosen in order to simulate the production of coﬀee
under shade. However, the model’s simplicity can be very useful in estimating the isolated
eﬀect of speciﬁc parameters in a sort of sensitivity analysis, such as the one performed here
for the input of solar radiation.
50
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 4
Conclusion
The main objective of this study was to apply the Soil-Vegetation-Energy-TraNsfer model
to a commercial coﬀee plantation in Costa Rica during the transition from the dry to
the wet season and assess the accuracy of the model in depicting the interactions within
the soil-vegetation-atmosphere continuum. The model validation with micrometeorological
observations and partially with satellite data showed a good correlation between observed
and simulated values.
The model performed quite well in predicting sensible (H) and
latent heat (LE) ﬂuxes, as well as net radiation (Rn). The model’s performance in cap-
turing trends in gross primary productivity (GPP) and land surface temperature (Ts) was
reduced compared to the energy budgets. The comparison between the half-hourly and
daily temporal scales showed a better ﬁt of the model on a half-hourly time scale which
was surprising and suggests that the model biases are not randomly distributed and can-
celled when averaged but systematic. The good results for the energy budgets open up
good prospects for operational applications in close to real time conditions. Using sub-
daily estimation on crop water use and crop water deﬁcit is an essential information for
the adaptation of the management practices to the changing needs of the plantation. An
important aspect of the management of the coﬀee plantation is the optimisation of the
harvesting process. To distribute workload during harvest, blossoming of coﬀee plants is
induced successively in the diﬀerent plots through intensive irrigation for a short period
of time. In order for the coﬀee plants to blossom, an intense period of watering needs
to follow an extensive period of drought (Rodriguez et al., 2011; DaMatta et al., 2007).
Monitoring of the received radiation and ET levels in each plot, could help optimise the
irrigation process, through correlation with the plants’ stress levels. This in turn would
minimize the amount of water needed to induce ﬂowering in the plants. Furthermore, other
interesting aspects related to water use should be considered. Although coﬀee agriculture
is in most cases rainfed, increasing temperatures are expected to eventually induce stress
to the plants, introducing the need for irrigation (Lin, 2007). In that case, monitoring of
ET levels as well as soil water content can be used for the optimisation or irrigation timing.
Moreover, coupling of an operational remote sensing-based model such as SVEN with crop
growth models (CGM) can help in the prediction of yield, as CGM require as inputs some
of the output variables of SVEN (Vezy et al., 2020). This can assist producers in a better
planning both in terms of the harvest period as well as the post-harvest processing stages.
Finally, an essential aspect of a proper monitoring both of water and carbon budgets at
the ﬁeld, is the conservation and promotion of ecosystem services. This can be especially
relevant for producers in Costa Rica, where a system of payments for ecosystem services is
established, providing incentives for farmers to contribute to conservation of biodiversity
51
==PAGE:62==
and sustainable use of available water resources (Pagiola, 2008).
An essential advantage of the SVEN model is its low requirements in terms of input data.
Standard meteorological observations and satellite data are used as input while the ma-
jority of parameters can be retrieved from look-up tables and literature on similar biome
types. If soil texture type is not available and a soil analysis is not accessible at a low
cost, calibration of parameters could be based on drone images, as explained by Wang et
al. (2019b). The fact that SVEN runs using standard meteorological data without the
requirement for continuous monitoring of micrometeorological observations (like EC data),
is an important advantage, especially for the implementation of the model in small to
medium scale agriculture as well as in developing countries. Nonetheless, a full sensitivity
analysis of the model to the diﬀerent parameters should be performed in order to prioritize
distribution of available resources to the accurate estimation of the most crucial parameters.
The second objective of this study was to use the calibrated model as a tool to explore some
of the beneﬁts in terms of water use, surface temperature and radiation budgets due to the
change in top of the canopy incoming shortwave radiation. The simpliﬁed approach that
was implemented was basically a sensitivity analysis decreasing the shortwave radiative
forcing according to in-situ measurements. As expected, the simulation showed a decrease
in daily Ts, a decrease in GPP for coﬀee and an increase in terms of soil water storage
(SWS). The average surface temperature had a decrease of 2 - 5.5 ◦C which can have a
signiﬁcant eﬀect in reducing stress for plants, especially under a warming scenario due to
climate change. The changes in GPP (decrease of 2.5 gC · m−2 · d−1 on average) and SWS
(increase of 4.4 mm of water daily on average) can be seen from two diﬀerent perspectives.
First, from the coﬀee plants’ perspective, decrease in GPP can lead to reduced yield, while
increased water availability means partial decline in stressful conditions for plants. Second,
from an ecosystem perspective, these changes need to be coupled with the contribution of
the trees’ layer, in terms of GPP and water use. These observations clarify on what would
be needed for a full adaptation of the model to shaded conditions. Two diﬀerent approaches
could be followed; simulation of the coﬀee plants layer alone, or simulation of the combined
system of plants and shade trees. In the ﬁrst case, shading canopy would be treated as
an external ”forcing” to the system (approach followed in this study), while in the second
case, an ”eﬀective” layer combining both coﬀee plants and shading canopy would have to
be considered. In any case, micrometeorological observations within the shaded plot would
be required for model validation. However challenging, further research on the potential
beneﬁts of shade in agricultural systems could be valuable for the mitigation of the eﬀects of
climate change and adaptation of agriculture to more sustainable use of available resources.
52
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
Acker, J. G. and Leptoukh, G. (2007). Online Analysis Enhances Use of NASA Earth Sci-
ence Data. Eos, Transactions of the American Geophysical Union, 88(2):14–17. Accessed
on 22/5/2020.
Alves Varella, C. A., Gleriani, J. M., and dos Santos, R. M. (2015). Precision agriculture
and remote sensing. Sugarcane: Agricultural Production, Bioenergy and Ethanol, pages
185–203. doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-802239-9.00009-8.
Atangana, A., Khasa, D., Chang, S., and Degrande, A. (2014). Tropical Agroforestry.
Springer Netherlands. doi:10.1007/978-94-007-7723-1.
Bennetzen, E. H. (2016). Greenhouse Gas Emissions from Agricultural Production. Mas-
ter’s thesis, Department of Plant and Environmental Sciences, Faculty of Science, Uni-
versity of Copenhagen.
Burba, G. and DJ, A. (2010). A Brief Practical Guide to Eddy Covariance Flux Measure-
ments: Principles and Workﬂow Examples for Scientiﬁc and Industrial Applications.
doi: 10.13140/RG.2.1.1626.4161.
Calvet, J. C., Noilhan, J., and Bessemoulin, P. (1998).
Retrieving the root-zone soil
moisture from surface soil moisture or temperature estimates: A feasibility study based
on ﬁeld measurements. Journal of Applied Meteorology, 37(4):371–386. doi:10.1175/1520-
0450(1998)037¡0371:RTRZSM¿2.0.CO;2.
Campbell, J. and Wynne, R. (2011). Introduction to Remote Sensing, Fifth Edition. Guil-
ford Publications.
Carlson, T. N., Gillies, R. R., and Schmugge, T. J. (1995). An interpretation of methodolo-
gies for indirect measurement of soil water content. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology,
77(3-4):191–205. doi: 10.1016/0168-1923(95)02261-U.
Carsel,
R. and Parrish,
R. (1988).
Developing joint probability-distributions of
soil-water
retention
characteristics.
Water
Resources
Research,
24(5):755–769.
doi:10.1029/WR024i005p00755.
Charbonnier, F., le Maire, G., Dreyer, E., Casanoves, F., Christina, M., Dauzat,
J., Eitel, J. U., Vaast, P., Vierling, L. A., and Roupsard, O. (2013).
Competi-
tion for light in heterogeneous canopies: Application of maestra to a coﬀee (coﬀea
arabica l.) agroforestry system.
Agricultural and Forest Meteorology, 181:152–169.
doi:10.1016/j.agrformet.2013.07.010.
Charbonnier, F., Roupsard, O., le Maire, G., Guillemot, J., Casanoves, F., Lacointe, A.,
Vaast, P., Allinne, C., Audebert, L., Cambou, A., Cl´ement-Vidal, A., Defrenet, E.,
Duursma, R. A., Jarri, L., Jourdan, C., Khac, E., Leandro, P., Medlyn, B. E., Saint-
Andr´e, L., Thaler, P., Van Den Meersche, K., Barquero Aguilar, A., Lehner, P., and
53
==PAGE:64==
Dreyer, E. (2017). Increased light-use eﬃciency sustains net primary productivity of
shaded coﬀee plants in agroforestry system. Plant Cell and Environment, 40(8):1592–
1608. doi:10.1111/pce.12964.
Costa, J. d. O., Coelho, R. D., Barros, T. H. d. S., Fraga Junior, E. F., and Fernandes,
A. L. T. (2019). Leaf area index and radiation extinction coeﬃcient of a coﬀee canopy
under variable drip irrigation levels. Acta Scientiarum - Agronomy, 41(1):e42703. doi:
10.4025/actasciagron.v41i1.42703.
Culf, A., Foken, T., and Gash, J. (2004). The Energy Balance Closure Problem. In: Kabat
P. et al. (eds) Vegetation, Water, Humans and the Climate. Global Change — The IGBP
Series. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-18948-713.
DaMatta, F. M., Ronchi, C. P., Maestri, M., and Barros, R. S. (2007).
Ecophysiology
of coﬀee growth and production. Brazilian Journal of Plant Physiology, 19(4):485–510.
doi:10.1590/S1677-04202007000400014.
Davis, A. P., Gole, T. W., Baena, S., and Moat, J. (2012). The impact of climate change
on indigenous arabica coﬀee (coﬀea arabica): Predicting future trends and identifying
priorities. Plos One, 7(11):e47981. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0047981.
Dickinson, R. E. (1984). Modeling Evapotranspiration for Three-Dimensional Global Climate
Models, pages 58–72. American Geophysical Union (AGU). doi: 10.1029/GM029p0058.
Donnet, M. L. (2007). Essays on specialty coﬀee procurement. PhD dissertation, Michigan
State University.
ESA
(2015).
Sentinel-2
User
Handbook.
European
Space
Agency.
https:
//sentinels.copernicus.eu/web/sentinel/user-guides/document-library/-/
asset_publisher/xlslt4309D5h/content/sentinel-2-user-handbook.
Accessed
on
25/06/2020.
FAO (2009).
The ETo Calculator. Reference Manual, Version 3.1.
Food and Agricul-
ture Organization of the United States. http://www.fao.org/fileadmin/user_upload/
faowater/docs/ReferenceManualETo.pdf. Accessed on 31/05/2020.
FAO (2018).
Transforming Food and Agriculture to Achieve the SDGs.
Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United States.
http://www.fao.org/publications/
transforming-food-agriculture-to-achieve-sdg/en/. Accessed on 15/04/2020.
FAO (2020).
Faostat.
http://www.fao.org/faostat/en/#data/QC.
Accessed on
27/02/2020.
Fisher, J. B., Tu, K. P., and Baldocchi, D. D. (2008). Global estimates of the land-atmosphere
water ﬂux based on monthly AVHRR and ISLSCP-II data, validated at 16 FLUXNET sites.
Remote Sensing of Environment, 112(3):901–919. doi: 10.1016/j.rse.2007.06.025.
Garc´ıa, M., Sandholt, I., Ceccato, P., Ridler, M., Mougin, E., Kergoat, L., Morillas, L.,
Timouk, F., Fensholt, R., and Domingo, F. (2013). Actual evapotranspiration in drylands
derived from in-situ and satellite data: Assessing biophysical constraints. Remote Sensing
of Environment, 131:103–118. doi: 10.1016/j.rse.2012.12.016.
Gu, C., Ma, J., Zhu, G., Yang, H., Zhang, K., Wang, Y., and Gu, C. (2018). Partitioning
evapotranspiration using an optimized satellite-based et model across biomes. Agricultural
and Forest Meteorology, 259:355–363. doi: 10.1016/j.agrformet.2018.05.023.
54
==PAGE:65==
G´omez-Delgado, F., Roupsard, O., Moussa, R., le Maire, G., Taugourdeau, S., Bonnefond,
J. M., P´erez, A., van Oijen, M., Vaast, P., Rapidel, B., Voltz, M., Imbach, P., and
Harmand, J. M. (2010).
Modelling the hydrological behaviour of a coﬀee agroforestry
basin in Costa Rica. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences Discussions, 7(3):3015–3071.
doi:10.5194/hessd-7-3015-2010.
Hauschild, M. Z., Rosenbaum, R. K., and Olsen, S. I. (2018). Life Cycle Assessment - Theory
and Practice. Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-56475-3.
Hergoualc’h, K., Blanchart, E., Skiba, U., H´enault, C., and Harmand, J. M. (2012). Changes
in carbon stock and greenhouse gas balance in a coﬀee (Coﬀea arabica) monoculture versus
an agroforestry system with Inga densiﬂora, in Costa Rica. Agriculture, Ecosystems and
Environment, 148:102–110. doi:10.1016/j.agee.2011.11.018.
Huete, A. (1987). A soil-adjusted vegetation index (SAVI). Remote Sensing of Environment,
25(25):295–309.
ICO (2020). Coﬀee production by exporting countries. International Coﬀee Organisation.
http://www.ico.org/prices/po-production.pdf. Accessed on 17/04/2020.
Jha, S., Bacon, C. M., Philpott, S. M., M´endez, V. E., L¨aderach, P., and Rice, R. A. (2014).
Shade coﬀee: Update on a disappearing refuge for biodiversity. Bioscience, 64(5):416–428.
doi:10.1093/biosci/biu038.
Juszak, I. and Pellicciotti, F. (2013). A comparison of parameterizations of incoming longwave
radiation over melting glaciers: Model robustness and seasonal variability.
Journal of
Geophysical Research Atmospheres, 118(8):3066–3084. doi:10.1002/jgrd.50277.
Konzelmann, T., van de Wal, R. S., Greuell, W., Bintanja, R., Henneken, E. A., and Abe-
Ouchi, A. (1994). Parameterization of global and longwave incoming radiation for the
Greenland ice-sheet.
Global and Planetary Change, 9(1-2):143–164.
doi:10.1016/0921-
8181(94)90013-2.
Krishnan, S. (2017). Sustainable coﬀee production. Oxford Research Encyclopedia, pages
1–34. doi: 10.1093/acrefore/9780199389414.013.224.
Kufa, T. and Burkhardt, J. (2013). Studies on root growth of coﬀea arabica populations and
its implication for sustainable management of natural forests. journal of agricultural and
crop research, 1(1): 1-10. Journal of Agricultural and Crop Research, 1:1–10.
Leuning, R. (1995).
A critical appraisal of a combined stomatal-photosynthesis model
for c3 plants.
Plant, Cell and Environment, 18(4):339–355.
doi:
10.1111/j.1365-
3040.1995.tb00370.x.
LI-COR
Biosciences
(2019a).
LAI2200
Plant
Canopy
Analyser
instruction
man-
ual.
LI-COR
Biosciences.
https://www.licor.com/env/products/leaf_area/
LAI-2200C/?gclid=CjwKCAjwrvv3BRAJEiwAhwOdM5JlZaQd4C-6jPXr8hMQ1U6e_
0-8Ii8abzzUoyJNZxqDoIgu3pfHuBoC8kQQAvD_BwE. Accessed on 25/04/2020.
LI-COR Biosciences (2019b).
LI-COR 7200/RS Enclosed CO2/H2O Gas Analyser
instruction manual.
LI-COR
Biosciences.
https://www.licor.com/documents/
k8b90wiwdhietarx04qd. Accessed on 25/06/2020.
LI-COR Biosciences (2020a). LI-1500 Light Sensor Logger. LI-COR Biosciences. https:
//www.licor.com/env/products/light/light_logger.html. Accessed on 25/06/2020.
55
==PAGE:66==
LI-COR Biosciences (2020b). LI-200R Pyranometer Brochure. LI-COR Biosciences. https:
//www.licor.com/env/products/light/pyranometer. Accessed on 25/06/2020.
Liang, S., Li, X., and Wang, J. (2012).
Advanced Remote Sensing.
Elsevier Inc.
doi:10.1016/c2010-0-67304-4.
Lin, B. B. (2007). Agroforestry management as an adaptive strategy against potential micro-
climate extremes in coﬀee agriculture. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology, 144(1-2):85–94.
doi:10.1016/j.agrformet.2006.12.009.
Lloyd, J. and Taylor, J. (1994). On the temperature-dependence of soil respiration. Functional
Ecology, 8(3):315–323.
Ministry of Agriculture, B. C. (2015). Soil water storage capacity and available soil moisture.
Water Conservation Factsheet.
https://www.droughtmanagement.info/literature/
BC_MA_Soil_Water_Storage_Capacity_2005.pdf.
Monteith, J. L. (1972). Solar-Radiation and Productivity in Tropical Ecosystems. Journal
of Applied Ecology, 9(3):747–766. doi: 10.2307/2401901.
Mualem,
Y. (1976).
A new model for predicting the hydraulic conductivity of
unsaturated
porous
media.
Water
Resources
Research,
12(3):513–22,
513–522.
doi:10.1029/WR012i003p00513.
Muschler,
R.
G.
(2001).
Shade
improves
coﬀee
quality
in
a
sub-optimal
coﬀee-zone
of
costa
rica.
Agroforestry
Systems,
51(2):131–139,
131–139.
https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1011863426305.
Mu˜noz-Villers, L. E., Geris, J., Alvarado-Barrientos, M. S., Holwerda, F., and Dawson, T.
(2020).
Coﬀee and shade trees show complementary use of soil water in a traditional
agroforestry ecosystem.
Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, 24(4):1649–1668.
doi:
10.5194/hess-24-1649-2020.
Noilhan, J. and Mahfouf, J. F. (1996). The isba land surface parameterisation scheme. Global
and Planetary Change, 13(1-4):145–159. doi:10.1016/0921-8181(95)00043-7.
Noilhan, J. and Planton, S. (1989). A simple parameterization of land surface processes
for meteorological models. Monthly Weather Review, 117(3):536–549. doi:10.1175/1520-
0493(1989)117¡0536:ASPOLS¿2.0.CO;2.
Pagiola, S. (2008). Payments for environmental services in Costa Rica. Ecological Economics,
65(4):712 – 724. Payments for Environmental Services in Developing and Developed Coun-
tries. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2007.07.033.
Peel, M. C., Finlayson, B. L., and McMahon, T. A. (2007). Updated world map of the
k¨oppen-geiger climate classiﬁcation. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, 11(5):1633–
1644. doi:10.5194/hess-11-1633-2007.
Priestley, C. H. B. and Taylor, R. J. (1972). On the assessment of surface heat ﬂux and
evaporation using large-scale parameters. Monthly Weather Review, 100(2):81–92. doi:
10.1175/1520-0493(1972)100¡0081:OTAOSH¿2.3.CO;2.
Putra, B. T. W. (2020). New low-cost portable sensing system integrated with on-the-go fer-
tilizer application system for plantation crops. Measurement: Journal of the International
Measurement Confederation, 155:107562. doi:10.1016/j.measurement.2020.107562.
Rausch, L. (2005). The Coﬀeeness of Costa Rica. Master’s thesis, The University of Kansas.
56
==PAGE:67==
Reddy, P. P. (2017).
Precision agriculture.
Agro-ecological Approaches To Pest Man-
agement for Sustainable Agriculture,
pages 295–309.
doi:10.1007/978-981-10-4325-
319, 10.1007/978 −981 −10 −4325 −3.
Reichstein, M., Falge, E., Baldocchi, D., Papale, D., Aubinet, M., Berbigier, P., Bernhofer,
C., Buchmann, N., Gilmanov, T., Granier, A., Gr¨unwald, T., Havr´ankov´a, K., Ilvesniemi,
H., Janous, D., Knohl, A., Laurila, T., Lohila, A., Loustau, D., Matteucci, G., Meyers, T.,
Miglietta, F., Ourcival, J., Pumpanen, J., Rambal, S., Rotenberg, E., Sanz, M., Tenhunen,
J., Seufert, G., Vaccari, F., Vesala, T., Yakir, D., and Valentini, R. (2005).
On the
separation of net ecosystem exchange into assimilation and ecosystem respiration: review
and improved algorithm. Global Change Biology, 11(9):1424–1439. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-
2486.2005.001002.x, 10.1111/j.1365-2486.2005.001002.x.
Rodriguez, D., Ricardo Cure, J., Miguel Cotes, J., Gutierrez, A. P., and Cantor, F. (2011).
A coﬀee agroecosystem model: I. growth and development of the coﬀee plant. Ecological
Modelling, 222(19):3626–3639. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2011.08.003.
Rueda, X., Thomas, N. E., and Lambin, E. F. (2014). Eco-certiﬁcation and coﬀee cultivation
enhance tree cover and forest connectivity in the colombian coﬀee landscapes. Regional
Environmental Change, 15(1):25–33. doi:10.1007/s10113-014-0607-y.
Ruimy, A., Kergoat, L., and Bondeau, A. (1999). Comparing global models of terrestrial
net primary productivity (npp): Analysis of diﬀerences in light absorption and light-use
eﬃciency. Global Change Biology, 5(1):56–64. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2486.1999.00007.x.
Running, S. W., Nemani, R. R., Heinsch, F. A., Zhao, M., Reeves, M., and Hashimoto, H.
(2004). A continuous satellite-derived measure of global terrestrial primary production.
Bioscience, 54(6):547. doi: 10.1641/0006-3568(2004)054[0547:ACSMOG]2.0.CO;2.
Sandholt, I., Rasmussen, K., and Andersen, J. (2020). A simple interpretation of the surface
temperature/vegetation index space for assessment of surface moisture status.
Schlundt, C., Kokhanovsky, A., Hoyningen-Huene, W., Dinter, T., Istomina, L., and Burrows,
J. (2011). Synergetic cloud fraction determination for sciamachy using meris. Atmospheric
Measurement Techniques, 4. doi: 10.5194/amt-4-319-2011.
Souza, H. N. d., de Goede, R. G., Brussaard, L., Cardoso, I. M., Duarte, E. M., Fernandes,
R. B., Gomes, L. C., and Pulleman, M. M. (2012). Protective shade, tree diversity and
soil properties in coﬀee agroforestry systems in the atlantic rainforest biome. Agriculture,
Ecosystems and Environment, 146(1):179–196. doi:10.1016/j.agee.2011.11.007.
Takahashi, R. and Todo, Y. (2014).
The impact of a shade coﬀee certiﬁcation program
on forest conservation using remote sensing and household data. Environmental Impact
Assessment Review, 44:76–81. doi:10.1016/j.eiar.2013.10.002.
UN (2020). Sustainable Development Goals Knowledge Platform. United Nations. https:
//sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdgs. Accessed on 15/04/2020.
Van De Griend, A. A. and Owe, M. (1993). On the relationship between thermal emissivity
and the normalized diﬀerence vegetation index for natural surfaces.
Vezy, R., le Maire, G., Christina, M., Georgiou, S., Imbach, P., Hidalgo, H. G., Alfaro,
E. J., Blitz-Frayret, C., Charbonnier, F., Lehner, P., Loustau, D., and Roupsard, O.
(2020).
Dynacof:
A process-based model to study growth, yield and ecosystem ser-
57
==PAGE:68==
vices of coﬀee agroforestry systems. Environmental Modelling and Software, 124:104609.
doi:10.1016/j.envsoft.2019.104609.
Wang, S., Garcia, M., Bauer-Gottwein, P., Jakobsen, J., Zarco-Tejada, P. J., Bandini, F.,
Paz, V. S., and Ibrom, A. (2019a). High spatial resolution monitoring land surface energy,
water and co2 ﬂuxes from an unmanned aerial system. Remote Sensing of Environment,
229:14–31. doi: 10.1016/j.rse.2019.03.040.
Wang, S., Garcia, M., Ibrom, A., and Bauer-Gottwein, P. (2019b). Temporal interpolation of
land surface ﬂuxes derived from remote sensing – results with an Unmanned Aerial System.
Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci. Discuss. https://doi.org/10.5194/hess-2019-490.
Wang, S., Ibrom, A., Bauer-Gottwein, P., and Garcia, M. (2018).
Incorporating diﬀuse
radiation into a light use eﬃciency and evapotranspiration model:
An 11-year study
in a high latitude deciduous forest.
Agricultural and Forest Meteorology, 248:479–493.
doi:10.1016/j.agrformet.2017.10.023.
Weiss,
M.,
Jacob,
F.,
and
Duveiller,
G.
(2020).
Remote
sensing
for
agricul-
tural applications:
A meta-review.
Remote Sensing of Environment, 236:111402.
doi:10.1016/j.rse.2019.111402.
Zhou, Y., Wu, X., Ju, W., Chen, J. M., Wang, S., Wang, H., Yuan, W., Black, T. A.,
Jassal, R., Ibrom, A., Han, S., Yan, J., Margolis, H., Roupsard, O., Li, Y., Zhao, F.,
Kiely, G., Starr, G., Pavelka, M., Montagnani, L., Wohlfahrt, G., D’Odorico, P., Cook,
D., Arain, M. A., Bonal, D., Beringer, J., Blanken, P. D., Loubet, B., Leclerc, M. Y.,
Matteucci, G., Nagy, Z., Olejnik, J., Tha Paw U, K., and Varlagin, A. (2015). Global
parameterization and validation of a two-leaf light use eﬃciency model for predicting gross
primary production across ﬂuxnet sites: Tl-lue parameterization and validation. Journal
of Geophysical Research: Biogeosciences, 121(4):1045–1072. doi:10.1002/2014JG002876.
58
