==PAGE:1==
Microstructure of the Creep Resistant 11%Cr
Steel, Z8
MSc Thesis, Materials and Manufacturing Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Euan Emil Glemminge Gordon
Supervisor: Professor John Hald, Department of Mechanical Engineering,
Technical University of Denmark
August 2020
==PAGE:2==
Contents
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Motivation for this investigation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Theory
5
2.1
Understanding creep and its mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Hardening mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.2
Softening mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
9% chromium steel microstructure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Precipitate phases
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.1
M23C6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.2
Laves phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.3
M2X . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.4
MX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.5
Z-phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
Z8 chemical composition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5
Z8 heat treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.6
Observed Z8 creep strength . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.7
Z8 microstructure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Methods
19
3.1
Heat treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Static oven aging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
Creep rupture testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4
Metallographic preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.5
Vickers hardness measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.6
Light optical microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.7
Transmission electron microscopy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.8
MatCalc equilibrium and precipitation simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4
Results & Discussion
25
4.1
Investigation of as-tempered, as-quenched and oven aged specimens
. . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Investigation of creep ruptured 650°C/120MPa/782h specimen
. . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.3
Investigation of thin ﬁlm and carbon extraction replica specimens . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.3.1
Investigation of thin ﬁlm specimens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.3.2
Investigation of carbon extraction replica specimens . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5
Conclusion
63
6
Aknowledgements and thanks
64
A
Appendix: hardness results
67
B
Appendix: LOM images
68
B.0.1
5x10 images of oven aged specimens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
B.0.2
20x10 images of oven aged specimens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
B.0.3
50x10 images of oven aged specimens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
B.0.4
100x10 images of oven aged specimens
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
1
==PAGE:3==
1
Introduction
Modern society is heavily reliant on thermal power cycles as a source of electrical power. Coal com-
bustion, for example, currently provides approximately 40% of the world’s energy demand, and is
not projected to signiﬁcantly decrease in the next few decades [1]. On an industrial scale, fossil
fuels are burned to facilitate heat transfer to a pressurised working ﬂuid in a boiler, such as water.
In modern USC (ultra-supercritical) power plants this raises both the pressure and temperature of
the working ﬂuid such that it changes from a liquid to supercritical ﬂuid, resulting in a ﬂuid with high
thermal energy. The most eﬃcient known way to capture energy from such a thermal system for
the purpose of generating electricity is through the use of a steam turbine coupled with an electrical
generator, where thermal energy is turned into electrical energy as the pressure and temperature
of the working ﬂuid drops across the steam turbine. After passing through the turbine the eﬄuent
ﬂuid (low pressure and temperature) is condensed back to a liquid state and then pumped back
to the boiler unit for reheating, completing the thermal power cycle. A basic schematic of such a
thermal power cycle is provided in ﬁgure 1.
Figure 1: Schematic of steam power cycle for generation of electrical power [2].
This energy conversion and the associated thermal cycle, providing electrical energy at an eco-
nomically aﬀordable rate, is what powers society. Given that fossil fueled thermal power plants like
this are also responsible for a signiﬁcant proportion of society’s CO2 production, any measure that
increases eﬃciency of this process is highly desirable, since this would minimise fuel consumption
and CO2 production. The ideal eﬃciency of the thermal power cycle (Carnot cycle) employed in
fossil fueled power stations is described with equation 1 [3]:
ideal efficiency = 1 −(Tcold/Thot)
(1)
Equation 1 shows that the ideal eﬃciency of such cycles increases with the temperature of the
working ﬂuid entering the steam turbine (Thot). Decreasing temperature of the working ﬂuid ex-
iting the steam turbine (Tcold) also increases the ideal eﬃciency. This ideal eﬃciency will always
be greater than the actual (real-world) eﬃciency of the system due to physical limitations, but in-
creases in the ideal eﬃciency also correspond to an increase in actual eﬃciency. Therefore, ideal
eﬃciency should be maximised until a physical limitation is reached. This report focuses on the lim-
iting factor of maximising Thot, which turns out to be limited by the creep strength and corrosion
resistance of the steel alloy used for making several critical components exposed to the working
2
==PAGE:4==
ﬂuid in the power plant, such as boiler tubes and sections of the steam turbine housing. This is
further explained in section 2.
Corrosion resistance is necessary to protect the steel alloy from signiﬁcant oxidation damage.
The chromium content of the alloy provides this protection through chromium’s ability to form a
protective, chemically passivating oxide layer on the surface of the alloy.
In crystalline materials such as steel alloys, creep can be described as the movement of disloca-
tions (plastic deformation) over longer periods of time while under constant stresses (that are less
than the material’s yield strength), eventually leading to failure of the material. This occurs in crys-
talline materials via diﬀusion processes which typically become signiﬁcant at temperatures greater
than 0.4 times Tm (melting temperature of the material). This is because the rate of diﬀusion (dif-
fusion coeﬃcient, D) increases with temperature, following an Arrhenius type behaviour as seen in
equation 2 where D is the diﬀusion coeﬃcient and T is the temperature:
D = D0exp(Ea/(RT))
(2)
Creep is mitigated through several diﬀerent creep strengthening mechanisms facilitated by the
heat treatment processes and chemical composition of the steel alloy. This is further discussed in
section 2.1.1.
Improved understanding on creep and how to mitigate it has resulted in steady improvements
in both alloy creep strength and corrosion resistance during the 20th century. Correspondingly,
operating temperatures and eﬃciencies have risen too. The addition of low amounts of chromium
and molybdenum in the 1920’s improved the steel creep strength which allowed for an increase
of operating parameters from 350°C & 15bar to 450°C & 35bar. This was further improved with
the addition of vanadium in the 1950’s, increasing operating parameters to 500°C & 100bar. To
improve oxidation resistance alongside increasing creep strength and operating temperature, the
chromium content of the steel was steadily increased. This led towards the development of the
state-of-the-art 9% chromium steels used today [4]. The strengthening mechanisms behind the
addition of molybdenum, vanadium and other elements is explored in further detail in section 2.
With 9% chromium steels in critical components of modern USC thermal power plants, oper-
ating parameters are limited to 620°C & 300bar, which corresponds to a real-world eﬃciency of
approximately 45%. The creep strength and corrosion resistance of this current generation alloy
comes from microstructural features that are the result of the a carefully designed heat treatment
process and chemical composition of the alloy. This is detailed in detail in section 2.2. As an ex-
ample, the necessary oxidation (corrosion) resistance is achieved with the 9wt% (weight percent)
chromium content.
To further increase maximum operating conditions beyond 620°C, and therefore the eﬃciency
of future thermal power plants, it is necessary to increase both the oxidation resistance and creep
strength of the alloy. A higher chromium content, up to 12wt%, is required to achieve a higher
level of oxidation resistance. However, as an unexpected consequence of the increased chromium
content, the creep strengthening microstructure previously used in 9% chromium steels was found
to be thermodynamically unstable at service temperatures (in between 600°C and 650°C). This re-
sults in a signiﬁcant loss of creep strength and premature rupture of the material [5]. Therefore, to
further increase the operating eﬃciency of future thermal power plants newly designed alloys are
required. These new alloys must accommodate an increased chromium content for oxidation resis-
tance without losing creep strength, and must overcome the observed microstructural instability in
current alloy design.
3
==PAGE:5==
1.1
Motivation for this investigation
Z8 is an 11% chromium steel that has been envisaged to replace the 9% chromium steels by coping
with operating conditions up to 650°C & 325bar. This could increase the real-world eﬃciency of
thermal power plants to approximately 50%.
The Z8 alloy has improved oxidation resistance from its higher chromium content and aims to
take advantage of the observed microstructural instability of the creep strengthening microstruc-
ture to provide the needed creep strength. Section 2.7 provides additional details on the creep
strengthening mechanism in Z8 suggested here. However, creep testing results of the Z8 alloy pro-
vided by Professor J. Hald, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Technical University of Denmark
have shown lower than expected creep strength, falling short of the creep strength of state-of-the-
art 9% chromium steel. This data is shown in section 2.6.
This work will investigate the microstructure of the Z8 alloy to try and gain insight into the
apparent lack of creep strength. This is investigated with one creep interrupted and two creep rup-
tured specimens of the Z8 alloy, as well as Z8 specimens in "as-quenched", "as-tempered" and "oven
aged" conditions. The eﬀect of varying the temperature used during the normalising and tempering
steps of the alloy heat treatment is also investigated with 6 unique temperature combinations of
1100°C or 1120 °C for austenitisation, and 700°C, 730°C or 750°C for tempering. Additionally,
thermodynamic and kinetic simulation of the Z8 microstructure is attempted and compared with
the real specimens. Further information on the testing methods is provided in section 3.
4
==PAGE:6==
2
Theory
Alloys intended for service at high temperatures require careful design of chemical composition
and heat treatment in order to yield a microstructure that ensures an economical service life. This
is achieved through understanding of the deformation mechanisms that occur during creep, how
they may be controlled, and the metallurgy of the alloy. Understanding this allows us to formulate
exactly what a desirable microstructure looks like. This microstructure is then controlled through
the chemical composition and heat treatment of the alloy. The theory section of this thesis aims
to detail this for current state-of-the-art high temperature steels (9% chromium steels mentioned
previously) and the potential replacement for them, Z8 steel.
2.1
Understanding creep and its mechanisms
Creep is the process of plastic deformation that occurs in a crystalline solid while under a constant
stress. This process occurs via diﬀusion of substitutional lattice atoms and is therefore a relatively
slow process, although interstitial atoms may also impact the rate of this process. In theory, this
process occurs in any stressed crystalline solid at any temperature above zero Kelvin, but is typically
not signiﬁcant at temperatures below 0.4 times the melting temperature of the solid. This is be-
cause diﬀusion rates increase with temperature according to the Arrhenius-type equation (as seen
in section 1), making creep a temperature dependent process. Exactly which creep mechanism is
dominant in high temperature steels at service temperatures and stresses has been debated [6],
but for the purposes of this report the dominant creep mechanism will be assumed to be disloca-
tion creep. Dislocation creep is the gradual movement of glissile (mobile) dislocations through the
crystal matrix (plastic deformation) via diﬀusion while under a constant stress. This happens even
when the material is at a stress level below its yield stress. However, the creep rate is ampliﬁed by
the level of applied stress.
Figure 2: Creep deformation mechanism map of an example material showing an increase in creep
strain rate (green contours) with increasing temperature and increasing stress [7].
Figure 2 maps the creep strain rate on green contour lines for an example material as a function
of both temperature and stress. Additionally, creep is also dependent upon time. Figure 3 shows a
5
==PAGE:7==
creep curve which displays the typical creep behaviour of a crystalline solid until failure (rupture).
Three stages are shown to be part of the creep process, each exhibiting a diﬀerent creep strain
rate. As the state of the microstructure changes over time at high temperature service through
diﬀusion controlled processes (such as coarsening of precipitates or sub-grains), the dominant mi-
crostructural hardening or softening mechanism may also change. The result of this is the change
in the creep stain rate seen in ﬁgure 3 with respect to time. Hardening and softening mechanisms
are detailed in sections 2.1.1 and 2.1.2, respectively. Hardening mechanisms increase resistance
to dislocation movement in the material (increasing yield stress) and reduce ductility. This is domi-
nant in the early stages of creep and gives the primary strain behaviour seen in ﬁgure 3 where the
creep stain rate is reducing with respect to time. The initial elastic strain is due to normal elastic
deformation experienced by the material while under stress. Next, there is the steady-state creep
period where the creep strain rate remains constant with respect to time. The data on Z8 in section
9 shows that Z8 has relatively little steady-state creep. Instead, primary strain and tertiary creep
are prevalent. Tertiary creep is the ﬁnal stage of the creep behaviour and ends with rupture of the
material. Softening mechanisms dominate during this stage, changing the state of the microstruc-
ture so that resistance to dislocation movement is decreased (reducing yield stress) and ductility is
increased with respect to time. This results in a sudden and drastic increase in creep strain rate,
rapidly leading to rupture.
Figure 3: Creep curve of an example material showing the three stages of typical creep behaviour
with engineering strain on y-axis. Image has been edited to exclude some information from original
image [7].
6
==PAGE:8==
2.1.1
Hardening mechanisms
The hardening mechanisms relevant to dislocation creep include boundary hardening, precipitation
hardening, dislocation hardening and solid solution hardening. Each of these hardening mechanisms
takes advantage of diﬀerent methods to introduce microscopic stresses or imperfections in the crys-
tal matrix. These stresses and imperfections then act to impede the movement of glissile disloca-
tions through the crystal matrix, slowing the creep process. The high temperature steels discussed
in this thesis primarily take advantage of precipitation hardening to build their creep strength, al-
though the other mechanisms do also play a role. Precipitation hardening takes advantage of the
metallurgy of the alloy, to precipitate many coherent/semi-coherent precipitates (less than 100nm
in diameter) dispersed throughout the microstructure of the material, which then act as obstacles
to dislocation movement. Due to the increased hardness of the precipitates and their coherency
with the matrix of the material, glissile dislocations cannot move through the precipitate-matrix
interface without increased applied stress. There are multiple proposed mechanisms that calculate
the threshold stress for a dislocation to pass a precipitate, but for the purposes of this report the
Orowan mechanism will be assumed. This is the bowing and looping of glissile dislocations around
the impeding precipitates, forming what is known as an Orowan loop. This process is demonstrated
in ﬁgure 4.
Figure 4: Formation of Orowan loops around widely spaced precipitates as a result of glissile dislo-
cation movement [8].
Correspondingly, an Orowan stress (σorowan) for dislocations to pass an impeding precipitate
may be calculated using equation 3:
σorowan = 0.8MGb/λ
(3)
Where M is the Taylor factor (equal to 3), G is the material shear modulus, b is the Burger’s
vector, and λ is the average inter-particle distance. Given that maximising the Orowan stress will
result in a maximum creep strength, it is desirable to minimize the average inter-particle distance.
This is achieved by creating a ﬁne dispersion of numerous, small precipitates in the matrix of the
material rather than fewer, larger precipitates. However, at service temperatures precipitates will
coarsen over time, increasing the average inter-particle distance, reducing the Orowan stress and
weakening the material’s creep strength. This coarsening of ﬁne precipitates is one of the softening
mechanisms discussed in section 2.1.2. To take advantage of the precipitation hardening eﬀect de-
scribed by the Orowan mechanism and create a dispersion of ﬁne precipitates, detailed knowledge
of the alloys metallurgy, precipitate phases involved and kinetics of precipitation is required. This
is discussed further with regards to high temperature steels in section 2.2 through to section 2.7.
7
==PAGE:9==
As the material deforms, glissile dislocations continue to encounter each precipitate and pile up
more Orowan loops around the precipitate, with each Orowan loop contributing to a local stress
ﬁeld in the matrix around the precipitate. This building stress ﬁeld works to further impede addi-
tional dislocation movement, giving a strain hardening eﬀect. This works because each dislocation
is a line defect in the crystal lattice, existing as a line of atom vacancies of substitutional lattice
sites. This locally distorts the lattice, inducing the microscopic stress ﬁeld. Even so, the dislocations
can still bypass the precipitate. To do this the dislocation must ﬁrst climb to a slip plane which
is unimpeded by the precipitate via diﬀusion of substitutional atoms as shown in ﬁgure 5. Once
the dislocation is unimpeded by the precipitate it can continue to move through the material un-
til it encounters yet another precipitate at which point this process must repeat. This eﬀectively
"bottle-necks" the movement speed of glissile dislocations to the diﬀusion speed of matrix atoms,
which is a relatively slow process as long as the number of impeding precipitates remains high. This
also explains the dependency of creep strain rate on temperature.
Figure 5: Demonstration of how dislocations can climb over impeding precipitates in the crystal
matrix via diﬀusion of lattice atoms [7].
Boundary hardening also works to create obstacles that oppose glissile dislocation movement
through the use of high angle boundaries (such as grain boundaries) and low angle boundaries (such
as martensite lath boundaries), rather than precipitates. These boundaries induce a microscopic
stress in the matrix of the material which impedes the movement of the glissile dislocations. This
is similar to the previously discussed precipitation hardening, although the stress ﬁeld is induced
through a diﬀerent method. Therefore, it is desirable to create a martensitic matrix in the material
to induce a high number of sub-grains in the microstructure, taking proper advantage of boundary
hardening. Together with precipitation hardening these boundaries are prevented from coarsening
since precipitates act to hinder movement of sub-grain boundaries composed of dislocations, sta-
bilising the dislocation structure and alloy strength.
Solid solution hardening also induces stresses in the matrix of the material by dissolving a sol-
uble chemical species into a solid solution that acts to impede the movement of dislocations. The
dissolved species occupies a substitutional lattice site with an atomic size (radius) that is signiﬁ-
cantly diﬀerent from that of the matrix chemical species. This creates a point defect in the crystal
lattice through the mismatch of atomic sizes of the atoms, which distorts the crystal lattice and
generates a local stress ﬁeld. The stress ﬁeld can then impede the movement of glissile dislocations
through the matrix of the material. In the high temperature steels studied in this report this eﬀect
is achieved by the controlled addition of the alloying elements molybdenum and/or tungsten.
8
==PAGE:10==
Figure 6: Demonstration of solid solution hardening eﬀect in a state of tension (left) and compres-
sion (right). The eﬀect can be seen to arise from mismatch of size between the foreign atom and
matrix atoms. Image has been edited to exclude some information from original image [9].
Dislocation hardening is similar to solid solution hardening, where the stress ﬁeld in the matrix
of the material is generated by the presence of dislocations (empty substitutional atom sites), rather
than foreign atoms with mismatching atomic radius. Similar to solid solution hardening, the crystal
lattice is distorted and a resulting stress ﬁeld is induced, which can then interact with the stress
ﬁeld of glissile dislocations to impede their movement through the crystal lattice. The dislocation is
analogous to a line of foreign substitutional atoms with atomic radii smaller than that of the matrix
atoms.
2.1.2
Softening mechanisms
In contrast to the hardening mechanisms, softening mechanisms are changes in the state of the
microstructure that result in a reduction of mechanical strength. The softening mechanisms occur
over time via diﬀusion at higher temperatures as the microstructure of the material changes to a
more thermodynamically stable state. Changing to a more thermodynamically stable state results
in an increase in creep strain rate of the material with respect to time, which is what we see in ter-
tiary creep. The relevant softening mechanisms to dislocation creep are the loss of ﬁne precipitates,
recovery of martensite, sub-grain coarsening, and the recovery of excess dislocations.
As mentioned when discussing precipitation hardening, smaller size and a higher population
of precipitates will result in a higher creep strength. Losing these numerous ﬁne precipitates will
also cause this creep strength to be lost, since then glissile dislocations encounter fewer impeding
precipitates as they move. Once formed (typically during initial heat treatment), ﬁne precipitates
will over time coarsen to larger, fewer particles at service temperatures due to the driving force to
minimise the curvature of the precipitate/matrix interface. In the case of high temperature steels,
a similar process occurs where the ﬁne precipitates are redissolved to grow a more thermodynami-
cally stable precipitate (driven by chemical driving force to form the more thermodynamically stable
precipitate), or by precipitates coarsening into larger precipitate particles of the same type. Since
these processes are driven by the microstructure changing to a more stable state, they cannot be
completely prevented. Instead, the strategy is to delay such undesirable changes by careful design
of the alloy chemical composition and heat treatment, so that the material remains useful for the
required economic service life. How the high temperature steels are designed for this is discussed
further in section 2.2.
The high temperature steels have a hard martensitic microstructure with a high density of dislo-
cations, discussed in section 2.2. Recovery of these dislocations through diﬀusion driven processes
at tempering and service temperatures results in a reduction of dislocation density and recovery
of the martensite. Similarly, recovery of sub-grains and excess dislocations are forms of disloca-
tion recovery. What martensite, sub-grain and excess dislocation recovery have in common is that
they all soften the material by the annihilation of dislocations. The diﬀerence between them is
where the dislocations come from. In recovery of martensite, dislocations from the austenite to
martensite transformation are annihilated, softening the material. Sub-grain recovery occurs when
dislocations that make up the sub-grain boundaries annihilate with each other, which coarsens the
sub-grain boundary structure. Excess dislocation recovery is the result of a change in the materi-
als dislocation density. This may occur when material is deformed at low (room) temperature and
9
==PAGE:11==
then heated to a high temperature. The low temperature deformation creates a high density of
dislocations in the material. The low rate of diﬀusion in the material at room temperature allows
the high density of dislocations remain in the material, even though this dislocation density is in
excess of the equilibrium dislocation density. Such dislocation may then be annihilated (recovered)
by heating (tempering) the material where diﬀusion rates are increased, enabling the dislocations
to move and more easily annihilate with each other. All of these dislocation recovery mechanisms
cause a softening of the material, reducing its yield stress and ultimately leading to creep rupture of
the material. Similar to the loss of ﬁne precipitates, these recovery processes cannot be prevented
and the alloy must be designed around delaying these softening processes. Precipitation hardening
is essential for preventing unwanted recovery of the dislocation structure because, as discussed
in section 2.1.1, precipitates act to impede the movement of dislocations and prevent dislocations
from moving to annihilate with each other. Therefore, we would like to design an alloy that takes
advantage of the precipitation hardening mechanism to stabilise the dislocation structure against
the recovery of sub-grains and dislocations. This maintains dislocation hardening eﬀects for as long
as possible at service temperature, giving the maximum creep strength of the material.
2.2
9% chromium steel microstructure
As mentioned in section 1, state-of-the-art high temperature steels used in high temperature ap-
plications today are designed to use several hardening mechanisms. These steels have a high creep
strength while maintaining necessary oxidation resistance to operate with an economic product life
time at 620°C & 300bar. This is achieved by careful balance of many diﬀerent alloying elements
and heat treatment of the alloy to yield the needed microstructure to achieve this material per-
formance. The chromium content of these alloys is approximately 9 weight percent and gives the
alloys their oxidation resistance and common name, 9% chromium steels. These steels typically use
the alloying elements B, C, Cr, Mn, Mo, N, Nb, Ni, Si, V and W. As an example of a 9% chromium
steel, the chemical composition of the alloy P92 is provided:
Table 1: P92 Steel Chemical Composition in Weight Percent [5]
C
N
Si
Mn
Cr
Mo
W
Ni
Nb
V
Al
B
Fe
0.11
0.049
0.17
0.43
9.27
0.48
1.701
0.25
0.067
0.197
0.005
0.0026
balance
Since these alloys are steels, their main component is iron. The matrix phase in these alloys
is formed by the iron with the other alloying elements dissolved, from which various precipitate
phases may also form. A good example of this behaviour is seen in the low carbon end of the com-
monly known metastable iron-carbon phase diagram (showing iron and the metastable cementite
precipitate), seen in ﬁgure 7.
10
==PAGE:12==
Figure 7: Metastable iron-carbon phase diagram for carbon contents between 0 and 6.7 weight
percent carbon [9].
The metastable iron-carbon phase diagram shows that below 727°C iron exists as a body-
centred cubic (BCC) crystal, known as ferrite, which is represented by the α symbol. At temper-
atures above 727°C the iron transforms to a face-centred cubic (FCC) crystal, known as austenite,
which is represented by the γ symbol.
This ferrite-austenite transformation temperature is aﬀected by the type and amount of each
alloying element used in the alloy. To control this a chromium equivalent value,Creq, is calculated as
seen in equation 4 using the chemical composition of the alloy in units of weight percentage. The
chromium equivalent number is calculated to estimate the eﬀect of several diﬀerent alloying ele-
ments on general alloy properties and then compare this to an alloy of iron with a chromium content
equal to the chromium equivalent number. The coeﬃcients corresponding to the diﬀerent alloying
elements show that the diﬀerent alloying elements eﬀect the chromium equivalent number to vary-
ing degrees. In particular, the chromium equivalent value is calculated to estimate the formation
of δ-ferrite. δ-ferrite is a chromium stabilized BCC phase in iron alloys that may form at high tem-
peratures during heat treatment (above 1493°C in ﬁgure 7) and has been found to have a negative
impact on alloy creep strength [10]. Several variations of how to calculate the chromium equivalent
number have been proposed, but for equation 4 the chromium equivalent number should be kept
under 10 to avoid δ-ferrite formation [11]. Using equation 4 the chromium equivalent value for Z8
is 8.7, so the formation of δ-ferrite is not expected.
Creq = Cr + 0.8Si + 2Mo + 1W + 4V + 2Nb + 1.7Al + 60B + 2Ti
+1Ta −20C −20N −2Ni −0.4Mn −0.6Co −0.6Cu [wt%]
(4)
The alloying elements with negative coeﬃcients are austenite stabilising elements, reducing the
ferrite-austenite transformation temperature and stabilising against δ-ferrite formation. Inversely,
the alloying elements with positive coeﬃcients stabilise the ferrite phase, increasing the ferrite-
austenite transformation temperature and promoting δ-ferrite formation. It is essential to balance
the content of austenite and ferrite stabilising elements against each other to ensure desirable alloy
properties.
11
==PAGE:13==
Figure 7 shows that the solubility of carbon is many times higher in the austenite phase than
in the ferrite phase. This behaviour is also seen in the solubility of other alloying elements, and is
essential for controlling the precipitation of phases from the matrix. During the heat treatment of
the alloy the iron matrix is transformed to its austenite phase which, because of its increased ability
to dissolve alloying elements, dissolves any precipitates. This exists as a solid solution as long as
the matrix remains at this temperature. This is the ﬁrst part of the heat treatment and is known
as austenitization. If the alloy is cooled slowly enough from this state (towards room temperature)
the microstructure will continuously transform towards its thermodynamically stable state through
diﬀusion. As discussed, once below 727°C this involves transformation from the FCC austenite to
the BCC ferrite. Given that the solubility of alloying elements is much lower in the ferrite phase, this
change to ferrite will result in the precipitation of additional phases. This is because the amount of
dissolved alloying elements exceeds the solubility limit of the ferrite matrix. The key to an optimal
heat treatment process lies in controlling this precipitation process.
If the alloy is cooled rapidly from the austenitised state not enough time is given for diﬀusion to
re-equilibrate the state of the microstructure with respect to the temperature of the alloy. In other
words, the rate of cooling is too high for the rate of diﬀusion to change the state of the microstruc-
ture to a state of equilibrium at the new temperature. This is commonly known as quenching and
in 9% chromium steels results in a body-centred tetragonal (BCT) crystal known as martensite (typ-
ically represented with a α’ symbol). Martensite is a meta-stable super-saturated solid solution of
the ferrite crystal with alloying elements. The austenite to martensite transformation (martensitic
transformation) creates a high number of dislocations and martensite laths in the microstructure
of the material which causes a signiﬁcant increase in the material hardness. The martensite laths
also serve as sub-grain boundaries and contribute to an increase in the boundary hardening eﬀect.
Given that the martensite structure is meta-stable, there is a driving force for the matrix to use
the super-saturated solution to precipitate new phases. At room temperature this driving force is
present but the precipitation cannot happen at any notable rate because of the low rate of diﬀu-
sion, allowing the meta-stable martensite to remain. This allows for the control of the precipitation
phases with a second heat treatment step, commonly called tempering. Tempering involves rais-
ing the temperature of the alloy to an elevated temperature for a controlled amount of time. This
increase in temperature increases the rate of diﬀusion for a controlled amount of time, such that
the state of the microstructure may change towards thermodynamic equilibrium at a controlled
rate before being cooled back to room temperature again. This controls how close the state of the
microstructure (and therefore the properties of the microstructure) gets to its thermodynamically
stable state. Since the alloying element content is designed to be in excess of the solubility limit of
the matrix, this will result in the precipitation of several phases from the matrix (diﬀerent alloying
elements correspond to the precipitation of diﬀerent phases). These phases have high concentra-
tions of the alloying elements and consume them from the matrix as they nucleate and grow. The
temperature and amount of time used for tempering allows for control of alloy properties to match
the needed performance. An example of such a heat treatment process is shown in ﬁgure 8.
12
==PAGE:14==
Figure 8: Example heat treatment of Z8 steel with austenitization and tempering steps.
Speciﬁcally, as the precipitation progresses during tempering, the meta-stable BCT martensite
transforms towards a more stable BCC crystal known as-tempered martensite as precipitate phases
form which contain high amounts of alloying elements. Controlling the temperature and time used
in the tempering step of the heat treatment allows for control of the size, population and chemical
composition of the precipitate phases. The major precipitate phases discussed in this thesis in high
temperature chromium steels are M23C6, Laves phase, M2X, MX and Z-phase.
2.3
Precipitate phases
2.3.1
M23C6
M23C6 is a stable, cubic structure carbide precipitate and typically consists of chromium and car-
bon, but may also include lesser amounts of iron, molybdenum, tungsten (in place of "M") or boron
(replacing "C" with "C,B"). M23C6 forms during the tempering step of the heat treatment and func-
tions to harden the alloy through the precipitation hardening mechanism. Precipitation of M23C6
consumes all pre-exisiting meta-stable carbides in the material (such as M3C or M7C3) and primarily
forms on grain boundaries and martensite laths. This precipitate may coarsen during service at high
temperatures, limiting the M23C6 precipitation hardening eﬀect on alloy creep strength. However,
recent work shows that the addition of small amounts of boron causes the formation of the boro-
carbide precipitate, M23(C, B)6. M23(C, B)6 has a lower rate of coarsening, allowing it to maintain
its precipitation strengthening eﬀect for longer periods during high temperature service, increasing
the creep strength of the alloy [12].
2.3.2
Laves phase
Laves phase is an intermetallic precipitate phase with a hexagonal crystal structure and is denoted
as (Fe, Cr)2M. It mainly consists of iron, tungsten and molybdenum but also contains chromium
and silicon (with tungsten or molybdenum in place of "M"). The precipitation of Laves phase typ-
ically occurs on grain boundaries and sub-grain boundaries during service at high temperatures,
rather than during the tempering step of the heat treatment. This is because the kinetics of pre-
cipitation for Laves phase are relatively slow since it involves the diﬀusion of large substitutional
atoms. The molybdenum and tungsten based Laves phase variants dissolve at temperatures above
650°C and 750°C, respectively. This also means that the service temperature is close to the solution
temperature of Laves phase, resulting in slow kinetics of Laves phase precipitation. The strength-
ening eﬀect of Laves phase precipitation has been debated because it consumes the solid solution
strengthening elements tungsten and molybdenum from the martensitic matrix, but at the same
time provides precipitation strengthening. Since the tungsten based Laves phase has been found to
precipitate more easily than the molybdenum based variant it forms as a ﬁner distribution of precip-
itates. A ﬁner distribution of Laves phase precipitates will increase the precipitation strengthening
eﬀect further and, therefore, better compensate for the loss of solid solution strengthening. For
13
==PAGE:15==
this reason it is desirable to form Laves phase as many ﬁne precipitates rather than fewer coarse
precipitates, making the tungsten based Laves phase more beneﬁcial than the molybdenum variant.
2.3.3
M2X
The M2X precipitate is a meta-stable carbo-nitride precipitate with a hexagonal crystal structure
and is a precursor to the MX precipitate. The "X" signiﬁes the presence of either a carbon or nitro-
gen atom, while the "M" can be a tantalum, niobium, vanadium or chromium atom. However, the
most common form of M2X precipitates in high temperature chromium steels consist of chromium
and nitrogen, Cr2N. The precipitation of M2X primarily occurs during the tempering step of the
heat treatment process on grain boundaries and martensite laths. M2X is typically observed in high
temperature chromium steels when lower tempering temperatures are used since the rate of diﬀu-
sion is limited. This does not allow for enough diﬀusion to occur to allow the M2X to decompose
to the more stable carbo-nitride, MX. Since a ﬁne distribution of MX is essential for creep strength
in previous high temperature chromium steels (such as P92), M2X is an undesirable precipitate.
2.3.4
MX
MX is an FCC precipitate that results from the decomposition of the M2X precipitate. MX consists
of a strong MX forming element, either vanadium, niobium or tantalum in place of the "M", and
carbon or nitrogen in place of "X". Precipitation of MX occurs during the tempering step of the heat
treatment on grain boundaries, martensite laths and inside sub-grains. The resulting MX precipi-
tates are stable at service temperatures and the niobium variant of MX remains undissolved even
during the austenitization heat treatment step (temperatures above 1100°C). The main precipitate
strengthening eﬀect in 9% chromium steels comes from a ﬁne distribution of vanadium and niobium
based MX precipitates which have been shown to have a slow coarsening rate, making it essential
for the alloy’s creep strength. However, in high temperature steels the MX was observed to become
thermodynamically unstable at service temperature when chromium content was increased beyond
9%. Speciﬁcally, the MX was observed to be consumed in the formation of the most thermodynam-
ically stable nitride, Z-phase [5]. The Z8 alloy investigated in this thesis contains tantalum in place
of vanadium or niobium and is designed to use the tantalum variant of Z-phase as a "replacement"
for the strengthening MX phase. This is elaborated on in sections 2.4 through to 2.7.
2.3.5
Z-phase
Z-phase is the most thermodynamically stable nitride precipitate in high temperature chromium
steels [5]. It is denoted as CrMN because it consists of nitrogen, chromium and the strong MN
forming elements: vanadium, niobium or tantalum. Given that it is the most stable nitride, its forma-
tion consumes all other nitrides already present in the alloy. Z-phase formation has been observed
to consume other nitrides at service temperature, such as the strengthening MN phase, creating
coarse Z-phase particles which causes a signiﬁcant loss of creep strength and premature rupture of
the alloy [13]. This instability of the MN precipitate is observed more readily in high temperature
steels during service when the chromium content is increased beyond 9% [5]. Therefore, in order to
overcome this issue while increasing the chromium content (to provide necessary oxidation resis-
tance at increased temperature), the alloy may be designed to either delay the formation of Z-phase
(maintaining the strengthening eﬀect from MX for longer periods of time) or use the Z-phase as a
ﬁne precipitate phase to provide needed creep strength, in place of MX. The Z8 alloy investigated
in this thesis is designed to use a ﬁne distribution of Z-phase particles to provide the needed creep
strength through the precipitation hardening mechanism. Additional details on how the Z8 alloy is
designed to obtain a ﬁne distribution of Z-phase precipitates are discussed in sections 2.4 through
2.7.
14
==PAGE:16==
2.4
Z8 chemical composition
In order to take advantage of precipitation hardening, which is the main creep strengthening mech-
anism in high temperature steels, several alloying elements must be added. The amount of alloying
elements added is balanced to build a certain amount of driving force to form each type of pre-
cipitate. Each alloying element can only form speciﬁc precipitates, so increasing the content of a
speciﬁc alloying element in the alloy increases the driving force to form its respective precipitate(s).
A higher driving force results in a higher rate of nucleation of precipitates, leading to a higher num-
ber of smaller precipitates forming. However, increasing the alloying element content too far may
lead to unintended eﬀects on the precipitate phases that degrade the performance of the alloy and
increase the monetary cost of the alloy. Therefore, the content of each alloying element must be
balanced within a certain range to maximize the intended performance of the alloy. Speciﬁcally, the
composition of Z8 is optimized to promote rapid precipitation of many ﬁne Z-phase precipitates,
since the intended purpose of this alloy is to assess whether this can be used in place of a ﬁne distri-
bution of MN precipitates for service at 650°C & 325bar. Table 2 shows the chemical composition
of the Z8 alloy in units of weight percent.
Table 2: Z8 Steel Chemical Composition in Weight Percent
C
N
Si
Mn
Cr
Mo
W
Ni
Co
Cu
Ta
B
Fe
0.005
0.019
0.3
0.05
10.6
0.007
0.91
0.117
3.05
1.67
0.36
0.0020
balance
Carbon, chromium, nitrogen and tantalum contents have been tuned to promote rapid precip-
itation of ﬁne Z-phase. As mentioned, chromium content of the alloy has been increased beyond
9% to give the needed oxidation resistance and increase the rate of Z-phase formation [5]. The
content of the strong nitride forming element, tantalum, and nitrogen have been balanced to be
equimolar. This is done because, in theory, this should leave no nitrogen left over in the matrix
after Z-phase precipitation is complete. Excess nitrogen can lead to formation of unwanted M2N,
consuming chromium from the matrix and deteriorating the oxidation resistance of the alloy. If the
nitrogen content is too high gaseous nitrogen porosities can form in the alloy, severely damaging
the alloy’s performance.
Tantalum is the strong nitride forming element chosen for the Z8 alloy. Tantalum was chosen be-
cause previous experiments have shown that niobium based Z-phase shows increased stability over
vanadium containing Z-phase [5], and the tantalum variant is expected to have a stability closer to
that of the niobium variant. Tantalum based Z-phase has also been found to form a ﬁner distribution
of precipitates and coarsen more slowly than the niobium based variant by Rashidi [14], resulting
in an increased creep strength when using tantalum based Z-phase. The increased stability of the
tantalum Z-phase should, therefore, increase the driving force to form Z-phase and result in a ﬁne
distribution of particles. Due to their increased stability, niobium and tantalum nitrides (MX and
Z-phase) can remain undissolved at austenite grain boundaries during austenitization, preventing
uncontrolled grain growth and the resulting softening of the alloy.
Carbon content is extremely low at 0.005wt% to minimize the amount of tantalum carbides
formed. Any tantalum carbides detract from the amount of tantalum available to from tantalum ni-
trides and leave an excess of nitrogen. Tantalum carbides would also slow the formation of Z-phase
as the carbon content of the carbide would need to be removed and "replaced" with nitrogen in
order to form Z-phase, since Z-phase is a nitride phase. Tantalum nitrides already contain nitrogen
and can directly proceed to form Z-phase. The low carbon content also prevents the formation of
M23C6, preventing creep strengthening eﬀects from M23C6 from interfering with examining the
creep strengthening eﬀect of Z-phase.
Austenite stabilizing elements, such as nickel, copper and cobalt, have been added to balance
the amount of ferrite stabilizing elements. This is done to balance the austenite-ferrite transforma-
tion temperature and to prevent the formation of δ-ferrite. Notably, the cobalt content is quite high
15
==PAGE:17==
since it is the only austenite stabilizing alloying element that doesn’t also have a negative eﬀect on
creep strength [15].
Solid solution strengthening elements, molybdenum and tungsten, are also present in low quan-
tities. The content of these Laves Phase forming elements was reduced for the Z8 alloy because
the previous Z alloy, Z4, showed signiﬁcant amounts of Laves Phase precipitates along grain bound-
aries [16]. This caused the alloy to easily fracture through intergranular fracture due to the brittle,
intermetallic nature of Laves Phase.
2.5
Z8 heat treatment
The design of the heat treatment steps in high temperature steels, austenitization and tempering,
are discussed in section 2.2. During the austenitization step the precipitates and alloying elements
are dissolved into the matrix and a solid solution is created. Depending on the austenitization tem-
perature used, TaN precipitates may remain undissolved at austenite grain boundaries, pinning the
boundaries and preventing uncontrolled grain growth. After austenitization the alloy is air quenched
to room temperature, creating a meta-stable martensitic matrix with a high dislocation density. A
tempering step is then administered, creating a tempered martensite matrix with a reduced disloca-
tion density and hardness. Precipitation of the various phases in the Z8 alloy also takes place during
the tempering step. The eﬀect of varying the temperatures used during heat treatment steps on al-
loy behaviour is investigated and is detailed further in section 3. Increasing tempering temperature
is expected to soften the alloy and increase precipitate nucleation rates. Increasing austenitisation
temperature is expected to create a strong super saturated solution upon air quenching to room
temperature, increasing the driving force to form precipitates during tempering.
2.6
Observed Z8 creep strength
Figure 9: Creep behaviour of various Z alloys at 650°C with 100MPa of stress by measuring total
plastic strain over time. Hyphenated lines show strain rate and solid lines show total plastic strain.
Creep behaviour of Z8 alloy with heat treatment C, D or F is shown. These heat treatments are
detailed in section 3.1. This data was provided by Professor J. Hald, Department of Mechanical
Engineering, Technical University of Denmark.
Figure 9 shows the measured creep behaviour of Z8 with various heat treatments, along with the
creep behaviour of other Z alloys. Z8 is shown by the turquoise, yellow and purple points of data as
16
==PAGE:18==
shown by the legend. The hyphenated lines show the strain rate and the solid lines show the total
plastic strain. All of these data sets on Z8 specimens show the onset of high strain rates, which
lead to creep rupture, around 1000h hours at 650°C with 100MPa of stress. This is well below the
rupture time for P92 in the same testing conditions. This is shown in ﬁgure 10:
Figure 10: Rupture time during creep testing for 9% chromium steels, P91 and P92, at 650°C and
various stress conditions. Creep data for the Z alloy, Z6, is also provided as an approximate compar-
ison with Z8. This data was provided by Professor J. Hald, Department of Mechanical Engineering,
Technical University of Denmark.
The data for the Z alloy, Z6, serves as a rough approximation of Z8 and shows rupture time
of 2283h at 650°C with 100MPa of stress. This is signiﬁcantly less than the rupture time for P92
at these conditions at 4493h. The rupture time for Z8 from ﬁgure 9 is even less at approximately
1000h. Despite the fact that Z8 was an attempt to replace 9% chromium steels, P92 shows higher
creep strength than Z8. The rupture time of a successful replacement alloy must be signiﬁcantly
higher than that of P92 to allow for economic service at 650°C. The benchmark of a rupture time of
10,000h at 650°C with 100MPa of stress has been suggested. This is what justiﬁes the investigation
into why the Z8 alloy is showing creep strength which is signiﬁcantly lower than expected.
2.7
Z8 microstructure
The aim in the design of the Z8 alloy was to examine the feasibility of using a ﬁne distribution of the
thermodynamically stable Z-phase precipitate as the creep strengthening phase in high temperature
steels with the necessary chromium content for proper oxidation resistance at the service temper-
ature of 650°C. The chemical composition of the alloy was balanced to provide a high driving force
for Z-phase formation, allowing for easy nucleation and giving a high number of ﬁne precipitates.
The distribution of ﬁne Z-phase precipitates aims to slow the movement of glissile dislocations,
increasing the material creep strength. The slowing of glissile dislocations also serves to prevent
loss of boundary hardening by reducing the coarsening rate of sub-grain boundaries. As the ma-
terial experiences service at high temperatures the strengthening Z-phase may coarsen through
Oswald Ripening, where the contents of smaller particles is transferred through the matrix on to
larger particles. This results in fewer and larger Z-phase precipitates which limits creep strength.
Investigating the Z8 microstructure to understand its ability to maintain its strengthening features
over a long period of time at service temperatures is the primary objective of this report.
17
==PAGE:19==
The performance of the Z8 alloy is evaluated in this thesis as a function of time at high temper-
ature since this is when it will experience changes in its microstructure. In other words, the creep
strength of Z8 is assessed with respect to changes in its microstructure that occur while at 650°C.
The microstructure of Z8 is characterised and evaluated in as-quenched, as-tempered, creep inter-
rupted and creep ruptured conditions. Additionally, the Z8 microstructure is also characterised and
evaluated after oven aging for 1000h, 3000h and 6500h at 600°C and 650°C beginning from the
as-tempered state. This is detailed in section 3.
18
==PAGE:20==
3
Methods
To investigate the apparent lack of creep strength from the Z8 steel, several specimens were in-
vestigated. The investigation involved Vicker’s hardness measurement, light optical microscopy
(LOM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Before being investigated the specimens were
treated with a austenitisation+tempering heat treatment, creep testing, static oven aging and met-
allographic preparation. This section details the preparation, treatment and characterisation used
for this investigation of Z8. Table 3 provides an overview the results gathered from each specimen
in this investigation. The details of these specimens are discussed within this section. Additionally,
the equilibrium and precipitation simulations of Z8 from the MatCalc software are detailed.
Table 3: List of Specimens and How They Were Investigated [Yes/No]
Specimen
Vicker’s hardness
LOM
TEM
(thin foil)
TEM
(extraction replica)
as-quenched
Y
Y
N
N
as-tempered
Y
Y
Y
Y
Oven aged 1000h at 600°C
Y
Y
N
N
Oven aged 1000h at 650°C
Y
Y
Y
Y
Oven aged 3000h at 600°C
Y
Y
N
N
Oven aged 3000h at 650°C
Y
Y
N
N
Oven aged 6500h at 600°C
Y
N
N
N
Oven aged 6500h at 650°C
Y
N
N
N
Creep interrupted Z8-F
N
N
Y
Y
650°C/100MPa/557h
Creep ruptured Z8-F
N
N
Y
Y
650°C/100MPa/1137h
Creep ruptured Z8-F
Y
Y
N
N
650°C/120MPa/782h
Specimens were received in as-quenched and as-tempered conditions from Saarchmiede GmbH
Freiformschmiede, Germany. Saarschmiede prepared these specimens from a melt of Z8 compo-
sition, speciﬁed in table 2. Ingots were cast from this melt and forged into multiple separate bars
of approximately 5cm x 5cm square cross-section. Each of the individual bars were given diﬀerent
heat treatments so that they were in as-quenched and as-tempered specimens, detailed in section
3.1. This is the condition of the Z8 specimens when they were received from the manufacturer,
and was the starting condition of the specimens in this investigation. These as-quenched and as-
tempered Z8 specimens were either characterised or treated with further creep testing or static
oven aging, detailed in sections 3.3 and 3.2, respectively.
3.1
Heat treatment
The eﬀects of varying the heat treatment temperatures is investigated in this report. Speciﬁcally,
the austenitisation and tempering temperatures used in preparing Z8 steel specimens was varied to
investigate the eﬀect of the heat treatment temperature on the Z8 microstructure. Heat treatments
were administered as part the Z8 manufacturing process, resulting in the "as-quenched" and "as-
tempered" specimens detailed in tables 5 and 4, respectively. The ultimate tensile stress (UTS) of
each as-tempered Z8 specimen was also provided by external testers and are summarised in table
4. Only temperatures are varied between heat treatments, and the time used for the heat treatment
steps was kept constant at 2h for austenitisation and pre-tempering, and 3h for tempering. The pre-
tempering heat treatment step is used to soften the material for manufacturing purposes of large
components and may not be used in the manufacturing of smaller components. Therefore, the pre-
tempering treatment is kept constant across all heat treatments and is not heavily investigated here.
19
==PAGE:21==
Table 4: Investigated Z8 Specimens in as-tempered Condition
Heat treatment name
Austenitisation
Pre-tempering
Tempering
Ultimate Tensile
Stress [MPa]
Z8-A
1100°C//2h
570°C//2h
730°C//3h
689
Z8-B
1100°C//2h
570°C//2h
750°C//3h
675
Z8-C
1120°C//2h
570°C//2h
730°C//3h
702
Z8-D
1120°C//2h
570°C//2h
750°C//3h
669
Z8-E
1100°C//2h
570°C//2h
700°C//3h
777
Z8-F
1120°C//2h
570°C//2h
700°C//3h
784
Figure 11 shows an example of heat treatment Z8-A with respect to time, and shows that cooling
to room temperature (assumed to be 25°C) after every heat treatment step happens at a constant
rate. In reality, this cooling rate is speciﬁed as "air cooling" and is not constant. This includes the
quenching after austenitisation, known as "air quenching". Since the specimen is air cooled the
cooling rate would not be constant, but would show a decreasing cooling rate with respect to time.
The full heat treatment steps happen in the following order:
Austenitisation –> air quenched to room temperature –> pre-tempering –> air cooled to room
temperature –> tempering –> air cooled to room temperature
Figure 11: Z8-A heat treatment assuming constant cooling and heating rates.
All investigated Z8 specimens received at minimum one austenitisation treatment. Specimens
that only received austenitisation heat treatment are designated as the "as-quenched" specimens.
All other specimens received the additional pre-tempering and tempering treatment. These speci-
mens are designated as the "as-tempered" specimens. Figures 11 and 12 show examples of austenitisation+pre-
tempering+tempering and only austenitisation heat treatments, respectively. The as-quenched
specimens were used to investigate the eﬀect of varying the time and temperature used for the
austenitisation heat treatment step. Table 5 provides details on how the austenitisation tempera-
ture and duration was varied.
Table 5: Investigated Z8 Specimens in as-quenched Condition
Specimen number
Austenitisation treatment
0
Reference: as forged
1
1100°C//2h
2
1100°C//4h
3
1120°C//2h
4
1120°C//4h
5
1150°C//2h
6
1150°C//4h
20
==PAGE:22==
Figure 12: Specimen 1 austenitisation heat treatment assuming constant cooling and heating rates.
3.2
Static oven aging
To investigate the microstructure of Z8 steel as it changes from the meta-stable as-tempered state
towards its thermodynamically stable state at service temperatures, as-tempered specimens of Z8
steel were placed in high temperature ovens for extended periods of time (1000h+). Two sets of
specimens were used. One set was kept in an oven at 600°C and the other set was kept in an oven
at 650°C. These temperatures were chosen because 600°C closely resembles the service temper-
ature of modern USC power plants, while 650°C is the target service temperature to develop the
highly eﬃcient A-USC power plants. This allows the evolution of the Z8 microstructure from the
as-tempered state towards service temperature equilibrium state to be examined at any time inter-
val. In this report these specimens are referred to as "oven aged specimens". The specimens are not
under any applied constant stress during the oven aging (except atmospheric barostatic pressure)
and do, therefore, not experience any creep. These specimens were kept at service temperature
in their ovens for a total time of 1000h, 3000h and 6500h. At the 1000h, 3000h and 6500h mark
the specimens are removed from the oven and allowed to air cool to room temperature. A piece
of the specimen was then cut oﬀto be used for investigation. The remainder of the specimen was
then placed back in the heated oven for further oven aging. Up to the 3000h mark, specimens
were oven aged at 600°C and 650°C in a Heraeus air circulating oven with a 407 Controller from
Control & Readout Limited. Beyond the 3000h mark, specimens oven aged at 650°C were aged in
a Scandiaovnen S30. Specimens oven aged at 600°C continued aging in the Heraeus air circulating
oven with 407 Controller from Control & Readout Limited.
3.3
Creep rupture testing
The creep testing of the creep interrupted and creep ruptured Z8-F specimens, speciﬁed in table 3,
was not preformed as part of this investigation. The creep testing was done to internal standards by
Siemens Industrial Turbomachinery AB in Finspång, Sweden. The specimens were received in the
speciﬁed creep condition to be used in investigating the eﬀects of creep on the Z8 microstructure.
3.4
Metallographic preparation
Prior to hardness, LOM and TEM investigation specimens were metallographically prepared. This
was done to reduce the surface roughness of the specimen so that microstructural features can be
measured and exposed by etching. Specimens in as-quenched, as-tempered, creep ruptured con-
ditions were already metallographically prepared and etched when received. Exactly how all other
specimens used for hardness measurements, LOM and TEM were metallographically prepared and
etched is detailed in their respective sections. To detail the full metallographic preparation process,
specimens were ﬁrst cut to size with a Struers Accutom-50 using a 30A13 cutting disc. Cutting
parameters are listed in table 7b. The cut pieces were embedded in durofast with multifast as a
ﬁller resin with a Struers ProntoPress-20 using the parameters listed in table 7a.
21
==PAGE:23==
Table 6: Embedding and Cutting Parameters for Specimen Perparation
(a) Struers ProntoPress-20 Embedding Parame-
ters
Parameter
Embedding diameter
30mm
Embedding resin
Durofast
Filler resin
Multifast
Heating time
5min
Temperature
180°C
Force
20kN
Cooling rate
High
Cooling time
3min
(b) Struers Accutom-50 Cutting Parameters
Parameter
Wheel
357CA
Feed
0.030mm/s
Rotation
Oﬀ
Water
On
Speed
4000rpm
Force
Medium
After embedding, specimens were surface prepared on a Struers RotoPoll-22 with 320, 500,
1000, 4000 grit silicon carbide (SiC) sanding paper, in that order. The specimens were then pol-
ished with 3µm and 1µm Struers DP-Suspension P, in that order. Force and time settings used for
these steps are listed in table 8. In this condition the specimens are fully metallographically pre-
pared and could be used in hardness investigation. LOM and TEM investigations require additional
specimen preparation which is detailed in sections 3.6 and 3.7, respectively.
Table 8: Struers RotoPoll-22 Sanding and Polishing Parameters
Sanding/Polishing
Abrasive agent
Lubricant
Force
Min. Time
Co-/Counter
rotation
Sanding
320 grit paper
De-ionised water
5N
4min
Co-rotation
at 150rpm
Sanding
500 grit paper
De-ionised water
5N
4min
Co-rotation
at 150rpm
Sanding
1000 grit paper
De-ionised water
5N
4min
Co-rotation
at 150rpm
Sanding
4000 grit paper
De-ionised water
5N
4min
Co-rotation
at 150rpm
Polishing
Struers
Struers
5N
4min
Co-rotation
DP-Suspension P 3µm
DP-Lubricant Blue
at 150rpm
Polishing
Struers
Struers
5N
4min
Co-rotation
DP-Suspension P 1µm
DP-Lubricant Blue
at 150rpm
3.5
Vickers hardness measurement
All hardness measurements were taken with a Struers DuraScan 70-G5 and were taken in accor-
dance with Danish standard DS 10411. Multiple 10kg Vickers hardness data points were gath-
ered from all specimens to get an average hardness of the specimen. The 650°C/120MPa/782h
creep ruptured, as-tempered, as-quenched specimens were etched with Viella’s agent (in prepara-
tion for LOM investigation) prior to taking hardness measurements. Specimens oven aged to 1000h
and 3000h were sanded and polished up to 1µm diamond suspension before measuring hardness.
Specimens oven aged to 6500h were only sanded up to 4000 grit on a Struers Knuth Rotor before
taking hardness measurements. Five data points of 10kg Vicker’s hardness were gathered and av-
eraged from specimens in as-quenched, as-tempered, 3000h and 6500h of oven aging conditions.
The standard deviation of these data points was also calculated. Ten data points of 10kg Vicker’s
hardness was gathered from specimens oven aged for 1000h. These data points were then aver-
aged and used to calculate a standard deviation. Hardness of the creep ruptured specimen was
measured along its length with three separate hardness proﬁles. Each of the proﬁles are shown
to be parallel to the length of the specimen in ﬁgure 28, with each proﬁle measuring data points
22
==PAGE:24==
at equal distances from the rupture surface. The three hardness proﬁles were then used to cal-
culate an average hardness proﬁle as a function of distance from the rupture surface. This allows
investigation of specimen’s hardness as a function of distance from the rupture surface and (due to
narrowing specimen) stress level. Additionally, the grip region of the specimen may be assumed to
be unstressed since the stress is applied through the grip to the rest of the specimen. Therefore,
this assumption may be made to assess the grip region as an example of unstressed oven aged Z8.
This allows for comparison between crept and uncrept Z8 within the same creep ruptured speci-
men. Additionally, comparisons may be made between the regions of the creep ruptured specimen
and oven aged specimens.
3.6
Light optical microscopy
Light optical microscopy (LOM) investigation of Z8 specimens was carried out on a Zeiss AX10 mi-
croscope using the ZEN Core 2 software suite. Automatic settings in the ZEN Core 2 software were
used to adjust white balance and colour temperature. Both bright ﬁeld and dark ﬁeld images were
gathered. To prepare the specimens for LOM investigation they were etched using Viella’s reagent
after metallographic preparation (see section 3.4). The etching time in Viella’s reagent varied from
30 to 60 seconds between oven aged specimens. as-quenched, as-tempered and creep ruptured
specimens were received in etched conditions. Viella’s reagent was also used in etching these spec-
imens, but etching times are not known.
3.7
Transmission electron microscopy
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was conducted using a JOEL 3000F ﬁeld emission gun
at an electron acceleration voltage of 300keV to investigate the microstructures of specimens in
creep interrupted, creep ruptured, oven aged for 1000h and as-tempered conditions. Additionally,
energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDS) was used on TEM specimens to measure their chemical
compositions.
Both thin ﬁlm and carbon extraction replica specimens were investigated by TEM. Circular thin
ﬁlm specimens 3mm in diameter were prepared by cutting a 0.2mm thick slice of the specimen
using the Struers Accutom-50, detailed in section 3.4. The 0.2mm thick slice was then sanded to a
thickness between 90µm and 120µm using 320 grit SiC paper on a Struers Knuth Rotor. The 3mm
discs were then punched out of this slice. A Struers TenuPol-5 system with a solution of 3% per-
chloric acid+10% ethylenglucolbutylether in ethanol was used to electropolish a hole through the
3mm disc and generate an electron transparent region around the resulting through-hole. When
using the Struers Tenupol-5 system to prepare a thin ﬁlm specimen, a voltage was applied across
the specimen with a cut-oﬀlight intensity setting of 20 and a pump ﬂow rate setting of 6.
Carbon extraction replicas were prepared by ﬁrst mounting specimens and then metallograph-
ically preparing them, detailed in section 3.4. Specimens were heavily etched in Viella’s reagent
until signiﬁcant pitting around precipitates (and therefore loosening of precipitates from the ma-
trix) was observed in LOM. After etching, the surface of the mounted specimen was then coated
with amorphous carbon using carbon rod deposition on a Axlab Q150R E at an absolute pressure
of 2∗10−2mbar. A grid pattern was carved on to the surface of the carbon coated specimen using a
simple scalpel, dividing the carbon coating into square sections of roughly 1.5mm by 1.5mm. These
square sections are separated from the specimen surface by dissolving the matrix of the material
underneath the carbon coating using a Struers power supply set to apply upto 2A of DC current
at 25V. Finally, these carbon extracts are transferred onto a 3.05mm diameter Athene copper grid.
These are then inserted into the electron microscope for investigation.
23
==PAGE:25==
3.8
MatCalc equilibrium and precipitation simulation
To assess whether simulation software can be used to predict the eﬀect of heat treatment and
oven aging on the Z8 alloy, MatCalc simulation software [17] was used. The MatCalc simulation
software was used to simulate the kinetics of precipitation during heat treatment and oven aging, as
well as the equilibrium state of the microstructure. The volume fraction of each precipitate phase at
equilibrium was simulated by using concepts of thermodynamics to calculate the state of minimum
Gibbs free energy in the alloy. When the Gibbs free energy of the alloy is at its lowest value, the
alloy is in a state of thermodynamic equilibrium and should not experience any further changes over
time. The precipitation of phases during heat treatment and oven aging was also simulated to pre-
dict mean precipitate diameter, precipitate volume fraction and precipitate chemical composition.
To perform these simulations MatCalc was provided with "MatCalc thermodynamic steel database,
version 2.059, created 2016-07-26"[18] and "MatCalc mobility diﬀusion database for steel, created
2016-10-19"[19] (version 2.011) which provide thermodynamic and diﬀusion data for the various
chemical species and phases involved.
Additionally, the chemical composition of Z8 steel (table 2) was input to MatCalc with some al-
terations. The thermodynamic database includes a description of the vanadium and niobium based
variants of the precipitates involved (such as Z-phase or MX), but not a description of the tanta-
lum based variants. Therefore, the tantalum content of the simulated alloy was replaced with an
equimolar amount of niobium to approximate the tantalum based variants. The boron content was
also removed from the simulated alloy as the role of boron in high temperature chromium steels
is not completely clear and is currently undergoing research [12]. This results in the simulated Z8
alloy, speciﬁed in table 9.
Table 9: Simulated Z8 Steel Chemical Composition in Weight Percent
C
N
Si
Mn
Cr
Mo
W
Ni
Co
Cu
Nb
Fe
0.005
0.019
0.3
0.05
10.6
0.007
0.91
0.117
3.05
1.67
0.1848
balance
The phases added to the simulation were also speciﬁed to be BCC_A2 (ferrite), FCC_A1 (austen-
ite), liquid (molten alloy), M23C6, Laves phase, HCP_A3 (M2X), FCC_A1#01 (MX) and Z-phase. Ta-
ble 10 lists the nucleation sites used for each solid phase in the kinetics simulation. The choice
of nucleation sites is based on information from Cipolla [20] and Rashidi [21]. Two precipitation
domains are speciﬁed: FCC_A1 (austenite) and BCC_A2 (ferrite). The FCC_A1 precipitation domain
was speciﬁed to have a dislocation density of 10 ∗10(12), grains of 400µm diameter and sub-grains
of 400µm diameter. The BCC_A2 precipitation domain was speciﬁed to have a dislocation den-
sity of 10 ∗10(14), grains of 400µm diameter and sub-grains of 40µm diameter. These grain and
sub-grain sizes are based on rough measurements from LOM and TEM images. Kinetics simulation
was used to simulate the heat treatments D and F in table 4, starting from a completely normalised
alloy at austenitisation temperature with the composition speciﬁed in table 9. Heat treatments D
and F are selected since they are the most investigated heat treatments in the Results and Discus-
sion section. To simulate the oven aging process the heat treatment is ﬁrst simulated and is then
followed by simulating 10,000h at 650°C.
Table 10: Nucleation sites of precipitate phases [Yes/No]
Precipitate phase
Dislocations
Grain boundaries
Sub-grain boundaries
M23C6
N
Y
Y
Laves phase
N
Y
Y
M2X
Y
Y
Y
MX
Y
Y
Y
Z-phase
Y
Y
Y
24
==PAGE:26==
4
Results & Discussion
4.1
Investigation of as-tempered, as-quenched and oven aged specimens
As discussed in section 2.6, Z8 has been found to have a lower than expected creep strength at
the target service temperature of 650°C. The microstructure of several Z8 specimens were inves-
tigated to try and get an insight into the reason behind the observed lack in creep strength. As
a starting point, specimens of Z8 with heat treatments A through F (heat treatments described
in table 4) were received in an as-tempered condition from the steel manufacturer, Saarschmiede
Gmbh Freiformschmiede in Germany. The as-tempered state is considered to be the state that the
alloy would be in prior to entering service. In the as-tempered state the alloy has been shown to
be strong enough to hold stresses up to 120MPa at 650°C, since one of the investigated creep
specimens took 782h to rupture at these conditions. However, the material’s strength is lost over
time due to softening mechanisms, increasing creep strain rate until the material ruptures. To char-
acterise the transformation of the microstructure from its strong meta-stable as-tempered state to
a weaker stable equilibrium, these specimens were used in the oven aging experiment as detailed
in section 3.2. The measured changes in the specimen’s microstructure is also compared to the
predictions of the MatCalc simulations detailed in section 3.8.
The purpose of investigating the MatCalc simulation is to assess the possibility of simulating the
behaviour of the Z8 alloy in software. Being able to do so would allow for a rapid design of alloy’s
similar to Z8, as well as predicting the behaviour of Z8 in response to changes in chemical compo-
sition or heat treatment. This could potentially save time and resources by reducing the amount of
needed real-world experimentation. To assess this the equilibrium state of the simulated Z8 alloy
is calculated to give an idea of what to expect from the Z8 alloy in a state of equilibrium. This could
insight into how the Z8 alloy changes from its as-tempered to equilibrium condition.
Figure 13: Simulated quilibrium phase fractions of simulated Z8 alloy as a function temperature.
25
==PAGE:27==
Figure 14: Simulated equilibrium phase fractions of simulated Z8 alloy as a function temperature
with matrix phases truncated.
Figures 13 and 14 show the results of simulating the equilibrium state of the simulated Z8 alloy
from 400°C to 1600°C. The simulated alloy matrix shows a transition from ferrite to austenite at
about 800°C and back to ferrite again above 1100°C. The alloy is also predicted to being melting
at about 1470°C. With the heat treatments listed in table 4, the alloy should be able to become
fully austenitised and then transform back to a ferritic (martensitic) matrix upon cooling. Truncat-
ing the matrix phases results in ﬁgure 14. This shows the phase fractions of the included precipitate
phases with changing temperature at equilibrium. As expected, the precipitates phase fraction falls
with increasing temperature, showing that they dissolve into the matrix. The exception to this is
the increase in MX phase fraction that beings at about 1000°C and ends at just over 1050°C. This
occurs at the same temperatures as a rapid fall in Z-phase phase fraction. This is a result of the
nitrogen content of the Z-phase being re-precipitated in the for of MX as the Z-phase dissolves at
higher temperatures. Keeping in mind that tantalum has been replaced with niobium, Laves phase,
Z phase and MX are shown to have solubility temperatures at about 660°C, 1050°C and 1270°C,
respectively.
To begin the real-world data analysis, the provided (not measured as part of this investigation)
ultimate tensile stress (UTS) data of the received, as-tempered specimens was analysed. Since the
austenitisation and tempering temperatures varies between each specimen, the observed change
in UTS allows for insight into the eﬀects of varying these temperatures and the impact of each of
the individual heat treatment steps. The UTS of each specimen was compared as a function of
austenitisation and tempering temperature. This is graphically shown in ﬁgure 15.
26
==PAGE:28==
Figure 15: Provided ultimate tensile strength of Z8 steel specimens in as-tempered state. Linear
interpolation is used between data point.
Figure 15 shows that the eﬀect of varying the tempering temperature from 700°C to 750°C
is much more dramatic than the eﬀect of varying the austenitisation temperature from 1100°C to
1120°C. During the tempering process we expect the super-saturated martensitic matrix to temper
and precipitate new phases, increasing the precipitation hardening of the material but also soften-
ing the dislocation structure of the martensite matrix. This is closely controlled by the duration
and temperature of the tempering process. Since the tempering time is kept constant in all heat
treatments examined here, it is expected that increasing the tempering temperature from 700°C to
750°C will increase the softening of martensite and increase the amount of precipitation that oc-
curs during tempering. This means that the reduction of UTS reported in ﬁgure 15 with increasing
tempering temperature may be due to either over aging of the alloy, or softening of the marten-
site being more signiﬁcant than the precipitation hardening eﬀect. As shown later by the hardness
results from the oven aged specimens, this reduction of UTS with increasing tempering tempera-
ture is likely due to increased softening of the martensite matrix, rather than over aging of the alloy.
Varying the austenitisation temperature shows a much smaller change in the UTS. Figure 15
shows that, when tempering at 700°C and 730°C the UTS increases when increasing the austeniti-
sation temperature from 1100°C to 1120°C. The example iron phase diagram in ﬁgure 7 may give
an idea of why this behaviour is observed. This phase diagram shows that the solubility of the
alloying element in the austenite phase increases with increasing temperature, up to the tempera-
ture of 1147°C (starting at 727°C), after which the solubility decreases as the alloy begins to melt.
Due to the increased solubility of alloying elements in the austenite matrix with increasing tem-
perature, the amount of dissolved alloying elements quenched into the resulting martensite matrix
also increases. Increasing the amount of dissolved alloying elements in the quenched matrix also
increases the driving force to form precipitates during tempering. This increases the precipitate
hardening eﬀect that occurs during tempering, giving the stronger specimen. However, this be-
haviour appears to be reversed when tempering at 750°C. While this might be due to variation or
error in the measurements, tempering at 750°C together with austenitisation at 1120°C may have
resulted in precipitates growing beyond their optimal strengthening size.
The impact of the austenitisation temperature was further investigated with Z8 specimens in
diﬀerent as-quenched conditions, detailed in table 5. These specimens were investigated with 10kg
Vicker’s hardness and LOM. Table 11 give the average measured hardness and corresponding stan-
dard deviation for each as-quenched specimen.
27
==PAGE:29==
Table 11: Average 10kg Vicker’s Hardness of Z8 Specimens in as-quenched Condition
Specimen number
Average hardness
Standard deviation
0
320
3
1
288
5
2
290
8
3
290
5
4
285
6
5
288
5
6
290
2
Since the diﬀerences between these specimens is the temperature and amount of time used
in their austenitisation treatment, it is expected that diﬀerent amounts of alloying elements get
dissolved into the austenite matrix. With increasing time and/or temperature the amount of dis-
solved alloying elements is expected to increase. This is because the solubility of alloying elements
in austenite increases with temperature, as suggested by the phase diagram in ﬁgure 7. Also, in-
creasing the duration of the treatment allows more diﬀusion to occur. This gives more time for the
austenite matrix to reach its equilibrium concentration of alloying elements, potentially dissolving
a higher amount of alloying elements. However, the average hardness of the specimens varies lit-
tle with time and temperature, staying within the 285 to 290 range. This is with the exception of
specimen 0 which did not receive any heat treatment after being forged into the 5cm x 5cm ingot.
Therefore, specimen 0 is expected to be in a work hardened state which would explain why it shows
a signiﬁcantly higher hardness than the rest of the specimens. The relatively constant hardness with
changing austenitisation temperature and time indicates that changing these variables has little im-
pact on the Z8 alloy. However, ﬁgure 15 indicates that the austenitisation temperature does have
an impact. To try and get further insight into the eﬀect of the austenitisation heat treatment step
these specimens were investigated with LOM, shown in ﬁgure 16.
28
==PAGE:30==
(a) Bright ﬁeld image of as-quenched specimen num-
ber 0.
(b) Bright ﬁeld image of as-quenched specimen num-
ber 1.
(c) Bright ﬁeld image of as-quenched specimen num-
ber 2.
(d) Bright ﬁeld image of as-quenched specimen num-
ber 3.
Figure 16: Bright ﬁeld LOM images of Z8 specimens number 0 through 3 at 5x10 magniﬁcation.
Specimen details in table 5.
The images from LOM in ﬁgure 16 show a martensitic microstructure with large grains in all
specimens. Again, specimen 0 in ﬁgure 16a is an exception and shows a highly deformed marten-
site structure. Even though specimens 1 through 6 all show a martensitic structure, they do appear
to have some diﬀerences. Both grain size and martensite lath density appear to signiﬁcantly in-
crease in specimens 5 and 6, while they remain much more constant in specimens 1 through 4.
This could be the result of 1150°C being hot enough to dissolve primary precipitates, such as the
before mentioned MX. Any undissolved MX precipitates may act to pin grain boundaries when be-
low the dissolution temperature, slowing grain growth. This could explain why grain size changed a
relatively negligible amount when austenitising at 1100°C and 1120°C, but increased signiﬁcantly
at 1150°C. This would closely agrees with what is shown in the simulated equilibrium results from
the niobium containing Z8 in ﬁgure 14, where not all precipitates are dissolved before a temperature
of about 1270°C is reached. This may show that the dissolution temperature of primary precipi-
tates sets a limit on the austenitisation temperature used. Dissolving primary precipitates may be
disadvantageous for alloy creep strength, since Z-phase requires the presence of MX to form[13].
Therefore, dissolving primary MX into the matrix could slow Z-phase formation during tempering,
resulting in coarser Z-phase precipitates. Dissolving all MX from the matrix would also increase
the amount of interstitial atoms dissolved in the austenite matrix upon quenching. This may be the
cause of the increased density of martensite laths in specimens 5 and 6, since this would increase
the driving force to form martensite. Diﬀerences between austenitising at 1100 and 1120 are much
29
==PAGE:31==
(e) Bright ﬁeld image of as-quenched specimen num-
ber 4.
(f) Bright ﬁeld image of as-quenched specimen num-
ber 5.
(g) Bright ﬁeld image of as-quenched specimen num-
ber 6.
Figure 16: Bright ﬁeld LOM images of Z8 specimens number 4 through 6 at 5x10 magniﬁcation.
Specimen details in table 5.
30
==PAGE:32==
more subtle and may not become obvious until after tempering. This leaves little direct evidence for
diﬀerences between austenitising at 1100°C and 1120°C. It could be argued that specimens 3 and
4 have slightly higher grain size than specimens 1 and 2, which may have an impact on mechanical
properties of the alloy. This could be investigated by performing grain size measurements.
Next, 10kg Vicker’s hardness was used to investigate the as-tempered Z8 specimens. Since
specimen hardness can be used as an approximation of UTS, we expect to see the same trends
in specimen hardness as we did with specimen UTS in ﬁgure 15. Figure 17 shows this with error
bars truncated. A version of this ﬁgure with error bars is available in appendix A. Error bars were
removed from this ﬁgure for clarity. The trends of decreasing hardness with increasing tempering
temperature and decreasing austenitisation temperature are shown. Indeed, the decrease in hard-
ness with increasing austenitisation temperature at 750°C tempering temperature is also shown,
mimicing the UTS results shown in ﬁgure 15.
Figure 17: Measured 10kg Vicker’s hardness of Z8 steel specimens in as-tempered state. Linear
interpolation is used between between data points.
The specimens were oven aged to investigate how they change from their as-tempered state
towards their equilibrium state under no applied stress at 600°C and 650°C. The method for this is
described in section 3.2. The 10kg Vicker’s hardness measurements were gathered with respect to
oven aging time at temperatures of 600°C and 650°C at 1000h, 3000h and 6500h. Figures 18 and
19 show the result of this at 600°C and 650°C, respectively. Error bars were also removed from
these ﬁgures for clarity, with a version of these ﬁgures available in appendix A showing error bars.
31
==PAGE:33==
Figure 18: Hardness of Z8 steel specimens with respect to oven aging time at 600°C. Linear inter-
polation is used between data points.
Signiﬁcant diﬀerences between the hardness of the diﬀerent Z8 specimens is observed dur-
ing oven aging at 600°C. Both increases and decreases in specimen hardness are observed. Up
to 3000h the hardness of specimens Z8-A, Z8-C, Z8-D and Z8-E are increasing, while the hard-
ness of specimens Z8-B and Z8-F are decreasing. All specimens show a decrease in hardness from
3000h to 6500h. Due to softening of the martensite structure and coarsening of precipitates we
expect the specimens to soften as they gradually transform towards their respective equilibrium
states. Therefore, the observed increase in hardness in specimens Z8-A, Z8-C, Z8-D and Z8-E up to
3000h is unexpected. A possible explanation for this increase in hardness could come from further
nucleation of precipitates during the oven aging, which dominates over the previously mentioned
softening mechanisms, so called "delayed precipitation". This would be where the new precipitates
are continually formed, and act to stabilise the martensite dislocation structure and increase hard-
ness. Referring back to the discussion on ﬁgure 15, this also indicates that the observed reduction
in UTS of as-tempered specimens with increasing tempering temperature is due to softening of the
martensite matrix. If this was instead due to over aging of precipitates, the increase in hardness
during oven aging from delayed precipitation would not be observed, since this would have hap-
pened during initial tempering.
32
==PAGE:34==
Figure 19: Hardness of Z8 steel specimens with respect to oven aging time at 650°C. Linear inter-
polation is used between data points.
When oven aging at 650°C none of the hardness measurements show an increase with oven
aging. All of the specimens show a decrease in hardness over time up to 6500h. If any of the spec-
imens undergo any increase in hardness while oven aging at 650°C, like they do at 600°C in ﬁgure
18, the hardening process may have ﬁnished before 1000h or may become dominated by compet-
ing softening mechanisms. The increased temperature causes an increased rate of diﬀusion, which
increases the rate of transformation towards thermodynamic equilibrium. The suggested delayed
precipitation that we observed at 600°C may still occur at 650°C. However, due to the increased
rate of diﬀusion at 650°C this process may have ﬁnished before the 1000h measurement, hence
any increase in hardness would not be observed. Alternatively, this could also be explained by
increased activity of softening mechanisms at 650°C to the point where they dominate over any
hardening from delayed precipitation.
The results from hardness testing of the oven aged specimens show that the specimens vary
in the way that they transform towards thermodynamic equilibrium, with some specimens show-
ing possible evidence of additional precipitation after tempering and others showing rapid drops in
hardness. With increased temperature all specimens show a more rapid decrease in hardness since
diﬀusion is accelerated. Interestingly, the hardness of the specimens seems to be approaching the
same value with increasing aging time. This is more obvious in the 650°C case and may suggest
that all the specimens are moving towards the same state of thermodynamic equilibrium.
To try and further investigate these specimens, LOM and MatCalc kinetics simulation was em-
ployed to characterise specimens at the extremes of the observed hardness. Speciﬁcally, specimen
Z8-D (shows the lowest as-tempered hardness and one of the lowest decreases in hardness during
oven aging) and Z8-F (shows the highest as-tempered hardness and most rapid initial drop in hard-
ness during oven aging).
33
==PAGE:35==
Figure 20: Phase fractions of precipitates in simulated Z8 alloy during simulation of heat treatment
D.
Figure 21: Mean precipitate diameter of precipitates in simulated Z8 alloy during simulation of heat
treatment D.
Figure 22: Chemical composition of MX precipitate in simulated Z8 alloy during simulation of heat
treatment D.
34
==PAGE:36==
The kinetics of precipitation in the simulated Z8 alloy was simulated during heat treatments D
and F. Figures 20 and 21 show the phase fraction and mean diameter of precipitates during heat
treatment F, respectively. To begin with there is no precipitation during austenitisation, meaning
that all alloying elements are completely dissolved in the matrix. This is the assumed starting con-
dition of the simulated Z8 alloy. During pre-tempering at 570°C, there is signiﬁcant precipitation
of M2X. Looking at the mean diameter of the precipitates, both MX and Z-phase seem to have
nucleated and grown during air quenching from the austenitisation temperature. Their mean diam-
eters shrink during pre-tempering, while their phase fractions remain constant. Mean precipitate
diameter of M2X and Z-phase increases to about 15nm during pre-tempering which is signiﬁcantly
higher than that of MX. Combined with its relatively high phase fraction, M2X seems to be the
dominant precipitate at pre-tempering temperature.
During tempering, all M2X is rapidly dissolved and the only signiﬁcant precipitates remaining
are Z-phase and MX. At about six hours into the heat treatment, the MX phase fraction falls while
its mean diameter increases. Figure 22 shows that this is accompanied by a decrease in nitrogen
content and increase in carbon content of the MX precipitate. At the same time, the Z-phase phase
fraction increases signiﬁcantly, while mean diameter increases slightly. This leaves the simulated
Z8-F microstructure with a ﬁne distribution of Z-phase and MC precipitates by the end of the heat
treatment.
Figure 23: Phase fractions of precipitates in simulated Z8 alloy during simulation of heat treatment
F.
Figure 24: Mean precipitate diameter of precipitates in simulated Z8 alloy during simulation of heat
treatment F.
35
==PAGE:37==
The mean precipitate diameters and phase fractions of precipitates during heat treatment F are
also shown in ﬁgures 23 and 24, respectively. Simulating heat treatment F shows a lot of the same
behaviours seen when simulating heat treatment D. However, the resulting precipitates are more
ﬁne, which may be due to decreased growth of precipitates once they are nucleated. MX mean
precipitate diameter is slightly lower after heat treatment F, and Z-phase mean precipitate diame-
ter is signiﬁcantly lower at just over 11nm.
The LOM investigation was carried out using the method and equipment detailed in section
3.6. Comparisons between specimens Z8-D and Z8-F are drawn based on the visible evidence of
precipitation at various sites in the microstructure (such as grain boundaries, sub-grain boundaries,
etc.) and any visible diﬀerences in the martensite laths between specimens. Here bright ﬁeld im-
ages at 50x10 magniﬁcation are focused on because this was judged to be the optimal size to assess
features of the Z8 microstructure by visual inspection. All captured images at magniﬁcations 5x10,
20x10 and 100x10 are available in appendix B. Dark ﬁeld versions of the bright ﬁeld images used
here are also available in appendix B.
36
==PAGE:38==
(a) Bright ﬁeld image of specimen Z8-D in as-
tempered state.
(b) Bright ﬁeld image of specimen Z8-F in as-
tempered state.
(c) Bright ﬁeld image of specimen Z8-D after 1000h
of oven aging at 600°C.
(d) Bright ﬁeld image of specimen Z8-F after 1000h
of oven aging at 600°C.
(e) Bright ﬁeld image of specimen Z8-D after 3000h
of oven aging at 600°C.
(f) Bright ﬁeld image of specimen Z8-F after 3000h
of oven aging at 600°C.
Figure 25: Bright ﬁeld LOM images of specimens Z8-D and Z8-F throughout the process of oven
aging at 600°C.
37
==PAGE:39==
The bright ﬁeld LOM images shown in ﬁgures 25 and 26 are etched to reveal the presence of
grain boundaries, larger precipitates and martensite laths. As discussed in section 2.1.1, the ﬁne
precipitates formed in the high temperature steels are essential for stabilising the high strength of
the martensite structure. This LOM investigation was aimed at investigating the Z8 microstructure
for evidence of how the precipitates and martensite structure are changing during oven aging. This
then gives insight into the main goal of investigating the creep strength of Z8. Figure 25 shows the
result of the LOM investigation for specimens oven aged at 600°C. Grain boundaries, martensite
packet boundaries and martensite laths are visible. All of which serve as possible nucleation sites
for the precipitates investigated in this thesis. Therefore, we can expect to see evidence of precipi-
tation at these locations. However, the precipitates that provide creep strength in high temperature
steels are very ﬁne, in the order of less that 100nm in diameter. This small size makes them too
small to be directly observed with LOM. Therefore, only larger precipitates can be inspected via
LOM. These would be precipitates that have become too large to contribute towards stabilising the
dislocation structure, no longer providing the needed strength. Since these larger precipitates form
as a result of precipitate growth or coarsening, the more larger precipitates are observed the more
the strength of the alloy may have degraded.
In the images of specimens Z8-D and Z8-F in ﬁgure 25, an increase in small dark spots in the
microstructure with increasing oven aging time. These small dark spots are likely holes, left behind
after a precipitate falls out of the surrounding matrix during etching. The most drastic increase in the
observed number of these spots is seen when going from the as-tempered state to 1000h, where
many new very small black spots appear. The amount of precipitate pits at the grain boundaries also
increases with oven aging time. This shows that the population of large precipitates is increasing
with oven aging time at 600°C in both specimens. This suggests that small, dislocation stabilising
precipitates may have been consumed through coarsening, and so we would expect a decrease in
specimen hardness. Referring back to ﬁgure 18, this does match the hardness behaviour seen in
specimen Z8-F, but not in specimen Z8-D. In specimen Z8-D we see an increase in hardness up
to 3000h, despite the increasing number of dark spots. Since the presence of larger precipitates
does not rule out the presence of smaller ﬁne precipitates, it is still possible that specimen Z8-
D increases in hardness because of delayed precipitation of ﬁne precipitates. Fine precipitates
may continue to precipitate from the matrix, even while larger precipitates are formed through
coarsening. This would also mean that the larger precipitates cannot form directly from the matrix.
This is similar to how MX results from the decomposition of M2X or how Z-phase consumes MX
(see sections 2.3.4 and 2.3.5, respectively). Therefore, it is hypothesised that both specimens Z8-D
and Z8-F are forming larger precipitates during oven aging, which do not stabilise the martensite
dislocation structure. The diﬀerence between them, as a result of their diﬀerent heat treatments,
is that specimen Z8-D may be continuing to form ﬁne precipitates during oven aging. These could
compensate for the loss of alloy hardness due to precipitate coarsening by acting to stabilise the
hard martensite structure over a longer period of time.
38
==PAGE:40==
(a) Bright ﬁeld image of specimen Z8-D in as-
tempered state.
(b) Bright ﬁeld image of specimen Z8-F in as-
tempered state.
(c) Bright ﬁeld image of specimen Z8-D after 1000h
of oven aging at 650°C.
(d) Bright ﬁeld image of specimen Z8-F after 1000h
of oven aging at 650°C.
(e) Bright ﬁeld image of specimen Z8-D after 3000h
of oven aging at 650°C.
(f) Bright ﬁeld image of specimen Z8-F after 3000h
of oven aging at 650°C.
Figure 26: Bright ﬁeld LOM images of specimens Z8-D and Z8-F throughout the process of oven
aging at 650°C.
39
==PAGE:41==
When looking at the bright ﬁeld LOM results for oven aging at 650°C, in ﬁgure 26, we can expect
to see the result of the increased rates of diﬀusion because of the increased temperature compared
to 600°C. Since coarsening of precipitates is a diﬀusion driven process, we expect to see increased
numbers of dark spots at earlier times. Indeed, we see a drastic increase in the amount of the dark
dots in the microstructures of both specimens by 1000h. By 3000h the density of dark dots has
increased even further. If these dark dots are indeed evidence of larger precipitates which result
from coarsening of ﬁne precipitates, these LOM images match with the hardness results of ﬁgure
19 where both specimens soften with increasing oven aging time. This builds evidence towards the
idea that the Z8 alloy loses its strength as the ﬁne, dislocation stabilising precipitates are slowly
coarsened with oven aging time, limiting the alloy’s creep strength.
4.2
Investigation of creep ruptured 650°C/120MPa/782h specimen
A creep ruptured specimen of Z8-F was characterised by 10kg Vicker’s hardness and LOM. The
specimen ruptured after 782h at 650°C with an applied stress of 120MPa. The hardness of this
Z8-F 650°C/120MPa/782h creep specimen was measured along its length to gain insight into the
hardening/softening behaviour of the Z8 alloy as creep deformation occurs. Since creep deforma-
tion causes the cross-section area and, consequently, the stress level of the specimen to vary over
its length, diﬀerent regions of the specimen will experience diﬀerent levels of creep deformation. By
characterising the Z8-F 650°C/120MPa/782h specimen with 10kg Vickers hardness these regions
can be deﬁned across the length of the specimen. Three hardness proﬁles were gathered at equal
distances from the rupture surface and then averaged. The result of this 10kg Vickers hardness
characterisation is seen in ﬁgure 27. Figure 28 relates this to a macroscopic view of the specimen
and highlights the identiﬁed regions used for LOM. These highlighted regions of the specimen were
identiﬁed based on their diﬀerence in hardness from neighbouring regions.
Figure 27: Average hardness proﬁle across length of Z8-F 650°C/120MPa/782h creep ruptured
specimen. The rupture surface is set at 0mm and measurements move towards the grip section of
the specimen. Linear interpolation is used between data points.
40
==PAGE:42==
Figure 28: Average hardness proﬁle from ﬁgure 27 referenced to a macroscopic image of the Z8-F
650°C/120MPa/782h creep specimen showing hardness indents (light spots down centre line of
specimen) with approximate scale bar. Regions of the specimen used for LOM have been highlighted
based on their diﬀerence in hardness from neighbouring regions and their location on the specimen.
Figure 27 shows a signiﬁcant change in average hardness across the length of the specimen,
with all averaged hardness measurements varying between 165 and 215. It is also clear that this
change in hardness is not distributed uniformly across the length of the specimen. The distribution
of hardness has been used to divide the creep specimen into the regions designated in ﬁgure 28.
Moving from the right side to the left in ﬁgure 28 the following regions have been designated: grip,
gauge, strained gauge, softened, strain hardened and rupture zone. Moving through these regions
in this order, the major variations in hardness do not begin before moving from the gauge region
towards the rupture zone. This is also where the largest variation in cross section area is observed.
The diﬀerence in average hardness between the grip and gauge regions are comparatively negligi-
ble, with both regions at an average hardness of about 210. Once the specimen begins to taper
towards the rupture zone, beyond the gauge region, the specimen average hardness drops at a rate
of about 307 HV10/mm. This is designated as the strained gauge region. The average hardness
continues to drop until the softened region is reached at about an averaged hardness of 167, which
is the minimum average hardness of the specimen. Moving towards the rupture zone from the soft-
ened region, the average hardness begins to signiﬁcantly increase at a rate of approximately 304
HV10/mm. This increase continues until, ﬁnally, the rupture zone is reached at an average hardness
of 196 1
3.
41
==PAGE:43==
The overview image in ﬁgure 28 gives evidence that the cross section area of the specimen also
varies at the same places where the changes in average hardness are measured. This shows that
the stress experienced by the Z8-F has a signiﬁcant impact on the creep strength of the alloy. With
decreasing cross section area the stress in that part of the specimen increases, which then increases
creep strain rate even further. This is why the specimen ruptures at the point where its cross section
area is smallest. Using this, the eﬀects of 782h of creep at 650°C on the microstructure of Z8-F
can be examined with stress varying across the length of the specimen. The stress in each region of
the specimen, the moment before rupture, can also be estimated by using the original cross section
area and stress level of 120MPa. Assuming that the diameter of the gauge region has not changed
signiﬁcantly during the creep testing, the stress in this region would still be approximately equal to
the original 120MPa. Using the overview image in ﬁgure 28, the width of each region on the image
can be compared to the width of the gauge region. This allows the cross section area in each region
to be estimated with respect to the cross section area of the gauge region. Since the stress in the
gauge region is assumed to be 120MPa, the stress in the other regions can also be estimated. Table
12 shows the measured reduction in width of each region with respect to the width of the gauge
region. The corresponding estimated stress is also shown. Since the width of the regions changes
signiﬁcantly over their deﬁned regions an arithmetic mean width is calculated for each region. The
mean width of each region is calculated using the width of the specimen at the indent closest and
furthest from the rupture surface. This mean width is then used for comparison with the width
of the gauge region. The grip region is relatively unstressed compared to the rest of the specimen
and is excluded. Assuming that the grip region is unstressed also means that it has experienced
little to no creep. Therefore, the hardness of this region can be assumed to be the hardness of the
specimen in a non-crept state after 782h at 650°C.
Table 12: Reduction in Width and Estimated Stress of Regions on Z8-F 650°C/120MPa/782h Creep
Ruptured Specimen with Respect to Gauge Region
Region
Reduction in mean width relative
to mean width of gauge region
rounded to ﬁrst decimal place
Estimated stress rounded to
nearest whole number [MPa]
Gauge
0% (reference)
120
Strained gauge
27.9%
230
Softened
35.0%
284
Strain hardened
51.9%
514
Rupture zone
66.7%
1083
Some of the stresses calculated in table 12 are very high for steel and are, therefore, gross over
estimates of the actual stresses in each region. The stress calculated in the rupture zone is well
beyond the UTS of any industrially used steel. This over estimation may come from the fact that
the creep ruptured specimen may not have been cut down its exact centre, error in measuring the
width of the specimen or an error in the assumptions made during this calculation. Even so, the
calculated estimated stresses can be plotted to give an idea of the stress variation across the length
of the specimen the moment before rupture. This is shown together with the average Vicker’s hard-
ness in ﬁgure 29.
42
==PAGE:44==
Figure 29:
Average hardness proﬁle compared to estimated stress across length of Z8-F
650°C/120MPa/782h creep ruptured specimen. The rupture surface is set at 0mm. Linear in-
terpolation is used between data points.
This gives insight into the behaviour of the creep of the Z8-F specimen. The changes in hardness
of the various regions with respect to the grip region shows the progression of the creep process
(since we know that creep is accelerated by increasing stress) and ﬁgure 29 shows an increase in
stress along side the change in hardness. This suggests that Z8-F will initially soften during creep
and then harden again before rupture. This is investigated further by LOM of each region in ﬁgure
30.
43
==PAGE:45==
(a) Bright ﬁeld image of rupture zone region of creep
ruptured Z8-F specimen.
(b) Bright ﬁeld image of strain hardened region of
creep ruptured Z8-F specimen.
(c) Bright ﬁeld image of softened region of creep rup-
tured Z8-F specimen.
(d) Bright ﬁeld image of strained gauge region of
creep ruptured Z8-F specimen.
(e) Bright ﬁeld image of gauge region of creep rup-
tured Z8-F specimen.
(f) Bright ﬁeld image of grip region of creep ruptured
Z8-F specimen.
Figure 30: Bright ﬁeld LOM images of creep ruptured Z8-F specimen. Creep rupture time was 782h
at 650°C with 120MPa applied stress.
44
==PAGE:46==
Similar to the LOM investigation of the oven aged specimens in ﬁgures 25 and 26, ﬁgure 30
shows small black dots in the various regions of the Z8-F 650°C/120MPa/782h creep ruptured
specimen, indicating the presence of large precipitates. These become more common when mov-
ing from the grip region towards the rupture zone, increasing with the estimated stress. For the
most part they are located on grain boundaries and martensite laths. However, ﬁgure 30a shows
a heavily deformed microstructure in the rupture zone region, making it diﬃcult to identify sites
and boundaries. The observed increase of large precipitates in regions of increasing stress suggests
a coarsening of the ﬁne precipitates formed during tempering, freeing up glissile dislocations to
move more easily. As the glissile dislocations begin to move the stabilised dislocation structure is
no longer maintained and would result in a drop in hardness of the martensite, which is what we
have observed in the strained gauge region. Indeed, in ﬁgure 30d the emergence of many small
black dots is visible when compared to ﬁgure 30e. The population of these black dots continues to
increase all the way to the rupture zone region so we might expect the hardness of the specimen
to drop even further. However, the minimum hardness was observed in the softened region, after
which the specimen hardness only increases. As the name of the strain hardened region suggests,
a possible explanation for this behaviour may come from the strain hardening eﬀect. Approaching
the rupture surface of the specimen, its cross section area dramatically decreases. This means that
the specimen has experienced higher strain rates in this region, such as those seen in tertiary creep.
This would mean that the strain rate in this region gets high enough for the strain hardening eﬀect
to overcome the softening from tempering of the martensite. This builds on the idea that creep
rupture in Z8 results from the high strain rates that result from coarsening of the ﬁne precipitates
that are formed during the initial austenitisation+tempering heat treatment.
4.3
Investigation of thin ﬁlm and carbon extraction replica specimens
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was employed to examine microstructure features be-
yond the resolution limit of LOM. Thin ﬁlms and carbon extraction replicas of Z8-F specimens in
as-tempered, oven aged, creep interrupted and creep ruptured conditions were prepared for TEM
investigation. An overview of these specimens is provided in table 13:
Table 13: Condition of Z8-F Specimens From Which Thin Films and Carbon Extraction Replicas
Were Prepared for TEM Investigation
Designation
Initial F heat
treatment [Y/N]
Crept specimen [Y/N]
Ruptured
specimen [Y/N]
Specimen details
as-tempered Z8-F
Y
N
N
F heat treatment only.
Z8-F2
Y
N
N
Oven aged for 1000h at
650°C after F heat treatment.
Z8-F6
Y
Y
N
Interrupted creep test at 557h
at 650°C with 100MPa
stress after F heat treatment.
Z8-F9
Y
Y
Y
Creep test at 650°C
with 100MPa stress until
creep rupture at 1137h.
45
==PAGE:47==
4.3.1
Investigation of thin ﬁlm specimens
Examining the specimens listed in table 13 allows for examining how the Z8-F material changes
from its as-tempered state towards a state of thermodynamic equilibrium, without stress, (Z8-F2)
and how this compares to the material during creep (Z8-F6 and Z8-F9). First, thin ﬁlms of these
specimens were prepared and then examined using TEM, detailed in section 3.7.
(a) Bright ﬁeld overview image of of as-tempered Z8-
F.
(b) Bright ﬁeld overview image of oven aged Z8-F2.
(c) Bright ﬁeld overview image creep interrupted Z8-
F6.
(d) Bright ﬁeld overview image of creep ruptured Z8-
F9.
Figure 31: Bright ﬁeld TEM overview images of thin ﬁlm specimens of as-tempered, oven aged,
creep interrupted and creep ruptured Z8-F, detailed in table 13.
As mentioned, the high resolution of TEM allows for investigation of microstructure features
that are too small to be investigated by LOM. This includes sub-grains, dislocations and smaller
precipitates. These features are the focus of this TEM investigation. Since we see contrast diﬀer-
ences from Z-number, thickness and diﬀraction diﬀerences in TEM imaging, all of these must be
considered when evaluating these features. As seen from the previous hardness and LOM investi-
gations, at 650°C we expect to see larger precipitates form and dislocation structures to coarsen
46
==PAGE:48==
with increasing time. Figure 31a shows the start state of the microstructure of specimens Z8-F2,
Z8-F6 and Z8-F9. The image shows a microstructure with signiﬁcant contrast. Compared to the
bright matrix of the material, many small dark spots are visible with dark lines running between
them. In the as-tempered state the specimens are expected to have a distribution of ﬁne precipi-
tates and have a high density of dislocations. These ﬁne precipitates are expected to be tantalum
based Z-phase in the Z8 alloy. Therefore, these precipitates would have a high tantalum content.
This would cause them to appear darker than the surrounding matrix and this what we see in ﬁgure
31a.
Dark lines through the matrix, in contact with these ﬁne precipitates are also observed. Com-
paring to the other TEM images in ﬁgure 31, we see far more of these dark lines in the as-tempered
specimen than any other. It is because of their high density in the as-tempered specimen and their
interaction with the ﬁne precipitates that these dark lines are thought to be dislocation lines. It is
from diﬀraction contrast that these lines show up as darker than the surrounding matrix.
Finally, compared to the other specimens, the as-tempered specimen does not show a clear
sub-grain structure. This is hypothesised to be linked to the larger dark textured features that are
visible in ﬁgure 31 which span over signiﬁcant lengths of the image. These large dark textured fea-
tures are thought to be the result of diﬀraction contrast from groups of dislocations that eventually
become organised into the sub-grain structure that is clearly visible in the other specimens. These
regions in the as-tempered specimen seem to shrink signiﬁcantly in size in specimens Z8-F2 and
Z8-F6, and are almost completely gone in specimen Z8-F9. This builds on the hypothesis that these
are groups of dislocations which disappear from the microstructure with time at 650°C. Other large
dark features are also visible in specimens Z8-F2, Z8-F6 and Z8-F9 and are distinguished based on
the texture of the interface between the dark feature and the surrounding matrix. These other large
dark features with smooth textures are likely precipitates. An example of this could be the Laves
phase discovered in specimens Z8-F2, Z8-F6 and Z8-F9 in ﬁgures 35 through 37. This is further
discussed when looking at the results from the EDS extraction replicas.
Moving to the other specimens in ﬁgure 31, they have some of the same features seen in the
as-tempered specimen. Specimens Z8-F2, Z8-F6 and Z8-F9 all show examples of dislocation lines,
a distribution of ﬁne precipitates and larger dark textured features. However, they vary signiﬁcantly
from the as-tempered specimen and each other in the number of instances of these features. As
mentioned, it is expected that the distribution of ﬁne precipitates will coarsen into larger precipi-
tates and that, consequently, the dislocation density will drop with increasing time at 650°C. Indeed,
specimen Z8-F9 obviously shows the lowest density of dislocation lines and ﬁne precipitates, as it
should, due to having the longest amount of time at 650°C also while under 100MPa of stress.
This is followed by specimen Z8-F6 which looks relatively similar to Z8-F2, but Z8-F6 still appears
to have a slightly higher density of these features. This is reasonable since Z8-F6 has 557h at
650°C while Z8-F2 has 1000h at 650°C, but Z8-F6 also had 100MPa of applied stress during this
time while Z8-F2 was unstressed. This stress would cause Z8-F6 to experience creep while Z8-F2
would not. Evidence of creep in Z8-F6 can be seen in the anisotropy of the sub-grains. The sub-
grains in Z8-F6 are columnar and are elongated across the image in ﬁgure 31c, while the sub-grains
in Z8-F2 appear relatively equiaxed. However, the orientation of these images with respect to the
stress axis was not controlled. Specimen Z8-F9 also shows a columnar sub-grain structure similar
to Z8-F6, but with coarser sub-grains. Despite this, specimens Z8-F2 and Z8-F6 still share many
similar features and look quite similar. The fact that these specimens look so similar after signiﬁ-
cantly diﬀerent times at 650°C goes to show that creep accelerates the loss of creep strengthening
features in the Z8-F microstructure. Specimen Z8-F9 shows the extreme of this at the moment of
specimen rupture. As mentioned, Z8-F9 shows the coarsest sub-grains and the lowest amount of
dislocations and ﬁne precipitates.
One more feature that is clearly visible in specimens Z8-F2, Z8-F6 and Z8-F9 but is not visible in
the as-tempered specimen are the large, round, bright spots. There are a few possible bright spots
in the as-tempered specimen, but they are signiﬁcantly smaller and it is diﬃcult to be sure that
these are the same features due to their small size. These bright spots are thought to be the result
47
==PAGE:49==
of thickness contrast from areas that were occupied by coarse precipitates which have been etched
from the specimen surface during specimen preparation. Indeed, we see that these bright spots de-
crease in number and increase in size when moving from specimens Z8-F2 and Z8-F6 to specimen
Z8-F9. Specimen Z8-F9 has experienced the highest amount of time at 650°C of all the specimens,
and was also under 100MPa of stress during this time. Therefore, it has experienced the furthest
transformation from the as-tempered state and should show the most coarse precipitates. It is
hypothesised that these are copper precipitates, similar to those seen by Hattestrand and Andren
[22]. Due to the noble nature of copper it could electro-chemically couple with the surrounding
steel matrix during specimen preparation. This would cause anodic dissolution of the surrounding
steel, dislodging the precipitate from the specimen and leave a precipitate shaped space behind on
the specimen surface. This is what is then seen as the round bright spots on ﬁgures 31b through
31d. These precipitates may have yet to precipitate in the as-tempered state, or they could be so
ﬁne that they are beyond the resolution of the image in ﬁgure 31a. These are both possible expla-
nations for why they are observed in specimens Z8-F2, Z8-F6 and Z8-F9 but not the as-tempered
specimen. Figure 32 gives us images of the same specimens at higher magniﬁcations.
48
==PAGE:50==
(a) Bright ﬁeld image of as-tempered Z8-F.
(b) Bright ﬁeld image of oven aged Z8-F2.
(c) Bright ﬁeld image of creep interrupted Z8-F6.
(d) Bright ﬁeld image of creep ruptured Z8-F9.
Figure 32: Bright ﬁeld TEM images of thin ﬁlm specimens of as-tempered, oven aged, creep inter-
rupted and creep ruptured Z8-F, detailed in table 13.
Looking at higher magniﬁcation images of these specimens, in ﬁgure 32, we can observe the
before mentioned microstructure features in greater detail. The same trends as discussed in ﬁgure
31 are observed here, where we see a reduction in the density of ﬁne precipitates and dislocations
with increasing time at 650°C. The higher magniﬁcation also gives clearer examples of dislocations
in contact with precipitates, as can be seen in ﬁgures 32a, 32c and 32d. However, the previously
mentioned large dark textured regions do not appear to consist of dislocations. Instead they seem
to be due to the Z-number contrast from a higher concentration of heavier elements, or diﬀraction
contrast from microscopic bending of the specimen (bending contours). Additionally, small bright
spots that look like they could be very ﬁne precipitates are visible in the as-tempered specimen.
These precipitates must coarsen relatively rapidly if they are the same as the hypothesised large
copper precipitates previously discussed in ﬁgure 31.
49
==PAGE:51==
4.3.2
Investigation of carbon extraction replica specimens
Carbon extraction replicas of the specimens in table 13 were also prepared to isolate precipitates
from the matrix material. This allows for them to be investigated without interference from the ma-
trix material. Additionally, EDS was used to analyse the chemical composition of the precipitates.
Additional details of the methods for the preparation of these carbon extraction replica specimens
and EDS investigation are detailed in section 3.7. Overview (lower magniﬁcation) images of these
carbon extraction replicas are shown in ﬁgure 33. Higher magniﬁcation images together with EDS
results are shown in ﬁgures 34 through 37.
(a) Bright ﬁeld overview image of carbon extraction
replica specimen from as-tempered Z8-F.
(b) Bright ﬁeld overview image of carbon extraction
replica specimen from oven aged Z8-F2.
(c) Bright ﬁeld overview image of carbon extraction
replica specimen from creep interrupted Z8-F6.
(d) Bright ﬁeld overview image of carbon extraction
replica specimen from creep ruptured Z8-F9.
Figure 33: Bright ﬁeld TEM overview images of carbon extraction replica specimens of as-tempered,
oven aged, creep interrupted and creep ruptured Z8-F, detailed in table 13.
50
==PAGE:52==
Since the matrix material is not part of the overview images shown in ﬁgure 33, we are left with
features extracted from the surfaces of the investigated specimens. This would be precipitates and
any contaminants on the specimen surface (dirt). This can be used to gain insight into the size,
shape and nucleation sites for the precipitates. It should also be considered that not all precipitates
are necessarily captured by these specimens. It is possible that precipitates are lost from the carbon
extraction replica during preparation.
From all the images in ﬁgure 33 it is clear that there is a preference of nucleation sites for the
captured precipitates. When analysing the organisation of the precipitates it should be considered
that the carbon extraction replica may have folded over themselves during preparation since this
was not controlled. Most of the ﬁne precipitates seem to be clustered together in lines which could
have coincided with the sub-grain structure of the matrix material. This would suggest that these
precipitates have nucleated on a grain or sub-grain boundary. However, there are still many ﬁne
precipitates that are not part of these lines and seem to have formed inside the sub-grains. It is
possible that these may have nucleated heterogeneously on dislocations or other features in the
matrix material. These ﬁne precipitates also seem to decrease in number with increasing time at
650°C as would be expected due to the coarsening of the ﬁne precipitates with time. Additionally,
larger precipitates begin to appear with time at 650°C, with Z8-F9 showing the highest number
of large precipitates. Z8-F9 also shows the lowest density of ﬁne precipitates on the proposed
sub-grain boundaries. The larger precipitates are expected to be the result of coarsening of the
ﬁne precipitates. To investigate the identities of these precipitates, EDS was employed to gather
information on their chemical composition.
51
==PAGE:53==
(a) Bright ﬁeld image of carbon extraction replica
specimen from as-tempered Z8-F.
Location
Identiﬁer
Cr [at%]
Fe [at%]
Ta [at%]
W [at%]
Fe+Ta [at%]
8
69.42
9.22
17.09
4.27
26.31
2
68.50
10.05
18.25
3.20
28.30
1
68.27
7.39
18.32
6.02
25.71
5
67.71
8.02
17.99
6.28
26.01
7
66.95
13.93
15.04
4.07
28.97
4
66.42
8.66
18.75
6.18
27.41
6
64.35
9.99
20.41
5.25
30.40
3
63.80
8.64
22.95
4.61
31.59
9
59.65
21.14
13.83
5.38
34.97
Average
66.19
10.78
18.07
5.03
28.85
(b) EDS chemical composition of precipitates in ﬁgure 34a with matching loca-
tion identiﬁers. These measurements are hypothesised to show the presence
of a variant of the M2X precipitate with chromium as primary constituent.
Carbon and nitrogen content excluded.
Figure 34: Bright ﬁeld TEM image of carbon extraction replica of as-tempered Z8-F in ﬁgure 34a
with EDS data in table 34b from measurements at corresponding locations.
52
==PAGE:54==
(a) Bright ﬁeld image of carbon extraction replica
specimen from oven aged Z8-F2.
(b) Bright ﬁeld image of carbon extraction replica
specimen from oven aged Z8-F2.
Location
Identiﬁer
Cr [at%]
Fe [at%]
Co [at%]
Ta [at%]
W [at%]
12
18.58
62.65
3.85
4.93
9.99
13
19.03
60.02
3.37
4.77
12.82
1
19.99
59.74
3.41
4.08
12.78
Average
19.20
60.80
3.54
4.59
11.86
(c) EDS chemical composition of precipitate in ﬁgure 35a with matching loca-
tion identiﬁers. These measurements are hypothesised to show the presence
of Laves phase with iron as primary constituent. Carbon and nitrogen content
excluded.
Location
Identiﬁer
Cr [at%]
Fe [at%]
Ta [at%]
W [at%]
Fe+Ta [at%]
4
71.58
5.11
19.05
4.26
24.16
14
70.88
6.34
19.94
2.84
26.28
2
68.42
4.99
20.07
6.52
25.06
6
68.18
3.57
22.76
5.49
26.33
8
68.10
6.35
20.74
4.81
27.09
10
68.05
7.68
20.07
4.19
27.75
11
67.40
5.30
21.89
5.41
27.19
5
67.24
3.87
23.85
5.05
27.72
7
67.23
3.20
23.96
5.61
27.16
16
66.06
6.16
23.51
4.27
29.67
9
64.83
5.18
23.01
6.98
28.19
3
63.17
4.04
21.22
6.52
25.26
15
62.75
4.84
26.48
5.93
31.32
Average
67.22
5.13
22.04
5.22
27.17
(d) EDS chemical composition of precipitates in ﬁgures 35a and 35b with
matching location identiﬁers. These measurements are hypothesised to show
the presence of a variant of the M2X precipitate with chromium as primary
constituent. Carbon and nitrogen content excluded.
Figure 35: Bright ﬁeld TEM image of carbon extraction replica of oven aged Z8-F2 in ﬁgures 35a
and 35b with EDS data in tables 35c and 35d from measurements at corresponding locations.
53
==PAGE:55==
(a) Bright ﬁeld image of carbon extraction replica
specimen from creep interrupted Z8-F6.
(b) Bright ﬁeld image of carbon extraction replica
specimen from creep interrupted Z8-F6.
(c) Bright ﬁeld image of carbon extraction replica
specimen from creep interrupted Z8-F6.
Figure 36: Bright ﬁeld TEM images of carbon extraction replica of creep interrupted Z8-F6 in ﬁgures
36a, 36b and 36c. EDS data in tables 36e and 36d from measurements at corresponding locations.
54
==PAGE:56==
Location
Identiﬁer
Cr [at%]
Fe [at%]
Ta [at%]
W [at%]
Fe+Ta [at%]
7
69.17
5.41
20.53
4.89
25.94
5
68.96
8.66
18.82
3.56
27.48
9
68.19
7.23
19.59
4.98
26.82
11
67.20
7.00
21.00
4.80
28.00
12
66.40
5.85
22.19
5.57
28.04
3
66.39
3.44
23.74
6.43
27.18
10
66.00
3.93
25.22
4.85
29.15
8
64.81
7.21
21.87
6.11
29.08
2
60.82
17.47
15.38
6.33
32.85
4
59.59
5.58
25.82
9.01
31.40
6
59.47
8.65
22.55
9.33
31.20
Average
65.18
7.31
21.52
5.99
28.83
(d) EDS chemical composition of precipitates in ﬁgures 36a, 36b and 36c with
matching location identiﬁers. These measurements are hypothesised to show
the presence of a variant of the M2X precipitate with chromium as primary
constituent. Carbon and nitrogen content excluded.
Location
Identiﬁer
Cr [at%]
Fe [at%]
Co [at%]
Ta [at%]
W [at%]
1
17.38
63.41
3.45
5.77
10.00
(e) EDS chemical composition of precipitate in ﬁgure 36a with matching loca-
tion identiﬁers. These measurements are hypothesised to show the presence
of Laves phase with iron as primary constituent. Carbon and nitrogen content
excluded.
Figure 36: EDS data measured at corresponding locations in ﬁgures 36a, 36b and 36c.
55
==PAGE:57==
(a) Bright ﬁeld image of carbon extraction replica
specimen from creep ruptured Z8-F9.
(b) Bright ﬁeld image of carbon extraction replica
specimen from creep ruptured Z8-F9.
Location
Identiﬁer
Cr [at%]
Fe [at%]
Co [at%]
Ta [at%]
W [at%]
9
19.59
62.57
2.95
1.80
13.09
10
19.01
60.90
3.18
2.61
14.31
Average
19.3
61.74
3.07
2.21
13.7
(c) EDS chemical composition of precipitates in ﬁgure 37b with matching loca-
tion identiﬁers. These measurements are hypothesised to show the presence
of Laves phase with iron as primary constituent. Carbon and nitrogen content
excluded.
Location
Identiﬁer
Cr [at%]
Fe [at%]
Ta [at%]
W [at%]
Fe+Ta [at%]
7
72.26
2.60
21.79
3.34
24.39
6
70.44
2.42
23.47
3.68
25.89
2
70.32
6.35
19.65
3.68
26.00
15
70.12
2.81
19.45
7.62
22.26
5
70.09
7.40
19.06
3.46
26.46
11
70.05
7.19
19.01
3.75
26.20
13
69.09
4.56
21.59
4.76
26.15
14
68.74
4.78
20.98
5.51
25.76
1
68.17
7.93
20.21
3.69
28.14
3
66.87
4.90
24.08
4.15
28.98
8
66.73
5.71
22.25
5.31
27.96
4
63.65
4.84
25.95
5.57
30.79
12
58.47
3.61
28.94
8.97
32.55
Average
68.08
5.01
22.03
4.88
27.04
(d) EDS chemical composition of precipitates in ﬁgures 37a and 37b with
matching location identiﬁers. These measurements are hypothesised to show
the presence of a variant of M2X precipitate with chromium as primary con-
stituent. Carbon and nitrogen content excluded.
Figure 37: Bright ﬁeld TEM image of carbon extraction replica of creep interrupted Z8-F9 in ﬁgures
37a and 37b with EDS data in tables 37c and 37d from measurements at corresponding locations.
56
==PAGE:58==
The EDS chemical composition results in ﬁgures 34 through 37 have been organised into tables
by type of precipitate. They have also been organised from highest to lowest atom percent of their
primary constituent. Two types of precipitates were identiﬁed and the EDS results for each type
have been organised into the separate tables. The ﬁrst of these types is the chromium rich (>59
at%) precipitate with a partial amount of iron and tantalum (<22 at% and <29 at% respectively). A
small amount of tungsten is also present (<10 at%). These compositions are shown in tables 34b,
35d, 36d and 37d. Of the precipitates known to be present in high temperature steels described
in section 2.3, this chromium rich precipitate is hypothesised to be a variant of the M2X precipi-
tate. This is based on its high chromium content in combination with a signiﬁcant amount of iron.
M2X precipitates may also contain vanadium. Given that vanadium and tantalum are part of the
same group on the periodic table, it is hypothesised that tantalum is replacing the role of vanadium
in this case. However, the tungsten content is anomalous, but since tantalum and tungsten have
very similar atomic radii it could be that tantalum and tungsten might be exchanged in the M2X
crystal. This might only be to a certain extent since the tantalum content was always found to be
signiﬁcantly higher than the tungsten content. Since only precipitates of this type were observed
in the carbon extraction replica from the as-tempered Z8-F, a diﬀraction ring pattern was gathered
to try and gather additional evidence for this being an M2X precipitate. The result of this is shown
in ﬁgure 38.
The second type of identiﬁed precipitate was an iron rich (>59 at%) precipitate with partial
amounts of chromium, tantalum, tungsten and cobalt (<20 at% each). These compositions are
shown in tables 35c, 36e and 37c. These precipitates were found less frequently than the hy-
pothesised M2X precipitate and were always signiﬁcantly larger. Based on the measured chemical
composition of these precipitates, they have been hypothesised to be the intermetallic Laves phase.
As discussed in section 2.3.2, Laves phase typically consists of iron, tungsten and molybdenum but
may also consist of chromium. This strongly matches with the EDS measurements, with the cobalt
and tantalum contents being unexpected. Additionally, tungsten based Laves phase is expected
to nucleate relatively slowly, as discussed in section 2.3.2. This may explain why this type of pre-
cipitate was not observed the as-tempered carbon extraction replica. It seems that the specimen
must be kept at 650°C for some time before this precipitate forms. The TEM images show that
these are highly elongated, large precipitates, which may be similar to previously observed Laves
phase behaviour in the Z4 alloy [16], where excessive Laves phase precipitates formed along grain
boundaries. Together these facts indicate that these are examples of Laves phase precipitates.
57
==PAGE:59==
Figure 38: Diﬀraction ring pattern result from multiple precipitates on carbon extraction replica
from as-tempered Z8-F specimen.
Not enough precipitates were measured to get a full diﬀraction ring pattern in ﬁgure 38, but sev-
eral spots are visible. The measured amorphous pattern comes from the carbon used to extract the
precipitates from the as-tempered Z8-F specimen. The spots on the diﬀraction ring pattern were
used to measure crystal lattice spacings of the hypothesised M2X precipitates. This was done by
taking the distance between diﬀraction spot pairs in the diﬀraction ring pattern and, using Bragg’s
Law as shown in equation 5, used to calculate the corresponding lattice spacing (denoted as d). The
left hand side of equation 5 was set equal to the distance measured between diﬀraction spot pairs
in the diﬀraction ring pattern (denoted as g in equation 5) and the corresponding lattice spacing
was calculated. Figure 39 shows the measured diﬀraction spot pairs with superimposed red lines.
58
==PAGE:60==
Figure 39: Diﬀraction ring pattern from ﬁgure 38 with lines superimposed to show measured
diﬀraction spot pairs.
nλ/sin(θ) = g = 2d
(5)
The calculated spacings were then compared to the lattice spacings of pure Cr2N from the Na-
tional Bureau of Standards [23], shown in table 14. The JEMS software [24] was used to adjust the
parameters of the pure Cr2N crystal ("a" and "c" for basal and planar faces, respectively) so that
its lattice spacings more closely resembled the measured lattice spacings from the diﬀraction ring
pattern. The results of this is the hexagonal crystal for the hypothesised M2X with a=0.450nm and
c=0.422nm. This is smaller than the original Cr2N crystal, which is surprising when considering
that both tantalum and tungsten are present in signiﬁcant quantities and have larger atomic radii
than chromium. A full list of lattice spacings of the hypothesised M2X crystal was also calculated
by the JEMS software. To check how well the hypothesised M2X crystal matches with the original
diﬀraction ring pattern, their respective lattice spacings were compared in table 15.
59
==PAGE:61==
Table 14: Comparison Between Cr2N Lattice Spacings and Simulated M2X Lattice Spacings. "N/A"
Used When Lattice Spacing is Not Available.
Lattice plane
Miller index (hkl)
Lattice plane
Miller-Bravais index (hkil)
Cr2N lattice spacing [nm]
Lattice spacing from
simulated M2X [nm]
0,0,1
0,0,0,1
N/A
0.422
1,0,1
1,0,1,1
0.305
0.286
1,1,0
1,1,2,0
0.241
0.225
0,0,2
0,0,0,2
0.224
0.211
1,1,1
1,1,2,1
0.212
0.199
2,0,1
2,0,2,1
0.189
0.177
1,1,2
1,1,2,2
0.164
0.154
0,0,3
0,0,0,3
N/A
0.141
2,1,1
2,1,3,1
0.149
0.139
1,0,3
1,0,1,3
N/A
0.132
3,0,0
3,0,3,0
0.139
0.130
3,0,1
3,0,3,1
N/A
0.124
1,1,3
1,1,2,3
0.127
0.119
2,0,3
2,0,2,3
N/A
0.114
2,2,0
2,2,4,0
0.120
0.113
3,0,2
3,0,3,2
0.118
0.111
2,2,1
2,2,4,1
0.116
0.109
0,0,4
0,0,0,4
0.112
0.106
3,1,1
3,1,4,1
N/A
0.105
60
==PAGE:62==
Table 15: Comparison Between Measured Lattice Spacings From Diﬀraction Ring Pattern and Sim-
ulated M2X Lattice Spacings
Measured lattice spacing
from ring pattern [nm]
Matched lattice spacing from
simulated M2X [nm]
Percent
diﬀerence [%]
Lattice plane
Miller-Bravais index (hkil)
from simulated M2X
0.108
0.109
0.93
2,2,4,1
0.119
0.119
0.00
1,1,2,3
0.128
0.130
1.56
3,0,3,0
0.128
0.130
1.56
3,0,3,0
0.133
0.132
0.75
1,0,1,3
0.141
0.141
0.00
0,0,0,3
0.141
0.141
0.00
0,0,0,3
0.152
0.154
1.32
1,1,2,2
0.152
0.154
1.32
1,1,2,2
0.152
0.154
1.32
1,1,2,2
0.158
0.154
2.53
1,1,2,2
0.161
0.154
4.35
1,1,2,2
0.163
0.154
5.52
1,1,2,2
0.163
0.154
5.52
1,1,2,2
0.185
0.177
4.32
2,0,2,1
0.191
0.199
4.19
1,1,2,1
0.214
0.211
1.40
0,0,0,2
0.214
0.211
1.40
0,0,0,2
0.215
0.211
1.86
0,0,0,2
0.216
0.211
2.31
0,0,0,2
0.231
0.225
2.60
1,1,2,0
0.235
0.225
4.26
1,1,2,0
0.280
0.286
2.14
1,0,1,1
0.282
0.286
1.42
1,0,1,1
Table 15 shows varying percent percent diﬀerence between the measured and simulated lattice
spacings. The highest percent diﬀerence of 5.52 percent occurs at the (1,1,2,2) plane and the low-
est of 0.00 percent occurs at the (0,0,0,3) plane. Given that the spacing of the (0,0,0,3) plane only
depends on the "c" dimension of the hexagonal crystal, the low percent diﬀerence indicates that
the simulated "c" dimension may be a good ﬁt to the real crystal. The (0,0,0,2) plane also shows
relatively low percent diﬀerence, varying between 1.40 and 2.31 percent. However, the planes that
involve the "a" dimension show an increased percent diﬀerence. The (1,1,2,0) and (3,0,3,0) planes,
which only involves the "a" dimension, show a percent diﬀerence varying between 1.56 and 2.31
percent. This could indicate that the simulated "a" dimension was not adjusted properly to match
the measured spacings, since none of the planes that depend only on the "a" dimension show 0
percent diﬀerence. Planes that involve both "a" and "c" dimensions show an even higher percent
diﬀerence, possibly as a result of the culmination of deviation in the simulated "a" and "c" values
from the real values. To reduce this percent diﬀerence the simulated "a" and "c" values may be re-
evaluated by matching lattice spacing of the database Cr2N to the measured spacings using peaks
that only depend on either the "a" or "c" dimensions, not a combination of both.
Looking back at the data in tables 34b, 35d, 36d and 37d, trends in the chemical compositions
can be drawn. Comparing the average composition in each table with each other, the average
iron and tantalum content varies with time at 650°C. Average iron content decreases from 10.78
at% to 5.01 at% in the as-tempered and Z8-F9 specimens, respectively. Inversely, average tan-
talum content increases from 18.07 at% to 22.03 at% in the as-tempered and Z8-F9 specimens,
respectively. Average tungsten content stays relatively constant, varying by little more than 1 at%.
Average chromium content also varies relatively little, with the extremes of this in specimens Z8-
F6 and Z8-F9 at 65.18 at% and 68.08 at%, respectively. This suggests that, at least on average,
61
==PAGE:63==
the hypothesised M2X precipitates are replacing iron atoms with tantalum atoms with increasing
time at 650°C. Perhaps this could be the result of inﬂuence from the large Laves phase precipitates
that were found in all but the as-tempered specimen. The average composition of tantalum in the
Laves phase precipitates in tables 35c, 36e and 37c, decreases with time at 650°C, which is the
opposite behaviour of the average tantalum content in the hypothesised M2X precipitates. The
fact that the Laves phase precipitates are only observed in specimens with time at 650°C, together
with their decreasing average tantalum content, could indicate that they may have an impact on the
increasing tantalum content of the hypothesised M2X precipitates that is happening concurrently
at 650°C. Alternatively, the increasing average tantalum content in the hypothesised M2X could
be inﬂuencing the Laves phase precipitates to decrease their tantalum content. Measurement 2
in table 36d was in close proximity to a Laves phase precipitate (see ﬁgure 36a) and was found to
have an exceptionally high iron content and low tantalum content. Further in-depth investigation
of the Z8 alloy at 650°C is needed to develop the understanding of these precipitates’ behaviours.
An interesting trend in the iron, tantalum and chromium content of the hypothesised M2X pre-
cipitates was observed when analysing the EDS data in tables 34b, 35d, 36d and 37d individually,
instead of comparing table averages. As discussed previously, the average iron content was ob-
served to decrease with time at 650°C, while average tantalum content was observed to increase.
This suggested that iron and tantalum atoms were being exchanged in these precipitates. Similarly,
this is supported further when looking at the individual data points in each table. A relatively high
tantalum content typically results in a relatively low iron content and vice versa. Data from location
identiﬁers 2 and 6 in table 37d show a strong example of this. As a result, the iron and tantalum
contents were added together for further analysis. This is because the sum of the iron and tan-
talum contents seems to have a dependency on chromium content. Average chromium content
was observed to remain relatively constant with time at 650°C, however signiﬁcant variation in
chromium is shown within each table. The measurements in table 37d, for example, shown in the
chromium content varying from 58.47 at% to 72.26 at%. As the chromium content increases from
58.47 at%, the sum of the iron and tantalum content decreases from 32.55 at% to 24.39 at%. This is
seen across all the hypothesised M2X tables as a general trend. A few measurements move a little
outside this trend (such as location identiﬁer 3 in table 35d), but this does seem to be a generally
applicable trend. This suggests that chromium might also be competing with iron and tantalum for
the same crystal lattice sites. Finally, the tungsten content again does not seem to depend on the
content of any of the other elements in the precipitate.
62
==PAGE:64==
5
Conclusion
This investigation of the microstructure of Z8 has given some mixed results. Simulation of the Z8
alloy in MatCalc has showed agreement with the dissolution temperatures of primary precipitates
during austenitisation and some diﬀerences between diﬀerent heat treatments. UTS, hardness,
LOM and TEM investigations show the expected trend of Z8 softening with oven aging time at
600°C and 650°C due to coarsening of features in the Z8 microstructure. Creep rate in Z8 was
also shown to increase with increasing stress, as the various regions of the 650°C/120MPa/782h
specimen were investigated seperately. TEM investigation also revealed that creep accelerates the
coarsening of ﬁne precipitates. EDS analysis showed the presence of two type of precipitates in
the Z8 microstructure. The identiﬁed Laves phase showed expected behaviour in precipitating
only after oven aging time at 650°C. The other identiﬁed precipitate was hypothesised to be M2X,
which is unexpected since this is a meta-stable nitride in an alloy where only the most stable nitride,
Z-phase, is expected. The presence of meta-stable nitrides indicates that their decomposition to
Z-phase may not have been completed during heat treatment. Identiﬁcation of the crystal structure
of the hypothesised M2X precipitates was attempted by comparing their diﬀraction ring pattern
to the crystal structure of Cr2N, with mixed success.
The most surprising result from this investigation is that none of the EDS results show strong
evidence of Z-phase composition, since the main driver behind the design of the Z8 alloy was to
rapidly precipitate a ﬁne distribution of tantalum based Z-phase. We would expect an atom percent
of approximately 50 for both chromium and tantalum for a pure tantalum based Z-phase, since
nitrogen is excluded from the EDS measurements. Reasons for the observed absence of Z-phase
could be one of the following:
• The mechanism to form Z-phase in the Z8 alloy did not occur as quickly as expected and
Z-phase has not formed, yet.
• Z-phase did form but was segregated to an unobserved region of the specimen (grain bound-
ary segregation for example).
• Z-phase precipitates did form but are beyond the resolution limit of the used observation
equipment.
• Other unanticipated reason preventing the formation or observation of Z-phase.
Since Z-phase is the most stable nitride precipitate to form in high temperature chromium steels,
Z-phase should be observed in Z8 after enough diﬀusion has occurred while below the solution
temperature of Z-phase. It is possible that not enough diﬀusion has occurred to reach Z-phase
formation, indicating that tantalum based Z-phase may form more slowly than expected. This may
result in the Z-phase precipitates being too large to stabilise any remaining dislocation structure
when they do form. This would be because of the low nucleation rate of Z-phase, resulting in fewer
Z-phase nuclei which would grow large in size instead of having a higher number of Z-phase nuclei
which remain small in size. Alternatively, the opposite of this may have occurred. The mechanism
for tantalum based Z-phase may have been so rapid that the nuclei may be too small to observe
with the used equipment. In this case the Z-phase precipitates would also be very numerous. It
is also possible that Z-phase nucleated heterogeneously at certain sites in the Z8 microstructure
that were not observed, such as grain boundaries outside the area of the gathered images. Further
investigation of the Z8 alloy with higher resolution TEM measurements could reveal more informa-
tion on the behaviour of tantalum based Z-phase in the Z8 alloy.
63
==PAGE:65==
6
Aknowledgements and thanks
The staﬀat the Technical University of Denmark and Department of Mechanical Engineering are
acknowledged for providing the education, support, resources and facilities for this MS.c. program
in Material and Manufacturing Engineering. I thank my fellow students for the advice, collaboration
and shared learning experiences that took place throughout the MS.c. education.
Special thanks is extended to the supervisor of this thesis project, Professor John Hald, for mak-
ing this thesis project possible, as well as sharing in his knowledge through his teachings, guidance
and generous support.
Special thanks is extended to the technical laboratory support staﬀof the Department of Me-
chanical Engineering for their work and guidance with the specialised laboratory equipment needed
for this thesis work. Thank you Niklas Brinckman Gammeltoft-Hansen and Steﬀen Munch for the
advice and instruction on how to use the needed laboratory equipment. Thank you Flemming Bjerg
Grumsen for your time and patience in helping with specimen preparation, TEM operation and data
analysis. This work would not have been possible without the generous support of these people.
64
==PAGE:66==
References
[1]
BP Energy Outlook: Demand and supply of fuels. URL: https://www.bp.com/en/global/
corporate/energy-economics/energy-outlook/demand-by-fuel.html.
[2]
Augusto Di Gianfrancesco. Materials for Ultra-Supercritical and Advanced Ultra-Supercritical
Power Plants. English. Elsevier Inc., 2016, p. 6.
[3]
J. R. Elliott and C. T. Lira. Introductory Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics. English. Pearson
Education Inc., 2012, pp. 96–98.
[4]
F. Masuyama and K.-H. Mayer. “The development of creep-resistant steels”. English. In: Creep-
Resistant Steels (2008), pp. 15–77. DOI: 10.1533/9781845694012.1.15.
[5]
H. K. Danielsen and J. Hald. “Behaviour of Z phase in 9-12% Cr steels”. English. In: Energy
Materials 1 (1 2006), pp. 49–57. DOI: 10.1179/174892306x99732.
[6]
J. Hald. “Microstructure of long-term creep properties of 9-12% Cr steels”. English. In: Inter-
national Journal of Pressure Vessels and Piping 85 (2008), pp. 30–37. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpvp.
2007.06.010.
[7]
D. Cebon, H. Shercliﬀ, and M. F. Ashby. Materials: engineering, science, processing and design.
English. Elsevier Butterworth-Heinemann, 2007. Chap. 13.
[8]
R. E. Smallman and A. H.W. Ngan. Physical Metallurgy and Advanced Materials. English. Elsevier
Ltd., 2007. Chap. 7, p. 396. DOI: 10.1016/b978-0-7506-6906-1.x5000-8.
[9]
W. D. Callister and D. G. Rethwisch. Materials Science and Engineering. English. Wiley, 2015.
Chap. 9.
[10]
M. Yoshizawa and M. Igarashi. “Long-term creep deformation characteristics of advanced
ferritic steels for USC power plants”. English. In: International Journal of Pressure Vessels and
Piping 84 (2007), pp. 37–43. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpvp.2006.09.005.
[11]
S. H. Ryu and Jin Yu. “A New Equation for the Cr Equivalent in 9 to 12 Pct Cr Steels”. English.
In: Metallurgical and Materials Transactions A 29A (1998), pp. 1573–1578. DOI: 10.1007/
s1166199800807.
[12]
A. Fedoseeva et al. “Eﬀect of alloying on interfacial energy of precipitation/matrix in high-
chromium martensitic steels”. English. In: Journal of Materials Science 52 (8 2017), pp. 4197–
4209.
[13]
L. Cipolla et al. “Conversion of MX nitrides to Z-phase in a martensitic 12% Cr steel”. English.
In: Acta Materialia 58 (2010), pp. 669–679. DOI: 10.1016/j.actamat.2009.09.045.
[14]
M. Rashidi et al. “Experimental and theoretical investigation of precipitate coarsening rate in
Z-phase strengthened steels”. English. In: Materialia 4 (2018), pp. 247–254. DOI: 10.1016/
j.mtla.2018.09.024.
[15]
K. Hidaka et al. “Development of Heat Resistant 12%CrWCoB Steel Rotor for USC Power
Plant”. English. In: Matsci: Advanced Heat Resistant Steel for Power Generation 708 (1999),
pp. 418–427.
[16]
J. Hald. “Prospects for Martensitic 12 % Cr Steels for Advanced Steam Power Plants”. English.
In: Transactions of the Indian Institute of Metals 69 (2 2016), pp. 183–188. DOI: 10.1007/
s12666-015-0793-4.
[17]
Ernst Kozeschnik. MatCalc Version 5.62.
[18]
Erwin Povoden-Karadeniz, ed. MatCalc thermodynamic steel database. Version 2.059.
[19]
Erwin Povoden-Karadeniz, ed. MatCalc mobility diﬀusion database for steel. Version 2.011.
[20]
L. Cipolla. “Conversion of MX Nitrides to Modiﬁed Z-Phase in 9-12%Cr Ferritic Steels”. En-
glish. 2010, pp. 1–64. ISBN: 9788790416294.
[21]
M. Rashidi. “Development of a new generation of creep resistant 12% chromium steels: Mi-
crostructure of Z-phase strengthened steels”. English. 2017, pp. 1–66. ISBN: 9789175976495.
65
==PAGE:67==
[22]
M. Hattestrand and H. Andren. “Microstructural development during aging of an 11% chromium
steel alloyed with copper”. English. In: Materials Science and Engineering 318 (1-2 2001), pp. 94–
101. DOI: 10.1016/S0921-5093(01)01304-1.
[23]
Natl. Bur. Stand. (U.S.) Monogr. 25, volume 21, page 63, (1984). CAS: 24094-93-7.
[24]
P. Stadelmann. JEMS-SWISS. URL: https://www.jems-swiss.ch/.
66
==PAGE:68==
A
Appendix: hardness results
Figure 40: Measured 10kg Vicker’s hardness of Z8 steel specimens in as tempered state with error
bars. Linear interpolation is used between between data points.
Figure 41: Hardness of Z8 steel specimens with respect to oven aging time at 600°C with error
bars. Linear interpolation is used between data points.
67
==PAGE:69==
Figure 42: Hardness of Z8 steel specimens with respect to oven aging time at 650°C with error
bars. Linear interpolation is used between data points.
B
Appendix: LOM images
B.0.1
5x10 images of oven aged specimens
Figure 43: Bright ﬁeld image of specimen Z8-D in as tempered state.
68
==PAGE:70==
Figure 44: Dark ﬁeld image of specimen Z8-D in as tempered state.
Figure 45: Bright ﬁeld image of specimen Z8-F in as tempered state.
69
==PAGE:71==
Figure 46: Dark ﬁeld image of specimen Z8-F in as tempered state.
Figure 47: Bright ﬁeld image of specimen Z8-D after 1000h of oven aging at 600°C.
70
==PAGE:72==
Figure 48: Dark ﬁeld image of specimen Z8-D after 1000h of oven aging at 600°C.
B.0.2
20x10 images of oven aged specimens
Figure 49: Bright ﬁeld image of specimen Z8-D in as tempered state.
71
==PAGE:73==
Figure 50: Dark ﬁeld image of specimen Z8-D in as tempered state.
Figure 51: Bright ﬁeld image of specimen Z8-F in as tempered state.
72
==PAGE:74==
Figure 52: Dark ﬁeld image of specimen Z8-F in as tempered state.
Figure 53: Bright ﬁeld image of specimen Z8-D after 1000h of oven aging at 600°C.
73
==PAGE:75==
Figure 54: Dark ﬁeld image of specimen Z8-D after 1000h of oven aging at 600°C.
B.0.3
50x10 images of oven aged specimens
Figure 55: Dark ﬁeld image of specimen Z8-D in as tempered state.
74
==PAGE:76==
Figure 56: Dark ﬁeld image of specimen Z8-F in as tempered state.
Figure 57: Dark ﬁeld image of specimen Z8-D after 1000h of oven aging at 600°C.
75
==PAGE:77==
B.0.4
100x10 images of oven aged specimens
Figure 58: Bright ﬁeld image of specimen Z8-D in as tempered state.
Figure 59: Bright ﬁeld image of specimen Z8-D after 1000h of oven aging at 600°C.
76
