==PAGE:1==
Deep Reinforcement learning for
managing communication in
peer-to-peer energy markets
Tianyang Zhao(S181242)
Kongens Lyngby - August 2020
==PAGE:2==
Deep Reinforcement learning for managing communication in peer-to-peer
energy markets
Author(s):
Tianyang Zhao(S181242)
Supervisor(s):
Pierre Pinson,Tiago Sousa
Department of Electrical Engineering
Centre for Electric Power and Energy (CEE)
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 325
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
www.elektro.dtu.dk/cee
Tel: (+45) 45 25 35 00
Fax: (+45) 45 88 61 11
E-mail: cee@elektro.dtu.dk
Release date:
21.08.2020
Class:
Public
Edition:
1. edition
Comments:
This report is a part of the requirements to achieve Master of Science
in Engineeering at Technical University of Denmark. The report
represents 30 ECTS points.
Rights:
Tianyang Zhao, 2020
==PAGE:3==
PREFACE
This thesis is prepared at the Department of Electrical Engineering of the Technical
University of Denmark in partial fulﬁllment of the requirements for acquiring the degree of
Master in Engineering.
The thesis is composed of seven chapters with 30 ECTS.
i
==PAGE:4==
ABSTRACT
This thesis focuses on exploring the deep reinforcement learning method as a strategy to
manage the communication among peers in a peer-to-peer (P2P) market. The increasing
penetration of renewable energy and distributed storage enables more consumers to manage
their consumption proactively. To adapt to the change, the electric market requires shifting
to a more consumer-centric way. Various structures are proposed with diﬀerent degrees of
centralization, and one of those structures is the peer-to-peer market. With fully developed
communication graph, the market can reach consensus with optimal results. However, the
convergence speed is low. A balance is expected to be found between the convergence
speed and the social welfare of the market.
Inspired by the wide variety of applications of deep reinforcement learning (DRL) and the
characteristic that is learning from the interaction with the environment, DRL can be used
as an interdisciplinary approach to supervise the communication of the P2P market.
In this project, random cut method, single shot method, constant method, and deep
Q-learning model (DQN) are applied. The DQN model can learn from the experience and
receive a reward as the feedback, whether it makes a proper decision. The P2P market
formulated in the thesis contains 70 peers. The market has two subcases to investigate the
inﬂuence of diﬀerent compositions on these methods. Diﬀerent indicators are utilized to
assess the performance of those methods from both a system and an individual perspective.
However, the result of the DQN model is out of expectation. Some possible reasons are
summarized in the end. The performance of DQN is expected to be improved with more
training episodes and more scientiﬁc designed hyperparameters.
ii
==PAGE:5==
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The end of this thesis project also means the two-year study experience in DTU comes to
an end. Looking back to the two years, I gained a lot of valuable experience, which makes
me grow both academically and from a personal perspective.
It did need some courage to change from I have studied in the past four years to a new
ﬁeld, deep reinforcement learning. Fortunately, I seize the chance and make a diﬀerence at
the end of my two-year experience.
Thanks for the instruction given by Prof. Pierre, and Tiago. I sincerely appreciate them
for the patience and support from them. Without their detailed guidance, I can not present
the thesis to you all. Thanks for the explanation from Tue Herlau, his selﬂess answers
gives me more insight into the deep learning ﬁeld. Thanks a lot for the reply from HPC
stuﬀ, they always love to help almost at any time when I’m stuck with HPC operation.
Also, thanks a lot for my friends who help me, encourage me in their own ways. Thanks
for Yu Xuan, providing me lots of advice even from China. I can still remember the time
when it is already midnight in China, he was trying to help me solve weird problems. I’m
really looking forward to the day when we meet again in Hangzhou. Thanks to my friend
Huang Bingshun, he is always willing to spare his time on listening to my complaint when
I met diﬃcult problems. I can not wait for the feast he promised me before. Thanks to
Mou Xiaofeng, Dong Meng, Zhao Jiantao, they always share their exciting experience with
me, which makes me recover from the depression. Thanks to Gao Shenghan, I learned a
lot from her, no matter in academic or personality.
Most important, I’m grateful to my parents, Zhao Yongqi and Yuan Yonghong. They
always stand by my side with their love. I miss them so much and have lots to say even
beyond my words.
It is a time hard for me but also shining with hope in it. The unexpected Covid19 upset
the plan, making everything usual. It is the ﬁrst time for me to keep learning for such a
long period at home, especially for a new ﬁeld, which I knew few about it.
I know the end of the thesis or master is not the end of the study. The study is a habit
that should be kept all life. The ending is just another new start for me. There are still a
lot of treasures waiting for me in the way, and I will keep my head on and go for them.
Wish me good luck, 2020.
iii
==PAGE:6==
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Preface
i
Abstract
ii
Acknowledgement
iii
Table of Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation Interpretation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Thesis Guide
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Modelling framework
5
2.1
Market structures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Model formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
P2P benchmark model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Methodology Statement
14
3.1
Random Cut
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Single Shot
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Constant Update . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4
Deep Q-learning Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.5
Performance evaluation indicators
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Case study
31
4.1
Data description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Cost curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3
Cases for testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5
Results and Discussion
35
5.1
Benchmark results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
Random Cut & Single Shot results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.3
Constant Update results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.4
DQN results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6
Conclusion
43
7
Future works
45
7.1
Expansion of training data-set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7.2
Model composition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7.3
DQN model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
iv
==PAGE:7==
Table of Contents
7.4
Model modiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
References
48
A Project plan
51
B Results of diﬀerent methods
52
C Code of DQN model
55
v
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
1
INTRODUCTION
This thesis covers all the work on the master project: Deep Reinforcement learning for
managing communication in peer-to-peer energy markets. This project aims to explore
deep reinforcement learning as a strategy to manage communication among peers in the
P2P market. A supervisory agent is trained as a third entity to deﬁne a small group
of trading partners for prosumers involved in the P2P market (P2P market). Diﬀerent
indicators will be adopted to evaluate the eﬃciency of the P2P market and compare it
with the performance of several conventional options.
1.1
Motivation Interpretation
The Paris Agreement has settled an ambitious goal to keep global temperature increase
below 2◦C [1]. In line with the agreement, the European Commission set the net-zero
greenhouse gas(GHG) emissions target by 2050. Many other countries around the world also
set their emission goal to reduce GHG in the long term by increasing the share of renewable
energy generation. Various technologies have been studied under this circumstance.
On the one hand, new technologies have been studying and purposing. On the other hand,
existing technologies are continuously improved. Thanks to the progressively lower prices
for producing renewable energy facilities and more advanced technologies are adopted,
Distributed Energy Resources(DERs) gains a larger share in the composition of the power
system. The tendency prompts part of the traditional consumers to turn into ’prosumers’ -
consumers who can switch their roles between producer and traditional consumer with the
help of DER. Compared with consumers, prosumers own a stronger ability to adjust their
activities by scheduling their production, consumption and storage while consumers are
assumed with only passive behaviors.
Lately, more consumer-centric market in the electric energy sector has gained momentum,
primarily due to advances in renewable assets and Information and Communication
Technology (ICT) devices. They support a more active role for small prosumers and
local communities with means of self-production and storage capabilities. These new
transactive agents are eager to have a more decisive choice about their energy needs,
especially in selecting their trading partners to exchange energy. Hence, one can think of
peer-to-peer (P2P) and community-based concepts as promising solutions in this paradigm.
Distributed optimization solutions are suitable to handle the decentralized negotiation
process, ultimately reaching a consensus market results that all participants agree. The
convergence performance to reach a consensus solution is aﬀected by the number of
potential trading connections in P2P systems. For example, assuming a scenario with
1000 prosumers where every prosumer may trade with the rest. Too many redundant
connections will increase the time to reach the solution. Sparsiﬁcation will necessarily
1
==PAGE:10==
1. Introduction
degrade the time of the distributed optimization to ﬁnd the optimal solution. P2P energy
markets need a correct managing strategy of sparsifying the trading connection while
guarantee a reasonable convergence time and performance.
Simultaneously, the advance in Information and Communication Technology (ICT) and
internet-of-things(IoT) enables all participants of the market to communicate with each
other at the household level.
On top of the advances in DERS and ICT, the novel
mechanism P2P market which accommodates a more consumer-centric fashion of power
system is proposed lately. The P2P market ﬂexibility allows participants to choose whom
they are going to trade with and decide the trade volume all by themselves.
However, going through all peers in a full P2P market to achieve the optimal solution
usually requires high computational cost. Therefore, a trade-oﬀis expected to be found
that sparsifying the communication among all peers will degrade the social welfare to
an acceptable level while guaranteeing the market eﬃciency at a relatively high level.
Technology development gives more possible solutions to handle this problem from various
perspectives. In recent years, deep learning has been widely applied to various ﬁelds
due to its powerful learning ability by imitating human neurons. Deep reinforcement
learning(DRL) integrates deep learning and reinforcement learning to create algorithms
diﬀerent from other artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs). DRL has a supervisory agent to
make strategies in an environment based on feedback from the system. Since the project
aims at higher market eﬃciency by controlling the communication among peers iteratively,
DRL is an appropriate method for supervising this process. In Chapter 3, DRL will be
explained thoroughly.
Compared with the other classical machine learning methods, it can adjust its action due
to the system’s feedback. The software agent ought to make strategies in an environment
to maximize proﬁt. The agent will utilize proﬁt from the last period as a reward signal to
validate if the strategy is good enough.
1.2
Literature review
The introduction of decentralized electricity markets can be traced back to the study
conducted by Wu and Varaiya as coordinated multi-lateral transactions [2] which is known
as peer-to-peer trades nowadays. Each participant can communicate with the rest of the
market participants directly, which diﬀers from the traditional pool market. The cited
work proves that the P2P market can still achieve all the beneﬁts without a visible pool
market operator in the decision process.
Based on various concerns such as privacy, regulation and certiﬁcation, etc., diﬀerent
structures may be considered. In [3], besides the P2P market, Y. Parag and B. K. Sovacool
identiﬁed and discussed another two possible layouts of decentralized electricity markets.
The ﬁrst one is stated as ’prosumer-to-grid models’ where the prosumers are connected
to a microgrid that can operate at both isolated mode or interconnected mode. Based
on the types of structures, various works have been done to investigate from diﬀerent
perspectives. In work conducted by Thomas Morstyn et al.[4], P2P trading is introduced
to maximize utility, thus easing the need for investments in infrastructure. In another work
[5], P2P trading is discussed from consensus-based optimization perspective with product
2
==PAGE:11==
1. Introduction
diﬀerentiation. Eric Munsing et al. studies the issues concerning security, transparency and
trust in P2P market. using blockchains and smart contracts technology blockchains and
smart contracts [6]. Another research team at the University of Florida under the leadership
of professor Yuguang Fang introduced an algorithm. This so-called Lyapunov-based cost
minimization algorithm helps coordinate the control system of P2P trading. On the other
hand, community-based mechanisms are considered as coalition games [7] and distributed
optimization [8].
The research work done by T. Baroche et al.[9] proposed a uniﬁed P2P market model
contains diﬀerent communication structures. This make it possible to compare the inﬂuence
of sparsitiﬁcation, eﬃciency and convergence speed among diﬀerent structures. Another
related work of F. Moret et al. [10] investigated the computational properties among
community-based, decentralized, and distributed P2P markets. It must be stated that the
results of their work justiﬁed the proposal of sparsiﬁcation of negotiation processes.
The relevant academic based research project partially conducted by F. Moret and P.
Pinson, introduced the concept of energy collectives [11].Under the community-based
structure, energy are allowed to share at community level among participants.It should be
noticed that parallel to the cited research , fairness indicators are also utilized to assess the
performance individually within their work. Quality of Service (QoS) is used to evaluate
allocation fairness with the help of Jain’s index which ﬁrstly proposed in [12], Quality of
Experience (QoE) is used as cost fairness indicator with index proposed in [13].
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) was ﬁrst proposed Volodymyr Mnih, Koray
Kavukcuoglu et al.
in NIPS Deep Learning Workshop 2013 [14].
In their study, a
variant of Q-learning combined with convolutional neural network trains an agent to play
seven Atari 2600 games. Diﬀerent from supervised learning and unsupervised learning,
the samples are generated by repeated actions of agent. By setting rewards for diﬀerent
actions, the agent learns what to do so as to maximize the total reward. They found its
performance surpassed experts on three of those games. The network trained with their
approach was referred as Deep Q-Network(DQN).
Later, the enhanced version of DQN was published by DeepMind on Nature in 2015 [15]
which attracted attention widely. In this paper, an independent Target Q-Net was add to
the model. By splitting the target Q and current Q value calculation, the model delays
the update process which makes the model more stable. The performance was improved
signiﬁcantly, the agent surpassed all previous algorithms.
In 2017, Rainbow DQN was proposed by DeepMind [16] which can improve performance
and data eﬃciency. As a combination of all the models proposed before, it results in a new
state of art results on Atari games.
1.3
Problem statement
The learning objectives of this project have been divided into three main targets as followed:
• Explore deep reinforcement learning as a strategy to manage the communication among
peers in the P2P market and compare its performance with other options
3
==PAGE:12==
1. Introduction
• Training a third party agent that optimally deﬁnes a small group of trading partners for
prosumers involved in the P2P market
• Sparsify the communication among peers while guaranteeing a fast convergence speed,
considering a trade oﬀbetween sparsity level and market eﬃciency
After satisfying the targets above, a full decentralized P2P market model that implements
DRL as a strategy can be achieved. Meanwhile, cases with diﬀerent composition ratios at
the same scale will be to help test the performance.
1.4
Thesis Guide
This section serves as guidance for the reader to see the whole picture of the thesis.
Chapter 2 talks about the framework for the P2P market model and the formulation of
the benchmark model.
Chapter 3 delivers the methodology introduction. Every method used in this thesis is
described including random cut, single shot. constant update and deep Q-learning network.
Chapter 4 describes the P2P market used to simulate the four methods mentioned above.
Chapter 5 displays the result of all the methods and discuss the performance of each
method.
Chapter 6 is the conclusion.
Chapter 7 proposes methods to improve the performance.
4
==PAGE:13==
2
MODELLING FRAMEWORK
In this chapter, diﬀerent structures of P2P electricity markets and modelling framework
are introduced.
2.1
Market structures
The existing electricity market is divided into two sections: the wholesale market and
the retail market.
The wholesale market is a traditional pool-based market.
Large
consumers(retailer) and generation companies put their bids and oﬀers into a pool where
the market operator sorts them in merit order, thus clearing the market to match the
demand. The marginal cost is determined as the market price. In the retailer market, the
distribution company sells energy to households and other small consumers. Both markets
are built in a top-down hierarchical structure. Therefore the participants can not negotiate
with each other directly.
Current electricity markets do not make full use of renewable resources according to [17].
As the share of prosumers increases, the markets need to change from the vertical structure
to a more ﬂattened one where ﬂexibility and controllability are partially given to the
consumption side. Therefore a more consumer-centric market is required where prosumers
can decide who his supplier is and whom he wants to sell energy to all by himself. P2P
market can satisfy such a requirement that consumers interact with others directly and
choose trading partners based on their preferences.
Various types of P2P markets are purposed and they can be classiﬁed by the degree of
decentralization. Three main types of P2P market can be deﬁned as introduced in the
following.
Full P2P markets
The market is designed in a fully decentralized way. Any participant can reach the rest
agents and select the partner based on its preference. Trades among all agents are made
directly without an extra supervisory node. The advantages and disadvantages of full P2P
markets is summarized as described in [17],
. Each participant has total autonomy which incentivizes proactive consumers
. Participants can freely choose their trading partners according their own preference
. Complete democratization of energy use
. The market has slow convergence speed to achieve consensus of ﬁnal energy delivery
. Since lacking supervisory node to manage trading, the operator has diﬃculties in
predicting system behaviour
. Expensive cost for investment and maintenance of the ICT assets
5
==PAGE:14==
2. Modelling framework
. Ensure the reliability and high quality of delivery
Community-based P2P markets
This design is envisaged in a more structured way that a group of prosumers who are
geographically close forms a community. A non-proﬁt supervisory node serves as the
community manager to coordinate the trading inside the community and the activities
with the rest of the system. The community can also be formed based on the agents
who share common goals, such as the participants who all taking care of environmental
problems and willing to pay for sustainable energy. The advantages and disadvantages of
full P2P markets is shown as described in [17],
. Sharing the same interest, the relationship and involvement of community members
will be enhanced
. Potential service for grid operator through community manager
. Cooperation and resilience of community members
. The complexity to reach the preference of all participants every time is higher
. Diﬃculties for community manager to aggregate the data from all members and
satisfy their expectations
. Hard to guarantee fairness at individual perspective
Hybrid P2P market
The hybrid P2P market is a combination of full P2P market and community-based P2P
market. This market is structured with multi-layers, full P2P or community-based P2P is
applied in each layer. In the lower level, part of agents form communities and the community
manager is responsible for managing the trading activities within the community. In the
upper level, trades are obtained among individual peers and energy communities. Overall,
this design makes use of the two previous approaches. The main advantages and challenges
of hybrid markets are shown as described in [17],
. More compatible with the power system in the next few years
. Easier for grid operator to predict system behaviour
. Trades in low-level and high-level are diﬃcult to coordinate
The decentralized market is usually conceived as a decentralized optimization of energy
trading among participants based on a communication graph.
Each participant is
represented by an agent to take part in market transactions. As displayed in 2.1, the
structure can be better characterized when comparing the traditional pool market with
full decentralized P2P market.
Compared with an existing pool-based market where all the agent put their bids into
the pool and waiting for scheduling by the controller, P2P markets allows agents to
negotiate trade amount and price simultaneously with the other agents directly without
the supervisory agent. As shown in the ﬁgure above, the design of the communication
graph has a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the eﬃciency of the market. Conclusions from graph
theory can play essential roles in this ﬁeld. Various organizations with diﬀerent structures
are proposed, for simplicity, only full P2P markets are considered in this project. In the
full P2P market as ﬁgure 2.1 implies, each agent can communicate with all the rest agents
in theory.
6
==PAGE:15==
2. Modelling framework
Figure 2.1. Pool market and full peer-to-peer market structure
It should be noticed that no matter community-based markets or full P2P markets, the
communication network is independent of the transmission & distribution network in
reality. The term "neighboring agents" does not mean a geographical relation among these
agents but only stands for valid links from a communication perspective.
A forward market mechanism is applied to this project. This term means issues from
power system operations aspects like phase angle, thermal limitation and voltage level,
etc. are not considered in the market. Those issues are more general settings in any
electricity market instead of only belongs to the P2P market. Since power system stability
considerations are not being considered in this project, the forward market exactly suits
the project.
2.2
Model formulation
Consider a set Ωcontains N agents, which contains three types of participants: generator,
pure load, and prosumer. The generator works as a power supplier, responds to the power
demanded by the rest two groups. The pure load is to simulate the participant that can
only consume power like the motor. The prosumer group refers to the participant who can
both produce and consume power.
To set the P2P model, the power injection Pi of agent i can be deﬁned as the summation
of all the bilateral trade with the rest of participants m of set ω. ωi contains all the rest of
agents except agent i.
As the trade is bilateral, the power injection Pi can be divided into two parts: positive
value means production, the power sold from agent i, a negative value means consumption,
agent i purchases power from other agents.
Power boundaries constrain the maximum and minimum amount of power available for
the agent.
Pi ≤Pi ≤Pi
(2.1)
Pi denotes the lower boundary while Pi is the upper boundary. The boundaries could be
positive or negative depends on the role of the agents. Boundaries will be positive if the
agent i is a generator and negative if agent i is a pure load. As for prosumers, the upper
7
==PAGE:16==
2. Modelling framework
boundary is positive, and the lower boundary is negative since prosumers can trade in
both directions.
In a common P2P market, the net energy Pi (i ∈Ω) can be split into a sum of all trade
amount with its neighbour j (j ∈ωi),i.e.,
Pi =
X
j∈ωi
Pij
(2.2)
The full decentralized P2P market can be formulated as
min
X
i∈Ω
fi(Pi)
(2.3)
s.t.
Pi ≤Pi ≤Pi,
∀i ∈Ω
(2.4)
Pij = −Pji,
∀i ∈Ω, ∀j ∈wi
(2.5)
Pi =
X
j∈wi
Pij,
∀i ∈Ω
(2.6)
Pij ≥0,
i ∈Ωp, j ∈wi
(2.7)
Pij ≤0,
i ∈Ωc, j ∈wi
(2.8)
The cost functions of producer and utility functions of consumers are simulated as quadratic
functions,
fi(Pi) = 1
2aiP 2
i + biPi + di
(2.9)
Quadratic functions are widely used tools to model those utility and cost functions,
especially for large conventional generators and consumers when lacking details. In [18],
more insights and details are explained about how those functions formed. It should be
noted that the power ﬂows in is assumed positive. Therefore, for generators Pi > 0, for
pure load Pi < 0. For prosumers, the sign depends on its need at that period. Constraints
(2.7) and (2.8) are used to ensure proper behaviours of the agents in P2P market.
The agent is limited to either producer or consumer. A positive trade amount Pij means a
sale or production from agent i to agent j. Thus a negative trade amount means a purchase
from agent i to j. The constraints (2.7) (2.8) guarantee that producers only sell energy and
consumers only purchase energy. The generator and pure load always belong to producer
and consumer groups, respectively. The prosumers can also apply these constraints by
splitting the role into seller(+) and buyer(-).
Pij = P +
ij + P −
ij
(2.10)
Compared with traditional pool market whose equilibrium is found by constraint (2.11)
on the overall level, the equilibrium of P2P market is guaranteed by individual constraint
(2.5) for all agents.
X
i∈Ω
Pi = 0
(2.11)
8
==PAGE:17==
2. Modelling framework
The dual value of the reciprocity constraint (2.5) deﬁnes the trade prices among agents.
Various trades can be made at diﬀerent prices.
2.3
P2P benchmark model
With a fully developed communication graph, the participant has complete freedom to
choose their trading partners. A more sparse communication graph will result in fewer
choices for the agent to compare, and the total cost will be higher. However, the converging
speed can be improved as a sparse trade graph reduces the computation cost caused by the
negotiating process among all the agents. Therefore an equilibrium is expected to be found
between converging speed and market eﬃciency by handling the communication graph
with diﬀerent strategies. Before implementing the strategy, section 2.3.1, 2.3.2, and 2.3.3
introduce other issues to make sure the model is more realistic and feasible. To control the
communication among agents conveniently, some relevant concepts and modiﬁcations are
needed on top of the initial model.
2.3.1
Communication graph
To improve market eﬃciency through handling communication among agents, the
communication matrix is introduced in this section.
Numbers 0 and 1 are used to represent if the connection between agent i and agent j
is available. 1 means they could have bilateral trade with each other within the given
capacities. 0 means the supervisory agent disconnects the connection; thus, no trade can
be made even if their need matches. A communication matrix can be formed by assembling
all the connections in corresponding positions. The matrix will always remain symmetrical
because trade is bilateral.
Since an agent can not trade with itself, the diagonal elements are always 0. For the agents
both in the generator group or pure load group, the connections are also set to 0 as they
are designed only to sell or consume power. For agents in the prosumer group, the element
can be either 1 or 0. For a P2P market with 6 agents, agent 1&2 as generators, agent 3&4
as pure loads and the rest as prosumers, the fully-developed communication matrix will
look like in ﬁgure 2.1,
Agent
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
2
0
0
1
1
1
1
3
1
1
0
0
1
1
4
1
1
0
0
1
1
5
1
1
1
1
0
1
6
1
1
1
1
1
0
Table 2.1. Full-developed communication matrix with 6 agents
For the initial model described in section 2.2, a hidden full-developed communication
matrix is used by default. To introduce the communication matrix explicitly,the function
(2.6) is updated as (2.12),
9
==PAGE:18==
2. Modelling framework
Pi =
X
j∈wi
ComijPij,
∀i ∈Ω
(2.12)
Comij represent the status of connection between agent i and agent j. Power injection Pi
now is the sum of ComijPi,j.
2.3.2
Flexibility of agents
One of the critical issues of distribution technology is storage. From a system perspective,
the deployment of storage devices enables higher energy eﬃciency and a smoother price
curve. On the other hand, storage devices enable prosumers to take actions in advance to
avoid less beneﬁcial situations with both upward downward ﬂexibility. Thus prosumers own
greater ﬂexibility to adjust their demand. Various storage devices are available nowadays,
such as electric vehicles, batteries, and heat pumps. How the storage device is modeled
has a massive impact on the underlying mechanism.
Take the battery, for instance, common parameters are like the capability, the charging
& discharging rate, ramping constraints, the loss rate of storage, the lifetime of the
battery, the relationship of each period, etc. All these parameters can inﬂuence the ﬁnal
performance, thus need to be taken into consideration. Since the main focus of this project
is to investigate the P2P market mechanism and hard to generalize the speciﬁc equipment
to other situations, a more straightforward way is utilized to represent the ﬂexibility. The
boundaries in equation (2.1) should be determined by both the demand and the available
storage. For simplicity’s sake, the boundaries can be simpliﬁed as a proportion of the
demand,
Pi ≤Pi ≤Pi
(2.13)
Pi = 0.8Pi
(2.14)
Pi = 1.1Pi
(2.15)
The demand of pure loads and prosumers (half hour for a single time step) can adjust
their demand in the range from 0.8 to 1.1 without caring where the ﬂexibility comes from
and which kind of speciﬁc device is selected. The chosen range of ﬂexibility is restricted
to a small area, which is not too aggressive but enough to make a noticeable diﬀerence.
The model is signiﬁcantly simpliﬁed in this way. The generators are assumed to adjust
the production according to the load freely, therefore the range is the capacity. Figure 2.2
describes the base load with the boundaries for 60 prosumers in a single day.
Another relevant setup is the daily budget. Although storage devices could soften the
demand curve to some degree with peak shaving function, the agent still lacks the motivation
to cut the total amount of consumption. Adding a daily budget as a goal for the agent can
push them to lower the demand, thus alleviating the pressure on the network and total
consumption. Daily budget can also help to suppress gambling behavior a bit.
10
==PAGE:19==
2. Modelling framework
Figure 2.2. Illustration of daily demand and ﬂexibility
One thing could be found by observing the data set used in this project.
Although
importation occupies most of the time for most prosumers, exportation can still exist at a
speciﬁc period, for example, at noon. This behavior makes posting a daily budget on daily
demand does not make any sense. Daily demand can not reﬂect the real amount of energy
ﬂow through the network as exportation and importation will oﬀset each other, resulting
in the daily demand less than the amount in absolute. Therefore the consumptionsales of
single time step will be accumulated as an absolute value, and the result will be used for
daily budget. Since the generator can adjust to the load change freely, thus no need to
assign a daily budget as pure loads and prosumers do.
0.9 ∗
48
X
t1=1
X
j∈wi
|Pij,t1| = Pi,budget
(2.16)
The daily budget equals to 0.9 times the amount accumulated in absolute value. A too
ambitious goal will exceed the ability of storage devices, making the model infeasible. In
contrast, a so gentle goal will not make a noticeable diﬀerence. It should be noticed that
the daily budget has no inﬂuence from the previous day to the following day, which makes
it possible to consider daily optimal solutions separately without hurting the ﬁnal optimal
solution for one year.
2.3.3
Slack variables
As the sparsity level increases, more connections will be cut down. One problem raised
during this process is, agent i may not own a useful connection to satisfy its demand at
speciﬁc periods. Take a P2P market containing four agents as an example; the 4 * 4 sparse
communication matrix is shown as follows,
11
==PAGE:20==
2. Modelling framework
Figure 2.3. Sparse communication matrix
Agent 1 is a generator, and agent 2 is a pure load, the rest agents are prosumers. For
most of the hours during the day, the model is feasible though sparse connections lead to a
higher cost than a fully developed matrix. However, the model will be infeasible during
the night or when the agent 3 requires energy during the day.
Although the connections between agent 3 and agent 2 &4 are available, no trade can
be made through their connections since both require energy. Therefore the model will
be infeasible. A similar situation will happen when the prosumer is only linked with
generators, and both need to sell energy, for instance, at 1 PM.
One common solution to address this problem is adding slack variables to the model. The
slack variable is a kind of variable introduced in the linear programming model for a
feasible solution. The variable is mostly used for equality constraints. To avoid the slack
variable becoming part of the optimal solution to the original problem, two large coeﬃcient
M1 and M2 are usually introduced to the objective function as penalties,
min
X
i∈Ω
fi(Pi) + M1PdG + M2PdL
(2.17)
As for this project, two additional slack variables are needed to avoid the situation above,
respectively. Since the variable is introduced to the equation in 2.17, the formulation can
be updated by simply having two additional variables PdG & PdL in set Ω.
From another perspective, PdG and PdL can be treat as connections with the external grid.
These connections serve as a backup to adjust the power system to a normal level in case of
a blackout. External grid is designed with such costly utility functions that the agents will
not be incentivized to trade with it unless no useful connections are available. To minimize
the total cost, the model will ﬁrst select the regular agents with a lower cost. External
grid will only be activated when the model is infeasible with the original model. Besides,
the results of external grid and derivative variables will not be counted in assessment or
taken into calculations, unlike regular agents.
In this project, the penalty for PdG is −109 and 109 for PdL which against the normal case.
The coeﬃcient can be even raised higher with two disadvantages, the model needs more
time to process the data, and the accuracy error caused by the optimizer itself may still not
be eliminated. For the consideration above, −109 and 109 are adopted. Compared with
other penalties 1012 and 1018, the inﬂuence of accuracy error is negligible even multiplied
with high penalties and the computation time does not have an obvious increase.
Besides that, the costly utility functions enable us to check if the communication matrix
allows the matrix to be more sparse. If the optimal solution sharply increases due to the
12
==PAGE:21==
2. Modelling framework
extraordinary cost, the result implies the sparsity level goes too far for part of agents. We
need one step back, and some connections should be reserved.
2.3.4
Benchmark model
With the elements introduced in previous sections, the model can be reformed into a new
form,
min
X
i∈Ω
fi(Pi)
(2.18)
s.t.
Pi ≤Pi ≤Pi,
∀i ∈Ω
(2.19)
Pij = −Pji,
∀i ∈Ω, ∀j ∈wi
(2.20)
Pi =
X
j∈wi
ComijPij,
∀i ∈Ω, ∀j ∈wi
(2.21)
Pi ≤Pi ≤Pi
∀i ∈Ω
(2.22)
48
X
t1=1
X
j∈wi
|Pij,t1| ≤Pi,budget,
∀i ∈Ω, ∀j ∈wi
(2.23)
Pij ≥0,
i ∈Ωp, j ∈wi
(2.24)
Pij ≤0,
i ∈Ωc, j ∈wi
(2.25)
Diﬀerent from (2.3), the set Ωcontains external grid PdG and PdL. The temporally binding
constraints establish interconnections within a single period and increase the complexity of
the problem. The optimization problem can usually be solved in two ways, centralized or
decentralized approach. With the decentralized approach, all agents focus only on their
own cost minimization problem instead of the total cost. While the centralized method is
the opposite. Due to time constraint, the centralized method is applied in this thesis since
no structural gap between them [5].
As mentioned above, the full P2P market mechanism and the following strategies are
proposed based on the forward market. Some perspectives of power system operation and
renewable energy are neglected since they are not the main focus for this project, such as
weather forecasting, ancillary service, and various types of storage technologies.
13
==PAGE:22==
3
METHODOLOGY STATEMENT
In this chapter, four diﬀerent methods are introduced to handle the communication graph.
Random cut is the method to start with, followed by single shot and constant update
methods. Afterward, a deep reinforcement learning based method is applied as a strategy
to control the connections. In the end, section 3.5 introduces the assessment indicators
used to compare model performance except for the optimal solution.
3.1
Random Cut
Random cut is a strategy that disconnecting connections among agents arbitrarily before
running the model for the entire year. Without any clue such as the utility function,
daily demand, or composition of the market, the communication graph will be randomly
sparsiﬁed. The communication will keep unchanged until the end of the year. With an
additional given parameter "replace rate" r, the proportion of disconnected connections
can be controlled at any desired level, as illustrated in ﬁgure 3.1. Therefore, the sparsity
level can keep at the same level when repeating the random choice lots of times. The
structure of the market with Random cut is summed up in ﬁgure 3.2.
Figure 3.1. Illustration of Random Cut method
Although this method is simple and basic compared with other strategies implemented
later, it can still serve as guidance. By repeating the test, the average total cost and
standard deviation are expected to be stable in the end. The rest strategies are expected
to have improvement on top of it.
14
==PAGE:23==
3. Methodology Statement
Figure 3.2. Flowchart of P2P market with Random Cut
3.2
Single Shot
Single shot is a strategy that running the model for a period with a fully-developed
communication matrix then disconnects some of its connections based on individual
cumulative trade volume. Afterward, ﬁnishing the rest of the periods with the updated
matrix. Parameter K is used to tell the supervisory agent only top K connections can be
kept for each participant. However, the agent may not keep exact K connections at some
time, and it is illustrated in the latter part of this section.
The principle is that agents with a lower cost tend to have more transactions with other
agents. Trade volume will be used as a selection indicator. However, the volume is also
aﬀected by the capacities of agents. For an agent with more power consumption and larger
capacities, it may be selected as the top K agent for agent i though it is not one of the
most needed agents.
Therefore the quantity needs normalization to mitigate this eﬀect. Due to this concern, a
percentage method is introduced to relieve this conﬂict.
Percentij = (Pij
Pi
+ Pij
Pj
)/2
(3.1)
Pij is the trade mount through this connection, Pi is the sum of all the trade of agent i.
15
==PAGE:24==
3. Methodology Statement
In this way, using percentage instead of directly using the values, both agent i and agent j
is taken into consideration, thus improving the situation somehow. The same method is
applied in the following method constant update and one of the indicators.
Figure 3.3. Trade amount in percentage of the ﬁrst month
Figure 3.4. Illustration of Single Shot method
Even if with normalization, the connection is still not guaranteed to be selected as top K for
both agents. Figure 3.4 shows that when the agent adjusts the matrix based on results like
shown in ﬁgure 3.3, there are still conﬂicts for some connections. Connection of Pi,j may
choose as top K connections for agent i, but for agent j the connection is not so important.
Considering this situation, the idea is to keep at least K connections individually. The
connection will be kept if one of its symmetrical positions is kept. Therefore, the number
of connections is usually more than K. The structure of the single shot is summed up in
ﬁgure 3.5.
16
==PAGE:25==
3. Methodology Statement
Figure 3.5. Flowchart of P2P market with Single Shot
3.3
Constant Update
Unlike the previous two methods, Constant update is a strategy that updates the product
diﬀerentiation matrix periodically without changing the communication matrix. The model
will start to run with the initial product diﬀerentiation matrix for the ﬁrst period, afterward
update the matrix for the next period. This process is iterated until the last period. The
communication matrix will keep as full matrix all the time.
In order to inﬂuence trade and keep the communication matrix unchanged, product
diﬀerentiation is introduced to the model.
Besides the energy itself, consumers are
also interested in other nonmonetary characteristics of the product. For instance, some
customers would like to pay a higher price for renewable energy due to environmental
concerns.
The method can be implemented by having an extra product diﬀerentiation matrix with
the same size as the communication matrix, and the same principle is applied. Diagonal
elements are always zero, and agents within same group(generator or pure load) can not
trade; thus the extra trading cost is also zero.
The extra cost is calculated as a linear function of the amount traded with neighboring
agents as shown in the following
ef(Pi) =
X
j∈wi
CijPij,
∀i ∈Ω
(3.2)
Cij is the trade coeﬃcient imposed on bilateral trade between agent i and agent j. The
factor represents the extra cost per unit. The objective function of the model with constant
update method can be expressed as,
min
X
i∈Ω
fi(Pi) + ef(Pi)
(3.3)
17
==PAGE:26==
3. Methodology Statement
where fi(Pi) is the quadratic function as shown in equation 2.18, and ef(Pi) is the cost
comes from product diﬀerentiation.
As for the period used in the method, a long period can not reﬂect the tendency in time,
while a short one is aﬀected by lots of accidental events. Considering these factors, one
week would be an appropriate choice as a period in this project.
To encourage the agent to use their preferred connections more often thus the rarely used
ones could be seen as sparse, all connections are divided into three classes ’Active’, ’Less
active’, and ’Rare’ based on the normalized cumulative trade volume from last period.
The extra cost for connections of ’Active’ group is 0 €/KWh, 1 €/KWh for connections of
’Less active’, and 1000 €/KWh for the ’Rare’.
Figure 3.6. Groups division in Constant Update method
The illustration of division is shown in ﬁgure 3.6. Tier 1 is the number of connections in
the active group, tier 2 is the number of connections in the ﬁrst two groups which is used
as a boundary between sparse and dense.
Figure 3.7. Trade amount in percentage of last period
Figure 3.8. Illustration of Constant Update method
18
==PAGE:27==
3. Methodology Statement
Figure 3.9. Flowchart of P2P market with Constant Update
The operations on the matrix are similar as single shot, the only diﬀerence is the process
is iterative and done on the product diﬀerentiation matrix instead of the communication
matrix. The low priority coeﬃcient will be overwritten by the one with high priority, as
shown in ﬁgure 3.8. The structure of constant update is summed up in ﬁgure 3.9
It should be noticed that only the historical data from the previous period is used for
reference; data from an earlier period is not considered.
3.4
Deep Q-learning Network
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) is a combination that contains the structure of deep
learning and reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms.
Diﬀerent from the static data usually used in supervised and unsupervised learning, the
learning process of DRL is a dynamic and continuously interactive process that exactly
suits the scenario of the P2P market. The agent can learn from its previous experience
and take action according to the dynamic environment. Actions leading the goal will be
rewarded. The agent is not told which actions are optimal in advance, and it needs to
learn by trying how to achieve the highest total reward.
19
==PAGE:28==
3. Methodology Statement
Figure 3.10. Illustration of Reinforcement learning
As Fig 3.10 shows, an RL usually includes two components, environment, and agent. The
agent and environment are interconnected by state, reward, and action. The loop continues
until the environment perceives the terminal state and ends the episode.
DRL can be generally classiﬁed into two classes: the value-based approach and policy
gradient-based approach. As one of the most classic approaches, Deep Q-learning Network
(DQN) is implemented in this thesis. DQN is a combination of Q-learning and deep neural
network. In the following part, Q-learning and neural network are introduced, respectively.
To accelerate the training process, Compute Uniﬁed Device Architecture (CUDA) has been
employed. CUDA is a parallel computing platform developed by Nvidia, it enables the
calculation within each layer of the network can be done by GPU with acceleration. With
tensorﬂow-gpu, more iterations can be completed in a certain period [19].
To make the code easy to read and algorithms easier for comparison in future work, a
customized environment is built within the Gym package developed by OpenAI [20]. The
gym is a toolkit that contains lots of built-in environments for comparing and developing
the algorithms. However, those built-in environments are far from the actual situation in
the P2P market. Therefore, a custom environment for the P2P market and adaptive to
the neural network architecture is created.
3.4.1
Q-learning
Q-learning is an oﬀ-policy reinforcement learning algorithm. Action-value function Q(s, a)
is used to represent the value of the pair (state, action).
Figure 3.11. Pseudo-code of Q-learning
20
==PAGE:29==
3. Methodology Statement
Figure 3.11 illustrates the Q-learning algorithm[21]. The Q-value is updated by equation3.4,
Q(St, At) ←Q(St, At) + α[Rt+1 + γ max
a
Q(St+1, a) −Q(St, At)]
(3.4)
where α is the learning rate, γ is the discount factor of future rewards. The policy employed
in this thesis is decaying ϵ-greedy policy, which combines Exploration & Exploitation. If
the probability randomly generated is less than ϵ, the agent will take a random action to
explore. On the contrary, the agent will take the best action according to estimation as
3.5 shows.
at+1 = arg max
a
Q(St + 1, a)
(3.5)
The ϵ value decreases gradually as the timestep increases, which means the agent is
encouraged to take more explorations in the early stages, while in the later periods taking
advantage of experience already known.
Besides the Q-learning algorithm, there are also several essential concepts need to be
introduced.
Environment The environment is the world which the agent interacts with. At the start
of each step of interaction, the agent observes the state of the environment then chooses
an action to achieve the expected reward. The environment changes due to the action, but
it should be noted that the environment may also change according to its own mode.
Reward The environment gives a reward at the end of every interaction. The reward
value is used to describe how good or bad the current state is. The goal of the agent is to
maximize the cumulative reward. In this way, the agent can learn how to react to achieve
the goal.
Reward design is one of the most ﬂexible parts of deep reinforcement learning. The principle
for reward design is to ﬁnd a proper way to reﬂect the goal. The agent always follows the
way of maximizing the total reward rather than the user’s intention. For instance, in a
maze game, the agent gets a higher positive reward if closer to the destination. Under this
situation, the best policy for the agent will be to wander around the destination and not
ﬁnish the game. The result may not be the expected one for the designer.
For the P2P market, the main goal is to ﬁnd a balance between sparsity level and total
cost. So both should be reﬂected in the reward function.
If the daily cost exceeds the threshold, which means the cost reaches an unacceptable level,
the reward will be 0.
reward = 0
(3.6)
Otherwise, the reward will be calculated as,
reward = rewardsocial_welfare + rewardsparsity
(3.7)
21
==PAGE:30==
3. Methodology Statement
And the sub-rewards are calculated as follows,
rewardsocial_welfare =
1
social_welfare ∗optimal
(3.8)
rewardsparsity = (sparsity −0.1) ∗0.4
(3.9)
The main idea is the lower the cost, the higher the reward agent will receive. However, if
the agent is only incentivized to chase the optimal cost, the agent will always prefer to
establish connections with other agents without considering the sparsity level. Therefore
the rewardsparsity is added to the equation, the agent is expected to weigh the beneﬁt from
both sides. It should be noted that the optimal value is a factor used to normalize the
sub-reward a bit. For the case with 70 agents modeled in the thesis, the optimal daily cost
is around a few thousand. So its reciprocal is a minimal value, the other part will mainly
dominate the reward. Normalization is needed to make the cost has a greater impact on
the reward, thus aﬀects the Q-value and gradient [16].
However, the disadvantage is that optimal value is an empirical value based on the scale
of the P2P market, the composition of the agents and the cost function, etc. If one of
these factors changes signiﬁcantly, the reference point should also be modiﬁed. Besides,
the optimal value may not handle the output very well if the proﬁle changes drastically.
For instance, the cost for days with more demand may relatively high, even with a full
matrix. Thus it is unfair still to evaluate those days by such a low standard.
At the early stage of the training process, the agent is encouraged to do more explorations,
making the agent more likely to receive both high cost and sparsity. If putting rewards
from both sides together directly, those experiences may lead the agent to think only
chasing for high sparsity is a good policy.
To avoid such misleading, a coeﬃcient is applied to the sparsity level. Besides, a small
fraction is subtracted from the sparsity, which means the agent will get a penalty if the level
is lower than the threshold. However, in the absence of many experiences, the mechanism
still needs to be examined in a case study.
State & Observation A state is a description including all the information of the
environment while observation is usually part of the state, which may miss some information.
The states and observations can be represented by a vector, matrix, or tensor. In this
thesis, the environment is assumed to be a fully observed one, thus they are considered
the same thing. The state is represented by notation s.
In Q-learning, the state contains all the information the agent needs for making a decision
in the current time step. Therefore the form of step will determine which kind of data
should be collected.
Two diﬀerent ways to set the step could be considered in the model. The ﬁrst manner
is to set half an hour as one step for the agent. Due to the daily budget constraint, the
agent needs to have some intermediate variables and take more information into account
to make sure not to violate the budget. This method allows the agent to be more ﬂexible
in adjusting its action and requires more computational power. The second manner is
to treat one day as a single step. Therefore the daily budget constraint will be satisﬁed
within one step. For the sake of simpliﬁcation, the latter option is applied in this thesis.
22
==PAGE:31==
3. Methodology Statement
Since the model is set to take one day as a step, the variables within one day are no longer
need to be considered. In the P2P market model, the daily demand and the state of
communication graph can aﬀect the action of the agent. The sparsity level is also added
to the state’s end as a variant indicator of the communication graph.
Action Spaces The set of all possible actions in a given environment is called action space.
For some environments, the agent has a discrete action space. Like AlphaGo, the agent
only has a ﬁnite number of choices. For other environments, the agent may own continuous
action space. The action of supervisory agents in the P2P market is to disconnect or
establish ﬁnite connections among participants, therefore the action space is discrete.
3.4.2
Neural Network
As computational algorithms by simulating the behavior of biological systems, Neural
network is a booming ﬁeld which has been applied successfully in various area and boost
the development of the industry. In ﬁelds like Natural Language Processing(NLP) and
Computer Vision, Neural network has been proved to be a quite eﬀective method.
Neural network is a function approximation method to map the input data to output,
which can hardly be represented by linear functions. Weights and bias are parameters
learned during the training process to shape the network towards better results in the
target domain.
Feedforward neural network combined with back propagation to optimize the parameter
is widely used in various problems. The data is processed only in the forward direction.
Methods such as Multilayer Perceptron(MLP) and Convolutional Neural Network(CNN)
belong to this category. In this part, MLP will be used the deep learning side of the DQN
model. The general architecture of feed forward neural network is shown in ﬁgure 3.12 [22]:
Figure 3.12. Illustration of neural network
The ﬁrst layer is the input layer, which receives the input data and communicates with
one or more hidden layers. The input layer nodes are passive, which only pass their input
to many connected hidden outputs. The hidden layer is the next two layers, where the
parameters are trained. The nodes are linked with weighted connections. A neural network
23
==PAGE:32==
3. Methodology Statement
has one or more hidden layers. The depth of neural network depends on the complexity of
the problem. The last layer is an output layer that returns the corresponding predicted
value of the input data. The number of output nodes depends on the situation.
3.4.2.1
Activation function
A series of activation functions have been developed for the hidden layer, and there is not
much clear guidance. The most commonly used functions are Rectiﬁed Linear Units(RELU),
Logistic Sigmoid, and Hyperbolic Tangent(tanh).
The form of RELU function is shown as follows,
g(z) = max(0, z)
(3.10)
If the input falls on the left side of RELU, the output is 0. The right side is a linear
function that the ﬁrst-order derivation is constant 1. The linearity avoids saturation when
x increases. Due to such property, RELU becomes the most common activation function.
In the DQN model, RELU is used as an activation function for hidden units.
Other popular activation functions like tanh and sigmoid function are also used quite often,
S(x) =
1
1 + e−x
(3.11)
tanh(x) = ex −e−x
ex + e−x
(3.12)
The main diﬀerence between them and RELU is only if the input falls in region close to
zero, the output is sensitive. The functions can easily saturate if fed with a large input,
thus almost no diﬀerence in output. Given those concerns, sigmoid and tanh are not
applied.
Figure 3.13. Three types of activation functions
24
==PAGE:33==
3. Methodology Statement
3.4.2.2
Training Algorithm
The goal of the optimizer is to minimize the value of loss function by updating weights
and bias. It is an algorithm measuring the performance of a network on the selected data
set. Adam (Adaptive Moment Estimation) is one of most widely used algorithm which
shows good adaptability for various applications in deep learning ﬁeld [23].
Adam is a combination of Root Mean Square Propagation(RMSProp) and momentum
methods. There is not too much guidance on choosing which algorithm should be used. On
average, Adam usually performances slightly better than RMSProp and is recommended
as the ﬁrst approach to try. Therefore Adam is employed as the training algorithm in the
thesis.
3.4.2.3
Batch Normalization
Batch Normalization is a method to speed up training processing by reducing the internal
co-variate shift. Internal co-variate shift occurs when the input distribution of network
changes and the hidden layer needs more time to adapt to the new distribution. The
training process will be slowed down then.
With Batch Normalization, each layer can train on input with a more stable distribution
that accelerates the training process.
The equation of Batch Normalization is shown as follows [24]:
Figure 3.14. Illustration of Batch Normalization
It should be noted that the last step is scaling and shifting, which including two new
learnable parameters γ and β. All the input data is transformed into mean 0 and unit
variance after normalization. Some information may be lost from such a procedure. To
avoid losing too much information, parameters γ and β enable the input data to adjust its
distribution with one more step.
25
==PAGE:34==
3. Methodology Statement
3.4.2.4
Data Splitting and Cross Validation
Data Splitting is often used in deep learning to test whether the model can perform well on
an unseen data set, the so-called test set. However, testing on the test set directly will leak
information to the network in advance as the user could tune the parameters according to
its performance on the test set. Therefore a third set, the validation set is a need.
For data set with huge size, merely dividing the data into three subsets is usually ﬁne.
Nevertheless, for those small or medium-size data set, the network could easily over-ﬁtting.
Cross Validation is one of the tools to address the issue and improve the utilization of data
as well. Mean square error(MSE) or Root mean square error(RMSE) are two commonly
used tools for evaluation in cross validation. However, considering the loss function is
not used in DQN, total reward on the validation set will be used as an evaluation metric
instead of MSE and RMSE. It should be noted that compared with models only has one
validation set or even without validation set, the greedy for more computational power
makes it a disadvantage for cross validation.
K-fold cross validation is used in the thesis. By splitting the training set into K fold and
test the network on k diﬀerent validation set, the conclusion is more credible. One subset
will be used for validation, the reset k-1 subsets will use for training. For each set of
hyperparameters, it will go through the training and validation k times and evaluate the
average reward of the validation set as shown in 3.13. K-fold ensures that each fold will be
used for validation only once. Figure 3.15 [25] shows an example of 10-fold cross validation.
5-fold or 10-fold is most commonly used in k-fold method, and 5-fold is used in this thesis.
Following the common ratios used in deep learning, the training set takes roughly 80%,
and the test set takes the rest of data. Then the training set is split equally into 5 subsets.
Therefore each subset contains 8 weeks, accounting for 20% of the training set.
avg_reward = 1
k
X
reward
(3.13)
Figure 3.15. 10-fold Cross-Validation
26
==PAGE:35==
3. Methodology Statement
3.4.2.5
Architecture Design
In this part, the architecture of neural network will be illustrated. As mentioned above,
the MLP is used for the neural network, which takes samples from replay buﬀer as input.
The input will be transformed by the RELU activation function at the hidden layer. While
in the output layer, the result is numeric value as a prediction of Q-value. The RELU
function is not necessarily needed, linear function with weights and bias is enough to
accomplish it. To accelerate the convergence, batch normalization is implemented before
the RELU function. The cost function is MSE error, and the optimal Q-value updated by
Q-learning is used as the label. The architecture is shown in ﬁgure 3.16.
Figure 3.16. Network working ﬂow
3.4.3
Deep Q-learning Network
In Q-learning, the observations are saved in a table.
However, this method is not
practical when the environment has enormous state space or action space. The explosive
increasing of observations results in a "dimension disaster" making it impossible to build
the table anymore. Therefore, using a network as a function approximator to represent
the observations and actions becomes an alternative choice.
Figure 3.17. Illustration of DQN
θ is parameters trained in the neural network, φ is feature vector extract from the state, a
′
is the set of all possible actions in the next step. The MSE cost function is calculated by
the target Q value and Q value. For non-terminal state, the target is calculated as
yj = rj + γ max
a′
Q(φj+1, a
′; θ)
(3.14)
27
==PAGE:36==
3. Methodology Statement
Experience Replay
One important technique often utilized during training in DQN is experience replay. For
a time-series event like the P2P market, The correlation between adjacent states of an
episode is very strong. Using sequential data in DQN, the parameters in network may
easily oscillate or diverge [14].
Experience replay can improve this situation by breaking the correlation and averaging the
distribution over many previous experiences. The data is stored in a replay buﬀer after
every step, which contains transition [current_state, action, reward, next_state]. During
the training process, the samples are randomly taken from the buﬀer.
Usually, the size of the experience reply is set to ﬁnite size of N, only the last N experience
tuples will be stored in the buﬀer. As the states increase, transitions of the early stage
will be overwritten by the latter ones which makes it a drawback of experience reply.
Some transitions may not have an immediate eﬀect, but might be helpful when the agent
encounters lots of situation[26]. A buﬀer with a small size may lose the experience near
starting point easily which causing the chance of failure and instability. The capacity of
the buﬀer is 50k in the thesis, which can accommodate all experience.
3.5
Performance evaluation indicators
Before implementing diﬀerent strategies to the model, the indicator used for assessment
needs to be claimed. Besides the optimal solution, other related indicators are also helpful
to better evaluate the performance from diﬀerent aspects. The introduction will start
from sparsity level at ﬁrst, then introduce intensity level. Fairness indicators quality of
service(QoS) and quality of experience(QoE) will be ﬁnally interpreted.
3.5.1
Sparsity Level
The number of available connections has a large inﬂuence on optimal solutions. Considering
the diﬀerent scales of tested cases, the number can vary from one to another. Density and
sparsity are often used in this situation to describe a graph or matrix, whether it is sparse
or not [27].
For undirected graphs, the density level can be calculated as,
D =
2|E|
|V |(|V | −1)
(3.15)
The density can be deﬁned as the ratio of the number of edges |E| and the maximum
possible edges, |V| denotes the vertex. Thus the sparsity can be calculated as,
sparsity = 1 −density
(3.16)
Unlike other strategies, the indicator sparsity of the constant update method is calculated
by the product matrix. It needs to be speciﬁed as either ’sparsityActive’, which takes the
connection with agents of ’Less active’ and ’Rare’ as zero, or ’sparsityActive&Less’ which
only take the connection of ’Rare’ agent as disconnected.
28
==PAGE:37==
3. Methodology Statement
One thing to be noticed, the diagonal elements and connections belong to the generator
and pure load group respectively, need to be excluded since impossible to trade with itself
or other agents fall in the same category. Otherwise, the density will never reach 100%
even with a fully developed communication matrix. As mentioned before, the connections
with the external grid will not be counted.
3.5.2
Intensity Level Indicators
Agent always prefers to trade with neighboring agents, which sells at the lowest price or
purchase with the highest bid ﬁrst. The preference to trade with those who can beneﬁt
them most makes some partners have a higher priority to other agents. Thus more trade
amounts will be made, or their connections will be activated more often than others.
Given a sparse communication matrix, the agent tends to keep those mostly used connections
with a lower cost. The connections triggered more often are more likely to be kept. The
decreased choices, which in return, will make the left connections more intense.
For each agent, the intense connections can be evaluated from two perspectives, the share
of trade amount and activated times.
Accumulated trade amount can be used as an indicator to show the intensity of connections
and which gains more advantage. However, using absolute value may lead to some problems,
as mentioned in section 3.2.
Due to the diﬀerence of capacities, the share of the same trade amount for an agent may
less than its partner. Considering from the agent’s point of view, some connections may
not worth keeping. However, from its partner’s point, the trade amount through that link
may take up a large proportion, thus need to keep. The situation can be quite usual when
expanding to a large scale. Therefore the mechanism needs to be reconsidered as unfair to
those agents with smaller capacities.
Due to this concern, the same percentage method is used to relief this conﬂict as shown in
section 3.2.
Percentij = (Pij
Pi
+ Pij
Pj
)/2
(3.17)
The second result can be used as an indicator is activated times of each connection. The
more times activated, the more likely to be an intense connection. However, the threshold
to justify whether a connection is an intense link tends to empirical as it can be inﬂuenced
by various factors like scale, the share of diﬀerent groups and other parameters, etc.
3.5.3
Fairness indicators
All the indicators above only care about from a system level. An individual perspective is
also worth paying attention.
The model may achieve a relatively low level regarding the optimal solution for the whole
system, but the increased expense mainly falls on the minority. Therefore the minority
will not be incentivized to accept the strategy used in the local market. Fairness indicators
29
==PAGE:38==
3. Methodology Statement
are introduced to reﬂect if all agents are treated reasonably enough in terms of volumes of
energy traded and personal expenses.
Quality of Service
Quality of Service(QoS) indicators are widely used to estimate fairness of distribution by
Jain’s index [12], shown as follows,
QoS = [Pn
i=1 |Pn|]2
n Pn
i=1 P 2n
(3.18)
QoS is calculated on the amount of energy traded by each agent. The indicator allows the
market to show the disequilibrium in terms of quantity. The system will be 100% fair when
all the energy exchanged in the market are equal for all agents. Equal trade amount for all
agents is not necessary, as QoS may be inﬂuenced by hourly demand. But a relative low
level of QoS implies the presence of agents that own large power over the market. Thus
the stability of the market will be easily aﬀected, and the robustness of the strategy used
needs to be reconsidered.
Quality of Experience
Quality of Experience(QoE) is another index to assess fairness from a user-centric
perspective. The quality is based on the price of each trade λi, the dual value drawn from
constraint (2.20). Employing the method proposed in [13], the QoE can be calculated as
QoE = 1 −
σ
σmax
(3.19)
where σ is the standard deviation of price λi received each half-hour, σmax is the maximum
price diﬀerence. Therefore the maximum fairness will be 1 when all the agents receive the
same price. Means and standard deviation of QoE will be indicators to examine whether
the increased cost falls approximate equally on every agent.
30
==PAGE:39==
4
CASE STUDY
For this chapter, a case study is presented to illustrate the application of proposed models
in Chapter 3. The chapter begins with the data description. Afterward, The cost curves,
ﬂexibility, and other parameters used in diﬀerent methods are discussed. The case study
covers various situations applied in the proposed models.
4.1
Data description
A reliable database is a cornerstone of the project. To build the model proposed in chapter
2, consumption data of controllable load and immutable load, generation data of PV or
wind production should be collected. The database from New South Wales in Australia
meets the requirement exactly, thus providing a realistic environment for the models [28].
Thanks to three separate meters, the solar generation, energy consumption, and controllable
load consumption are recorded each half-hour, respectively.
In Australia grid data
set, residential solar generation recorded is referred to as Gross Generation (GG).
The consumption of the immutable load is referred to as General Consumption (GC).
Consumption of controllable load (CL) records the consumption caused by water heating
of 137 consumers from 300 residents. The water heating equipment enables the consumers
to switch the source for their all electric heated water systems and incentivize them from a
ﬁnancial perspective.
Figure 4.1. Illustration of power ﬂow in the residential system
The relationship of the power ﬂow can be illustrated by ﬁgure 4.1. The self-produced
power provided by PV or wind turbine has a higher priority than power imported from
the grid, it must be taken ﬁrst. So the real demand of consumers is calculated as follows,
31
==PAGE:40==
4. Case study
di = GCi −GGi + CLi
(4.1)
The demand for prosumer i is denoted by di.
As a simulation of heavy loads, the
consumption sequence of pure loads is assumed to be larger than common household
prosumers. It is generated by randomly selecting a negative value from GC of the existing
database and add an extra consumption range from -5 KWh to -3 KWh on top of it.
Generators’ capacities are considered to be larger than small consumers, and the production
is always non-negative.
4.2
Cost curves
This section describes the cost function used in models and the coeﬃcients of the quadratic
function. The coeﬃcient ai and bi used are randomly selected within a similar range
adopted in [5]. Coeﬃcient values are shown in table 4.1.
Producer
Consumer
External generator
External load
ai[c€/kWh2]
0.01-0.02
0.1-0.2
0
0
bi[c€/kWh]
2-3
1-2
1*109
-1*109
di[c€/kWh]
0
0
0
0
Table 4.1. Parameters of the cost functions
The coeﬃcient di in equation (2.9) usually regarded as to start-up cost is assumed to be 0
in this thesis. For a more realistic setup, the coeﬃcient should be distinguished based on
speciﬁc types to characterize the cost functions. The marginal cost for renewable generators
like PV or wind turbines is zero, which makes renewable energy a higher priority than
conventional generators’ power. Therefore both ai and bi for prosumers producing power
should be almost zero. However, the convergence speed will slow down without product
diﬀerentiation. Another option provided by [5] is to deﬁne those agents with virtual cost
functions to make sure the uniqueness. Renewable generation is adopted as a mandatory
option for the market, conventional generators will start producing when demand can not
be covered by prosumers.
Conventional generators are assumed as fully-dispatchable with identical capacities of 0.2
MW. For the sake of simplicity, generators can adjust its output according to the demand
side without any reaction time. Therefore, the power setpoint is no need for the generators.
4.3
Cases for testing
The test cases are run on the High Performance Computing Clusters (Elektro-HPC-
Clusters), Huawei XH620 V3 server. Each server is equipped with Intel Xeon Processor,
256 GB or 512 GB memory. To make the best use of HPC, test cases are designed to be as
large as possible. After testing diﬀerent cases, the case with 140 agents is the closest one to
the physical limitation when implementing a centralized optimization method. Considering
the running time is still somewhat long, cases with 70 agents are the most commonly used
32
==PAGE:41==
4. Case study
ones. Part of the training process of DQN is run on GPU nodes of HPC, Tesla V100 16GM,
32 GB memeory.
To investigate the inﬂuence of prosumers, two cases are created for market. The ﬁrst one
has 60 prosumers, and the second one has 40 prosumers, the rest agents are divided equally
as generators and pure loads. For the sake of simplicity, non-time-varying agents are used
in these cases. No participant is allowed to join or quit halfway, and the cost curves stay
the same all the time.
For the random cut method, the sparsity level varies from 0.1 to 0.7. 0.1 is used as one
step for cases in general, smaller steps are used in some intervals where total cost changes
rapidly. With a higher sparsity level, the total cost will grow explosively thus doesn’t make
any sense. All the test cases are repeated 5 times for each of them to reduce the impact
of random selection. The average value and standard deviation are used to describe the
result.
For single shot method, top K connections are kept individually. Parameter K starts from 1
to 70 for 70 agents group. The sampling interval becomes shorter as K increases gradually.
For constant update method, top K connections are classiﬁed as active connections. For
the sake of simplicity, the boundary between the ’Less active’ group and the ’Rare group’
is ﬁxed. Two sub-cases are created for 70 agents group regarding boundaries between ’Less
active’ group and ’Rare group’, one with boundary set at 40 and the other with 20.
As for the DQN model, various hyperparameters could have an inﬂuence on performance.
Due to time limitation, learning rate, discount factor and batch size which are usually
considered ﬁrstly in deep learning or DQN are selected.
The learning rate determines the step size as the model moves towards the minimum of a
loss function. A lower learning rate requires more time for training and may be stuck at a
local optimum. A higher rate need less time to reach the optimal but it can easily lead
to an unstable process, overshoot will be the main problem. The learning rate is often in
the range from 0 to 1. In this thesis, 0.001, 0.01, 0.1 and 1 are employed to try to ﬁnd a
suitable rate.
Batch size is another important parameter that deﬁnes the number of samples to be fed in
the neural network. With more samples propagated through the network, the estimate of
the gradient will be more accurate. Smaller batch size requires less memory and trains the
network faster. Typically, the batch size is set 32 as default. 16, 32, 64, 128 as batch size
has been implemented in this thesis, respectively.
Discount factor γ determines the weight of future rewards in equation 3.14. Considering
the number of steps in the training set, the impact of future rewards will decay to a
negligible point even for a relatively higher factor. Therefore, γ =0.9, 0.95,0.99, is utilized
to investigate the inﬂuence of future reward.
As mentioned in Chapter 3, the data is split into a 5-fold training set and a test set. Each
episode contains four folds that corresponding to 223 steps. For each training process, the
agent will go through 10 K episodes. Weights and bias of the network will be recorded every
1000 steps. The group of hyperparameters with the best performance on the validation set
33
==PAGE:42==
4. Case study
will be selected for the test set.
Due to the time constraint, only the P2P market with 60 prosumers is trained. To compare
the performance between DQN and other methods, the data from the test set is also used
for random cut, single shot, and constant update. Moreover, the initial state is set with a
full matrix except for the random cut method.
34
==PAGE:43==
5
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
All those models presented in chapter 3 are simulated with Gurobi optimizer [29] applied
in Python 3.6.2.
5.1
Benchmark results
The results of the P2P market with 60 prosumers and 40 prosumers are summarized in
the following table 5.1 as a benchmark.
Cost(€)
Sparsity
QoS[p.u.]
QoE[p.u.]
Intensityamount
Intensitytimes
60 prosumers
757912.08
0%
0.140
0.856
0.33%
0%
40 prosumers
1529164.67
0%
0.227
0.766
0%
0%
Table 5.1. P2P market benchmark results
Both P2P markets have 70 agents in total. The ﬁrst market contains 60 prosumers, 5
generators, and 5 pure loads. The second market is composed of 40 prosumers, 15 generators,
and 15 pure loads. The results are calculated with a fully developed communication matrix
for the whole year.
5.2
Random Cut & Single Shot results
Figure 5.1.
Total cost with 40 prosumers
Figure 5.2. Total cost with 60 prosumers
For the random cut and single shot methods, ﬁgure 5.1 and ﬁgure 5.2 reveal how the cost
changes as the sparsity level increases. The logarithmic scale is used to show the whole
tendency where the base is the optimal cost of the benchmark. The shaded area is the
35
==PAGE:44==
5. Results and Discussion
standard deviation of the cost. Part of the results with cost under the blue dashed line
is shown in ﬁgure 5.3. It can be found that both markets show similar responses when
Figure 5.3. Partial results of P2P market
communication is more sparse. It appears that the system with fewer prosumers has better
adaptability in both methods. With more generators and pure loads, prosumers have more
choice to trade with. But for markets with fewer generators or pure loads, the connections
of prosumers are moe likely to be cut. Then the prosumer has to trade with the external
grid on high price. The same principle also applies to pure loads. Moreover, random
cut shows better performance than single shot. In single shot method, the supervisory
agent makes its decision based on knowledge from the ﬁrst month while random cut knows
nothing about their proﬁle or cost functions. However, the proﬁle of peers will change
quite a lot throughout the whole year. Using information based on any speciﬁc month will
not help but cause the cost to increase sharply when the proﬁle shows a diﬀerent trend.
The second reason results from some essential connections are disconnected due to their
trade amount. Without those connections, agents at speciﬁc periods have to trade with
the external grid. The detailed results can be found in the appendix.
Figure 5.4.
Impact of sparsity on system
fairness indicators with 40 con-
sumers
Figure 5.5. Impact of sparsity on system
fairness indicators with 60 con-
sumers
36
==PAGE:45==
5. Results and Discussion
Figure 5.1 and 5.2 depicts the impact of sparsity on the fairness indicators, the impact
of the external grid is not taken into consideration. QoS indicator is used to evaluate
allocation fairness. Low values of QoS implies the presence of participants who own market
power. It is possible to notice that QoS trends and cost trends coincide most of the time.
This behavior results from the trade with the external grid. Due to the limited connections
and capacities, some agents have to import/export energy from outside. Therefore, the
reliance on some favorable traders is reduced to some extent and shows fairer from a system
perspective. When the graph is almost empty, the market shrinks to a much smaller size,
and some speciﬁc agents will gain power again.
As for QoE, the decreasing trend implies the imbalance of price at the early stage of
sparsiﬁcation. Limited choices make the price rise for some of the agents, thus it will be
unfair for them as their interests are harmed. When it comes to the much-sparsiﬁed graph,
all agents have to trade at a similarly high price. As a result, the price deviation is reduced
at that time.
Figure 5.6. Impact of sparsity on intensity level with 40&60 prosumers
The intensity level based on activation times is not shown in the plot, as it is always
lower than 2% even with 90% sparsity. The intensity increases when the communication
is empty. The reason behind may due to the threshold settings. 20% is still a so high
criterion for "intense connection" that most of the connections can not meet the standard.
Higher sparsity means all the rest links are more likely to be activated, thus making it
hard to tell which one is activated more frequently.
Figure 5.6 describes how the intensity level based on the trade amount changes as sparsity
rises. It could be seen that the intensity level remains at a relatively low level, although
the cost has already increased sharply. The results conﬁrms that only some essential
connections is disconnected while the majority of connections are still work as normal.
37
==PAGE:46==
5. Results and Discussion
5.3
Constant Update results
The results of the constant update are depicted by ﬁgure 5.7. 60 denotes the market with
60 prosumers, while 40 means 40 prosumers. "20 agents less active" means the boundary
between dense and sparse is ﬁxed at 20 agents. The sum of connections in active and less
active groups is ﬁxed at 20 or 40, and the ratio of two groups changes. In the constant
update method, all the links are divided into three groups: active group, less active group,
and rare group. The extra cost of product diﬀerentiation is 0 €/kWh, 1 €/kWh and
1000 €/kWh respectively. The connections in the rare group could be seen as sparse in
calculation due to their high cost. Since the boundary of the two groups is ﬁxed, the
sparsity level is almost constant, thus hard to distinguish in the plot. The range of sparsity
is summarized in table 5.2 while the ratio changes with two groups.
Figure 5.7. Total cost with 40&60 prosumers
Instead of using sparsityActive&Less, sparsityActive only considering the link of the active
group is used as x-axis for better eﬀects in the plot, so the label "sparsity level" has a
diﬀerent meaning with previous plots. If not speciﬁed, all the results of constant update
method use it as the x-axis.
As ﬁgure 5.7 shows, once the boundary of the ﬁrst two groups is ﬁxed, the cost hardly
changes.
60- 20 less active
60- 40 less active
40- 20 less active
40- 40 less active
sparsityActive&Less
54%-61%
36%-37%
54%-55%
25%-30%
Table 5.2. Range of sparsity level, constant update
38
==PAGE:47==
5. Results and Discussion
Figure 5.8.
Impact of sparsity on system
fairness indicators of 40 con-
sumers, constant update method
Figure 5.9. Impact of sparsity on system fair-
ness indicators of 60 consumers,
constant update method
As described in ﬁgure 5.8 and 5.9, both QoS and QoE show a downward trend in the
constant update method. Diﬀerent from the random cut or single shot which operates
on the communication graph, the graph keeps unchanged in constant method. All the
changes are done by adjusting the cost from product diﬀerentiation. Since the connections
are not really disconnected, thus the main grid is rarely involved in the market unless the
demand beyond the capacities. Without the participation of external grid, higher sparsity
level leads to more signiﬁcant price variation and lower QoE. It also enables a small group
of traders to gain more market power than usual. As a result of that, QoS will decrease.
It is also possible to notice that at the end of 20 agents less active in ﬁgure 5.8, QoE shows
a slight increase. More investigations could be done to check whether it is coincidence or
due to other hidden rules. One possible explanation could be many prosumers happen to
all connected one or two same generators as more sparse, thus the QoE increases a bit.
Figure 5.10. Impact of sparsity on intensity level of 40&60 prosumers, constant update method
It could be seen that as the communication graph is more sparse, the number of intense
39
==PAGE:48==
5. Results and Discussion
connections also rises. The tendency in ﬁgure 5.10 is consistent with previous methods.
Compared with the former two methods, the remaining connections are not fully dominant
because connections of the less active group will take over part of the transaction. On the
other hand, 20% percent is a bit high requirement for "intense trade". Therefore only a
small growth in intensity level is found.
5.4
DQN results
For the DQN method, the models are run on the training set ﬁrstly and then validated in
the validation set. The performance on the training set and validation set are shown in
ﬁgure 5.11 and 5.12. The highest reward is around 134 per episode, which corresponds to
0.6 average rewards per step.
Figure 5.11. Performance on training set
Due to the settings of the hyperparameter, the time required to ﬁnish one episode is
diﬀerent. The slowest model completed 35 episodes in 72 hours, the performance at that
point on the validation set is used as the selection criterion.
Among all the models, the group of learning rate=1, gamma=0.9, batch size=32 is the best
one (the line in purple). Therefore it is implemented in the test set. Table 5.3 summarizes
the performance of DQN on the test set.
Cost
Sparsity
QoS[p.u.]
QoE[p.u.]
Intensity
benchmark model
177968
0%
0.135
0.862
0.4%
DQN
177968
0%
0.135
0.862
0.4%
Table 5.3. Performance of DQN on test set, P2P market with 60 prosumers
From the table, the DQN model shows precisely the same performance as the benchmark
model. Although it seems the reward of sparsity has no eﬀect on the agent’s decision, the
40
==PAGE:49==
5. Results and Discussion
Figure 5.12. Performance on validation set
model still performs not too bad. However, the inference does not hold on a solid base for
the reason that the agent can only disconnect up to 166 connections in theory (consider
P1,2 and P2,1 as two connections).
The P2P market with 60 prosumers and the full matrix has 4490 connections, so the agent
can only aﬀect up to 3.7% of them within the given steps. In most situations, such a small
portion can not aﬀect the result obviously. Even if the period is extended to the whole
year and the agent keeps connecting or disconnecting diﬀerent connections, it can still only
change up to 16% percent, which is still not enough in many cases, not to mention it is
almost impossible. Since change a single connection can not bring any obvious reward
from sparsity, the agent will choose to keep the current connections and maximize the
reward from the total cost. The limited power on operations can easily make the agent
stuck in local optimum or the plain thus, and no progress can be made.
Furthermore, for the P2P market in reality with many participants, it is far from meeting
the need and adapting to the rapidly changing environment.
Given the concern above, it can not tell whether DQN is a good method or not. Reasons
accounting for the performance is discussed in the latter part of this chapter, and the
methods may help to address those issues are listed in Chapter 7.
From the result shown in ﬁgure 5.11 and 5.12, it can be found that all the DQN model does
not show evident convergence in both the training set and validation set. Two possibilities
can be inferred from the results, either that the DQN fails to converge, or it converges and
the problem does not have a better policy than 0.6 average reward per step. An idea that
can be used for verifying is to employ a linear function approximator for Q-values since
they have well-deﬁned convergence properties [30]. This will gives a good indication if
the DQN fails to converge or 0.6 is some upper limit for the average reward. Considering
that DQN models usually show convergence after hundreds or thousands of episodes, the
41
==PAGE:50==
5. Results and Discussion
former is more likely to be the truth.
The main reason for divergence comes from the complexity of the P2P market model. For
the P2P market with 60 prosumers, the agent is only able to run around 10k steps in
72 hours, which means 45 episodes. Compared to the 10k episodes settings, the agent
accomplished less than 0.05% of the goal. It takes too much time for the agent to execute
per step and calculate the optimal cost with a given state.
Although the required number of episodes to draw the conclusion is diﬀerent from case to
case, training with huge amount episodes is the cornerstone for DQN models. Lacking of
enough trials, it will be hard to tell whether DQN model is an eﬀective method for the
P2P market.
Besides the complexity, there are two other sources responsible for time consumption in the
DQN model, the scale of the market, and the processing of neural network. 70 agents is not
a big scale for the P2P market, but the time is still considerable. Even tested on a much
smaller scale, the time is still not satisfying. Therefore, it also conﬁrms the constraints
employed in the P2P market model need to be more simpliﬁed.
The architecture of the network could be an barrier hinders to save time. In a Multilayer
Perceptron (MLP), the input layer takes vectors as input, which needs to be ﬂattened
and roll it back at the end of per step for each layer. Neural network in other forms like
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) may help to improve the speed to process the input
data. CNN takes a matrix as an input thus the state of the environment can be utilized
directly. Lots of time may save in this way.
It should be noted that calling functions from other documents reading or transferring
data among ﬁles repeatedly also takes part of the time. Elaborating the code by reducing
loops or redundant operations will deﬁnitely improve eﬃciency.
The hyperparameters also have an impact on its performance. For instance, a too high
learning rate will lead to the same results. Even 0.001 step size may still too big for the
network. The weight changes so large that the optimizer overshoots the minimum and
make the situation worse and unstable.
The exploration rate ϵ is another factor that aﬀects the convergence speed. A higher
exploration rate allows the agent to have more chances to take random action, thus requires
more episodes for training.
42
==PAGE:51==
6
CONCLUSION
This master thesis project aims to apply a deep reinforcement learning method to supervise
the communication among peers in the P2P market and seek a balance between sparsity
level and market eﬃciency.
The project starts with building a P2P market with an explicit communication matrix for
the convenience of following operations. For better to quantify performance, indicators
including sparsity level, intensity level, QoS, and QoE are introduced. Random cut is
implemented ﬁrstly as the most basic idea, it is also easier to put in practice. The result
shows the market can keep stable at the early stage, but the cost will increase rapidly at
some point.
In the second method, single shot is applied to the P2P market for taking into account
the past behavior. It is expected to have better performance than random cut as it has
a month historical data. With more insight into the energy ﬂow, the connections with
more transaction volume will be kept. However, its performance is out of expectation.
Compared with random cut, the system loses the balance at an earlier stage, as shown in
ﬁgure 5.1 and 5.2.
Two reasons attribute to this performance: the proﬁle changes along the year, which make
the experience learned from the past no longer work, the existence of some necessary
connections which have only a small amount of transaction volume. The result implies the
importance of connections should not be assessed on the quantity only.
The third method, constant update could be seen as an enhanced version of single shot. The
concept of product diﬀerentiation is introduced in this method as the communication matrix
needs to keep unchanged. By having diﬀerent extra transaction costs, the supervisory
agent is able to force the participants consider some speciﬁc connections ﬁrst. The agent
can make use of results from last period and adjust the cost of product diﬀerentiation
continuously without worrying whether the experience is out of date. Compared with the
former two methods, an increase in cost could be noticed while it is still under controlled.
In terms of fairness, QoE=0.82 of constant update is lower than the QoE measured in the
benchmark model where QoE is 0.856. As for QoS, there is not too much diﬀerence.
With regards to the deep reinforcement learning strategy, a DQN model is built as a
combination of Q-learning and neural network, it requires ﬁne-tuning for its parameters
during the training process. The agent is encouraged to take trials randomly in the P2P
market then receives a reward as the feedback. The goal of the agent is to maximize the
cumulative reward, which is calculated on both cost and the sparsity level. Batch size,
learning rate, discount factor are selected to investigate the inﬂuence on the model. The
group of hyperparameters that performs best on the validation set will be chosen for the
test set.
43
==PAGE:52==
6. Conclusion
However, the performance on the test set is not quite well, as shown in table 5.3. In fact,
the agent keeps the communication matrix unchanged. The main reasons can be concluded
as: the complexity of the P2P market model, reward design, hyperparameters of DQN.
All these factors can result in low eﬃciency in training, thus the network unable to learn
much useful information.
Though the performance is out of expectation, it still can not tell DQN is an invalid
method for the P2P market. The ways to improve training speed will be the key issue in
future works. Considering the performance of DRL on other interactive issues, it does
worth continuing to study this approach. Methods can help address the problems that are
introduced in the last chapter.
44
==PAGE:53==
7
FUTURE WORKS
In this section, future works on how to improve the model performance are introduced as
follows.
7.1
Expansion of training data-set
In this master thesis, only one year of historical data of 300 households has been collected.
It still cannot meet the model’s demand for large amounts of data. The data set should
be expanded from two sides, a more extended period and the number of participants.
With more data provided, the DQN model is able to gain more experience from diverse
situations, thus will help to improve the generalization ability.
7.2
Model composition
The P2P market is composed of three diﬀerent roles in this thesis which represent generators,
consumers with only consumption and consumers can trade in both directions. Throwing
more light on that, the pure loads are more like industrial load with larger consumption
while the prosumers are all equipped with a storage system. Such composition is still not
a general case for the P2P market. Two more types of participants should be added to
the market for a more realistic simulation, consumers in household scale and prosumers
without storage system, which means they have to purchase energy at once when the PV
can not meet their demand.
On the other hand, the portion of these agents could also be more ﬂexible. Only 40 and 60
prosumers are tested in this thesis, the rest roles are divided equally for generators and
pure-loads. Nevertheless, it is not always the case that prosumers take the main part of a
market, the situation when pure-loads or generators occupies a much larger share should
also be studied.
Moreover, it is also interesting to simulate a more dynamic market in the future works
where the agent is allowed to join or exit the market at any time. Compared with a static
market without any disturbance, a dynamic market is more realistic.
7.3
DQN model
DQN requires much engineering to make it work well. From the performance shown in
Chapter 5, there are several improvements that could be made in future works, including
the architecture of the neural network, the structure of DQN model, the reward & action
design.
45
==PAGE:54==
7. Future works
7.3.1
Architecture of neural network
Convolutional neural network (CNN) is another feed-forward network. Besides including
the same fully connected layers used in MLP, it has convolutional layers and pooling layers
to its structure. CNN is widely used in computer vision problems as it accepts matrix as
the input, and it can signiﬁcantly reduce the parameters in each layer. Considering the
communication matrix as part of the state, CNN may quite suitable for this problem, thus
speed up the training process.
7.3.2
Structure of DQN
Except for the DQN implemented in the thesis, there are still other enhanced types of
DQN. Double DQN, Prioritized DQN, Dueling DQN are other widely used DQN models
in DRL. The performance of the model is improved by adding another target Q-Net or
making better use of the samples stored in the reply buﬀer.
7.3.3
Reward & Action design
The result shown in table 5.3 implies the reward mechanism in the model is designed
improperly. Although having a part of the reward from sparsity, the reward of cost is still
in a dominant position, which makes the agent ignore the sparsity.
The function should be redesigned with a higher sparsity reward. However, to what extent
the reward should mainly depend on the experience. Only by having lots of trials, the
proper ratio could be found.
Limited range of action also attributes to the performance in table 5.3. The agent is
allowed to connect or disconnect a single link per step, stops the agent from receiving a
higher reward, which is also hard for the agent to ﬁnd the optimal solution during the
training process.
Lots of switches may occur within each step in real life, a single operation at each step is
far from enough. Therefore, the agent is supposed to have more power to decide which
links should be established or not, and the number of operations should also be ﬂexible.
With those abilities, the supervisory agent can make a timely response according to the
state.
7.4
Model modiﬁcation
To make the DQN model have an inﬂuence on the market in practice, modiﬁcation on the
P2P market model is the key point.
There are many ways to set the hyperparameters of DQN as mentioned before, but the
prerequisite for a solid conclusion is to run the model enough times. For a complex problem,
it may need thousands of episodes to train the agent before it converges. However, the
model can only run up to 17 episodes per day in this thesis. It seems the running speed
becomes the main obstacle that hinders further research on other issues unexpectedly.
46
==PAGE:55==
7. Future works
Decreasing the scale of the market can accelerate the training process, but some hidden
facts may also be obscured.
Therefore the problem should be addressed from other
perspectives. Constraints or functions simpliﬁcation could be helpful as it reduces the
number of calculations. For instance, using linear cost functions instead of quadratic ones
can make it easier to ﬁnd the equilibrium. Fixing the demand for certain agents without
any ﬂexibility may also help. Distributed algorithms like ADMM [31] could also be a useful
approach to address the problem. However, to what extent can it improve still need to be
tested.
47
==PAGE:56==
REFERENCES
[1]
Paris Agreement. Paris agreement. In Report of the Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (21st Session, 2015:
Paris). Retrived December, volume 4, page 2017. HeinOnline, 2015.
[2]
Felix Wu and Pravin Varaiya. Coordinated multilateral trades for electric power
networks: Theory and implementation. University of California Energy Institute,
1995.
[3]
Yael Parag and Benjamin K Sovacool. Electricity market design for the prosumer era.
Nature energy, 1(4):1–6, 2016.
[4]
Thomas Morstyn, Alexander Teytelboym, and Malcolm D McCulloch. Bilateral
contract networks for peer-to-peer energy trading. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid,
10(2):2026–2035, 2018.
[5]
Etienne Sorin, Lucien Bobo, and Pierre Pinson. Consensus-based approach to
peer-to-peer electricity markets with product diﬀerentiation. IEEE Transactions on
Power Systems, 34(2):994–1004, 2018.
[6]
Eric Münsing, Jonathan Mather, and Scott Moura. Blockchains for decentralized
optimization of energy resources in microgrid networks. In 2017 IEEE conference on
control technology and applications (CCTA), pages 2164–2171. IEEE, 2017.
[7]
Woongsup Lee, Lin Xiang, Robert Schober, and Vincent WS Wong. Direct electricity
trading in smart grid: A coalitional game analysis. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas
in Communications, 32(7):1398–1411, 2014.
[8]
Fabio Moret and Pierre Pinson. Energy collectives: a community and fairness based
approach to future electricity markets. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, 34(5):
3994–4004, 2018.
[9]
T Baroche, Fabio Moret, and P Pinson. Prosumer markets: A uniﬁed formulation. In
2019 IEEE Milan PowerTech, pages 1–6. IEEE, 2019.
[10] Fabio Moret, T Baroche, E Sorin, and P Pinson. Negotiation algorithms for
peer-to-peer electricity markets: Computational properties. In 2018 Power Systems
Computation Conference (PSCC), pages 1–7. IEEE, 2018.
[11] Fabio Moret and Pierre Pinson. Energy collectives: a community and fairness based
approach to future electricity markets. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, 34(5):
3994–4004, 2018.
[12] Rajendra K Jain, Dah-Ming W Chiu, William R Hawe, et al. A quantitative measure
of fairness and discrimination. Eastern Research Laboratory, Digital Equipment
Corporation, Hudson, MA, 1984.
48
==PAGE:57==
References
[13] Tobias Hoßfeld, Lea Skorin-Kapov, Poul E Heegaard, and Martin Varela. Deﬁnition of
qoe fairness in shared systems. IEEE Communications Letters, 21(1):184–187, 2016.
[14] Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis
Antonoglou, Daan Wierstra, and Martin Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep
reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.5602, 2013.
[15] Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness,
Marc G Bellemare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg
Ostrovski, et al. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. nature,
518(7540):529–533, 2015.
[16] Matteo Hessel, Joseph Modayil, Hado Van Hasselt, Tom Schaul, Georg Ostrovski,
Will Dabney, Dan Horgan, Bilal Piot, Mohammad Azar, and David Silver. Rainbow:
Combining improvements in deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1710.02298, 2017.
[17] Tiago Sousa, Tiago Soares, Pierre Pinson, Fabio Moret, Thomas Baroche, and
Etienne Sorin. Peer-to-peer and community-based markets: A comprehensive review.
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 104:367–378, 2019.
[18] Gabriela Hug, Soummya Kar, and Chenye Wu. Consensus+ innovations approach for
distributed multiagent coordination in a microgrid. IEEE Transactions on Smart
Grid, 6(4):1893–1903, 2015.
[19] CUDA toolkit. URL https://developer.nvidia.com/cuda-toolkit.
[20] Gym OpenAI. URL https://gym.openai.com/.
[21] Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction.
MIT press, 2018.
[22] neural-network-sand-deeplearning. URL
http://neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.com/chap1.html.
[23] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
[24] Sergey Ioﬀe and Christian Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network
training by reducing internal covariate shift. arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.03167, 2015.
[25] K-fold cross-validation. URL
http://karlrosaen.com/ml/learning-log/2016-06-20/.
[26] Tom Schaul, John Quan, Ioannis Antonoglou, and David Silver. Prioritized
experience replay. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.05952, 2015.
[27] Swati Goswami, CA Murthy, and Asit K Das. Sparsity measure of a network graph:
Gini index. Information Sciences, 462:16–39, 2018.
[28] Elizabeth L Ratnam, Steven R Weller, Christopher M Kellett, and Alan T Murray.
Residential load and rooftop pv generation: an australian distribution network
dataset. International Journal of Sustainable Energy, 36(8):787–806, 2017.
49
==PAGE:58==
References
[29] Gurobi. URL http://www.gurobi.com/.
[30] Shimon Whiteson. Adaptive tile coding for value function approximation. Technical
report, 2007.
[31] Stephen Boyd, Neal Parikh, and Eric Chu. Distributed optimization and statistical
learning via the alternating direction method of multipliers. Now Publishers Inc, 2011.
50
==PAGE:59==
A
PROJECT PLAN
The initial plan of the thesis project is shown as follows in table A.1. The regular meeting
was held once a week and changed into an online meeting due to COVID-19. It usually
lasted around one hour each time.
Figure A.1.
Schedule of working packages
51
==PAGE:60==
B RESULTS OF DIFFERENT METHODS
The following ﬁgures show the results of the P2P market with 40 & 60 prosumers.
Figure B.1. Results of the P2P market, 60 prosumers -1
Figure B.2. Results of the P2P market, 60 prosumers -2
52
==PAGE:61==
B. Results of diﬀerent methods
Figure B.3. Results of the P2P market, 60 prosumers -3
Figure B.4. Results of the P2P market, 60 prosumers -4
Figure B.5. Results of the P2P market, 40 prosumers -1
53
==PAGE:62==
B. Results of diﬀerent methods
Figure B.6. Results of the P2P market, 40 prosumers -2
Figure B.7. Results of the P2P market, 40 prosumers -3
Figure B.8. Results of the P2P market, 40 prosumers -4
54
==PAGE:63==
C CODE OF DQN MODEL
1
# -*- coding: utf-8 -*-
2
"""
3
Created on Sun Jul 26 21:15:52 2020
4
5
@author: To find Berlin
6
"""
7
8
import gym
9
import tensorflow as tf
10
import numpy as np
11
import random
12
from collections import deque
13
import time
14
from sklearn.model_selection import KFold
15
import pandas as pd
16
from tensorflow.python import pywrap_tensorflow
17
18
19
# Hyper Parameters for DQN
20
GAMMA =0.9
# discount factor for target Q
21
INITIAL_EPSILON =1 # starting value of epsilon
22
FINAL_EPSILON =0.1 # final value of epsilon
23
REPLAY_SIZE =50000 # experience replay buffer size
24
BATCH_SIZE =32
# size of minibatch
25
#TARGET_UPDATE_RATE = 0.01
26
tf.reset_default_graph()
27
28
29
class DQN():
30
# DQN Agent
31
def __init__(self, env,ifreload):
32
# init experience replay
33
self.replay_buffer =deque()
34
# init some parameters
35
self.time_step =0
36
self.epsilon =INITIAL_EPSILON
37
self.state_dim =env.observation_space.shape[0]
38
self.action_dim =env.action_space.n
39
ifreload =ifreload
40
41
# Init session
42
import os
43
os.environ["CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES"]= "0,1,2"
44
config=tf.ConfigProto(log_device_placement=True,
allow_soft_placement=True,device_count
={’GPU’: 3,’CPU’:8} )
45
config.gpu_options.allow_growth =True
46
config.gpu_options.per_process_gpu_memory_fraction =1
55
==PAGE:64==
C. Code of DQN model
47
48
self.session =tf.InteractiveSession(config =config)
49
50
# self.create_Q_network()
51
var_dict =self.create_Q_network()
52
53
self.create_training_method()
54
self.session.run(tf.global_variables_initializer())
55
56
# loading networks
57
self.saver =tf.train.Saver(var_dict)
58
59
checkpoint =tf.train.get_checkpoint_state("p2p_saved_networks32-2")
60
if checkpoint and checkpoint.model_checkpoint_path:
61
if ifreload:
62
self.saver.restore(self.session, checkpoint.model_checkpoint_path)
63
print ("Successfully loaded:", checkpoint.model_checkpoint_path)
64
else:
65
print("New fold, can not reload")
66
else:
67
print ("Could not find old network weights")
68
69
global summary_writer
70
summary_writer =
tf.summary.FileWriter(’Summaryfile-onegraph32-2’,graph=self
71
72
73
def weight_variable(self,shape) :
74
initial =tf.truncated_normal(shape)
75
return tf.Variable(initial)
76
77
def bias_variable(self,shape):
78
initial =tf.constant(0.01,shape =shape)
79
return tf.Variable(initial)
80
81
82
def create_Q_network(self):
83
# network weights
84
W1 = self.weight_variable([self.state_dim,32])
85
self.b1 =self.bias_variable([32])
86
W2 = self.weight_variable([32,self.action_dim])
87
b2 = self.bias_variable([self.action_dim])
88
89
# input layer
90
self.state_input =tf.placeholder("float",[None,self.state_dim])
91
92
ema = tf.train.ExponentialMovingAverage(decay=0.9)
93
def mean_var_with_update(fc_m,fc_v):
94
ema_apply_op =ema.apply([fc_m,fc_v])
95
with tf.control_dependencies([ema_apply_op]):
96
return tf.identity(fc_m), tf.identity(fc_v)
97
98
# hidden layers
99
# Batch Normalization
100
logits =tf.matmul(self.state_input,W1) +self.b1
101
axis = list(range(len(logits.get_shape()) -1))
102
56
==PAGE:65==
C. Code of DQN model
103
fc_mean1, fc_var1 =tf.nn.moments(logits, axis)
104
# the output size is units of next layers
105
self.scale1 =tf.Variable(tf.ones([1]))
106
shift1 =tf.Variable(tf.zeros([1]))
107
108
mean, var =mean_var_with_update(fc_mean1,fc_var1)
109
logits =tf.nn.batch_normalization(logits, mean, var, shift1, self.scale1, 0.001)
110
111
112
h_layer =tf.nn.relu(logits)
113
# Q Value layer
114
self.Q_value =tf.matmul(h_layer,W2) +b2
115
116
117
variables_dict ={’Variable’: W1, ’Variable_1’: self.b1, \
118
’Variable_2’: W2, ’Variable_3’: b2,
119
# ’Variable_4’: scale0, ’Variable_5’:shift0,
120
’Variable_4’: self.scale1, ’Variable_5’:shift1,
121
}
122
return variables_dict
123
124
125
def create_training_method(self):
126
127
self.action_input =tf.placeholder("float",[None,self.action_dim]) # one hot
presentation
128
129
self.y_input =tf.placeholder("float",[None])
130
Q_action =
tf.reduce_sum(tf.multiply(self.Q_value,self.action_inp
=1)
131
self.cost =tf.reduce_mean(tf.square(self.y_input -Q_action))
132
133
tf.summary.scalar("loss",self.cost)
134
global merged_summary_op
135
merged_summary_op =tf.summary.merge_all()
136
137
self.optimizer =tf.train.AdamOptimizer(0.0001).minimize(self.cost)
138
139
def perceive(self,state,action,reward,next_state,done):
140
141
self.time_step +=1
142
143
one_hot_action =np.zeros(self.action_dim)
144
one_hot_action[action] =1
145
146
self.replay_buffer.append((state,one_hot_action,reward,next_state,done))
147
if len(self.replay_buffer) >REPLAY_SIZE:
148
self.replay_buffer.popleft()
149
150
if len(self.replay_buffer) >BATCH_SIZE:
151
self.train_Q_network()
152
153
def train_Q_network(self):
154
155
# Step 1: obtain random minibatch from replay memory
156
minibatch =random.sample(self.replay_buffer,BATCH_SIZE)
57
==PAGE:66==
C. Code of DQN model
157
state_batch =[data[0] for data in minibatch]
158
action_batch =[data[1] for data in minibatch]
159
reward_batch =[data[2] for data in minibatch]
160
next_state_batch =[data[3] for data in minibatch]
161
162
y_batch =[]
163
Q_value_batch =self.Q_value.eval(feed_dict={self.state_input:next_state_batch})
164
165
for i in range(0,BATCH_SIZE):
166
done = minibatch[i][4]
167
if done:
168
y_batch.append(reward_batch[i])
169
else :
170
y_batch.append(reward_batch[i] +GAMMA *np.max(Q_value_batch[i]))
171
172
self.optimizer.run(feed_dict={
173
self.y_input:y_batch,
174
self.action_input:action_batch,
175
self.state_input:state_batch
176
})
177
178
summary_str =self.session.run(merged_summary_op,feed_dict={
179
self.y_input :y_batch,
180
self.action_input :action_batch,
181
self.state_input :state_batch
182
})
183
184
summary_writer.add_summary(summary_str,self.time_step)
185
186
# save network every 1000 iteration
187
if self.time_step % 1000 ==0:
188
self.saver.save(self.session, ’p2p_saved_networks32-2/’ +’network’ +’-dqn’,
global_step =self.time_step)
189
190
def egreedy_action(self,state):
191
Q_value =self.Q_value.eval(feed_dict ={
192
self.state_input:[state]
193
})
194
195
196
197
if self.time_step >2000:
198
self.epsilon -=(INITIAL_EPSILON -FINAL_EPSILON)/10000
199
if random.random() <=self.epsilon:
200
return random.randint(0,self.action_dim -1)
201
else:
202
return np.argmax(Q_value)
203
else:
204
if random.random() <=self.epsilon:
205
return random.randint(0,self.action_dim -1)
206
else:
207
return np.argmax(Q_value)
208
209
210
def action(self,state):
211
return np.argmax(self.Q_value.eval(feed_dict ={
212
self.state_input:[state]
58
==PAGE:67==
C. Code of DQN model
213
}))
214
215
216
# ---------------------------------------------------------
217
# Hyper Parameters
218
ENV_NAME =’Market_Strategy-v0’
219
# print("xxxx")
220
EPISODE =100
# Episode limitation
221
STEP = 222
# Step limitation in an episode 32 * 7 -1
222
# TEST = 10
# The number of experiment test every 100 episode
223
224
225
def main(num1,num2,ifreload):
226
# initialize OpenAI Gym env and dqn agent
227
num1 = num1
228
num2 = num2
229
ifreload =ifreload
230
231
# print("start0")
232
env = gym.make(ENV_NAME)
233
# print("start1")
234
agent =DQN(env,ifreload)
235
train_reward =[]
236
train_movingavg =deque()
237
train_movingavg2 =[]
238
avg_reward2 =[]
239
dev_reward2 =[]
240
for episode in range(EPISODE):
241
# initialize task
242
state =env.reset(num1)
243
# Train
244
total_reward =0
245
for step in range(STEP):
246
action =agent.egreedy_action(state) # e-greedy action for train
247
248
next_state,reward,done,_ =env.step(action, step, num1)
249
total_reward +=reward
250
251
agent.perceive(state,action,reward,next_state,done)
252
state =next_state
253
254
train_movingavg.append((reward))
255
cnt2 = []
256
if len(train_movingavg) >20:
257
train_movingavg.popleft()
258
for i in train_movingavg:
259
cnt2.append(i)
260
train_movingavg2.append(sum(cnt2)/20)
261
if step %200 ==0:
262
train_movingavg3 =pd.DataFrame(train_movingavg2)
263
train_movingavg3.to_csv(’Trainset-Moving-avg-reward32-2’ +
str(num1[0])+’.csv’,index=False)
264
265
train_reward.append(total_reward)
266
train_reward4 =pd.DataFrame(train_reward)
267
train_reward4.to_csv(’Trainset-total-reward32-2-’ +
str(num1[0])+’.csv’,index=False)
59
==PAGE:68==
C. Code of DQN model
268
269
if episode >=5:
270
state2 =env.reset(num2)
271
total_reward2 =0
272
273
for step2 in range(55):
274
action2 =agent.action(state2) # direct action for test
275
state2,reward2,done2,_ =env.step(action2,step2, num2)
276
total_reward2 +=reward2
277
278
avg_reward2.append(total_reward2 /55)
279
avg_reward3 =pd.DataFrame(avg_reward2)
280
dev_reward2.append(total_reward2)
281
dev_reward3 =pd.DataFrame(dev_reward2)
282
avg_reward3.to_csv(’Devset-avg-reward32-2-’ +str(num1[0])+’.csv’,index=False)
283
dev_reward3.to_csv(’Devset-total-reward32-2-’ +str(num1[0])+’.csv’,index=False)
284
285
return np.array(train_reward)
286
287
288
def devset(num,ifreload):
289
# initialize OpenAI Gym env and dqn agent
290
num = num
291
ifreload =ifreload
292
env = gym.make(ENV_NAME)
293
agent =DQN(env,ifreload)
294
295
state =env.reset(num)
296
# Validate
297
total_reward2 =0
298
for step in range(len(num) *7 -1 ):
299
action =agent.action(state)
300
301
state,reward,done,_ =env.step(action,step, num)
302
303
total_reward2 +=reward
304
305
avg_reward2 =total_reward2 /(len(num) *7 -1)
306
return np.array([avg_reward2])
307
308
309
if __name__ ==’__main__’:
310
X = range(0,40) #40
311
X = np.array(X)
312
fold = 5
313
kf = KFold(n_splits=fold, random_state=None, shuffle=False)
314
kf.get_n_splits(X)
315
316
dev_result =[]
317
X_num1 =np.array([ 0, 1, 2,
3,
4,
5,
6,
7, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24,\
318
25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39])
#
319
X_num2 =np.array([8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15])
320
321
tf.reset_default_graph()
322
323
cnt1 = main(X_num1,X_num2,False)
60
==PAGE:69==
C. Code of DQN model
324
325
train_reward2 =cnt1
326
# Dev Set
327
tf.reset_default_graph()
328
dev_reward =devset(X_num2,True)
329
330
train_reward2 =train_reward2
331
train_reward3 =pd.DataFrame(train_reward2)
332
train_reward3.to_csv(’Trainset-avgreward-per-epi-32-2’ +str(X_num1[0]) +
’.csv’,index=False)
333
dev_result =pd.DataFrame(dev_result)
334
dev_result.to_csv( ’Devset-reward-32-2’ +str(X_num1[0]) +’.csv’,index=False)
61
==PAGE:70==
Department of Electrical Engineering
Centre for Electric Power and Energy (CEE)
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 325
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
www.elektro.dtu.dk/cee
Tel: (+45) 45 25 35 00
Fax: (+45) 45 88 61 11
E-mail: cee@elektro.dtu.dk
