==PAGE:1==
Criteria Space Methods for
Multi-Objective Optimization
Masters Thesis in Mathematical
Modeling and Computation
DTU Management
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Criteria Space Methods for Multi-Objective Optimization
Masters Thesis in Mathematical Modeling and Computation
June 27, 2020
By
Lucas Frese Grønbech Jensen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Multi-objective optimization is the logical extrapolation of standard operations research,
and represents a wide variety of problems.
In this thesis, a basis for understand bi-
objective optimization is presented through a review of the methodology for multi-ojective
optimization. In addition, two pre-existing algorithms are discussed and compared to
the Boxcutter method, which represents a new procedure for generating non-dominated
sets of points. Finally, the extension to tri-objective problems is introduced, and possible
means of adapting the Boxcutter method to three objectives are discussed.
ii
Criteria Space Methods for Multi-Objective Optimization
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
MSc DTU
Creator of this thesis template.
Thomas Jacob Riis Stidsen, Associate Professor, DTU Management
The advisor for this thesis project, Thomas Stidsen was my first contact at DTU, providing
me with guidance for Operations Research during the summer before my first semester
had begun. He continually helped me foster an interest in multi-objective optimization,
even inviting me to join him at the RAMOO conference at Aarhus University. His work on
hybrid search methods for multi-objective optimization form the basis of the investigation
of this thesis, and without his support it would not have been possible.
Criteria Space Methods for Multi-Objective Optimization
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Criteria Space Methods for Multi-Objective Optimization
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Basics of Bi-Objective Optimization
3
2.1
Primer on Ordering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Bi-Objective Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Box Method
10
4
Balance Box Method
13
5
Boxcutter Method
15
6
Representations of Pareto Fronts
20
7
Methodology
25
8
Results and hypothesis of reason/ discussion
26
8.1
Set Covering Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
8.2
Set Packing Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
8.3
Knapsack Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
8.4
Discussion of Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
9
Transition to 3D
32
10 Boxcutter in 3D
33
11 Conclusion
36
Bibliography
37
Criteria Space Methods for Multi-Objective Optimization
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Criteria Space Methods for Multi-Objective Optimization
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Multi-objective optimization is of great interest, primarily because of its large presence in
real world applications. As is often the case, practical versions of a problem have many
more complications to them than is initially present in the academic introduction. Take,
for example, the Traveling Salesman Problem. The TSP is a very well known IP problem,
and it is likely that every Operations Research student has been introduced to it. In its
standard form, the problem seeks to find the shortest route connecting a series of nodes.
Each node must be visited exactly once, and the route must form a single loop through
the nodes.
Now consider how this example would play out for an actual salesman. To begin with,
the traveler might decide they want the quickest route through the nodes, that is to say,
minimizing time spent. But in all likely hood, the traveler would also seek to save as much
money as possible. This means another objective is introduced, minimizing expenses.
The fastest route is rarely the cheapest, so now there are two opposing objectives that
must be balanced. Simply solving two separate single-objective models is insufficient,
unless one objective can be prioritized entirely over the other. This means new techniques
for solving for multiple objectives must be applied.
However, despite the ubiquitous nature of multi-objective problems, there exists no stan-
dard method of solving them. For single-objective problems, their exist various software
packages, such as Cplex [1], Gurobi [2], or GLPK [3], which can easily be given a problem
and solve for the optima. However, no such software yet exists for multi-objective work,
and new algorithms must be written from scratch to approach any given problem.
The goal of this thesis is two-fold. The first is to investigate a new method of effectively
searching bi-objective criterion space. This new method, dubbed the Boxcutter Method,
will be evaluated alongside two established methods, namely the a posteriori Box Method
[4] and the Balance Box Method [5]. Additionally, the application of the Boxcutter method
to three objectives will also be explored, but is left as an open-ended discussion. Second,
the hope for this thesis is that it may be used as a comprehensive introduction to multi-
objective optimization for future OR students, in order to further research of this type of
problem.
As a note to the reader, this thesis depends heavily on background knowledge from a few
key articles, namely [6], [4], [5], [7], and [8]. [6] is used to provide a basic introduction
to multi-objective optimization. It is assumed the reader has a background in Operations
Research, but has not had extensive experience with multi-objective optimization. [4] and
[5] are detailed to explain the workings of the a posteriori Box method and the Balance
Box method respectively. [7] is cited to provided the background to the conception of the
Boxcutter method. [8] is reviewed to provide understanding of how an algorithm might
be evaluated besides just the time to completion. The information from these articles is
covered here for the sake of completion, and sections with information stemming from
them are identified in their opening paragraphs.
Section 2 acts as an introduction to ordering and multi-objective optimization, and provides
the background information to the terminology utilized in the rest of the thesis. Sections 3,
4, and 5 provide details on the specific algorithms used for testing. Additionally, Section 6
discusses the qualities of a ”good” representation. In Sections 7 and 8, the results that this
Criteria Space Methods for Multi-Objective Optimization
1
==PAGE:10==
thesis tests are shown and discussed. This is followed by a primer on the evolution to tri-
objective optimization in Section 9 and the theory of extension of the Boxcutter algorithm
in Section 10. Finally, Section 11 concludes this thesis.
2
Criteria Space Methods for Multi-Objective Optimization
==PAGE:11==
2
Basics of Bi-Objective Optimization
2.1
Primer on Ordering
Before addressing multi-objective modeling itself, it is necessary to be review the con-
cept of minimal. In single-objective problems, this definition is intuitive. However, for
multi-objective cases, the solutions take the forms of vectors rather than scalars. Take
the bi-objective minimization case as an example. What would qualify the result f(x) =
(f1(x), f2(x)) as minimal? The value of x which minimizes f1(x) is unlikely to also mini-
mize f2(x). As a consequence, depending on the preferences of the decision maker, the
bi-objective problem may have many solutions. A comprehensive introduce is found in
[6], which is summarized here.
The concept of ”less than” is an example of an binary relation. The explanation here refers
to [6]. Formally a binary relation R of a set S is a subset of S × S. A pair of elements of
S exist in R if they satisfy the relationship which is defined by R. For example, suppose
ˆS is the set of positive integers, and ˆR is the relation that a divides b. Then the pairs
(1, 4), (2, 4), (3, 3) ∈ˆR, but (4, 1), (3, 4), (2, 5) /∈ˆR. Written in shorthand, (a, b) ∈R can be
formulated aRb.
There are many possible properties a binary relation can have, but some are of particular
interest. R is called
• reflexive if (a, a) ∈R ∀a ∈S
• irreflexive if (a, a) /∈R ∀a ∈S
• transitive if (a, b) ∈R and (b, c) ∈R =⇒(a, c) ∈R ∀a, b, c ∈S
• negatively transitive if (a, b) /∈R and (b, c) /∈R =⇒(a, c) /∈R ∀a, b, c ∈S
• symmetric if (a, b) ∈R =⇒(b, a) ∈R ∀a, b ∈S
• asymmetric if (a, b) ∈R =⇒(b, a) /∈R ∀a, b ∈S
• antisymmetric if (a, b) ∈R and (b, a) ∈R =⇒a = b ∀a, b ∈S
• connected if (a, b) ∈R or (b, a) ∈R ∀a, b ∈S, a ̸= b
A binary relation which is both reflexive and transitive is called a preorder or quasi-order.
That is to say every element is related to itself, and that elements are related to the rela-
tions of all its own relations. For preorders the relation can be written a ⪯b for (a, b) ∈R.
This looks familiar, as the standard one dimensional ≤is an example of a preorder. Sim-
ilarly, if the relation between a, b ∈S is irreflexive under ⪯, then it can be written using ≺.
This is equivalent to ”strictly less than”. Conversely, if the relation between a, b is reflexive
under ⪯, then it can be written using ∼. This is equivalent to ”equals”.
Now, a binary relation ⪯on S is called
• a total preorder if it is reflexive, transitive, and connected
• a total order if it is a antisymmetric total preorder
• a strict weak order if it is asymmetric and negatively transitive
• a partial order if it is reflexive, transitive, and antisymmetric
Criteria Space Methods for Multi-Objective Optimization
3
==PAGE:12==
• a strict partial order if it is transitive and asymmetric
For the integers, ≤constitutes a total order. The example from earlier, ˆR, is a partial
order. To illustrate the above, an example of a total order is provided in Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: A total order, where a line →marks the relation.
First, each element is related to itself, so the relation is reflexive. Second, each element
is related to everything its relations are related to, so the relation is transitive. Third, there
exists a relation between any two elements, so the relation is connected. This makes it a
pre-order. Additionally, there is no case where a relation goes both ways, so the relation
is antisymmetric, making it a total order.
For multi-objective optimization, the concern is primarily for partial orders for S = Rp,
where p is the number of objective functions. As such, for y1, y2 ∈R, it is said that y1 ≤y2
if ∀i ∈{1, 2, ..., p} y1
i ≤y2
p. This definition of ≤is reflexive, transitive, and antisymetric,
which means it is a partial order.
For the remainder of this thesis, the relation used to compare solutions to multi-objective
problems of dimension p will be denoted using the definition
y1 ≦y2
y1
k ≤y2
k k = 1, ..., p
Weak Componentwise Order
y1 ≤y2
y1
k ≤y2
k k = 1, ..., p, y1 ̸= y2
Componentwise Order
y1 < y2
y1
k < y2
k k = 1, ..., p
Strict Componentwise Order
The simplest case would be if the decision maker considers one objective as strictly more
important than the others. In this case, simply optimizing on one objective at a time in
order of importance would provide a single ideal solution. However, this is often not the
case. When organizing the set of solutions, a solution f(ˆx) is considered minimal if there
exists no other x ∈S such that f(x) ≤f(ˆx). Note that no two jointly minimum solutions
can be related to each other by ≤. Conceptually, this means that a solution is optimal if
no objective can be improved except at the expense of another.
2.2
Bi-Objective Optimization
When considering the bi-objective integer programming model, it is useful to think of it
as simply an extension of the single objective case. After all, the constraint matrix is
completely untouched by the addition of a second objective function. In this case, the
decision space of the model is structurally unchanged. This background is further detailed
in [6].
4
Criteria Space Methods for Multi-Objective Optimization
==PAGE:13==
The bi-objective problem is formally defined by
min
f(x) =
(f1(x)
f2(x)
)
st
x ∈X
(2.1)
where X is the feasible region of the decision space, and f1(x) and f2(x) are the two
objective functions. In this format, the problem minimizes first the objective f1(x), and
then minimizes f2(x) with the limitation that f1(x) must not be altered. Additionally Y
is defined as the feasible region of the criterion space, which is the set of all solutions
(f1(x), f2(x)). The set of optimal solutions is called the Pareto front.
Like their single-objective counterparts, multi-objective problems can be both continuous
or discrete. The methods used to solve them differ, as they do for linear programming
and integer programming. This thesis is concerned with discrete multi-objective prob-
lems, which have integer variables and therefore a countable number of solutions, and
compares three algorithms which address this type of model.
Formalizing the Pareto front requires several definitions regarding the decision space (the
set of feasible variable solutions x) and the criterion space (the set of solution values
f(x)). Given two solutions, f(xA) and f(xB), it is said that xA dominates xB and f(xA)
dominates f(xB) if f1(xA) ≤f1(xB) and f2(xA) ≤f2(xB). In other words both objective
values at xA are less than or equal to those at xB. Additionally, if f1(xA) < f1(xB) and
f2(xA) < f2(xB), then xA strongly dominates xB. The relationship ≤for multi-objective
solutions can be defined this way; f(xA) ≤f(xB) if and only if f(xA) dominates f(xB).
Just as in the single-objective version of the problem, we are interested in any value
ˆx ∈X which is not dominated by another value in the decision space. We define ˆx ∈X
as efficient or Pareto Optimal if there exists no x ∈X such that f(x) ≤f(ˆx). If ˆx is
efficient, then f(ˆx) is non-dominated. We denote the set of efficient solutions by XE. The
set of non-dominated solutions is the Pareto Front. It is in effect the set of solutions where
one objective cannot be improved without diminishing the other objective.
Figure 2.2: Visualization of the Bi-Objective Pareto front. Efficient points are marked with
squares.
Criteria Space Methods for Multi-Objective Optimization
5
==PAGE:14==
The space above the front in Figure 2.2 is the dominated set, while the space below is
infeasible.
Of the Pareto Front, the lexicographic points are the most straightforward to find. Conse-
quently, all the algorithms examined in this thesis begin by calculating them. These points
are found by optimizing the objective functions in lexicographic order, that is to say the
order in which they are listed in the objective vector. There exist as many lexicographic
points as there are orderings possible given the number of objectives. In the case of the
bi-objective problem, this means there are two lexicographic points. The points are found
by first minimizing one objective as if by single-objective optimization. Then the second
objective is minimized, but with the added constraint that the first objective may not ex-
ceed its minimum value. These points form the extreme points on the Pareto front, with
all other non-dominated points located between them.
There are two additional points of interest which are not part of the Pareto front itself,
namely the ideal point and the nadir point. The ideal point fI(x) = (fI
1 (x), fI
2 (x)) is
defined by
fI
k(x) = min
x∈X
fk(x).
(2.2)
This represents the lower bound of the Pareto front, as no point can possibly dominate it.
Equivalently the nadir point fN(x) = (fN
1 (x), fN
2 (x)) is defined by
fN
k (x) = max
x∈XE
fk(x)
(2.3)
and acts as the upper bound to the Pareto front. For a bi-objective problem, the nadir
point is easy to calculate. Additionally, the search space can easily be defined by the
lexicographical points. However, for multi-objective problems of higher dimensions, it is
often necessary to calculate the ideal and nadir points. For these cases the nadir point
becomes an increasing difficult problem [6].
The objective then of multi-objective search algorithms is to as efficiently as possible find
the remaining non-dominated points. These algorithms fall into two main categories; de-
cision space search algorithms and criterion space search algorithms. Decision space
refers to the set of feasible x values, and algorithms of this sort often involve many forms
of branches and cuts. However, new types of branching must defined for multi-objective
problems, and as such developing new decision space algorithms requires a tremendous
effort. The problem is that decision space algorithms cannot take advantage of the legacy
of improvements found in single-objective solvers, such as CPLEX and Gurobi, which are
incredibly efficient at solving MIP problems. As such, they are often much more inefficient
without a serious investment.
Criterion space is the set of feasible f(x) values, and often involves bounds on various
objectives to search specific parts of the problem. These methods are therefore capable of
benefiting from increased performance of single-objective solvers. This thesis is primarily
concerned with criterion space search algorithms.
When searching the criterion space, the specific area of interest is determined via ϵ
bounds on the objective values. The most basic form of this problem, the lexicographical
ϵ-constraint problem [4]
lex min
f(x) =
(f2(x)
f1(x)
)
st
f1(x) ≤ϵ
x ∈X
(2.4)
6
Criteria Space Methods for Multi-Objective Optimization
==PAGE:15==
which minimizes the objective f2(x) first, but under the condition that f1(x) cannot exceed
a specified value ϵ. This problem effectively translates to two separate single-objective
problems
ˆϵ = min
f2(x)
st
f1(x) ≤ϵ
x ∈X
(2.5)
min
f1(x)
st
f2(x) ≤ˆϵ
x ∈X.
(2.6)
Solving this problem with ϵ sufficiently large, that is, equal to the maximal value of the
objective, would find the lexicographic point with f2(x) minimal. This is denoted in this
thesis by z2. Naturally, the order of optimization can be reverse, minimizing first f1(x) and
then f2(x). Solving this reverse problem with ϵ sufficiently large would result in the other
lexicographic point, denoted z1.
Figure 2.3: A single step of the lexicographic ϵ-constraint problem.
Solving for the full Pareto front using only Model 2.4 would be incredibly costly, but can
be used as a sort of brute force check of accuracy for smaller Pareto fronts. This method,
the ”Brute Force” method, would incrementally increase ϵ, starting from one lexicograph-
ical point and ending at the other. At each step the method solves Model 2.4 and adds
the resulting point to the Pareto front. However, this introduces a complication if the co-
efficients of the objective values are non-integer. Without integer solutions, it becomes
impractical to search the entire space with Model 2.4 exhaustively, as increments of ϵ may
skip over possible non-dominated points if they are chosen too large. However, if it can
be guaranteed that all coefficients are of integer value, incrementing ϵ by 1 is sufficient to
search the entire space.
Criteria Space Methods for Multi-Objective Optimization
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.4: For too large an ϵ, the circled non-dominated solution is not found.
Detailed in Algorithm 1 is the instructions for the basic search method mentioned in 2.4.
It solves for the Pareto front with an accuracy of ϵ > 0.
Algorithm 1 Brute Force Method
1: Rep ←∅
2: Compute lexicographic points z1, z2
3: Rep ←{z1, z2}
4: ˆϵ ←z1
1 + ϵ
5: while ˆϵ < z2
1 do
6:
Solve 2.4 with ˆϵ, denote solution z∗
7:
Rep ←Rep ∪{z∗}
8:
ˆϵ ←ˆϵ + ϵ
The ϵ value can be decided prior to running the algorithm, or calculated as a fraction of
the distance between the two lexicographic points on the f1(x) axis.
This method represents the most straightforward approach to the problem, but also the
most inefficient. With each iteration of the search, large parts of the search space are
redundantly searched, resulting in wasted time. This provides the motivation to find more
efficient methods for bi-objective optimization.
While not efficient by itself, Model 2.4 plays a large part in the algorithms discussed in
Chapters 3 and 4. One variation is the popular method for solving for the Pareto front
detailed in [9], named the ϵ-Constraint method. In this method, the objective being con-
strained is changed, so that the optimization problem takes the form
8
Criteria Space Methods for Multi-Objective Optimization
==PAGE:17==
lex min
f(x) =
(f2(x)
f1(x)
)
st
f2(x) ≤ϵ∗
x ∈X
(2.7)
and where the algorithm takes the form
Algorithm 2 ϵ-Constraint Method
1: Rep ←∅
2: Compute lexicographic points z1, z2
3: Rep ←{z1, z2}
4: ϵ∗←z2
1 −0.5
5: while ϵ∗> z1
1 do
6:
Solve 2.7 with ϵ∗, denote solution z∗
7:
Rep ←Rep ∪{z∗}
8:
ϵ∗←z∗
1 −0.5
This algorithm is extremely efficient for solving for the entire Pareto front, but as discussed
in Chapter 6, there are other qualities that are of interest for multi-objective optimization
problems. The ϵ-Constraint method solves for each point consecutively, which means any
representation it generates will skew heavily to one side of the Pareto front. This means
it is not well suite to particularly large problems.
The stipulation that a problem have integer coefficients is in fact very important for discrete
multi-objective problems. Without this, many algorithms become inefficient to terminate
with a guarantee of a full Pareto front. Suppose the Brute Force method were applied
to a problem which may return non-integer solutions. For any two values of ϵ chosen
for Model 2.4, it may be that two solutions exist between them. In this case, the method
would only find one, and the second would not be included in the final answer. Similarly,
the ϵ-Constraint method would require some ϵ > 0, but sufficiently small.
However, if all coefficients were to be integer, it would be impossible for solutions to exist
between ϵ1 and ϵ2 for |ϵ1 −ϵ2| ≤1. This means the final results of algorithms can be
relied upon to return the true Pareto front. This means the Brute Force method solves
for the full Pareto front for ϵ = 1, and the ϵ-Constraint method does so for ϵ = 0.5. For
the remainder of this thesis, it is assumed that this property of the coefficients is
satisfied.
There are many qualities by which an algorithm may be judged, so only a select number
are discussed here. The most natural is total time until completion, when the algorithm
will return the Pareto front. However, even the most advanced algorithms may use unrea-
sonably large amounts of time to solve large-scale problems. Thus, another standard to
observe is how well the algorithm approximates the Pareto front after a small amount of
time. Finally, how well can parallelization be applied to the algorithm? As computer cores
no longer see massive increases to their computational power, it becomes increasingly
useful to take advantage of the large number of cores available on modern machines.
This last quality is not formally measured here, but it may be useful to consider how well
a problem can be divided into multiple independent sub-problems. In theory, the brute
force method could assign each ˆϵ to a separate core to increase the speed of the search.
Criteria Space Methods for Multi-Objective Optimization
9
==PAGE:18==
3
Box Method
The first method tested in this thesis is the ”Box Method”, of which there are two variations.
These methods are explained in more detail in [4], but are reviewed here. The premise is
to represent the relevant search space as the titular boxes, represented by corner points
from the non-dominated set. The boxes are generated in such a way that they contain the
set of non-dominated points, but also allow the algorithm to avoid redundant searches of
the criterion space, unlike the brute force method.
The goal of the Box methods is to provide a basic strategy for computing representations
of the Pareto front. By limiting the algorithm’s run time using an error tolerance of ∆, the
methods continue their search of the eligible space until all boxes of area greater than
∆have been searched. However, every point found in the representation is guaranteed
to be an element of the non-dominated set as well, which means the algorithm can still
provide optimal choices to the decision maker.
The first box can be defined by the two lexicographic points. Keeping consistent with the
notation in [4], we denote these points by
z1 :=
(z1
1
z1
2
)
= lex min
x∈XE
(f1(x)
f2(x)
)
z2 :=
(z2
1
z2
2
)
= lex min
x∈XE
(f2(x)
f1(x)
)
(3.1)
where z1 is the upper left corner of the initial box, and z2 is the lower right. For subsequent
boxes, these corners are denoted by y1 and y2 respectively, denoting the box form from
these points by R(y1, y2). We denote the area of a box by a(R(y1, y2)) := (y2
1 −y1
1) · (y1
2 −
y2
2).
From this initialization, two variations of the box method are presented, the a posteriori
and a priori algorithms. The algorithms differ in their method of dividing the search space
into smaller boxes, specifically in how they calculate ϵ to solve problem 2.4, but share
their representation of the search space and criteria for termination. The a posteriori
algorithm generates ϵ each iteration based on the current search space. The a priori
method generates a list of all necessary ϵ immediately, then iterates over this list. For
each algorithm a value ∆> 0 is specified, which determines the accuracy of the final
representation. Boxes are searched and generated until their area is less than the chosen
∆. Lower values of ∆result in better representations and longer run-times. For this thesis
data was generated using ∆= 0.99. As all coefficients and variables are integer, this
guarantees that the full Pareto front will be obtained. However, for the a priori method, this
is equivalent to the brute force method detailed previously. As such, for the remainder
of this thesis the primary box method will be the a posteriori variant.
As stated previously, the a posteriori method calculates ϵ each iteration, tailored to the box
currently being searched. As such, for a given box R(y1, y2), ϵ := ⌊y1
1+y2
1
2
⌋, which divides
the box in two. Let x∗∈X be optimal for 2.4 with ϵ, and denote z∗:= (f1(x∗), f2(x∗)). z∗
is proven in [4] to be part of the Pareto front, and can be used to further divide the search
space. In total, five additional boxes result from this division, but only two are candidates
10
Criteria Space Methods for Multi-Objective Optimization
==PAGE:19==
for further investigation.
R1 := R(y1, z∗)
R2 := R(p1, p4)
R3 := R(p2, p6)
R4 := R(p3, p7)
R5 := R(p5, y2)
where
p1 :=
(z∗
1
y1
2
)
p2 :=
(ϵ + 1
y1
2
)
p3 :=
(y1
1
z∗
2
)
p4 :=
( ϵ
z∗
2
)
p5 :=
( ϵ + 1
z∗
2 −1
)
p6 :=
(y2
1
z∗
2
)
p7 :=
( ϵ
y2
2
)
as illustrated in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Division of a Box.
As proved in [4], the rectangles R2 and R3 can be eliminated from the search space, as
every point they contain is dominated by the new solution z∗. Similarly, R4 can be elimi-
nated, as had it contained a solution which dominated z∗, that solution would have been
returned as the non-dominated solution instead. This leaves R1 and R5 as candidates for
further search, provided they have area greater than or equal to ∆. Therefore, practically,
only p5 need be computed each iteration.
This process is continued until no rectangles of interest have an area greater than ∆.
Assuming ∆has been chosen sufficiently small, in this case 1, the algorithm will terminate
having found the complete Pareto front. The pseudo-code for the a posteriori is as follows
in Algorithm 3;
Criteria Space Methods for Multi-Objective Optimization
11
==PAGE:20==
Algorithm 3 A Posteriori Method
1: Rep ←∅
2: S ←∅
3: Compute lexicographic points z1, z2, and a(R(z1, z2))
4: Rep ←{z1, z2}
5: S ←{R(z1, z2)}
6: while S ̸= ∅do
7:
Choose the largest R(y1, y2) ∈S
8:
S ←S \ {R(y1, y2)}
9:
Solve 2.4 with ϵ := ⌊y1
1 + y2
1−y1
1
2
⌋, denote solution z∗
10:
Rep ←Rep ∪{z∗}
11:
if a(R(y1, z∗)) > ∆then
12:
S ←S ∪{R(y1, z∗)}
13:
if a(R(p5, y2)) > ∆then
14:
S ←S ∪{R(p5, y2)}
Note that the algorithm chooses the box with the largest area to search at each iteration,
ensuring the search space is processed efficiently. Should the algorithm terminate early,
this ensures the greatest amount of space has been searched. This is a common strategy,
and is incorporated in the other two tested search methods as well. The a posteriori
method acts as a reliable baseline to test the new algorithm against.
12
Criteria Space Methods for Multi-Objective Optimization
==PAGE:21==
4
Balance Box Method
While the previous box method is proven to find the full Pareto front, it has analytically
been shown to be inefficient in practice. To amend this, a refinement of the algorithm is
proposed by [5], dubbed the Balance Box Method, which is reviewed here. The intent is
a more effective search of the eligible space for non-dominated points. Much like the a
posteriori method, the initial points are the lexicographical solutions, defining the search
space as a box between them.
When searching a box, the Balance Box method divides the search space in two, creating
two boxes to search instead of one. By defining two additional points, zt = (z2
1, (z1
2+z2
2)/2)
and zb = (z1
1, (z1
2 + z2
2)/2), the box is split horizontally, defining two new boxes RT =
R(z1, zt) and RB = R(zb, z2). These boxes can be solved via 2.4, just as in the standard
box method.
Figure 4.1: Initial division of the box in two.
To search the space, first RB is searched by solving lex minx∈X {z1(x), z2(x)|z(x) ∈RB}.
The advantage of the Balance Box method is that if a non-dominated point ˆz1 is found in
RB, it dominates a portion of RT which may now be excluded from the search. Thus RT
can be redefined by setting zt = (ˆz1
1 −ϵ, (z1
2 + z2
1)/2), where ϵ > 0, see Figure 4.2. In
this case, if all coefficients are integer, then ϵ = 0.5 will allow the algorithm to find all non-
dominated points. Thus RT can be searched by solving lex minx∈X {z2(x), z1(x)|z(x) ∈
RT } to find the next non-dominated point ˆz2.
The two rectangles R(z1, ˆz2) and R(ˆz1, z2) represent the remaining search space capa-
ble of containing non-dominated points, and can be further investigated using the same
method that produced them. Note that the search of RB will only return z2 if there exists
no other non-dominated points RB. The same is true of RT and z1. The algorithm in full
is provided by Algorithm 4.
Criteria Space Methods for Multi-Objective Optimization
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 4.2: Using the solution to the first half of the box, the search space for the second
half can be reduced.
Algorithm 4 Balance Box Method
1: Rep ←∅
2: S ←∅
3: Compute lexicographic points z1, z2, and a(R(z1, z2))
4: Rep ←{z1, z2}
5: S ←{R(z1, z2)}
6: while S ̸= ∅do
7:
Choose the largest R(y1, y2) ∈S
8:
S ←S \ {R(y1, y2)}
9:
RB ←R((z1
1, (z1
2 + z2
2)/2), z2)
10:
ˆz1 ←lex minx∈X {z1(x), z2(x)|z(x) ∈RB}
11:
if ˆz1 ̸= z2 then
12:
Rep ←Rep ∪{ˆz1}
13:
S ←S ∪{R(ˆz1, z2)}
14:
RT ←R(z1, (ˆz1
1 −ϵ, (z1
2 + z2
2)/2))
15:
ˆz2 ←lex minx∈X {z2(x), z1(x)|z(x) ∈RT }
16:
if ˆz2 ̸= z1 then
17:
Rep ←Rep ∪{ˆz2}
18:
S ←S ∪{R(z1, ˆz2)}
In summary, the Balance Box method is much more efficient than the a posteriori method
when eliminating search space from consideration, and it guarantees that all non-dominated
solutions will be found. This allows the full Pareto front to be determined using fewer to-
tal calls to the minimization function, decreasing the total run time of the algorithm. This
provides a much more robust method to test the Boxcutter method against.
14
Criteria Space Methods for Multi-Objective Optimization
==PAGE:23==
5
Boxcutter Method
The third method discussed in this thesis deviates from the others in several ways. Primar-
ily, the construction of the single-objective optimization problems differs in its constraints,
stemming from a difference in division of search space. In this case, the space is still di-
vided into boxes and, similar to the Balance Box method, divided in two during the search
procedure. This method stems from a portion of the hybrid method devised in [7].
In [7], a hybrid method of criterion space search and decision space search is outlined,
intending to borrow from the inherent strengths of each type of search. By dividing the
search space using a criterion search method, decision space search methods can be
applied to multiple parts of the problem. The advantage is that these methods can work
independently, as each block is unaffected by the Pareto front of it’s neighboring block,
running in parallel to increase the speed of the search. While decision space methods lie
outside of the scope of this thesis, the criterion space search method detailed in [7] is of
interest as a stand-alone algorithm.
This method is defined by the division of the search space by ”slices”, cutting the boxes
in two. Unlike the horizontal division in the Balance Box method, these division take the
form of lines radiating from the origin of the (z1(x), z2(x)) space, of the form z2 = αz1
where α > 0.
Figure 5.1: The division of the criterion search space.
Given a box R(z1, z2), the intent is to divide it into two halves via a slice. These two
partitions are denoted as △up and △down and defined by
△up = {z ∈Y|z2 ≥αz1, z1
1 ≤z1 ≤z2
1, z2
2 ≤z2 ≤z1
2}
△down = {z ∈Y|z2 ≤αz1, z1
1 ≤z1 ≤z2
1, z2
2 ≤z2 ≤z1
2}
(5.1)
These divisions translate to one of two additional constraints to the standard lexicographic
Criteria Space Methods for Multi-Objective Optimization
15
==PAGE:24==
model, which determine whether the top half or the bottom half of the division is searched.
It is important to note that only one constraint is added to the problem at any given time.
min{z(x)|f2(x) ≥αf1(x), x ∈X}
(5.2)
min{z(x)|f2(x) ≤αf1(x), x ∈X}
(5.3)
The feasible region to Model 5.2 is denoted by Xup and the feasible region to Model 5.3 is
denoted by Xdown, referenced in Figure 5.2. The goal is to find two non-dominated points
zA ∈△up and zB ∈△down, such that they are the closest points in their respective △to
the dividing line z2 = αz1. To accomplish this, two optimization problems are defined, one
for each triangle. For △up the model R(α, ≥)
lex min{(z2(x), z1(x))|x ∈Xup}
(5.4)
and for △down the model R(α, ≤)
lex min{(z1(x), z2(x))|x ∈Xdown}.
(5.5)
This translates to a modified version of Model 2.4, given by (for △up)
lex min
z(x) =
(z2(x)
z1(x)
)
st
z2(x) ≥αz1(x)
x ∈Xup
(5.6)
These points are, graphically (see Figure 5.2), the closest points to dividing line which are
non-dominated in their △.
Figure 5.2: The points zA and zB.
However, it is possible that either zA or zB dominates the other. This is because each
point is found only from the non-dominated set of its particular △. If so an additional
constraint must be considered to find the true non-dominated point. In this case, a slightly
16
Criteria Space Methods for Multi-Objective Optimization
==PAGE:25==
modified version of the corresponding optimization model is applied, see Algorithm 5. It
is proved in [7] that the two points found from this method are in fact non-dominated, and
importantly, consecutive members of the Pareto front. This second trait is important, as it
means the space between the two points can be safely eliminated from consideration.
There are four cases to consider to show that zA and zB are part of the non-dominated
set.
Case 1 is when zA = zB. In this case it is simple to see that zA is non-dominated in
△up and zB is non-dominated in △down. Therefore it follows that zA is part of the non-
dominated set. In the following three cases, it is assumed that zA ̸= zB.
Case 2 is the case of zA ⊀zB and zB ⊀zA, i.e. no additional points must be calculated.
In order to satisfy these conditions, it can be assumed that zB
1 > zA
1 and zB
2 < zA
2 . Next,
assume by contradiction that zB is not a non-dominated point. Then there must exist some
zD in the non-dominated set for which zD ≺zB. Importantly, this means that zD
2 ≤zB
2 and
that zD ∈△up. However, this would mean that zD
2 < zA
2 , but zA is the point in △up with the
smallest value of z2. Thus there is a contradiction, and zB must be in the non-dominated
set. The reasoning for zA non-dominated is similar.
Case 3 is when zA ≺zB, and a new point zB′ must be calculated. The constraint z2 ≤zA
2 −
ϵ is added to the model R(α, ≤) for a sufficiently small ϵ > 0. This constraint guarantees
that for the new point zB′ zB′
2
< zA
2 . From the assumption zA
2 ≤zB
2 it follows that zB′
2
< zB
2 .
Additionally, as zB, zB′ are part of the non-dominated set for △down, zB′
1
> zB
1 . It was
assumed that zA
1 ≤zB
1 , thus zA
1 < zB′
1 . This proves the case is equivalent to case 2 with
zA ⊀zB′ and zB′ ⊀zA, and the proof follows as before.
Case 4 is when zB ≺zA, and is similarly processed.
Showing that these points are consecutive is an exercise in showing that, should a point
exist between them, it must either exist in △up or △down. In either case, it violates the fact
that each point, zA or zB, is the closest point in its △to the division. Therefore such a
point cannot exist.
The process of executing this slice constraint can be written as follows in Algorithm 5,
given the input of R(α, ≥) and R(α, ≤).
Algorithm 5 Individual Slices
1: zA ←lex min{(z2(x), z1(x))|x ∈Xup}
2: zB ←lex min{(z1(x), z2(x))|x ∈Xdown}
3: if zA dominates zB then
4:
Add the constraint {z ∈Y|z2 ≤zA
2 −ϵ} to R(α, ≤).
5:
zB′ ←Solution
6:
Return zA, zB′
7: if zB dominates zA then
8:
Add the constraint {z ∈Y|z1 ≤zB
1 −ϵ} to R(α, ≥).
9:
zA′ ←Solution
10:
Return zA′, zB
11: Else
12:
Return zA, zB
Consequently two lemmas can be stated regarding the existence of points between two
slices with non-dominated points zA, zB and zC, zD respectively.
Criteria Space Methods for Multi-Objective Optimization
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 5.3: Non-dominated points for two slices, illustrating Lemmas 1 and 2.
Lemma 1 If zA = zC or zB = zD, then the interior of the slice αdownz1 ≤z2αupz1 contains
no non-dominated points.
Lemma 2 If zA ̸= zC and zB ̸= zD and if zB = zC, the the interior of the slice contains
only one non-dominated point, namely zB.
Algorithm 5 can be included into a larger algorithm to thoroughly search the criterion space
for the full Pareto front. This full algorithm is dubbed the Boxcutter Method, and is the one
of the new contributions of this thesis.
It is important to determine how exactly α is chosen for each iteration of the Boxcutter
method, as there are various possibilities. For this thesis, α was calculated to be the
slope of the line passing through the origin to the center point of the box being divided.
Thus,
α = (y1
1 + y2
1)/2
(y1
2 + y2
2)/2 = (y1
1 + y2
1)
(y1
2 + y2
2)
Another possible definition of α could be the slope of the line dividing the boundary of the
box, namely the lines going from {y1
1, y2
1} to {y1
2, y2
1} and from {y1
2, y2
1} to {y1
2, y2
2}. Many
other methods of choosing α are possible, so long as α remains within the box. The
absolute limit is
y2
2
y2
1
< α < y1
2
y1
1
(5.7)
Outside of these bounds, α is no longer dividing the box, and any attempted optimization
will be infeasible.
Similar to Algorithm 3, the Boxcutter method can be terminated early by large choice of
∆> 0. In this case, the full Pareto front can be found by setting ∆= 0.9, due to the
requirement that coefficients be integer.
18
Criteria Space Methods for Multi-Objective Optimization
==PAGE:27==
Algorithm 6 Boxcutter Method
1: Rep ←∅
2: S ←∅
3: Compute lexicographic points z1, z2, and a(R(z1, z2))
4: Rep ←{z1, z2}
5: S ←{R(z1, z2)}
6: while S ̸= ∅do
7:
Choose the largest R(y1, y2) ∈S
8:
S ←S \ {R(y1, y2)}
9:
α ←(y1
2 + y2
2)/(y1
1 + y2
1)
10:
Run Algorithm 5 using α and R(y1, y2). Get output yA, yB
11:
Rep ←Rep ∪{yA, yB}
12:
if a(R(y1, yA)) > ∆then
13:
S ←S ∪{R(y1, yA)}
14:
if a(R(yB, y2)) > ∆then
15:
S ←S ∪{R(yB, y2)}
The Boxcutter method has an additional key property; namely that the two points found
are consecutive non-dominated points. By exploiting this trait, a variation of the Boxcut-
ter method which performs similarly to the ϵ-Constraint method from Algorithm 2 can be
derived. By using a previously existing point, say zA, a version of 5.6 can be constructed;
lex min
z(x) =
(z1(x)
z2(x)
)
st
z2(x) ≤αz1(x)
z2 ≤zA
2 −ϵ
x ∈Xdown
(5.8)
where α = zA
2
zA
1 . This finds the neighboring non-dominated point to zA located in △down.
While the background of the methods differ, this is in practice identical to the ϵ-Constraint
method in terms of dividing search space. 1
One interesting property of the Boxcutter algorithm is that, despite its name, it need not
define its search area as boxes. Instead, the area could be defined using α, with the
search space modeled as the range of α’s as described in Equation 5.7. Upon locat-
ing new non-dominated points, the range of α encompassed by those points could be
removed from the total, with new α chosen such that it divides the largest strip of the
range. This will be explored more in Chapter 10 discussing the Boxcutter in relation to
tri-objective problems.
1(Due to an initial emphasis on speed, see Conclusion) The functionality of Algorithm 2 was reached
independently in the process of writing this thesis. The connection to the [5] was realized only a day prior to
submission
Criteria Space Methods for Multi-Objective Optimization
19
==PAGE:28==
6
Representations of Pareto Fronts
Due to the nature of multi-objective optimization, as the size of the models increases the
total run-time of the algorithms tend to approach unreasonable size. As such, it may be
more important for the algorithm to construct a useful representation of the Pareto front
quickly, rather than the entire non-dominated set. This means that an algorithm which
may take many iterations to finally search all the criterion space can be more valuable
than an algorithm which terminates relatively quickly, but which struggles to find points
early on. The question then is how to evaluate the resulting estimation. This thesis refers
to the metrics detailed in [8].
The most obvious metric is to compare the actual number of non-dominated points found.
However, this is insufficient in practice to determine the usefulness of the representation.
Consider the brute force method of searching the space discussed in Algorithm 1. Should
it be terminated part-way through its run-time, the resulting representation would in fact
poorly represent the true Pareto front. All the points discovered would be weighed to one
side, nearest the upper right lexicographical point (see Figure 6.1).
Figure 6.1: The representation from early termination of the brute force method.
This is clearly not a particularly useful estimation, as any non-dominated points favoring
the other objective are not located. The representation does not represent a large number
of points, and its members are clustered in one area. In the following section, several ways
of evaluating representations are discussed.
Ideally, a representation of the Pareto front should provide non-dominated points which
fairly represent the space between the lexicographical points, but which contains a min-
imal number of clusters of points. It is also advantageous to obtain these qualities with
a minimal total number of points, as the problem in question is the computational time
needed. This is to provide the decision maker, the one who is to make use of the opti-
mal solution, with the tools to make the best decision. Evaluations of these qualities are
discussed extensively in [8], and will be review here for completeness. These consist of
three criteria, namely coverage, uniformity, and cardinality.
20
Criteria Space Methods for Multi-Objective Optimization
==PAGE:29==
In order to properly define these metrics, a sense of distance must be defined as well.
The distance between two points in criterion space may be defined several ways based
on preference
dp(y, y′) =
{
p√
|y1 −y′
1|p + |y2 −y′
2|p
for p = 1, 2, ...
max(|y1 −y′
1|, |y2 −y′
2|)
for p = ∞
(6.1)
These distances, for p = 1, 2, and ∞are the commonly used Manhattan, Euclidean, and
Chebyshev definitions, and are not unique to this context.
Coverage is a measure of how well the non-dominated points are represented in the es-
timation. A representation has good coverage if any non-dominated points not included
in the representation are sufficiently close to those which are included. This means that
even though not all points are included in the representation, each non-dominated point
has a point in the representation which can be used as a fair approximation. Mathemati-
cally this is measured via the coverage error, which is defined for a representation R ⊂N,
where N is the set of non-dominated points.
Γ(R, N) = max
y∈N min
y′∈R dp(y, y′)
(6.2)
Graphically, this is the longest distance needed such that every point y ∈N is within said
distance from a point y′ ∈R.
Uniformity is the degree to which the points of the representation are spread out in criterion
space. Good uniformity means a representation does not contain clusters of points. This
means that there are few redundant points. Clustered points would all represent the same
points in the non-dominated set. The uniformity level of a representation is defined by
∆(R) =
min
y,y′∈R,y̸=y′dp(y, y′)
(6.3)
which is the smallest distance between any two distinct points in R.
Finally, cardinality is simply a measure of how many points a representation contains. As
representations are best applied to large problems which are time consuming to solve,
being able to achieve good results with as few points as possible is most beneficial. For
a given representation R, the cardinality is written |R|.
Considering that each of these metrics are numeric values, it is possible to consider the
problem of building a representation, hereby referred to as the discrete representation
problem or DRP, as a tri-objective optimization problem itself. Ideally, the coverage error
should be minimized, the uniformity level should be maximized, and the cardinality should
be minimized. This means solutions to the DRP can themselves be dominated or non-
dominated. However, one complication lies in that the calculation of the coverage error
seems to require the non-dominated set N, which would defeat the purpose of building a
representation to begin with.
A particularly useful type of representation is the equidistant representation, which is
shown in [8] to have favorable qualities for any given |R|. A representation is said to
be equidistant if any two consecutive points, ranked in ascending order of f1(x) value,
are a fixed distance apart, i.e.
dp(yj, yj+1) = dp(yj′, yj′+1)
∀1 ≤j, j′ ≤|R| −1.
(6.4)
Criteria Space Methods for Multi-Objective Optimization
21
==PAGE:30==
(a) Low Coverage Error.
(b) High Coverage Error.
Figure 6.2: Two representations of equal cardinality, one with relative good (low) coverage
error, and one with relative bad (high) coverage error.
If the lexicographical points, z1, z2 ∈R for R equidistant, then R is said to be a complete
equidistant representation. For equidistant representations, the fixed distance between
points is denoted dr.
Two more definitions are required to make use of the results of [8], namely critical points
and critical distance. They are defined for a given representation R = {y1, y2, ..., y|R|},
respectively, by
¯yj =
argmax
y′∈N st yj
1≤y′
1≤yj+1
1
min
y∈{yj,yj+1}dp(y, y′)
(6.5)
¯dj = min
y∈R dp(y, ¯yj)
(6.6)
where it assumed that y0 = z1 and y|R|+1 = z2. This allows for the coverage error to be
formulated using the critical distances, namely by
Γ(R) = maxj∈{0,...,|R|} ¯dj
(6.7)
where N is given by context. Additionally, the union of a representation R and its critical
points is defined as the super-representation, sup(R, N) = {¯y0, y1, ¯y1, ..., y|R|, ¯y|R|}. If
|R| is odd, then it is also possible to define the sub-representation of R by sub(R) =
{y2, y4, ..., y|R|−1}. If R is a complete equidistant representation, then sup(sub(R)) = R.
22
Criteria Space Methods for Multi-Objective Optimization
==PAGE:31==
(a) High Uniformity.
(b) Low Uniformity.
Figure 6.3: Two representations of equal cardinality, one with relative good (high) unifor-
mity, and one with relative bad (low) uniformity.
With these definitions in hand, [8] presents three interesting lemmas and one theorem
which will be referenced in this thesis.
Lemma 3 Let y, y′, y′′ ∈Y be three points that are mutually weakly non-dominated and
sorted such that y1 ≤y′
1 ≤y′′
1. Then
• d(y, y′) ≤d(y, y′′)
• y′
1 = y′′
1 if d(y, y′) = d(y, y′′)
Lemma 3 formalizes the relative distances of three consecutive points, and is proved in
[10]. This will prove useful for the proofs of the following lemmas.
Lemma 4 A representation R for which sup(R) is a complete equidistant representation
uniquely minimizes the coverage error among all representations of cardinality |R|.
A formal proof is shown in [8], and is described here. Let R be a representation such that
sup(R) is a complete equidistant representation, and suppose there exists ˆR with such
that |R| = | ˆR| and Γ( ˆR) ≤Γ(R). The goal is then to show that ˆR = R. It can be shown
that if ˆyj
1 ≤yj
1 then ˆyj+1
1
≤yj+1
1
. Since ˆR is defined to have a smaller coverage error than
R, it is impossible for ˆyj+1
1
to overtake yj+1
1
, as that would require the critical distance to
exceed that of R, which is impossible by definition.
Criteria Space Methods for Multi-Objective Optimization
23
==PAGE:32==
Again, by the assumption that Γ( ˆR) ≤Γ(R), it can be determined that d(¯y0, ˆy1) ≤d(¯y0, y1),
as the first point of ˆR must be closer to the lexicographic point. But as seen in the previous
paragraph, this means by induction that d(¯y|R|, ˆy|R|) ≥d(¯y|R|, y|R|), and consequently that
Γ( ˆR) ≥Γ(R). From Lemma 3, R = ˆR.
What follows is a sufficient condition for a non-dominated solution to the DRP, an important
result from [8].
Theorem 1 A representation R is a non-dominated solution to the DRP if sup(R) is a
complete equidistant representation.
The principle of this proof, found in [8], is to assume by contradiction that a representation
S exists which dominates R, with Γ(S) ≤Γ(R) and |S| ≤|R|. It can be shown that by
adding |R| −|S| points to S, these properties cannot hold, and therefore that S = R.
Lemma 5 If R is a complete equidistant representation, then R has the maximum unifor-
mity level over all representations of cardinality |R|.
Again, a sketch of the proof is found here, with the full proof detailed in [8]. Since R is
equidistant, every point in the representation is equally far from its neighboring points,
including the lexicographic points. As such, any other representation ˆR with | ˆR| = |R|
cannot be closer to y1 without being further from y|R|. This means it can at best have
uniformity equal to that of R.
These definitions are useful, but ultimately not practical to use directly for building the rep-
resentations found from the algorithms detailed above. However, they provide a valuable
metric for the quality of the representations found. The closer the numerically generated
representations are to the qualities of the theoretical best, the more likely they provide
a good cover of the non-dominated set. This can be tested against the full Pareto front,
which is also calculated in this experiment.
24
Criteria Space Methods for Multi-Objective Optimization
==PAGE:33==
7
Methodology
The main aim of this next section is to compare the new Boxcutter method to the es-
tablished methods of bi-objective optimization. The goal is to find a reliable method of
measuring the performance of the algorithm which will allow for sensible evaluation of the
various methods in relation to each other.
The primary metric by which the algorithms will be measured is the number of calls to the
optimization problem modeled in Model 2.4. When timing the methods it was determined
that more than 99% of the run time was spent computing this problem, so it is a reasonable
method of measuring performance. Therefore the progress of the various methods can
be graphed by taking the size of the current Pareto representation as a function over the
number of calls to Model 2.4. However, it should be made clear that the model used in
the Boxcutter method differs in constraints from that of the a posteriori and the Balance
Box method, so consideration must be given to the difference actual time between each
model.
When interpreting the results, there are multiple qualities of the algorithms of interest. The
most obvious might be which algorithm terminates first, providing the full Pareto front.
However, in real world applications, many problems are too large to be evaluated in their
entirety. Therefore it is also important to take note of how quickly each method approaches
close approximation of the Pareto front. These algorithms could be made to terminate
early, and still provide sufficient to fulfill the purpose of the full front. This can be done
because every point found by the algorithms is guaranteed to be non-dominated. Finally,
a measure of the run-time in seconds is measured, to give a sense of the real world
time needed to complete each method. Note, that the sizes across the different types
of problems are not comparable. This means although all tested methods may seem to
perform better on one problem type compared to the other, this may simply be due to a
difference between the number of variables in each problem. Direct comparisons should
only be drawn between the three methods on each problem type.
The performance of each algorithm may also vary based on the type of optimization prob-
lem they are applied to. Therefore it is prudent to compare the efficiency of the methods
on a variety of problems. Although it is not an exhaustive list, three types were chosen for
this thesis. The data for these bi-objective problems comes from the vOptLib library, [11].
For these experiments, the algorithms are applied to the Bi-Objective Set Covering Prob-
lem (SCP), the Set Packing Problem (SPP), and the Knapsack Problem (KSP). These
problems are easy to implement and test, as all coefficients and variables are composed
of integer values. While this gives the results of the comparison more legitimacy, it should
be noted that there are some short-comings as well. Most notably, all three problems cho-
sen for these tests utilize exclusively binary variables. Such overlap means that further
testing could be performed to explore the properties of the evaluated algorithms.
Finally, it is of interest to compare the quality of the Pareto front representations at a given
time. For each of the three problem types, the three algorithms will be evaluated part way
through their computation of the true front. Since the number of elements in the repre-
sentation is recorded for any given number of calls to the optimization of Model 2.4, the
representations can be reconstructed by saving the non-dominated points in order of their
discovery. The metrics detailed in [8] provide the primary evaluation of the representa-
tions’ quality.
Criteria Space Methods for Multi-Objective Optimization
25
==PAGE:34==
8
Results and hypothesis of reason/
discussion
In this chapter the results of several tests on the three methods are discussed. Note, that
due to the formatting of Figures, it may be that Figures are not included exactly alongside
the text discussing them, and may be found later in the chapter.
8.1
Set Covering Problem
The first trial is the bi-objective SCP. Each algorithm was run on the same data set, which
contains 1000 binary variables. The performance of the methods are shown in Figure 8.1.
Figure 8.1: Performance for the Set Covering Problem. The horizontal axis denotes the
number of calls to Model 2.4, while the vertical axis denotes the cardinality of the current
representation.
The x-axis is the number of calls made to a constrained lexicographic optimization by the
method, and the y-axis is the number of non-dominated points found. The first clear re-
sult is that the standard Box method takes much more time to complete the Pareto front.
It takes nearly 700 calls to Model 2.4 to exhaustively search the criterion space. Mean-
while the Boxcutter is finished after just under 400 calls to Model 5.4 or Model 5.5. The
more interesting result is that initially the Box method is more efficient about finding non-
dominated points, as before the 100 mark it has a larger representation when compared
to the Boxcutter method, although it flattens quickly afterwards. It is clear that the Balance
box method is the most efficient, however, matching the Box method initially and staying
above the Boxcutter method throughout.
The next step is to compare the representations at a given time. To best visualize the
representations, each method is shown with the first twenty non-dominated points it finds.
To reach the representations in Figure 8.2, it takes the a posteriori and Balance Box
methods 20 optimizations, while the Boxcutter method uses 26. From the graphs the a
26
Criteria Space Methods for Multi-Objective Optimization
==PAGE:35==
(a) A posteriori Box Method
(b) Balance Box Method
(c) Boxcutter Method
(d) Full Pareto Front
Figure 8.2: Representations generated from first 20 located points for the Set Covering
Problem. The horizontal axis represents the values of the first objective, and the vertical
axis corresponds to the values of the second objective.
posteriori gives the representation with both the lowest coverage error and the highest
uniformity. This is due to the tendency of the other two methods to find points in close
proximity to each other.
8.2
Set Packing Problem
The bi-objective SPP data set contains 600 binary variables. Performances are detailed
in Figure 8.3.
The results are very similar to those of the SCP model. The primary difference is a small
interval between 125 and 150 where the Boxcutter provides the best representation of
the three algorithms. Outside of this space however, the Balance Box remains the most
efficient method.
Again, the first 20 non-dominated points are compared as representations of the full set.
To reach these representations in Figure 8.4, it takes all three methods 20 optimizations
to reach 20 non-dominated points. Again, the a posteriori method is more uniform and
has better coverage.
8.3
Knapsack Problem
The bi-objective KSP data set contains 300 binary variables, and is detailed in Figure
8.5. Structurally the KSP differs from the previous two problems, in that it only has one
constraint that must be satisfied, where the SCP and SPP have many.
Criteria Space Methods for Multi-Objective Optimization
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 8.3: Performance for the Set Packing Problem. The horizontal axis denotes the
number of calls to Model 2.4, while the vertical axis denotes the cardinality of the current
representation.
The KSP results differ from the previous two tests. In this case, we see the Boxcutter
is the least efficient algorithm for generating non-dominated points. It should be noted
that an error occurred in the run of a posteriori box method, and it did not complete the
Pareto front, terminating early. However, despite not completing its representation, it still
eclipses the Boxcutter while it did run. It would seem that the Boxcutter suffers in relative
performance when fewer constraints exist in the base problem. This would be an avenue
for further testing on various problem types.
Once again, from the results in Figure 8.6, the a posteriori method provides the best
representation early in the run time of the algorithms. It is difficult to see, as the full pareto
front in this case contains over 700 points, but the empty space in the representations for
both the Balance box and Boxcutter methods is due to the grouping of their non-dominated
points in pairs.
8.4
Discussion of Results
The results show that although the Boxcutter method shows potential, it does not out-
class other methods of bi-objective optimization. For both the SCP and SPP, it solved
for the exact Pareto front before the a posteriori, but after the Balance box method. The
interesting result is that it was out-performed by both of these methods when applied to
the bi-objective knapsack problem. The primary difference between these problems is
the number of constraints, so it is possible that this plays a role in the Boxcutter’s per-
formance. However, the data in this thesis is insufficient to make a definite conclusion in
that regard.
To investigate this to some degree, the real time cost of each algorithm can be examined.
By dividing this amount by the total number of optimizations performed, it can be roughly
determined how effectively each algorithm finds individual points. The run-time of each
algorithm is compared to that of the ϵ-Constraint method, to show how much speed is
sacrificed to attempt a better representation of the non-dominated set.
28
Criteria Space Methods for Multi-Objective Optimization
==PAGE:37==
(a) A posteriori Box Method
(b) Balance Box Method
(c) Boxcutter Method
(d) Full Pareto Front
Figure 8.4: Representations generated from first 20 located points.
Figure 8.5: Performance for the Knapsack Problem. The horizontal axis denotes the
number of calls to Model 2.4, while the vertical axis denotes the cardinality of the current
representation.
Total Run Time in Seconds
SCP
SPP
KSP
A Posteriori
5977.99
193.78
81.91
Balance Box
3176.79
174.11
122.06
Boxcutter
3824.29
174.33
125.85
ϵ-Constraint
1775.75
88.43
66.42
Criteria Space Methods for Multi-Objective Optimization
29
==PAGE:38==
(a) A posteriori Box Method
(b) Balance Box Method
(c) Boxcutter Method
(d) Full Pareto Front
Figure 8.6: Representations generated from first 20 located points.
In each case (with the exception of the faulty KSP), the a posteriori method requires the
most time to complete the Pareto front. The Balance box method requires the least time,
although in the case of the SPP and KSP, this difference is rather small. This would
indicate that, should the goal be the fastest full Pareto front, the Balance box is the ideal
choice amoung the methods provided.
Number of Optimizations
SCP
SPP
KSP
A Posteriori
636
201
986
Balance Box
334
172
1424
Boxcutter
376
184
1314
ϵ-Constraint
168
87
714
Time Per Optimization
SCP
SPP
KSP
A Posteriori
9.399
0.964
0.083
Balance Box
9.511
1.012
0.086
Boxcutter
10.171
0.947
0.096
As expected, for the SCP and KSP the a posteriori and the Balance box method are very
similar in their time spent in each optimization step, as they are solving the same lexico-
graphical ϵ-constraint problem. However, the Boxcutter method requires a small amount
of additional time. When computed over many iterations, this difference makes a differ-
ence in the run-time of the algorithm. This increase in time per iteration may be because
the Boxcutter method solves a modified version of Model 2.4 at each step, bounded by an
30
Criteria Space Methods for Multi-Objective Optimization
==PAGE:39==
extra constraint as shown in Model 5.6. Oddly for the SPP the a posteriori shares similar
performance with the Boxcutter method, which appears to be the fastest at solving the
individual optimization problem. The general trend is that the Boxcutter method needs
more time to perform this action. It is likely that this contributes to its performance relative
to the other algorithms, as it would mean the Boxcutter method must perform a certain
number fewer calls to Model 5.6 to outperform the Balance box method. Another issue to
this could be that the Boxcutter sometimes calls the modified Model 5.6 three times to find
two non-dominated points (which may not be new). Meanwhile the Balance box method
never needs more than two calls to Model 2.4 to find two possible new non-dominated
points.
One area of this thesis which could be improved upon in future research is that the com-
parisons of the representations had to be done at early points in the run times of the
various methods. Due to time constraints, the mathematical definitions of coverage error
and uniformity were not applied to larger representations, so the evaluation needed to be
done by visual inspection, rather than applying the formal definitions from Chapter 6. This
only works for small representations.
In light of this, the a posteriori method is the clear choice in terms of early representations.
This is due to the fact that although both the Balance box and Boxcutter methods are more
efficient at finding points, they have a tendency to find pairs of points clustered together.
This is because both methods are designed to use one point to quickly find its neighbor.
Unless the algorithms are extremely lucky, these points will represent roughly the same
portion of the true Pareto front. If these points could be generated in a non-consecutive
fashion, the representations might be better approximations early in the run time.
Criteria Space Methods for Multi-Objective Optimization
31
==PAGE:40==
9
Transition to 3D
Having crafted an algorithm for the 2D bi-objective problem, the natural extension is the
step to tri-objective. However, the complexity of the problem does not simply scale up
by one, and the algorithm in question may require some adjustments. To illustrate this,
consider first the lexicographic points. For two dimensions, two points could be found
by optimizing the objectives in order, f1(x), f2(x) and f2(x), f1(x). However, for three
objectives there are six possible orderings of the objectives, resulting in six lexicographic
points. This is a factorial scaling, which quickly increases the size of the problem. Defining
the search space for many algorithms now falls to the ideal point and the nadir point. The
ideal point remains simple, but the nadir point becomes rapidly more complex. Many
heuristics exist to calculate it, but it remains a costly problem, as it scales as a factorial of
the number of objective functions.
Much like how the bi-objective methods called the Model 2.4, tri-objective problems re-
fer to an extension of the lexicographical ϵ-constraint problem, written (in one order of
optimization)
lex min
f(x) =


f3(x)
f2(x)
f1(x)


st
f2(x) ≤ϵ2
f1(x) ≤ϵ1
x ∈X.
(9.1)
Similarly, each point of the Pareto front can be found through proper manipulation of ϵ1,
ϵ2. The goal is then to find an algorithm which can effectively apply Model 9.1 to find
non-dominated points while eliminating search space using the values of the ϵ’s.
Creating an algorithm to inefficiently calculate the tri-objective Pareto front is straightfor-
ward, and is a natural extension of the brute-force method for bi-objective problems. The
tri-objective Pareto front can be visualized as many neighboring bi-objective fronts, much
like the bi-objective front is comprised of many neighboring single-objective solutions. For
each step, ϵ1 is incrementally increased to bound the first of the three objective functions.
For each ϵ1, an entire Pareto front can be found for the other two objectives. This method
is robust but incredibly time consuming. This magnifies the importance of developing
efficient algorithms to handle these kinds of multi-objective problems.
Due to the increased complexity of the tri-objective case, it becomes increasing important
to find methods of optimization which quickly find a good representation of the full Pareto
front. For example, a second weakness of the brute force method detailed above is that as
it solves for the Pareto front, it locates points neighboring the previous points it has found.
Thus, early termination of the brute force method would result in a skewed representation
which leaves large portions of the possible Pareto front un-searched.
32
Criteria Space Methods for Multi-Objective Optimization
==PAGE:41==
10
Boxcutter in 3D
In this section a sketch of a possible transition of the Boxcutter algorithm from bi-objective
to tri-objective is presented. It is important to note that the proof of correctness of any
method presented hereafter is incomplete, and further investigation is required. It may be
that this is an inefficient translation, but hopefully it may serve as a starting point for the
development of something better.
When applying the Boxcutter to two objectives, it was mentioned that it was possible to
represent the search space in multiple ways. In the version detailed in Algorithm 6, the
space was organized in boxes, similar to the other bi-objective methods. However, it might
instead be prudent to record the eligible space in terms of the scalar α. The upper and
lower bound to α are known from the lexicographic points. Choosing, for example, the
value for α which exactly divides this interval, two non-dominated points could be found,
and the interval between them could be removed from the search space.
If a third objective were to be added to the model, each slice could be represented by two
values, α and β, where α is the angle between z2 and z1, and β is the angle between z3
and z2. Thus this slice is represented by the three equations z2 = αz1, z3 = βz2, and
z3 = βαz1. The values of α and β are bounded by the six lexicographic points, just as
how α in the bi-objective case is bounded by two.
Suppose to start that α and β are chosen such that the resulting line goes through the
center of the polygon defined by the lexicographic points. The result is six wedges cor-
responding to the two △’s from the bi-objective case, depending on the desired order of
optimization.
△3,2,1
z3, z2, z1
z3 ≥βz2
z2 ≥αz1
△3,1,2
z3, z1, z2
z3 ≥αβz1
z2 ≤αz1
△2,3,1
z2, z3, z1
z3 ≤βz2
z3 ≥αβz1
△2,1,3
z2, z1, z3
z2 ≥αz1
z3 ≤αβz1
△1,3,2
z1, z3, z2
z3 ≤αβz1
z3 ≥βz2
△1,2,3
z1, z2, z3
z2 ≤αz1
z3 ≤βz2
To solve for the point in each wedge closest to the dividing line, a modified version of
Model 9.1 must be solved. For example, for △3,2,1, the model would be
lex min
z(x) =


z3(x)
z2(x)
z1(x)


st
z3(x) ≥βz2(x)
z2(x) ≥αz1(x)
x ∈X△3,2,1
(10.1)
This should locate the non-dominated point z∗
3,2,1 closest to the dividing line within the
wedge △3,2,1, similar to the bi-objective case. It is also important to recall that each version
of Model 10.1 only measures non-dominated in relation to the other points in the wedge
in question. Once all six points have been found, they must be compared against each
Criteria Space Methods for Multi-Objective Optimization
33
==PAGE:42==
other to determine if any are dominated by each other. In such case, ϵ constraints are
added to Model 10.1 to find a new point which is truly non-dominated.
Like the bi-objective version, these points are ”consecutive” non-dominated points. If
any points were to exist between them, then those points would have been found by
Model 10.1 instead. As such, no other non-dominated points exist in the polygon defined
by these points. This area can consequently be removed from consideration for further
search.
Figure 10.1: Searching around a center point. Eliminated search space in white, further
search space in grey. Non-dominated points represented by red squares.
This process could be continued for polygons of eligible search space until a full Pareto
front is discovered. However, as stated previously, the construction of a full set of non-
dominated points for three objectives is a computational costly endeavor. So the goal is
to find a method of searching the space which could be terminated early and still find a
good representation, keeping in mind the metrics put forth in [8]. One such possibility is
discussed here, although it has not been formally proved.
Consider again the case from before, where α and β are chosen to find the line through
the center of the initial polygon. Instead of generating all six points from the wedges, it
may suffice to find one, as generating a cluster of six points in relative proximity to each
other goes against the principle of uniformity for good representations. Although this point
cannot be guaranteed to be in the non-dominated set, it may be sufficient to divide the
search space if compared to future points. Given this new point, z∗, the search area can
be divided into further polygons, for example triangles. By now selecting the lines passing
through the center of each of these new polygons, more points could be generated such
that the space is covered evenly and uniformly. In theory, this could satisfy both a low
coverage error and a high uniformity.
However, this is still theory, and more time is required to properly investigate this method.
One possible problem is that search space is inefficiently eliminated, so the same area
may be searched multiple times. If the neighboring points are not calculated in the same
step, it is not possible to eliminate the space in between them. This version of the 3D
Boxcutter may take even longer to compute the full Pareto front, but may be more effi-
34
Criteria Space Methods for Multi-Objective Optimization
==PAGE:43==
Figure 10.2: Dividing search space into triangles for further search. Non-dominated points
labeled with red squares, future slices marked by black circles.
cient at finding a representation early. Another thing to consider is how to decided which
point to search for around each slice. It could be selected randomly, or predetermined
based on the shape of the polygon. The problem with only finding one point is that it
may be dominated by one of the points in the other wedges. Just like in the bi-objective
case, the model will only locate points non-dominated in their respective wedges. This
could mean separate versions of the algorithm would be more suited to either solving for
representations or solving for the full Pareto front.
The Boxcutter method may represent a new way to search tri-objective space, but be-
cause it cannot guarantee the points found in each wedge are truly non-dominated, it
is not an effective choice in its current state. To verify the points found, all six must be
determined at the same time, resulting in clusters of up to six points populating the rep-
resentation. This means any representation determined by the current Boxcutter method
will naturally have low uniformity.
Criteria Space Methods for Multi-Objective Optimization
35
==PAGE:44==
11
Conclusion
In this thesis criteria space search methods for multi-objective optimization problems are
considered. Starting with an introduction into multi-objective optimization, two established
methods, the a posteriori Box method [4] and the Balance Box method [5] were detailed
to illustrate the search procedure. Then the new Boxcutter method, derived from part of
the hybrid method introduced in [7], is introduced as a new candidate for generating the
Pareto front.
To evaluate the performance of these algorithms, in addition to time until completion, var-
ious criteria for evaluating representations of the Pareto front were discussed [8]. These
include uniformity and coverage error. These metrics are important when a problem is
too large to solve to completion, when an estimation of the final answer is more feasible.
The three methods were tested against each other on three different integer programming
problems, the SCP, SPP, and KSP. In general, for the tests performed in this thesis it was
found that the Boxcutter performed better than the a posteriori method but worse than the
Balance Box method in terms of speed when finding the Pareto front. This was true of
both the SCP and SPP. For the KSP, it was found that the Boxcutter method performed
slower than even the a posteriori method. If speed is the primary concern for finding a
representation of the Pareto front, the Balance Box method is the best choice.
When this thesis started, a great emphasis was placed on the speed of the various algo-
rithms. However, in hindsight more focus should have been placed on the representations
generated by the methods in a given amount of time or iterations. For multi-objective prob-
lems, even fast algorithms may take a long time to solve large problems. If speed was
the main concern, the ϵ-Constraint method would be ideal. Instead, emphasis should be
placed on the representations given by the methods at various points in their search of
the criteria space. Given the data collected here, the a posteriori box method appears
to be the best choice for building a representation. For a given cardinality, it produced
the representation with the lowest coverage error and the highest uniformity. This is due
to the tendency of the Balance Box method and the Boxcutter method to find points in
clustered pairs.
Finally, the transition from bi-objective to tri-objective problems is addressed. Some theo-
ries are presented for how to adapt the original Boxcutter method to the problem. Ideally,
an algorithm that can generate a good representation could be found in future study, as by
the nature of the problem each objective causes the complexity to increase on a factorial
scale. If the current Boxcutter method were to re-purposed for tri-objective problems, it
would likely prove ineffective due to it’s nature of finding clusters of points. Some modifi-
cation could hopefully be found to increase uniformity in the representation.
In the future, better techniques could be found to apply the Boxcutter method to the tri-
objective case. More in depth analysis of the representations generated by these methods
could also be conducted. The Boxcutter may not have proven most effective in its current
form, but there might be a more efficient way to use it to generate a representation. It’s
ability to find consecutive points non-dominated points may prove to be an advantage in
future versions of the algorithm
36
Criteria Space Methods for Multi-Objective Optimization
==PAGE:45==
Bibliography
[1]
IBM CPLEX Optimizer. URL: https : / / www . ibm . com / analytics / cplex - optimizer.
(accessed: 01.06.2020).
[2]
Gurobi Optimization. URL: https://www.gurobi.com/. (accessed: 01.02.2020).
[3]
GLPK (GNU Linear Programing Kit). URL: https://www.gnu.org/software/glpk/.
(accessed: 01.06.2020).
[4]
Horst W. Hamacher, Christian Roed Pedersen, and Stefan Ruzika. “Finding rep-
resentative systems for discrete bicriterion optimization problems”. In: Operations
Research Letters 35 (2007), pp. 336–344. DOI: 10.1016/j.orl.2006.03.019.
[5]
Natashia Boland, Hadi Charkhgard, and Martin Savelsbergh. “A Criterion Space
Search Algorithm for Biobjective Integer Programming: The Balanced Box Method”.
In: INFORMS Journal on Computing 27.4 (2015), pp. 735–754. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1287/.
[6]
Matthias Ehrgott. Multicriteria Optimization. Germany: Springer Berlin, 2005.
[7]
Thomas Stidsen and Kim Allan Andersen. “A hybrid approach for biobjective opti-
mization”. In: Discrete Optimization 28 (2018), pp. 89–114. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.disopt.2018.02.001.
[8]
Martin Philip Kidd, Richard Lusby, and Jesper Larsen. “Equidistant representations:
Connecting coverage and uniformity in discrete biobjective optimization”. In: Com-
puters and Operations Research 117 (2020). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.
2019.104872.
[9]
Chankong V and Haimes YY. Multiobjective Decision Making Theory and Method-
ology. New York: Elsevier Science, 1983.
[10]
D. Vaz et al. “Representation of the non-dominated set in biobjective discrete opti-
mization”. In: Comput. Oper. Res. 63 (2015), pp. 172–186.
[11]
vOptLib: Library of numerical instances for MultiObjective Linear Optimization prob-
lems. URL: https://voptsolver.github.io/vOptLib/. (accessed: 01.03.2020).
Criteria Space Methods for Multi-Objective Optimization
37
==PAGE:46==
Technical
University of
Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
