==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Improving the Development and De-
ployment Process of Web Applica-
tions by Microservice Architectural
Patterns
Alexander Kristian Armstrong
(s154302)
Mathias Ennegaard Asmussen
(s154219)
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Developers, who are inexperienced in working with microservices, have, in general, a
longer startup time when creating new microservice systems. This longer startup time
is described, in literature, as a microservice premium, as valuable development hours
are wasted on this setup. In order to reduce the time spent, during initial start up, a
quick guide, along with a .NET code template is created. The purpose of this quick
guide is to enable inexperienced developers to quickly setup a microservice system, and
thus enable them to quickly be able to provide value for their clients.
The project uses design science to solve this problem.
Research on the topic of
microservices is made in order to determine how to create a guide which can solve
the problem. The guide has been created based on two example projects. In the first
example an existing system is migrated into a microservice system. The experience and
understanding gained from that is used to create the initial guide. The guide is then
used to implement the second example project. Experience gained from this is used to
improve the guide even further and make it more generic. Both of the example projects
follow an agile development process and use user stories to define the requirements of
each project.
The guide consists of best practises for getting started with developing a microservice
system. It describes how to decompose a domain into microservices, as well as how
to setup infrastructure of a microservice system. Specifically, the guide instructs how
to setup a gateway, a message queue, and how to use containerization.
Finally, it
assists with the creation of each microservice. The guide contains two .NET templates.
These templates provide a way to automatically configure infrastructure as well as aid
developers in the creation of the following microservices.
The guide is validated through a tech-share. Three experts discussed the usefulness of
the guide in terms of how well it reduces startup time. The discussion concluded that the
guide is a step in the right direction, however, guidelines on deployment and operation
are missing. Further validation of the guide should be made, especially validation which
can provide quantitative data on the guide’s performance.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This masters thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark in collaboration with Knowledge
Cube A/S in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a masters degree in computer
science.
Kongens Lyngby, July 15, 2020
Alexander Kristian Armstrong (s154302)
Kongens Lyngby, July 15, 2020
Mathias Ennegaard Asmussen (s154219)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
We would to like acknowledge the following people for their guidance, cooperation, and
support throughout the process of this thesis. Ekkart Kindler for supervising and for
lifting the scientific level of the thesis through weekly meetings. Jacob Overgaard Bay for
assisting with supervision, helping us gather relevant information, as well as experienced
developers, with whom validation could be performed. Additionally, we would like to
thank Thomas Blandford Houldberg and Henrik Nørgård for participating in our tech-
share. Finally, we would like to thank Knowledge Cube A/S for facilitating the project.
Without these people the thesis would not have been possible.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Report structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Problem Statement
5
3
Methodology
9
3.1
Design Science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Activities in Design Science Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Design Science Research Cycles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.4
Agile Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4
State of the Art
13
4.1
Architectures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.2
Monoliths vs Microservices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.3
Migrating a monolith to microservices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.4
Decomposition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.5
Testing a microservice system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5
Technology
23
5.1
Containerization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.2
Inter-service communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.3
Gateway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6
Example Domains
27
6.1
Legalization web shop
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.2
Consumer Complaint Domain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
7
Example 1
33
7.1
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
7.2
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
8
Template Design
47
8.1
Initial Template . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
8.2
The .NET Core Template Engine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
8.3
Example 2 - Using the Template . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
8.4
Improving the template . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
9
Quick Start Guide
55
9.1
Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
9.2
When to use a microservice
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
9.3
Identify microservice candidates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
9.4
Microservice system architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
9.5
Your first microservice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
9.6
Installation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
9.7
Start coding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
9.8
Implementing Unit Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
9.9
Deployment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
9.10 Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
10 Validation
77
10.1 Tech-share . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
10.2 Validation through implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
10.3 Next steps for validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
10.4 Research questions revisited . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
10.5 Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
11 Conclusion
81
A Legalization Web Shop Glossary
83
B Consumer Complaint Domain Glossary
85
C Legalization Web Shop User Stories
87
D Consumer Complaint User Stories
89
E Techshare Slides
91
Bibliography
93
==PAGE:11==
Contents
ix
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
Acronyms
CI/CD Continuous integration and deployment. 23
DDD Domain-Driven Design. 56, 80
KC Knowledge Cube. 1, 2, 7, 33, 77, 78
MSA Microservices architecture. 13–18, 24, 36, 40, 47, 53, 55, 79, 81
==PAGE:14==
xii
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In the IT consulting business microservices are currently a hot topic. It is a software
architecture which splits a system into small self-contained services. These services make
it possible to create software which is robust, easily scalable, independently deployable
as well as fault tolerant, in comparison to monolithic software.
However, the microservice architecture has its own drawbacks. A microservice system
is essentially a distributed system, and as such is plagued by the increased complexity of a
distributed system. For a microservice system, this complexity arises when implementing
inter-service communication as well as handling transactionality across multiple services.
The increase in complexity, makes it more complicated, for businesses whose developers
have no previous experience with microservices, to develop a microservice system. This
leads to more time being spent during startup of new projects. This startup time is
troublesome, especially for small to medium sized businesses, which are dependant on
rapid prototyping.
We propose a solution to reduce the complicatedness of creating microservice projects,
and thus reduce the startup time, by developing a quick start guide. The guide will
contain documentation on how to get started developing, as well as some boilerplate
code to be used. The code will be created by migrating an existing monolithic system
to a microservice system, and from that extracting a framework to be used as a .NET
template - henceforth referenced simply as a template - for building new microservice
systems. This whole process will be documented and presented in such a way that it
will be possible to easily gain an understanding of microservices but also be able to get
started with development quickly. The template will be included in the guide and can be
used when starting new microservice projects by setting up the required infrastructure.
In particular, the template will automatically configure and use a message queue system,
as well as some container orchestration.
The result of this, is that developers can focus on creating value for the product
owner, rather than spending time on technical setup. Using the guide should result in a
shorter startup time for new projects. Additionally, it should enable developers, who are
inexperienced with microservice architecture, to utilize the advantages of microservices
without being hampered by the disadvantages.
As a scientific underpinning, we will apply the principles of design science. Following
these principles, a general problem is firstly identified. The state of current technology
is examined, in order to determine a way to address the identified problem. This will
be done through research of the current knowledge base, as described in Chapter 2 of
the book Design Research in Information Systems, 2010 [10]. The project has been
developed in collaboration with the company Knowledge Cube (KC). KC has provided
==PAGE:16==
2
1 Introduction
example domains which are used throughout the project, and as such the project is
driven by example. Initially, the template will be based on an implementation of one
of these example domains. However, as this is just a single instance of the problem,
another implementation, using the same template, is created within a different example
domain. This second implementation is done to ensure a higher level of generality of the
template, as opposed to if only a single implementation was done. This will in turn make
it easier to validate the template’s general usefulness. The template will be validated
based on the reduction of start-up time spent when the template is used by engineers
with no prior experience as opposed to without the template.
1.1
Report structure
The following summary describes how this report has been structured, as well as the
purpose of each chapter.
Chapter 2 - Problem Statement
This chapter describes the problem being examined in more detail. It describes how this
thesis attempts to tackle the problem and proposes some research questions in order to
guide the process.
Chapter 3 - Methodology
This chapter details the methods used throughout this thesis. It focuses on how design
science is used in order to approach and validate the research done. It also describes
how agile design has been used during development of software.
Chapter 4 - State of the Art
This chapter gives an overview of existing concepts and theories regarding microservices,
as well as the migration from monoliths to microservices.
Chapter 5 - Technology
This chapter details the technological aspects of microservices that come into play during
some of the later chapters. This is purely a conceptual overview with no implementation
specifics given.
Chapter 6 - Example Domains
This chapter gives an overview of the example domains provided by KC.
==PAGE:17==
1.1 Report structure
3
Chapter 7 - Example 1
This chapter describes the first implementation of a microservice system. It details how
to go from a domain model towards a component model detailing the microservices
needed. In addition to this, it goes into detail about more specific implementation.
Chapter 8 - Template Design
This chapter describes how, using the experience from the previous chapter, a .NET
template was created for development of microservices. In addition to this, it details
how the template was used to develop a second example.
Chapter 9 - Guide
This chapter is the complete guide of how to get started with building microservices
using the template. In addition to simply explaining how to use the template, it also
goes into detail on how to split a specific domain into microservices, and concludes with
a short description on some technologies which might be useful in further development.
Chapter 10 - Validation
This chapter describes how the quick start guide was validated, through a tech-share in-
volving developers who have experience in developing microservice systems. In addition,
each research question reviewed in terms of how well it has been answered.
==PAGE:18==
4
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
Problem Statement
Many companies wish to make a shift from developing monolithic software into develop-
ing microservice oriented software. This shift can involve, both the migration of existing
systems, as well as the development of new systems. For developers who are inexperi-
enced with microservices, this shift may be difficult. Such a shift is a time consuming
process and does not happen over night. As companies can not simply shut down while
they transition to microservices, they would be required to balance creating new sys-
tems as microservices, as well as simultaneously maintaining their current systems. The
reason this needs to be balanced is that typically migrating existing software does not
introduce new functionalities, which potentially leads to a halt in income. This halt in
income can be devastating for especially small to medium sized businesses.
The problem this thesis solves, is that it is time consuming for developers with a mono-
lithic mindset, who are inexperienced with microservices, to begin using microservices
as there is an inherent complexity with this change. In his article MicroservicePremium
[5], Martin Fowler brings this issue to light. As seen in Figure 2.1, the productivity of
a team is much higher for monolithic systems, as long as the base complexity is low. In
contrast to this, a microservice which might not necessarily be very complex, will result
in much lower productivity, due to the overhead of managing a microservice system.
Microservices introduce certain problems, such as inter-service communication, trans-
actionality, and data consistency which a developer has to approach differently when
creating a new project. Having to tackle these problems, especially affects start up time
of new projects and is one of the reasons why it is time consuming to transition to us-
ing microservices. This thesis will attempt to increase the productivity for microservice
systems, by creating a thorough set of guidelines, on how to begin development. As this
thesis’s focus is on the start up process of new projects, deployment of a microservice
system will not be examined in detail. Though deploying and operating a microservice
system is important, this topic has been moved out of the scope for this thesis. The
guidelines will however give a few options on how to get started on deployment.
==PAGE:20==
6
2 Problem Statement
Figure 2.1: Graph showing how the microservice premium can affect productivity
https://martinfowler.com/bliki/MicroservicePremium.html
==PAGE:21==
2 Problem Statement
7
The contributions provided by this thesis will be based on the following questions:
Q1 How can we ease the migration of an existing monolithic system to a microservice
system?
Q2 What granularity should a service have, to be implemented as a microservice?
Q3 What functionalities would a service need in order to function as a microservice?
Q4 What would a quick start guide consist of, in order to be used to assist creation
of a microservice system?
Q1 will be researched partially by reviewing existing work within the field, as well
as by migrating a simplified version of a project provided by KC.
Q2 will be investigated by examining an existing problem domain and corresponding
monolithic system. This domain should help determine when to decompose a service
into a new microservice, and at which granularity. In addition to simply determining
how to decompose the domain, an actual implementation, based on the existing system,
will be undertaken.
The final two questions will focus on the template to be created. Q3 requires deter-
mining which functionalities are fundamental to a microservice system. This question is
important in terms of determining what code should be automatically generated using
the template. The answer to this should be found through, both research into state-of-
the-art and from the experience gained from building the first example system. Further,
the example system created will also make it possible to answer Q4. This will be done by
extracting some of the features found to be fundamental, and creating a .NET template
which can generate boilerplate code, to ease the addition of new microservices.
Each of these questions will be answered utilizing some form of design science activi-
ties which is described in Chapter 3.
==PAGE:22==
8
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3
Methodology
Throughout this thesis, two main methods will be used. Design science will be used
in order to maintain a high level of scientific rigidity and agile design method will be
used for development, since this method is a well established method within computer
science [21].
3.1
Design Science
As with any research, it is important to be able to describe and document the phenomena
being researched. This thesis uses a special type of design research, design science, to
do just that. Design research is a method of research which focuses on improvement of
the world through development of artefacts. In developing these, knowledge about their
use is documented [11].
Within IT a special type of design research is often used; design science. This offshoot
focuses on improving the life of developers as well as the people using the artefacts
created by developers. As Paul Johanneson and Erik Perjons define in their book An
Introduction to Design Science, 2014 [11], design science is the process of developing
artefacts as a solution to problems in practices. In this thesis the artefacts will consist
of some code, as well as the aforementioned guide. The design science method is an
iterative process. The method used throughout this thesis is based both on the method
framework proposed by Johanneson and Perjons in Chapter 4, as well as the design
science research cycles proposed by Alan Hevner and Samir Chatterjee in Chapter 2 of
their book Design Research in Information Systems, 2010 [10].
3.2
Activities in Design Science Research
As mentioned in Section 3.1, Johanneson and Perjons have proposed a method frame-
work, which includes five activities to be used throughout any design science project.
They define the activities in an order which follows the general process of most projects,
however, it is not to be thought of as a strict order. As design science is iterative and
as such each activity may need to be revisited multiple times. The following lists the
activities in the order they are presented by Johannes and Perjons:
==PAGE:24==
10
3 Methodology
”Explicate Problem”
This activity focuses on researching the problem. It is impor-
tant to be able to precisely define the problem, as well as being able to point to a specific
practice in which this issue is an actual problem that requires improvement. During this
activity the problem is identified and analysed in order to determine its importance
towards the current knowledge within the field.
”Define Requirements”
In the same way as the previous activity focuses on the
problem, this activity is focused on defining a solution to the problem. During this
activity the requirements for the proposed artefact must be outlined in order to make
the next activity as streamlined as possible.
”Design and Develop Artefact”
This activity is where the artefact will be designed
and developed. It is an extension of the ”Define Requirements”, as this activity
designs the artefact based on the requirements outlined. After the artefact has been
designed, it must be developed in a way that it solves the problems it has been designed
to solve.
”Demonstrate Artefact”
The demonstrate artefact activity is the initial test of the
artefact. During this activity an initial implementation of the artefact is tested in a
real-life case proving its usability.
”Evaluate Artefact”
The evaluate activity must relate back to the requirements set
up for the artefact, and determine how well the artifact solves the problem. In order to
do this some form of metrics must be set in order to measure success or failures of the
artefact.
3.3
Design Science Research Cycles
In addition to the activities described in section 3.2, Hevner and Chatterjee propose
a cyclical process when employing design science research. A quick overview of these
cycles can be seen in Figure 3.1. They detail three different cycles, which each have
different focus points. Firstly, the relevance cycle. This cycle bridges the domain of the
problem with the design science research phase. Secondly, the rigor cycle. This cycle
connects the design science research phase with the knowledge base. Finally, the design
cycle. This cycle utilizes information gained from the previous cycles and is employed
to generate the desired artefacts, as well as evaluates them.
3.3.1
Relevance cycle
The relevance cycle is what initiates design science research. This cycle deals with the
application domain, which consists of people and systems which interact in order to
==PAGE:25==
3.3 Design Science Research Cycles
11
Figure 3.1: Design science research cycles [10]
complete some goal. It is within this environment that a problem is identified. This
context provides the requirements for the research but also assists in the definition of
the criteria on which the solution will be judged. As such, this cycle consists of both
defining requirements, but also of testing that these requirements are met. With each
test, it must be determined whether the problem has been sufficiently solved.
3.3.2
Rigor cycle
The rigor cycle ensures that the research is based on existing knowledge. The research
is required to draw on an existing knowledge base, which contains the expertise and
experience of previous research projects, as well as any existing artefacts in the applica-
tion domain. The rigor cycle ensures that any new discoveries are based on existing and
accepted knowledge, as well as makes explicit what new contributions are added to the
knowledge base.
3.3.3
Design cycle
The design cycle is the main part of any design science research project. It is during
this cycle that any artefacts are created. These are the actual solutions to the problems
being researched. The design cycle draws its requirements from the relevance cycle as
well as the existing theories and methods from the rigor cycle and combines these when
creating artefacts. These artefacts must, of course, also be tested thoroughly before
being field tested as part of the relevance cycle.
In essence, design science is used in order to; identify a problem, understand the
problem, attempt to solve the problem, and finally evaluate how well the problem has
==PAGE:26==
12
3 Methodology
been solved. All these activities are performed in a cyclical matter, and as such build
upon each other in order to get the best result.
3.4
Agile Design
The objective of agile software development is, in essence, to rapidly produce useful
software for the client. In 2001, a manifesto was proposed by a group of people, in
order to guide development of software towards a process more open to changes during
development. The manifesto contains four tenets, the main focus on which is to shift
focus from ”planning and documentation”, towards ”meaningful interactions” and devel-
oping software which works [1]. Robert C. Martin, one of the authors of the manifesto,
explains some of the ideas behind the manifest in his book Agile Principles, Patterns,
and Practices in C# [12]. These four tenets are the following:
”Individuals and interactions over processes and tools”
This point states that
it is more important to have people who can communicate and work well together, than
enforcing strict processes. A team should be built before defining the processes that
should guide their work.
”Working software over comprehensive documentation”
This point states that
the most important documentation for a system is the code. Obviously documenting
the code is important, however, often the focus is more on the documentation than in
writing good code. A balance needs to be made between documentation and code.
”Customer collaboration over contract negotiation”
It is almost impossible,
whilst writing code, to define a strict plan at the beginning, follow the plan, and finish
with a product providing a solution to all the customer’s problems. The focus shouldn’t
be on planning all the details from the start, but rather on collaborating with the client
during development, and making changes accordingly.
”Responding to change over following a plan”
It is, as stated above, extremely
important when developing code for a client, to be able to quickly react to any changes
that might arise. These changes often arise when a customer sees a function, created
to the specifications agreed upon. The code may have been written according to the
specifications, however, if the client realises something is missing, or may be solved in a
better way, it is important to be able to adapt to these changes.
Throughout this report, agile design has been used when developing code. In order
to aid the development process, user stories and features were written, and development
was done in weekly sprints, after which feedback on development was given.
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 4
State of the Art
This chapter gives an overview of existing state of the art in terms of research into
Microservices architecture (MSA). It explores established concepts, and creates a basis
of knowledge on which the rest of the thesis will be built upon.
4.1
Architectures
In order to properly define MSA it is important to first talk about monolithic archi-
tecture. This is due to the fact, that many challenges encountered whilst developing
monolithic software, are directly solved by using microservices architecture.
4.1.1
Monolithic architecture
The term monolithic is defined as ”consisting of one piece” [14]. Within computer science,
the term monolithic is sometimes used as a buzzword, and its meaning has changed over
time. Initially, the word was used to describe an application, which is designed as a
single-tiered application, and was deployed as a single artifact. In essence, this means
that any code written, will be written in the same project. Over time, the definition
of monolithic architecture has shifted away from purely single-tiered applications, and
towards multi-tiered applications as well. A multi-tiered application, means that the
code has been divided into a multitude of parts, such as a classic model-view-controller
layering. Dividing the code base in such a way, can make it easier to perform changes, or
add new features, since the code isn’t as highly coupled. However, it still runs as a single
unit of deployment, and scaling for performance requires deployment of a new instance
of the entire system [9]. Throughout this thesis, monoliths, or monolithic applications,
will refer to an application which has to be deployed as a single instance, and thus this
instance can be either single or multi-tiered.
4.1.2
Microservices architecture
As a contrast to the monolithic architecture is the MSA. This architecture is a service
based architecture, which focuses on creating services to solve a specific part of a problem.
The main point of the MSA is that each service runs in its own environment, and can be
deployed completely independently of any other services. The services are all capable of
contacting each other through a message queue or an API. In essence, this allows each
==PAGE:28==
14
4 State of the Art
service to be deployed independently of other services, and as many times as needed, in
order to scale the system according to traffic [6].
As described, microservices are applications which perform a single functionality well.
This means, when developing a microservice, it is important to maintain high cohesion
as well as keeping the services loosely coupled [18]. These terms are paramount when
developing microservices, and must be understood by any developer hoping to create a
microservice system.
Having a loosely coupled system, in short, means that any changes to a service
cannot result in changes to any consumers of the service.
This makes it easier for
multiple teams to simultaneously develop their respective services, without having to
worry about adapting integrations between services. This also means it is important to
reduce the amount of different messages that can be sent between services, since this
can inadvertently result in a tighter coupling.
In contrast to loose coupling, having high cohesion means that any functionality
which relates to one another, should be located in the same place. The reasoning for
this is quite simple. In case of any changes to behaviour, it is easier to only have to
make changes in a single place.
It is important to keep these requirements in mind when determining the boundaries
of the problem domain. When determining the domain, it can be useful to look at the
business logic of a system. This may seem obvious but it is extremely important, when
developing a microservice system, to divide each service with the utmost care. Having
to refactor the context bounds can be extremely costly, and this is the reason that many
developers suggest developing a monolithic system first, and slowly moving towards a
microservice system, once the domain is better defined. Decomposing the domain will
be described in depth later on in Section 4.4.
Figure 4.1 shows a basic overview of each architecture. Each box in the diagram
represents a deployed service. The figure shows how a monolithic application is built
in a somewhat siloed approach, where each service is contained within a single module.
This single module can then connect to a single database. In contrast, the microservice
diagram shows how each service can be hosted by itself. In addition to this, it also shows
that the database can be hosted in the same location as the service, or on a separate
server. Additionally, the diagram shows how duplicated services can share the same
database.
4.2
Monoliths vs Microservices
Some of the characteristics of the monolithic architecture described in Section 4.1 can
pose issues for a development team. These issues can be solved by using an MSA, and
are discussed in most papers on the benefits of microservices [6, 15, 20]. The following
section will focus on the descriptions provided in the paper Microservices: Yesterday,
Today, Tomorrow by Dragoni et.
al.
[3].
This paper provides a concise and clear
overview of the challenges posed by monoliths as well as how the MSA correspondingly
==PAGE:29==
4.2 Monoliths vs Microservices
15
Figure 4.1: A simple diagram showing the architectural differences between a monolith
and microservices.
https://martinfowler.com/articles/microservices.html
solves these. It should be stated that these challenges may be solved through other
means than using microservices, however, for the sake of this thesis, these solutions will
not be explored. The challenges they describe are:
1. Large monoliths are difficult to maintain due to their complexity and large code
base.
2. Monoliths often suffer from ”dependency hell” where adding or updating libraries
causes issues with compilation and running the system.
3. Any updates require redeploying the entire system, which in turn means high
downtime for large systems.
4. Limited scalability, such that any time traffic increases, a new instance of the entire
system must be deployed. This is sub-optimal if only a small part of the system
is being stressed.
5. Monoliths lock in the technology for developers. It is not trivial to mix and match
different languages together in a monolithic application.
These challenges directly correspond to the definition of MSA laid out by Dragoni
et. al. [3]. They directly define the MSA as the solutions it provides:
==PAGE:30==
16
4 State of the Art
1. A microservice has a single functionality and does that single thing well. This
means adding new features is as simple as adding a new service, and extending
existing features is mostly restricted to editing a limited part of the code base since
it should all exist within the single service. This also extends to testing for the
most part, since a service should be able to be tested in isolation from the rest of
the system.
2. Microservices can be deployed simultaneously alongside each other. This means,
adding new libraries, or updating existing ones, can be done gradually as the
system adapts to these updates.
3. A system built using MSA will never experience considerable downtime, since each
service can be redeployed independently of each other. Basically, any service can
be taken down and redeployed without significantly affecting other services. So
updates can happen seamlessly. This in turn also indicates that microservices lend
themselves well to continuous integration as well as continuous deployment.
4. Scaling an MSA system is easy since, as mentioned above, any amount of services
can be deployed simultaneously. This means, if traffic increases for a single service,
a new instance can be deployed in order to help balance the load. Once the traffic
subsides, this service can be taken down again without affecting any of the other
services.
5. The only constraint for microservice - in terms of technology - is the protocol
through which they communicate. This means that a system can consist of multiple
services utilizing various different technologies. So a developer can always choose
the technology that lends itself best to the functionality of the service.
Since things are so seemingly clear cut, it may be pertinent to ask; why use monoliths
at all? There are some features which do make it easier to work with monolith than
with microservices. Monoliths are especially more easy to work with during the initial
phases of development, when compared to MSA [20]. Since the code base is so small
it is easy to understand and implement changes. Deploying the application is as simple
as moving a single file to a server that can host it, and any scaling can be done by a
simple load balancer. However, this requires the code base to be reasonably small. All
these advantages begin to fade once the code base becomes increasingly complex. This
means that bug fixing becomes a difficult and time consuming process.
Given that it can be easier to work with, as well as implement changes to, a monolith
in the initial phases of development, it seems natural to want to start any project by
doing just that.
This gives rise to the Monolith First approach.
This approach is
described by Martin Fowler in his article ”MonolithFirst” [7]. Fowler writes that most
successful MSA systems have started out as monoliths, and as such this should always
be the starting point. Since it is impossible to avoid the so called microservice premium
[5] it is better to wait until necessary to utilize MSA. Fowler illustrates this with the
graph shown in Figure 2.1, showing how complexity of a system impacts the productivity
of a team.
==PAGE:31==
4.3 Migrating a monolith to microservices
17
Chris Richardson makes the same points, especially focused towards startups, that
an initial system should be developed as a monolith and later migrated towards an MSA
system later in its life-cycle [20]. This leads to the question; when and how should this
migration take place?
4.3
Migrating a monolith to microservices
Whether or not a system should initially be designed as a monolith or an MSA is
a widely discussed topic [7, 17].
Developing a system using microservices from the
beginning, means the development team avoids having to do a large refactor later on
in the development phase. However, this requires the development team to know the
exact bounds of the domain, and when and where to create new services. This is rarely
the case, and having to suddenly merge or split services can be extremely detrimental
to the development process. Sam Newman provides a thorough collection of patterns
which can be used in order to migrate from a monolith towards a microservices as well
as provides arguments for when each pattern should be used in his book ”Monoliths to
Microservices” [18].
4.3.1
The strangler fig
The strangler fig migration pattern, given its name by Martin Fowler, is based on a type
of fig. This fig will plant itself in the higher branches of a tree, and begin sending its
roots towards the ground. These roots will envelop the original tree, initially for support,
but eventually the tree will rot away and die.
This analogy is quite apt, in the sense that the monolith is the tree and the microser-
vices are the figs. The microservices will slowly grow around the monolith, until the
existing functionality has been completely moved to various microservices. The process
is a three step process, shown in Figure 4.2. Firstly, the functionality to move needs
to be identified. Secondly, a new microservice must be built, containing that function-
ality. This can be done either by copying code from the existing monolith, or writing
completely new code. Finally, calls are redirected to the microservice, instead of the
monolith.
This pattern is only really useful for migrating functionalities which lie at the perime-
ter of the monolith, since it is dependant on simply redirecting the external calls to a
new endpoint.
4.3.2
Branch by abstraction
This pattern is used when the functionality to be migrated lies deep within the monolith.
As opposed to the strangler fig pattern, this pattern is useful when drastic changes to
functionality are required. This could be done by creating a feature branch. A fea-
ture branch is essentially a version of the software, developed separately from the main
==PAGE:32==
18
4 State of the Art
Figure 4.2: An overview of the strangler fig pattern [18]
version, which, at a later date, is merged into the main version. However, Newman rec-
ommends using trunk based development, instead of having long lived feature branches.
Trunk based development, means always adding the newest code to a single version of
the system. This gives rise to the branch by abstraction pattern.
The process is quite simple. Step one is to set up an abstraction of the functionality
to be moved. The monolith must then be changed to implement this new abstraction.
After this, the new functionality must be implemented, in this case in the form of a
microservice. Once this has been completed, the monolith can switch to use the new
implementation, and the old implementation can be removed from the system. Keep in
mind that this development cycle is done whilst doing trunk based development, and as
such each step must not have any breaking changes.
4.3.3
Decorating collaborator
The decorating collaborator pattern is a useful pattern in cases where new functionality
is to be added to a system which hasn’t been migrated to a MSA yet. This functional-
ity must react to some behavior happening within the monolith, however, the behavior
cannot be moved. In this pattern a proxy is set up to intercept calls to and from the
monolith, which are then delegated to a microservice containing the new functionality.
The microservice can then react accordingly to the data extracted from the calls. New-
man states that this pattern should only be used in cases where the inbound or outbound
requests contain all the information required by the new microservice.
4.3.4
Change data capture
This pattern can be used as an alternative to the decorating collaborator. In cases where
there isn’t enough information in the request and response to the monolith, a microser-
vice can be set up to listen to the monolith’s datastore instead. As such, whenever a
==PAGE:33==
4.4 Decomposition
19
change in the database happens, a request is sent to a microservice. An example of this
could perhaps be that some action must be taken when a new customer is inserted into
a customer table.
A multitude of ways to migrate a monolith to a microservice exist, and not just the
ones described here. It is important to be able to properly determine which method fits
the needs of the migration being used. However, not only is the method used important,
but also where the monolith is split. This is where decomposition becomes relevant.
4.4
Decomposition
As previously mentioned, microservices are built around a single business capability.
The microservices act as components of the system. These microservices should have
a high cohesion internally and be decoupled from other microservices.
Therefore, it
is the general consensus to follow a domain-driven design process when developing a
microservice system. Part of a domain-driven design process is how to define the context
boundaries within the domain, which is referred to as decomposition. Sam Newman
uses the term Bounded Context. A bounded context is the idea that there exist multiple
contexts within any domain, and are essentially sub-domains within said domain. These
bounded contexts, consist of entities which do not need to be shared with other bounded
contexts, as well as explicitly defined interfaces for what can pass in and out of the
context [6, 16]. These bounded contexts make perfect candidates for microservices, as
they have high cohesion within the context and are decoupled from other contexts.
In his book Building Microservices [16], Sam Newman proposes a strategy for decom-
posing a domain, and how to identify these bounded contexts. He suggests looking at
business capabilities and considering how each of these would contribute to the function-
ality of the system. Newman uses the questions: ”What does this context do?” and ”So
what data does it need to do that?” to determine contribution to the functionality of the
system. Next, he suggests looking at which entities should be shared and which should
be hidden, within each context. He also mentions that entities can have a different
meaning in different contexts. For example, a product would be interpreted differently
in a finance and a warehouse context. For these ambiguous entities, it must be clear
which information is shared and which is not, as well as how they are mapped to the
other instances in other contexts.
Many might tend to rush the decomposition process. However, spending time and
resources on making a decomposition should be seen as an investment rather than an
expense. If the required time and work are not put into the decomposition, it ends up
as a premature decomposition, where the boundaries of the decomposition will have to
be changed. As mentioned, is changing the boundaries a costly process if the system has
already been implemented and it is generally not worth it in the long run. Therefore,
the decomposition should be made as right as possible the first time.
==PAGE:34==
20
4 State of the Art
4.5
Testing a microservice system
As with any system, a microservice system should also be validated through tests. How-
ever, a microservice system isn’t as straightforward to test as a monolithic system. This
is mainly because it is essentially split into small independent systems, making it a
distributed system.
To test the internal logic of a microservice, unit tests can be used, in a manner
similar to when unit testing a monolithic system. They are fast, cheap, and give precise
information about where errors have occurred. Ideally, as much internal service logic
should be tested, with unit tests, as possible.
However, the internal service logic of one microservice usually doesn’t makes up the
whole process of a user story, and as such unit tests can not verify the correctness of the
system alone. Other types of tests must be included.
Mike Cohn has created a model known as the testing pyramid, which can be seen
in Figure 4.3. It describes three types of automated tests, UI (also known as end-to-
end), service (also known as integration) and unit tests. Tests placed higher up in the
pyramid, provide more confidence of correctness, at the cost of development time. A
higher level also means that it spans more components of the system.
However, as
previously mentioned, the microservices are the components of the system. This makes
it even more problematic and expensive to perform end-to-end testing. Errors related to
distributed systems, such as network errors and race conditions may lead to brittle and
flaky tests. This brings ambiguity into the testing suite and makes it unreliable. Toby
Clemson suggests, that having infrastructure-as-code might help remove some of this
ambiguity. It would be possible to setup static network configuration and thus ensuring
that network problems are not related to the configuration of the network. However, he
mentions that it does not solve the problems associated with end-to-end testing.
Sam Newman and Toby Clemson proposes an alternative to extensive end-to-end
testing, namely Contract Testing. Usually, when integrating between two systems, de-
velopers will only have control over one of the systems. In addition, developers of the
two systems will not necessarily share the same goals and responsibility towards the
other system.
Imagine two systems: One of the systems is a generic accounting system mainly for
logging transactions, whereas the other system might be a web-shop. The web-shop
integrates with the accounting system to keep track of transactions, however the web-
shop is just one of many users of the accounting system. Therefore, the accounting
system will not feel a direct responsibility if the integration should fail, but rather say
it is the consumers responsibility to maintain the integration. The two systems will not
share a common goal, and neither of the development teams will feel responsible for the
correctness of the other team’s system. Yet is the web-shop dependent on the account
system in order to fulfill it’s business processes.
In a microservice system, microservice might have to integrate with other microser-
vices within the system. However, as microservices exists within in same the system
developers will have control of both parts of the integration. It might be that the mi-
==PAGE:35==
4.5 Testing a microservice system
21
Figure 4.3: Mike Cohn’s testing pyramid. Taken from Sam Newman’s book Building
Microservices [16].
croservices are developed and maintained by different teams, but these teams will share
the same goal and responsibility towards the entire system. This makes it possible to
perform contract testing within the microservice system.
With contract testing, the consumer will provide a set of tests for the producer.
These tests should merely check if any information is missing from the message, when
producing it. This way, the producer is held accountable towards the consumer, when
making changes to an endpoint as the contract test will fail. This makes it possible to
automatically notify the consumer development team and discuss how to proceed [2, 16].
==PAGE:36==
22
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 5
Technology
When creating a microservice system several types of technologies are needed: Container-
ization, inter-service communication, gateways, Continuous integration and deployment
(CI/CD) and container orchestration. This chapter describes in detail the technologies
used in this thesis. CI/CD and container orchestration are not explained, as deploy-
ment of a microservice system is not a part of the scope for this thesis. Each type of
technology will be discussed in terms of how it supports a microservice system. Based
on this discussion, specific technologies were chosen for this project.
5.1
Containerization
When discussing microservices, it is almost unavoidable to discuss virtualization. Vir-
tualization makes it possible to programmatically define the environments in which the
microservices are going to run. This can be done by using containers. A container is a
virtual environment designed to separate applications running on the same system. In
essence, a container contains all the required code and libraries required to run a spe-
cific application. This allows for multiple applications to be hosted on the same server,
without interfering with each other. By using a container engine, which runs on top
of the OS, it is more lightweight to deploy containers than it is to run multiple virtual
machines in parallel. Figure 5.1 shows how additional resources are required when using
virtual machines since each machine requires a host OS, whilst each container can run
on the base OS, as long as the container engine is present.
This is especially important when creating microservices, since it is important to be
able to quickly deploy additional instances of these. In addition to this, it is also possible
for containers to share resources, in the case that both containers require the same data.
For these reasons, it is largely beneficial to deploy microservices using containers. There
are multiple technologies available when selecting a containerization engine. However,
none are more ubiquitous than Docker. A survey conducted by Flexera reports that
close to two thirds of companies surveyed are currently using Docker, whilst around 10%
are planning to adopt Docker [4], and as such is Docker used in this project. An in
depth explanation of how Docker was used as a containerization engine will be given in
Section 7.2.1.
==PAGE:38==
24
5 Technology
Figure 5.1: Differences between virtual machines and containers [8].
5.2
Inter-service communication
As described in Chapter 4, services in a microservice system are required to be able
to communicate among each other. This communication will be referred to as inter-
service communication. In order to achieve inter-service communication, different types
of communication technologies can be used. Within a microservice system both REST
as well as a message bus can serve as inter-service communication, however, they each
have different properties.
REST is a widely recognized and popular protocol for communication. As such it is
easy to implement, the security of it is robust, and it is easily documented. Alternatively,
messaging can be used. Messaging creates an easy, lightweight method to implement an
event-driven system. This means that a service won’t act until a message is published,
that it needs to act upon.
When using REST, the requests being sent are synchronous. This means that, when-
ever a microservice is called, it is blocked until it receives a response. In addition to this,
REST creates a tight coupling between two services, as each request is sent directly to
each service. This goes against one of the main design principles of MSA; low coupling.
In contrast to this, using a message queue allows for non-blocking requests. Whenever
a message is published, no time is wasted waiting for a response, and as such the mi-
croservice is free to handle any other requests. Additionally, using a queue also creates
low coupling between services, since each microservice only need to know the location of
the message queue. They do not need to know anything about each other. A downside
to the message queue, is that it is a single point of failure. Since all messaging needs to
travel to and from the bus, and should it fail, no messages can be published or received.
Despite creating a single point of failure, message queues are almost always better
than using a RESTful service. The many advantages outweigh the disadvantage. Espe-
cially since, a service should always be replaced if it fails, given a container orchestrator
has been properly set up. This doesn’t mean that REST is useless when working with
microservices, as will be described in Section 5.3.
==PAGE:39==
5.3 Gateway
25
For the purpose of this thesis, both technologies will be used, however, solely mes-
saging will be used for inter-service communication, due to the advantages mentioned
above. The implementation of this will be described in Chapter 7.
5.3
Gateway
As a microservice system is a distributed system, most user interactions should be done
in a transparent way. This means the system should appear to the outside as a single
component. A way to do this with a microservice system, could be that each microservice
would expose an API. However, this would not be very transparent, as it would be
possible to see all the different microservices, as a consumer of the system. Additionally,
since each microservice is only responsible for a single part of the entire system, it might
be required to make calls to multiple microservices. To avoid clients having to make
multiple requests to the system a gateway could be used. A gateway is the entry point
to the microservice system, and is responsible for routing traffic to each microservice. If
multiple microservices need to be involved, in order to provide a sufficient answer, the
gateway will request data from all these microservices, and aggregate the information
into a single response. This will provide transparency to the microservice system, but
does not come free of cost. As with the message queue, a gateway will act as a single
point of failure. This single point of failure is, however, not as critical as the point of
failure related to the message queue. There are mainly two reasons for this. The first
reason is; a gateway does not help maintain state for the system. Should the gateway
crash, the state of the system would be unaffected. Secondly, a gateway is stateless.
In case of a system failure, or in case of heavy traffic, it is possible to deploy multiple
instances of the gateway. These two properties are required by a microservice system,
as a microservice system is expected to have as little downtime as possible.
There exist many ways to implement such gateway.
For this project it was cho-
sen to use an external framework called Ocelot to implement the gateway. A detailed
description of the implementation of this framework is given in Section 7.2.
==PAGE:40==
26
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 6
Example Domains
As part of the design science process, two example projects were created. These examples
projects are based on two different domains. The first domain is based on a legalization
web shop while the second domain is based on a consumer complaint web application.
Both domains are based on existing monolithic systems created by Knowledge Cube. For
simplicity, both domains have been reduced to only contain their main case scenarios
and have been made anonymous in order to protect the identity of the customer, as well
as not to reveal any business secrets. The purpose of this chapter, is to introduce the
reader to these two domains. A glossary for both domains can be found in Appendix A
and in Appendix B.
6.1
Legalization web shop
The first example is based on a legalization web shop domain. The web shop offers
products and services related to legalizing documents. By legalizing the documents, the
owner of the web shop will digitally sign the documents with a certificate, thus making it
possible for third parties to verify that the owner of web shop has approved the content
of the documents. These documents can be either digital or physical and might contain
either an electronic or a wet signature. The web shop is not limited to this single service
or product, as it is possible for administrators to add, edit, or delete the products sold
through the web shop.
Some products, such as the legalization product, requires a
caseworker to manually inspect the documents uploaded by the customer. Therefore, it
is possible for caseworkers to view and manage cases, which are tied to each purchase of
a product.
A model which describes the relations between the different entities of the domain
can be seen in Figure 6.1. The web shop offers products. These products can be bought
any number of times, thus establishing a one-to-many relation between product and
purchase. The purchase will always have a single receipt and a single case associated
with it.
Therefore, there is a one-to-one relation between products and the entities
receipt and case. It is possible for a customer to make multiple purchases, however
each purchase is always related to only a single customer. This creates a one-to-many
relation between the customer and the purchase entities. A case contains one or more
legal documents creating a one-to-many relation between the case and the legal document
entities. All legal documents are signed with a signature. Therefore, there is a one-to-
one relation between legal documents and signature. Signatures can either be of the
==PAGE:42==
28
6 Example Domains
type wet or electronic, which creates an inheritance relation between signature, wet, and
electronic. Receipt and legal documents are both documents and as such is there also an
inheritance relation between the document, the receipt and the legal document entities.
The main product of the web shop is the legalization product, which is that of
purchasing digital signatures for documents. There are other products and processes
in the system, however, this is the most important and is therefore described in more
detail. The legalization process is illustrated in Figure 6.2.
The legalization process is initiated by the customer. The customer will select the
legalization product, fill in personal details, and finally purchase the product. When
the customer purchases the product an event is triggered which sends a message to
the system which creates a case for that purchase. After the purchase, the customer
uploads either one or more documents to the system. A caseworker reviews the case and
determines whether the documents can be legalized or not. If the documents are eligible
the caseworker will sign the documents thus legalizing them. When the documents have
been legalized the caseworker will return them to the customer, thereby ending the
legalization flow.
Figure 6.1: Legalization domain model
==PAGE:43==
6.1 Legalization web shop
29
Figure 6.2: Legalization process in BPMN
==PAGE:44==
30
6 Example Domains
6.2
Consumer Complaint Domain
The second example is based on a consumer complaint system, which will be referred to
as a complaint system. The following will give an overview of how the system is used.
The complaint system is created to help solve disputes between consumers and com-
panies. These disputes could be a disagreement about a defect product to be refunded.
After a complaint has been registered it is sent to a board of lawyers, which will try and
find a solution to the dispute. The consumer will henceforth be known as the claimant of
the complaint, whilst the company will be referred to as the respondent. The employees
of the board of lawyers is known as case workers.
The complaint process start off with the claimant filling in a complaint regarding
a respondent. The complaint consist of contact information for both the claimant and
the respondent along with general information about the dispute such as price and date
of purchase. Along with this information, a statement must be included, regarding the
claimant’s point of view of the dispute. After the claimant has filled in the information,
the complaint is given to the respondent who must also provide a statement regarding
the dispute. After both statements have been submitted, the complaint is sent to an
external case management system. In this external system, a case worker will pickup
the case and find a solution from a legal perspective.
It is important to emphasize that the case management system is an external system
provided by a third party, as this affects how the complaint system can integrate with
the case management system.
In order to provide a better understanding, the domain model seen in Figure 6.3
was drawn. The complaint is created when the claimant submits a complaint. Thus
there is a single-to-many relation between the claimant and the complaint entity. The
claimant creates the complaint about a respondent, thus creating a one-to-many relation
between respondent and complaint. When a statement from both the claimant and the
respondent has been given a case is started. This creates one-to-one relation between
case and complaint. Not much is known about the external case management system,
but it is known that a case worker will be assigned the case. This means there is a
one-to-many relation between case worker and case.
Both of the described domains will be used as a base for implementing the example
projects, which are documented in the following chapters.
==PAGE:45==
6.2 Consumer Complaint Domain
31
Figure 6.3: Domain model for the consumer complaint domain
==PAGE:46==
32
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 7
Example 1
This chapter describes how the first example project was designed and implemented.
The example project is based on the legalization web shop domain which described
in Chapter 6. The general development of the example project is based on the agile
method described in Section 3.4. The development processes have been influenced by
KC’s development processes as this project is made in collaboration with KC.
7.1
Design
This section will describe the design process and describe the overall structure of the
system as a result of the design process.
7.1.1
Process
The first step for designing the system, was to define user stories as formal requirements
for the system. These user stories would normally be defined in close collaboration with
the client of the system. However, this was not possible in this project. Instead KC
acted as the client for the system, as they possessed the same knowledge as the client did,
when the system was initially developed. The existing system’s development process is
documented in a prioritized list of user stories and sprints. The user stories for this
example project, have been written based on the stories from this list, in order to get
an authentic agile experience. The user stories have, however, been formulated in an
anonymous way to not reveal any business secrets, for either KC or the real client. The
users stories used for this example project can been seen in Appendix C. Due to the
system having to remain anonymous, the method used to migrate it had to be modified
slightly. Throughout development of the example systems, the closest migration pattern
used was the strangler fig pattern, mentioned in Section 4.3. This is due to the fact
that existing functionalities are extracted and implemented as microservices. However,
an integration to the existing system could not be created in order to maintain as high
anonymity as possible. Instead, the system was implemented as a greenfield system.
==PAGE:48==
34
7 Example 1
7.1.2
Decomposition
Based on the domain model and the user stories a decomposition was made. The de-
composition was based on the process described in Section 4.4. This process resulted in
splitting the domain into microservices as seen in Figure 7.1. The following will explain
the figure by explaining the process of splitting the legalization domain.
The goal of the system is to have low coupling between microservices and have high
cohesion internally in each microservice.
Additionally, microservices should be built
around business capabilities, which in this project were defined through the previously
mentioned user stories.
At first it was proposed to combine Product, Purchase and Customer as they seemed
related to the same type of business processes. However, it was decided to move Product
into a microservice of it’s own as product might contain different information in different
contexts.
In a web shop context, a product might be related to information about
selling a product, such as price, product description, amount in stock. However, in a
financial context, the product might rather be related to the actual purchase and contain
information such as price, customer, payment info.
Furthermore, it was clear that there should be a microservice responsible for handling
cases, as well as a microservice for handling documents. Before implementing the system,
the context boundaries for both of the microservices seemed clear-cut.
However, in
hindsight, the boundaries were not that well defined. In Figure 7.1 it can be seen that
Legal Document exists in both the Document and the Case microservice. This is because
the Legal Document relates to two contexts. It relates to the legalization process seen
in seen in Figure 6.2, which is the case context.
However, it also relates to simply
existing as a document, which is the document context. In both of the contexts, the
same information is stored, which it should not have been. In general, microservices
should only store data which is needed to complete the underlying business processes.
The case microservice has no need to actually view the document, it should only know
whether or not the document exists, as well as whether or not it has been signed. As
such the case microservice should not have stored the actual document data. In terms of
the document microservice, it should not have stored any information related to the case
processing. It would also have been a possibility to remove the document microservice
and put Receipt into the Purchase microservice and keep Legal Document in the Case
microservice.
7.1.3
Components
An overview of the system components is shown in Figure 7.2. The overall structure
of the system is based on the structure found in the guide ”Designing and Develop-
ing Multi-Container and Microservice-Based .NET Applications”[13] by Microsoft. A
characteristic of a microservice system, is that each microservice is a component of the
system. This system consists of four microservices. Each of these microservices have
their own database. For the simplicity of this project, these databases are hosted in a
single Docker container. However, as mentioned in Section 7.2.1, having databases in a
==PAGE:49==
7.1 Design
35
Figure 7.1: Decomposition for the legalization web shop project
Docker container is not recommended as there is a risk of losing data. The system also
consists of a message queue, which is hosted in a Docker container. The microservices
use this message queue to communicate asynchronously with each other as described
in Section 5.2. In order to maintain transparency of the system, a gateway is added,
which acts as a single point of entry for the system. The gateway forwards external http
requests to the REST endpoint of the relevant microservice. Finally, there is a front-end
which makes http requests to the system and displays the results to the user.
Figure 7.2: Components of the legalization web shop system
==PAGE:50==
36
7 Example 1
7.1.4
Onion Architecture
Since the system on which this example is based was designed using a specific architecture
it seemed natural to preserve that architecture when transferring it to an MSA. The
original system was based on an architecture proposed by Jeffery Palermo known as the
onion architecture. This architecture is called such since it is based on various layers, like
an onion [19]. This led to each microservice being modelled after the onion architecture
during development. A diagram of the architecture can be seen in Figure 7.3 and will
be described in the following section.
Figure 7.3: Diagram of the onion architecture
https://dzone.com/articles/onion-architecture-is-interesting
The center of the so called onion is the application core.
It is within this, that
the domain model and services are defined. For this implementation this is where the
database entities are defined, as well as any business logic. The business logic is typically
found within a so called service class, which is not to be confused with a microservice.
The next layer is the infrastructure layer. This layer contains access to the database.
In the case of the web shop domain it is in this layer the database context and repository
classes, which define which entities should be stored in the database, as well as how they
should be saved and retrieved is defined.
Finally, there is the web layer. In the case of prototype one, since there is no front
end as a part of any of the microservices, this layer has been named control. This is the
user’s point of access. Within this layer controller classes are placed, as well as consumers
for MassTransit. In addition to this it also contains factories, which aid transformation
of data sent by the user, to become data which can be used by the services in core.
==PAGE:51==
7.2 Implementation
37
7.2
Implementation
This section describes how the first example project is implemented. It will cover how
several frameworks how been configured generally for the whole microservice system as
well as how they have been configured for the individual microservices. Finally, it will
show the general implementation of a microservice.
7.2.1
Docker
As mentioned in Section 5.1, Docker was chosen as a containerization engine for this
project. It was chosen as it is lightweight and, as mentioned in Section 5.1, it is broadly
used in the industry. Docker uses Dockerfiles and images to configure containers. The
Dockerfiles are usually created and modified by developers where the images are usually
provided by third parties if not provided by Docker itself. The images can be seen as
the operating system of the container and can come with any pre-installed software such
as SDK’s, databases, etc.
For simplicity, it was chosen to place the databases in a single Docker container. This
is makes it easier for developers to setup their local development environment. However,
this should not be done in production. The reason for this is mainly that there is a risk
of data loss associated with running the database in a container. Furthermore, it adds
unnecessary complexity to the production environment, which is not ideal [13][22].
Dockerfiles
In order to utilize containers it is important to be able to define and build the environ-
ments that they should run. Defining a container’s environment is done using some type
of manifest file, for Docker containers this file is called a Dockerfile. This file defines what
environment should be virtualized in the container, as well as how an application should
be built therein. An example of such a file can be seen in Listing 7.1. Going through
each line of this listing gives a nice overview of the basic functions of a Dockerfile.
The first four lines are fairly simple. The first line retrieves the image to be used to
build the container, in this case .NET core version 3.1 and sets an alias base. On line 2
the working directory for the container is set to be /app, and on the following lines it
exposes port 80 and port 443 for http and https requests.
Lines 6 to 14 define the build step of the application to be run within the container.
It pulls the .NET core SDK image which contains the tools required to build a core
application. Now the working directory is set to /src. Lines 8, 9, and 10 define steps in
which the project files are copied from a local directory, into a directory in the container.
From this directory it is now possible to run a dotnet restore in order to ensure required
tools and dependencies are present.
Finally, it copies everything from the working
directory where the docker build command is issued, relative to the build context that is
passed to it, and copies it to the current working directory of the Docker image in order
to build. Line 14 simply states to build a Release version of the project output to the
==PAGE:52==
38
7 Example 1
/app/build directory. The final stage reuses the base specified in the beginning. This
step specifies what to include in the image to use for the container. It only copies from
publish since it doesn’t need all the build tools in order to run. This makes the image
more lightweight.
1 FROM mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/core/aspnet:3.1-buster-slim AS base
2 WORKDIR /app
3 EXPOSE 80
4 EXPOSE 443
5
6 FROM mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/core/sdk:3.1-buster AS build
7 WORKDIR /src
8 COPY ["DocumentService/Documents.Control/Documents.Control.csproj", "
Documents.Control/"]
9 COPY ["DocumentService/Documents.Infrastructure/Documents.Infrastructure.
csproj", "Documents.Infrastructure/"]
10 COPY ["DocumentService/Documents.Core/Documents.Core.csproj", "Documents.
Core/"]
11 RUN dotnet restore "Documents.Control/Documents.Control.csproj"
12 COPY . .
13 WORKDIR "/src/DocumentService/Documents.Control"
14 RUN dotnet build "Documents.Control.csproj" -c Release -o /app/build
15
16 FROM build AS publish
17 RUN dotnet publish "Documents.Control.csproj" -c Release -o /app/publish
18
19 FROM base AS final
20 WORKDIR /app
21 COPY --from=publish /app/publish .
22 ENTRYPOINT ["dotnet", "Documents.Control.dll"]
Listing 7.1: Dockerfile for the document service of example project one
Each service made for the first prototype, contains a Dockerfile such as the one from
Listing 7.1. These files help build each individual container. However, each container
requires a command to be run in order to build it. It would be easier if a single command
could orchestrate the deployment of all services simultaneously.
Docker Compose
In order to build and deploy multiple docker containers at the same time, Docker Com-
pose can be utilized. Docker Compose is a tool used to define and run multi-container
Docker applications. Using compose is a basic three step process. Firstly, each service
requires a Dockerfile. Secondly, a Docker Compose YAML file must be defined. It is
within this file the rules for deployment are defined. Finally, docker-compose up starts
and runs the entire application. It is important to properly define the Docker Compose
YAML file, since it is here build and deployment is defined. For the first prototype a
fairly simple Docker Compose file was defined, seen in Listing 7.2. For simplicity, some
services have been omitted from the actual file.
==PAGE:53==
7.2 Implementation
39
1 version: '3.4'
2
3 services:
4
api:
5
image: ${DOCKER_REGISTRY -}api
6
build:
7
context: API/
8
container_name: "APIGateway"
9
10
documents.control:
11
image: ${DOCKER_REGISTRY -}documentscontrol
12
build:
13
context: DocumentService/Documents.Control/
14
container_name: "DocumentsService"
15
depends_on:
16
- db
17
- rabbitmq
18
19
db:
20
image: "mcr.microsoft.com/mssql/server"
21
environment:
22
SA_PASSWORD: "ComplexPW2019!"
23
ACCEPT_EULA: "Y"
24
ports:
25
- "3306:1433"
26
container_name: "Database"
27
28
rabbitmq:
29
image: "rabbitmq:3-management"
30
ports:
31
- "15672:15672"
32
container_name: rabbitmq
Listing 7.2: docker-compose file for the first prototype application
This Docker Compose file specifies four different containers, or as called within the file,
services:
• api
• documents.control
• db
• rabbitmq
The first option specified within each service is the image option. This specifies where
the image can be retrieved. The ${DOCKER_REGISTRY-} environment variable can be set
in order to retrieve the images from a shared location. In the case of db and rabbitmq,
their images are retrieved from a remote server. The build option specifies how to build
the container. This is only important for containers which are defined by the application,
since the db and rabbitmq images are fetched elsewhere. The context specified in the
==PAGE:54==
40
7 Example 1
build option contains a path to a directory containing a Dockerfile, but could also contain
a url to a repository which contains the required Dockerfile. The container_name option
is used to give the container a recognizable name. Finally, the depend_on option specifies,
that a service is dependant upon other services, and therefore must wait for these services
to be started, before this service can be started. For the db service some environment
variables must be set. In this case a password for the user sa (which in any production
file would not be written as plain text here, but retrieved from a secret key store) as well
as acceptance of some terms and agreements. Other images may have other environment
variables which would be specified in the same way. For the rabbitmq service a port has
been forwarded. Basically this states that when accessing the system at port 3306 the
user will be forwarded to the rabbitmq service on port 1433, which is the default port
used to access the rabbitmq dashboard.
Using this file, it is now possible, whenever a new service is defined, to have it
be started alongside all other services, with a single command, instead of having to
start each service individually.
The Docker Compose file can also contain environ-
ment variables such as database connection strings. In addition, it is possible to de-
fine multiple Docker Compose files, depending on which environment is being deployed
to. This way different variables can be set for test environment as opposed to produc-
tion environment. The structure of the file is the same, it must simply be renamed to
docker-compose.{environmentname}.yml, where {environmentname} is replaced by
the environment being deployed to.
7.2.2
RabbitMQ
When determining how services should communicate, it seems prudent to examine the
requirements of an MSA system. Each service in such a system must be loosely coupled
and easy to scale. Additionally, in case of a service failing, it should still be possible for
the rest of the system to continue. These characteristics can all be maintained by using
messaging for communication between services, as opposed to REST.
Messaging allows for asynchronous communication between services, by using what
is known as a message broker. For this implementation a framework called RabbitMQ
was used. This tool sets up a message broker which is ready for use immediately. As seen
in Listing 7.2 there even exists a pre-existing Docker image which automatically sets up
the broker. This broker facilitates a variety of different messaging protocols. For this
implementation, the AMQP 0-9-1 protocol is used. Figure 7.4 shows a simple version of
the protocol, taken from the RabbitMQ documentation. In brief, this model consists of
publishers and consumers. A publisher is an agent who publishes messages to the broker.
These messages are then routed from an exchange to a queue both located within the
broker. These messages can then be consumed by a consumer. Once a consumer has
consumed the message, it will automatically notify the broker, so the broker is certain
that the message has been delivered properly.
In regards to microservices, whenever they need to communicate with a separate
service it is possible to simply send a message which the receiving service can consume.
==PAGE:55==
7.2 Implementation
41
Figure 7.4: Diagram of the AMQP 0-9-1 protocol
https://www.rabbitmq.com/tutorials/amqp-concepts.html
Since it isn’t a requirement that a response must be given to the publisher, the publisher
is not blocked by this message. Similarly, since the broker will hold on to message until
it has been delivered, even if the consumer is down, it will eventually receive the message
once it is up and running again.
MassTransit
In order to ease the setup process of this messaging broker system, a framework called
MassTransit was used. This tool is made for setting up messaging system using .NET
core. MassTransit automatically sets up a lot of the configuration needed for RabbitMQ,
this includes concurrency, connection management, error handling, and serialization.
This tool is ideal since the goal of this thesis is to make setting up microservices as
simple and pain free as possible.
Setting up MassTransit is fairly simple. Listing 7.3 shows the setup for one of the
services used for this implementation.
==PAGE:56==
42
7 Example 1
1 public static void ConfigureMassTransit(this IServiceCollection services)
2 {
3
services.AddMassTransit(x =>
4
{
5
x.AddConsumer <ReceiptConsumer >();
6
x.AddConsumer <LegalizationConsumer >();
7
x.AddBus(provider => Bus.Factory.CreateUsingRabbitMq(cfg =>
8
{
9
cfg.Host("rabbitmq");
10
cfg.ReceiveEndpoint("generate -receipt", e =>
11
{
12
e.Consumer <ReceiptConsumer >(provider);
13
});
14
cfg.ReceiveEndpoint("generate -legalization", e =>
15
{
16
e.Consumer <LegalizationConsumer >(provider);
17
});
18
}));
19
});
20
21
services.AddSingleton <IHostedService , BusService >();
22 }
Listing 7.3: Configuration file for MassTransit for the Document service
The ConfigureMassTransit method registers the required components to the service
collection during startup of the application. On lines 5 and 6, all consumers which are
part of the service are registered. Hereafter, a service bus is registered. This is where
MassTransit sets up the RabbitMQ broker. Within this configuration, the RabbitMQ
host must be specified. As part of the docker setup, this service can be found using
its container name, which in this case is simply rabbitmq. After the host has been
specified, each queue must be set up as an endpoint to receive messages. Each endpoint
has a registered consumer, which can consume the messages delivered to the respective
endpoint. Finally a bus service is registered, which is used to transport messages. This
is the basics of the setup process for MassTransit. However, in order to utilize messaging,
the consumers must be defined. This is done by creating a class which implements the
IConsumer interface supplied by MassTransit. The consumer must also specify exactly
what type of message it can consume. Whenever such a message is consumed, it will call
the Consume() method defined in the consumer class, which can then perform whatever
action is required.
The queues set up by MassTransit are durable. This means that any message pub-
lished to it will be routed to all queues registered on that exchange. This allows for
multiple consumers to consume the same message if needed. If this is not ideal for the
specific system, it is possible to set up a direct exchange. A direct exchange will route
each message to a specific queue based on a routing key. So only consumers listening
on that specific queue will receive the message. This means that a message will remain
in the queue until it has been consumed or deleted. In addition to this, it is possible
to define when a consumer has successfully consumed a message. In case the service
==PAGE:57==
7.2 Implementation
43
throws an exception before the message has been successfully consumed, the exception
will propagate back to the queue, and the message will be moved to an error queue
alongside a log of the exception.
MassTransit’s messaging system is split in two different types of messages, commands
and events. Commands are defined as direct messages which are meant for a specific ser-
vice, whereas events are broadcast so all services can read them. For this implementation
only commands have been used.
7.2.3
Swagger
Swagger is a simple tool, used to visualize a system’s API. The way the first example
project is built it is set up, such that intercommunication between services utilizes mes-
saging, however whenever an end user wants to send a request to the system it uses
REST. Swagger creates a basic front end which shows all available REST endpoints,
and allows them to be called, without having to implement any additional front end. In
order to include swagger in this implementation, a framework called Swashbuckle was
used. This is a tool created for .NET products in order to facilitate setup of Swagger.
Using this tool Swagger is automatically setup, without requiring any additional config-
uration from the developer. It must simply be added to the startup file of the project.
Based on the swagger file generated an Angular frontend were implemented.
Ocelot
Ocelot is a .NET API gateway designed specifically with microservices in mind.
It
allows developers to specify the access points for each service which should be exposed
to outside the system. Ocelot will automatically reroute requests, made to the access
points, directly to the responsible service which can handle such a request. With the
right configuration it is also possible to use Ocelot to load balance the requests. However,
for simplicity have this not been done.
In addition to Ocelot, an extension was used called SwaggerForOcelot. This extension
generates a normal Swagger UI using the service endpoints specified for Ocelot.
In
essence, this allows the gateway to consolidate all the service REST endpoints on a
single swagger page. However, for a larger system this probably wouldn’t be wanted,
since the purpose of a gateway is to only expose the endpoints which the user should
be able to access, and then the gateway should be able to distribute calls made to the
respective services.
Ocelot also supports service discovery. When using this, each service will register
itself with the gateway, instead of the gateway having to know where each service is
located on start up. However, for simplicity’s sake, this has not been utilized for the
development of this system. Instead, the following ocelot file has each service manually
configured. The file can be seen in Listing 7.4, and, as with Listing 7.2, this is only an
excerpt of the full file.
==PAGE:58==
44
7 Example 1
1 {
2
"ReRoutes": [
3
{
4
"DownstreamPathTemplate": "/document",
5
"DownstreamScheme": "http",
6
"DownstreamHostAndPorts": [
7
{
8
"Host": "documents.control",
9
"Port": 80
10
}
11
],
12
"UpstreamPathTemplate": "/document",
13
"UpstreamHttpMethod": [ "Get", "Post", "Put" ],
14
"SwaggerKey": "document"
15
},
16
{
17
"DownstreamPathTemplate": "/document/{everything}",
18
"DownstreamScheme": "http",
19
"DownstreamHostAndPorts": [
20
{
21
"Host": "documents.control",
22
"Port": 80
23
}
24
],
25
"UpstreamPathTemplate": "/document/{everything}",
26
"UpstreamHttpMethod": [ "Get", "Post", "Put" ],
27
"SwaggerKey": "document"
28
}
29
],
30
31
"SwaggerEndPoints": [
32
{
33
"Key": "document",
34
"Config": [
35
{
36
"Name": "Document API",
37
"Version": "v1",
38
"Url": "http://documents.control:80/swagger/v1/swagger.json"
39
}
40
]
41
}
42
]
43 }
Listing 7.4: Ocelot configuration file for prototype one
The ReRoutes key in this json file specifies an upstream and downstream for the
gateway endpoints.
It tells the gateway where a user might try to access a service
and when a user does this, where to redirect the request. In addition to this there is a
SwaggerEndPoints key. This aids configuration of Swagger for the gateway. Each Swag-
ger endpoint points to a Swagger json file defined in a microservice. The gateway can
==PAGE:59==
7.2 Implementation
45
then determine which endpoints the service can be accessed at, and create corresponding
endpoints on the gateway. As stated previously, this most likely isn’t something to be
used for production, but can be nice for development, for easy access to each service
from a single point.
==PAGE:60==
46
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 8
Template Design
This chapter describes how the microservice template was created, aided by the previ-
ously described example system. The template was designed by examining the example
project, and determining which components lent themselves to be generated automati-
cally.
8.1
Initial Template
Developing the initial template was done using the experience gained whilst developing
the first MSA system.
The main focus here was to create an easy way to set up
new MSA systems. It was determined that the template should be divided into two
separate templates, since the gateway would only have to be set up once, whilst multiple
microservices would need to be created. It was chosen to use the .Net template engine
to create these code templates.
8.1.1
Gateway Template
Since the gateway is the component which consolidates all of the microservices, a decision
was made to create the template for this first. After the gateway template had been
created, it would be be possible to create a template that adds microservices.
The initial step towards creating this gateway template, was to plan out the features
to be included. For the gateway template, it was determined that components, which
were generally needed by a microservice, should be generated automatically.
These
components are; the gateway project, the Docker Compose project, the Ocelot file, and
a shared project for messages.
Since a gateway had already been made, as described in Chapter 7, nothing had to be
created from scratch. It was simply a question of removing code specific to the domain
of that system. However, the only code specific to the domain described in Chapter 7
was found in the Ocelot file, the services defined in the Docker Compose file, as well as
a connection to the front-end in the gateway project. Once these files had been pruned,
the gateway template was finished. This means, any gateway created using the template,
would be configured the same was as the gateway described in Section 6.1.
As such, whenever this template is used it will provide; a gateway, ready to forward
requests to and from any microservices, a database container, to host any databases, as
well as a message broker, in order to route messages between microservices.
==PAGE:62==
48
8 Template Design
8.1.2
Microservice Template
The template to create the actual microservices, was a bit more complicated. Since a
microservice is very domain specific, it was important to carefully determine what should
be automatically generated, and what shouldn’t. In addition to this, it was decided to
eliminate the multiple C# projects for each microservice, and consolidate them into a
single project. This meant that each microservice was contained within a single C#
project. After this step, in order to better structure what the microservice would need,
empty directories were added to the project. Most of these directories would go on to
remain empty, however, they provided a clear view of what components would be able
to be automatically generated.
Since the idea behind the templates is to decrease time spent writing initial configu-
rations, it stands to reason that most of what is automatically generated will be related
to this. The first two candidates, since they are set up by the gateway, were connections
to the RabbitMQ bus as well as connecting to the hosted database container. These
two connections could easily be generated automatically, since they are set when the
gateway is created, and as such, shouldn’t change from microservice to microservice.
Additionally, a variety of base classes, could be generated automatically.
These
classes are used to help streamline setup of new entities and domain service classes. Use
of these will be explained in 9. However, no actual entities or services could be included
since these would vary based on the domain. It was considered to generate both of these
automatically, based on the source name provided when generating the microservice.
So if, for instance, a document microservice was created, this service would include an
entity Document as well as a service class DocumentService. However, these classes
would need to be altered in specification to the domain anyway, so were omitted from
the template.
No controller was added, since not all microservices would need to have REST end-
points.
However, a producer was included, since almost all microservices should be
publishing messages at some point.
8.2
The .NET Core Template Engine
The previous sections discuss the design and the creation of the templates. Actually
implementing the templates was done by using the .NET Core Template Engine, which
is a part of the .NET Core CLI [23]. This tool allows for creation of templates, containing
boilerplate code, which can be generated through the CLI. The making of the templates
were much inspired by the Angular CLI 1 tool, as this can generate a whole front-end
with just a single command.
The process of creating such a template is quite simple. Any C# project can be
turned into a template, by simply ensuring there is a .template.config directory within
the project.
This directory must contain a single file: template.json.
This file is
1https://cli.angular.io/
==PAGE:63==
8.2 The .NET Core Template Engine
49
shown in Listing 8.1.
This file contains a variety of information, such as the name
of the template, as well as what name should be used when creating a new instance
of the template. These are the name and shortName keys respectively. Additionally,
a sourceNameis specified in this file.
The source name can be used as a key word
throughout any file within the template. When using the template, any section of code
or filename that contains the source name will be replaced with whatever name has been
specified for the microservice. Additionally, on line 19 where the source target i specified,
the source name has also been used. This means that whenever a microservice is created
using this template, it is placed within the Microservices folder inside a directory with
the same name as the name specified for the project.
Finally, it is also possible to
add postActions. These are actions which will run after the project has been created.
This could an action such as dotnet restorein order to ensure any dependencies are
properly installed. Listing 8.1 does not contain any post actions.
1 {
2
"$schema": "http://json.schemastore.org/template",
3
"author": "Alexander Armstrong and Mathias Assmussen",
4
"classifications": [
5
"Microservice"
6
],
7
"identity": "ExampleTemplate.MicroservicesTemplate",
8
"name": "Microservices template",
9
"shortName": "ms",
10
"tags": {
11
"language": "C#",
12
"type": "project"
13
},
14
"sourceName": "MSSourceName",
15
"preferNameDirectory": false,
16
"sources": [
17
{
18
"source": "./",
19
"target": "Microservices/MSSourceName",
20
"modifiers": [
21
{
22
"exclude": [
23
".git/**",
24
"README.md"
25
]
26
}
27
]
28
}
29
]
30 }
Listing 8.1: template.json file for the microservice template.
Once the template has been completed, it must be installed in order to be able to be
used with the CLI. This can be done using a simple command: dotnet new -i <PATH-TO-
TEMPLATE-CODE>. Once this command has been run, it is possible to create a new project
using the template the same way any of the default templates are used: dotnet new ms -
==PAGE:64==
50
8 Template Design
n <PROJECT-NAME>. This command would create a new microservice project, based on the
configuration specified in the template.json file.
8.3
Example 2 - Using the Template
With the templates completed, it was time to test them. This was done by implementing
the domain described in Section 6.2. This domain consisted of a complaint system, in
which any submitted complaints should be synchronized with an external case system.
The development process of the example followed an agile development process and used
user stories to define the requirements for the system, just as with example project one.
These stories can be seen in Appendix D.
8.3.1
Design
The planning of this system was largely the same as described in Chapter 7. As such,
most of the details of the planning won’t be repeated here. The domain decomposition
can be seen in Figure 8.1. This figure shows that complaints, claimants, and respondents
are all serviced by a single complaint service. In addition, since it is done by an external
system, cases are handled by a single service.
However, it should be noted that an
additional service has been added. This service, the synchronization service, is a service
solely used to administrate the synchronization of complaints and cases. This service
was created since it was determined that the synchronization of cases and complaints
should neither be the sole responsibility of the complaint service nor the case service.
Additionally, there exists a restriction that the case service cannot call the complaint
system itself. Instead, the complaint system, must always request data from the case
system. This requirement was set by the client, and as such, could not be changed.
Finally, splitting the synchronization into its own service provides the opportunity to be
able to scale it independently of the complaint service and the email service.
Figure 8.1: Decomposition of complaint domain
==PAGE:65==
8.3 Example 2 - Using the Template
51
8.3.2
Implementation
In terms of implementation, the gateway and the complaint service work similar to the
services described in Section 7.2. The only difference is that they have been created using
the templates described earlier, and as such are structured according to the template
structure. Therefore, this service will not be the focus. Instead the focus will be on how
the synchronization service has been implemented.
As mentioned in Section 8.3.1 the synchronization service’s job is to ensure that the
status of a case and the status of a complaint is the same. This meant that it required
a connection to both the complaint service, as well as the case service. Since the case
service is an external system, it doesn’t communicate with this using the message queue,
but rather using a REST endpoint. A framework was used to generate a client which can
connect to this case service and make any request defined within this service. In order to
be able to communicate with the complaint service two different types of messages were
defined. A message so the complaint service can tell the synchronization service that a
complaint has been made that needs to be sent to the case service. Another message
was made so the synchronization service could tell the complaint service that a case has
been updated, and that the complaint should therefore also be updated.
Figure 8.2: Sequence diagram of the synchronization between the complaint service and
the case service
A sequence diagram was drawn, showing the main scenario of the system, seen in
Figure 8.2. This figure shows the sequence of events between the three services. In this
figure REST request are shown in red, whilst messages are shown in blue. The message
==PAGE:66==
52
8 Template Design
bus has been omitted in order to increase clarity of the figure. The blue arrows represent
a message being published from one service and consumed at another.
Since a complaint needs to be sent from the complaint service to the case service,
all data recorded on the complaint service, is sent to the synchronization service. Here
a new synchronization entity can be saved. Since the synchronization service is only
interested in synchronizing, it only needs to store the id, as well as any properties which
can be updated, in this case only the status. However, the message from the complaint
service is forwarded to the case service. The response from this request contains the id
that the case has been given by the case client, which, in turn, is stored alongside the
complaint id, in the synchronization service’s database.
In addition to this, it is also the synchronization service’s job to poll the case client
every now and then, to determine whether the status of a case has been updated. For
the sake of simplicity, no automatic polling was implemented. Instead a controller was
added to the synchronization service, from which a call could be made to activate the
synchronization. Whenever the case client returns any cases with a different status, the
synchronization service will update its own database, and publish a message stating that
the status has been updated. Interestingly, this means that the synchronization service
is completely hidden from the gateway. As such, it is an example of a service which is
only accessed via another microservice.
Additionally, as can also be seen in Figure 8.3, an email service was included. This
microservice’s only function is to listen for published messages regarding the status of
a complaint.
If a message of such a type is published, it will send an email to the
claimant, specifying that there has been a change to the complaint status. This makes
it important that the messages are published as events and not commands, since more
than a single microservice reacts to the messages. If the messages were sent directly from
the synchronization service to the complaint service as a command, the email service
would never receive word about the updated status. Alternatively, this could have been
handled by implementing a new message to send to the email service, however, since
this can be avoided, there is no need to make communication more complicated than
necessary.
The result of the implementation described can be seen in Figure 8.3. This diagram
shows REST calls in red and messages in purple. In this figure, subscriptions are shown
as arrows directed from the message queue to the microservice, while publishing is shown
as an arrow directed from the microservice towards the message queue. This diagram,
when compared to Figure 8.1, shows how the actual system was created, in comparison
to the decomposition of the domain.
8.4
Improving the template
During development of the complaint system, using the template, some additional fea-
tures were noted, which could be added to an improved version of the template. The
most noticeable improvement would be to include some testing. Since tests are by nature
==PAGE:67==
8.4 Improving the template
53
Figure 8.3: Component diagram of the complaint system
dependant on the domain, it was never considered to include tests. However, implement-
ing unit tests for the complaint system, proved to be more challenging than originally
planned. This led to the idea that perhaps test projects should be included, whenever
a microservice is added, which in turn led to a discussion of how this could be added to
the template as an improvement.
The initial idea of the template, was that it should be useful for both a developer
who has no experience with MSA as well as someone who has extensive knowledge of
MSA. The idea was, that a person who is familiar with MSA would not have to set up
all of the boilerplate code himself, whilst an inexperienced developer would be guided by
the auto-generated code, alongside the guide detailed in Chapter 9. However, a question
remained of whether or not any specific microservice examples, should be included in
the template. Including such an example, may make using the template tedious when
using it as an experienced developer. However, it could help teach an inexperienced
developer how to create a good service. Additionally, this related to how best to include
tests, since these would most likely need to be written as examples, since there would
need to be something specific to test.
This led to the idea of including a microservice example in the gateway example. It
seems like a nice compromise, since an experienced developer, could simply remove the
created project, and it wouldn’t affect them more than that. However it creates a nice
sandbox for an inexperienced developer to test how a microservice system works. This
idea was based on Microsoft’s own template for an API web project. When such a project
is created, it contains a simple controller class along with an entity. When run, it shows
how the controller is used. This example microservice could do something similar. It
could contain a controller class which is connected to the gateway, as well as a producer
and a consumer, which are both connected. Since messaging doesn’t necessarily have to
be between two different services, it would be possible to have the producer publish a
message which the consumer then consumes. This in turn would allow for a test project
which could contain some test displaying how to test a consumer. However, due to time
constraints, these steps have been added to the guide, allowing anyone who follows that
==PAGE:68==
54
8 Template Design
to create the tests themselves.
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 9
Quick Start Guide
In order to help developers who have never worked with MSA before, this quick guide
has been developed. This guide is created to help developers, step by step, throughout
a development process. However, it is assumed that the reader of this guide has existing
knowledge of software development, and experience in using some of the technologies
which are not necessarily specific for microservices. In order to make the guide more
practical in nature, some specific technologies have been used, however, the ideas behind
should stay the same, due to technology agnosticism of MSA. The guide is intended to
be read on its own, for the most part. However, for the sake of brevity, some chapters
of the thesis are referenced, in order to provide more detailed explanations.
In order to reduce the time spent setting up boilerplate code, two .NET code tem-
plates were created.
A template which sets up a infrastructure for the microservice
system, as well as a template which will set up a single microservice, where the last can
be used repeatedly. The technology chosen for these templates was largely based on
what we have experience with, as well as the technology used at Knowledge Cube, since
this thesis is written in collaboration with them. In addition, frameworks were chosen
based on recommendations found during research of this topic.
The code for both templates is written in C# using the .NET Core framework. As
such, it is possible to create a new .NET project with the template, using either a
command prompt or an IDE which allows use of templates. Both templates are set up
in a manner that is intended to aid with development, including setting up initial code,
as well as various folders in order to help structure code depending on the domain.
9.1
Requirements
In order to be able to follow this guide, some technologies are required.
• .NET Core SDK
• Docker
• Docker Compose
• Docker Machine - if the installed OS does not support virtualization
In addition to these technical requirements, it would be useful to have a decent
amount of experience in developing C# systems, however it is not required.
==PAGE:70==
56
9 Quick Start Guide
9.2
When to use a microservice
A microservice system is a powerful type of system when it comes to scaling and deploy-
ment, but comes at a cost of increased complexity among things described in Chapter 4.
Before continuing with this guide, it should be considered if a microservice system is in
fact what is needed. This guide minimizes the setup time of a microservice system, but
if the domain of the problem does not have a substantial size, the time spent on creating
a microservice system might be wasted. The benefits of a microservice system should
outweigh the increased complexity of using such a system. Furthermore, as mentioned
in Chapter 4, a monolithic approach should be considered in cases where the domain is
not clearly defined.
9.3
Identify microservice candidates
Development of a microservice system follows a Domain-Driven Design (DDD) approach.
The first step is to gain an overview and knowledge of the domain. Commence by creating
a domain model similar to the ones in Chapter 6 as domain models are the center piece of
DDD. Next, create user stories to get a better understanding of the business capabilities
within the domain. Followed by identifying microservice candidates which is difficult.
The term candidate is used as it might be that the context boundaries will be changed
during the development process.
Before splitting the domain into candidates, think of some of the properties of a
microservice. It should be built around a single business capability, have high cohesion
internally, and be decoupled from other microservices. With the aforementioned prop-
erties in mind, place the entities of the domain model into groups. It is possible for an
entity to exists in multiple groups, but should not be a complete replica. These groups
will be the microservice candidates. After having split the domain into groups look at
the user stories and see if it fulfils each user story within a group. It might be that the
user story produces events which other groups will require, but it should be possible to
fulfil each user story within a group independently of the other groups. If not go back
and try splitting the domain differently. Once it is possible to perform each user story
within a group there should be a clear bounded context for all the groups, which can
lay the foundation for each microservice. The next step is then to define the contracts
or messages which can be sent between the microservices. A side effect of a user story
might be a message, which starts another user story. These messages should be based
on the You aren’t gonna need it principle and should only contain enough information
to fulfil the user story. Think of what messages each microservice needs and needs to
produce in order to fulfil user stories related to it and create messages based on this.
Following the above approach should have split the domain into multiple microser-
vices, however the following will provide an example to give a better understanding of
the approach.
The domain used as an example throughout the rest of this guide will be the com-
==PAGE:71==
9.3 Identify microservice candidates
57
plaint domain from Chapter 6. The result of following the above approach can be seen
in Figure 9.1. It can be seen that the domain has been split into three microservices,
complaint service, sync service and case service. There is a user story which defines the
creation of a complaint, which includes the claimant and the respondent entity. The
claimant, respondent and complaint is therefore grouped together. Likewise does a user
story define an external case system, which is used by the case workers, and is therefore
modelled as a microservice. Complaint data need to be synchronized between these two
services and as such is a sync service defined. Sync service shares a part of the complaint
and case entity namely the complaint number and the case number. These two numbers
are used along with a status to keep track of which complaint maps to which case. These
numbers are an example of shared entities as they exists in all services, however they
have a different purpose within each service. There exists multiple messages within this
domain, however only a few will be highlighted here. It is possible for complaint service
to produce a message containing a newly created complaint, all data included, which
will be consumed by sync service. Sync service will, store the complaint number and
convert the message into a new message which can be consumed by the case service.
This gives an overview of how a domain can be split into decoupled microservices,
based on business capabilities with high cohesion. As mentioned, the boundaries of the
microservices might be changed during the early stages of development as the domain
becomes clearer. It should be noted that spending time and resources on splitting the
domain should be seen as an investment as it becomes more expensive and difficult to
change the boundaries as the development process progresses.
Figure 9.1: Identified microservices in the complaint domain
==PAGE:72==
58
9 Quick Start Guide
9.4
Microservice system architecture
Once the domain has been split into microservices, the next step is to design the architec-
ture of the system. When considering the architecture there are a variety of components
that must be taken into consideration. This section will give a quick glance at each of
these components.
Arguably the most important feature for a microservice system is for the microser-
vices to be able to communicate with each other. This can be done simply using REST,
however, it is often more beneficial to use a message queue. A message queue allows
for each service to publish messages to a shared bus, which then delegates each message
to the respective service. A message queue is more lightweight, and doesn’t rely on a
specific service being available at the time of publishing a message.
For microservices it is important for each service to be decoupled from all other ser-
vices. For this reason, each service should have its own database. Each database can be
hosted on the same server, but none of the data can be shared between databases of dif-
ferent services. Each service should store the data that it needs in its own database. This
also means, that each microservice can potentially utilize a different type of database.
So whenever a new service is created, it could potentially be useful to also consider
which types of databases or database languages lend themselves well to the data the
microservice will handle.
9.4.1
System components
Figure 9.2 shows the architecture of the complaint system example project from Sec-
tion 6.2. The following sections will make it clear what each component of the diagram
is used for, and how to easily implement a similar system.
Figure 9.2: Architecture of the complaint system from Section 6.2
==PAGE:73==
9.4 Microservice system architecture
59
9.4.2
The gateway
The gateway, as the name suggests, is the entry point for interactions between an external
system and the microservice system.
Part of the default template is an automatic
configuration of Swagger. The idea is that any microservice endpoints are mapped to a
common Swagger page, so anyone who wants to integrate to any of the microservices, will
have a single point of access, and each request is forwarded to the appropriate service.
The mapping of services is done by Ocelot. Swagger and Ocelot will be explained in
Section 9.7.4.
Each endpoint needs to be mapped in the ocelot.json file.
This is
automatically done when creating a new microservice project using the template.
9.4.3
Messages
In addition to the gateway project another project can also be found.
This is the
Messages project. This project will initially be empty, but is in fact one of the most
important pieces of the template. This project will contain all the message contracts
which are to be shared between microservices. How these contracts are defined will be
described in a later section, so for now simply keep in mind that the project exists.
9.4.4
Docker-Compose
The chosen build tool for this template was Docker-Compose. Docker-Compose provides
an easy way to orchestrate the build of each container defined in the Docker-Compose
file. The file provided by the template provides code to build three of the components
shown in Figure 9.2; the gateway, the database container, and the messaging service.
The Docker-Compose file is a YAML file used to guide the build of each service. The
one provided by the template is shown in Listing 9.1. Most of the configuration will
be handled by the template, however it might be useful to expose container ports for
debugging. Docker also creates an internal DNS lookup table with the names of the
services.
==PAGE:74==
60
9 Quick Start Guide
1 version: '3.4'
2
3 services:
4
gateway:
5
image: ${DOCKER_REGISTRY -}gateway
6
build:
7
context: .
8
dockerfile: ../Gateway/Dockerfile
9
container_name: "Gateway"
10
11
db:
12
image: "mcr.microsoft.com/mssql/server"
13
environment:
14
SA_PASSWORD: "ComplexPW2019!"
15
ACCEPT_EULA: "Y"
16
ports:
17
- "3306:1433"
18
container_name: "Database"
19
20
rabbitmq:
21
image: rabbitmq:3-management
22
ports:
23
- "15672:15672"
24
container_name: rabbitmq
Listing 9.1: The docker-compose file which is automatically created when creating a new
gateway using the provided template
9.5
Your first microservice
Now that an overview of the system has been given, it is time to give an in-depth view of
the structure of a microservice. Figure 9.3 gives an overview of the various components
of a microservice, and the following sections will describe each the components shown
in the figure.
9.5.1
Extensions
Most of the configuration of the microservice is in extension classes which can be found
in the Extensions directory. The templates provides automatic configuration for the
following: Swagger, MassTransit, a database, and dependency injection. However, in-
stead of going through each extension here, they will be discussed alongside the relevant
functionality throughout Section 9.7, however, it is important to know where they are
located and used.
==PAGE:75==
9.5 Your first microservice
61
Figure 9.3: Overview of the architecture of a microservice created by the provided
template
9.5.2
Control
The control folder contains all control mechanisms of the microservice. This includes
a controller class for defining REST endpoints, as well as a Producer which produces
messages for the message queue, and any consumers which consume specific messages.
Controllers should be used as entry points from the gateway, as shown in red in
Figure 9.3. This is not a requirement, but simply the way the template is set up. The
microservice will automatically host a json document describing its endpoints, using
Swagger. This document will be retrieved by the gateway and mapped to the gateway’s
endpoints, using Ocelot. The REST endpoints should be viewed as regular endpoints,
as they exist in a monolithic system, that an end user, or external system, can access,
and send data to and from. Theoretically, the Gateway could access the message queue
as well, and communicate using messages, however this approach is not included in the
guide.
The producer and consumers are what the microservice will use to communicate with
other microservices. These follow a publish/subscribe pattern, which can be seen in blue
in Figure 9.3. In order to ensure reliable messaging the template configures a RabbitMQ
message bus using the MassTransit framework. Messages between the producer and
the consumer are defined using message contracts. These normally take shape as an
interface defined in a shared project between services, in this case the message project.
Only a single producer is required for each microservice. This class can produce any
number of messages and publish them to the appropriate queues, based on the message
contract used. By default, the producer creates a fanout exchange. However it is possible
to configure it to use a direct exchange if needed.
In contrast to the producer, in order to allow a microservice to consume multiple
types of messages, multiple consumers must be created. Each consumer subscribes to
==PAGE:76==
62
9 Quick Start Guide
a specific queue, and will only consume a single type of message. Each queue is also
durable, meaning messages persist, even if the bus is restarted.
9.5.3
Core
The Core directory is named as such in accordance with the Onion Architecture proposed
by Jeffery Palermo. This architecture is described in more detail in Chapter 7 This
directory, as the name suggests, should contain the core application components. In
order to help facilitate the code structuring, some empty directories will automatically
be created. These are:
• DataTransferObjects - This directory is used for DTO’s for mapping between
REST requests or messages and entities.
• Interfaces - This directory is for interfaces.
• Models - Any entities should be placed within this directory.
• ServiceLogic - Any entity services should be placed here. It has been named service
logic in order to avoid confusion with the microservice naming.
The final directory is the Base directory. This directory contains a variety of base
classes to be used when defining entities. The use of these will be shown in later sections.
9.5.4
Infrastructure
The infrastructure of each microservice follows a common repository pattern. The mi-
croservice template provides a basic repository with generic predefined CRUD opera-
tions. The Infrastructure directory contains, the database context and the repository.
The database context represents a session with the actual database, and is used to
manipulate data in the database. The repository class acts as a decoupling between
the application and the DbContext. In addition to the classes mentioned here, it is
also important to note that the database connection is set up in one of the startup
extensions classes; ConfigureDbContext.cs, which will be explained in a later section.
However, configuration of the database connection does not change for development of
microservices.
9.6
Installation
If not already done, now is the time to install the templates. This can be done using
the command dotnet new -i <PATH-TO-DIRECTORY> in a command prompt. In this case,
<PATH-TO-DIRECTORY> is the location in which the template is located on the computer.
This command will need to be run for each template. After the installation, running the
==PAGE:77==
9.6 Installation
63
command dotnet new -u will print a list of installed templates, from which it is possible
to verify that the installation was successful. If the following is part of the output, the
templates have been successfully installed:
[Full path to template folder]
Templates:
Microservices System (ms-sys) C#
Uninstall Command:
dotnet new -u [Full path to template folder]
Templates:
Microservices template (ms) C#
Uninstall Command:
dotnet new -u [Full path to template folder]
Once the templates have been installed, the next step is to run them. The first
template to run is the gateway template.
This is done using the dotnet command:
dotnet new ms-sys -n <PROJECT NAME>. This command will generate a directory with the
name specified as the project name in the command. Within this directory, the template
will generate three additional directories. The first directory is the Gateway directory.
This is where the C# project for the gateway is located. The second directory is the
docker-compose directory.
This contains a docker-compose project which is used to
build the system and run it. The third and final directory is the Microservices directory.
It is within this directory that all the microservice projects will be placed when using
the second template.
In order to create a microservice the command dotnet new ms
-n <SERVICE-NAME> must be run from the main project directory.
The template will
automatically find the microservices directory, and place the new project within.
IDE support
This section is not necessarily important in terms of development, however, during the
creation of this thesis it was found to be a hindrance when using the template in certain
development environments. Since the template doesn’t include a solution file (.sln),
using it within an environment such as Visual Studio or JetBrains’ Rider can be a
hassle, since these programs depend on .sln files in order to determine the structure of
any included projects. Therefore, a .sln file has to be created before the creation of any
microservice projects. Once a solution file has been created it is possible to manually
add any existing or new projects as one would normally, unfortunately the template does
not do this automatically, as not all users are dependent on solution files.
==PAGE:78==
64
9 Quick Start Guide
9.7
Start coding
Now that each component has been described, it will be explained how to implement a
microservice with the help of the provided .NET template. The complaint domain from
Section 6.2 will be used as coding example for this part of the guide.
9.7.1
Entities
The first step is to convert the domain model into entities for the microservice. For the
complaint microservice the entities, complaint, claimant, and respondent are defined.
The complaint entity can be seen in Listing 9.2. As one can see the Complaint entity
contains properties related to a complaint. It also contains properties of other entities
such as Claimant and Respondant, which is not shown in detail here.
Notice how the Complaint class inherits from the EntityBase class. This makes it
work with the provided RepositoryBase class found in the Core directory. All entities
intended to be stored in the database should always inherit from EntityBase.
1 public class Complaint : EntityBase
2 {
3
[DatabaseGenerated(DatabaseGeneratedOption.Identity)]
4
public int ComplaintNumber { get; set; }
5
public string Title { get; set; }
6
public DateTimeOffset FilledDate { get; set; }
7
public Claimant Claimant { get; set; }
8
public Respondent Respondent { get; set; }
9
public string Concern { get; set; }
10
public string Response { get; set; }
11
public decimal Price { get; set; }
12
public ComplaintStatus Status { get; set; }
13 }
Listing 9.2: The complaint entity. The classes contained in the complaint entity can be
seen in the attached source code.
9.7.2
Database setup
Now that the entities have been defined they need to be added to the database. This is
done by adding them to the DbContext. An example can be seen in Listing 9.3. A DbSet
must be added to the DbContext, for each entity otherwise a corresponding database
table won’t be generated. This is due to the fact that EntityFramework Core is used as
an ORM, and will only recognize entities in the DbContext.
==PAGE:79==
9.7 Start coding
65
1
2 public class ComplaintDbContext : DbContext
3 {
4
...
5
public DbSet<Complaint > Complaints { get; set; }
6
public DbSet<Address > Addresses { get; set; }
7
public DbSet<Claimant > Claimants { get; set; }
8
public DbSet<ContactInformation > ContactInformation { get; set; }
9
public DbSet<CustomerInformation > CustomerInformation { get; set; }
10
public DbSet<Respondent > Respondents { get; set; }
11
...
12 }
Listing 9.3: The ComplaintDbContext. Entitites are added by making a property with
a dbset of a the entity type
The connection to the database is configured in the extension class ConfigureDbCon-
text, which can be seen in Listing 9.4.
The current connection string in the variable connection provides a connection to
the database container defined in the docker-compose file. This database should only be
used for development and never in production as it does not guarantee data persistence.
In addition, the connection string should be stored in a secret file or something similar.
1
2 internal static partial class ServiceCollection
3 {
4
public static void ConfigureDbContext(this IServiceCollection services
)
5
{
6
// This is unsafe , change this before prod
7
const string connection = @"Server=db;Database=ComplaintService;
User=sa;Password=ComplexPW2019!";
8
9
services.AddDbContext <ComplaintDbContext >(options =>
10
{
11
options.UseSqlServer(connection);
12
});
13
}
14 }
Listing 9.4: Extension class used for configuring the ComplaintDbContext and injecting
it other classes through dependency injection.
Now that the entities have been defined and the database context has been configured
properly, it is time to instruct the database builder to build the database model. This
is done by using EntityFramework Core Migrations. In a command line navigate to
the infrastructure folder and run the command seen in Listing 9.5. The command will
create a migration which, when applied to the database, will adjust the database to
reflect changes in the application model. In this case the migration should create a
database table for each of the defined entities. On microservice startup all migrations
will be applied to the database.
==PAGE:80==
66
9 Quick Start Guide
1 cd ~/.../Microservices/ComplaintService/Infrastructure/
2 dotnet ef migrations add InitialMigration -c ComplaintDbContext
Listing 9.5: Command for adding a migration to the specified startup project.
9.7.3
Service logic
Now that there is a data model to work with, the next step is to implement some
logic to manipulate the data. A class is created in the ServiceLogic folder named
ComplaintService. The class can be seen in Listing 9.6. This class contains the business
logic of the complaint service. It can be seen that the class inherits from ServiceBase
and implements IComplaintService. The ServiceBase class uses the repository class
and supports therefore by default generic CRUD operations. The IComplaintService
interface is used to expose methods within ComplaintService. This is used for when
injecting the ComplaintService into other classes.
As most of the needed logic is
actually provided by the ServiceBase class only a single method for updating the
ComplaintStatus through the complaint number is needed.
The method returns a
ServiceResult which contains a list of errors (if any) along with the entity.
It is
generally good practice to inform consumers of any errors in a similar way.
1 public class ComplaintService : ServiceBase <Complaint >, IComplaintService
2 {
3
public ComplaintService(IRepositoryBase <Complaint > repository) : base(
repository)
4
{
5
}
6
7
public ServiceResult <Complaint > UpdateStatus(SyncComplaint
contextMessage)
8
{
9
var entity = Get(c => c.ComplaintNumber == contextMessage.
ComplaintId).Single();
10
11
entity.Status = (ComplaintStatus) contextMessage.Status;
12
return Update(entity);
13
}
14 }
Listing 9.6: ComplaintService class which contains the business logic of the complaint
service.
9.7.4
Endpoints
In order to add an endpoint to the microservice a REST controller class is created in the
Controllers folder and named ComplaintController. An excerpt of the ComplaintController
is shown in Listing 9.7. The gateway’s default configuration will forward any requests to
==PAGE:81==
9.7 Start coding
67
the endpoint which is placed at /complaint. Using the Route attribute the ComplaintController
is configured to place an endpoint at /complaint. As with the previously created service
logic class it is good practise to return status messages indicating success or failure, this
is done with the ActionResult. In the constructor of the ComplaintController are
the servicelogic class injected along with two other classes which will be examined in the
following sections.
1
2 [ApiController]
3 [Route("[controller]")]
4 public class ComplaintController : ControllerBase
5 {
6
private readonly ComplaintFactory _factory;
7
private readonly Producer _producer;
8
private readonly IComplaintService _service;
9
10
public ComplaintController(ComplaintFactory factory , Producer producer
, IComplaintService service)
11
{
12
_factory = factory;
13
_producer = producer;
14
_service = service;
15
}
16
17
[HttpGet]
18
public ActionResult <IEnumerable <ComplaintDTO >> GetComplaints()
19
{
20
return Ok(_factory.GetCases());
21
}
22
...
23 }
Listing 9.7: Excerpt of the complaintController. Used to define a rest endpoint for the
complaint microservice.
It is possible to reconfigure the gateway to forward message into deeper URL’s such
as /<Microservice name>/command. Within the Gateway project there is a json file
named ocelot.json. An excerpt of it can be seen in Listing 9.8.
By adding a new reroute to the ReRoute list it is possible to configure the gateway
to forward requests to more URL’s.
In the example shown the requests coming to
/complaint/{everything}, defined in UpstreamPathTemplate, will be forwarded to
/complaint/everything, defined in DownstreamPathTemplate. The /{everything} is a
wildcard to indicate that all url’s will match until another ’/’ is provided.
The template also automatically configures a swagger page for each microservice.
This is done in the SwaggerEndPoints list element. The Key element of a SwaggerEndPoints
element is matched with the SwaggerKey element in the reroutes list.
When deploying to a production environment some of these settings will be configured
by a microservice orchestrator for better security and scalability.
==PAGE:82==
68
9 Quick Start Guide
1 {
2 "ReRoutes": [
3 ...,
4
{
5
"DownstreamPathTemplate": "/complaint/{everything}",
6
"DownstreamScheme": "http",
7
"DownstreamHostAndPorts": [
8
{
9
"Host": "complaint",
10
"Port": 80
11
}
12
],
13
"UpstreamPathTemplate": "/complaint/{everything}",
14
"UpstreamHttpMethod": [ "Get", "Post", "Put" ],
15
"SwaggerKey": "complaint"
16
},
17 ...],
18 "SwaggerEndPoints": [
19 {
20
"Key": "complaint",
21
"Config": [
22
{
23
"Name": "Complaint API",
24
"Version": "v1",
25
"Url": "http://complaint:80/swagger/v1/swagger.json"
26
}
27
]
28 },...]
Listing 9.8: Ocelot.json file which is used to configure the gateway. It maps URL’s to
microservice controllers.
==PAGE:83==
9.7 Start coding
69
9.7.5
Messaging
In order for a microservice to receive messages the SyncComplaintConsumer class is
created within the Consumers folder. The class can be seen in Listing 9.9. The class must
inherit from IConsumer. The type provided will be the messages which the consumer
class can consume. The class must have a Consume method as shown in the example.
This method will be invoked every time a message of the provided type is received.
The complaint microservice should consume SyncComplaint messages which informs
the complaint microservice to change the status of a certain complaint.
1 public class SyncComplaintConsumer : IConsumer <SyncComplaint >
2 {
3
private readonly IComplaintService _service;
4
5
public SyncComplaintConsumer(IComplaintService service)
6
{
7
_service = service;
8
}
9
10
public Task Consume(ConsumeContext <SyncComplaint > context)
11
{
12
_service.UpdateStatus(context.Message);
13
14
return Task.CompletedTask;
15
}
16 }
Listing 9.9: SyncComplaintConsumer class used for consuming messages of the type
SyncComplaint.
After setting up the consumer class a message queue will have to be configured. This
is done with the framework MassTransit. The template comes comes with an extension
class named ConfigureMassTransit, which can be seen in Listing 9.10. The purpose
of this class is to make the consumer subscribe to messages in the message queue.
The consumer class have to be registered with MassTransit which is done with
the AddConsumer method.
Then a receive endpoint is registered with the method
ReceiveEndpoint.
This later method has to be provided a queue name which has
to be unique across all microservices. Doing the above will configure SyncComplaint
messages be placed on the synchronize\complaint\status queue and be consumed by
the SyncComplaintConsumer.
==PAGE:84==
70
9 Quick Start Guide
1 internal static partial class ServiceCollection
2 {
3
public static void ConfigureMassTransit(this IServiceCollection
services)
4
{
5
services.AddMassTransit(x =>
6
{
7
x.AddConsumer <SyncComplaintConsumer >();
8
9
x.AddBus(provider => Bus.Factory.CreateUsingRabbitMq(cfg =>
10
{
11
cfg.Host("rabbitmq");
12
13
// Add endpoints here
14
cfg.ReceiveEndpoint("synchronize_complaint_status", e =>
15
{
16
e.Consumer <SyncComplaintConsumer >(provider);
17
});
18
}));
19
});
20
21
services.AddSingleton <IHostedService , BusService >();
22
}
23 }
Listing 9.10: Configures mass transit which configures the underlying message queue
provider to create a queue named synchronize_complaint_status.
Now it is possible for the complaint microservice to consume messages however it
should also be able to produce messages in order to properly communicate with other
microservices. The template provides each microservice with a Producer class which is
made for this purpose. An example of the producer class can be seen in Listing 9.11.
This class was the one being injected in the controller class.
The class’s constructor takes an IPublishEndpoint as a parameter. This endpoint
parameter is however injected automatically by MassTransit. This PublishEndpoint
provides a way of sending and publishing messages to the underlying message queue.
The complaint microservice needs to be able to notify other microservices that a new
complaint has been created. In order to do so the Publish method is used. The type of
message which should be sent is set by the method’s type parameter. MassTransit will
automatically serialize the data being published such that it is mapped to the specified
message type provided. As it is a publish method MassTransit will deliver the message
to each of the queues which can consume the message type. Consumers can then use
the message contract in order to extract the data.
==PAGE:85==
9.8 Implementing Unit Tests
71
1 public class Producer {
2
private readonly IPublishEndpoint _publishEndpoint;
3
4
public Producer(IPublishEndpoint endpoint) {
5
_publishEndpoint = endpoint;
6
}
7
8
public async Task SynchronizeComplaint(ComplaintDTO complaint)
9
{
10
await _publishEndpoint.Publish <CreateComplaintSync >(complaint);
11
}
12 }
Listing 9.11: Producer class used for sending messages to the underlying message queue.
It is now possible for the complaint microservice to communicate internally with
other microservices, it is possible to setup REST endpoints, it is possible define service
logic, as well as it is possible to integrate with a database. All this makes it into a fully
functional microservice.
9.8
Implementing Unit Tests
For the purposes of this guide the main focus has been put on implementing unit tests.
Ideally, these tests will make up the majority of the tests needed, and are much less
complicated than integration or end-to-end tests. When creating a microservice using
the template, a test project is also created alongside it.
9.8.1
Testing messages
The first test example will demonstrate how to test consumers. It will only test that
the appropriate message is consumed from the bus. However, it is important to note
that there are a multitude of different functionalities which can be tested relating to
consumers, some of which will also be mentioned.
The first step to creating a new test is creating the test class. This class should
have the [TestFixture] attribute. This attribute will tell NUnit that this is a unit test
class. In addition to this, any methods created within this class should have the [Test]
attribute added. This tells NUnit that these methods should be run as unit tests.
Listing 9.12 shows a class made to test the consumer for the synchronization microser-
vice in the complaint system. The first line of this test, line 11 in the listing, shows a
simple way to mock a service. Simply create a new Mock object with the interface of
the system being mocked. The following line shows a test harness being created. This
is a MassTransit functionality which sets up a temporary in-memory bus service for
producing and consuming messages. Finally, a consumer is created. The reason this is
done using a lambda expression, is in order to pass in constructor parameters. With a
==PAGE:86==
72
9 Quick Start Guide
test harness and a consumer defined, the harness can be started. The await keyword
is there due to the fact that starting and stopping the harness is an asynchronous op-
eration, so without it the test might attempt to publish a message before the harness
has started, which will result in the test failing. Once the harness has started the test
simply attempts to publish a message to an endpoint. The data of the message has been
hidden for brevity’s sake. Once the message is published, the consumer should consume
it.
This does not require any additional code, and as such, the test can be finished off by
asserting that a message was consumed with the correct type, on both the harness, but
also that the specific consumer being tested, consumed the message. This is useful for
testing routing messages with multiple consumers consuming the same message types,
but on different queues.
1 using ...
2
3 namespace SyncTest
4 {
5
[TestFixture]
6
public class When_a_create_complaint_sync_message_is_consumed
7
{
8
[Test]
9
public async Task Should_consume_message()
10
{
11
var service = new Mock<ISyncService >();
12
var harness = new InMemoryTestHarness();
13
var consumer = harness.Consumer(() => new
SynchronizeComplaintConsumer(service.Object, new
SyncFactory()));
14
15
await harness.Start();
16
try
17
{
18
await harness.InputQueueSendEndpoint.Send<
CreateComplaintSync >(new
19
{ ... });
20
21
Assert.That(consumer.Consumed.Select<CreateComplaintSync
>().Any(), Is.True);
22
}
23
finally
24
{
25
await harness.Stop();
26
}
27
}
28
}
29 }
Listing 9.12: Test class for testing the synchronization consumer for the complaint
system.
==PAGE:87==
9.8 Implementing Unit Tests
73
In addition to testing that a message has been consumed, it may also be pertinent to
test for a result, in a case where the consumer publishes an event describing the result
of its actions. This can be done by defining a request client, in the above case it could
look something like:
1 await harness.Start();
2 try
3 {
4 var requestClient = await harness.ConnectRequestClient <CreateComplaintSync
>();
5
var response = await requestClient.GetResponse <ComplaintSyncCreated >(
new
6
{ ... });
7
8
Assert.That(consumer.Consumed.Select<CreateComplaintSync >().Any(), Is.
True);
9
Assert.That(harness.Sent.Select<ComplaintSyncCreated >().Any(), Is.True
);
10 }
11 finally
12 {
13
await harness.Stop();
14 }
Listing 9.13: Small example showing how the request client can be utilized for testing a
consumer.
This test sets up a request client and waits until it receives a response. The response
should arrive once the consumer has consumed the message, and published the response
event. It is then possible to also assert that the harness sent the response.
9.8.2
Testing service logic
In addition to testing consumers, it is also important to be able to test the services
which will, more often than not, contain a large portion of the logic. The code shown
in Listing 9.15 is a test taken from the complaint system, which tests that the synchro-
nization function correctly updates its state, when synchronizing cases from the external
case system. This basically means, updating the status of a complaint according to the
status set in the case system. The SyncService being tested, has 3 dependencies which
need to be mocked, as well as a repository, which is configured to utilize an in memory
database, configured in an external TestUtility class shown in Listing 9.14. It should be
noted, that this utility class can easily be copied to other test projects. If this is done,
it is important to change the DbContext being used.
In addition to mocking the CaseClient, in this case it is also required to mock what
one of the methods being used should return. This is due to the fact that the case client
is an external system, which isn’t being tested here. This can also be done using Moq,
seen on line 15, the Setup method describes which method should be mocked, while the
==PAGE:88==
74
9 Quick Start Guide
ReturnsAsync call defines what should be returned, whenever this method is called. In
this case, the client should return a list containing a single case. Once this has been
done the service to be tested, can be created. The final step in the setup phase of the
test is to create some data to test against. This is done directly on the repository, so
this test isn’t affected by the service method for creating new entities. For this case the
only important part of the data is the status. The mock case returned by the case client
has a status of Completed, while the Sync entity will have the status Awaiting. This
gives rise to a need for synchronization. The method being tested SyncCases() is thus
called. Finally, any asserts can be performed. In this case a standard assert that the
service result is valid is made, as well as asserting that the Sync entity being updated
has had its status changed to completed. This obviously only tests the case where a
case is complete while the sync service thinks it is awaiting. Similar unit tests must be
performed for different statusses. In addition to this, there should also be a test to test
cases when no case is returned or if a case doesn’t exist in the sync service.
1 public class TestUtility
2 {
3
public static RepositoryBase <T> CreateRepository <T>(
SyncServiceDbContext context) where T : EntityBase
4
{
5
return new RepositoryBase <T>(context);
6
}
7
8
public static DbContextOptions <SyncServiceDbContext >
CreateContextOptions(string dbName)
9
{
10
return new DbContextOptionsBuilder <SyncServiceDbContext >()
11
.UseInMemoryDatabase(dbName)
12
.Options;
13
}
14 }
Listing 9.14: Utility class used to facilitate in memory database for testing purposes.
==PAGE:89==
9.9 Deployment
75
1 [Test]
2 public void When_case_status_is_2_set_sync_status_to_completed()
3 {
4
var options = TestUtility.CreateContextOptions("sync_cases");
5
6
ServiceResult <IEnumerable <Sync>> serviceResult;
7
8
using (var context = new SyncServiceDbContext(options))
9
{
10
var repository = TestUtility.CreateRepository <Sync>(context);
11
var producer = new Mock<IProducer >();
12
var factory = new Mock<SyncFactory >();
13
var caseClient = new Mock<ICaseServiceClient >();
14
15
caseClient.Setup(m => m.CaseAllAsync())
16
.ReturnsAsync(new List<CaseDTO >
17
{
18
new CaseDTO
19
{ ... });
20
21
var service = new Service(repository , factory.Object, producer.
Object , caseClient.Object);
22
repository.Create(new List<Sync>
23
{
24
new Sync
25
{
26
CaseId = 1,
27
ComplaintId = 1,
28
Status = SyncService.Core.Enums.Status.Awaiting
29
}
30
});
31
serviceResult = service.SyncCases();
32
}
33
34
using (var context = new SyncServiceDbContext(options))
35
{
36
Assert.That(serviceResult.IsValid , Is.True);
37
Assert.That(serviceResult.Entity.First().Status, Is.EqualTo(
SyncService.Core.Enums.Status.Completed));
38
}
39 }
Listing 9.15: Unit test to test synchronization of cases from the external case system
9.9
Deployment
At this point it is possible to develop a functional program. It is possible to add or remove
microservices to a system as well as testing it locally with Docker Compose. This ensures
developers having an environment as closely related to a production environment as
==PAGE:90==
76
9 Quick Start Guide
possible. This helps developers testing and running the system locally when developing.
However, deployment, to production, of a microservice system is not straightforward as
the system grows.
The biggest issue with deploying a microservice system is administration of the mi-
croservices. For smaller systems it might be completely fine to manually administrate
the microservices, through e.g. Docker Compose. However, as the system expands so
does the time spent to administrate the microservices. Because of this it is recommended
to use a microservice orchestrator, such as Kubernetes or Azure. These programs makes
it possible to automatically administrate, or orchestrate, containerized microservices.
Additionally, it is recommended to setup a continuous integration/deployment pipeline
for the microservice system. However, be careful not to end up deploying the whole sys-
tem as one, as this will ruin the purpose of deploying each microservice independently of
each other. When building the CI/CD pipeline there exists more of these pitfalls which
will ruin the advantages of microservices and it is therefore recommended to research
the topic before setting up the deployment.
This guide does not provide any information on how to setup orchestrators or pipelines,
but the architecture described in this guide enables the use of both. We think that Sam
Newman’s book Building Microservices: Designing Fine-Grained Systems [16], contains
valuable information on deploying microservices and would be a good starting point
when deploying a microservice system.
9.10
Summary
Following this guide, should have provided the reader with an understanding of how to
quickly get started developing microservices. Additionally, if the templates were utilized
throughout, a system should already have been setup. In this system a gateway and
a message queue have been configured. Additionally, a microservice has been added to
the system and it is possible to orchestrate the whole system through Docker-Compose.
Whenever new microservices are to be added, it is simply a question of using the template
again, or, alternatively, integrating a different type of microservice with the gateway. The
guide should have provided knowledge of the required concepts in order to be able to do
so.
==PAGE:91==
CHAPTER 10
Validation
A part of the relevance cycle seen in Figure 3.1 is field testing of the produced artefact.
The artefact in this case, is the guide, including the .NET templates. Therefore, this
chapter will discuss validation of the guide seen in Chapter 9. This chapter evaluates
how effective, the guide solves the problem described in Chapter 2 and discusses to what
extent the research questions have been answered. Since the design science method is a
highly iterative process, some validation was performed after each example project, as
part of the design cycle. The experience gained from implementing the first example
project, was used in order to improve the design for the next example project. The
validation done for these implementations is described in their respective chapters, and,
as such, is not part of this chapter. This chapter explains how the guide is field tested
through a small tech-share, as well as briefly describing the next steps to more thoroughly
validating the guide.
10.1
Tech-share
In order to validate the guide, a tech-share was held. Three experts on microservices
were invited to discuss the guide and provide feedback. The experts were provided by
KC and were picked due to their experience in working with microservices. As such,
they know what functionalities would be required by a microservice system, and can
validate the guide. The purpose of the tech-share, was to evaluate the guide in a real
life context, and get qualitative feedback on how well the guide reduces startup time for
developers, who are inexperienced with microservices.
This approach was chosen, as it is relevant to hear what experts think of the guide,
even though they are not the intended target group. Initially, it was planned to test on
a larger group of people. However, due to unforeseen consequences of the COVID-19
pandemic1, large gatherings of people were prohibited, and as such there was no time
to arrange a larger test group. The planned validation, is described in Section 10.3 as
future validation, and includes a larger tech-share as well as a hackathon.
In order for the experts to get an overview, they were given the guide prior to the
tech-share. The tech-share consisted of a presentation of the guide, as well as an open
discussion forum, which was guided by questions from the presentation. As the experts
are not the target group of the guide, it was chosen to focus on the usefulness of the
guide, as well as what they think of the guide’s purpose. The slides from the presentation
1https://politi.dk/en/coronavirus-in-denmark, 2020-07-06
==PAGE:92==
78
10 Validation
can be seen in Appendix E. In the following, the main points of the tech-share will be
highlighted.
Initially, the discussion took a turn towards what problems are associated with a mi-
croservice system. The outcome of this discussion was that there exist more challenging
problems than what the guide discusses, such as deployment, logging, and bug fixing, in
short operation, which the experts rather saw handled.
During the next part of the tech-share, it was discussed how inexperienced developers
would perceive and use the guide. This discussion created a disagreement on whether
it is appropriate to automatically setup components for inexperienced developers. The
argument for not doing so was that inexperienced developers would lack understanding
of the automatically configured components. Additionally, due to a lack of knowledge,
an inexperienced developer would never be tasked with creating a microservice system.
An argument for automatically configuring some of the components was, that it would
be great for on-boarding new developers to microservice projects, especially because of
the written quick guide. No conclusive opinion on whether or not it is a good idea to
automatically configure microservice system components, for inexperienced developers,
was reached.
Finally, the usefulness of the guide for experienced developers was discussed. It was
mentioned that the .NET template could also be useful for experienced developers, as
it sets up default boilerplate code. Especially given a possibility to adjust the code for
personal preferences, such as which type of message queue should be used.
At the end of the tech-share, the experts summarized that the guide is a step in the
right direction, however, it is lacking certain features, such as deployment and operation,
in order for it to be production ready.
Overall, the tech-share provided valuable feedback, in that the guide can solve the
defined problem to a certain extent. The experts believe it reduces the start up time,
however, whether or not the guide provides adequate understanding of the underlying
system, remains unclear.
It could be discussed how much evidence the tech-share provides in terms of vali-
dation. The feedback is based on opinions from developers, whom are not part of the
intended target group, as they all have experience with microservices. Additionally, they
are employees from KC. Both of these factors might influence how they perceive the
guide and it’s usefulness. Therefore, it would be beneficial to further validate the guide
in order to improve it.
10.2
Validation through implementation
Throughout the project, two example projects were developed. The first example project
was developed over a time span of five weeks, whereas the second example project was
developed over a time span of two weeks. However, the second example project was
developed using the guide. This indicates that the guide has a positive effect on the
startup time of newly created microservice systems. Though, it is difficult to prove, that
==PAGE:93==
10.3 Next steps for validation
79
this reduction of startup time spent is directly correlated to using the guide. As both
projects were developed by the same developers, the experience gained from the first
project, would have affected the startup time of the second project as well. Additionally,
it is difficult to determine if both example projects have the same size and complexity,
in their current state. However, it was determined that the two example projects are
roughly the same size and complexity. Finally, it is bad practise to use yourself as a test
subject when validating your own artifacts, which is the case with example project two.
Due to the aforementioned points, this can only be used as an indication of the guide’s
effect on the start up time.
10.3
Next steps for validation
Validating the guide using quantitative methods, would provide unbiased evidence of the
effect of the guide. Such a method could be a hackathon. The hackathon would consist
of an event where inexperienced developers would develop systems in teams. Some of
the teams would be given the guide while others would not. By having developers, from
the target group, test the guide, it would be possible to measure a potential reduction
of startup time spent, when creating microservice systems.
Another way of further validating the guide, could be by having a larger tech-share.
That way it would be possible to have a discussion, not only with experts, but also
with developers from the target group. Along with this, a questionnaire could be made
in order to properly gauge opinions on specific points. This way both qualitative and
quantitative data can be gathered and used to validate the guide.
10.4
Research questions revisited
In this section, each of the research questions from Chapter 2 will be revisited, and how
it has been answered. A short description of how it was planned to answer each question
can be found in Chapter 2.
How can we ease the migration of an existing monolithic system to a mi-
croservice system?
This question is answered through research of the topic of migration of monolithic sys-
tems to MSA systems. The results of this research is found in Section 4.3. An attempt
was made to apply the strangler fig migration method to both example projects as a
way of further answering the question. The main functionality of each example project
was moved into a microservice. The next step in the migration process, according to
the strangler fig method, would have been to integrate the microservice with the exist-
ing monolith, however, this was not possible. This was due to legal issues, as well as
to the fact that the migrated functionalities are just a simplified version of the actual
functionality. As such, migration is not included in the quick guide.
==PAGE:94==
80
10 Validation
What granularity should a service have, to be implemented as a microser-
vice?
As with the previous question, this question is mostly answered through research of
the topic. The result of this research is found in Section 4.4. Here the main point is
that the decomposition of a domain should follow a DDD approach. Furthermore, this
question is examined in practice, as the decomposition theory was applied in both ex-
ample projects. The result of applying the theory, is included in the guide on how to
decompose a domain into microservices.
What functionalities would a service need in order to function as a mi-
croservice?
This question, as with the other questions, was answered by, firstly, researching the
topic, and then applying it in both of the example projects. However, This question is
answered in more detail by creating the .NET template as it provides generic function-
alities of a microservice. The tech-share validated the .NET template as well as gave
suggestions on how to improve it.
What would a quick start guide consist of, in order to be used to assist
creation of a microservice system?
This question was answered, by creating the two example projects, and building the
guide based on experience gained from creating these two projects. Furthermore, this was
validated through the tech-share, where multiple points for improvement were suggested.
The project enables developers, who are inexperienced with microservices, to rapidly
setup a microservice system. Through a quick guide, it is possible to gain adequate
understand of the components of a microservice system. Two .NET templates have
been created, to automatically setup and configure these components. A tech-share was
used to field test the guide, which indicates that all questions have been answered in
an acceptable manner. However, using more validation methods could provide more
evidence of how well each question has been answered, as well as highlight new points
for further improvement. It would be especially useful, to have quantitative data to see
if it reduces the setup up time for new microservice projects, in order validate the guide.
The tech-share, however, indicates that the guide is a step in the right direction and it
is useful provided a few modifications are made.
10.5
Future work
In order to improve this project, based on the feedback from the experts during the tech-
share, some additions could be implemented. An additional course has been organized,
which will focus on how to best deploy the microservice systems created by the templates.
This course will also focus on operation of the systems, in terms of load balancing and
scaling, as well as monitoring the systems.
==PAGE:95==
CHAPTER 11
Conclusion
The quick start guide, for developing microservice systems, created as a result of this
thesis, reduces startup when creating new microservice systems. The guide consists of
written best practices within MSA and a .NET template for automatically setting up
a microservice system along with new microservices. Experts believe that the guide is
a step in the right direction towards reducing startup time. However, they were unsure
how well it would help developers with no MSA experience. The experts did believe
that the .NET template could be a useful tool even after the startup process. This is
due to the fact that less time would have to be spent writing duplicate code, each time
a new microservice is set up.
The guide was created by taking an existing system and re-implementing it as a
microservice system based on research. From this implementation a .NET template
was written and used to re-implement another existing system as a microservice system,
based on research and experience from the first implementation. Finally, the guide was
written based on the template as well as the experience gained through development of
each system. Each implementation followed agile design principles. Requirements for
both systems were defined in user stories and implemented through short sprints of two
week durations.
Following the principles of design science, the guide was validated in order to de-
termine what could be contributed to the knowledge base. The guide was validated
through qualitative feedback given by three MSA experts. Given more time it would
be pertinent to also attempt to validate how well the template performs when used by
developers who have limited or no MSA knowledge. This could be done by having teams
of developers each develop similar systems, one team using the guide, and comparing
the results, thus providing quantitative data for further validation.
The authors of this thesis have found the guide to be useful. The validation shows
that the result is not as useful as initially hoped. However, it is believed that with more
thorough quantitative validation within the target group it can be proven that the guide
will have a greater effect. Finally, given more time it would have been interesting to
have added deployment as a more central part of the guide. This will be explored in a
course, which was created as an extension of this thesis.
==PAGE:96==
82
==PAGE:97==
APPENDIX A
Legalization Web Shop
Glossary
Descriptions of terms for the legalization web shop domain:
• Service, a product sold in the webshop. An example of such could be a legalization
service. Not to be confused with a technical service, such as a microservice.
• Digital Signature, a signature which can be used to digitally sign a digital document
through cryptographic means. Each signature is owned by a single person.
• Certificate, is a part of the digital signature and is used to digitally sign a docu-
ment.
• Customer, the person who is buying products from the webshop.
• Administrator, a person employed by the webshop who can edit the products of
the webshop.
• Caseworker, a person employed by the webshop, who reviews documents uploaded
by customers to see if they are eligible to be digitally signed.
• Case, created when a customer buys a product from the webshop.
Cases are
handled by the caseworkers.
• Document type, a type indicating what kind of document it is. Types include;
legal documents, uploaded documents or receipts.
• Signer, person who signed a document either digitally or physically.
• Document, usually uploaded by customers when buying a product.
• Wet signature, signature written in ink on a physical piece of paper.
• Elektronic signature, signature in a digital format. Can either be a digital signa-
ture, but can also be a scanned version of a wet signature.
==PAGE:98==
84
==PAGE:99==
APPENDIX B
Consumer Complaint
Domain Glossary
Descriptions of terms for the legalization consumer domain:
• Consumer, a person who bought a product from a company.
• Company, a person or persons who sells products.
• Complaint, a dispute between a consumer and a company. Is filled by the consumer
because of an unsatisfactory product or service.
• Claimant, the same person as the consumer once a complaint has been filled.
• Respondent, the person or persons as the companny once a complaint has been
filled.
• Case, created as a result of the complaint, containing information for a lawyer to
come with a verdict.
• Caseworker, person, usually a lawyer, who handles cases.
• Statement, a description of a claiment or respondent point of view of the dispute.
Is a part of the complaint.
==PAGE:100==
86
==PAGE:101==
APPENDIX C
Legalization Web Shop User
Stories
==PAGE:102==
88
C Legalization Web Shop User Stories
==PAGE:103==
APPENDIX D
Consumer Complaint User
Stories
Figure D.1: User stories used for developing example 2
==PAGE:104==
90
==PAGE:105==
APPENDIX E
Techshare Slides
The slides from the techshare can be seen in the following link:
https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1o0S8F0urnX3TzQ1EdKAbtrk-FMmNRGjb0p4CW-
elluE/edit?usp=sharing.
==PAGE:106==
92
==PAGE:107==
Bibliography
[1]
Kent Beck et al. Manifesto for Agile Software Development. 2001. url: https:
//agilemanifesto.org/ (visited on 18 June 2020).
[2]
Toby Clemson. Testing Strategies in a Microservice Architecture. 2014. url: https:
//martinfowler.com/articles/microservice-testing/ (visited on 22 June
2020).
[3]
Nicola Dragoni et al. “Microservices: Yesterday, Today, and Tomorrow”. In: Present
and Ulterior Software Engineering. Springer, 2018. Chapter 12, pages 195–216.
isbn: 9783319674254. url: https://link-springer-com.proxy.findit.dtu.
dk/content/pdf/10.1007%2F978-3-319-67425-4_12.pdf.
[4]
Flexera. “2020 Flexera State of the Cloud Report”. In: (2020).
[5]
Martin Fowler. MicroservicePremium. 2015. url: https://martinfowler.com/
bliki/MicroservicePremium.html (visited on 12 April 2020).
[6]
Martin Fowler. Microservices - a definition of this new architectural term. 2014.
url: https://martinfowler.com/articles/microservices.html.
[7]
Martin Fowler. MonolithFirst. 2015. url: https://martinfowler.com/bliki/
MonolithFirst.html.
[8]
Google. Containers at Google - A better way to develop and deploy applications.
url: https://cloud.google.com/containers (visited on 22 June 2020).
[9]
Dan Haywood and Thomas Betts. In Defence of the Monolith, Part 1. 2017. url:
https://www.infoq.com/articles/monolith-defense-part-1/.
[10]
Alan Hevner and Samir Chatterjee. Design Research in Information Systems: The-
ory and Practice. Springer, 2010. Chapter 2. isbn: 9781441956521. doi: 10.1007/
978-1-4419-6108-2. url: https://link-springer-com.proxy.findit.dtu.
dk/content/pdf/10.1007%2F978-1-4419-5653-8.pdf.
[11]
Paul Johannesson and Erik Perjons. An introduction to design science. Springer,
2014. Chapter 1. isbn: 9783319106328. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-10632-8. url:
https://link-springer-com.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/content/pdf/10.1007%
2F978-3-319-10632-8.pdf.
[12]
Robert C Martin and M Micah. Agile Principles, Patterns, and Practices in C#.
Robert C. Martin Series. 2006, page 768. isbn: 0-13-185725-8.
==PAGE:108==
94
Bibliography
[13]
Microsoft. Designing and Developing Multi-Container and Microservice-Based .NET
Applications. 2018. url: https : / / docs . microsoft . com / en - us / dotnet /
architecture/microservices/multi-container-microservice-net-applications/
(visited on 19 June 2020).
[14]
Monolithic. url: https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/monolithic
(visited on 9 April 2020).
[15]
Sam Newman. Building Microservices - Designing Fine-grained Systems. O’Reilly
Media, 2015. Chapter 1. isbn: 9781491950357.
[16]
Sam Newman. Building Microservices - Designing Fine-grained Systems. O’Reilly
Media, 2015. isbn: 9781491950357.
[17]
Sam Newman. Microservices For Greenfield? 2015. url: https://samnewman.io/
blog/2015/04/07/microservices-for-greenfield/ (visited on 13 April 2020).
[18]
Sam Newman. Monolith to Microservices: Evolutionary Patterns to Transform
your Monolith. Second. O’Reilly Media, 2019. url: https://books.google.dk/
books?id=nNa_DwAAQBAJ&lpg=PP1&ots=eg0U0wu9eJ&dq=Sam%20Newman&lr&pg=
PR2#v=onepage&q&f=false.
[19]
Jeffrey Palermo. The Onion Architecture. 2008. url: https://jeffreypalermo.
com/2008/07/the-onion-architecture-part-1/.
[20]
Chris Richardson. Microservices Patterns. Manning, 2019. Chapter 1. isbn: 9781617294549.
[21]
Ian Sommerville. Software Engineering, Global Edition. 10th. PEARSON EDU-
CATION, 2015. Chapter 3. isbn: 1292096136.
[22]
Vladislav Supalov. Should You Run Your Database in Docker? url: https://
vsupalov.com/database-in-docker/ (visited on 7 July 2020).
[23]
Maira Wenzel and Tom Dykstra. .NET Core CLI. 2020. url: https://docs.
microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/tools/ (visited on 7 July 2020).
