==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Dynamic linking to FELA
Master Thesis 2020
Authors:
Chendong Cai, s153447
Mark Pettersson, s154652
Supervisors:
Jan Karlshøj, Lector
External supervisors:
Lars Zenke Hansen, NIRAS A/S
Mads Holten Rasmussen, NIRAS A/S
Jørgen Krabbenhøft, Optum CE
Morten Andersen Herfelt, Optum CE
June 27, 2020
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
DTU Byg
Brovej
Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
byg@byg.dtu.dk
Phone: 4525 1700
Title: Dynamic linking to FELA
Project period: 27-01-2020 to 27-06-2020
Supervisor:
Jan Karlshøj, Lector
External supervisors:
Lars Zenke Hansen, NIRAS A/S
Mads Holten Rasmussen, NIRAS A/S
Jørgen Krabbenhøft, Optum CE
Morten Andersen Herfelt, Optum CE
Chendong Cai
Mark Pettersson
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Preface
In this Master’s Thesis titled Dynamic linking to FELA, you will read about an at-
tempt to automate the current industry practices of exchanging data between a BIM
software and a FELA/FEM software. The main focus is to utilize the concepts of
the Semantic Web, Linked Data, and ontologies to create a centralized data-hub that
potentially is usable by other BIM and FELA software. The thesis counting for 30
ECTS points is written as the ﬁnal part of the Master of Science program on Technical
University of Denmark (DTU), majoring in Civil Engineering.
The project period lasted from 27-01-2020 to 27-06-2020 and was undertaken in colla-
boration with NIRAS A/S and Optum CE, and came to life after a phone call with Lars
Zenke Hansen from NIRAS, who had a new project in mind with Jørgen Krabbenhøft
from Optum CE. Through meetings, it was decided that Jan Karlshøj would be per-
fect as the supervisor from DTU since he has supervised similar projects previously.
He then included Mads Holten Rasmussen from NIRAS into the project, because of
his competences within the Linked Building Data community, and Morten Andersen
Herfelt was included to represent Optum CE with his competences within FELA.
We would like to thank all of our supervisors for their assistance in providing advice
and guidance in taking the project in the direction it took, and for being available
throughout the entire project period. An extra thanks for also helping with the pre-
decessor report Design Practice.
We hope you enjoy reading it!
Mark Pettersson and Chendong Cai
27-06-2020
i
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
The practice of exchanging data between Building Information Modelling (BIM) and
structural analysis software is currently a manual process fragile to errors. Studies
show that a full-scale digitalization of the Architecture, Engineering, Construction,
Owner, and Operator (AECOO) industry will reduce the global annual cost signiﬁ-
cantly. Therefore an ambition for a fully integrated web-based data exchange process,
also known as BIM Maturity Level 3, is highly sought. With the use of the concepts of
the Semantic Web, Linked Data, and ontologies, this thesis aims to improve the current
processes of exchanging data. To demonstrate how integrated web-based BIM can look
like, the BIM program, Autodesk Revit, is made interoperable with the Finite Ele-
ment Limit Analysis (FELA) program, Optum MP. The information exchange works
through a shared triplestore that acts as an accessible web-hosted database for stor-
ing the information sent by the two programs, to simulate the process being web-based.
Based on dialogues with experts in the industry, it was clear that a new approach
to handle data exchange is needed. Moreover, through a state of the art research
on a relevant set of literature about the use of ontologies and other proposed data
exchange solutions, it was found that the concept of Linked Data is well-suited for
implementation in the process presented in this thesis. A demonstration of the concept
has shown that it is feasible to simplify and automate a large part of the exchange
process.
The results indicate that the use of Semantic Web technologies makes it
possible to have a purely web-based data exchange and collaborations. On this basis,
an implementation for a similar concept in commercial BIM/FELA software enabling
direct communications with a triplestore is recommended, which is in alignment with
the visions of BIM level 3.
iii
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research of the problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Existing solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Thesis statement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
State of the art
6
3
Theory
7
3.1
BIM Maturity Levels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
The Semantic Web and Linked Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Ontology, RDF and triples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.4
Querying data, SPARQL and Triplestore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Methodology
13
5
Slab Analysis Ontology
16
5.1
Relation between elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.2
Utilization of OPM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
6
Results
22
6.1
Accessibility & User interface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6.1.1
Error management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.2
The complete cycle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6.2.1
Data extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6.2.2
Data conversion & structural analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6.2.3
Data import . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.3
Structural veriﬁcation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
7
Discussion
35
7.1
Automation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
7.2
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
8
Conclusion
37
9
Future Work
38
References
40
v
==PAGE:10==
Appendices
42
A
Dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
B
Scripts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
C
Design Practice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
vi
==PAGE:11==
List of Abbreviations
AECOO
Architecture, Engineering, Construction, Owner, and Operator
API
Application Programming Interface
BIM
Building Information Modelling
BOT
Building Topology Ontology
CAD
Computer Aided Design
CDE
Common Data Environment
ECSO
European Construction Sector Observatory
FELA
Finite Element Limited Analysis
FEM
Finite Element Method
FoI
Feature of Interest
GUI
Graphical User Interface
HTML
HyperText Markup Language
IFC
Industry Foundation Classes
LD
Linked Data
OPM
Ontology for Property Management
OWL
Web Ontology Language
PROV-O
PROVenance Interchange Ontology
RDF
Resource Description Framework
SAO
Slab Analysis Ontology
SEAS
Smart Energy Aware Systems
SPARQL
SPARQL Protocol And RDF Query Language
URI
Uniform Resource Identiﬁer
W3C
World Wide Web Consortium
XML
Extensible Markup Language
vii
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
1
Introduction
T
he number of building projects in Denmark and the rest of Europe has conti-
nuously been increasing since 2010. Denmark alone has experienced an increase
in architectural and civil engineering activities by 21.9% from 2010-2018. The total
turnover of the European construction sector went from EUR 44.4 billion to EUR 74.5
billion - a signiﬁcant growth of 67.8%. According to the European Construction Sec-
tor Observatory (ECSO)[1], a full-scale digitalization of the Architecture, Engineering,
Construction, Owner, and Operation (AECOO) industry will be a huge game-changer.
Estimations made for non-residential construction suggest that the total annual global
cost can be shortened by approximately EUR 0.6-1.0 trillion in the engineering and
construction phases of building projects.
The digitalization of the AECOO industry has currently, and throughout the past two
decades, been a well-discussed topic, and the focus on developing new approaches to
advance it has never been higher. The primary tool has been an industry-wide im-
plementation of the concept of Building Information Modeling (BIM), an integrated
method of digitalizing building processes to increase collaboration between stakehold-
ers in a building project throughout its life-cycle. The concept has been in development
since the early 70s, but the broad acceptance of it ﬁrst began in the early 2000s. Con-
currently, the ﬁeld of civil engineering also beneﬁted from the digitalization of the
industry, and the implementation of BIM has only accelerated the discipline even fur-
ther. As a result of the digitalization, a wide variety of both BIM and structural
analysis software has come to life, which means that even within the same company,
numerous diﬀerent programs are in use. This trend raises the issue of interoperabil-
ity between programs. Exchanging data between these two types of software can be
problematic due to a lack of compatibility with the data format they each generate.
Therefore, a goal in the civil engineering ﬁeld has been to create an eﬀective method
to exchange data dynamically between a BIM and a structural analysis program, in
such a way, that calculated results automatically change the design in BIM models
accordingly.
The current industry standard of exchanging data is the Industry Foundation Classes
(IFC), a data model for describing primarily geometrical data of BIM models. Its
purpose is to increase interoperability in BIM-based projects, but it has its issues re-
garding the ultimate goal of the AECOO industry.
1
==PAGE:14==
Introduction
The ultimate goal of the AECOO industry is for data exchange to happen purely on a
web-scaled BIM-hub with a fully developed data-integration over the diﬀerent industry
disciplines. It essentially means that all involved stakeholders can collaborate and
exchange data on a project in real-time hosted over the web. In an attempt to reach
this, a clear set of goals, in the form of BIM Maturity Levels were formulated. The
levels range from BIM level 0 (also known as pre-BIM) to BIM level 3, and as the name
suggests, describe the maturity of BIM. Currently, the industry in the modern world
is in BIM level 2, where the data exchange is still heavily ﬁle-based, e.g., IFC-ﬁles and
exchanging ﬁles manually. It is not a terrible method, but the data exchange is not
happening in accordance with the visions of BIM 3.0 since it is not a very dynamic
process. IFC is primarily used as a reference model and not meant to be edited by
other stakeholders than the original creator of the model (typically the architect).
There is, therefore, a need for new methods of digitalizing the industry with the intent
of making the process of data exchange more clean and eﬃcient and ultimately reach
BIM 3.0.
1.1
Research of the problem
As of today, a dynamic data exchange between a structural analysis software, for
example, based on the Finite Element Method (FEM) or the Finite Element Limit
Analysis (FELA), and a BIM software is not a reality. FELA and BIM programs that
can exchange data are typically designed to work between those two speciﬁc programs
only and are most often only able to transfer data in one direction (BIM to FELA).
This ineﬃcient data exchange has been a well-known issue in the AECOO industry
for a long time. The sole goal in this project was initially to improve this process
by developing a program that connects the BIM software, Autodesk Revit, with the
FELA software, Optum MP, with a primary focus on the modeling of reinforcement
bars (short form, rebar). In Revit, rebar modeling is not an automated process. Each
time a change was made in the design model, causing the results in the FELA software
to change, the rebars had to be remodeled, which is a tedious and time-consuming task.
This thesis’ relevance is further backed up by the structural engineer Lars Zenke
Hansen from the Danish engineering consultancy company NIRAS, who is also an
external supervisor on the project and has established knowledge about the current
practices. His take on the matter is:
“I believe that the use of FELA or FEM software that automatically communicates
with BIM-tools in utilizing modeled geometry and sending information back to the BIM
model is of great importance in the industry. Today, the process is manual in almost
all facets except for a few geometric parameters. Nowadays, the time spent on using
FELA or FEM calculations is a cumbersome and inﬂexible process often associated
with a high risk of errors. Automation of exchanging data for, for example, concrete
structures such as geometries, material quality, and reinforcement, will provide signiﬁ-
cant beneﬁts and make working with structures more robust to changes.”
2
==PAGE:15==
Introduction
Hansen’s response conﬁrms the need for a process that eﬃciently links a BIM and a
FEM software with full/semi-automation. Before developing such a process, it is nece-
ssary to gain an understanding of what data to exchange. Therefore, a predecessor
project called Design practice with FELA for reinforced concrete slabs[2] was created,
investigating how a preliminary process of dynamic linking between Revit and Optum
MP could take place. The primary purpose was to learn the theories of FELA, focusing
on the lower bound theorem, which Optum MP uses to carry out structural calcula-
tions. The second purpose was learning how to do proper static documentation. After
understanding the theory, an analysis was carried out on a simple structural model
by hand calculations and FELA calculations using simple code provided by Optum in
the programming language MatLab. Finally, the results were veriﬁed using the FELA
software Optum MP. This predecessor report provided a solid understanding of FELA
and knowledge of the necessary data for a structural analysis program. The report
can be found in appendix C.
A solution that focuses on only linking Autodesk Revit and Optum MP will, however,
weaken the potential of dynamic data exchanging profoundly. Therefore, all involved
partners in the project agreed to add more ﬂexibility to the solution by applying the
concepts of Linked Data and ontologies. With this, the extracted data information
from Revit or any other BIM software is supposed to be adaptable by any FEM soft-
ware, meaning that the solution in this thesis is usable for other future projects. Revit
and Optum MP are still used in the project for the demonstration purpose.
To get a clearer understanding of what the suggested solution is compared to the
current data exchange process using the IFC format, diagrams are presented in ﬁgures
1.1 and 1.2.
Figure 1.1: Current IFC-based method of information exchange.
3
==PAGE:16==
Introduction
Figure 1.2: Suggested method of information exchange based on Linked Data and ontologies.
Figure 1.1 illustrates the current exchange process that the majority of the industry is
using, which is to export an IFC ﬁle from Revit. The IFC-ﬁle has to be processed in
a converter to be imported into Optum MP, although some FEM software accepts a
direct import of IFC. The engineer that performs the structural analysis informs the
obtained results to the architect, who then redesigns the model.
The suggested process in ﬁgure 1.2 uses a triplestore to store the data. Revit and
Optum MP will then exchange data through the triplestore via each of their commu-
nication interfaces. The data exchange will here work both ways, meaning that the
results obtained from running a structural analysis in Optum MP, can be returned to
Revit in a more automated process. Moreover, the idea is for other similar software
to make use of the triplestore or contribute to it as well.
1.2
Existing solutions
As an improvement to the current process, Ling et al. have proposed the Uniﬁed
FEM[14] solution, adding to the IFC-based BIM. The addition is an integrated sys-
tem that converts the IFC-format to XML containing only vital information needed for
structural analysis. The XML format is then further converted into a FEM-compatible
ﬁle format depending on which FEM program the user will use. The XML-based uni-
ﬁed FEM solution compared to the current process, is an improvement because it is
easier to maintain and upgrade according to the authors.
Another, more direct and software-speciﬁc approach, is proposed by Zotkin et al. [12].
Here, a proposal for a more eﬀective data exchange process between Autodesk Revit
and a FEM program IRA 2.0 was given by developing a Revit plug-in and a data
converter. The advantage of this approach is time-eﬃciency and that the process is
simpliﬁed exceptionally. This solution is similar to the one proposed in this thesis. It
is, therefore, also presented in the State of the Art chapter.
4
==PAGE:17==
Introduction
There are many more methods in development besides the few mentioned. Rasmussen
et al.
suggest that a better way of exchanging data would be an ontology-based
method using the Linked Data principles and the Semantic Web concepts. Therefore,
they developed the Building Topology Ontology (BOT)[9], an ontology for describing
the building domain, speciﬁcally. A list of the pros and cons giving an overview of the
highlighted methods are listed in table 1.1.
Table 1.1: Pros and cons of the highlighted methods.
Uniﬁed FEM
Direct Exchange
Ontology-based
Pros
Cons
Pros
Cons
Pros
Cons
- Flexible
- Document-based
- Eﬃcient
- Software-speciﬁc
- Flexible
- Complicated development
- Easy to maintain
- Simple
- Web-based
- Linking of data
The method used in this project is similar to the same Linked Data approach as the
BOT ontology paper did by using a set of ontologies for information management.
First of all, this approach fulﬁlls all the requirements mentioned in the introduction,
ﬁrst formulated in the BOT-ontology paper. It is a similar method compared to the
uniﬁed FEM, except that it neglects IFC entirely, and it is a web-based solution.
Aside from the one-way data exchange process from the Uniﬁed FEM approach, the
boundary is set slightly higher for this project by creating a dynamic link that goes
both ways between two pieces of software, here Optum MP and Autodesk Revit. The
main focuses of the proposed solution are for it to be dynamic, ﬂexible, and eﬃcient.
The idea for this solution is that the information not only has to be transferred to
Optum MP to conduct a reinforced concrete slab analysis but also for the desired data
to return to Revit, speciﬁcally the reinforcement data. Furthermore, the system has to
be able to handle any changes made that lead to new calculations of the reinforcement
data resent into Revit. The method for achieving this is described in the Methodology
chapter.
1.3
Thesis statement
Based on the visions of the AECOO industry and by researching the problems and
existing solutions, a formal thesis statement is formulated to express the main idea of
this thesis:
The current practice of exchanging data between a BIM and structural analysis
software is an archaic, ineﬃcient, error-prone, and typically one-directional process.
Therefore, a concept based on automation and integration of data is required to improve
the process and potentially lead to BIM level 3.
5
==PAGE:18==
2
State of the art
T
his chapter presents several existing research publications shedding light on the
topic of making a BIM and FEM software interoperability as well as how Linked
Data might be useful. To most eﬃciently explore these two topics and understand the
relationships between them, a set of literature has been selected based on its relevance
to the following questions:
(i) How to deal with the current issues of exchanging data between BIM and FEM
software?
(ii) How to manage the data extracted from a BIM software?
(iii) How to deal with changes in data, caused by the constant re-designing through-
out the life-cycle of a building project?
Zotkin et al. have been working with BIM related projects and published many re-
lated articles, one of which, published in 2016, is about their take on interoperability
between BIM and FEM software. Their solution was to build an Autodesk Revit plug-
in to decrypt an IFC ﬁle and only extract the parameters necessary for conducting
a structural analysis in the FEM software IRA 2.0. A converter then processes that
data and automatically runs the analysis. The entire idea is built around automat-
ing the data exchange process [12]. However, according to Rasmussen et al.’s four
requirements, document-based data storage is not an optimal solution to achieve BIM
maturity level 3. In 2019, the group adopted the concept of Linked Data and Semantic
Web into the AECOO industry by creating the Building Topology Ontology (BOT)
to describe data in building projects. The vision is to move from a Web of documents
to a Web of data [9]. The same researchers have published another ontology, Ontology
for Property Managing (OPM) in 2018, as an extension to the existing Smart-Energy
Aware System (SEAS). The OPM ontology adds the possibility of managing properties
that change over time and modeling them in diﬀerent levels of complexity. Also, the
paper demonstrated that storing a property’s value in a state and preserving historical
records [10]. The OPM ontology was updated a year later in 2019 with new terminolo-
gies dealing with two main issues: property reliability and property interdependence.
The new extension makes it possible to describe whether a property has an assumed
value or if it has been conﬁrmed and even adding documentation to it. The property
interdependence is about the association and aﬀection of a derived property to the
property from which it is derived [11] . In both papers about OPM, the authors have
illustrated how the properties can be managed using the SPARQL query language.
6
==PAGE:19==
3
Theory
In this chapter, the concepts and terminologies that are necessary to know to gain a
full understanding of the thesis are presented, starting with the BIM maturity levels.
3.1
BIM Maturity Levels
As mentioned in the introduction, the AECOO industry formulated the BIM Maturity
Levels [6, 7] to state clear goals for the visions of BIM. The levels range from BIM level
0 to BIM 3.0 and represent the evolution of the digitalization in the industry through
time. They are deﬁned as follows:
BIM level 0
BIM level 0 is also known as pre-BIM. Here, the building information exchange is
mostly paper-based in the form of 2D Computer-Aided Design (CAD) drawings, and
collaboration across the diﬀerent stakeholders is almost non-existent.
BIM level 1
BIM 1.0 is the real beginning of the digitalization in the AECOO industry. Here, the
data exchange mainly takes place electronically in the form of 2D- or 3D-geometrical
models using a Common Data Environment (CDE), usually managed by the contrac-
tor. It is also known as managed CAD.
BIM level 2
BIM 2.0 is an extension of level 1 with a much larger focus on collaboration between
stakeholders. The data exchange here runs via virtual libraries, which is a shared
platform with easy access for everyone involved in a project. It is also what is known
as full BIM, which are complex 3D-models merged from all the engineering disciplines
that have a large amount of information attached to them besides geometrical data.
An example could be attributing the cost of building elements to a model, which then
acts as a property of the said elements when accessing the data.
7
==PAGE:20==
Theory
BIM level 3
BIM 3.0 is currently the ultimate goal for the AECOO industry and is known as
integrated BIM. The vision is a fully developed data-integration over the diﬀerent en-
gineering disciplines with a basis on a purely web-scaled BIM-hub. Because maturity
level 3 is the next step, it is still yet to be fully deﬁned. However, the cause of this is
mainly due to the lack of methods on how to achieve it.
The main idea of what BIM 3.0 should look like is quite clear, and a set of requirements
to reach it is suggested in ECPPM[8] and further developed by [9] as follows:
• REQ1: Support of web-based information exchange;
• REQ2: Use of an information hub to allow collaborative, web-based workﬂows
among interdisciplinary stakeholders;
• REQ3: Use of a set of interoperable, ﬂexible, and open, standards covering
diﬀerent domains;
• REQ4: Support of distributed data integration, linking and tracking at data
level.
The requirements essentially state that to reach level 3, all information exchange should
take place on the web by utilizing open standards and interoperable decentralized BIM-
hubs. One method that is growing in popularity to fulﬁll these requirements is the use
of Linked Data, the concepts of the Semantic Web, and ontologies.
An illustrative model of the maturity levels and their usage throughout the past 30
years is presented in ﬁgure 3.1. Here, the visions of the future of BIM can be seen,
which is a full transition of the AECOO industry into BIM maturity level 3.
Figure 3.1: BIM maturity model by M. Bew and M. Richards [21]
8
==PAGE:21==
Theory
3.2
The Semantic Web and Linked Data
To describe the concept of Semantic Web without the involvement of Linked Data is
diﬃcult since the terms are interrelated. The Semantic Web is an extension of the
World Wide Web envisioned by the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C). The idea
is to move from a Web of Documents to a Web of Data where data is interpretable
by computers using a collection of Semantic Web technologies such as Resource De-
scription Framework (RDF) and SPARQL, ultimately making the internet a global
database. The Semantic Web is not only about putting data on the internet but also
”linking” the data (thereof Linked Data) together semantically, thereby creating a Web
of Data. The data, therefore, becomes metadata (data that provides data about data),
and computers should be able to interpret the data the same way a human mind does.
For data to become linked, programs using a format such as RDF should be able to
access existing databases such as Extensible Markup Language (XML) and HyperText
Markup Language (HTML). Furthermore, it should also be possible to query the data
to make it more available for the users of a program to work with [16].
3.3
Ontology, RDF and triples
The term Ontology, in information science, is deﬁned as ”a set of concepts and ca-
tegories in a subject area or domain that show their properties and relations between
them.” [15].
One of the ﬁrst developed ontologies is the Web Ontology Language
(OWL)[3] created by W3C. An example could be having a person, Jack, who is a
student, and another person, Anna, who is a teacher. A human will automatically as-
sociate diﬀerent attributes to Jack and Anna, for example, that they both are persons,
but a computer will not draw this connection by itself. By modeling this situation in
an RDF format, an extra deﬁnition states that a student is a person and a teacher
is also a person, is needed before a computer can make that connection. This extra
deﬁnition is an ontology. Ontologies can be as small as this but also consist of several
thousand deﬁnitions that are interrelated [16]. The creation of a new ontology usually
takes place when a description of relations and properties in a new domain is needed,
and the deﬁnition does not already exist in other ontologies. The best practice of
creating new ontologies is to create as many relations as possible to existing ontologies
to keep several deﬁnitions of the same terms from being created at a minimum, though
if it seems relevant to the new ontology, exceptions are made.
The RDF[17] format is the standard for exchanging data on the web.
It expands
on the linked data structure by using Uniform Resource Identiﬁers (URI) to state
the relations between resources (or things) in the form of subject-predicate-object, also
known as a triple. A triple is smart because it presents information in a machine-
readable way and is, therefore, a useful format for creating ontologies. To illustrate
how a triple functions, an example based on the above deﬁnition, a student is a person,
is formulated as a simple triple in listing 3.1.
9
==PAGE:22==
Theory
Listing 3.1: Simple triple.
<Student> <is_a> <Person> .
This triple is very basic and not very informative for a computer since there are no
real data attached to the statement. A solution to this is describing the same triple
by using URIs, as shown in listing 3.2.
Listing 3.2: Triple using URIs.
<http://example.com/test/student#>
<http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#type>
<http://schema.org/person> .
URIs are essentially a compact string of characters identifying a single resource. From
the above listing, an example is http://example.com/test/student#, which is the URI
referring to a deﬁnition of a student (this URI is a ﬁctive example for explanation’s
sake). It consist of a scheme part http (a database in this case), an authority part
example.com (the server hosting the data), and a fragment part student# (the ID of
the server). By using URIs, a computer will know the exact data the triple is referring
to and can, therefore, understand the ontology stating that a student is a person [18].
While RDF is the standard data model, RDF also oﬀers an ontology under the same
name. The second line of listing 3.2 is an example of a URI from the RDF ontology,
which states that a resource, in this case, the term student is an instance of the term
person.
When creating triples, it is tedious to write the URIs of every statement, especially
when describing a larger dataset. Here, the use of a textual syntax for RDF called
Turtle comes in handy because it works with preﬁxes. A preﬁx is a sort of library of
contents (ontologies) and consists of the scheme and authority parts of the URIs. The
purpose of importing them is to beneﬁt from the existing ontology deﬁnitions, also
known as the IDs. If used on the example, the triples become as shown in listing 3.3.
Listing 3.3: Triple using preﬁxes.
# Prefix
PREFIX test: <http://example.com/test#>
PREFIX rdf: <http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#>
PREFIX schema: <http://schema.org/>
test:student rdf:type schema:person .
In this example, formulating the triples with preﬁxes is more complicated than in
listings 3.1 and 3.2, but when the data becomes larger, it is an easier and smarter
method for stating them. By utilizing preﬁxes, when referring to a deﬁnition from an
ontology, one only has to call the preﬁx along with the ID. In this case, test:student
refers to the ontology test, and the ID, student, and a computer will automatically
10
==PAGE:23==
Theory
infer that the statements refer to their URIs. An even simpler form of the triple in
listing 3.3 exist, since the Turtle syntax already knows the RDF format, so rdf:type
is replaceable with an a.
3.4
Querying data, SPARQL and Triplestore
As stated in section 3.2, for data to be linked, it has to be queryable and accessible by a
program using RDF format. To query data is to retrieve or manipulate data, and a tool
to do this is SPARQL (pronounced ”sparkle”). SPARQL is a recursive acronym for
SPARQL Protocol and RDF Query Language, a query language speciﬁcally designed
for working with RDF formatted data. With SPARQL, it is possible to extract, display,
and manipulate speciﬁc data from databases.
For example, one could ask to see
only the data related to all doors in a building project, and SPARQL then returns
only information about doors.
SPARQL uses clauses such as SELECT, CONSTRUCT,
ASK, INSERT, DELETE, and WHERE, all of which are means to work with data in every
imaginable way. To demonstrate how SPARQL works, a CONSTRUCT query is used
in a visualizer developed by M. H. Rasmussen, called SPARQL-Visualizer[22], on the
example of Jack and Anna. The full triple of this example is seen in listing 3.4, as well
as the CONSTRUCT query shown in listing 3.5 [19].
Listing 3.4: Triples representing the example of Jack and Anna.
# Prefix
PREFIX test: <http://example.com/test#>
PREFIX schema: <http://schema.org/>
test:Anna a test:teacher ;
a schema:person .
test:Jack a test:student ;
a schema:person .
test:student a schema:person .
test:teacher a schema:person .
Listing 3.5: CONSTRUCT query for displaying every triple in listing 3.4.
CONSTRUCT
WHERE{
?something a ?class .
}
This CONSTRUCT query gives every triple entity that consist the predicate rdf:type,
in this case the letter a. A clear representation of how the triples are interrelated can
be seen in ﬁgure 3.2.
11
==PAGE:24==
Theory
Figure 3.2: Results from the CONSTRUCT query in listing 3.5 using SPARQL-Visualizer developed by
M. H. Rasmussen.
From this ﬁgure, it can be seen that a computer now draws the relationships between
all the instances, in the same way a human mind does, by connecting them to being a
person.
Another term that is necessary to know is triplestore. It is essentially a database for
storing RDF triples. A triplestore exposes a SPARQL endpoint, which means that one
can use SPARQL to communicate with it. The SPARQL endpoint can be considered
as an Application Programming Interface (API), which is a computer interface that
acts as an intermediary between multiple software [20].
12
==PAGE:25==
4
Methodology
I
n this chapter, a strategy to solve the problems of the current data exchange process
between BIM and FEM software is discussed. To determine the relevance of the
project, the authors had been in contact with NIRAS A/S, and Optum MP. Both
companies ﬁnd that the current process is time-consuming and costly for the industry
(read the interview with Hansen in the Introduction).
Due to the complexity of the project, it was ﬁrst divided into two parts. The ﬁrst
part is a preliminary project to understand the theories behind FELA/FEM, how it
is performed, and the parameters needed for the calculation. The second part, which
is this thesis, focused on the data exchange between BIM and FELA software.
Next, a state of the art research was conducted by exploring articles and papers on
the topic and ﬁnding the relations between them. It was necessary to have a general
idea of the current research state of the subject. Furthermore, the theories related to
Linked Data was also investigated and studied.
Finally, the concept was demonstrated as presented in ﬁgure 1.2, the overall strategy
was to demonstrate a dynamic exchange process between Autodesk Revit and Optum
MP through a triplestore. The speciﬁc triplestore used in the project was the Apache
Jena Fuseki triplestore, as it was free to use and open sourced. Since neither Revit nor
Optum MP could communicate with the database itself, tools were needed to establish
the connection. The following programming languages were used as communication
tools.
• Dynamo is a visual programming tool, which was used as a communication
interface for Revit. Dynamo provides access to the Revit API. It can retrieve
almost any information contained in a Revit project imaginable. When combined
with the RDF model, it can send just the necessary data to the triplestore.
• Python is currently one of the most popular programming languages. The main
reason this language was chosen as the communication interface between the
triplestore and Optum MP was that it oﬀered plenty of libraries, which were
incredibly relevant for the topics investigated in this thesis. For instance, the
xml.tree package for generating the structural analysis ﬁle.
13
==PAGE:26==
Methodology
Figure 1.2 as mentioned is suﬃcient to illustrate the concept. However, the underlying
processes are more complicated than it seems on that illustration. Therefore, a ﬂow
chart was created. It is a great tool to describe the processes in detail and is presented
in ﬁgure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Flow chart of dynamic linking work ﬂow
On the ﬂow chart, the red arrows represent the ﬂow of processes that transfer data
from Revit to Optum MP, and the black arrows the returning path from Optum MP
to Revit. The document symbols represent the format of the ﬁle generated by the
ﬁle-creating processes. Additionally, the processes also indicate which tool is involved.
The ﬂow diagram starts with Revit, followed by the extraction of the data and con-
version of it to the RDF format. The data is then sent to the Fuseki triplestore that
recognizes it.
The next step was to retrieve the necessary data to build the ﬁle for conducting a slab
analysis in Optum MP. Optum MP required a .mpn ﬁle to run the analysis, which
essentially is an XML ﬁle that contained information about the geometry, supports,
loads, and more. The majority of these tasks in the ﬂow chart was done in Python.
The two most crucial modules for this project were SPARQLWrapper for obtaining and
14
==PAGE:27==
Methodology
updating data from the triplestore (an example of how SPARQLWrapper is used can
be found in the results) and xml.etree for building and parsing XML-ﬁles. Once the
structural analysis was completed in Optum MP, another Python script returned the
new information or any possible changes of existing information to the database and
stored it using the OPM ontology to deal with properties that are changed over time.
The ﬁnal part of the workﬂow to complete the cycle was transferring the desired in-
formation back to the Revit project. One way of doing this was by creating Shared
Parameters[4], which were parameter deﬁnitions that could be used in multiple Re-
vit families and across Revit projects. The creation of Shared Parameters could be
done eﬃciently in Dynamo. Python was used to get the desired information from the
database and stored it in a .xlsx-ﬁle, which could then be imported into Dynamo and
used to create Shared Parameters in the Revit project.
To say that the suggested solution had worked, a veriﬁcation of the result was manda-
tory. Since this was not a classic structural engineering project, there were not many
numbers available for comparisons. However, with the knowledge gained from the pre-
decessor project, it was recognized that the structural analysis should yield a particular
load factor, which was used to verify the accuracy of the automatically generated struc-
tural model. If the two load factors were the same or would diﬀer within an acceptable
range, the concept was proven to work.
15
==PAGE:28==
5
Slab Analysis Ontology
T
he development of the Slab Analysis Ontology (SAO) is intended as a tool to
describe information accurately within the scope of this project. As previously
mentioned, there are a great number of ontologies available. Among the existing on-
tologies, the BOT and ifcOWL ontologies are, perhaps, the ones that best suit this
project. However, BOT is intended for describing larger building elements, such as
bot:Building, bot:Zone, etc. The smallest instances it describes are bot:Element
and its sub-elements, which does not cover the types of element. On the other hand,
ifcOWL does provide the necessary classes for the structure in this project, such as
:ifcSlab and :ifcColumn, but as the entire idea of SAO is based on avoiding IFC,
deﬁning these terminologies in a new ontology as SAO is more relevant for the project.
The following example demonstrates why describing data more accurately on a com-
puter is important. For instance, if SAO was not developed, and the dataset only used
BOT, when deﬁning a slab and a column, both would be assigned as bot:Element,
and to obtain these elements, the following SPARQL query may be used:
Listing 5.1: Simple query for obtaining all instances of class bot:Element
# Prefix
PREFIX bot: <https://w3id.org/bot#>
PREFIX rdf: <http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#>
# Query
SELECT ?element
WHERE {
?element rdf:type bot:Element .
}
The query saves both the slab and the column in the variable ?element and returns
it (the variable could be given any name). Now, what if only one of these elements is
sought? Then, this action is not feasible yet, as there are no distinguishable diﬀerences
between these two elements. For this reason, the ontology needs to have sub-classes.
Hence, the SAO ontology. To solve the above problem, the slab element is now of
class sao:Slab, and the column of class sao:Column. Also, the computer needs to
understand that the slab and the column are still building elements (BOT:Element).
16
==PAGE:29==
Slab Analysis Ontology
Therefore, the ontology deﬁnitions in listing 5.2 are needed. It is precisely the same
logic as the example about Jack and Anna, mentioned in the Theory chapter.
Listing 5.2: Ontology deﬁnitions
sao:Slab rdfs:subClassOf bot:Element .
sao:Column rdfs:subClassOf bot:Element .
The additional deﬁnitions in the above triples may not be necessary for the completion
of the data exchange, but it is the initial step into Linked Data.
Without these
ontologies, everything stored on the database is merely a dataset. In contrast, the
goal of Linked Data is to create a Web of Data, including the relationships among
data or a collection of interrelated datasets on the web. These deﬁnitions allow for
the retrieval of all structural elements eﬃciently, and it also informs the database that
a slab and a column are not the same elements, but that they both are structural
elements.
5.1
Relation between elements
The triplestore holds information of element dimensions, identiﬁcation numbers, and
the relation between elements, all of which are relevant for modeling structures in Op-
tum MP. The fundamental piece of information is the relationship between elements.
In Optum MP, the modeling method is based on constraints rather than coordinates.
Four grids constrain a slab. Two perpendicularly intersecting grids constrain a column
and the slab(s) it supports. A wall is constrained by the grids that are at each end of
it, the parallel grid its centerline follows, and the supported slab(s). A few predicates
are created to store this information: sao:hasId stores a six-digits ID to each element
directly obtained from the Revit project, sao:supports deﬁnes the relation of a sup-
porting element to the host element, and sao:isConstrainedBy deﬁnes the relation of
a structural element to the intersecting grids. All three are a owl:DatatypeProperty
that holds a data value. To put this in a simple visualization, ﬁgure 5.1 presents such
an example of a column element.
Linking of the elements is done by using the element ID. The value of sao:supports is
given by a list of IDs belonging to the slabs which the column is supporting. The length
of the list varies from 1 to 4, given that all slabs are rectangular shaped. However,
sao:hasId only contains one single ID. Thus, from the Linked Data’s point of view,
these elements are not explicitly linked to each other, but instead are tied together by
mutual values. The same goes for the relation between the column and the grids, only
that the list has an ID of two grids.
Note that the ID discussed in this section is the six-digits number directly related to
the corresponding element from the Revit project, and one should diﬀer it from the
unique identiﬁer found in the element name as following:
inst:8546f365-e1ed-4931-b031-fb07bc8c3578-000481e5
17
==PAGE:30==
Slab Analysis Ontology
Figure 5.1: Relations between a column and other elements.
An arguably more ”correct” solution is to directly link these elements, which can be
illustrated by ﬁgure 5.2. This topic is also a matter of improvement discussed in Future
Work.
Figure 5.2: Relation between elements described with SAO.
The rest of the predicates in the dataset describing element dimensions and other
properties are used to store values and are quite evident in what they do. They can
be understood without further interpretation, for example, sao:hasThickness and
sao:hasCoordinates. The complete list of the dataset is found in the Appendices.
18
==PAGE:31==
Slab Analysis Ontology
5.2
Utilization of OPM
For managing the rebar data, the OPM ontology is fully utilized. It is the part of
the dataset that uncovers the versatility and the potential of Linked Data. The re-
bar properties are modeled as OPM-compliant L3(level 3) properties[10], which indi-
cates the degree of complexity and refers to the steps/relations between the feature
of interest (FoI) and the actual object. An L3 property requires that the property
instance must have at least one opm:hasPropertyState relation to a state and the
opm:CurrentPropertyState class must be assigned to the most recent state. The
listing below shows how the rebar data is managed with the OPM ontology, along
with schema.org and PROV-O.
Listing 5.3: Rebar data management
# Ontology
sao:Slab rdfs:subClassOf bot:Element ; a owl:Class .
sao:Rebar a owl:Class .
sao:hasDiameter a owl:ObjectProperty .
# Data
inst:8546f365-e1ed-4931-b031-fb07bc8c3578-00047edf
a sao:Slab ;
bot:hasSubElement inst:7adaec6a-8acd-11ea-bc55-0242ac130003 .
inst:7adaec6a-8acd-11ea-bc55-0242ac130003
a sao:Rebar ;
sao:hasDiameter <http://localhost:3030/test/diameter> .
<http://localhost:3030/test/diameter>
a opm:Property ;
opm:hasPropertyState <http://localhost:3030/test/diameter#state1> .
<http://localhost:3030/test/diameter#state1>
a opm:CurrentPropertyState ;
schema:value "0.012" ;
prov:generatedAtTime "2020-06-12"
An L1 version of the rebar would be much more simpliﬁed and link the value directly
to the rebar:
Listing 5.4: L1 equivalence of listing 5.3
inst:7adaec6a-8acd-11ea-bc55-0242ac130003
a sao:Rebar ;
sao:hasDiameter "0.012" .
If this is the case, sao:hasDiameter would become a owl:DatatypeProperty instead
of owl:ObjectProperty. The diﬀerence between these classes is that owl:Datatype-
19
==PAGE:32==
Slab Analysis Ontology
Property links individuals to data values, whereas owl:ObjectProperty links indi-
viduals to individuals.
Despite the complexity of the L3 property, it comes with a beneﬁt, which is having
an opm:PropertyState. With it and the actual value stored under it, the change of
value over time becomes achievable. An essential feature of an L3 property is that it
can be presented as an L1 property using a CONSTRUCT query(see listing 5.5) for lucid
illustration purposes, but not the other way around. The query is especially useful,
when the data model has to be presented to other stakeholders that might only have
basic knowledge of ontology.
Listing 5.5: Query for construction of L1 property from L3 property
CONSTRUCT{
?foi ?prop ?val
}
WHERE{
?foi ?prop ?theProperty .
?theProperty opm:hasPropertyState ?latestState .
?latestState a opm:CurrentPropertyState .
?latestState schema:value ?val
}
To illustrates how the OPM is implemented on a property, the following ﬁgure is
presented with the rebar diameter as the example.
The ﬁgure illustrates how the
diameter property alters from one state to another using OPM.
Figure 5.3: Graphical illustration of OPM ontology.
20
==PAGE:33==
Slab Analysis Ontology
Originally, State1 is assigned to the diameter with a value and with opm:CurrentPropertyState,
indicating that it is the latest state. When the value has been changed, a new state
is assigned to the property and succeeds the class opm:CurrentPropertyState, while
the previous state remains. It implies that if the new state is assigned by mistake or
somehow, the action is regretted, and the older state can be accessed and reassigned to
the property. The same model is applied to the rebar spacing property, which likewise
the rebar diameter, are the two properties used to demonstrate the concept of Linked
Data. As some properties are interrelated such as rebar diameter and the thickness of
slabs, the most ideal solution is to implement the extension of the OPM ontology as
well. For example, the term opm:wasDerivedFrom can be used to draw a connection
between the diameter and the thickness. However, due to the limited time frame of
the project, it is not implemented at the moment.
21
==PAGE:34==
6
Results
T
his chapter presents the proposed solution with an in-depth description of the
involved Linked Data processes by dividing the workﬂow in ﬁgure 4.1 into smaller
and more understandable parts. For demonstration purposes and to verify the solution,
the same simple structural model from the predecessor report is used, with the same
geometry and material/load conditions (see ﬁgure 6.1). But ﬁrst, the issue of making
the solution processes accessible and user-friendly is addressed.
Figure 6.1: Test model in Revit
Dimensions
Slab width: 8000 mm
Slab depth: 6000 mm
Slab thickness: 400 mm
Column size: 500 x 500 mm
Wall thickness: 250 mm
Material/Load
Com. strength of concrete: 35 MPa
Ten. strength of rebar: 550 MPa
Self-weight: 10 kN/m2
Other self-weight: 2 kN/m2
Live load: 5 kN/m2
22
==PAGE:35==
Results
6.1
Accessibility & User interface
As previously mentioned in the Methodology, the two programming languages, Dy-
namo and Python, are used to create the communication interfaces between the triple-
store and its corresponding clients, Revit and Optum MP. The development of the
entire data information exchange cycle presented in ﬁgure 4.1 has resulted in six Dy-
namo scripts and a vast number of Python scripts, all of which are necessary for the
completion of the change process. Due to the high number of scripts, managing them
all in the right order becomes diﬃcult. Even people who are deeply involved in the
project might ﬁnd it challenging to navigate through the scripts, let alone someone
who has no prior knowledge in programming. Therefore, to make the scripts more
user-friendly, a GUI was created.
Fortunately, for the Dynamo scripts, Revit already has a built-in add-on, namely
Dynamo Player, which makes it possible to run all the scripts without actually opening
them. Besides this, Dynamo Player also oﬀers quick user inputs option directly on the
platform (see ﬁgure 6.2).
Figure 6.2: Dynamo Player
23
==PAGE:36==
Results
Now for the Python scripts, the GUI is built from scratch using the toolkit TkInter,
which is a commonly used Python GUI builder package. This way, the relevant Python
scripts are assembled in a small, simple application that makes it easy to control and
access all of the main functions, which are categorized and sorted in the right order
of execution to reduce confusion. The ﬁrst thing to see when opening the GUI is the
main page (see ﬁgure 6.3) with the buttons and categories Settings, mpn Converter,
Data Management, and Quit, which exits the program.
Figure 6.3: Python GUI main page with function categories.
• Settings: is focusing on establishing connection to the Fuseki triplestore and
choosing which dataset the data is to be stored. This page acts as a preparation
step and is the ﬁrst page to run before the actual data exchange can take place.
• mpn Converter: is where the necessary ﬁles for conducting a slab analysis in
Optum MP are generated based on the data from the triplestore.
• Data Management: contains the updating and the ability to manage the
dataset with changes made in Optum MP, including the optimized rebar infor-
mation.
Now, the interface of each category is presented along with a description of their re-
spective functions.
24
==PAGE:37==
Results
(a) GUI page 1: Settings.
(b) GUI page 2: mpn Converter.
(c) GUI page 3: Data Management.
Figure 6.4: GUI interfaces, pages 1-3.
25
==PAGE:38==
Results
Settings
• Launch Triplestore: as the name states, launches triplestore and opens the Fuseki
triplestore in the default web browser.
• Dataset Name: deﬁnes which dataset created on the database that the informa-
tion is to be stored.
• Save: saves the dataset name, so all other functions refer to it.
mpn Converter
(After transferring the data from Revit to triplestore via Dynamo).
• Generate XML ﬁles: generates all the XML ﬁles for the diﬀerent elements needed
for the structural analysis ﬁles for Optum MP.
• Merge ﬁles: merges the generated XML ﬁles and creates a single .mpn ﬁle ready
to be opened in Optum MP.
• Open ﬁle location: opens the ﬁle folder containing current and previously gener-
ated .mpn ﬁles.
Data Management
(After running the structural analysis in Optum MP).
• Upload rebar data: uploads the rebar data from the .mpn ﬁle generated by the
structural analysis in Optum MP to the database, and creates a relation between
the slabs and the rebar.
• Update rebar data: updates the rebar data on the database if there are new
changes made in the .mpn ﬁle.
• Add ontology: uploads the the ontology deﬁnitions to the database.
• Create Shared Parameters: requests rebar information from the database and
stores it in a .xlsx ﬁle.
The arrangement of the buttons should make it intuitive for users to use the program,
but some problems may arise if the execution of the buttons is out of order. Therefore,
as an eﬀort to reduce the chance of errors occurring, some time was spent on error
management.
26
==PAGE:39==
Results
6.1.1
Error management
The chance of an error occurring when using the GUI is highly probable despite the
means made to reduce them. The fact is that the more functions the application oﬀers,
the more likely an error will occur. Most of the errors are due to human mistakes,
such as not establishing a connection to the database or executing the functions in
the wrong order. An error in a software program is ubiquitous and unavoidable, but
when the error is left untouched, it becomes problematic. To ensure the program is
user-friendly, the developer must think of every possible scenario where an error could
occur and manage and respond to it accordingly. In this case, the GUI will replace the
Python error messages with pop-up message boxes that are understandable even for
users without any programming knowledge. These pop-up boxes also guide the user
to what the next steps are in the application. As an example, below an error message
in Python is listed:
ConnectionRefusedError: [WinError 10061] No connection could be made because the
target machine actively refused it
During handling of the above exception, another exception occurred:
urllib.error.URLError: <urlopen error [WinError 10061] No connection could be made
because of the target machine actively refused it>
This error message states that something is wrong with the triplestore connection.
The message is messy and hard to understand. So instead, a pop-up window stating
the issue occurs, as seen in ﬁgure 6.5, is implemented.
Figure 6.5: Python error text converted into a simple error message.
The errors in Python were handled by the inbuilt try and except functions. Essen-
tially, it means that a script try a block of code will continue running, except when
an error occurs, and the script stops, and a message box of error shows up. In 6.6), an
example of a message box that guides the user through the workﬂow of the program
is shown. Here, it states that the user should switch from Python to Dynamo before
continuing the other processes in the GUI. All of these measures improve the speed
and smoothness of the workﬂow. Hence, it is increasing the user-friendliness.
27
==PAGE:40==
Results
Figure 6.6: Info message guiding the user to Dynamo after setting the working dataset.
6.2
The complete cycle
Now that the handling of the accessibility and error management has been presented,
this chapter will continue with explaining the workﬂow from ﬁgure 4.1 in detail. As
stated earlier, the workﬂow is divided into three parts. The ﬁrst part being the data
extraction from Revit to the triplestore, the second part a data conversion into Optum
MP, and the third part being the importing of the desired information back into
Revit. Each part will include ﬁgures and algorithms to analyze what is involved in the
processes and how APIs operate behind the user interface.
6.2.1
Data extraction
The ﬁrst step in the workﬂow is creating the geometrical model in Revit. The builtin
Revit application, Dynamo, is then used to extract the data from that model. Dynamo
works by creating nodes with speciﬁc functions that link to other nodes that together
will perform the intended purpose for the whole script, in this case, to extract data.
They quickly became quite large and were therefore separated into four parts, one for
each type of element (decks, gridlines, walls, columns). The image in ﬁgure 6.7 is a
portion of the Dynamo script for the column elements. In short, it locates the slab
that is intersecting with a column element and obtains its ID. The same information
is later stored with the predicate sao:supports as illustrated in ﬁgure 5.1.
Figure 6.7: Dynamo script for obtaining the ID of slabs that intersect each column.
28
==PAGE:41==
Results
While the scripts obtain the geometrical data from Revit, they also have to convert
the data an RDF-format and send it to the triplestore. In Dynamo, it is possible to
use Python programming to make nodes that perform speciﬁc actions and to do the
above, an adaptation of the OPM-REST[13] tool created by Mads Holten Rasmussen,
was used (see 6.8). The ﬁrst Python script receives the information and stores it in
a list of triples and sends it to another Python Script that sends the triples to the
triplestore using the HTTP Request module. The data sent to the triplestore can in
Dynamo using the ”watch”-node, be viewed.
Figure 6.8: Dynamo script for triple generation and data post.
The data is now stored on the Fuseki triplestore and can be accessed using the SPARQL
query language.
Figure 6.9: Data on Fuseki triplestore
29
==PAGE:42==
Results
6.2.2
Data conversion & structural analysis
The next step is to perform the structural analysis in Optum MP. Optum MP requires
an XML-formated input ﬁle, and the relevant data must, therefore, be requested from
the database to create it. The SPARQLWrapper module, a powerful tool in Python,
allows Python to communicate with the database in its original form using SPARQL
queries. In the following algorithm, SPARQLWrapper establishes a connection to the
database using the provided URL of the dataset endpoint and sends a query request
that is formulated in the function setQuery. The ﬁnal line then converts the data to
XML-format, which can easily be manipulated in Python to get the desired result.
Listing 6.1: SPARQLWrapper in Python
from SPARQLWrapper import SPARQLWrapper, XML
url = "http://localhost:3030/test/"
# Using SPARQL query to get data from database
sparql = SPARQLWrapper(url)
sparql.setQuery("""
PREFIX sao: <http://sao#>
PREFIX inst: <http://tst/>
PREFIX rdfs: <http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#>
SELECT ?tk
WHERE{
?s a sao:Slab ;
sao:hasThickness ?tk .
} """)
# Convert the data to XML format
sparql.setReturnFormat(XML)
xml_string = sparql.query().convert().toxml()
The data manipulation and processing of constructing the .mpn ﬁle is a major task
in itself and not that exciting, so the speciﬁcs of the coding is not presented here.
However, for anyone interested in the process can ﬁnd the codes in appendix B. A
piece of the ﬁnished ﬁle to illustrate the structure of a .mpn ﬁle.
is presented in
ﬁgure 6.10. The .mpn ﬁle format has the same structure as an XML-ﬁle, a standard
ﬁle format, which certainly makes the process of setting it up easier. The speciﬁc
example in ﬁgure 6.10 is for slab modeling in Optum MP. The slabs have diﬀerent
properties, such as ID, level, and name. The child nodes of the Deck contains a list of
GridLineConstraints that, too, have the corresponding IDs. They act as references to
the actual gridlines that constrain the slab.
30
==PAGE:43==
Results
Figure 6.10: Slab modeling section of the .mpn ﬁle.
The .mpn ﬁle can now be run in Optum MP to perform the structural analysis. The ﬁle
is only valid with some mandatory parameters: material properties, load magnitudes,
and load combinations. Thus these parameters are pre-deﬁned when creating it. If
the result does not satisfy the given load combination, a manual adjustment of the
parameters is possible in Optum MP until the desired result is obtained. Note that the
model, shown in ﬁgure 6.11, has ﬁve separated slabs instead of one single slab. The
result of the analysis may vary depending on the modeling method, which is discussed
in the next chapter.
Figure 6.11: Structural model in Optum MP
31
==PAGE:44==
Results
6.2.3
Data import
After completing the structural analysis, the ﬁnal phase to ﬁnish the data exchange
process is to return the rebar properties to Revit. The relevant information is sent
to the database and managed by using the OPM ontology, as described in Slab Anal-
ysis Ontology. In the Python GUI, when pressing the function called Create Shared
Parameters, the rebar data is requested and stored in an Excel spreadsheet, as seen
in ﬁgure 6.12. Here the property name, the value of the property, and the parameter
group it belongs to in Revit are stated.
Figure 6.12: Spreadsheet with rebar information
The same spreadsheet is imported to the Dynamo script shown in ﬁgure 6.13 that
creates the Shared Parameters in the Revit project. This phase of the process is where
most manual work has to be done.
Although the Shared Parameters are created
automatically in the Revit Project, they must be assigned to the desired category
manually, in this case, the Floors. When the parameters are ﬁrst assigned, they will
have an empty value.
Figure 6.13: Dynamo script for creating Shared Parameters.
32
==PAGE:45==
Results
The script in ﬁgure 6.14 is the ﬁnal piece of the puzzle.
It sets the value of the
assigned Shared Parameters. Similar to all the other Dynamo scripts, this script is
also accessible from the Dynamo Player interface. When it is executed, the user must
choose between an instance or a type parameter. Which one is dependent on which
option was selected when the parameters were ﬁrst assigned.
Figure 6.14: Dynamo script for assigning value to Shared Parameters.
After running the script, the value of the parameters now appears on the property page
(see ﬁgure 6.15). If that is the case, the rebar information has successfully returned to
Revit, and the data exchange cycle is complete.
Figure 6.15: Property page of a ﬂoor family with Shared Parameters highlighted.
33
==PAGE:46==
Results
6.3
Structural veriﬁcation
The calculations done in the ﬁrst report [2] were on the same test model as the one
used in this project, which means that the results are comparable. The result of this
report was a load factor of 1.4691. By using the automatically generated model, the
load factor is found to be 1.4662, which is a diﬀerence of 0.2 %. A plausible cause for
this could be that the gridline coordinates are rounded. Another option, as mentioned
previously in this chapter, how the slabs are modeled. As the rounding of numbers
is insigniﬁcant to the numbers’ size, this is unlikely to be the reason. Therefore the
second possible source of error is investigated. For the test, a new model is created
manually in Optum MP based on the model, with the slab divided into ﬁve pieces.
It turns out that the load factor obtained in the new model is exactly 1.4662. This
conﬁrms that the way the structure is modeled has an impact on the result.
34
==PAGE:47==
7
Discussion
The main goal in this thesis was to demonstrate how the principles of the Semantic
Web, Linked Data, and the use of ontologies are a viable method in creating integrated
web-based data exchange by making a BIM and a FEM/FELA software interoperable.
It was shown and veriﬁed, with the creation of the Slab Analysis Ontology, a simple
GUI to handle the data exchange, and the use of Dynamo, on a simple structural
system, that a partially automated data exchange process is possible.
By comparing the results from structural analysis in Optum MP on a manual built
model with the automatically generated model using the suggested solution, the proof
of concept is perfectly demonstrated, as the comparison showed no diﬀerence in the cal-
culated results. It suggest that the current practice of using IFC-format ﬁle exchange
can be completely obsolete in the future if the concept of Linked Data is further ap-
plied throughout the industry, and the proposed program is expanded to cover more
than just slab structures.
Comparing the result with the requirements to reach BIM maturity level 3, they are
fulﬁlled, in theory, but only superﬁcially. It is still a satisﬁed result, as the aim of
the project is not to reach BIM level 3, but to demonstrate what a solution might
look like, and the potential of Linked Data. REQ1 and REQ2 are fulﬁlled since the
exchanged data is stored on a triplestore hosted over the web. The triplestore is the
information hub that applications can use for collaborations. REQ3 and REQ4 are
also fulﬁlled by applying ontology and Semantic Web’s standards. There is still a long
way to go before the concept is fully developed and brings the industry into BIM level
3. Additionally, to reach it, the BIM and FEM software are required to be able to
communicate with the database directly, which is not the case presently. Therefore,
a solution would be for the BIM/FEM software to implement such a concept in the
program.
7.1
Automation
A sizable chunk of the project is about the automation of the data exchange process.
A fully automated process is undoubtedly time-eﬃcient and cost-saving.
What if
the solution can take the information to a FEM software, run the analysis itself,
and then bring the result back? Or perhaps it can even make the changes in the
35
==PAGE:48==
Discussion
BIM project accordingly? How about that the abovementioned steps are done with
just a single click?
Is it not the most desirable thing for many companies in the
industry? The authors take on this subject is that although the full automation brings
countless beneﬁts, some critical processes must remain open for human decisions. The
computer could make a suggestion, and the architect/engineer should decide whether
to accept or discard it. It is, of course, based on the premise that full automation is
achievable. Based on the limitations of BIM/FEM software of the current technology
in the industry, the best outcome might be a partially automated process with the
modeling and structural analysis needed to be overlooked by an engineer..
7.2
Limitations
The result shows that the data exchange process based on Linked Data has worked
as intended. However, due to the inadequate knowledge about Dynamo, the process
suﬀers a few limitations. Two of the most noticeable are: the centerline of a wall must
be in alignment with the grid, and a column must be placed on the intersecting point
of two grids (see ﬁgure 7.1). Besides the supporting elements’ location limitations,
the solution is also limited to accept one-leveled slab structures, which is discussed in
Future Work.
(a) Top view of wall section
(b) Top view of column section
Figure 7.1: Restraint on modeling of supporting elements
36
==PAGE:49==
8
Conclusion
The research aimed to improve the current practices of exchanging data between BIM
and structural analysis software. Based on Linked Data and the use of Semantic Web
technologies and development of the SAO ontology, it has been demonstrated that
the idea of an integrated web-based and semi-automated data exchange process is
possible. By developing communication interfaces to combine the BIM program Revit
and the FELA program Optum MP through a shared triplestore, manually modeling
simple slab structures in FELA software can be completely obsolete. It can thereby
save a signiﬁcant amount of time and avoid errors happening while modelling and
miscommunications between stakeholders. Based on the discussions, it is within the
current technologies to implement the visions of BIM 3.0 into the AECOO industry
to a certain degree. To fully realize the vision, the process should ultimately remove
the communication interfaces by implementing the technologies into the BIM and
FELA software directly, making them able to perform direct communication with the
triplestore. The thesis is therefore viewed, by the authors, as a successful project.
37
==PAGE:50==
9
Future Work
The ﬁnished work of the project is yet to be called a product but it is a developing
concept. There are still many optimizations to be done to fully reveal the potential
of Linked Data and before it can be used in practice. Due to the lack of time, many
optimizations and tests have been left for the future.
The potential of Linked Data and using ontologies to describe the data is tremendous.
However, the concept has not been fully utilized in the project yet, and many other
useful ontologies could be linked. The following are some of the improvements that
can be done for the ontology.
• The ﬁrst of which being lack of a unique identiﬁer to some of the instances in
the dataset, for instance, the diameter property instance. Giving an instance
a unique ID is a common practice for using ontologies. Therefore it should be
improved.
• The extension of the OPM ontology[11] that describes the reliability of prop-
erties, and property interdependence is not yet implemented in the project due
to the small size of the data sample. When in practice dealing with a massive
structure involving multiple stakeholders, the reliability of a property becomes
essential. Overall this extension of OPM can make a dataset more robust.
• The way the sao:supports terminology is used currently is not optimal. As men-
tioned previously, a smarter method is to redeﬁne it as a owl:ObjectProperty
and use it to directly link an individual to another. For instance
<Column1> sao:supports <Slab1>.
• One of the most prominent features of an ontology is that it can be shared with
others using a preﬁx. However, the SAO ontology is still in an early stage of
development. In order to publish the ontology, it needs more terminologies to
be complete.
Another possible option is to combine SAO with other similar
ontologies within the domain of structural analysis by collaborating with other
researchers.
A collaboration will most likely result in a more comprehensive
structural analysis ontology.
At the time being, the developed method is limited to a simple one-level slab struc-
ture. It could be interesting to extend the program to deal with more complex slab
38
==PAGE:51==
Future Work
structures or even other types of structures, which will undoubtedly help the spread
of the concept.
The eﬃciency of the current workﬂow could also use an improvement. Some parts
of the data exchange process can be combined and thereby require less user inputs.
As a result, the entire process should become less time-consuming. For instance, the
process where Python obtains data from the database and creates a ﬁle with Shared
Parameters, which is imported into Dynamo, could be optimized so that Dynamo di-
rectly obtains the data from the database. Improvement of GUI may also optimize
the workﬂow.
Another area that could be improved is where the data is returned from Optum MP.
The program can be extended to return not only the material parameters but also the
geometrical. This will allow the engineer to modify the geometry of a structure and
suggest new dimensions if this is more eﬃcient than a change of the rebar material
parameters.
39
==PAGE:52==
References
[1] European construction sector observatory. Country fact sheets
https://ec.europa.eu/growth/sectors/construction/observatory en
[2] C. Cai and M. Pettersson. Design practice with FELA for reinforced concrete
slabs. Technical University of Denmark, Department of Civil Engineering, 2020
[3] Web Ontology Language (OWL).
https://www.w3.org/OWL/
[4] Autodesk Inc. Shared Parameters https://knowledge.autodesk.com/support/revit-
products/learn-explore/caas/CloudHelp/cloudhelp/2018/ENU/Revit-
Model/ﬁles/GUID-E7D12B71-C50D-46D8-886B-8E0C2B285988-htm.htmll
[5] W3C. Linked Data
https://www.w3.org/standards/semanticweb/data.html
[6] United BIM. BIM Maturity Levels Explained
https://www.united-bim.com/bim-maturity-levels-explained-level-0-1-2-3/
[7] V. Quick. A Brief History of BIM
https://www.archdaily.com/302490/a-brief-history-of-bim
Archdaily, 2012.
[8] M. Bew, J Underwood, J Wix and G Storer. Going BIM in a commercial world.
ECPPM, 2008.
[9] M. H. Rasmussen, M. Lefran¸cois, G. F. Schneider and P. Pauwels. BOT: the
Building Topology Ontology of the W3C Linked Building Data Group. Semantic
Web, IOS Press, 2019.
[10] M. H. Rasmussen, M. Lefran¸cois, M. Bonduel, C. A. Hviid and J. Karlshøj. OPM:
An ontology for describing properties that evolve over time. 6th Linked Data in
Architecture and Construction Workshop, HAL Archives, 2018, ﬀhal-01885248.
[11] M. H. Rasmussen, M. Lefran¸cois, P. Pauwels, C. A. Hviid and J. Karlshøj. Man-
aging interrelated project information in AEC Knowledge Graphs. preprint (Else-
vier), 2019.
[12] S. P. Zotkin, E. V. Ignatova and I. A. Zotkina. The Organization of Autodesk Revit
Software Interaction with Applications for Structural Analysis. Elsevier, 2016.
40
==PAGE:53==
REFERENCES
[13] M. H. Rasmussen. OPM-REST.
https://github.com/MadsHolten/OPM-REST/tree/master/tools/dynamo-
scripts
GitHub
[14] Qin. Ling, Xueyuan Deng, Xila Liu. Industry Foundation Classes Based Integra-
tion of Architectural Design and Structural Analysis.
Shanghai Jiaotong University and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2011
[15] Lexico (Oxford Dictionary). Ontology
https://www.lexico.com/en/deﬁnition/ontology
[16] W3C. Semantic Web https://www.w3.org/standards/semanticweb/
[17] W3C. RDF https://www.w3.org/RDF/
[18] IONOS. URI: The Uniform Resource Identiﬁer Explained
https://www.ionos.com/digitalguide/websites/web-development/uniform-
resource-identiﬁer-uri/
[19] ontotext. What is SPARQL?
https://www.ontotext.com/knowledgehub/fundamentals/what-is-sparql/
[20] ontotext. What is RDF Triplestore?
https://www.ontotext.com/knowledgehub/fundamentals/what-is-rdf-triplestore/
[21] J. Karlshøj and T. P. McGinley. Advanced Building Information Modelling,
Course 11034 . Technical University of Denmark, Department of Civil Engineer-
ing, 2019
[22] Mads Holten Rasmussen. SPARQL-visualizer
https://madsholten.github.io/sparql-visualizer/
41
==PAGE:54==
Appendices
A
Dataset
@prefix sao: <http://sao#> .
@prefix inst: <http://tst/> .
@prefix bot: <https://w3id.org/bot#> .
@prefix owl: <http://www.w3.org/2002/07/owl#>.
@prefix rdf: <http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#>.
@prefix rdfs: <http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#>.
@prefix opm: <https://w3id.org/opm#> .
@prefix prov: <http://www.w3.org/ns/prov#> .
@prefix schema: <http://schema.org/>
"------------------------------Ontology-----------------------------"
sao:Slab a owl:Class ;
rdfs:subClassOf bot:Element .
sao:Column a owl:Class ;
rdfs:subClassOf bot:Element .
sao:Wall a owl:Class ;
rdfs:subClassOf bot:Element .
sao:Grid a owl:Class .
sao:Rebar a owl:Class .
sao:hasWidth a owl:DatatypeProperty .
sao:hasDepth a owl:DatatypeProperty .
sao:hasLength a owl:DatatypeProperty .
sao:hasThickness a owl:DatatypeProperty .
sao:hasArea a owl:DatatypeProperty .
sao:xEnd a owl:DatatypeProperty .
sao:xStart a owl:DatatypeProperty .
sao:yEnd a owl:DatatypeProperty .
sao:yStart a owl:DatatypeProperty .
sao:hasCoordinate a owl:DatatypeProperty.
sao:isCategory a owl:ObjectProperty .
sao:hasName a owl:ObjectProperty .
sao:isConstrainedBy a owl:ObjectProperty
sao:supports a owl:ObjectProperty .
sao:hasId a owl:DatatypeProperty .
sao:hasDiameter a opm:Property .
sao:hasSpacing a opm:Property .
42
==PAGE:55==
Appendices
"----------------------------------Data----------------------------------"
# Slabs
inst:8546f365-e1ed-4931-b031-fb07bc8c3578-00047f1c
a sao:Slab ;
sao:hasArea "48.0" ;
sao:hasId "294684" ;
sao:hasThickness "300.0" ;
sao:isConstrainedBy "[294191, 294023, 294183, 294122]" ;
bot:hasSubElement inst:7adaec6a-8acd-11ea-bc55-0242ac130003 .
inst:8546f365-e1ed-4931-b031-fb07bc8c3578-00047efc
a sao:Slab ;
sao:hasArea "48.0" ;
sao:hasId "294652" ;
sao:hasThickness "300.0" ;
sao:isConstrainedBy "[294191, 294122, 294183, 294130]" ;
bot:hasSubElement inst:7adaec6a-8acd-11ea-bc55-0242ac130003 .
inst:8546f365-e1ed-4931-b031-fb07bc8c3578-00047f2c
a sao:Slab ;
sao:hasArea "48.0" ;
sao:hasId "294700" ;
sao:hasThickness "300.0" ;
sao:isConstrainedBy "[294183, 294023, 294156, 294122]" ;
bot:hasSubElement inst:7adaec6a-8acd-11ea-bc55-0242ac130003 .
inst:8546f365-e1ed-4931-b031-fb07bc8c3578-00047edf
a sao:Slab ;
sao:hasArea "48.0" ;
sao:hasId "294623" ;
sao:hasThickness "300.0" ;
sao:isConstrainedBy "[294199, 294122, 294191, 294130]" ;
bot:hasSubElement inst:7adaec6a-8acd-11ea-bc55-0242ac130003 .
inst:8546f365-e1ed-4931-b031-fb07bc8c3578-00047f0c
a sao:Slab ;
sao:hasArea "48.0" ;
sao:hasId "294668" ;
sao:hasThickness "300.0" ;
sao:isConstrainedBy "[294183, 294122, 294156, 294130]" ;
bot:hasSubElement inst:7adaec6a-8acd-11ea-bc55-0242ac130003 .
# Columns
inst:8546f365-e1ed-4931-b031-fb07bc8c3578-00048304
a sao:Column ;
sao:hasCoordinate "[13673.9503, -146.6638, 0.0]" ;
sao:hasDepth "500.0" ;
sao:hasId "295684" ;
sao:hasWidth "500.0" ;
43
==PAGE:56==
Appendices
sao:isConstrainedBy "[294130, 294156]" ;
sao:supports "[294668]" .
inst:8546f365-e1ed-4931-b031-fb07bc8c3578-0004831f
a sao:Column ;
sao:hasCoordinate "[5673.9503, -6146.6638, 0.0]" ;
sao:hasDepth "500.0" ;
sao:hasId "295711" ;
sao:hasWidth "500.0" ;
sao:isConstrainedBy "[294122, 294183]" ;
sao:supports "[294652, 294668, 294684, 294700]" .
inst:8546f365-e1ed-4931-b031-fb07bc8c3578-0004825d
a sao:Column ;
sao:hasCoordinate "[-2326.0497, -12146.6638, 0.0]" ;
sao:hasDepth "500.0" ;
sao:hasId "295517" ;
sao:hasWidth "500.0" ;
sao:isConstrainedBy "[294023, 294191]" ;
sao:supports "[294684]" .
inst:8546f365-e1ed-4931-b031-fb07bc8c3578-000481e5
a sao:Column ;
sao:hasCoordinate "[-2326.0497, -6146.6638, 0.0]" ;
sao:hasDepth "500.0" ;
sao:hasId "295397" ;
sao:hasWidth "500.0" ;
sao:isConstrainedBy "[294122, 294191]" ;
sao:supports "[294623, 294652, 294684]" .
inst:8546f365-e1ed-4931-b031-fb07bc8c3578-00048352
a sao:Column ;
sao:hasCoordinate "[13673.9503, -6146.6638, 0.0]" ;
sao:hasDepth "500.0" ;
sao:hasId "295762" ;
sao:hasWidth "500.0" ;
sao:isConstrainedBy "[294122, 294156]" ;
sao:supports "[294668, 294700]" .
inst:8546f365-e1ed-4931-b031-fb07bc8c3578-000482e5
a sao:Column ;
sao:hasCoordinate "[5673.9503, -146.6638, 0.0]" ;
sao:hasDepth "500.0" ;
sao:hasId "295653" ;
sao:hasWidth "500.0" ;
sao:isConstrainedBy "[294130, 294183]" ;
sao:supports "[294652, 294668]" .
inst:8546f365-e1ed-4931-b031-fb07bc8c3578-00048278
a sao:Column ;
44
==PAGE:57==
Appendices
sao:hasCoordinate "[-2326.0497, -146.6638, 0.0]" ;
sao:hasDepth "500.0" ;
sao:hasId "295544" ;
sao:hasWidth "500.0" ;
sao:isConstrainedBy "[294130, 294191]" ;
sao:supports "[294623, 294652]" .
# Walls
inst:8546f365-e1ed-4931-b031-fb07bc8c3578-00047f91
a sao:Wall ;
sao:hasId "294801" ;
sao:hasLength "8000.0" ;
sao:hasThickness "200.0" ;
sao:isConstrainedBy "[’[294023, 294183]’, ’[294023, 294156]’]" ;
sao:supports "294700" .
inst:8546f365-e1ed-4931-b031-fb07bc8c3578-00047f54
a sao:Wall ;
sao:hasId "294740" ;
sao:hasLength "6000.0" ;
sao:hasThickness "200.0" ;
sao:isConstrainedBy "[’[294122, 294199]’, ’[294130, 294199]’]" ;
sao:supports "294623" .
# Grids
inst:8546f365-e1ed-4931-b031-fb07bc8c3578-00047cea
a sao:Grid ;
sao:hasId "294122" ;
sao:hasName "2" ;
sao:xEnd "-20435.3812" ;
sao:xStart "18033.1393" ;
sao:yEnd "-6146.6638" ;
sao:yStart "-6146.6638" .
inst:8546f365-e1ed-4931-b031-fb07bc8c3578-00047cf2
a sao:Grid ;
sao:hasId "294130" ;
sao:hasName "3" ;
sao:xEnd "-20435.3812" ;
sao:xStart "18033.1393" ;
sao:yEnd "-146.6638" ;
sao:yStart "-146.6638" .
inst:8546f365-e1ed-4931-b031-fb07bc8c3578-00047d2f
a sao:Grid ;
sao:hasId "294191" ;
sao:hasName "C" ;
sao:xEnd "-2326.0497" ;
sao:xStart "-2326.0497" ;
sao:yEnd "-19432.8054" ;
45
==PAGE:58==
Appendices
sao:yStart "6808.839" .
inst:8546f365-e1ed-4931-b031-fb07bc8c3578-00047d0c
a sao:Grid ;
sao:hasId "294156" ;
sao:hasName "A" ;
sao:xEnd "13673.9503" ;
sao:xStart "13673.9503" ;
sao:yEnd "-19432.8054" ;
sao:yStart "6808.839" .
inst:8546f365-e1ed-4931-b031-fb07bc8c3578-00047d37
a sao:Grid ;
sao:hasId "294199" ;
sao:hasName "D" ;
sao:xEnd "-10326.0497" ;
sao:xStart "-10326.0497" ;
sao:yEnd "-19432.8054" ;
sao:yStart "6808.839" .
inst:8546f365-e1ed-4931-b031-fb07bc8c3578-00047c87
a sao:Grid ;
sao:hasId "294023" ;
sao:hasName "1" ;
sao:xEnd "-20435.3812" ;
sao:xStart "18033.1393" ;
sao:yEnd "-12146.6638" ;
sao:yStart "-12146.6638" .
inst:8546f365-e1ed-4931-b031-fb07bc8c3578-00047d27
a sao:Grid ;
sao:hasId "294183" ;
sao:hasName "B" ;
sao:xEnd "5673.9503" ;
sao:xStart "5673.9503" ;
sao:yEnd "-19432.8054" ;
sao:yStart "6808.839" .
# Rebar properties
inst:7adaec6a-8acd-11ea-bc55-0242ac130003
a sao:Rebar ;
sao:hasDiameter <http://localhost:3030/test/diameter> ;
sao:hasSpacing <http://localhost:3030/test/spacing> .
<http://localhost:3030/test/diameter>
a opm:Property ;
opm:hasPropertyState <http://localhost:3030/test/diameter#state1> .
<http://localhost:3030/test/diameter#state1>
a opm:CurrentPropertyState ;
46
==PAGE:59==
Appendices
schema:value "0.012" ;
prov:generatedAtTime "2020-06-27" .
<http://localhost:3030/test/spacing>
a opm:Property ;
opm:hasPropertyState <http://localhost:3030/test/spacing#state1> .
<http://localhost:3030/test/spacing#state1>
a opm:CurrentPropertyState ;
schema:value "0.15" ;
prov:generatedAtTime "2020-06-27" .
47
==PAGE:60==
Appendices
B
Scripts
The Python GUI scripts as well as Dynamo scripts can be found in Dropbox.
Click here to access the folder, or use the following link:
https://www.dropbox.com/sh/hsty6nm2tho9gav/AABFaB_R0r7lQuM8aZfK-6KAa?dl=
0.
The following guide is for the data exchange process.
Optum MP is not needed,
unless one wishes to perform the structural analysis. However Autodesk Revit and
Dynamo are necessary to complete the process. For Revit 2020, Dynamo for Revit
comes pre-installed.
1. Download DynamicLinkingToFELA.zip and Test model.rvt.
2. Unzip DynamicLinkingToFELA.zip.
3. Open mainScript.exe to run the Python GUI.
4. Go to Settings, Launch Triplestore and create a dataset.
5. Enter the name of the dataset and Save.
6. Open Autodesk Revit and ﬁnd Dynamo Player.
7. Locate the Dynamo scripts in the folder. Triples, and run all 4 scripts (Remember
to change the dataset name under Input.
8. In the GUI, go to mpn Converter, click on Generate XML files and then Merge
files to get an mpn-ﬁle.
9. Go to Data Management, click on Upload rebar data, then Add ontology to
complete the dataset.
10. Create Shared Parameters to store rebar parameters in an Excel-ﬁle.
11. Open Dynamo Player in Revit again, locate the folder Shared Parameters and
run addSP to create rebar parameters in Revit project.
12. Assign the created parameters to the family Floors as either instance of type
parameters.
13. Run the script setSP in Dynamo Player to assign a value to the parameters.
48
==PAGE:61==
Technical University of Denmark
Design practice with FELA for reinforced
concrete slabs
3-week course, Jan 20
Authors:
Chendong Cai, s153447
Mark Pettersson, s154652
Supervisors:
Jan Karlshøj, Lector
External:
Lars Zenke Hansen, NIRAS A/S
Mads Holten Rasmussen, NIRAS A/S
Jørgen Krabbenhøft, Optum CE
Morten Andersen Herfeldt, Optum CE
January 24, 2020
C
Design Practice
,
49
==PAGE:62==
Contents
1
Introduction
4
2
Theoretical understanding of FELA
5
2.1
Lower bound theorem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Upper bound theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Plate theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3.1
Statical equilibrium conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3.2
Yield conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3.3
Boundary conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Finite element formulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Reinforcement design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.6
Punching shear calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Structural calculations according to SBI271
15
3.1
Partial coeﬃcients & load combinations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
FELA Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2.1
Initial calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2.2
Structural modeling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.3
Results and veriﬁcation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
Punching shear . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4
Conclusion
21
5
Further work
22
5.1
Ontology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.2
Linked Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.3
Other work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
References
24
Appendices
26
150
==PAGE:63==
List of symbols
List of symbols
α
The angle between the shear reinforcement and the plane of the slab
β
Load factor for punching shear calculation
γc
Strength coeﬃcient for concrete
γs
Strength coeﬃcient for reinforcement steel
λ
Load factor
R
Variable load factor
R0
Constant load factor
µ
Ratio of reinforcement in x- and y-direction
ρl
The degree of reinforcement in the longitudinal direction of the slab
σcp
Normal concrete stress
Asw
The area of one perimeter of shear reinforcement around the column
Asx
Area of reinforcement per unit length in x-direction
Asy
Area of reinforcement per unit length in y-direction
As
Area of one reinforcement bar
b
The size of the column
c
Cover layer of the reinforcement
d
The eﬀective depth of the reinforcement
fcd
The design concrete strength
fck
The characteristic concrete strength
fyd
The design tensile reinforcement strength
fyk
The characteristic tensile reinforcement strength
fywd,ef The eﬀective design strength of the punching shear reinforcement
g
Permanent load(self-weight) per unit area
h
The thickness of the slab
KFI
Consequence class coeﬃcient
m1
First principal moment per unit length
m2
Second principal moment per unit length
mb
Bending moment per unit length
mp
Plastic moment capacity
mv
Torsional moment per unit length
51
==PAGE:64==
List of symbols
mpx
Positive plastic moment capacity in x-direction
m′
px
Negative plastic moment capacity in x-direction
mpy
Positive plastic moment capacity in y-direction
m′
py
Negative plastic moment capacity in y-direction
mxy
Torsional moment per unit length
mx
Moment per unit length in x-direction
my
Moment per unit length in y-direction
P −
max
Lower bound limit load
P +
min
Upper bound limit load
q
Variable load per unit area
sr
The radial spacing of perimeters of shear reinforcement
sbar
Spacing between each reinforcement bar
u1
The length of the basic control perimeter
v
Shear force per unit length
v1
First principal shear force per unit length
v2
Second principal shear force per unit length
vx
Shear force per unit length in x-direction
vy
Shear force per unit length in y-direction
VEd
Shear force
vEd
Shear stress
vmin
The minimum required shear resistance
vRd,cs Shear resistance with reinforcement
vRd,c
Shear resistance without reinforcement
x
The height of the compression zone
Ybar
Diameter of the reinforcement bar
52
==PAGE:65==
1
Introduction
1
Introduction
This is a preliminary project to a larger and more complex project about Finite Element
Limit Analysis (FELA) of concrete plate and data link between a FE-program and a BIM-
program, such as Revit. In consideration of the complexity of the latter part, it is necessary
to understand the basis of the FELA and the underlying theories. Thus, this is the main
focus in this report.
For this purpose, the following structure is given. The main structural element is the concrete
plate(ﬂat slab) simply supported by seven columns and two walls. The static of the structure
will mainly be analyzed in a given MatLab FE program.
Other analyses such as cross-
sectional analysis and punching shear reinforcement will be done analytically according to
the relevant building codes.
Figure 1: Concrete slab system
• Slab thicknesses: 400 mm
• Column dimensions: 500 mm × 500 mm
• Wall thickness: 250 mm
• Concrete strength: fck = 35 MPa
• Reinforcement steel strength: fyk = 550 MPa
• Free self load: 2.0 kN/m2
• Variable load: 5.0 kN/m2
• Self-weight: 25 kN/m3 · 400 mm = 10 kN/m2
53
==PAGE:66==
2
Theoretical understanding of FELA
2
Theoretical understanding of FELA
Finite element limit analysis is the ﬁnite element formulation of the rigid-plastic theory that
deals with determining the load-bearing capacity of structures consisting of plastic materials.
This theory is called Limit Analysis and the most important theorems within are the upper
and lower bound theorems that in short calculates the upper and lower limit load that a
structure can withstand before reaching a state of beginning plastic collapse. The actual
limit load capacity will be within these two limits [1].
2.1
Lower bound theorem
The lower bound theorem states that when the load is maximized while the stress distribution
satisﬁes the statical equilibrium conditions and the boundary conditions are kept within the
yield criteria for the structure, the maximized load corresponds to the lower bound limit load
for the concerned structure. This means that the structure will not be able to collapse for
loads lower than this value. A stress distribution that complies with the above is denoted as
a safe and statically admissible stress distribution and the lower bound limit load is therefore
a safe bet to use for designing structures. The lower bound limit load is denoted as P −
max
[1][5].
2.2
Upper bound theorem
The upper bound theorem is diﬀerent from the lower bound theorem. The lower bound is
based on having a statically admissible stress distribution while complying with the yield
conditions, whereas the upper bound is based on having geometrically possible strain ﬁelds
(kinematically admissible collapse mechanism). Due to this, the limit load capacity can be
found by utilizing the work equation as the ratio between internal and external work. The
upper bound limit load is then found by minimizing the load while keeping the above true,
and the minimum collapse load is equal to or greater than the true collapse load. The upper
bound limit load is denoted as P +
min [1][5].
Since the provided MATLAB FEM program is based on the lower bound method, the upper
bound method will not be described further in this report.
2.3
Plate theories
Now the conditions that needs to be satisﬁed for the lower bound theorem will be presented
for reinforced concrete slabs.
2.3.1
Statical equilibrium conditions
To do this, the statical equilibrium conditions for a reinforced concrete slab will be presented
ﬁrst. Therefore, an assumption of the internal forces per unit length acting in a normal sec-
tion is made (see ﬁgure 2).
It is seen from this ﬁgure that the internal forces acting in a normal section of a slab is a
bending moment, mb, a torsional moment, mv, and a shear force, v. Furthermore, if the
normal section is divided into principal sections, which are two sections at right angles to
each other where mv = 0 and mb →extreme, then the bending moment in these sections
will be the principal moments m1 and m2 for their respective sections. For arbitrary sections
to the ﬁrst principal moment, m1, will make it possible to determine the bending and the
torsional moment also at arbitrary sections by:
54
==PAGE:67==
2
Theoretical understanding of FELA
Figure 2: Intenal forces in slabs [1]
mb = m1 cos2 α + m2 sin2 α = 1
2(m1 + m2) + 1
2(m1 −m2) cos 2α
(1)
mv = 1
2(m1 −m2) sin 2α
(2)
This can be illustrated on a a Mohr’s circle (see ﬁgure 3), where the angle α is in the clockwise
direction.
Figure 3: Mohr’s circle for bending and torsional moments in slabs [1]
From this it can also be seen that mv will be equal with opposite signs in two sections at
right angles to each other. Another thing is that if the principal shear forces, v1 and v2, are
known, then v in the section can be found also dependent on α:
v = v1 cos α + v2 sin α
(3)
Equations (1), (2) and (3) make up the equilibrium conditions for a normal section of a slab.
These can be converted to a Cartesian coordinate system by looking at an element with
dimensions dx · dy (see ﬁgure 4) [1].
By assuming that mxy = −myx, the equilibrium conditions are formulated as:
vy = ∂my
∂y −∂mxy
∂x
(4)
vx = ∂mx
∂x −∂mxy
∂y
(5)
55
==PAGE:68==
2
Theoretical understanding of FELA
Figure 4: Slab element with loading and internal forces in a Cartesian coordinate system [1]
∂vx
∂x + ∂vy
∂y = −p
(6)
and by inserting equations (4) and (5) into (6), the equilibrium conditions are formulated
by:
∂2mx
∂x2 −2∂2mxy
∂x∂y + ∂2my
∂y2
= −p
(7)
It is easy to see that mx, my and mxy are factors that fully determine the internal forces of
a slab. They are called the generalized stresses of a slab and are used to describe the yield
conditions [1].
2.3.2
Yield conditions
The yield conditions for reinforced concrete slabs are in short the determination of the bend-
ing moments, mx and my, and the torsional moment mxy. For an isotropic slab, where
the slab is reinforced equally in the top and the bottom in both the x- and the y-direction
(As = Asx = A
′
sx = Asy = A
′
sy), the yield conditions will form two cones and the principal
moments, m1 and m2, can be described by what is called a square yield condition (see ﬁgure
5) proposed by Johansen (1962) [8][1].
Figure 5: Yield conditions for isotropic slabs [1]
56
==PAGE:69==
2
Theoretical understanding of FELA
From this ﬁgure it can be seen that the principal moments are ruled by combinations of mx,
my and mxy, and when they are combined in a certain way that ensures that one or both of
the principal moments become equal to the absolute value of the yield moment, |mp|, during
pure bending, the generalized stresses will be resisted. The yield surface for a reinforced
concrete slab is described in a Cartesian coordinate system by:
1
2(mx + my) ±
r
1
4 (mx −my)2 + m2xy = ±mp
(8)
where the left hand side determines the principal moments [1].
A common way of reinforcing a concrete slab is doing it orthotropically. This means that
the reinforcement areas are kept the same in the top and the bottom but with diﬀerent sizes
in the x- and y-direction:
Asx = A
′
sx = As
Asy = A
′
sy = µAs
where (µ < 1).
The same goes for the plastic moment capacity:
mpx = mp
and
m
′
px = m
′
p
mpy = µmp
and
m
′
py = µm
′
p
By considering that each reinforcement direction have its own plastic moment capacity, the
yield condition for the orthotropic case can be written analytically as:
−(mpx −mx)(mpy −my) + m2
xy ≤0
−(m
′
px + mx)(m
′
py + my) + m2
xy ≤0
(9)
where the following also need to be true:
mx ≤mpx
my ≤mpy
mx ≥m
′
px
my ≥m
′
py
(10)
If the plastic moment capacities are converted into the isotropic case:
mpx = mpy = mp
m
′
px = m
′
py = mp
(11)
then equation (9) and (10) become equivalent to the yield condition in equation (8) [1].
When (9) and (10) is true and thereby veriﬁed, the slab will be able to withstand the moment
ﬁeld for isotropic and orthotropic case [1].
57
==PAGE:70==
2
Theoretical understanding of FELA
2.3.3
Boundary conditions
For slabs, the boundary conditions are derived by the principle of virtual work.
In short, the principle of virtual work is built on both the statical conditions (described
in section 2.3.1) and geometrical conditions which have not been presented yet.
Where
the statical equilibrium conditions derived the generalized stresses, mx, my and mxy, the
geometrical conditions derive the generalized strains, κx, κy and κxy which have to satisfy
the conditions of compatibility:
∂κx
∂y = −∂κxy
∂x
(12)
∂κy
∂x = −∂κxy
∂y
(13)
Another thing about the geometrical conditions is that the generalized strains determine the
deformed shape of a slab and will disappear when the slab is displaced as a rigid body [1].
They also allow the principle of virtual work to describe a arbitrary shaped slab in Cartesian
coordinates with a n,t-coordinate system being a Cartesian coordinate that moves along the
edge of the slab. The principle of virtual work is formulated as:
Z Z
(mxκx + myκy + 2mxyκxy) dx dy
=
Z Z
pw dx dy −
Z
mn
∂w
∂n ds +
Z 
vn −∂mnt
∂s

w ds
(14)
where the last two terms are moving along the edge of the slab, mn is the bending moment
and mnt is the torsional moment on the (n,t)-plane, −∂w
∂n is the rotation of the normal for
the component following the t-axis and w is describing the virtual displacements.
From the last term of equation (14) it can be seen that the torsional moment, mnt(s), along
an edge (here called PQ) is statically equivalent to a shear force (see ﬁgure 6). This is easily
seen by comparing ﬁgure 6 with ﬁgure 2. The statically equivalent shear force is:
v∗
n = −∂mnt
∂s
(15)
Figure 6: Statical equivalence of torsional moments at boundary [1]
58
==PAGE:71==
2
Theoretical understanding of FELA
Since the slab cannot diﬀerentiate between the internal shear force vn and the static equiv-
alence shear force acting along the edge, v∗
n, it is expected that the static equivalence of
the internal forces vn and mmt must correspond to the values for shear forces and torsional
moments acting at the edge, so:
vn = ¯vn
and
mnt = ¯mnt
The boundary conditions are then presented along the edge of a slab as:
¯mn = mn
(16)
¯vn −∂¯mnt
∂s
= vn −∂vnt
∂s
(17)
For a free edge and an edge loaded with a line load will transform equation (17) into the
following two equations, respectively:
vn −∂vnt
∂s = 0
(18)
¯p = vn −∂vnt
∂s
(19)
The last special case is for a corner of a slab loaded by a force P, which is stated as:
P = m(2)
v
−m(1)
v
+
Z
l
vds
(20)
where l is the curve between the two edges making up the corner, m(1)
v
and m(2)
v
being the
end point torsional moments.
These boundary conditions tells that when the edge moments and shear forces are the equiv-
alence of zero, then a torsional moment can exist on a free edge. This is easily explained by
Kirchhoﬀderivation of his formulation of boundary conditions (which the above conditions
are).
Figure 7: Boundary beam used in a derivation of Kirchoﬀboundary conditions [1]
In ﬁgure 7 is a boundary beam presented which is subjected to the internal forces V and M.
The equilibrium equations then become:
dV
ds = −¯vn + vn
(21)
59
==PAGE:72==
2
Theoretical understanding of FELA
dM
ds = V + ¯mnt −mnt
(22)
If the moment as stated before is then set to be zero, equation (22) becomes:
V = −¯mnt + mnt
(23)
Now by inserting equation (21) into (23) it will be:
¯vn −∂¯mnt
∂s
= vn −∂vnt
∂s
(24)
which is the exact same as (17), and the Kirchhoﬀboundary conditions have now been
presented [1].
2.4
Finite element formulations
Now that the prerequisite conditions for the lower bound theorem all have been described,
a FEM-implementation will now be presented.
The provided FEM-program by Optum CE is using second order programming, meaning
that the yield conditions (9) are modeled as cones as originally stated. This leads to more
precise results. It is done by the assistance of optimization algorithms provided by Mosek
[10]. The problem can then be formulated based on the equilibrium equations and the yield
surfaces as described in previous sections, which means that the primary unknown variables
will be the generalized stresses at selected points of an element.
The provided FEM-program is dividing a slab into triangular elements using Kirchhoﬀ
boundary conditions to turn the torsional moments along element edges into concentrated
corner forces as stated in equation (20). The triangle element is then also formulated by us-
ing linearized moment variation inside the element which will correspond to constant shear
forces within in element and lastly by representing the load as line forces along the edges
(as explained in section 2.3.3). This means that the elements can be solved by point-wise
equilibrium equations. A ﬁgure showing how an element is built and divided into degrees of
freedom is shown below:
Figure 8: Triangle element with degrees of freedom shown [5]
In the program, the system equilibrium equations[5] can be described as:
Hβ = λR + R0
(25)
60
==PAGE:73==
2
Theoretical understanding of FELA
where the load vector is split into a constant R0 and a variable part R. Simply put, the
goal of the problem is to maximize the load factor λ, while the system equilibrium equations
must be fulﬁlled. If λ > 1, the provided reinforcement is suﬃcient to resist the loads acting
on the plate.
2.5
Reinforcement design
The FELA-program requires the plastic moment capacities as an input, which can be deter-
mined with two diﬀerent methods, one of which is considering the plate as a ”sandwich” and
using the theory of reinforced disk, and the other one is a simple cross-sectional analysis.
Since the imaginary thickness of the disk is not given, the latter is preferred.
First, the area of reinforcement pr. spacing is calculated:
As = Y 2
barπ
4
1
sbar
(26)
Now, the height of the compression zone can be determined:
x = Asfyd
0.8fcd
(27)
Finally, the plastic moment capacity per unit length:
mp = Asfyd

d −x
2

(28)
where the eﬀective depth of reinforcement d is determined using h −c. c is chosen as 50 mm
in this case.
For simplicity of the calculation, it is assumed that the plate is isotropic reinforced. Further
more, the reinforcement at the top and at the bottom are likewise the same (equation (11)).
2.6
Punching shear calculations
The punching shear is a failure mechanism in structural members such as slabs due to highly
concentrated loads at supports, e.g., columns. Especially, for the case of a ﬂat slab supported
directly on a column, the chance of punching shear occurring is increased. The punching
shear in slabs is a two-dimensional analog of the shear in beams, but it is less critical. The
failure occurs when the shear resistance of the slab is not suﬃcient enough to withstand the
total shear force acting around the support. Leading it to a collapse around the support.
A few changes in the structural designs can prevent, if not, at least decrease the chance of
the punching shear failure occurring. These changes can be increase of the depth of the slab,
increase of the size of the support column, or introducing drop panels or column capitals,
that can help to redistributed the concentrated load. However, the action of structural design
change is not allowed in this project, punching shear reinforcement can be implemented as
an alternative solution.
The design consideration of the punching shear failure is done according to the building code
DS/EN 1990-1-1[3]. The Eurocode requires that the following checks should be carried out:
1. Punching shear reinforcement is not necessary if:
vEd ≤vRd,c
(29)
2. If the ﬁrst requirement is not fulﬁlled, reinforcements should be implemented, and the
following requires:
vEd ≤vRd,cs
(30)
61
==PAGE:74==
2
Theoretical understanding of FELA
Figure 9: Punching shear failure [4]
The total shear stress at a support can be calculated with the following equation:
vEd = β VEd
u1d
(31)
All the diﬀerent columns should be checked, that is to say, the internal columns, edge columns
and corner columns, as the length of the perimeter, value of β and the shear stress are diﬀerent
in each case. The diﬀerent cases and the corresponding value of β are deﬁned in ﬁgure 10.
The basic control perimeter u1 is normally taken to be at a distance 2d from the loaded area.
The deﬁnition of the u1 for diﬀerent support cases are illustrated in ﬁgure 11
Figure 10: Recommended value of β [3]
The shear resistance of the slab with and without the reinforcement are determined as follows,
respectively:
vRd,c = CRd,ck(100ρlfck)1/3 + k1σcp ≥(vmin + k1σcp)
(32)
vRd,cs = 0.75vRd,c + 1.5 d
sr
Aswfywd,ef
1
u1d sin α
(33)
where
CRd,c = 0.18/γc
(34)
k = 1 +
p
200/d ≤2.0
(35)
62
==PAGE:75==
2
Theoretical understanding of FELA
(a) Internal
(b) Close to or at edge or corner
Figure 11: Basic control perimeter for rectangular loaded areas [3]
vmin = 0.035k3/2 · f1/2
ck
(36)
For the given plate, the normal concrete stress is equal zero, thus equation (32) can be
reduced to vRd,c = CRd,ck(100ρlfck)1/3 ≥vmin
ρl = √ρly · ρlz ≤0.02
(37)
sr = d/0.67
(38)
fywd,ef = 250 + 0.25d ≤fywd
(39)
63
==PAGE:76==
3
Structural calculations according to SBI271
3
Structural calculations according to SBI271
Veriﬁcation process of the obtained results are based on SBI anvisning 271, which documents
the safety and use of buildings according to the Danish building regulation 2018 (BR18).
The focus lies in the section 2.3 Static analysis (Statiske beregninger). The section gives a
guideline on how to document a structure in the Ultimate Limit State, Servicebility Limit
State, as well as the use of IKT-tools, of which, relevant parts for this given structure are
used.
3.1
Partial coeﬃcients & load combinations
As the structure is not subjected to geotechnical loads, bearing capacity veriﬁcation is car-
ried out by using load combination 1 and 2, cf. DS/EN 1990, table A1.2(B+C) [2].
Permanent load dominant
1.2KFI · g + 0 · q = 14.4 kN/m2
(40)
Variable load dominant
1KFI · g + 1.5KFI · q = 19.5 kN/m2
(41)
The second load combination with the variable load dominating is the most critical. Thus,
in the design process, this load combination is used. The safety coeﬃcients are listed in table
1, along with the strength coeﬃcients that are used to determine the design strength of the
concrete and the reinforcement. The design strengths are used for all calculations, unless
formulas speciﬁcally require the use of the characteristic strength parameters.
Table 1: Safety and strength coeﬃcients used in the calculations.
Safety coeﬃcients
KFI
1.0
γ0
1.0
γ3
1.0
Strength coeﬃcients
γc
1.45 γ0γ3
γs
1.20 γ0γ3
3.2
FELA Code
3.2.1
Initial calculations
The initial calculations for the input parameters that are required for the given FE-program
is done analytically, such as the plastic moment capacity. To ﬁnd the suﬃcient capacity is
an iterative process, where the diameter of the bar or the spacing are adjusted until the load
factor λ becomes larger than 1. The cross-sectional parameters are chosen as follows. With
these, the plastic moment capacity mp is calculated.
64
==PAGE:77==
3
Structural calculations according to SBI271
Table 2: Cross-sectional parameters.
Ybar [mm]
sbar [mm]
x [mm]
d [mm]
mp [kN m/m]
12
150
17.9
350
117.86
As mentioned previously, the plate is assumed to be isotropic reinforced.
Thus, mp =
117.86 kNm/m is used at the top and at the bottom and at both directions. The result of
the cross-sectional analysis is veriﬁed with another FE software Optum MP, which yields a
design value of 118.56 kNm/m. A sketch of the cross-section is illustrated in ﬁgure 12.
Figure 12: Cross-sectional view of the slab. [7]
3.2.2
Structural modeling
The structure is modeled in the given MatLab FE program.
The program is based on
FELA and lower bound theorem. It also uses the MatLab extension program Mosek[10] for
optimization problems. As all other programs based on FE, the program also yields more
precise results, when the number of elements increases. For this structure, 1000 elements are
found to be suﬃcient for the outputs to be relative accurate. The elements are triangular,
so that the mentioned theories can be applied. The most essential output is the load factor
λ, and other outputs are plots of moment distribution for mx, my, mxy, as well as the two
principal moments m1 and m2.
65
==PAGE:78==
3
Structural calculations according to SBI271
Figure 13: The structure modeled in FE program and divided in 1000 elements.
When the structure has been successfully modeled, the loads and boundary conditions have
to be enforced. To enforce the boundary conditions, indices 1-4 are used: 1 for point support,
1+2 for simple line support, and 1+2+3+4 for cantilever support. For this structure, only
indices 1 and 2 are used, since only point supports and simple line supports are present.
For instance, one wishes to enforce a point support at node 1 in the ﬁgure below, then
simply type [1 1 1]([Element no. — Node no. of the element — Boundary condition]) in the
program.
Figure 14
The surface loads in the program are stored in the variable called sys.BC.R.surf and
sys.BC.Rvar.surf, respectively. The common way to model the loads is to store the perma-
nent loads as a ﬁxed load in sys.BC.R.surf, and the variable loads in sys.BC.Rvar.surf.
In this way, the bearing capacity of the structure will be 1KFI · g + λ · (1.5KFI · q). Alter-
natively, one could store the total load in sys.BC.Rvar.surf and disregard the ﬁxed load,
then the ﬁnal bearing capacity will be λ · (1KFI · g + 1.5KFI · q).
66
==PAGE:79==
3
Structural calculations according to SBI271
3.2.3
Results and veriﬁcation
The value of λ yield from the given FE program is 1.018. Again, this value is also veriﬁed
with the model from Optum MP, from which a value of 1.469 is obtained. This is signiﬁcantly
higher than 1.018, with an error of 44.3%. Naturally, the result can not be accepted without
a further testing.
After testing with a few examples with diﬀerent boundary conditions, the investigation has
come to a conclusion that there is a diﬀerent in deﬁnition of a column support in these two
programs. In the MatLab FE program, the column support is deﬁned as a point support.
However, in reality, a column comes with a certain size.
In Optum MP, the size of the
column has been taken into account. Hence the higher value of λ. Now, this problem is
especially critical with increasing numbers of elements, as the point support in the MatLab
FE program becomes less signiﬁcant. There are two solutions for this: 1) to improve the FE
coding, so that it takes the size of columns into account, which is the most optimal. 2) to
reduce the column size of Optum MP-model, so that it corresponds to the point support in
the MatLab FE program.
For the sake of time, the second method has been used. As the consequence of size reducing to
5 mm × 5 mm. The value of λ obtained from Optum MP has now been decreased to 1.14. The
size can yet been reduced to a point, where the two values becomes exactly same. λ > 1 means
that the structure has suﬃcient bearing capacity. Or in other words, the maximum load per
unit area the structure can withstand is pmax = 1KFI · g + λ · (1.5KFI · q) = 19.64 kN/m2.
The following ﬁgures show a comparison between the two principal moments from the FE
program and Optum MP, which also share similarities.
(a) MatLab FE program
(b) Optum MP
Figure 15: Comparison of the ﬁrst principal moment m1 [kNm/m]
67
==PAGE:80==
3
Structural calculations according to SBI271
(a) MatLab FE program
(b) Optum MP
Figure 16: Comparison of the second principal moment m2 [kNm/m]
NOTE: the method of reducing the size of column in Optum MP is absolutely not an optimal
solution. It is only used here for time saving and to conﬁrm the hypothesis that the column
support is not deﬁned correctly in the given MatLab FE program, and the code has to be
improved to take into account the size of the column, which can highly impact the resulting
load factor.
3.3
Punching shear
The suﬃciency of the punching shear resistance of the ﬂat slab is veriﬁed using the criterion
(29). If this is found insuﬃcient, the criterion (30) is used. Beside the two main criteria, a
serial of in-equations has to be fulﬁlled as well. These are (35), (37), (39), and lastly, the
punching shear resistance without reinforcement must reach the minimum requirement vmin.
The above-mentioned parameters are common for all investigated column supports, and the
results and the corresponding requirements are listed in table 3.
Table 3: Punching shear parameters
k [-]
ρl [-]
fywd,ef [MPa]
vRd,c [MPa]
Result
1.76
3.77 · 10−3
337.5
0.515
Requirement
≤2
≤0.02
≤fywd = 550
≥vmin = 0.481
It is seen from the above table that all the parameters have met the requirement. As some
columns have diﬀerent length of basic control perimeter u1, load factor β as well as the
magnitude of the load to carry, all the relevant cases must be investigated. The deﬁnition of
each column support of the structure is illustrated in ﬁgure 17.
68
==PAGE:81==
3
Structural calculations according to SBI271
Figure 17: Deﬁnition of each columns: internal columns(blue), edge columns(green), corner columns(orange),
special edge columns(red)
Most columns are adequate to withstand the loads without the necessity of implementing
reinforcements, except for the special column(red) that is deﬁned as an edge column. Thus,
reinforcement is needed at this column to prevent punching shear. The size of the reinforce-
ment bar is selected as Ø28 mm(2 rails). The radial distance between each stud sr is 520
mm. The studs are installed perpendicularly to the bending reinforcement and between the
top and bottom reinforcements, therefore the angle α is 90°, and the length of the studs are
300 mm. With the selected properties of the reinforcement studs, the ﬁnal bearing capacity
of the investigated columns are shown in table 4 and a cross-sectional view is illustrated in
ﬁgure 18.
Table 4: Punching shear bearing capacities
Internal
Edge
Corner
Special(Edge)
Load vEd [MPa]
0.481
0.506
0.478
0.585
Resistance without reinforcement vRd,c [MPa]
0.515
0.515
0.515
0.515
Reinforcement with reinforcement vRd,cs [MPa]
-
-
-
0.592
Figure 18: Cross-sectional view of the punching shear reinforcement.
69
==PAGE:82==
4
Conclusion
4
Conclusion
It has been shown that it is possible to design reinforcement for concrete slabs using FELA
and FE-softwares. But also, that there are a lot of possibilities to expand the current program
into a more comprehensive and speciﬁc software for example by including automatically de-
sign calculations of the punching shear with respect to the standards, which was done manual
in this project. The provided FE-code was built on optimizing using the load factor, λ, but
a more eﬀective optimization method might be by optimizing on the material usage in the
reinforcement or concrete (which is where a lot of money can be saved in the industry). This
would probably also eliminate much of the manual interpolation that takes place in guessing
the size of the reinforcement bars.
For the given plate problem, a bending reinforcement of Ø12 ct. 150 mm and a punching
shear reinforcement of 2 x Ø28 ct. 520 mm are needed to resist the given loads with a load
factor of λ = 0.018. And the maximum load resistance of the plate is 19.64 kN/m2
The case was also treated as consisting of isotropic reinforced concrete slabs, which does not
give much room for optimizing because the reinforcement in top and bottom might need to
resist diﬀerent forces and therefore does not necessary need to be the same sizes. This also
applies with respect to the x- and the y-direction.
The number of elements also have a large impact, especially around columns where a more
compact ﬁeld of elements might increase the accuracy of the result distributions. Also, by
keeping the compact zone of elements only where it is deemed necessary, will reduce the
overall running time of FE-softwares but will not necessarily impact the results negatively.
70
==PAGE:83==
5
Further work
5
Further work
Since this project is preliminary work for a much larger scaled project that will focus on
using FELA based FE-softwares for concrete elements and to formulate a data link between
this and a BIM-software, not every subject relevant to this was looked into, due to the time
window for the preliminary report. Therefore, the next step that will be the beginning of
the larger project will be presented here. This is much more preliminary and might not be
completely correct.
The next steps on this subject is looking into Ontology and Linked Data in order to under-
stand how a possible transference of data from a FE-software to a BIM-software is possible.
5.1
Ontology
Ontology in BIM is deﬁned as
”A set of concepts and categories in a subject area or domain that show their properties and
relations between them.” [11]
An example on Ontology is applying it on a building or in this case the plate system. It
is a way of describing how concepts or elements individually is deﬁned as a ”column”, a
”wall” and a ”slab”, each with their own properties, but when they are all combined, they
will deﬁne a ”building” also with its own properties consisting of properties for all the other
components [11].
5.2
Linked Data
Linked Data is a subject that has huge potential in the AECO (Architecture, Engineering,
Construction and Operation) world.
It is a way of structuring data that are interlinked
with other data. Thereby, a semantic web of data is created. An example has been made
graphically for the plate system (see ﬁgure 19).
Figure 19: Simple linked data graph of the plate system. S(1..5) is representing the slabs, W(1..2) the walls
and C(1..7) the columns.
This ﬁgure shows (very simply) how each element and their data properties are interlinked
with each other. For example, slab 5 is connected with all the other slabs except slab 3, but
both slab 3 and slab 5 is connected with slab 1 and slab 4, thereby already creating a web of
71
==PAGE:84==
5
Further work
interlinked elements. This is very simple illustration of the concept, an example of further
data linking is by giving each element in the ﬁgure properties such as dimensions. Then it
would be possible to make a diagram showing what elements have similar slab thicknesses
and much more.
A great example of linked data is Wikipedia. Hundreds of thousands of articles about diﬀer-
ent persons, monuments, historic events and so on are somehow linked with each other. On
every page, there are links that leads to another article, which is very good for knowledge
sharing, because all the necessary knowledge that is needed to get the full picture is available
by diﬀerent links. [12]
Linked Data is therefore a very interesting subject to investigate alongside Ontology for this
project, because if it is possible to create a data output from the FE-software (for example
by creating a CSV ﬁle) with clearly deﬁned (preferable universally) variables, that can be
read by a BIM software and thereby automatically model the calculated data, will be very
helpful to the AECO industry overall and reduce the many man-hours going into remodeling
and recalculating due to constant changes on building projects.
5.3
Other work
Other work on the subject might emerge throughout the period of the project. This could
for example be to implement punching shear reinforcement into an FE-software so it is
automatically calculated if needed for columns and then also transferred to be modeled in
a BIM-software. The code can also be improved, so that the size of the column support is
taken into account. Potential other work will be discussed with the supervisors of the project
in order to keep the work relevant to the project.
72
==PAGE:85==
References
References
[1] M. P. Nielsen and L. C. Hoang. Limit Analysis and Concrete Plasticity, 3rd Edition. CRC
Press, Taylor & Francis Group, LLC, 2011
[2] Energi Styrelsen. DS/EN 1990 DK NA:2013. Nationalt anneks til Eurocode 0: Projek-
teringsgrundlg for bærende konstruktioner, 2013
[3] Dansk Standard. Eurocode 2: Design of concrete structures – Part 1-1: General rules
and rules for buildings .
[4] Civil Digital. Punching Shear in Flat Slabs.
https://civildigital.com/punching-shear-punching-shear-flat-slabs/
[5] Peter Noe Poulsen. Computational structural modelling: plates and shells. Danmarks
Tekniske Universitet.
[6] S. Krenk, L.Damkilde, and O Høyer. Limit analysis and optimal design of plates with
equilibrium elements, 1994.
[7] Optum Computational Engineering. Optum MP.
https://optumce.com/products/optum-mp/
[8] K. W. Johansen Yield line theory, 3rd Edition. Cement and Concrete Association, 1961
[9] Statens Byggeforskningsinstitut. SBI-anvisning 271 Dokumentation og kontrol af bærende
konstruktioner, 3. udgave. 2019
[10] Mosek Aps. Mosek, version 9.1.x
https://www.mosek.com/
[11] J. Karlshøj and T. P. McGinley. Advanced Building Information Modelling, Course
11034 . Technical University of Denmark, Department of Civil Engineering, 2019
[12] World Wide Web Consortium (W3C). LINKED DATA.
https://www.w3.org/standards/semanticweb/data.html
73
==PAGE:86==
24-01-20 12:13
/Users/chen0045/OneDrive/Spe.../Example.m
1 of 4
% DESCRIPTION ---------------------------------------------------
% Simple cantilever example with 8 elements.
 
close all, clear all
 
% Diameter and spacing of bars
Ybar = 12;
abar = 150;
 
% Safety factors
gamma.var = 1.5; % variable load
gamma.perm = 1.0; % permanent load
gamma.c = 1.45;  % concrete
gamma.s = 1.2;   % steel
 
% Calculation of plastic moment capacity
mp = CrossAna(Ybar,abar,gamma);
 
% Parameters
a = 8;                    % Width and height of each plate
b = 6;
ne = 10;                  % Number of elemenets per plate in each direction
 
% Number of elements in x and y direction for bottom 2 plates
nx1 = 2*ne;                
ny1 = ne;                 
% Number of elements in x and y direction for top 3 plates
nx2 = 3*ne;
ny2 = ne;
 
% TOPOLOGY ------------------------------------------------------
% Node coordinates
% x = 0:a/n:a;
% y = x;
% [Y,X] = meshgrid(x,y);
% sys.X = [X(:),Y(:)];
 
% Plate 1 (bottom left)
x1 = 0:b/ne:b;
y1 = a:a/ne:2*a;
[Y1,X1] = meshgrid(x1,y1);
% Plate 2
x2 = 0:b/ne:b;
y2 = 2*a:a/ne:3*a;
[Y2,X2] = meshgrid(x2,y2);
X2(1,:) = [];
Y2(1,:) = [];
% Plate 3 (top left)
x3 = b:b/ne:2*b;
y3 = 0:a/ne:a;
[Y3,X3] = meshgrid(x3,y3);
% Plate 4
x4 = b:b/ne:2*b;
y4 = a:a/ne:2*a;
[Y4,X4] = meshgrid(x4,y4);
X4(1,:) = [];
Y4(1,:) = [];
% Plate 5
x5 = b:b/ne:2*b;
y5 = 2*a:a/ne:3*a;
[Y5,X5] = meshgrid(x5,y5);
X5(1,:) = [];
Appendices
74
==PAGE:87==
24-01-20 12:13
/Users/chen0045/OneDrive/Spe.../Example.m
2 of 4
Y5(1,:) = [];
 
% Combining all plates into global system
XX1=[X1;X2];
YY1=[Y1;Y2];
XX1(:,ne+1)=[];
YY1(:,ne+1)=[];
XX2=[X3;X4;X5];
YY2=[Y3;Y4;Y5];
 
sys.X = [XX1(:),YY1(:);XX2(:),YY2(:)];
 
% Element topology
k = 1;
% Bottom row of elements
for i = 1:nx1
    sys.T{k} = [i i+1 nx1+i+2]; k = k + 1;  
end
for i = 1:nx1
    sys.T{k} = [nx1+i+2 nx1+i+1 i]; k = k + 1;
end
 
%Making rows above until the row before 3 plates begin
for j = 2:ny1-1
    for i = 1:2*nx1
        sys.T{k} = sys.T{k-2*nx1}+nx1+1; k = k + 1;
    end
end
 
% Making bottom triangle elements for last row before 3 plates begin
for i = 1:nx1
        sys.T{k} = sys.T{k-2*nx1}+nx1+1;
        sys.T{k}(3)=sys.T{k}(3)+ne;
        k = k + 1;
end
% Making top triangle elements for last row before 3 plates begin.
for i = 1:nx1
        sys.T{k} = sys.T{k-2*nx1}+nx1+1;
        sys.T{k}(1)=sys.T{k}(1)+ne;
        sys.T{k}(2)=sys.T{k}(2)+ne;
        k = k + 1;
end
 
% Making bottom row for the 3 top plates
for i = (nx1+1)*ne+1:(nx1+1)*ne+nx2
    sys.T{k} = [i i+1 nx2+i+2]; k = k + 1;
end
for i = (nx1+1)*ne+1:(nx1+1)*ne+nx2
    sys.T{k} = [nx2+i+2 nx2+i+1 i]; k = k + 1;
end
% Finishing the top 3 plates with elements
for j = 2:ny2
    for i = 1:2*nx2
        sys.T{k} = sys.T{k-2*nx2}+nx2+1; k = k + 1;
    end
end
nel=size(sys.T,2);
 
% Visualize the topology with(1)/without(0) node/element numbers
plotTop(sys,0,0);
 
% MATERIALS -----------------------------------------------------
75
==PAGE:88==
24-01-20 12:13
/Users/chen0045/OneDrive/Spe.../Example.m
3 of 4
% Group 1:
G{1}.mpx = mp;                 % plastic positive moment capacity
G{1}.mpy = mp;                 % plastic positive moment capacity
G{1}.mpxm = mp;                % plastic negative moment capacity
G{1}.mpym = mp;                % plastic negative moment capacity
sys.G = G;
 
% Material groups
sys.GTy(1:nel) = 1;           % Define the material type of the elements
 
% BOUNDARY CONDITIONS -------------------------------------------
% Node supports - prescribed dofs:
% eq:   1 for the corner
%       2 for the shear force at the mid side opposite of the corner
%       3 and 4 for the moments at the side opposite of the corner
% sys.BC.V.node(i,:)=[element corner/side eq]
% Bottom elements:
k = 1;
% Corner column (bottom)
for el = 1:1
    sys.BC.V.node(k,:) = [el 1 1]; k = k + 1;
end
% Wall (bottom)
for el = nx1/2+1:nx1
    sys.BC.V.node(k,:) = [el 1 1]; k = k + 1;
    sys.BC.V.node(k,:) = [el 3 2]; k = k + 1;
    sys.BC.V.node(k,:) = [el 2 1]; k = k + 1;
end
% Columns (middle)
for el = nx1^2+nx1/2:nx1/2:nx1^2+nx2
    sys.BC.V.node(k,:) = [el 2 1]; k = k + 1;
end
 
% Left boundary:
% Wall (left)
for el = nx1^2+nx2+1:2*nx2:nx1^2+nx2*(nx1-1)+1
    sys.BC.V.node(k,:) = [el 2 1]; k = k + 1;
    sys.BC.V.node(k,:) = [el 3 1]; k = k + 1;
    sys.BC.V.node(k,:) = [el 1 2]; k = k + 1;
end
 
% Top boundary:
% Columns (top)
for el = nx1^2+nx2*nx1-2*nx2/3:nx1/2:nx1^2+nx2*nx1
    sys.BC.V.node(k,:) = [el 1 1]; k = k + 1;
end
  
% Node loads:
% eq:   1 for the corner
%       2 for the shear force at the mid side opposite of the corner
%       3 and 4 for the moments at the side opposite of the corner
% sys.BC.R/Rvar.node(i,:)=[element corner eq value]
%  sys.BC.Rvar.node = [
%                      7 3 2 -a
%                      8 3 2 -a
%                      ];
 
% Surface loads:
% sys.BC.R/Rvar.surf(i,:) = [element value]
% Constant surface load
p = -12*gamma.perm;
for i = 1:nel
76
==PAGE:89==
24-01-20 12:13
/Users/chen0045/OneDrive/Spe.../Example.m
4 of 4
  sys.BC.R.surf(i,:) = [i p];
end
% Variable surface load
pvar = -5*gamma.var;
for i = 1:nel
  sys.BC.Rvar.surf(i,:) = [i pvar];
end
 
 
% SOLVE SYSTEM EQUATIONS ----------------------------------------
% Perform linear elastic static analysis
[sys,prob,res]=coneopt(sys);
 
% Expected load factor: mpym / (a * b) = 0.25
lambda = res.sol.itr.xx(end);
 
%% Post processing
 
% Plot moments:
plotSigma(sys,res,'x')
plotSigma(sys,res,'y')
plotSigma(sys,res,'xy')
plotSigma(sys,res,'X')
plotSigma(sys,res,'Y')
 
% Plot collapse mode:
plotDof(sys,res,2)
 
% Calculated collapse load:
Pmax = -(p+lambda*pvar)
 
 
77
==PAGE:90==
(1.7)
(1.7)
(1.2)
(1.2)
(1.8)
(1.8)
(1.1.1)
(1.1.1)
(1.1)
(1.1)
(1.3)
(1.3)
(1.4)
(1.4)
(1.5)
(1.5)
(1.6)
(1.6)
Punching shear calculations
x
8 m : y
6 m : p
19.5 kN
m2 : h
400 mm : d
350 mm : b
500 mm : Acol
500 mm 500 mm : fck
35 MPa : As
0.754 mm2
mm
:
k
evalf
1
200 mm
d
k
1.755928946
l
simplify
As
1
2 h
l
0.003770000000
k1
0.1
k1
0.1
CRd, c
0.18
1.45
CRd,c
0.1241379310
90
180
2
sr
d
0.67
sr
522.3880596 mm
Asw
36 mm 2 
4
Asw
324  mm2
fywd, ef
250
 0.25 
d
mm
MPa
fywd,ef
337.50 MPa
Internal column
Aload
x y
Aload
48 m2
78
==PAGE:91==
(1.1.2)
(1.1.2)
(1.1.4)
(1.1.4)
(1.2.2)
(1.2.2)
(1.1.7)
(1.1.7)
(1.1.6)
(1.1.6)
(1.2.4)
(1.2.4)
(1.2.1)
(1.2.1)
(1.1.5)
(1.1.5)
(1.2.3)
(1.2.3)
(1.1.3)
(1.1.3)
u1
evalf 4 b
4 d 
u1
6398.229716 mm
VEd
 p Aload
VEd
936.0 kN
m2  m2
vEd
convert 1.15
VEd
u1 d , units, MPa
vEd
0.4806686704 MPa
vmin
evalf
0.035 k
3
2
fck
MPa
1
2
MPa
vmin
0.4817952057 MPa
vRd, c
simplify CRd, c k
100 l 
fck
MPa
1
3
MPa
vRd,c
0.5150877708 MPa
vRd, cs
0.75 vRd, c
1.5
d
sr
 Asw fywd, ef
1
u1 d
 sin
vRd,cs
0.5404883047 MPa
Edge column
u1
evalf
3 b
4 d 
2
u1
3699.114858 mm
Aload
1
2 x y
Aload
24 m2
VEd
 p Aload
VEd
468.0 kN
m2  m2
vEd
convert 1.4
VEd
u1 d , units, MPa
vEd
0.5060670112 MPa
79
==PAGE:92==
(1.3.3)
(1.3.3)
(1.3.1)
(1.3.1)
(1.3.4)
(1.3.4)
(1.2.7)
(1.2.7)
(1.3.2)
(1.3.2)
(1.2.5)
(1.2.5)
(1.3.7)
(1.3.7)
(1.3.5)
(1.3.5)
(1.2.6)
(1.2.6)
(1.3.6)
(1.3.6)
vmin
evalf
0.035 k
3
2
fck
MPa
1
2
MPa
vmin
0.4817952057 MPa
vRd, c
simplify CRd, c k
100 l 
fck
MPa
1
3
MPa
vRd,c
0.5150877708 MPa
vRd, cs
0.75 vRd, c
1.5
d
sr
 Asw fywd, ef
1
u1 d
 sin
vRd,cs
0.6529825739 MPa
Corner column
u1
evalf
2 b
4 d 
4
u1
2099.557429 mm
Aload
1
4 x y
Aload
12 m2
VEd
 p Aload
VEd
234.0 kN
m2  m2
vEd
convert 1.5
VEd
u1 d , units, MPa
vEd
0.4776516844 MPa
vmin
evalf
0.035 k
3
2
fck
MPa
1
2
MPa
vmin
0.4817952057 MPa
vRd, c
simplify CRd, c k
100 l 
fck
MPa
1
3
MPa
vRd,c
0.5150877708 MPa
vRd, cs
0.75 vRd, c
1.5
d
sr
 Asw fywd, ef
1
u1 d
 sin
vRd,cs
0.8561438535 MPa
80
==PAGE:93==
(1.4.6)
(1.4.6)
(1.4.1)
(1.4.1)
(1.4.4)
(1.4.4)
(1.4.7)
(1.4.7)
(1.4.5)
(1.4.5)
(1.4.3)
(1.4.3)
(1.4.2)
(1.4.2)
Special edge column
u1
evalf
3 b
4 d 
4
3
u1
4798.672287 mm
Aload
3
4 x y
Aload
36 m2
VEd
 p Aload
VEd
702.0 kN
m2  m2
vEd
convert 1.4
VEd
u1 d , units, MPa
vEd
0.5851618597 MPa
vmin
evalf
0.035 k
3
2
fck
MPa
1
2
MPa
vmin
0.4817952057 MPa
vRd, c
simplify CRd, c k
100 l 
fck
MPa
1
3
MPa
vRd,c
0.5150877708 MPa
vRd, cs
0.75 vRd, c
1.5
d
sr
 Asw fywd, ef
1
u1 d
 sin
vRd,cs
0.5918791303 MPa
81
