==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering in Biotechnology
Functional characterization of cell
wall deletions and influence on
secretion of the final product in cell
factories
Verónica Ramos (s182283)
Supervised by:
Iben Møller-Hansen
Irina Borodina
Kongens Lyngby
July 2020
==PAGE:2==
DTU Biosustain
The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability
Technical University of Denmark
Kemitorvet
Building 220
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 8000
biosustain@biosustain.dtu.dk
www.biosustain.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
A major drawback when up-scaling the production of an intracellular fine chemical is the
downstream processing. The procedure requires more unit operations and becomes more
expensive. Therefore, a secreted compound is always preferred. Some strategies include
the expression of heterologous transporters, but not all product-specific transporters are
known.
In this study, we hypothesized that small hydrophobic molecules are able to cross
the plasma membrane by diffusion but the cell wall impedes their complete secretion.
This project aimed at weakening the cell wall by single knockouts in order to achieve
complete secretion in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The compounds tested in this study
were β-carotene, p-coumaric acid and fatty alcohols. The knockouts showed to have a
variable effect on the cell wall depending on the compound produced. At the same time,
the knockouts supressed the compound production on the p-coumaric acid producer
strain. No significant secretion was achieved on the β-carotene producer strains. All
together, our findings demonstrate the importance on the cell wall in cell factory design.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract
i
Contents
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Petrochemical vs bio-based production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
S. cerevisiae as a host
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Cell factory engineering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
β-Carotene
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.5
p-Coumaric acid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.6
Fatty alcohols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.7
Production and localization of β-carotene, p-CA and FA in S. cerevisiae .
7
1.8
Selection of β-carotene, p-CA and FA for secretion and cell wall engineer-
ing in S. cerevisiae
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.9
The cell wall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.10 Target genes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.11 Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2
Materials and Methods
17
2.1
Strains and growth conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2
Deletion strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3
Transformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.4
Cultivation of S. cerevisiae for compound production . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.5
Extraction and compound analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.6
Spot assays
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Results and discussion
21
3.1
Effect of mutations on resistance to caffeine
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Knockouts in p-CA producer strain show a growth impairment on MM
.
23
3.3
No effect of knockouts on β-carotene secretion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4
Knockouts suppress extracellular p-CA production . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.5
Effect of knockouts on FA secretion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4
Conclusion and future perspectives
29
5
Appendix
31
==PAGE:6==
iv
Contents
5.1
Strains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2
BioBricks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.3
Primers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.4
t-Test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.5
p-CA chromatograms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
References
37
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
1.1
Petrochemical vs bio-based production
There are more than 7 billion people in our planet and the number keeps increasing. As
a consequence, an enormous amount of waste is generated and meanwhile, there is a
growing world demand for raw materials and energy. Throughout history and since the
Industrial Revolution, minerals and fossils sources have been used without hesitation
until reaching the depletion concern we suffer nowadays. Furthermore, their usage is
linked to an increase of greenhouse gases in our atmosphere (Bennett 2012) and as a
result, counteraction efforts have been undertaken in order to find innovative solutions.
There is a range of sustainable alternatives for fossil fuels like wind and solar energy
to provide power. Regarding the mass and carbon, which is essential for the production
of tangible products like pharmaceuticals, it is possible to obtain them from renewable
non-fossil feedstocks, moving towards a biobased economy.
Biological systems can produce relevant chemicals on large scale using renewable
sources in what is known as industrial biotechnology. This new strategy, sometimes
even coupled with significant cost savings, helps reducing water, energy, and raw mate-
rial inputs as well as pollution. Bacteria and fungi are the organisms most commonly
used. For instance, the production of insulin was performed from the extraction of cattle
and pigs pancreas and purified during decades. In the 1980s, researchers used genetic
engineering to manufacture a human insulin from Escherichia coli (Nilsson et al. 1996).
The outcome allowed to have unlimited supply independent to animals. This milestone
set a precedent on microbial production of compounds. It has been followed by another
important event, the production of artemisinin, used in the treatment and prevention
of malaria. Artemisin is naturally produced by the Chinese medicinal plant Artemisia
annua, but its extraction and isolation is not an eco-friendly process and dependent on
seasonality (Hommel 2008). However, the production of artemisinic acid, its immediate
precursor, is a cost-effective, environmentally friendly, high-quality and reliable source
of artemisinin which can help the global supply. In this case, the artemisinic acid is
obtained from an engineered Saccharomyces cerevisiae developed by Amyris Biotech-
nologies and the Keasling group at the University of California at Berkeley (Ro et al.
2006).
The localization of the final compound is very influential when scaling up the process.
An intracellular compound or a low efficiency in secretion will carry high separation
costs and it is therefore desirable to produce an extracellular one. This is also highly
beneficial in the case of toxic compounds, which diminishes cell fitness. A promising
==PAGE:8==
2
1 Introduction
strategy is transporter engineering, which has already given positive results in the case
of glutamate in Corynebacterium glutamicum (Sano 2009) or 1-alkenes (Zhou et al. 2018)
in yeast. However not all substrate-specific transporters have been identified yet. This is
where cell wall engineering could overcome this problem enhancing its permeability. This
project is going to focus on the yeast S. cerevisiae as a platform for the production of
chemicals and secretion and to investigate the cell wall role in this process. Consequently,
the next section will be dedicated to this microorganism and its advantages as a model
organism.
1.2
S. cerevisiae as a host
S. cerevisiae (also known as baker’s yeast) is a unicellular fungus from the phylum
Ascomycota and a well established model organism. In nature, S. cerevisiae switches
between two mating types: haploid type MATa, which can mate with the other haploid
type MATα to form stable diploid MATa/MATα cells. However, in laboratory strains,
mating types are often stable and do not switch due to the absence of a functional HO
(homothallic switching) endonuclease (Duina et al. 2014).
Among the advantages for the use of this organism in cell factory engineering are
the ease of use, the capability of growth to high cell densities on a wide variety of car-
bon sources and that it is a Generally Recognized As Safe (GRAS) organism, meaning
no health threat. S. cerevisiae can tolerate low pH and therefore there is no need for
neutralization when producing acids and carries a lower risk of bacterial contamination.
In addition, it was the first eukaryotic organism whose genome was sequenced and it
is completely available, which simplifies the genetic manipulation. As it is an eukary-
otic organism, its research can be applied to humans more easily rather than in other
model organisms as E. coli, as it can realize most of the post-translational modifications
required for a biologically active recombinant protein. Moreover, yeast fermentation is
cheaper to run than E. coli fermentation and is not subject to phague contamination
(Wagner & Alper 2016). Besides, S. cerevisiae strongly favors homologous recombination
(HR), whereas other yeasts present a stronger preference for non-homologous end-joining
(NHEJ) (Gomes et al. 2018).
The availability of genetic tools plays a prominent role when choosing a host for
heterologous production. Some of these are the Yeast Knockout (YKO) Collection which
includes knock-out strains covering 96% of the yeast genome. Other genetic tools for
S. cerevisiae are EasyClone ensuring high stable expression of multiple genes and low
population heterogeneity (Jensen et al. 2014) or EasyClone-MarkeFree via CRISPR-Cas9
with integration efficiency of 95%-100% without the use of selection markers (Jessop-
Fabre et al. 2016).
The aptitudes of S. cerevisiae for the production of native and heterologous com-
pounds has been demonstrated through the years. It has been used in the production of
bulk chemicals like succinic acid (Raab et al. 2010), flavouring compounds (Kutyna &
Borneman 2018) and pharmaceuticals (Nielsen 2013). In the next section the concept
==PAGE:9==
1.3 Cell factory engineering
3
of cell factory engineering is going to be reviewed in order to get a more comprehensive
point of view on the approach employed in the construction of the cell factories used as
a starting point in this study.
1.3
Cell factory engineering
A cell factory is a cell/organism acting as a chemical catalyst converting one compound
-usually glucose- into a high value one. Within the context of industrial biotechnology;
the idea is to create an available industrial bio-product from a carbon source that is
converted in an economic bio-process into a desired product of quality. Although to
use cells as a factory is not a new way of thinking and industrial biotechnology has a
long history, it was not until the arrival of genetic engineering when it was possible to
modify cell DNA. Originally, it meant to perform random mutagenesis and subsequent
screening for the desired phenotype and it was not until 1980s and 1990s when gene
targeted modifications became a reality (Sauer & Mattanovich 2012).
Milestones in
genetic engineering history have been DNA sequencing discovered by Walter Gilbert and
Frederick Sanger in 1977 which has allowed the sequencing of whole genomes and the
gene editing tool CRISPR/Cas9. The awareness of the genome promoted genomics, the
science that studies the structure, function, evolution, and mapping of genomes, together
with the other Omics Sciences such us transcriptomics, proteomics, or metabolomics.
Their holistic method allows to better understand an organism, which is considered as a
whole (Vailati-Riboni et al. 2017). With regards to CRISPR/Cas9, CRISPR (Clustered
Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats) alongside with the known nuclease
Cas9 is a prokaryotic immune system that confers resistance to external agents such
as plasmids and phages and provides a form of acquired immunity (Mojica et al. 2000,
Jinek et al. 2012). The CRISPR protospacers recognize specific sequences and guide the
nuclease Cas to cut and degrade these exogenous gene elements. These can be used to
achieve targeted mutations in the genome (Cho et al. 2013, Cong et al. 2013, Mali et al.
2013, DiCarlo et al. 2013).
This ”cocktail” leads to the main objective of cell factory engineering (CFE), the mod-
ification of some natural pathways of an organism or the introduction of an heterologous
one with the finality of achieving the desired bio-product. Microbial cell factory design
is a cyclic process consisting of successive rounds of Design, including modeling based on
obtained data, Construction of the new strain with molecular biology tools, Character-
ization phase where cell features are tested and Analysis where the Omic Sciences play
their role (Figure 1.1). Strategies for improving the native or heterologous production of
a compound are pathway overexpression, transporter engineering, co-factor engineering,
avoid product degradation, de-branching, removal of feedback inhibition, among others
(Davy et al. 2017). Some examples are the production of sesquiterpenes in S. cerevisiae
with co-factor engineering by replacing an enzyme with another with the same function
by using another non-limiting co-factor(Asadollahi et al. 2009) or the expression of a
bacterial transporter that increases its resveratrol content (Wang et al. 2011).
==PAGE:10==
4
1 Introduction
Figure 1.1: Cell factory design. Consists of an iterative process of Design, Construction, Characterization
and Analysis (Davy et al. 2017).
Transport engineering has become object of study in industrial biology because the
accumulation of the product inside the cell can trigger feedback inhibition or even be
toxic (Kell et al. 2015). This is why it is always preferably to secrete the compound
than having an intracellular one. However, what has never been investigated is how to
engineer the yeast cell wall to improve the secretion of the product in a cell factory. In
the following sections the microbial production of β-carotene, p-coumaric acid and fatty
alcohols will be reviewed in more detail due to the relevance for the present work.
1.4 β-Carotene
β-Carotene is a tetraterpenoid consisting of 40 carbon atoms in a core structure with 9
double bonds and 2 β-ionone rings (Figure 1.2). It is an organic, strongly colored red-
orange pigment naturally found in fruits and vegetables. Due to its conjugated double
bonds it shows an absorption peak at 450 nm which is responsible for the red color of the
compound (Britton 1996). β-Carotene is precursor of Vitamin A (Krinsky & Johnson
2005) and it is well known for its antioxidant activity against reactive oxygen species
(Young & Lowe 2001). The global β-carotene market size was USD 432.2 million in 2015
in applications such as food beverages, dietary supplements, cosmetics and animal feed.
The oldest way of obtention of β-carotene is by extraction directly from plant materi-
als with organic solvents, however it is dependant on seasonality and there are high costs
associated with the process (Bogacz-Radomska & Harasym 2018). Chemical synthesis
has been used in carotenoids production since it was developed in the 50s with Witting
reactions or Grignard compounds. The Witting reaction consists of the combination
of two phosphodium salts (C15x2) and an aldehyde (C10). On the other hand, the
second method consists of the combination of one diketone molecule and two methanol
molecules achiving a 40 carbons compound (Álvarez et al. 2013). However chemical syn-
thesis is based on petrochemical resources and therefore, it is desirable to find another
==PAGE:11==
1.5 p-Coumaric acid
5
method for natural production. Natural β-carotene can be produced using microorgan-
isms in biotechnological processes like microalgae, where the natural producer Asterarcys
quadricellulare has reached titers of 47µg/mg per dry biomass with optimized conditions
(Singh et al. 2019). Some filamentous fungi like Blakeslea trispora (Xu et al. 2007) and
bacteria from Salinibacterium sp. and Cryobacterium sp. (Vila et al. 2019) produce it
too. Although there are some yeasts which are natural producers (Buzzini et al. 2007),
new advances in genetic engineering allow to boost the production with the expression
of heterologous enzymes (Verwaal et al. 2007, Kildegaard et al. 2017). The strategy
takes the Mevalonate Pathway as starting point (MVA) and a new step is added from
geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate GGPP with the expression of crtYB (which encodes a
bifunctional phytoene synthase and lycopene cyclase) and crtI (phytoene desaturase)
from Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous.
Figure 1.2: β-carotene structure.
Its chemical formula is C40H56 and it consists of two β-rings and 9
double bonds.
1.5
p-Coumaric acid
p-Coumaric acid (p-CA) is an hydroxycinnamic acid derived from cinnamic acid. It is the
most abundant of the three isomers (o-coumaric acid, m-coumaric acid, and p-coumaric)
which differ in the position of the hydroxy substituent (Figure 1.3). p-Coumaric belongs
to the non-flavonoid phenolic compounds and it is naturally present in fruits (kiwis,
blueberries, apples, grapes) and cereal grains (wheat, rice, oat flours) (Boz 2015). It has
a great number of important applications in the nutraceutical, pharmaceutical, material
and chemical industries (Călinoiu & Vodnar 2018, Lv et al. 2012) having antioxidant,
inflammatory and antimicrobial properties (Luceri et al. 2007, Lou et al. 2012). Addition-
ally, besides being a valuable chemical building block, it is precursor for the biosynthesis
of a number of secondary metabolites, such as polyphenols, flavonoids, and some polyke-
tides (Sánchez-Maldonado et al. 2011).
==PAGE:12==
6
1 Introduction
Figure 1.3: p-CA structure.
Its chemical formula is C9H8O3 and it consists of a phenyl ring with an
hydroxy substituent at C4.
The chemical production of p-CA is performed from coumarin, which can be obtained
by chemical synthesis (John Wiley & Sons 2000) opening its ring and performing a cis-
trans isomerization (López-Castillo et al. 2013). It can also be extracted from natural
sources like lignin in an alkaline hydrolysis (Mussatto et al. 2007). However, both pro-
cesses involve strong bases, becoming a non-environmentally friendly process.
Biological production of p-CA from glucose can be achieved via deamination of the
aromatic amino acids L-tyrosine or L-phenylalanine. Deamination of L-phenylalanine
produces trans-cinnamic acid (CA) which is further hydroxylated in the para position
to produce pCA. However, when tyrosine is used as the substrate, it is produced in one
step which reaction is accomplished mainly by phenylalanine ammonia-lyase (PAL) or
also by tyrosine ammonia-lyase (TAL) which is promiscuous and also accepts tyrosine.
Production has been achieved mostly in E.coli (Vannelli et al. 2007, Li et al. 2018) and
S. cerevisiae with higher titers (Rodriguez et al. 2015). Rodriguez et al. overexpressed
tyrosine ammonia-lyase TAL from Flavobacterium johnsoniaeu, in Δpdc5Δaro10 strain
background which reduced by-product formation. Further modifications take into consid-
eration the feedback-inhibition of DAHP synthase and chorismate mutase by L-tyrosine
and L-phenylalanine. To avoid this, feedback resistant Aro4k229l and Aro7g141sæ were
overexpresed. The E.coli isoenzyme of shikimate kinase II (aroL) from the aminoacids
pathway was overexpressed too reaching 1.93±0.26 g/L of p-CA.
1.6
Fatty alcohols
Fatty alcohols (FA) are composed of one or more hydroxyl groups attached to an aliphatic
chain (Figure 1.4). Due to its amphiphilic properties, they are used as detergents and
surfactants in cosmetic technology and personal care products such as creams, shampoos
and soaps (Kelm & Wickett 2017). According to a new study by Grand View Research,
Inc. global FA market size is expected to reach USD 7.51 billion by 2022.
Figure 1.4: Fatty alcohol structure. The molecule illustrated is hexadecanoyl-CoA, but they vary in chain
length and saturation.
==PAGE:13==
1.7 Production and localization of β-carotene, p-CA and FA in S. cerevisiae
7
There is a variety of methods for the production of FA including the chemical and
biotechnological processes. The chemical method can be performed from natural sources
like palm kernel or coconut oil containing TAGs which are first hydrolyzed into glycerol
and fatty acids, then glycerol is removed and fatty acids or the methyl esters of fatty
acids are fractionated and hydrogenated to fatty alcohols. Alternatively, they can be
obtained from petrochemical resources where the hydrogenation and oxidation processes
are controlled in the presence of catalysts (Valoppi et al. 2018). Both options carry
environmental challenges: from natural oils, increasing its demand leading to rainforest
deforestation and a biodiversity threat (Fitzherbert et al. 2008); from petrochemical
feedstocks, it raises concerns about greenhouse effects generated by the reaction harsh
conditions. In order to overcome these issues, microbial production of fatty alcohols
from renewable feedstocks can be a more sustainable method.
The most relevant industrially applicable hosts for the production of fatty alcohols
are E.coli and S. cerevisiae. The biosynthesis of fatty alcohols in bacteria starts with the
conversion of a fatty acyl-ACP to produce a free fatty acid by the action of a thioesterase
(TE). Then, the free fatty acid becomes a fatty acyl-CoA by the action of a fatty acyl-
CoA synthase. The resulting fatty acyl-CoA can then be reduced to a fatty alcohol
through the formation of its corresponding fatty aldehyde in a reaction catalyzed by
a NADPH-dependent fatty acyl-CoA reductase (FAR) (Fillet & Adrio 2016). Subse-
quently, fatty alcohol production has been further enhanced by deletion of genes from
competing pathways (Liu et al. 2016). In yeast, the production is done by two enzymatic
steps from fatty acyl-CoA. First it is converted to a fatty aldehyde by an acyl-CoA reduc-
tase (ACR) and then by an aldehyde reductase (AHR) into a fatty alcohol. Both steps
can be also achieved by the enzyme alcohol-forming fatty acyl-CoA reductase (FAR).
Rhodosporidium toruloides has been engineered with a fatty acyl-CoA reductase from
Marinobacter aquaeolei VT8 achieveing 8 g/L in a bioreactor and S. cerevisiae has also
been engineered with FARs from other microorganisms and further strategies like con-
trolling carbon flux or co-factor balancing (d’Espaux et al. 2017).
1.7
Production and localization of
β-carotene, p-CA and FA in S. cerevisiae
The heterologous production of β-carotene, p-CA and FA in S. cerevisiae is tightly at-
tached to the lipid metabolism. It starts with the uptake of glucose from the extracellular
environment and glucose metabolism results in acetyl-CoA accumulation and the release
of NADPH. From the acetyl-CoA as converged point, the production of FA follows the
fatty acid synthesis pathway. Conversely, the production of β-carotene is ensued by
the endogenous mevalonate pathway which also constitutes the road to the synthesis of
ergosterol, an essential structural component of yeast membranes. The p-CA follows the
==PAGE:14==
8
1 Introduction
shikimate pathway leading to the production of aromatic amino acids. The subcellular
synthesis of the compounds takes place in the cytoplasm according to Yeast GFP fusion
localization database, except for β-carotene, whose producing enzyme is localized in the
ER membrane according to UniProt.
Figure 1.5: Synthesis scheme of β-carotene, p-CA and FA. Color code: blue, glycolysis; yellow, citric acid
cycle (CAC); orange, Mevalonate pathway; green, Shikimate pathway; purple, engineered steps.
Full arrows represent one step and dotted arrows multiple steps.
1.8
Selection of β-carotene, p-CA and FA for
secretion and cell wall engineering in S.
cerevisiae
The plasma membrane, composed by a phospholipid bilayer creates a hydrophobic inte-
rior. As a consequence, this structure causes the membrane to be selectively permeable.
Only relatively small, hydrophobic, nonpolar materials which can dissolve in the mem-
brane’s core can move through the lipid bilayer. Some examples of these are other lipids,
oxygen and carbon dioxide gases, and alcohol (Yang & Hinner 2014). Besides, neutral
amphiphilic molecules move through lipid bilayers with relative ease (Hamilton 2007).
==PAGE:15==
1.9 The cell wall
9
In terms of hydrophobicity, all three compounds are a group of extremely non-polar,
hydrophobic molecules with little or no solubility in water which usually do not increase
with higher temperature. As hydrophobic compounds, they can not be in solution in the
cytoplasm. Conversely they form lipid bodies acting as a reservoir of energy and building
blocks for membrane lipid synthesis (Graef 2018, Ma et al. 2019). β-carotene has a
transverse cell membrane orientation due to its amphiphilic nature (Shibata et al. 2001)
and influences membrane fluidity, by increasing its rigidity and mechanical strength
(Britton 1995).
With the characteristics mentioned, the compounds object of this study would the-
oretically be able to cross the plasma membrane, reason why these compounds have
been selected for the study. However, they are not completely secreted into the medium
except from p-CA and need an extraction method (Kildegaard et al. 2017, Rodriguez
et al. 2015, Dahlin et al. 2019). The accumulation of the compounds may be by action
of the second barrier to the external environment, the cell wall.
As mention in previous sections, a secreted metabolite is preferred instead of an
intracellular one. The reason for this is that a cell factory producing an intracellular
compound needs a cell lysis step in the downstream process, leading to more unit oper-
ations and hence a more expensive process. Moreover, their accumulation leads to cell
wall stress linked to osmotic imbalance and some metabolites may be toxic for the cell
if accumulated in big amounts (Dahlin et al. 2019). For a better understanding on how
the cell wall influences its accumulation the its main features will be reviewed in the
next section.
1.9
The cell wall
The cell wall in S. cerevisiae is situated outside the cell after the plasma membane with
the periplasmic space in between. It provides the cell with its shape, osmotic integrity
and physical protection (Smith et al. 2000). Electron microscopy shows that it has a
thickness of 70-100 nm depending on growth conditions and genetic background (Osumi
1998). The cell wall accounts for approximately 15-30% of the cell dry weight (Aguilar-
Uscanga & Francois 2003, Yin et al. 2007). It has an inner layer, which is responsible
of the mechanical strength, and an outer layer, which limits the permeability, and it is
responsible for recognition events (Klis et al. 2002). The major components are β-1,3-
and β-1,6-linked glucans, mannoproteins, and chitin (Figure 1.6). The inner layer is
composed of glucans and chitin and the outer layer consists of mannoproteins where
all components are crosslinked (Kollár et al. 1997). Chitin is directly attached to the
glucans, and these are attached to the processed glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) an-
chor of mannoproteins in the case of β-1,6 or to β-1,3-glucan through an alkali-labile
bond. The cell wall and plasma membrane are physically linked by GPI-anchored cell
wall proteins (CWP).
==PAGE:16==
10
1 Introduction
Figure 1.6: Cell wall structure.
The yeast cell wall is situated above the plasma membrane and it is
composed mainly of β-glucans, chitin and mannoproteins.
1.9.1
Cell wall proteins (CWPs)
CWPs are proteins covalently attached to the the cell wall and form radially extend-
ing fibrillae at the outside. They are highly glycosylated and mannosylated with the
carbohydrates counting from 50 to 95% of of the total weight (Lipke & Ovalle 1998),
processes explained in more detail in the next section. Cell surface proteins can be iden-
tified using a membrane-impermeable biotinylayion agent that reacts with free amino
groups specifically (Mrsă et al. 1997). Phosphorylation of the mannosyl side chains in
O-mannosylated proteins gives the cell wall an anionic charge and their addition to the
cell wall occurs after the association of both types of glucans and before the addition of
chitin (Hartland et al. 1994).
CWPs have numerous functions, however in some cases is still unclear; some help
stabilizing the cell wall like Cwp2, others are involved in cell-cell adhesion like the floc-
culins (Lo & Dranginis 1998, Teunissen & Steensma 1995), some can even be factors
of virulence (Hsu et al. 2015) or be involved in the resistance to chemicals. They also
influence the different growth stages and cell wall processing (Klis et al. 2002). More-
over, CWPs limit cell wall permeability as a collective (Zhang et al. 2008, Nobel et al.
1990). There are two types of CWPs: the GPI-dependent cell wall proteins (GPI-CWPs)
and the Pir (proteins with internal repeats) proteins (Pir-CWPs). The GPI-CWPs are
generally linked to β-1,3 glucan through a β-1,6 glucan moiety with a remnant of their
GPI anchor as opposed to Pir-CWPs which are linked to β-1,3 glucan through an alkali-
sensitive linkage (Kapteyn et al. 1999). GPI-CWPs contain regions rich on serine and
threonine with internal repeats and the most studied is the sexual agglutinin Sag1. They
carry an N-terminal signal peptide and a hydrophopbic sequence which is replaced in
the ER by a GPI anchor, a process explained in the next section. These CWPs can be
solubilized applying β-glucanase. Pir proteins do not contain the GPI anchor and have
significantly much more internal repeats than GPI-CWPs. They can be released to the
medium by the action of β-glucanase or by mild-alkali incubation (Kapteyn et al. 1999).
The expression of CWPs is not continuous and homogeneous but it is rather affected
==PAGE:17==
1.9 The cell wall
11
and regulated by the following factors. Interestingly, their transcription level is modified
when entering into a respiratory growth or stationary phase when the cell wall becomes
thicker and more resistant, being Sed1 a good example of this phenomenon, increasing
its expression in this situation (Shimoi et al. 1998). During nitrogen starvation, they
switch to pseudohyphal growth and express more amount of flocculins (Lo & Drangi-
nis 1998). With regards to the cell cycle, transcriptomics shows that over 50% of all
cell wall proteins are cell cycle regulated (Spellman et al. 1998) and most of them are
active in late M and early G1 phase (Smits et al. 1999) like Cwp1 and Cwp2. Cwp1
is also expressed in response to extreme environmental pH (Kapteyn et al. 2001) but
its transcript level is diminished in response to anaerobic conditions, alongside Cwp2
(Abramova et al. 2001). On the contrary Tir1, Tir2, Tir3 and Tir4 are up-regulated and
required for growth during G phase.
As mentioned before, CWPs limit permeability forming an intricate framework with
their ramified polysaccharides. They form a shield protecting the skeletal polysaccha-
rides from being atacked by foreign enzymes (Zlotnik et al. 1984). Contrariwise, they
may also limit the escape of molecules from the inside, partially due to their long and
ramified modifications.
De Nobel et al.
(Nobel et al. 1990) achieved a polycation-
induced leakage of UV-absorbing compounds which was dependent on cell wall porosity,
and which at the same time was dependent on media composition and number of disul-
phide bridges. On the other hand, several studies have reported that mutations affecting
the cell wall (de Groot et al. 2001) and specially CWPs (Zhang et al. 2008) affect its
porosity and increases its sensitivity to genotoxic agents. Taking this phenomenoms
into account, a deletional strategy appears as an attractive way of getting compounds
outside the cell. The next section will focus on CWPs modifications due to its relevance
in cell wall porosity.
1.9.2
CWPs modifications
The mannoproteins seem to be directly linked to the permeability of the cell wall (Zlot-
nik et al. 1984, Nobel et al. 1990) and they are modified with N-glycosylations, O-
mannosylations or GPI anchors. The first ones involve a two-step process conserved on
eukaryotic cells (Figure 1.7). It first comprises an attachment of a branched 14-sugar
oligosaccharide to the dolichylpyrophosphate carrier (Dol-PP) in the ER membrane.
Then it is transferred to a protein in selected asparagines in the ER lumen through an N-
glycosidic bond between a GlcNAc by the oligosaccharyltransferase complex (OST)(Aebi
2013, Larkin & Imperiali 2011). Subsequently the motif goes through a glycan process-
ing in the ER lumen by Ktr, Mnn, Mnt families and Kre2. Properly folded proteins go
to the Golgi, where a mannan outer chain is elaborated before continuing through the
secretory pathway (Jigami 2008, Fabre et al. 2014). The N-glycosylation is the most
abundant protein modification of eukaryotic cells.
==PAGE:18==
12
1 Introduction
Figure 1.7: N-glycosylation. In the ER the mannans and N-Acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) are added to the
precursor Dolichol-P (1) by mannosyltransferases and N-acetyl-glucosamine transferases (Alg
family), they are transferred to a protein (2), and processed (3) by Gls family, Gtb1 and Mns1.
In the Golgi, they are then elongated (5, 6) with mannan chains with by complexes such as the
mannan ploymerase I and II (M-Pol I, M-Pol II) formed by Mnn (1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 9, 10, and 11)
family of proteins, Och1, Van1, Anp1, Hoc1, Kre2, Mnt1, Ktr1-3 and Yur1. Picture adapted
and simplified from (Orlean 2012).
In the O-mannosylation, the first mannan is added in the ER lumen onto the hydroxyl
side chains of serine or threonine residues through an a-mannosyl bond (Sentandreu &
Northcote 1968) by O-mannosyltransferases. Then up to four mannoses are added in the
Golgi (Lussier et al. 1999). Both N-glycosylation and O-mannosylation are not essential
but a deffect on these bioprocesses increases cell wall permeability and compromises
its integrity (Nobel et al. 1990). Disruption of the O-mannosylation decreases cell wall
content of the β-1,6 glucan because its secretion or assembly may be dependent of its
attachments to the O-glycosylation of mannoproteins (Lipke & Ovalle 1998).
The third type of modification is the Glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchoring
where at least 21 proteins are involved. It starts with GlcNAc addition to PI and de-
N-acetylation of GlcNAc-PI to GlcN-PIthe phophatidylinositol in the cytoplasm side
of the ER membrane (Tiede et al. 2000, Watanabe et al. 1999). Then, the mannans
are added in the ER lumen side following the addition of Etn-P moieties added to the
2-OH of Man-1 and to the 6-OH of Man-2 and Man-3 (Orlean 2012). Finally, the GPI
is attached to the protein in a process involving essential membrane proteins (Fraering
et al. 2001) (Figure 1.8).
==PAGE:19==
1.9 The cell wall
13
Figure 1.8: GPI anchoring. The process starts in the cytoplasmic side of the ER with PI where leaving a
GlcN. It continues in the ER lumen with the addition of mannoses and moieties and posterior
attachment to the protein. The final result is a GPI anchor with the core structure protein
CONH2-CH2-CH2-PO4-6-Manα1,2Manα1,6Manα1,4GlcNa1,6-myoinositol phospholipid with
the α1,4- and α1,6-linked Man modified with Etn-P. Picture adapted and simplified from
(Orlean 2012).
1.9.3
Repair mechanisms
Taking into account all the dangers in a yeast environment that threatens the cell wall,
it is expected that they had developed a compensation mechanism in case of damage.
This is achieved by the cell wall integrity (CWI) signaling pathway (Figure 1.9). It
gets triggered by a stretch on the cell wall occasioned by a variety of signals: heat and
osmotic stress, hypo-osmotic shock, cell cycle regulation, cell-wall stressing agents, etc
(Schiavone et al. 2014, Ana Belén Sanz & Arroyo 2017). The signal is sensed by the
membrane protein families Wsc and Mid. It then arrives to Rho, a GTP-binding protein
which activates the Pck1-MAP kinase cascade leading to the activation of transcription
factors and membrane proteins (Levin 2005). The result is the increased expression
of β1,3-glucan synthesis, cell wall biosynthetic enzymes and CWPs. There is also an
increased deposition of chitin observed in cell wall mutants as gas1Δ, action that that
helps the cell to compensate for cell wall damage.
==PAGE:20==
14
1 Introduction
Figure 1.9: CWI signaling pathway.
The protein family WSC, Mid2 and Mlt1 are sensor membrane
proteins that translate the signal to Rho1 through Rom 1/2. Rho1 can activate the Pck1-
MAP kinase cascade, the β-1,3 glucan synthase (GS), the Bni1 formin protein, Sec3 and the
transcription factor Skn7. The cascade is activated by Pkc1 and involves Bck1, Mkk1/2 and
Mpk1 which then activates the transcription factors Swi4/6 and Rlm1. Additional regulatory
inputs to Rho1, Pkc1 and Mkk 1/2 are indicated .
1.10
Target genes
The target genes of this study where selected according to the premises of non-essentiality
and bibliographic evidence of yeast cell wall damage.
Las21 (YJL062W) codifies a mannose-ethanolamine phosphotransferase involved in
the synthesis of GPI. The protein is localized in the endoplasmic reticulum membrane
and catalyzes the addition of a side chain ethanolamine phosphate to the alpha1,6-linked
second mannose residue of the GPI lipid precursor (Toh-e & Oguchi 1998, Benachour
et al. 1999). Its mutant is known to affect cell wall assembly (de Groot et al. 2001).
Ecm33 (YBR078W) codifies a GPI-anchored protein involved in efficient glucose uptake
(Umekawa et al. 2017) and it is important for cell wall integrity (Pardo 2004). Pun1
(YLR414C) codifies a protein in the plasma membrane required for cell wall integrity
and its mutant presents a modifies cell wall composition (Hosiner et al. 2011). Cwp1
(YKL096W) is a GPI-CWP and a structural constituent of the cell wall. Its deletion in-
creases cell wall permeability being CWPs the major barrier to environmental genotoxic
==PAGE:21==
1.11 Objective
15
agents (Zhang et al. 2008). Cwp2 (YKL096W-A) is a CWP contently attached and plays
an important role on stabilizing the cell wall (van der Vaart et al. 1995), with its mu-
tant showing a thinner cell wall. Kre2 (YDR483W) is an alpha1,2-mannosyltransferase
of the Golgi that transfers an alpha-D-mannosyl residue from GDP-mannose into lipid-
linked oligosaccharide, forming an alpha-(1->2)-D-mannosyl-D-mannose linkage. It is
also involved in the O-glycosylation by attaching the third mannose residue (Orlean
2012).
This array of gene targets allows to cover the most important elements and processes
affecting cell wall permeability. Las21 addresses the GPI linked CWPs, Kre2 the O-
glycosylations and N-mannosylations and Ecm33, Pun1, Cwp1 and Cwp2 individual
CWPs.
1.11
Objective
The microbial production of β-carotene, p-CA and FA in S. cerevisiae has been achieved
previously in our research group, Yeast Metabolic Engineering (DTU Biosustain). How-
ever, although p-CA achieves the secretion, it is not the case for β-carotene and fatty
alcohols, which need and extraction method. These compounds seem to be able to cross
the plasma membrane but somehow get stuck in the preriplasmic space, just before the
cell wall. It is hypothesized that weakening the cell wall could be a good strategy to get
these compounds out of the cell, which will then alleviate the cell from osmotic stress
and toxic effects caused by their accumulation. Moreover, in S. cerevisiae no relation-
ship has been previously made between the production of non-native compounds and its
influence on the cell wall and vice versa.
The aim of this project is to, through cell wall related genes knockouts, improve the
secretion of compounds and to determine the effect of their production on the cell wall.
This includes to determine if all genes have the same influence on the cell wall or if
there are some differences and if they depend on the compound being produced. The
findings will also help determine if small hydrophobic molecules are able to go through
the plasma membrane as previously commented.
==PAGE:22==
16
==PAGE:23==
2
Materials and Methods
2.1
Strains and growth conditions
The background strains in this study were genetically modified previously from the
parent strain S. cerevisiae CEN.PK113-7D. These include: a p-coumaric acid producer
strain ST4058 ￿aro10 ￿pdc5 ↑Tal14 ↑Aro7pm ↑Aro4pm ↑AroL (Rodriguez et al. 2015),
β-carotene producer strain ST8969 with XdCrtE, XdCrtYB and XdCrtI an extra copy
of XdCrtI and truncated HMG (In-house strain), and fatty alcohols producer strain
ST6989 4x MalFAR, Δpex10,Δhfd1 (Dahlin et al. 2019). Routine growth of S. cere-
visiae was carried out at 30 °C in Yeast Peptone Dextrose (YPD) medium, containing
10 g/L yeast extract, 20 g/L peptone, and 20 g/L D-glucose. 20 g/L agar were added if
solid cultivations were required. When necessary, 200 mg/L G418 (Sigma Aldrich) was
supplemented to the media.
The deletions cassettes where obtained from the Yeast Knockout (YKO) collection.
It consists of a nearly complete set of yeast open reading frame (ORF) knock-outs pro-
duced by the Saccharomyces Genome Deletion Project (SGDP) from HorizonTM. A
PCR based strategy was used to replace each ORF with a KanMX cassette containing
unique tags, “barcodes”, for each deletion. Currently, 95% of the approximately 6,200
known ORFs have been deleted by the SGDP. The MATa collection currently contains
4786 unique ORFs. MATa strains are in the BY4741 background and have a genotype
of his3Δ1 leu2Δ0 met15Δ0 ura3Δ0. All strains used in this study are available in Ap-
pendix 5.1.
2.2
Deletion strategy
The deletion strategy consisted of transforming the producer strains with a repair frag-
ment which contained 150-200 bp homologous arms on the sides of a KanMX cassette.
The repair fragments were amplified from the YKO collection. The plasmids, BioBricks
and primers used in this study can be consulted in Appendix. BioBricks were PCR
amplified using Phusion U DNA polymerase (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following the
manufacturer’s instructions. The standard PCR programme consisted of the following
steps: 98 °C for 2 min; 32 cycles of 98 °C for 20 sec, 55 °C for 30 sec, and 72 °C for 30
sec/kb; 72 °C for 5 min. BioBricks were purified from agarose gels using NucleoSpin®
==PAGE:24==
18
2 Materials and Methods
Gel and PCR Clean-up kit (Macherey-Nagel). The deletions were confirmed by PCR.
2.3
Transformation
Competent S. cerevisiae cells were transformed using the Lithium acetate/single-stranded
carrier DNA/Polyethylene glycol method (Gietz and Schiestl, 2007). For each transfor-
mation, 360 µl of the transformation mix was prepared. The transformation mix required
for a single transformation contains 240 µl of 50% (w/v) polyethylene glycol (PEG), 36
µl of 1M lithium acetate, 10 µl of 10 mg/ml SS-carrier DNA (salmon sperm DNA)
previously boiled for 3 minutes and kept on ice, 2-4 µg of repair fragment and Milli-Q
water to 360 µl. The mix was kept on ice until mixed with competent cells. For each
transformation, 360 µl of the transformation mix was added on top of the previously
prepared competent cell pellet in a microcentrifuge tube and cells were resuspended in
the mix. A heat shock was then performed by incubating the tubes at 42 °C for 40 min.
The cells were then spin down and the supernatant was removed. The cells were left to
incubate in YPD for 2 hours at 30°C with shaking to provide time for expression of the
antibiotic resistance genes. Transformed cells were spin down, resuspended in 200 µl of
Milli-Q water and plated on YPD agar plates supplemented with 200 mg/L of G418 and
sorbitol 1M in the case of the fatty alcohols producer strains.
In detail, verification was performed by picking single S. cerevisiae colonies from the
transformation plate and transferring them to a PCR tube with 10 µl of 40 µM NaOH.
This was then treated with the following program: 65°C for 30s, 8°C for 30s, 65°C for
1min 30s, 99°C for 3 min, 8°C for 1 min, 65°C for 3 min, 99°C for 1 min, 65°C for 1 min,
80 °C for 10 min. 0.7 µl from this cell solution were used as template for PCR, performed
with Taq DNA Polymerase 2X Master Mix, following the manufacturer’s instructions.
Verification primers used can be consulted in Appendix.
2.4
Cultivation of S. cerevisiae for compound
production
Cultivations for compounds production were carried out in YPD for β-carotene producer
strains or Minimal medium for p-CA producer strains. Minimal medium (pH 6.0) was
prepared as described by Jensen et al. (2014), containing 7.5 g/L (NH4)2SO4, 14.4 g
KH2PO4, 0.5 g/L MgSO4·7H2O, 20 g/L D-glucose, 2 mL/L trace metals solution, and
1 mL/L vitamins.
For pre-culture preparation, single colonies were inoculated from fresh plates in 3 mL
YPD or Minimal medium in 24-well plates with air-penetrable lid (EnzyScreen, NL) and
grown for 18 h at 30°C and 300 rpm agitation at 5 cm orbit cast. The required volume
==PAGE:25==
2.5 Extraction and compound analysis
19
of the inoculum was transferred to 3 mL YPD8% glucose or Minimal medium for an
initial optical density at 600 nm (OD600) of 0.1 into new 24-well plates. The plates were
incubated for 72 h at 30 °C with 300 rpm agitation. After 72h of cultivation, the end
OD600 is measured using the NanoPhotometer (Implen GmbH, Germany).
At the end of cultivation, 1 mL of the cultivation broth was transferred into a 2 mL mi-
crotube (Sarstedt) for carotenoids extraction and to 2mL microtube for p-CA extraction.
2.5
Extraction and compound analysis
2.5.1 β-Carotene
From each culture a sample was centrifuged at 10,000 g for 5 min and the supernatant
removed and another sample was kept with the supernatant. To each tube, 500 mL
of 0.5e0.75 mm glass beads were added.
1 mL of ethyl acetate supplemented with
0.01% 3,5-di-tert-4-butylhydroxy toluene (BHT) was also added to each tube. BHT was
supplemented to prevent carotenoid oxidation. Cells were disrupted using a Precellys®24
homogenizer (Bertin Corp.) in four cycles of 5500 rpm for 20 s. After disruption, the cells
were centrifuged for 5 min at 10,000 g. For total carotenoid measurement, the solvent
fraction was moved to a 96-well plate and read in BioTek Synergy™Mx microplate
reader with full spectrum scan (230 nme700 nm) with 5 nm interval. Absorbance value
at 450 nm was used to quantify total carotenoids. For the measurements of individual
carotenoids, the samples were further processed before HPLC analysis as below.
For cell dry weight measurement 2 mL microtube (Sartedt) was lebelled and dried ON
at 60°C before using it. After 24h , they were placed in a desiccator to cool down and
its weight was measured using 4-digits analytical balance. After the 72h of cultivation,
1 mL of sample was transferred and its weight measured after 96h.
For HPLC measurements, 50-200 µL of ethyl acetate extract was evaporated in a
rotatory evaporator and dry extracts were redissolved in 1 mL 99% ethanol with 0.01%
BHT. Extracts were then analyzed by HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA)
equipped with a Discovery HS F5 150 mm 2.1 mm column (particle size 3 mm). The
column oven temperature was set at 30 C. All organic solvents were HPLC grade (Sigma
Aldrich). The flow rate was set at 0.7 mL/min with an initial solvent composition of 10
mM ammonium formate (pH 3, adjusted with formic acid) (solvent A) and acetonitrile
(solvent B) (3:1) until min 2.0. Solvent composition was then changed following a linear
gradient until % A=10.0 and % B=90.0 at 4.0 min. This solvent composition was kept
until 10.5 min when the solvent was returned to initial conditions and the column was
re-equilibrated until 13.5 min. The injection volume was 10 µL. Peaks were identified
by comparison to the prepared standards and integration of the peak areas was used
to quantify carotenoids from obtained standard curves using the software Chromeleon
7 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
β-Carotene had a retention time of 7.6 min and had
absorbance at 450 nm.
==PAGE:26==
20
2 Materials and Methods
2.5.2
p-CA
Samples from p-coumaric acid producer strains were mixed with an equal volume of
absolute ethanol and centrifuged at 15,000 g for 5 min. Supernatant was stored at -20 °C
until analyzed. 5 µl of sample was injected for the quantification. The HPLC system was
equipped with a Discovery HS F5 150 mm × 2.1 mm column, particle size 3 µm (Supelco)
and a DAD-3000 UV/Vis detector (Dionex). The column oven temperature was set at 30
°C and the flow rate to 0.7 mL/min. Solvent A was 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 3.0,
adjusted by formic acid). Solvent B was acetonitrile. Solvent composition was initially
A = 95.0%, and B = 5.0%, which was kept until 0.5 min. Then, solvent composition
was changed following a linear gradient until A = 40.0%, and B = 60.0% at 7.0 min.
These conditions were kept constant for 2.5 min (7.0-9.5 min). The solvent composition
was returned linearly to the initial conditions (A = 95.0%, B = 5.0 %) at 9.6 min, and
remained unchanged until the end of the run (9.6-12 min). p-coumaric acid was detected
at a retention time of 4.7 min, using the absorbance at 277 nm for the quantification.
2.5.3
FA
Fatty alcohols were analyzed by collecting 1 ml of culture broth and 1ml of super-
natant into a 4-ml glass vial and adding 10-µl internal standard (2 g/L of methyl cis-10-
heptadecanoate dissolved in 100% ethanol). Samples were vortexed for 3 s and frozen
at -80°C until further processing. To perform the extraction, samples were freeze-dried
for 2–3 days at −30°C under vacuum in a freeze-drying system (Labconco). 1 ml 2:1
chloroform:methanol mixture was added to each freeze-dried sample to disrupt the cells,
vortexed for 15 min in a DVX-2500 multi-tube vortexer (VWR), and left at room tem-
perature for 4 h. The solvents were subsequently evaporated under a nitrogen stream.
1 ml hexane was added to the sample vials, vortexed for 15 min in a DVX-2500 multi-
tube vortexer (VWR), and incubated at room temperature overnight. Samples were
transferred to new vials and stored at −20°C until analyzed.
The analysis was carried out on a GC-MS using an INNOWax column (30 m × 0.25
mm × 0.25 ￿m) with helium as carrier gas. The injector was set to splitless mode at
220°C; the oven temperature was set to 80°C for 1 min, increased at a rate of 10°C/min
to 210°C, followed by a hold at 210°C for 15 min, increased at a rate of 10°C/min to
230°C followed by a hold at 230°C for 20 min. The GC-MS was operated in electron
impact mode (70 eV), scanning at the range 30–400 m/z. Compounds were quantified
relative to the internal standard (methyl cis-10-heptadecenoate).
2.6
Spot assays
Cells were grown overnight at 30°C in YED or YPD medium. 5 µL cell suspensions were
spotted in serial ten-fold dilution (10,102,103,104,105,106) in YED and YED + 12mM
caffeine and MM. Pictures of the plates were taken after 72h at 30°C.
==PAGE:27==
3
Results and discussion
All three compounds object of this study have proved industrial value: β-carotene
with its antioxidant activity (Young & Lowe 2001); p-CA with its antioxidant, anti-
inflammatory and antimicrobial effect (Lou et al. 2012) and FA with its amphiphilic
properties in soaps (Kelm & Wickett 2017).
In previously conducted studies in our
research group, Yeast Metabolic Engineering (DTU Biosustain), the production of all
three compounds in S. cerevisiae was performed (Milne et al. 2019, Rodriguez et al.
2015, Dahlin et al. 2019). Building on this research, the following work presents dele-
tion strategies pursued to increase their secretion into the media to make fermentation
processes more effective, sustainable and, at the same time, to evaluate the interaction
between the production of the different compounds and the cell wall.
3.1
Effect of mutations on resistance to
caffeine
In order to prove that the target genes were actually involved in cell wall integrity, a
caffeine spot assay was performed. Caffeine has a mutagenic effect on yeast on high
doses. It prevents the activation of Cds1 and phosphorylation of Chk1(Moser et al.
2000), two protein kinases that enforce the S-M checkpoint. This checkpoint, also know
as the DNA replication checkpoint, ensures genome stability by waiting for the mitosis
until the DNA synthesis is completed. Caffeine also appears to act through the phos-
phoinositide 3-kinase-related protein kinases Tel1 and Mec1 (Saiardi et al. 2005), known
regulators of telomere length. Besides, the drug is known for rapidly induce phosphory-
lation of Mpk1p as a response, component of the cell wall integrity pathway. Therefore,
mutants jeopardizing the cell wall integrity are hypersensitive to caffeine, displaying a
lytic phenotype in the presence of this compound that can be prevented by osmotic
stabilization (de Groot et al. 2001).
The spot assay was performed in both plates with YED medium and YED with 12
mM caffeine (Figure 3.1) in the background strain CEN.PK113-7D as well as in all three
producing strains, i.e. ST8939 (β-carotene) ST4058 (p-CA) and ST6989 (FA) and their
single knockouts on the genes Las21, Ecm33, Pun1, Cwp1, Cwp2 and Kre2 described in
the introduction. On YED plates all strains grew similarly independently of mutations
or compound produced. Contrariwise, the phenotype shown is very different on the
caffeine plates. All reference strains including CEN.PK113-7D and the wildtypes (wt)
==PAGE:28==
22
3 Results and discussion
showed a growth deficit being more aggressive in the FA producer strain. In regards
to the knockouts, Las21 and Ecm33 show a noteworthy effect in both β-Carotene and
p-CA producer strains. However, in the FA strain all the mutants and the wt show the
same high disturbance displaying a differential phenotype depending on the compound
produced. This low resistance to caffeine can be explained by the toxicity that FA means
for the cells. The transcriptomic data originated in a previous work showed ”response
to a toxic substance” as a GO enriched category (Dahlin et al. 2019). It also revealed
an upregulation of the genes selected for this study, reason why transformants were
only obtained when sorbitol was added to the medium. The compound accumulation
produces an osmolarity imbalance aggravated by the cell wall knockouts and sorbitol is
known by its role against osmotic stress (Shen et al. 1999). Sorbitol is not metabolized
by S. cerevisiae when glucose is present, so it is an inert component that will not affect
metabolism like glucose or sucrose, but will affect osmolarity. The compound toxicity
added to the caffeine damage produces higher impairment. Surprisingly, Las21 appears
to show an improvement on resistance to caffeine, but the reason behind has not yet
been identified.
On the knockouts where the difference with the wt is not so noteworthy does not
mean necessarily that they do not have an effect on the cell wall, which it has already
been bibliographically proved, but that they are not as important for caffeine resistance
as other targets.
With respect to the differential phenotype, Cwp2 also seems to have a higher effect
on p-CA producer strain which is not appreciated on the rest of knockouts. This leads
to think that it is not a capricious event and the effect on the cell wall is different
depending on the compound produced. This observation is surprising since there is no
former evidence of how small molecules can affect significantly the cell wall.
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Knockouts in p-CA producer strain show a growth impairment on MM
23
Figure 3.1: Caffeine spot assay.
Serial dilutions of exponentially growing culture of each mutant were
spotted onto YED agar plates and YED containing 12 mM caffeine. A) wt CEN.PK113-7D on
YED on the left and YED + 12mM caffeine on the right where a growth defect is perceptible.
B) The wt strains from ST8939 (β-Carotene) ST4058 (p-CA) and ST6989 (FA) and their single
knockouts on the genes Las21, Ecm33, Pun1, Cwp1, Cwp2 and Kre2 spotted on YED. They do
not shown any differential growth between strains. C) Same strains as b) spotted on YED +
caffeine 12mM. A growth impairment is appreciable on mutants, specially Las21 and Ecm33.
3.2
Knockouts in p-CA producer strain show a
growth impairment on MM
When p-CA cultures where prepared for extraction, the original protocol was on MM.
Surprisingly, the cell wall knockouts were unable to grow. To check this more deeply,
spot assays of all strains were grown on MM. Effectively, p-CA knockouts were not able
to grow at all, but they did on the wildtype strain and when the mutations are in the
β-carotene or FA strain. All together, this findings suggest that it is not caused by either
the compound production or the knockouts alone but a combination of both. When cells
are grown on a rich medium like YPD, it contains carbohydrates, salts, all the amino
acids and other nutrients that yeast cells could need. As a consequence yeast cells do
not invest cellular energy to make them de novo, but instead scavenge them from the
==PAGE:30==
24
3 Results and discussion
medium (Ljungdahl & Daignan-Fornier 2012). If a mutation occurs in the genome and
damages a protein required for biosynthesis, the mutant yeast cell can no longer grow
on minimal medium. Such mutants are called auxotrophs. Following this concept, a
mutation may have appeared on the amino acids biosynthetic pathway triggered by cell
stress and hence it becomes impossible for them to grow unless the amino acid not pro-
duced is added to the medium. This stress may be due to the toxicity of p-CA for S.
cerevisiae (Adeboye et al. 2014). An interesting aproach to overcome this issue could
be to perform adaptive laboratory evolution to obtain a resistant strain e.g. as it has
previously done with 3-hydroxypropionic acid (Kildegaard et al. 2014).
Figure 3.2: Minimal media spot assay. Serial dilutions of exponentially growing culture of each mutant
and original producer strains (wt) were spotted onto minimal media agar plates.
3.3
No effect of knockouts on β-carotene
secretion
The knockouts effect on the production and hypothetical secretion of β-carotene was
addressed. The six genes were knocked-out on the β-carotene producer strain and the
resulted ones were cultured for compound production. An extraction process was per-
formed on the cells alone and cells with the supernatant and subsequently analyzed by
HPLC in comparison with a standard. The results show no improvement of the total
culture accounting for the cells and the supernatant with respect to the cells alone ex-
cept for the mutant las21Δ (Figure 3.3). However, after a t:test of two-sample assuming
equal variances in comparison with the wildtype in the same condition the difference
was declared as not significant (Appendix 5.4). These results suggest that either the
hypothesis is incorrect or the compound is not actually crossing the plasma membrane.
The initial hypothesis proposed that the compound was captured in the periplasmic
space and that weakening the cell wall could release it.
It is generally assumed that small hydrophobic molecules are able to cross the plasma
membrane by passive diffusion down their concentration gradients (Yang & Hinner 2014).
Despite of this widespread view, the reality may be different and most hydrophobic
==PAGE:31==
3.4 Knockouts suppress extracellular p-CA production
25
molecules may need the presence of a protein transporter to be secreted (Kell et al.
2015, Claus et al. 2019, Kell 2020). Sterols, with a similar structure to β-carotene, are
speculated to be transported by ABC family members Pdr5p and Snq2p (Ma et al.
2019) and free sterols can be exported by PRY proteins (Choudhary & Schneiter 2012)
if first converted into their acetylated counterpart by the acetyltransferase Atf2 (Tiwari
et al. 2007). In the light of these findings, it could be interesting to find the transporter
responsible for β-carotene efflux.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
ST9769 Wt
ST9724 ∆Las21 ST9825 ∆ecm33 ST9797 ∆pun1 ST10268 ∆cwp1 ST10279 ∆cwp2 ST10267 ∆kre2
β-carotene production (mg/g DCW)
Cells
Cells + Supernatant
Figure 3.3: β-Carotene production of the producer strain and several engineered strains with different
single knockouts. Cultivations were carried out for 72 h in YPD with 8% of glucose. Results
presented are the average of three replicates in the intracellular content. Error bars represent
standard deviation.
3.4
Knockouts suppress extracellular p-CA
production
The production of p-CA was measured by HPLC in all the single knockouts and com-
pared to the producer strain in order to evaluate if there is an increase on the secretion of
the compound. The extraction was performed only from the supernatant as the metabo-
lite is mostly secreted by transporters not yet identified (Rodriguez et al. 2017).The
reference strain without deletions was able to produce 0.32±0.03 g/L and surprisingly,
the single knockouts revealed no p-CA detection. In figure 3.4 it the chromatogram of
the las21 knockout replica compared to a control replicate is shown as an example. The
rest of the chromatograms are presented in Appendix showing the same outcome. The
==PAGE:32==
26
3 Results and discussion
UV spectra are also present comparing the one from the standard to the producer one
showing their equivalence (Figure 3.5).
These results implicate that either the compound is not secreted or its production
is being affected. In previous works, it has been observed transcriptional changes in
genes involved in the cell wall when growing on xylose as a carbon source compared
with glucose (Borja et al. 2019). However, when comparing a producer strain with a
non-optimized strain in glucose, differential expression only showed a downregulation of
amino acids and sugars transport (Rodriguez et al. 2017). Interestingly, the knockout
of some of these transporters increased the production, exposing their important role on
cell factories.
It is less likely that p-CA is not being secreted and is rather accumulated than
not produced at all. The reason behind this is the known toxicity of p-CA for yeast.
Therefore it would be more beneficial for the cell to secrete the product to the media
instead of keep it inside.
This phenomenon added to the fact that deletions in the
cell wall causes osmolarity stress, may cause the cell to build up mutations on the
genes responsible of the product formation as a stress response (Galhardo et al. 2007),
explanation that matches their inability to grow on MM, as explained in the last section.
The cell may have accumulated mutations on the amino acid synthesis pathway and in
the step from TYR to p-CA. This can be easily test by sequencing the TAL heterologous
enzyme responsible for its synthesis as well as the other enzymes responsible for the
pathway and look for nonsense or missense point mutations.
Figure 3.4: HPLC p-CA chromatogram. p-CA was detected at 277 nm and 4.7 min of retention time in
the reference strain shown in the upper picture. The second chromatogram corresponds to a
las21 knockout replicate showing no detection peak.
==PAGE:33==
3.5 Effect of knockouts on FA secretion
27
Figure 3.5: UV spectra. The upper chromatogram corresponds to the standard and the second one corre-
sponds to the producer strain. .
3.5
Effect of knockouts on FA secretion
The secretion improvement was addressed by knocking out the genes on the p-CA pro-
ducer strain and performing an extraction protocol. At the time of the writing, we are
still pending of the GC-MS results from the Analytics team at DTU Biosustain.
==PAGE:34==
28
==PAGE:35==
4
Conclusion and future
perspectives
In this study we assessed the potential of several cell wall knockouts for achieving se-
cretion or an increased secretion of hydrophobic molecules. The caffeine assay helps
to identify proteins affecting cell wall integrity and formation. The knockouts showed
a growth defect, although some of them were not affected. The way the cell responds
to caffeine is strengthening the cell wall by upregulating the cell wall integrity path-
way. However these other mutants may not be in the regulation cascade against caffeine
and therefore they do not show an effect, which does not necessarily mean that they
do not have an effect on the cell wall. Therefore, the assay is used as a phenotypical
confirmation of their effect.
Although the caffeine assay showed some promising effect on the cell wall, it did not
reflect on compound secretion in the β-carotene producer strain. This result suggests
that either the compound is not being able to cross the plasma membrane at all or the cell
wall is actually not influencing the secretion. The p-CA producer strain would have been
able to solve these uncertainties, as it is a known extracellular product. Although p-CA
is secreted, some accumulation may happen as with other compounds, where strategies
as overexpression of efflux pumps have been applied as an efficient way to increase
the flux and limit feedback inhibition Davy et al. (2017). However, the knockout strains
suppressed the production. It could be interesting to investigate whether the production
could be restored by stabilizing the osmolarity with sorbitol, as previously done for the
FA knockouts transformation.
Despite the lack of data, important phenotypes have been revealed which proves
the tight relationship between the cell wall and the compound production, where just a
single knockout can stop completely the production of a compound in a cell factory. On
the other hand, the cell wall and viability have also been shown affected in comparison
to a non producer strain like the case of FA.
These findings highlight the importance of how engineered cells respond to produc-
tion of compounds by heterologous pathways where the characterization at an omic-level
plays an important role. It also questions the settled idea of passive transport across the
plasma membrane, suggesting transporter proteins as general export mechanism Kell
et al. (2015). By better understanding nature passage fundamentals in and out of the
cell, researchers can design improved cell factories. Future work will focus on deter-
mining at a genomic level how the amino acid pathway has been altered on the p-CA
==PAGE:36==
30
4 Conclusion and future perspectives
producer strains with cell wall knockouts, efforts will be made on restoring it and to
investigate whether this would lead to an increase in product titers on knockouts. The
findings will allow to verify or reject the hypothesis of cell wall influence on compound
secretion.
In the case the hypothesis turns out wrong, different strategies like the use of trans-
porters have showed effectiveness on FA secretion Hu et al. (2018).
When choosing
transporter candidates, similar substrate specificity of known transporters in other or-
ganisms was the theoretical basis for choosing them. Another strategy is to perform a
competition-based selection assay which enhances toxicity tolerance Dunlop et al. (2011).
In conclusion, the effect of some selected knockouts on the cell has been proved in caf-
feine assays as well as their differential effect on compound production depending on the
type of product. Future research will clarify the question of whether the cell wall also
affects secretion.
==PAGE:37==
5
Appendix
5.1
Strains
Table 5.1: List of strains used in this study.
Name
Parent Strain
Description
Element added
Source
BY4741
MATa his3Δ1 leu2Δ0 met15Δ0 ura3Δ0
1361
BY4741
MATa his3Δ1 leu2Δ0 met15Δ0 ura3Δ0 Δlas21
YKO Collection
3215
BY4741
MATa his3Δ1 leu2Δ0 met15Δ0 ura3Δ0 Δecm33
YKO Collection
5322
BY4741
MATa his3Δ1 leu2Δ0 met15Δ0 ura3Δ0 Δpun1
YKO Collection
4945
BY4741
MATa his3Δ1 leu2Δ0 met15Δ0 ura3Δ0 Δcwp1
YKO Collection
7026
BY4741
MATa his3Δ1 leu2Δ0 met15Δ0 ura3Δ0 Δcwp2
YKO Collection
4317
BY4741
MATa his3Δ1 leu2Δ0 met15Δ0 ura3Δ0 Δkre2
YKO Collection
CEN.PK113-7D
MATa URA3 HIS3 LEU2 TRP1 MAL2-8c SUC2
Entian & Kötter (2007)
ST4058
CEN.PK113-7D
￿aro10 ￿pdc5 ↑Tal14 ↑Aro7pm ↑Aro4pm ↑AroL
Rodriguez et al. (2015)
ST6989
CEN.PK113-7D
4x MalFAR, Δpex10,Δhfd1 Cas9 + gRNA
Dahlin et al. (2019)
ST8939
CEN.PK113-7D
MATa URA3 HIS3 LEU2 TRP1 MAL2-8c SUC2
X-4::XdCrtI-XdCrtYB XII-5::XdCrtE XI-3::XdCrtI-tHMG1
+ pCfB2312 (2￿m cas9 KanMX)
Milne et al. (2019)
ST9769
ST8939
MATa URA3 HIS3 LEU2 TRP1 MAL2-8c SUC2
X-4::XdCrtI-XdCrtYB XII-5::XdCrtE XI-3::XdCrtI-tHMG1
Cas9 removed
This study
ST9784
ST6989
4x MalFAR, Δpex10,Δhfd1
Cas9 and gRNA removed
This study
ST9797
ST9769
MATa URA3 HIS3 LEU2 TRP1 MAL2-8c SUC2
X-4::XdCrtI-XdCrtYB XII-5::XdCrtE XI-3::XdCrtI-tHMG3
Δpun1
BB4528
This study
ST9824
ST9769
MATa URA3 HIS3 LEU2 TRP1 MAL2-8c SUC2
X-4::XdCrtI-XdCrtYB XII-5::XdCrtE XI-3::XdCrtI-tHMG1
Δlas21
BB4526
This study
ST9825
ST9769
MATa URA3 HIS3 LEU2 TRP1 MAL2-8c SUC2
X-4::XdCrtI-XdCrtYB XII-5::XdCrtE XI-3::XdCrtI-tHMG2
Δecm33
BB4527
This study
ST9939
ST4058
￿aro10 ￿pdc5 ↑Tal14 ↑Aro7pm ↑Aro4pm ↑AroL Δlas21
BB4526
This study
ST9940
ST4058
￿aro10 ￿pdc5 ↑Tal14 ↑Aro7pm ↑Aro4pm ↑AroL Δecm33
BB4527
This study
ST9941
ST4058
￿aro10 ￿pdc5 ↑Tal14 ↑Aro7pm ↑Aro4pm ↑AroL Δpun1
BB4528
This study
ST10265
ST4058
￿aro10 ￿pdc5 ↑Tal14 ↑Aro7pm ↑Aro4pm ↑AroL Δkre2
BB4800
This study
ST10267
ST9769
MATa URA3 HIS3 LEU2 TRP1 MAL2-8c SUC2
X-4::XdCrtI-XdCrtYB XII-5::XdCrtE XI-3::XdCrtI-tHMG6
Δkre2
BB4800
This study
ST10268
ST9769
MATa URA3 HIS3 LEU2 TRP1 MAL2-8c SUC2
X-4::XdCrtI-XdCrtYB XII-5::XdCrtE XI-3::XdCrtI-tHMG4
Δcwp1
BB4798
This study
ST10269
ST9784
4x MalFAR, Δpex10,Δhfd1 Δkre2
BB4800
This study
ST10270
ST9784
4x MalFAR, Δpex10,Δhfd1 Δcwp1
BB4798
This study
ST10271
ST9784
4x MalFAR, Δpex10,Δhfd1 Δecm33
BB4527
This study
ST10272
ST9784
4x MalFAR, Δpex10,Δhfd1 Δpun1
BB4528
This study
ST10275
ST4058
￿aro10 ￿pdc5 ↑Tal14 ↑Aro7pm ↑Aro4pm ↑AroL Δcwp1
BB4798
This study
ST10276
ST4058
￿aro10 ￿pdc5 ↑Tal14 ↑Aro7pm ↑Aro4pm ↑AroL Δcwp2
BB4799
This study
ST10277
ST9784
4x MalFAR, Δpex10,Δhfd1 Δcwp2
BB4799
This study
ST10278
ST9784
4x MalFAR, Δpex10,Δhfd1 Δlas21
BB4526
This study
ST10279
ST9769
MATa URA3 HIS3 LEU2 TRP1 MAL2-8c SUC2
X-4::XdCrtI-XdCrtYB XII-5::XdCrtE XI-3::XdCrtI-tHMG5
Δcwp2
BB4799
This study
==PAGE:38==
32
5 Appendix
5.2
BioBricks
Table 5.2: List of BioBricks used in this study.
BioBrick ID
Description
PCR template
Forward Primer
Reverse Primer
Source
BB4526
KANMX4 with las21 homology regions
gDNA 1361
PR-25422 (Las21F1)
PR-25425 (Las21R2)
This study
BB4527
KANMX4 with ecm33 homology regions
gDNA 3215
PR-25426 (Ecm33F1)
PR-25429 (Ecm33R2)
This study
BB4528
KANMX4 with pun1 homology regions
gDNA 5322
PR-25430 (Pun1F1)
PR-25433 (Pun1R2)
This study
BB4798
KANMX4 with cwp1 homology regions
gDNA 4945
PR-27244 (Cwp1F1)
PR-27245 (Cwp1R1)
This study
BB4799
KANMX4 with cwp2 homology regions
gDNA 7026
PR-27246 (Cwp2F1)
PR-27247 (Cwp2R1)
This study
BB4800
KANMX4 with kre2 homology regions
gDNA 4317
PR-27242 (Kre2F1)
PR-27243 (Kre2R1)
This study
5.3
Primers
Table 5.3: List of primers used in this study.
Primer ID
Sequence
Description
PR-25422 (Las21F1)
GCTGTTCTTCTCTCCTCTTTTGTAA
Forward primer for amplifying KanMX4 from Δlas21 YKO Collection
PR-25425 (Las21R2)
GCACTTAACCTACTAGATTGGGACA
R primer for amplifying KanMX from Δlas21 YKO Collection
PR-25426 (Ecm33F1)
AGCCGGTATAAATATTCAATGTCAA
Forward primer for amplifying KanMX4 from Δecm33 YKO Collection
PR-25429 (Ecm33R2)
AGAAGAGCAGTAAAGATGGCAGTTA
Reverse primer for amplifying KanMX4 from Δecm33 YKO Collection
PR-25430 (Pun1F1)
TATTTCCAAATCGGGCGTACTAT
Reverse primer for amplifying KanMX4 from Δpun1 YKO Collection
PR-25433 (Pun1R2)
ATTATTTCTGGCTCTTCTCCATTTT
Reverse primer for amplifying KanMX4 from Δpun1 YKO Collection
PR-26424 (Las21F1.2)
TTAACCAACTTTTCCCGCCT
Forward primer to check las21 deletion
PR-26425 (Ecm33F1.2)
TTCTTTTTCTTCGTCTCTCTCTCC
Forward primer to check ecm33 deletion
PR-26426 (Pun1F1.2)
GCGAACGTCACAGATCAAAA
Forward primer to check pun1 deletion
PR-26827 (Las21R1.2)
TGTAACGTGGAGATTGGCTTG
Reverse primer to check las21 deletion
PR-26828 (Ecm33R1.2)
CAACCCCAACTCCATCTTCT
Reverse primer to check ecm33 deletion
PR-26829 (Pun1R1.2)
TCCGTGGTGAGTCAAAAATTA
Reverse primer to check pun1 deletion
PR-27242 (Kre2F1)
TTATAGTGCCATTCTTGAGGTC
Forward primer for amplifying KanMX4 from ΔKre2 YKO Collection
PR-27243 (Kre2R1)
TTCCTCTTTCCTCTCACTTGT
Reverse primer for amplifying KanMX4 from Δkre2 YKO Collection
PR-27244 (Cwp1F1)
GAAGGTGCCACAAAAGAAAAC
Forward primer for amplifying KanMX4 from Δcwp1 YKO Collection
PR-27245 (Cwp1R1)
CGTATTAGCAGTCAGTGGAAC
Reverse primer for amplifying KanMX4 from Δcwp1 YKO Collection
PR-27246 (Cwp2F1)
CCGTCCTTTTTCCTCTTTCT
Forward primer for amplifying KanMX4 from Δcwp2 YKO Collection
PR-27247 (Cwp2R1)
AGCAAACTCGAAGAAACCCA
Reverse primer for amplifying KanMX4 from Δcwp2 YKO Collection
PR-27398 (Kre2F2)
CTTGAGCCCTATTCCGTTGTA
Forward primer to check kre2 deletion
PR-27399 (Kre2R2)
ACACCTCTTTGAGAACATCC
Reverse primer to check kre2 deletion
PR-27400 (Cwp1F2)
TCCCACAACGGTAACTTACT
Forward primer to check cwp1 deletion
PR-27401 (Cwp1R2)
ACCGTAGTGATTTCTTGCTT
Reverse primer to check cwp1 deletion
PR-27402 (Cwp2F2)
AACATCCCACTACCCTAGAAA
Forward primer to check cwp2 deletion
PR-27403 (Cwp2R2)
CACGCCTTGACTCTTTAATC
Reverse primer to check cwp2 deletion
==PAGE:39==
5.4 t-Test
33
5.4
t-Test
Table 5.4: t-Test: Two-Sample Assuming Equal Variances.
￿Las
wt
Mean
35,88038
26,47205
Variance
30,60395
5,464478
Observations
2
2
Pooled Variance
18,03421
Hypothesized Mean Difference
0
df
2
t Stat
2,215459
P(T<=t) one-tail
0,078547
t Critical one-tail
2,919986
P(T<=t) two-tail
0,157093
t Critical two-tail
4,302653
5.5
p-CA chromatograms
Figure 5.1: HPLC p-CA chromatogram. p-CA was detected at 277 nm and 4.7 min of retention time in
the reference strain shown in the upper picture. The second chromatogram corresponds to a
ecm33 knockout replicate showing no detection peak.
==PAGE:40==
34
5 Appendix
Figure 5.2: HPLC p-CA chromatogram. p-CA was detected at 277 nm and 4.7 min of retention time in
the reference strain shown in the upper picture. The second chromatogram corresponds to a
pun1 knockout replicate showing no detection peak.
Figure 5.3: HPLC p-CA chromatogram. p-CA was detected at 277 nm and 4.7 min of retention time in
the reference strain shown in the upper picture. The second chromatogram corresponds to a
cwp1 knockout replicate showing no detection peak.
==PAGE:41==
5.5 p-CA chromatograms
35
Figure 5.4: HPLC p-CA chromatogram. p-CA was detected at 277 nm and 4.7 min of retention time in
the reference strain shown in the upper picture. The second chromatogram corresponds to a
cwp2 knockout replicate showing no detection peak.
Figure 5.5: HPLC p-CA chromatogram. p-CA was detected at 277 nm and 4. 7min of retention time in
the reference strain shown in the upper picture. The second chromatogram corresponds to a
kre2 knockout replicate showing no detection peak.
==PAGE:42==
36
==PAGE:43==
References
Abramova, N., Sertil, O., Mehta, S. & Lowry, C. V. (2001), ‘Reciprocal regulation
of anaerobic and aerobic cell wall mannoprotein gene expression in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae’, Journal of Bacteriology 183(9), 2881–2887.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1128/jb.183.9.2881-2887.2001
Adeboye, P. T., Bettiga, M. & Olsson, L. (2014), ‘The chemical nature of phenolic
compounds determines their toxicity and induces distinct physiological responses in
saccharomyces cerevisiae in lignocellulose hydrolysates’, AMB Express 4(1).
URL: https://doi.org/10.1186/s13568-014-0046-7
Aebi, M. (2013), ‘N-linked protein glycosylation in the ER’, Biochimica et Biophysica
Acta (BBA) - Molecular Cell Research 1833(11), 2430–2437.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.04.001
Aguilar-Uscanga, B. & Francois, J. (2003), ‘A study of the yeast cell wall composition
and structure in response to growth conditions and mode of cultivation’, Letters in
Applied Microbiology 37(3), 268–274.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1472-765x.2003.01394.x
Álvarez, R., Vaz, B., Gronemeyer, H. & de Lera, Á. R. (2013), ‘Functions, therapeutic
applications, and synthesis of retinoids and carotenoids’, Chemical Reviews 114(1), 1–
125.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/cr400126u
Ana Belén Sanz, Raúl García, J. M. R. P. & Arroyo, J. (2017), ‘The CWI pathway:
Regulation of the transcriptional adaptive response to cell wall stress in yeast’, Journal
of Fungi 4(1), 1.
URL: https://doi.org/10.3390/jof4010001
Asadollahi, M. A., Maury, J., Patil, K. R., Schalk, M., Clark, A. & Nielsen, J. (2009),
‘Enhancing sesquiterpene production in Saccharomyces cerevisiae through in silico
driven metabolic engineering’, Metabolic Engineering 11(6), 328–334.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2009.07.001
Benachour, A., Sipos, G., Flury, I., Reggiori, F., Canivenc-Gansel, E., Vionnet, C.,
Conzelmann, A. & Benghezal, M. (1999), ‘Deletion ofGPI7, a yeast gene required
for addition of a side chain to the glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) core structure,
affects GPI protein transport, remodeling, and cell wall integrity’, Journal of Biological
==PAGE:44==
38
References
Chemistry 274(21), 15251–15261.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.274.21.15251
Bennett, S. J. (2012), Implications of climate change for the petrochemical industry:
Mitigation measures and feedstock transitions, in ‘Handbook of Climate Change Mit-
igation’, Springer US, pp. 319–357.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4419-7991-910
Bogacz-Radomska, L. & Harasym, J. (2018), ‘Beta-carotene properties and production
methods’, Food Quality and Safety 2(2), 69–74.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/fqsafe/fyy004
Borja, G. M., Rodriguez, A., Campbell, K., Borodina, I., Chen, Y. & Nielsen, J. (2019),
‘Metabolic engineering and transcriptomic analysis of Saccharomyces cerevisiae pro-
ducing p-coumaric acid from xylose’, Microbial Cell Factories 18(1).
URL: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12934-019-1244-4
Boz, H. (2015), ‘p-coumaric acid in cereals: presence, antioxidant and antimicrobial
effects’, International Journal of Food Science & Technology 50(11), 2323–2328.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1111/ijfs.12898
Britton, G. (1995), ‘Structure and properties of carotenoids in relation to function.’, The
FASEB Journal 9(15), 1551–1558.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1096/fasebj.9.15.8529834
Britton, G. (1996), Carotenoids, in ‘Natural Food Colorants’, Springer US, pp. 197–243.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4615-2155-67
Buzzini, P., Innocenti, M., Turchetti, B., Libkind, D., van Broock, M. & Mulinacci,
N. (2007), ‘Carotenoid profiles of yeasts belonging to the genera Rhodotorula, Rho-
dosporidium, Sporobolomyces, and Sporidiobolus’, Canadian Journal of Microbiology
53(8), 1024–1031.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1139/w07-068
Călinoiu, L. F. & Vodnar, D. C. (2018), ‘Whole grains and phenolic acids: A review on
bioactivity, functionality, health benefits and bioavailability’, Nutrients 10(11), 1615.
URL: https://doi.org/10.3390/nu10111615
Cho, S. W., Kim, S., Kim, J. M. & Kim, J.-S. (2013), ‘Targeted genome engineer-
ing in human cells with the cas9 RNA-guided endonuclease’, Nature Biotechnology
31(3), 230–232.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.2507
Choudhary, V. & Schneiter, R. (2012), ‘Pathogen-related yeast (PRY) proteins and
members of the CAP superfamily are secreted sterol-binding proteins’, Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 109(42), 16882–16887.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1209086109
==PAGE:45==
References
39
Claus, S., Jezierska, S. & Bogaert, I. N. A. V. (2019), ‘Protein-facilitated transport of hy-
drophobic molecules across the yeast plasma membrane’, FEBS Letters 593(13), 1508–
1527.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1002/1873-3468.13469
Cong, L., Ran, F. A., Cox, D., Lin, S., Barretto, R., Habib, N., Hsu, P. D., Wu, X.,
Jiang, W., Marraffini, L. A. & Zhang, F. (2013), ‘Multiplex genome engineering using
CRISPR/cas systems’, Science 339(6121), 819–823.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1231143
Dahlin, J., Holkenbrink, C., Marella, E. R., Wang, G., Liebal, U., Lieven, C., We-
ber, D., McCloskey, D., Ebert, B. E., Herrgård, M. J., Blank, L. M. & Borodina,
I. (2019), ‘Multi-Omics Analysis of Fatty Alcohol Production in Engineered Yeasts
Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Yarrowia lipolytica ’.
URL: https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fgene.2019.00747
Davy, A. M., Kildegaard, H. F. & Andersen, M. R. (2017), ‘Cell factory engineering’,
Cell Systems 4(3), 262–275.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cels.2017.02.010
de Groot, P. W. J., Ruiz, C., de Aldana, C. R. V., Duenas, E., Cid, V. J., Rey, F. D.,
Rodríquez-Peña, J. M., Pérez, P., Andel, A., Caubín, J., Arroyo, J., García, J. C., Gil,
C., Molina, M., García, L. J., Nombela, C. & Klis, F. M. (2001), ‘A genomic approach
for the identification and classification of genes involved in cell wall formation and
its regulation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae’, Comparative and Functional Genomics
2(3), 124–142.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1002/cfg.85
d’Espaux, L., Ghosh, A., Runguphan, W., Wehrs, M., Xu, F., Konzock, O., Dev, I.,
Nhan, M., Gin, J., Apel, A. R., Petzold, C. J., Singh, S., Simmons, B. A., Mukhopad-
hyay, A., Martín, H. G. & Keasling, J. D. (2017), ‘Engineering high-level production of
fatty alcohols by Saccharomyces cerevisiae from lignocellulosic feedstocks’, Metabolic
Engineering 42, 115–125.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2017.06.004
DiCarlo, J. E., Norville, J. E., Mali, P., Rios, X., Aach, J. & Church, G. M. (2013),
‘Genome engineering in Saccharomyces cerevisiae using CRISPR-cas systems’, Nucleic
Acids Research 41(7), 4336–4343.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkt135
Duina, A. A., Miller, M. E. & Keeney, J. B. (2014), ‘Budding yeast for budding geneti-
cists: A primer on the Saccharomyces cerevisiae model system’, Genetics 197(1), 33–
48.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.114.163188
Dunlop, M. J., Dossani, Z. Y., Szmidt, H. L., Chu, H. C., Lee, T. S., Keasling, J. D.,
Hadi, M. Z. & Mukhopadhyay, A. (2011), ‘Engineering microbial biofuel tolerance and
==PAGE:46==
40
References
export using efflux pumps’, Molecular Systems Biology 7(1), 487.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/msb.2011.21
Entian, K.-D. & Kötter, P. (2007), 25 yeast genetic strain and plasmid collections, in
‘Methods in Microbiology’, Elsevier, pp. 629–666.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/s0580-9517(06)36025-4
Fabre, E., Hurtaux, T. & Fradin, C. (2014), ‘Mannosylation of fungal glycoconjugates
in the golgi apparatus’, Current Opinion in Microbiology 20, 103–110.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mib.2014.05.008
Fillet, S. & Adrio, J. (2016), ‘Microbial production of fatty alcohols’, World Journal of
Microbiology and Biotechnology 32.
Fitzherbert, E., Strueboig, M., Morel, A., Danielsen, F., Bruhl, C., Donald, P. & Phalan,
B. (2008), ‘How will oil palm expansion affect biodiversity?’, Trends in Ecology &
Evolution 23(10), 538–545.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2008.06.012
Fraering, P., Imhof, I., Meyer, U., Strub, J.-M., van Dorsselaer, A., Vionnet, C. &
Conzelmann, A. (2001), ‘The GPI transamidase complex of Saccharomyces cerevisiae
contains gaa1p, gpi8p, and gpi16p’, Molecular Biology of the Cell 12(10), 3295–3306.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.12.10.3295
Galhardo, R. S., Hastings, P. J. & Rosenberg, S. M. (2007), ‘Mutation as a stress
response and the regulation of Evolvability’, Critical Reviews in Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology 42(5), 399–435.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/10409230701648502
Gomes, A. V., Carmo, T. S., Carvalho, L. S., Bahia, F. M. & Parachin, N. (2018),
‘Comparison of yeasts as hosts for recombinant protein production’, Microorganisms
6(2), 38.
URL: https://doi.org/10.3390/microorganisms6020038
Graef, M. (2018), ‘Lipid droplet-mediated lipid and protein homeostasis in budding
yeast’, FEBS Letters 592(8), 1291–1303.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1002/1873-3468.12996
Hamilton, J. A. (2007), ‘New insights into the roles of proteins and lipids in membrane
transport of fatty acids’, Prostaglandins, Leukotrienes and Essential Fatty Acids 77(5-
6), 355–361.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plefa.2007.10.020
Hartland, R. P., Vermeulen, C. A., Sietsma, J. H., Wessels, J. G. H. & Klis, F. M.
(1994), ‘The linkage of (1-3)--glucan to chitin during cell wall assembly Saccharomyces
cerevisiae’, Yeast 10(12), 1591–1599.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1002/yea.320101208
==PAGE:47==
References
41
Hommel, M. (2008), ‘The future of artemisinins: natural, synthetic or recombinant?’,
Journal of Biology 7(10), 38.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1186/jbiol101
Hosiner, D., Sponder, G., Graschopf, A., Reipert, S., Schweyen, R. J., Schüller, C.
& Aleschko, M. (2011), ‘Pun1p is a metal ion-inducible, calcineurin/crz1p-regulated
plasma membrane protein required for cell wall integrity’, Biochimica et Biophysica
Acta (BBA) - Biomembranes 1808(4), 1108–1119.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbamem.2011.01.002
Hsu, P.-H., Chiang, P.-C., Liu, C.-H. & Chang, Y.-W. (2015), ‘Characterization of
cell wall proteins in Saccharomyces cerevisiae clinical isolates elucidates hsp150p in
virulence’, PLOS ONE 10(8), e0135174.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0135174
Hu, Y., Zhu, Z., Nielsen, J. & Siewers, V. (2018), ‘Heterologous transporter expression
for improved fatty alcohol secretion in yeast’, Metabolic Engineering 45, 51–58.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2017.11.008
Jensen, N. B., Strucko, T., Kildegaard, K. R., David, F., Maury, J., Mortensen, U. H.,
Forster, J., Nielsen, J. & Borodina, I. (2014), ‘EasyClone: method for iterative chromo-
somal integration of multiple genes Saccharomyces cerevisiae’, FEMS Yeast Research
14(2), 238–248.
Jessop-Fabre, M. M., Jakočiūnas, T., Stovicek, V., Dai, Z., Jensen, M. K., Keasling,
J. D. & Borodina, I. (2016), ‘EasyClone-MarkerFree: A vector toolkit for marker-less
integration of genes into Saccharomyces cerevisiae via CRISPR-cas9’, Biotechnology
Journal 11(8), 1110–1117.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1002/biot.201600147
Jigami, Y. (2008), ‘Yeast glycobiology and its application’, Bioscience, Biotechnology,
and Biochemistry 72(3), 637–648.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1271/bbb.70725
Jinek, M., Chylinski, K., Fonfara, I., Hauer, M., Doudna, J. A. & Charpentier, E.
(2012), ‘A programmable dual-RNA-guided DNA endonuclease in adaptive bacterial
immunity’, Science 337(6096), 816–821.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1225829
John Wiley & Sons, I., ed. (2000), Kirk-Othmer Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology,
Wiley.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1002/0471238961
Kapteyn, J. C., Egmond, P. V., Sievi, E., Ende, H. V. D., Makarow, M. & Klis, F. M.
(1999), ‘The contribution of the o-glycosylated protein pir2p/hsp150 to the construc-
tion of the yeast cell wall in wild-type cells and beta1, 6-glucan-deficient mutants’,
Molecular Microbiology 31(6), 1835–1844.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2958.1999.01320.x
==PAGE:48==
42
References
Kapteyn, J. C., ter Riet, B., Vink, E., Blad, S., Nobel, H. D., Ende, H. V. D. & Klis,
F. M. (2001), ‘Low external pH induces HOG1-dependent changes in the organization
of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae cell wall’, Molecular Microbiology 39(2), 469–480.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2958.2001.02242.x
Kell, D. B. (2020), ‘Hitchhiking into the cell’, Nature Chemical Biology 16(4), 367–368.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41589-020-0489-x
Kell, D. B., Swainston, N., Pir, P. & Oliver, S. G. (2015), ‘Membrane transporter engi-
neering in industrial biotechnology and whole cell biocatalysis’, Trends in Biotechnol-
ogy 33(4), 237–246.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tibtech.2015.02.001
Kelm, G. R. & Wickett, R. R. (2017), The role of fatty acids in cosmetic technology, in
‘Fatty Acids’, Elsevier, pp. 385–404.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-12-809521-8.00012-x
Kildegaard, K. R., Adiego-Pérez, B., Belda, D. D., Khangura, J. K., Holkenbrink, C. &
Borodina, I. (2017), ‘Engineering of Yarrowia lipolytica for production of astaxanthin’,
Synthetic and Systems Biotechnology 2(4), 287–294.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.synbio.2017.10.002
Kildegaard, K. R., Hallström, B. M., Blicher, T. H., Sonnenschein, N., Jensen, N. B.,
Sherstyk, S., Harrison, S. J., Maury, J., Herrgård, M. J., Juncker, A. S., Forster, J.,
Nielsen, J. & Borodina, I. (2014), ‘Evolution reveals a glutathione-dependent mecha-
nism of 3-hydroxypropionic acid tolerance’, Metabolic Engineering 26, 57–66.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2014.09.004
Klis, F. M., Mol, P., Hellingwerf, K. & Brul, S. (2002), ‘Dynamics of cell wall structure
inSaccharomyces cerevisiae’, FEMS Microbiology Reviews 26(3), 239–256.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1574-6976.2002.tb00613.x
Kollár, R., Reinhold, B. B., Petráková, E., Yeh, H. J. C., Ashwell, G., Drgonová, J.,
Kapteyn, J. C., Klis, F. M. & Cabib, E. (1997), ‘Architecture of the yeast cell wall’,
Journal of Biological Chemistry 272(28), 17762–17775.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.272.28.17762
Krinsky, N. I. & Johnson, E. J. (2005), ‘Carotenoid actions and their relation to health
and disease’, Molecular Aspects of Medicine 26(6), 459–516.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mam.2005.10.001
Kutyna, D. & Borneman, A. (2018), ‘Heterologous production of flavour and aroma
compounds inSaccharomyces cerevisiae’, Genes 9(7), 326.
URL: https://doi.org/10.3390/genes9070326
Larkin, A. & Imperiali, B. (2011), ‘The expanding horizons of asparagine-linked glyco-
sylation’, Biochemistry 50(21), 4411–4426.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/bi200346n
==PAGE:49==
References
43
Levin, D. E. (2005), ‘Cell wall integrity signaling in Saccharomyces cerevisiae’, Microbi-
ology and Molecular Biology Reviews 69(2), 262–291.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1128/mmbr.69.2.262-291.2005
Li, Y., Li, J., Qian, B., Cheng, L., Xu, S. & Wang, R. (2018), ‘De novo biosynthesis of
p-coumaric acid in e. coli with a trans-cinnamic acid 4-hydroxylase from the Amaryll-
idaceae plant Lycoris aurea’, Molecules 23(12), 3185.
URL: https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules23123185
Lipke, P. N. & Ovalle, R. (1998), ‘Cell wall architecture in yeast: new structure and new
challenges’, Journal of bacteriology 180(15), 3735–3740.
URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9683465
Liu, Y., Chen, S., Chen, J., Zhou, J., Wang, Y., Yang, M., Qi, X., Xing, J., Wang, Q. &
Ma, Y. (2016), ‘High production of fatty alcohols in Escherichia coli with fatty acid
starvation’, Microbial Cell Factories 15(1).
URL: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12934-016-0524-5
Ljungdahl, P. O. & Daignan-Fornier, B. (2012), ‘Regulation of amino acid, nucleotide,
and phosphate metabolism in Saccharomyces cerevisiae’, Genetics 190(3), 885–929.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.111.133306
Lo, W.-S. & Dranginis, A. M. (1998), ‘The cell surface flocculin flo11 is required for
pseudohyphae formation and invasion by Saccharomyces cerevisiae’, Molecular Biology
of the Cell 9(1), 161–171.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.9.1.161
López-Castillo, N. N., Rojas-Rodríguez, A. D., Porta, B. M. & Cruz-Gómez, M. J. (2013),
‘Process for the obtention of coumaric acid from coumarin: Analysis of the reaction
conditions’, Advances in Chemical Engineering and Science 03(03), 195–201.
URL: https://doi.org/10.4236/aces.2013.33025
Lou, Z., Wang, H., Rao, S., Sun, J., Ma, C. & Li, J. (2012), ‘p-coumaric acid kills
bacteria through dual damage mechanisms’, Food Control 25(2), 550–554.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2011.11.022
Luceri, C., Giannini, L., Lodovici, M., Antonucci, E., Abbate, R., Masini, E. & Dolara,
P. (2007), ‘p-coumaric acid, a common dietary phenol, inhibits platelet activity in
vitro and in vivo’, British Journal of Nutrition 97(3), 458–463.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1017/s0007114507657882
Lussier, M., Sdicu, A.-M. & Bussey, H. (1999), ‘The KTR and MNN1 mannosyltrans-
ferase families of Saccharomyces cerevisiae’, Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) -
General Subjects 1426(2), 323–334.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/s0304-4165(98)00133-0
==PAGE:50==
44
References
Lv, J., Huang, H., Yu, L., Whent, M., Niu, Y., Shi, H., Wang, T. T., Luthria, D.,
Charles, D. & Yu, L. L. (2012), ‘Phenolic composition and nutraceutical properties of
organic and conventional cinnamon and peppermint’, Food Chemistry 132(3), 1442–
1450.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2011.11.135
Ma, T., Shi, B., Ye, Z., Li, X., Liu, M., Chen, Y., Xia, J., Nielsen, J., Deng, Z. & Liu,
T. (2019), ‘Lipid engineering combined with systematic metabolic engineering of Sac-
charomyces cerevisiae for high-yield production of lycopene’, Metabolic Engineering
52, 134–142.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2018.11.009
Mali, P., Yang, L., Esvelt, K. M., Aach, J., Guell, M., DiCarlo, J. E., Norville, J. E.
& Church, G. M. (2013), ‘RNA-guided human genome engineering via cas9’, Science
339(6121), 823–826.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1232033
Milne, N., Tramontin, L. R. R. & Borodina, I. (2019), ‘A teaching protocol demon-
strating the use of EasyClone and CRISPR/cas9 for metabolic engineering of Saccha-
romyces cerevisiae and Yarrowia lipolytica’, FEMS Yeast Research .
URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/femsyr/foz062
Mojica, F. J. M., Diez-Villasenor, C., Soria, E. & Juez, G. (2000), ‘Biological signifi-
cance of a family of regularly spaced repeats in the genomes of archaea, bacteria and
mitochondria’, Molecular Microbiology 36(1), 244–246.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2958.2000.01838.x
Moser, B. A., Brondello, J.-M., Baber-Furnari, B. & Russell, P. (2000), ‘Mechanism of
caffeine-induced checkpoint override in fission yeast’, Molecular and Cellular Biology
20(12), 4288–4294.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1128/mcb.20.12.4288-4294.2000
Mrsă, V., Seidl, T., Gentzsch, M. & Tanner, W. (1997), ‘Specific labelling of cell wall
proteins by biotinylation. identification of four covalently linked o-mannosylated
proteins of Saccharomyces cerevisiae’, Yeast 13(12), 1145–1154.
URL:
https://doi.org/10.1002/(sici)1097-0061(19970930)13:12<1145::aid-
yea163>3.0.co;2-y
Mussatto, S., Dragone, G. & Roberto, I. (2007), ‘Ferulic and p-coumaric acids extrac-
tion by alkaline hydrolysis of brewer's spent grain’, Industrial Crops and Products
25(2), 231–237.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indcrop.2006.11.001
Nielsen, J. (2013), ‘Production of biopharmaceutical proteins by yeast’, Bioengineered
4(4), 207–211.
URL: https://doi.org/10.4161/bioe.22856
==PAGE:51==
References
45
Nilsson, J., Jonasson, P., Samuelsson, E., Stahl, S. & Uhlén, M. (1996), ‘Integrated
production of human insulin and its c-peptide’, Journal of Biotechnology 48(3), 241–
250.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/0168-1656(96)01514-3
Nobel, J. G. D., Klis, F. M., Munnik, T., Priem, J. & Ende, H. V. D. (1990), ‘An assay
of relative cell wall porosity in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Kluyveromyces lactis and
Schizosaccharomyces pombe’, Yeast 6(6), 483–490.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1002/yea.320060605
Orlean, P. (2012), ‘Architecture and biosynthesis of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae cell’,
192(3), 775–818.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.112.144485
Osumi, M. (1998), ‘The ultrastructure of yeast: Cell wall structure and formation’,
Micron 29(2-3), 207–233.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/s0968-4328(97)00072-3
Pardo, M. (2004), ‘PST1 and ECM33 encode two yeast cell surface GPI proteins impor-
tant for cell wall integrity’, Microbiology 150(12), 4157–4170.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1099/mic.0.26924-0
Raab, A. M., Gebhardt, G., Bolotina, N., Weuster-Botz, D. & Lang, C. (2010),
‘Metabolic engineering of Saccharomyces cerevisiae for the biotechnological produc-
tion of succinic acid’, Metabolic Engineering 12(6), 518–525.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2010.08.005
Ro, D.-K., Paradise, E. M., Ouellet, M., Fisher, K. J., Newman, K. L., Ndungu, J. M.,
Ho, K. A., Eachus, R. A., Ham, T. S., Kirby, J., Chang, M. C. Y., Withers, S. T.,
Shiba, Y., Sarpong, R. & Keasling, J. D. (2006), ‘Production of the antimalarial drug
precursor artemisinic acid in engineered yeast’, Nature 440(7086), 940–943.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature04640
Rodriguez, A., Chen, Y., Khoomrung, S., Özdemir, E., Borodina, I. & Nielsen, J. (2017),
‘Comparison of the metabolic response to over-production of p-coumaric acid in two
yeast strains’, Metabolic Engineering 44, 265–272.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2017.10.013
Rodriguez, A., Kildegaard, K. R., Li, M., Borodina, I. & Nielsen, J. (2015), ‘Establish-
ment of a yeast platform strain for production of p-coumaric acid through metabolic
engineering of aromatic amino acid biosynthesis.’, Metabolic engineering 31, 181–188.
Saiardi, A., Resnick, A. C., Snowman, A. M., Wendland, B. & Snyder, S. H. (2005),
‘Inositol pyrophosphates regulate cell death and telomere length through phospho-
inositide 3-kinase-related protein kinases’, Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 102(6), 1911–1914.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0409322102
==PAGE:52==
46
References
Sánchez-Maldonado, A., Schieber, A. & Gänzle, M. (2011), ‘Structure-function relation-
ships of the antibacterial activity of phenolic acids and their metabolism by lactic acid
bacteria’, Journal of Applied Microbiology 111(5), 1176–1184.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2672.2011.05141.x
Sano, C. (2009), ‘History of glutamate production’, The American Journal of Clinical
Nutrition 90(3), 728S–732S.
URL: https://doi.org/10.3945/ajcn.2009.27462f
Sauer, M. & Mattanovich, D. (2012), ‘Construction of microbial cell factories for indus-
trial bioprocesses’, Journal of Chemical Technology & Biotechnology 87(4), 445–450.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1002/jctb.3711
Schiavone, M., Vax, A., Formosa, C., Martin-Yken, H., Dague, E. & François, J. M.
(2014), ‘A combined chemical and enzymatic method to determine quantitatively the
polysaccharide components in the cell wall of yeasts’, FEMS Yeast Research 14(6), 933–
947.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1111/1567-1364.12182
Sentandreu, R. & Northcote, D. H. (1968), ‘The structure of a glycopeptide isolated
from the yeast cell wall’, Biochemical Journal 109(3), 419–432.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1042/bj1090419
Shen, B., Hohmann, S., Jensen, R. G., & Bohnert, H. J. (1999), ‘Roles of sugar alcohols
in osmotic stress adaptation. replacement of glycerol by mannitol and sorbitol in yeast’,
Plant Physiology 121(1), 45–52.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.121.1.45
Shibata, A., Kiba, Y., Akati, N., Fukuzawa, K. & Terada, H. (2001), ‘Molecular charac-
teristics of astaxanthin and -carotene in the phospholipid monolayer and their distri-
butions in the phospholipid bilayer’, Chemistry and Physics of Lipids 113(1-2), 11–22.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/s0009-3084(01)00136-0
Shimoi, H., Kitagaki, H., Ohmori, H., Iimura, Y. & Ito, K. (1998), ‘Sed1p is a major
cell wall protein of Saccharomyces cerevisiae in the stationary phase and is involved
in lytic enzyme resistance’, Journal of Bacteriology 180(13), 3381–3387.
Singh, D. P., Khattar, J. S., Rajput, A., Chaudhary, R. & Singh, R. (2019), ‘High
production of carotenoids by the green microalga Asterarcys quadricellulare PUMCC
5.1.1 under optimized culture conditions’, PLOS ONE 14(9), e0221930.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0221930
Smith, A. E., Zhang, Z., Thomas, C. R., Moxham, K. E. & Middelberg, A. P. J. (2000),
‘The mechanical properties of Saccharomyces cerevisiae’, Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 97(18), 9871–9874.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.97.18.9871
==PAGE:53==
References
47
Smits, G. J., Kapteyn, J. C., van den Ende, H. & Klis, F. M. (1999), ‘Cell wall dynamics
in yeast’, Current Opinion in Microbiology 2(4), 348–352.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/s1369-5274(99)80061-7
Spellman, P. T., Sherlock, G., Zhang, M. Q., Iyer, V. R., Anders, K., Eisen, M. B.,
Brown, P. O., Botstein, D. & Futcher, B. (1998), ‘Comprehensive identification of cell
cycle–regulated genes of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae by microarray hybridiza-
tion’, Molecular Biology of the Cell 9(12), 3273–3297.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.9.12.3273
Teunissen, A. W. R. H. & Steensma, H. Y. (1995), ‘The dominant flocculation
genes of Saccharomyces cerevisiae constitute a new subtelomeric gene family’, Yeast
11(11), 1001–1013.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1002/yea.320111102
Tiede, A., Nischan, C., Schubert, J. & Schmidt, R. E. (2000), ‘Characterisation of the
enzymatic complex for the first step in glycosylphosphatidylinositol biosynthesis’, The
International Journal of Biochemistry & Cell Biology 32(3), 339–350.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/s1357-2725(99)00122-3
Tiwari, R., Köffel, R. & Schneiter, R. (2007), ‘An acetylation/deacetylation cycle
controls the export of sterols and steroids from s. cerevisiae’, The EMBO Journal
26(24), 5109–5119.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.emboj.7601924
Toh-e, A. & Oguchi, T. (1998), ‘Isolation and characterization of the yeast las21 mutants,
which are sensitive to a local anestheticum, tetracaine.’, Genes & Genetic Systems
73(6), 365–375.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1266/ggs.73.365
Umekawa, M., Ujihara, M., Nakai, D., Takematsu, H. & Wakayama, M. (2017), ‘Ecm33
is a novel factor involved in efficient glucose uptake for nutrition-responsive TORC1
signaling in yeast’, FEBS Letters 591(22), 3721–3729.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1002/1873-3468.12882
Vailati-Riboni, M., Palombo, V. & Loor, J. J. (2017), What are omics sciences?, in
‘Periparturient Diseases of Dairy Cows’, Springer International Publishing, pp. 1–7.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-43033-11
Valoppi, F., Calligaris, S. & Marangoni, A. G. (2018), Stearyl alcohol oleogels, in ‘Edible
Oleogels’, Elsevier, pp. 219–234.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-12-814270-7.00009-5
van der Vaart, J. M., Caro, L. H., Chapman, J. W., Klis, F. M. & Verrips, C. T. (1995),
‘Identification of three mannoproteins in the cell wall of Saccharomyces cerevisiae.’,
Journal of bacteriology 177(11), 3104–3110.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1128/jb.177.11.3104-3110.1995
==PAGE:54==
48
References
Vannelli, T., Qi, W. W., Sweigard, J., Gatenby, A. A. & Sariaslani, F. S. (2007), ‘Pro-
duction of p-hydroxycinnamic acid from glucose in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Es-
cherichia coli by expression of heterologous genes from plants and fungi’, Metabolic
Engineering 9(2), 142–151.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2006.11.001
Verwaal, R., Wang, J., Meijnen, J.-P., Visser, H., Sandmann, G., van den Berg, J. A. &
van Ooyen, A. J. J. (2007), ‘High-level production of beta-carotene in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae by successive transformation with carotenogenic genes from Xanthophyl-
lomyces dendrorhous’, Applied and Environmental Microbiology 73(13), 4342–4350.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1128/aem.02759-06
Vila, E., Hornero-Méndez, D., Azziz, G., Lareo, C. & Saravia, V. (2019), ‘Carotenoids
from heterotrophic bacteria isolated from fildes peninsula, king george island, antarc-
tica’, Biotechnology Reports 21, e00306.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.btre.2019.e00306
Wagner, J. M. & Alper, H. S. (2016), ‘Synthetic biology and molecular genetics in non-
conventional yeasts: Current tools and future advances’, Fungal Genetics and Biology
89, 126–136.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fgb.2015.12.001
Wang, Y., Halls, C., Zhang, J., Matsuno, M., Zhang, Y. & Yu, O. (2011), ‘Stepwise
increase of resveratrol biosynthesis in yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae by metabolic
engineering’, Metabolic Engineering 13(5), 455–463.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2011.04.005
Watanabe,
R.,
Ohishi,
K.,
Maeda,
Y.,
Nakamura,
N.
&
Kinoshita,
T.
(1999),
‘Mammalian
PIG-L
and
its
yeast
homologue
Gpi12p
are
N-
acetylglucosaminylphosphatidylinositol
de-N-acetylases
essential
in
glycosylphos-
phatidylinositol biosynthesis’, The Biochemical journal 339 ( Pt 1(Pt 1), 185–192.
URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10085243
Xu, F., Yuan, Q.-P. & Zhu, Y. (2007), ‘Improved production of lycopene and beta-
carotene by blakeslea trispora with oxygen-vectors’, Process Biochemistry 42(2), 289–
293.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procbio.2006.08.007
Yang, N. J. & Hinner, M. J. (2014), Getting across the cell membrane: An overview for
small molecules, peptides, and proteins, in ‘Site-Specific Protein Labeling’, Springer
New York, pp. 29–53.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-2272-73
Yin, Q. Y., de Groot, P. W. J., de Jong, L., Klis, F. M. & Koster, C. G. D. (2007), ‘Mass
spectrometric quantitation of covalently bound cell wall proteins in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae’, FEMS Yeast Research 7(6), 887–896.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1567-1364.2007.00272.x
==PAGE:55==
References
49
Young, A. J. & Lowe, G. M. (2001), ‘Antioxidant and prooxidant properties of
carotenoids’, Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 385(1), 20–27.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1006/abbi.2000.2149
Zhang, M., Liang, Y., Zhang, X., Xu, Y., Dai, H. & Xiao, W. (2008), ‘Deletion of yeast
CWP genes enhances cell permeability to genotoxic agents’, Toxicological Sciences
103(1), 68–76.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/toxsci/kfn034
Zhou, Y. J., Hu, Y., Zhu, Z., Siewers, V. & Nielsen, J. (2018), ‘Engineering 1-alkene
biosynthesis and secretion by dynamic regulation in yeast’, ACS Synthetic Biology
7(2), 584–590.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00338
Zlotnik, H., Fernandez, M. P., Bowers, B. & Cabib, E. (1984), ‘Saccharomyces cerevisiae
mannoproteins form an external cell wall layer that determines wall porosity.’, Journal
of bacteriology 159(3), 1018–1026.
==PAGE:56==
