==PAGE:1==
Visualizing Crystal Defects in Semiconductor Nanowires
Using Scanning Electron Microscopy
Department of Materials and Manufacturing Engineering
Written by
Ribka Balakrishnan - s182314
Supervisor: Marco Beleggia
Co-supervisors: Alice Bastos da Silva Fanta
&
Martín Espiñeira Cachaza
==PAGE:2==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
Abstract
This paper will detail the process of visualizing crystal defects (i.e. stacking faults
and dislocations) in selectively grown III-V semiconductor nanowires.
The nanowires
are grown by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) on a GaAs(001) substrate.
To achieve
optimal device performance, the nanowires must be uniform along their length with no
crystal defects. The presence of defects lowers the performance of the devices, and it is
therefore of interest to ﬁrst visualize, and then quantify these defects. Electron channeling
contrast imaging (ECCI) is a scanning electron microscopy (SEM) technique that can
be used to identify defects in crystalline samples. ECCI is attractive for this purpose,
because it is a non-destructive technique that can obtain the same information as other,
destructive techniques—in a fraction of the time. Traditionally, ECCI is conducted using
a backscatter electron (BSE) detector, due to the behavior of BSEs, which are known to
give orientation-based contrast in crystalline samples. This study involves the visualization
of crystal defects using both the backscatter detector and the through-the-lens detector
(TLD), which detects secondary electrons (SE). The results of the experimental trials
show that defects can be detected using the TLD in immersion mode, in which the stage is
engulfed within the magnetic ﬁeld of the immersion system. Stacking faults in the (-111)
and (1-11) planes can be resolved in [1-10] nanowires in both imaging modes (BSE and
SE), and will be analyzed with regard to their contrast, density, and orientation.
i
==PAGE:3==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
Acknowledgements
First, to all of my colleagues at the Microsoft Quantum Materials Laboratory– you are all
amazingly talented and brilliant people, and I am honored to have spent the last year and a
half among you. Thank you to Peter Krogstrup, who initially hired me into the group and then
gave me the space to ﬂourish into the microscopist I feel comfortable calling myself today.
I would like to give a massive shout out to my co-supervisor Martín Espiñeira, who has
been by my side through all of my investigations into curious SEM techniques in the past
year, getting just as excited as me when I stumbled upon a research a paper about ECCI, and
getting equally as involved when it came to reaching out to FEI and ﬁguring out how to make
adjustments to our SEM in order to try it ourselves. Thank you for your patience with me
through the millions of questions I ask, without judgement and whether or not you have the
answer.
Next, I would like to thank my other co-supervisor Alice Bastos, about whom I had heard
after learning about ECCI and trying to ﬁnd people who could help me with it.
When I
eventually asked you to supervise my thesis, you said yes without hesitation, despite having
several of your own projects to work on, EBSD and TKD trainings to run, and a family at
home. I admire your tenacity and bright spirit; I feel better and more sure of myself after each
time we speak, which in and of itself speaks volumes about your character. Thank you for
believing in me, and for your unwavering support throughout this process.
I would like to thank Marco Beleggia for taking on the role of supervisor for this project,
although you got roped into it somewhat unexpectedly. Thank you for inviting and welcom-
ing me to the EMINT meetings, and making me feel like a part of the group, yet another
environment in which I was among brilliant minds.
Lastly, thank you to everyone who has lent a helping hand in any way. To Anna Christensen,
thank you for the emotional support over lunches and cake. To Gunjan Nagda, thank you for
lending a listening ear when I didn’t even know I needed one. To Eliana Tesfaye, thank you
for the studious companionship throughout hundreds of hours of late work nights. To Jordan
Kang, thank you for the small, unexpected, and sometimes anonymous acts of kindness: they
do not go unnoticed. To Daniel Frandsen, thank you for standing by me through all of the
madness that this semester entailed, and for supporting me in too many ways to count. To my
parents, thank you for allowing all of this to become a reality.
ii
==PAGE:4==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
4
2.1
Semiconductor Devices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
III-V Compound Semiconductors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.1
Gallium Arsenide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Crystal Growth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.1
Molecular Beam Epitaxy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.2
Heteroepitaxy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3.3
Lattice Mismatch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Crystal Defects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4.1
Observing Crystal Defects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Electron Channeling Contrast Imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5.1
Low magniﬁcation: Electron Channeling Pattern . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5.2
High magniﬁcation: Defect Imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Scanning Electron Microscopy
15
3.1
Concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.1
Secondary Electrons (SE)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.2
Backscatter Electrons (BSE) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.1
Electron Beam
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.2
Stage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Detectors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3.1
Everhart-Thornley Detector (ETD) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3.2
Through the Lens Detector (TLD)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3.3
Backscatter Detector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Experimental Methods
23
4.1
Sample Details
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.1
Lattice Mismatch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2
Electron Channeling Pattern . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
iii
==PAGE:5==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
4.2.1
Beam and Stage Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2.2
Stage Position . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2.3
Indexing the Pattern . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3
ECCI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3.1
Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3.2
Nanowires Studied
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3.3
Region 1: Reverse Engineered ECCI
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3.4
Region 2: SE and BSE Imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5
Results and Discussion
32
5.1
ECP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2
ECCI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2.1
Interaction Volume . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2.2
Defect Contrast over 360o Rotation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2.3
Defect Contrast in SE vs. BSE Modes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2.4
Defect Contrast at 0T0R vs. 5T18R
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.2.5
Defect Density by Nanowire Thickness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.2.6
Veriﬁcation by TEM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6
Conclusion
59
Appendices
66
A Defect Contrast: 5o tilt, 0-360o rotation
66
iv
==PAGE:6==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
1
Introduction
In-depth characterization of crystal defects is a crucial aspect of semiconductor device fabrica-
tion and research, due to the signiﬁcant detrimental eﬀects they have on device performance.
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) is the most commonly used characterization technique
to investigate crystal defects such as dislocations, stacking faults, twins, and more. While TEM
can oﬀer direct, high resolution imaging of crystals and their defects on an atomic scale, it has
signiﬁcant drawbacks as well. First, is not suitable for high-throughput measurements due
to long sample preparation times and limited sampling area, and second, it is a destructive
technique that requires a thin slice of the sample to be physically removed for analysis.
In this thesis, semiconductor nanowires that have been selectively grown via molecular
beam epitaxy (MBE), are analyzed via scanning electron microscopy (SEM) to investigate the
presence and nature of crystal defects. Electron channeling contrast imaging (ECCI) is the
speciﬁc SEM technique used, which can be used as a complementary or alternative technique
to TEM due to its high throughput capabilities. ECCI requires no sample preparation, and
can be performed on any ﬁeld-emission SEM that has a backscatter electron (BSE) detector
mounted under the pole piece. ECCI operates on diﬀraction principles as TEM does, except
the signal electrons are backscattered instead of being forward scattered.
Figure 1.1: ECCI set up.
When performing ECCI, the ﬁrst step is to obtain an electron channeling pattern (ECP),
which is formed at low magniﬁcation due to the variation in signal resulting from the change in
angle between the beam and the crystal lattice of the sample. Dark lines appear against a bright
background, the former representing areas in which the beam satisﬁes the Bragg condition for
a particular set of planes or is said to be "channeling", and the latter an area of high BSE
1
==PAGE:7==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
intensity where no diﬀraction condition is met. The dark lines are called Kikuchi lines, and
can be oriented with respect to the beam by tilting and rotating the sample. When a Kikuchi
line, which corresponds to a speciﬁc Bragg condition, is moved to the center of the viewing
screen by tilt and rotation, it is then aligned with the optic axis of the SEM. Here, when the
magniﬁcation is increased, the BSE coeﬃcient is generally low, because the incident electrons
are channeling into the lattice planes at this angle. If a dislocation is present, it will create a
barrier for the incident electrons from continuing to travel through the lattice planes, creating
a localized area of increased BSE signal. In this way, defect imaging is possible via ECCI.
The concept behind ECCI was ﬁrst predicted in 1962 by Hirsch et. al. [1], and the ﬁrst
observation of electron channeling was noted in 1967 by Coates [2]. A thorough description of
the method and theory behind defect imaging via ECCI was published in 1972 by Spencer et.
al. [3], and ﬁnally the ﬁrst observation of dislocations via ECCI with a ﬁeld-emission gun SEM
was reported in 1979 by Morin et. al. [4]. Since then, extensive studies have been conducted
by ECCI, on several semiconductor materials, including GaAs [5] [6] [7], InAs [6], GaSb [8],
GaN [9] [10], Ge [11] [12], and more.
The motivation of this particular work was ﬁrst the observation of faint, dark lines along
several selectively grown nanowires oriented in the [1-10] direction, grown on a (001) GaAs
substrate. A micrograph showing an example of this can be seen in Figure 1.2.
Figure 1.2: Faint dark lines seen in a [1-10] nanowire under standard SE imaging conditions. Scale bar:
200nm.
These features were observed in an FEI Verios G4 SEM, under normal secondary electron
(SE) imaging conditions. They could be seen in most nanowires of this orientation at high
2
==PAGE:8==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
magniﬁcation, so they were investigated further. It was conﬁrmed by atomic force microscopy
(AFM) that these dark lines were not topographical features, so they were investigated yet
further by this ECCI study in order to determine their true nature.
The following experimental study investigates defects in nanowires grown exclusively in the
[1-10] direction, from two diﬀerent regions on the same sample, grown on a GaAs(001) substrate.
The study includes four main parts: 1) the change in defect contrast due to changing diﬀraction
conditions, 2) the change in defect contrast due to SEM imaging via BSEs vs. SEs, 3) the change
in defect contrast at a speciﬁc diﬀraction condition vs. at no diﬀraction condition, and 4) the
change in defect density as the thickness of the nanowires was changed. A ﬁnal veriﬁcation of
the ﬁndings resulting from the ECCI trials was done by TEM. The TEM used was a FEI Titan
Analytical 80-300ST.
3
==PAGE:9==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
2
Theory
2.1
Semiconductor Devices
The band gap, also called an energy gap, is the gap between the valence band and the conduction
band of an atom. Conductive materials have zero band gap, which allows electrons to move
freely between the two bands. Insulating materials have a large band gap (> 3 eV), which
prevents valence electrons from ever jumping to the conduction band, thus eliminating the
potential for current ﬂow. Semiconductors have a medium-sized band gap (0 - 3 eV), which
sometimes allows valence electrons to jump into the conduction band, but only under speciﬁc
environmental conditions, such as when the temperature is increased, or when exposed to light.
Semiconductors therefore exist in a gray area between insulators and conductors, sometimes
acting as the former and other times as the latter [13]. It is this duality of semiconductors that
makes them attractive for many applications– including quantum computing.
Silicon, an elemental semiconductor, forms the foundation of the electronics industry. Along
with germanium and other group IV elements, silicon has a four-fold coordinated crystal struc-
ture, meaning that each atom is covalently bonded to its four neighboring atoms, forming a
tetrahedron [13]. Silicon is the chosen semiconductor for many electrical applications because it
is one of the most abundant elements on Earth [14], and its electrical properties can be modiﬁed
and controlled.
Semiconductors can also be formed as binary compounds, the most common of which are III-
V semiconductors, formed by a group III atom bonded to a group V atom. The bonding between
these atoms is partially ionic, due to the transfer of charge from the group III atom to the
group V atom. This type of bond leads to a higher energy in the band gap, therefore changing
the semiconductor properties of the compound.
The ionicity increases in II-VI compound
semiconductors, with most having a band gap larger than 1 eV. The I-VII compounds have an
even higher ionicity, with band gaps reaching greater than 3 eV and many being considered as
insulators [13].
2.2
III-V Compound Semiconductors
The sample studied in later sections is composed of III-V compound semiconductors. Group III
elements which form binary III-V semiconductors are boron (B), aluminum (Al), gallium (Ga),
and indium (In). Group V elements which form these compounds are nitrogen (N), phosphorous
4
==PAGE:10==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
(P), arsenic (As), and antimony (Sb) [13]. Some of the most common III-V compounds include
GaAs, GaSb, and InP.
2.2.1
Gallium Arsenide
Gallium arsenide (GaAs) is the substrate material of the sample that will be analyzed in later
chapters. It has a zinc blende crystal structure, the unit cell of which is shown in Figure 2.1.
The Ga atoms, shown in blue, occupy sites as in a traditional FCC crystal, and the As atoms
(yellow) form a tetrahedron within the unit cell [15]. The placement of the Ga and As atoms
can be switched in the unit cell and still be an accurate representation of the crystal structure.
Figure 2.1: The zinc blende crystal structure is shown here, in the form of a GaAs unit cell. Ga atoms are
shown in blue, and As atoms in yellow. In the orientation guide in the bottom left corner, the axis directions
are as follows; a: [100], b: [010], and c: [001]. In the unit cell shown on the left, the (010) plane is the front
face of the cube, and in the corresponding orientation guide, the b axis is pointing out of the page.
This material is often used as a substrate upon which other III-V semiconductors can be
grown. An advantage of GaAs over Si as a substrate is that it can be grown or doped in such
a way that results in a semi-insulating material, or one with a higher electrical resistivity [15].
This characteristic allows for improved device speeds, and for many more active devices to be
fabricated on a chip of the same area without compromising their performance. This is an
important characteristic of GaAs as the trend of the electronics industry moves further into
miniaturization [16].
5
==PAGE:11==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
2.3
Crystal Growth
The transformation of a plain III-V semiconductor substrate into a ﬁnished chip with devices
involves a few intermediate steps, the ﬁrst of which is to grow nanostructures on the substrate,
for later use as devices. There are many diﬀerent ways by which nanostructures can be epi-
taxially grown, or grown layer by layer, on a bulk crystal substrate. Two of the most common
epitaxial growth methods are molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) and metalorganic vapor phase
epitaxy (MOVPE). These methods allow for crystals to be deposited monolayer by monolayer in
a very precise manner, and are the two methods by which almost all compound semiconductors
are commercially manufactured today [17].
2.3.1
Molecular Beam Epitaxy
Molecular beam epitaxy is the method by which the sample analyzed in this thesis was grown.
In MBE, epitaxial layers are grown on a heated single crystal substrate in an ultra high vac-
uum (UHV) environment, by means of atomic or molecular beams impinging on the substrate
material. Figure 2.2 demonstrates this process. The source of the beams are evaporation cells
(numbered 7 in the ﬁgure), which each contain one element, and can be turned on and oﬀ
simultaneously or individually by opening and closing their respective shutters (numbered 6
in the ﬁgure). The temperature of these cells can be individually manipulated. The substrate
(black, numbered 2 in the ﬁgure) is rotated by a magnetic sample holder (1 in the ﬁgure) to
encourage uniform growth across the substrate, and the material is grown one monolayer at a
time. Advantages of MBE include the ﬂexibility of materials that can be grown, which includes
almost all semiconductors, and the possibility of in-situ characterization via electron or ion
beams, on account of the sample already being in a high vacuum environment [17]. In-situ
characterization is done by reﬂecting high-energy electron diﬀraction, or RHEED, a process
through which an electron gun (3 in the ﬁgure) aims electrons towards the substrate at a low
angle, such that the electrons do not penetrate the sample but rather diﬀract, and this signal
is then detected by a screen (numbered 4 in the ﬁgure). RHEED is used to obtain information
about the growth dynamics in real time, allowing the crystal grower to adjust growth param-
eters as necessary [18]. Disadvantages of MBE include its high cost, the maintenance required
for the UHV system, and limited throughput [17].
6
==PAGE:12==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
Figure 2.2: MBE chamber.
2.3.2
Heteroepitaxy
There are two types of growths possible via MBE: homoepitaxy and heteroepitaxy. In homoepi-
taxy, a ﬁlm is deposited on a single crystal of the same composition, for example depositing
GaAs onto a GaAs substrate. Heteroepitaxy is the growth of a ﬁlm on a bulk single crystal
of a diﬀerent material, for example the growth of GaAs on a Si substrate. Materials can be
grown on the entire substrate or in selected areas, by depositing a mask on the substrate in
areas where growth is unwanted. The mask functions as a stencil such that areas where the
substrate is exposed, in the case of a heteroepitaxial growth, would result in a heterostructure.
The sample discussed in later chapters contains selectively grown heterostructures.
2.3.3
Lattice Mismatch
When materials of diﬀerent compositions are layered, they should ideally have similar lattice
parameters so as to minimize strain between the layers. But rarely are lattices in heteroepitaxial
growths matched; in fact the relaxed lattice constant of the new layer is almost always diﬀerent
7
==PAGE:13==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
from that of the substrate. Strain due to lattice mismatch can be deﬁned as:
f = as −ae
ae
,
(2.1)
where as is the relaxed lattice constant of the substrate, and ae is the relaxed lattice constant
of the epitaxial layer. Strain relaxation, which begins once the growth has reached a critical layer
thickness, refers to the rearrangement of atoms in a crystal to accommodate lattice mismatch.
This rearrangement comes in the form of defect development along the interface between two
layers.
2.4
Crystal Defects
A crystal defect is deﬁned as an imperfection in the regular geometric arrangement of atoms
in a crystalline solid.
Defects on an atomic scale result in changes in the mechanical and
electrical behavior of a material [19] and, in the case of heteroepitaxially grown semiconductor
devices, often result in a degradation of device performance [17]. For this reason, it is favorable
to minimize the number of defects that develop in semiconductor heterostructures meant for
device fabrication.
Dislocations are linear defects in which the interatomic bonding is disrupted in comparison
to the regularity of a perfect crystal. Dislocations in crystal growths can arise in two ways:
the ﬁrst way is if the seed crystal, or substrate, has existing defects that reach its surface,
those defects will extend into the layer grown on top; the second way is dislocations that are
generated during the growth process [20]. Dislocations can come be of the edge, screw, or
mixed type. Edge dislocations, for example, are associated with an extra half plane in which
the dislocation exists along the edge of the extra plane, as shown in Figure 2.3. Dislocations
can nucleate in a few ways. Heterogeneous nucleation involves an existing defect, for example
if there is a threading dislocation in the substrate material, it can extend into the next layer as
a misﬁt dislocation (MD) [17]. Homogeneous nucleation occurs when a dislocation appears in
a region of the crystal with no preexisting defects. This type of nucleation occurs when a large
stress is involved, such as a large lattice mismatch [20].
Planar defects also exist, and can come in the form of stacking faults, twins, and more. A
perfect crystal can be thought of as a stack of atomic planes, appearing in a speciﬁc sequence.
The stacking sequence in zinc blende crystals follows the pattern . . . ABCABCABC. . . in the
[111] direction. Stacking faults appear when there is a missing plane or an extra plane in the
8
==PAGE:14==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
stacking sequence, referred to as intrinsic and extrinsic stacking faults, respectively. Stacking
faults can be represented by a plane bounded on either side by a partial dislocation. They can
be created during heteroepitaxial growth, but also can derive from the dissociation of a perfect
dislocation into partial dislocations. In diamond and zinc blende crystal structures, a perfect
dislocation can dissociate into two partial dislocations [17].
Figure 2.3: Crystal with an extra half plane, resulting in a linear defect, or edge dislocation, along the top
edge of the extra half plane.
2.4.1
Observing Crystal Defects
Researchers have used various experimental methods to observe defects in crystals.
These
methods include surface techniques in which material is progressively removed from the surface
(opposite of growth) revealing defects at the surface, decoration methods involving inducing
precipitation along the defect line, transmission electron microscopy (TEM), x-ray diﬀraction
topography, ﬁeld ion microscopy, and computer simulations in combination with other direct
observation techniques [20]. Of these techniques, TEM is the most widely used to observe
defects in crystals. As an electron microscopy technique, it uses the behavior of electron inter-
actions with a material to visualize defects in crystals. However, drawbacks of TEM include
that it involves taking a thin slice of the sample, called a lamella, destroying the sample in the
process; and that it is an extremely time consuming technique, when accounting for sample
preparation.
A relatively new technique, performed in a scanning electron microscope (SEM), called elec-
tron channeling contrast imaging (ECCI), can visualize defects in a crystal without destroying
9
==PAGE:15==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
a sample, and in a fraction of the time it takes to perform proper TEM imaging, including
sample preparation.
2.5
Electron Channeling Contrast Imaging
Electron channeling contrast imaging (ECCI) is an SEM method which utilizes diﬀraction
techniques in order to visualize variations in the crystal lattice of a material, or in other words:
defects. This is achieved by following a few steps: 1) by obtaining a diﬀraction pattern, or an
electron channeling pattern (ECP), from the crystal, 2) using this pattern to orient the crystal
to a particular plane of interest, then 3) increasing the magniﬁcation to see local changes in
the lattice from the chosen vantage point.
This method traditionally exploits the behavior of BSEs to obtain such information from
a crystal, because they are known to give orientation-based contrast when interacting with a
crystalline material. Backscattered electrons are often used to show contrast diﬀerence between
grains in polycrystalline materials, because the number of BSEs able to escape from a crystal
depends on its orientation relative to the electron beam in the SEM. Since the likelihood of
incident beam electrons being backscattered and escaping from the sample material depends
on the orientation of the crystal, the same trend applies within a single crystal. For example,
if a crystal has a localized change in atomic arrangement, like a dislocation; this area should
show a diﬀerence in BSE emission relative to the surrounding crystal. ECCI operates upon
this principle, giving relevant information about crystalline materials at both low and high
magniﬁcation, the details of which will be elaborated on in the following sections.
2.5.1
Low magniﬁcation: Electron Channeling Pattern
An ECP is a faint diﬀraction pattern, quite similar to the Kikuchi pattern seen in a TEM or
an EBSD system. The detector used to obtain the pattern is a solid-state backscatter detector,
mounted just below the pole piece and therefore directly above the sample. When the angle
between the incident beam and a crystal lattice is changed, the resulting backscatter intensity
varies. It is this intensity variation that creates the electron channeling pattern.
If the incident beam is considered under the wave model, as opposed to the particle model,
it can be represented by a series of plane waves, each with the periodicity of the lattice, called
Bloch waves. In the simplest representation, the electron beam can be resolved into two Bloch
waves, as shown in Figure 2.4, where the Type II wave has its intensity maxima between the
10
==PAGE:16==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
lattice planes, and the Type I wave has its maxima on the line of atoms that constitute the
planes. The Type II wave will interact very little with the lattice, due to its distance from it,
and will therefore not be strongly backscattered. The Type I wave electrons will alternatively
be strongly backscattered due to the high probability that they interact directly with the atoms
of the lattice. Assuming that the beam current remains unchanged, the sum of the two waves’
intensities therefore remains constant. The ratio of Type I to Type II wave on the other hand,
depends on the angle between the incident beam and the lattice.
Figure 2.4: Electron beam shown as the sum of two plane waves, Bloch waves I and II, where the Type I
wave has intensity maxima in line with the center of the atoms, and Type II has its maxima in between the
atomic planes.
If the incidence angle satisﬁes the Bragg condition for the lattice spacing d, then the two
Bloch waves are of equal intensity. If the incidence angle is less than the Bragg angle, the Type
I wave will have a higher intensity than Type II, which increases the overall backscattered
intensity. If the incidence angle is greater than the Bragg angle, the Type II wave will have
a higher intensity than Type I, decreasing the overall backscattered intensity. At the lowest
magniﬁcation in a SEM, the beam is rastered over a relatively large area of the crystal (assuming
a single crystal material), and if the necessary Bragg angles are achieved within that range, it
is possible for multiple lattice planes to contribute to this change in BSE signal, creating bands
of contrast where channeling occurs along those planes. This is how a channeling pattern is
formed.
11
==PAGE:17==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
Figure 2.5: The BSE signal varies with the scanning angle of the incident beam, resulting in the distribution
shown.
The electron channeling pattern (ECP) created using the method just described– by raster-
ing the beam over a large single crystal in an SEM– is called a wide area channeling pattern,
and can be seen in a live BSE image of a single crystal material at the SEM’s lowest magni-
ﬁcation. In this method, the variation in angle between the beam and crystal lattice comes
from the divergence in raster scan. At an SEM’s lowest magniﬁcation, the beam scans across
several millimeters of the crystal. The incident beam in an SEM is always scanning across a
given area of the sample, so naturally there is an angle over which the beam sways. This angle
increases as the magniﬁcation is decreased and the area over which the beam sweeps enlarges.
This scanning motion over a large single crystal creates a signiﬁcant variation in the incident
angle with respect to the crystal lattice, which in turn creates a variation in the BSE signal
emitted from the sample. The backscatter detector hovering directly above the sample captures
this BSE signal, resulting in the ﬁnal ECP displayed on the viewing screen. It is important
to note that the ﬁeld of view varies between SEMs, and the larger the ﬁeld of view is, more
of the ECP will be visible on the screen. Translating the crystal will not change the pattern,
12
==PAGE:18==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
since the orientation of the crystal is still the same relative to the beam. Tilting and rotating
the stage, however, will change the angle between the incident beam and the lattice, and will
translate and rotate the pattern, respectively.
A channeling pattern can be obtained in a number of other ways as well, not just by
examining a crystal at low magniﬁcation. An ECP can be obtained from a single grain in a
polycrystalline sample, by a method involving "rocking" the incident beam. This was performed
as early as 1969 to obtain an ECP [21] [22] [23]. The result is called a selected area channeling
pattern (SACP), because it derives from a selected area of the sample, as the name implies. In
this method, the incident beam is rocked about a ﬁxed point on the sample. As the beam rocks,
the angle at which the incident beam hits the lattice is constantly varying, and this variation
is what creates the channeling pattern. Since this method requires special electron optics to
allow for such control of the beam, it is not viable for widespread adoption [24], although
some researchers have successfully performed this method using instruments that do not have
this feature installed, by manipulating the beam manually [25].
Some SEM manufacturers
such as Tescan [26], Thermo Fisher [27], and CamScan [28] have included beam rocking as a
commercial feature. While some have opted for manipulating the beam as a way to change
the angle between the beam and the lattice, others have chosen to manipulate the sample via
"stage rocking" with a ﬁxed beam [29] [24]. Another method used to obtain an ECP is a
tilt-free EBSD system, which has recently been developed by Thermo Fisher, in which a pixel
detector is integrated with a semiconductor sensor, so that electrons that strike the detector
are immediately converted into electric signals [30]. Although there are a handful of ways to
obtain an ECP from a crystalline material, the method used in the experimental section of this
paper is the wide-area method.
2.5.2
High magniﬁcation: Defect Imaging
Once the ECP has been indexed, meaning that the bands in the pattern have been assigned to
the planes to which they correspond, the sample can be tilted and rotated so that the edge of a
band of interest passes through the center of the viewing screen, and therefore intersects with
the optic axis. This brings the band into a diﬀraction condition with a speciﬁc set of planes,
meaning that the electron beam is oriented such that the primary electrons are traveling almost
parallel to the lattice plane that corresponds to said band. When the beam and crystal have
been oriented relative to each other in this way, the backscatter signal is reduced in this region,
creating the dark band seen.
13
==PAGE:19==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
When the magniﬁcation is increased here so that the dark band from the channeling pattern
ﬁlls the entire viewing screen, any local changes in the lattice such as stacking faults or disloca-
tions will locally increase the backscatter coeﬃcient. This occurs because said local change will
block the path of the incident electrons, which were initially moving relatively uninterrupted
between the organized planes of the lattice. The incident electrons will interact with the nucleus
of the atoms blocking their path, resulting in a higher backscatter coeﬃcient in this area, and
creating a localized change in contrast. Therefore, defects can be detected in this way: by ﬁrst
orienting the crystal relative to the beam to align it with a speciﬁc plane, then increasing the
magniﬁcation in order to discern localized defects in the lattice.
14
==PAGE:20==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
3
Scanning Electron Microscopy
3.1
Concept
A scanning electron microscope (SEM) is a powerful tool, useful for visualizing any material
at a high magniﬁcation, up to 100,000x in most SEMs. Scanning electron microscopes provide
topographical, compositional, and crystallographic information about a material.
The ﬁrst
main component of an SEM is its electron source, which can be either a tungsten or LaB6
ﬁlament that is heated to a high temperature until electrons escape from the ﬁlament, or a ﬁeld
emission gun (FEG) made of a tungsten wire with a very sharp tip. After escaping from the
source, the electrons pass through a series of lenses that focus the beam of electrons as it moves
down the column of the microscope. After the beam has been focused into a spot as small as
possible on the specimen, scanning coils deﬂect the beam in the x and y directions, so that it
scans over the sample surface [31].
Figure 3.1: SEM schematic (O. Mishin, Lecture 3.
The beam is a stream of electrons being pulled out of the electron source by an anode,
and is called the incident or primary beam. When these incident, or primary electrons hit the
sample, they knock out electrons from atoms within the sample. Low energy electrons (< 50eV)
that are released from the sample are categorized as secondary electrons (SE). Some incident
electrons interact with the nucleus of an atom contained within the sample, and are scattered
elastically back up and out of the sample. These electrons are called backscattered electrons
(BSE). Electrons that are released from the sample create a signal which is read by various
15
==PAGE:21==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
detectors, giving the user diﬀerent information about the sample [32]. The interaction volume
in SEM specimens, as well as the information that can be obtained from various depths within
the sample is shown in Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Sample interaction volume in an SEM.
3.1.1
Secondary Electrons (SE)
Secondary electrons are characterized mainly by their typical low energy, which is the determin-
ing factor in making their escape depth so shallow, on the order of 5nm. Secondary electrons are
continuously created as the incident electrons interact with the sample throughout the interac-
tion volume, but SEs are inelastically scattered, losing much of their energy while interacting
with the specimen. In addition to this, even those SEs near to the surface of the sample must
overpower the surface potential barrier with an energy of several electron volts to escape [33].
The probability of SEs escaping decreases exponentially as its depth in the sample material
increases. It has been calculated [34] that the maximum depth from which an SE can resurface
is 5λ, where λ is the mean free path and can range from 1 to 10nm in metals and insulators,
respectively. The incident beam electrons create SEs as they travel into the sample, and those
created within 5λ of the surface have a chance of escaping. Those that escape are called SEIs.
As the incident electrons enter the sample and emerge again as BSEs, they also create SEs
16
==PAGE:22==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
on their way back up and out of the sample. Secondary electrons that are created by BSE
interactions and also manage to escape from the designated 5λ depth, are called SEIIs. Since
these SEs are created as a result of backscattering, they carry signal associated with that of
the BSEs [33]. A schematic of these two types of SEs can be found in Figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: SEI and SEII trajectory within sample [33].
Lastly, SEIIIs are secondary electrons that are created when BSEs come into contact with
areas within the chamber, changing trajectory and losing a enough energy to then be classiﬁed
as a secondary electron.
3.1.2
Backscatter Electrons (BSE)
Backscattered electrons are beam electrons that experience several elastic collisions, and change
their trajectory entirely to reemerge at the surface of the material.
Backscattering can be
quantiﬁed by the backscatter coeﬃcient, η, which is deﬁned in the equation below, where nBSE
is the number of BSEs, and nB is the total number of incident beam electrons that hit the
sample.
η = nBSE
nB
(3.1)
The number of BSEs created within a material increases with increasing atomic number
(Z), creating compositional contrast in the SEM when imaging with BSEs. This occurs because
heavier elements have larger nuclei, with which BSEs are more likely to have an elastic collision
(SOURCE). The backscatter coeﬃcient rises quickly with atomic number for elements with Z
< 50. Above this point, it increases at a slower rate, beginning to level out around Z = 90
17
==PAGE:23==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
[35]. In practice, this means that BSEs will show a stronger diﬀerence in contrast between
adjacent elements of lower Z values, and weaker diﬀerence between two elements with high
atomic numbers.
Changes in the incident beam energy have a negligible eﬀect on the number of BSEs created,
although the interaction volume increases with beam energy. Backscattered electrons have a
slightly lower energy than that of incident beam electrons, due to the several scattering events
that they endure before escaping the sample.
Lower energy electrons are more inclined to
transfer their kinetic energy to create SEs, so as compared to the incident electrons, BSEs are
more eﬃcient at creating SEs. Due to this phenomenon, SEIIs dominate the overall SE signal
from heavier elements (more backscattering), whereas SEIs dominate the signal from lighter
elements (less backscattering).
Backscatter electrons are also known to give contrast diﬀerences based on crystal orientation.
This is because the number of BSEs able to escape from a crystal depends on its orientation
relative to the electron beam in the SEM (SOURCE). Therefore, BSEs are often used to show
the contrast between grains in polycrystalline materials.
3.2
Parameters
Many parameters can be changed in the SEM, including the acceleration voltage of the elec-
trons in the beam, the probe current, magniﬁcation, astigmatism, working distance, apertures,
brightness, and contrast.
3.2.1
Electron Beam
The acceleration voltage is deﬁned as the speed at which the electrons escaping from the
ﬁlament are moving down the column. Increasing the acceleration voltage decreases the lens
aberrations by accelerating the electrons to a higher energy, therefore narrowing the beam to
a smaller probe on the sample, and increasing the resolution of the ﬁnal image. Although
increasing the acceleration voltage can increase the resolution, it also increases the interaction
volume of the sample, therefore getting more signal from deeper in the sample, which can reduce
the amount of information coming from the surface. In other words, if the voltage is too high,
some resolution can also be lost.
The probe current can be speciﬁed in some microscopes, while others simply have a high
current mode that can be turned on and oﬀ. Imaging with high current increases the signal to
18
==PAGE:24==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
noise ratio. At the same time, higher current means a larger probe size, which in theory would
result in a worse image resolution than when imaging with a lower probe current.
The magniﬁcation of an SEM is determined by the scanning coils and the area of the sample
over which they deﬂect the beam. The numerical value given to the magniﬁcation is given by
the ratio of the scanning length of the image on the operator’s screen to the length across the
sample over which the beam is scanning.
Adjusting the stigmation can be used to correct any asymmetry in the beam. Asymmetry
in the beam results in an oval shaped beam instead of a circular one, and this will result in a
distorted image of the sample on the monitor.
Apertures are present along the SEM column in order to narrow the beam, physically
prohibiting any electrons scattered too far from the optical axis from continuing down the
column. A larger aperture results in a smaller depth of ﬁeld and low resolution, while a smaller
aperture results in a greater depth of ﬁeld and creates a smaller spot size, allowing for a higher
resolution.
3.2.2
Stage
The working distance (WD) in the SEM is the distance between the sample surface and the
bottom of the objective lens when the surface is in focus. Changing the working distance is
often a way to coarsely focus the sample. A longer working distance oﬀers a greater depth of
ﬁeld.
3.3
Detectors
3.3.1
Everhart-Thornley Detector (ETD)
The Everhart-Thornley detector (ETD) is used to image SEs emitted from the sample, or low
energy electrons. The detector is usually positively biased, accepting the whole range of SEs,
including those knocked out by the incident beam (SE I), those knocked out by BSEs escaping
from the sample (SE II), and those generated when BSEs hit parts of the SEM chamber (SE
III). The detector is also placed on the side of the sample, and therefore receives a higher
number of SEs from surfaces facing the detector, and those areas are brighter in the resulting
image [31]. This creates a shadowing eﬀect in SE images, and the resulting image looks as if
a light is shining on the sample from an angle. The ETD shows strong sample topography
19
==PAGE:25==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
contrast because of this eﬀect. Some BSEs are also detected by the ETD– those coming from
surfaces facing the detector, contributing to slight orientation contrast in the image.
3.3.2
Through the Lens Detector (TLD)
The in-lens detector, or TLD, also detects secondary electrons, but only SE Is and SE IIs,
which reduces the amount of noise as compared to imaging with the ETD, which also gathers
signal from SE IIIs and BSEs. The in-lens detector is located close to the objective lens, which
projects a magnetic ﬁeld into the chamber of the SEM, which in turn traps SE Is and SE IIs,
and they spiral up the column and through the lens [31]. Although this detector cannot image
sample topography as well as the ETD due to its placement in the column, it can visualize
sharp edges and clear details on the sample. This enhancement of details also holds true for
contamination and scratches on the sample surface – these can both be seen clearly with the
in-lens detector.
Figure 3.4: Location of detectors within the SEM chamber and column. The green component is the mirror
detector, where BSEs that travel close to the optic axis are detected. The blue component represents the TLD.
The purple component is the mirror adjuster, oﬀwhich SEs and BSEs are deﬂected toward the TLD, when
using the TLD to image. The yellow component shows the suction tube, the voltage of which can be changed
to create an energy ﬁlter specifying which electrons will be attracted into the pole piece. The CBS detector is
shown in red, with the three segments on each side representing the three concentric rings of the detector.
20
==PAGE:26==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
The TLD can also be modiﬁed in regard to which electrons it chooses to collect.
This
is accomplished by adjusting the suction tube voltage and the mirror adjuster. At negative
suction tube voltages, the detector repels low energy SEs, and therefore only detects BSEs. At
positive voltages, SEs are collected. The voltage can be adjusted from -150V to detect only
BSEs to +150V to detect SEs, and the maximum setting is 244.7V. The mirror detector is
used to deﬂect the path of incoming SEs toward the TLD, and can also convert high energy
incoming BSEs into SEs when the TLD is set to backscatter mode [36]. A diagram showing
the location of the TLD, MD, suction tube, and the CBS detector (which will be discussed in
the next section) in the chamber can be found in Figure 3.4 [37].
3.3.3
Backscatter Detector
The BSE detector is inserted just under the pole piece, and therefore directly above the sample
surface. This allows for a wide collection angle as BSEs are emitted from the sample material.
As discussed in earlier sections, BSEs give atomic number (Z) and orientation contrast. More
BSEs are created when incident electrons hit atoms with larger nuclei, or higher atomic number,
therefore giving a higher BSE signal and brighter hues in areas where heavier elements are
present. Orientation contrast arises due to the fact that BSEs are likely to be deﬂected straight
back up out of the sample.
This means that a surface oriented perfectly ﬂat with respect
to the detector will produce a high BSE signal, and this region will appear bright on the ﬁnal
micrograph, whereas the detector will detect fewer BSEs from another orientation on the sample
tilted slightly oﬀaxis.
21
==PAGE:27==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
Figure 3.5: The concentric backscatter (CBS) detector shown at a side view and top view, showing the
concentric rings and segmented nature of the rings.
This detector is usually made up of a few concentric rings, and in some SEMs the rings
are segmented into 3 or 4 sections. This segmentation allows the user to sepcify the angular
range of BSEs detected. This detector will be referred to as the CBS, or concentric backscatter
detector. The placement of the CBS detector in the chamber can be seen in Figure 3.4, and a
top view showing the rings and segmentation of the detector can be found in Figure 4.2.
22
==PAGE:28==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
4
Experimental Methods
4.1
Sample Details
The sample used in this thesis was fabricated at the Microsoft Quantum Materials Laboratory.
The growth process is detailed step by step in Figure 4.1. A layer of silicon oxide was ﬁrst
deposited on a commercially fabricated GaAs(001) substrate. On top of the oxide, a resist was
deposited. Speciﬁc areas of the resist were then stripped away according to a chip design via
electron beam lithography (EBL). The sample was then etched according to the same design, in
order to selectively remove the oxide layer and expose the original substrate material, creating
trenches in which the nanostructures could then grow.
Figure 4.1: Growth process of nanowires. 1) GaAs(001) substrate, 2) silicon oxide layer deposited on the
substrate, 3) resist layer deposited on the silicon oxide, 4) resist selectively stripped using EBL, 5) exposed
areas of silicon oxide were then etched, creating trenches where the original substrate material is exposed, 6)
remainder of resist removed, 7) ﬁrst buﬀer layer, GaAs(Sb) deposited via MBE, 8) second buﬀer layer, InGaAs
deposited via MBE, and 9) top layer, InAs deposited via MBE. Sample was grown by Daria Beznasyuk,
postdoctoral researcher at Niels Bohr Institute.
The remaining resist was then removed, and the sample was moved into the MBE chamber.
23
==PAGE:29==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
Throughout the entirety of the MBE process, the sample was kept at a temperature of 522oC.
In the MBE vacuum system, GaAs(Sb) was ﬁrst deposited for 1800 seconds at 670oC, followed
by InGaAs for 3600 seconds at 580oC, then InAs for 2400 seconds at 580oC.
4.1.1
Lattice Mismatch
The lattice constant of the substrate material, GaAs, is 5.65Å, and that of InAs is 6.05Å. The
relative composition of the In and Ga in the InGaAs layer was measured via both XRD and
EELS, and gave results of In0.84Ga0.16As and In0.61Ga0.39As, respectively. If the XRD data is
taken to be true, the lattice mismatch between the GaAs and InGaAs layers is ≈4%, and the
mismatch between the InGaAs and InAs layers is ≈3%. If the EELS data is taken to be true,
the mismatch between GaAs and InGaAs is ≈6% and that between InGaAs and InAs is ≈1%.
4.2
Electron Channeling Pattern
The SEM used to obtain all of the micrographs in this paper is the FEI Verios G4 SEM. The
ECP was ﬁrst obtained from a plain GaAs(001) substrate, with the wide area method. A plain
substrate was used instead of the actual sample, because the presence of the oxide layer from
the actual sample would have worsened the resolution of the channeling pattern. The FEI
Verios has a limited ﬁeld of view once the CBS detector is inserted, therefore in order to create
the ﬁnal channeling pattern, several micrographs were obtained then stitched together to get
an increased ﬁeld of view.
4.2.1
Beam and Stage Conditions
The ECP was acquired at 25kV, 3.2nA current, 8mm working distance, and the lowest mag-
niﬁcation possible.
The CBS detector was used for imaging, which when inserted into the
chamber, sits less than 500µm under the pole piece. This gap between the detector and pole
piece, coupled with the relatively small size of the central hole of the detector, further narrows
the ﬁeld of view by creating a ring around the viewing screen at the lowest magniﬁcation, as
seen in Figure 4.2. After increasing the magniﬁcation so that the detector is out of view, 150x
is the lowest magniﬁcation at which the incoming signal comes only from the substrate.
24
==PAGE:30==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
Figure 4.2: The white circle covering much of this image shows the CBS detector minimizing the ﬁeld of
view of the SEM at the lowest allowable magniﬁcation. The black border outside of the white circle is the
SEM’s standard ﬁeld of view, or the bottom opening of the pole piece. This micrograph was not used as a
part of the ECP shown later. Scale bar: 1mm.
All segments of the CBS detector were active when acquiring the ECP. A high acceleration
voltage was chosen because the higher the accelerating voltage, the larger the scan angle,
therefore sweeping a larger area of the sample and revealing more of the pattern [38]. The
maximum allowable voltage on the instrument used is 30kV, at which point much of the contrast
is gone, so 25kV was used. The current was chosen according to the guidelines laid out by Joy
and Newbury [38], which specify an incident current of 10−8A for a visual scan rate, and 10−9A
for a relatively long scan rate. A dwell time (scan rate) of 5 microseconds was used to obtain
the channeling pattern in Figure 4.3, so a current 3.2nA seemed a reasonable choice. A working
distance of 5mm was chosen after a trial and error process to see which resulted in the clearest
Kikuchi lines.
4.2.2
Stage Position
Due to the limited angular range of the SEM used, the sample had to be progressively tilted and
rotated in order to bring diﬀerent areas of the channeling pattern into view. This resulted in
25
==PAGE:31==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
a series of micrographs that were then stitched together, revealing the full channeling pattern
shown in Figure 4.3. The stage was ﬁrst rotated so that the [1-10] direction (major ﬂat of
the substrate) was aligned to the horizontal in the viewing screen. An initial micrograph was
obtained at the original stage position, at 0o tilt and 0o rotation. From there, the stage was
tilted to 1o, 2o, 3o, and 4o, with a micrograph acquired at each step. This was repeated at tilt
angles of -1o, -2o, -3o, and -4o. This created the vertical set of images in the ECP. The stage
was then rotated 45o clockwise, and micrographs were then acquired at the same tilt angles.
This process was repeated with the stage rotated to 90o and 135o, clockwise with respect to
the initial position in which the major ﬂat was aligned to the horizontal.
a)
b)
Figure 4.3: a) The experimental channeling pattern of the GaAs(001) substrate, in which each frame was
obtained with speciﬁc tilt and rotation coordinates. The angles written in blue represent the rotation angles of
that column of frames, and those in black are the tilt angles for the column of frames obtained at 0o rotation.
The same tilt angles apply for each column of frames relating to a rotation angle. b) An indexed illustration of
bands appearing in ECP of (001) oriented surface [39].
4.2.3
Indexing the Pattern
After stitching together the micrographs to show a suﬃcient area of the channeling pattern, the
ECP was indexed to assign each band to its respective plane. This was done by comparing the
26
==PAGE:32==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
experimental pattern with the known pattern of a (001) oriented surface, as shown in Figure
4.3b. All eight bands shown can be found in the experimental pattern in Figure 4.3a.
4.3
ECCI
4.3.1
Parameters
The SEM parameters used for high magniﬁcation imaging of the nanowires were the following:
an acceleration voltage of 20kV, a current of 0.1nA, a working distance of 5mm, and a dwell
time of 30µs. These parameters were chosen after a careful analysis of other successful ECCI
studies with similar materials. The contrast and brightness were were set to approximately
80% and 4%, respectively.
4.3.2
Nanowires Studied
Since the motivation of this study was to further investigate the faint dark lines that consistently
appeared in SE micrographs of [1-10] oriented (horizontal on an (001) substrate) nanowires,
these wires were the focus of the study. There are two main areas of the chips used in this study
that are relevant to note, both of which contain NWs oriented in the [1-10] direction. The ﬁrst
area, which will be referred to as Region 1, is an array of 50 nanowires, each 230 nm wide, 40
µm long, and 600 nm apart. A micrograph showing the entire array can be found in Figure
4.4a. The second area, shown in Figure 4.4b, which will be referred to as Region 2, is a 2x4
array of structures, each of which includes 4 nanowires. In this array, the top two structures,
with the thinnest wires, will be referred to as 1FE2 and 2FE2, left and right respectively. The
bottom two structures have the thickest wires, and will be called 1FE5 and 2FE5, again left
and right respectively. The structures in Region 2 are labeled in Figure 4.4b. Both regions
were used to investigate defects arising in nanowires grown in the [1-10] direction.
27
==PAGE:33==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
a) Region 1. Scale bar shows 20
microns.
b) Region 2. Scale bar shows 30
microns.
Figure 4.4: The two areas of the chip containing [1-10] NWs.
4.3.3
Region 1: Reverse Engineered ECCI
When performing traditional ECCI, the ECP is used to ﬁrst align the center of the viewing
screen with a band of interest at low magniﬁcation, by tilting and rotating the sample to trans-
late and rotate the pattern about the zone axis, respectively. This is done because maximum
channeling occurs when the optic axis is aligned to the Kikuchi line (the edge of the band) [39].
"Maximum channeling" implies that the incident beam electrons are traveling almost parallel
to the lattice planes, and the majority of them are therefore traveling deep into the crystal
before being backscattered, thus reducing the BSE signal emitted. At this angle of incidence,
when the magniﬁcation is increased, the background of the live image is dark, and defects in the
lattice will abruptly change the trajectory of the incident electrons that had been channeling
into the crystal moments before. This will increase the local BSE intensity as incident beam
electrons are scattered back out of the sample, appearing as bright features on an otherwise
dark background. Unfortunately, due to the poor resolution of the experimental channeling
pattern and its Kikuchi lines, the pattern could not be relied on to accurately position the
optic axis with respect to a particular plane of interest. Therefore, a preliminary study was
conducted as an alternate way to observe and categorize defects in the [1-10] nanowires.
The study constituted reverse engineering the process of standard ECCI. Considering the
low resolution of the ECP, the standard ECCI process would not allow for consistent accurate
positioning of crystal with respect to the optic axis. Instead, the sample was ﬁrst tilted to
an arbitrary angle of 5o, then rotated over a range of 360 degrees, with high magniﬁcation
28
==PAGE:34==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
micrographs taken in the grower region at increments of 5o of rotation. The goal was to see
how the defect contrast in the nanowires changed over this range of angles, and what defects,
if any, became bright at various angles of rotation.
a) Path of e−beam at 5o tilt and
through 360o of rotation.
b) Bands corresponding to the (110)
family of planes highlighted in red.
c) Bands corresponding to the (100)
family of planes highlighted in red.
d) Bands corresponding to the (013)
family of planes highlighted in red.
Figure 4.5: Each purple dot represents a speciﬁc rotation angle (at 5o tilt) where the beam satisﬁes the
Bragg condition relative to the plane corresponding to the highlighted Kikuchi line.
Figure 4.5 shows a simulated version of the channeling pattern, generated by a software
29
==PAGE:35==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
called TOCA (Tools for Orientation Determination and Crystallographic Analysis, also used
by Zaeﬀerer et. al. [40]). In Figure 4.5a, the blue circle represents the path of the beam along
the ECP as the sample is tilted to 5o, and as it rotates through a 360o range. The top notch,
as labeled, represents the location of the beam at 5o tilt and 0o rotation. At speciﬁc rotation
angles, the optic axis intersects with speciﬁc bands, each of which correspond to a speciﬁc
crystal plane. Figure 4.5 shows the points at which the beam aligns with particular planes.
As the sample was rotated incrementally and the nanowires in Region 1 were imaged at
high magniﬁcation, many of the rotation angles coincided with rotation angles at which the
optic axis intersected with a Kikuchi line associated with a plane. The purpose of this study
was to correlate the defect contrast seen in a nanowire with the corresponding position of the
beam on the channeling pattern. This way, the orientation of the sample could be known at
angles showing strong defect contrast at high magniﬁcation. A simulated pattern was used here
because several more bands could be resolved than in the experimental channeling pattern, and
because tilt and rotation angles could also be simulated in TOCA.
4.3.4
Region 2: SE and BSE Imaging
In Region 2, only the second column of structures were analyzed via ECCI (i.e. 2FE1-2FE5).
Of this column of ﬁve structures, the three with the thickest nanowires, namely 2FE3, 2FE4,
and 2FE5, showed the best overall image and nanowire quality, so the focus of this portion of
the study is on these three structures. These nanowires were imaged at 5o tilt and 18o rotation,
due to the clear defect contrast that arose in the Region 1 nanowires at those stage coordinates.
The structures were each imaged with the TLD in immersion mode, and with the CBS detector.
Each structure (2FE3, 2FE4, 2FE5) was imaged at 5o tilt and 18o rotation with the CBS
detector and with the TLD in both SE and BSE modes. The "mode" of the TLD was switched
from SE to BSE by changing the suction tube voltage and the mirror angle. The suction tube
voltage manages the energy of the electrons collected, with a negative voltage repelling low
energy SEs and a positive voltage attracting low energy SEs. The higher the voltage is on the
positive side, the more low energy SEs are collected [36].
30
==PAGE:36==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
Table 4.1: Stage and detector settings used to image Region 2 structures (2FE3, 2FE4, and 2FE5).
CBS
TLD
Default BSE
TLD
Default SE
TLD
Custom SE
TLD
Down-hole Visibility
0o T
0o R
x
x
5o T
18o R
x
x
x
x
x
Table 4.2: Detector settings used to image Region 2 structures (2FE3, 2FE4, and 2FE5).
CBS
TLD
Default BSE
TLD
Default SE
TLD
Custom SE
TLD
Down-hole Visibility
Suction Tube
Voltage (V)
n/a
-50
70
150
244.7
Mirror (o)
n/a
0
-15
-15
-15
The structures in Region 2 were imaged by the TLD in four diﬀerent modes: 1) the default
SE setting, 2) a custom SE setting, 3)the default BSE setting, and 4) down-hole visibility. The
default suction tube voltage and mirror angle settings for the SE and BSE modes are: 70V, -15o;
and -150V, 0o, respectively. The custom SE setting had a suction tube voltage of 150V with the
mirror at -15o. This setting was used to see the diﬀerence, if any, in the defect contrast when
more low energy SEs are accepted into the detector. The ﬁnal setting, down-hole visibility, has
a suction tube voltage of 244.7V (the maximum allowable setting) and a mirror angle of -15o.
The goal of this setting is to accept the most low energy electrons by setting the suction tube
voltage as high as possible, which results in a micrograph showing clear signal from the deepest
crevices, thus the name of the setting "down-hole visibility".
The structures were also imaged at 0o tilt and 0o rotation in the default SE and BSE modes
of the TLD, in order to analyze the diﬀerence in defect contrast when the stage is in its original
position versus when it is tilted and rotated to promote channeling in a speciﬁc plane (i.e. (220)
at 5o tilt, 18o rotation).
Lastly, the defect density was calculated in the same area of each of the three structures to
compare across the structures, which vary in thickness.
31
==PAGE:37==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
5
Results and Discussion
5.1
ECP
The channeling pattern seen in Figure 4.3 was made as a proof of concept, but this ECP was
not used for its traditional role in ECCI – to orient the beam with respect to the lattice, in
order to align it with a particular plane. The simulated patterns from TOCA were instead used
to calculate the location of the beam on the pattern, according to the stage tilt and rotation
angles at which various micrographs were obtained.
5.2
ECCI
5.2.1
Interaction Volume
Figure 5.1: Result of the MonteCarlo simulation, showing the interaction volume of a 20kV electron beam in
the sample. Blue lines indicate SE trajectories, and red lines represent BSE trajectories.
32
==PAGE:38==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
When investigating atomic scale defects at high resolution in the SEM, it is important to know
from what volume within the sample the signal originates. This was veriﬁed by a MonteCarlo
simulation using the Casino v2.0 software, the result of which is shown in Figure 5.1. The
relative depths of the buﬀer layers were estimated from a similar sample upon which cross
sectional TEM had been done. The simulation shows that a 20kV beam fully penetrates the
sample, and the backscattered signal (red lines) comes from a depth of approximately 480nm,
which is well into the substrate material. It can therefore be concluded that any defect contrast
seen in micrographs obtained using an acceleration voltage of 20kV or higher, arising from
either BSE or SE signal, can come from anywhere throughout the sample, since all layers are
penetrated.
5.2.2
Defect Contrast over 360o Rotation
In Region 1, it was assumed that all nanowires in the array would have the same defect contrast
and density along their length, due to the similarity in dimensions from one nanowire to the
next, and due to their localization to an area of about 40 x 40µm on the chip (see Figure 4.4a for
reference). It was therefore considered to be non-essential for this portion of the study to image
the exact same location, or even nanowire, in order to compare the defect contrast from one
rotation angle to the next. This assumption helped to avoid excessive carbon contamination on
just one area of the region due to the high volume of micrographs taken using a high acceleration
voltage and long scan rates.
This study was used as preparation to investigate Region 2, because the same defects could
be expected to arise at similar stage settings in nanowires of the same orientation. It also
constituted a sanity check, to conﬁrm that rotation angles resulting in the alignment of the
optic axis to the same band on the ECP would show consistency in defect contrast. Appendix
A contains all images of the nanowires throughout the full 360o rotation, from 3o to 358o, at
increments of 5o.
At a tilt of 5o, the ranges of rotation angles that showed the nanowire as having distinct
features were the following. From 13o to 25o, several bright triangular planes can be seen along
the horizontal nanowire, facing both left and right, and overlapping many times. The same
features reappear at 158o-168o, 193o-198o, and 343o-353o, all of which are rotation angles that
coincide with the beam being aligned to the (2-20) and (-220) bands.
33
==PAGE:39==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
Figure 5.2: Micrographs of individual NWs from Region 1, all taken at 5o tilt, with the rotation angles
shown to the left of the nanowires. On the right, purple dots on the simulated ECP represent the location of
the optic axis relative to the pattern at rotation angles 13o, 18o, 23o, and 25o.
Figure 5.3: Micrographs of individual NWs from Region 1, all taken at 5o tilt, with the rotation angles
shown to the left of the nanowires. On the right, purple dots on the simulated ECP represent the location of
the optic axis relative to the pattern at rotation angles 158o, 163o, and 168o.
Figure 5.2 shows the defect contrast along the nanowires, and the position of the incident
beam’s optic axis on the channeling pattern when the sample is tilted to 5o and rotated from
34
==PAGE:40==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
13o-25o. The simulated ECP shows that the beam is aligned to, or is very close to aligning to
the (2-20) band on the channeling pattern at these angles. Figure 5.3 shows the defect contrast
and position of the beam at 5o tilt and at rotation angles of 158o-168o. At these angles, the
beam is also aligned to the (2-20) band on the ECP. In Figure 5.5, at all angles of rotation
shown, the beam is aligned to the (-220) band, as shown in the simulated channeling pattern.
The triangular planes seen in Figures 5.2, 5.3, and 5.5, are defects that become visible when
the incident beam is aligned to either the (2-20) or the (-220) band.
These defects seem to be planar defects, as they are fully shaded in bright triangles, meaning
the BSE intensity is higher across the whole plane of the triangle. As seen in Figure 5.1, the
BSE signal contains information from deep within the sample, all the way into the substrate
material. This means that a planar defect arising in any of the layers of the nanowire would
still be visible at this acceleration voltage and at the speciﬁc rotation angles shown in Figures
5.2, 5.3, and 5.5.
Figure 5.4: Schematic of [1-10] nanowire showing the particular planes in the {111} family from which these
defects arise. Side and top view shown for further understanding.
Stacking faults are a type of planar defect often observed in heteroepitaxial III-V semicon-
ductor compounds, and especially in selective area growths, where the trenches can trap {111}
defects [5] [41] [42]. Slip occurs between the closest packed atomic planes, and in FCC crystals,
these are the {111} planes. The slip direction is <110>, and very rarely occurs in another
direction [20]. Figure 5.4 shows a schematic of a [1-10] nanowire, and the two {111} planes in
which slip could occur and then create the triangular-shaped defects seen in Figures 5.2, 5.3,
and 5.5. These two planes are (-111) and (1-11), and along a nanowire of this particular shape
and orientation, they would appear as triangular, and leaning left and right along the length
of the nanowire, respectively. As one atomic layer slides over another in the {111} plane, a
35
==PAGE:41==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
stacking fault is formed [20]. The triangular defects will therefore be assumed to be stacking
faults, and will henceforth be referred to as such.
Figure 5.5: Micrographs of individual NWs from Region 1, all taken at 5o tilt, with the rotation angles
shown to the left of the nanowires. On the right, purple dots on the simulated ECP represent the location of
the optic axis relative to the pattern at rotation angles 193o, 198o, and 343o - 353o.
To mathematically conﬁrm the visibility of (-111) and (1-11) stacking faults at the (2-20)
and (-220) diﬀraction conditions, the well-known invisibility criterion can be used:
−→g · −→
b = 0
(5.1)
where −→g is the diﬀraction vector, and −→
b is the Burgers vector of the defect. If the dot
product of the two vectors is equal to zero, then the defect will be invisible at that diﬀraction
condition. If the product does not equal zero, then the defect will be visible.
In order to utilize the invisibility criterion, the Burgers vector of the stacking faults seen
must ﬁrst be determined. Stacking faults are bound by what are called partial dislocations,
36
==PAGE:42==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
which act as the boundary line of a planar fault. In other words, when a stacking fault ends
in a crystal, the boundary separating the fault from the remaining perfect crystal, is a partial
dislocation. Partial dislocations allow for an easier, lower energy path of dislocation movement
than that of a perfect dislocation. There are two types of partial dislocations that form stacking
faults in FCC crystals: Shockley partials and Frank partials.
The slip direction of {111} planes in FCC crystals is <110>, so the Burgers vector of a
perfect dislocation in the {111} plane would be of the form 1
2 <110>. For heteroepitaxial zinc
blende semiconductors grown in the (001) orientation, there are speciﬁcally eight active slip
systems. These slip systems can be categorized by the line vector of their misﬁt dislocations;
half of which have a line vector of [110], and the other half [1-10]. For the nanowires under
investigation, the line vector of the dislocations is [110], and the glide planes are (-111) and
(1-11). Possible Burgers vectors for these four slip systems are:
1
2[101], 1
2[01-1], 1
2[10-1], and
1
2[011] [43].
Considering any one of these Burgers vectors as the perfect dislocation, Shockley partials
form as it dissociates into two partial dislocations, both of which have the form 1
6 <112>. For
example, if b1 is the perfect dislocation and b2 and b3 are the subsequent partial dislocations,
the reaction would be as follows:
−→
b1 = −→
b2 + −→
b3
(5.2)
1
2 < 101 >= 1
6 < 112 > +1
6 < 211 >
(5.3)
This is just one possible reaction, but if any of the possible Shockley partials were the
Burgers vector of the stacking faults seen in Figures 5.2, 5.3, and 5.5, then the dot product
with the −→g , namely [2-20] and [-220], should not equal zero, because the defects are visible at
these diﬀraction conditions. This is true.
A Frank partial dislocation is an alternative way in which a stacking fault can end within a
crystal. Frank partials form as an intrinsic (missing plane) or extrinsic (extra plane) stacking
fault is directly nucleated through the diﬀusion of vacancies, interstitials, or impurities. The
Burgers vector of a Frank partial is normal to the {111} plane of the stacking fault, and has a
magnitude of 1
3 due to the change in spacing that results from the removal or addition of one
atomic layer in the ABCABCABC stacking sequence: b= 1
3 <111>. Since it is known that
the stacking faults observed in the Region 1 nanowires are in the (-111) and (1-11) planes, the
Burgers vector for a Frank partial in this speciﬁc case would be b= 1
3 (-111) or 1
3 (1-11). Frank
37
==PAGE:43==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
partials are edge dislocations. If the Burgers vector of the Frank partial was indeed the Burgers
vector of the stacking faults in Figures 5.2, 5.3, and 5.5, then the dot product of these vectors
by either diﬀraction vector [2-20] or [-220] should not equal zero. This is true.
Thus far, it has been determined that the stacking faults seen in the Region 1 nanowires
can either be bound by Shockley partials or Frank partials. Since the dot product of either
Burgers vector −→
b , Shockley or Frank, with either diﬀraction vector −→g , [2-20] and [-220], does
not equal zero– at this point in the analysis, the Shockley or Frank partial is equally possible
as the Burgers vector of the stacking faults seen in Region 1 nanowires.
Now looking at Figures 5.6 and 5.7, the beam is aligned to the (220) and (-2-20) bands in
the simulated ECP, and the triangular defects are entirely gone, indicating that the Burgers
vector of the stacking faults should now satisfy the invisibility criterion (Equation 5.1).
Figure 5.6: Micrographs of individual NWs from Region 1, all taken at 5o tilt, with the rotation angles
shown to the left of the nanowires. On the right, purple dots on the simulated ECP represent the location of
the optic axis relative to the pattern at rotation angles 73o - 83o.
First, plugging the Shockley partial’s Burgers vector and the diﬀraction vector [220] into
Equation 5.1 results in:
1
6 < 112 > ·[220] ̸= 0
(5.4)
38
==PAGE:44==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
Since this does not equal zero, the Burgers vector of the stacking fault cannot be that of
the Shockley partial.
Figure 5.7: Micrographs of individual NWs from Region 1, all taken at 5o tilt, with the rotation angles
shown to the left of the nanowires. On the right, purple dots on the simulated ECP represent the location of
the optic axis relative to the pattern at rotation angles 98o, 103o, and 283o.
Next, the Burgers vector of the Frank partial will be plugged into Equation 5.1, resulting
in:
[111] · [220] = 0
(5.5)
[111] · [220] = 0
(5.6)
Both possibilities of the Frank partial’s Burgers vector; that belonging to the (-111) plane
and the (1-11) plane, result in satisfying the invisibility criterion. It can thus be concluded that
the triangular defects are indeed stacking faults bounded by Frank partial dislocations.
5.2.3
Defect Contrast in SE vs. BSE Modes
Next, diﬀerences in defect contrast and overall image quality were compared when imaging the
structures in SE and BSE modes. Region 2 structures were used for this comparison, namely
39
==PAGE:45==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
2FE3, 2FE4, and 2FE5. First, the stage was tilted and rotated to 5o and 18o, respectively. This
was done due to the ﬁnding in the previous section that this tilt and rotation angle resulted
in an alignment of the electron beam with the (2-20) diﬀraction condition, resulting in strong
contrast of stacking faults oriented in the (-111) and (1-11) planes. The Region 2 structures
were imaged via BSEs and SEs; the former accomplished using the CBS detector and the TLD
in BSE mode, and the latter using the TLD in three diﬀerent SE modes. The detector settings
for the TLD modes can be found in Table 4.2 in the experimental section.
Each structure was imaged in all ﬁve modes. The micrographs have been cropped to show
the same portion of the bottom nanowire in each structure (of the total four nanowires in
each structure). These are shown side by side for the reader’s convenience, so that the defect
contrast in the diﬀerent modes can be directly compared.
Figure 5.8: 2FE3 structure, left half of bottom nanowire. From top to bottom, the detector settings are:
CBS, TLD BSE mode, TLD SE mode, TLD custom SE mode, TLD down-hole visibility.
40
==PAGE:46==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
In the 2FE3 structure, the ﬁrst BSE micrograph in Figure 5.8 was obtained using the CBS
detector. It shows bright lines curving to the left and right along the length of the nanowire.
The contrast here between the defect planes and the nanowire itself is strong, but the drawback
here is that a signiﬁcant portion of the lateral edges of the nanowire is shrouded from view due
to BSEs’ lack of topographic information. The second BSE micrograph, obtained with the TLD
in BSE mode, shows the full nanowire including its edges, and also shows clear contrast from
the same defects as in the ﬁrst BSE micrograph, but with much better resolution.
In the micrograph obtained using the TLD in default SE mode, the defects are still visible,
but blur somewhat as compared to the wire imaged with the TLD in BSE mode. They are still
visible, but have less sharp of a change in contrast at the edge of the defect. The diﬀerence
between the third and fourth micrograph, the latter having been obtained using the TLD in a
custom SE mode (STV: 150V, M: -15o), is less obvious. There are slight diﬀerences between the
two micrographs, the one in custom SE mode showing very slightly improved defect resolution
and even revealing a few defects that were not visible in the default SE mode. Lastly, the
nanowire shown at the bottom of the row, imaged by in down-hole visibility mode, shows
poorer defect contrast than both of the other SE micrographs, fading some of the bright planes
into the background of the nanowire.
The micrographs of 2FE4 show a similar trend in defect contrast to what was seen in 2FE3.
The top nanowire in Figure 5.9 shows a BSE image collected by the CBS detector, in which the
edges of the nanowire are again in shadow, and only a thin slice at the middle of the nanowire is
visible. Still, there are bright triangular planes pointing to the left and right, with no obvious
pattern. The diﬀerence in the shape of these bright lines between 2FE3 and 2FE4 can be
attributed to the morphology of the nanowire from the latter structure being more sharply
triangular due to having less of a top facet than the former. In other words, the portion of the
2FE4 nanowire shown in Figure 5.9 has a more pointy, triangular shape than the portion of
2FE3 shown in Figure 5.8, which has a softer, curved shape.
Compared to the CBS detector image, the next four micrographs in Figure 5.9 obtained
using the TLD have signiﬁcantly better resolution regarding revealing the morphology of the
nanowire, clearly showing the edges, top facet, and topography along the wire. The BSE image
collected by the TLD shows more defects than by the CBS detector, mainly because the bulge
midway through the portion of the nanowire shown obscures a few defects from view in the
CBS image. The TLD SE micrograph at default settings (third from the top of Figure 5.9)
shows a slight fading in the sharpness of the defect lines. A few defects around the bulge are no
41
==PAGE:47==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
longer clearly visible to the eye, as they were in the TLD BSE micrograph. The custom TLD
mode shows essentially the same level of defect contrast in the nanowire as TLD SE mode does.
The ﬁnal row micrograph, taken with the TLD in down-hole visibility mode, shows a slightly
darker image, with all the defects still discernible.
Figure 5.9: 2FE4 structure, left half of bottom nanowire. From top to bottom, the detector settings are:
CBS, TLD BSE mode, TLD SE mode, TLD custom SE mode, TLD down-hole visibility.
The images in Figure 5.10 show 2FE5’s bottom-most nanowire. The ﬁrst from the top is
a BSE micrograph obtained by the CBS detector. Defects here cannot be seen well, but there
are some blurred bright areas which could indicate the presence of defects. The second BSE
image just below, taken using the TLD, more clearly shows the presence of defects. The defects
appear as bright lines along the top facet, which is dark in comparison. The defects do not
visibly extend past the top facet and down the sloping sides of the nanowire, as they did in
2FE3 and 2FE4, eventually intersecting with the bright edges of the nanowire on either side.
42
==PAGE:48==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
The third image, a micrograph obtained using the TLD in default SE mode, shows the defects
fading even into the top facet, where they were somewhat clear in the TLD image above, in
BSE mode. The defects are very slightly more resolved in the custom TLD mode than in the
default SE mode, and the patchy change in contrast along the nanowire in down-hole visibility
mode makes it diﬃcult to discern many of the defects which were visible in other modes.
Figure 5.10: 2FE5 structure, left half of bottom nanowire. From top to bottom, the detector settings are:
CBS, TLD BSE mode, TLD SE mode, TLD custom SE mode, TLD down-hole visibility.
Considering all the micrographs obtained, there was a major diﬀerence between the signal
obtained by the CBS vs. that obtained by the TLD. While both display visible defect contrast,
the CBS micrographs show only a fraction of the central spine of the nanowire, with the edges
along the length of the wire in shadow. In addition, much, if not all of the topological contrast is
43
==PAGE:49==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
gone. The TLD micrographs show defect contrast while maintaining the topographical contrast
characteristic of secondary electron detectors.
Among the micrographs obtained using the TLD– regardless of the mode and in all of the
structures shown in Figures 5.8, 5.9, and 5.10– there was not a single mode that constituted
a major diﬀerence in defect contrast, or overall image quality. Even comparing the TLD BSE
micrographs to their corresponding SE micrographs, the defect contrast did not change in a
major way. As discussed earlier, defects are local changes in a crystal lattice. This constitutes
information about the orientation of the sample material, which is information known to be
carried by the BSE signal. SEIIs are also known to carry orientational information because
they are created as BSEs exit the sample. The reason for almost equally visible defect contrast
in SE micrographs must mean that they are either primarily composed of SEII signal, or some
other signal that carries diﬀraction information.
The only factors changed from one TLD mode to the next were the suction tube voltage
and the angle of the mirror. For reference, see Figure 3.4 for the setup of the suction tube
and mirror, and their relative placement in the column. The suction tube voltage is adjusted
to either attract or repel electrons with varying energies into the pole piece, and the mirror is
used to help deﬂect the path of those incoming electrons toward the TLD. The suction tube
voltages (STV) and mirror angles for the various modes can be found in Table 4.2.
To reiterate, in BSE mode, the STV is set to -50V so that SEs will be repelled from entering
the column. In essence, this creates a high-pass energy ﬁlter, allowing only high energy BSEs
to pass into the column. The BSEs then travel up the column until impinging on the mirror,
which is at 0o, thus losing energy and becoming SEIIIs before being detected by the TLD at
the side of the column. In SE mode, the STV is set to 70V (default) or 150V (custom), thus
attracting low energy SEs, allowing them to travel up the column, and eventually be deﬂected
by the mirror (positioned at 15o) toward the TLD. In these modes, however, nothing is stopping
BSEs from also entering the column, and therefore the SEIII signal coming from BSEs hitting
the mirror is also contributing to the ﬁnal image in SE mode (conﬁrmed by [44]). The same
goes for down-hole visibility, when the STV is set to its maximum setting of 244.7V. Overall,
neither the STV nor the mirror angle seemed to have a signiﬁcant eﬀect on the signal collected
from the sample.
The TLD in the FEI Verios SEM is meant to be used in immersion mode for imaging at
high magniﬁcation, and was used for all micrographs in this thesis. Immersion mode creates a
strong magnetic ﬁeld that penetrates the specimen region, and forms a ﬁne probe by reducing
44
==PAGE:50==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
aberrations in the objective lens [45] [46]. Another eﬀect of this magnetic ﬁeld in the sample
region is a collimation of signal electrons to the optical axis [44]. In this way, a large part of
the signal electrons are guided into the OL, where they are processed further and detected.
Since this is the case, the strong magnetic ﬁeld created in immersion mode would thus have
the power to gather BSE signal emitted from the sample and guide it into the objective lens,
regardless of the suction tube setting. This would allow BSEs to then be deﬂected oﬀthe mirror
and create SEIIIs, which retain information about crystal orientation and therefore also about
defects. This detector was chosen over the ETD for SE imaging because the TLD can achieve
a higher resolution while maintaining topographic contrast [47].
5.2.4
Defect Contrast at 0T0R vs. 5T18R
The next variable changed, to see its eﬀect on defect contrast, was the angle of tilt and rotation.
The same Region 2 structures were used for this portion of the study (2FE3, 2FE4, and 2FE5).
While the study of Region 1 maintained the sample at 5o tilt, this part of the study compared
the defect contrast ﬁrst at 0o tilt and 0o rotation, then at 5o tilt and 18o rotation. Imaging was
done via the TLD in both default BSE mode and defailt SE mode.
The micrographs in BSE mode can be seen in Figure 5.11. The diﬀerence in defect contrast
between the two sets of tilt and rotation angles is quite stark in the TLD’s BSE mode. At 0o
tilt, 0o rotation, 2FE3 shows very faint dark defect lines in the usual triangular shape, 2FE4
also shows a few faint dark defect lines, and 2FE5 shows no discernible defect contrast. At
5o tilt, 18o rotation, all three structures clearly show several defects as bright lines along the
nanowire. The micrographs in SE mode can be found in Figure 5.12. Very few dark defect lines
can be seen at 0o tilt and rotation, whereas at 5o tilt and 18o rotation, again the defect lines
become bright, and several more of them are visible.
Now the question is, why are any defect lines visible at 0o tilt and 0o rotation? Some studies
have found that defect contrast is reversed when the beam is aligned to the -−→g diﬀraction vector
[48] [4], but as seen in the ﬁrst portion of the study, aligning to the (2-20) band vs. (-220) band
did not create a change in defect contrast – the stacking faults were still bright planes on a
darker background. The contrast of defects is known to change when the beam is oriented near
the edge of band [40] [48]. The deviation parameter, s, deﬁnes the deviation of the primary
beam from the exact Bragg condition. The edge of the band is at the Bragg condition, and
s≈0. When s<0, the beam is within the Kikuchi band, as is the case when the sample is tilted
and rotated to 0o. At this condition, defects show weak contrast on a bright background [48],
45
==PAGE:51==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
which could explain why some defects are faintly visible in the structures at 0o tilt and rotation.
Figure 5.11: Defect contrast in default BSE mode (TLD).
46
==PAGE:52==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
Figure 5.12: Defect contrast in default SE mode (TLD).
47
==PAGE:53==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
5.2.5
Defect Density by Nanowire Thickness
As displayed in prior sections, all three of the structures analyzed have a number of defects
across their length. In this section, the defect density in each structure was quantiﬁed and
compared. The width of the nanowires in each structure vary from 2FE3 with the thinnest
wires at about 202nm wide, to 2FE4 with 266nm thick nanowires, to the thickest nanowires in
2FE5, at approximately 338nm.
The defect density was calculated for each nanowire by ﬁrst counting the number of defects
seen along its length, then dividing that number by said length, resulting in units of defects
per micron. The micrographs used to count these defects were obtained using the TLD in BSE
mode, with the stage at 5o tilt and 18o rotation (the same micrographs seen in the second column
of Figure 5.11). These micrographs show the left side of the bottom two nanowires in each
structure, and were used in this portion of the study because they had the highest magniﬁcation
while maintaining resolution, allowing for maximum direct visibility of the defects.
In Figures 5.13, 5.14, and 5.15, the small red arrows point out bright defect lines in the
nanowires. The full structure is shown at the top left of each ﬁgure, with a red box around the
portion imaged in the larger, magniﬁed micrograph.
Figure 5.13: Defects in 2FE3. Scale bar in magniﬁed micrograph shows 500nm.
48
==PAGE:54==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
Figure 5.14: Defects in 2FE4. Scale bar in magniﬁed micrograph shows 500nm.
Figure 5.15: Defects in 2FE5. Scale bar in magniﬁed micrograph shows 500nm.
49
==PAGE:55==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
Defects in Figures 5.13, 5.14, and 5.15 were tallied and recorded in Table 5.1. All defects are
triangular, or v-shaped, pointing either left or right along the nanowire, and as shown earlier in
Figure 5.4 and again in Figure 5.16, those pointing right were characterized as (-111) stacking
faults, and those pointing left as (1-11) stacking faults. The lengths recorded for the nanowires
shown in each micrograph was measured using the ImageJ software. As each of the micrographs
show two nanowires from the structure, the defects and lengths of each nanowire were quantiﬁed
separately. Table 5.1 shows the defect counts from each nanowire, their respective lengths, and
the ﬁnal defect density found.
Figure 5.16: On a nanowire (shown in gray), the white v-shaped lines represent the defects, characterized as
stacking faults in the (-111) plane when pointing right, and (1-11) plane when pointing left.
Table 5.1: Defect densities as they appear in Figures 5.13, 5.14, and 5.15.
2FE3
2FE4
2FE5
Top NW
Bottom NW
Top NW
Bottom NW
Top NW
Bottom NW
(-111) stacking
faults
4
9
8
6
13
5
(1-11) stacking
faults
9
2
2
6
2
3
Total defects
13
11
10
12
15
8
Length of NW
over which defects
appeared (microns)
2.27
2.29
2.29
2.27
2.39
2.34
Defect density
(defects/micron)
5.7
4.8
4.4
5.3
6.3
3.4
The ﬁnal defect densities found, shown in the bottom row of Table 5.1 and plotted in Figure
5.17 seem to have no overall correlation to the widths of the nanowires.
50
==PAGE:56==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
Figure 5.17: Defect density of each nanowire in Figures 5.13-5.15.
The highest overall defect density was found in 2FE5’s top nanowire, while its bottom
nanowire had the lowest overall defect density. The top nanowires in both 2FE5 and 2FE3
had higher densities than their bottom nanowires, while 2FE4 had an opposite trend with its
bottom nanowire having the higher density. In regards to the width of the nanowires– with
2FE3 having the thinnest and 2FE5 the thickest– no trend in defect density emerges.
5.2.6
Veriﬁcation by TEM
A longitudinal cut of the 1FE3 structure was done via focused ion beam (FIB) in order to
conﬁrm the nature of the defects seen in prior sections. See Figure 5.18 for the location of the
cut. The full lamella is shown in Figure 5.19a, with a magniﬁed version of the right side of the
nanowire in Figure 5.19b. In the latter, clearly contrasted layers can be seen.
The layers are labeled with their respective compositions in Figure 5.20. The bottom-most
layer is the GaAs substrate, the thin dark layer is the silicon oxide mask, the cloudy gray
region just above it is the GaAs(Sb) buﬀer layer, then above that is the InGaAs buﬀer layer.
The grainy looking area overlapping the InGaAs layer is carbon, which was deposited by the
electron beam in order to create a darker contrast with the nanowire layers, and to see them
more clearly. This layer shrouds the top InAs layer from clearly being seen, but the location of
the InAs layer is still labeled in the ﬁgure. The lighter colored grainy area above the C is Pt,
also deposited by the electron beam.
51
==PAGE:57==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
Figure 5.18: Location of FIB cut in the 1FE3 structure. FIB and HRTEMs done by Martín Espiñeira, PhD
fellow at Niels Bohr Institute. Scale bar: 1 micron.
a) Full lamella resulting from the cut
in Figure 5.18. Scale bar: 1 micron.
b) Right side of the nanowire. Scale
bar: 180nm.
Figure 5.19: Longitudinal FIB cut of 2FE3.
52
==PAGE:58==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
Figure 5.20: Layers of the NW seen in longitudinal cross section. Scale bar: 100nm.
Figure 5.21a shows a high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) micrograph, in which the layers of
the nanowire are again seen as in Figure 5.20. The image in Figure 5.21b is a Fast-Fourier
Transform (FFT) derived from the HRTEM image in a) by the software ImageJ. The FFT
shows a spot pattern, which is comparable to the diﬀraction pattern that a crystalline material
would produce in a TEM with a parallel beam (the details of this are outside the scope of
this paper). The spots correlate to the periodicity of the crystal planes found in the HRTEM
micrograph in a), thereby conﬁrming the crystallinity of the nanowire. The zone axis here is
[110], and the spots have been labeled according to their corresponding planes. The vertical
streaks on some of the spots in this image are artifacts of the processing [49]. In Figure 5.21c,
two of the spots in the FFT have been selected, and the inverse FFT of these peaks was
calculated, resulting in the image in Figure 5.21d. The purpose of selecting these spots is to
highlight lattice discontinuities in the (1-11) and (-11-1) planes, if there are any to be found.
Figure 5.21d reveals that there are indeed a handful of discontinuities along these planes, giving
rise to what is recognizable as stacking faults in the (-111) planes.
53
==PAGE:59==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
a) HRTEM. Scale bar: 20nm.
b) FFT of HRTEM shown in a). Scale
bar: 2nm−1
c) Masked FFT. Scale bar: 2nm−1
d) Inverse FFT of c). Scale bar: 20nm
Figure 5.21: a) HRTEM micrograph of an area along the nanowire. b) FFT of the micrograph in a), with a
zone axis of [110] and the spot pattern labeled with its corresponding planes. c) FFT with (1-11) and (-11-1)
planes selected. d) Inverse FFT of c), revealing stacking faults in the (-111) plane.
Two of the stacking faults in Figure 5.21d cut through the InGaAs layer, while two others
arise in the GaAs(Sb) layer, and end before reaching the InGaAs buﬀer. There is one stacking
fault that seems to originate in the GaAs(Sb) buﬀer, and then end within the InGaAs layer.
54
==PAGE:60==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
Figure 5.22 is an inverse FFT of the InGaAs layer, where the same (1-11) and (-11-1) planes
were selected in the FFT. The periodicity of the (1-11) planes can be seen clearly throughout
the image, with the planes extending diagonally from the top left to the bottom right corner
of the image. Near the bottom right corner, there is a dark defect line visible, and at this
magniﬁcation it is possible to see the mismatch between the planes on either side of the defect
line, indicating a missing (-111) plane.
Figure 5.22: Inverse FFT of InGaAs layer, with (1-11) and (-11-1) peaks selected in the FFT. This reveals
discontinuities in these planes, all of which are seen constitute stacking faults in the (-111) plane.
55
==PAGE:61==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
Figure 5.23: Simulated crystal with equivalent orientation as in Figure 5.21.
Figure 5.24: A missing (-111) plane in the stacking sequence results in discontinuities in the (-11-1) planes.
56
==PAGE:62==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
Figure 5.23 shows the crystal orientation of the lamella, with the (-111) and (1-11) planes
displayed in pink and purple, respectively. The prominent dark lines seen in Figure 5.21d and
Figure 5.22 each constitute a missing (-111) plane, which create discontinuities in the (1-11)
lattice planes. Figure 5.24 shows the stacking sequence in the zinc-blende crystal structure,
and how a missing (-111) plane creates discontinuities in the (1-11) planes, just as in Figure
5.22.
Figure 5.25 shows other areas along the nanowire where stacking faults in the (-111) plane
orientation appear. The images shown are all inverse FFTs where the spots representing the
(1-11) and (-11-1) planes were selected in the FFT of the original micrograph. Some of the
stacking faults can be seen extending through the GaAs(Sb) layer and past the InGaAs layer,
others begin and end within the GaAs(Sb) layer, and yet others start in the InGaAs layer and
extend towards the top of the nanowire, potentially through the InAs layer. The dark splotches
at the bottom derive from the thin amorphous layer of silicon oxide that made its way into
the lamella, and the dark region at the top of the right image in Figure 5.25 comes from the
amorphous layer of carbon deposited by the electron beam.
Figure 5.25: Inverse FFT of two other areas along the lamella, with (1-11) and (-11-1) peaks selected in the
FFT. All scale bars: 20nm.
In all areas imaged, an inverse FFT was calculated with each pair of spots selected. The
defects only appeared when the (1-11) and (-11-1) planes were selected in the FFT, showing a
57
==PAGE:63==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
missing (-111) plane, or an intrinsic stacking fault. This is only partially consistent with the
micrographs from the several ECCI trials, which repeatedly show stacking faults in both (-111)
and (1-11) planes in all nanowires from both regions studied. This discrepancy of information,
i.e. the lack of visible (1-11) stacking faults in TEM micrographs and inverse FFTs, could be
due to the fact that only areas along the lamella with (-111) stacking faults happened to be
imaged.
Although the (1-11) stacking faults are missing from the TEM data, the data does conﬁrm
that the triangular defects seen in SEM micrographs are indeed stacking faults.
58
==PAGE:64==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
6
Conclusion
The experimental trials in this thesis visualized defects in selectively grown, heteroepitaxial,
[1-10] oriented nanowires in a handful of ways by utilizing the ECCI technique.
The visibility of these defects was ﬁrst explored by tilting the sample to 5o and then rotating
it incrementally over a full 360o span to see what defects would become visible at various
diﬀraction conditions. A simulated ECP was used to determine with which band, if any, the
beam aligned at the various rotation angles. It was found that when the beam aligned with
the (2-20) band, several bright triangular shaped defects would arise along the nanowires, some
pointing to the left and others to the right. These same defects disappeared when the beam
aligned with the (220) band. These were assumed to be planar defects, or stacking faults arising
in the (-111) and (1-11) planes, based on their shape and orientations compared to those of
the nanowires. The invisibility criterion was used to determine that the Burgers vector of the
defects was [-111] for the right-pointing triangular defects and [1-11] for those pointing left.
Next, defect contrast via BSEs and SEs was compared by imaging using the CBS detector
and TLD in four diﬀerent modes. One set of tilt and rotation coordinates found to create suit-
able defect contrast in the 360o rotation study was 5o tilt and 18o rotation, so this was the stage
condition used in the following ECCI trials. When comparing BSE and SE micrographs, it was
found that the CBS detector, while showing defect contrast at the correct diﬀraction conditions,
lost much of the topographical contrast of the nanowire and obscured a large percentage of the
nanowire itself. The TLD, on the other hand, showed excellent topographic contrast in all
modes (both SE and BSE), while maintaining defect contrast with much better resolution than
with the CBS detector. It was determined that the visibility of defects in SE imaging came
from the fact that in the TLD’s immersion mode, regardless of the detector settings meant to
absorb exclusively SEs, BSEs still travel into the column and bounce oﬀthe mirror, converting
into SEIIIs and still getting detected by the TLD. Since SEIIIs still carry the BSE’s informa-
tion on the orientation of the sample, they maintain the defect contrast, while the SEs that are
rightfully detected in SE modes create the topographic information. It is therefore conﬁrmed
that using the TLD in immersion mode allows for high resolution defect imaging in SE mode.
The change in defect contrast was then observed when changing the sample tilt and rotation
from 0o and 0o, respectively, to 5o tilt and 18o rotation. At the former stage condition, the
beam does not align with any band in the channeling pattern, and at the latter, the beam is
aligned with the (2-20) band. This was done using the TLD in both SE and BSE modes. Both
59
==PAGE:65==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
showed optimal defect contrast at 5o tilt and 18o rotation, as seen in the previous trials. But
at 0o tilt and 0o rotation, few faint dark defect lines arising from the same stacking faults could
also be seen.
Lastly, the defect density of each of the three structures analyzed from Region 2 was cal-
culated. The variable here was the thickness of the nanowires, as the three structures had an
overall variation of 72nm. The micrographs taken using the TLD in BSE mode in the previous
study (0o tilt and 0o rotation vs. 5o tilt and 18o rotation) were used for said quantiﬁcation. No
correlation between nanowire thickness and defect density was found.
A veriﬁcation of the nature and orientation of the defects seen was conducted by TEM, in
which a nanowire was sliced longitudinally, and the cross section was analyzed. As expected,
(-111) intrinsic stacking faults could be seen, but the (1-11) stacking faults were not observed
in the areas imaged. In order to fully conﬁrm or deny the presence of (1-11) stacking faults, a
1:1 comparison of ECCI and TEM would have to be done.
In conclusion, the ECCI technique is an extremely viable tool for defect imaging, especially
using the in-column side-mounted SE detector, or through-the-lens detector (TLD) in immer-
sion mode. With the help of a simulated channeling pattern, ECCI it was simple to see where
the optic axis lay on the ECP, and with which bands it aligned. The advantages of ECCI
include quick visualization of defects with no sample preparation involved, and visualization of
large areas as compared with TEM. Drawbacks, especially considering heteroepitaxially grown
structures, include not being able to see exactly from which depth, or in which layers the defects
arise. Overall, ECCI is a great technique for quick visualization and characterization of crystal
defects in semiconductor nanowires.
60
==PAGE:66==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
References
[1] PB Hirsch, A Howie, and MJ Whelan. On the production of x-rays in thin metal foils.
Philosophical Magazine, 7(84):2095–2100, 1962.
[2] DG Coates. Kikuchi-like reﬂection patterns obtained with the scanning electron micro-
scope. The Philosophical Magazine: A Journal of Theoretical Experimental and Applied
Physics, 16(144):1179–1184, 1967.
[3] JP Spencer, CJ Humphreys, and PB Hirsch. A dynamical theory for the contrast of perfect
and imperfect crystals in the scanning electron microscope using backscattered electrons.
Philosophical Magazine, 26(1):193–213, 1972.
[4] P Morin, M Pitaval, D Besnard, and G Fontaine. Electron–channelling imaging in scanning
electron microscopy. Philosophical Magazine A, 40(4):511–524, 1979.
[5] Po-Chun Hsu, Han Han, Eddy Simoen, Clement Merckling, Geert Eneman, Yves Mols,
Nadine Collaert, and Marc Heyns. Observation of the stacking faults in in0. 53ga0. 47as
by electron channeling contrast imaging. physica status solidi (a), 216(17):1900293, 2019.
[6] Jian Huang, Yating Wan, Daehwan Jung, Justin Norman, Chen Shang, Qiang Li, Kei May
Lau, Arthur C Gossard, John E Bowers, and Baile Chen.
Defect characterization of
inas/ingaas quantum dot pin photodetector grown on gaas-on-v-grooved-si substrate. ACS
Photonics, 6(5):1100–1105, 2019.
[7] Patrick G Callahan, Brian B Haidet, Daehwan Jung, Gareth GE Seward, and Kunal
Mukherjee. Direct observation of recombination-enhanced dislocation glide in heteroepi-
taxial gaas on silicon. Physical Review Materials, 2(8):081601, 2018.
[8] Marina Baryshnikova, Yves Mols, Yoshiyuki Ishii, Reynald Alcotte, Han Han, Thomas
Hantschel,
Olivier Richard,
Marianna Pantouvaki,
Joris Van Campenhout,
Dries
Van Thourhout, et al. Nano-ridge engineering of gasb for the integration of inas/gasb
heterostructures on 300 mm (001) si. Crystals, 10(4):330, 2020.
[9] Johannes Ledig,
Frederik Steib,
Jana Hartmann,
Sönke Fündling,
Hergo-Heinrich
Wehmann, and Andreas Waag. Correlative ecci and cl of single g a n microstructures
obtained using ecp by beam rocking on small areas. In European Microscopy Congress
2016: Proceedings, pages 1043–1044. Wiley Online Library, 2016.
61
==PAGE:67==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
[10] G Naresh-Kumar, Benjamin Hourahine, A Vilalta-Clemente, P Ruterana, P Gamarra,
C Lacam, M Tordjman, MA di Forte-Poisson, PJ Parbrook, AP Day, et al. Imaging and
identifying defects in nitride semiconductor thin ﬁlms using a scanning electron microscope.
physica status solidi (a), 209(3):424–426, 2012.
[11] Andreas Schulze, Libor Strakos, Tomas Vystavel, Roger Loo, Antoine Pacco, Nadine
Collaert, Wilfried Vandervorst, and Matty Caymax.
Non-destructive characterization
of extended crystalline defects in conﬁned semiconductor device structures. Nanoscale,
10(15):7058–7066, 2018.
[12] Andreas Schulze, Han Han, Libor Strakos, Tomas Vystavel, Clement Porret, Roger Loo,
and Matty Caymax.
Ascertaining the nature and distribution of extended crystalline
defects in emerging semiconductor materials using electron channeling contrast imaging.
ECS Transactions, 86(7):387, 2018.
[13] Manuel Cardona and Y Yu Peter. Fundamentals of Semiconductors. Springer, 2005.
[14] Gary J Gascho. Silicon sources for agriculture. In Studies in plant science, volume 8, pages
197–207. Elsevier, 2001.
[15] K.H.J. Buschow, R. Cahn, M.C. Flemings, S. Mahajan, B. Ilschner, E.J. Kramer, and
P. Veyssiere. The Encyclopedia of Materials: Science and Technology. Encyclopedia of
Materials: Science and Technology. Elsevier, 2001.
[16] Marianna Epicoco. Knowledge patterns and sources of leadership: Mapping the semicon-
ductor miniaturization trajectory. Research Policy, 42(1):180–195, 2013.
[17] John E Ayers, Tedi Kujofsa, Paul Rago, and Johanna Raphael. Heteroepitaxy of Semicon-
ductors: Theory, Growth, and Characterization. CRC press, 2016.
[18] Wolfgang Braun.
Applied RHEED: Reﬂection High-Energy Electron Diﬀraction during
Crystal Growth, volume 154. Springer Science & Business Media, 1999.
[19] Encyclopædia Britannica. Crystal defect, 2006.
[20] Derek Hull and David J Bacon. Introduction to Dislocations. Butterworth-Heinemann,
2001.
62
==PAGE:68==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
[21] EM Schulson and CG Van Essen. Optimum conditions for generating channelling patterns
in the scanning electron microscope. Journal of Physics E: Scientiﬁc Instruments, 2(3):247,
1969.
[22] C Van Essen, EM Schulson, and RH Donaghay. The generation and identiﬁcation of sem
channelling patterns from 10 µm selected areas. Journal of Materials Science, 6(3):213–
217, 1971.
[23] DC Joy and DE Newbury. Scanning electron microscope selected area channelling patterns
from 1 micron specimen areas. Journal of Materials Science, 7(6):714–716, 1972.
[24] Karl A Hujsak, Benjamin D Myers, Jann Grovogui, and Vinayak P Dravid. Stage-rocked
electron channeling for crystal orientation mapping. Scientiﬁc reports, 8(1):1–9, 2018.
[25] RD Kerns, S Balachandran, AH Hunter, and MA Crimp.
Collection of selected area
electron channeling patterns (sacp) on an fei helios nanolab scanning electron microscope.
Microscopy and Microanalysis, 23(S1):548–549, 2017.
[26] J Dluhoš, L Sedláček, T Ižák, T Hrnčíř, and J Jiruše. It-4-p-2405 application of multi-tilt
specimen stage for advanced electron channeling contrast technique.
[27] Apreo 2 sem: Unmatched versatility powered by colorsem technology, 2020. Datasheet.
[28] Julien Guyon, H Mansour, Nathalie Gey, MA Crimp, S Chalal, and Nabila Malouﬁ. Sub-
micron resolution selected area electron channeling patterns. Ultramicroscopy, 149:34–44,
2015.
[29] Douglas G Coates. Pseudo-kikuchi orientation analysis in the scanning electron microscope.
1969.
[30] Tomáš Vystavěl, Pavel Stejskal, Marek Unčovsk`y, and Chris Stephens.
Tilt-free ebsd.
Microscopy and Microanalysis, 24(S1):1126–1127, 2018.
[31] Bob Hafner. Scanning electron microscopy primer. Technical report, Characterization
Facility, University of Minnesota.
[32] Weilie Zhou and Zhong Lin Wang. Scanning microscopy for nanotechnology: techniques
and applications. Springer science & business media, 2007.
63
==PAGE:69==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
[33] David C. Joy Charles E. Lyman Patrick Echlin Eric Lifshin Linda Sawyer J.R. Michael
Joseph Goldstein, Dale E. Newbury. Scanning Electron Microscopy and X-ray Microanal-
ysis. Springer, 3rd edition, 2003.
[34] H Seiler.
Actual problem of secondary electron emission.
Z. Angew. Phys., 22: 249-
63(1967).
[35] FJ Heinrich. X-ray optics and microanalysis. In 4th International Congress on X-ray Optics
and Microanalysis. Edited by R. Castaing, P. Deschamp, and J. Philibert. Hermann and
Cie, Paris, 1966.
[36] Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc. Verios G4 User Operation Manual.
[37] Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc. Deca upgrade, 2019.
[38] David C Joy, Dale E Newbury, and David L Davidson. Electron channeling patterns in
the scanning electron microscope. Journal of Applied Physics, 53(8):R81–R122, 1982.
[39] Julia I Deitz, Santino D Carnevale, Steven A Ringel, David W McComb, and Tyler J
Grassman. Electron channeling contrast imaging for rapid iii-v heteroepitaxial character-
ization. JoVE (Journal of Visualized Experiments), (101):e52745, 2015.
[40] Stefan Zaeﬀerer and Nahid-Nora Elhami. Theory and application of electron channelling
contrast imaging under controlled diﬀraction conditions. Acta Materialia, 75:20–50, 2014.
[41] Bernardette Kunert, Yves Mols, Marina Baryshniskova, Niamh Waldron, Andreas Schulze,
and Robert Langer. How to control defect formation in monolithic iii/v hetero-epitaxy on
(100) si? a critical review on current approaches. Semiconductor Science and Technology,
33(9):093002, 2018.
[42] C Merckling, Niamh Waldron, Sijia Jiang, W Guo, O Richard, B Douhard, A Moussa,
D Vanhaeren, H Bender, N Collaert, et al. Selective area growth of inp in shallow trench
isolation on large scale si (001) wafer using defect conﬁnement technique.
Journal of
Applied Physics, 114(3):033708, 2013.
[43] B Yarlagadda, A Rodriguez, P Li, R Velampati, JF Ocampo, EN Suarez, PB Rago, D Shah,
JE Ayers, and FC Jain.
X-ray characterization of dislocation density asymmetries in
heteroepitaxial semiconductors. Applied Physics Letters, 92(20):202103, 2008.
64
==PAGE:70==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
[44] Ivo Konvalina, Filip Mika, Stanislav Krátk`y, Eliška Materna Mikmeková, and Ilona
Müllerová. In-lens band-pass ﬁlter for secondary electrons in ultrahigh resolution sem.
Materials, 12(14):2307, 2019.
[45] I Müllerová and I Konvalina. Collection of secondary electrons in scanning electron mi-
croscopes. Journal of microscopy, 236(3):203–210, 2009.
[46] Q Xing. Information or resolution: Which is required from an sem to study bulk inorganic
materials? Scanning, 38(6):864–879, 2016.
[47] Laura Zarraoa, María U González, and Álvaro San Paulo. Imaging low-dimensional nanos-
tructures by very low voltage scanning electron microscopy: ultra-shallow topography and
depth-tunable material contrast. Scientiﬁc reports, 9(1):1–11, 2019.
[48] BA Simkin and MA Crimp. An experimentally convenient conﬁguration for electron chan-
neling contrast imaging. Ultramicroscopy, 77(1-2):65–75, 1999.
[49] David B. Williams and C. Barry Carter. Transmission electron microscopy: A textbook for
materials science. Springer US, 2009.
65
==PAGE:71==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
Appendices
A
Defect Contrast: 5o tilt, 0-360o rotation
66
==PAGE:72==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
67
==PAGE:73==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
68
==PAGE:74==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
69
==PAGE:75==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
70
==PAGE:76==
August 2020
Master’s Thesis
s182314
71
