==PAGE:1==
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and
Operational Assurance in Fog-based Envi-
ronments via Trusted Platforms
Master Thesis
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based
Environments via Trusted Platforms
Master Thesis
August, 2020
By
Philip Metin Özari
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Bygning 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Philip Metin Özari - s144482
Signature
Date
ii
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The Fog computing paradigm promises to bridge the cloud and IoT to make systems more
secure and efficient. This emphasizes and introduces several challenges regarding especially
security, trust, privacy and operational assurance. The increasingly distributed nature of
these environments challenges the structures and solutions that our infrastructure is built
upon as all aspects of our systems become more exposed and more autonomous. Systems
and devices must be able to remotely verify one another and securely protect and use
keys and cryptographic primitives to establish a base line of trust. In order to achieve
this systems can use trusted components which act as trust anchors for important security
functionalities like remote attestation. The misuse of personal and sensitive information
has called for systems to employ privacy by design to protect not only the confidentiality
of explicit data but also the identifiers of entities in systems. Direct anonymous attesta-
tion (DAA) is a anonymous digital signature schemes that allows for efficient and secure
privacy capabilities in combination with trusted components. In this thesis we concep-
tualise protocols and models for delegated secure zero touch provisioning of a Fog based
environment and enhance it with the strong privacy capabilities of the DAA. Combining
these schemes present the possibility for entities to authentically join the environment in
a trusted manner with minimal physical intervention, where they can enjoy strong pri-
vacy guarantees. We analyse and explore the limitation and capabilities of the proposed
protocols, and propose and number of enhancements and a structure for potential future
work.
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Philip Metin Özari, MSc Computer Science and Civil Engineering, DTU
Author of this thesis.
To my loving partner, friends and family for supporting me through this process during
such unusual times.
iv
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Preliminaries
3
2.1
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
IPv6 and CJDNS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Interface for Secure and Efficient Fog Environments
15
3.1
Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Entities and functionality
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
S-ZTP component
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.4
Privacy component . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4
Trust Modelling
39
4.1
Modelling trust through state diagrams
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.2
S-ZTP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.3
Privacy and DAA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5
Protocols and Architecture
53
5.1
Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.2
Protocols
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.3
Delegated TC enabled S-ZTP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.4
DAA enabled privacy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
5.5
A challenge: Privacy S-ZTP and enhanced DAA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
5.6
Limitations and capabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
5.7
Security analysis and adversarial model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
6
Conclusion and Future Work
93
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The growth and development of modern IoT and distributed systems has created or empha-
sized many challenges regarding security and functionalities in these increasingly pervasive
systems, leading to the need for new comprehensive and standardised models for security
and privacy. To this end the concepts of fog and edge computing has been proposed to
aid and extend the cloud paradigm [22]. These systems inherit all the classic security
challenges while, due to their nature and scale, demand further distributed, efficient and
scalable solutions [22] [33]. IT systems are deploying and changing at such a rate that
it’s becoming infeasible to physically configure network devices [21] [53] leading to the
challenges of how to ensure high levels of trust and security in devices and systems that
enjoy high levels of autonomy. A response to the need of efficient and secure provisioning
and deployment of IT infrastructure is secure zero touch provisioning (S-ZTP) [27] [21]
[53] [41] where devices are automatically deployed in the environments with minimal to
none manual configuration. With this level of autonomy it’s essential that the security of
systems include resilience and operational assurance [30]. Operational assurance is essen-
tial for trust establishment and security in autonomous systems, as entities must be able
to provide verifiable authentic evidence to one another about the correctness of state and
operation. The process of providing this proof in a secure and trusted manner is know as
remote attestation [30] [59] [5].
With smart vehicles, cities and homes we increasingly have connected devices all around
us, where some carry highly sensitive information and others are responsible for critical
infrastructure, the question of security becomes ever more pressing. The threat landscape
is also following this rapid development emphasising the need to detect and protect against
security incidences in these distributed devices [1] [33] as evident by attacks like Mirai,
Sybil and Duqu. A lot of focus in research has been put into trust management in IT
systems and devices [1] [26] [59] [7] [17] where, as with human trust and the general
notion of security, its considered a hard problem without one right way to solve it [26] [19].
However some promising concepts are driving security solutions aiming at providing strong
trustworthiness and security guarantees through secure trust anchors which aim to quantify
and minimise the basic building blocks needed to derive strong security guarantees. Secure
hardware and trusted components such as the trusted computing group’s TPM [59] and
DICE [55], intel’s SGX [2] and TrustLite [29], and ARM’s trustzone [4] are technologies
based on the notion of secure trust anchors which can serve as a base to design solutions
with enhanced trustworthy security and operational assurance.
The issue of privacy throughout the fog environments is critically connected to the notion
of trust in fog environments. Privacy from the perspective of the devices and users is
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
1
==PAGE:10==
important, considering the pervasive nature of Fog based environments and the systems it
deploy [22] [15], this includes both thinking about the privacy of explicit communication
and privacy in identification. However, the relationship between privacy, trust and security
is not trivial [26] [25]. Trust is essential for security, how and when we establish it has direct
implications on security, consider especially the certification structure behind the public
key infrastructure which is built on identification. In order to achieve a better balance
between trust and privacy, research has looked into how we can create greater granulation
in the management of identification, authentication and trust through pseudonymous and
anonymous authentication schemes [9] [46] [11] [10].
Indeed, in the era of Fog computing there is a need for systems that can scale efficiently
with a strong base for security. As the centralised solutions of the cloud are being put under
pressure [22] we must look to delegate responsibilities and functionalities throughout the
layers of the fog environments to best accommodate the structure of modern computing.
The work of this thesis therefore seeks to conceptualize and model a high level architec-
ture and security protocols for the fog computing paradigm using the current security
technologies to ensure high levels of security, operational assurance, privacy and trust.
This thesis is organised into 6 chapters. In chapter 3 we define the general security require-
ments and functionalities as they relate to fog environments and conceptualise the general
structure of the protocols. In chapter 4 we construct a trust model over the essential ac-
tions as state diagrams. In chapter 5 we define the detailed security protocols expanding
on the two previous chapters and highlight the core architectural concepts supporting the
protocols. Finally we conclude the thesis and discuss the future work in chapter 6.
2
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 2
Preliminaries
In this chapter we iterate research and work in relation to the topic of this thesis, and estab-
lish some preliminary concepts and analysis’ that has influenced the scope and construction
of the final models and protocols. As such this chapter partly contains a shallow analysis
and summation of research in solutions, technologies and challenges relevant for security,
trust and privacy in relation to modern computing paradigms and fog based environments.
We introduce the prominent solutions for trusted components, remote attestation, and pri-
vacy enhanced protocols using the concept anonymous digital signatures. This is related to
the challenges of the fog environments and the concept of secure zero touch provisioning.
Lastly we analyse the CJDNS IPv6 networking protocol to evaluate its potential role in fog
computing. Some concepts will be further expanded upon as they introduced into the scope
of this work.
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
3
==PAGE:12==
2.1
Related work
Modern IT system models for e.g. fog, edge and IoT can be realised in many different
ways, and is dependent on the specifics of the use case [22] [15], but in order to truly
facilitate an effective system from the cloud to the edge and IoT the centralised approach
is increasingly being substituted for alternative and decentralised approaches that can
strike a better balance between scalability and complexity. Peer to Peer systems as such is
the opposite approach to the centralised and hierarchical typologies, but they are known
to suffer for high complexity where centralised solutions do not scale well [22].
The IEEE standard for adoption of the OpenFog architecture describes the need for N-
layer topologies [22] pressing the need for the fog systems to provide flexibility, scalability
and availability. Due to the pervasive nature of the Fog it should be able to adapt to
different situations depending on specific need [22] [15], as such there is not a clearly
defined system or networking model that’s universally applicable to the fog paradigm.
The core challenges of the fog paradigm are among many of the same as found in edge
computing and other distributed systems, however they have been identified to relate
especially to QoS, management, federation, scalability and interoperability [15].
With a perspective of fog computing as the glue between cloud, edge and IoT that can
be facilitated in an N-layered topology which must be flexible in nature we can see how
both general and specific models, architectures and security schemes can find relevance
within these boarders. Driven by the prevalence of privacy and security in any pervasive
infrastructure, these features should be considered a base building block in fog computing
[15] [22]. The promise of standardised trusted components, like the TPM [59], Intel’s SGX
[2] and ARM’s Trustzone [4], to provide secure certification and attestation through secure
and trustworthy roots of trust for identity, storage and execution presents the opportunity
to define a common concept for systems and protocols using these as base building blocks
for the security of systems.
The trusted computing group TCG defines the trust concept of their TPM as a part of
the roots of trust needed to determine whether or not the trusted computing base (TCB),
or the hardware and software responsible for maintaining security policies of the system,
has been compromise and to prevent eventual compromises [59]. The TPM is a crypto-
graphic chip that does this together with core essential components which together are
defined as the trusted building blocks [59]. The TPM is highly resistant to attacks even
from a physical access attacks by ensuring that keys can only be used through commands
exposed by the TPM itself. Fundamentally it provides isolation and secure storage of
the platform configuration registers to which keys can be sealed i.e. a key can only be
used if the registers are in the same state as during key creation [59]. Thus the TPM
facilitates trustworthy identity with internal key hierarchies that facilitate attestation and
certification. Together this provides a way to present accurate and verifiable evidence of
information [59]. Essentially remote attestation can be seen as a interaction between two
entities where a prover presents verifiable and trustworthy evidence about its state to a
verifier, who can then actively verify this evidence and derive trust in the prover [1]. The
intersection between this concept of providing operation assurances through remote attes-
tation and the secure design of modern distributed systems for e.g. cloud, fog and IoT has
yielded schemes providing effective remote attestation as SEDA [5], FutureTPM [53] and
Astrid [54], minimal and effective architectures for attestation using both software and
hardware based attestation with TrustLite [29], SMART [18] and TyTan [8]. The design
of systems that use attestation and the specific processes and protocols for effectively are
both current research topics where attestation is still very much being explored for bet-
ter and more comprehensive ways of providing comprehensive, effective and trustworthy
4
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:13==
evidence for operational assurance. Two European research project [54] [53] have concep-
tualised and used what is defined as configuration integrity verification CIV. They have
defined and expanded on the original concepts and use cases for attestation defined by the
TCG as implicit and explicit attestation [59]. The CIV module defines attestation for a
comprehensive security model protecting against offline, online and runtime attacks on the
configuration, software and execution within a device supplied with a trusted component
[54] [53].
Secure zero touch provisioning (S-ZTP) [3] [41] [21] [53] has been conceptualised to meet
the challenges of scalability and security in efficient deployment of distributed system.
The IETF [3] has proposed a S-ZTP framework for secure and remote provisoining of
netowrking devices from a factory image.
Microsoft [41] and the FutureTPM project
[53] has specified how to the TPM can be utilised to allow trust to be established and
maintained in remote devices based on the strong roots of trust.
FutureTPM further
expands on the concept by employing a comprehensive attestation architecture such that
not only the validity of the TPM can be established but also operational assurance of the
remote device to ensure high levels of trustworthiness. As such we define S-ZTP as the
capability of a device to securely and automatically become operational without human
intervention.
Secure zero touch provisioning, trust anchors and remote attestation has been used as
potential approach in solving some of the challenges just mentioned from fog computing
and the integration of security as a base building block [53] [5] [54]. The solution proposed
in [53] and [54] utilize the above for enhancing security in between two layers which can
be described as relationships between an orchestrator and its entities or nodes where
devices or virtual constructs uses the capabilities of the TPM to enable secure identities
and strong cryptographical functionalities to provide the orchestrator with the necessary
guarantees for it to trust in the distributed entities. However even if an orchestrator to
router relationship works well for a local deployment and management of routers as in
[53] it quickly becomes clear that these security features lack support for the multi leveled
topology as identified in [22], motivating the need to extend these capabilities. SEDA’s
swarm device attestation [5] presents another take on remote attestation for distributed
system with the focus on a highly dynamic swarm structure that accumulates attestation
evidence and uses it to attest to all devices in the swarm to a single verifier [5].
We
see room in the area to investigate the possibilities of a multi layered structure that
enjoys the security functionalities of S-ZTP, remote attestation and secure trust anchors
in the form of trusted components.
The missing link is the extension of the security
capabilities promoted in e.g. the Future TPM device management case [53], is for the
establishment of trust between an orchestrator and a node in the system to also includes a
delegation of responsibilities and further possibility to extent the trust closer to the edge
down through the N-layered fog hierarchy. Thus enabling the the construction of trusted
communities and delegated certification while still enjoying the division of responsibilities
and functionalities that best serve the structure of the fog topology.
2.1.1
Privacy
Any system deployed in the fog environment must comply with the basic security require-
ments of CIA, and due to its pervasive nature and hyper-locality the challenge of privacy
must be viewed outside the scope of just the data itself. Aggregating data and behaviour
can lead to identification and potential breaches of privacy [52], we must therefore not
only consider the security capabilities of channels to protect sensitive information but
how to protect the identities of the participating entities. Strong privacy and security
models might lead users to derive higher levels of trust in a system [15] but there is an
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
5
==PAGE:14==
inherent challenge in for any system in the relationship between trust and privacy since
trustworthiness can be seen as trait that increases as true knowledge about an entity in-
creases [25]. In order to accommodate the challenge of disclosure and identification many
schemes has been proposed to enable better privacy capabilities and privacy by design
[11] [10] [46] [9]. A common theme in many solutions is a drive towards solutions with
pseudonymity as is also specified in the GDPR as a key concept in privacy by design [12].
In practice the idea is to aggregate behavior and identifiers around semi user controlled or
user controlled pseudonyms that are unlinkable to the original identities, which are either
protected by a trusted third party [10] [46] or as in the case of the direct anonymous
attestation DAA scheme [9] [62] protected cryptographically even when colluding with the
third party. Commonly there solutions are based around concept of anonymous digital
signatures. Under this category two installations are found in most schemes: group based
signature [13] schemes or ring based signature [43] schemes. With anonymous digital sig-
natures the concept is that individuals or entities can be authenticated based on trust
derived from being a certified member of the group. As such each signature becomes in-
distinguishable from any other made within the group and behaviour or other data leaks
can not be aggregated. This only holds only insofar as K-anonymity is preserved and
explicitly private information is not being disclosed. However it does present a viable way
to inherently enhance the privacy capabilities of systems as shown e.g. in this privacy
enhanced VANET concept [40], where the DAA protocol and the TPM is used to enable
trusted and privacy enhanced infrastructure and communication.
The DAA scheme utilises group based signatures where a signer can be verified anony-
mously or pseudonymously against a group public key. It creates the conditions for this
is a combination of zero knowledge proofs of knowledge schemes, commitment schemes
and blind signatures [9] [62]. Essentially a signer is able to generate its own asymmetric
key pair, based on some public parameters provided by an issuer, and provide evidence of
ownership over the private part without disclosing it by combining a zero knowledge proof
and a commitment to make a signature proof of knowledge SPK. This can be certified
through a blind signature by an issuer resulting in the DAA credential which together
with the asymmetric key pair of the signer is used to generate pseudonymous or anony-
mous signatures that are verifiable with the group public key. The DAA protocol further
relies on the presence of a TPM or similar trusted component to ensure the security of the
scheme on the assumption that the TC provides isolation, protected execution and secure
storage [40].
In conventional systems and infrastructures a trusted relationship between two entities
is established before transactions can take place.
The system derives trustworthiness
through disclosure of information and identity, which can then be used as a basis for
access control, policies and other security mechanism [26]. Essentially identifying, to some
extent, all entities that interact with the system creating a scenario where data and identity
can be linked. The current PKI with x509 certificates [14] relies on openness and direct
identification to establish trust leaving little to no room for entities to decide whether or
not they want to be identified and more importantly if they want to have their interactions
linkable to other interactions.
Anonymous digital signatures, and especially the DAA construction, allows for a less
privacy invasive way of managing certification than what is done with the current standard
of x509 certificates and PKI’s, as subsequent interaction with a system becomes unlikable
with regards to the identity to which the credential/certificate was issued [62]. However
in a multilayered infrastructure we need to extent certification throughout the layers and
a centralised certification approach will struggle to scale as well as a decentralised or
6
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:15==
delegated approach. Digital signatures can also be extended to the notion of group based
certification [63]. As the anonymous digital signatures of the DAA can be used to certify
keys as presented in [40] it’s conceivable that the DAA functionalities can be pushed
down throughout the potentially N-layered structure of fog based environments. If the
certification process is to be delegated throughout the different layers of the infrastructure,
then there is a need for strong trust and security guarantees as certificate authorities are
generally considered entities that must be trusted as a compromised CA would compromise
all entities relying on it’s certificate for validation of the certificate chain.
2.1.2
Network and fog
Routing and network topology becomes an integral part of the applications and systems
in the fog environment especially with containerization and microservices as services need
to discover each other over the network and interact appropriately [37]. Systems and net-
works in fog environments must hence be able to handle individual failures while ensuring
the health of the system [44]. This goes in line with the challenge of delegation and trust
throughout the layers of the topology. The current structure for network deployed with
IPv4 inherently faces challenges regarding scalability as the address space limitation has
created a strict hierarchy with limitations on the flexibility and challenges for secure and
effective communication [31]. The adoption of IPv6 provides a way to not only enable
to growth of IoT device and distribution of fog environments, but also enhance the sys-
tem topology but also fit the underlying network connectivity directly into the design of
modern fog environments. As evident in the research on anonymous routing schemes [50]
when considering privacy in the scope of the networking and routing, the structure of the
network, purpose of the system and capabilities of entities all play an important role in
finding a suitable protocol for routing. The Tor routing protocol is a well known solution
for enhanced privacy by hiding the IP from receiver through the use of onion routing a
central entities managing paths. Mclachlan et. al [34] showed with TORSK, a DHT en-
hanced Tor network, how privacy capabilities of the Tor can be efficiently enhanced with
a neighborhood cryptographic algorithm and the Kademlia XOR metric [39] for routing.
TORSK achieves bidirectional communication in a partially connected network that can
be realised as a hybrid system [50]. The network protocol known as CJDNS [16] offers full
IPv6 integrated networking where the functionalities of routing, switching and encryption
in combined into every entity providing close to zero configuration networking, end to end
encryption and highly flexible networking structure as a hybrid mesh network. As the
CJDNS protocol is not a direct result of the academic community, we will will make a
brief analysis of the routing, switching and especially the cryptographic functionalities of
the protocol in section 2.2.
2.1.3
General challenges
Pervasive fog environments require a strong security foundation. Not only is there a need
for distributed devices to have strong cryptographical functionalities but these functionali-
ties must be used to shift the trust and security foundation of the system from a centralised
perspective towards the device throughout the fog. This potentially means that devices
should be able to establish trust remotely and securely authenticate, certify and delegate
responsibilities among one another. A strong foundation on which to base the security
of such systems is needed, this might be found through the use of trusted components.
Device provisioning must be secure, efficient and scalable, to this end we can use the con-
cept of S-ZTP and remote attestation. Privacy is an integral part of security, especially
in widely distributed systems, and to this end DAA is a promising protocol. As such the
building blocks needed to enhanced security, privacy and operational assurance for Fog
based environments is present but must be realised a unified concept and framework in
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
7
==PAGE:16==
order to facilitate actual integration and implementation. Conceptually we explore the
possibility of extending an S-ZTP scheme as presented in [53] [41] [21] with delegation
and DAA privacy enhanced digital signatures where trust is derived through device based
trusted anchors (trusted components) and remote attestation.
2.2
IPv6 and CJDNS
CJDNS [16] is a IPv6 protocol that combines the functions of the router, the switch and
session encryption in one. Essentially it allows all nodes to carry out functions in the
network relating specifically to layer 2, 3 and 4.
This is partially due to the desired
hybrid/mesh network structure where all nodes can act as routers and switches and be
connected as endpoints or as a hub node with many links. CJDNS works in the space of
the OSI layers 2, 3 and 4. At the moment of writing the CJDNS protocol can establish
deliberate UDP across the internet or use any system specific addressing and transmission
protocols to establish link level connections. Routing is based on IPv6 and end to end
encryption is achieved directly in the networking layer as packets are encrypted both point
to point and end to end at the level through the router and switch.
CJDNS distinguishes links from connections, where links are ideally permanent relation-
ships between two nodes, who know one another beforehand and thus trust each other.
The idea is to establish links with pre-shared secret which allow nodes to authenticate in
a pre-arraged way. This way the network is based on a friend to friend topology. When
a node wishes to find or connect with another node in the network which it’s not already
linked to, it searches the network using the Kademlia Xor metric to find the most efficient
path [39]. This is done by selecting the best candidate which you have a link to and
then starting a point to point CryptoAuth session with that node. This point to point
session represents the outer encryption that wraps the inner end to end encryption for
the intended receiver. Thus a node might establish a connection to another node but not
necessarily a link. As such links are created between friends who decide to trust each
other, creating the basis for trust and accountability in CJDNS. There are therefore also
no rules or limits to the amount of links a node can make and it’s thus up to the nodes
themselves to organise in an efficient manner presenting both a nice flexibility and chal-
lenge. However all nodes are free to establish a link to another node and as long as a path
exists the elimination of one node will not block any other nodes.
Since all nodes can carry out all vital networking functionality, expose services and commu-
nicate with one another, it makes the network very resilient against DoS attacks. However
the system is inherently based on shared secret for authentication making it quite static
whilst also applying public key cryptography. Private and public key pairs hold an essen-
tial role in CJDNS as all IPv6 addresses are deterministically derived from the public key
of the key pair. Thus when nodes wish to connect who don’t know each other they forward
the public key for the other node to derive and address and it also help assure that the
node you are communicating with is in fact the intended recipient. In order to establish
secure communication CJDNS uses public key authenticated encryption (PKAE).
2.2.1
The Routing module
The router of CJDNS which is implemented directly into nodes such that any node can
route traffic. In order to direct packets either further or to itself the node uses the switch
protocol also inherent in CJDNS. The router has three functions searching, responding to
searches and forwarding packets.
The CJDNS network topology is organised around the idea of logical closeness through
address space distance which is calculated with the XOR metric developed for the Kadem-
8
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:17==
lia DHT system. This means that when nodes enter a system they are logically placed in
other nodes routing tables according to their XOR distance [16] [39].
In CJDNS searching is done sending queries to nodes that might be close to the destination
according to the XOR metric.
The searching node continually adds newly discovered
nodes to its routing table and to the search and continues the search asking the new newly
added nodes.
Queries in CJDNS has a dictionary defining the purpose of the packet.
The functionality includes responding to a search, forwarding a packet or a search query.
Importantly router messages must include a transaction id noted ”txid”. A router can
further define a query which can be used to search for nodes, or ping a specific node. When
searching for a specific node the router specifies the target node noted ”tar”, preceded by
the query type find node note ”fn”. The search target specified in the router query is the
IPv6 address of the desired node.
When the router wants to send a packet to another node it first forms the router message
then passes it through the CryptoAuth session then applies the IPv6 header label specifying
how to get to the node and finally passes the packet to the switch. This encryption layer
is the inner encryption layer and is used for end to end encryption.
2.2.2
The Switch module
The switch determines where a packet has to go by reading the route label. In CJDNS a
route label consists of an ordered set of directors, which individually tells the switch which
interface to send the packet to. There are two types of interfaces, a self interface and a
point-to-point interface. The latter represents a link to another CJDNS switch which can
be emulated through Ethernet frames or UDP packets.
As such the packets in CJDNS is guided by the route label which is interpreted and encoded
by the switch. The switch automatically builds the inverse or return path when reading the
route label before sending it to the next switch. Messages exchanged by switches includes
the switch header attached to the router packet wrapped in a CryptoAuth session for
point-to-point encryption. The switch header therefor also includes information about the
state of the CryptoAuth handshake. CJDNS also supports simple messages that require
no encryption called Switch Control Packets which define PING, PONG messages and
KEYPING, KEYPONG messages for requesting and sending public keys.
2.2.3
The CryptoAuth module
The security capabilities of CJDNS are built around the CryptoAuth module. As stated
in the whitepaper this module defines how packets should be encrypted between nodes.
It facilitates a connections built around a handshake which includes 4 distinct actions:
Connect to me, Hello packet, Key packet and Data packet. At a high level it
defines point-to-point authenticated encryption to enable the end-to-end authenticated
encryption between two nodes.
2.2.3.1
The cryptography
Internally CJDNS uses the crypto_box library to do public key authenticated encryption.
Specifically the xSalsa20 stream cipher for encryption, curve25519 an elliptic-curve-Diffie-
Hellman function for key exchange and poly1305 message authentication code for message
authenticity and data integrity. XSalsa20 is a version of Salsa20 that uses a 192-bit nonce
instead of the 64-bit nonce of Salsa20. It’s a symmetric key stream cipher that expands a
256-bit key and a 192-bit nonce into a byte stream.
The crypto_box implementation used in CJDNS is called
crypto_box_curve25519xsalsa20poly1305.
It was originally designed to be usable with
a single call to the crypto_box authenticated encryption function and a single call to
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
9
==PAGE:18==
the crypto_box_open authenticated decryption function [6].
The encryption function
authenticates a message using the sender’s secret key, the receiver’s public key and a
nonce, with the decryption function taking the cipher text, sender’s public key, receiver’s
secret key and a nonce [24]. This construction guarantees its security properties in so far
as the public keys are either pre-shared over a secure channel or authentication of sender
and receiver public keys are done by trustworthy certification. [20],
Two popular ways for achieving Authenticated encryption are either by using signatures as
in the ESSR (Encrypt Sender-key then Sign Receiver-key) scheme which as suggested by
the name binds the sender and receiver keys to each other to ensure that the message can
be authenticated [20]. Or the authenticated encryption applied in CJDNS which is know
as DHETM (Diffie-Hellman based Encrypt-Then-Mac) which uses symmetric encryption,
DH key exchange and MAC (Message Authentication Code) schemes.
Essentially the
asymmetric keys are used to generate a shared secret that then can be used for effective
encryption and MAC schemes. This combination binds the secret keys of each party to
the exchange ensuring that only intended receiver and sender can ultimately generate the
messages thus granting privacy and message authenticity[20]. However the deterministic
nature of DH requires that the proper use of nonce’s is securely implemented as otherwise
the same secret key would be derived many times and significantly lower the complexity
and strength of the protocol.
However DHETM does not assure forward secrecy as the static keys are directly linked
to the secret key and provides little KPI (Key-compromise impersonation) resistance [38].
In order to provide forward secrecy temporary/ephemeral keys are introduced. Using the
pre-shared and authenticated static keys, entities can securely exchange temporary keys,
allowing each entity to then generate a shared secret based on the authenticated temporary
key which can then be used to effectively authenticate and encrypt data.
2.2.3.2
The Session
CJDNS does not assume preshared keys nor does it assume certification instead CJDNS
builds its trust from a securely communicated shared secret. With this secret established
between two friends(nodes) the protocol, assuming keys are not pre-shared as well, is
initiated by the Connect to me packet. The only purpose this serves is to give the other
party your public key and let them know that you want them to start a connection.
Upon receiving this package a node will look to see if this a known node i.e. either there is
a connection already or that it has a password or shared secret with this node. If there’s
no connection, the receiving node will respond with a Hello packet. This packet consists
of authenticated encryption over the temporary public key by the senders static private
key and recipients static public key and nonce or the shared secret. If the shared secret is
used CJDNS classifies this as authentication of identity. Otherwise the session is without
authentication of identity.
Before sending the third packet i.e. the Key packet the node receiving the Hello packet
creates a temporary key pair, and uses its static private key with the temporary public key
it just received to compute a new shared secret. It then uses this secret to authenticate and
encrypt its own temporary public key and content. Finally both parties are ready to send
data packets as both can now compute the same shared secret using each others temporary
keys and use it in the PKAE encryption scheme to provide a secure channel providing
authenticity, integrity and confidentiality. The use of temporary keys also provides forward
secrecy from after the Hello packet.
10
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:19==
DAA revocation protocol
Sender s
Receiver r
Spk, Ssk
Rpk, Rsk
Rpk
Spk
1 :
Connect to me*
2 :
Gen temp keys: Trpk, Trsk
3 :
ϕ = KDF{Spk, nonce, Rsk}
4 :
Hello packet
aenc{Trpk}ϕ, nonce
5 :
ϕ = KDF{Rpk, nonce, Ssk}
6 :
Gen temp keys: Tspk, Tssk
7 :
ϕ∗= KDF{Ssk, nonce′, Trpk}
8 :
Key packet
aenc{Tspk}ϕ∗, nonce′
9 :
ϕ∗= KDF{Spk, nonce′, Trsk}
10 :
ϕsession = KDF{Tspk, nonce∗, Trsk}
11 :
Data packet
aenc{Data}ϕsession, nonce∗
12 :
ϕsession = KDF{Trpk, nonce∗, Tssk}
The CJDNS approach to authenticated encryption is highly standardised and follows cur-
rently used handshakes for authenticated public key encryption with forward secrecy. One
note is that the Hello and Key packets don’t enjoy this secrecy guarantee if the static pri-
vate keys or shared secrets are compromised but the Data packet is still protected by the
temporary private keys. Sender and receiver authentication is based on the pre-shared
secret which must be shared over an authentic and confidential channel. This however
does not scale well and as such is not directly applicable for fog based environments.
2.2.4
Challenges
Establishing secure and effective fog-based environments requires a certain degree of flex-
ibility, robustness and autonomy.
The minimal configuration requirements offered by
CJDNS are great for efficiency but the requirement of behind the scenes exchange of
shared secrets and establishment of authentication leaves a gap that must be accounted
for directly in the networking protocol. The privacy implications of the current state of
CJDNS needs changes in order to accommodate stronger inherent privacy guarantees such
as allowing end-to-end communication to not only be private with regards to the content
and context of the communication but also have privacy built in between the endpoints.
CJDNS does in fact not specify nor include all the needed steps to provide secure communi-
cation explicitly. This is understandable considering the original purpose of the protocol
to create a friend to friend based anonymous p2p network. However with the current
protocol it would be possible to derive the needed assurance in sender authenticity by de-
manding that the other party to certify their keys. This however presents a unique issue
for CJDNS as public keys are linked deterministically to the address’ of the nodes. Thus
simply by looking up someones public key certificate you also know the owner of a node.
CJDNS uses a modern fast cipher for encryption, but its encryption session and routing
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
11
==PAGE:20==
protocol is geared towards privacy for p2p communication sacrificing efficiency. In order
to achieve desirable privacy properties the CryptoAuth protocol is established both at a
point to point level and at an end to end level. Router messages are sent as Data packets
thus at every hop the handshake has to be done from the Hello packet to the Data packet
assuming that nodes haven’t forgotten the addresses of their links.
Using authenticated public key encryption with the addition of temporary keys it’s possible
to achieve the desired security properties without securely pre-sharing secrets or keys. Any
type of certification of the static public key will allow nodes to verify the owner of the
public key and thus eliminate the problem of having a malicious actor attempt to present
his own uncertified public key as a valid key. However relying on certification presents its
own challenges as the trusted CA’s can become single points of failure and can result in
unwanted latency as certification and revocation must go through the hierarchy
2.2.4.1
Scalability
With scalability we consider the environments ability to grow in an effective manner regard-
ing topology and communication. In order to help CJDNS scale better another measure
for authenticated link establishment should be considered. Depending on the needs of the
fog environments it might be suitable to remove point to point encryption to achieve a
higher throughput as the amount of cryptographic operations needed for communication
is reduced.
2.2.4.2
Link establishment
The unspecified exchange of shared secrets for link establishment must be addressed as
remote and autonomous entities should be able to efficiently be deployed with minimum
overhead on the infrastructure. Shared secrets would not only present a challenge to initial
deployment but once devices are deploy they should also be able to dynamically establish
links to new nodes when needed or according to demand. Incorporating an efficient and
secure mechanism for this can help the network topology to change and grow faster as
links can be established without the need for manually shared secrets. Solutions based
on certification and public key cryptography could greatly decrease the overhead but also
brings forth other issues. Certificates used to approve entities for link establishment puts
a great deal of demand on the PKI, and thus it must be considered how certification can
be managed and established securely and efficiently.
2.2.4.3
Point to point encryption
Point to point encryption is great for anonymity when it obscures the source and desti-
nation from potential malicious entities as the case of CJDNS and demonstrated in the
concept of onion routing. However this also presents a significant overhead to the efficiency
and throughput of the infrastructure. Depending on the use case of the environment and
the routing protocol it might be preferable to consider end to end encryption sufficient
especially if addresses are dynamic and potentially unlinkable to identities. The concept
of privacy enhanced routing on address and identity level is explored in section 3.2.2.
2.2.4.4
Privacy
CJDNS facilitates privacy through ensuring confidentiality of data communicated between
authenticated parties. However the protocol does not seek to provide privacy with regards
to the participating entities in the network as all entities explicitly are know through
their friends and, if certification is added, also their certificates belonging to the public
keys of the corresponding addresses. Knowing the identity of all participating entities
eliminates the possibility to make privacy enhanced interactions that are either anonymous
or pseudonymous. The need for privacy enhanced communication is however evident as
much research is dedicated to creating privacy enhanced communication schemes [9] [11]
12
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:21==
[46]. Untangling IP addresses and identities is necessary in order to create a foundation
to allow pseudonymity or anonymity, as the benefit of employing e.g. anonymous digital
signatures is nullified if IPs are statically assigned to one identity even if the certificate
behind is group based as the IP becomes the source for linking actions to the same entity.
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
13
==PAGE:22==
14
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 3
Interface for Secure and Efficient
Fog Environments
In this chapter we define the interface as a reflection on the overall structure of the security
protocol needed to satisfy identified security requirements and functionalities suitable for
the fog computing paradigm. We consider how privacy, trust and security can be com-
bined as a basis for secure and efficient fog environments, and expand on the need and
purpose of modern security enhancing concepts such as trusted components, direct anony-
mous attestation and secure zero touch provisioning.
These are modeled as high level
functionalities that shed light on the further steps needed to properly model the trust and
security capabilities of fog security protocol. The key elements of the interface is defined
as two components: a delegated secure zero touch provisioning component and a privacy
enhanced DAA component.
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
15
==PAGE:24==
3.1
Interface
This section describes the desired functionality and requirements providing an interface
for a fog based environment using the networking capabilities of CJDNS. One of the main
requirements for the interface is to provide secure zero-touch provision (S-ZTP) an strong
privacy mechanisms. Other essential requirements for the interface to truly facilitate fog
based environments are flushed out in this section in response to the identified challenges
needs of fog environments.
With CJDNS providing a security enhanced networking protocol for end to end commu-
nication in the IPv6 address space, it remains to enhance the privacy and trustworthiness
of the system. Trusted components provide a measure to enhance just this, i.e. the trust-
worthiness of the system by providing strong roots of trust. With security guarantees in
the roots of trust we can look to enhance authentication and certification procedures and
importantly also provide strong security guarantees provided by secure storage, isolation
and protected execution [40]. This allows us to securely deploy and manage nodes whilst
limiting if not eliminating the need for manual setup and configuration. S-ZTP and desired
quality of services are achieved by defining a protocol supporting autonomous, and auto-
matic set up for highly distributed fog environments at scale with the high trustworthiness
provided by trusted components as a trust anchor.
As identified earlier a challenge and need of fog environments is trust management and
especially how to provide proof of operational correctness together with key and certifica-
tion management. With the tall hierarchy of the PKI being too inefficient for the dynamic
structure and scale of fog environments, we seek to facilitate delegation and trusted com-
munity by shifting trust to devices utilising the strong security guarantees and security
functionality of trusted components.
Privacy must be a core concern of this interface.
As the data collected from fog and
especially the edge might concern information gathered from specific individuals, vehicles
or devices it’s not enough to think only in terms of the content of the data. Information
about both the source and destination of data must be considered like location, identifiers
and auxiliary information that might be used to link, track or otherwise disclose unwanted
and private information about those entities from which the data came. To this end the
interface must incorporate technologies that enable strong privacy supported by unlikablil-
ity and unforgeability. Since this privacy at this level might not be practical for many
application weaker privacy should also be possible like pseudonymity.
These privacy enhancing mechanisms must ensure that privacy doesn’t have to be a case
of trusting a third party to not disclose the link between data and identity, but instead
making the exchange inherently private unless the source decides to give up any private
information. This interface specifies privacy enhanced communication and infrastructure
facilitated by Direct Anonymous Attestation (DAA) in order to achieve the required pri-
vacy guarantees like user- and device-centric unlinkability, unforgeability and anonymity
by effectively pushing the trustworthiness towards the devices and users through strong
roots of trust.
You can push some trust to privacy CA’s (PCA) requiring that they do not expose the link
between identity and certificate as also conceptualised by the TCG [10], but ultimately the
issue is the same. It’s difficult to enforce companies to follow strict standards for systems
and infrastructures that support strong privacy mechanism and even if it was possible
checking that those standards are actually followed would be at least as hard.
Hence
we specify the need for trusted components in order to facilitate operational assurance
through remote attestation.
16
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:25==
We visualise, in figure 3.1 a conceptual structure for N-layered fog environments popu-
lated by nodes which are deployed in an S-ZTP fashion relying on group certification for
authentication where the main functionalities of provisioning and trust establishment can
be delegated throughout the system. Where zones contain the children certified by specific
parent who ultimately are certified by the orchestrator.
Figure 3.1: The interface structure
This interface describes interactions in the system of interconnected nodes and a orches-
trator. Entities can be deploy and organised in a network utilizing CJDNS functionalities
to deploy with minimal configuration. This inherently enhances networking capabilities
as all entities in the system can network based on unique addresses and thus provides a
step towards being configured remotely and automatically. If such autonomy is granted
then the reliability and trustworthiness between orchestrators, fog nodes and edge nodes
needs to be precisely defined and enforceable. The integrity of devices is also crucial for
the application of fog environments. Considering the high level of potential exposure and
wide distribution of fog and edge devices, a reliable and efficient way to ensure device and
interaction integrity is a crucial feature needed to enhance the security of the environment.
In the following the expand further on specific security requirements that we identify for
such an environment.
As we throughout this thesis go deeper into certain aspects of
the technologies and requirements identified, we iteratively expand on them and relevant
specifics for the context.
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
17
==PAGE:26==
3.1.1
Interface Security Requirements
S-ZTP: Nodes will need automatically to become relevant in the context of their deploy-
ments. Challenges here are to make this efficient, scalable, and secure. If nodes must be
deployed zero-touch i.e. without any assumptions about the configuration and manual
aid, then the nodes cannot know it’s context before hand, which means that there is a
need for an orchestrator or parent to aid the deployment of nodes. The relationship be-
tween orchestrator and nodes is such that they each other must know only what is strictly
necessary about one another such that a child node securely can become certified by a
parent and enter the network. Setting this up is the initial provisioning step. Doing this
remotely and securely requires that nodes can validate the integrity of one another to
provide adequate guarantees that a node is in fact valid. As a node is deployed it should
simply be turned on with network access. Here the node must, based on it’s software and
initial provisioning, be able to reach a parent and complete the remote and automatic
provisioning step. Thus there are two distinct provisioning steps, one is the provisioning
of the trusted component and the device to establish a root of trust from the base of the
trusted platform, the other is the remote provisioning of the platform i.e. trusted compo-
nent and device in its functional role in the network. S-ZTP in this context encapsulates
both these steps but in terms of the desired efficiency relating to ”zero touch” it refers to
the automatic provisioning of a platform to the network in its functional role.
Secure distributed and remote device management: Following the promise of fog
based environments to not only distribute work to enable efficiency at all layers of the
system, but also enhance security by distributing security mechanisms and responsibility.
Doing this systems can be more resilient as local breaches and failures stay local and don’t
ripple out through the system. Allowing nodes to function on multiple levels with different
policies and degrees of access based on the trust they can provide, nodes can be arranged in
trusted communities which where responsibility is divided into many layers and in a more
granular way. This trust can be provided in a efficient manner with delegated certification
and operational assurance. Proving and verifying operational correctness autonomously
allows entities to decide whether or not another entity is trustworthy without incurring a
high overhead on the back-end infrastructure. This however requires that entities have a
trustworthy way to provide evidence of operational correctness, protect data and memory.
Fog nodes should be able to take responsibility for other fog nodes when failures or attacks
render them unavailable. The autonomy of nodes should allow them to function when
parents are temporarily unavailable until a new parent can assume responsibility and
control of those nodes. Integral to this is as mentioned above the ability of nodes keep their
configuration secure and to provide evidence to other nodes that the system is behaving
as expected.
Delegated certification: Parent nodes must be able to extent their certification to child
nodes by acting as low level CA’s. This requires that parent nodes can safely manage
keys, identities and certificates including node revocation, and storage and generation
of certificates. Furthermore they must support the establishment of adequately secure
communication channels to enable trustworthy distribution and management of certificates.
Important to consider when working with certificates is especially to protect the private
part of the certificate and consider the security of the source from which the certificate
is created and signed. For certification to be done remotely it’s crucial that devices have
internal secure environments either as hardware based security as with a TPM, or through
other means can generate a trusted execution environment [41] [1].
Privacy: The pervasive nature of Fog environments implies the existence of hyperlocal
18
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:27==
and potentially personal data and with that comes the caveats of privacy. Creating an
interface which inherently supports privacy and security by design could significantly en-
able reliable and responsible development of fog based systems. Data measured, stored or
sent by any component in the system must therefore by subject to suitable cryptographic
protection with the possibility to encrypt, authenticate and provide integrity of messages,
connections and stored data. Due to concerns about privacy but also about repudiation
and accountability it’s important to consider a good balance between trust and security
when it comes to privacy enhancing technologies [25]. The interface must be flexible but
at least to some extent support pseudonymity/anonymity with unforgeability and also to
a certain degree unlinkability and untraceability.
The ability to establish privacy enhanced connections must be must be controlled at device
level such that, as long as the device wishes to engage in privacy enhanced communication,
it can do so based on the roots of trust supplied by its own trusted component. In fog
based environments, several different approaches to privacy can be considered based on
the use cases for the environment by looking e.g.
at what kind of routing is desired
and the structure of the infrastructure [50]. Achieving a level of enhanced privacy for
the system can be facilitated by anonymous digital signatures, PCAs and K-anonymity
mechanisms such as in UProve [11] ABC4Trust [46], TCG’s privacy CA [10] and DAA
[9]. There must be considered a balance between privacy and control. The exact desired
and effective level of privacy will always be dictated by the use case, but with flexible
privacy enhanced technologies and guaranteeing certain minimum levels of privacy we
might greatly aid in the construction of privacy enhanced fog based environments. In
the TCG and ISO standardised [23] DAA, strong privacy properties are achieved though
anonymous digital signatures. Together with the ability of nodes to certify each other
in a trustworthy manner and establish certain levels of operational assurances we can
distribute these crucial security and privacy functionalities.
Decentralised roots of trust: All the security requirements described above are linked
to a trust anchor with strong roots of trust i.e. a component that must behave as expected
[19] and can provide the strong security functionalities. Key generation requires strong
random seeds, which requires a source with high entropy and randomness, but a strong
key is only secure if it has been generated in secrecy or by a trustworthy party and if it
securely has been placed in the device where it’s needed. From here the device must be
capable of protecting sensitive data and its keys physically and in communication. Thus
showing how essential parts of the system must trust previous parts continuing down to
the root of trust in a chain of trust [59]. Therefore the nodes of this infrastructure must
be supported by a strong root of trust in order to initiate a chain of trust over the system
behaviour. We denote such an entity a trusted component (TC).
Operational assurance: Establishing operational assurance between devices is an es-
sential requirement for autonomous, delegated and distributed systems. It requires that
nodes in the system are able to remotely attest to the integrity of their platforms in order
by providing verifiable evidence that they are in fact operating as expected both statically
and dynamically. Remote attestation allows for a device to prove the correctness of its
state by presenting some verifiable evidence, which essentially ensures that a remote and
potentially exposed node can be trusted. Remote attestation requires two basic elements:
proof of the state of the device and proof that the device providing this proof is in fact
the device attesting [57]. As such there is the need for a trusted entity as trust anchor [30]
that reliably can measure the integrity of a system, store those measurements and report
them based on reliable authentication. In the TCG specification this is facilitated through
several distinct root of trusts [59]: root of trust for measurements (RTM), root of trust
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
19
==PAGE:28==
for reporting (RTR) and root of trust for storage (RTS) [58]. A node that hasn’t obtained
certification can initially interact with other nodes based on the trust through operational
assurance provided by remote attestation and a framework to measure the system state
statically and dynamically with configuration integrity verification.
Remote attestation All entities in this interface must support remote attestation capa-
bilities i.e. the ability of a prover (Prv) in an authenticated manner to present evidence
for the correctness of state and execution to a verifier (Vrf). It can be seen as providing
authenticated proof to achieve operational assurance through configuration integrity ver-
ification and execution integrity. Research on this field generally divide attestation into
two categories; static and dynamic attestation[30] [49] [53] [1]. Static attestation can be
captured at boot by measuring the integrity of e.g. the binary images providing evidence
towards the configuration and firmware of the device[30].
A static hash over software
at boot is not able to capture changes happening as the device operates and during ex-
ecution, this presents a challenge as most systems require dynamic creation of binaries,
files and changes to state all of which might be compromised. Attacks based on memory-
or data-related vulnerabilities might compromise the device at run-time [30]. Dynamic
attestation attempts to deal with these issues by making software the base of the trusted
evidence. The core idea of control flow integrity is to measure the entire control flow of
the applications that must be trusted in order to provide evidence of operation assurance
[1] hence establishing assurance of run time or execution integrity. Dynamic attestation
therefor has challenges with efficiency and scalability as measuring and maintaining a full
overview of correct execution comes with significant overhead [30]. In [30] a lightweight
dynamic attestation scheme called Control-flow property-based attestation is proposed to
allow for attestation of edge and IoT devices through reducing the code-base needed to be
attested by considering only the safety-critical software functions in attestation. Attesta-
tion demands not only that control flow graphs can be securely managed and generated
on the device, but crucial is also the integrity and authentication of devices when seeking
to provide this evidence [30] hence the need for a trust anchor.
TCG specifies functionality to allow attestation to happen either explicitly or implicitly
[58]. Explicit attestation captures the original concept of explicitly providing measure-
ments to the verifier which can then determine if these measurements are acceptable or
not. Implicit attestation however utilises the presence of a trusted component to only
allow certain critical actions to take place when the device is in a predetermined good
state, e.g. the unsealing of a key tied to the trusted component such that any signature
made with that key, which is known to belong to a trusted component, implicitly can
prove that the device is in a good state. As such this key has a policy specifying that it
only can be used if the device can provide specific measurements [58].
In order to protect against malicious software on the device seeking to forge correct mea-
surements, secure hardware and trusted software provides further security guarantees
through roots of trust [58] [1].
Due to the large attack vector of IoT and distributed
devices [47], they must enjoy a certain level of security properties such as memory and
type safety [30], read-only memory and memory isolation [5] in order to prevent memory
leaks, unwanted access and attacks on the stack and heap. As such trusted component and
technologies play an important role in enabling distributed and secure remote attestation.
Configuration integrity verification (CIV): Is an architecture that enables the contin-
uous ability measure and trace the integrity of devices through digest lists is a key aspect
of a distributed system to enable operational assurance [54] [53]. This includes protecting
the configuration of devices and the ability to obtain evidence that the configuration is in
20
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:29==
fact in a good state. Proving that a device at boot has not changed crucial parts of the
system from the expected state, or proving that code is in fact being executed as expected
during run-time are ways to provide such confidence in a system. Obtaining this evidence
in a trustworthy manner enhances the trustworthiness needed when manual physical as-
surances are impractical and in some cases impossible to establish. CIV measurements
can be realised through cryptographic hashes over e.g. software images and configuration
information which crucially must be protected from unauthorized access and be accom-
panied by authentication mechanisms to provide unforgeability [54]. To this end there’s
a need for roots of trust which can trusted to reliably handle measurements the secure
communication of these. This concept will be further expanded upon in chapter 4.
Secure identity provisioning: As nodes are deployed and managed in the fog systems
the identifiers for specific nodes must be protected and managed in a secure way as to allow
the system to authentically identify who is who and protect against attacks like identity
spoofing or privacy compromises. Such identifiers can e.g. be realised as individual or
group based, and supported by policy based access control, attributes, types and roles.
The importance lie in the guarantees supporting strong identifiers together with verifiable
and/or certifiable evidence about that id [26]. This can be in the form of binding a key
pair known only to the node and parent to the identity of that node. When the parent
encounters a signature from that key pair during deployment it knows that it can only
belong to that node. As such it obvious that not only the key pair must be protected but
the binding of that key pair to an identity is equally important. This includes the need for
establishing secure connection for exchanging identifiers. Crucial parts of memory should
be protected for the purpose of handling the sensitive information and identifiers, whilst
access to certain parts of memory should be restricted and managed to protect against
shared memory access attacks [30].
Device identifiers can therefore be seen as asymmetric key pairs where the private part is
protected and bound to a device and the public part can be used to verify the identity of
a device. It’s been shown that keys can be weakened or compromised if used excessively
or for multiple different cryptographic operations [57]. Unique static device identifying
keys should therefore be treated carefully in order to serve as a reliable and secure root of
trust.
Dynamic, efficient and secure networking: In terms of networking, nodes must be
able to create links, expose services and discover connections and services. The approach
presented here is to have all entities in the network take some responsibility for networking
by eliminating the need for conventional networking infrastructure and overhead. CJDNS
allows for entities to do this, but in terms of privacy and efficiency it needs to be tweaked
in order to fulfill requirements of fog environments as mentioned in section 2.2.
Secure key management: Security of key based cryptography always starts with a
cryptographically strong and secret key, either the private part of an asymmetric key
pair of the shared secret key for symmetric encryption algorithms. Keys must therefore
be based on sufficiently large random seeds with high entropy as to ensures that high
computational complexity protects the secret keys and the specific algorithms enjoy their
full potential. As such its highly important to base key generation on a suitable entity
and provide high security capabilities for distribution of these keys. Thus we must also
ensure that eventual key exchanges are protected as even when building cryptography
around asymmetric keys there is a risk of exploitation and attacks [38]. As private keys
are essential for the security of most functionality in a system, it’s clear that if entities
must be able to authenticate one another and ensure confidentiality and integrity, they
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
21
==PAGE:30==
must have a reliable way to protect and use these keys.
Authenticated encryption: In order to establish fully trusted relationships it must be
possible for devices to establish connection ensuring authentication, confidentiality and in-
tegrity. Authenticated encryption provides data and message authenticity, authentication
of communicating parties and confidentiality. Pushing the responsibility of this function-
ality to the devices creating device-centric authentication is crucial for S-ZTP as the scale
of IoT and hence the fog based environments demands decentralised solutions [47] [22].
As CJDNS is built around asymmetric keys this concept should extend to schemes using
public key authenticated encryption.
The following sections describe the necessary actions and requirements needed for a trusted
component backed CJDNS interface providing S-ZTP and functionality to deal with the
security and quality of service challenges of fog based environments. This includes showing
how to deal with various identified challenges of CJDNS in the context of fog based envi-
ronments by changing the CJDNS protocol to integrate the desired security functionality
that can be provided by trusted components.
3.1.2
Summary of security requirements
1. The interface must provide S-ZTP.
(a) Secure id provisioning.
(b) Certification extension capabilities.
(c) Secure key management and provisioning.
(d) Secure and authenticated communication.
(e) Networking capabilities.
(f) Remote attestation
2. The interface must provide enhanced DAA privacy
(a) Secure key management.
(b) Certification capabilities.
(c) Strong roots of trust.
(d) Cryptographic algorithms
(e) Secure and authenticated communication.
(f) Secure storage
3. Interface must provide Remote attestation capabilities.
(a) Configuration integrity verification.
(b) Operational assurance
(c) Type, memory and control-flow safety.
(d) Secure communication channel
(e) Secure Identity management
(f) Trusted component providing strong root of trust
4. The interface must provide secure, distributed and remote asset management.
22
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:31==
(a) Secure id management.
(b) Certification extension capabilities.
(c) Secure and authenticated communication.
(d) Secure key management
5. The interface must provide confidential, authentic and authenticated communica-
tion.
(a) Authenticated public key encryption.
(b) Strong random number generation.
(c) Asymmetric and symmetric cryptography
6. The interface must provide secure networking.
(a) Networking capabilities.
(b) End to end encryption.
(c) Authenticated public key encryption.
3.2
Entities and functionality
The functionality is based on the requirements as defined above and serves to show how
the individual components of the systems must behave in order to achieve the security
requirements of the system.
The interface defines 3 inherent entities which make up the system of the fog environment.
1. Node, a fog or edge node with a trusted component.
2. Orchestrator, a cloud or back end entity that serves as the trust anchor.
3. TC, the trusted component.
Nodes and the orchestrator all appear in a hierarchical parent-child topology where the
orchestrator is the root of the hierarchy as a trusted parent to fog nodes and fog nodes
parents to other fog or edge nodes. At each level nodes should be able to interact with
their parent and other nodes at the same level. As trusted components are isolated entities
on the systems where they are hosted it will be regarded as a separate entity but will be
a part of every node as a combined platform. Secure dynamic networking is achieved
through CJDNS. In order for CJDNS to be functional all entities in the network must
have an asymmetric key pair in form of a public and a private key. This entails that
entities in must be capable of managing keys and securely store them. For entities to be
able to confidently establish links there must be a basis for authentication and verification.
In the CJDNS protocol this can be done either with pre-shared secrets or certification.
Pre-shared secrets generally don’t scale well thus certificates can be used with public keys
to enable effective authentication between nodes. A node must therefore have its key pair
certified and nodes must be able to verify each other based on certificates. At this point
CJDNS supports end to end encryption based on authentication and with the capabilities
of ensuring the integrity of that channel.
Nodes: In order for an fog node to support S-ZTP it must be able to identify a valid
source from which to become certified and be identified as a valid entity. To this end
the node must either be known to the source or provide evidence to support its validity
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
23
==PAGE:32==
as a correct node, and it must be able to verify the validity of the source. This can, as
explained above, be realised in zero-touch fashion through what we will call enrollment
and deployment where enrollment describes an initial setup of the node acquiring the
valid orchestrator certificate and registration of the node’s configuration as valid at the
orchestrator.
Authentication is done with certificates and public key cryptography, thus implying that
nodes must have secure storage and a cryptographically strong way to manage keys, signa-
tures, certificate signing requests (CSR), encryption and decryption. Strong key generation
and delegated certification will allow nodes to become a part of the chain of trust, where
by extending certificates based on certification higher up the chain nodes can act in a truly
distributed way.
Due to the inherent distributed structure both locally and globally of fog environments it’s
necessary to establish if nodes are acting as intended or have been compromised. In order
for nodes to be able to interact with one another they must be able to establish trust in that
interaction, implying that authentication is not enough. With remote attestation nodes
can provide evidence to prove operational correctness to a verifier. Doing this provides a
way to not only become authenticated but also provide evidence for the trustworthiness
in a distributed way by proving operational correctness. Hence the relationship between
parent and child implies the ability of the parent to verify the measurements provided by
the child in an explicit way.
Nodes then extent this trust through validation, authentication and certification of child
nodes in a similar fashion to the relationship between nodes and the orchestrator. This
trust can be granted though remote attestation architectures as CIV providing that nodes
must have a capable trust anchor. In order minimise the efficiency and privacy impact of
trust establishment between nodes in the system, nodes can after deployment implicitly
attest to their correctness through policies bound keys protected by the TC. Nodes can
as such exist in the infrastructure as group entities through group certification issued by
a parent node and DAA privacy enhanced signatures can be used to realise this. The TC
must be responsible for providing the isolation, such that it is separated from the host,
it must ensure that internal operations are protected such that execution can be trusted
and secure storage that only the TC can have access to.
Orchestrator: The orchestrator is the trust anchor of the system and as such is consid-
ered secure and trustworthy entity. Its knowledge of node configurations and source of
certification puts high demands on its security capabilities. It must be able to establish
secure channels to nodes and be able to securely store any information related to par-
ticipating entities. S-ZTP from the orchestrator perspective is the concept of automatic
establishment of trust in an unknown node enabled by enrollment. Enrollment happens ini-
tially between a fog node and an orchestrator where the necessary exchange of information
is made such that the orchestrator can later securely validate the node during deployment.
The orchestrator two main responsibilities is to manage and distribute digests of valid
configurations to the appropriate nodes and serve as a root certificate authority.
The
latter allows nodes to validate each other either by direct trust in a certificate or through
a certificate chain backed by remote attestation.
3.2.1
Routing & Networking
The choice of routing algorithm is essential to the security and especially the privacy
capabilities of the interface and derived protocols. Since many fog based environments can
be expected to be of highly interoperable, heterogeneous and dynamic of nature in many
ways they can be implemented as, or closely related to, mobile ad-hoc networks (MANETs)
24
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:33==
[36], vehicular ad-hoc networks (VANETs) [60] or flying ad-hoc networks (FANETs) [28].
In many cases these networks are realised with the use of topology based routing. However
the privacy capabilities provided by the network ultimately depends on the specific use
case desired as this will inform the topology, nature of channel and addressing scheme [50].
As the aim for this fog interface is to facilitate an efficient and robust system that stretches
from the cloud to the edge by utilizing nodes at each level as trusted intermediaries it also
makes sense to distribute the responsibility of routing. As described earlier we divide
the interface into child parent node relationships and the orchestrator.
This division
fits into an arbitrary hierarchical topology and so the routing protocol should facilitate
and make efficient use of such a division.
It’s desired that the routing protocol and
networking facilitates flexibility and robustness. CJDNS facilitates two way authenticated
communication with node based routing discoverability. With this as a base an initial
enhancement of privacy would be to allow nodes to dynamically change their addresses
such that addresses at best become pseudonyms and then to have communication sessions
be authenticated with group certificates providing unlinkability and pseudonymity.
Since node still have to be directly certified on their addresses we provide some measure
of protection against sybil like attacks. DoS and DDoS attacks like Mirai are limited by
adopting a mesh like networking infrastructure where individual device rarely are single
points of failure.
CJDNS supports viewing entities through the topology of physical links and overlay con-
nections.
Technically these can be done explicitly but also simulated over the regular
internet. For the sake of simplicity we will consider the network created by the orches-
trators and nodes to be entirely IPv6 and facilitated through physical connections where
nodes and the orchestrators exist in the overlay. As such we consider what overlay routing
protocol to use. However it’s important to note that both disruption of physical links and
routing paths present a vulnerability to the environment.
Considering the features of MANETs [36], VANETs [60] and FANETs [28] the interface will
accommodate high mobility at the edge such as to satisfy requirements from networks like
the FANET and especially VANET where routing must accommodate edge nodes entering
and leaving the area of control of fog or parent nodes. Using a reactive routing protocol
where nodes addresses can change frequently allows for the addresses to be detached and
potentially un-linkable to node identity, but presents the challenge of managing routing
and using id’s for end to end communication. The interface must support child to child
and parent to child communication. It must be considered how nodes to send messages to
other nodes, whom it’s not currently in direct connection with, using multiple hops.
CJDNS and classic topology based routing uses IP addresses and IDs. For any network
to be able to maintain some notion of privacy enhanced communication it’s necessary to
de-associate IP’s from ID’s as otherwise once an ID is discovered that IP will always be
identified and create issues with regards to linkability. Building the network around ID
also allows for discovery to be done based on the IDs such that IPs can be dynamically
changed as to not give any information away regarding identity of the host. It’s clear that
a fully anonymous system can’t directly send packages to other specific entities than those
the node can establish links to as there would be no way to specify identities to which
traffic must be directed. As that use case is fairly limited we will also consider different
privacy enhanced schemes that enforce either pseudonymity or partial anonymity.
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
25
==PAGE:34==
3.2.1.1
Sender anonymity
The case of partial anonymity can be realised as sender anonymity.
This scheme can
be achieved with one way connections where nodes are able to anonymously attest to
their validity and trustworthiness trough group authentication and configuration integrity.
Nodes are aware of relevant nodes through the parent as can send messages to those node
by specifying the destination address.
This scheme allows for parent nodes to have a
minimal impact in routing as the only requirement for them is to distribute IDs of nodes
in its responsibility zone. Classic reactive routing protocols can facilitate routing based on
this information as the path to any node that requires multiple hops are found on demand.
Thus low overhead is required as IDs are the only mandatory information for nodes to
connect, however end to end communication is slower as routes have to be discovered and
the exchange is message based.
3.2.1.2
Parent based node to node anonymous connections
It’s also possible to enable anonymous connection between two nodes at the same level, e.g.
edge to edge or node to node (n2n), by making all communication go through the parent
node or having the parent node define all routing paths, as it defines the routing tables
for nodes to use. Each node can then store this in its routing table. As such nodes can
both anonymously attest to group membership and configuration integrity without ever
knowing anything other than the fact that it’s communicating with a trustworthy entity.
Obviously this same anonymity is not extended to the parent as it would at minimum have
to know either pseudonyms or IDs of nodes in its zone of control to distribute the pre-
ferred communication paths. This approach is closer to proactive routing, as nodes would
have to communicate changing their IP to the parent in order for the parent to maintain
these preferred paths and destinations. With some entities responsible for managing the
privacy implication of routing it start to look like schemes that fit into a Tor based privacy
approach. Some recent research has show multicast, group based Tor routing with Mtor
[32] where nodes can privately communicate to its group. Also a Tor approach to hybrid
structure is found in Torsk [34] with all nodes appearing both as relays and end points
have realised source routing with anonymity. These approaches inherently demands higher
overhead than the sender anonymity, but end to end communication would be faster. Fol-
lowing this approach nodes are again free to determine the extend to which they appear
pseudonymous or anonymous in relation to other nodes at the same level.
This also has the advantage that the CJDNS protocol can be used as is with regards to
node authentication as authenticated public key encryption guarantees that both parties
are in possession of the keys in question. Therefore if the system efficiently and securely
can manage and distribute certificates then nodes can also verify connections anonymously
and establish two way connections.
3.2.1.3
Routing protocol
Implementing routing through CJDNS provides flexibility for the network topology as all
entities have the capabilities for routing, switching and establishing secure channels. Its
routing table supports IDs but is meant for address lookup based on IPs, therefore the
protocol must be changed in order to support the sender anonymous routing as lookups are
based on DHTs and logical vicinity [16] [39]. To emphasize the immediate possible benefits
of inherently using group based certificates and anonymous signatures through DAA, we
show how pseudonymity and two way connections are possible using the same structure
as the CJDNS handshake. The only assumption we need to add is that nodes will protect
themselves from acting only under one address by periodically changing addresses. If so we
can consider CJDNS to be pseudonymous at a session basis where each session encapsulates
acting in the network under one pseudonym.
This provides fairly weak privacy as all
26
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:35==
actions under that pseudonym can be linked but does allow any node to change pseudonym
arbitrarily often. This again brings forth the challenges of how to properly manage such
and pseudonymous and dynamic infrastructure.
3.2.2
Identity and privacy management
We have established the desired functionality for a fog-based environment with the capa-
bilities for secure-zero touch provisioning. Distributed certification backed by strong roots
of trust creates the base for efficient and trustworthy fog environments. Considerations
about privacy by protection of data, identity and communication are based on the appli-
cation of anonymous digital signatures and group keys. The process of enrollment ensures
that the infrastructure can trust nodes based on attestation and TC validity. In deploy-
ment nodes are recognised based on this and further has their certification capabilities
established, meaning two things. A node has a public certificate with which it can be
authenticated and the node is able to sign and create certificates for other nodes whilst
providing the chain of certificates as proof of validity.
In the generic S-ZTP case we consider a weakly privacy enhanced model for nodes to
enroll and deploy to a fog based infrastructure. As such, we don’t consider the need to
hide the identity of communicating nodes as we seek to simply establish trusted identities
and connections. Nodes can identify other nodes by signing with their certificates while
remote attestation provides stronger notion of operational assurance.
For privacy among nodes we consider anonymous digital signatures and group based keys.
This has both be researched in the TCG technologies [10] [9] as well as with intel’s SGX [2].
This has a distinct impact on certification for authentication and identification as nodes
must be able to sign with a group based certificate instead of individual authentication.
Furthermore the issue of IP addresses must be addressed. If parent nodes are to have a
an overview of its group whilst being able to define where traffic should flow it must have
some knowledge over relevant metrics of nodes. As mentioned earlier nodes can use group
certificates to authenticate their IPs.
3.2.2.1
Group based infrastructure
In order to accommodate the privacy from the infrastructure we consider a group based
infrastructure. The premise of this infrastructure is that nodes can function solely based
on attributes, roles and pseudonyms. The driving idea is that entities can be divided
into groups no smaller than necessary to allow for unlinkability between interactions as
K-anonymity [52], and that the functionalities provided entities in the system are not
dependent on needing to actively identify individual nodes but rather validate them. Thus
such a system is driven by rules and policies defining e.g. that a nodes must inform nodes
of a certain group at a certain distance from the current node. With this premise nodes are
at every layer in the topology defined, introduced and recognised as belonging to a group
which is verified and validated through anonymous digital signatures. However building
an infrastructure based on this is complex when considering management, efficiency and
use cases.
3.2.3
Privacy enhanced handshake
A point of improvement for CJDNS is the capability for anonymous authentication. As
show earlier the CJDNS handshake relies on shared secrets and authenticated public key
cryptography for authentication [16]. The protocol must be able to authenticate nodes
based on certified keys which can be privacy enhanced with blind signatures and group
certificates, presenting a unified structure for authentication such that it’s not required
that acceptable node connections are agreed outside the network and remain static within
the network. As specified in S-ZTP we require the solution to be automatically configured
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
27
==PAGE:36==
including certification upon deployment. This functionality could be introduced in place
of the shared secret introducing a mechanism for providing the necessary primitives and
certificate allowing nodes to authenticate the public key used for the handshake without
introducing big overhead. Following the functionality and concepts defined in the DAA
protocol [9] we can provide a robust way to allow nodes to anonymously get authenticated
and extend certificates however nodes must be able to support specific cryptographic
operations and provide certain guarantees with regards to the integrity and authenticity
of these operations.
3.2.4
Revocation
As nodes are increasingly certified there must be robust way of revoking ill behaving
nodes. This becomes complicated in when privacy must be guaranteed. Again we rely
on the DAA protocol for this functionality as nodes can be revoked based on signatures
and pseudonym keys as illustrated in [40] [62]. Its important that revoking a node does
not reveal communication that it has previously had, as revocation could then be used
to maliciously breach privacy. However it’s just as important to be able to reliably and
effectively revoke the actual offending nodes as it otherwise would be impossible have
confidence in the system.
3.2.5
Components
The wish for secure efficient deployment and strong privacy enhancing capabilities, as
emphasized through the above, is represented through the two main requirements for the
interface i.e. S-ZTP and Privacy. Therefore they will be separated into distinct compo-
nents for the sake of clarifying the essential functionality needed for each component and
how this functionality fulfills the overall security, privacy, trust and correctness require-
ments. Hence the interface defines two components first is the S-ZTP component which
defines the necessary functionality for secure, remote and efficient provisioning of nodes.
The second is the privacy enhanced component which defines the necessary functionality
for achieving the privacy requirements of the interface.
3.3
S-ZTP component
In this component we capture the realisation of delegated S-ZTP through enrollment and
deployment. As such we consider the actions to be carried out interactively between a child
and parent in the system when a child node is deployed to an already certified parent or
orchestrator. Enrollment captures as mentioned the a pre deployment phase which serves
to properly prepare the node and the infrastructure i.e. the orchestrator to receive the
node.
Initially nodes must be enrolled such that the infrastructure and node have a basis for
establishing trust in one another after which it can be deployed. This is described further
in section 3.3.1.
In deployment the node establishes that it is in fact a trusted entity and becomes certified
by its logical parent node. To be certified the node establishes a signing key or identity
key, this key becomes certified by the parent after which it can subsequently produce keys
for various purposes. By proving that its keys originate from its valid TC a node can
use this to inherent strong security mechanisms from its TC to enable trustworthy remote
attestation to provide proof of operational correctness. As such the validity of the node
TC and operational assurance is the basis for secure delegated deployment. The validity
of the TC is established through a certified root key also know as the endorsement key
in TCG and it’s assumed that all entities can recognise valid TC root credentials. In the
following section 3.3.2 we expand further on the necessary action and conditions for S-ZTP
28
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:37==
deployment and how nodes can use deployment to authentically communicate through a
two way handshake where nodes trust each other based on the knowledge that a parent
node or orchestrator would only certified a node that has a valid TC and therefore is
capable of providing operational assurance.
Due to the importance of the RTR in providing authenticity to remote attestation, device
TCs must support a hierarchy of keys originating from its TC root key. As the root key
and main identifier will break the security of the device if compromised it must be kept
in secure storage and be used only for internal and limited operations. Such protected
storage might be provided by the Device identifier composition engine (DICE) [55], Trusted
Platform Module (TPM) or Intel Software Guard Extensions (SGX) [2].
Since anyone could have a valid TC our S-ZTP functionality is crucially dependent on
strong remote attestation as supplied by CIV in the Astrid or FutureTPM projects [54]
[54] which we will expand upon further in chapter 4.1. For this purpose a device must be
able to create a key that can be bound to this root key acting as an identity or signing key
that can be verified with the public portion of the asymmetric root key. The signing keys
are used to attest to device configuration and execution measurements as policy digests
to provide operational assurance.
The back-end infrastructure and orchestrators distribute knowledge of platforms and mea-
surements that are trusted and to be certified further i.e. enrolled fog and edge nodes. For
the purpose of simplicity we assume that the orchestrator is a trusted and known entity
and we will therefore not discuss the details of orchestrator provisioning.
Currently CJDNS comes with its own means for checking and generating key pairs for
security and address allocation. Changing this functionality to securely generate and inte-
grate keys based on trusted components is the first step for CJDNS to support delegated
S-ZTP and allow for trusted communities and distributed certification. As such privacy in
authentication is not considered in the S-ZTP component as we focus on the establishment
of trust through valid TCs and operational assurance. In section 3.4 we expand on the
privacy component and how we can extend these features maintain trustworthiness with
enhanced privacy.
User stories: Based on the previous analysis two steps are represented to validate the
functional requirements for a fog environment with S-ZTP.
1. Enrollment of nodes.
2. Deployment of nodes.
3.3.1
1 - Enrollment of node
Enrollment involves an initial preparation and registration of the node to the orchestrator
such that the node can recognise the orchestrator at deployment and the orchestrator can
verify the state of the node at deployment. The node must be provided with knowledge
of a valid orchestrator certificate such that it can recognise when a legitimate orchestrator
or parent is certifying it.
The orchestrator is therefore assumed to be a trusted entity, which safely can manage
its keys, certificates and valid device configurations. Since nodes must be able to provide
operational assurance through remote attestation, this can serve as a basis for the dis-
tributed and delegated S-ZTP deployment mechanism. It’s the role of the orchestrator to
synchronise and manage the states of valid devices such that a configured and deployed
node can certify and validate its own nodes.
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
29
==PAGE:38==
3.3.1.1
Enrollment figure 3.2: Main actions and interactions
1. Orchestrator register node state.
2. Orchestrator sends orchestrator certificate to the node.
Figure 3.2: Enrollment of node
3.3.2
2 - Deployment of node
In order establish the trustworthiness of these distributed platforms it’s necessary to be
able to establish operational assurance. For this to be feasible a notion of correctness
needs to be established in order to distinguish between correct and corrupt. This presents
challenges both from the perspective of the verifier (Vrf) and the prover (Prv). Vrf must
be able to efficiently check if attestation results are correct. And Prv must be able to
measure the system in a trustworthy manner and use these measurement to prove opera-
tional correctness either implicitly or explicitly. The platform must manage these trusted
measurements securely and provide integrity and authenticity when shared between the
entities [30].
In the deployment phase a parent or verifier establishes trust in the child or prover through
the presence of a valid TC with certified TC credentials. This is the basis to provide re-
mote attestation and secure communication. Deployment therefore involves establishing
trust in a platform through operational assurance and the presence of a trusted TC. The
initial deployment requires the parent or verifier to have knowledge of correct states or con-
figurations of the prover and only certified the prover if it can present valid measurements
in the form of a policy digest.
Ultimately a node must establish two keys. A connection key certified by the signing key,
and a signing key which is certified by a parent node. These are the basis for the node
to actively participate in the network and communicate with peers. The keys must be
protected by the root of trust such that their trustworthiness can be established based
on the credentials of the TC and certification. The signing key is used to extend the
certificate chain by signing certificates of child nodes and self signing communication keys.
The verifier must be able establish that the signing key is protected by a valid TC root
key of Prv. This can be ensured through a simple challenge response in which the verifier
uses the public part of the root key to encrypt a nonce for Prv to send back. If Prv is able
to validate the TC credential and verify the state of Vrf then Prv will certify the signing
key of Vrf. Hence a node will always authenticate through signing key certificates except
for the process of deployment in which the validation and authentication of a node TC
first happens.
30
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:39==
The orchestrator is responsible for managing states of correct nodes and acting as a cer-
tificate anchor for the certificate chains. Therefore the first nodes are deployed at the
orchestrator to become parents which can further deploy nodes.
The Correct certification of nodes must establish that a node has a valid trusted component,
and that a node is certified by a trusted parent which in turn ultimately has been signed
by the orchestrator thus creating a chain of certificates. The newly certified node must
then also be able to delegate certification. As such all nodes must know the orchestrator
certificate to validate certificate chains originating from that point on.
Hence secure
authenticated node to node communication is facilitated through authenticated public
key encryption using certificates to verify the identity of the owner of the asymmetric key
pair.
The keys and credentials that prove the unique identity and credentials of the TCs are
the TC root keys and TC root credentials. The keys used to authenticate, certify and sign
integrity measurements are signing keys along with signing certificates. The keys used to
connect with other nodes are connection keys. These can be signed by signing keys to
prove their relationship to the sender and can then be used for encryption and decryption
in authenticated public key encryption. The certificate of the sender signing key will allow
nodes to recognise the signature thus public keys can be exchanged preserving authenticity
and integrity.
3.3.2.1
Establish signing key certificate, figure 3.3: Main actions and interac-
tions
Figure 3.3: Deployment of node with parent
1. Node obtains policy digest and verifies parent signing certificate.
2. Node creates policy bound signing key and CSR.
3. Node sends TC root key credentials, signing key and CSR.
4. Parent verifies the state of the node and the policy of the signing key. A challenge
response is used to validate that the signing key is indeed associated with a valid
TC.
5. Parent creates and signs the signing key certificate .
6. Parent sends node signing key certificate to the node and stores certificate.
7. Node stores parent and node certificates.
On the basis of the certification nodes must be able to establish authenticated connec-
tions to each other. Following the cryptographic structure of the CJDNS we can use the
established signing key to protect a newly created communication key which can be self
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
31
==PAGE:40==
signed and thus linked to the parent issued certificate of the signing key. Thus both keys
can be verified as long as the nodes share knowledge of the parent certificate. Hence we
utilize the same handshake structure as in CJDNS, but where key exchange is verified
through certificates and signatures instead of a shared secret. After the keys have been
established the nodes can use their TC’s complete the session handshake and establish an
PKAE channel with forward secrecy.
Operational assurance can be provided through implicit remote attestation since the sign-
ing key can only be used if its policy is satisfied. Hence when completing the key exchange
nodes also exchange fresh nonce’ that must be signed with the signing key.
3.3.2.2
Authenticated n2n connection figure 3.4: Main actions and interac-
tions
Figure 3.4: Authenticated n2n communication
1. Node A received a fresh nonce from node B and creates a connection key used for
the connection handshake.
2. Node A signs connection key and nonce with its singing key and initiates the key
exchange sending a fresh nonce to Node B.
3. Node B validates the signature using the signing certificate of node A.
4. Node B creates a connection key used for the key exchange.
5. Node B signs connection key and nonce with its singing key and completes key
exchange.
6. Node A validates the connection key and nonce of node B and both nodes are ready
to engage in the PKAE session handshake.
3.4
Privacy component
DAA is used as a baseline for privacy enhanced authentication and remote attestation in
order to establish strong privacy properties for the interface. These privacy properties [62]
[40] include:
• Device-controlled anonymity: The ability for the device to decide whether or not to
reveal any identifying information.
• Device-controlled linkability: The ability for the device to decide if signatures can
linked.
• Non-frameability: Signatures can not be faked.
• Corretness: All valid signatures can be verified.
This component defines the functional requirements for supporting a anonymous digital
signature scheme like DAA such that nodes can interact with each other in a privacy
enhanced manner. Following the DAA protocol [40] [23] we consider the three base entities
32
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:41==
(Issuer, Signer, Verifier) in relation to the interface. All parent nodes must be able to
function as all three entities as they should be able to allow child and leaf nodes to join the
group following the DAA protocol by receiving credentials and certification. Parent nodes
must be able verify a child node’s signatures i.e. authenticate them based of the group
membership and they must be able to join the protocol themselves. Orchestrators must
at be able to issue DAA credentials and verify the DAA credentials. Nodes at the same
logical level in the hierarchy must be able to verify the credentials and signatures of one
another. The goal here is facilitate a way for nodes to interact with each another without
having to rely on full identity disclosure in order to authenticate the communication.
The S-ZTP functionality described above defines the base interactions needed in order to
use trusted components and certification to provision devices remotely and autonomously
whilst distributing responsibility to devices in many layers of the cloud to edge systems.
However relying on classic certificates and signatures requires that the signer disclose its
identity for authentication or rely on a third party to keep identity certificate pairings
secret [10]. Autonomous nodes in a fog-based environment must be able to confidently
establish connections with nodes that it is supposed to contact. The DAA protocol achieve
this through blind signatures, zero knowledge proofs and group keys that can also be
bound to attributes [49] [62].
The issuer is responsible for issuing credentials i.e.
act
as certificate authority, the signer uses these credentials blinded to sign a message and
create zero knowledge proofs, and the verifier can verify that the message came from a
certified entity without knowledge of the credentials or private key using the issuer group
key.
This however allows for a weaker kind of authentication as the node you are in
contact with shouldn’t be fully identified [40]. For the purpose of edge, fog and IoT this
privacy enhanced authentication is however a great way to distribute and manage trust and
minimizing the risk of devices broadcasting potential privacy violating identifiers through
communication with other edge devices.
As such the Privacy component needs to define the necessary actions for nodes to issue
DAA credentials to nodes, nodes to verify DAA credentials from other nodes and to sign
messages with the DAA credentials. The Privacy component is the enabler of privacy, thus
it serves to make it possible for the actions and functionality in the S-ZTP component to
be built with strong privacy capabilities. Hence when actions in S-ZTP have required a
node to be authenticated, this can be exchanged with Privacy component authentication
guaranteeing stronger privacy.
In terms of functionality we can logically separate the privacy component into 3 parts.
First is privacy enhanced authentication as we wish for nodes to be authenticated whilst
preserving high levels of privacy achieving either anonymity or pseudonymity with regards
to device identification. This functionality can be achieved using the signing and verifica-
tion part of the DAA scheme. Then we have certification of a node, that must be able to
do privacy enhanced authentication. This functionality is carried out between the issuer
and the signer, and can logically be done in the certification of a node where the node
needs to prove the validity of its TC and obtain its DAA credentials. As with deployment
in the S-ZTP component the node that wants to become certified must provide opera-
tional assurance to the issuer or certifier and therefore it’s necessary to establish remote
attestation as the issuer must be able to know if the node to be certified is in fact a valid
node. Lastly we need the functionality to revoke nodes while preserving the privacy of the
node.
With the DAA design for privacy enhanced signatures defining the functionalities for
private n2n communication, we can now look at privacy with regards to the infrastructure.
The S-ZTP construction concerns itself with privacy in form of ensuring confidentiality of
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
33
==PAGE:42==
data whilst exposing node identities with certification.
3.4.1
Identities and privacy
The key structure defined for the S-ZTP component is extended with the privacy compo-
nent allowing nodes to act on privacy enhanced authentication.
As we have seen in the analysis of CJDNS and construction of the S-ZTP component we
use a specialised key for communication which is signed by the signing key of the node in
order to provide authenticated and certified communication. This key can at any time be
changed by the node to which it belongs effectively allowing the node to change CJDNS
identity and address which can then be backed by the actual node identity.
With the functionalities outlined above we can not only have nodes change their CJDNS
identities but these identities can be anonymously or pseudonymously signed with through
the DAA protocol thus nodes are in control of their own CJDNS identities whilst allowing
other nodes to always confirm that a node is in fact part of the trusted group.
There is however still a need for parents to be informed of node identifiers if routing and
multi-hop for efficient directed communication is to be possible as outlined in section 3.2.2.
User stories: Based on the previous analysis several steps represented as user stories
validates the functional requirements for a fog environment with DAA.
1. Privacy enhanced certification
2. Privacy enhanced authentication
3. Privacy enhanced revocation
3.4.2
1 - Privacy enhanced certification
In the deployment phase 3.3.2 described in the S-ZTP component nodes are certified on
the basis of their signing key and a provided identity where the acceptance of the node is
based on whether or not the TC root credentials have been registered with the orchestrator.
The identity of the node from this point on is static and will be exposed every time a node
is authenticated.
The DAA scheme [62] specifies an algorithm and a protocol to essentially certify a node for
privacy enhanced functionality. Initially the issuer who is responsible for the certification
constructs specific security parameters tied to an asymmetric key pair [62] [40] this is
called setup. The keys created here are used for verifying signatures and creating DAA
credentials and the security parameters are needed in order for entities to create DAA
compatible keys. These keys are denoted issuer keys, and their corresponding certificates
the issuer certificates.
The other part of certification is called join, this is an interactive protocol between the
issuer and the signer and involves the signer creating its DAA key pair based on the
security parameters. The DAA key is then sent to the issuer who, based on authenticating
the signer and the validity of the its TC, issues DAA credentials for the DAA key which are
tied to the private key of the issuer [40]. The DAA credentials are sent to the signer who
now can then proceed to create anonymous and pseudonymous signatures based on the
DAA keys and received credentials. Hence nodes can create a self signed pseudonym key
certificate with a DAASign procedure. These credentials are blindly signed by the issuer,
ensuring that it’s infeasible to derive the identity of the TC based on the pseudonym [40].
This pseudonym key can be used similarly to the communication key and with the advan-
tage that the device itself decides weather or not this pseudonym should be linkable to
34
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:43==
anonymous [40]. For a node to become a parent it can use its DAA credential to also self
sign its own issuer key certificate and deploy new nodes based based on this. As the issuer
certificate is DAA signed its verifiable by the parent issuer certificate and so on. This
extends to the orchestrator who’s issuer certificate is the certificate anchor.
3.4.2.1
Creation and certification of issuer key
Creating and getting the issuer key certified can be done in the same way as how the
signing key was created for the S-ZTP component. This key is of a different construction
according to the DAA protocol [40] [62], but it must be possible to authenticate the parent
through certificate chains originating from the orchestrator in order to establish trust in
the group memberships.
3.4.2.2
certification and creation of signer DAA key - Setup and Join (figure
3.5): Main actions and interactions
Here a child node or signer gets privacy enhanced credentials that allows it to communicate
with other nodes based on the group parent key. Hence nodes can create pseudonymous
or anonymous messages according to the DAA protocol. Notice that nodes will have both
a certified issuer key pair used to issue privacy enhanced DAA credentials to child nodes
and its own privacy enhanced credentials issued by its parent node. As such all nodes can
engage in privacy enhanced communication
Figure 3.5: certification of signer DAA key
1. Setup: Issuer sends issuer certificate and security parameters to signer.
2. Setup: Signer verifies the issuer security parameters and creates DAA keys based on
them.
3. Join: Signer requests to be certified i.e. join, and sends its DAA public key and TC
root credentials.
4. Join: Issuer validates the TC root credentials and initiates challenge response to
verify ownership of root key.
5. Join: Issuer verifies CSR to establish that the DAA key was created at a valid system
state and protected by the signing key, and creates DAA credentials through blind
signature.
6. Join: Issuer sends credentials to signer TC in confidentiality.
7. Join: Signer verifies the construction of the credentials and stores them.
8. Join: Signer creates pseudonym keys and blindly certifies them with the DAA key
and credentials.
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
35
==PAGE:44==
9. Signer sends the newly created pseudonym certificate to the parent node which stores
it.
3.4.3
2 - Privacy enhanced authenticated communication
Authentication is provided with a signing protocol sign and a verification procedure verify.
Following the construction of the DAA protocol the pseudonym keys are certified in such
a manner that their signatures can be verified based on the issuer public key and an
anonymous/pseudonymous pseudonym key certificate. The certification therefore happens
locally on the device using certified DAA credentials.
The verifier can verify that the pseudonym certificate belongs to a valid trusted component
and that this certificate is made by trusted DAA credentials. The reason why the verifier
can be sure that it belongs to a valid TC is based on the need of the issuer public key in
order to confirm the pseudonym through the DAAV erify procedure [40].
Hence in order for a node to verify another node’s signature it needs to know and trust the
DAA setup public key of an issuer. Nodes that are deployed to the system and certified
will be informed of this public key allowing them to authenticate other nodes certified by
that parent and potentially nodes certified by another parent who’s public key they have
received in a trustworthy manner.
DAASign and DAAV erify can therefore be used to establish pseudonym keys for the
authenticated channel as in the S-ZTP component but instead of directly identifying each
other the nodes prove only potential attributes and group membership.
3.4.3.1
Privacy auth n2n - Sign and Verify, figure 3.6:
Main actions and
interactions
Using the common parent or orchestrator issuer certificate nodes can recognise the pseudonym
certificates of other nodes if created with a DAA key and credential from that same issuer
key. I.e. child nodes can verify other child nodes using the parent group certificate. When
a node wishes to establish a connection it creates and certifies, with a DAA signature
DAASign, a pseudonym key. It then sends this certificate to a node it wishes to establish
an authenticated channel with. The recipient uses DAAV erify to verify that the node
has been certified by a trusted parent also establishing that the other node must be in
possession of a valid TC. Once both nodes have shared pseudonym keys they can establish
a PKAE channel.
Figure 3.6: Privacy auth n2n - Sign and Verify
1. Node A creates and certifies pseudonym key with DAA key and blinded credentials
and sends the verifiable certificate signature and pseudonym certificate to Node B.
2. Node B verifies the signature using the Parent issuer public key and the pseudonym
certificate.
36
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:45==
3. Node B signs pseudonym key with its DAA key and sends pseudonym key, signature
and pseudonym certificate to Node A.
4. Node A verifies the signature using the Parent issuer public key and the pseudonym
certificate.
5. The pseudonym keys can now be used to establish PKAE channel as in Auth n2n -
3.3.2.2
3.4.4
3 - Privacy enhanced revocation
Revocation of a node can be done by the orchestrator through a revocation messages
containing the revoked pseudonym key, and a command to revoke the TC DAA key and
all child keys of the DAA. This means that other nodes in the system that suspects or
discovers malicious behaviour can report it to the orchestrator which then can decide to
revoke the node in question. When the revocation message is received by the node it
verifies the validity of the request and creates two linkable blind DAA signature over the
pseudonym key and its issuer certificate key used for revocation confirmation. This is
sent back to the orchestrator together with its issuer certificate and its child pseudonym
certificate list for confirmation of the revocation request. The orchestrator then uses the
supplied signatures establish that the TC from which the pseudonym key originated has
processed the revocation request and that the child certificates originates from the node’s
issuer certificate.
Ultimately then a node finishes to process its revocation request it
deletes its DAA key and child keys.
3.4.4.1
Revocation, figure 3.7: Main actions and interactions
Figure 3.7: Privacy enhanced revocation
1. Orchestrator generates revocation message signed by its issuer key.
2. Orchestrator send the revocation message to the node.
3. Node verifies the message and blinds its credential.
4. Node uses the blinded credential to create DAA revocation signatures.
5. Node sends the revocation confirmation package to the orchestrator.
6. Orchestrator verifies the signatures and establishes if any child certificates are to be
revoked.
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
37
==PAGE:46==
38
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 4
Trust Modelling
In this chapter we look into the device and inter device level trust through state diagrams
as trust models.
The modeling is based on the concept of tracing the essential flow of
actions from the trusted components and devices to a desired trusted state. We therefore
expand on the role of remote attestation as tool for conveying evidence for establishment of
trust between devices. The models are derived from the high level functional models of the
interface and serve to clarify how and why the essential trusted action are related in order
to fulfill the defined functionalities in a trusted manner. As such these state diagrams can
serve as a basis for formal models, which in turn can be expanded and formally verified.
However for scope of this thesis, the state diagrams can further be used as reference points
in order to aid in the construction of the final protocols.
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
39
==PAGE:48==
4.1
Modelling trust through state diagrams
Based on the functionality and the corresponding actions identified in the interface section
we can now model the trust relationships between entities in the interface. The purpose
here is to capture the Trusted Computing Base (TCB) through states or trust distribution
diagrams such that we can derive statements about the trust of the system and the conse-
quences when violating expected i.e. trusted behaviour [17] [35]. The notion of quantifying
the trustworthiness of the TCB is not new, however it’s been popularized to argue about
trust of the TCB with the metric of code size [17]. This has the obvious drawback that
both small and large code bases might be completely untrustworthy as the size of code
holds no direct link to the reliability of the code. With states diagrams we can argue about
the essential trusted action and operations and their relation to one another to derive a
map of the trusted states of the system [17]. Therefore we will use state diagrams to
capture the dependencies and flow of trusted actions. With this approach we can capture
the correct sequential execution of core actions and functionalities. It also allows us to
precisely define the trust assumptions and components needed for each action, such that
security requirements can be met as long as those actions are trustworthy [35]. The state
diagrams therefore capture the complex flow of trusted actions and relations within and
between entities. The result of this is the establishment of ”chain of trust” over those
entities and actions [35].
The trusted component (TC) encapsulates the need for a trusted root for crucial oper-
ations like key generation and protection.
Therefore we seek to here model the core
abstract actions and the flow of actions by states to serves as the base line for a specific
protocol over these states. Therefore the states do not specify cryptographic primitives,
and solution specific message exchanges but rather capture the flow of actions needed for
the establishment of important security elements as certificates, keys and cryptographic
operations.
The actions that create the basis for the trust of devices and hence the trust of the system
as a whole, are first and foremost the actions required for any device to handle sensitive
data and ensure that this data is not compromised. As such the devices must be able
to reliably establish trusted and authenticated connections by ensuring that keys were
created, protected and used according to specification and policy without this, trustwor-
thiness can’t be established. As mentioned remote attestation plays an important role in
ensuring trustworthiness as devices become able to provide operational assurance. How-
ever the challenges of remote attestation especially centered around limiting the trusted
computing base i.e. the amount of code and functionality that requires trust [19]. In [30]
it’s emphasized how operation assurance can be achieved by carefully reducing the TCB to
only the essential trusted actions and properties of the execution. This further motivates
the need for defining a flow of trusted actions with root in a component which we can
expect to behave in a predictable manner due it’s implementation and our trust in the
manufacturer.
In the following sections 4.2 and 4.3 the state diagrams are provide an overview of the
chain of trusted actions either locally or between devices. Different devices are separated
with colors such that white and green states separate the states of two different entities.
No distinction has been made between the host and the TC in this modelling, but we
expand upon the relationship between the host and the TC and explicitly show how a
host interact with the TC in the protocols in chapter 5.
40
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:49==
4.1.1
Trust and trusted components
In general we define trust as an expectation of behaviour [59] as such we relate it closely
to being trustworthy. However trust also captures a need to rely on something to act as
expected thus implying a risk if this is not the case. As such root of trust specify elements
that must be trusted as misbehaviour can not be detected [59]. Therefore roots of trust are
trusted based on correct implementation and specification, and they must be defined and
function in such a way that we can use them to derive trustworthiness in other elements
as long as the root of trust is not compromised.
The TCG specifies two methods that enable the evaluation of trust authority in a platform
based on various roots of trust [59]:
1. Authority for trust is based on hashed measurements (digests) from the root of trust
for measurement (RTM) which is stored in the root of trust for storage (RTS) and
reported by the root of trust for reporting (RTR). Verification of these measurements
can then be done by a verifier with knowledge of trustworthy measurements.
2. Measurements are signed to bind the identity of the authority to that code. Hence
it can be known if it’s a trusted authority that runs the code.
This evaluation of trust authority is the basis for remote attestation as defined by TCG.
In order to rely on the trusted component for this we must establish a basis from which
to bootstrap trust in the TC as we must establish that we are in fact interacting with
the intended TC in order to trust its mechanisms. We previously mentioned that the root
key or RTR is the seed of this trust as its key is certified from the manufacturer side and
thus can validate the specific TC. In order to ensure the proper use of the TC we define
its functionality in the scope of sessions in which communication between the host and
the TC authorized. As such we specify that the interactions between host and TC to be
facilitated through policy authorization sessions [53] [59]. These sessions require that the
configuration integrity of the system can be measured through either static or dynamic
tracing in order to generate a policy digest that must be matched with the authentication
value attached to the commands and objects used to control authenticity of the interaction.
As specified in the previous section we use the signing key for this purpose.
4.1.1.1
Roots of trust
The interface specifies the reliance on roots of trust especially for the devices, however as a
holistic system we should also trace the relationships of the roots of trust and their hierar-
chy 4.1 among authorities as the resulting inter device level trust derived from operational
assurance between the entities.
This is necessary as trust will have to be carried implicitly between devices especially
considering that devices might not be as capable closer to the edge which can become
significant as remote attestation and operational assurance can be time consuming and
costly to establish [30] [58].
4.1.2
Attestation
To encapsulate the need for devices to statically and dynamically attest to the overall
device integrity, we provide in this section two abstractions. There must exist a concept of
correctness based on some measurements of the system which are stored in a secure place in
order to provide evidence that can be matched to a whitelist. These measurements might be
static as binaries on boot or dynamic as control flow graphs that can capture the execution
of code.For simplicity we assume the whitelist is composed of policy digests over valid
system states which a verifier can therefore use to compare with trusted measurements
provided by the prover, resulting explicit attestation [49] [53].
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.1: Hierarchy over infrastructure roots of trust
Implicit attestation becomes feasible once a key has been created bound to a policy [49],
at this point the whenever the TC wishes to use the key it must be able to satisfy the
policy and there is hence to need for a whitelist. Remote implicit attestation therefore
works trusting that a signing key only is certified if the parent or the orchestrator could
validate the policy digest bound to key during certification. As such a verifier trusts the
prover through the knowledge that a certified key can only be used when the specified
policy is met.
Using implicit attestation like this has been conceptualized in [54] as attestation by proof.
It allows the entities in the system to attest in an online manner as the TC requires a fresh
measurement of the system state from the RTM. To enhance systems with comprehensive
configuration attestation capabilities [53] and [54] uses a configuration integrity verification
(CIV) model joining the IMA digest lists attestation scheme from [48] with the extended
verification module (EVM) to monitor information flow and configuration for efficient
attestation.
Likewise the device must be able to attest the execution of safety critical code dynamically,
conceptually this can be done with complete knowledge of the safety critical code, however
issues with scalability and efficiency renders it unpractical to maintain a whitelist of all
code [30]. As demonstrated in [30] and [48] there are more efficient ways to trace and
attests to run time execution. [30] specifies how this can be accomplished with a reference
to trusted properties of code or full code execution patterns. This type of attestation
considers not the system state as such, but rather the concrete properties of code execution
and as such we will abstract this as execution integrity. In order to achieve effective implicit
attestation as mentioned in [48] it necessary to be able to verify and validate the certificate
and policy of the restricted signing key that signs the the measurements and other keys
from the TC.
42
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:51==
4.1.2.1
Templates
In order to create restricted verifiable keys we use the concept of templates for key creation.
This concept has been defines and implemented by the TCG in TPM functionality and it
allows a trusted component to create key on the basis of the templates through which a
policy can specified and hence enable the creation of keys for implicit attestation by sealing
a key with that policy. The TC must require that the key can only be used when the policy
is satisfied. For this to be possible the TC must be in control of the private part of keys
and there must be a policy digest such that this can be guaranteed [49] [56]. Further a
key can be restricted specifying that it can only sign objects and digests originating from
a TC. The TPM does this through special certificate HMAC ticket that is attached to
TPM generated object and used to verify that the object did indeed originate from the
TPM [59].
4.1.2.2
Policy digest
With remote attestation we can start to track when systems or devices are in good states
or display certain critical properties. Proving this to another entity or internally to a root
of trust it possible to enforce a concept of property based access control [30]. Specifically
this allows us to define security policies and rules based on which certain permission can be
granted if these policies and rules are met [42]. TCG specifies how keys can be embedded
with certain policies [49] denoted policy bound keys in order for them to be bound to
certain configuration states and rules that must present before the key can be released for
use by the TC. This provides the basis for implicit attestation within a system and in so
far as another system can confirm that a key is originating from a TC it too can trust
in the implicit attestation. It should be noted that relying on implicit attestation puts a
high demand on the predictability of the policy digest lists as the system state present at
the moment of key creation must keep being relevant [48].
In section 5.2 we explicitly create a protocol on the basis of the flow of states further ex-
panding on the cryptographic primitives and the details of the interactions between nodes.
This is done in order to emphasize that there might be a plethora of implementations and
protocols that can satisfyingly emulate the trust models, and that such models can help us
create sound solutions and provide stronger guarantees for trust and security assumptions.
4.2
S-ZTP
S-ZTP is built from the assumption that the TC credentials allow us to reliably verify
that a device carries a valid trusted component. From here the trust flows through the
actions that can be proven to be done by and belong to this TC and that especially the
keys used for communication are protected and used correctly. As such when nodes are
deployed they must provide evidence that they are currently in an accepted state e.g. for
the creation and use of signing keys to be valid. Trusted measurements based on the RTM
provides evidence such that crucial actions can either be explicitly or implicitly attested
and therefore also this is an essential part defining if the system can be trusted or not.
4.2.1
Enrollment
A enrolled node is a trusted entity and thus has a valid trusted component and its config-
uration is part of the whitelist such that validity can be established in deployment. The
node must additionally also be able to recognise an orchestrator as it serves as certificate
anchor, hence all nodes must recognise the orchestrators as a CA and thus be a aware
of its certificate so that nodes can validate certificate chains originating from the orches-
trators. This is done by giving the node the trusted orchestrator certificate in a secure
environment.
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
43
==PAGE:52==
How a trusted root key with credentials is established vary between trusted components.
In the following protocol in section 5.2 we show, that the algorithm, commands and
protocol for establishing this is rather simple thus we assume this to be done according to
a standardised approach as a requirement for these actions.
We assume that the whitelist of acceptable configurations is establish independently before
nodes are deployed such that the orchestrator and parents can verify the policy digests of
during deployment.
4.2.2
Deployment
4.2.2.1
Establish signing key
Valid device states for any node is managed in a whitelist from which a parent node can
check attestation values against. The trusted component has an essential role in this as
it is responsible for managing the device integrity values which must be protected while
also guaranteeing the security of the keys. Ensuring the security and trustworthiness of
the keys involves both the guarantee that the system created the keys and measurement
in the correct way and also the guarantee that the system is in a good state when using
the key. In order for the node to use its signing key to extent trustworthy certificates it
must get the signing key certificate signed by the parent node.
Upon receiving the key and CSR from a child node the system must be able to establish
that it originates from a trusted entity by confirming that the creation of key was done
by a valid trusted component. In order to tie the CSR and signing key to the TC the TC
signs the message with its root key and sends along the public part of the root key. To
ensure that the device is in a good state the configuration integrity measurements must be
send along with necessary execution integrity measurements. This effectively establishes
that the device is in the whitelist with the correct state.
As the signing key will be used to certify other nodes, the parent node must now sign
the certificate of this key with its own certified signing key. Providing the node with an
attestation report also signed which the node can use to establish some level of operational
assurance to nodes who are not in possession of the whitelist.
The node receives signing certificate and credentials which it stores for further use. The
parent stores the certificate so as to efficiently be able to recognise signatures from nodes
and distribute the certificates to nodes child nodes which must be able to communicate
with one another.
Figure 4.2: Trust model over node deployment
4.2.2.1 Deployment states - figure 4.2
Device integrity whitelist: The device to be deployed has to be able to provide oper-
ational assurance. In order for the parent to know if the device states measured during
creation of the signing key is correct it must know what policy digest to compare it with.
And since the node must create a signing key bound to a correct policy digest it must also
be presented with the knowledge of a whitelisted policy digest.
44
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:53==
Verify cert: The node must verify that the parent is certified by a trusted entity and
establish that the policy digest originates for such a trusted entity or the parent.
Start session: Start a session to create a restricted policy bound signing key. This is
a policy session in which measurements are provided by the RTM in order to create the
proof that the device is in fact in a trusted state and that its possible for the device to
satisfy the policy bound to the signing key.
Load root key: Load the root key from the protected environment such that it can be
used to load the signing key.
Calculate device integrity values: Measurements of the current device state to be
compared with the policy digest of the signing key in creation.
Create signing key: Generate as a child key of the root key a cryptographically strong
signing key that is policy bound received policy digest. To be able to verify the creation
an HMAC over the key and digest is made. The signing key is made with the inherent
random number generator of the TC as a seed.
Load signing key: The newly created signing key is loaded into the TC using the root
key. The signing key and TC root key is needed to generate creation certificate request.
In order to use the key the session digest must match the policy digest of the signing key.
Create and sign signing key CSR: A CSR is created for the creation of the signing key.
This CSR contains a certificate with proof of the device state during creation signed by
the signing key. A new HMAC is constructed over the device state digest and the signing
key in order to ensure that this indeed is the singing key created by the TC. Then the
CSR is signed by the root key in order to prove that the CSR and signing key originates
from the a valid TC.
Validate TC credentials: The parent must validate the TC credential of the node using
the trusted manufacturer certificate. This establishes the validity of the TC in question.
It then proceeds to start a challenge response over a fresh nonce encrypted by the TC
public root key. If the following verification of TC signatures are verifiable with this TC
root public key, then the parent can be sure that this valid TC was involved.
Verify CSR: Verifying the CSR received from the node includes verifying the policy digest
over the signing key and verifying the signature of the TC root key on the signing key. If
this verification can be completed the parent will start a session to use its signing key for
certifying the node signing key.
Start session: The is also a policy session in order to load the parent signing key which
also is bound to a policy digest.
Load signing key: The signing key is loaded into the TC using the root key (we assume
here that the TC root key is loaded for brevity). The signing key and TC root key is
needed to generate creation certificate request. In order to use the key the session digest
must match the policy digest of the signing key
Calculate device integrity values: Measurements of the current device state to be
compared with the policy digest of the signing key for signing the node certificate.
Sign signing key: Certify the verified signing key with the parent signing key as to extend
the certificate chain. This can only be done if the parent is in a good state according to
the policy digest of its signing key.
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
45
==PAGE:54==
4.2.2.2
Authenticated n2n connection
Initially, when a node wishes to establish an authenticated secure connection to other
nodes, a key exchange must take place. This also serves as the initial verification of node
identities through their certified signing keys. However this certification does not in itself
convey any information about the state of a node and if it’s currently in a trusted state.
In order to convey this information the nodes utilizes implicit attestation or attestation
by proof [54]. Hence there is no need to establish a whitelist before hand, neither node
knows the state of the other but trust in the fact that a parent node will only certify a
correctly created signing key bound to a trusted policy digest.
Each communicating node will load their keys from the TC, create TC connection keys
secured by the signing key and present implicit attestation to along with a signed message
produced by the signing key. As such the crucial part of node authentication takes place
in the key exchange. Any subsequent communication between those nodes, using the same
communication key, is bound to the communication key.
A policy session is started to enable implicit attestation, the policy of signing key is
checked with the state of the device if successfull the node can go on to creation and
signing operations. The Node and its TC loads the TC root key and signing key in order
to create a TC key used as communication key. The communication key is then loaded
and the node is ready use it. A signature over the communication key with the signing key
is made and send along with the communication key to node B. Upon receiving the key
exchange node B verifies the signature from node A using the public key certificate of the
signing key. Node B creates its own connection key and starts and authentication session
for implicit attestation and completes the same steps as node A. Upon receiving the key
exchange node A verifies the signature from node B using the public key certificate of the
signing key.
Figure 4.3: Authenticated n2n communication
4.2.2.2 - figure 4.3: Authorize signing key, create and sign connection key
Start session: Start a policy session to authorize the signing key, create a connection
key and sign it with the signing key.
Load root key: Load the root key from the protected environment such that it can be
used to load the signing key since the signing key is protected by the root key.
Load signing key: Load the signing key from the protected environment such that it
can be used for protecting and signing the communication key.
Calculate device integrity values: Measurements of the current device state to be
compared with the policy digest of the signing key for signing the connection key.
Create connection key: Create a connection key and protect the private part with the
signing key. As the signing key is used in the creation of the connection key the signing
key policy digest must match the session digest.
46
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:55==
Load connection key: Load the connection key from the protected environment such
that the public part can be released in the key exchange.
Sign connection key: Use the signing key to sign the connection key. Only do this if
the device is in a good state provided that the session digest matches the expected policy
digest of the signing key.
Validate certificate: After receiving a key exchange message the receiving node validates
the signing certificate of the sender using the parent certificate. This to ensure that the
sender is in fact in possession of a valid TC since it has been certified.
Verify connection key signature: The recipient verifies the signature made with the
validated signing key and can now proceed
4.2.2.2 - figure 4.3(B): Sign connection package with authorized signing key
4.3
Privacy and DAA
In this section we capture the trusted actions required to achieve the privacy enhanced ca-
pabilities as illustrated in section 3.4. These will be further expanded upon and actualized
in section 5.4. The trusted DAA actions are modeled from elliptic curve DAA algorithm
as specified in [40] and under mechanism 4 in [23]. As such we collect the cryptographic
functions into issuer and signer based DAA actions as DAASign, DAAVerify for signatures,
Blindly sign or BlindSign for creating DAA credentials and VerifyCred for verifying the
DAA credentials. The creation of issuer and DAA keys is also implied to done according
to mechanism 4 in [23] or possibly adapted from the DAA protocol in [62].
4.3.1
Privacy enhanced certification
The certification part will be divided into two sections:
First we define the actions essential to the creation and certification of the issuer key. As
stated this is the key that functions to certify group key pairs and its public key functions
as a group public key that can be used to verify signatures.
Second we look at the creation and certification of DAA and pseudonym keys. These
ultimately allow nodes to create pseudonymous or anonymous signatures.
Hence the correct implementation of the two steps above are essentials to the security
features of the system. The DAA privacy protocol also allows for nodes to provide implicit
attestation as in S-ZTP since this can be done with minimal privacy implications. We
therefore carry the notion of whitelists and device integrity values. The integrity of device
only become more prevalent as authentication becomes weaker as we rely less on individual
identification and more on group membership and the notion of K-anonymity.
4.3.1.1
Issuer key creation and certification
The creation and certification of the issuer key is a locally performed protocol. Since the
issuer key is certified with DAA credentials it implicitly certified the entity responsible for
certifying the DAA credentials. This makes the issuer certificate verifiable with the parent
issuer key. The flow of states here is the same as for the creation of the pseudonym key
as this is also a DAA certified key.
As with the creation of communication keys we rely here on implicit attestation as the
DAA key can only be loaded by using the signing key and we do therefore not need to
establish a whitelist.
In this section the load of the TC root key has been omitted for brevity.
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 4.4: Certification of issuer public key
4.3.1 - figure 4.4: Certification and creation of issuer public key
Start session: Start a policy session to authorize the use of the signing key to load the
DAA key.
Load signing key: Load the signing key using the root key.
Calculate device integrity values: Measurements of the current device state to be
compared with the policy digest of the signing key for loading the DAA key protected by
the singing key.
Load DAA key: Load the DAA key making the private part available to the TC. This
can only be done if the policy digest of the signing key matches the session digest.
Create issuer key: The issuer key is created as a child key of the DAA key this binds
the issuer key to the DAA key. The issuer key must be created according to the DAA
protocol and it corresponding group security parameters are made. The group security
parameters are used by child nodes to create a DAA key that this parent can certify with
its issuer key such that it becomes verifiable with the group public key.
Load issuer key: The issuer key is loaded into the TC using the DAA key such that it
can be signed and certified by the DAA key.
DAAsign issuer key: This state encapsulates the DAA signing process using the DAA
credentials which can blinded, the object to be signed and the DAA key.
When this
operation is called a random value is generated to create the random part of the signature.
There is also made a deterministic non-verifiable signature over the object and the DAA key.
These two are combined with the blinded DAA credential to make up a DAA signature.
Create issuer cert: The issuer cert is based on the issuer key and the DAA signature
over that key. This makes the issuer certificate verifiable by the parent issuer group public
key.
4.3.1.2
DAA & pseudonym key creation and certification
The interactive DAA creation and certification processes must establish the validity and
authentication of the node TC and much like the creation and certification of the signing
key the parent node (issuer) must be authenticated. The whitelist is again introduced for
explicit attestation but also enjoys the inherent implicit attestation as the signing key is
involved.
4.3.1.2 - figure 4.5(A): Creation & certification of DAA key
Device integrity whitelist: The device to be deployed has to be able to provide oper-
ational assurance. In order for the parent to know if the device states measured during
creation of the DAA key is correct it must know what policy digest to compare it with.
The creation CSR must provide the correct policy digest for the parent to accept the DAA
key. However the attestations provided here are in fact two fold as the implicit attestation
provided by using the signing key in the creation for the DAA key as a parent and that
the parent can verify the policy digest provided by the CSR.
48
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:57==
Figure 4.5: Creation and certification of DAA & pseudonym key
Start session: Start a policy session to authorize the signing key such that it can be used
as a parent key for the creation of the DAA key.
Verify issuer cert: Verify the parent issuer certificate with the trusted orchestrator
certificate in order to establish the presence of a valid TC. The trust here build on the
notion that only valid TC are certified by the orchestrators.
Load signing key: Loading the signing key using the TC root key. The root key is
assume loaded for brevity. The signing key must only be used if the session digest is the
same as the policy digest bound to the signing key. In the following this includes the
creation and loading and the creation CSR of the DAA key.
Calculate device integrity values: Measurements of the current device state to be
compared with the policy digest of the signing key for creating the DAA key.
Create DAA key: The creation of the DAA key is based on a DAA template generated
from the group security parameters. A creation HMAC is made over a digest of the device
state and the DAA key.
Load DAA key: Load the newly created DAA key into the TC using the signing key.
Create and sign DAA CSR: A CSR is created for the creation of the DAA key. This
CSR contains a certificate with proof of the device state during creation signed by the
DAA key. A new HMAC is constructed over the device state digest and the DAA key in
order to ensure that this indeed is the DAA key created by the signing. Then the CSR is
signed by the signing key in order to prove that the CSR and DAA key originates from
the verifiable signing key in turn proving the presence of a policy bound key.
Validate TC credential: The parent must validate the TC credential of the node using
the trusted manufacturer certificate. This establishes the validity of the TC in question.
It then proceeds to start a challenge response over a fresh nonce encrypted by the TC
public root key. If the following verification of TC signatures are verifiable with this TC
root public key, then the parent can be sure that this valid TC was involved.
Verify CSR: Verifying the CSR received from the node includes verifying the policy digest
over the DAA key and verifying the signature of the signing key on the DAA key. If this
verification can be completed, the parent will start a session to using its issuer key for
certifying the node DAA key.
Start session: Start a policy session to authorize the signing key to load the DAA key
which is used to load the issuer key for certification.
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
49
==PAGE:58==
Load signing key: Loading the signing key using the TC root key. The root key is
assume loaded for brevity.
Calculate device integrity values: Measurements of the current device state to be
compared with the policy digest of the signing key for authorization.
Blindly sign DAA key (DAA credential): A blind signature is made over the DAA
key to create the DAA credentials for the node. The DAA credential are then confidentially
and authentically sent to the node.
Verify DAA cred: The deployed node verifies the received credential using the parent
issuer key. This verifies both the validity of the construction and that the public issuer
key can verify signatures made with the DAA key and credential.
4.3.1.2 - figure 4.5(B): Creation and signing of pseudonym key
Start session: Start a policy session to authorize the use of the signing key to load the
DAA key.
Load signing key: Load the signing key using the root key.
Calculate device integrity values: Measurements of the current device state to be
compared with the policy digest of the signing key for loading the DAA key protected by
the singing key.
Load DAA key: Load the DAA key making the private part available to the TC. This
can only be done if the policy digest of the signing key matches the session digest.
Create Pkey: Create a pseudonym key as a child of the DAA key, this key is not usable
if the DAA key is revoked.
Load Pkey: The pseudonym key is loaded into the TC using the DAA key such that it
can be signed and certified by the DAA key.
DAAsign Pkey: This state encapsulates the DAA signing process using the DAA creden-
tials, which can be blinded, the object to be signed and the DAA key. When this operation
is called, a random value is generated to create the random part of the signature. There
is also made a deterministic non-verifiable signature over the object and the DAA key.
These two are combined with the blinded DAA credential to make up a DAA signature.
Create Pkey cert: The pseudonym certificate is based on the pseudonym key and the
DAA signature over that key.
This makes the pseudonym certificate verifiable by the
parent issuer group public key.
4.3.2
Privacy enhanced pseudonym key authentication
The DAA certified pseudonym key allows nodes to bind a pseudonymous identity to a
communication channel with another node. The certificate can be shared but does not
include fresh authentic attestation.
Figure 4.6: Privacy enhanced pseudonym key authentication
4.3.2 - figure 4.6: Privacy enhanced authentication with pseudonym keys
50
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:59==
Create nonce: A nonce is created by the other node to ensure freshness of the exchange
requiring that the key has been loaded in the current session. The nonce must be suffi-
ciently randomly generated and sufficiently large to provide the desired freshness.
Start session: Start a policy session to authorize the use of the signing key to load the
DAA key. The DAA key is needed to load the pseudonym key.
Load signing key: Load the signing key into the TC using the TC root key handle. We
assume the TC root key loaded for brevity.
Calculate device integrity values: Measurements of the current device state to be
compared with the policy digest of the signing key for loading the DAA key protected by
the singing key.
Load DAA key: Load the DAA key making the private part available to the TC. This
can only be done if the policy digest of the signing key matches the session digest.
Load Pkey: The pseudonym key is loaded using the DAA key handle.
Sign nonce: The pseudonym key is used to sign a nonce provided by the entity that
wishes to obtain a proof of authenticity.
Verify signature: The requesting node receives the signature and can now verify that is
has been signed by the pseudonym key in question.
4.3.3
Privacy enhanced revocation
Figure 4.7: Privacy enhanced revocation state diagram
Start session: Start a policy session to authorize the signing key for loading the DAA
key.
Load signature key: The signing key is loaded using the key handle of the root key,
which is assumed loaded for brevity.
Calculate device integrity values: Measurements of the current device state to be
compared with the policy digest of the signing key for loading the DAA key protected by
the singing key.
Load DAA key: The DAA key is loaded into the TC such that it can be used to make
signature over pseudonym key in the revocation request and the issuer key of the node. In
order to sign the issuer key we can just feed the publicly available part to the DAASign
process, hence its not needed to load the issuer key.
Verify revocation msg: Before making any signatures the node must verify the revo-
cation message and that it came from a trusted orchestrator. This includes a revocation
message with the pseudonym key to be revoked, and a signature made by the orchestrator
over the message.
DAASign Pkey: A DAA signature is made over the received pseudonym key with blinded
DAA credentials. The blinding ensures that revocation signature is privacy preserving.
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
51
==PAGE:60==
The deterministic part of the DAA signature is used as a basis for confiming that this
node in fact is owner of the revoked pseudonym key.
DAASign issuer key: A DAA signature over the issuer key of the node is made with
the same blinded version of the DAA credential as used for signing the pseudonym key.
This links the two generated signatures while the deterministic part of the DAA signature
can be compared with the deterministic part of the issuer certificate of the node.
Equal rvk & Pkey signatures: The parent uses the deterministic parts of the newly
created revocation signature rvk over the pseudonym key received from the node and the
signature attached to the pseudonym key certificate to determine if the current node is
the owner of the pseudonym key.
Verify Pkey signature: The parent verifies the revocation signature made by the node
using the parent issuer key to establish that the DAA revocation signature is made from
a valid TC that had certified by a parent node. This can be verified also as a chain of
certificates.
Link rvk & issuer signatures: Since the revocation signature and issuer signature
received from the node was made with the same blinded DAA credential these are linkable,
and the parent can establish that the same node must have made these.
Equal issuer signatures: In order to establish that the issuer certificate received from
the node is in fact from this node, the deterministic part of the fresh issuer signature
is compared with the deterministic part of the signature in the issuer certificate. This
establishes that the issuer certificate is from the node that has just been revoked.
Verify child certificates: With the issuer certificate of the node the orchestrator verifies
all that the child DAA certificates of the node is in fact originating from that node and
can now confidently repeat this process revoking the DAA keys and credentials of all child
nodes.
52
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 5
Protocols and Architecture
This chapter defines the protocols and architectural concepts supporting the models defined
in the interface and trust model sections. As the interface, the protocols here are also
divided into two distinct sections with the privacy enhanced protocol as expansion of the
S-ZTP protocol. The protocols show the detailed cryptographic exchanges, function and
relation between the entities defined in the interface and how information is moved from the
trusted world of the TC to its host. An adversarial model is also defined and the security
of the protocols and functions are analysed on the basis of this.
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
53
==PAGE:62==
5.1
Architecture
The models derived and enforced in this section are designed to enable highly scalable
and delegated distributed environments that can enjoy both strong cryptographic security
through trusted components but also enjoy strong privacy enhancing functionality by
integration with the DAA protocol. The proposed models and protocols are made with
the purpose of showing how many of the desired security requirements and functionalities
can be achieved, but leaves room for the protocols to be modified in order to serve specific
desired functionalities. The limits and capabilities of the final protocols will be discussed
in detail throughout the chapter. As such the decision to design the system around high
scalability and thus also higher complexity induced by e.g. synchronisation challenges is an
active choice. Furthermore the use of the TC to enhance security in exchanges is applied
while being well aware that for devices of certain capacity it is considered infeasible to
host a secure hardware module like a TPM as a TC. Hence we also design the protocols
with the intention of making them fairly general such that desired functionality might be
condensed into the TCG DICE or other trusted computing solutions aimed at providing
efficient roots of trust.
The concept of the orchestrator topology is often related to containerized solutions. Whilst
we do emphasise the use and importance of the orchestrator the security guarantees are
defined in the scope of one TC per node providing only trusted security functionality for
one identity. The presence of multiple containers or micro-services on a node for which
each need to be protected from the other and potentially provide privacy and security
sensitive operations is not directly applicable to this model. However its possible to look
into a connection between the functionalities derived here and schemes for micro-kernels
[61]. As such we assume that all services running on a node are content to be treated as
one entity that share the same security functionalities.
As described in chapter 3 the systems essentially consists of nodes as platforms i.e. a
device as a host of a TC, and the orchestrator. The orchestrator stores and manages the
policy digests and states for currently acceptable nodes and acts as a trust anchor. Initial
deployments are made between the orchestrator and nodes where after deployment can
be delegated to those nodes as needed. The orchestrator is also the revocation authority
responsible for deciding and issuing revocations.
5.1.1
Delegated deployment
With delegated deployment we capture decentralisation as the transfer of responsibilities
to distributed or delegated fog nodes from the central orchestrator. These responsibilities
are mainly considered to be verification through establishing operational assurance and
secure certification. This implies a host of security requirements as outlined in the interface
3.1. As such we consider the key concepts for delegated deployment in the S-ZTP setting
to be:
1. How can a parent establish operational assurance of a node when issuing and verify-
ing the creation of signing keys of new nodes.
2. How new nodes can prove that they should be accepted into the system without
disclosing its configuration to the system.
3. How a new node can trust the parent that certifies the node.
Central solution to this problem as illustrated in [54] [40] [53] rely on the ”orchestrator”
or any single entity to issue credentials and verify nodes. This model and the associated
protocols use the key mechanisms from the models of [54] and [53] to provide S-ZTP while
expanding them to on them to provide this in a delegated fashion. Then this concept is
54
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:63==
expanded further with privacy enhanced capabilities for delegated deployment by using
the concept of direct anonymous attestation with anonymous digital signatures as defined
in [9][62] [23]. The desired topology is still hierarchical as illustrated in figure 5.1, however
the role of the orchestrator becomes more implicit as its active participation in deployment
can be limited to a small subset of nodes in the entire system.
Figure 5.1: Central deployment (left), Delegated deployment (right)
1 - Remote attestation is the main driver for achieving this functionality and we show how
nodes through policy bound keys and the a certified TC root key can become part of the
system without requiring the parent node to know anything specific about the node. In
order to handle this specific information we utilize the orchestrator as a trusted entity. It
can capture and manage the desired configurations and states of nodes, hash them into
policy digests Phash and distribute them to the parent nodes who must be able to perform
delegated deployment. Parents then trust in the correct creation of the signing key based
on verifying a node’s TC root credentials guaranteeing that the node is in possession of a
valid TC.
2 - In the deployment protocol 5.3.2.1 we assume that the parent has the expected policy
digest for nodes it should certify. The policy digest is sent to a node and then used to create
a template for the signing key and the node eventually creates an attestation certificate
binding the key to the TC state policy digest generated by the TC which can be verified
to match the policy digest that the parent has. Since these are hashed the parent does
not have any explicit knowledge of the node except from the fact that a hashed digest of
its state match the policy digest that the parent node has been given by the orchestrator.
3 - In enrollment nodes receive the trusted certificates i.e. the orchestrator certificate such
that they can verify the certificate chains from a common trust anchor of the orchestrator.
This allows nodes to authenticate a
5.1.1.1
Scalability and complexity
With the desired structure being highly scalable this will naturally infer an increase in
complexity as synchronization challenges arises from the distribution of responsibilities. In
the context of this interface and its protocols there are a few key challenges as a direct result
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
55
==PAGE:64==
of delegated nature. Management and synchronisation of current policy digests is one such
problem. As the orchestrator manages what kinds of nodes are supposed to be accepted
into the system, it must be able to synchronize its nodes so all agree on what constitutes
valid and invalid nodes. Depending on the desired level of responsibilities and delegation it
might also be relevant to consider having nodes further down the hierarchy being sources
for new acceptable states. This would further complicate the synchronisation.
The problem of synchronization in considered is an open problem for distributed systems
[45] as nodes at scale must be synchronised according to agree on the acceptable states.
We do not aim to provide an explicit solution to this problem, but to emphasize the
impact and importance of the trade off that happens when control is delegated.
The
right choice of synchronisation scheme is important as the trade offs can and should be
chosen that best fit the specific implementation and use case of the system [45]. The
challenges with synchronisation can be found also in networking as potentially highly
dynamic networks can change both addresses and typologies, its important that changes
are properly synchronised.
5.1.2
TC root key and credentials
So far we have worked with the assumption that the TC has a root key and root key
credentials, that can be used to validate a a correctly provisioned unique TC. In the TCG
world this key is called an endorsement key (EK) which is also the RTR. The EK is
supposed to be created and bound to a TPM upon creation, thus we extent this concept
to the generalised TC. In section 5.2.2 we outline the protocol for bootstrapping EK and
EK credential, it’s otherwise assumed as a prerequisite for any protocol involving a TC as
the baseline for trust in the TCs lies in the possession of valid root credentials. As such
nodes aware of the trusted issuer of these credentials and can use its certificate Certm to
validate the root credentials CredTC of nodes. Note here that an issuer as a concept is
an entity that issues credentials or certificates, and in these protocols we work with the
notion of two different issuers.
• Manufacturer TC root credential issuer (associated in the following by Certm)
• Entity X DAA credential issuer (associated in the following by Certx
i )
• Entity X signing key certificate issuer (associated in the following by Certx
s)
In the following protocols we will show how a distributed node can become a DAA cre-
dential issuer, through distributed certification and remote attestation.
The TC root
credential issuer is not such a distributed entity as certification of individual TCs require
the knowledge and provisioning of the TC root keys together with correct bootstrapping
and implementation of the TC itself. The assassination with Certm is derived from man-
ufacturer m which is the entity that must be trusted in order to trust the TC itself.
Manufacturer makes sense in the space of secure hardware modules, but it suffices to
encapsulate the entity responsible for the validity of the TC being either a hardware or
software component. The verification of the correctly provisioned TC root credential to
the TC is therefore the basis for verifying the validity of the TC itself.
5.1.3
TC key hierarchies
With the root key as a root of trust for reporting (RTR) we expand in both S-ZTP and the
privacy enhanced protocols the key hierarchy of the TC to arrive at the desired security.
In the S-ZTP protocols the main keys managed by the TC are the root key TC the signing
key S and the communication key C as shown in figure 5.2.
In the DAA protocol we introduce a number of new keys see figure 5.3 as specified in the
56
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:65==
Figure 5.2: S-ZTP TC keys
interface privacy component 3.4. The signing key is, what in TCG specification is called
the attestation key, as we can bind this key to a policy we keep it help achieve implicit
remote attestation when using the DAA key D as a child key of the signing key. Then we
introduce the pseudonym key P as a privacy enhanced communication key and lastly for
the delegated functionality parent nodes must also have an issuer key I.
Figure 5.3: Privacy enhanced TC keys
5.2
Protocols
The following sections 5.3 and 5.4 contains protocols explicitly showing the exchange of
messages and content between the system entities required in order to satisfy the require-
ments and functionality described in section 3.1. In order to provide a solid notion of the
core trusted actions these will be explicitly linked to the trust models defined in section
4.1 as we aim to provide specific protocols.
Building on the trust models the protocols defined below are centered around showing
how the TC and node interact. A core action introduced in section 4.1 is the loading keys.
TC components are considered to provide useful and strong cryptographic operations like
in the case of the TPM [59], but are also considered limited in storage and computation
power. This is even more so true considering DICE [55]. As such we see that keys are
managed through commands like Load, managed through partially encrypted key blobs
denoted e.g. SK/DK and referenced through key handles like SKH/DKH for use in
subsequent commands. Ultimately it must be considered carefully which operations to
carry out on the node in the unsafe environment and which operations must be done in a
safe environment like the TC, but the security critical operations should be well protected
and computed by the TC as these would be particularly vulnerable if attacked. Many of
these critical operations are reflected in the section 4.1 together with operations that are
essential for a node trust the messages coming from another.
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
57
==PAGE:66==
5.2.1
TC assumptions
The system relies on the TC to provide strong roots of trust and attestation to derive trust
between entities. In the TCG the root of trust for attestation capabilities is derived from
a trusted process in which measurements are taken by the root of trust for measurements
(RTM) i.e. the tracer and then used by the TC representing an exchange between the
normal and secure worlds. Therefore we have to assume that measurements process is
secure to rely on configuration integrity verification capabilities.
Another core assumption in the world of trusted components is that an adversary will
not block communication between the host and the TC. Obviously an attacker in the
distributed systems and IoT space can perform a denial of service by physically removing
the device or a compromised host could have all its communication between the host
and TC blocked. The protocols are designed around these assumptions including that we
expect a given protocol to executed but allow the possibility that the adversary might
manipulate the input in order to compromise the security requirements.
5.2.2
Root credential provisioning
The keys generated for a TC should be based on a strong seed with high entropy and
appropriate size compared cryptographic algorithms and key required. This root seed or
endorsement primary seed as in the TCG specification [59] [56] is inserted into the TC and
then used together with key parameters to derive the desired endorsement key. Parameters
are often referred to as a template allowing any platform to create the its own TC root key
at any time without jeopardizing the seed. With knowledge of the seed a fresh endorsement
key is then certified by the manufacturer resulting in the the TC obtaining CredTC. The
root seed is therefore the base for the TC identity and RTR as it defines the security of the
TC root/endorsement key TCpk/sk. The private part of the root key is directly linked to
the identity of the TC and it should therefore never be revealed, hence its recommended
that the manufacturer also deletes this and the seed after certifying the root key of a TC
[56]. In the EK creation and certification protocol we assume that the manufacturer
is authorized to interact with its own trusted component. Since the manufacturer act as
a commonly known and trusted entity we treat this certification as certificate anchor and
hence do not expand on how a manufacturer could obtain CA certification of the root key
credential.
EK creation and certification
TC
Manufacturer
Seedroot, Temproot
Msk, Mpk, Credm,
TCSeed{Seedroot}
Store Seedroot
{TCpk, TCsk}
= CreatKey{Seedroot, Temproot}
V erifyRootKey{TCsk, TCpk} ⇐⇒
CredT C = Certify{TCpk, Msk}
TCCreatPrimary{Temproot}
{TCpk, TCsk}
= CreatKey{Seedroot, Temproot}
RootCred{CredT C}
Store CredT C
58
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:67==
5.2.3
TC protected keys
Most keys are handled through the TC but due to the limited storage of the TC, it must
export encrypted and integrity protected key blobs to the host. In order to load a given
key blob the TC needs to know the parent key which is protecting it. To refer to loaded
key the TC returns the key handle for that key represented as a value uniquely identifying
the key. Key blobs are referred to as the letter of the key and the uppercase ”K” hence the
signing keys Spk/sk have the key blob SK and the key handle is denoted by ”H” i.e. SKH.
Since key blobs are exposed as they are stored at the host outside the TC, they must be
protected. The TCG standard for protecting TPM keys have a key blob consisting of a
private part symmetrically encrypted, the public part readable, and for integrity a MAC
over the encrypted part of the blob and the key name [59] [62]. The keys used for the
symmetric encryption and the MAC are created from a key derivation function over the
parent key and a salt. From this point on we will consider the loading of keys through
this process implicit as the protocols invoke the commands LoadSK, TCH making both
the public and private part of the signing key protected by TC root key available to the
TC for further use.
5.2.4
DAA group Certification
The Certification structure achieved with the TC and S-ZTP can be realised with identi-
fiable certificates in which a parent node certifies the signing key of a child node with a
key certified by its parent or the orchestrator.
Figure 5.4: DAA enhanced group certification hierarchy
With the group signature concept of DAA we can use the fact that nodes can create their
own self signed certificate which can be verified with the orchestrator issuing certificate.
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
59
==PAGE:68==
This is illustrated in figure 5.4, where the DAA group captures signatures made by node
DAA keys and credentials which are verifiable by the parent or orchestrator. Especially
this includes the issuing key pair and certificate needed to create new DAA keys. As such
the orchestrator only directly issues credentials to nodes x, y and z whom then can issue
credentials to other nodes. A node that is deployed in the DAA group of node x can self
sign keys and certificates with its DAA key and credential which is verified by the issuer
certificate of node x which in turn is signed by the DAA key of node x which is verifiable
by the orchestrator issuer certificate.
Orchestrator issuer certificate −→
Node x DAA credential −→Node x issuer certificate −→
Child node DAA credential...
This implies that all nodes must receive the issuing certificate of its parent such as to be
able to identify nodes from its own group. As nodes must be equipped with the certificate
of the orchestrator to establish a trust anchor for the certificate chain.
5.3
Delegated TC enabled S-ZTP
In order to achieve S-ZTP we utilize the remote attestation capabilities made possible by
strong roots of trust in trusted components. The desired protocols defined here follow the
models of Deployment in section 3.3.2 and expand on the relationship between nodes and
TCs. The core idea of S-ZTP remains as the desire to establish trust through operational
assurance before a new node is enabled to communicate with other nodes and act in the
context of the system. In the following protocols we show how parents and orchestrators
can use policy digests, remote attestation and trusted components to do just this.
A
node needs a certified signing key with which it can authenticate itself through signatures.
Section 5.3.2 contains the protocols for creation the signing key in cooperation with the
TC bound to a received policy digest 5.3.2.1. The following certification of the signing
key by the parent is shown in section 5.3.2.2, and displays how the parent verifies that the
signing key is in fact created bound to policy digest over a known and trusted device state.
With these two sections we define the base for trusted and secure zero-touch provisioning.
in section 5.3.3 a protocol is defined for how two deployed nodes can establish a secure
authenticated PKAE channel based on the certified signing key and utilizing the TC as
a tool to secure the key exchange and handshake between the nodes. Remote attestation
is established as the policy bound signing keys require the device to be in a trusted state
before signing communication keys thus effectively associating the communication keys
with device in a good state.
5.3.1
Enrollment
With enrollment nodes registered and prepared to become deployed.
We assume that
nodes have a TC correctly provisioned i.e.
nodes have a certified TC root key pair
(TCpk, TCsk, CertTC). The TC root certificate is signed by the manufacturer and thus ver-
ifiable by its certificate Certm. This is the first premise of this model. The second premise
for S-ZTP is to supply nodes with the knowledge of trusted entities i.e. the orchestrator.
All nodes are assumed to know and recognise Certm but in enrollment nodes will be given
the certificate of the trusted orchestrator Certo which is the trust anchor for the certificate
chain. In a hierarchy three layers deep e.g. Orchestrator −→Parent −→Node we say that
a parent certificate Certp is signed by the orchestrator and verifiable by Certo and a node
certificate Certn is signed by the parent and verifiable by Certp. At last we need the basis
for remote attestation to be established before a node can be deployed. Inspired by the
TCG definition and use of policy configuration registers [59] [49] the orchestrator manages
60
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:69==
the current correct states of types of nodes that can be deployed to the system. With
the remote attestation frameworks like configuration integrity verification as used in the
future tpm project [53], the Astrid project [54] and the concept of simple remote attesta-
tion [48], we define that the orchestrator knows the desired configuration of the registers
and can condense this information into a hash Chash = {Configuration registers} this
is then made into a policy digest Phash = {Pconf, Chash} where Pconf specifies the policy
over the relevant registers and the hash of the configuration itself.
5.3.2
Deployment
Deployment takes place between a Parent or Orchestrator and a Node. The deployment
protocols reflects the deployment figure 3.3 in the s-ztp component section 3.3. The main
interactions between the node and the parent is creation of the node signing key based
on the policy digest received from the parent node. This is followed by request to issue
a certificate for the node. In order for the parent to establish initial trust in the node it
validates the TC root key credential CredTC with the issuer/manufacturer certificate. The
manufacturer is a know trusted entity thus all entities are assumed to trust and know its
certificate. If the parent establishes that the node has a valid TC, it initiates a challenge
response with a fresh nonce n encrypted with the TC root public key and public signing
key. If the node is able to produce the nonce and send it back the parent is sure that the
node is in fact in possessions of the TC key pair. The parent then validates the CSR and
especially here validates that the signing key is restricted with the correct policy and that
it has been signed by the root key.
5.3.2.1
Creation of signing key
The protocol Deployment TC interactions part 1 shows the detailed interactions
between a platform (TC and Node) and the Parent in order to establish the signing key
for deployment. In the ”Trust modelling” chapter 4.1 we identified the essential trusted
actions that must take place in order to establish a stronger notion of trust between the
Node and Parent 4.2.2. Initially the whitelist must be established as a way for the parent
to know what policy digest it must expect of its children.
Upon receiving the policy digest the node uses it to create a key template for a restricted
signing key with the policy embedded. Before the signing key can be created the node
must load the root key TC, since this key is used to integrity-protect and symmetrically
encrypt the signing key. Load TC is a request to the TC to prepare the TC root key for
use and should return a handle TCH with which it can be requested to use the key. This
keeps the key secure as it’s still protected and managed by the TC.
The Node asks the TC to create the signing key based on the template and protected
by the root key is encapsulated in CreateKey{TCH, Stemp}. Importantly the TC must
then create the signing key pair {Sn
pk, Sn
sk}, securely unload them as SK with the private
portion authentically encrypted with the help of the root key and the public portion
readable. This ensures that the signing key is only used by the TC. Then the TC creates
and HMAC ticket HT as verifiable proof of creation over the TC state TCstate during
creation adn the parent key HT and this along with SK is returned to the node. The
signing is now loaded into the TC with Load{SK, TCH} the TCH is necessary as it is
needed to specify how to decrypt SK. This returns a signing key handle SKH.
The creation part culminates in the construction of a verifiable creation CSR CCSR and
fetching the TC credentials. The restricted signing key can only be used if the policy
defined of the signing key is not violated. Therefore a new creation ticket HT ′ is made
to internally certify that the TC created this key by comparing it to HT. A signing key
certificate SKcert binds the SK to the current device state and this certificate is then
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
61
==PAGE:70==
Entities
Data items
Description
Parent
Phash
Sp
pk/sk
aenc{nonce||Sn
pk}TCn
pk
Policy digest over the policy and the configuration registers
Parent signing key pair pk = public key, sk = private key
Authenticated encryption of the nonce and signing key over the root key
Node
Stemp = CreateTemp{Phash}
V alidateCert{Certp
s, Opk}
Signing key template based on the policy provided by H
Validates the certificate of parent signed by the orchestrator
TC
CredTC
TCpk/sk
TCH
Spk/sk = CreateKey{TCH, Stemp}
SK = {Enc{Sn
sk, TCn
sk}, Sn
pk}
SKH = {Dec{Sn
sk, TCn
sk}Sn
pk}
SKcert = {TCstate, SK}
TCstate = {TC State||TC}
CH = {TCstate||TCpk}hash
HT = {Proof, CH, SK}HMAC
Proof
σcert = sign{SKcert, TCH}
CCSR{SKH, TCH, SKcert, HT}
CCSRSK = {σcert, SKcert}
adec{C, TCn
sk
Root/endorsement key credentials of the TC
Root key pair : pk = public key, sk = private key
Key handle returned by loading the TC root keys
TC signing key pair restricted by policy and protected by TC root key
The private signing key is encrypted by the TC public key
Signing key handle as a response to loading the SK with TCH
Create a verifiable creation certificate for attestation over the TC state signed by SK
A hashed structure of the device state during creation and the root key used for creation.
Hash over TCstate and the parent key at key creation
A HMAC ticket over the restricted signing key and the TC state during creation
A proof value used as a HMAC key
A verifiable signature by the root key over the signing key creation certificate
Request a verifiable creation certificate request for the newly created signing key
The verifiable creation certificate signing request
Authenticated decryption of cipher text C over the root key
Table 5.1: Deployment protocol security parameters
signed by the root key σcert. If the check is true then a creation certificate signing request
over the signing key CCSRSK is made with signing key cert and the signature of the root
key hence providing verifiable evidence of the device state, and the relationship of the
singing key to the root key. The CSR is returned along with the TC credentials CredTC.
The steps explained over the Deployment TC interactions part 1 protocol are contin-
ued in Deployment TC interactions part 2 in the following section 5.3.2.2.
62
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:71==
Deployment TC interactions part 1
TC
Node
Parent
TCn
pk, TCn
sk
Sp
pk, Sp
sk
CredT C
Credo
Certp
s, Phash
1 :
σ =
sign{Phash, Ssk}
2 :
Phash, σ, Certp
s
3 :
V erifyCert{
Certp
s, Credo}
4 :
V erifySign{
Phash, σ, Sp
pk}
5 :
⇐⇒Stemp =
CreateTemp{Phash}
6 :
Load TC
7 :
TCH = Load TC
8 :
TCH
9 :
CreateKey{TCH, Stemp}
10 :
{Sn
pk, Sn
sk} =
CreateKey{Stemp, TCH}
11 :
SK =
{Enc{Sn
sk, TCn
sk}, Sn
pk}
12 :
CH =
{TCstate||TCpk}hash
13 :
HT =
{Proof, CH, SK}HMAC
14 :
SK, CH, HT
15 :
Load{SK, TCH}
16 :
Sn
pk, SKH =
{Dec{Sn
sk, TCn
sk}Sn
pk}
17 :
SKH
18 :
Request: Cred TC &
CCSR{SKH, TCH, CH, HT}
19 :
HT ′ =
{Proof, CH, SK}HMAC
20 :
SKcert =
Cert{CH, SK}
21 :
σcert =
sign(SKcert, TCH)
⇐⇒HT == HT ′
22 :
CCSRSK =
{σcert, SKcert}
23 :
CredT C = Cred TC
24 :
CCSRSK, CredT C
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
63
==PAGE:72==
5.3.2.2
Signing key certification and verification
This section corresponds to Deployment TC interactions part 2 and Deployment
TC interactions part 2 (parent) covering the establishment that the node in fact is
in possession of a valid TC V alidateCred{CredTC, Certm}, and with the use of a chal-
lenge response establish that the TC credentials originate from the node in question. The
certificate signing request is then verified over the defined policy digest and signed by the
Parent signing key.
Deployment TC interactions part 2
TC
Node
Parent
TCn
pk, TCn
sk
SK
Sp
pk, Sp
sk
Sn
pk, Sn
sk, CredT C
Credo
Certm
1 :
CCSRSK,
SK, CredT C
2 :
V alidateCred{
CredT C, Certm}
3 :
⇐⇒fresh nonce
4 :
C =
aenc{nonce||Sn
pk}T Cn
pk
5 :
adec{C, TCH}
C
6 :
nonce =
adec{C, TCn
sk}
7 :
nonce
nonce
8 :
V s =
V erifySign{
TCn
pk, σcert, SKcert}
9 :
V c =
V erifyCert{
SKcert, Phash, Sn
pk}
10 :
Certn
s =
Sign{SK, Sp
sk}
⇐⇒V s ∧V c
11 :
Store Certn
s
12 :
Certn
s
13 :
Store Certn
s
14 :
Store Certp
s
64
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:73==
Deployment TC interactions part 2 (Parent)
Node
Parent
TC
TCn
pk, TCn
sk
Certm, IKH, Certn
s , TCH
Certm, Ip
pk, Ip
sk
1 :
CCSRSK,
SK, CredT C
2 :
V alidateCred{
CredT C, Certm}
3 :
⇐⇒fresh nonce
4 :
C =
aenc{nonce||Sn
pk}T Cn
pk
5 :
C
6 :
nonce
7 :
V s = V erifySign{
TCn
pk, σcert, SKcert}
8 :
V c = V erifyCert{
SKcert, Phash, Sn
pk}
9 :
V s ∧V c ⇐⇒
Certify{Sn
pk, SHK}
10 :
Certn
s =
Certiy{SK, Sp
sk}
11 :
Certn
s
With the CSR and TC root credentials the node sends them to the parent for certification
and verification. CredTC is validated using the certificate of the issuer of the root creden-
tial Certm and establishes that the TC of the node is trustworthy. The parent initializes
and challenge response with a fresh nonce n which is encrypted with the signing public key
and the TC root public key. If the node manages to respond with the nonce the Parent
can be sure that this node is in fact the owner of the TC in question.
Producing the certificate for the node requires that the parent establishes that the signing
key is in fact a restricted signing key which will only respond with the specified policy
digest of Phash and which is associated with the TC root key. To do this the parent both
verifies the signature σcert with V erifySign over the public TC root key and SKcert and
also verifies the signing key certificate SKcert over the policy Phash and the public signing
key of the node Sn
pk. Only if those verification hold can the parent be sure that the signing
key is created correctly under the trusted TC root key and with a trusted device state.
Finally the certificate is stored and sent to the node for storage which also stores the
certificate of the parent.
5.3.3
Authenticated n2n connection
This section provides a detailed protocol of over authenticated node to node (n2n) con-
nections supported by implicit attestation also know as attestation by proof. As such the
protocol expands on the system diagram 3.4 in the s-ztp component section 3.3 and trust
model 4.3. The first part 5.3.3 provides a generic overview of the protocol in its entirety
consisting of two parts: the key exchange as displayed in key exchange with TC inter-
actions lines 1-9 and the establishment of a PKAE channel modelled to be compatible
with he structure of the CJDNS handshake.
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
65
==PAGE:74==
The compatibility with the CJDNS handshake is most obvious in the first protocol
(Authenticated node to node overview) as we can clearly see the steps of CJDNS
followed, as shown in 2.2:
1. Key exchange authenticated (prerequisite in CJDNS)
2. Hello packet
3. Key packet
4. Data packet
Entities
Data items
Description
Node A
Certa
s
Stemp = CreateTemp{Phash}
V erifySign{CK, σA, Sb
pk}
T a/b
pk/sk
ϕsession = KDF{T a
pk, T b
sk}
esession = enc{Data}ϕsession
Verifiable certificate of the parent signing key.
Signing key template based on the policy provided by H
Verifies the signature made on the connection key by the signing key
Temporary key pairs
The session key derived from the temporary keys of both nodes
Symmetric encryption with the shared session key
TC
TCpk/sk
TCH
SKH = {Dec{Sa
sk, TCa
pk}Sa
pk}
SKcert = {TCstate, SK}
Ca
pk/sk = CreateKey{SKH}
CK = {Enc{Ca
sk, SKa
pk}, Ca
pk}
CKH = {Dec{Ca
sk, SKa
pk}Ca
pk}
Chash = {TCstate}
TCAuthSession
TCPolicy
S = {Pconf, Chash}hash
Pd = GetPolicy{SKH}
σA = sign{CK, SKH}
KDF{Ca
pk, CKH}
ϕ = KDF{Ca
pk, Cb
sk}
ϕH = ϕhash
aenc{ϕH, T b
pk}
aeϕ = aenc{ϕ, T b
pk}
adec{aeb
ϕ, ϕH}
Root key pair : pk = public key, sk = private key
Key handle returned by loading the TC root keys
Signing key handle as a response to loading the SK with TCH
Create a verifiable creation certificate for attestation over the TC state signed by SK
Connection key pair protected by the signing key.
The private connection key is encrypted by the SK public key
Connection key handle as a response to loading the CK with SKH
Configuration hash over the current device state
Start an authorization session
Get the policy for the authorization session
Update the policy configuration registers with the current device state and return digest
The policy digest from the restricted signing key
A verifiable signature by the signing key over the connection key
Request TC key derivation function between received communication key and its own
The derived shared key
Shared key handle
Request authenticated symmetric encryption with shared key handle
Authenticated symmetric encryption with shared key ϕ
Request of authenticated decryption with shared key handle
Table 5.2: Authentication protocol security parameters
The basis for establishing trust in implicit attestation is the confirmation and verification
of the policy of a restricted signing key. This means that nodes must be aware of the
desired policy digests of correctly configured nodes. If a restricted signing key is able
to sign a message then, when it is being verified the verifier can inspect the policy and
decide if the this made by a node in a trusted state or not. As in the previous section
we capture with through configuration registers and policy digests over these registers.
However unlike during the creation and certification of the signing key, we do not aim
to restrict the communication key but provide evidence that the creation key has been
signed by a TC belonging to a node in a good state. We do this since each node is expected
to know the certificates of other nodes controlled certified by its parent and as such the
parent also makes sure that nodes have information on the desired state of other nodes.
66
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:75==
Authenticated node to node overview
Node A
Node B
Sa
pk, Sa
sk
Sb
pk, Sb
sk
NodeB
Certb
s
Certa
s
1 :
Ca
pk, Ca
sk
2 :
σA = sign{Ca
pk}Sa
sk
3 :
key exchange
{σA, Ca
pk}
4 :
Cb
pk, Cb
sk
5 :
σb = sign{Cb
pk}Sb
sk
6 :
key exchange
{σb, Cb
pk}
..........................................Key exchange complete..........................................
7 :
Gen temp keys: T b
pk, T b
sk
8 :
ϕ = KDF{Ca
pk, nonce, Cb
sk}
9 :
Hello packet
aenc{T b
pk}ϕ, nonce
10 :
ϕ = KDF{Cb
pk, nonce, Cb
sk}
11 :
Gen temp keys: T a
pk, T a
sk
12 :
ϕ∗= KDF{T b
pk, nonce′, Ca
sk}
13 :
Key packet
aenc{T a
pk}ϕ∗, nonce′
14 :
ϕ∗= KDF{T b
sk, nonce′, Ca
pk}
15 :
ϕsession = KDF{T a
pk, nonce∗, T b
sk}
16 :
Data packet
aenc{Data}ϕsession, nonce∗
17 :
ϕsession = KDF{T b
pk, nonce∗T a
sk}
5.3.3.1
The key exchange
The key exchange part of the protocol (key exchange with TC interactions lines 1-
3(4-5) & 6) initiates similarly to the creation of the signing key, however now the signing
key has already been created and the node can simply load the TC root key, and then use
it to load the signing key. For brevity we assume in the protocol that the TC root key and
signing key have been loaded. The signing key is authorized through a policy session and
then used through its key handle SKH to create the communication key CK with the
TC. The key creation command protects the private part of the key and returns the key
blob so that it can be loaded by the TC returning the key handle for the communication
key CKH.
We introduce a nonce nb that allows the verifier to trust that the signer has made a fresh
signature with the signing key implying the need for a policy authorization session. At this
point the node must establish an authorization session TCAuthSession and take device
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
67
==PAGE:76==
measurements for the policy with TCPolicy in order sign the communication key and
nonce with the restricted signing key. This signature serves to allow remote attestation
through by providing proof of the policy bound to the restricted signing key and that
the communication key is in fact originating from a device with correct state. The policy
digest over the current device state captured in S and can compared with policy digest
of the signing key Pd. The communication key is then signed with by the signing key to
produce σA only if S == Pd. The signature, the public communication key and a fresh
nonce na is sent to the verifying node (Node B) for verification.
Upon receiving the key exchange packet the node determines if the requesting node is
trusted by verifying the signature using the signing key certificate public key, from which
it can inspect the policy digest and determine if this is a trusted configuration. Finally the
node stores the communication key for use in the handshake to create a PKAE channel.
68
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:77==
key exchange with TC interactions lines 1-3(4-5) & 6
TC
Node A
TCa
pk, TCa
sk
Certb
s, SKH, Certp
s
fresh nb
TCAuthSession
TCPolicy
Chash = {TCstate}hash
S = {Pconf, Chash}hash
CreateKey{SKH}
Pd = GetPolicy{SKH}
Pd == S ⇐⇒
{Ca
pk, Ca
sk} =
CreateKey{SKH}
CK =
{Enc{Ca
sk, Sa
sk}Ca
pk}
CK
Load{CK, SKH}
CK, CKH =
{Dec{Ca
sk, Sa
sk}Ca
pk}
CKH
TCAuthSession
TCPolicy
Chash = {TCstate}hash
S = {Pconf, Chash}hash
sign{CK, nb, SKH}
Pd = GetPolicy{SKH}
σA = sign{CK, nb, SKH}
⇐⇒S == Pd
σA
fresh na
key exchange
{σA, na, Ca
pk}
........................................... The response from node B ...........................................
key exchange
{σB, Cb
pk}
Node B = Trusted ⇐⇒
V erifySign{CK, σB, na, Sb
pk}
store Cb
pk
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
69
==PAGE:78==
5.3.3.2
PKAE handshake
This part of the protocol is show in three parts: The handshake with TC inter-
actions lines 7-9, The handshake with TC interactions lines 9 - 13 and The
handshake with TC interactions lines 13-15. These show interactions between two
nodes (A and B) and the nodes and their TC. The communication key is the initia-
tor for the public key authenticated encryption, from which a temporary shared secret
ϕ = KDF{Ca
pk, n, Cb
sk} = KDF{Cb
pk, n, Ca
sk} is derived. The protocol achieves an au-
thenticated channel with forward secrecy by constructing a layered protocol in which the
partially static communication keys are used to construct secret key ϕ which is used share
the temporary public keys T b
pk with Node A. The temporary public keys and the private
parts of the communication keys CKA/B
sk
are used to derive yet another shared secret ϕ∗
in which node A computes ϕ∗= KDF{T b
pk, n′, Ca
sk} corresponding to the key computed
by node B ϕ∗= KDF{T b
sk, n′, Ca
pk}. Node A uses ϕ∗to share its temporary public key
T A
pk with Node B. Once both nodes have each others temporary public keys they can com-
pute a session key ϕsession with which to send data over a symmetrically encrypted and
authenticated channel.
The handshake with TC interactions lines 7-9
NodeB
TC
Certa
s, Sb
pk
Sb
pk, Sb
sk
CK, CKH, Ca
pk
Cb
pk, Cb
sk
Gen temp keys:
T b
pk, T b
sk
KDF{Ca
pk, CKH}
fresh n
ϕ = KDF{Ca
pk, n, Cb
sk}
ϕH = ϕhash
ϕH, n
aenc{ϕH, T b
pk}
aeϕ =
aenc{ϕ, T b
pk}
Hello packet
aeϕ, n
aeϕ
Part 1 - The handshake with interactions lines 7-9 After node B sends node A its
signature and communication key and has verified A’s signature it generates it’s tempo-
rary keys T b
pk, T b
sk. It then continues to request the TC to compute a shared key using
the communication keys ϕ = KDF{Ca
pk, n, Cb
sk}. With the freshly computed authenti-
cated key the node requests a symmetric encryption of its temporary key resulting in the
encrypted data aeϕ = aenc{ϕ, T b
pk}. The authentication takes place as ϕ is a key bound
to the secret key of one node and the public key of the other. Depending on the node
computing the key it requires the presence of the secret part of the public key shared by
the other node. To achieve forward secrecy the shared secret should not depend directly
on the static communication key, hence a the nodes must securely share the temporary
public keys and from them generate the session key.
70
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:79==
The handshake with TC interactions lines 9-13
TC
NodeA
Sa
pk, Sa
sk, Cb
pk
Certb
s, Sa
pk
Ca
pk, Ca
sk
CK, CKH, Cb
pk
Hello packet
aeB
ϕ , n
Gen temp keys: T a
pk, T a
sk
KDF{Cb
pk, n, CKH}
ϕ = KDF{Cb
pk, n, Ca
sk}
ϕH = ϕhash
ϕH
adec{aeB
ϕ , ϕH}
T b
pk =
adec{aeB
ϕ , ϕ}
T b
pk
ϕsession = KDF{T b
pk, T a
sk}
fresh n′
KDF{T b
pk, n′, CKH}
ϕ∗= KDF{T b
pk, n′, Ca
sk}
ϕ∗H = ϕ∗
hash
ϕ∗H, n′
aenc{ϕ∗H, T a
pk}
aeϕ∗= aenc{ϕ∗, T a
pk}
aeϕ∗
Key packet
aeϕ∗, n′
Part 2 - The handshake with TC interactions lines 9-13 Node A receives the packet
with the cipher encrypted with ϕ and follows identical steps as above in order decrypt the
cipher and reveal the temporary public key of node B T b
pk. Since node A now has its
own public key and the public key of node B it can compute the session key ϕsession.
However node B needs the temporary key of node A. Node A proceeds to compute a new
key ϕ∗from the its private communication key and the public temporary key of node B
ϕ∗= KDF{T b
pk, n′, Ca
sk}. ϕ∗is used to symmetrically encrypt T a
pk and send it to node B.
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
71
==PAGE:80==
The handshake with TC interactions lines 13-15
NodeB
TC
Certa
s, Sb
pk
Sb
pk, Sb
sk
CK, CKH, Ca
pk
Cb
pk, Cb
sk
Key packet
aea
ϕ∗, n′
KDF{T b
sk, n′, Ca
pk}
ϕ∗= KDF{T b
sk, n′, Ca
pk}
ϕ∗
hash
adec{aea
ϕ∗, ϕ∗
hash}
T a
pk =
adec{aea
ϕ∗, ϕ∗}
T a
pk
fresh n∗
ϕsession = KDF{T a
pk, n∗, T b
sk}
aesession = aenc{Data}ϕsession
Data packet
aesession, n∗
Part 3 - The handshake with TC interactions lines 13-15 In the last part of the
protocol for authenticated node to node communication node B receives the temporary
public key encrypted under ϕ∗as aeA
ϕ∗. It passes a request to compute the shared key
to the TC which computes it as ϕ∗= KDF{T b
sk, n′, Ca
pk}. Decrypting aeA
ϕ∗reveals T a
pk
allowing node B to also compute the session key as ϕsession = KDF{T a
pk, n∗, T b
sk}
72
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:81==
5.4
DAA enabled privacy
The S-ZTP protocol uses remote attestation to allow nodes to deploy in a distributed
manner by proving correctness of state and configuration. Nodes can communicated in
a fully authenticated way and the trust to certify and extend the system is decentralized
lowering the load on the back end orchestrators.
The desire for privacy enhanced capabilities can be realised with the DAA protocol, by
specifying a protocol for nodes to create anonymous and pseudonymous verifiable signa-
tures in a group signature fashion. Since the DAA is originally conceptualized for the
TPM [9] we carry the need for a trusted and certified component that is compatible with
the algorithms specified in [23] DAA with elliptic curves. In this protocol we will still be
referring to such a component as a trusted component TC.
With DAA, as stated previously, we design a protocol centered around enabling private
communication with attestation capabilities, as nodes must still be able to make trust
evaluations based on the operational assurances derived from such attestations.
5.4.1
Certification
In section 3.4 we outline the concept of certifying the DAA credentials allowing nodes
to create privacy enhanced signatures.
This section further defines that concept and
illustrates how the trusted states from section 4.3.1 figure 4.4 and 4.5 are realised. As
with the the trust modelling we divide certification into two parts: DAA key creation
and certification and Issuer key creation and certification.
Entities
Data items
Description
Parent
GSparam
IP
pk/sk
BlindSign{Dpk, Isk}
Security parameters used for creating a DAA key verifiable by issuer key
DAA issuer key pair
Creates the DAA credential through a blind signature on the DAA public key
Node
r
blind{CredDAA, r}
DAASign{PKH, DKH}
Certps
CredDAA
Cred∗
DAA
DAAV erify{σps, Certi}
Random value used to blind credentials
Blinds the DAA credentials with r
Requests a DAA signature from the specified key handles PKH and DKH
Pseudonym key certificate
DAA credentials used to generate privacy enhanced signatures
Blinded DAA credential
Verifying the pseudonym signature σps with DAA issuer certificate
TC
Dpk/sk
Ppk/sk
Spk/sk
r′
DAASign{Ppk, r′, Dsk}
BlindSign{Ppk, r′, Dsk}
The DAA key pair
The pseudonym key pair
The policy bound signing key pair
Random value used to blind a signature
The DAA signing procedure including generating both σ1 and σ2
A blind signature on Ppk signed with Dsk and blinded by r′
Table 5.3: Security parameters introduced in the privacy protocols
5.4.1.1
DAA key creation and certification
The construction of the DAA key 5.4.1.1 is predicated on GSparam given by the parent
acting as a DAA credential issuer. Ideally for the DAA key to provide the possibilities for
remote implicit attestation we also wish to bind it to a policy digest specifying the correct
state of the node resulting in a DAA template DAAtemp containing both a policy digest
Phash and GSparam. However this flow assumes that the restriction of the circumstances
and use of the DAA key bound to a policy does not break the security guarantees of
the DAA protocol. As the security of the DAA protocol relies mainly on the DAA key
following an exact cryptographic construction it is out of scope to prove whether or not
this is possible. We explore further the potential of enhanced versions of S-ZTP and DAA
in section 5.5 and rely here instead on joining more conventional approaches to reach our
privacy goals while sacrificing some efficiency and flexibility.
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
73
==PAGE:82==
The protocol DAA key creation follows the same flow as the S-ZTP Deplyment TC
interactions part 1 protocol as the verification of the DAA signature must still entail an
assertion of operational assurance for the system to maintain the efficiency of zero-touch
as nodes attest before being accepted. However where in the S-ZTP case it was possible
to create a key that is bound to a policy digest supplied by the parent this, as mentioned
earlier, has to our knowledge not been proved feasible for DAA keys. This means that we
need another entity to guarantee that the device is in a good state when using DAA key.
Fortunately we can use a policy bound signing key as a parent key for the DAA key. As such
the DAA key is created using the group security parameters as a seed, and internally in the
TC the private DAA key is encrypted with the signing key CreatKey{SKH, DAAtemp}.
This therefore requires that the node initiates a authorization policy session and retrieves
the a policy digest with TCAuthSession and TCPolicy which is compared to the use of
the policy digest bound to the signing key whenever using the signing key.
The certificate signing request CSRDK carries a creation certificate Cert{CH, DK} over
the creation hash CH supplied by the TC and a signature σcert = sign(DKcert, SKH)
on this certificate by the TC root key. It also checks that the creation HMAC ticket HT
matches the HMAC made during certification providing proof that the TC did in fact
create the DAA key.
74
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:83==
DAA key creation
TC
Node
Parent
TCn
pk, TCn
sk
SK, TCH
GSparam
CredT C
Certo
i
Certp
i
1 :
GSparam, Certp
i
2 :
Load{SK, TCH}
3 :
Sn
pk, SKH =
{Dec{Sn
sk, TCn
sk}Sn
pk}
4 :
SKH
5 :
DAAtemp =
CreateTemp{GSparam}
6 :
TCAuthSession
TCPolicy
7 :
Chash = {TCstate}hash
8 :
S = {Pconf, Chash}hash
9 :
CreateKey{SKH, DAAtemp}
10 :
Pd = GetPolicy{SKH}
11 :
Pd == S ⇐⇒
{Dn
pk, Dn
sk} =
CreateKey{DAAtemp, SKH}
12 :
DK =
{Enc{Dn
sk, Sn
sk}, Dn
pk}
13 :
CH = {TCstate||Spk}hash
14 :
HT =
{Proof, CH, DK}HMAC
15 :
DK, CH, HT
16 :
Load{DK, SKH}
17 :
Dn
pk, DKH =
{Dec{Dn
sk, Sn
sk}Dn
pk}
18 :
DKH
19 :
CCSR{DKH, SKH, CH, HT}
20 :
HT ′ =
{Proof, CH, DK}HMAC
21 :
DKcert =
Cert{CH, DK}
22 :
σcert =
sign(DKcert, SKH)
⇐⇒HT == HT ′
23 :
CCSRDK =
{σcert, DKcert}
24 :
CCSRDK
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
75
==PAGE:84==
To certify the DAA key 5.4.1.1 we again have to establish the connection between a key
and a trusted TC as in the Deployment TC interactions part 2. The DAA key
certification (Node) protocol does the same with the exception that the signing key Sn
pk
is used to infer that the TC is trusted by protecting the DAA key. Also the creation of
the DAA credentials CredDAA happens according to the DAA protocol including a blind
signature BlindSign{Dn
pk, Ip
sk} on the DAA key and the parent private group membership
key. This is shown as with the parent TC in DAA key certification (parent) in order
to illustrate the involvement of the TC and that the issuer key must be loaded since
the handle IKH is needed.
Therefore a policy authorization session as in the DAA
key creation is assumed completed. Before The parent blindly signs the DAA key of the
child, the parent node verifies the signature V erifySign{Sn
pk, σcert, DKcert} and certificate
V erifyCert{Kcert, Phash, Dn
pk} received in the creation certificate signing request CCSR.
This establishes that the DAA key was created under with a correct system state and
that it has been protected in the TC by the signing key. The DAA credentials can not be
transmitted over an exposed channel as these could weaken the privacy capabilities of the
DAA [62].
76
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:85==
DAA key certification (Node)
TC
Node
Parent
TCn
pk, TCn
sk
DKH, SKH, Certp
i
Certm, Ip
pk, Ip
sk, Certn
s
1 :
CCSRDK,
Dn
pk, CredT C
2 :
V alidateCred{
CredT C, Certm}
3 :
⇐⇒fresh nonce
4 :
C =
aenc{nonce||Dn
pk}T Cn
pk
5 :
adec{C, TCH}
C
6 :
nonce =
adec{C, TCn
sk}
7 :
nonce
nonce
8 :
V s = V erifySign{
Sn
pk, σcert, DKcert}
9 :
V c = V erifyCCert{
DKcert, Phash, Dn
pk}
10 :
CredDAA =
BlindSign{Dn
pk, Ip
sk}
⇐⇒V s ∧V c
11 :
fresh key k
12 :
e = enc{CredDAA, k}
13 :
d = aenc{k||Dn
pk, Sn
pk}
14 :
adec{d, SHK}
e, d
15 :
k = adec{d, Sn
sk}
k
16 :
CredDAA =
dec{e, k}
17 :
V erifyCred{
CredDAA, Ip
pk}
18 :
Create{
Certps}∗
19 :
Certps
Store Certps
In order to ensure CredDAA is securely sent to be the node of the TC a temporary key k
is produced and used to encrypt CredDAA as e. k is then authentically encrypted by the
node TC public key TCn
pk together with the signing key as d such that the credentials can
only be opened if the TC can in can decrypt d to get k. Finally we specify the creation of a
pseudonym certificate Create{Certps}∗that is sent to the parent to enable the revocation
functionality this is explained in section 5.4.3 and the protocol for pseudonym key creation
is defined in the following section 5.4.1.2.
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
77
==PAGE:86==
DAA key certification (Parent)
Node
Parent
TC
TCn
pk, TCn
sk
Certm, IKH, Certn
s , SKH
Certm, Ip
pk, Ip
sk
1 :
CCSRDK,
Dn
pk, CredT C
2 :
V alidateCred{
CredT C, Certm}
3 :
⇐⇒fresh nonce
4 :
C =
aenc{nonce||Dn
pk}T Cn
pk
5 :
C
6 :
nonce
7 :
V s = V erifySign{
Sn
pk, σcert, DKcert}
8 :
V c = V erifyCert{
DKcert, Phash, Dn
pk}
9 :
V s ∧V c ⇐⇒
BlindSign{Dn
pk, IHK}
10 :
CredDAA =
BlindSign{Dn
pk, Ip
sk}
11 :
CredDAA
12 :
fresh key k
13 :
e = enc{CredDAA, k}
14 :
d = aenc{k||Dn
pk, Sn
pk}
15 :
e, d
5.4.1.2
Pseudonym key creation
This protocol involves the creation of a key which is locally certified and signed through
a DAA signing process.
The DAA protocol specifies that attributes can be disclosed
from the credentials [62] by adding them to the certificate structure hence making them
verifiable along with the pseudonym key. Since the DAA key is protected by the signing
key that is bound to a policy digest, loading this key implies that the node from which
the pseudonym key came is in fact in a good state providing operational assurance to
a verifying node. Hence a authorization policy session is started and the device state is
reported from the registers as in the DAA key creation protocol. Note that once the
DAA key is loaded it does not require further policy checks with the disadvantage that the
DAA key signature itself can not be used through a session to provide remote attestation.
The operation assurance here stems from the beginning of the DAA key session marked
by the loading of the DAA key.
Pseudonymity and node controlled linkability is achieved through blinding the DAA cre-
dential and subsequently creating a TC key using the blinded credentials Cred∗
DAA re-
sulting in a pseudonym key pair Ppk and Psk. We specify the command to initiate DAA
compatible key as CreateKey with the addition of the DAA credentials. After receiving
the key handle the node specifies the TC to create a DAA signing process using the DAA
key and the given blinded credentials by DAASign{PKH, DKH}. The result of the DAA
78
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:87==
signing is a pseudonym certificate Certps and based on Ppk and the signature σ1 of the
DAA key DA
sk on the pseudonym key Ppk, a blind signature σ2 with random value r′ and
DA
sk on Ppk combined with Cred∗
DAA to form σps i.e (σ1||σ2||Cred∗
DAA).
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
79
==PAGE:88==
Pseudonym key creation and DAA certification
TC
NodeA
TCn
pk, TCn
sk
CredDAA, DK, SKH
1 :
TCAuthSession
TCPolicy
2 :
Chash = {TCstate}hash
3 :
S = {Pconf, Chash}hash
4 :
Load{DK, SKH}
5 :
Pd = GetPolicy{SKH}
6 :
Pd == S ⇐⇒
Da
pk, DKH = {Dec{Da
sk, TCn
sk}Da
pk}
7 :
DKH
8 :
fresh r
9 :
Cred∗
DAA =
blind{CredDAA, r}
10 :
CreateKey{DKH}
11 :
{Ppk, Psk} =
CreateKey{DKH}
12 :
PK =
{Enc{Psk, TCn
sk}, Ppk}
13 :
PK
14 :
Load{PK, DKH}
15 :
Ppk, PKH = {Dec{Psk, Dn
sk}Ppk}
16 :
PKH
17 :
DAASign{
PKH, DKH, Cred∗
DAA}
18 :
fresh r′
19 :
σps = DAASign{Ppk, r′, Da
sk} = (σ1||σ2||Cred∗
DAA)
σ1 = Sign{Ppk, Da
sk}
σ2 = BlindSign{Ppk, Da
sk, r′}
20 :
Certps = {Ppk, σps}
21 :
Certps
22 :
store Certps
5.4.1.3
Issuer key creation and certification
The issuer or node responsible for issuing DAA credentials to other nodes must be able to
generate the specific necessary cryptographic parameters according to the version of DAA
and issuer key generation process. As stated in the privacy component section 3.4 the
issuer key generation and certification process is concerned with the correct creation of
three outputs: public security parameters, group public key and the private issuer
key. ISO has standardised several versions of the DAA construction in ISO/IEC 20008-2
[23] where the elliptic curve DAA construction is followed in [40]. This construction offers
an efficient implementation of the DAA protocol which is further extended for better
80
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:89==
efficiency in [62] where the actions taken between the often low capacity TC and the host
or in our case node.
The Issuer key creation and certification protocol is locally done on a node with DAA
credentials in the same protocol as the pseudonym key 5.4.1.2. It obvious that an issuer’s
key must be associated with a trusted entity that can extent the certificate chain, and such
an entity can be the orchestrator or any entity that has been verified and certified by the
orchestrator in providing trust. As illustrated in the figure 5.4 a node self signs its issuer
key certificate Certn
i = (In
pk, σi) where σi = (σ1i||σ2i||Cred∗
DAA) using its DAA credentials.
This allows the node issuer certificate to be verifiable by the parent or orchestrator issuer
certificate due to the construction of the DAA group credentials and keys.
This also
provides implicit attestation capabilities and the possibilities for the system to audit or
monitor the trusted state of deployed nodes as the DAA can only be loaded by the signing
key if the device is in a trusted state.
The added data items from the issuer protocol can be represented by the triple { Ipk,
Isk, GSparam } where Ipk is the group public key derived from the secret group credential
issuing key Isk and the ECC algorithm group security parameters GSparam. Utilizing a
node’s DAA keys and credential we sign the issuer key just like the pseudonym key in
5.4.1.2. Thus a node does a local attestation at the time of signing the issuer certificate
with the DAA key and the node also enters the certificate chain as its certificate is now
verifiable with the parent issuer cert. Creating the issuer key under the DAA also means
that if a node gets its DAA credentials revoked then it would also become unable to further
use the issuer keys as they would be unable to be loaded in the TC.
The TC component must support elliptic curves (ECC) along with the base requirements
mentioned in the interface 3.1. In order to realise the Setup phase of the DAA we re-
quire any issuer node to support the cryptographic operations related the ECC algorithm
including hashing to points on an elliptic curve in a given prime field.
5.4.2
Authentication
Unlike the authenticated node to node connections the utilization of verifiable fully anony-
mous or pseudonymous keys allow nodes to maintain privacy in connections. After the
exchange of pseudonym keys the PKAE exchange allows the nodes to
5.4.2.1
Key exchange with pseudonym key certificate
As nodes who recognize the same trusted orchestrators or parents are in possession of the
DAA issuing certificate, they can verify signatures made with any DAA key and credentials
originating from that parent. Nodes ultimately trust in the certificate chain, the protocols
and the correct implementation of the trusted components. This trust entails that any
node trusts the fact that a compromised of false node will be stopped at attestation in the
deployment protocol since they are required to satisfy a policy defined by the orchestrator.
The key exchange (Key exchange with pseudonym keys) between two nodes entails
implicit remote attestation as the DAA key has been bound to a policy signing key and
that the DAA signature is verifiable by a trusted parent or orchestrator. Hence receiving
a DAA key certified pseudonym key implies the node was in a good state when signing
this certificate.
In order obtain fresh operational assurance through implicit attestation (Privacy en-
hanced authentication) the inclusion of a nonce is necessary. This can either be realised
in the as an input in the creation protocol or simply after or during the key exchange as
a signature over the the nonce with pseudonym key. This would require the node to load
the DAA with signing key handle requiring the authorization session and the measurement
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
81
==PAGE:90==
of the current TC state as in the Pseudonym key creation and DAA certification
protocol 5.4.1.2. For brevity we leave out the loading of the TC root key and signing key.
DAAV erify is introduced as the command capturing the verification of the DAA signature
structure created when a node uses DAASign.
Key exchange with pseudonym keys
Node A
Node B
Certa
ps, Certp
i
Certp
i , Certb
ps
Certa
ps
DAAV erify{σA
ps, Certp
i } ⇐⇒
store Certa
ps
Certb
ps
DAAV erify{σB
ps, Certp
i } ⇐⇒
store Certb
ps
Privacy enhanced authentication
TC
Node A
TCa
sk, TCa
pk, Sa
sk, Sa
pk
PK, SK, DK, Certa
ps
TCAuthSession
TCPolicy
nb
Chash = {TCstate}hash
S = {Pconf, Chash}hash
Load{DK, SKH}
Pd = GetPolicy{SKH}
Pd == S ⇐⇒
Da
pk, DKH = {Dec{Da
sk, TCn
sk}Da
pk}
DKH
Load{PK, DKH}
Ppk, PKH = {Dec{Psk, Dn
sk}Ppk}
PKH
sign{nb, PKH}
σ = {nb, Psk}
σ
σ
With two nodes having exchanged pseudonym keys with the desired level of authentication
and operational assurance, an authenticated communication protocol can be realized as
the protocols in the PKAE handshake section 5.3.3.2.
82
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:91==
This construction opens up for nodes to communicate through dynamically generated
pseudonym keys. However depending on the concrete use cases different schemes to man-
age these pseudonyms might be applied. In a one hop scenario where nodes are only have
to send messages to nearby nodes
5.4.3
Revocation
The orchestrator can revoke nodes showing suspicious behaviour or nodes that have been
reported over some threshold.
This is facilitated by a revocation command encrypted
by the parent signing key over a pseudonym key.
Since nodes will be communicating
with its peers through pseudonym certificates and keys, DAA revocation can use the fact
the pseudonym certificate is bound to the DAA key through a deterministic signature
in the DAAsign procedure and hence by issuing a revocation message based on a single
pseudonym key the TC will revoke the DAA key controlling the pseudonym key based on
signatures. After receiving the revocation message the TC will delete its DAA key and
pseudonyms. This effectively stops the node from communicating with other nodes and
issuing new certificates.
Revocation in the DAA enhanced systems such as [40] or the use cases mentioned in
[62] are effective and powerful since the certifying DAA key can be revoked based on a
misbehaving pseudonym. Since its not needed to know the DAA credentials in order to
revoke them, revocation can remain privacy preserving. This presents a challenge in the
delegated model since a specific DAA key pair and credential is not only used for signing
messages in communication but also certification. This brings forth the question:
”What happens when a parent has been pseudonymously revoked, but it has many certified
children?”
As the issuer of the DAA credentials is a trusted entity that at will Join another entity with
knowledge of its public root or endorsement key it’s possible, to some extent, to identify
the entity that wishes to join. The privacy enhanced functionality comes in the fact that
this entity can then proceed to create unlikable signatures and pseudonym keys in relation
to the root credentials. Thus in deployment 5.3.2 the parent node or the orchestrator ends
the protocol by receiving a pseudonym certificate created with its newly certified DAA key.
In revocation we can now minimise the issue of managing revocation lists, since a revoked
parent as a part of its own revocation will revoke all of its children DAA credentials. This
process will not be privacy invasive as long as the child nodes have not used that specific
pseudonym certificate for other communication since deployment. This means that a node
can effectively delete or forget the pseudonym key created under deployment as its only
purpose is for the parent to efficiently erase its certificate hierarchy when revoked.
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
83
==PAGE:92==
DAA revocation protocol
TC
Node
Orchestrator
TCn
pk, TCn
sk
DKH, IK, CCl
Certps, Certo
i
Dn
sk, Dn
pk
CredDAA, Certp
i
In
sk, In
pk
Certn
i
Msgr = {Revoke||P r
pk}
σr = Sign{Msgr, Io
sk}
Msgr, σr
fresh r
Cred∗
DAA =
blind{CredDAA}
V erify{
Msgr, σr, Io
pk}
Cred∗
DAA
V erify{Msgr, σr, Io
pk} ⇐⇒
fresh r′
σrvk = DAASign{P r
pk, r′, Da
sk} =
(σ1r||σ2r||Cred∗
DAA)
σ1r = Sign{P r
pk, Da
sk}
σ2r = BlindSign{P r
pk, Da
sk, r′}
σrvk
DAASign{In
pk,
DKH, Cred∗
DAA}
fresh r∗
σir = DAASign{Ipk, r∗, Da
sk} =
(σ1ir||σ2ir||Cred∗
DAA)
σ1ir = Sign{Ipk, Da
sk}
σ2ir = BlindSign{Ipk, Da
sk, r∗}
σir
σrvk, σir
Certn
i , CCl
eq{σ1, σ1r}
DAAV erify{σrvk, Ip
pk}
link{σrvk, σir}
eq{σ1i, σ1ir}
DAAV erify{CCl, In
pk}
revoke CCl
In order to propagate the revocation to the children revoked by the node utilize some
inherent properties of the DAA and the key hierarchy:
1. The fact that the issuer key is protected by the TC and that the DAA key which is
restricted will only sign TC generated content.
2. DAA signatures are linkable given the same ”pseudonym” i.e. blinding value or the
DAA credentials.
84
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:93==
3. A certificate signed by two differently blinded versions of the same DAA credentials
can be linked based on the key used in the certificate.
Each node acting as a parent node will accumulate a list of pseudonym certificates from
its children which are only verifiable through its own issuer key (children certificate list)
or CCl. Upon revocation the node verifies the revocation message signed by the orches-
trator V erify{Msgr, σr, Io
pk}. If the verification is successful then the node will create a
revocation DAA signature σrvk using freshly blinded DAA credential to prove that its in
fact the owner of the pseudonym and to confirm revocation. Then in order to prove its
ownership of CCl using the same blinded version of the DAA credential it produces a DAA
signature over its issuer public key DAASign{Ipk, r∗, Da
sk}. These two signatures can now
be linked through their common credential Cred∗
DAA. After constructing σrvk and σir the
nodes sends those along with its self signed issuer certificate and the child certificate list.
Lastly the orchestrator verifies the connections in order to issue revocation of the children
of the revoked node:
1. eq{σ1, σ1r} - Establish the connection between the revoked pseudonym with signa-
ture σ1 and the revocation verification signature σ1r.
2. DAAV erify{σrvk, Ip
pk} - Verifying the revocation signature and hence that the DAA
key was involved with the node’s parent issuer key obtained through the certificate
chain.
3. link{σrvk, σir} - Linking the blinded DAA credential from the two DAA signatures
thus relating the revocation signature on the pseudonym key to the signature on the
issuer key.
4. eq{σ1i, σ1ir} - Establishing that the issuer signature σir that can be linked to the
revocation signature belongs to the same node as the issuer certificate received. Only
the node that made the pseudonym revocation signature could make the issuer re-
vocation signature.
5. DAAV erify{CCl, In
pk} - Verifying the child certificates with the node issuer key
establishing that they are issued from the revoked node.
5.5
A challenge: Privacy S-ZTP and enhanced DAA
The proposed privacy enhancing solution for delegated S-ZTP is engineered to derive high
scalability and strong security. This has caused the solution to employ a high number
of keys and as such a high number of cryptographic operations to achieve this. Effective
S-ZTP without enhanced privacy relies only on few keys and cryptographic operations
but has its main challenge in the explicit effectiveness and correctness of configuration
integrity verification through remote attestation [30] [48]. When it comes to achieving
S-ZTP with strong privacy guarantees current solutions use either certification and in
best case a privacy CA to provide privacy. Through the conceptualization of this protocol
its worth noting that the concepts of S-ZTP and DAA merged through trusted compo-
nents could be a powerful solution for providing great flexibility for solution and models
to employ operational assurance, strong privacy and strong security guarantees. S-ZTP
concepts and solutions [53] [54] [41] [21] have shown the promising power of especially the
TPM for achieving effective deployment of distributed systems through a central entity
like an orchestrator. We can extend this S-ZTP functionality to achieve delegated deploy-
ment relying on strong roots of trust and remote attestation capabilities for configuration
integrity verification. Enhancing S-ZTP with strong privacy capabilities that can be con-
trolled at a delegated and distributed basis would require an upgrade of the cryptographic
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
85
==PAGE:94==
capabilities to achieve unlinkability and anonymity. The DAA protocol have shown that
it’s possible to do remote attestation by quote in which a trusted entity asks another to
generate a verifiable quote certificate from which the trusted entity can confirm the state
and operational assurance. This requires that all entities have access to the states of all
other entities and as such might have privacy implications considering the construction
of the configuration hash and K-anonymity. But its also not well suited for the delegated
system as the costs of synchronisation would grow quickly. The lack of support for im-
plicit attestation or attestation by proof hinders the DAA in this regard, but would be
an interesting addition to it’s capabilities by providing a strong and flexible for delegated
remote attestation in the pseudonymous or anonymous realm.
5.5.1
Enhanced DAA
The DAA at its current stage [62] has provided secure functionality for explicit attestation
as entities can sign quotes with a DAA key that confidently can be associated with a
valid TC [62] [54].
Remote attestation by quote involves explicitly and authentically
asking an entity to measure its relevant configuration registers and return the result, based
on the versifier’s knowledge of accepted configurations it can then check if the returned
measurements are correct. This explicit nature of this attestation puts a big burden on
the correct management of accepted states especially in the delegated scheme as all nodes
would need to know of the correct configurations of all other nodes. Further more the
explicit knowledge of the configuration of any node could present a challenge to privacy as
configurations could become identifiers nullifying the the privacy capabilities of the DAA.
Implicit attestation, on the other hand, only requires that a node upon provisioning its
signing/attestation key provides evidence that the TC has created the key as a policy
bound key and that the policy digest it has been bound to is the same as the expected.
This is the attestation scheme we have designed the protocols around, and it obvious that
there is a significant increase in load due to the need of signing key as a parent key of the
DAA key for this functionality, as shown in figure 5.3.
Hence we note that an potentially powerful addition to the DAA protocol would be either
a proof that the DAA key can be created as a policy bound key without breaking the
cryptographical construction and safety or to design the needed functionality to include
this into the existing DAA protocols.
5.6
Limitations and capabilities
The DAA enhanced S-ZTP protocols provide some basic functionalities that has been
identified in the scope of delegated fog environments utilizing a central entity as a trust
anchor for hierarchy. As such the proposed architecture supported by the protocols is a
hierarchy of nodes originating from the orchestrator with the addition that the functional
responsibilities of the orchestrator are limited as it’s not longer necessarily an active entity
in the deployment of new nodes to the system. The monitoring of the system state is also
delegated as parent nodes can be trusted to monitor its own child nodes.
As identities of nodes are revealed upon deployment but from that point on protected by
device controlled pseudonyms the design of the security protocols enable a decoupling of
actual identities and verifiable trusted pseudonym identities that nodes use to interact with
the system. The group certification structure created through DAA signatures creating
a parent to child group relationship allow nodes verify certificates based on group public
keys and any certificate can be chained from the trusted orchestrator without explicitly
identifying intermediary nodes.
Remote attestation and the RTR are the basis for the trust and security guarantees of
86
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:95==
this system.
As such we have taken a very optimistic approach to the reliability and
applicability of remote attestation. These protocols do not expand on the quality of the
CIV capabilities that are used as evidence in remote attestation as this is still very much
an open and developing area of research, especially how to efficiently and reliably attest
to safety critical code and configuration. However granting that the proper management
of policy digests and the TC’s ability guarantee that device state measurements are safe,
remote attestation can be an integral part of trusted device authentication.
In relation to CJDNS this would allow for nodes join the system as initially unknown
entities, as before allowing node to engage with the rest of the infrastructure they would
have to certified implying providing operational assurance and proving the validity of its
TC. CJDNS as currently defined is not concerned with privacy of identity and as such
relies on participating nodes to have a static address/identity. This is partly due to the
structure of the CJDNS in defining a common identity down to the link layer. Considering
the implications of the ability of nodes to create and self certified pseudonym keys that
can be used as temporary IP addresses, nodes could in fact use the routing functionalities
of the CJDNS to dynamically enter the network under the pseudonym certificates.
As mentioned the DAA enhance functionality comes at a high cost in terms of load on
the TC and node as we keep the signing key that, in this case just functions as a gate
keeper for the DAA key allowing for the DAA enhanced scheme to enjoy remote implicit
attestation. As the DAA is already considered an expensive protocol and much research
has gone into optimizing it [62] it’s clear that this protocol is probably not suite for very
constrained devices. However the security functionalities provided could be used as a base
scheme for fog nodes with suitable computational power and storage. The model still fits
into the world of fog based environments as local specific solutions will be required never
the less.
This even more so goes for the integration with specific networking schemes
outside the CJDNS as the identity and certification scheme is fairly universal under the
conditions of using DAA capable TCs. Hence, as mentioned in chapter 3 it’s possible to
deploy different routing schemes depending on the level of privacy desired and the specific
purpose of the entities in the system.
The delegation of this architecture naturally inherits significant complexity as parent nodes
must be aligned with orchestrator and their children in turn must also be kept up to date.
This is only amplified and further complicated as nodes take on pseudonymous identities
that can’t be traced back to the original identity during deployment.
5.7
Security analysis and adversarial model
Distributed, IoT and fog based solutions are vulnerable to adversaries from within and
outside the devices and systems [44] [1]. As such we consider the implication of unautho-
rized and authorized adversaries who aim to disrupt individual devices or the system as
a whole. We consider especially the implications on S-ZTP functionality with trust estab-
lishment and the privacy guarantees from the DAA enhanced protocols. We assume that
the cryptographic guarantees are sound and will consider them computationally infeasible
to break. The reliance of attestation as a main source of trustworthiness puts emphasis on
the robustness of the relationship between the signer/prover and verifier [1]. In the direct
context to the world of trusted components we can consider what an adversary without
a TC might accomplish, and what an adversary that compromises the host or platform
with a valid TC might accomplish. The latter also includes the category of honest but
curious attack model [51] in which a certified platform might be able to break security
guarantees by monitoring, colluding or interacting with the system to discover private or
sensitive information. When a platform is attacked by an outsider either physically or
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
87
==PAGE:96==
remotely with malware etc. we must consider what such an intruder can accomplish with
the compromise of the host’s credentials and key blobs such an uncovering the identity of
a TC or forge messages.
We consider security in an attack surface including all entities in the system including
nodes, TCs and the orchestrator.
The security assurances of the TC and correct pro-
visioning of it is the basis the security guarantees. The orchestrator is also considered
a trustworthy secure entity in the scope of this security analysis and will thus only be
considered as a potentially honest but curious entity.
5.7.1
Security analysis of S-ZTP functionality
To evaluate the S-ZTP functionality we seek especially to see if the delegated deploy-
ment protocol is vulnerable against an adversary infiltrating either the parent or the
node and if the authenticated communication protocol can be manipulated to allow an
unauthenticated node to communicate with another, or have a node impersonate another.
Additionally we will consider if the CIA properties can be guaranteed.
The goal of S-ZTP in short is to only accept nodes into the system that have a trusted and
software configuration without the need for any specific knowledge about those nodes and
a hands on verification and authentication of those nodes at first connection. We achieve
this based on remote attestation and the authentication of a valid TC. In the model for
S-ZTP deployment we assume the presence of a trusted third party the manufacturer who
securely issues root key credentials for the TCs and with the TC as a root of trust we can
derive the safety of the TC root private key used to finally authenticate the TC in the
deployment protocol guaranteed. This although does not guarantee that we only accept
nodes in the right configuration.
Configuration integrity for node verification backed by the TC is the construction that
protects the system from rouge nodes with valid TCs trying to enter. As the measure-
ments from the tracer and RTM is considered trustworthy we consider it infeasible for an
inside or outside intruder to manipulate this process. Hence, in deployment through the
CreatKey{TCH, Stemp}, when the device state is measured CH = {TCstate||TCpk}hash
and used to verify the policy digest to bind the signing key, we can create evidence in
the creation certificate signing request with which the parent can confidently verify that
the node is in a correct state and this process has been conducted by the TC. Remember
that the TC root private key can never leave a correctly provisioned and secure TC thus
guaranteeing this process with the confidence of the TC capabilities. Since the parent can
check the policy digests against each other, the security against an adversary making the
parent accept a corrupt state is based on the strength of the hashing algorithm against
collisions.
Considering the parent node infiltrated opens more options as the parent could produce
its own policy digests. This could be realised as an attack on the system where corrupt
nodes get accepted into the system if a node and parent colludes about the policy digest
and the device state. Naturally this would not harm honest nodes as their system state
would not match the corrupt policy digest and they would fail to be able to use the singing
key bound to this state. One might consider signing the policy digest by the orchestrator
as to make it infeasible to fake a policy digest, however since its already required that the
parent and node must collude in order to make this attack happen then node could just
as well replace the orchestrate credentials with the parent credentials when verifying the
policy digest. This presents a significant risk to the system but is an inherent risk when
delegating responsibilities, consider likewise if the orchestrator itself is compromised. The
parent itself could not be running malicious code in so far as the attestation capabilities
88
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:97==
can detect it as the orchestrator would have issued and verified that the parent is in a
correct state. Hence it would also be possible for the orchestrator the audit the system or
sections of the system to uncover nodes with rouge software as they would fail to produce
attestation quotes that are acceptable to the orchestrator.
In the establishment of node to node authentication two valid nodes mutually trusts each
through a verifiable parent certificate originating from the orchestrator guaranteeing that
the other node has a TC and policy bound signing key. A node running corrupt software
will not be able to establish an authenticated channel with another node as the signing key
is policy bound and required to make a signature over the fresh nonce received providing
proof of a valid TC in a correct state. Its here worth noting that this guarantee does not
prove that nodes still run on valid software if the same symmetric session key is used across
sessions. In order to establish this nodes would need to request fresh signatures from the
signing key or complete a another key exchange protocol. Considering the case where
a corrupt parent manages to deploy a corrupt node. This corrupt node would be able
to talk to other nodes through the authenticated key exchange as nodes only implicitly
trust the state of other nodes. As such we might consider the trustworthiness reduced
the further away from the orchestrator the system moves since it would require more
potentially vulnerable colluding parent to node relationships.
5.7.2
Security analysis of privacy functionality
We iterate the main privacy requirements that we wish to achieve in the above protocols
including deployment, communication and revocation:
• Device-controlled anonymity: The ability for the device to decide whether or not to
reveal any identifying information.
• Device-controlled linkability: The ability for the device to decide if signatures can
linked.
• Non-frameability: Signatures can not be faked.
• Corretness: All valid signatures can be verified.
Further the protocol has been designed to enjoy enhanced security through remote attes-
tation. We analyse the security properties inherent to the privacy protocol using DAA
and consider in addition the effects of effective remote attestation.
Anonymity, pseudonymity and linkability: The foundation for privacy in this model
is the use of pseudonym keys and the verifiable DAA signatures used to authenticate
various certificates. The identity of the node using the DAA credential is not revealed
unless by the node itself and the credentials do not hold any information that can identify
the node due to the blind certification of the credentials. Following the DAA protocol
it’s considered infeasible to uncover to whom (which TC) a pseudonym key and DAA
signature belongs to [62] [40].
This level of protection assumes that the issuer hence either parents or issuer are hon-
est, since the join part of the DAA requires the authentication of a TC hence initially
establishing the identity of the TC. Therefor a malicious issuer could publish all the DAA
credential and TC identity pairs. This would make it possible for an infected node to be
continuously identified as the adversary could log all communication as originating from
the TC. However this attack does not work retrospectively as signatures generated by valid
DAA credentials can’t be linked back to the credentials in so far as the node has chosen
to blind the credential for every DAA signature, the pseudonym key is freshly generated,
the deterministic signature σ1 in DAASign isn’t verifiable and the signature σ2 is blinded
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
89
==PAGE:98==
[40]. As the node is acting in a network and will adopt an address we consider the use of
addresses to be completely dynamic and changeable at any rate desired by the node. With
these properties the node can communicate with strong privacy capabilities especially if
local and remote attestation detects the presence of current attacks on the system.
Remote attestation is used to enforce the relationship between parent and child node as
a certified parent must use its policy bound signing key in order to eventually issue DAA
credentials. The DAA key creation protocol in section 5.4.1.1 creates the DAA key as a
child key of the policy bound signing key hence only allowing the load of the DAA key
into the TC if the device is in a good state. This is verifiable by the parent node as the
creation certificate request CCSR is signed by the verifiable signing key. In the parent
certification and verification the DAA credential is only created if the parent can verify the
signing key signature. Likewise the node can trust in the fact that the orchestrator only
certifies correct parent nodes and thus also infer that the parent issuer certificate verifiable
by the orchestrator issuer key is associated with a DAA key and credential protected by
the parent signing key. Please refer to figure 5.3 for an overview of the key hierarchy in the
DAA model. As mentioned this remote attestation hierarchy does not have as powerful
attestation capabilities as in the non privacy enhanced S-ZTP. Its not possible for nodes
to request a guaranteed fresh signature over the state in a privacy preserving manner and
must therefore rely on the need to load and unload keys using the signing key. However
it’s not possible for an adversary to manipulate the local attestation procedure and force
the TC to load the DAA key when its not in a good state.
Non-frameability: A malicious entity wishing to produce fake communication on behalf
of a valid node would have to either compromise the TC protected private pseudonym
key or be able to generate its own pseudonym key certificate. As the DAA credentials
are signed by the issuer or parent who only issues credentials to valid TC, we can be
guaranteed that pseudonym key certificate and any DAA signed messages originates from
a valid TC. The key exchange establishes that the pseudonym certificate originates from
a trusted TC as DAAverify requires the presence of a trusted parent’s issuer certificate
to verify the DAA signature over the pseudonym certificate.
5.7.3
Revocation
The revocation protocol is built around request and verification. Requesting revocation
consists of a message secured by a signature over the pseudonym key to be revoked. Nodes
only accept genuine revocation messages with verifiable signatures, as such an outside
adversaries can’t send arbitrary revocation messages to revoke nodes. As the signature
comparison for confirming revocation is done with the pseudonym key and the private TC
protected DAA key a specific pseudonym key can’t be used to revoke other nodes.
During revocation the node locally constructs a blind DAA signature over the pseudonym
key, the DAA key and its credential.
The construction of the DAA signature is the
same process as in pseudonym key creation and certification. The blinding of the DAA
credential protects the privacy of the node while the unverifiable deterministic signature
σ1 in DAASign can be checked to match the signature of the pseudonym certificate.
Verifying the DAA signature from revocation signing DAAV erify{σrvk, Ip
pk} establishes
that revocation signature comes from a valid TC. This part follows the same procedure
as shown in [40] and their security analysis still holds. Importantly we establish that the
TC has been a part of the process and we can trust it to act on the revocation message
and delete its pseudonym keys and DAA key.
The final protocol proposed for revocation extends revocation to include all nodes issued
by the parent node utilising the DAA signature scheme and the fact that both the issuer
90
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:99==
key and the pseudonym keys are made under the same DAA key. We need to be sure that
nodes that are in fact issued by the parent are revoked with out risking an adversary to
mess up the process causing other nodes to be revoked. The main functionality making
this possible is as stated in the description of the protocol that the DAA signature has
a deterministic part and that signatures over different objects can be linked if the DAA
credentials are blinded with the same value or not blinded at all. Since we leverage normal
DAA behaviour we ensure that nothing is cryptographically compromised. The two DAA
revocation signatures created i.e. σrvk and σir can be proven to originate from a valid
TC since they are verifiable only with a trusted issuer certificate. The confirmation of
revocation is now not only about ensuring that a node carrying a valid TC has used it to
generate a revocation signature, but we must also establish that the child certificate list
originates from this node and that only its own children are subsequently revoked.
If we can show that the child certificates are verifiable with an issuer key that can only
originate from the node in question then we can confidently revoke them.
After the
ownership of the revoked pseudonym is established we link the issuer revocation signature
with the pseudonym revocation signature link{σrvk, σir}. These are linked based on the
node using the same value for DAA credential blinding when creating the signatures.
Then the equality between the signature σ1i in the node issuer certificate and the issuer
revocation signature σ1ir is established (this is based on the deterministic part of the DAA
signing). This establishes that the same TC has been involved in the creation of σir and
Certn
i and thus we can be sure that the certificates that can be verified in CCl are actually
issued by the parent node. Hence if an attacker or the parent wanted to manipulate the
child certificate list, it would have to be able to forge a DAA signature using the locally
generated child keys protected by valid TCs.
Assuring that revocation takes place is a challenge as the attacker can block all incoming
revocation requests. This was also discussed in [40] where a heartbeat mechanism was
proposed to be integrated into the TC. The idea is to have the TC expect a revocation
message from a trusted entity e.g.
the orchestrator.
Hence if an attacker blocks the
revocation messages, at some point the TC of the node will revoke itself.
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
91
==PAGE:100==
92
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:101==
Chapter 6
Conclusion and Future Work
The modern fog computing paradigm imposes the need for high scalability, security, pri-
vacy and efficiency in pervasive and highly autonomous systems, calling for the need of
security and privacy by design through standardised approaches as the connectivity and
interoperability of these systems make them highly exposed. In this thesis we propose
the combined use of current security technologies and concepts to create a foundation for
trusted and delegated privacy and security enhanced Fog environments. The two major
components of this thesis lies in the delegated S-ZTP functionality and DAA privacy en-
hancement which has been conceptualised in an iterative manner through an analysis of
technologies and requirements, and construction of trust models and protocols. The latter
serves as a basis from which to further develop and evaluate the proposed functionalities
and methods. Conceptually its possible to combine the DAA with S-ZTP functionality
and still enjoy the benefits of remote attestation for trust Establishment. Although this
comes at cost to the efficiency of the system due to the increased computational and man-
agerial load of cryptographic primitives and operations imposed by the current limitations
of the DAA in relation to the desired policy based implicit attestation. We emphasize
the flexibility of the protocols identified as the privacy functionality allow for device con-
trolled disclosure of attributes, pseudonymity and anonymity providing also unlinkablity
and un-forgeability.
Hence we do not specify a concrete use case but focus on the applicability as framework for
a potential N-layered Fog topology in which entities can be arrange in desired relationships
facilitated by possibility of distributed delegation and flexibility of IPv6 routing. However
we conceptualize how routing can be modified to meet different privacy and security related
requirements. The privacy enhanced PKAE channel that is used as a case for a two way
communication channel is limited in its applicability from a pure privacy perspective as
both parties become aware of the pseudonyms that each is acting under. However it does
show how two nodes can confidently establish secure channel with forward secrecy while
not disclosing any unwanted information or identifiers.
The analysis of the CJDNS routing and the privacy functionalities of the proposed proto-
cols reveal that a different routing structure is needed from that of the CJDNS in order to
facilitate privacy enhanced routing. We note here that conceptually the proposed model
and protocols could be extended with other types of entities based on attribute disclosures
and remote attestation to allow for role, type and policy based functionalities and entities
to play an even greater role in the system. As such we see that one aspect of future work
could be to combine the TORSK [34] networking protocols with the CJDNS and the pro-
posed S-ZTP and DAA privacy enhanced protocols in order to establish sender anonymity
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
93
==PAGE:102==
and effective end to end encryption while still enjoying the efficiency of delegation. The
added flexibility of the increased address space of IPv6 create the opportunity for novel
ways of managing identities and addresses as entities as in the case of CJDNS can be
assigned unique addresses that don’t need to filtered through the classic IPv4 addressing
schemes.
Since the work done here is purely theoretical the next step would be to implement and
test the protocols with a specific trusted component to derive a precise idea of the timings
and further challenges that might pertain to specific TCs. This should be done along
with a complete axiomatic definition of the protocols such that security features can be
tested and formally proven. This is an essential basis for further developing the proposed
models as it would enable us to adopt an iterative approach where features can be concep-
tualised, formally verified, implemented and then further developed addressing the need
for a security-centric design process. Importantly this cycle would allow for trustworthy
protocols and implementations to be developed where ”simple” security flaws would be
minimised while allowing for a more comprehensive and accurate risk assessment to take
place in the development cycle.
The current environment for effective and distributed systems has a lot of focus on virtual-
isation and containerisation presenting the question on how secure hardware and trusted
components can be used to efficiently extend their security features to containers and
micro-kernels residing on the same physical platform. The proposed protocols might be
modified while still preserving the security and privacy capabilities to fit a micro-kernel
scheme like [61] or a containerised solution where each node in the system has multiple
containers which all enjoy the privacy and security benefits as the node itself can enjoy
with the trusted component and DAA.
Further more we note that the functionality specified in this thesis does not include an
efficient scheme for updating the policy bound key, which would be necessary when pushing
node updates to the system. The current functionality allows a node to be updated and
go through the deployment phase again resulting in a new signing key and new DAA key
since the DAA key is sealed under the signing key. This would also mean the child node
hierarchy as they are certified by the issuer key sealed under the DAA key. Hence a node
would have to be revoked and then go through deployment again, this also goes for all
nodes under itself in the certificate hierarchy.
94
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:103==
Bibliography
[1]
Tigist Abera et al. “Invited - Things, trouble, trust: On building trust in IoT sys-
tems”. eng. In: Proceedings - Design Automation Conference 05-09- (2016), a121.
issn: 0738100x. doi: 10.1145/2897937.2905020.
[2]
Alexandre Adamski. Intel SGX. https://blog.quarkslab.com/overview-of-intel-sgx-
part-1-sgx-internals.html. Accessed on 2020-07-06.
[3]
K. Watsen et al. “Secure zero touch provisioning”. eng. In: RFC 8572 (2019). issn:
2070-1721.
[4]
ARM trustzone system architecture. hhttps://developer.arm.com/architectures/learn-
the-architecture/trustzone-for-armv8-a/system-architecture. Accessed on 2020-07-15.
[5]
N. Asokan et al. “SEDA: Scalable embedded device attestation”. eng. In: Proceedings
of the Acm Conference on Computer and Communications Security 2015- (2015),
pp. 964–975. issn: 15437221. doi: 10.1145/2810103.2813670.
[6]
Daniel J. Bernstein. “The salsa20 family of stream ciphers”. eng. In: Lecture Notes in
Computer Science (including Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and
Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 4986 (2008), pp. 84–97. issn: 16113349, 03029743.
doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-68351-3_8.
[7]
Matt Blaze, Joan Feigenbaum, and Jack Lacy. “Decentralized Trust Management”.
eng. In: (2009).
[8]
Ferdinand Brasser and Brahim. et al. El Mahjoub. “TyTAN: Tiny trust anchor for
tiny devices”. eng. In: Proceedings - Design Automation Conference 2015- (2015),
p. 7167218. issn: 0738100x. doi: 10.1145/2744769.2744922.
[9]
Chen Liqun Brickell Ernie Camenisch Jan. Direct Anonymous Attestation. HP Labo-
ratories Bristol HPL-2004-93: Proceedings of the Acm Conference on Computer and
Communications Security, 2004.
[10]
Liqun Chen and Bogdan Warinschi. “Security of the TCG privacy-CA solution”. eng.
In: Proceedings - Ieee/ifip International Conference on Embedded and Ubiquitous
Computing, Euc 2010 (2010), pp. 5703585, 609–616. doi: 10.1109/EUC.2010.98.
[11]
Greg Zaverucha Christian Paquin. U-Prove Cryptographic Specification V1.1 Revi-
sion 3. Microsoft Corporation, 2013.
[12]
Intersoft Consulting. Art. 25 GDPR Data protection by design and by default. https:
//gdpr-info.eu/art-25-gdpr/. Accessed on 2020-11-02. May 2016.
[13]
E. Heyst D. Chaum. “Group signatures”. eng. In: EUROCRYPT’91 (1992).
[14]
et al. D. Cooper S. Santesson. “Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure Certificate
and Certificate Revocation List (CRL) Profile”. eng. In: RFC 5280 (2008).
[15]
Michele De Donno, Koen Tange, and Nicola Dragoni. “Foundations and Evolution
of Modern Computing Paradigms: Cloud, IoT, Edge, and Fog”. eng. In: Ieee Access
7 (2019), pp. 8869772, 150936–150948. issn: 21693536. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.
2947652.
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
95
==PAGE:104==
[16]
Caleb James Delisle. CJDNS White Paper. https://github.com/cjdelisle/cjdns/blob/
master/doc/Whitepaper.md. Accessed on 2020-03-04.
[17]
Michael E. Locasto, Steven J. Greenwald, and Sergey Bratus. “Trust distribution
diagrams: Theory and applications”. eng. In: (2013).
[18]
Karim El Defrawy, Daniele Perito, and Gene Tsudik. “G.: SMART: Secure and
Minimal Architecture for (Establishing a Dynamic) Root of Trust”. eng. In: (2015).
[19]
Dieter Gollmann. Why Trust is Bad for Security. TU Hamburg-Harburg, Hamburg,
Germany: Science Direct, 2006.
[20]
Jee Hea An. “Authenticated Encryption in the Public-Key Setting: Security Notions
and Analyses”. eng. In: (2009).
[21]
Huawei ZTP implementation. https : / / support . huawei . com / enterprise / en / doc /
EDOC1000166630/3ca99b18/implementation. Accessed on 2020-03-12.
[22]
IEEE Standard for Adoption of Open Fog Reference Architecture for Fog Computing.
eng. IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–176, 1–176. isbn: 9781504450171. doi: 10.1109/IEEESTD.
2018.8423800.
[23]
“Information technology – Security techniques – Anonymous digital signatures –
Part 2: Mechanisms using a group public key”. eng. In: (2013).
[24]
Bernstein Daniel J., Lange Tanja, and Schwabe Peter. “The security impact of a
new cryptographic library”. eng. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including
Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformat-
ics) 7533 (2012), pp. 159–176. issn: 16113349, 03029743. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-
33481-8_9.
[25]
Christian Damsgaard Jensen Jean-Marc Seigneur. Trading Privacy for Trust. New
York, NY 10036. 212-431-4370: Springer, 2010.
[26]
Christian Damsgaard Jensen. The Importance of Trust in Computer Security. Techni-
cal University of Denmark DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark: Department of Applied
Mathematics & Computer Science, 2014.
[27]
M. Abrahamsson K. Watson I. Farrer. “Secure Zero Touch Provisioning (SZTP)”.
eng. In: RFC 8572 (2019).
[28]
Muhammad Asghar Khan and Inam Ullah. et al. Khan. “Dynamic routing in flying
Ad-Hoc networks using topology-based routing protocols”. eng. In: Drones 2.3 (2018),
pp. 27, 1–15. issn: 2504446x. doi: 10.3390/drones2030027.
[29]
Patrick Koeberl et al. “TrustLite: A security architecture for tiny embedded devices”.
eng. In: Proceedings of the 9th European Conference on Computer Systems, Eurosys
2014 (2014), p. 10. doi: 10.1145/2592798.2592824.
[30]
Nikos et al. Koutroumpouchos. “Secure Edge Computing with Lightweight Control-
Flow Property-based Attestation”. eng. In: Proceedings of 1st International Workshop
on Cyber-security Threats, Trust and Privacy Management in Software-defined and
Virtualized Infrastructures (2019), pp. 8806658, 84–92. doi: 10.1109/NETSOFT.2019.
8806658.
[31]
Stanford L. Levin and Stephen Schmidt. “IPv4 to IPv6: Challenges, solutions, and
lessons”. eng. In: Telecommunications Policy 38.11 (2014), pp. 1059–68, 1059–1068.
issn: 18793258, 03085961. doi: 10.1016/j.telpol.2014.06.008.
[32]
Dong Lin, Micah Sherr, and Boon Thau Loo. “Scalable and Anonymous Group
Communication with MTor”. eng. In: Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies
2016.2 (2016), pp. 22–39, 22–39. issn: 22990984. doi: 10.1515/popets-2016-0003.
[33]
Zaigham Mahmood. Fog computing: Concepts, frameworks and technologies. eng.
Springer International Publishing, 2018, chapter 1. isbn: 9783319948898, 9783319948904,
3319948903, 331994889x. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-94890-4.
96
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:105==
[34]
Jon Mclachlan, Andrew Tran, and Yongdae Kim. “Scalable Onion Routing with
Torsk”. eng. In: (2009).
[35]
Liqun Chen et al. Nada El Kassem. “First Report on the Security of the TPM”. eng.
In: Future Proofing the Connected World: A QuantumResistant Trusted Platform
Module (2019).
[36]
Muthana Najim Abdulleh, Salman Yussof, and Hothefa Shaker Jassim. “Compar-
ative Study of Proactive, Reactive and Geographical MANET Routing Protocols”.
eng. In: (2016).
[37]
Adrian Orive et al. “Novel orchestration architecture for Fog computing”. eng. In:
2019 Ieee 17th International Conference on Industrial Informatics (indin) 1 (2019),
pp. 485–491, 485–491. issn: 2378363x. doi: 10.1109/indin41052.2019.8972087.
[38]
Trevor Perrin. The Noise Protocol Framework. http://noiseprotocol.org/noise.html#
one-way-handshake-patterns. Accessed on 2020-03-14. 2018.
[39]
David Mazières Petar Maymounkov. “Kademlia: A Peer-to-peer Information System
BAsed on the XOR Metric”. eng. In: (2002).
[40]
Privacy-enhanced capabilities for VANETs using direct anonymous attestation. und.
Vol. 2018-January. 2018, pp. 123–130. isbn: 9781538609866. doi: 10.1109/VNC.2017.
8275615.
[41]
Provisioning devices with Azure IoT Hub Device Provisioning Service. https://docs.
microsoft.com/en-us/azure/iot-dps/about-iot-dps. Accessed on 2020-04-10.
[42]
et al. R. Yavatkar D. Pendarakis. “A Framework for Policy-based Admission Control”.
eng. In: RFC 2753 (2000).
[43]
Ronald L. Rivest, Adi Shamir, and Yael Tauman. “How to leak a secret”. eng. In:
Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial
Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 2248 (2001), pp. 552–565. issn:
16113349, 03029743. doi: 10.1007/3-540-45682-1_32.
[44]
Rodrigo Roman, Javier Lopez, and Masahiro Mambo. “Mobile edge computing, Fog
et al.: A survey and analysis of security threats and challenges”. eng. In: Future
Generation Computer Systems 78 (2018), pp. 680–698. issn: 18727115, 0167739x.
doi: 10.1016/j.future.2016.11.009.
[45]
Agarwal S., Starobinski D., and Trachtenberg A. “On the Scalability of Data Syn-
chronization Protocols for PDAs and Mobile Devices”. eng. In: (2009).
[46]
Ahmad Sabouri, Ioannis Krontiris, and Kai Rannenberg. “Attribute-based creden-
tials for trust (ABC4Trust)”. eng. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including
Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformat-
ics) 7449 (2012), pp. 218–219. issn: 16113349, 03029743. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-
32287-7_21.
[47]
Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi, Christian Wachsmann, and Michael Waidner. “Security and
privacy challenges in industrial internet of things”. eng. In: (2020).
[48]
Roberto Sassu. A Simple Protocol for Remote Attestation of System Integrity. https:
//events19.linuxfoundation.org/wp- content/uploads/2017/12/LSS_EU_2018_
Roberto_Sassu_Simple_RA_Protocol_Roberto-Sassu.pdf. Accessed on 2020-06-11.
[49]
Ariel Segall and Institution of Engineering. Trusted Platform Modules: Why, When
and How to Use Them. eng. IET, 2016, pp. xviii+363. isbn: 1849198934, 9781849198943,
9781849198936, 1849198942, 1523108576. doi: 10.1049/PBPC013E.
[50]
Fatemeh Shirazi et al. “A survey on routing in anonymous communication protocols”.
eng. In: Acm Computing Surveys 51.3 (2018), p. 51. issn: 15577341, 03600300. doi:
10.1145/3182658.
[51]
Gisdakis Stylianos, Giannetsos Thanassis, and Papadimitratos Panos. “SPPEAR:
Security & privacy-preserving architecture for participatory-sensing applications”.
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
97
==PAGE:106==
eng. In: Wisec 2014 - Proceedings of the 7th Acm Conference on Security and Privacy
in Wireless and Mobile Networks (2014), pp. 39–50. doi: 10.1145/2627393.2627402.
[52]
Latanya Sweeney. “k-ANONYMITY: A MODEL FOR PROTECTING PRIVACY
1”. eng. In: (2013).
[53]
et al. T. Giannetsos S. Menesidou. “Demonstrators Implementation Report – First
Release”. eng. In: Future Proofing the Connected World: A QuantumResistant Trusted
Platform Module (2019).
[54]
et al. T. Giannetsos V. Sekar. “ASTRID Deliverable D3.1, RELEASE OF THE AL-
GORITHMS FOR THE DETECTION AND MANAGEMENT OF VULNERABILI-
TIES, THREATS, AND ANOMALIES”. eng. In: AddreSsing ThReats for virtualIseD
services (2020).
[55]
TCG. “Implicit Identity Based Device Attestation”. eng. In: (2018).
[56]
TCG. TCG EK Credential Profile For TPM Family 2.0; Level 0. Trusted Computing
Group Administration,3855 SW 153rd Drive Beaverton, Oregon 97003: TCG, 2018.
[57]
TCG. TCG TPM v2.0 Provisioning Guidance. Trusted Computing Group Adminis-
tration,3855 SW 153rd Drive Beaverton, Oregon 97003: TCG, 2017.
[58]
TCG. TCG Trusted Attestation Protocol (TAP) Use Cases for TPM Families 1.2
and 2.0 and DICE. Trusted Computing Group Administration,3855 SW 153rd Drive
Beaverton, Oregon 97003: TCG, 2019.
[59]
TCG. Trusted Platform Module Library Part 1: Architecture. Trusted Computing
Group Administration,3855 SW 153rd Drive Beaverton, Oregon 97003: TCG, 2016.
[60]
Sabih Ur Rehman and M. et al. Arif Khan. “Vehicular Ad-Hoc Networks (VANETs)
-An Overview and Challenges”. eng. In: (2020).
[61]
Steffen Wagner and Claudia Eckert. “Policy-based implicit attestation for microkernel-
based virtualized systems”. eng. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including
Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformat-
ics) 9866 (2016), pp. 305–322. issn: 16113349, 03029743. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-
45871-7_19.
[62]
Kang Yang et al. “Direct Anonymous Attestation with Optimal TPM Signing Effi-
ciency”. In: IACR Cryptology ePrint Archive 2018 (2018).
[63]
Yu. Yao-Chang, Hou. Ting-Wei, and Hou. Ting-Wei. “An efficient forward-secure
group certificate digital signature scheme to enhance EMR authentication process”.
und. In: Medical and Biological Engineering and Computing 52.5 (2014), pp. 449–457.
issn: 17410444, 01400118. doi: 10.1007/s11517-014-1147-9,10.1007/s11517-014-
1147-9.
98
Towards Enhanced Security, Privacy and Operational Assurance in Fog-based Environments via Trusted Platforms
==PAGE:107==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Bygning 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
