==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Master Thesis
17 August 2020
Determining Antigen Speciﬁcities
and Phenotype of CD8 T Cells in
Rheumatoid Arthritis
Author: Leiying Zhu, s143231
Duration: 27.01.2020 - 17.08.2020
ECTS: 35
Supervisor:
Professor Sine Reker Hadrup
Postdoc Christina Heeke
DTU HEALTH TECH
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
I declare that I have authored this report independently, that I have not used other than
declared sources/resources, and that I have explicitly indicated all material which has been
quoted either literally or by content from the sources used. The text document uploaded
to DTUonline is identical to the present report.
Date
Signature (Leiying Zhu)
17-08-2020
==PAGE:3==
17 August 2020
Preface and Acknowledgements
This thesis has been submitted to the Technical University of Denmark, the Department of
Health Technology, to obtain the master degree. The present work has been conducted at
the Department of Health Technology, under supervision of Professor Sine Reker Hardrup
and Postdoc Christina Heeke.
First of all, I would like to express my sincere appreciation to Sine Reker Hardrup for letting
me in your group. Thank you for being such an enthusiasts, inspiring, and thoughtful
supervisor. Thank you for all the scientiﬁc discussion from which I have learned a lot. You
are a role model in the life.
Additionally, I want to thank Christina Heeke for your excellent guidance and being another
super patient, professional and inspiring supervisor. Thank you for spending hours with
me in the lab, in front of the ﬂow cytometer and teaching me diﬀerent analysing methods
in the kitchen.
I would also like to thank Natasja, Stine, Signe, Sara, Nikolaj, Jepp and Sunil for invaluable
help in the lab, scientiﬁc discussion as well as for creating a work environment in which
help is always nearby. In addition, I wish to thank Anni and Bente for your advise and
technical support in the lab.
Last but not least, I want to thank my family and friends for their endless love and support.
Josephine and Johan, thank you for being so sweet and understandable when mum spends
a lot of time in the study room which is supposed to be spent with you two. Allan, my
best friend and husband, thank you for being there all the time. Without you, I would
never ever thinking of being at this stage in my life.
i
==PAGE:4==
17 August 2020
Abstract
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a prototypical human autoimmune disease principally
characterized by chronic synovial inﬂammation aﬀecting the joints.
CD4 T cells are
traditionally thought as the most related T cells due to the well-described association of
this disease with Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) class II alleles.
However,
data on the role of CD8 T cells in RA has been scanty.
Using peptide-MHC class I
multimers labeled with DNA barcodes, a detection of antigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells against
637 potential auto-epitopes from six RA associated proteins was made in this project. A
signiﬁcantly higher level of autoreactive T cells was observed in the peripheral blood
(PB) of a cohort of 45 RA patients compared with 28 healthy controls, in terms of both
the number and the estimated frequencies of responses. In addition, Collagen type II was
identiﬁed as the most immunogenic protein of the six included RA-related proteins.
Moreover, peptides in the citrullinated form were found representing the majority of the
immunogenic peptides in relation to those in the native form in RA patients.
Furthermore, based on the data generated from the screening assay, a phenotyping
analysis of the autoreactive CD8 T cells in 27 patients with RA was made by measuring
the expression of activation,
diﬀerentiation,
and exhaustion surface markers via
multicolor ﬂow cytometry. The majority of these CD8 T cells had a phenotype proﬁle of
eﬀector cells.
In particular, signiﬁcantly more RA related CD8 T cells were eﬀector
memory RA (Temra) cells expressing the late diﬀerentiated marker CD57 compared to
the viral antigen reactive CD8 T cells.
When dividing the patients into two groups
according to the Disease Activity Score 28 (DAS28), it was observed that CD8 T cells in
patients with active RA tend to have more Temra phenotypic proﬁle and express more
CD57 when compared to those in patients with inactive RA disease.
These ﬁndings indicate CD8 T cells play a potential role in the parthenogenesis of RA
with their speciﬁc recognition of autoantigens derived from these previously described
RA proteins, and CD57 expressed on autoreactive CD8 T cells has the potential as a
candidate immunological marker for RA.
ii
==PAGE:5==
17 August 2020
Abbreviations
ACPA
Anti–citrullinated protein antibody
Aire
Autoimmune regulator
APC
Allophycocyanin
BC
Buﬀy coat
Bc
Barcode-cytometry
BcB
Barcode-cytometry buﬀer
CDR
Complementarity-determining region
CMV
Cytomegalovirus
CTL
Cytotoxic T lymphocytes
DAS28
Disease Activity Score 28
DC
Dendritic cell
DMSO
Dimethyl sulfoxide
EBV
Ebstein-Barr virus
ER
Endoplasmic reticulum
FACS
Fluorescence-activated cell sorting
FasL
Fas/Fasligand
FDR
False discovery rate
FLS
Fibroblast-like synoviocyte
FLU
Inﬂuenza virus
GRP78
Glucose Regulated Protein 78
HCMV
Human cytomegalovirus
HIV
Human immunodeﬁciency virus
HLA
Human Leukocyte Antigen
iii
==PAGE:6==
17 August 2020
ICS
Intracellular cytokine staining
IFNγ
Interferon γ
IL
Interleukin
KIR
Killer cell immunoglobulin-like receptors
MC
Cryoglobulinemia
MFI
Median ﬂuorescence intensity
MHC
Major Histocompatibility Complex
MHC-I
MHC class I
MHC-II
MHC class II
MMP
Matrix metalloproteinases
MS
Multiple Sclerosis
mTEC
Thymic epithelial cells
NGS
Next-Generation Sequencing
Nir
Near-IR-viability
PAD
Peptiddyl-arginine deiminases
PB
Peripheral blood
PBMC
Peripheral blood mononuclear cell
PBS
Phosphate buﬀered saline
PCR
Polymerase chain reactions
PE
Phyvoerythrin
PFA
Paraformaldehyde
pMHC
Peptide-MHC
PMT
Photomultiperlier tube
RA
Rheumatoid arthritis
RF
Rheumatoid factor
iv
==PAGE:7==
17 August 2020
RT
Room temperature
SA
Steptavidin
SE
Shared Epitope
SF
Synovial ﬂuid
SLE
Systemic lupus erythematosus
SSc
Systemic sclerosis
T1D
Type 1 Diabetes
TAP
Transporter associated with antigen processing
Tcm
Central memory CD8 T
TCR
T cell receptor
Teﬀ
Eﬀector CD8 T
Tem
Eﬀector memory CD8 T
Temra
Eﬀector memory RA
Tex
Exhausted CD8 T
Th
T helper
TLR
Toll-like receptor
Tmem
Memory CD8 T
TNFα
Tumor necrosis factor α
Trm
Tissue-resident memory CD8 T
Tsup
Regulatory CD8 T
UMAP
Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection
v
==PAGE:8==
17 August 2020
Contents
Preface and Acknowledgements
i
Abstract
ii
Abbreviations
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Adaptive immunity and T cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
CD8 T cell
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.2
CD8 T cell diﬀerentiation and subtypes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.1.3
CD8 T cell in autoimmunity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2
Detection of antigen speciﬁc CD8 T cells
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.2.1
Detection of antigen-speciﬁc CD8 T-cells via MHC multimers . . . .
7
1.2.2
The heterogeneity of the CD8 T cell antigen landscape . . . . . . . .
8
1.2.3
High throughput detection of antigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells via DNA
barcode-labelled dextran multimers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.2.4
In silico peptide prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.3
Analysis of multicolor ﬂow cytometry data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.3.1
UMAP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.4
Rheumatoid Arthritis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.4.1
Disease Activity Score 28
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.4.2
Immunology of Rheumatoid Arthritis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.4.3
Speciﬁc citrullinated proteins in Rheumatoid Arthritis . . . . . . . .
14
1.4.4
T cells in Rheumatoid Arthritis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2
Project Aims
18
3
Experimental strategy
19
4
Materials and Methods
22
4.1
Patient and healthy control materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.1.1
Patient samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.1.2
HLA analysis across the RA cohort . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.1.3
Healthy control samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2
The peptides
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2.1
RA peptide prediction analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2.2
Virus derived peptides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3
Determination of CD8 T cell antigen speciﬁcity in RA . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3.1
Generation of DNA barcodes labeled peptide-MHC class I multimers
25
vi
==PAGE:9==
17 August 2020
4.3.2
T cell staining with pMHC-multimer labeled with DNA barcodes . .
26
4.3.3
Sorting of MHC multimer-positive T cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3.4
DNA barcode ampliﬁcation for Ion Torrent sequencing . . . . . . . .
28
4.3.5
Processing of sequencing data from multimer-labeled DNA barcodes
29
4.4
Phenotype of autoantigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells in RA . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.4.1
Generation of RA peptide- and virus peptide-tetramers . . . . . . . .
30
4.4.2
T cell staining
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.4.3
Flow cytometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.4.3.1
Compensation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.4.3.2
Gating strategy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.4.4
Data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.5
Graph generation and statistical data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5
Results
35
5.1
The detection of antigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells in RA . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.1.1
Correlation plot for validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.1.2
Exclusion of responses from HLA-C0501 bond peptides . . . . . . . .
36
5.1.3
More RA pMHC-speciﬁc CD8 T cell response are detected in RA
patients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.1.4
The estimated frequency of RA pMHC-speciﬁc CD8 T cells is higher
in RA patients
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.1.5
Correlation of clinical parameters and the detection of RA pMHC-
speciﬁc CD8 T cells
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.1.6
Collagen type II is the most immunogenic protein in RA . . . . . . .
39
5.1.7
The citrullinated RA peptides represent the majority of the immuno-
genic peptides in RA patients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.2
Phenotype of autoantigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells in RA . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.2.1
Phenotype panel design and staining of CD8 T cells
. . . . . . . . .
43
5.2.2
UMAP analysis on antigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.2.3
Comparison of phenotypic proﬁle between RA pMHC-speciﬁc and
virus pMHC-speciﬁc CD8 T cells in RA patients
. . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.2.3.1
The comparison of CD197 and CD45RA expression
. . . .
46
5.2.3.2
The comparison of CD57 and PD expression
. . . . . . . .
48
5.2.4
Comparison of phenotypic proﬁle between RA pMHC-speciﬁc T cells
in patients with active/inactive disease . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.2.4.1
The comparison of CD197 and CD45RA expression
. . . .
50
5.2.4.2
The comparison of CD57 and PD1 expression . . . . . . . .
52
vii
==PAGE:10==
17 August 2020
6
Discussion
54
6.1
The detection of autoantigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells in RA . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.2
Phenotype of autoantigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells in RA . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
7
Conclusions and Future Perspectives
59
8
List of Literature
60
9
Appendices
72
9.1
A
Patient list . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
9.2
B
Full HLA type of each patient
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
9.3
C
Full HLA type of each healthy donor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
9.4
D
Predicted RA relevant peptides
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
9.5
E
List of virus derived peptides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
9.6
F
A-key list for DNA barcode ampliﬁcation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
9.7
G
Gating strategy in T cell sorting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
9.8
H
The selected patients and peptides in phenotyping . . . . . . . . . .
83
viii
==PAGE:11==
17 August 2020
1
Introduction
The immune system is a complex, powerful, and well-orchestrated network of cells and
organs that defends the body against any infectious elements.
It is comprised of a
heterogeneous mixture of cells and can be divided into innate and adaptive immunity.
CD8 T cells are one of the most essential cell types in the adaptive immune system.
Their function is to speciﬁcally recognize and eﬃciently kill the infected cells.
This
process is mediated by the speciﬁc interaction between their expressed T cell receptors
(TCRs) and the peptide fragments presented by MHC class I (MHC-I) molecules on the
surface of nucleated cells. In addition, they are also acknowledged to be implicated in
autoimmune parthenogenesis, where the immune system goes awry and the dysregulated
T cells could focus their attack against self components and thus result in autoimmune
syndrome.
In order to study and understand such disease mechanism as well as to develop targeted
therapy in the future, it is crucial to investigate and determine the speciﬁc interaction
between the TCR and peptide-MHC (pMHC) complex, since the key function of CD8 T
cells is preliminary relying on the speciﬁc recognition of antigen. The revealed antigen
speciﬁcity of CD8 T cells by the detection together with a functional and phenotypic
analysis of them may provide an insight to their roles in such disease.
1.1
Adaptive immunity and T cells
Compared with the inborn innate immunity with its fast but low speciﬁc responses, the
adaptive immune response of vertebrates is more speciﬁc. It takes a longer time to arise
but is able to form memory. This means when re-exposed to the same antigen, a faster
and more eﬀective immune response can be activated. The adaptive response involves
two major types of lymphocytes: B cells and T cells.
The B-lymphocytes are mainly
responsible for the antibody-mediated humoral immunity, which speciﬁcally act against
a given antigen.
On the other hand, the cellular immune response is orchestrated by
T-lymphocytes, which can be divided into two major categories, CD4 and CD8 T cells.
CD4 T cells are also termed T-helper (Th) cells as their primary function is to help other
cells to exert their eﬀector functions. CD4 T cells recognize degraded extracellular antigens
presented by the MHC-II molecules, which are expressed mainly by antigen presenting cells
(APCs), including dendritic cells (DCs), macrophages, and B cells [1]. There are several
subsets of CD4 T cells which are deﬁned by their diﬀerent functions together with the
proﬁles of cytokine production. Although CD4 T cells are not the main eﬀector cells, they
play an important role in sustaining a functional adaptive immune response.
1
==PAGE:12==
17 August 2020
CD8 positive lymphocytes are also designated cytotoxic T-lymphocytes (CTL). When
activated upon antigen recognition, they are able to directly kill target cells. In addition,
they can also induce cell apoptosis indirectly by secreting cytokines enabling death
signaling through speciﬁc receptors expressed on the target cell surface [2].
1.1.1
CD8 T cell
CD8 T cell is a subset of TCRαβ+ T cells and thus expresses a TCR consisting of α and
β polypeptide chains that form a heterodimeric complex supported by the associated
signaling complex CD3.
Each TCR-chain comprises a constant and a variable region
(Figure 1A) [3]. During T cell development in the thymus, TCR chains are assembled
somatically by the random rearrangement of discrete variable (V), diversity (D) and J
(joint) gene segments into the complementarity-determining region (CDR), including:
CDR1α/β, CDR2α/β, and CDR3α/β (Figure 1B) [4]. The diverse recombination leads
the generation of numerous diﬀerent TCRs with an estimated number of ten million in an
individual [5]. Indeed, with this TCR diversity, it forms the basis of the speciﬁcity of T
cells [4, 3].
Figure 1: The TCRαβ+ receptor. A. CD8 T cell express TCRα and TCR β chains which are co-expressed with
CD3 chains composed of two CD3ζ, one CD3γ, one CD3δ, and two CD3ϵ chains. Co-receptor CD8 complex is also
expressed by CD8 T cell aiding the recognition of antigen-derived peptide presented by the MHC class I molecule.
MHC I is a heterodimeric glycoprotein that comprises an α chain and a β2-microglobulin chain. B. a. TCR diversity
arises from genetic recombination of V and J gene segments of the α chain and V, D and J gene segments of the
β chain. In humans, there are 52Vα and 61Jα, over 70Vβ, 2Dβ and 13Jβ gene segments. Somatic recombination
and subsequent splicing to constant region leads to the formation of the TCR. b. CDR1 and CDR2 are encoded
within the V gene segments, while the highly variable CDR3 spans parts of both VJ gene segments for α chain and
all VDJ gene segments for β chain. CDR3 is the part of TCR responsible for the interaction with the peptide in
the pMHC complex, whereas CDR1 and CDR2 bind to the MHC I molecule. Modiﬁed from [3].
Recognition of a given antigen for CD8 T cells requires the interaction between the TCRs
and the speciﬁc peptide presented by MHC-I molecules, in humans called Human
2
==PAGE:13==
17 August 2020
Leukocyte Antigens (HLAs) class I. MHC-I is expressed on the surface of nearly all
nucleated cells [1] and function as a ’window’ that preferentially present 8-10mer peptide
fragments to CD8 T cells [6].
Before these intracellular peptides bind to the MHC-I
molecules,
they
undergo
a
series
of
processing,
including
proteasomal
cleavage,
transporter associated with antigen processing (TAP) protein-mediated active transport
into
the
endoplasmic
reticu-lum,
further
trimming
by
aminopeptidases
[7],
and
chaperones associated loading onto MHC-I. On top of this pathway, extracellular
antigens can also be presented by MHC-1 expressed on DCs to CD8 T cells via
cross-presentation [8].
The activation of CD8 T cells requires the binding of TCRs to the pMHC complex,
where the CDR1 and CDR2 regions bind mainly to the MHC molecule, whereas the
hypervariable CDR3 loop primarily interact with peptide positioned in the MHC
complex [9]. In addition, a suﬃcient activation of CD8 T cells is also controlled by the
presence of T cell co-receptor molecules (CD8 and CD3), the co-stimulatory molecules
(e.g.B7, CD40) and speciﬁc cytokines such as Interleukin (IL)-2 (Figure 1A). Normally,
the initial interaction between a T cell and an epitope has very low aﬃnity. Therefor,
clustering of identical TCRs is important to enable multiple interactions and increase
overall avidity towards antigens [2].
1.1.2
CD8 T cell diﬀerentiation and subtypes
When Naive CD8 T cells are activated, robust proliferation and clonal expansion take
place, which leads to their diﬀerentiation into CD8 eﬀector T (Teﬀ) cells that have the
capacity to eﬃciently kill target cells bearing the same antigen [2].
During this
diﬀerentiation process, Teﬀcells undergo a number of ’transformations’, including
transcriptional, epigenetic, and metabolic reprogramming.
In addition, they also gain
some characteristic eﬀector features, such as the ability to produce eﬀector cytokines and
cytotoxic molecules [10]. Following antigen clearance and inﬂammation resolution, most
of the Teﬀcells die by apoptosis, whereas a small portion of them persist in the body and
diﬀerentiates into memory T (Tmem) cells. Tmem cells have a long-term contraction and
are able to proliferate vigorously with enhanced responses when re-encountering a given
antigen [11]. With respect to phenotypic markers, eﬀector functions and tissue-homing
capabilities, Tmem cells are traditionally further divided into three subtypes, termed
central memory T (Tcm) cells, eﬀector memory T (Tem) cells and Temra cells. Tcm cells
are proposed to mediate the reactive memory and the expression of chemokine receptor
CD197 that facilities their homing to secondary lymphoid organs. They have little or no
eﬀector function, yet readily proliferate and diﬀerentiate to eﬀecter cells in response
antigenic stimulation. The protective memory is mediated by Tem cells, which migrate to
3
==PAGE:14==
17 August 2020
inﬂamed peripheral tissues and display rapid eﬀector function, while Temra cells are cells
that approach late-stage diﬀerentiation [12].
More recently, two other subtypes of
activated CD8 T cells were described. One lineage is tissue-resident memory T (Trm)
cells, which orchestrate responses to infections reencountered at their residential organs
and tissues [13]. In the settings of chronic infections, cancer, and autoimmunity, where
antigen stimulation persists,
a proportion of active T cells become functionally
unresponsive to further antigen stimulation and represent a distinct state of T-cell
diﬀerentiation. These cells are called exhausted T (Tex) cells [10].
On top of the mentioned subtypes, regulatory CD8 T (Tsup) cells are emerging as an
important subset of CD8 positive T cells.
These cells are functional in suppressing
eﬀector T cells and inﬂammatory cytokines and therefore are critical in immune
homeostasis and tolerance [14] (Figure 2A.).
Figure 2: CD8 T cell subgroups and their potential surface markers. A. Schematic representation of
diﬀerent subgroups of CD8 T cells, including naive, eﬀector (Teﬀ), memory (Tmem), central memory (Tcm), eﬀector
memory (Tem), eﬀector memory RA (Temra), tissue-residential memory (Trm), exhausted (Tex), and regulatory
(Tsup) Cd8 t cells. B. The table shows the potential surface markers that can be used to distinguish the diﬀerent
subgroups of CD8 T cells.
The characterization of these distinct but also related CD8 T cell subtypes is
corresponding to diﬀerent levels of diﬀerentiation, activation status, eﬀector function and
cytokine production. In this context, cell surface markers provide an expedient way to
distinguish them though the exact classiﬁcation of certain subtypes is still a matter of
debate.
The phenotypic classiﬁcation of CD8 T cell can be based on the absence or
presence of co-stimulatory receptors (eg.
CD45RA), chemokine receptors (eg.
CD197,
CD195), IL receptors (eg. CD25, CD127), adhesion molecule (eg. CD49d), and other
surface makers, such as CD39, CD57, CD69 and PD1 (Figure 2B.).
Naive CD8 T cells express receptor CD45RA, whereas memory cells lose the expression
of it. In addition, naive cells also express CD197, while only Tcm cells express it. Thus,
naive (CD197+ CD45RA+), Tcm (CD197+ CD45RA–) and Tem (CD197– CD45RA–)
cells can be distinguished. Due to the re-expression of CD45RA on Temra cells, these
cells can be labeled as CD197– CD45RA+ Temra cells [12].
Trm cells express the
4
==PAGE:15==
17 August 2020
canonical marker CD69, which promotes their tissue retention [13]. Programmed death 1
(PD-1) is an inhibitory molecule, which is predominantly up-regulated on activated or
early diﬀerentiated CD8 T cells and thus mainly regarded as an activation marker [15].
The ectonucleotidases CD39 is a ’resent antigen activation’ surface marker that is
expressed upon the activation of CD8 T cells but rapidly downregulated after the antigen
exposure [16]. The CD57 antigen, also known as L2, is often used to identify terminally
diﬀerentiated CD8 T cells with reduced proliferation abilities and modiﬁed functional
properties. Thus cells expressing CD57 are regarded as highly antigen-experienced cells
and observed during chronic immune activation [17, 18]. However, the speciﬁc marker for
Tsup cell identiﬁcation is still elusive.
CD8+ CD25+ Foxp3+ is the most common
paradigm to deﬁne Tsup, where Foxp3+ is an intracellular DNA-binding protein that
prevents transcription [19]. In addition, CD127 is shown absent or expressed at a low
level on Tsup cells [20].
On top of the above-mentioned markers, the other makers
associated with the migration of activated CD8 T cells, including CD195 and CD49d will
be described in a later section.
1.1.3
CD8 T cell in autoimmunity
Delicately balanced immune responses build up a success immune system to defend our
body against the invaded pathogens and the caused infections, but remain ’calm’ and
unreactive to the harmless agents from the environment or our own body. The success
can be attributed to a series of checkpoints, centrally as well as in the periphery, that act
synergistically to restrain self-reactivity but not impair the necessary immunity.
The ﬁrst checkpoint that T cells should pass is the central tolerance mechanism.
During development and maturation in the thymus,
T cells are presented with
self-peptide:self-MHC complexes.
Positive selection ensures that only T cells that can
recognize and bind to this complex can get the survival signal, whereas those that have
too high TCR aﬃnity towards self-peptide:self-MHC complexes are removed by negative
selection. The process of central tolerance is thought to induce apoptosis in up to 95% of
all immatured T cells and ensures that only the cells with aﬃnities for self-pMHC in an
intermediate-range are allowed to mature and migrate to the peripheral lymphoid organs
[21]. In addition, highly expressed autoimmune regulator (Aire) on thymic epithelial cells
(mTECs) also plays a role in the process of negative selection to ensure no T cells
reacting strongly to self-peptides are released to the circulation, thereby avoiding the
induction of autoimmunity [22]. Nevertheless, not all self-antigens are expressed in the
thymus, as they may appear in other tissues, at other stages in the development of cells,
or undergo post-transnational modiﬁcations (e.g. citrullination, methylation). Therefore,
such cells whose cognate antigens are absent in the thymus or expressing lower-aﬃnity
5
==PAGE:16==
17 August 2020
TCRs, do escape central tolerance into the peripheral under normal conditions (Figure
3).
Figure 3:
Schematic representation
of central and peripheral tolerance.
In the central tolerance, positive and
negative selection ensures only T cells with
intermediate aﬃnities for self-pMHC are
allowed to matured and migrate from the
thymus to the peripheral lymphoid organs.
The cells cannot pass them to undergo
apoptosis. In addition, T cells need to pass
the peripheral tolerance as well to become
matured non-self-reactive T cells. In this
process, escaped self-reactive T cells are
become apoptosis, anergic or suppressed
by Tsup cells [22]
These self-reactive CD8 T cells will have to overcome an additional checkpoint, the
peripheral tolerance mechanisms, e.g.
become anergy due to the absence of
co-stimulatory signals, suppression by regulatory T cells and myeloid-derived suppressor
cells [22]. Moreover, Aire has been shown expressed in lymphoid tissues, which enables
the clonal deletion of auto-reactive T cells in these tissues just like in the thymus [23].
When these checkpoints are deﬁcient or defective, inadequate central or peripheral
tolerance can lead to autoimmune diseases.
Regarding some common T cell-mediated autoimmune syndromes, such as Multiple
Sclerosis (MS) and Type 1 Diabetes (T1D), CD4 T cells were traditionally considered to be
the key factor. The main reason is the strong associations that have been shown between
their disease susceptibility and given MHC-II alleles [24, 25]. To date, emerging data show
evidence that cytotoxic CD8 T cells also play an important role in autoimmune disorders.
Activated CD8 T cells can directly recognize pMHC complexes and kill target cells through
the Fas/Fasligand (FasL) pathway, or by secreting cytolytic granules. They can also cause
tissue injury by releasing high levels of proinﬂammatory cytokines, such as tumor necrosis
factor α (TNFα) and IFNγ. The contribution of CD8 T cells to the pathogenesis of several
autoimmune diseases have been described recently [26, 27, 28]. On the other hand, besides
functioning as an eﬀector in autoimmunity, CD8 T cells, Tsup in particular, have also been
identiﬁed as negative regulators of autoimmune responses in diﬀerent studies [29, 30].
1.2
Detection of antigen speciﬁc CD8 T cells
Over the past decades, tremendous eﬀorts have been made to develop reliable strategies for
studying antigen-speciﬁc T cell recognition. However, T cells speciﬁc for a given antigen
are featured with low aﬃnities for the antigenic pMHC as well as low frequency in the PB.
6
==PAGE:17==
17 August 2020
Indeed, auto-antigen reactive CD8 T cells have typically lower aﬃnity for pMHC molecules
when compared with virus-speciﬁc CD8 T cells. They also comprise only a small fraction
of the total T cell population. These two factors impeded the direct detection of TCR-
pMHC interactions for a long time until pMHC molecules were successfully multimerized
by Altman and his group [31].
1.2.1
Detection of antigen-speciﬁc CD8 T-cells via MHC multimers
In 1996 Altman et al.
[31] described the generation of the classic MHC multimers to
overcome the issue of insuﬃcient interaction of TCR with pMHC monomer.
In short, MHC tetramer is generated by using four identical biotinylated MHC monomers
and multimerized with a streptavidin (SA)-conjugated ﬂuorochrome as a scaﬀold. The
multimerization enables the simultaneous binding between TCRs and their speciﬁc pMHC
targets, thus provides suﬃcient binding stability to TCR for detecting the ﬂuorescent label
CD8 T cells by ﬂow cytometry (Figure 4).
Figure 4:
Detection
of
antigen-speciﬁc
T-cells
via
MHC
multimers.
Single
interactions
between
TCR
and
pMHC
are
unstable and insuﬃcient for the ﬂuorescence based
detection of antigen-speciﬁc T cells.
In contrast,
multimeric complexes of pMHC takes advantage of
simultaneous binding between several molecules and
thus increase the overall acidity of the interaction
and make a more sensitive and accurate detection
possible. Adapted from [32].
Since it was ﬁrst reported, ﬂuorochrome-conjugated MHC multimer staining has been
widely used as a method for ﬂow cytometric isolation and detection of antigen-speciﬁc T
cells. During the past 20 years, on top of the basic principle, a number of improvements
have been introduced to this method for optimization, such as the peptide exchange
technology [33, 34].
Due to the instability of the MHC molecule in the absence of a peptide in the binding
groove [35], the initial process to refold MHC monomers with every new individual T cell
epitope was laborious and insuﬃcient.
This limited the generation of a big pMHC
complex library for a large scale and a high-throughput T cell response detection. The
development of UV-mediated peptide exchange technology made a major eﬀort to
overcome this challenge.
Upon UV exposure, the photolabile ligand is cleaved.
The
empty MHC molecule can be rescued by excess amount of epitopes of interest
immediately instead of disintegration. Thus, desired pMHC complexes are produced and
in a high-throughput manner (Figure 5) [34].
More recently, the invention of dextran based pMHC multimers further improved the
7
==PAGE:18==
17 August 2020
Figure 5:
UV-mediated ligand exchange.
Upon UV-exposure with radiation <350nm, the
conditional ligand is cleaved at the UV-photolabile
cleavage site shown in green and dissociate from
the MHC complex. The MHC will degrdate if not
rescued immediately by excess of another peptide of
interest that is MHC speciﬁc. Modiﬁed from [34]
detection ability of T cell responses. Dextran is a stable polysaccharide chain functioning
as a ’docking backbone’ allowing numerous biotinylated pMHCs to attach. This higher
order multimerization increases the overall staining eﬃciency and stability of a given
TCR to its ligand. And consequently improve the distinction of antigen-speciﬁc T cells,
especially for autoimmune T cell populations that are likely to display weak TCR–pMHC
aﬃnity and diﬃcult to detect [36].
1.2.2
The heterogeneity of the CD8 T cell antigen landscape
The recognition of a given pMHC by CD8 T cell via TCR involves three components,
which are the MHC-1 molecule, the presented peptide, and the TCR. The diversity and
complexity of TCR in terms of how TCRs recognize their cognate antigens is beyond the
scope of this project, while the heterogeneity of the T cell antigen landscape in a given
disease is of interest. Both HLA-I speciﬁcity and the number of potential antigens to be
presented, bind to HLA-I have an impact on this landscape.
Indeed, each individual
express six HLA-I alleles and more than 10,000 distinct HLA-I alleles have been
identiﬁed to date [37].
Moreover, 24,000 HLA-I restricted peptides were identiﬁed as
updated in 2017 [6].
This gives rise to the enormous number of possible pMHC
complexes that can be recognized by a single TCR and consequently activate the immune
system. Therefore, truly large scale screening methods are needed to enhance the ability
for studying the immune recognition. Much eﬀort has been made to reach the goal, such
as the approach utilizing combinatorial encoding of ﬂuorescently labeled multimers [38]
and another approach combining mass CyTOF analysis and combinatorial pMHC
multimer staining [39]. An additional step to increase the size of the peptide library that
can be accessed was achieved in 2016 with the generation of DNA-barcode labeled pMHC
multimer by Bentzen et al. group [40].
8
==PAGE:19==
17 August 2020
1.2.3
High throughput detection of antigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells via DNA
barcode-labelled dextran multimers
In this approach, Bentzen et al. use dextran as a backbone for providing multiple biotin-
binding sites for 1) targeted pMHCs generated by UV-mediated peptide, 2) a common
PE ﬂuorochrome, 3) a unique DNA barcode to bind, and 4) sorting based on shared
ﬂuorescent label. With the technology of next-generation sequencing (NGS) on attached
barcodes, as well as the usage of only one shared ﬂuorophore, it allows the screen of T cell
recognition towards over 1,000 pMHC elements simultaneously in a single clinical sample of
10 million peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). More than 1000 diﬀerent pMHC
multimers can be assembled with the present design in piratical terms [40]. Besides the
ability of large-scale screening of antigen speciﬁc CD8 T cells, this barcode-based method
also allows the detection of low aﬃnity T cell populations, such as of those in autoimmune
diseases. This is because DNA barcodes are able to be isolated from T cells even though
their ﬂuorescence intensity are close to negative population [40].
1.2.4
In silico peptide prediction
Although the DNA barcoding technology lifted the peptide detection number up to >
1000 in parallel, it is still far beyond the number of possible epitopes that are of interest
in a given disease. It has been estimated that only <0.1% of the potential peptides from
human protein-coding genes are actually able to bind to HLA-I molecule and be presented
to CD8 T cells [6]. Given so selective in HLA binding, accurate prediction of whether a
peptide is likely to bind to a speciﬁc HLA allele is very challenging but highly necessary
for successful study design. This can ensure all the non-binding peptides from a target
protein are excluded in a project.
The NetMHC predictor family is a prediction algorithm that trains an artiﬁcial neural
network to identify likely MHC binders. The algorithms are taught to do the prediction
based on in vitro generated binding aﬃnity data and able to predict the binding aﬃnity
of all potential peptides derived from a certain protein of interest.
The latest version
NetMHCpan4.0 was updated to include a bigger training data and thus provides a powerful
prediction ability of binding between peptides and HLA-I molecules [41]. In this project,
NetMHCpan4.0 was employed as a useful tool to guide the selection of peptides from RA
speciﬁc proteins to study CD8 T cell recognition in RA.
1.3
Analysis of multicolor ﬂow cytometry data
Classical phenotyping is another way to the investigation of T cell recognition. Multiple
cell expressing surface markers that are diﬀerently regulated in response to antigen
recognition can be simultaneous detected at single-cell resolution. Normally multicolor
9
==PAGE:20==
17 August 2020
ﬂow cytometry is used to discriminate cell subsets in a heterogeneous antigen-speciﬁc T
cell population stained by ﬂuorescence-labeled antibodies.
The most common and
applied approach for analyzing ﬂow cytometry data is a process called gating. However
this manual operation has several issues, such as likely to be subjective and biased, not
reproducible,
ineﬃcient and time consuming when large marker panels are used.
Especially with the recent advances in ﬂow cytometry, where the number of parameters
measured per cell keeps increasing and generates huge as well as high-dimensional data
sets [42].
In order to have a more objective analysis strategy in a more standardized manner, as
well as being able to visualize high-dimensional data in 2D determination, several
diﬀerent automated algorithms have been developed for analysis of ﬂow cytometry data.
The dimensionality reduction tool, Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection
(UMAP) is one of them.
1.3.1
UMAP
The UMAP algorithm is a visualization tool ﬁrst introduced by Becht et al.
[43].
It
reduces data dimensionality by associating all including parameters for each single cell
and separates the data based on the similarity between the cells. The similarity of single
cells in the multidimensional space are reﬂected by the distance between the cells in the
generated scatter plots. This means cells with similar properties are close to each other or
cluster together. The bigger distance between ’neighbors’, the more distinct are the cells.
In addition, by overlaying including markers in an analysis, UMAP is able to visualize the
expression level of them on a 2D level by a color gradient [43].
As one of the most used automated gating tools, UMAP provides a good alternative to
manual gating for the exploration of the ﬂow cytometry data. It decreases subjectivity of
the gating process and is more reproducible. However, before processing data with UMAP,
certain pre-processing and quality control steps are needed to optimize the operation time
and generated results. This is due to the runtime of UMAP scales linearly with the number
of cells analyzed [43]. In addition, dimensionality reduction may result in simpliﬁcation of
the original, high-dimensional data with a loss of certain details, as not all of them can be
preserved in the two-dimensional projection [42]. Though, a small scale study by Ferrer-
Font et al. [44] showed that the results yielded by UMAP is comparable for spectral ﬂow
cytomery data. Therefore, a rational combination of utilizing both the conventional manual
gating and the computational automated gating to assess the data of pMHC multimer-
binding T cells might be an appropriate strategy.
10
==PAGE:21==
17 August 2020
1.4
Rheumatoid Arthritis
Rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic and systemic autoimmune disease that is primarily
characterized by synovial inﬂammation,
which can lead to joint destruction and
irreversible disability when no suﬃcient treatment is carried out. RA aﬀects about 1% of
the population worldwide and has three times higher prevalence in woman than in men
[45].
While the exact cause of rheumatoid arthritis remains unclear, it was reported that
complex interactions among genetic and environmental factors are involved in RA
development [45, 46].
More speciﬁcally, environmental stimuli, such as smoking,
infectious agents or inhalation of dust together with the genetic risk factor, such as
HLA-DRB1 alleles,
can promote post-transnational modiﬁcations on a number of
proteins which consequently initiate RA [47, 48, 49, 50, 51]. One of the post-translational
modiﬁcation is glycosylation on IgG molecules.
This results the production of
autoantibodies (such as IgM and IgA) directly reactive with the Fc fragment of self IgGs,
namely rheumatoid factors (RFs). Although RF is a classical RA-associated serological
marker, it is not speciﬁc for RA as it also occurs in the context of many other
inﬂammatory conditions and in around 5% of the healthy population [52].
Another
modiﬁcation found in RA is the cintrullination of autoantigens. The conversion of the
amino acid arginine to citrulline in a self-antigen can induce the production of
autoantibodies speciﬁc for citrullinated proteins, which are known as Anti–citrullinated
protein antibodies (ACPAs) [45, 46]. ACPAs are more speciﬁc for RA and serve as the
major diagnostic and prognostic marker for RA currently [46, 52].
Moreover, the
presence of the two autoantibodies is also employed to divide RA patients into two
subsets: 1) seropositive patients with the presence of autoantibodies, and 2) seronegative
patients without autoantibodies in the blood. They are distinct in disease courses and
nearly 70% of all RA cases are ACPA-positive [52].
1.4.1
Disease Activity Score 28
Due to the complex pathogenesis of RA, it is diﬃcult to ﬁnd a proper and reliable
biomarker to measure disease activity and monitor disease severity.
Currently, the
dominant biomarker that can be utilized is clinical disease activity including a range of
disease activity scoring systems [45].
The DAS28 is a rating systems that is validated by the EULAR (European League
Against Rheumatism) and widely used in assessing the progress and improvement of RA
[53].
As one of the many ’DAS’ scores for RA, it is a useful measure to make a
reproducible and comparable assessment of the disease activity. This clinical index of RA
activity takes into account four conditions of patient including: 1) the number of tender
joints (TJC28), the number of swollen joints (SJC28), the Erythrocyte Sedimentation
11
==PAGE:22==
17 August 2020
Rate (ESR) and the patient global health assessment (GH) [54]. The 28 targeted joints
measured for the score are showed in Figure 6.
Figure 6:
The 28 tender and swollen joints
accessed
in
DAS28
[55] The 28 examined
tender or swollen joints are:
shoulders, elbows,
wrists,
metacarpophalangeal
joints,
proximal
interphalangeal joints and the knees.
The computation of the DAS28 score is calculated through the following equation:
DAS28 = 0.56 ×
√
TJC28 + 0.28 ×
√
SJC28 + 0.7 × ln ESR + 0.014 × GH
The score provides an absolute classiﬁcation of individual patient’s disease activity ranging
from remission, low, moderate to high level. Generally, remission is achieved when DAS28
is smaller than 2.6. Low activity is between 2.6 and 3.2. Moderate activity corresponds
to 3.2 and smaller/equal to 5.1, while above 5.1 is strictly considered as high activity
[53]. According to this ranking system, in this project, patients with active RA are those
have DAS28⩽2.6, while those have DAS28 under 2.6 are deﬁned as patients with inactive
disease.
1.4.2
Immunology of Rheumatoid Arthritis
As a prototype chronic inﬂammatory disease, RA is also characterized by its strong
involvement of the autoimmunity in respect to the disease pathogenesis.
Even though the exact etiology of RA remains unknown, the most acknowledged
pathway that triggers RA-associated immunity has been suggested in the mucosa
(mouth, lung, and gut) (Figure 7A) [51, 56, 57], when the mentioned environmental
stimuli bind to Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and subsequently activate APCs [47, 48, 49].
This
process
may
lead
to
the
activation
and
increased
expression
of
enzymes
peptidyl-arginine deiminases (PADs) (Figure 7a.). The calcium dependent PAD is then
able to catalyze citrullination and generate RA-related neo-epitopes consequently [58].
These altered self-antigens are presented by APCs to T cells, and thus induce the
activation of adaptive immunity as well as the formation of antiantibodies including RFs
and APCPs (Figure 7B). Along with epitope spreading and a rising antibody titre, the
autoimmune response matures gradually in either regional lymph nodes or other
peripheral lymphoid organs [52]. Indeed, the on-going development of ACPAs and RFs
can take more than 10 years before a clinical onset of RA [59].
12
==PAGE:23==
17 August 2020
Figure 7:
Schematic representation of the initiation and progression of RA. A. The environmental stimuli
act together with genotype at mucosal surfaces such as the lungs, gums and gut can cause post-translational
modiﬁcations (e.g. citrullination) on self-peptides can create neo-epitopes that can be recognized by the adaptive
immune system. a. Illustrated example of local immune activation in the lungs. Various stimuli such as dust and
particles can be inhaled to the lungs, leading the stimulation of TLRs and resulting the increased expression of
PAD enzyme, which catalyses the citrullination on self-peptides. The generated neo-peptides can then activate the
adaptive immune system via APC presentation to lymphocytes. B. The modiﬁed peptides are presented by APCs
which activate an adaptive immune response in lymphoid tissues and induce autoantibody formation. C. APCs,
macrophages, and FLS can be activated locally and produce a number of diﬀerent inﬂammatory factors resulting pain
and swelling at the joints. D. The persistent production of cytokines and adaptive immune responses can ultimately
lead to cartilage, bone destruction, and ended with joint damage. APCAs, anti-citrullinated protein antibodies;
CCL19, CC-chemokine ligand 19; CCL21, CC-chemokine ligand 21; GM-CSF, granulocyte–macrophage colony-
stimulating factor; MHC, major histocompatibility complex; miRNA, microRNA; MMP, matrix metalloproteinase;
RANKL, receptor activator of nuclear factor-kB ligand; RF, rheumatoid factor; TCR, T cell receptor; TNF, tumor
necrosis factor. Modiﬁed from [45, 52]
Synovial inﬂammation, which is denoted as early RA, is established after the inﬁltration
of mononuclear cells, activation of stromal cells (such as ﬁbroblast-like synoviocyte (FLS))
and the migration of pathogenic antibodies together with the activated T cells and B cells
from secondary lymphoid tissues to synovium. A range of inﬂammatory factors (such as the
pro-inﬂammatory cytokines) and matrix-degrading enzymes (such as metalloproteinases
(MMPs)), are secreted by these cells, which induce synovial vascular leakage and cause
pain and swelling at the joints (Figure 7C) [45, 60, 61].
The pathways leading to the cardinal sign of RA, characterized by cartilage and bone
erosion and joint damage (Figure 7D), are diﬀerent for the two RA subsets [45]. Generally,
13
==PAGE:24==
17 August 2020
macrophages and neutrophils are reported as the cell types that cause joint damage by
releasing cytokines and MMPs [45, 49]. Cadherin-11-positive FLS contributes to cartilage
destruction via the production of extracellular matrix-degrading proteins - proteases such
as MMPs and stromelysins [62]. In addition, bone erosion is believed mainly due to the
maturation and activation of bone-resorbing cells (osteoclasts) that can produce proteases
to degrade and mineralize bone matrix, though solid in vivo evidence is needed [63, 64].
Moreover, the constant adaptive immune responses also play an important role in the
ultimate joint destruction [46].
1.4.3
Speciﬁc citrullinated proteins in Rheumatoid Arthritis
Over the past decades, an essential role has been recognized for the presence of speciﬁc
citrullinated proteins as autoantigens in the pathogenic mechanisms of RA [65, 66]. Some
of the citrullinated proteins are well established in this context, while others are awaiting
further characterization [65]. Among them, ﬁbrinogen, vimentin, collagen type II, and
α-enolase are four major prevalent RA related proteins [65, 67]. In addition, citrullinated
aggrecan and GRP78 are two new identiﬁed proteins that show strong association with
RA disease [68, 69]. They are previously demonstrated immunogenic and have diﬀerent
potential roles in the disease process either by the analyses of CD4 T cells or
autoantibody reactivity assays. Therefore these six proteins are included in this project
and investigated in terms of the CD8 T cell recognition.
Fibrinogen is a glycoprotein complex, which is also called clotting factor (factor I) with
an essential function for proper blood clot formation. In RA, the citrullinated ﬁbrinogen
is one of the best-established speciﬁc autoantigens and abundantly found in inﬂammatory
joints of patients [45, 70]. It was originally identiﬁed by Masson-Bessiere et al. group [70]
via its cross-reaction with antiﬁlaggrin antibodies extracted from RA serum. A resent
study by Sanchez-Pernaute et al.
[71] has concluded that citrullinated ﬁbrinogen
enhanced the pro-inﬂammatory response via a TLR4 pathway and contributed to keep
the cytokine burst in RA.
Vimentin is a member of the intermediate ﬁlaments family and has a role in the
dynamic organization of the cytoskeleton with a vital function.
When compared with
other citrullinated proteins, several studies suggested that vimentin was speciﬁcally
important in the initiation of RA [72, 73, 74]. The citrullinated vimentin is also used as a
diagnosis marker for RA in two commercial in vitro assays [75, 76] and has been
suggested to play an important role for driving the pathological immune response in RA
[77].
14
==PAGE:25==
17 August 2020
Collagen type II is a ﬁbrillar protein and a predominant component in joint cartilage.
Autoantibodies reactive with citrullinated collagen type II were ﬁrst described in the
work of Burkhardt et al. [78] when 286 patients were investigated at the early stages of
RA. Lundberg et al.
[79] showed collagen type II had increased immunogenicity and
arthritogenicity in the citrullinated form compared with the native counterpart in a rat
model. In addition, in the same model of collagen-induced arthritis, they reported the
presence of citrullinated collagen type II in arthritic joints was also correlated with the
severity of the disease. These data together show that high reactivity to collagen type II
is frequently found in RA patients and plays a critical role in the inﬂammatory process in
RA.
Alpha-enolase is a glycolytic protein and the most abundant isotype of enolase. It is
expressed in various tissues and performs many functions in eukaryotes and prokaryotes,
such as hypoxia tolerance and cell migration [80].
α-enolase has been described as an
autoantigen in its native form in a range of infectious and autoimmune diseases, such as
mixed cryoglobulinemia (MC), systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), and systemic
sclerosis (SSc) [80].
In 2002, the speciﬁc autoimmunity of this protein for RA was
reported by Saulto et al. [81]. Later, frequency of anti-citrullinated α-enolase antibodies
was detected by using a modiﬁed citrullinated α-enolase peptide-1 as well as a
recombinant whole human α-enolase protein citrullinated in vitro [65, 82].
Aggrecan is a matrix proteoglycan and a major structural component of articular
cartilage.
It is responsible for maintaining the ﬂuid and electrolyte balance in the
articular cartilage [83]. An early study by Law et al. examined responses to a variety of
citrullinated proteins in RA patients [68]. The result showed that citrullinated aggrecan
peptide was the most immunogenic compared with citrullinated collagen, vimentin, and
ﬁbrinogen.
This suggests that aggrecan is a new member of the citrullinated antigen
associated with RA.
Glucose Regulated Protein 78 (henceforth GRP78), also referred to as BiP or
HSPA5, is a major endoplasmic reticulum (ER) chaperone [84]. Cell stress can induce
migration of GPR78 from ER to cell surface,
which may trigger autoimmunity
consequently. A previous study has found a high overexpression of GRP78 in synovial
ﬂuid (SF) from RA patients [85].
More recently, Lu and co-workers have reported
citrullinated GRP78 was the cognate antigen of the ACPA puriﬁed from pooled
ACPA-positive RA sera.
The binding induced the production of TNFα, which can
contribute to the inﬂammatory reactions of RA [69].
The identiﬁcation of these citrullinated antigens, and the speciﬁc ACPAs reactive with
15
==PAGE:26==
17 August 2020
them, lead us to explore the speciﬁcity and regulation of T cell responses in RA.
1.4.4
T cells in Rheumatoid Arthritis
As some of the most well recognized RA-relevant alleles, the DRB1*04:01, DRB1*04:04
and DRB*01:01, attribute around 30% of the genetic susceptibility to RA, ACPA-positive
RA in particular [45]. They all contain a conserved amino acid sequence at positions 70 to
74 of the third hypervariable region of DR β chains, which was ﬁrst described as the ’Shared
Epitope (SE)’ by Gregersen et al. in 1987 [86]. This SE region forms the fourth anchoring
pocket (P4) in the HLA-DR antigen-binding groove.
The substitution of citruline for
arginine by citrullination, enables the binding to the positively charged P4 pocket (Figure
8) [87]. This may explain the fact that citrullinated peptides are preferentially bond to
HLA molecule and presented to T cells, yet native ones in RA [52].
Figure 8:
The
binding
of
citrulinated
proteins to HLA-DR allele.
The ﬁgure shows the interaction between the pMHC
complex
expressed
on
an
APC
and
the
TCR
expressed on a navie T cell. Citrullinated peptides
(denoted as red circles) have been reported that
bind preferentially to the p4 pocket of the peptide-
binding groove of the HLA-DR molecules. Adapted
from [52]
HLA-DR is a class II MHC molecule with the key function of antigen presentation to
CD4 T cell. Therefore, the very strong association of this locus and the development of
RA implicates antigen-speciﬁc CD4 T cell as an important factor of disease etiology.
Indeed, studies have shown the induction of speciﬁc CD4 T cell responses by the some of
the proteins mentioned in the previous section [65, 68, 88].
Although there is a growing body of evidence suggest CD8 T cells are involved in
autoimmune disease as described previously, information on the role of CD8 T cells in RA
have been scarce. This may due to the incompatible results obtained from the studies.
One early study showed PB CD8 T cell in RA patients tend to have more frequent Tcm
phenotype while the proportion of the Tem cells is decreased, when compared with
health controls [89].
More recently, the frequency of Tem, but not Tcm, cells was
presented to be upraised in PB and SF from RA patients [90]. Meanwhile, Wang and his
co-worker [91] has characterized the ’clonal exhaustion’ subtype of CD8 T cells in the SF
from RA patients, with the phenotypic expression of CD57.
The study by Bodman-Smith et al.
[92] reported SF CD8 T cells stimulated by an
autoantigen (chaperone immunoglobulin binding protein9, presented a regulatory role in
RA due to the production of IL-10. In another study, CD8 T cell was used as a cell-based
16
==PAGE:27==
17 August 2020
immunotherapy based on their suppressor function [93].
However, Carvalheiro et al. [94] have reported in their study that circulating CD8 T cells
from RA patients exhibited an eﬀector phenotype with elevated level of inﬂammatory
cytokines (TNF, IL6 and IL-7) in comparison with healthy controls. They also showed
the increased production of inﬂammatory cytokines is positively correlates with the
activity of the disease, measured by DAS28. Moreover, in contrast to the historical view
of genetic susceptibility to RA is associated with HLA-DR alleles, Raychaudhuri et al.
[95] have identiﬁed HLA-B allele (amino acid at position 9 in the peptide binding groove)
has also close association with RA disease risk. This may indicate HLA-1 molecule is, in
addition to SE, another genetic risk factor of RA. Furthermore, a very recent study has
strengthened the hypothesis that antigen speciﬁc CD8 T cell exert a predominantly
eﬀector function in RA with the ability to counteract the suppressing regulation from
regulatory T cells [96].
All these data support the belief that antigen speciﬁc CD8 T cells do have a role in
RA. Whether it is a regulator that suppresses on-going autoimmune responses, or an
inducer that enhances RA disease requires further investigations to study and establish.
As essential to the function of CD8 T cells is their speciﬁc recognition of antigen, it is
therefore pivotal to investigate the speciﬁc interaction between their TCR and the pMHC
complex to contribute solving the puzzle, and this can be done by using the DNA barcoded
high-throughput antigen screening method to characterize antigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells in
RA together with a phenotypic functionality interrogation.
17
==PAGE:28==
17 August 2020
2
Project Aims
The aim of this present project is to characterize CD8 T cells in the autoimmune disease
Rheumatoid Arthritis in terms of their RA related antigen speciﬁcity and phenotype by
utilizing high-throughput antigen screening method and phenotyping assays.
More speciﬁcally, the study consist of:
1. Detection of antigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells against 637 potential auto-epitopes in RA,
via DNA barcode-labeled pMHC multimers.
2. Determine the level of T cell recognition, related to the examined antigens and their
citrullination proﬁles.
3. Comparison of RA related CD8 T cell response proﬁles between patients and healthy
controls based on the data generated from the screening assay.
4. Characterization of the phenotypic proﬁle of CD8 T cells in RA by measuring the
expression of activation, diﬀerentiation and exhaustion surface markers.
A schematic presentation of the experimental strategy to achieve all the above aims is
presented in the next section.
18
==PAGE:29==
17 August 2020
3
Experimental strategy
To detect antigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells in the PB of patients with Rheumatoid Arthritis,
blood samples from 28 healthy donors and 45 RA patients are screened for the presence
of autoreactive CD8 T cells targeting in-silico predicted peptides derived from six well-
selected RA-related proteins. In addition, to investigate the role of the autoreactive CD8
T cells in RA, phenotyping of 27 patients and four healthy donors were carried out as well
in this project. In this section, the experiment strategy, which is divided into six main
points, is described:
1. As described in section 1.4.3., Aggrecan, enolase, GPR78, collagen type II, fribinogen
and vimentin are six RA-related proteins that can be targeted by ACPAs and are
proved having strong association in the pathogenic mechanisms of RA. Therefore
they were chosen for the screen of the antigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells in RA patients.
2. The on-line prediction algorithm, NetMHCons4.0, enabled the prediction of short
peptide fragments from the six proteins with the ability to bind to eight diﬀerent
HLA-I molecules that are included in this study.
3. The in-silico prediction resulted the selection of a peptide library consisting of 637
diﬀerent potential CD8 epitopes with the length of 8-11 aa.
4. Subsequently, individual pMHC monomers were generated by using the 637 predicted
RA-peptides via UV-mediated peptide exchange technology as described in section
1.2.1. In addition, 23 virus epitopes from ﬁve diﬀerent virus (described in section
4.2.2) were also selected and used to make viral pMHC monomers.
These virus
epitopes used as positive controls for the T cell screen since they are known with the
ability to generate T cell responses in individuals who carry common virus infection.
Next, all the pMHC monomers were multimerized onto a phyvoerythrin (PE)-labeled
polysaccharide backbone coupled to a DNA barcode that was unique to each speciﬁc
pMHC (described in section 4.3.1).
5. As shown in the experiment pipeline under the strategy point ﬁve, the screening for
the T cell recognition started with mixing the generated 637 RA- and 23 viral pMHC
multimers according to donor HLA. Samples from both patient cohort and healthy
donors were stained. CD8 T cells having the ability to bind to pMHC multimers were
sorted when PE positive signals were detected. Next, the associated DNA barcodes
were ampliﬁed and sequenced in order to reveal the speciﬁcity of the CD8 T cells.
Finally, a serious data analysis were performed on the resulted sequencing data.
6. Based on the T cell responses detected, and the speciﬁcities uncovered by the DNA
barcoded pMHC multimer screening in each patients, 27 patients were selected to
19
==PAGE:30==
17 August 2020
perform the phenotyping assay. Four healthy donor were included as the staining
controls.
The experiment pipeline for this strategy point was started by the
generation of SA-ﬂuorochrome conjugated pMHC tetramers.
67 RA-pMHC
monomers were conjugated by PE ﬂuorochrome while APC ﬂuorochrome was used
for 23 viral-pMHC monomers.
The inclusion of virus epitopes served as a
comparison for identiﬁcation of potential phenotype characteristics diﬀerentiating
RA- and virus-speciﬁc CD8 T cells. The yielded tetramers were mixed and used to
stain all the PBMC samples. After acquisition on the ﬂow cytometer, the resulted
FCS ﬁles were analyzed by gating and UMAP algorithms.
Finally, statistical
analysis were also performed on the generated data sets.
An overview of the experimental strategy and the experiment pipeline of point number 5
and 6 in the strategy are showed in ﬁgure 9. Of note, points 1, 2, 3 were designed and
already conducted by senior scientist Stine Kiær Larsen, part of points 4 and 5 were also
performed by her before I jointed this project.
20
==PAGE:31==
17 August 2020
Figure 9: Experiment strategy and overview of the experiment pipeline for strategy ﬁve and six.
21
==PAGE:32==
17 August 2020
4
Materials and Methods
In this section, the materials and the methods applied in the present project are described.
As this project was initiated before my participation, work mentioned in 4.1.1, 4.1.2, 4.2
were mainly and preliminarily performed by Stine. Part of the work presented in section
4.3, speciﬁcally the screening on most of the RA patients samples were accomplished by
her as well.
4.1
Patient and healthy control materials
4.1.1
Patient samples
45 RA diagnosed patients with DSA28 score ranging from 1.2 to 7.28 (age range: 21-84y;
11 male) were selected for blood donation from the known patient cohort. The blood was
collected in collaboration with professor Bernard Lauwerys at the Department of
Rheumatology at University catholique de Louvain.
A list of all patients containing
information of patient ID, age, gender, and grade of the disease is given in Appendix A.
Of this cohort, 28 patients were ACPA positive. Two patients were medication naive, the
rest were using drugs from four types of RA medications:
1) Disease-Modifying
Anti-Rheumatic Drug (DMARD): Rheumatrex;
2) Non-Steroidal Anti-Inﬂammatory
Drug (NSAID): Salazopyrin; 3) Biological response modiﬁer: Humira, Enbrel, Mabthera
and RoActemra; and 4) Glucocorticoid: Corticosteroid.
These medications are either
taken alone or in combination. All patients had white and red blood cell counts within
normal range.
PBMCs were isolated from patients’ whole blood by density gradient centrifugation by
using Ficoll gradient reagent.
They were then frozen in 10% DMSO (Sigma) in fetal
bovine serum (FBS, Gibco), and cryopreserved at -80◦C until use.
4.1.2
HLA analysis across the RA cohort
All patient samples were HLA typed by NGS conducted by IMGM Laboratories in
Germany. The full exome of MHC class I HLA-A, -B, and -C was sequenced and the full
HLA type of each donor is presented in Appendix B. The highlighted HLA subtypes,
including: HLA-A*0101, -A*02:01, -A*24:02; HLA-B*07:02, -B*08:01; and HLA-C*05:01,
-C*07:01, -C*07:02, are included for studying their speciﬁcity towards the selected RA
relevant peptide in this project. The ratio of each HLA haplotypes is shown in table 1.
4.1.3
Healthy control samples
Isolated buﬀy coats (BCs) from 28 healthy donors’ PBMCs were selected and served as
control samples. All in-house BCs were already HLA typed and selected based on the
22
==PAGE:33==
17 August 2020
corresponded ratio between each subtype in respect to which of the patient samples (table
1). The full HLA type of the BCs are listed in Appendix C.
RA patients (n=45)
Healthy controls (n=28)
HLA type
Amount
Ratio
Amount
Ratio
HLA-A*0101
11
24%
10
36%
HLA-A*0201
24
53%
10
36%
HLA-A*2402
10
22%
6
21%
HLA-B*0702
8
18%
8
29%
HLA-B*0801
11
24%
9
32%
HLA-C*0501
11
24%
4
14%
HLA-C*0701
18
40%
12
43%
HLA-C*0702
10
22%
7
25%
Table 1: Overview of the distribution of each HLA in RA patients and healthy controls.
4.2
The peptides
To establish a pMHC complex library for the antigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cell screening, six
RA associated proteins were selected and 637 peptides with the ability to bind to the
mentioned HLA-I molecules were predicted from these proteins.
4.2.1
RA peptide prediction analysis
To generate peptides from the six selected proteins (Aggrecan, Collagen type II, Enolase,
Fibrinogen, GPR78 and Vimentin) with the ability to bind the above mentioned eight
HLA alleles,
peptide prediction analysis was made by using the online available
prediction algorithm NetMHCpan 4.0 (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/NetMHCpan/).
The MHC binding %Rank score is an important parameter referring to this algorithm to
deﬁne the binding ability of a peptide, where the range for a good binder is deﬁned as
having a %Rank score below 0.5 and a weak binder having rank score less than 2. All
peptides with a rank score above 2 are predicted to be non-binders.
In addition, a
peptide with a %Rank score of 0.5 means that it is among the 0.5 best binding peptides
among 400.000 random natural peptides [97].
Peptides with %Rank scores of one or
below and length of 8-11mer were included in this study.
Moreover, studies have showed that RA is characterized by autoantibodies targeting
citrullinated slef-epitopes [45, 66]. In order to investigate how dependent the aﬃnity was
on arginine (R), in silico artiﬁcial citrulination was performed on the peptides containing
R. This was done by exchanging R with an unknown code - X, and peptides that 1) still
bind to the matched HLA after this exchange or 2) bind to the matched HLA only when
R was replaced, were selected if their MHC binding rank scores < 1.
This allows to
identify the peptides that would gain a better binding aﬃnity by loosing R or that would
at least keep the same good binding aﬃnity.
23
==PAGE:34==
17 August 2020
A total of 637 predicted T cell epitopes that across the six particular proteins and eight
diﬀerent HLA molecules were acquired. Precisely, 132 peptides were predicted for speciﬁc
binding to HLA-A*01:01, 57 peptides for HLA-A*02:01, 35 peptides for HLA-A*24:02,
127
peptides
for
HLA-B*07:02,
42
peptides
for
HLA-B*08:01,
96
peptides
for
HLA-C*05:01, 11 peptides for HLA-C*07:01 and 10 peptides for HLA-C*07:02.
In
addition, 127 epitopes having speciﬁcity over more than one HLA subtype, called
multiple binders, were predicted (table 2).
HLA type
Predicted peptide
HLA-A*0101
132
HLA-A*0201
57
HLA-A*2402
35
HLA-B*0702
127
HLA-B*0801
42
HLA-C*0501
96
HLA-C*0701
11
HLA-C*0702
10
Multi-binder
127
Total
637
Table 2: Overview of the distribution of the predicted peptides for each HLA.
4.2.2
Virus derived peptides
A panel (23) of known virus peptides from ﬁve virus proteins are selected to match the
included HLA-A and -B haplotypes and used as positive controls.
However, due to
limited HLA-C restricted T cell epitopes have been identiﬁed, no HLA-C matched virus
peptide was included in the panel.
This in-house peptide library comprised peptides
derived from cytomegalovirus (CMV), Ebstein-Barr virus (EBV), inﬂuenza virus (FLU),
human immunodeﬁciency viruses (HIV) and human cytomegalovirus (HCMV).
All the peptides were synthesized and purchased from Pepscan (Pepscan Presto, The
Netherlands) and dissolved in Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO; Sigma-Aldrich) to a ﬁnal
concentration of 10mM.
4.3
Determination of CD8 T cell antigen speciﬁcity in RA
A number of approaches have been developed to detect large numbers of T cell
speciﬁcities simultaneously, such as approaches based on ﬂuorescently labeled pMHC
multimers, combinational encoded ﬂuorescently labeled pMHC multimers, and metal
encoded pMHC multimers [38, 39, 98, 99, 100, 101]. However the number of detected T
cell speciﬁcities by these methods are limited. Therefore, the barcoded pMHC multimer
technique [40] was chosen to conduct a large scale epitope recognition proﬁling for this
RA study.
24
==PAGE:35==
17 August 2020
4.3.1
Generation of DNA barcodes labeled peptide-MHC class I multimers
DNA barcodes labeled pMHC-I multimers applied in this study was ﬁrst described in the
work by Bentzen et. al [40] and brieﬂy was composed by three steps as illustrated in ﬁgure
10 (1-3).
Figure 10:
The ﬂowchart of DNA
barcode
labeled
MHC
multimer
generation.
The
ﬁrst
step
is
to
attach DNA barcodes to PE- and SA-
coujugated dextran. The second step is
to yield the desired pMHC monomers
by using UV-mediated ligand exchange
method, which then assembled with the
generated dextran to make the pMHC
and DNA labeled dextran as the third
step.
Generation of DNA barcodes and dextran conjugation
The ﬁrst step was to attach 5’ biotinylated AxBy DNA barcodes to PE- and SA-conjugated
dextran (Immudex, Denmark) as described in Bentzen et. al [40].
In brief, oligonucleotides containing distinct 25mer nucleotide sequences (LGC Biosearch
Techmologis, Denmark) [102] were modiﬁed with a 5’ biotin tag (oligo A) and then joined to
unmodiﬁed, partially complementary oligonucleotides (oligo B) (Figure 11 A). Annealing of
oligo A and oligo B with a ﬁnal concentration ratio of 1:2 in 5x Sequenase Reaction Buﬀer
mix (PN7072, Aﬀymetri) was followed by an elongation step where Sequenase polymerase
(70775Y, Aﬀymetrix), DTT (R0861-DTT, Thermo scientiﬁc) and dNTPS (18427-013, Life
technologies) was added to create double-stranded AxBy DNA barcodes (Figure 11 B).
After 15min incubation at room temperature (RT), elongated AxBy barcodes (Figure 11
C) were diluted in barcode-cytometry (Bc) freezing buﬀer (PBS + 0.5% BSA + 100µg/mL
herring DNA + 2mM EDTA + 5% glycerol) and stored at -20◦C until use.
Figure 11: Barcode design, annealing and elongation. DNA barcodes comprise a biotin moiety, forward
primer region (FR), unique molecular identiﬁer (UMI), Ax and By oligoes(identiﬁers), and a reverse primer region
(RR).
25
==PAGE:36==
17 August 2020
On the day of dextran conjugation, 5’ biotinylated AxBy DNA barcodes were ﬁrst
thawed on ice and then mixed with dextran conjugates followed by a 30min incubation at
4◦C (Figure 10-1.).
In previous titration experiments it was determined that 2 DNA
barcodes were used per dextran in this thesis to avoid loss of antigen-speciﬁc interactions
between barcoded multimers and T cells in the later T cell staining step.
UV-mediated conditional peptide exchange
An empty MHC-I molecule is unstable in the absence of a peptide, and degrades quickly
when not rescued by HLA-binding peptide [35]. UV-mediated ligand exchange method
[34] takes advantage of this unstable nature of MHC and desired speciﬁc pMHC
monomers can be generated. When exposed to UV-light (366 nm), the conditional ligand
(p*), carried by a selected HLA-I monomer, is cleaved and leave the HLA binding groove
empty.
By mixing with excess of desired HLA ligands, the speciﬁc pMHC is then
generated (Figure 10-2.).
In short, eight p*HLA monomers (produced in house as
described in [103]) were mixed with matching diluted peptides at a ﬁnal concentration of
50 µg/ml monomer and 100mM peptide in individual wells of a 384 well plate. After 60
min of UV light exposure (UV cabinet, CAMAG), the pMHC complexes were generated
and ready to be coupled with the made DNA barcode and PE-labeled dextran
backbones. A total of 637 RA related pMHC complexes and 23 virus pMHC complexes
were generated by this way as described in [34].
Assembly of peptide-MHC and DNA labeled dextran
Both UV-exchanged pMHC, PE-labeled and barcode associated dextrans were quickly
centrifuged to sediment any aggregates for 5 min at 3300xg at 4◦C. Equal amount of
supernatant was then collected, mixed and incubated for 20 min on ice. Bc freezing buﬀer
together with 909nM D-Biotin (saturate the potential free binding sites on dextran) were
thereafter added the pMHC multimers were stored at -20◦C until use (Figure 10-3.).
4.3.2
T cell staining with pMHC-multimer labeled with DNA barcodes
Cryopreserved (-80◦C) cells were ﬁrst thawed, washed twice in 10 ml R10 (RPMI + 10%
FCS) and counted.
About 10 million cells were distributed in wells of a 96-well
polypropylene
plate,
centrifuged
for
5min
at
1500rpm
at
4◦C
and
washed
in
barcode-cytometry buﬀer (BcB: PBS + 0.5% BSA + 100µg/mL herring DNA + 2mM
EDTA).
Along with this, pre-made barcode-labeled pMHC multimers were thawed on ice and
centrifuged for 5 min at 3300xg at 4◦C. Following centrifugation, 1.5µl (corresponding to
0.043 µg) of each pMHC speciﬁcity was carefully collected from the top of each well to
avoid any potential aggregates and then pooled together according to the HLA type of
26
==PAGE:37==
17 August 2020
each donor in a pre-saturated (with 2%BSA for at least 2 hours) reservoir.
Next, the
volume of the pMHC multimer pool was reduced by being transferred to pre-saturated
centrifugal concentrators (VivoSpin 6, 100,000 Dalton, Sartorius) and then ultra-ﬁltrated
at 3000xg at 4◦C until a ﬁnal volume of ∼80µl was obtained. Following ultraﬁltration,
the concentrated multimer pool were transferred to an Eppendorph tube and spun at
10,000xg for 2 min to sediment any aggregates. After carefully transferring the pool of
multimer to a new Eppendorph tube, without any potential sedimented aggregates, the
concentrated pMHC multimer pool was generated and ready for cell staining.
The
amount of multimer used for staining is 80µl per sample.
In addition, an aliquot of 5µl of the concentrated pMHC multimer pool was store at -20
◦C as baseline (reference) for subsequent DNA barcodes analysis.
Followed addition of 5µl of 1µM Dasatinib to the cell sample in each well, the pMHC
multimer concentrate was added immediately to reach a total volume of 80µl and the mix
was incubated for 15 min at 37 ◦C.
Following incubation, the multimer stained cells were then stained with an antibody mix
showed in table 3.
Fluorochrome
Target
Final dilution
Source
BV480
CD8
1/50
BD566121
Dump channel antibodies
FITC
CD4
1/80
BD345768
FITC
CD14
1/32
BD345784
FITC
CD19
1/16
BD345776
FITC
CD40
1/40
Serotech MCA1590F
FITC
CD16
1/64
BD335035
Table 3: Antibody mix for T cell staining
The applied FITC dump channel strategy enabled "dumping" all the positively stained
cells with FITC color, which works eﬀectively for ’cleaning up’ heterogeneous cell
populations, which in this context are CD4 T cells, monocyte, B cells and natural killer
cells. Additionally, 0.1µl LIVE/DEAD Fiable Near-IR (Invitrogen L10119) (ﬁnal dilution
1/1000) was also used to stain free amines to distinguish dead cells followed incubation at
4 ◦C for 30 min.
Next,
cells
were
washed
in
200µll
BcB
three
times
and
ﬁxed
in
50µl
1%
paraformaldehyde (PFA) for 1-24 hours. Cells were acquired within a week after being
washed twice, ﬁltered through a cell-strainer (352235, Corning) and resuspended in 200µl
barcode-cytometry buﬀer.
27
==PAGE:38==
17 August 2020
4.3.3
Sorting of MHC multimer-positive T cells
FACSMelodyTM cell sorter (BD) was utilized to sort cells stained with DNA-barcode
labeled multimers.
By using the built-in BD FACSChorus software, single, live,
CD8-positive and dump channel (CD4, 14, 16, 19, and 40)-negative lymphocytes were
gated out ﬁrst, and then all the multimer-positive (PE) cells within this CD8 positive
population were gated out and sorted into a 1.5 ml Eppendorf tube containing 100µl
BcB. This collection tube was pre-saturated with PBS + 2% BSA preventing the
unwanted binding of DNA barcodes. The gating strategy is shown in Appedix E. When
gating on CD8 positive and multimer positive cells, a small proportion of multimer
negative (PE-dim) cell population was also included. This was tested and reported by
Bentzen et al.
[40] having no impact on the ﬁnal results but beneﬁting for detecting
low-avidity T cells.
The sorted antigen speciﬁc CD8 T cells were centrifuged immediately at 5000g for 10 min
at 4 ◦C. After removing the buﬀer, the cell pellet was stored at -80 ◦C in a minimal
volume of residual buﬀer (<20µl) until PCR ampliﬁcation for Ion Torrent sequencing.
4.3.4
DNA barcode ampliﬁcation for Ion Torrent sequencing
The multimer attached DNA barcode ampliﬁcation was conducted as previously
described [40].
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was performed on the sorted MHC
multimer positive CD8 positive T cells (in <20µl BcB buﬀer) and on the stored aliquots
of the baseline reference pool.
The latter was used as the reference to establish the
baseline number of DNA barcode reads within a non-treated MHC multimer reagent
library.
As shown in ﬁgure 12, all the DNA barcodes have a forward primer region and a reverse
primer region, which are complementary to a forward primer and a reverse primer (A-key
and P1-key, respectively).
Both primers contain Ion Torrent PGM 5’ adaptors for
Iontorrent sequencing, while the forward-primer contains also an embedded sample
identiﬁer sequence, named sampleID. This sample-speciﬁc A-key was assigned to each
sample in this project and the complete list is shown in Appendix D.
Figure 12:
The PCR ampliﬁcation of DNA
barcodes. The forward primer is ﬂanked by a 5’
sample identiﬁer sequence (sampleID, green). Both
the forward primer (Fx) and reverse primer (Rx)
encode a 5’ sequencing adaptor sequence for the
Ion Torrent sequencing platform (A-key and P1-
key respectively). Adapted from [40]
On the day of ampliﬁcation, the sorted multimer positive CD8 T cells were thawed on ice
and centrifuged brieﬂy before the addition of 0.3µM assigned A-keys, 0.3µM P1-keys,
28
==PAGE:39==
17 August 2020
and the Taq PCR Master Mix (Taq PCR Master Mix kit, Qiagen, 201443) to a total
volume of 50µl in a PCR tube.
In addition, the baseline aliqouts of the pMHC multimer reagent library was thawed and
diluted 10.000x in the ﬁnal 50µl PCR solution (A-key + P1-key + Taq PCR Master Mix),
which was termed the baseline input and made in triplicates. Furthermore, two negative
controls were also used, namely 1) No template control with BcB (NTC:BcB), and 2) No
template control with nuclease-free Water (NTC:H2O). The information of A-keys assigned
to inputs and controls are listed in Appendix D. After a quick spin of the PCR tubes, PCR
was performed under the conditions showed in table 4.
Temperature (◦C)
Time (s)
No. of cycles
95
600
1
95
30
36
60
45
72
30
72
240
1
4
∞
1
Table
4:
The
thermal
proﬁle
applied
for
ampliﬁcation of DNA barcodes.
In order to inspect the quality of PCR products,
a gel electrophoresis was subsequently conducted
by using 2% Agarose gel containing ethidium
bromide (Invitrogen, G601802). After a 15-min
run in the electrical ﬁeld and exposed under UV-
light (366 nm), PCR products were visualized
as clear bands.The relative band shades were
used to help pooling the PCR products with an
appropriate amount before puriﬁcation, as PCR
products bearing dim bands should be added in
greater amounts than those with brighter bands.
QI Aquick PCR puriﬁcation kit (Qiagen, 28104), following its attached instruction, was
utilized to purify the pooled PCR products by removing primers, nucleotides, enzymes,
mineral oils, salts and other impurities before sequencing.
To measure concentration and purity of the pooled PCR products, Nanodrop 1000 was
used, ensuring the sequencing criteria (200µg DNA in 50µl nuclease-free water) was
reached.
Lastly, the enriched DNA barcodes were sequenced at Sequetch (USA) or
PrimBio (USA) using an Ion Torrent PGM 318 or s5-520 chips (Life Technologies).
4.3.5
Processing of sequencing data from multimer-labeled DNA barcodes
The ampliﬁed DNA barcodes were sequenced by the amplicon sequencing, which
generated a FASTAQ ﬁles containing reads of enriched DNA barcodes.
This highly
targeted sequencing approach was chosen due to its eﬃcient variant identiﬁcation and
characterization in complex samples.
The sequencing data was then processed by a DTU-developed online software package
’Barrcoda’ (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/Barracoda/).
This tool distinguishes the
barcodes used in each experiment, assigns sampleID and pMHC speciﬁcity to their
corresponded barcode and calculates both the total reads number and the number of
29
==PAGE:40==
17 August 2020
clonally reduced reads (reads that do not include multiple counting of duplicated
sequence reads caused by ampliﬁcation) for each pMHC-related DNA barcode.
In
addition, Barrcoda makes barcode enrichment analysis in the R package edgeR [104] and
displays enrichment in the form of log2 fold change [105, 40]. Moreover, P-values of the
log2 fold change were calculated individually by comparing each experiment to the mean
reads of the triplicate baseline samples. The negative binomial distribution with a ﬁxed
0.1 dispersion parameter is used in the P-value (p) calculation [40].
Furthermore,
false-discovery rates (FDRs) is accounted by the Benjamini-Hochberg method, and the
signiﬁcance threshold of speciﬁc barcode is set at FDR<0.1%. Thus, Barrocoda deﬁnes
barcodes having a log2 fold change with a p<0.001 and FDR<0.1 as the true T cell
responses.
When using the Barracoda program, a set of ﬁles and information (e.g. sequencing data,
barcode information, sample identiﬁcation, barcode annotation and barcode plate setup)
were submitted online to generate a corresponding excel ﬁle containing analysis results for
each experiment. These results were used for further analyses, such as to generate graphs
or perform statistical analysis.
4.4
Phenotype of autoantigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells in RA
In order to investigate and characterize the role of autoantigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells in RA,
phenotyping with surface markers staining was performed on selected 27 patient samples
and four healthy controls based on the screen results.
4.4.1
Generation of RA peptide- and virus peptide-tetramers
SA-ﬂuorochrome conjugated pMHC tetramers were generated to stain the antigen speciﬁc
CD8 T cells for the phenotyping approach. Speciﬁcally, monomers containing RA related
peptides were conjugated with PE ﬂuorochrome, while APC ﬂuorochrome was used for
virus pMHCs.
Tetramer generation was started with UV mediated peptide exchange as described in
section 4.3.1.2. The selection of peptides was based on the antigen speciﬁc proﬁle of CD8
T cell detected by DNA barcode multimers in the ﬁrst part of the project.
Following a quick spin for 2 min, PE- and APC-SA-conjugates were diluted in PBS to
reach the same volume as exchanged monomer (9.02µl SA-conjugate per 100µl monomer).
Diluted PE- and APC-conjugates were then added to the exchanged RA-pMHC and virus-
pMHC respectively and incubated on ice for 30 min. After tetramerization, 0.5µl D-biotin
(Avidity Bio200) was added to each speciﬁcity and incubated on ice for 20 min. Freezing
buﬀer (0.5% BSA + 5% glycerol) were thereafter added and the pMHC tetramers were
stored at -20◦C until use.
30
==PAGE:41==
17 August 2020
4.4.2
T cell staining
With the generated pMHC tetramers
Cryopreserved (-80◦C) cells were thawed and washed as described in section 4.3.2, but in
stead of barcode-cytometry buﬀer, the cells were washed in ﬂuorescence-activated cell
sorting (FACS) buﬀer (PBS + 0.5%FCS) at the last step. The pre-made tetramers were
thawed, spun for 5 min at 3300g at 4◦C and then were added together with 5µl dasatinib
to the cells followed by a 15 min-incubation at 37
◦C. The volume used for each
speciﬁcity was 1µl per staining.
While preserved on ice, the cells were ready for the
following surface marker staining.
Surface marker staining
As shown in table 5, antibodies CD3, CD4, CD8, CD45RA, CD197, CD25, CD127,
CD49d, PD-1, CD39, CD57, CD195, CD69 were used to stain the surface markers in
order to inspect the possible sub-cell populations and the phenotypic changes within the
autoantigen reactive CD8 T cells.
In practice, all the mentioned antibodies together with the live/dead Near-IR-viability
(Nir) dye were added into the tetramer stained cells with the staining amount showed in
table 5. Surface staining reactions were performed by light-protected incubation for 30
min at 4◦C. After washing thrice with FACS buﬀer at 1500rmp for 5min at 4◦C, cells
were ﬁxed for intracellular staining.
Intracellular cytokine staining
In order to assess whether the autoreactive CD8 T cells from RA patients having a
regulatory proﬁle, by the presence of RA related antigens, an intracellular cytokine
staining (ICS) targeting FOXP3 was performed.
Surface-stained cells were resuspended in 200µl FoxP3 ﬁxation/permeabilization working
solution buﬀer (eBioscience, 88-8824-00), incubated for 30min at 4◦C, washed twice with
permeabilization buﬀer made from 1:10 dilution in MilliQ water (eBioscience) at
1500rpm for 5 min at 4◦C and resuspended in 10µl permeabilization buﬀer. Cells were
then serially incubated with 0.625µl FOX3 antibody for 30 min at 4◦C. After two times
washing with 150µl permeabilization buﬀer, cells were resuspended in 250µl FACS buﬀer
and ready for acquisition.
4.4.3
Flow cytometry
The LSRFortessaTM ﬂow cytometer (BD) was used for the whole phenotyping approach in
the present project. With up to 7 lasers, this machine allows for the detection of up to 18
diﬀerent colors. In the conﬁguration of the study, 5 lasers including: a 355nm UV laser, a
405nm violet laser, a 488nm blue laser, 532nm green UV laser and a 640nm red laser, were
31
==PAGE:42==
17 August 2020
used enabling the detection of all the 17 colors used in the applied panel simultaneously.
To make a survey phenotyping of the T cell subsets, their diﬀerentiation state and their
exhaustion/activation state, a panel composed of the following ﬂuorochrome-conjugated
monoclonal antibodies was made as shown in table 5 (including SA-ﬂurochrome APC and
PE used for the tetramers).
Fluorochrome
Target
Vol(uL)/stain
Source
Clone
Red laser
APC-Cy7/Nir
Live/dead
0,1
Nvitrogen L10119
AF700/APC-R700
CD127
2,5
BD 565185
HIL-7R-M21
APC
Virus derived pMHC tetramers
Biolegend 405207
B266711
Green laser
PE-Cyanine7
CD57
2,5
Nordic Biosite 393310
QA17A04
PE-Cyanine5
CD69
5
Biolegend 310908
FN50
PE-CF594
CD39
2,5
BD 563678
TU66
PE
RA related MHC tetramers
Biolegend 405204
B217372
Blue laser
BB700
FOXP3
0,625
BD 566527
236A/E7
FITC
CD4
2
BD 345768
9060554
Violet laser
BV786
CD3
5
BD 563800
SK7
BV711
CD25
2,5
Biolegend 302636
BC96
BV650
CD197
5
Biolegend 353233
G043H7
BV605
CD49d
1,75
Biolegend 304323
9F10
BV480
CD8
2
BD 566121
RPA-T8
BV421
CD45RA
0,625
BD 562885
HI100
UV laser
BUV737
CD279 (PD-1)
1,25
BD 565299
EH12.1
BUV395
CD195
5
BD 565224
2d7/CCR5
Table 5: Staining panel for phenotyping.
4.4.3.1
Compensation
Since multiple lasers and a relatively big panel consisting of ﬂuorochromes close to each
other in range are used in this study, it is very likely to cause a spectral overlap. This is
because some of the ﬂuorescence coming from one ﬂuorochrome can be detected in the
channel of another ﬂuorochrome. Therefore it is necessary and important to implement
compensations in order to correct ﬂuorescence spillover emissions. As a standard method,
individually labeled stain controls are run to calculate the percentage of each ﬂuorescence
contributed to the other channels.
Here, OneComp eBeads Compensation Beads (ThermoFisher, 01-1111-42) were used to
compensate each color listed in table 5 except Nir dye.
One drop of OneComp
compensation beads was ﬁrst added to all FACS tubes, and then 0.5µl of the respective
antibodies were added, mixed and incubated for 10 min at room temperature in dark.
For the negative control, no antibody was added and incubated under the same
condition. After incubation, 500µl PBS buﬀer was added to each tube, well mixed and
32
==PAGE:43==
17 August 2020
ready to use.
For Nir dye, which binds free amines in dead cells, ArC Amine Reactive Compensation
Bead Kit (ThermoFisher, A10346) was used. One drop of Arc amine reactive beads and
1µl Near-IR was added to a FACS tube, followed with 10 min incubation at RT in dark.
One drop of Arc negative control beads were added after two washes with 1ml FACS
buﬀer at 1500rmp at 4◦C. Afterwards the mix was resuspended in 250µl FACS buﬀer
prior to analysis on Fortessa cytometer.
Prior to compensation of all the colors, the negative control with no ﬂurochrome was run
on the cytometer. This was to set the photomultiperlier tube (PMT) values in a way that
peaks of the negative populations for all the colors in the panel were at around 102. With
these PMT values, each of the single positive tubes was subsequently run one after
another, and the positive gates were set on. Manually adjustments with caution on PMT
values were made to ensure there was no overlap between the peak of the positive
population for each color.
The peak of the positive population for its responded
ﬂurochrome should also locate at highest end compared with the others. The build-in
FACSDiva software version 6.1.2 (BD Biosciences) was then used to count the overlap
between two colors.
When results showing no overlap were above 100%,
the
compensation was saved and applied by all the following experiments that used the same
ﬂuorochromes.
4.4.3.2
Gating strategy
The gating starts with the identiﬁcation of lymphocytes in a FSC/SSC plot. Single cells
(FSC-A/FSC-H), live cells (Nir dye) and CD3 positive cells were subsequently gated on.
Next, from the CD3 positive cells CD4, CD8 cells were gated. Within the CD3 and CD8
positive population, seven gates were set on: 1) CD197/CD45RA for the identiﬁcation
of Temra, naive, Tcm and Tem cells respectively; 2) CD69 positive cells for Trm cells;
3) CD195/CD49d for the positive expression of chemoreceptors; 4) PD1/CD39 and 5)
PD1/CD57 for Tex population; and 6) CD127/CD25 cells and identiﬁcation of Treg cells
was done by further gating on 7) FOXP3 positive cells from the CD127- and CD25+
population. In addition, two more gates were made for the RA tetramer positive cells and
virus tetramer positive cells.
For both RA tetramer positive and virus tetramer positive cells, the mentioned seven gates
were made again to show the existence of these CD8 T cell subgroups within the tetramer
positive populations. These seven gates were made by using the seven upper-level gates
as references, since it was diﬃcult to place the gates when there were only a few events in
the tetramer positive populations.
33
==PAGE:44==
17 August 2020
4.4.4
Data analysis
Data from the surface marker staining and intracellular cytokine staining was analyzed in
FACSDiva Software version 8.0.2 (BD Biosciences) and all the gating were performed in
FLowJo version 10.4.2 (TreeStar, Inc).
UMAP was downloaded through www.ﬂowjo.com/exchange/ and placed in the plugin
folder of FlowJo. Before running the high-dimensional algorithms, manual pregating was
made to select CD3 and CD8 positive cells out of single live lymphocytes. In order to
optimize the runtime and have the same number of events, all the samples were
concatenated into one ﬁle with 10,000 events per fcs ﬁle.
UMAP analysis was then
performed with default setting of nearest neighbors of 15 and minimum distance of 0.5
using the Euclidean distance function [43].
Compensated markers including: CD127,
CD57, CD69, CD39, FOXP3, CD25, CD127, CD49d, CD45RA, PD1 and CD195 were
selected to generate the UMAP maps.
4.5
Graph generation and statistical data analysis
Statistical analysis of DNA barcodes was completed by Barracoda software as described
previously and organized in Excel Windows. The graphs and the statistical analysis for
both barcode-based screen and phenotyping were made by Graphpad Prism 8.0. Compar-
ison of the number and the estimated frequencies of CD8 T cells between patient samples
and healthy controls were performed using a non-parametric Mann Whitney test. Com-
parison of the markers of CD8 T cells between two tetramer-positive populations or cell
populations in patients with active disease and in patients with inactive disease were also
performed using a non-parametric Mann Whitney test. As this statistical test compares
the median of the ranks in two unpaired groups, median values were indicated in the
graphs. The Pearson coeﬃcient was used to measure the goodness of correlation between
two staining on the same eight samples. For all the ﬁgures, *: p<0.05, **: p<0.01, ***:
p<0.001, ****: p<0.0001.
34
==PAGE:45==
17 August 2020
5
Results
5.1
The detection of antigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells in RA
Blood samples from a cohort of 45 RA patients and 28 healthy controls were screened
with two libraries of DNA-labelled dextran MHC multimers for determining the proﬁle
of antigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells in RA disease. The RA-library contained 637 predicted
epitopes and the virus-library consisted of 23 viral peptides.
5.1.1
Correlation plot for validation
In order to validate the set up of the screening approach as functional and reliable, eight
patient samples were screened separately at two diﬀerent time points with the exact same
experimental ﬂow. A correlation plot made based on log2-fold change of the two screens
is showed in ﬁgure 13.
Figure 13: The correlation plot of two screens on same samples. Each dots represents a detected barcode
read from two separate screenings on same eight patient samples. The red color denotes the responses from both
screens but HLA-B0702 restricted while the purple is used for all the responses that for the other HLA alleles from
both screens. n=2603, p<0.0001 (Pearson’s correlations).
Each dot represented the log2-fold change for a given barcode (comparing the sorted cells
to the pool of pMHC multimer library), where the red color denoted the reads towards
peptides that were restricted to HLA-B0702 and the reads for the rest HLA alleles from
both screens were colored in purple. log2-fold change that is mapped to a given barcode
relative to the mean read counts mapped to triplicated baseline samples is estimated using
normalization factors deﬁned by the trimmed mean of M-values method [40]. A T cell
35
==PAGE:46==
17 August 2020
response is considered as a true response here only when the barcode has a log2-fold
change with a p-value smaller than 0.001, which equals a FDR<0.1, and with clonal read
counts above the number of 100 [40]. Three dots were observed that situated far away from
the majority and lied around the x-axis. Their very prominent log2-fold changes in screen
one were related to the particular HLA-C0702 allele, which might potentially fail in the
second screen. In spite of this, it was observed that the two screens correlated positively
with the statistical signiﬁcance (r= 0.0819). In addition, due to the fact that HLA-B0702
monomers were not functional at the ﬁrst screen, their related responses denoted in red
color were thus observed lying on the y-axis. These suggested that our screen approaches
were functional and the results were validated and could be trusted.
5.1.2
Exclusion of responses from HLA-C0501 bond peptides
When analyzing HLA-allele matched signiﬁcant CD8 T cell responses based on the
generated barcoding data, the number of responses towards peptides restricted to
HLA-C0501 allele appeared to be very high, comprising more than 70% of all responses
(data not shown). This raised suspicion of the creditability of these responses as they
might
in
fact
be
background
noise.
Further
investigation,
such
as
killer
cell
immunoglobulin-like receptors (KIR) blocking assay might be necessary to distinguish
the true responses. As HLA-C binding antigen was reported cross-reactive and can bind
to NK cell inhibitory receptors, which are also occasionally present on CD8 T cells [106].
However, this topic is beyond the scope of this study and currently investigated by other
scientists in our group. Thus, to be on the safe side at the present state, all the T cell
responses towards peptides restricted to the HLA-C0501 allele were excluded in this
project. This also led to the exclusion of this allele in the phenotyping experiments.
5.1.3
More RA pMHC-speciﬁc CD8 T cell response are detected in RA
patients
After validating reproducibility of the barcode-multimer results and exclusion of C0501
pMHC from following data analysis, the total number of HLA-matched T cell responses in
each donor related to the two pMHC libraries (RA- and viral-pMHCs) were counted. The
comparison plot is shown in ﬁgure 14.
It was observed that the number of detected virus responsible responses for both cohorts
(RA patients and healthy controls) had the same median value. This indicated that the
general immune competence within the two cohorts was similar. Conversely, RA-speciﬁc
responses can be detected to a signiﬁcantly higher number in the RA patients compared
to healthy controls. Moreover, the number of RA-related responses in healthy donors was
signiﬁcantly lower than in the virus associated responses.
36
==PAGE:47==
17 August 2020
Figure 14:
The number of RA-speciﬁc and virus-speciﬁc CD8 T cell responses detected in each
donor. Each dot represents the sum of all CD8 T cell responses detected towards the library of RA and virus
pMHC for each individual donor (red: RA patients (n=45), blue: healthy donors (n=25)). The median value was
presented as the box with 95% Conﬁdence interval (CI). p=0.0116 (*), p<0.05(***). (Mann-Whitney U test).
5.1.4
The estimated frequency of RA pMHC-speciﬁc CD8 T cells is higher in
RA patients
The frequency of all multimer positive CD8 T cell population was estimated as described
in [40]. Basically, the fraction of sequencing reads speciﬁcally for a given pMHC out of
the total reads derived from the same sample was multiplied by the percentage of sorted
pMHC multimer-binding cells out of total CD8 T cells. The sum of the HLA-matched
estimated frequencies of each detected response with p<0.001 for each patient and
healthy donor is plotted in ﬁgure 15.
37
==PAGE:48==
17 August 2020
Figure 15: The sum of the estimated frequency of the RA-peptide and virus-speciﬁc CD8 T cell
responses detected in each donor.
Each dot represents the sum of the frequencies of all true CD8 T cell
responses detected towards a given pMHC for each individual donor (red: RA patients (n=45), blue: healthy
donors (n=25)). The median value was presented as the box with 95% Conﬁdence interval (CI). p=0.0138 (*),
p=0.0046 (**). (Mann-Whitney U test on log transformed data, est.freq + 0.1).
Similar to the number of responses, RA-speciﬁc responses in the RA patient cohort had
signiﬁcantly higher estimated frequencies than those found in the healthy control group.
Moreover, for healthy donors, the responses towards RA peptides had also signiﬁcantly
lower estimated frequencies than those towards virus peptides. In addition, virus responses
had comparable estimated frequencies in both cohorts.
5.1.5
Correlation
of
clinical
parameters
and
the
detection
of
RA
pMHC-speciﬁc CD8 T cells
The activity of RA disease can be measured by DAS28 and RA patients with the score ≥
2.6 are deﬁned as having active disease [53]. Disease activity might be inﬂuenced by the
presence (number of responses) and the size of RA speciﬁc T cell populations. To analyze
this, the patients cohort was split into two groups based on their disease activity state.
In addition, the presence of autoreactive antibody ACPA in the PB of patients is another
diagnostic marker for RA [46] and thus the patients cohort was also split into two groups
based on this factor.
The comparisons of the number of T cell responses, as well as the estimated frequency
between these patient subgroups are shown in ﬁgure 16.
Neither the number nor the
estimated frequency of T cell response seemed to be diﬀerent between patients with active
and inactive disease. RA-related peptides showed a trend to induce slightly more frequent
responses in the patients that have no APCP, though no statistical signiﬁcance was found.
This indicated that there was no obvious correlation between the two clinical parameters
38
==PAGE:49==
17 August 2020
and the detected RA pMHC-speciﬁc CD8 T cells in RA patients.
Figure 16: Comparisons of diﬀerent clinical parameters and RA speciﬁc T cell populations. Each
dot represents a true detected response. A.&B. The comparison between RA patients with and without active
disease of the total detected CD8 T cell responses and the sum of the estimated response frequencies in each donor,
respectively. C.&D. The comparison between RA patients with and without the presence of APCP of the total
detected CD8 T cell responses and the sum of the estimated response frequencies in each donor, respectively. No
statistical signiﬁcance is found. (Mann-Whitney U test, Log transformed data = est.freq + 0.1)
5.1.6
Collagen type II is the most immunogenic protein in RA
Analysis of the number of CD8 T cells responses among the six RA-related proteins was
conducted to test if a certain protein was more prone to generate T cell responses in RA
patients.
The response number per protein could be biased by the size of the peptide library
generated from each protein and the distribution of each protein to each HLA molecule.
This means that a certain protein may be applied more frequently and their potential
interactions with CD8 T cells could generate more responses than others.
Therefore,
normalization on the response number was performed to remove the possible variations.
The calculated HLA-based normalized number of responses was the result of the fraction
of the number of peptides in each protein and the total number of peptides used,
multiplied with the detected number of responses for each protein of each HLA. The sum
of the normalized response numbers for each protein is shown in ﬁgure 17A, together
39
==PAGE:50==
17 August 2020
with the entire RA peptide library for each protein and the recognized peptides without
normalization for the purpose of comparison. A ’matched’ pattern emerged from these
three data sets, which indicated that the bigger the peptide library of a protein was,
higher number of the peptides were recognized by the antigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells.
Among the six proteins, Aggrecan generated the most responses.
Subsequently, to further study the immunogenicity of these proteins, the immunogenicity
score for each protein was calculated based on the equation:
X
No. of detected responses of each peptides and HLA
No. of each HLA in patients × No. of peptides of each protein for each HLA
Interestingly, a diﬀerent pattern was observed (Figure 17B) as collagen type II had the
highest immunogenicity score, although the size of its peptide library ranked number four
among the six proteins. This suggested collagen type II might have the strongest ability
to induce CD8 T cell mediated immune responses in RA patients.
Figure 17: Comparison of the immunogenicity of the selected RA relevant proteins. A. Dark green:
Number of predicted peptides for each proteins included in this project. Light green: The number of recognized
peptides of each protein. Oliver green: The HLA-based normalized number of recognized peptides of each proteins.
B. The immunogenicity score of the recognized peptides from each proteins.
5.1.7
The
citrullinated
RA
peptides
represent
the
majority
of
the
immunogenic peptides in RA patients
Speciﬁc citrullinated proteins have been recognized as autoantigens and play an essential
role in the pathogenic mechanisms of RA [65, 66].
They were reported preferentially
bound to the HLA-DR alleles and presented to CD4 T cells [52]. In this project, detected
CD8 T cell responses towards citrullinated peptides were compared with those towards
the wild-type peptides.
637 predicted RA-related peptides were included to detect antigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells.
Among these epitopes,
40% were in the native form while the rest carried the
40
==PAGE:51==
17 August 2020
citrullinated form of arginine (Figure 18A). To investigate the distribution of the diﬀerent
forms of recognized peptides in the patient cohort, the number of responses generated by
each sequence of peptides in each patient was counted and sorted according to the native-
and citrullinated-peptide forms.
Since it was observed that a peptide could elicit a
response in both its native and citrullinated form, a third category was also included in
this analysis, namely responses towards RA peptides in both forms.
In addition, the
estimated frequencies of T cells responses which indicated how often the peptides were
recognized were also evaluated. The result is presented as a pie chart in ﬁgure 18B, C. As
illustrated, the majority of T cell recognized peptides were in the citrullinated form, both
in term of the number of responses, and the estimated frequency. This matched along
with the number of the predicted RA peptides, as 60% of them were in the citrullinated
form.
However, an even bigger proportion of the estimated frequency of CD8 T cell
responses was towards citrullinated RA peptides. Moreover, a small fraction of responses
was derived from peptides, that are recognized both in the native- and the citrullinated
form.
Figure 18: Distribution of the T cell recognized wild-type and cirtrullinated RA peptides in RA
patients. A. The distribution of the predicted RA peptides included in this project (n=637). Peptides in wild-
type form account for 40% of the whole RA peptide library (light grey). RA peptides with citrullination accounts for
60%, or 385 total (dark grey). B. The distribution of recognized peptides with regards to the number of responses.
Each true response induced by a given peptide is counted and the sum of all the responses generated by the predicted
native RA peptides are plotted in light grey color, by the predicted citrullinated RA peptides are in dark grey color,
while by both forms are in black. Total n=32 RA related peptides are recognized by the antigen-speciﬁc CD8 T
cells. C. The distribution of recognized peptides with regards to the estimated response frequencies. The sum of
the estimated frequencies is calculated for each true responses and also plotted according to the peptide form of
native (light grey), citrullinated (dark grey), and both (black).
41
==PAGE:52==
17 August 2020
5.2
Phenotype of autoantigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells in RA
Besides the detection of T cell responses, phenotypic analysis of autoreactive CD8 T cells
in RA patients was conducted. The patients selection was based on the results observed
by the DNA barcode pMHC multimer screening. 27 patients were selected as RA speciﬁc
T cell responses were detected from them. The PBMCs from these patients were stained
with 1) a pool of PE-labeled RA- and APC-labeled viral pMHC tetramers, speciﬁc for
each patient sample, where the speciﬁcities were uncovered by DNA barcoded multimer
screening , 2) the antibody panel of surface makers listed in section 4.4.2, and ﬁnally 3) a
single intracellular staining of FoxP3.
The virus pMHC tetramer was included to
compare the phenotypic characteristics of virus-reactive T cells versus RA-speciﬁc T cells
in RA patients.
The use of two diﬀerent ﬂuorochromes (PE and APC) for the
conjugations made it easy to distinguish between RA- and viral-peptides based on the
correspondent PE and APC positive signals. For each staining, one healthy control was
selected and stained on the same principle serving as the staining control. Due to the
long staining procedure, 27 patient samples were divided into four groups and thus four
healthy control samples were included in total.
In Appendix 9.8, a list including the
patients and healthy controls of selection, the speciﬁc RA peptide numbers, and the
speciﬁc viral peptide numbers can be found.
Figure 19: Gating strategy.
Example gating strategy: tetramer-positive cells are out from single, live, CD8
positive lymphocytes. FSC-A: forward scatter area, SSC-A: side scatter area, FSC-w: forward scatter width.
A multicolor panel of ﬂuorescent antibodies against 14 markers characteristic for T cell
phenotype was designed to identify potential subgroups of antigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells
and therefore characterize their phenotypic proﬁle in RA patients.
The three T cell
42
==PAGE:53==
17 August 2020
lineage surface markers: CD3, CD4 and CD8 were used to distinguish them from the
total
lymphocyte
population
by
ﬂow
cytometry
analysis.
Moreover,
RA
tetramer-positive- and virus tetramer-positive CD8 T cells were gated on within the
gated CD8 T cell population. The gating strategy for patient RA12 is shown in ﬁgure19
as an example of the applied gating strategy.
5.2.1
Phenotype panel design and staining of CD8 T cells
To phenotype the RA-speciﬁc and virus-speciﬁc CD8 T cells in patient samples, RA
tetramer-positive cells and virus tetramer-positive cells were gated on from the
CD8-positive population and analyzed for the expression of 11 other markers. In ﬁgure
20, an overview of the gating strategy applied on the CD8 T cells and the two
tetramer-positive cells from patient RA12 is shown as an example.
The CD8 positive population was analyzed by seven dot plots generated by the
combinations of the markers:
1) the diﬀerentiation states of CD8 T cells could be
identiﬁed
on
basis
of
the
expression
of
CD197
and
CD45RA
as
naive
(Cd197+Cd45RA+), Tcm (CD197+CD45RA-), Tem (CD197-CD45RA-) and Temra
(CD197-CD45RA+) cells [12]; 2) CD69 was used for deﬁning Trm cells (CD8+CD69+);
3) both CD49d and CD195 are chemokine receptors that have been reported to be
upregulated in RA patients [107, 108]; 4) the activation marker PD1 and senescent
marker CD57 were used to investigate the activation/clonal diﬀerentiation state; 5)
CD8+CD39+ cells have been shown to have an increased frequency in the peripheral
blood from patients with chronic inﬂammation as well as with high expression of PD1
[109]; and 6) CD127-CD25+ CD8 cells were potentially regulatory T cells, which were
further veriﬁed by 6.1) the expression of FoxP3 to determine if they were true CD8 Tsub
cells.
Furthermore, to phenotype the RA-speciﬁc and virus-speciﬁc CD8 T cells in
patient samples, the seven gates were also made on the RA tetramer-positive and virus
tetramer-positive cells (2nd and 3nd rows in ﬁgure 20). The placement of these gates was
based on the ’reference’ gates on the CD8 positive cells (1st row in ﬁgure 20), since it
could be challenging when these tetramer-positive populations had only few cells.
43
==PAGE:54==
17 August 2020
Figure 20: (Continued on the following page.)
44
==PAGE:55==
17 August 2020
Figure 20: Gating Representative dot plots showing the gating strategy for RA12 patient data set and population
frequencies.
Gated on CD3+CD8+ cells (1st column:1st row), CD8+RA tetramer+ (2nd column:1st row),
CD8+virus tetramer+ (3rd column:1st row) cells. Seven gates formed with diﬀerent combination of the 11 selected
markers are placed on the CD3+CD8+ cells (1st colum:2nd row-7th row). All these gates are denoted with number
from 1 to 6. number 6.1 (1st colum:7th row)is used to represent the FoxP3 gate which are the next level of CD127-
CD25 cells (1st colum:6th row). The same seven gates were also placed on the RA tetramer+ (2nd column:2nd
row-7th row) and virus tetramer+ (3rd column:2nd row-7th row) cells as well.
Generally, a signal was obtained from all antibodies included, as observed in the seven
dot plots of the CD8 T cells for each patient (1st row in ﬁgure 20). Moreover, a good
separation between negative and positive populations was also observed for each marker.
This demonstrated an eﬀective and functional staining of the CD8 T cells with the
designed phenotype panel, although variations were observed from sample to sample with
respect to the intensities of the signals and the diﬃculties of separation for each marker.
This might be caused by technical instability, biological variation of diﬀerent patients as
well as the expression levels of a given marker.
Additionally, looking at the staining with RA tetramer and the virus tetramer (1st
column, 2nd and 3rd rows in ﬁgure 20), the detected antigen-speciﬁc responses were
comparable with the results of the DNA barcoded screening. This veriﬁed the CD8 T cell
responses found by the previous DNA barcoded pMHC screening.
To have more insight and description of the phenotypic proﬁle across the whole patient
cohort, the newly developed visualizing tool, UMAP was used. This high-dimensional data
analysis algorithm can also provide an unbiased way to investigate the data compared with
the more subjective gating principle.
5.2.2
UMAP analysis on antigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells
In order to minimize noise from irrelevant cell populations, a pre-gating of CD8 T cells
from live, single cell lymphocytes expressing CD3 was performed for individual patient
data prior to the UMAP analysis (same gating strategy shown in ﬁgure 19). Next, to
improve the runtime of the algorithms and normalize the data, the pre-gated CD8 T cell
population from all samples were concatenated into one single FCS ﬁle with the same
number of events (10,000 cells) for each sample. In addition, ’RA tetramer’ and ’virus
tetramer’ were excluded from the parameter list for the UMAP analysis, in order to avoid
a clustering based on the tag of tetramer as an unwanted ’clustering driver’.
This
ensured that the generated UMAP was unbiased and had the full phenotype clustering
(11 selected markers) on these two tetramer-positive cell populations.
The expression levels of each marker within CD8 T cells across the 27 patients are
45
==PAGE:56==
17 August 2020
showed as heat maps in ﬁgure 21. Due to the fact that only CD8 T cells were analyzed,
no distinct separated cell cluster was observed from the UMAP projections.
However,
UMAP was able to recapitulate activation, diﬀerentiation and exhaustion stages of CD8
T cells as seen by the diﬀerent expression levels for the markers. Generally, the marker
expression on the UMAP plots were comparable to the results made by manual gating.
For example, CD57 was seen highly expressed on the tip of the UMAP projection. In
addition, the expression levels of CD45RA and CD197 were correspondent to the
elucidated subpopulation distribution by manual gating.
Moreover, except FoxP3,
diﬀerences of expression level across the whole cell population could be observed for most
of the markers.
Figure 21: UMAP projections of marker expression of the CD8 T cells from RA patients. UMAP
analysis was performed with default FlowJo environment and displayed in 2D plots using the resultant UMAP1
and UMAP2 dimensions. Expression levels of CD127, CD69, CD49d, CD197, CD57, PD1, CD25, FoxP3, CD39,
and CD45RA across the data of all 27 RA patient CD8 T cells are shown and visualized using a rainbow heat scale
(color based on percentile of marker expression).
5.2.3
Comparison of phenotypic proﬁle between RA pMHC-speciﬁc and virus
pMHC-speciﬁc CD8 T cells in RA patients
In accordance with the generated UMAP projection, a comparison of phenotypic proﬁle
was performed between the RA pMHC-speciﬁc- and the virus pMHC-restricted CD8 T
cells.
5.2.3.1
The comparison of CD197 and CD45RA expression
Based on the ﬁndings given by the manual gating and the UMAP analysis, I further
evaluated the diﬀerentiation state of the antigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells related to CD197
and CD45RA in the two tetramer-positive populations. First by manually setting gates
on the concatenated FCS ﬁle, the CD8 T cells were divided into four subpopulations with
46
==PAGE:57==
17 August 2020
the combination of the two markers. RA tetramer-positive and virus tetramer-positive
populations were also gated on within CD8+ T cells. They were then visualized in the 2D
UMAP plot with the generated UMAP1 and UMAP2 dimensions (ﬁgure 22A and B).
Figure 22: Comparison of RA pMHC-speciﬁc- and virus pMHC-speciﬁc CD8 T cells in relation to
diﬀerentiation markers CD197 and CD45RA. A. Gatings of naive (grey), Temra (red), Tcm (purple) and
Tem (orange) cells within all CD8 T cells overlay on 2D UMAP projection with UMAP1 and UMAP2 dimensions
by the algorithms. The graph is shown in the type of counter plot with 5% counter level. B. Virus tetramer-positive
(pink) and RA tetramer-positive CD8 T cells (blue) overlay on 2D UMAP projection with UMAP1 on x-axis and
UMAP2 on y-axis. The graph is shown as type of counter plot with 5% counter level. C. The expression proﬁle of
markers CD197 and CD45RA on RA pMHC-speciﬁc- and virus pMHC-restricted CD8 T cells in RA patients. The
graph is shown in the type of counter plot with 10% counter level. D. The fraction of naive, Temra, Tcm and Tem
cells out of the total tetramer+ CD8 T cell population in 27 RA patients. All patients were stained with RA pMHC
tetramers and 14 patients were stained with virus pMHC tetramers. Each dot represents an individual patient.
The data presented as whiskers (min to max) with medians indicated by the horizontal lines across the boxes.
Nonparametric Mann-Whitney U-test. P<0.05 is considered statistically signiﬁcant. * P=0.014, ** P=0.001, ****
P<0.0001.
Four clusters of antigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells were clearly seen on UMAP projection
shown in ﬁgure 22A. Each cell cluster was one of the four CD8 T cell diﬀerentiation
subsets: naive, Temra, Tcm and Tem cells that was represented by diﬀerent colors. Of
note, Tem cells accounted for the biggest sub-population within the CD8 positive T cell
population. To have a direct comparison, RA pMHC-speciﬁc cells (blue color) and virus
pMHC-restricted T cells (pink color) were overlaid on UMAP dimension 1 and 2 (ﬁgure
22B). It was observed that, RA related cells spread all over the UMAP projection with
47
==PAGE:58==
17 August 2020
an intense clustering on the right tip of the map. In contrast, virus speciﬁc cells cluster
located mostly at the lower region of the map, overlapping with some parts of the RA
cell clusters.
When linking ﬁgure 22A and ﬁgure 22B together, it was seen that
virus-speciﬁc cells were preliminary Tem and Tcm cells while all four CD8 subsets could
be found in RA related cell population. This observation was also in line with ﬁgure 22C,
when gating on CD197 vs CD45R. In all, almost no naive cells were seen in the virus
tetramer-positive population while there was a bigger fraction of Temra cells in the RA
multimer positive population.
Also, the Tem cells were the biggest subpopulation for
both the RA pMHC- and virus pMHC-speciﬁc cells.
According to these phenotypic characteristics reﬂected by the UMAP analysis, a second
look was taken at the original data set and the manual gating in order to perform a
quantitative analysis on the populations (ﬁgure 22D). The percentage of parent
population
for
the
four
CD8
subsets
was
measured
in
both
RA-
and
virus
tetramer-positive populations.
Comparable with the observation from the UMAP
analysis, RA tetramer-positive CD8 T cells had signiﬁcantly bigger naive (p<0.0001) and
Temra (p=0.001) cell population than virus tetramer-positive CD8 T cells. On the other
hand,
bigger
Tcm
and
Tem
(p=0.014)
subsets
were
found
within
the
virus
pMHC-speciﬁc. In addition, for both of the tetramer-positive populations, most of the T
cells exhibited a Tem phenotype.
5.2.3.2
The comparison of CD57 and PD expression
Moreover, ’inspired’ by the results of UMAP analysis, a comparison of the expression
levels of CD57 and PD1 between RA- and virus-pMHC speciﬁc cells was made (ﬁgure
23A). This was because CD57 was regarded as a senescent marker expressed by terminally
diﬀerentiated CD8 T cells, such as Temra cells and PD1 molecule a marker associated with
both the activation and exhaustion of CD8 T cells [18, 110].
48
==PAGE:59==
17 August 2020
Figure 23: Comparison of PD1 and CD57 expression between RA pMHC-speciﬁc- and virus pMHC-
speciﬁc CD8 T cells. A. The expression proﬁle of markers CD57 and PD1 on RA pMHC-speciﬁc- (blue) and
virus pMHC-restricted (pink) CD8 T cells in RA patients. The graph is shown in the type of counter plot with
5% counter level. CD57+ cell population was divided into two subpopulation: CD57low and CD57high, deﬁned
by the dashed line boxes. B. Histogram plots of the expression levels of CD57 of each CD8 T cell subsets in RA
tetramer+ population (on the left) and in virus tetramer+ population (on the right). C. The expression proﬁle
of CD57 in both virus tetramer+ and RA tetramer+ population by measuring the % of parent population. D.
The expression proﬁle of PD1 of CD57+ CD8 T cells (CD57low and CD57high) in both virus tetramer+ and RA
tetramer+ population by measuring the MFI values. For both C. and D., each dot represents an individual patient.
The data presented as whiskers (min to max) with medians indicated by the horizontal lines across the boxes.
Nonparametric Mann-Whitney U-test. P<0.05 is considered statistically signiﬁcant. * p=0.0436, *** P=0.0004,
**** P<0.0001.
In ﬁgure 23A, a clear separation of CD57- and CD57+ populations for both RA- and
virus-related T cells was observed. In addition, there were more cells expressing CD57
within RA tetramer-positive cells than that within virus tetramer-positive cells when
looking at CD57+ T cells only.
On the other side, it was diﬃcult to distinguish the
expression level of PD1 regarding to negative or positive on these antigen-speciﬁc CD8 T
cells.
Nevertheless, the virus pMHC-speciﬁc population as a whole seemed to have a
much higher expression of the PD1.
Indeed, there was a distinct diﬀerence in PD1
expression levels when CD57low and CD57high cells were compared.
Next, the expression level of CD57 on each subsets of CD8 T cells was assessed in the RA
and virus pMHC related populations (ﬁgure 23B). Within RA tetramer-positive cell
population, both Tem and Temra expressed high level of CD57 while almost no
49
==PAGE:60==
17 August 2020
expression was seen on naive and Tcm cells. Similarly, Tem and Temra cells were also the
two populations that expressed more CD57, but at a lower level compared to RA
pMHC-speciﬁc cells.
These observations were further veriﬁed by the quantitative analysis. By measuring the
percentage of parent population, signiﬁcantly larger fraction of CD57+ cells was again
observed (P<0.0001) within RA tetramer-positive cells compared to that in the virus
tetramer-positive cells (ﬁgure 23C). To determine the expression level of marker PD1
more speciﬁcally, the CD57+ cells were ﬁrst divide into CD57low and CD57high T cell
subsets. Then the median ﬂuorescence intensity (MFI) of PD1 was measured in these two
sub-CD57+ populations for both tetramer-positive populations (ﬁgure 23D). Both
CD57high (P=0.0004) and CD57low (P<0.0001) virus tetramer-positive cells had
signiﬁcantly higher PD1 expression level than RA tetramer-positive cells. Interestingly,
CD57low expressed signiﬁcantly higher PD1 than CD57high RA pMHC-speciﬁc T cells
(p=0.0436).
In short, RA tetramer-positive CD8 T cells were observed to have more naive, Temra
and CD57-expressed cells when compared to virus tetramer-positive CD8 T cells, which
expressed higher level of PD1 marker. In addition, within RA tetramer-positive CD8 T
cell population, CD57low cells expressed higher level of PD1 than CD57high cells.
5.2.4
Comparison of phenotypic proﬁle between RA pMHC-speciﬁc T cells
in patients with active/inactive disease
Similar to the assessment made in section 5.1.5, an UMAP analysis was also made to
compare the phenotypic ﬁle of RA pMHC-speciﬁc T cells within the patient cohorts in
respect to the disease activities, active vs inactive disease.
5.2.4.1
The comparison of CD197 and CD45RA expression
RA tetramer-positive cells from the patients with active RA, from the patients with
inactive RA, together with RA tetramer-positive cells from all 27 patients were visualized
in UMAP projections (ﬁgure 24A).
The most notable diﬀerence between the three diﬀerent populations was the upper left
arm region of the UMAP map (circled cells) (ﬁgure 24A). The active RA tetramer-positive
population had a smaller cell cluster at that position when compared to the inactive RA
tetramer-positive population. In order to investigate which T cell subset these circled cells
might belong to, RA pMHC-speciﬁc CD8 T cells were manually divided into the naive,
Tcm, Tem and Terma subsets. Based on the gating overlaid on UMAP1 and UMAP2
50
==PAGE:61==
17 August 2020
dimensions (ﬁgure 24B), the majority of these cells were observed as naive cells. This
indicated that patients with inactive RA had more naive RA reactive CD8 T cells compared
to those with active RA disease. This indication was also in agreement with the observation
obtained from ﬁgure 24C, where the two populations were compared and shown in the plot
with CD197 vs CD45RA.
Figure 24: Comparison of the phenotypic proﬁle of RA pMHC-speciﬁc CD8 T cells between patients
with active RA disease and patients with inactive disease. A. Three UMAP projections of all RA tetramer-
positive CD8 T cells, CD8 T cells in patients with active RA disease and CD8 T cells in patients with inactive RA
disease. The circles are used to mark the most notable diﬀerence of cell cluster when compare the two UMAP plots.
B. Gating on naive (grey), Temra (red), Tcm (purple) and Tem (orange) cells within the RA pMHC-speciﬁc CD8 T
cells overlay on 2D UMAP projection with the resultant UMAP1 and UMAP2 dimensions by the algorithms. The
graph is shown as type of dot plot. C. The counter plot of the expression proﬁle of markers CD197 and CD45RA
on RA pMHC-speciﬁc CD8 T cells in RA patients with active disease (red) and with inactive disease (blue). D.
The fraction of naive, Temra, Tcm and Tem cells out of the RA tetramer-positive cells in RA patients with active
disease (red, n=13) and with inactive disease (blue, n=14). Each dot represents an individual patient. The data
presented as whiskers (min to max) with medians indicated by the horizontal lines across the boxes. Nonparametric
Mann-Whitney U-test. P<0.05 is considered statistically signiﬁcant. RA tetramer-positive cells from the patients
with active RA (active RA tetramer+), from the patients with inactive RA (inactive RA tetramer+).
Subsequently, the percentage of parent population was further measured to quantify the
four CD8 T cell subsets (ﬁgure 24D). Although no statistical signiﬁcance was found, within
the RA tetramer-positive population, patients with inactive disease tended to have more
naive and Tcm cells, while patients with active disease had a bigger fraction of Temra and
Tcm cells. This was conﬁrmed by the direct visualization plots in ﬁgure 24B and C.
51
==PAGE:62==
17 August 2020
5.2.4.2
The comparison of CD57 and PD1 expression
Next, the expression of marker PD1 and CD57 on the RA tetramer-positive cells was
compared between the patient subgroups of diﬀerent disease activities (ﬁgure 25A). Again,
a clear separation of the CD57 expression was observed, while no obvious PD1 positive
or negative population could be determined. Looking more closely at CD57+ cells only,
there was slightly higher expression level of PD1 and CD57 on the RA tetramer-positive
cells in patients with active disease than those in patients with inactive disease.
This
observation suggested that RA patients with active disease might have more diﬀerentiated
RA pMHC-speciﬁc CD8 T cells than those without active disease.
Figure 25: Comparison of expression level of CD57 and PD1 on RA pMHC-speciﬁc CD8 T cells
between patients with active RA disease and patients with inactive disease. A.The expression proﬁle
of markers CD57 and PD1 on RA pMHC-speciﬁc CD8 T cells in RA patients with active disease (red) and with
inactive disease (blue). The graph is shown as type of counter plot with 5% counter level. CD57+ cell population
was divided into two subpopulations: CD57low and CD57high, deﬁned by the dashed-line boxes. B. The expression
proﬁle of CD57 on RA pMHC-speciﬁc CD8 T cells in RA patients with active disease (red, n=13) and with inactive
disease (blue, n=14) by measuring the percentage of parent population. C. The expression proﬁle of PD1 of CD57+
CD8 T cells (CD57low and CD57high) in RA patients with active disease (red, n=13) and with inactive disease
(blue, n=14) by measuring the MFI values. For both B. and C., each dot represents an individual patient. The data
presented as whiskers (min to max) with medians indicated by the horizontal lines across the boxes. Nonparametric
Mann-Whitney U-test. P<0.05 is considered statistically signiﬁcant. *** P=0.0004, **** P<0.0001. RA tetramer-
positive cells from the patients with active RA (active RA tetramer+), from the patients with inactive RA (inactive
RA tetramer+).
Similar to the quantitative analysis made in section 5.2.3.2, percentage of parent
population expressing CD57 and the expression level PD1 (by measuring MFI) were
determined. As shown in ﬁgure 25B, there was a tendency that more cells express CD57
within the RA tetramer-positive population in patients with active disease, although it
was not statistically signiﬁcant.
The expression level of PD1 on both CD57low and
CD57high RA tetramer-positive population seemed to be similar (ﬁgure 25C), which was
also in agreement with the visualization in ﬁgure 25A.
52
==PAGE:63==
17 August 2020
Basically, patients with active disease had a tendency to have less naive RA pMHC reactive
CD8 T cells but a bigger Temra population. Cells in this patient subgroup were tend to
express more CD57 and higher level of PD1 compared to patients with inactive RA disease.
53
==PAGE:64==
17 August 2020
6
Discussion
Rheumatoid Arthritis is traditionally known as a CD4 T cell related autoimmune disease,
due to the genetic association with the well-recognized RA-relevant class-II MHC
molecule: HLA-DR allele [45]. Several studies have shown that candidate autoantigens,
including their citrullinated variants, can bind speciﬁcally to the peptide-binding grooves
of certain HLA-DR alleles and induce the activation of CD4 T cells.
In addition, the
presence of CD4 T cells speciﬁc for citrullinated epitopes have also been also reported
with eﬀector and memory phenotype in RA patients [52, 65, 68, 88]. This data suggests a
principal role of antigen-speciﬁc CD4 T cells in the pathogenesis and maintenance of
inﬂammation in RA. In contrast, less attention is given to autoantigen-speciﬁc CD8 T
cells in this regard, although a number of studies have suggested that CD8+ T cells are
involved in the pathogenesis of RA and have the potential to be used as a disease
biomarker [18, 89, 90].
Hence, there is a clear need for a study that can detect and
phenotype the antigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells in patients with RA, in order to understand
and characterized the role of CD8 T cells in this disease.
In this project, continued with the work that was previously conducted by Stine (ﬁgure
9: experiment strategy point 1, 2, 3 and part of point 4), an intensive screen for CD8 T
cell recognition of RA relevant proteins in PBMCs from the 45 patients with RA and 38
healthy controls was performed. Thereafter, analysis of the phenotype of the autoantigen-
and virus-speciﬁc CD8 T cells in selected 27 RA patients was also done based on the
generated screening results.
6.1
The detection of autoantigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells in RA
The ﬁrst part of this project was to screen for the CD8 T cell recognition of a large
peptide library that consisted of 637 potential epitopes in RA, both in native and
citrullinated forms. This was accomplished by using the high throughput DNA-barcode
labeled pMHC multimers - a method that enabled the detection of the antigen-speciﬁc
CD8 T cells against hundreds of peptides in parallel. These peptides were restricted to
eight selected HLA class I molecules, including HLA-A*0101, -A*02:01, -A*24:02;
HLA-B*07:02, -B*08:01; and HLA-C*05:01, -C*07:01, -C*07:02, based on the HLA
typing results via NGS across the RA cohort.
In healthy donors, the number and the estimated frequencies of viral-speciﬁc CD8 T cell
responses were found to be signiﬁcantly higher than those of RA-related CD8 T cells
(ﬁgure 14, 15).
This indicates an operative and functional detection of CD8 T cells
recognition in the included samples. Because these viral epitopes were selected and used
as the positive control since responses against them have been detected before in the
54
==PAGE:65==
17 August 2020
chosen healthy controls.
More important, a signiﬁcantly higher level of responses in
terms of the number and the estimated frequency of the RA pMHC-speciﬁc CD8 T cell
was detected in the patient cohort compared to the healthy controls. This means there is
a higher breadth of auto-reactive T cells against RA-related peptides in patient cohort
which has also the higher cell numbers (estimated frequencies).
It could be possibly
related to the higher absolute number of CD8 T cells found in peripheral blood of RA
patients than that in healthy controls [111]. In addition, comparable levels of CD8 T cell
recognition of viral peptides were observed in both the patient cohort and healthy
controls. This can serve as a good conﬁrmation, as it is expected that each individual
should have virus-speciﬁc T cells regardless of whether they are with RA or not. Taken
together, the detected bigger number and higher estimated frequencies of RA-pMHC
speciﬁc CD8 T cell conﬁrms the previous results that the autoreactive CD8 T cells from
the peripheral blood have a signiﬁcant relevance in RA disease [112].
Based on the calculated immunogenicity, Collagen type II seemed to have the strongest
ability to induce CD8 T cell-mediated immune responses in RA (ﬁgure 17). Indeed, this
ﬁbrillar protein is a well-established autoantigen and has long been used as a toleration
approach to treat RA [78, 113]. In the review by Kim et. al [114], they pointed out that
high reactivity of T cell to Collagen type II was often found in RA patients.
The
enhanced T-cell responses to this protein were related to increased production of
proinﬂammatory cytokines and chemokines, that were crucial for inﬂammatory responses
in RA. A more recent study demonstrated a higher prevalence of autoantibodies against
cyclic citrullinated collagen type II in the sera of patients than in the healthy controls
[115]. However, these data were generally based on the analyses of CD4 T cells and the
reactivity of autoantibodies, whereas this project demonstrated that the clinical relevance
of Collagen type II in RA could also be associated with CD8 T cells in the peripheral
blood.
Citrullinated peptides were more frequently recognized by antigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells
compared to their corresponding native peptides with respect to both the number of
responses and the estimated frequencies (ﬁgure 18).
This is in common with the
observations that made earlier on CD4 T cells that citrullinated auto-antigens binds
preferentially to HLA-DR alleles. The similar preferential binding of CD8 T cells and the
citrullinated peptides observed here might be due to the presence of a single amino acid
polymorphisn in the binding groove in the class I HLA-B08 allele as reported by
Raychaudhuri et al. [95]. Still, further investigation is needed. However, this observation
could indicate that citrullinated epitopes recognized by not only CD4 T cells but also
CD8 T cells are of particular relevance in RA. Of note, there is a portion of peptides that
can be recognized in both forms. This could be explained by the possibility that both the
55
==PAGE:66==
17 August 2020
native and citrullinated peptides are recognized by two diﬀerent T cells and both of the
responses were detected. However, this ﬁnding could also be due to the ability of the
TCR to cross-recognize both forms of a peptide [116]. Although it was not veriﬁed in this
project, a double tetramer staining with the native- and citrullinated pMHC conjugated
with two diﬀerent ﬂuorochromes can be used to ﬁnd the answer.
As if T cells can
recognize peptides in both forms, they will be detected as double positive, while single
positive T cells recognize only one of the forms. In addition, a single cell-based antigen
detection approach might be another candidate assay to solve this puzzle [117].
In addition, this project demonstrates that autoreactive CD8 T cells from peripheral blood
in RA patients can be detected by the DNA-barcoded pMHC multimer screening in most
individuals, although these cells are likely to have low aﬃnity for their target pMHC
and have low frequency in the total CD8 T cell population. The same strategy was also
employed recently to ﬁnd disease relevant autoreactive CD8 T cells in another autoimmune
disease, narcolepsy [118].
6.2
Phenotype of autoantigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells in RA
Phenotype characterization of the autoreactive CD8 T cells in RA was performed based
on the results generated by the DNA barcode-labeled pMHC multimer screening. Out of
45 patients, 27 were selected based on the presence of RA pMHC-speciﬁc T cell
responses. Within these patients, viral pMHC-speciﬁc T cell responses were also detected
in 18 patients.
In contrast to the ﬁndings in a previous study [90], almost no antigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells
in RA patients (with regard to both RA-pMHC- and viral-pMHC- reactive CD8 T cells)
were observed exhibiting Tsup (CD127-CD25+ and FoxP3+) phenotype, whereas a big
proportion of them exhibited Tem phenotype (CD197-, CD45RA-) when looking at ﬁgure
20 and 21. This suggests that the circulating antigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cell compartment
in RA patients has a skewed phenotype towards an activated or inﬂammatory phenotype
instead of a negative regulatory phenotype. Indeed, earlier studies have reported the same
observations, that CD8+ Tem subset have increased frequency in the peripheral blood of
patients with RA in relation to age-matched healthy controls [94, 90].
When compared the RA tetramer-positive cells and the virus tetramer-positive cells, one
of the signiﬁcant diﬀerences between them was that there were more naive CD8 T cells
within the former cell population whereas such subset was almost not seen in the latter
cell population (ﬁgure 22). This is most likely that all viral reactive T cells in the TCR
repertoire would have been exposed to the selected virus epitopes in an early viral
infection, and thus have bee expanded and activated. Therefore, almost no CD8 T cells
56
==PAGE:67==
17 August 2020
remain in naive state.
Additionally, the smaller size (n=23) of the virus pMHCs pool
might also favor the distinct TCR binding.
On the other side, a bigger number of
RA-pMHCs were included (n=40). Potentially, the majority of the RA reactive T cells
towards this RA pMHC library, either are not present, or remain naive and hence only a
small proportion may have been expanded and activated.
Another striking diﬀerence
between the two tetramer-positive populations was that there was a signiﬁcantly bigger
proportion of Temra cells in the RA tetramer-positive population. Temra cells are the
terminally diﬀerentiated memory cells with low proliferate capacity and high sensitivity
to apoptosis [2, 119].
Hence we might relate this observation to the potential
phenomenon of chronic antigen exposure leading to the clonal diﬀerentiation of the
antigen-speciﬁc
CD8
T
cells.
As
for
autoimmune
diseases,
such
as
RA,
the
antigen-speciﬁc T cells normally have a long-term reactivity towards their cognate
epitopes which makes these cells enter the terminally diﬀerentiated state [119]. Indeed,
Temra cells are mostly considered positive for the senescence marker CD57 [120]. This
was also observed in this project:
signiﬁcantly more RA-pMHC speciﬁc CD8 T cells
express CD57 when compared with the virus-pMHC speciﬁc CD8 T cells (ﬁgure 23).
Interestingly,
CD57high cells in RA tetramer-positive cell population expressed a
signiﬁcantly lower level of PD1 than CD57low cells. This indicates PD1, in this setting,
functions more as an activation marker instead of an exhaustion marker [110].
The
signiﬁcantly higher expression level of PD1 by the virus-speciﬁc CD8 T cell conﬁrms this
observation as a very small proportion of this cell population were at the terminally
diﬀerentiated stage while a big proportion of the cells had Tem and Tcm phenotype
(ﬁgure 22). Moreover, within both tetramer-positive cell populations, the biggest fraction
of cells were those that express the Tem phenotype, and the virus tetramer-positive
population had signiﬁcantly more of them (ﬁgure 22). The high frequency of Tem cells in
the circulating antigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells can potentially arise from the repetitive
reactivation of memory CD8 T cells by vaccine boosters or successive infections [121]
experienced by the selected RA patients. Further, this observation is also in line with the
study by Cammarata et.
al
group,
that autoreactive CD8 T cells recognizing
self-antigens in RA express a phenotype of Teﬀcells. They proposed that these Teﬀcells
can be expanded within inﬂamed tissue by counter-regulating and killing neighboring
regulatory T cells [96].
The comparison of CD45RA and CD197 expression between patients with diﬀerent
disease activity (active vs inactive) illustrated the T cell subset distribution of the RA
pMHC-speciﬁc CD8 T cells in the two patient subgroups (ﬁgure 24).
More naive and
Tcm cells were found in patients with inactive disease while those with active disease had
a bigger proportion of Tem and Temra cells.
Although no statistical signiﬁcance was
found, this data might indicate that the diﬀerentiation stage of CD8 T cells has some
57
==PAGE:68==
17 August 2020
relevance for the disease state. The circulating CD8 T cells in patients with active RA
might have a prolonged antigen exposure and therefore exhibit more Temra phenotype.
This is conﬁrmed by the observation that more cells in this patient cohort tend to express
CD57 (ﬁgure 25). Indeed, CD8+CD57+ T cells have been suggested to be involved in the
pathogenesis of RA [91]. However, the potential relation between the expression of CD57
and the disease state of RA was not investigated in previous studies, but such relation
was demonstrated in this project as shown in ﬁgures 25 A, B. Moreover, Focosi [122]
reported that the expression of CD57 in CD8 T lymphocytes was an useful marker for
measuring functional immune deﬁciency in patients with several autoimmune diseases.
Nonetheless, no functional analysis is included in this project due to the time limitation.
It is therefore not possible to determine the functionality of these antigen-speciﬁc CD8 T
cells in RA patents at present, but might be worthy to be investigated as the next step.
Overall, a comparable level of antigen-speciﬁc responses was observed from the results of
tetramer staining and the responses detected by the DNA barcoding based screen. This
is not only a positive validation for the CD8 T cell responses found by the latter method,
but also demonstrates an eﬀective analysis strategy to interrogate antigen-speciﬁc CD8 T
cells in an autoimmune disease setting. As mentioned earlier, the DNA barcoding-based
technology is particularly advantageous for detecting low-aﬃnity T cells, as the speciﬁcity
of the T cells is analyzed in a ﬂuorescent-independent manner. And the detected responses
and speciﬁcity can beneﬁt both the sample selection and the potential antigen selection
for the following ﬂuorescence-based phenotyping assay.
When performing the phenotyping analysis, only four healthy controls were included as
staining control. This was due to the limited number of suitable healthy control samples in
house, as they should have the correct HLA alleles for the investigated peptides. It would
be interesting to see if there was a diﬀerent phenotype signature between the RA-pMHC
speciﬁc CD8 T cells in healthy donors and those in the patients with RA. However, it
should be noted that RA-pMHC speciﬁc T cells are barely at the detectable level in the
healthy donors, therefore conducting phenotype analysis might be technically challenged.
Another limitation in this study is that there is no information about the disease
progression of the patients. It was reported that the frequency and the phenotype of CD8
T cells diﬀered in the patients with early RA (disease duration <1 year) compared to the
patients in remission [94, 112]. Thus the investigation of the correlation between the RA
disease outcome and the antigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells might be conducted in the future.
So far only four out of 11 activation, diﬀerentiation and exhaustion makers on the used
panel have been analyzed due to time limitations. However, based on the observations of
the UMAP plots, some of the other markers, such as CD69 and CD195 are worth further
evaluation.
58
==PAGE:69==
17 August 2020
7
Conclusions and Future Perspectives
The aim of this present project is to characterize CD8 T cells in the autoimmune disease
Rheumatoid Arthritis in terms of their RA related antigen speciﬁcity and phenotype by
utilizing high-throughput antigen screening method and phenotyping assays.
By using
DNA barcode-labeled MHC multimers, enhanced CD8 T cells recognition of RA-relevant
proteins was detected compared to healthy donors, both in terms of the frequency and
the breadth of their CD8 T cells responses. Although no direct correlation of the disease
activity or the presence of autoantibody ACPA in patients was found to the level of
recognition of RA-pMHC speciﬁc in the patient cohort, Collagen type II was identiﬁed as
the most immunogenic proteins of the six included RA-related proteins.
In addition,
citrullinated peptides were observed representing the majority of the immunogenic
peptides in RA patients.
Moreover, RA-pMHC speciﬁc CD8 T cells were found to have more Temra phenotype
and express more terminal diﬀerentiation marker CD57 compared to virus-pMHC speciﬁc
CD8 T cells. On top of this, these cells in patients with active RA seem to have more
Tem and Temra cells as well as express more CD57, when compared to the cells in
patients with inactive disease.
These ﬁndings provide the indications that CD8 T cells play a potential role in the
parthenogenesis of RA with their speciﬁc recognition of autoantigens derived from these
previously described RA proteins. This may suggest novel therapeutic strategies for RA
by limiting the toxicity proﬁle of these antigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells and thus decrees the
disease symptoms. This could be achieved by, for example, controlling the cytotoxic T
cell population by enhancing the amount of regulatory T cells, or directly kill the
cytotoxic T cells that circulate in the RA patients. In addition, more RA speciﬁc CD8 T
cells express the CD57 in the peripheral blood of patients with RA suggests the potential
of this phenotypic marker as a candidate immunological marker.
Though further
investigations are needed to fully study these potentials.
59
==PAGE:70==
17 August 2020
8
List of Literature
References
[1] PJ Bjorkman, MA Saper, B Samraoui, WS Bennett, JL Strominger, and DC Wiley.
Structure of the human class I histocompatibility antigen, HLA-A2. 1987.
[2] MH Andersen, D Schrama, P Thor Straten, and JC Becker.
Cytotoxic T cells.
Journal of Investigative Dermatology, 126(1):32–41, 1 2006.
[3] SJ Turner, PC Doherty, J Mccluskey, and J Rossjohn. Structural determinants of
T-cell receptor bias in immunity. Nature reviews/ Immunology, 6, 2006.
[4] MM Davis and PJ Bjorkman. Erratum: T-cell antigen receptor genes and T-cell
recognition (Nature (1988) 334 (395-402)). Nature, 335(6192):744, 1988.
[5] TP Arstila, A Casrouge, V Baron, J Even, J Kanellopoulos, and P Kourilsky. A direct
estimate of the human αβ T cell receptor diversity. Science, 286(5441):958–961, 10
1999.
[6] JG Abelin, DB Keskin, N Hacohen, MS Rooney, SA Carr, and CW Correspondence.
Mass Spectrometry Proﬁling of HLA-Associated Peptidomes in Mono-allelic Cells
Enables More Accurate Epitope Prediction. Immunity, 46(2):315–326, 2 2017.
[7] L Saveanu, O Carroll, V Lindo, M Del Val, D Lopez, Y Lepelletier, F Greer, L Schom-
burg, D Fruci, G Niedermann, and Peter M Van E. Concerted peptide trimming by
human ERAP1 and ERAP2 aminopeptidase complexes in the endoplasmic reticulum.
Nature Immunology, 6(7):689–697, 5 2005.
[8] J Neefjes, MLM Jongsma, P Paul, and O Bakke. Towards a systems understanding
of MHC class i and MHC class II antigen presentation. Nature Reviews Immunology,
11(12):823–836, 12 2011.
[9] AK Sewell.
Why must T cells be cross-reactive?
Nature Reviews Immunology,
12(9):669–677, 9 2012.
[10] LM Mclane, MS Abdel-Hakeem, and EJ Wherry. CD8 T Cell Exhaustion During
Chronic Viral Infection and Cancer. Annual Review of Immunology, 37(1):457–495,
4 2019.
[11] MD Martin and VP Badovinac. Deﬁning memory CD8 T cell. Frontiers in Immunol-
ogy, 9(NOV):2692, 11 2018.
60
==PAGE:71==
17 August 2020
[12] F Sallusto, Lenig, R Förster, M Lipp, and A Lanzavecchia. Two subsets of mem-
ory T lymphocytes with distinct homing potentials and eﬀector functions. Nature,
401(6754):708–712, 10 1999.
[13] SN Mueller and LK Mackay. Tissue-resident memory T cells: Local specialists in
immune defence. Nature Reviews Immunology, 16(2):79–89, 2 2016.
[14] RK Dinesh, BJ Skaggs, AL Cava, BH Hahn, and RP Singh. CD8 + Tregs in lupus,
autoimmunity, and beyond. Autoimmunity Reviews, 9(8):560–568, 6 2010.
[15] D Sauce, JR Almeida, M Larsen, L Haro, B Autran, GJ Freeman, and V Appay.
PD-1 expression on human CD8 T cells depends on both state of diﬀerentiation and
activation status. AIDS, 21(15):2005–2013, 10 2007.
[16] MR Bono, D Fernández, F Flores-Santibáñez, M Rosemblatt, and D Sauma. CD73
and CD39 ectonucleotidases in T cell diﬀerentiation: Beyond immunosuppression.
Febs Letters, 589(22):3454–3460, 11 2015.
[17] H Kared, S Martelli, TP Ng, SLF. Pender, and A Larbi. CD57 in human natural
killer cells and T-lymphocytes. Cancer Immunology, Immunotherapy, 65(4):441–452,
4 2016.
[18] M Strioga, V Pasukoniene, and D Characiejus. CD8+CD28- and CD8+CD57+ T
cells and their role in health and disease. Immunology, 134(1):17–32, 9 2011.
[19] G Churlaud, F Pitoiset, F Jebbawi, R Lorenzon, B Bellier, M Rosenzwajg, and
D Klatzmann. Human and mouse CD8+CD25+FOXP3+ regulatory T cells at steady
state and during interleukin-2 therapy. Frontiers in Immunology, 6(MAR):171, 4
2015.
[20] MR Vieyra-Lobato, J Vela-Ojeda, L Montiel-Cervantes, R López-Santiago, and
MC Moreno-Lafont. Description of CD8 + Regulatory T Lymphocytes and Their
Speciﬁc Intervention in Graft-versus-Host and Infectious Diseases, Autoimmunity,
and Cancer. Journal of Immunology Research, 2018:3758713, 8 2018.
[21] KA Hogquist, TA Baldwin, and SC Jameson. Central tolerance: Learning self-control
in the thymus. Nature Reviews Immunology, 5(10):772–782, 10 2005.
[22] Daniel L. Mueller. Mechanisms maintaining peripheral tolerance. Nature Immunol-
ogy, 11(1):21–27, 1 2010.
[23] MS Anderson and MA Su.
AIRE expands: new roles in immune tolerance and
beyond. Nature Reviews Immunology, 16(4):247–258, 4 2016.
61
==PAGE:72==
17 August 2020
[24] MR. Lincoln, A Montpetit, M.Z Cader, J Saarela, DA. Dyment, M Tiislar, V Ferretti,
PJ. Tienari, A.D Sadovnick, L Peltonen, GC. Ebers, and TJ. Hudson. A predominant
role for the HLA class II region in the association of the MHC region with multiple
sclerosis. Nature Genetics, 37(10):1108–1112, 10 2005.
[25] GT Nepom and WW Kwok. Molecular basis for HLA-DQ associations with IDDM.
Diabetes, 47(8):1177–1184, 1998.
[26] KT Coppieters, F Dotta, N Amirian, PD Campbell, TWH Kay, MA Atkinson,
BO Roep, and MG von Herrath. Demonstration of islet-autoreactive CD8 T cells in
insulitic lesions from recent onset and long-term type 1 diabetes patients. Journal
of Experimental Medicine, 209(1):51–60, 1 2012.
[27] M Salou, B Nicol, A Garcia, and DA Laplaud. Involvement of CD8+ T cells in
multiple sclerosis, 2015.
[28] M Degn and BR Kornum. Type 1 narcolepsy: a CD8 sup+/sup- T cell-mediated
disease? Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1351(1):80–88, 9 2015.
[29] S Sinha, AW Boyden, FR Itani, MP Crawford, and NJ Karandikar. CD8+ T-cells
as immune regulators of multiple sclerosis. Frontiers in Immunology, 6(DEC), 2015.
[30] M Pellegrino, A Crinò, MM Rosado, and A Fierabracci. Identiﬁcation and functional
characterization of CD8+ T regulatory cells in type 1 diabetes patients. PLoS ONE,
14(1), 1 2019.
[31] JD Altman,
PAH Moss,
PJR Goulder,
DH Barouch,
Michael G, JI Bell,
AJ Mcmichael, and MM Davis. Phenotypic Analysis of Antigen-Speciﬁc T Lym-
phocytes. Advancement Of Science, 274(5284):94–96, 2008.
[32] EW Newell and MM Davis. Beyond model antigens: high-dimensional methods for
the analysis of antigen-speciﬁc T cells. Nature Biotechnology, 32:149–157, 2013.
[33] Mireille Toebes, Miriam Coccoris, Adriaan Bins, Boris Rodenko, Raquel Gomez,
Nella J. Nieuwkoop, Willeke Van De Kasteele, Guus F. Rimmelzwaan, John B.A.G.
Haanen, Huib Ovaa, and Ton N.M. Schumacher. Design and use of conditional MHC
class I ligands. Nature Medicine, 12(2):246–251, 3 2006.
[34] B Rodenko, M Toebes, SR Hadrup, WJE van Esch, AM Molenaar, TNM Schu-
macher, and H Ovaa. Generation of peptide-MHC class I complexes through UV-
mediated ligand exchange. Nature Protocols, 1(3):1120–1132, 2006.
[35] Ton N M Schumacher, Marie-Thbrse Heemels, Jacques J Neefjes, W Martin Kast,
Cees J M Melief, and Hidde L Ploegh. Direct Binding of Peptide to Empty MHC
Class I Molecules on Intact Cells and In Vitro. Technical report, 1990.
62
==PAGE:73==
17 August 2020
[36] G Dolton, A Lissina, A Skowera, K Ladell, K Tungatt, E Jones, D Kronenberg-
Versteeg, H Akpovwa, JM Pentier, CJ Holland, AJ Godkin, DK Cole, MA Neller,
JJ Miles, DA Price, M Peakman, and AK Sewell. Comparison of peptide-major his-
tocompatibility complex tetramers and dextramers for the identiﬁcation of antigen-
speciﬁc T cells. Clinical and Experimental Immunology, 177(1):47–63, 2014.
[37] J Robinson, JA Halliwell, JD Hayhurst, aul Flicek, P Parham, and SGE Marsh. The
IPD and IMGT/HLA database: allele variant databases. Nucleic Acids Research,
43:423–431, 2015.
[38] SR Hadrup, AH Bakker, CJ. Shu, RS Andersen, J van Veluw, P Hombrink, E Cast-
ermans, P thor Straten, C Blank, JB Haanen, MH Heemskerk, and TN Schumacher.
Parallel detection of antigen-speciﬁc T-cell responses by multidimensional encoding
of MHC multimers. Nature Methods, 6(7):520–526, 2009.
[39] EW Newell, N Sigal, SC Bendall, GP Nolan, and MM Davis. Cytometry by Time-
of-Flight Shows Combinatorial Cytokine Expression and Virus-Speciﬁc Cell Niches
within a Continuum of CD8+ T Cell Phenotypes. Immunity, 38(1):198–199, 1 2013.
[40] AK Bentzen, AM Marquard, R Lyngaa, SK Saini, S Ramskov, M Donia, L Such, AJS
Furness, N McGranahan, R Rosenthal, PT Straten, Z Szallasi, IM Svane, C Swanton,
SA Quezada, SN Jakobsen, AC Eklund, and SR Hadrup. Large-scale detection of
antigen-speciﬁc T cells using peptide-MHC-I multimers labeled with DNA barcodes.
Nature Biotechnology, 34(10):1037–1045, 2016.
[41] VI Jurtz, S; Paul, M; Andreatta, P; Marcatili, B; Peters, and M Nielsen.
NetMHCpan-4.0: Improved Peptide-MHC Class I Interaction Predictions Integrating
Eluted Ligand and Peptide Binding Aﬃnity Data. Journal of Immunology, (8):199,
2017.
[42] Y Saeys, S Van Gassen, and BN Lambrecht. Computational ﬂow cytometry: Helping
to make sense of high-dimensional immunology data. Nature Reviews Immunology,
16(7):449–462, 7 2016.
[43] E Becht, L McInnes, J Healy, CA Dutertre, IWH Kwok, LG Ng, F Ginhoux, and
E Newell.
Dimensionality reduction for visualizing single-cell data using UMAP.
Nature Biotechnology, 37(1):38–47, 1 2019.
[44] L Ferrer-Font, JU Mayer, S Old, IF Hermans, J Irish, and KM Price.
High-
Dimensional Data Analysis Algorithms Yield Comparable Results for Mass Cytom-
etry and Spectral Flow Cytometry Data. Cytometry Part a, 2020.
63
==PAGE:74==
17 August 2020
[45] JS Smolen, D Aletaha, A Barton, GR Burmester, P Emery, GS Firestein, A Ka-
vanaugh, IB McInnes, DH Solomon, V Strand, and K Yamamoto.
Rheumatoid
arthritis. Nature Reviews Disease Primers, 4, 2 2018.
[46] MC Boissier, L Semerano, S Challal, N Saidenberg-Kermanac’h, and G Falgarone.
Rheumatoid arthritis: From autoimmunity to synovitis and joint destruction. Jour-
nal of Autoimmunity, 39(3):222–228, 9 2012.
[47] L Padyukov, C Suva, P Stolt, L Alfredsson, and L Klareskog. A gene-environment
interaction between smoking and shared epitope genes in HLA-DR provides a high
risk of seropositive rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis and Rheumatism, 50(10):3085–
3092, 10 2004.
[48] P Stolt, A Yahya, C Bengtsson, H Källberg, J Rönnelid, I Lundberg, L Klareskog,
L Alfredsson, G Lindahl, B Sverdrup, H Hellström, T Weitoft, B Lindell, B Nord-
mark, J Bratt, I Hafström, I Leden, B Löfström, A Bengtsson, T Skogh, E Lindqvist,
L Jacobsson, K Huddénius, C Lindström, A Teleman, E Baecklund, A Knight, and
O Svernell. Silica exposure among male current smokers is associated with a high
risk of developing ACPA-positive rheumatoid arthritis.
Annals of the Rheumatic
Diseases, 69(6):1072–1076, 6 2010.
[49] D Makrygiannakis, M Hermansson, AK Ulfgren, AP Nicholas, AJW Zendman, A Ek-
lund, J Gmnewald, CM Skold, L Klareskog, and AI Catrina.
Smoking increases
peptidylarginine deiminase 2 enzyme expression in human lungs and increases cit-
rullination in BAL cells. Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases, 67(10):1488–1492, 10
2008.
[50] M Soory and M Soory Periodon.
Association of periodontitis with rheumatoid
arthritis and atherosclerosis: Novel paradigms in etiopathogeneses and management?
Technical report, 5 2010.
[51] S Viatte, D Plant, and S Raychaudhuri. Genetics and epigenetics of rheumatoid
arthritis. Nature Reviews Rheumatology, 9(3):141–153, 3 2013.
[52] V Malmström, AI Catrina, and L Klareskog. The immunopathogenesis of seropositive
rheumatoid arthritis: From triggering to targeting. Nature Reviews Immunology,
17(1):60–75, 1 2017.
[53] J Fransen and P van Riel. The Disease Activity Score and the EULAR Response
Criteria. Rheumatic Disease Clinics of North America, 35(4):745–757, 11 2009.
[54] DF McWilliams, PDW Kiely, A Young, N Joharatnam, D Wilson, and DA Walsh.
Interpretation of DAS28 and its components in the assessment of inﬂammatory and
64
==PAGE:75==
17 August 2020
non-inﬂammatory aspects of rheumatoid arthritis.
BMC Rheumatology, 2(1), 12
2018.
[55] DAS28 | Calculators | RheumaKit. https://www.rheumakit.com/en/calculators/das28.
[56] G Reynisdottir, R Karimi, V Joshua, H Olsen, AH Hensvold, A Harju, M En-
gström, J Grunewald, S Nyren, A Eklund, L Klareskog, CM Sköld, and AI Cat-
rina. Structural changes and antibody enrichment in the lungs are early features
of anti-citrullinated protein antibody-positive rheumatoid arthritis.
Arthritis and
Rheumatology, 66(1):31–39, 2014.
[57] G Reynisdottir, H Olsen, V Joshua, M Engström, H Forsslund, R Karimi, CM Sköld,
S Nyren, A Eklund, J Grunewald, and AI Catrina. Signs of immune activation and
local inﬂammation are present in the bronchial tissue of patients with untreated early
rheumatoid arthritis. Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases, 75(9):1722–1727, 9 2016.
[58] N Wegner, R Wait, A Sroka, S Eick, KA Nguyen, K Lundberg, A Kinloch, S Culshaw,
J Potempa, and PJ Venables. Peptidylarginine deiminase from Porphyromonas gin-
givalis citrullinates human ﬁbrinogen and α-enolase: Implications for autoimmunity
in rheumatoid Arthritis. Arthritis and Rheumatism, 62(9):2662–2672, 2010.
[59] S Rantapää-Dahlqvist, Ben AW De J, E Berglin, G Hallmans, G Wadell, H Sten-
lund, U Sundin, and WJ Van Venrooij. Antibodies Against Cyclic Citrullinated Pep-
tide and IgA Rheumatoid Factor Predict the Development of Rheumatoid Arthritis.
Arthritis and Rheumatism, 48(10):2741–2749, 10 2003.
[60] B Bartok and GS Firestein.
Fibroblast-like synoviocytes:
Key eﬀector cells in
rheumatoid arthritis. Immunological Reviews, 233(1):233–255, 1 2010.
[61] Morris Ziﬀ. Relation of Cellular Inﬁltration of Rheumatoid Synovial Membrane to
its Immune Response. Arthritis and Rheumatism, 17(3):313–319, 1974.
[62] HP Kiener, B Niederreiter, DM. Lee, E Jimenez-Boj, JS Smolen, and MB Brenner.
Cadherin 11 promotes invasive behavior of ﬁbroblast-like synoviocytes. Arthritis and
Rheumatism, 60(5):1305–1310, 5 2009.
[63] G Schett and E Gravallese.
Bone erosion in rheumatoid arthritis: Mechanisms,
diagnosis and treatment, 11 2012.
[64] K Redlich and JS Smolen. Inﬂammatory bone loss: Pathogenesis and therapeutic
intervention. Nature Reviews Drug Discovery, 11(3):234–250, 3 2012.
[65] N Wegner, K Lundberg, A Kinloch, B Fisher, V Malmström, M Feldmann, and
PJ Venables. Autoimmunity to speciﬁc citrullinated proteins gives the ﬁrst clues to
the etiology of rheumatoid arthritis. Technical report, 2010.
65
==PAGE:76==
17 August 2020
[66] G Valesini, MC Gerardi, C Iannuccelli, VA Pacucci, M Pendolino, and Y Shoenfeld.
Citrullination and autoimmunity. Autoimmunity Reviews, 14(6):490–497, 2015.
[67] LA Trouw, TWJ Huizinga, and REM Toes. Autoimmunity in rheumatoid arthri-
tis: Diﬀerent antigens - Common principles.
Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases,
72(SUPPL. 2):ii132–ii136, 4 2013.
[68] SC Law, S Street, CHA Yu, C Capini, S Ramnoruth, HJ Nel, E van Gorp, C Hyde,
K Lau, H Pahau, AW Purcell, and R Thomas. T-cell autoreactivity to citrullinated
autoantigenic peptides in rheumatoid arthritis patients carrying HLA-DRB1 shared
epitope alleles. Arthritis Research and Therapy, 14(3):1–12, 5 2012.
[69] MC Lu, NS Lai, HC Yu, HB Huang, SC Hsieh, and CL Yu. Anti-citrullinated protein
antibodies bind surface-expressed citrullinated Grp78 on monocyte/macrophages and
stimulate tumor necrosis factor α production. Arthritis & Rheumatism, 62(5):1213–
1223, 5 2010.
[70] C Masson-Bessière, M Sebbag, E Girbal-Neuhauser, L Nogueira, C Vincent, T Sen-
shu, and G Serre. The Major Synovial Targets of the Rheumatoid Arthritis-Speciﬁc
Antiﬁlaggrin Autoantibodies Are Deiminated Forms of the α- and β-Chains of Fibrin.
The Journal of Immunology, 166(6):4177–4184, 3 2001.
[71] O Sanchez-Pernaute, M Filkova, A Gabucio, M Klein, H Maciejewska-Rodrigues,
C Ospelt, F Brentano, BA Michel, RE Gay, G Herrero-Beaumont, S Gay, M Neid-
hart, A Juengel, and OS Pernaute. Citrullination enhances the pro-inﬂammatory re-
sponse to ﬁbrin in rheumatoid arthritis synovial ﬁbroblasts. Annals of the Rheumatic
Diseases, 72(8):1400–1406, 8.
[72] L Damjanovska, MM Thabet, and EWN Levarth. Diagnostic value of anti-MCV
antibodies in diﬀerentiating early inﬂammatory arthritis. Annals of the Rheumatic
Diseases, 69:730–732, 2010.
[73] E Wagner, M Skoumal, P M Bayer, and K Klaushofer. Antibody against mutated cit-
rullinated vimentin: a new sensitive marker in the diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis.
Rheumatol Int, 29:1315–1321, 2009.
[74] X Liu, R Jia, J Zhao, and Z Li. The role of anti-mutated citrullinated vimentin
antibodies in the diagnosis of early rheumatoid arthritis. Journal of Rheumatology,
36(6):1136–1142, 6 2009.
[75] N Despres, G Boire, FJ Lopez-Longo, and HA Menard. The Sa system: A novel
antigen-antibody system speciﬁc for rheumatoid arthritis. Journal of Rheumatology,
21(6):1027–1033, 1994.
66
==PAGE:77==
17 August 2020
[76] H Bang, K Egerer, A Gauliard, K Lüthke, PE Rudolph, G Fredenhagen, W Berg,
E Feist, and G Burmester. Mutation and citrullination modiﬁes vimentin to a novel
autoantigen for rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis & Rheumatism, 56(8):2503–2511, 8
2007.
[77] K van Steendam, K Tilleman, and D Deforce. The relevance of citrullinated vimentin
in the production of antibodies against citrullinated proteins and the pathogenesis
of rheumatoid arthritis. Rheumatology, 50(5):830–837, 5 2011.
[78] H Burkhardt, B Sehnert, R Bockermann, Å Engström, JR Kalden, and R Holmdahl.
Humoral immune response to citrullinated collagen type II determinants in early
rheumatoid arthritis. European Journal of Immunology, 35(5):1643–1652, 5 2005.
[79] K Lundberg, S Nijenhuis, ER Vossenaar, K Palmblad, WJ van Venrooij, L Klareskog,
AJ Zendman, and HE Harris. Citrullinated proteins have increased immunogenicity
and arthritogenicity and their presence in arthritic joints correlates with disease
severity. Arthritis research & therapy, 7(3):R458, 2005.
[80] B Terrier, N Degand, P Guilpain, A Servettaz, L Guillevin, and L Mouthon. Alpha-
enolase: A target of antibodies in infectious and autoimmune diseases. Autoimmunity
Reviews, 6(3):176–182, 1 2007.
[81] V Saulot, O Vittecoq, R Charlionet, P Fardellone, C Lange, L Marvin, N Machour,
X Le Loët, D Gilbert, and F Tron. Presence of autoantibodies to the glycolytic
enzyme α-enolase in sera from patients with early rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis &
Rheumatism, 46(5):1196–1201, 5 2002.
[82] A Kinloch, V Tatzer, R Wait, D Peston, K Lundberg, P Donatien, D Moyes, PC Tay-
lor, and PJ Venables. Identiﬁcation of citrullinated alpha-enolase as a candidate
autoantigen in rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis research & therapy, 7(6):1–9, 10 2005.
[83] A Hanyecz, K Olasz, O Tarjanyi, P Nemeth, K Mikecz, T T Glant, and F Boldizsar.
Proteoglycan Aggrecan Conducting T Cell Activation and Apoptosis in a Murine
Model of Rheumatoid Arthritis. Preprint article, 2014.
[84] KT Pfaﬀenbach, AS Lee, L Glimcher, and C Hetz. The critical role of GRP78 in
physiologic and pathologic stress This review comes from a themed issue on Cell
regulation Edited. Current Opinion in Cell Biology, 23:150–156, 2010.
[85] S Bläß, A Union, J Raymackers, F Schumann, Ut Ungethüm, S Müller-Steinbach,
FD Keyser, JM Engel, and GR Burmester. The stress protein BiP is overexpressed
and is a major B and T cell target in rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis & Rheumatism,
44(4):761–771, 4 2001.
67
==PAGE:78==
17 August 2020
[86] PK Gregersen, J Silver, and RJ Winchester.
The shared epitope hypothesis. an
approach to understanding the molecular genetics of susceptibility to rheumatoid
arthritis. Arthritis & Rheumatism, 30(11):1205–1213, 11 1987.
[87] SW. Scally, J Petersen, SC Law, NL. Dudek, HJ. Nel, KL Loh, LC. Wijeyewickrema,
SBG. Eckle, JV Heemst, RN. Pike, J McCluskey, RE. Toes, Nicole L. La G, AW.
Purcell, HH. Reid, R Thomas, and J Rossjohn. A molecular basis for the associ-
ation of the HLA-DRB1 locus, citrullination, and rheumatoid arthritis. Journal of
Experimental Medicine, 210(12):2569–2582, 11 2013.
[88] C Rims, H Uchtenhagen, MJ Kaplan, C Carmona-Rivera, P Carlucci, K Mikecz,
A Markovics, J Carlin, JH Buckner, and EA James. Citrullinated Aggrecan Epitopes
as Targets of Autoreactive CD4+ T Cells in Patients With Rheumatoid Arthritis.
Arthritis and Rheumatology, 71(4):518–528, 4 2019.
[89] A Maldonado, P Mueller, YMand Thomas, P Bojczuk, C O’Connors, and PD Kat-
sikis. Decreased eﬀector memory CD45RA+ CD62L-CD8+ T cells and increased
central memory CD45RA-CD62L+ CD8+ T cells in peripheral blood of rheumatoid
arthritis patients. Arthritis research & therapy, 5(2), 2003.
[90] BA Cho, J Sim, J Park, H Kim, WH Yoo, SH Lee, DS Lee, J Kang, YI Hwang,
W Lee, I Kang, E Bong Lee, and HR Kim. Characterization of Eﬀector Memory
CD8 + T Cells in the Synovial Fluid of Rheumatoid Arthritis. Journal of Clinical
Immunology, 32(4):709–720, 8.
[91] ECY Wang, TM Lawson, K Vedhara, PAH Moss, PJ Lehner, and LK Borysiewicz.
CD8high+ (CD57+) T cells in patients with rheumatoid arthritis.
Arthritis &
Rheumatism, 40(2):237–248, 2 1997.
[92] MD Bodman-Smith, VM Corrigall, DM Kemeny, and GS Panayi. BiP, a putative
autoantigen in rheumatoid arthritis, stimulates IL-10-producing CD8-positive T cells
from normal individuals. Rheumatology, 42:637–644, 2023.
[93] E Davila, YM Kang, YW Park, H Sawai, XW He, S Pryshchep, JJ. Goronzy, and CM.
Weyand. Cell-Based Immunotherapy with Suppressor CD8 + T Cells in Rheumatoid
Arthritis . The Journal of Immunology, 174(11):7292–7301, 6 2005.
[94] H Carvalheiro, C Duarte, S Silva-Cardoso, JAP da Silva, and MM Souto-Carneiro.
CD8+ T Cell Proﬁles in Patients With Rheumatoid Arthritis and Their Relationship
to Disease Activity. Arthritis & Rheumatology, 67(2):363–371, 2 2015.
[95] S Raychaudhuri, C Sandor, EA Stahl, J Freudenberg, HS Lee, X Jia, L Alfredsson,
L Padyukov, L Klareskog, J Worthington, KA Siminovitch, SC Bae, RM Plenge,
68
==PAGE:79==
17 August 2020
PK Gregersen, and P De Bakker. Five amino acids in three HLA proteins explain
most of the association between MHC and seropositive rheumatoid arthritis. Nature
Genetics, 44(3):291–296, 3 2012.
[96] I Cammarata, C Martire, A Citro, D Raimondo, D Fruci, O Melaiu, V D’oria,
C Carone, G Peruzzi, C Cerboni, A Santoni, J Sidney, A Sette, M Paroli, R Cac-
cavale, E Milanetti, M Riminucci, E Timperi, S Piconese, A Manzo, C Montecucco,
R Scrivo, G Valesini, E Cariani, and V Barnaba. Counter-regulation of regulatory
T cells by autoreactive CD8 + T cells in rheumatoid arthritis. Journal of Autoim-
munity, 99:81–97, 5 2019.
[97] NetMHC 4.0 Output format. http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/NetMHC/output.php.
[98] G Dolton, K Tungatt, A Lloyd, V Bianchi, SM Theaker, A Trimby, CJ Holland,
M Donia, AJ Godkin, DK Cole, P Thor Straten, M Peakman, IM Svane, and
AK Sewell. More tricks with tetramers: A practical guide to staining T cells with
peptide-MHC multimers. 146(1):11–22, 9 2015.
[99] L Wooldridge, A Lissina, DK Cole, HA van den Berg, DA Price, and AK Sewell.
Tricks with tetramers: how to get the most from multimeric peptide-MHC.
Im-
munology, 126(2):147–164, 2 2009.
[100] EW Newell, LO Klein, W Yu, and MM Davis. Simultaneous detection of many T-cell
speciﬁcities using combinatorial tetramer staining. Nature methods, pages 497–499,
2009.
[101] EW Newell, N Sigal, N Nair, BA Kidd, HB Greenberg, and MM Davis. Combinatorial
tetramer staining and mass cytometry analysis facilitate T-cell epitope mapping and
characterization. Nature Biotechnology, 31(7):623–629, 7 2013.
[102] M Donia, N Junker, E Ellebaek, MH Andersen, PT Straten, and IM Svane. Char-
acterization and Comparison of ‘Standard’ and ‘Young’ Tumour-Inﬁltrating Lym-
phocytes for Adoptive Cell Therapy at a Danish Translational Research Institution.
Scandinavian Journal of Immunology, 75(2):157–167, 2 2012.
[103] SR Hadrup, M Toebes, B Rodenko, AH Bakker, DA Egan, H Ovaa, and TNM Schu-
macher. High-throughput t-cell epitope discovery through mhc peptide exchange.
Methods in Molecular Biology, 524:383–405, 2009.
[104] MD Robinson, DJ Mccarthy, and GK Smyth. edgeR: a Bioconductor package for
diﬀerential expression analysis of digital gene expression data. Bioinformatics appli-
cations note, 26(1):139–140, 2010.
69
==PAGE:80==
17 August 2020
[105] MD. Robinson and A Oshlack. A scaling normalization method for diﬀerential ex-
pression analysis of RNA-seq data. Genome Biology, 11(3):1–9, 3 2010.
[106] MJW Sim, SA Malaker, A Khan, JM Stowell, J Shabanowitz, ME. Peterson, S Ra-
jagopalan, DF Hunt, DM Altmann, EO Long, and RJ Boyton. Canonical and cross-
reactive binding of NK cell inhibitory receptors to HLA-C allotypes is dictated by
peptides bound to HLA-C. Frontiers in Immunology, 8(MAR), 3 2017.
[107] O Laﬀn, O Laﬀn, R Garcia-vicuﬂa, A Humbria, AA Postigo, AL Corbi, M De L,
and F Sanchez-madrid. Upregulated Expression and Function of VLA-4 Fibronectin
Receptors on Human Activated T Cells in Rheumatoid Arthritis. Preprint article.
[108] S Prahalad. Negative association between the chemokine receptor CCR5-D32 poly-
morphism and rheumatoid arthritis: a meta-analysis. Genes and Immunity, 7:264–
268, 2006.
[109] F Pablo Canale, M Cecilia Ramello, and C Lucía Montes. CD39 as a marker of
pathogenic CD8+ T cells in cancer and other chronic inﬂammatory diseases. Tech-
nical Report 4, 2018.
[110] K Shimizu, D Sugiura, I Okazaki, C Cheng, S Ozaki, and Taku O Correspondence.
PD-1 Imposes Qualitative Control of Cellular Transcriptomes in Response to T Cell
Activation. Molecular Cell, 77:937–950, 2020.
[111] LR Coulthard, J Geiler, R J Mathews, L D Church, L J Dickie, D L Cooper, C Wong,
S Savic, D Bryer, M H Buch, P Emery, A W Morgan, and M F Mcdermott. Diﬀer-
ential eﬀects of inﬂiximab on absolute circulating blood leucocyte counts of innate
immune cells in early and late rheumatoid arthritis patients. Clinical and Experi-
mental Immunology, 170(1):36–46, 2012.
[112] A Petrelli and F Van Wijk. CD8+ T cells in human autoimmune arthritis: The
unusual suspects. Nature Reviews Rheumatology, 12(7):421–428, 7 2016.
[113] DE Trentham, RA Dynesius-Trentham, EJ Orav, D Combitchi, C Lorenzo,
KL Sewell, DA Haﬂer, and HL Weiner.
Eﬀects of Oral Administration of Type
II Collagen on Rheumatoid Arthritis. Technical Report 5129, 1993.
[114] WU Kim, ML Cho, YO Jung, SY Min, SW Park, DJ Min, JH Yoon, and HY Kim.
Type II Collagen Autoimmunity in Rheumatoid Arthritis. American Journal of the
Medical Sciences, 327(4):202–211, 2004.
[115] B Liang, CR Ge, E Lönnblom, X Lin, H Feng, L Xiao, J Bai, B Ayoglu, P Nilsson,
KS Nandakumar, M Zhao, and R Holmdahl. The autoantibody response to cyclic
70
==PAGE:81==
17 August 2020
citrullinated collagen type II peptides in rheumatoid arthritis. Rheumatology (United
Kingdom), 58(9):1623–1633, 9 2019.
[116] Amalie Kai Bentzen and Reker Hadrup. T-cell-receptor cross-recognition and strate-
gies to select safe T-cell receptors for clinical translation. Immuno-oncology Technol-
ogy, 2:1–10, 6 2019.
[117] SQ Zhang, KY Ma, AA Schonnesen, ML Zhang, CF He, E Sun, CM Williams,
WP Jia, and N Jiang. High-throughput determination of the antigen speciﬁcities of
T cell receptors in single cells. Nature Biotechnology, 36(12):1156–1159, 12 2018.
[118] NW Pedersen, NP Kristensen, AK Bentzen, MRV Essen, FT Selleberg, and
SR Hadrup. Large-scale identiﬁcation and transcriptional characterisation of auto-
reactive CD8 T cells in multiple sclerosis.
European Journal of Immunology,
49(Suppl. 3 SI):388–389, 2019.
[119] F Sallusto, J Geginat, and A Lanzavecchia.
Central Memory and Eﬀector Mem-
ory T Cell Subsets : Function, Generation, and Maintenance . Annual Review of
Immunology, 22(1):745–763, 4 2004.
[120] K Verma, J Ogonek, PR Varanasi, S Luther, I Bünting, K Thomay, YL Behrens,
E Mischak-Weissinger, and L Hambach. Human CD8+ CD57- TEMRA cells: Too
young to be called "old". PLoS ONE, 12(5), 5 2017.
[121] SM Kaech and WG Cui. Transcriptional control of eﬀector and memory CD8 + T
cell diﬀerentiation. Nature Publishing Group, 12:749, 2012.
[122] D Focosi, M Bestagno, O Burrone, and M Petrini. CD57 sup+/sup- T lymphocytes
and functional immune deﬁciency. Journal of Leukocyte Biology, 87(1):107–116, 1
2010.
71
==PAGE:82==
17 August 2020
9
Appendices
9.1
A
Patient list
Patient ID
Age
ACPA
DAS28
Gender
Treatment
RA1
46
+
3,77
F
Enbrel
RA2
55
+
1,54
F
Enbrel
RA3
33
+
1,6
F
Humira; Medrol
RA5
61
-
1,95
F
Enbrel; MTX 10 mg
RA6
43
+
2,78
F
MTX ; Salazopyrine
RA10
75
+
4,77
M
MTX
RA11
61
-
3,31
F
Roactemra; MTX
RA12
45
+
1,75
M
MTX
RA13
70
+
2,21
F
Humira; MTX
RA14
35
+
2,38
F
Parenteral corticosteroids; MTX
RA15
38
+
4,13
F
Mabthera; MTX; Medrol
RA16
72
-
4,06
M
MTX
RA17
40
+
1,51
F
Roactemra; MTX
RA18
62
+
3,13
M
MTX
RA19
81
+
4,99
F
MTX; Medrol
RA20
44
+
1,21
F
Orencia; MTX
RA22
84
+
2,75
F
Enbrel; MTX
RA23
55
+
1,31
F
MTX
RA24
57
-
4,82
F
Untreated
RA25
41
-
3,34
F
Salazopyrine
RA26
66
+
2,19
M
Enbrel; MTX
RA27
56
-
1,65
F
MTX
RA28
57
-
2,4
M
MTX
RA29
70
+
1,69
F
MTX
RA30
51
+
2,35
M
Salazopyrine
RA31
78
-
4,24
M
Enbrel
RA32
29
-
3,71
M
MTX
RA33
68
+
3,36
M
Parenteral corticosteroids; MTX
RA34
69
-
2,32
F
MTX
RA35
55
-
5,41
F
Untreated
RA36
34
+
2,35
F
Humira; MTX
RA37
57
+
3,54
F
Mabthera IV; MTX; Medrol
RA38
66
+
1,2
M
Humira; MTX; Medrol
RA39
45
-
1,52
F
Humira; MTX
RA40
49
-
7,27
F
MTX
RA42
29
-
5,32
F
Remicade; MTX; Arava; Prednisolone
RA43
63
+
3,7
M
MTX
RA44
57
-
5,29
F
MTX
RA45
35
+
3,48
F
MTX
RA46
20
+
7,28
F
Humira; MTX
RA47
40
+
2,43
F
MTX
RA48
61
+
2,02
F
Humra; MTX
RA49
28
-
3,76
F
MTX
RA50
46
-
1,31
F
MTX
RA51
67
+
2,96
F
Mabthera; MTX; Prednisolone
Table 6: The patient list. All the patients included in this project is listed in this list with their gender, age,
DAS28 score, the presence of ACPA and the treatments they received.
72
==PAGE:83==
17 August 2020
9.2
B
Full HLA type of each patient
Patient ID
HLA-A
HLA-B
HLA-C
RA1
02:01:01G
56:01:01G
73:01
01:02:01G
15:05:01G
RA2
24:02:01G
80:01:01G
08:01:01G
45:01:01G
06:02:01G
07:01:01G
RA3
11:01:01G
30:02:01G
44:02:01G
52:01:01G
05:01:01G
12:02:01G
RA5
02:01:01G
25:01:01G
44:02:01G
05:01:01G
RA6
01:01:01G
02:01:01G
44:02:01G
44:05:01
02:02:02G
05:01:01G
RA10
01:01:01G
02:01:01G
15:18:01G
44:03:01G
07:04:01G
16:01:01G
RA11
68:01:02G
07:02:01G
44:02:01G
07:02:01G
07:04:01G
RA12
02:01:01G
68:01:01G
08:01:01G
15:03:01G
02:10:01G
07:01:01G
RA13
11:01:01G
24:02:01G
44:02:01G
44:03:01G
05:01:01G
16:01:01G
RA14
02:01:01G
03:01:01G
07:02:01G
51:01:01G
07:02:01G
14:02:01G
RA15
01:01:01G
31:01:02G
08:01:01G
44:02:01G
05:01:01G
07:01:01G
RA16
03:01:01G
34:02:01
08:01:01G
49:01:01G
07:01:01G
RA17
02:01:01G
18:01:01G
40:01:01G
03:04:01G
07:01:01G
RA18
02:05:01G
34:02:01
08:01:01G
49:01:01G
07:01:01G
RA19
02:01:01G
32:01:01G
18:01:01G
01:02:01G
07:01:01G
RA20
02:01:01G
15:01:01G
44:02:01G
03:03:01G
05:01:01G
RA22
02:01:01G
32:01:01G
27:05:02G
40:01:01G
01:02:01G
03:04:01G
RA23
03:01:01G
68:01:02G
18:03
47:01:01G
06:02:01G
07:01:01G
RA24
01:01:01G
24:02:01G
39:01:01G
44:03:01G
07:02:01G
16:01:01G
RA25
02:01:01G
11:01:01G
35:01:01G
51:01:01G
04:01:01G
15:02:01G
RA26
01:01:01G
26:01:01G
08:01:01G
07:01:01G
RA27
01:01:01G
02:01:01G
15:01:01G
57:01:01G
03:03:01G
06:02:01G
RA28
02:01:01G
07:02:01G
18:01:01G
07:01:01G
07:02:01G
RA29
01:01:01G
03:01:01G
08:01:01G
15:01:01G
05:01:01G
07:01:01G
RA30
24:02:01G
29:02:01G
15:01:01G
35:02:01G
03:03:01G
04:01:01G
RA31
02:01:01G
32:01:01G
37:01:01G
44:02:01G
05:01:01G
RA32
01:01:01G
03:01:01G
51:01:01G
57:01:01G
02:02:02G
06:02:01G
RA33
01:01:01G
24:02:01G
07:02:01G
08:01:01G
07:01:01G
07:02:01G
RA34
02:01:01G
68:01:01G
07:02:01G
50:01:01G
06:02:01G
07:02:01G
RA35
02:01:01G
44:02:01G
05:01:01G
07:04:01G
RA36
33:01:01G
34:02:01
08:01:01G
14:02:01G
07:01:01G
08:02:01G
RA37
01:01:01G
02:01:01G
08:01:01G
44:02:01G
05:01:01G
07:01:01G
RA38
02:01:01G
29:02:01G
44:03:01G
45:01:01G
02:02:02G
06:02:01G
RA39
24:02:01G
69:01:01G
08:01:01G
51:01:01G
07:01:01G
15:02:01G
RA40
02:01:01G
29:02:01G
35:03:01G
44:02:01G
04:01:01G
05:01:01G
RA42
02:01:01G
24:02:01G
18:01:01G
44:05:01
02:02:02G
07:01:01G
RA43
03:01:01G
68:01:02G
07:02:01G
40:01:01G
03:04:01G
07:02:01G
RA44
24:02:01G
26:01:01G
38:01:01
57:01:01G
06:02:01G
12:03:01G
RA45
02:01:01G
11:01:01G
07:02:01G
15:01:01G
03:04:01G
07:02:01G
RA46
24:02:01G
29:02:01G
35:08:01
44:03:01G
04:01:01G
16:01:01G
RA47
01:01:01G
02:01:01G
37:01:01G
67:01:01
06:02:01G
07:02:01G
RA48
24:02:01G
33:03:01G
07:05:01G
44:03:02G
07:01:01G
07:02:01G
RA49
11:01:01G
30:02:01G
07:05:01G
18:01:01G
04:01:01G
05:01:01G
RA50
02:01:01G
03:01:01G
07:02:01G
35:01:01G
04:01:01G
07:02:01G
RA51
02:01:01G
02:05:01G
15:01:01G
49:01:01G
03:04:01G
07:01:01G
Table 7: Full HLA type of each patient.
73
==PAGE:84==
17 August 2020
9.3
C
Full HLA type of each healthy donor
BC ID
HLA-A
HLA-B
HLA-C
BC36
02:05:01G
03:01:01G
40:01:01G
49:01:01G
03:04:01G
07:01:01G
BC43
01:01:01G
11:01:01G
08:01:01G
40:01
03:04:01G
07:01:01G
BC44
03:01:01G
23:01:01G
44:02:01G
44:03:01G
04:01:01G
05:01:01G
BC61
01:01:01G
02:01:01G
39:01:01G
15:01:01G
03:03:01G
07:02:01G
BC97
02:01:01G
07:02:01G
44:03:01G
12:03:01G
07:02:01G
BC105
01:01:01G
07:02:01G
08:01:01G
07:01:01G
07:02:01G
BC106
03:01:01G
25:01:01G
18:01:01G
07:01:01G
12:03:01G
BC113
68:01:02G
07:02:01G
51:01:01G
05:01:01G
14:02:01G
BC114
01:01:01G
25:01:01G
08:01:01G
18:01:01G
07:01:01G
12:03:01G
BC117
01:01:01G
29:02:01G
08:01:01G
44:03:01G
07:01:01G
16:01:01G
BC118
24:02:01G
30:01:01G
37:01:01G
51:01:01G
06:02:01G
15:02:01G
BC124
02:01:01G
27:05:02G
51:01:01G
02:02:02G
14:02:01G
BC128
02:01:01G
31:01:02G
37:01:01G
40:01:01G
03:04:01G
06:02:01G
BC130
02:01:01G
27:05:02G
40:02:01G
02:02:02G
BC303
02:01:01G
24:02:01G
07:02:01G
35:03:01G
07:02:01G
12:03:01G
BC309
02:01:01G
15:01:01G
51:05
03:03:01G
04:01:01G
BC314
03:01:01G
07:02:01G
15:01:01G
03:04:01G
07:02:01G
BC317
01:01:01G
32:01:01G
07:02:01G
14:01:01G
07:02:01G
08:02:01G
BC318
02:05:01G
11:01:01G
41:02:01G
49:01:01G
07:01:01G
17:01:01G
BC320
01:01:01G
68:01:02G
08:01:01G
40:01:01G
03:04:01G
07:01:01G
BC322
02:01:01G
11:01:01G
44:02:01G
44:03:01G
05:01:01G
16:02:01G
BC323
01:01:01G
24:02:01G
07:02:01G
08:01:01G
06:02:01G
07:01:01G
BC326
03:01:01G
24:02:01G
35:01:01G
40:01:01G
03:04:01G
04:01:01G
BC328
03:01:01G
24:02:01G
07:02:01G
08:01:01G
07:01:01G
07:02:01G
BC335
02:01:01G
35:01:01G
40:01:01G
03:04:01G
04:01:01G
BC336
01:01:01G
24:02:01G
08:01:01G
44:03:01G
07:01:01G
16:01:01G
BC338
02:01:01G
15:01:01G
40:01:01G
03:04:01G
BC340
01:01:01G
68:01:02G
08:01:01G
44:02:01G
05:01:01G
07:01:01G
Table 8: Full HLA type of selected buﬀy coats (BCs) from healthy controls.
74
==PAGE:85==
17 August 2020
9.4
D
Predicted RA relevant peptides
#
Protein
HLA
Pos.
Peptide sequence
#
Protein
HLA
Pos.
Peptide sequence
1
Aggrecan
A0101
120
QSLRSNDSGVY
67
Enolase
A0101
48
LCitDNDKTRY
2
Aggrecan
A0101
120
QSLCitSNDSGVY
68
Enolase
A0101
48
LRDNDKTCitY
3
Aggrecan
A0101
202
WLADQTVCitY
69
Enolase
A0101
48
LCitDNDKTCitY
4
Aggrecan
A0101
202
WLADQTVRY
70
Fibrinogen
A0101
116
FSSANNCitDNTY
5
Aggrecan
A0101
203
LADQTVCitY
71
Fibrinogen
A0101
116
FSSANNRDNTY
6
Aggrecan
A0101
203
LADQTVRY
72
Fibrinogen
A0101
117
SSANNCitDNTY
7
Aggrecan
A0101
234
IRDTNETYDVY
73
Fibrinogen
A0101
117
SSANNRDNTY
8
Aggrecan
A0101
234
ICitDTNETYDVY
74
Fibrinogen
A0101
842
WVSFCitGADY
9
Aggrecan
A0101
235
RDTNETYDVY
75
Fibrinogen
A0101
842
WVSFRGADY
10
Aggrecan
A0101
235
CitDTNETYDVY
76
Fibrinogen
A0101
105
TTNIMEILCit
11
Aggrecan
A0101
300
WLADCitSVRY
77
Fibrinogen
A0101
105
TTNIMEILR
12
Aggrecan
A0101
300
WLADRSVCitY
78
Fibrinogen
A0101
187
LACitEVDLKDY
13
Aggrecan
A0101
300
WLADCitSVCitY
79
Fibrinogen
A0101
187
LAREVDLKDY
14
Aggrecan
A0101
300
WLADRSVRY
80
Fibrinogen
A0101
268
ITCitGGSTSY
15
Aggrecan
A0101
301
LADRSVRY
81
Fibrinogen
A0101
268
ITRGGSTSY
16
Aggrecan
A0101
301
LADRSVCitY
82
Fibrinogen
A0101
419
VSPGTCitCitEY
17
Aggrecan
A0101
301
LADCitSVRY
83
Fibrinogen
A0101
419
VSPGTCitREY
18
Aggrecan
A0101
301
LADCitSVCitY
84
Fibrinogen
A0101
419
VSPGTRCitEY
19
Aggrecan
A0101
339
PSSRYDAICY
85
Fibrinogen
A0101
419
VSPGTRREY
20
Aggrecan
A0101
339
PSSCitYDAICY
86
Fibrinogen
A0101
569
FPSCitGKSSSY
21
Aggrecan
A0101
340
SSRYDAICY
87
Fibrinogen
A0101
569
FPSRGKSSSY
22
Aggrecan
A0101
340
SSCitYDAICY
88
Fibrinogen
A0101
582
FTSSTSYNCit
23
Aggrecan
A0101
560
RPSTETYDVY
89
Fibrinogen
A0101
582
FTSSTSYNR
24
Aggrecan
A0101
560
CitPSTETYDVY
90
Fibrinogen
A0101
716
LTQCitGSVLCit
25
Aggrecan
A0101
623
GWLADGSLCitY
91
Fibrinogen
A0101
716
LTQCitGSVLR
26
Aggrecan
A0101
623
GWLADGSLRY
92
Fibrinogen
A0101
716
LTQRGSVLCit
27
Aggrecan
A0101
624
WLADGSLCitY
93
Fibrinogen
A0101
716
LTQRGSVLR
28
Aggrecan
A0101
624
WLADGSLRY
94
Grp78
A0101
260
CitVMEHFIKLY
29
Aggrecan
A0101
625
LADGSLCitY
95
Grp78
A0101
260
RVMEHFIKLY
30
Aggrecan
A0101
625
LADGSLRY
96
Grp78
A0101
557
RIDTCitNELESY
31
Aggrecan
A0101
2387
CTDATTYKR
97
Grp78
A0101
557
CitIDTRNELESY
32
Aggrecan
A0101
163
YTLDFDRAQCit
98
Grp78
A0101
557
CitIDTCitNELESY
33
Aggrecan
A0101
163
YTLDFDCitAQR
99
Grp78
A0101
557
RIDTRNELESY
34
Aggrecan
A0101
163
YTLDFDCitAQCit
100
Grp78
A0101
559
DTCitNELESYAY
35
Aggrecan
A0101
163
YTLDFDRAQR
101
Grp78
A0101
559
DTRNELESYAY
36
Aggrecan
A0101
278
CitLATTGHVY
102
Grp78
A0101
317
FSETLTCitAK
37
Aggrecan
A0101
278
RLATTGHVY
103
Grp78
A0101
317
FSETLTRAK
38
Aggrecan
A0101
527
WLRDQTVCitY
104
Grp78
A0101
500
FEIDVNGILCit
39
Aggrecan
A0101
527
WLCitDQTVRY
105
Grp78
A0101
500
FEIDVNGILR
40
Aggrecan
A0101
527
WLCitDQTVCitY
106
Grp78
A0101
558
IDTCitNELESY
41
Aggrecan
A0101
527
WLRDQTVRY
107
Grp78
A0101
558
IDTRNELESY
42
Aggrecan
A0101
549
DSSPGVCitTY
108
Grp78
A0101
559
DTCitNELESY
43
Aggrecan
A0101
549
DSSPGVRTY
109
Grp78
A0101
560
TCitNELESYAY
44
Aggrecan
A0101
613
WSCitGLDKCY
110
Grp78
A0101
560
TRNELESYAY
45
Aggrecan
A0101
613
WSRGLDKCY
111
Vimentin
A0101
0
MSTCitSVSSSSY
46
Aggrecan
A0101
2225
WVDAERCitCCit
112
Vimentin
A0101
0
MSTRSVSSSSY
47
Aggrecan
A0101
2225
WVDAECitRCCit
113
Vimentin
A0101
1
STCitSVSSSSY
48
Aggrecan
A0101
2225
WVDAECitCitCR
114
Vimentin
A0101
1
STRSVSSSSY
49
Aggrecan
A0101
2225
WVDAERRCCit
115
Vimentin
A0101
108
ELNDCitFANY
50
Aggrecan
A0101
2225
WVDAECitRCR
116
Vimentin
A0101
108
ELNDRFANY
51
Aggrecan
A0101
2225
WVDAERCitCR
117
Vimentin
A0101
20
ASCitPSSSRSY
52
Aggrecan
A0101
2225
WVDAECitCitCCit
118
Vimentin
A0101
20
ASRPSSSCitSY
53
Aggrecan
A0101
2225
WVDAERRCR
119
Vimentin
A0101
20
ASCitPSSSCitSY
54
Aggrecan
A0101
2385
ITCTDATTYKCit
120
Vimentin
A0101
20
ASRPSSSRSY
55
Aggrecan
A0101
2385
ITCTDATTYKR
121
Vimentin
A0101
29
YVTTSTCitTY
56
Aggrecan
A0101
2386
TCTDATTYKCit
122
Vimentin
A0101
29
YVTTSTRTY
57
Aggrecan
A0101
2386
TCTDATTYKR
123
Vimentin
A0101
43
LCitPSTSRSLY
58
Aggrecan
A0101
2387
CTDATTYKRCit
124
Vimentin
A0101
43
LRPSTSCitSLY
59
Aggrecan
A0101
2387
CTDATTYKCitR
125
Vimentin
A0101
43
LCitPSTSCitSLY
60
Aggrecan
A0101
2387
CTDATTYKCitCit
126
Vimentin
A0101
43
LRPSTSRSLY
61
Aggrecan
A0101
2387
CTDATTYKRR
127
Vimentin
A0101
259
VSKPDLTAALCit
62
Enolase
A0101
47
ELCitDNDKTRY
128
Vimentin
A0101
259
VSKPDLTAALR
63
Enolase
A0101
47
ELRDNDKTCitY
129
Vimentin
A0101
374
EMACitHLREY
64
Enolase
A0101
47
ELCitDNDKTCitY
130
Vimentin
A0101
374
EMARHLCitEY
65
Enolase
A0101
47
ELRDNDKTRY
131
Vimentin
A0101
374
EMACitHLCitEY
66
Enolase
A0101
48
LRDNDKTRY
132
Vimentin
A0101
374
EMARHLREY
Table 9: Predicted RA relevant peptides-I
75
==PAGE:86==
17 August 2020
#
Protein
HLA
Pos.
Peptide sequence
#
Protein
HLA
Pos.
Peptide sequence
133
Aggrecan
A0201
3
LLWVFVTLRV
202
Aggrecan
A2402
2211
YQGHCYCitHF
134
Aggrecan
A0201
3
LLWVFVTLCitV
203
Aggrecan
A2402
2215
CYRHFPDRETW
135
Aggrecan
A0201
202
WLADQTVRYPI
204
Aggrecan
A2402
2215
CYRHFPDCitETW
136
Aggrecan
A0201
202
WLADQTVCitYPI
205
Aggrecan
A2402
2215
CYCitHFPDRETW
137
Aggrecan
A0201
320
NLLGVRTVYV
206
Aggrecan
A2402
2215
CYCitHFPDCitETW
138
Aggrecan
A0201
320
NLLGVCitTVYV
207
Aggrecan
A2402
480
HYRPGPTCitYSL
139
Aggrecan
A0201
321
LLGVCitTVYV
208
Aggrecan
A2402
480
HYCitPGPTRYSL
140
Aggrecan
A0201
624
WLADGSLRYPI
209
Aggrecan
A2402
480
HYCitPGPTCitYSL
141
Aggrecan
A0201
624
WLADGSLCitYPI
210
Aggrecan
A2402
480
HYRPGPTRYSL
142
Aggrecan
A0201
1819
SLVDRTLVESV
211
Aggrecan
A2402
807
VCitPFPSVELF
143
Aggrecan
A0201
1819
SLVDCitTLVESV
212
Aggrecan
A2402
807
VRPFPSVELF
144
Aggrecan
A0201
7
FVTLCitVITAAV
213
Aggrecan
A2402
2209
NKYQGHCYCitHF
145
Aggrecan
A0201
7
FVTLRVITAAV
214
Aggrecan
A2402
2209
NKYQGHCYRHF
146
Aggrecan
A0201
9
TLCitVITAAV
215
Aggrecan
A2402
2259
QWIGLNDCitTI
147
Aggrecan
A0201
9
TLRVITAAV
216
Aggrecan
A2402
2259
QWIGLNDRTI
148
Aggrecan
A0201
300
WLADCitSVRYPI
217
Aggrecan
A2402
2284
NWCitPNQPDNF
149
Aggrecan
A0201
300
WLADRSVCitYPI
218
Aggrecan
A2402
2284
NWRPNQPDNF
150
Aggrecan
A0201
300
WLADCitSVCitYPI
219
Collagen
A2402
45
VWKPEPCCitI
151
Aggrecan
A0201
300
WLADRSVRYPI
220
Collagen
A2402
45
VWKPEPCRI
152
Aggrecan
A0201
527
WLRDQTVCitYPI
221
Fibrinogen
A2402
586
TSYNCitGDSTF
153
Aggrecan
A0201
527
WLCitDQTVRYPI
222
Fibrinogen
A2402
586
TSYNRGDSTF
154
Aggrecan
A0201
527
WLCitDQTVCitYPI
223
Fibrinogen
A2402
687
TWQDYKCitGF
155
Aggrecan
A0201
527
WLRDQTVRYPI
224
Fibrinogen
A2402
687
TWQDYKRGF
156
Collagen
A0201
1246
GLCitQHDAEV
225
Aggrecan
B0702
32
IPQPSPLRV
157
Collagen
A0201
1246
GLRQHDAEV
226
Aggrecan
B0702
32
IPQPSPLCitV
158
Enolase
A0201
402
CitLAKYNQLL
227
Aggrecan
B0702
32
IPQPSPLCitVL
159
Enolase
A0201
24
FTSKGLFCitA
228
Aggrecan
B0702
32
IPQPSPLRVL
160
Enolase
A0201
24
FTSKGLFRA
229
Aggrecan
B0702
34
QPSPLCitVL
161
Fibrinogen
A0201
111
ILCitGDFSSA
230
Aggrecan
B0702
34
QPSPLCitVLL
162
Fibrinogen
A0201
111
ILRGDFSSA
231
Aggrecan
B0702
34
QPSPLRVL
163
Fibrinogen
A0201
161
QLVDMKCitLEV
232
Aggrecan
B0702
34
QPSPLRVLL
164
Fibrinogen
A0201
161
QLVDMKRLEV
233
Aggrecan
B0702
36
SPLRVLLGTSL
165
Fibrinogen
A0201
850
YSLCitAVCitMKI
234
Aggrecan
B0702
36
SPLCitVLLGTSL
166
Fibrinogen
A0201
850
YSLCitAVRMKI
235
Aggrecan
B0702
226
FPGVCitTYGI
167
Fibrinogen
A0201
850
YSLRAVCitMKI
236
Aggrecan
B0702
312
KACitPNCGGNLL
168
Fibrinogen
A0201
850
YSLRAVRMKI
237
Aggrecan
B0702
312
KARPNCGGNLL
169
Fibrinogen
A0201
851
SLCitAVCitMKI
238
Aggrecan
B0702
313
ACitPNCGGNLL
170
Fibrinogen
A0201
851
SLCitAVRMKI
239
Aggrecan
B0702
313
ARPNCGGNLL
171
Fibrinogen
A0201
851
SLRAVCitMKI
240
Aggrecan
B0702
314
CitPNCGGNLL
172
Fibrinogen
A0201
851
SLRAVRMKI
241
Aggrecan
B0702
314
RPNCGGNLL
173
Grp78
A0201
434
KLIPCitNTVV
242
Aggrecan
B0702
440
CitPWGFPTPGL
174
Grp78
A0201
434
KLIPRNTVV
243
Aggrecan
B0702
440
RPWGFPTPGL
175
Grp78
A0201
463
KVYEGECitPL
244
Aggrecan
B0702
481
YRPGPTCitYSL
176
Grp78
A0201
463
KVYEGERPL
245
Aggrecan
B0702
481
YCitPGPTRYSL
177
Vimentin
A0201
77
CitLLQDSVDFSL
246
Aggrecan
B0702
481
YCitPGPTCitYSL
178
Vimentin
A0201
342
QMCitEMEENFAV
247
Aggrecan
B0702
482
RPGPTCitYSL
179
Vimentin
A0201
342
QMREMEENFAV
248
Aggrecan
B0702
482
CitPGPTRYSL
180
Vimentin
A0201
67
VCitLRSSVPGV
249
Aggrecan
B0702
482
CitPGPTCitYSL
181
Vimentin
A0201
67
VRLCitSSVPGV
250
Aggrecan
B0702
484
GPTRYSLTF
182
Vimentin
A0201
67
VCitLCitSSVPGV
251
Aggrecan
B0702
484
GPTCitYSLTF
183
Vimentin
A0201
67
VRLRSSVPGV
252
Aggrecan
B0702
535
YPIVSPCitTPC
184
Vimentin
A0201
68
CitLRSSVPGV
253
Aggrecan
B0702
535
YPIVSPRTPC
185
Vimentin
A0201
68
RLCitSSVPGV
254
Aggrecan
B0702
551
SPGVCitTYGV
186
Vimentin
A0201
68
CitLCitSSVPGV
255
Aggrecan
B0702
632
YPIVTPCitPA
187
Vimentin
A0201
68
RLRSSVPGV
256
Aggrecan
B0702
632
YPIVTPRPA
188
Vimentin
A0201
378
HLCitEYQDLLNV
257
Aggrecan
B0702
645
KPGVCitTVYL
189
Vimentin
A0201
378
HLREYQDLLNV
258
Aggrecan
B0702
660
LPDPLSCitHHAF
190
Aggrecan
A2402
129
VYRCEVMHGI
259
Aggrecan
B0702
802
EPFPSVCitPF
191
Aggrecan
A2402
129
VYCitCEVMHGI
260
Aggrecan
B0702
802
EPFPSVRPF
192
Aggrecan
A2402
155
HYRAISTRYTL
261
Aggrecan
B0702
804
FPSVCitPFPSV
193
Aggrecan
A2402
155
HYRAISTCitYTL
262
Aggrecan
B0702
2112
CitPAETHLEI
194
Aggrecan
A2402
155
HYCitAISTRYTL
263
Aggrecan
B0702
2112
RPAETHLEI
195
Aggrecan
A2402
155
HYCitAISTCitYTL
264
Aggrecan
B0702
2404
HPRCitSCitPST
196
Aggrecan
A2402
579
VFFATCitLEQF
265
Aggrecan
B0702
2404
HPCitRSCitPST
197
Aggrecan
A2402
580
FFATRLEQFTF
266
Aggrecan
B0702
2404
HPCitCitSRPST
198
Aggrecan
A2402
580
FFATCitLEQFTF
267
Aggrecan
B0702
2404
HPRRSCitPST
199
Aggrecan
A2402
2210
KYQGHCYRHF
268
Aggrecan
B0702
2404
HPRCitSRPST
200
Aggrecan
A2402
2210
KYQGHCYCitHF
269
Aggrecan
B0702
2404
HPCitRSRPST
201
Aggrecan
A2402
2211
YQGHCYRHF
270
Aggrecan
B0702
2404
HPCitCitSCitPST
Table 10: Predicted RA relevant peptides-II
76
==PAGE:87==
17 August 2020
#
Protein
HLA
Pos.
Peptide sequence
#
Protein
HLA
Pos.
Peptide sequence
271
Aggrecan
B0702
2404
HPRCitSCitPSTA
340
Fibrinogen
B0702
212
LPSCitDCitQHL
272
Aggrecan
B0702
2404
HPCitRSCitPSTA
341
Fibrinogen
B0702
212
LPSCitDCitQHLPL
273
Aggrecan
B0702
2404
HPCitCitSRPSTA
342
Fibrinogen
B0702
212
LPSCitDRQHL
274
Aggrecan
B0702
2404
HPRRSCitPSTA
343
Fibrinogen
B0702
212
LPSCitDRQHLPL
275
Aggrecan
B0702
2404
HPCitRSRPSTA
344
Fibrinogen
B0702
212
LPSRDCitQHL
276
Aggrecan
B0702
2404
HPRCitSRPSTA
345
Fibrinogen
B0702
212
LPSRDCitQHLPL
277
Aggrecan
B0702
2404
HPCitCitSCitPSTA
346
Fibrinogen
B0702
212
LPSRDRQHL
278
Aggrecan
B0702
2404
HPRRSRPST
347
Fibrinogen
B0702
212
LPSRDRQHLPL
279
Aggrecan
B0702
62
APSTAPLAPCit
348
Fibrinogen
B0702
569
FPSCitGKSSS
280
Aggrecan
B0702
62
APSTAPLAPR
349
Fibrinogen
B0702
569
FPSRGKSSS
281
Aggrecan
B0702
376
WPDMELPLPCit
350
Vimentin
B0702
55
SPGGVYATCit
282
Aggrecan
B0702
376
WPDMELPLPR
351
Vimentin
B0702
55
SPGGVYATR
283
Collagen
B0702
203
GPMGPRGPP
352
Aggrecan
B0801
151
GIVFHYCitAI
284
Collagen
B0702
203
GPMGPCitGPP
353
Aggrecan
B0801
151
GIVFHYRAI
285
Collagen
B0702
205
MGPRGPPGPA
354
Aggrecan
B0801
152
IVFHYCitAI
286
Collagen
B0702
205
MGPCitGPPGPA
355
Aggrecan
B0801
152
IVFHYRAI
287
Collagen
B0702
206
GPRGPPGPA
356
Collagen
B0801
1371
NVQMTFLCitL
288
Collagen
B0702
206
GPCitGPPGPA
357
Collagen
B0801
1371
NVQMTFLRL
289
Collagen
B0702
318
SPGPMGPCitGL
358
Enolase
B0801
2
ILKIHACitEI
290
Collagen
B0702
318
SPGPMGPRGL
359
Enolase
B0801
2
ILKIHAREI
291
Collagen
B0702
320
GPMGPRGL
360
Enolase
B0801
422
FAGCitNFRNPL
292
Collagen
B0702
320
GPMGPRGLPG
361
Enolase
B0801
422
FAGRNFCitNPL
293
Collagen
B0702
320
GPMGPCitGL
362
Enolase
B0801
422
FAGCitNFCitNPL
294
Collagen
B0702
320
GPMGPCitGLPG
363
Enolase
B0801
0
MSILKIHACitEI
295
Collagen
B0702
528
APGERGPSGL
364
Enolase
B0801
0
MSILKIHAREI
296
Collagen
B0702
528
APGECitGPSGL
365
Enolase
B0801
1
SILKIHACitEI
297
Collagen
B0702
621
LPGAPGLRGL
366
Enolase
B0801
1
SILKIHAREI
298
Collagen
B0702
621
LPGAPGLCitGL
367
Enolase
B0801
2
ILKIHACitEIF
299
Collagen
B0702
750
MPGERGAAGI
368
Enolase
B0801
2
ILKIHAREIF
300
Collagen
B0702
750
MPGECitGAAGI
369
Fibrinogen
B0801
153
LLQKNVCitAQL
301
Collagen
B0702
777
APGKDGGCitGL
370
Fibrinogen
B0801
153
LLQKNVRAQL
302
Collagen
B0702
777
APGKDGGRGL
371
Fibrinogen
B0801
852
LCCitAVCitMKIRPL
303
Collagen
B0702
1159
SGPRGPPGPV
372
Fibrinogen
B0801
852
LCCitAVRMKICitPL
304
Collagen
B0702
1159
SGPCitGPPGPV
373
Fibrinogen
B0801
852
LCCitAVRMKIRPL
305
Collagen
B0702
1160
GPRGPPGPV
374
Fibrinogen
B0801
852
LCitAVCitMKICitPL
306
Collagen
B0702
1160
GPCitGPPGPV
375
Fibrinogen
B0801
852
LCRAVCitMKIRPL
307
Collagen
B0702
1226
GPREKGPDPL
376
Fibrinogen
B0801
852
LCRAVRMKICitPL
308
Collagen
B0702
1226
GPCitEKGPDPL
377
Fibrinogen
B0801
852
LRAVCitMKICitPL
309
Collagen
B0702
1276
KNPACitTCRDL
378
Fibrinogen
B0801
852
LRAVRMKIRPL
310
Collagen
B0702
1276
KNPARTCCitDL
379
Fibrinogen
B0801
853
CitAVCitMKIRPL
311
Collagen
B0702
1276
KNPACitTCCitDL
380
Fibrinogen
B0801
853
CitAVRMKICitPL
312
Collagen
B0702
1276
KNPARTCRDL
381
Fibrinogen
B0801
853
CitAVRMKIRPL
313
Collagen
B0702
1277
NPACitTCRDL
382
Fibrinogen
B0801
853
RAVCitMKICitPL
314
Collagen
B0702
1277
NPARTCCitDL
383
Fibrinogen
B0801
853
RAVCitMKIRPL
315
Collagen
B0702
1277
NPACitTCCitDL
384
Fibrinogen
B0801
853
RAVRMKICitPL
316
Collagen
B0702
1277
NPARTCRDL
385
Fibrinogen
B0801
854
AVCitMKIRPL
317
Collagen
B0702
198
MQGPMGPMGPCit
386
Fibrinogen
B0801
854
AVRMKICitPL
318
Collagen
B0702
198
MQGPMGPMGPR
387
Fibrinogen
B0801
855
VCitMKICitPL
319
Collagen
B0702
199
QGPMGPMGPCit
388
Fibrinogen
B0801
855
VCitMKIRPL
320
Collagen
B0702
199
QGPMGPMGPR
389
Fibrinogen
B0801
855
VRMKICitPL
321
Collagen
B0702
200
GPMGPMGPCit
390
Fibrinogen
B0801
620
CitGHAKSCitPV
322
Collagen
B0702
200
GPMGPMGPR
391
Fibrinogen
B0801
620
CitGHAKSRPV
323
Collagen
B0702
335
GPAGAAGACit
392
Fibrinogen
B0801
620
RGHAKSCitPV
324
Collagen
B0702
335
GPAGAAGAR
393
Fibrinogen
B0801
620
RGHAKSRPV
325
Collagen
B0702
809
GPAGSAGACit
581
Aggrecan
C0501
64
STAPLAPRI
326
Collagen
B0702
809
GPAGSAGAR
582
Aggrecan
C0501
64
STAPLAPCitI
327
Collagen
B0702
1097
GPSGPAGACit
583
Aggrecan
C0501
203
LADQTVRYPI
328
Collagen
B0702
1097
GPSGPAGAR
584
Aggrecan
C0501
203
LADQTVCitYPI
329
Collagen
B0702
1153
SGPAGPSGPCit
585
Aggrecan
C0501
301
LADRSVRYPI
330
Collagen
B0702
1153
SGPAGPSGPR
586
Aggrecan
C0501
301
LADRSVCitYPI
331
Collagen
B0702
1154
GPAGPSGPCit
587
Aggrecan
C0501
301
LADCitSVRYPI
332
Collagen
B0702
1154
GPAGPSGPR
588
Aggrecan
C0501
301
LADCitSVCitYPI
333
Collagen
B0702
1181
GPIGPPGPCit
589
Aggrecan
C0501
537
IVSPRTPCV
334
Collagen
B0702
1181
GPIGPPGPR
590
Aggrecan
C0501
537
IVSPCitTPCV
335
Enolase
B0702
127
VPLYCitHIADL
591
Aggrecan
C0501
625
LADGSLRYPI
336
Enolase
B0702
322
TNPKCitIAKAV
592
Aggrecan
C0501
625
LADGSLCitYPI
337
Enolase
B0702
322
TNPKRIAKAV
593
Aggrecan
C0501
1820
LVDRTLVESV
338
Fibrinogen
B0702
284
SPCitNPSSAG
594
Aggrecan
C0501
1820
LVDCitTLVESV
339
Fibrinogen
B0702
284
SPRNPSSAG
595
Aggrecan
C0501
87
VATEGRVCitV
Table 11: Predicted RA relevant peptides-III
77
==PAGE:88==
17 August 2020
#
Protein
HLA
Pos.
Peptide sequence
#
Protein
HLA
Pos.
Peptide sequence
596
Aggrecan
C0501
87
VATEGCitVRV
665
Vimentin
C0501
6
SSSSYCitCitMF
597
Aggrecan
C0501
87
VATEGCitVCitV
666
Vimentin
C0501
6
SSSSYRRMF
598
Aggrecan
C0501
87
VATEGRVRV
667
Vimentin
C0501
164
TNDKACitVEV
599
Aggrecan
C0501
159
ISTCitYTLDF
668
Vimentin
C0501
164
TNDKARVEV
600
Aggrecan
C0501
159
ISTRYTLDF
669
Vimentin
C0501
300
AANCitNNDAL
601
Aggrecan
C0501
336
YPDPSSCitYDAI
670
Vimentin
C0501
300
AANRNNDAL
602
Aggrecan
C0501
336
YPDPSSRYDAI
671
Vimentin
C0501
338
SLECitQMREM
603
Aggrecan
C0501
528
LRDQTVCitYPI
672
Vimentin
C0501
338
SLERQMCitEM
604
Aggrecan
C0501
528
LCitDQTVRYPI
673
Vimentin
C0501
338
SLECitQMCitEM
605
Aggrecan
C0501
528
LCitDQTVCitYPI
674
Vimentin
C0501
338
SLERQMREM
606
Aggrecan
C0501
528
LRDQTVRYPI
675
Vimentin
C0501
357
YQDTIGCitL
607
Aggrecan
C0501
625
LADGSLCitYPIV
676
Vimentin
C0501
357
YQDTIGRL
608
Aggrecan
C0501
625
LADGSLRYPIV
677
Aggrecan
C0701
154
FHYRAISTCit
609
Collagen
C0501
1237
YMRADQAAGGL
678
Aggrecan
C0701
154
FHYCitAISTR
610
Collagen
C0501
1237
YMCitADQAAGGL
679
Aggrecan
C0701
154
FHYCitAISTCit
611
Collagen
C0501
1238
MCitADQAAGGL
680
Aggrecan
C0701
154
FHYRAISTR
612
Collagen
C0501
1239
RADQAAGGL
681
Enolase
C0701
404
AKYNQLLCitI
613
Collagen
C0501
1239
CitADQAAGGL
682
Enolase
C0701
404
AKYNQLLRI
614
Enolase
C0501
261
KSPDDPSCitYI
683
Grp78
C0701
44
FKNGCitVEII
615
Enolase
C0501
261
KSPDDPSRYI
684
Grp78
C0701
44
FKNGRVEII
616
Enolase
C0501
262
SPDDPSCitYI
685
Grp78
C0701
90
TVFDAKCitLI
617
Enolase
C0501
262
SPDDPSRYI
686
Grp78
C0701
90
TVFDAKRLI
618
Enolase
C0501
10
IFDSCitGNPTV
687
Vimentin
C0701
435
THSKCitTLLI
619
Enolase
C0501
10
IFDSRGNPTV
688
Enolase
C0702
250
FFCitSGKYDL
620
Enolase
C0501
48
LRDNDKTRYM
689
Fibrinogen
C0702
0
MFSMCitIVCL
621
Enolase
C0501
48
LCitDNDKTRYM
690
Fibrinogen
C0702
844
SFCitGADYSL
622
Enolase
C0501
48
LRDNDKTCitYM
691
Fibrinogen
C0702
844
SFRGADYSL
623
Enolase
C0501
48
LCitDNDKTCitYM
692
Grp78
C0702
365
TCitIPKIQQL
624
Enolase
C0501
260
FKSPDDPSCitYI
693
Grp78
C0702
43
VFKNGCitVEI
625
Enolase
C0501
260
FKSPDDPSRYI
694
Grp78
C0702
43
VFKNGRVEI
626
Fibrinogen
C0501
129
VSEDLCitSCitI
695
Vimentin
C0702
113
FANYIDKVCitFL
627
Fibrinogen
C0501
129
VSEDLCitSRI
696
Vimentin
C0702
148
LYEEEMREL
628
Fibrinogen
C0501
129
VSEDLRSCitI
697
Vimentin
C0702
148
LYEEEMCitEL
629
Fibrinogen
C0501
129
VSEDLRSRI
698
Aggrecan
A0101/C0501
571
FVDRLEGEV
630
Fibrinogen
C0501
845
FCitGADYSLCitAV
699
Aggrecan
A0101/C0501
571
FVDRLEGEVF
631
Fibrinogen
C0501
845
FCitGADYSLRAV
700
Aggrecan
A0101/C0501
571
FVDRLEGEVFF
632
Fibrinogen
C0501
845
FRGADYSLCitAV
701
Aggrecan
A0101/C0501
571
FVDCitLEGEV
633
Fibrinogen
C0501
845
FRGADYSLRAV
702
Aggrecan
A0101/C0501
571
FVDCitLEGEVF
634
Fibrinogen
C0501
847
GADYSLCitAV
703
Aggrecan
A0101/C0501
571
FVDCitLEGEVFF
635
Fibrinogen
C0501
847
GADYSLRAV
704
Aggrecan
A0101/C0501
2272
FCitWSDGHPMQF
636
Fibrinogen
C0501
214
SCitDCitQHLPL
705
Aggrecan
A0101/C0501
2387
CTDATTYKCit
637
Fibrinogen
C0501
214
SCitDRQHLPL
706
Aggrecan
A0101/C0501
2387
CTDATTYKRCitL
638
Fibrinogen
C0501
214
SRDCitQHLPL
707
Aggrecan
A0101/C0501
2387
CTDATTYKCitRL
639
Fibrinogen
C0501
214
SRDRQHLPL
708
Aggrecan
A0101/C0501
2387
CTDATTYKCitCitL
640
Fibrinogen
C0501
248
KALTDMPQMCitM
709
Aggrecan
A0101/C0501
2387
CTDATTYKRRL
641
Fibrinogen
C0501
248
KALTDMPQMRM
710
Collagen
A0101/B4402
1421
CitAEGNSRFTY
642
Grp78
C0501
52
IANDQGNCitI
711
Collagen
A0101/B4402
1421
RAEGNSCitFTY
643
Grp78
C0501
52
IANDQGNRI
712
Collagen
A0101/B4402
1421
CitAEGNSCitFTY
644
Grp78
C0501
67
FTPEGECitLI
713
Collagen
A0101/B4402
1421
RAEGNSRFTY
645
Grp78
C0501
67
FTPEGERLI
714
Enolase
A0101/B4402
246
AASEFFCitSGKY
646
Grp78
C0501
330
NMDLFCitSTM
715
Enolase
A0101/B4402
246
AASEFFRSGKY
647
Grp78
C0501
330
NMDLFRSTM
716
Enolase
A0101/B4402
247
ASEFFCitSGKY
648
Grp78
C0501
298
LSSQHQACitI
717
Enolase
A0101/B4402
247
ASEFFRSGKY
649
Grp78
C0501
298
LSSQHQARI
718
Fibrinogen
A0101/C0501
162
LVDMKCitLEV
650
Grp78
C0501
329
LNMDLFCitSTM
719
Fibrinogen
A0101/C0501
162
LVDMKRLEV
651
Grp78
C0501
329
LNMDLFRSTM
720
Fibrinogen
A0101/C0501
249
ALTDMPQMCitM
652
Vimentin
C0501
109
LNDCitFANYI
721
Fibrinogen
A0101/C0501
249
ALTDMPQMRM
653
Vimentin
C0501
109
LNDRFANYI
722
Fibrinogen
A0101/C0501
250
LTDMPQMCitM
654
Vimentin
C0501
116
YIDKVCitFL
723
Fibrinogen
A0101/C0501
250
LTDMPQMCitMEL
655
Vimentin
C0501
116
YIDKVRFL
724
Fibrinogen
A0101/C0501
250
LTDMPQMRM
656
Vimentin
C0501
205
FCitQDVDNASL
725
Fibrinogen
A0101/C0501
250
LTDMPQMRMEL
657
Vimentin
C0501
206
RQDVDNASL
726
Vimentin
A0101/C0501
163
LTNDKACitVEV
658
Vimentin
C0501
206
CitQDVDNASL
727
Vimentin
A0101/C0501
163
LTNDKARVEV
659
Vimentin
C0501
432
LVDTHSKCitTL
728
Vimentin
A0201/C0501
77
RLLQDSVDFSL
660
Vimentin
C0501
432
LVDTHSKCitTLL
729
Vimentin
A0201/C0501
176
NLAEDIMCitL
661
Vimentin
C0501
432
LVDTHSKRTLL
730
Vimentin
A0201/C0501
176
NLAEDIMRL
662
Vimentin
C0501
432
LVDTHSKRTL
731
Vimentin
A0201/C0501
378
HLCitEYQDLL
663
Vimentin
C0501
6
SSSSYCitRMF
732
Vimentin
A0201/C0501
378
HLREYQDLL
664
Vimentin
C0501
6
SSSSYRCitMF
733
Aggrecan
A2402/C0702
580
FFATCitLEQF
Table 12: Predicted RA relevant peptides-IV
78
==PAGE:89==
17 August 2020
#
Protein
HLA
Pos.
Peptide sequence
#
Protein
HLA
Pos.
Peptide sequence
734
Fibrinogen
A2402/C0702
587
SYNRGDSTF
803
Aggrecan
A2402
609
LYAAWSCitGL
735
Fibrinogen
A2402/C0702
735
AYAEYHFRV
804
Fibrinogen
A2402
587
SYNCitGDSTF
736
Fibrinogen
A2402/C0702
125
TYNCitVSEDL
805
Fibrinogen
A2402
735
AYAEYHFCitV
737
Fibrinogen
A2402/C0702
125
TYNRVSEDL
806
Vimentin
A2402
115
NYIDKVCitFL
738
Vimentin
A2402/C0702
59
VYATCitSSAV
807
Vimentin
A2402
115
NYIDKVRFL
739
Vimentin
A2402/C0702
59
VYATRSSAV
808
Vimentin
A2402
317
EYCitRQVQSL
740
Vimentin
A2402/C0702
114
ANYIDKVCitFL
809
Vimentin
A2402
317
EYRCitQVQSL
741
Vimentin
A2402/C0702
114
ANYIDKVRFL
810
Vimentin
A2402
317
EYCitCitQVQSL
742
Vimentin
A2402/B4402
316
TEYCitRQVQSL
811
Vimentin
A2402
317
EYRRQVQSL
743
Vimentin
A2402/B4402
316
TEYRCitQVQSL
812
Aggrecan
B0702
481
YRPGPTRYSL
744
Vimentin
A2402/B4402
316
TEYCitCitQVQSL
813
Collagen
B0801
1451
YRSQKTSCitL
745
Vimentin
A2402/B4402
316
TEYRRQVQSL
814
Collagen
B0801
1451
YCitSQKTSCitL
746
Aggrecan
B0702/B0801
69
APRIKWSCitV
815
Collagen
B0801
1451
YCitSQKTSRL
747
Aggrecan
B0702/B0801
69
APCitIKWSRV
816
Collagen
B0801
1451
YRSQKTSRL
748
Aggrecan
B0702/B0801
69
APCitIKWSCitV
817
Vimentin
C0501
205
FRQDVDNASL
749
Aggrecan
B0702/B0801
69
APRIKWSRV
818
Vimentin
C0501
71
SSVPGVCitLL
750
Aggrecan
B0702/B0801
226
FPGVRTYGI
819
Vimentin
C0501
71
SSVPGVRLL
751
Aggrecan
B0702/B0801
551
SPGVRTYGV
820
Aggrecan
C0701
155
HYRAISTRY
752
Aggrecan
B0702/B0801
645
KPGVRTVYL
821
Aggrecan
A0101
2272
FRWSDGHPMQF
753
Aggrecan
B0702/B0801
660
LPDPLSRHHAF
822
Aggrecan
A0201
2364
FVQCitHMPTI
754
Aggrecan
B0702/B4402
800
SEEPFPSVCitPF
823
Aggrecan
A0201
2364
FVQRHMPTI
755
Aggrecan
B0702/B4402
800
SEEPFPSVRPF
824
Grp78
A0201
260
RVMEHFIKL
756
Aggrecan
B0702/B0801
804
FPSVRPFPSV
757
Aggrecan
B0702/B0801
2404
HPRRSRPSTA
758
Enolase
B0702/B0801
127
VPLYRHIADL
759
Enolase
B0702/B0801
323
NPKCitIAKAV
760
Enolase
B0702/B0801
323
NPKRIAKAV
761
Fibrinogen
B0702/B0801
253
MPQMCitMEL
762
Fibrinogen
B0702/B0801
253
MPQMRMEL
763
Enolase
B0801/B0702
422
FAGRNFRNPL
764
Fibrinogen
B0801/C0702
855
VRMKIRPL
765
Vimentin
B4402/C0701
343
MREMEENFAV
766
Collagen
C0501/C0701
1238
MRADQAAGGL
767
Aggrecan
C0701/C0702
154
FHYRAISTRY
768
Aggrecan
C0701/C0702
154
FHYRAISTCitY
769
Aggrecan
C0701/C0702
154
FHYCitAISTRY
770
Aggrecan
C0701/C0702
154
FHYCitAISTCitY
771
Aggrecan
C0701/C0702
155
HYRAISTCitY
772
Aggrecan
C0701/C0702
155
HYCitAISTRY
773
Aggrecan
C0701/C0702
155
HYCitAISTCitY
774
Aggrecan
C0701/C0702
479
FHYRPGPTRY
775
Aggrecan
C0701/C0702
479
FHYRPGPTCitY
776
Aggrecan
C0701/C0702
479
FHYCitPGPTRY
777
Aggrecan
C0701/C0702
479
FHYCitPGPTCitY
778
Aggrecan
C0701/C0702
480
HYRPGPTCitY
779
Aggrecan
C0701/C0702
480
HYCitPGPTRY
780
Aggrecan
C0701/C0702
480
HYCitPGPTCitY
781
Aggrecan
C0701/C0702
480
HYRPGPTRY
782
Aggrecan
C0701/C0702
479
FHYRPGPTCit
783
Aggrecan
C0701/C0702
479
FHYCitPGPTR
784
Aggrecan
C0701/C0702
479
FHYCitPGPTCit
785
Aggrecan
C0701/C0702
479
FHYRPGPTR
786
Vimentin
C0701/C0702
435
THSKRTLLI
787
Vimentin
C0701/C0702
356
NYQDTIGCitL
788
Vimentin
C0701/C0702
356
NYQDTIGRL
789
Enolase
C0702/B0801
250
FFRSGKYDL
790
Vimentin
C0702/C0701
113
FANYIDKVRFL
791
Aggrecan
A0101
2273
RWSDGHPMQF
792
Aggrecan
A0101
2273
CitWSDGHPMQF
793
Grp78
A0101
317
FSETLTCitAKF
794
Grp78
A0101
317
FSETLTRAKF
795
Collagen
A0201
1372
VQMTFLCitLL
796
Collagen
A0201
1372
VQMTFLRLL
797
Enolase
A0201
402
RLAKYNQLL
798
Fibrinogen
A0201
1
FSMCitIVCLV
799
Fibrinogen
A0201
1
FSMRIVCLV
800
Grp78
A0201
260
CitVMEHFIKL
801
Aggrecan
A2402
580
FFATRLEQF
802
Aggrecan
A2402
609
LYAAWSRGL
Table 13: Predicted RA relevant peptides-V
79
==PAGE:90==
17 August 2020
9.5
E
List of virus derived peptides
#
Virus
HLA
Peptide sequence
v9
CMV
A0101
YSEHPTFTSQY
v15
CMV
A0101
VTEHDTLLY
v19
Flu
A0101
VSDGGPNLY
v3
Flu
A0201
GILGFVFTL
v5
EBV
A0201
CLGGLLTMV
v6
EBV
A0201
GLCTLVAML
v10
EBV
A0201
FLYALALLL
v13
CMV
A0201
NLVPMVATV
v16
EBV
A0201
YVLDHLIVV
v24
CMV
A0201
VLEETSVML
v41
HIV
A0201
ILKEPVHGV
v4
EBV
A2402
RYSIFFDY
v7
EBV
A2402
TYGPVFMCL
v8
EBV
A2402
DYCNVLNKEF
v12
HCMV
A2402
AYAQKIFKIL
v14
CMV
B0702
TPRVTGGGAM
v20
CMV
B0702
RPHERNGFTV
v21
EBV
B0702
RPPIFIRLL
v1
Flu
B0801
ELRSRYWAI
v17
EBV
B0801
RAKFKQLL
v22
CMV
B0801
ELRRKMMYM
v30
EBV
B0801
QAKWRLQTL
v31
EBV
B0801
FLRGRAYGL
Table 14: The list of virus derived peptides. Cytomegalovirus (CMV), Ebstein-Barr virus (EBV), inﬂuenza virus
(FLU), human immunodeﬁciency viruses (HIV) and human cytomegalovirus (HCMV).
80
==PAGE:91==
17 August 2020
9.6
F
A-key list for DNA barcode ampliﬁcation
Table 15: A-key list for DNA barcode ampliﬁcatio
RA patients screen
Healthy controls & RA patiens screen
A-key sample ID
Samples
A-key sample ID
Samples
A-key sample ID
Samples
A-key sample ID
Samples
A-Key_2OS_F1_229
RA51
A-Key_2OS_F1_207
RA28
A-Key_2OS_F1_71
BC-36
A-Key_2OS_F1_93
BC-61
A-Key_2OS_F1_230
RA17
A-Key_2OS_F1_208
RA14
A-Key_2OS_F1_72
BC-43
A-Key_2OS_F1_94
BC-97
A-Key_2OS_F1_231
RA19
A-Key_2OS_F1_209
RA34
A-Key_2OS_F1_73
BC-106
A-Key_2OS_F1_95
BC-124
A-Key_2OS_F1_232
RA1
A-Key_2OS_F1_210
RA45
A-Key_2OS_F1_74
BC-114
A-Key_2OS_F1_200
BC-128
A-Key_2OS_F1_234
RA22
A-Key_2OS_F1_211
RA50
A-Key_2OS_F1_75
BC-117
A-Key_2OS_F1_201
BC-130
A-Key_2OS_F1_235
RA25
A-Key_2OS_F1_213
RA11
A-Key_2OS_F1_76
BC-318
A-Key_2OS_F1_202
BC-309
A-Key_2OS_F1_236
RA38
A-Key_2OS_F1_214
RA43
A-Key_2OS_F1_77
BC-320
A-Key_2OS_F1_203
BC-314
A-Key_2OS_F1_238
RA5
A-Key_2OS_F1_79
NTC: BCB
A-Key_2OS_F1_78
BC-335
A-Key_2OS_F1_204
BC-317
A-Key_2OS_F1_239
RA20
A-Key_2OS_F1_83
NTC: H2O
A-Key_2OS_F1_79
BC-338
A-Key_2OS_F1_205
RA-11
A-Key_2OS_F1_240
RA31
A-Key_2OS_F1_87
input 3
A-Key_2OS_F1_211
NTC H2O
A-Key_2OS_F1_206
RA-14
A-Key_2OS_F1_241
RA40
A-Key_2OS_F1_88
input 3
A-Key_2OS_F1_212
NTC BCB
A-Key_2OS_F1_207
RA-34
A-Key_2OS_F1_242
RA35
A-Key_2OS_F1_89
input 3
A-Key_2OS_F1_213
input 5
A-Key_2OS_F1_208
RA-43
A-Key_2OS_F1_243
RA3
A-Key_2OS_F1_215
RA6
A-Key_2OS_F1_215
input 5
A-Key_2OS_F1_209
RA-45
A-Key_2OS_F1_81
NTC: BCB
A-Key_2OS_F1_216
RA10
A-Key_2OS_F1_216
input 5
A-Key_2OS_F1_210
RA-50
A-Key_2OS_F1_83
NTC: H2O
A-Key_2OS_F1_217
RA27
A-Key_2OS_F1_81
BC-44
A-Key_2OS_F1_211
NTC H2O
A-Key_2OS_F1_201
input 1
A-Key_2OS_F1_218
RA37
A-Key_2OS_F1_82
BC-113
A-Key_2OS_F1_212
NTC BCB
A-Key_2OS_F1_202
input 1
A-Key_2OS_F1_219
RA47
A-Key_2OS_F1_83
BC-118
A-Key_2OS_F1_220
input 7
A-Key_2OS_F1_203
input 1
A-Key_2OS_F1_220
BC105
A-Key_2OS_F1_84
BC-303
A-Key_2OS_F1_221
input 7
A-Key_2OS_F1_244
RA49
A-Key_2OS_F1_221
RA24
A-Key_2OS_F1_85
BC-322
A-Key_2OS_F1_222
input 7
A-Key_2OS_F1_245
RA2
A-Key_2OS_F1_222
RA33
A-Key_2OS_F1_86
BC-323
A-Key_2OS_F1_246
RA12
A-Key_2OS_F1_224
RA15
A-Key_2OS_F1_87
BC-326
A-Key_2OS_F1_247
RA16
A-Key_2OS_F1_225
RA26
A-Key_2OS_F1_88
BC-328
A-Key_2OS_F1_248
RA18
A-Key_2OS_F1_226
RA29
A-Key_2OS_F1_89
BC-336
A-Key_2OS_F1_249
RA36
A-Key_2OS_F1_227
RA32
A-Key_2OS_F1_90
BC-340
A-Key_2OS_F1_250
RA39
A-Key_2OS_F1_228
RA13
A-Key_2OS_F1_91
RA-28
A-Key_2OS_F1_252
RA23
A-Key_2OS_F1_80
NTC: BCB
A-Key_2OS_F1_92
RA-33
A-Key_2OS_F1_253
RA42
A-Key_2OS_F1_83
NTC: H2O
A-Key_2OS_F1_211
NTC H2O
A-Key_2OS_F1_254
RA48
A-Key_2OS_F1_90
input 4
A-Key_2OS_F1_212
NTC BCB
A-Key_2OS_F1_255
RA30
A-Key_2OS_F1_95
input 4
A-Key_2OS_F1_217
input 6
A-Key_2OS_F1_256
RA44
A-Key_2OS_F1_200
input 4
A-Key_2OS_F1_218
input 6
A-Key_2OS_F1_257
RA46
A-Key_2OS_F1_219
input 6
A-Key_2OS_F1_82
NTC: BCB
A-Key_2OS_F1_83
NTC: H2O
A-Key_2OS_F1_204
input 2
A-Key_2OS_F1_205
input 2
A-Key_2OS_F1_206
input 2
81
==PAGE:92==
17 August 2020
9.7
G
Gating strategy in T cell sorting
The gating strategy used to sort the CD8 positive and multimer positive cells.
Figure 26: Gating strategy used to identify single, live lymphocytes from step 1 to step 3. After step 4 and 5,
CD8 and MHC speciﬁc T cells were gated out and they were also sorted into the collection tube, as showed in the
last picture.
.
82
==PAGE:93==
17 August 2020
9.8
H
The selected patients and peptides in phenotyping
Patient
RA-Pep
Virus-Pep
Patient
RA-Pep
Virus-Pep
Patient
RA-Pep
Virus-Pep
Patient
RA-Pep
Virus-Pep
RA25
134
V3
RA17
796
RA6
18
v6
RA5
796
v13
799
V6
678
717
v10
RA20
822
v5
V10
805
RA10
42
v9
v6
V16
RA23
678
v5
v10
RA26
22
v17
679
v10
v13
678
v31
767
RA15
717
v1
v16
RA29
678
V1
798
678
v17
v24
679
V17
v31
RA38
158
v13
V31
RA24
689
RA16
678
v1
RA50
796
v3
RA33
18
V9
770
679
v17
323
v5
717
V15
796
v22
v10
726
RA30
796
v31
v13
688
v1
RA40
163
RA18
679
v1
v14
689
v17
RA42
796
v17
BC-335
v3
796
v22
678
v22
v5
RA39
796
v17
RA46
796
RA28
677
v3
v10
679
v31
RA48
678
v5
v13
RA12
678
v17
679
RA32
727
v9
v16
679
v22
803
v15
767
v31
804
RA36
677
v17
775
805
BC-317
726
v9
782
813
v15
798
796
807
RA51
796
BC-317
726
v9
784
v15
BC-130
796
V3
v10
v13
Table 16: The selected patients and healthy donors together with the RA related peptide number and the virus derived peptide number that they
are stained with in the phenotyping analysis.
83
