==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Master Thesis
Contextual feature extraction with respect to
recommendation engines
Kathrine Thorup Hagedorn (s144247)
Internal supervisors:
Søren Hauberg
Nicki Skafte Detlefsen
External supervisor:
Thomas Christensen
Kongens Lyngby
August 13, 2020
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over approximately six months at the Section for Cognitive
Systems, within the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the
Technical University of Denmark. Its purpose is the partial fulfilment in order to acquire
the Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng degree. The scope of the thesis corresponds
to 35 ECTS points. This report was written by Kathrine Thorup Hagedorn.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics and intu-
itively within the most common concepts of Machine Learning. The thesis is written in
collaboration with the company Nordija A/S. Therefore, the report is written in a manner
which enables easy understanding and interpretation, and is addressed to readers such as
the author’s colleagues.
Kathrine Thorup Hagedorn - s144247
Signature
Date
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
iii
13-08-2020
==PAGE:4==
Summary (English)
Recommender systems are a great asset concerning content discovery within different types
of online services, such as streaming services. The common denominator for a well func-
tioning recommender system is the solid data foundation with respect to (1) service-user
interaction information, and (2) rich content metadata. However, the General Data Pro-
tection Regulation has resulted in the possible need for alternative recommender systems
that minimises the use of personal data, in order to reduce the risk of breaking some of the
GDPR rules. In this thesis we explore the possibility of trading the need for personal data
in a recommender system with contextual visual metadata, in the hope that it increases
the variability and precision of recommendations. The exploration concerns the attempt
of extracting contextual features from visual data, in the form of posters and in-action im-
ages, with respect to the metadata type genres. A pure multi-label Convolutional Neural
Network (ConvNet) and the one vs. one scheme is used for feature extraction. Subse-
quently a simple recommender system is build utilising the results from the one vs. one
ConvNets as program identities. Firstly we evaluate the performance of the ConvNets
by using traditional loss and accuracy paradigms. Secondly the recommender system is
evaluated by an empirical survey. We can conclude that genres are not ideal to use as
a separator of program images. However, there were some signs towards the ConvNets
having learned both non-contextual and contextual information from the images. Further-
more, only a few number of subjects answered the survey. Thus the empirical evaluation
is cautiously interpreted. The results of the recommender system were a tad better than
just random recommendations. Moreover, the average rating of the recommender system
was around the median. However, the measures were also associated with relatively high
variance. Future work should as such focus on how to improve the findings and poten-
tially combine them with other strategies in order to implement a complete and improved
recommender system while still minimising the use of personal data.
iv
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Anbefalings-systemer har set stor succes indenfor opdagelse af indhold på diverse online
tjenester såsom streaming tjenester.
Fællesnævneren for et velfungerende anbefalings-
system er det solide datagrundlag bestående af (1) brugerinformation relateret til tjen-
esten og (2) rig meta-data. Databeskyttelsesforordningen (GDPR) har imidlertid resul-
teret i behovet for alternative anbefalings-systemer, der minimerer brugen af persono-
plysninger, med henblik på, at reducere risikoen for at overtræde GDPR regelsættet. I
denne afhandling undersøges muligheden for, at reducere behovet for personoplysninger i et
anbefalings-system, for i stedet at bruge kontekstuel meta-data. Undersøgelsen indeholder
forsøget på, at udtrække kontekstuelle træk fra visuelt data i form af plakater og billeder
med aktioner, i forhold til at adskille genre. Et rent multi-label Convolutional Neuralt
Netværk (ConvNet) og ”one versus one” metoden benyttes til udtrækningen af visuel in-
formation. Derefter bygges et simpelt anbefalings-system, som anvender resultaterne fra
”one versus one” ConvNettene. Først vurderer vi ydeevnen af ConvNettene ved hjælp af
traditionelle nøjagtighedsparadigmer. Derefter evalueres anbefalings-systemet ved hjælp
af en empirisk undersøgelse. Det kan konkluderes, at det ikke er ideelt at benytte genrer
til adskille program-billederne. Nogle tegn pegede dog på, at ConvNettene havde lært
både ikke-kontekstuel og kontekstuel information. Det var kun et fåtal som besvarede den
empiriske undersøgelse, og dermed fortolkes denne forsigtigt. Resultaterne af anbefalings-
systemet var en smule bedre end tilfældige anbefalinger. Desuden var den gennemsnitlige
vurdering af anbefalings-systemet omkring medianen.
Resultaterne var dog forbundet
med relativt høj varians. Fremtidigt arbejde bør fokusere på, hvordan resultaterne kan
forbedres, og potentielt hvordan de kan kombineres med andre strategier med henblik på,
at implementere et komplet og forbedret anbefalings-system, samt stadig minimere brugen
af personlige data.
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
v
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors Søren Hauberg and Nicki Skafte Detlefsen. I greatly
appreciate the help and support needed to reach the goal, especially concerning the more
technical and mathematical aspects. I always felt more wiser and encouraged after our
conversations and discussions.
Furthermore, I thank Thomas Christensen and everyone at Nordija A/S for the always
innovative thinking leading to the creation of this thesis. I am grateful for your enthusiasm
and the always open door.
Lastly I thank my family and friends for having my back. I value all the conversations
and feedback I have received from everyone around me; without you some ideas may not
have come into mind.
vi
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:7==
Contents
1
List of abbreviations
1
2
Introduction and motivation
2
2.1
General Data Protection Regulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Project objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Thesis structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Dataset creation and analysis
8
3.1
Scraping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
The Database . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Explorative analysis of the data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3.1
Descriptive analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3.2
Visual analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Feature extraction and the Recommender system
19
4.1
Supervised Deep Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.1.1
Training Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.1.2
Convolutional Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
The Recommender System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2.1
Content-Based Filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2.2
The one versus one approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2.3
Similarity measures and K-Nearest Neighbours . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5
Experimental setup
31
5.1
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.1.1
PyTorch Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.1.2
Define the Neural Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.1.3
Loss and optimiser functions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.1.4
Training the network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2
Experimental design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.2.1
The pure multi-label ConvNet
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2.2
The one versus one ConvNets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.2.3
Network outputs to recommendations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.3
Empirical study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6
Results and Discussion
42
6.1
Pure multi-label ConvNet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.1.1
Loss and accuracy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.1.2
Alternative accuracy metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
vii
==PAGE:8==
6.2
One versus one ConvNets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.2.1
Loss and accuracy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.2.2
Alternative accuracy metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.3
Evaluation of the recommender system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.3.1
User profiles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.3.2
Similarities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.3.3
Evaluation of the empirical study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.3.4
Concluding thoughts on the results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
7
Future Work
54
8
Conclusion
56
Bibliography
57
A Learning Goals
61
B Project evaluation
62
C Genre distribution
64
D Linear Discriminant Analysis
65
D.1 Fisher’s Linear Discriminant with two classes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
D.2 Fisher’s Linear Discriminant for multiple classes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
D.3 Singular Value Decomposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
E Colourfulness metric
70
F Logistic Regression
71
G VGG-16
72
H Training Neural Networks
73
I
Additional results from the pure multi-label ConvNet
74
J
Additional results from the OvO ConvNets
75
J.1
Loss and accuracy curve plots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
J.2
Confusion matrices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
K Additional similar images
83
K.1 One-genre data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
K.2 Multi-genre data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
viii
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:9==
1
List of abbreviations
• GDPR: General Data Protection Regulation
• CF: Collaborative Filtering
• CBF: Content-Based Filtering
• ASLM: Attention-Based Short-term and Long-term Model
• Programs: TV-series and movies
• ERD: Entity Relation Diagram
• LDA: Linear Discriminant Analysis
• ANN: Artificial Neural Network
• Adam: Adaptive Moment Estimation
• SGD: Stochastic Gradient Descent
• MSE: Mean Squared Error
• ConvNet: Convolutional Neural Network
• ReLU: Rectified Linear Unit
• OvO: One versus one
• kNN: k Nearest Neighbours
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Introduction and motivation
Choosing between content has become a great part of our everyday lives. Whether it is on
social media, e-commerce websites such as Amazon or eBay, or streaming services such as
Netflix or HBO, it can be rather difficult as a consumer to navigate through the enormous
amount of content. Hence, a lot of research has gone into how the process of discovering
relevant content can be facilitated.
One of the research areas that have achieved prominent success within content discov-
ery is recommendation engines.
Recommendation engines can be considered as being
particularly important when dealing with content navigation, seeing that a relevant and
personalised recommendation creates value to the subscribers and increases satisfaction.
The common denominator for a well functioning recommendation engine is a solid data
foundation. However, the last two decades have seen an increased awareness on the topic
of personal data usage, i.e. data from which a person can be identified. The individual
viewers have become more aware of what they consent to and what they share, and an
over-/misuse of a user’s personal data may create an uncertain environment for both par-
ties involved. All of which eventually gave rise to the General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR) [1].
A company whose purpose is to facilitate content discovery is Nordija A/S. Nordija is
a Danish based software company whose primary objective is to improve the relevance
and discoverability of TV and On Demand content. They do this by delivering various
solutions in which it becomes easier to navigate through all of the existing content.[2]
The change that GDPR have caused, gives companies, including Nordija A/S, an incentive
to be more careful regarding how they collect and use personal data. There is a greater
attention towards what kind of data and how much the company actually needs in order
to reach their goals. The latter being exactly the primary motivation behind this project.
2.1
General Data Protection Regulation
Historically speaking the issue of privacy when utilising personal data have always existed.
However, where it was formerly the companies themselves who defined how to use the
data and to what degree privacy should, or could, be incorporated into their business, it is
now regulated by laws and sanctions making up the General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR)[1].
With the GDPR going into effect (in 2018), laws as how to use, manage and protect
personal data, and strong sanctions were were made as to encourage close compliance.[3]
Hence, companies are expected to make their systems and businesses GDPR compliant,
and should they fail to do so, they could risk getting very large fines.
2
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:11==
Figure 2.1 shows the attributes, or requirements if you will, existing within the GDPR.
Given the scope of this project, only the three attributes; ’defining personal data’, ’profiling
usage of personal data’ and ’privacy by design’ are considered. Nonetheless, in a real life
setting one should act in accordance with all of the attributes.
Figure 2.1: GDPR Personal Data Protection Attributes [3]
Defining personal data
The new definition of personal data is rather comprehensive. However, personal data can
essentially be divided into four founding elements[4]:
1. “any information”
2. “relating to”
3. “an identified or identifiable”
4. “natural person”
The term ”natural person” is used to distinguish between to whom personal data can
be associated. For instance, the data of a non-living person is not considered under the
GDPR [4].
Simply put, personal data is any information from which a person can be identified. This
can be direct or indirect identifiers. Direct identifiers can be e.g. metadata (name, email,
social media posts, IP-addresses etc.) or demographics (gender, age, race, area etc.). An
indirect identifier is for example how the person interacts with a platform and can be
characterised as profiling usage of personal data.[3]
Profiling usage of personal data
As mentioned, profiling usage of personal data covers indirect identifiers of a person such
as tracking persons’ interactions with the system through e.g. items bought, movies seen
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
3
==PAGE:12==
or clicks.[3, 4] In this manner, it is possible to create a user profile that, to a certain degree,
describes the person.
These behavioural analyses, together with the other definitions of personal data, are heav-
ily used within the recommendation engine research area (cf. Chapter 2.2).
Privacy by design
It is important to consider ’privacy by design’, i.e. when developing new systems, data
protections should be considered from the beginning and during the entire development
process to ensure privacy is properly incorporated. There are different kinds of protections,
also pictured in Figure 2.1. However one which is not in the Figure but worth mentioning
is the lifetime. The lifetime addresses for how long the personal data should be allowed
to live in the system/database. The latter is important to regard, since for instance in
a scenario where the company got hacked, the worst case would be that the personal
information exceeding its lifetime could be grossly exploited.
Hence, with respect to creating a recommendation engine, the GDPR needs to be taken
into account in all areas of the system, which affects everything from the choice of algo-
rithms to the type of data and how to present the recommendations.
2.2
Related work
This section presents related work common to the recommendation research area.
State of the art recommender systems
Recommendation engines are typically divided into two categories; Collaborative Filtering
(CF) and Content-Based Filtering (CBF).
What distinguishes CF and CBF is the type of data involved. CF relies on past interactions
between users and items, which are stored in a ”user-item interaction matrix”. Interactions
can be explicit, implicit or both. Explicit interactions are e.g. users’ ratings of items
whereas implicit interactions are clicks, seen a movie or buys. Regardless of the type, the
interaction is a measure indicating the user’s preference. Given the user-item interaction
matrix, it is possible to compute ”neighbourhoods”. There exists two types; an item or
user neighbourhood which consists of either item or user similarities respectively. Thereby,
the shared appreciation of items between similar users or the item comparison based upon
the shared appreciation of users eventually results in recommendations to a user.[5, 6]
Some of the pros of CF are:
• The algorithm takes into account the overall user behaviours there exists in the data.
• It is relatively easy to deploy CF into a system.
However, CF also presents some major challenges:
• Oftentimes it can be difficult to get people to rate items, probably because they see
it as a waste of time, or they are indecisive. Hence, there is a high level of sparsity
in recommender system databases, which is the underlying issue of the so called
cold-start problem; there is an inadequate number of ratings for new users/items in
order to compute useful recommendations.
4
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:13==
• CF is unable to register user-specific traits seen as recommendations are based solely
on the similarity between users/items.
• The scalability of CF suffers when the number of users and/or items grows tremen-
dously.
Contrary to how CF computes the item-item similarities, CBF instead utilises content
features such as genre, actors, directors, nationality, tags and various other metadata to
create content embeddings; a content identity so to speak.
The algorithm compares the content identities and recommends the most ”likable” item to
the user based on his or her profile. A user profile is a preference thematic profile generated
either explicitly by the user, automatically from past interactions with the system, or based
on demographics.
Pros:
• CBF overcomes some or all of CF’s weaknesses by discarding the need for a user-item
interaction matrix and hence, does not suffer from the cold-start problem.
• It is relatively easy to deploy CBF into a system.
• With respect to GDPR, utilising CBF one has the possibility to avoid having to
include a great amount of personal information.
Cons:
• Most metadata is created manually by humans, which is a rather labour intensive
and time consuming task, leading to a considerable lack of rich metadata.
• Often it is arduous to create meaningful, precise and nuanced user profiles, seen as
it is troublesome to figure out which user features are relevant to the system in order
to increase user satisfaction. In this regard CBF tends to recommend most similar
items thereby lacking variance in the types of recommendations to a user.
Everything is a recommendation
The streaming service Netflix has adapted themselves such that 75% of what people watch
is from a recommendation [7]. Their business objective is to tailor their service to the user
in order to maximise member satisfaction, and to retain member subscriptions. However,
in order to transform a service into an almost complete personalised service, especially a
good one, it requires both a hybrid of different algorithms and a substantial amount of
user/personal data.
In 2006 Netflix announced the Netflix prize, a machine learning and data mining com-
petition where the goal was to optimise their existing recommender system by reducing
its error (Root Mean Square Error) from 0.9525 to 0.8572 or less. In 2007 a team won
the progress prize with an improvement of 8.43%. Their contribution was a combina-
tion of 107 algorithms, of which the two underlying algorithms were Matrix Factorization
(more specifically the Singular Value Decomposition, SVD) and the Restricted Boltzmann
Machines (RBM). These two algorithms are still being used as a part of the Netflix rec-
ommendation engine today.[7]
Additionally, they utilise various concepts within machine learning, from unsupervised
methods such as clustering algorithms to supervised classifiers. Furthermore, they com-
pute user-user and item-item similarities, i.e. they have incorporated both CF and CBF
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
5
==PAGE:14==
into their system as well. Lastly, they treasure the ranking of recommendations according
to preference, which enables the user to discover the best content first.[8]
Consequently, by having such a broad and large system, its performance relies heavily
on obtaining as much personal data as possible, being both explicit and precise as well
as implicit and imprecise.
Anything helps.
Data employed into the system consists,
among other, of viewing statistics (e.g. percentage of movie seen), feedback, explicit taste
preferences and ratings, viewing history, friend’s recommendations or even information
through the Facebook connect feature.[7]
Attention-Based Recommendations
In [9] they propose an attention-based scheme in order to solve the next-item recommen-
dation problem, i.e. what is the best next item to recommend. They focus on computing
contextual characteristics of the user by considering users’ long-term preference which re-
flects the relatively stable interests of items based on the user’s online activity over time,
and the short-term intent which represents a user’s current interests.
They state that ”It has been shown that the attention mechanism is able to assign different
weights according to the importance of items[...]”[9]1, thereby reinforcing the user-profile
by modelling a user’s various attentions towards different items.
They build two different Recurrent Neural Network based layers in order to incorporate the
long- and short-term preferences respectively, hence the name Attention-Based Short-term
and Long-term Model (ASLM).
One of their greatest contributions is diminishing the cold-start problem by making the
best use of awareness of the variation in the user’s contextual preference.
Still, their
model depends on the data availability since it is data-driven and continuously requires
user session data to process when running.
2.3
Project objectives
The formal objectives can be found in Appendix A. Additionally, a project evaluation is
located in Appendix B.
All of the related work above does not question the use of personal data, and though
it is not illegal to utilise, one can argue that it can be somewhat dangerous. If any of
the regulations under the GDPR are broken, it has great consequences for the company
or system/project owner, both economically and reputation wise, moreover it creates a
distrust between the users and the company.
It is of course easier to tailor recommendations if you know as much as possible about
the person in question. CF, for example shows better predictive performance than CBF
[5] and Netflix is known to do well based on their number of subscribers [7]. Be that as
may, common to them both is the extensive use of personal data. As a consequence of the
GDPR, an interesting question has surfaced;
Is it possible to extract relevant features from visual data and content metadata, to be used
in computation of recommendations with the least possible amount of personal data, and
how well would such a recommender system perform.
1page 3, line 6
6
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:15==
Trying to answer that question, the main goal of this thesis is to explore whether it is
possible to extract relevant features from visual content and content metadata through
supervised deep learning, thereby creating embeddings which are rich on contextual infor-
mation. The idea is that, if such embeddings are obtained, much more nuanced similarities
can be computed between content, and a lesser amount of personal data could still produce
an appropriate recommendation.
By using these embeddings in a recommender system, the hope is to eliminate some of the
challenges brought on by the GDPR. Therefore a simple recommender system is developed,
using as little as possible personal data.
The recommender system will be tested based on the k-nearest neighbour method. The
testing and validation are comprised of an empirical study. This is done for two reasons, (1)
to analyse the performance of the recommender system, including the extracted features,
and (2) to analyse the degree of value my findings holds.
2.4
Thesis structure
The first chapter introduces the reader to the author’s motivation behind this project.
Furthermore, the core focus of this report is highlighted together with some of the main
challenges behind good recommendations.
Chapter 2 gives an insight into the used dataset. The chapter provides a thorough expla-
nation and inspection of the data, how it is structured and stored as well as an exploratory
analysis.
Chapter 3 introduces the Supervised Deep Learning framework and the associated Con-
volutional Neural Networks.
Additionally, the concept of Content-Based Filtering for
recommendations is explained.
In Chapter 4 some of the important elements of the implementation are presented. Fur-
thermore, the experimental design is elaborated upon.
Chapter 5 presents, evaluates and discusses the results obtained throughout the project.
Chapter 6 goes through any future work there may be of importance, and how it could
potentially be incorporated.
Finally, chapter 7 concludes on the report as a whole.
All code produced throughout this thesis can be found in the author’s GitHub reposi-
tory [10]. As the main focus has been the mathematical and theoretical aspects behind
completing the project objectives, a user installation guide for the software has not been
developed.
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
7
==PAGE:16==
3
Dataset creation and analysis
A significant amount of time was used to extract and preprocess the dataset. This chapter
elaborates on the dataset creation process and presents two dataset analyses.
The dataset supplied by Nordija A/S consists of programs with associated metadata.
Programs in this regard can be TV-programs or movies. The dataset creation process is
comprised of (1) scraping and preproccessing and (2) insertion into a database.
The dataset analyses consists of a descriptive and visual analysis. A rundown and simple
statistics of the data is presented in the descriptive analysis and a visual analysis is carried
out to detect if there exists noticeable patterns in and between images and genres.
3.1
Scraping
The data was retrieved through a Nordija A/S server, and Elasticsearch was utilised to
extract the data allowing for it to be stored locally.
Elasticsearch is an open source search and analytics engine, known especially for its speed
and scalability. It uses queries similar to that of Database queries, with some exceptions.
[11]
The defined Elasticsearch query ensured that only relevant data was extracted. Relevant
being programs having one or more genres associated, i.e. if a program did not have a
genre specified, it would not be collected. The output of the query corresponded to a
dump of raw json documents.
Each json document contained the program id and all associated metadata. All metadata
except images was explicit. However, the image data would have to be procured through
a URL. Through this URL all images were downloaded and stored locally. For each image
it was made sure that:
1. The URL existed
2. The URL was not faulty
3. The image was not a duplicate
Although, some duplicates did slip through this filter due to minor variations in the images,
such as the title language.
8
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:17==
3.2
The Database
Different options are available for data structuring, one being to continue the use of Elastic-
search1. However, due to minimal prior knowledge concerning Elasticsearch, and the time
it would require to obtain sufficient knowledge, it was assessed to be a non viable option.
Instead, the time was prioritised elsewhere, and based on previous experience, creating a
SQL Database for data storage and handling was assessed as the optimal approach.
Amongst different SQL database engine providers [12, 13] SQLite was chosen, seen as
previous experience had been obtained concerning this specific engine.
SQLite is not
necessarily the best engine when it comes to SQL Databases and their functionalities,
which is implied by ”Lite”. It lacks some of the otherwise common SQL query features
such as order by, right join, drop- and alter column.
Furthermore, SQLite does
not prevent storing the wrong data type into a field and does not support multi-client
concurrency.[14] However, seen as the amount of data is relatively small and none of the
above features are critical for the intent of this project, it was concluded that SQLite
would suffice.
Another possibility was to use Pandas DataFrames entirely, but that would require spend-
ing a substantial amount of time on writing multiple DataFrames as pickle dumps (or as
other storing methods) and loading them again each time needed.
Rather, a mix of database data storage, SQL queries and DataFrames have been taken
in use. In this manner, loading data into python scripts is fast and DataFrames delivers
manageable and prompt handling of the loaded data, and can compensate for some of the
mentioned shortages of SQLite2.
In Figure 3.1 an Entity Relation Diagram (ERD) shows the structure of the built SQLite
database. In the programs table all unique program UUIDs are stored together with their
specific title and type. To the left of programs is pictured the imageData table which
consists of (1) an image’s type, i.e. whether it is a poster or an in-action image, (2) a
unique relative URL which is used to extract the image from the server, and (3) an image
path to the local folder in which the image is stored.
The programs and imageData tables have a one-or-many to one-and-only-one relation.
Meaning that a program shall have at least one image connected but may have more. An
image however, belongs to exactly one program.
Each program can further have keywords associated. The keywords table consists of a
keyword id and the keyword itself. The programs and keywords tables have a zero-or-
more to one-or-more relation; a program can have zero or more keywords but a keyword
must belong to one ore more programs, otherwise it would not exist. The same applies to
the relation between the programs and casts tables. The casts table consists of a cast
uuid, a cast name e.g. Robert De Niro and a cast type, e.g. actor.
Additionally, each program has one or more genres associated. The genres table consists
of a genre id, genre name e.g. drama, a count of how frequent the genre appears and a
status (INCLUDED vs. NOT INCLUDED) of whether the count is high enough to include
it in the model development. The programs to genres table relation is one-or-more to
one-or-more, since it is only relevant to store programs which have genres connected to it,
1See sect. 3.1 for information about Elasticsearch
2Overall direct use of SQLite queries are preferred and DataFrames are only used where meaningful
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
9
==PAGE:18==
i.e. a program shall have one or more genre(s), and one genre shall belong to one or more
program(s).
Lastly, each genre can have a synonym. In the raw data there were a lot of different
words for the same genre, e.g. ”komedi”, ”comedy”, ”komedie”. Hence, a synonym table
was created in order to combine the synonyms into one genre. The genreSynonyms table
consists of a synonym id and the synonym itself. The relation between the genres and
genreSynonyms tables is zero-or-more to one-and-only-one, since one genre can have mul-
tiple synonyms, but a synonym such as ”komedi” belongs only to one genre, in this case
”comedy”.
Programs
program uuid
title
type
Keywords
keyword id
keyword
Image Data
type
relative url
image path
Casts
cast uuid
cast name
cast type
Genres
genre id
genre name
count
status
Genre Synonyms
synonym id
synonym
Figure 3.1: Entity Relation Diagram (ERD) of the SQLite database
3.3
Explorative analysis of the data
Among the metadata, only the genres was chosen in order to limit the workload. The
genres were chosen because of the correlation between genre and mood, i.e.
the idea
that people selects programs primarily on the basis of their mood. Note that the term
”program” covers both TV-series and movies.
The data exploration concerns itself firstly with a descriptive analysis and secondly a visual
analysis of the dataset.
3.3.1
Descriptive analysis
There are two types of image data in the dataset; poster images and still images from a
specific scene in the program, referred to as ”in-action” images. The in-action images are
not randomly chosen, as that could result in an image of e.g. a wall and would not bear
much information. An example of a poster image and an in-action image can be seen in
Figure 3.2.
10
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:19==
A poster image
An in-action image
Figure 3.2: Examples of the two types of images there exists in the dataset
Dataset
Total #samples
Posters
6112
In-action
17939
Table 3.1: Poster and in-action sample sizes
The dataset was retrieved over two peri-
ods.
Poster images were gathered firstly,
as the initial thought was to experiment
on these exclusively. However, poster im-
ages are made such that they appeal to the
audience and does not always reflect the
actual mood or contextual content of the
program. Consequently, it is expected that
some bias exist in the poster images. In order to counterbalance this bias, it was decided
to include in-action images. The hypothesis is that the in-action images will contribute
with visual contextual information that the posters perhaps lack.
Table 3.1 shows the number of samples for each of the image types. On average, each
poster image is associated with two in-action images, which leaves some of the in-action
images as stand-alones.
Additionally, some posters may be stand-alones as well.
The
in-action images are overly represented, which is not necessarily perceived as a weakness.
On the contrary, the goal is not to classify posters from in-action images, but rather to
extract as many features as possible from both types of images, but especially contextual
information from the in-action images.
Genre analysis
Figure 3.3 shows the genre distribution of the entire dataset (top), the poster images
(bottom left) and the in-action images (bottom right). An explicit count of each genre
can be found in Appendix C. It is noticed that the distribution of genres is the same for
both posters and in-action images.
It can further be seen from Figure 3.3 (top) that the genre children is clearly the most
frequent. The main contributor of the children genre are the in-action images, which were
retrieved at a later point in time than the poster images. The content database is dynamic
resulting in constantly changing frequencies of genres. As such, exactly why children is
the most frequent is unclear, perhaps it is due program popularity at certain times.
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
11
==PAGE:20==
Children set aside, the next most frequent genre is drama. Intuitively, it makes sense that
drama would be one of the most frequent genres since it is a rather meaningless genre;
almost everything can be somewhat of a drama.
Figure 3.3: Genre distributions within (top:) the entire dataset, (bottom left:) the posters
subset and (bottom right:) the in-action images subset
Besides children and drama, the remaining of the top five frequent genres are comedy,
thriller and action (cf. Figure 3.3). It is noticed that all of the top five frequent genres are
also some of the most known and common in the industry. Common genres are often rather
ambiguous and allows for different interpretations. The latter presents a great challenge in
the metadata creation process, seen as the vast majority of metadata is manually assigned.
Thereby, a bias is introduced stemming from an individual’s subjective opinion on genre
categorising.
Bias in this regard involves the assignment of unfitting genres or a lack
thereof.
Having very vague differentiators represents a challenge when training neural
networks to distinguishing between programs.
Figure 3.4: Frequency of programs/movies having one through five genres associated.
12
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.4 gives an insight into program and genre association. It is observed that the
vast majority of programs are only described by one genre, further showing signs of the
former mentioned bias of manually assigning metadata; it requires a lot of resources to
create detailed metadata for each program in the database. It is easier and quicker to
attach just one genre, and if its ambiguous enough, it can not go wrong.
Figures 3.4 and 3.3, shows that the data points, and thereby the genres, are greatly
exponentially distributed, which is a clear sign of an imbalanced dataset. Indeed, an often
occurring problem when working with multi-label classification tasks, is the existence of
an imbalanced dataset [15].
A reason for the imbalance could be that typically the more detailed a program is de-
scribed, the more niche the genres become and are used less frequently. Another reason
can also be the most frequently produced programs in the industry. One would expect
that mainstream programs, such as drama, comedy, etc. are produced more frequently
than musicals, westerns and cults.
Having an imbalanced dataset is a critical point of risk within data analysis and classi-
fication. One of the problems with imbalanced datasets is the accuracy paradox. The
accuracy paradox states that it is not necessarily the case that a model with higher accu-
racy is the best model. To combat this, other evaluation metrics can be used to discover
a model’s actual accuracy, where a certain level of these metrics holds more predictive
power than the aforementioned higher accuracy.[16]
Figure 3.5: Interactions of genres
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
13
==PAGE:22==
Lastly, the interaction of genres were looked upon to explore the ”correlation” between
genres. Figure 3.5 shows a graph where genre nodes are connected with an edge if they
occur together in a program. The edge-size is defined by two genre’s interaction frequency.
As one would expect, drama lies in the middle occurring together with almost every other,
if not all other, genres. The graph indicates that drama correlates highly with especially
action, thriller and comedy. This emphasises the theory that almost every program can
be somewhat of a drama. Furthermore, the genres lying closest to the centre indicates
that the most mainstream genres have high correlations with each other. The more niche
genres, including e.g. crime, cult, and western lies much further away from the centre and
have almost invisible edge size, indicating that these can be interpreted to be somewhat
independent of other genres. Note that the genre ”other” is not really a genre, but rather
something undefined and should perhaps have been left out.
Opposite to having observed how the genres interact, it is equally relevant and interesting
to find how the genres separates. This is done in the visual analysis where the genres and
how they relate to the visual data are examined.
3.3.2
Visual analysis
The visual analysis was carried out to inspect whether or not there is a clear relation
between the raw pixel values, i.e. colour, and the genres, along with how well the gen-
res separates.
In other words, the hope is to get a sense of how the image ambience
is distributed across the different genres.
The analysis is performed through a Linear
Discriminant Analysis (LDA) and a colourfulness analysis respectively.
It should be noted that, in order to perform the analyses it was necessary to reduce the
dataset down to only including data points associated to one genre and having a count
greater than a 100.
Linear Discriminant Analysis
The Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) is a supervised classification and dimensionality
reduction technique that can be used as a preprocessing step in Machine Learning and
pattern classification applications. However, the results from this analysis are merely used
as indicators towards patterns existing in the data and are not used again later.
There are some drawbacks of using the classic LDA on image data. The first being the fact
that LDA produces a linear discriminator, where the majority of patterns in images are
non-linear, such as shapes and objects. The second is a dimensional problem. An image
input x is originally a matrix of dimension m×n, however the input required by LDA must
be a D-dimensional vector. Therefore, it is necessary to reshape the image matrix into
a (m · n)-dimensional vector thereby loosing some of the information that is inherent in
the matrix structure; (1) vectorization destroys the structural information such as shapes
and spatial correlations (pixel positions relative to each other) and (2) the transformation
from a (m × n) matrix to a (m · n × 1) vector induces incredibly high dimensionality,
e.g. for a relatively small image, say 96 × 96, the image vector would have a dimension
of 9216 × 1. This high dimensionality, can affect the precision of the output by the LDA
since mn ≫N where N is the total number of samples. [17]
It would have been interesting to see the result from the algorithms proposed by [17]
and [18], concerning extensions of the LDA with respect to 2D data. Nonetheless, some
information can still be obtained by inspecting how well the images separates when only
considering the pixel values.
14
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:23==
In order to reduce the dimensionality, the images were resized to be of size 48 × 48 before
performing the LDA on the normalized (2304 × 1) image vectors.
Component
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Explained
variance (%)
22.75
20.02
13.72
13.12
10.92
10.33
9.13
Table 3.2: Explained variance ratio for each component
Table 3.2 holds the variance explained by each of the linear components/discriminators.
Selecting the four components with greatest percentage of variance explained, and plotting
the first component against the next three yields Figure 3.6. By looking at how the samples
projects down onto the LD1 axis, it can be seen that the first component (LD1) separates
the family genre from all other genres. Looking at the second component (LD2) it seems
as though there are some evidence of a separation between the genre children and the
other genres. Furthermore, the third and fourth component indicates that horror and
action respectively are somewhat well separated from the other classes.
Figure 3.6: LDA on normalized image data. The figure shows the first linear discriminant
plotted against the second, third and fourth respectively. To the left (a) the first is plotted
against the second. In the middle (b) the first and third, and to the right (c) the first and
fourth
However, the overall tendency suggests that it is a rather hard problem separating the
genres apart based solely on the raw image pixel values.
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
15
==PAGE:24==
Colourfulness analysis
Colourfulness is an expression used to describe how prominent the colours in an image
are. The colourfulness is used in this project as an indicator of the ambience in an image.
It is anticipated that horror, thriller and sci-fi programs are some of the least colourful
whereas children, family (because of animations) and comedy programs are some of the
most colourful.
In Hasler and Süsstrunk’s paper [19], they asked 20 non-experts to rate an image’s colour-
fulness on a scale of 1 to 7:
1. Not colorful
2. Slightly colorful
3. Moderately colorful
4. Averagely colorful
5. Quite colorful
6. Highly colorful
7. Extremely colorful
Through a series of experimental calculations they were able to derive a simple metric
correlating above 90% with the experimental data, that described the colourfulness. The
derivation of the colourfulness metric can be found in Appendix E.
(a) Distribution of the colourfulness mea-
sures
Interval
Colourfulness
[0, 25]
Not
[26, 51]
Slightly
[52, 77]
Moderately
[78, 103]
Averagely
[104, 129]
Quite
[130, 155]
Highly
[156, 182]
Extremely
(b) Colourfulness measures divided into in-
tervals with their corresponding colourful-
ness scale value
Figure 3.7: The distribution of colourfulness measures as (a) a distribution plot, and (b)
intervals with corresponding scale value
A plot of the colourfulness distribution over images can be seen in Figure 3.7a. Addition-
ally, by dividing the colourfulness measures into intervals it is possible to interpret the
results with respect to the defined colourfulness scale above, resulting in Table 3.7b.
The colourfulness of the images seems to follow a positively skewed normal distribution
around a mean of ≈50 (corresponding to slightly or moderately colourful) and with a
standard deviation of 24.2495. The positive skewness of the normal distribution indicates
that the majority of images are not to moderately colourful. The relatively small standard
deviation indicates that it is a minority of images which deviates from the mean. Meaning
16
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:25==
that the images belonging to each of the tails in Figure 3.7a, can most easily be told apart
based on the their colourfulness.
Figure 3.8: Left: Boxplots of colourfulness measures across genres. Right: Mean colour-
fulness for each genre.
Looking at the colourfulness measure divided across the different genres gives us the box-
plots and mean colourfulness in Figure 3.8. We observe from both the boxplots and means,
that no huge distinction can be made between genres. However, one can argue that family
stands out by having some of the most colourful images and least number of outliers.
Furthermore, as expected it seems as though that drama, thriller and especially horror
generally have lower colourfulness measures than most other images. Finally, it is observed
that comedy and action have great resemblance both in the boxplot span and in average.
Least colourful
Genre
Count
drama
25
horror
9
comedy
8
children
3
thriller
3
action
1
total
49
(a) Genre count for the least colourful im-
ages
Most colourful
Genre
Count
children
26
comedy
9
family
6
drama
4
action
2
horror
1
thriller
1
total
49
(b) Genre count for the most colourful im-
ages
Table 3.3: Genre count of least and most colourful images
Taking the genre count of the 49 least and most colourful images presented in Table 3.3
shows that it is children and comedy which are the most colourful. However, drama and
not horror, as one would otherwise expect, has the least colourful images. The exponential
appearance of the data, could affect the count, since children and drama are more likely to
occur. The latter is noticed in Figure 3.9b where images from the same children program
occurs frequently. Furthermore, from 3.9a it is seen that some of the images are from
black and white programs, which of course influences the least colourful genre count. By
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
17
==PAGE:26==
temporarily ignoring drama and children, the next least and most colourful images are
horror and comedy respectively, which are true to what was originally anticipated in the
beginning of the colourfulness analysis.
Referring back to Figure 3.7a it is observed that all genres not represented in Tables
3.3a and 3.3b are the ones lying closest to the colourfulness average, indicating that it
is somewhat difficult to tell these apart, while the genres of the least and most colourful
images, ({drama, horror}, and {children,comedy} are more easily told apart.
(a) The 49 least colourful images
(b) The 49 most colourful images
Figure 3.9: Least and most colourful images in the dataset
Finally, it is important to remember that duplicates does exist, although in a limited
number, which affects the results in the visual analysis, since a program appearing twice
has double the effect. In a perfect world, there would be no duplicates and images such
as the 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 6th in Figure 3.9a would probably be removed.
Some key takeaways from these analyses are:
• The genres are heavily exponentially distributed
• There is a majority of one-genre programs relating to the time consuming task of
metadata creation
• Genres do correlate with each other
• Genres with respect to their visual appearance are not linearly separable
• The variation in the colour-spectrum of the different genres is relatively low
• The majority of images are similar in appearance making it difficult to differentiate
between genres based on colours in images alone, and suggests that more contextual
information is needed in order to separate genres properly.
18
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:27==
4
Feature extraction and the
Recommender system
This chapter will go through the methods and algorithms used to establish models created
in the project. The first step was performed by using a supervised deep learning approach
to extract features from images divided into their respective genres. Subsequently, the
features were combined and used as input in a recommender system.
4.1
Supervised Deep Learning
Deep Learning is a subfield within Machine Learning concerning Artificial Neural Networks
(ANN), which are models heavily inspired by neuroscience. Deep Learning architectures
tries to learn a hierarchical representation of data in order to model complex concepts out
of simpler concepts.[20] This is achieved through a series of (hidden) layers consisting of
nonlinear units each transforming the representation in one layer into a representation in
the next layer, analogously to how neurons are interconnected in the brain.[21]
Furthermore, neural networks provides four key advantages[22]:
1. The ability to detect complex feature interactions.
2. The ability to work with variables consisting of many categories.
3. The ability to learn low-level features from minimally processed raw data.
4. The ability to work with unlabelled data.
These strengths as well as the non-linearity of neural networks allows for more abstract
patterns to be discovered and much more detailed models can be created. Consequently,
deep learning architectures may compensate or expand on areas where other machine
learning techniques and/or linear classification methods are inadequate to the problem at
hand.
Generally speaking the learning part of deep learning can be divided into three categories
[23]:
1. In supervised deep learning the true labels of the data are known. Thereby, a
supervised algorithm tries to learn a posterior distribution p(y|x) by analysing the
input data {xi}N
i=1 and inferring a function based on how well the outputs {yi}N
i=1
matches the true targets.
2. In unsupervised deep learning no target labels exists.
The unsupervised algo-
rithm will search for underlying patterns and groupings in the data, and tries to fit
probability densities p(x) over the input data x
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
19
==PAGE:28==
3. In semi-supervised deep learning, the supervised and unsupervised approaches are
combined. Typically, the discrimination of data by using a supervised deep network
is assisted and improved by utilising the outcomes of an unsupervised deep network.
In this thesis the supervised strategy from point 1. is considered.
4.1.1
Training Neural Networks
As mentioned previously, the supervised setting operates with an input signal {xi}N
i=1
and an output signal {yi}N
i=1. Furthermore, the true targets can be either continuous in
a regression network or discrete for classification. For further development we consider
the classification network setting with the targets being genres. The targets are denoted
yc, c ∈{1, ..., C} where C is the number of unique classes. Moreover, a distinction can
be made between multi-label and multi-class classification. In this thesis the focus has
been on multi-label classification since a program can have multiple genres simultaneously.
Had it been a multi-class problem, each genre would be mutually exclusive, however this
is clearly not the case as we observed in Chapter 3.3.
Regardless of network architecture, the aforementioned non-linear units are essentially
parametric functions, with one for each label; f(x, w) = [f1(x, w), . . . fC(x, w)], where w
consists of all weights in the network. For a fixed w the function becomes a mapping of
the input signals x to output values y, cf. point 1 above. The training of a network then
consists of minimising the error between the output values and true target values.
Binary classification
Consider the case where C = 1, and let ˆyi = fC1(xi, w).
For each input signal we
consider a binary classification in which fC1 maps xi to a single target variable t such
that t = 1 denotes that xi ∈C1 and t = 0 denotes xi /∈C1. By applying the sigmoid
activation function, given in Equation (4.1), to the raw outputs of the network, we get
that 0 ≤ˆyi ≤1 (a plot of how the sigmoid function maps values can be found in Figure
H.1).
Thereby, we can interpret ˆyi as the conditional probability p(yi = C1|xi, w) of observation
i belonging to class C1, with p(yi ̸= C1|xi, w) given by 1 −ˆyi.
ˆy = σ(y) =
1
1 + exp(−y)
(4.1)
The conditional distribution of targets given the input signals is then a Bernoulli distri-
bution of the form:
p(yi = t|xi, w) = ˆyt
i{1 −ˆyi}1−t,
t ∈{0, 1}
(4.2)
From the definition of Bayes’ theorem, seen in Equation (4.3) and interpreted into words
in (4.4), we recognise that Equation (4.2) corresponds to the likelihood function.
p(w|xi, t) = p(t|xi, w)p(w)
p(t|xi)
⇒
(4.3)
posterior ∝likelihood × prior
(4.4)
The likelihood function is not a probability distribution, but rather a measure indicating
how probable the observed ts are for different values of w. Hence, we would like to find
20
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:29==
values of w which maximises the likelihood of observing t. An often used approach is
to take the negative logarithm of the likelihood and then minimise this term. This is
done since the negative logarithm is a monotonically decreasing function, hence when the
likelihood increases, the negative log-likelihood decreases.
Consequently, the error function, given by the negative log of the likelihood function in
Equation (4.2), then becomes the cross-entropy error function of the form:
E(w) = −
N
∑
n=1
{tnln(ˆyn) + (1 −tn)ln(1 −ˆyn)}
(4.5)
When getting output values corresponding to probabilities in a classification model, the
cross-entropy loss or log-loss function can be used to measure the performance of the
predicted classifications versus the true labels. The cross-entropy loss increases as the
predicted probability deviates from the true label (cf. Figure H.2).
Multi-label classification
Now, consider the case where C > 1. Then the network has to perform C separate binary
classifications resulting in C outputs each having a logistic sigmoid activation function
applied, as well as an associated class label tc ∈{0, 1} where c = 1, . . . , C. Assuming that
the class labels are independent, given an observation, then the conditional distribution
of the target for observation i in the multi-label case can be defined as:
p(yi = t|xi, w) =
C
∏
c=1
ˆytic
ic [1 −ˆyic]1−tic
(4.6)
where ˆyic = fc(xi, w). This function corresponds to the likelihood function for one obser-
vation i. Considering N observations X and corresponding weights w and targets y, then
assuming that the observations X are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d), the
likelihood of all observations becomes:
p(y = t|X, w) =
N
∏
i=1
C
∏
c=1
ˆytic
ic [1 −ˆyic]1−tic
(4.7)
Applying the negative logarithm to (4.7) yields the following error function for all obser-
vations:
E(w) = −
N
∑
i=1
C
∑
c=1
{ticln(ˆyic) + (1 −tic)ln(1 −ˆyic)}
(4.8)
Given that the error function is a smooth continuous function of w, we can use the gradient
information of the error function to determine the w so that ∇E(w) = 0. More specifically,
∇E(w) informs us of the greatest rate of increase in the error function. If ∇E(w) = 0
there is no increase, and either a minima, maxima or saddle point have been found.
One technique used to solve ∇E(w) = 0 is an iteratively process, where we move from wτ
to wτ+1 by taking a step in the direction of the negative gradient:
wτ+1 = wτ −η∇E(wτ)
(4.9)
Where η is called the learning rate or step size. Thereby we evaluate the gradient for each
new w at step τ. This approach is called gradient descent since the weights moves in the
direction of the greatest rate of decrease in the error function.
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
21
==PAGE:30==
Error backpropagation
With respect to the derivation of the backpropagation rules presented in this section,
inspiration has been drawn from [24] and [25], as well as exercise 1 from the course 02456
Deep Learning at DTU.
Besides gradient descent, other weight updating schemes exists, for example Stochastic
Gradient Descent (SGD), Momentum and Adam. [26, 27] Each of them has their own ad-
vantages and disadvantages regarding convergence time, computational cost and robust-
ness. Common for them all is the requirement of evaluating the error function derivative
with respect to the weights, which is a computational inefficient task, especially for very
deep networks. Backpropagation is a technique providing a more efficient way to compute
the gradients.
Figure 4.1: The simplest of networks is the one with only two units; an input and an
output
Consider the very simple network with an input and an output unit in Figure 4.1. The
figure shows the forward pass of information through the network. That is, we can compute
the output ˆyj given the input xi and the weight wji. For simplicity, let the error function
of the output and the target value tnj take on the mean squared error (MSE) form:
En = 1
2(ˆynj −tnj)2
for a particular input n. Other error functions such as cross-entropy are also an option.
Remember that the goal is to update the weights utilising the gradient information. We
shall see how backpropagation eases this process by reusing multiple values as we move
backwards through the network.
For the simple network, the backpropagation would
simply be to compute the gradient of the MSE:
∂En
∂wji
=
∂
∂wji
1
2(ˆynj −tnj)2 =
∂
∂wji
1
2(wjixni −tnj)2
= (wjixni −tnj)
∂
∂wji
(wjixni −tnj)
= (wjixni −tnj)
∂
∂wji
(wjixni)
= (wjixni −tnj)xni
= (ˆynj −tnj)xni
If the number of hidden units are increased, as in Figure 4.2, then the notion of backprop-
agation needs to be generalised. For clarity, the five important functions from Figure 4.2
22
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.2: A Feed-forward neural network with four units
are written below:
aj = wjixi,
zj = h(aj)
(4.10)
ak = wkjzj,
zk = h(ak)
(4.11)
ˆyl = wlkzk
(4.12)
where h(·) in (4.10) and (4.11) is the activation function, which could for instance be the
aforementioned sigmoid activation function.
Moving backwards through the network, first from unit l to k, we need to find the derivative
of the error function of the output versus target with respect to the previous weight wlk.
This corresponds to the derivation above for the simple input/output network and results
in:
∂En
∂wlk
= (ˆynl −tnl)znk
(4.13)
Next, moving one more step backwards from unit k to j, it is noticed that, when finding
the weight update, the error function En depends on the weight wkj only through the
input ak in (4.11). Thereby the chain rule for partial derivatives can be applied:
∂En
∂wkj
= ∂En
∂ank
∂ank
∂wkj
=
∂
∂ank
1
2(ˆynl −tnl)2
∂
∂wkj
wkjznj
=
∂
∂ank
(1
2(wlkh(ank) −tnl)2) · znj
= (wlkh(ank) −tnl)
∂
∂ank
(wlkh(ank) −tnl) · znj
(wlkh(ank) −tnl)
∂
∂ank
(wlkh(ank)) · znj
= (ˆynl −tnl)wlkh′(ank)znj
We can already see, that the blue term has been reused once now. Moving even further
down the network, i.e. evaluating ∂En
∂wji , the pattern of reusing variables becomes even more
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
23
==PAGE:32==
obvious:
∂En
∂wji
= ∂En
∂anj
∂anj
∂wji
=
∂
∂anj
1
2(ˆynl −tnl)2
∂
∂wji
wjixi
= (ˆynl −tnl)
∂
∂anj
(wlkh(wkjh(anj)) −tnl)
∂
∂wji
wjixi
= (ˆynl −tnl)wlkh′(wkjh(anj))wkjh′(anj)xi
= (ˆynl −tnl)wlkh′(ank)wkjh′(anj)xi
This terminology also extends to multiple inputs and outputs, however this is regarded out
of scope for this thesis. Given the emerged pattern, a useful notation can be introduced
for some of the variables. For the output unit we have:
δl = ˆynl −tnl
And for the hidden units:
δk ≡∂En
∂ank
= (ˆynl −tnl)wlkh′(ank)
δj ≡∂En
∂anj
= (ˆynl −tnl)wlkh′(ank)wkjh′(anj)
Consequently, the backpropagation formula can be formalised as:
δj = h′(aj)δkwkj
(4.14)
Where the index j indicates that it is the δ at unit j and likewise, the index k indicates
the δ at the previous unit (cf. Figure 4.2). Thereby the gradient of the error function
∇En(w) =
[
∂En
∂wlk , ∂En
∂wkj , ∂En
∂wji
]T
can be computed more efficiently by reusing variables and
the update can be computed thereafter.
Mini-batch learning
While training a network, epochs are used. In each epoch one forward and one backward
pass are made through the network, computing the update of the weights. In the previous
section, the index n was used to indicate that the equations and derivations concerned
only one particular observation/input. Obtaining the total error E(w), and the gradient
thereof, requires iterating over all observations (n = 1, . . . , N) in the data set which can
be computationally troublesome given a very large N. Therefore, it is often preferable
to divide the data into batches. A distinction is made between full batch, online, and
mini-batch learning.
Full batch learning is when all observations are used at once in each epoch to compute the
update (b = N, b being batch). In this manner the true gradient of the error is obtained,
resulting in an exact answer of the next step direction for the update. However, in order
24
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:33==
for the method to be efficient, it requires that the full batch is to be stored in memory,
which is not possible on today’s hardware due to memory constrains.
On the other hand, when setting b = 1 it is called online learning. Following this method-
ology, each epoch is comprised of an update to the weight vector made on one observation
at a time which improves the computational efficiency significantly. Furthermore, since
each observation is chosen at random, thereby only reflecting a very small part of the
whole truth, online learning will introduce noise into the system. This noisiness is not
necessarily a disadvantage; it may help with escaping local minima and/or saddle points.
However, updating at each data point for a large data set where too much noise is present,
may set the learner off course, leading to lower convergence rate.
The mini-batch methodology is a compromise based on the advantages from both full
batch learning and online learning. In mini-batch learning 1 < b < N, i.e. the data set
is divided into m = N/b smaller subsets each containing b observations. In this way,
the gradient will be closer to the true gradient, while still injecting enough noise to each
update. Additionally, the computational effort is lowered while still achieving relatively
speedy convergence.
4.1.2
Convolutional Neural Networks
There exists various structures of ANN’s here among Convolutional Neural Networks
(ConvNets). ConvNets are especially utilised within the computer vision area, since they
have the ability to capture spatial information in images, contrary to other ”flat” network
architectures and classification algorithms (such as LDA). The units in the hidden layers
of the ConvNets are arranged in three dimensions corresponding to the width, height and
depth of an image (here depth is the number of channels in an image, e.g. 3 for RGB im-
ages). By applying certain filters in some of the layers, it is possible to capture important
spatial information while reducing the dimension of the units, eventually resulting in the
label scores. The full ConvNet architecture consists of convolutional layers, pooling layers
and fully connected layers as well as activation layers.
The convolutional layer
The convolutional layer extracts features from the input image by convolving filters across
the image. The different types of filters and their definitions are regarded out of the scope
of this thesis.
Figure 4.3 shows a poster image before and after a convolution. It can be seen from the
figure how the Sobel filter [28] enhances vertical lines in the image, which are exactly
the types of low-level features the first convolutional layers captures, as well as colours.
Subsequent layers captures more abstract features since these are combinations of previous
layers after activation.
For an image X with dimensions width × height × channels, and K filters with dimen-
sions widthfilter × heightfilter × channels (where typically widthfilter = heightfilter) the
convolution computation with filter F (k) takes on the form:
Z(k)
m,n = (F(k) ∗X)m,n =
C
∑
c=1
Hf
∑
i=1
Wf
∑
j=1
F (k)
c,i,jXc,m+i−1,n+j−1
(4.15)
Where ∗is the convolution operator, and C is the number of channels in the input image,
Hf and Wf is the height and width of the filter respectively and Z(k)
m,n is the (m, n)th ouput
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.3: Poster image before and after the convolution utilising the Sobel filter in the
x-direction to extract vertical edges.
of the convolution for the (k)th filter. The total feature map Z will have dimensions:
width = width −widthfilter + 2 · padding
stride
+ 1
height = height −heightfilter + 2 · padding
stride
+ 1
depth = K
Padding is a border of zeros around the input image before convolving. It is typically used
if a specific dimension of the output after convolution is required. Stride is the sliding
distance of the filter.
The Equation for the forward pass of the convolutional layer after activation can then be
defined as follows:
H(k) = h
(
Z(k) + b(k))
(4.16)
for some bias b(k) and an activation function h(·).
For a visual interpretation of convolutions, the reader is referred to [29].
Pooling
In succession to the convolutional layers follows often a pooling layer. The pooling layers
down-samples the images spatially while preserving the depth throughout the network and
are used in order to reduce (1) the computational effort and (2) the amount of parameters,
consequently reducing the risk of overfitting.
One of the most common pooling operations is the maxpooling. The maxpooling filter is
typically of dimension 2 × 2 with a stride of 2. The maxpooling filter operates by taking
the max value of the 2 by 2 window in the input image. [29] For a visual representation
see Figure 4.4
Whichever pooling scheme is chosen, common to them all is that they help making rep-
resentations in the image approximately invariant to small translations. This property is
26
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.4: The maxpool operation [29]
neat if we do not care about an object’s position in the image, but rather whether it exists
or not. More specifically, the invariance to translation means that if an object is shifted by
a small amount in the image, the output of the pooling operation does not change much
since we only care about the maximum value in the pooling window in the image. [20]
Fully Connected Layers
Figure 4.5: Architecture of fully connected layers [30]
The layer previous to the first fully connected layer returns a 3-dimensional output. The
first fully connected layer then flattens its incoming input from the previous stage, i.e. it
flattens the incoming 3-dimensional matrix to a 1-dimensional vector consisting of all the
learned features so far. The subsequent fully connected layers then performs the steps
described in Section 4.1.1 until reaching the last fully connected layer, which returns the
label probabilities. An example of the fully connected architecture can be seen in Figure
4.5.
For images, the use of convolutional layers is very advantageously because of the shared
weights concept. The shared weights concept is the use of the same weight matrices (filters)
across the input image. For comparison, take a simple 3D input of size (96×96×2) mapping
to an output of size (94×94×1). A fully connected layer would need (96·96·2)·(94·94·1)
weights whereas a convolutional layer would need (3 · 3 · 3) weights (depending on stride
and padding). Hence, convolutional layers are significantly more parameter effective than
fully connected layers.
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
27
==PAGE:36==
Rectified Linear Unit activation function
A common choice for the activation function h(·) mentioned in Section 4.1.2 is the Rectified
Linear Unit activation function (ReLU):
h(x) = max(0, x)
(4.17)
The ReLU function has two primary advantages: [31]
1. It accounts for non-linear interactions by taking the slopes from different units in
the network into consideration
2. It does not have the problem of vanishing gradients as opposed to the sigmoidal or
tanh activation functions
Leaky ReLU
A problem with the ordinary ReLU is, that if the output after the activation function is 0,
then some ReLU units in the network will ”die” and remain inactive no matter what input
it is fed. A large number of dead units will affect the performance of the network. [32]
The problem of dying ReLU units can be corrected by changing the slope left of x = 0,
allowing for small negative values instead of 0:
h(x) = max(0, x) + negative_slope · min(0, x)
(4.18)
4.2
The Recommender System
Given the novelty of this project, it was chosen to move forward with Content-Based
Filtering (CBF). The primary reason hereof is that CBF is a state of the art recommender
system. [5] Additionally, CBF, contrary to CF, seemed beneficial because of the possibility
of limiting the need of personal data. Moreover, CBF solves some of the weaknesses of
CF, such as the cold start problem.
The input fed to the recommender system comprises of the content embeddings/identities.
These consists of the output of multiple binary classifiers following the one versus one
neural network scheme.
4.2.1
Content-Based Filtering
CBF, as the name suggests, tries to filter content based on their respective metadata.
Examples of such metadata are genre, production year, cast and/or directors. Thereby,
given an interaction response from a user; a click on a movie for instance, it is possible to
filter relevant content to recommend.
User profiles
In order to relate recommendations to users, some user information is required. Typically
this information is stored in a thematic user profile. Such a profile can be created explicitly
by the user or automatically through the user’s history of interactions.
One disadvantage is that it is often necessary to have a very detailed user profile con-
tradicting the limited use of personal data. The reason thereof is that if the coverage of
metadata is low or too ambiguous (e.g. the majority of movies being solely drama, which
is probably not the truth), then few and non-specific preferences like ”I like movies with
28
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:37==
Nicolas Cage” or ”I like drama” are an insufficient amount of knowledge and will result
in a high probability of leading to poor recommendations.
The lack of rich metadata inspired the attempt of using visual features as metadata instead
of explicit metadata. The inspiration is drawn from the idea that the program itself has
metadata embedded within; a picture says more than a thousand words. The hope is
that by expanding the concept of metadata, the need for personal data in the user profile
is reduced. The visual features are generated through the one versus one binary neural
network approach.
4.2.2
The one versus one approach
An approach to deal with multi-label classification is to use the one versus one (OvO)
modelling method.
[33] Note that the word class is sometimes used instead of labels
although technically there is only one class; genres. The OvO method decomposes the K-
label classification problem into M = K(K−1)
2
separate pair-wise classification problems.
Subsequently the outputs are combined, resulting in one final classification of the input.
However, the interest in this thesis is not to be able to classify the program images per
say. Rather we wish to utilise the output of the M binary neural networks as an identity
of the program. Therefore, the last part of the OvO scheme of combining the output is
not further explained in this report.
Let a two-class neural network be denoted fm(Ci, Cj) where 1 ≤m ≤M and Ci is class
i, and Cj is class j, for 1 ≤i < j ≤K. The network fm(Ci, Cj) is trained solely with
observations from class i and class j and its output ˆynm is a measure indicating whether
the input Xn is class i or j.
Consequently, the program identity will have the form
ˆyn = [ˆyn1, . . . , ˆynM]T .
Instead of transforming the probabilities (ˆynm) into classifications (as we saw in Section
4.1.1), they are interpreted as a measure of how much the input is considered being class
i or j.
4.2.3
Similarity measures and K-Nearest Neighbours
Once all the identities have been obtained, it is possible to calculate the similarities between
them. This is in fact the content filtering part of the recommender system. Consider for
instance a user clicking on a program which has a certain identity, we then wish to find
similar identities to that movie, in order to produce a recommendation.
Two different similarity measures have been used in this project; the cosine and the Pear-
son.
Cosine similarity
The angle between two identities corresponds to how different/how far away they are from
one another. To find the angle between two vectors we use:
cos(θ) =
a • b
∥a ∥∥b ∥=
∑N
i=1 aibi
√∑N
i=1 a2
i
√∑N
i=1 b2
i
(4.19)
Equation (4.19) is exactly the definition of the cosine similarity and ranges from -1 to 1.
More specifically when the angle between the vectors are 0, i.e. they lie on top of each
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
29
==PAGE:38==
other we have θ = 0 ⇒cos(θ) = 1, and oppositely θ = π ⇒cos(θ) = −1.
Pearson similarity
The Pearson correlation can be divided into two steps:
1. Consider one vector across the x-axis and another across the y-axis in a 2D coordinate
system. A linear regression line is fitted to the (x,y)-values in the coordinate system.
2. Let the term baseline denote the specific linear regression of the form y = 1x. The
baseline would be a perfect fit, meaning that x = y for all (x, y)-pairs in the vectors.
The angle between where the linear regression line from point 1. meets the baseline
indicates how similar/dissimilar the two original vectors are.
To calculate the cosine of the angle we use again Equation (4.19). Although, contrary to
the cosine similarity, by centering the data, the Pearson similarity takes into account the
averages of the vectors, and its formula becomes:
pearson =
∑N
i=1(ai −a)(bi −b)
√∑N
i=1(ai −a)2
√∑N
i=1(bi −b)2
(4.20)
where a and b are the averages of a and b respectively.
K-Nearest Neighbours
After obtaining all pair-wise similarities, the so called neighbourhoods can be formed. The
neighbourhood of an item consists of its k most similar items, hence the name k-Nearest
Neighbours (kNN). Based on a user’s interaction with items and the neighbourhoods of
these it is possible to recommend new content to the user.
30
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:39==
5
Experimental setup
A substantial amount of code has been written in order to convert theory into practice.
This chapter presents an overview of the core implementation settings of neural networks
as they are the main concern of this thesis. Subsequently, a more detailed explanation of
the individual networks and their architecture is given. Furthermore, in order to transform
the output of the networks into recommendations, a simple recommender system was build,
and the overall settings thereof are presented as well. Finally, the design of an empirical
study, performed to evaluate the recommender system, is elaborated upon.
5.1
Implementation
All code in this thesis has been written in the coding language Python [34]. The neural
networks were implemented utilising the PyTorch package. PyTorch is an open source
Python-based scientific software library tailored towards deep learning research. PyTorch
operates with Tensors which are similar to NumPy’s ndarrays and shares many of the
same functionalities. Additionally, Tensors have the possibility of being used on the GPU
to expedite computing. However in order to utilise the GPU, an NVIDIA GPU is re-
quired, which the computer used in this thesis does not have. This of course caused some
restrictions with respect to the scale of the networks and the time needed to train these.
The general network training structure in PyTorch is comprised overall of four steps:
1. Write a custom Dataset designed specifically for the data used [35]
2. Define the network architecture including the forward pass
3. Specify the loss and optimiser functions
4. Write the training loop in which the backward pass is run
The PyTorch setting enables dynamic and clear programming of neural networks.
5.1.1
PyTorch Dataset
The abstract class torch.utils.data.Dataset is used to facilitate the data loading pro-
cess. When creating a custom dataset it is required that it should inherit the Dataset
class and override the methods [35]:
• __len__ : returns the size of the dataset
• __getitem__ : support indexing such that dataset[i] can be used to get the ith
sample
An example of the custom dataset class can be seen in pseudo code below [35]:
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
31
==PAGE:40==
1
2
class CustomDataset(Dataset):
3
4
def __init__(self, [input_args], root_dir , transform=None):
5
"""
6
Args:
7
[input_args] : arguments related to the data storage unit,
8
e.g. path to csv file
9
root_dir (string): Directory with all the images.
10
transform (callable , optional): Optional transform to be applied
on a sample.
11
"""
12
13
# Initialise instances
14
self.dataframe
15
self.root_dir
16
self.transform
17
18
def __len__(self):
19
# Size of dataframe
20
return len(self.dataframe)
21
22
def __getitem__(self, idx):
23
if torch.is_tensor(idx):
24
idx = idx.tolist()
25
26
image = # read image[idx] from path
27
targets = # get targets from dataframe.iloc[idx]
28
29
sample = {'image': image, 'targets': targets}
30
31
if self.transform:
32
sample = self.transform(sample)
33
34
return sample
Having created the dataset we can use torch.utils.data.DataLoader to iterate through
the data while also batching and shuffling it.
5.1.2
Define the Neural Network
The network architecture is build as a class in which the forward pass is also defined.
To build the network architecture the torch.nn package is used. With this package we
can define the layers needed. For instance, if we want to build a ConvNet we would use
nn.Conv2d to specify the convolutional layers followed by pooling layers nn.MaxPool2d
and finally the fully connected layers nn.Linear. The activation functions are specified
through nn.functional, e.g. nn.functional.relu.
Pseudo code of a ConvNet class example can be seen below:
1
class Network():
2
3
def __init__(self):
4
super(Network , self).__init__()
5
self.conv1 = nn.Conv2d
6
self.pool = nn.MaxPool2d
7
self.conv2 = nn.Conv2d
32
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:41==
8
self.fc1 = nn.Linear
9
self.fc2 = nn.Linear
10
self.fc3 = nn.Linear
11
12
def forward_pass(self,x):
13
# First convolutional layer
14
x = self.conv1(x)
15
16
# ReLU activation function
17
x = nn.functional.relu(x)
18
19
# Maxpool
20
x = pool(x)
21
22
# All together
23
x = self.pool(nn.functional.relu(self.conv2(x)))
24
25
x = # flatten x
26
27
# First fully connected layer
28
x = self.fc1(x)
29
30
# ReLU activation function
31
x = nn.functional.relu(x)
32
33
# All together
34
x = nn.functional.relu(self.fc2(x))
35
36
# Last fully connected layer
37
x = self.fc3(x)
38
return x
5.1.3
Loss and optimiser functions
The loss function used throughout this project is a numerical stable version of the Cross
Entropy combined with the sigmoid activation function nn.BCEWithLogitsLoss [36]. The
result of BCEWithLogitsLoss is the same as using the sigmoid activation function followed
by the regular Cross Entropy loss function as we did in Section 4.1.1. However the problem
of underflow may occur when doing the two operations separately, which is what the
numerical stable version solves by combining the two operations into one layer [36]. Hence,
it was assessed that the stable version is the better choice.
For optimisation of the weights, the Adam optimiser torch.optim.Adam is used. Most
often used optimisers are the SGD, AdaGrad, AdaMax, RMSprop or Adam, and it can be
hard to choose either one rather than the other. However SGD was specifically not chosen
based on the cons discussed in Section 4.1.1, and because various research finds that the
other optimisers performs better [27, 37, 38]. Eventually the Adam optimiser was chosen
based on its popularity in the field and given its good results of performance [27].
5.1.4
Training the network
Putting it all together, we can loop over each epoch in which:
1. the input and targets are loaded from the custom dataset defined in Section 5.1.1
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
33
==PAGE:42==
2. the forward pass resulting in the outputs is computed by calling Network(input)
(cf. Section 5.1.2)
3. the loss function specified in Section 5.1.3 is evaluated
4. the backward pass is computed by calling loss.backward()
5. and finally the weights are updated by calling optimiser.step()
5.2
Experimental design
Two different experiments were carried out concerning (1) a pure multi-label classification
problem as in Section 4.1.1, and (2) the OvO approach to multi-label classification as in
Section 4.2.2. Both experiments comprises of ConvNet architectures, which are described
in the subsequent sections. It should be noted that all hyperparameters listed below and
in the following sections were found by a trial and error process rather than e.g. cross-
validation since the latter was deemed too time consuming. Listed below are the properties
that the two different ConvNet approaches shares:
Pre-processing of input data
All images were resized into being 96×96×3. Note here, that the channel (=3) is stated to
emphasise that all images must have exactly 3 channels, since some images in the dataset
are black and white. Black and white images were transformed into having 3 channels by
stacking two zero-valued channel matrices of size 96 × 96 on top. Furthermore, the data
was normalised to range between 0 and 1.
Hyperparameters
The hyperparamters in common for both network structures are:
• A batch size of 32
• A learning rate (aka step size cf. Section 4.1.1 and Equation (4.9)) of 0.001
• A weight decay of 0.0005 in the Adam optimiser. The weight decay corresponds to
the L2 penalty for regularisation in order to prevent over-fitting
• The number of epochs, which is set to 50
Early stopping
Early stopping is used as a regularisation method to avoid over-fitting.
The method
keeps track of the validation loss, and if the loss has stopped decreasing over a specified
number of epochs, the training stops. The ”specified number of epochs” is called patience
and is the number of epochs you allow to run before the training loop breaks. In this
project the patience is set to 15 epochs. The Early stopping method used is a class in the
pytorchtool.py package created for PyTorch models [39]. It saves a checkpoint of the
model each time the validation loss decreases. In this way, it is possible to load the model
from the last checkpoint.
Convolutional neural network architecture
For simplicity, the same ConvNet architecture, shown in Figure 5.1, have been used for
both experiments. Additionally, using one architecture sets the same basis for a compar-
ison of the results, since these thereby are produced given the same factors. After each
convolution the leaky ReLU, discussed in Section 4.1.2, is applied. Furthermore, dropout
is used to avoid over-fitting [40].
34
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:43==
Figure 5.1: Architecture of the convolutional neural network used for both experiments.
It was inspired by the VGG-16 ConvNet architecture [41].
The activation function on the output is the sigmoid function as mentioned in Section
5.1.3. The reasoning behind using the sigmoid function is, that a program/movie can
have multiple genres simultaneously.
5.2.1
The pure multi-label ConvNet
For the pure multi-label network it was chosen, based on the discussion in Section 3.3.1,
and to ensure enough data samples of each category for training, to proceed with programs
having either one or two genres associated. Figure 5.2 shows the resulting frequency of the
genres included in the one- and two-genres subset. When using the one- and two-genres
subset for further development, it was chosen to only include genres with a count greater
than 100 and to exclude the genres documentary and series since, realistically, they are
not genres as much as they are categories; they are too ambiguous and does not contribute
with important information.
Figure 5.2: The genre distribution of the dataset consisting of data points having either
one or two genres associated
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
35
==PAGE:44==
In order to relieve some of the imbalance, i.e. 20072 one-genre samples versus 3135 two-
genre samples, it was chosen to randomly sample 2000 data points of each of the two
categories. That is, 2000 samples having exclusively one genre and 2000 samples having
exclusively two genres (=4000 samples total). This of course induces a certain bias in the
way, that the data does not reflect the whole truth, and certain images are left out which
perhaps would have been nice to have included. The challenge of tackling imbalanced data
in multi-label classification tasks is a whole separate area of research [42, 15, 43].
The data was divided by a 0.8 training split, 0.1 validations split and 0.1 test split resulting
in 3201 training samples, 400 validation samples and 399 test samples.
5.2.2
The one versus one ConvNets
For the OvO ConvNets, the subset of only one-genre data points was used since the goal
is to learn the visual context specific to each of the separate labels, i.e. genres. Figure
5.3 shows the frequency of each genre in the one-genre subset. For the rest of this report,
when working with the one-genre subset, only genres with a count above 100 are included.
Moreover, as for the one- and two-genres subset, the genres documentary and series are
excluded here as well.
Resulting in the set {children, drama, comedy, thriller, action,
family, horror, sci-fi }
Figure 5.3: Frequency of genres in the one-genre subset
Moreover, remembering from Section 4.2.2 that the OvO scheme requires K(K−1)
2
different
binary classifiers, and given the time restriction of the project and limited computer re-
sources led to actions being taken in order to reduce this number. Given the indications of
correlations between genres both explicitly and visually from Section 3.3, it seems feasible
to combine some of the genres.
We use the findings from the explorative analysis and refer to Section 3.3 in order to give
an educated guess regarding which genres should be paired and which should be let alone.
The combinations can be seen in 5.1. Below is the reasoning behind the choices of which
genres to combine.
36
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:45==
children
family
horror
comedy+action
drama+thriller+sci-fi
Table 5.1: Genre combinations
From the LDA, it was clear that family separated itself visually from all other genres.
Furthermore, there was some evidence towards children being somewhat different from
the other genres as well. This is also supported by the genre interaction graph in Figure
3.5 where both family and children have relatively low genre correlations. Hence, there is
evidence towards letting children and family stand alone.
Given the first and third component from the LDA (cf. Figure 3.6), there are clear evidence
towards letting horror stand alone. This is also supported by the colourfulness analysis in
which we saw that horror had the next highest count of least colourful images.
The colourfulness analysis, showed further signs of action and comedy being somewhat
similar in expression (cf. Figure 3.8).
CNN
Class 1
Class 0
#samples
1
children
comedy + action
3505
2
children
drama + thriller + sci-fi
6550
3
children
family
367
4
children
horror
288
5
comedy + action
drama + thriller + sci-fi
3505
6
comedy + action
family
367
7
comedy + action
horror
288
8
family
drama + thriller + sci-fi
367
9
horror
drama + thriller + sci-fi
288
10
family
horror
288
Table 5.2: Class 1 versus class 0 used in the 10 binary
OvO classifiers and the numer of samples (#samples)
used in each of the classes.
Finally, the last remaining gen-
res, drama, thriller and sci-fi
were combined.
The evidence
for the latter is not as clear.
However, the LDA shows in all
cases that these genres lie on
top of each other, suggesting
an inability to differentiate be-
tween them. Additionally, the
colourfulness analysis gives no
clear evidence as to let them
stand alone. Quite on the con-
trary, the interaction graph in
Figure 3.5 shows that drama
and thriller have one of the
highest correlations.
This is just one composition out
of many. It would be wrong to
suggest, without proper testing,
that this is the absolute best option. A total of ten binary classifiers are established and
can be seen in Table 5.2. For each of them the data was divided by a 0.6 training split, a
0.3 validation split and a 0.1 test split.
5.2.3
Network outputs to recommendations
As mentioned in Section 4.2.2, the goal is usually to combine the separate outputs from the
ten classifiers into one final classification. However, we are not interested in classifying the
images, but rather to utilise the contextual information that the networks have hopefully
learned to separate labels. Hence, the outputs, being probabilities, are considered as a
measure of to what extent a given image can be perceived as being a given class. In this
way we allow the possibility of a program to include a certain degree of every genre.
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
37
==PAGE:46==
ConvNet
Output
1
0.3301
2
0.1033
3
0.0906
4
0.6171
5
0.7405
6
0.6390
7
0.6924
8
0.2799
9
0.4874
10
0.9887
(a) Output of the ten binary classifiers for
the image in 5.4b
(b) The movie poster for ”Pretty In Pink”.
Its true genre is comedy
Genre
Count
comedy+action
4
drama+thriller+sci-fi
3
family
2
children
1
horror
0
(c) Translating the probability outputs in
Table 5.4a into a genre count cf. Table 5.2
Figure 5.4: An example of an image input (b) fed to the 10 OvO binary classifiers and
the resulting outputs (a). (c) shows the class count based on the outputs
An example of an input and corresponding outputs is shown in Figure 5.4. The true label
of the movie is comedy. For these outputs, intuitively, a value of 0.5 would indicate that
the image is equally much of both class 1 and 0. A value greater than 0.5 indicates the
input being class 1, and a value less than 0.5 indicates it being class 0. Table 5.4c shows
the predicted genre count when translating the output probabilities into label predictions.
If the maximum of the predicted genre count had been taken, we could classify the input as
comedy, action or both (given it is a combined class). However, the output is used directly
as an identity of the input where the magnitude of the probability indicates how far it is
from being strictly class 1 or 0. That is, the term |p −0.5|, where p is the probability,
yields an indicator of significance. Had the time allowed it, a weighting paradigm of the
probabilities would have been interesting to look into.
The use case for the final recommender system is as such; a user clicks on, wish-lists, or
has previously seen the movie in Figure 5.4b. Using the similarity measures described
in Section 4.2.3, we can find similar programs based on their identity.
The challenge
however, lies in how to combine multiple responses into one recommendation.
Figure
5.5 shows the flow, from user response to recommendation. A class-wise average iden-
tity can be calculated from the identities of the images respective to the multiple user
response. Subsequently, the most similar programs to this average identity can be found
and recommended.
38
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.5: Flowchart of the recommender system. The input, i.e. a user response; for
instance seen movies, represented as a binary vector, is transformed into the corresponding
movies’ identities. A class-wise average of these are computed and from that it is possible
to find its top k nearest neighbours (kNN) to recommend.
The class-wise averages are made in one of two ways; a (1) normal average or (2) weighted
average. For (2) the identity is weighted if it belongs to the favourites of the subject. Each
average class probability across identities is calculated by:
pj,avg =
∑I
i=1 pijwi
∑I
i=1 wi
, j = 1, . . . , C
(5.1)
where I is the total number of identities, and C is the number of binary classifiers. The
weights were set given the intuitive idea that favourites should count for twice as much,
i.e. wi = 2 if identity i is a favourite, otherwise wi = 1.
5.3
Empirical study
To test the usage performance of the recommender system, an empirical study was carried
out. Each subject was shown a series of 49 posters chosen randomly from the dataset. For
each image they were asked the following yes/no questions:
1. Have you seen the movie?
2. Does the movie look interesting?
3. Would you add it to your favourites?
It should be noted that point number 2. and 3. are interrelated in the sense that if the
program does not look interesting, one would probably not add it to one’s favourites.
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
39
==PAGE:48==
However, since just having seen a movie does not indicate whether or not it was actually
liked by the person, it seemed relevant to additionally ask the other two questions.
Since all questions are answered with a yes or no, the series of answers can be translated
into binary vectors where 1 corresponds to either (1) seen, (2) interested or (3) favourite,
and 0 corresponds to the opposite.
A total of 17 answers were obtained. Based on these, recommendations were computed as
well as random recommendations, and send back to the subjects while asking them their
opinion of these. It should be mentioned, that 17 answers are not near enough to validate
the recommender system properly, and had there been additional time, a more thorough
survey would have been executed. However, by including the results, an indication of the
performance of the system can still be attained and evaluated.
The opinion survey were made up of five parts in which recommendations were based on:
1. Seen programs
2. Interesting programs
3. Favourites
4. Seen and interesting programs
5. Random programs
These were furthermore divided into whether the cosine or pearson similarity measure
was used, and whether it was the normal or weighted average identity, resulting in 20
recommendations per subject. Each recommendation consisted of the top 3 programs.
For each of those, the subject were asked their opinion on a scale from 1 to 4 (1: None of
the top 3 recommendations looks interesting, 4: All of them looks interesting).
Concerning the GDPR, it was required to know the subjects’ names in order to convey
their respective recommendations. Hence, total anonymity was not an option. The survey
however, was private in the sense, that the subject group consists of people whom the
author knows. Their answers and names are deleted completely after the lifetime of the
data. In a real world setting though, at a substantially larger scale, the anonymity of users
are of the utmost importance, and should be handled accordingly.
Lastly, a great deal of bias exists when carrying out surveys which includes the human
factor. This bias and the results obtained from all experiments described in this chapter
are presented and discussed further in the following chapter.
40
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:49==
(a) Average train and validation loss curve of the pure
multi-label ConvNet.
At the final epoch (49) the aver-
age train loss is: 0.2747, and the average validation loss
is: 0.2741
(b) Average train and validation accuracy of the pure multi-
label ConvNet. At the final epoch (49) the average train
accuracy is: 0.1444, and the average validation accuracy is:
0.0962
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
41
==PAGE:50==
6
Results and Discussion
This chapter first covers a discussion of the results obtained from the pure multi-label
ConvNet and the OvO ConvNets. Subsequently, assessments of the similarity measures
on the outputs are given. The chapter concludes with a presentation and discussion of the
results from the final recommender system.
The standard approach when assessing an algorithm is to note run-times. This is done
to assess their performance with respect to scaling.
However, this thesis is more of a
proof-of-concept more than an actual ready for production project. As such, the run-time
of algorithms may be mentioned, but it will be in a general sense.
6.1
Pure multi-label ConvNet
The following sections presents and discusses the results obtained from the pure multi-label
ConvNet.
6.1.1
Loss and accuracy
Looking at the average train and validation loss from the training process in Figure 5.6a,
we see no clear sign of either over- or under-fitting. However, this should not be interpreted
as the model being perfect. On the contrary, it seems as though the loss has not fully
converged and therefore it is hard to conclude anything solely based on the average losses.
Instead, by including the average accuracy in the evaluation, it can be seen from Figure
5.6b that both the average train and validation accuracies are quite small. Although, it
seems like the accuracies have not fully converged either and have an increasing tendency.
By increasing the number of epochs we may have seen whether or not the accuracy would
keep growing, or begin to stabilise. However, due to the limited hardware capabilities,
where at 50 epochs, the model had a run-time of over 5 hours, another strategy was
chosen.
The accuracy is calculated using the sklearn.metrics.accuracy_score. It ”[. . .] com-
putes subset accuracy: the set of labels predicted for a sample must exactly match the
corresponding set of labels in y_true.” (sklearn documentation)1 Hence, the accuracy
measure does not allow for a subset of true predictions, thereby lowering the accuracy.
6.1.2
Alternative accuracy metrics
In terms of the accuracy paradox mentioned earlier in Section 3.3.1, the importance of
involving several measures of accuracy was discussed. In this case the accuracy paradox is
1https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.metrics.accuracy_score.html
42
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:51==
not immediately applicable due to a low obtained accuracy score. Nevertheless, it reminds
us of the importance of including alternative accuracy measures to support ones findings.
Misclassifications and the confusion matrix
44 out of the total 399 test samples were predicted entirely true, yielding an accuracy frac-
tion of
44
399 = 0.11 corresponding to the accuracy scores from Section 6.1.1 (approximately
being 0.14 and 0.096 for the train and validation set respectively). When looking at the
obtained accuracy score, it is relevant to have in mind, that a target can have at most
two genres (labels). Hence in the binary representation of the targets at least one, and at
most two indexes will be ones, the rest will contain zeros. The latter causes that (1) if
many predictions are just one off, the accuracy is easily lowered, and (2) the network is
uncertain given the majority of zeros in the targets. The zeros can ”confuse” the network
into often being more certain that a label should be zero rather than one. Indeed, it can
be seen from Table 6.1 that the majority of classifications are either one or two off.
All correct
One off
Two off
Three off
Total
44
172
174
9
399
Table 6.1: The number of labels misclassified. That is, if a label is misclassified then either
it is predicted true when it really was false (false positive), or vice versa (false negative)
To further interpret the aforementioned label misclassifications, we can accompany Table
6.1 with the confusion matrix across all labels given in Table 6.2. From there, it can
be seen that a great number of true ones are predicted as zeros (false negatives), which
supports the above statement concerning the model predicting an excess of zeros.
Predicted
class 1
class 0
True
class 1
68
528
class 0
19
4572
Table 6.2: Confusion matrix across all labels for the pure multi-label ConvNet based on
the test set
Precision, Recall and the F1-score
It is further appropriate to look at the terms precision, recall and the F1-score.
The
precision is a measure of how many selected items are relevant, and is given by:
precision =
#true positives
#true positives + #false positives
(6.1)
The variable recall is a measure of how many relevant items are selected, and is given by:
recall =
#true positives
#true positives + #false negatives
(6.2)
Finally, the F1-score combines precision and recall into a measure of accuracy.
More
precisely, it is the harmonic mean of precision and recall:
F1 =
2
recall−1 + precision−1 = 2 precision · recall
precision + recall
(6.3)
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
43
==PAGE:52==
We could calculate the precision and recall across all labels using the values from the
confusion matrix in Table 6.2. However, this would be misleading since in reality there are
13 different labels each contributing to the ”true” accuracy measure. Instead, the micro-
and macro averages of the label-wise precision, recall and F1-scores can be computed:
microavg(precision) =
∑C
i=1{true positives}i
∑C
i=1{{true positives}i + {false positives}i}
(6.4)
microavg(recall) =
∑C
i=1{true positives}i
∑C
i=1{{true positives}i + {false negatives}i}
(6.5)
macroavg(precision) =
∑C
i=1 precisioni
C
(6.6)
macroavg(recall) =
∑C
i=1 recalli
C
(6.7)
From the above definitions, it is seen that macro-average perceives all classes as equal,
whereas the micro-average takes the class imbalance into consideration. Both measures
are included for comparison.
The class-wise precision, recall and F1-scores together with the micro- and macro-averages
of these can be found in Table 6.3. The F1-score can be perceived as a measure of accuracy.
The most noticeable is the few number of genres having measures, i.e. the rest of the genres
were not predicted at all by the network on the test set. The reason behind children, drama
and comedy being predicted could be their high number of support. The support is the
number of labels observed in the test set. Once again, the aforementioned imbalance of
the genre count in the data is expressed, which probably leads the network to learn the
behaviour of the targets, i.e. frequent occurring genres, instead of learning visual features
that separates the genres. However, the genre animation has a very low support, yet it is
still predicted. A reason thereof may be that the visual appearance of animations consists
of bright colours and sharp edges, and are thereby easily separable from other images. For
examples of images from the test set and their predictions see Appendix I.
It can further be seen from Table 6.3 that for all of the highlighted genres, except drama,
the precision measures are rather high. On the other hand, the recall measures for all
genres except animation are significantly low. This can be interpreted as a general uncer-
tainty when the network predicts, except in the case of animation. In the mean time, when
predictions are made, the models are fairly precise/certain in the case of either children,
comedy or animation. The low precision of drama is most likely caused by its ambiguity.
With respect to the accuracy (F1-score), the missing predictions for a majority of genres
can be considered as a source of error, and should probably be reflected in the accuracy
measure. Hence, it is perhaps wiser to consider the macro-average which treats all classes
equally, thereby lowering the accuracy compared to the micro-average. With that said,
both the micro- and macro-averages of the F1-score are both relatively low.
Based on these results, the choice to move forward with another strategy was made. It
44
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:53==
Precision
Recall
F1-score
Support
children
0.78
0.16
0.27
87
drama
0.41
0.17
0.24
150
comedy
0.86
0.18
0.30
98
thriller
0.00
0.00
0.00
67
action
0.00
0.00
0.00
45
family
0.00
0.00
0.00
21
horror
0.00
0.00
0.00
30
nordic
0.00
0.00
0.00
31
adventure
0.00
0.00
0.00
18
romance
0.00
0.00
0.00
13
sci-fi
0.00
0.00
0.00
18
music
0.00
0.00
0.00
4
animation
0.93
0.67
0.78
21
micro average
0.62
0.12
0.2
603
macro average
0.23
0.09
0.12
603
Table 6.3: Class-wise precision, recall and F1-scores as well as the micro- and macro-
averages, given the test set. The support corresponds to the number of observed labels.
The values are produced in Python via the classification_report from the sklearn
library
could however have been interesting to increase the number of epochs to see if the accuracy
would increase. Had the model shown good performance then it would have been preferred
to continue with the pure multi-label strategy since it would remove the need for training
multiple ConvNets.
6.2
One versus one ConvNets
The following sections presents and discusses the results obtained from the ten OvO Con-
vNets.
6.2.1
Loss and accuracy
Observations have been made based on the loss and accuracy curve plots of the ten OvO
ConvNets.
In order to limit information overload, all mentioned plots are located in
Appendix J and the curious reader is referred thereto. The overall behaviour of the loss
and accuracy curves for all networks shows signs of over-fitting, and so early stopping was
used to choose the optimal model. All corresponding run-times can be seen in Table 6.4.
Looking at Table 6.5, it is observed that the ConvNets; 1, 2, 3, 4, 6 and 8 are rather similar
in performance and are doing quite well. It is further noticed that the genre children is
reoccurring for the ConvNets {1,2,3,4} and likewise the genre family for ConvNets {6,8}.
This indicates that the networks succeeds in separating children and family from other
genres.
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
45
==PAGE:54==
ConvNet
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Total
5:14:17
10:17:25
0:43:38
0:38:14
4:47:22
0:49:33
0:35:03
0:46:40
0:22:12
0:52:37
Early
stop
2:39:14
6:41:41
0:14:40
0:20:33
2:15:45
0:30:07
0:15:47
0:25:22
0:07:42
0:38:28
Table 6.4: For each ConvNet is presented (1) the total run-time and (2) the run-time up
until the early stopping occurred. The times are specified as hours:minutes:seconds
ConvNet
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Class
1
children
children
children
children
comedy
action
comedy
action
comedy
action
family
horror
family
0
comedy
action
drama
thriller
sci-fi
family
horror
drama
thirller
sci-fi
family
horror
drama
thirller
sci-fi
drama
thirller
sci-fi
horror
Loss
Train
0.4058
0.2794
0.4015
0.364
0.6484 0.3948
0.5821 0.3393
0.6963 0.1971
Val
0.4193
0.3145
0.3778
0.4838
0.6486 0.455
0.571
0.3523
0.6912 0.2667
Accuracy
Train
0.82
0.8803
0.8583
0.8582
0.6298 0.8386
0.7311 0.8764
0.49
0.9585
Val
0.8058
0.8659
0.8514
0.7674
0.6296 0.8086
0.7376 0.8661
0.54
0.8795
Table 6.5: The training and validation loss as well as the train and validation accuracy of
the ten binary OvO classifiers
Looking at the highlighted values it can be seen that the ConvNets 5, 7 and 9 performs
the poorest, having a relatively high loss and lower accuracy. The accuracies for ConvNets
5 and 7 are above 0.5, i.e. better than random. The accuracy for ConvNet 9 however,
corresponds more or less to a random choice between either horror or drama+thriller+sci-
fi. For ConvNets 5, 7 and 9, the genres comedy+action, drama+thriller+sci-fi and horror
reoccurs, indicating that it is harder to separate these from each other. Lastly, ConvNet
10 performs the very best and seems to succeed in visually separating family from horror.
It could perhaps be sensible to combine horror and drama+thriller+sci-fi as well.
6.2.2
Alternative accuracy metrics
The precision and recall measures are based on the values from the confusion matrix of
each label. All confusion matrices are located in Appendix J.2.
Precision, recall and the F1-score
Looking at Table 6.6, the precision, recall, F1-score, support and accuracy can be seen for
all OvO ConvNets. The accuracies for ConvNets 5, 7 and 9 supports the findings above
in Section 6.2.1 concerning their performance. What differs is, that ConvNet 5’s accuracy
is lower than the other two. The reason thereof could be the difference in magnitude of
support. Intuitively, if the ConvNet performs reasonably well, then running it on a small
small test set with little variance between images, should yield a relatively good precision
46
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:55==
and recall. However, including more samples in the test set often induces a higher variance
between images, thus opening up for the possibility of a larger number of wrong predictions
to occur, thereby decreasing precision and recall.
CNN
Class
Precision
Recall
F1-score
Support
Accuracy
1
children
0.79
0.84
0.82
370
0.815
comedy+action
0.84
0.79
0.81
381
2
children
0.87
0.86
0.86
831
0.86
drama+thriller+sci-fi
0.86
0.87
0.86
820
3
children
0.84
0.90
0.87
69
0.87
family
0.90
0.84
0.87
77
4
children
0.89
0.71
0.79
35
0.77
horror
0.66
0.86
0.75
22
5
comedy+action
0.59
0.59
0.59
432
0.58
drama+thriller+sci-fi
0.57
0.58
0.57
413
6
comedy+action
0.83
0.76
0.79
45
0.75
family
0.67
0.76
0.71
29
7
comedy+action
0.73
0.66
0.69
29
0.71
horror
0.70
0.77
0.73
30
8
family
0.86
0.95
0.90
40
0.90
drama+thriller+sci-fi
0.95
0.85
0.90
41
9
horror
0.77
0.67
0.72
36
0.68
drama+thriller+sci-fi
0.59
0.71
0.64
24
10
family
0.81
0.79
0.80
28
0.83
horror
0.85
0.87
0.86
38
Table 6.6: Precision, recall, the F1-score, support and accuracy of the ten binary OvO
networks. Accuracy is the average of the F1-scores
Overall the ten OvO ConvNets performs better than the pure multi-label ConvNet. It
seems like the genres children and family are easy to separate from other genres, whereas
drama+thriller+sci-fi, comedy+action and horror are presumably hard to distinguishing
from both each other, and versus other genres. It can be noticed that those genres which
are hard to distinguish are the combined genres.
An advantage of using the OvO scheme is that if one of the networks makes a classification
mistake, one or more of the other networks might counterbalance by predicting correctly.
[33] Additionaly, the imbalance problem is avoided, since for every OvO ConvNet one
can sample equally many observations from each class. A potential, yet to be discovered,
advantage could be, that by letting the OvO ConvNets predict a measure of each genre,
new meta-data could potentially be discovered.
A drawback is that for each new class (genre), K new networks are needed to be trained
without affecting the existing
K(K−1)
2
ConvNets [33].
Hence if the number of genres
increases rapidly, then so would the number of new networks to be trained requiring
computational resources correspinding to K passes through the models for OvO, whereas
it would require one pass through the pure multi-label network.
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
47
==PAGE:56==
6.3
Evaluation of the recommender system
Most of the effort in this thesis has been spent on creating the neural networks. As such,
the recommender system is merely a proof-of-concept. As a consequence thereof, limited
time was allocated to compute tests with high significance. It is however possible to draw
some tendencies and indications from the obtained test results of the recommender system.
CBF is, as a founding father of recommender systems, a relatively robust algorithm. How-
ever, as listed in Chapter 2.2 in the introduction, CBF suffers from some disadvantages.
The following sections presents and discusses the test results of the recommender system.
In the end the disadvantages and whether or not these are solved are deliberated.
6.3.1
User profiles
(a) A subject’s seen movies out of the 49 programs/movies from the empirical study
(b) Top 3 similar programs/movies to the average identity of the seen movies in (a). The left movie
has the genres drama, comedy and romance, the middle movie has the genres comedy and action
and the right movie has the genre children
Figure 6.1: (6.1a): seen movies of one of the subjects in the empirical study. (6.1b): top
3 similar movies based on the average identity of the seen movies above in (6.1a)
The recommender system is first of all dependent on the user response; what type it is
(seen, click etc.), how much of it there is and its quality.
A distinction can be made
between single-response and multi-response data.
48
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:57==
A single response can potentially yield fast recommendations in real time, eliminating
the need to store personal data. There is the concern however, that single-response rec-
ommendations will be insufficient, depending on how much contextual information the
ConvNets has learned and the user’s taste of the programs in question. Utilising multiple
responses may provide a solution for the latter. Assuming that liked programs comprises
the majority of user responses, the average identity will lean towards other likeable pro-
grams. This will not hold though if the profile has multiple users as the average identity
is tainted by multiple different preferences. Lastly, an average identity may open up for
varying recommendations as seen in 6.1.
6.3.2
Similarities
In the following some visual tendencies after applying the similarity measures on the iden-
tities are discussed. First the visual difference between the cosine and Pearson measures
are evaluated, and secondly an empirical assessment regarding visual tendencies is given.
An assortment of images are shown. More examples on similar images can be found in
Appendix K.
Cosine versus Pearson similarity
By looking at Figure 6.2, no clear visual difference between (a) and (b) is seen. From the
definitions of the two similarity measures, it can be drawn that unless the average of an
identity is large, the cosine and Pearson similarities will act equivalent.
(a) Similar programs/movies to the first movie ”Barbie” based on the cosine similarity measure
(b) Similar programs/movies to the first movie ”Barbie” based on the Pearson similarity measure
Figure 6.2: One-genre images; similar programs/movies to the first movie ”Barbie”, based
on the cosine and Pearson similarity measures respectively
Python provides different functions to calculate similarities which are rather fast. Logi-
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
49
==PAGE:58==
cally, the larger the matrix, the more computational time the calculations require. How-
ever, computing all similarities are only required to be run once in a while when a sub-
stantial amount of new programs enters the database.
Visual features
Relevant features in images are in this thesis contextual information such as face expres-
sions, some colours or body/head positioning. Non-contextual features exists as well, such
as low-level shapes. Similarities are computed based on (1) the one-genre data, which the
networks were trained on, and (2) the multi-genre data, which the model has never seen
before. The interesting question is if some visual features/contextual information recur
across similar identities.
Figure 6.3: Example of a comedy having exclusively children images as most similar
Logically, non-contextual features influences which identities that are perceived as sim-
ilar. Take for example Figure 6.3. No contextual features can be found across all four
images, whereas the non-contextual colours recur. This is an example of an insufficient
recommendation.
Signs of contextual features can be found by looking at Figures 6.4 and 6.5. Firstly, the
face expressions seems similar; serious, slightly opened mouth or frowning. Secondly, the
head and body positioning recur; the slight turn of the head looking over the shoulder (cf.
Figure 6.4). And thirdly, the number of objects/persons in the image (cf. Figure 6.5).
It is observed that genres used in the best performing ConvNets occur more frequently
together than those from the worst performing ConvNets. The genre mis-classifications
actually leads to similar contextual information across different true genres.
Since it was not tested how well the networks would perform on poster images only, it is
unclear how much of the contextual information is contributed by the in-action images.
The appearance of the in-action images suggests that it could be the case that some of the
contextual features originates from the in-action images. Finally, the in-action images are
often most similar to other in-action images reducing the variability of recommendations,
whereas poster images are more likely to be similar to both types of images.
50
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:59==
Figure 6.4: Multi-genre images; similar programs/movies to the first movie ”Never Here”,
based on the cosine and Pearson similarity measures respectively
Figure 6.5: Multi-genre images; similar programs/movies to the first movie ”10 Cloverfield
Lane” based on both the cosine and the Pearson similarity measure
6.3.3
Evaluation of the empirical study
The 17 obtained answers concerning the subjects’ opinion of their recommendations has
been translated into some statistical measures. However, as mentioned previously in Sec-
tion 5.3, the measures presented in the following are only used as indicators as well as
incentives to discussions. Remember that the measures are based on votes being nominal
values between 1 and 4.
h avg
avg
std
Seen
1.8478
2.3403
1.0304
Interesting
1.8614
2.3666
1.1043
Favourites
1.9385
2.3798
1.0975
Interesting+seen
2.1283
2.5769
1.0039
Random
1.6391
2.0116
0.7844
Table 6.7: Table of the harmonic average (h avg), the normal average (avg) and its
corresponding standard deviation (std) across the different types of user responses used
for recommendations. The measures are calculated on the basis of the subjects’ opinion
to their respective recommendations on a scale of 1 through 4 cf. Section 5.3
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
51
==PAGE:60==
When looking at the values in Table 6.7 no clear difference between the type of user
response can be seen. If anything are to be drawn from these values, it may be that the
user-response-recommendations performs a tad better than the random recommendations,
and using seen which are also interesting increases performance by ≈0.2. But then again
looking at the corresponding standard deviations it seems like the subjects are generally
more varying in their opinions (std ≈1) of the recommendations from the recommender
system than the random recommendations.
h avg
avg
std
Cosine
1.7484
2.1508
0.8459
Pearson
2.0177
2.5193
1.1642
Figure 6.6: Table of the harmonic average (h avg), the normal average (avg) and its
corresponding standard deviation (std) of the different similarity measures used for rec-
ommendations. The measures are calculated on the basis of the subjects’ opinion to their
respective recommendations on a scale of 1 through 4 cf. Section 5.3
From Table 6.6 it seems as though that the Pearson recommendations are more liked
than those based on the cosine similarity. However taking the standard deviations into
consideration, these suggests that cosine might be just as good. The same tendency is
recognised in Table 6.8 where the normal and weighted average identities seems to perform
identically.
h avg
avg
std
Normal
1.8603
2.3456
1.0568
Weighted
1.9058
2.3245
1.0052
Table 6.8: Table of the harmonic average (h avg), the normal average (avg) and its
corresponding standard deviation (std) of the different types of average identities used
for recommendations. The measures are calculated on the basis of the subjects’ opinion
to their respective recommendations on a scale of 1 through 4 cf. Section 5.3
Finally, it is important as well to consider the possible biases when carrying out empirical
studies. Given below is listed an overview of biases to consider:
• Only posters were used to be certain that the subjects could identify the program
• If the programs presented have been seen by the subject this could affect his or her
interest in the program
• The subjective optimism or pessimism towards movie choices
• The mood of the subjects at the time of voting. Had the subjects been presented
the same programs at a later point in time, their opinion might differ
• The small size and randomness of the subset of programs presented to the subjects.
Furthermore, included in the subset were many niche movies
• Age of subjects or other demographics affecting their fondness of the programs
52
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:61==
6.3.4
Concluding thoughts on the results
The following tries to answer whether or not some of the disadvantages (cf. Section 2.2)
of CBF are solved in relation to GDPR as well.
Most metadata is created manually by humans, which is a rather strenuous task, leading
to a considerable lack of rich metadata.
All results above suggests that the genre metadata are insufficient in separating the visual
context of programs. However, the ambiguity of the genres probably allowed the networks
to learn similar features, both contextual as well as non-contextual across genres. Had
the problem been about correct classification, the uncertain ConvNets would have had an
impact on the final result. It can be argued however, that the classification performance
of the ConvNets is not really a hard limitation since the contextual information across
genres is more important. Utilising learned contextual features would remove the task of
manual metadata creation and contribute with meaningful information.
Often it is arduous to create meaningful, precise and nuanced user profiles, seen as it is
troublesome to figure out which user features are relevant to the system in order to increase
user satisfaction.
The results somewhat suggests that it could be possible to establish a recommender sys-
tem using a minimum of personal data, and counterbalance limited user information by
using contextual information directly from the programs. However, the assumption being
that by having a great knowledge base of user preferences, the more meaningful the rec-
ommendation becomes, still stands. Therefore, it should be considered where to lie focus
with respect to the GDPR; cut out all personal data, minimise the use, or use all of it
while complying cautiously to the GDPR.
CBF tends to recommend most similar items thereby lacking variance in the types of
recommendations to a user.
The concept of building identities based on classifications of programs seems promising.
The mis-classifications yields varying recommendations, which can be good, but it can also
be bad as we saw when the comedy had children as most similar programs. The bad cases
are most likely caused by the worst performing ConvNets. The ConvNets performs poorly
when they can not separate the images visually with respect to the genres. Furthermore,
a bias exists in the sense that if contextual information are really learned by the networks,
that information will most often be linked to the genre which it was trained to classify
the image as (unless it is a mis-classification). For instance, the possibility exists that the
networks learns that in actions people have guns.
Sometimes this correlation between genre and contextual information may be true. How-
ever, most often it would not; people may for instance laugh across multiple genres. Hence,
it is not ideal to use genres exclusively as a separator of contextual information, but may
instead be an indicator of certain contextual features being present in the program. Fur-
thermore, the contextual features found by the ConvNets in this thesis are not of great
significance. Therefore, future work should focus on how to expand on the concepts and
findings in this thesis and how to combine these with other strategies, resulting in a more
complete recommender system.
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
53
==PAGE:62==
7
Future Work
Alternations to the ConvNets
If time had allowed it, it would have been preferable to discover the difference in perfor-
mance by exploring the affect of alternations to the ConvNets.
Training the networks exclusively on either posters or in-action images would have given
an idea of how much value there is in including the in-action images.
Apply data augmentation to increase the data size for all ConvNets. Furthermore, being
able to even out the number of observations for each genre and weighting the labels in the
pure multi-label ConvNet may counteract the imbalance. If the pure multi-label ConvNet
had performed reasonably it would have been preferred to continue with it. For future
work, it is also a good idea to increase the number of epochs when training.
Lastly, it is important to regard the performance of the system as a whole in the form
of run-time and scalability. Hence, in the future more energy should go into analysing
the latter, e.g. by the Big-O notation. Additionally, it would have been interesting to see
how the developed recommendation system performed compared to a baseline using raw
metadata exclusively as program identities.
Contextual information in videos
It would be interesting to extend the dataset into also using videos and extract contextual
information from these to use as, or combine with, the established identities in this thesis.
Examples on contextual information are, colour gradients across frames, action-analysis,
average face expressions/average mood or screen time of actors.
In [44] they propose a ConvNet approach to video classification. The dataset chosen to
train their ConvNets are sports videos from YouTube. Substituting these with typical
actions in movies, e.g. car chases or kisses could perhaps yield valuable information. A
downside however is the need of (1) a data set consisting of the scenes in which the action
takes place, and (2) tagged targets to each video.
Another interesting contextual aspect is the concept of arousal versus valence in images
or videos.
In [45] Hanjalic proposed to combine features across frames such as sound
intensity and motion detection, and from these calculate the arousal (exciting vs. calm)
and valence (negative vs positive) enabling mood discovery and extraction from videos.
Lastly, by following the approach in [46] we could add into the identity of a program the
screen time of actors or other objects.
An unsupervised learning setting
Given the conclusion that genres does not separate visual context properly, it would be
54
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:63==
interesting to explore the possibilities of unsupervised learning, which could potentially
enable automatic metadata creation.
One of the contributions in [47] is unsupervised
attribute discovery. Thereby, it becomes easier to visually differ between images when the
context is known. In this manner, it would be interesting to use the genres as well as other
manually tagged metadata available together with the contextual information to build the
program identities.
Transfer learning
An initial attempt of image classification was to use the VGG-16 model directly on image
posters, see Appendix G for small example. However, the results obtained were not fitting
for the goal of this project and hence the approach were discarded. For future work though,
a transfer learning approach could perhaps increase the performance of the networks in
this report, by not being forced to learn features from scratch and by the use of weights
learned based on significantly more data (e.g. VGG-16).
A logistic regression approach to recommendations
The logistic regression approach were tried out superficially, see Appendix F for the def-
inition of logistic regression. The approach seemed promising. However time would not
allow for proper testing and therefore it was chosen to exclude the strategy from the main
report.
It is possible that logistic regression, with the multiple user response as targets and the
corresponding identities as input, would be a more robust approach to recommend pro-
grams. Using logistic regression could potentially increase the variability in recommenda-
tions, however the ranking of programs that kNN provides by recommending most similar
programs is sacrificed.
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
55
==PAGE:64==
8
Conclusion
For this project having the GDPR in mind, the content-based filtering algorithm were
chosen as the foundation of a possible recommendation engine. In this regard the dataset
used consists of metadata concerning movies and/or TV-series, provided by Nordija A/S.
To reduce the workload, only genres and images from the dataset were considered, seen
as these attributes are often the first impression users’ get in a recommendation. Dealing
with visual data, it was chosen to implement Convolutional Neural Networks (ConvNet);
a pure multi-label ConvNet and ten one vs. one binary classifiers.
Before experimenting with the ConvNets, a data exploration was firstly carried out over
two stages; (1) a descriptive analysis and (2) a visual analysis. The findings were that
low-level features such as colours seemed to perform poorly in separating images with
respect to genres. Hence ConvNets would be able to learn some more abstract features.
Furthermore, the genres are heavily exponentially distributed which were later shown to
affect the pure multi-label ConvNet greatly, thus choosing to move forward with the one
vs. one strategy.
Subsequent to discarding the pure multi-label ConvNet, experiments were carried out with
the one vs. one binary classifiers. The exploratory visual analysis showed some evidence
towards combining some of the genres as to reduce the dimensionality of the problem
and increase the network performance, since images across genres apparently shares many
low-level visual features.
In other words, only few genres separates programs visually
(genres ̸= context). It was surprising that, contrary to the intuitive believe that more
and detailed genres would increases performance, combining genres actually allowed for
contextual information to surface. Obviously, the binary classifiers having to discriminate
between two very opposite images both visually and in genre, performed the best.
The output of the binary classifiers made up an identity of the program, where the returned
probability from the classifier represents an amount of how much the program is a given
genre. Similarities between these identities were computed, eventually resulting in content-
based filtering recommendations. The empirical study of said recommendations was not
of significant character, but did give the indication that some value can be found in such
a recommender system.
Future work would be needed to test further whether or not there are substance in the
findings, and how these could be improved; perhaps append genres explicitly to the identity
instead of using them as separators of contextual information.
It was not feasible to
completely discard all GDPR related data when computing the recommendations, since
something was needed to relate a recommendation to the user, and a user’s interaction
with a system/platform is considered as personal data and falls under the the GDPR.
However, it seems promising to limit the user responses and instead build a rich identity
of programs based on their contextual information. It is uncertain though how such a
56
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:65==
recommender system would perform compared to the state-of-the-art systems, and rises
the question of the tradeoff between privacy and performance.
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
57
==PAGE:66==
Bibliography
[1] gdpr info.eu. Official legal text, Sep 2019.
[2] Nordija A/S. Products.
[3] James Cusick. The general data protection regulation (gdpr): What organizations
need to know. CT Corporation Resource Center, March 2018.
[4] What is considered personal data under the eu gdpr?, Feb 2019.
[5] Laurent Candillier, Kris Jack, Françoise Fessant, and Frank Meyer. State of the Art
Recommender System, pages 1–22. IGI Global, April 2009.
[6] Baptiste Rocca. Introduction to recommender systems, Jun 2019.
[7] Xavier Amatriain and Justin Basilico. Netflix recommendations: Beyond the 5 stars
(part 1), Apr 2017.
[8] Xavier Amatriain and Justin Basilico. Netflix recommendations: Beyond the 5 stars
(part 2), Apr 2017.
[9] Ruo Huang, Shelby Mcintyre, Meina Song, Haihong E, and Zhonghong Ou.
An
attention-based recommender system to predict contextual intent based on choice
histories across and within sessions. Applied Sciences, 8(12):2426, 2018.
[10] Kathrine Hagedorn. Code developed in the process of this thesis: https://github.com/
Gingergurl/s144247-master-thesis.
[11] elastic.co. What is elasticsearch?
[12] 2019 database trends - sql vs. nosql, top databases, single vs. multiple database use,
Mar 2019.
[13] DB-Engines. Engines ranking.
[14] Mark Niemann-Ross. Weaknesses of sqlite, Oct 2017.
[15] Francisco Charte, Antonio J. Rivera, María J. del Jesus, and Francisco Herrera.
Mlsmote: Approaching imbalanced multilabel learning through synthetic instance
generation. Knowledge-Based Systems, 89:385 – 397, 2015.
[16] Tejumade Afonja. Accuracy paradox, Dec 2017.
[17] Wei Hu, Weining Shen, Hua Zhou, and Dehan Kong.
Matrix linear discriminant
analysis. Technometrics, 62:1–27, 05 2019.
[18] Ming Li and Baozong Yuan. 2d-lda: A statistical linear discriminant analysis for
image matrix. Pattern Recognition Letters, 26(5):527–532, 2005.
58
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:67==
[19] David Hasler and Sabine E. Suesstrunk. Measuring colorfulness in natural images.
Human Vision and Electronic Imaging VIII, 2003.
[20] Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. MIT Press,
2016. http://www.deeplearningbook.org.
[21] Yann Lecun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton.
Deep learning.
Nature,
521(7553):436–444, 2015.
[22] New Tech Forum By SriSatish Ambati and SriSatish Ambati. Deep learning: A brief
guide for practical problem solvers, Nov 2015.
[23] Li Deng and Dong Yu. Deep learning: Methods and applications. Foundations and
Trends in Signal Processing, 7:197–387, 2014.
[24] Christopher M. Bishop. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. Springer-verlag
New York, 2016.
[25] Brian Dolhansky. Artificial neural networks: Mathematics of backpropagation (part
4), Oct 2014.
[26] Lili Jiang. A visual explanation of gradient descent methods (momentum, adagrad,
rmsprop, adam), Jun 2020.
[27] Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,
2014.
[28] Ashish. Understanding edge detection (sobel operator), Sep 2018.
[29] Convolutional neural networks (cnns / convnets).
[30] Fully connected layers in convolutional neural networks: The complete guide.
[31] Dansbecker. Rectified linear units (relu) in deep learning, May 2018.
[32] Himanshu Sharma.
Activation functions : Sigmoid, relu, leaky relu and softmax
basics for neural networks and deep..., Feb 2019.
[33] Guobin Ou and Yi Lu Murphey. Multi-class pattern classification using neural net-
works. Pattern Recognition, 40(1):4–18, 2007.
[34] pytorch.org. What is pytorch?
[35] pytorch.org. Writing custom datasets, dataloaders and transforms.
[36] pytorch.org. Bcewithlogitsloss.
[37] A. Shaf, T. Ali, W. Farooq, S. Javaid, U. Draz, and S. Yasin. Two classes classifica-
tion using different optimizers in convolutional neural network. In 2018 IEEE 21st
International Multi-Topic Conference (INMIC), pages 1–6, 2018.
[38] Somenath Bera and Vimal K. Shrivastava. Analysis of various optimizers on deep
convolutional neural network model in the application of hyperspectral remote sensing
image classification. International Journal of Remote Sensing, 41(7):2664–2683, 2020.
[39] Bjarten.
Early stopping github repo:
https://github.com/Bjarten/early-stopping-
pytorch.
[40] Nitish Srivastava, Geoffrey Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Ruslan
Salakhutdinov. Dropout: A simple way to prevent neural networks from overfitting.
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 15(56):1929–1958, 2014.
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
59
==PAGE:68==
[41] Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for large-
scale image recognition, 2014.
[42] Andrés Felipe Giraldo-Forero, Jorge Alberto Jaramillo-Garzón, José Francisco Ruiz-
Muñoz, and César Germán Castellanos-Domínguez. Managing imbalanced data sets
in multi-label problems: A case study with the smote algorithm. Progress in Pattern
Recognition, Image Analysis, Computer Vision, and Applications Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, page 334–342, 2013.
[43] Min ling Zhang, Yu kun Li, and Xu ying Liu. Towards class-imbalance aware multi-
label learning.
[44] Andrej Karpathy, George Toderici, Sanketh Shetty, Thomas Leung, Rahul Suk-
thankar, and Li Fei-Fei. Large-scale video classification with convolutional neural
networks.
2014 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2014.
[45] Alan Hanjalic. Extracting moods from pictures and sounds: towards truly personal-
ized tv. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 23(2):90–100, 2006.
[46] Pulkit Sharma. Video analysis using python: Deep learning on video data, May 2020.
[47] Xiaofang Wang, Kris M. Kitani, and Martial Hebert. Contextual visual similarity,
2016.
[48] Vrutik Halani. Fischer’s linear discriminant analysis in python from scratch, Apr
2020.
[49] Jonathan Hui. Machine learning - singular value decomposition (svd) principal com-
ponent analysis (pca), Feb 2020.
[50] C. A. Bouman. Opponent color spaces, January 2020.
[51] Rohit Thakur. Step by step vgg16 implementation in keras for beginners, Aug 2019.
60
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:69==
A
Learning Goals
The below action points are the success criteria in order to complete the project.
• Find and use relevant literature and utilize current international research.
• Collect and preprocess relevant non-GDPR data such as visual based data being e.g.
movies, trailers, front covers etc. and text based-/metadata being e.g. tags, genres,
actors etc. The raw data will either be supplied by the external partner (Nordija)
or collected through open-source sites like The Movie Database, The Open Movie
Database and/or MovieLens via GroupLens.
• Specify, extract and combine relevant features using deep learning methods.
• Develop a baseline and a main model by utilizing appropriate methodologies, theories
and tools learned throughout my studies, but also be able to acquire new knowledge
from elsewhere.
• Test, validate and compare the models.
• Analyze, discuss and conclude on my findings. Furthermore, I shall discuss how my
findings could be used in practice with respect to a functioning recommendation
engine.
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
61
==PAGE:70==
B
Project evaluation
The initial project plan can be seen in Figure B.1
Figure B.1: The initial project plan
It took longer than anticipated to figure out which of the considered strategies to move
forward with. In this regard, the initial objectives were found to be too broad and difficult
to achieve, hence the objectives were rewritten to be more realistic.
Some knowledge had already been obtained with regard to recommender systems, Machine
Learning and Deep Learning through various courses at DTU, such as 02450 Introduction
to- and 02460 Advanced Machine Learning, and 02456 Deep Learning.
Through the
course of this thesis however, a more thorough understanding of especially Deep Learning,
Convolutional Neural Networks, and Content-Based Filtering was achieved. Furthermore,
insight was gained with respect to real life development within the fields of mathematics
and programming.
During the data gathering process the COVID-19 hit Denmark, and the office at Nordija
A/S shut down in the beginning of March, making it impossible to get the data needed.
The data, and thereby the project, were delayed by approximately two months, in which
the original plan was to have developed and run test on the relevant models. Instead
the project were more or less on hold until May. The deadline was eventually pushed
to the 13th of August. However, the consequences of the COVID-19 situation have been
noticeable and affected the project as a whole.
Lastly, this thesis was more a research and development project than a predefined problem
with a ”true output”. In this regard the project was started with the attitude that there
is a risk of the problem being rather unsolvable given the chosen strategy. With that said,
I’m fairly satisfied with the results, despite a lot of uncertainty within these. Though
the results and performance of the final product are questionable they lie the basis of
future and promising work for improvement. Given the exploratory analysis it was not
surprising that genres are not qualified to linearly differentiate between visual content in
the program images. It was surprising though that, contrary to the intuitive believe that
62
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:71==
more and detailed genres increases performance, combining genres actually allowed for
contextual information to surface.
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
63
==PAGE:72==
C
Genre distribution
Table C.1: Table of genre counts in dataset
Genre
No. of instances
children
8314
drama
7381
comedy
4230
thriller
1761
action
1424
documentary
1156
horror
727
family
726
nordic
599
adventure
508
series
472
sci-fi
471
romance
462
animation
277
music
212
sport
63
western
55
crime
47
cult
19
other
5
entertainment
3
64
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:73==
D
Linear Discriminant Analysis
The mathematics in the following sections concerning Linear Discriminant Analysis is
based on the theory in Bishop’s Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning [24] sections
4.1.4 and 4.1.6.
D.1
Fisher’s Linear Discriminant with two
classes
Consider the one dimensional case:
y = wT x
(D.1)
where x is a D-dimensional input vector, then y is the projection of x down to one
dimension by some weight vector w. By placing a threshold on y a standard linear classifier
is obtained.
However, the reduction to one dimension may cause a significant loss of
information, and well-separated classes in the D-dimensional space may overlap in one
dimension. To overcome this, considering a two-class problem where class C1 has N1 and
class C2 has N2 data points, then the simplest measure of separating the classes, when
projected onto w, is by maximising the distance between projected class means. The two
mean vectors of the two classes are given by:
m1 = 1
N1
∑
n∈C1
xn
(D.2)
m2 = 1
N2
∑
n∈C2
xn
(D.3)
Maximising the distance between class means corresponds to choosing w so as to maximise
m2 −m1 = wT (m2 −m1)
(D.4)
where
mk = wT mk
(D.5)
is the mean of the projected data from class Ck.
However, there still exists a problem concerning overlapping distributions when projecting
onto the line joining the two classes’ means. Looking at Figure D.1 to the left, it can be
seen that the classes are well separated, however the within-class covariances are neglected
causing an overlap in the resulting histograms. The solution to the latter, proposed by
Fisher, is to maximise a function that will give a large class separation based on the
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
65
==PAGE:74==
Figure D.1: Left: samples from two classes and their respective histograms resulting from
the projection onto the line joining their class means. Right: The projection based on the
Fisher’s linear discriminant.[48]
projected class means while also giving a small variance within each class (cf. Figure D.1
right).
The within-class variance for the transformed data yielded by applying Equation (D.1) is
defined by:
s2
k =
∑
n∈Ck
(yn −mk)2
(D.6)
where yn = wT xn. The total variation of the entire dataset is then simply s2
1 + s2
2. The
Fisher criterion is then the ratio of the between-class variance and within-class variance
and is given as:
J(w) = (m2 −m1)2
s2
1 + s2
2
(D.7)
Writing Equation (D.7) out, the dependence on w becomes more obvious.
By using
Equations (D.1), (D.5) and (D.6) the Fisher criterion can be rewritten to:
J(w) = wT SBw
wT SW w
(D.8)
SB = (m2 −m1)(m2 −m1)T
(D.9)
SW =
∑
n∈C1
(xn −m1)(xn −m1)T +
∑
n∈C2
(xn −m2)(xn −m2)T
(D.10)
where SB is the between-class covariance matrix and SW is the total within-class covariance
matrix.
By differentiating Equation (D.8) with respect to w it is found that J(w) is maximised
when
(wT SBw)SW w = (wT SW w)SBw
(D.11)
It is seen from Equation (D.9) that SBw will point in the direction of (m2−m1). Further-
more, we only care about the direction of w, not its magnitude. Consequently, the scalar
66
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:75==
factors (wT SBw) and (wT SW w) in Equation (D.11) can be dropped. After multiplying
by S−1
W on both side of (D.11) we obtain the following expression:
w ∝S−1
W (m2 −m1)
(D.12)
Equation (D.12) is called Fisher’s Linear Discriminant, although strictly it is not a dis-
criminant as such, but rather a direction for projection of the data down to one dimension.
D.2
Fisher’s Linear Discriminant for multiple
classes
Having K > 2 classes, the expression in Equation (D.1) can be generalised to:
y = WT x
(D.13)
where y is a vector consisting of D′ > 1 linear features; yk = wT
k x, k = 1, . . . , D′ in which
x is the D-dimensional input space. It is assumed that D is greater than the number K of
classes. W is the weight matrix whose columns are the individual weight vectors {wk}.
The generalisation of the within-class covariance matrix from Equation (D.6) becomes:
SW =
K
∑
k=1
Sk
(D.14)
where
Sk =
∑
n∈Ck
(xn −mk)(xn −mk)T
(D.15)
mk = 1
Nk
∑
n∈Ck
xn
(D.16)
and Nk is the number of samples in class Ck. Finding a generalisation of the between-class
covariance is a bit trickier, since it is no longer a question of finding the largest distance
between two class means but rather a question of finding the overall optimal distances
between multiple class means. In order to find the generalisation the mean of the total
dataset is incorporated following Duda and Hart (1973):
ST =
N
∑
n=1
(xn −m)(xn −m)T
(D.17)
where m is the mean of the total data set:
m = 1
N
N
∑
n=1
xn = 1
N
K
∑
k=1
Nkmk
(D.18)
and N = ∑
k Nk is the total number of data points. The total covariance matrix can be
decomposed into the sum of the within-class covariance matrix, given in (D.14) and (D.15),
plus an additional matrix SB identified as a measure of the between-class covariance
matrix. Hence,
ST = SW + SB
(D.19)
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
67
==PAGE:76==
where
SB =
K
∑
k=1
Nk(mk −m)(mk −m)T
(D.20)
The above covariance matrices have been defined in the original x-space. Similarly, we
can define matrices for the projected samples y. The within-class covariance matrix in the
D′-dimensional y-space becomes:
sW =
K
∑
k=1
∑
n∈Ck
(yn −µk)(yn −µk)T
(D.21)
and the between-class covariance matrix:
sB =
K
∑
k=1
Nk(µk −µ)(µk −µ)T
(D.22)
where
µk = 1
Nk
∑
n∈Ck
yn,
µ = 1
N
K
∑
k=1
Nkµk
(D.23)
As for the two-class problem the goal is again to compute a scalar that is large when the
between-class covariance is large, and the within-class covariance is small. This can be
solved by:
J(W) = Tr{s−1
W sB}
(D.24)
Equation (D.24) can then be rewritten into an explicit function of the projection matrix
W (similarly to what we did with (D.7) and (D.8)):
J(w) = Tr{(WSW WT )−1(WSBWT )}
(D.25)
In order to maximise such criteria, the weight values are determined by the eigenvectors
of S−1
W SB which corresponds to the D′ largest eigenvalues. The algorithm used to find the
eigenvectors and corresponding eigenvalues is called Singular Value Decomposition (SVD).
D.3
Singular Value Decomposition
Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) is an algorithm that decomposes a matrix into three
other matrices. SVD is used to find the eigenvectors and corresponding eigenvalues used for
the Linear Discriminant Analysis in section 3.3.2. The following background and tutorial
on SVD is based on [49].
If a matrix A is an m × n real matrix with m > n, then A can be written as a so-called
sigular value decomposition of the form:
A = USV T
(D.26)
where U is an m x m orthogonal matrix, S is an m x n diagonal matrix and V is an n x n
orthogonal matrix. The columns of U are the left singular vectors, S contains the singular
values and V’s rows are right singular values.
Finding the aforementioned eigenvectors and eigenvalues corresponds to calculating the
eigenvalues and eigenvectors of AAT and AT A. The eigenvectors of AT A corresponds
to the columns of V , the eigenvectors of AAT corresponds to the columns of U and the
68
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:77==
singular values in S are the square roots of the eigenvalues from AAT or AT A.
The
transpose of A is:
AT = (USV T )T = V ST UT = V SU T
(D.27)
We can then compute AT A by knowing that from the orthogonality of U and V follows:
UT U = I
(D.28)
and
V T V = I
(D.29)
where I is the identity matrix with 1’s in the diagonal and 0 everywhere else. Hence:
AT A = V SU T (USV T ) = V S2V T
(D.30)
AT AV = V S2
(D.31)
Equation (D.31) is equivalent to the eigenvector definition Av = λv, where A corresponds
to the matrix (AT A), v corresponds to an eigenvector in V , i.e. V consists of all eigen-
vectors and λ corresponds to an eingenvalue in S2, i.e. S2 consists of all eigenvalues.
The same course of action applies for AAT :
AAT = USV T (V SU T ) = US2UT
(D.32)
AAT U = US2
(D.33)
Lastly, use above to solve U, V and S for A = USV T .
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
69
==PAGE:78==
E
Colourfulness metric
The colourfulness metric is based upon the opponent colour space representation and the
mean and standard deviation of the values therefrom. Colour perception is usually not best
represented in the RGB space, instead the opponent colour theory suggests that the human
eye perceives opposing colour pairs; black versus white (luminance), red versus green (red-
green channel) and blue versus yellow (blue-yellow channel). An intuitive example is if
one stares at a bright colour for too long, say red, then turning away to look at a white
field, one will perceive a green colour.
The metric proposed in [19] is derived as follows:
rg = R −G
(E.1)
yb = 1
2(R + G) −B
(E.2)
where R is Red, B is Blue and G is Green. Equation (E.1) describes the difference between
the red and green channels and Equation (E.2) represents half the sum of the red and
green channels minus the blue channel, yielding a blue-yellow relation. A more detailed
explanation is not covered in this project. For an elaboration on the metrics derived and
the opponent colour space, the reader is referred to [19] and [50] respectively.
Next, the combined standard deviation σrgyb and mean µrgyb are calculated as:
σrgyb =
√
σ2rg + σ2
yb
(E.3)
µrgyb =
√
µ2rg + µ2
yb
(E.4)
And finally the colourfulness C is defined as:
C = σrgyb + 0.3 · µrgyb
(E.5)
70
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:79==
F
Logistic Regression
A logistic regression approach can also be used to predict recommended items for a user.
The following presents a short conceptual description. Logistic regression is simply put a
logistic sigmoid function (Equation 4.1) wrapped around a linear regression of the form
f(x) = β0 + β1x1 + · · · + βpxp.
The input to the logistic regression fit are the program/movie embeddings. Maximum
likelihood, is then used to find the weights (β’s) of the regression. The targets are binary
vectors, where 1 could correspond to e.g. ”seen” and 0 to ”not seen”. Furthermore, it is
often the case that there are a greater number of 0’s than 1’s. In these cases it would be
beneficial to assign weights to the classes. For example increasing the weight for class 1
would assign more importance to class 1 in the regression. A choice of weight could for
instance be #negative samples
#positive samples where positive samples are 1’s and negative samples are 0’s.
Choosing to weigh classes can however have the opposite effect and decrease the accuracy.
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
71
==PAGE:80==
G
VGG-16
An experiment was carried out to see if the result of passing a movie poster through
the VGG-16 network could be relevant. For more information about the VGG-16 Neural
Network see [51]. The model tried to identify the type of the input image. An example
hereof can be seen below:
Figure G.1: Stuart Little movie poster
Table G.1: Classes and the probability that
Stuart Little belongs to each class.
Image type
Probability
web site
0.1542
comic book
0.1407
jigsaw puzzle
0.1340
parachute
0.0807
monitor
0.0747
Based on the above results it was chosen not to move forward with this approach seeing
as the goal in this project was not to be able to detect objects in images. However the
VGG-16 network could have been used in a transfer learning approach.
72
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:81==
H
Training Neural Networks
Figure H.1 shows a plot of the sigmoid function over different values of a.
Figure H.1: The sigmoid activation function
Figure H.2 shows how the loss increases as the predicted probability deviates from the
true label.
Figure H.2: The cross-entropy loss function
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
73
==PAGE:82==
I
Additional results from the
pure multi-label ConvNet
Figure I.1: Images from the test set with their respective true and predicted labels
74
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:83==
J
Additional results from the
OvO ConvNets
J.1
Loss and accuracy curve plots
(a) Train (red) and validation (blue) loss.
The vertical line indicates the optimal cutoff
at epoch 13
(b) Train (red) and validation (blue) accu-
racy. The vertical line indicates the optimal
cutoff at epoch 13
Figure J.1: First binary OvO neural network. Children vs. comdey+action
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
75
==PAGE:84==
(a) Train (red) and validation (blue) loss.
The vertical line indicates the optimal cutoff
at epoch 25
(b) Train (red) and validation (blue) accu-
racy. The vertical line indicates the optimal
cutoff at epoch 25
Figure J.2: Second binary OvO neural network. Children vs. drama+thriller+sci-fi
(a) Train (red) and validation (blue) loss.
The vertical line indicates the optimal cutoff
at epoch 9
(b) Train (red) and validation (blue) accu-
racy. The vertical line indicates the optimal
cutoff at epoch 9
Figure J.3: Third binary OvO neural network. Children vs. family
76
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:85==
(a) Train (red) and validation (blue) loss.
The vertical line indicates the optimal cutoff
at epoch 15
(b) Train (red) and validation (blue) accu-
racy. The vertical line indicates the optimal
cutoff at epoch 15
Figure J.4: Fourth binary OvO neural network. Children vs. horror
(a) Train (red) and validation (blue) loss.
The vertical line indicates the optimal cutoff
at epoch 11
(b) Train (red) and validation (blue) accu-
racy. The vertical line indicates the optimal
cutoff at epoch 11
Figure J.5: Fifth binary OvO neural network. Comedy+action vs. drama+thriller+scifi
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
77
==PAGE:86==
(a) Train (red) and validation (blue) loss.
The vertical line indicates the optimal cutoff
at epoch 22
(b) Train (red) and validation (blue) accu-
racy. The vertical line indicates the optimal
cutoff at epoch 22
Figure J.6: Sixth binary OvO neural network. Comedy+action vs. family
(a) Train (red) and validation (blue) loss.
The vertical line indicates the optimal cutoff
at epoch 13
(b) Train (red) and validation (blue) accu-
racy. The vertical line indicates the optimal
cutoff at epoch 13
Figure J.7: Seventh binary OvO neural network. Comedy+action vs. horror
78
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:87==
(a) Train (red) and validation (blue) loss.
The vertical line indicates the optimal cutoff
at epoch 15
(b) Train (red) and validation (blue) accu-
racy. The vertical line indicates the optimal
cutoff at epoch 15
Figure J.8: Eighth binary OvO neural network. Drama+thriller+sci-fi vs. family
(a) Train (red) and validation (blue) loss.
The vertical line indicates the optimal cutoff
at epoch 3
(b) Train (red) and validation (blue) accu-
racy. The vertical line indicates the optimal
cutoff at epoch 3
Figure J.9: Ninth binary OvO neural network. Drama+thriller+sci-fi vs. horror
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
79
==PAGE:88==
(a) Train (red) and validation (blue) loss.
The vertical line indicates the optimal cutoff
at epoch 34
(b) Train (red) and validation (blue) accu-
racy. The vertical line indicates the optimal
cutoff at epoch 34
Figure J.10: Tenth binary OvO neural network. Family vs. horror
80
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:89==
J.2
Confusion matrices
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
81
==PAGE:90==
82
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:91==
K
Additional similar images
K.1
One-genre data
Below are images from the one-genre data set. Every first, most left image in a row is the
original image, and the subsequent images to the right are most similar images based on
either the cosine or Pearson measure.
Figure K.1: Most left in each row is the original image, followed by its most similar images
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
83
==PAGE:92==
Figure K.2: Most left in each row is the original image, followed by its most similar images
K.2
Multi-genre data
Below are images from the multi-genre data set. Every first, most left image in a row is
the original image, and the subsequent images to the right are most similar images based
on either the cosine or Pearson measure.
84
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
==PAGE:93==
Figure K.3: Most left in each row is the original image, followed by its most similar images
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
85
==PAGE:94==
Figure K.4: Most left in each row is the original image, followed by its most similar images
86
Contextual feature extraction with respect to recommendation engines
