==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering
Development and validation of
novel disulfide-stabilized MHC class I
molecules for T cell identification
Susana Patricia Amaya Hernandez
s181780
Supervisors:
Professor Sine Reker Hadrup
Tripti Tamhane
Kongens Lyngby, Denmark 2020
==PAGE:2==
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Email: healthtech-info@dtu.dk
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis ”Development and validation of novel disulfide-stabilized MHC class I
molecules for T cell identification” was conducted in Department of Health Technology
at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requisites required for
acquiring a Master of Science degree in Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering.
Susana Patricia Amaya Hernandez
s181780
Kongens Lyngby, Denmark, August 14, 2020
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to Professor Sine Reker, for giving me
the opportunity to join the T Cell and Cancer Group and to carry out the research
presented in this thesis. Without your leadership and inspiration, this would not have
been possible.
I would like to give an special appreciation to Tripti Tamhane, for providing con-
tinuous support, guidance and advice throughout the development of this research.
Thanks for being there during this period and to steer me on the proper direction
whenever it was needed. Your scientific knowledge and kindness were the perfect mix
to make this thesis and research successful.
I am very thankful with the rest of the monomer production team, Anna Burkal
and Yogesh Basavaraju, for all the support in laboratory activities and very fruitful
discussions carried out.
I want to thank everyone in the T Cell and Cancer Group for welcoming me to the
team. I thank you for all the experiences and good times that we have shared.
I have no words to express the gratitude to my family; my mom Susy, my dad Chucho
and my sister Gaby, for unconditionally support my life’s endeavors.
Finally, to my best friend and husband Pepe for loving me and for always being
present. Thanks for pushing me to always follow my dreams and become a better
person. We are the perfect team.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
Peptide-MHC-I (pMHC-I) multimers have been used as a tool to for the identification
of viral- and cancer-associated- immunogenic antigens, as well as for the detection and
characterization of antigen-specific T cells. This is essential to understand the role
of CTL response in the control and clearance of viral infections and in the elimina-
tion of tumorigenic cells, as well as for therapeutic development such as personalized
cancer immunotherapies. The use of pMHC-I multimers as T cell detection platform
was initially constrained by the production of recombinant pMHC-I complexes which
required up to thousands individual in vitro refolding reactions of MHC-I complexes
with specific peptides, as peptide binding to MHC peptide-binding groove is essential
for the proper folding and stability of the MHC-I comple. The generation of pMHC
complexes was greatly facilitated by the development of MHC peptide exchange tech-
nologies which allows their using conditional ligands which, upon command, can be
cleaved and exchanged with any MHC ligand of interest. However, MHC peptide
exchange technologies are still limited by the dependency on peptides to stabilize the
MHC-I molecules. To overcome this, a disulfide bond was introduced in the pep-
tide binding cleft to generate empty MHC-I molecules which can be instantly loaded
with peptide of interest and multimerized for the detection of antigen-specific T cell.
This technology has been implemented for the generation of a number of DS-HLA-A
and -B molecules, however it has not been tested yet for the generation of HLA-C
molecules.
The objective of the project was to produce new disulfide-stabilized empty HLA-C
molecules (DS-HLA-C) for different HLA-C alleles which can be used to generate
DS-HLA-C multimers as a versatile platform that can be used for easy and fast iden-
tification and characterization of antigen-specific T cells.
Six disulfide-stabilized HLA-C monomers for different HLA-C alleles (HLA-C*02:02,
HLA-C*03:04, HLA-C*04:01, HLA-C*05:01, HLA-C*06:02, and HLA-C*07:02) were
successfully produced by optimization of procedures used for production of DS-HLA-
C monomers. Further validation for their capability for T staining still need to be
done.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Abbreviations
==PAGE:10==
viii
Abbreviations
APC
Antigen Presenting C ells
BC
Buffy Coats
BV
Brilliant Violet
p*HLA-C
Conditional Ligand-HLA-C complexes
CTL
Cytotoxic T cell
DC
Dendritic Cell
DMSO
Dimethyl Sulfoxide
DS
Disulfide Stabilized
E. coli
Escherichia coli
EMSA
Electrophoretic Mobility Shift Assay
ELT
Empty Loadable Tetramers
ER
Endoplasmic Reticulum
ERAPI
ER Aminopeptidase I
FACS
Fluorescence-Activated Cell Sorting
FCS
Fetal Calf Serum
GGM
Glycyl-Glycyl-Methionine
GL
Glycine – Lysine
HCMV
Human Cyto Megalovirus
HLA
Human Leukocyte Antigen
HLA-I
HLA class I molecule
Ig
Immunoglobulin
IE1
Immediate-Early-1
IPTG
Isopropyl- ￿-D-1-ThioGalactopyranoside
KIRs
Killer cell Immunoglobulin-like Receptors
MD
Molecular Dynamics
MHC
Major Histocompatibility Complex
MHC-I
MHC class I
MW
Molecular weight
NK
Natural Killer
PBLs
Peripheral Blood Lymphocytes
TILs
Tumor-Infiltrating Lymphocytes
PBS
Phosphate-Buffered Saline
pDS-MHC-I
peptide-loaded DS-MHC-I
PE
Phycoerythrin
PBMC
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells
PLC
Peptide-Loading Complex
pp150
Phosphoprotein Protein 150
pp50
Phosphoprotein Protein 50
pp65
Phosphoprotein Protein 65
SA
Streptavidin
SEC-HPLC
Size Exclusion-High-Performance Liquid Chromatography
TAP
Transporter associated with Antigen Processing
TCR
T Cell Receptor
UV
Ultraviolet
wt
Wild Type
wt-pMHC-I
Wild Type Peptide-loaded-MHC-I
β2m
β2m-macroglobulin
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Preface
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Abstract
v
Abbreviations
vii
Contents
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
MHC class I in immune response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
T cells clinical applications for cancer immunotherapies
. . . . . . . .
7
1.3
Technologies for identification of antigen-specific T cells
. . . . . . . .
9
1.4
Role of HLA-C in the immune response
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2
Context, Hypothesis and Objective
17
2.1
Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2
Hypothesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Materials and Methods
19
3.1
Technology for production of HLA-C molecules . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
HLA-C allotypes selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3
DS-HLA-C heavy and light chain production
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.4
DS- and wt-HLA-C monomer production
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.5
Validation of DS-HLA-C tetramers for T cell identification . . . . . . .
28
3.6
Generation of HLA-C restricted CMV peptide libraries . . . . . . . . .
31
4
Results
33
4.1
HLA-C allotype selection for DS-HLA-C monomer production . . . . .
33
4.2
DS-HLA-C heavy chains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3
DS-HLA-C monomer production
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.4
Wt-p*HLA-C monomer production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.5
Validation of DS-HLA-C tetramers for T cell identification . . . . . . .
44
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
4.6
Generation of HLA-C restricted HCMV peptide libraries . . . . . . . .
46
5
Discussion
49
5.1
Future perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6
Conclusions
57
A HCMV peptide sequences
59
B Flow cytometry analysis
62
C Libraries of HLA-C restricted peptides
69
Bibliography
75
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
MHC class I in immune response
1.1.1
MHC class I structure
Under cellular abnormalities such as viral infections and cancer, immune surveillance
is mediated by the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules that
occur in nearly all nucleated cells. MHC class I (MHC-I) molecules are involved in
both innate and adaptive immunity. They play a central role in adaptive immunity
as they present antigenic peptides to CD8+ T cells (also known as cytotoxic T lym-
phocytes or CTL), and as for the innate immunity, they participate by interacting
with receptors on the surface of natural killer (NK) cells to influence their functions.
The MHC class I molecule is a heterodimer formed by a glycosylated transmem-
brane heavy α chain (∼45 kDa) noncovalently bound to a small invariant chain, β2-
macroglobulin (β2m) (12 kDa) (Figure 1.1 A and B). The α chain is 362-366 amino
acids long consisting of three ∼90 amino acid extracellular domains (named α1, α2
and α3), a transmembrane segment (∼25 amino acids) and a C-terminal cytoplasmic
end (∼30 amino acids). The α1 and α2 domains fold to form a domain known as
the peptide-biding groove or cleft (Figure 1.1 C) where small peptide-fragments of
8-10 amino acids bind, and that is bordered by a surface that interacts with a T cell
receptor (TCR) or a NK cell killer immunoglobulin-like receptor (KIR). The ends of
the peptide-binding cleft are closed, limiting the size of the peptide that can bind
to 8-10 residues. The α3 domain and β2m associates to support the peptide-binding
domain, while the transmembrane domain of the α chain, anchors the molecule to
the cell surface [54][41].
The α chain is encoded by the MHC-I genomic region. In humans, this region is called
human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I region, and is located in the chromosome 6.
The gene that encodes for β2-microglobulin is located on chromosome 15. HLA class
I (HLA-I) molecules have two properties to attain diversity of antigen presentation.
They are polygenic as they contain several different HLA-I α chain genes. In hu-
mans, there are three classical HLA-I α chain genes, called HLA-A, -B, and -C. HLA
molecules are also highly polymorphic; that is, there are multiple variants, or alleles,
of each gene within the population [41, 47]. Up to date, nearly 20,000 HLA-I classical
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
alleles have been identified [56]. Each individual inherits two copies of the chromo-
some carrying the HLA genes, one from each parent. Due to HLA polymorphisms,
most individuals will be heterozygous for the genes encoding HLA class I, and will
therefore co-dominantly express 6 different HLA-I molecules (two of each HLA- A,
-B, -C). The major differences between the different HLA allelic forms are located
in the peptide-binding cleft influencing which peptides will bind, and thus thanks
to polygenism and polymorphism every individual possesses a set of HLA molecules
with different ranges of peptide-binding specificities. By contrast, β2m which does
not contribute directly to peptide binding, is not polymorphic [41, 47].
Figure 1.1: (A) Structure of the heterodimer MHC-I molecule, consisting of a membrane-
spanning α chain bound noncovalently to β2-macroglobulin. Adapted from [54]. (B) Equiva-
lent ribbon diagram of the MHC-I molecules. (C) MHC peptide-binding cleft where peptide
antigens bind to the MHC molecules. Adapted from [41]
1.1.2
MHC class I antigen presentation
Mature cell surface MHC-I molecules are formed in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
with the help of resident proteins (Figure 1.2). Initially, newly synthesized MHC-I
heavy chains enters the ER membrane and binds to calnexin, a chaperone protein
which retains the MHC-I molecule in a partly folded state. β2m binds to the heavy
chain, causing the heterodimer to dissociate from calnexin and bind to an assembly
of proteins called the MHC-I peptide-loading complex (PLC), formed by tapasin
and the chaperones ERp57 and calreticulin. Tapasin forms a bridge between MHC-
I molecules and the transporter associated with antigen processing (TAP) complex.
The PLC maintains the MHC-I molecule in a state that is receptive to peptide binding.
Peptides derived from self or foreign proteins are generated in the cytosol by the
proteasome and translocated into the lumen of the ER by the TAP1:TAP2 complex.
Longer peptides are additionally trimmed by the ER aminopeptidase I (ERAPI) to
a length of 8-10 amino acids.
Peptides can then bind to the cleft of the MHC-I
heavy chain, completing the molecule folding and providing stability to the MHC
molecule. Binding of the peptide to the MHC-I molecule is stabilized at both ends
==PAGE:15==
1.1 MHC class I in immune response
3
of the peptide-binding cleft by hydrogen bonds between the free amino- and carboxy-
terminal ends of the peptide and invariant sites that are found at each end of the cleft.
Sequence dependent interactions are distributed along the length of the binding cleft
in pockets (designated A, B, C, D, E and F) that accommodate amino acid side
chains at various positions and contribute to allele-specific peptide recognition and
specificity. The peptide primary anchor residues, providing the main contact points,
are located at residue positions P1, P2 and P9. Other residues in the peptide serve as
additional anchors, providing less significant interactions. Mature MHC-I molecules
containing the bound peptide are then transported into the cell surface [8, 30, 41].
Figure 1.2: Antigenic peptides generated by the proteasome are translocated into the ER
and loaded onto MHC- I molecules. MHC-peptide complexes are then transported to the
cell surface were they can be recognized by CTL. Reprinted from [30]
.
1.1.3
TRC recognition by HLA class I molecules
Cytosolic peptides are presented on the surface of somatic cells by MHC-I molecules as
a complex to signal the presence of cellular abnormalities and activate armed effector
CD8+ T cells for elimination of infected or malignant cells. In antigen presenting cells
(APC), mainly dendritic cells (DC), which may not themselves be infected or malig-
nant, peptide-MHC-I complexes serve to activate antigen-specific naïve CD8+ T cells.
==PAGE:16==
4
1 Introduction
The peptide-MHC-I complex ligand is recognized by the TCR on CD8+ T cells (Figure
1.3). The TCR consist of an α chain covalently paired with a β chain, and noncova-
lently associated with a complex of several invariant chains of the CD3 family. The
TCR α β chains are involved in the recognition of the peptide-MHC-I complex, while
the CD3 complex is involved in the signaling process which activates the T cell after
recognition of the ligand. T cells express a wide range of TCR α β chains that can
recognize a wide variety of antigenic peptides. T cells also expresses the co-receptor
CD8 which binds to the MHC-I α3 region, maintaining the T cell and the target
cell bound closely together during T cell activation. The activated effector CD8+ T
cell will become cytotoxic killing the infected or malignant cells either by perforin/
granzyme–mediated lysis or by death receptor–induced apoptosis. Naïve T cells acti-
vation by APC requires additional co-stimulatory signals to become effector CD8+ T
cells [41, 47] .
Figure 1.3: A CD8+ T cell recognizes a target cell by binding of its TCR to the appropriate
combination of MHC-I and peptide. Reprinted from [41]
.
1.1.4
NIR recognition by HLA class I molecules
MHC-I molecules are also ligands for the killer cell immunoglobulin-like receptors
(KIRs), which are expressed on the surface of NK cells and a small subset of CD8+
T cells. KIRs interaction with HLA-I ligands are known to influence the resistance
to infections, susceptibility to autoimmune diseases and cancer, outcome of human
pregnancy, and the effects of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation [46].
KIRs are type I transmembrane glycoproteins that can be divided into two subfam-
ilies based on the number of immunoglobulin (Ig)-like domains in the extracellular
portion of the protein. The KIR3D subfamily contains three Ig- like domains (named
D0, D1 and D2), whereas the KIR2D proteins contain only two Ig-like domains (D1
==PAGE:17==
1.1 MHC class I in immune response
5
and D2). The D1 and D2 domains forms a V-shaped interface and binds to one end
of the peptide-binding groove by positioning each domain over the α1 and α helices
of the HLA, respectively (Figure 1.4 A). The D0 domain does not provide allotype
specificity, but enhances the binding. In addition to binding the HLA-I molecule, the
KIR also interact with the C-terminal region of the peptide, indicating the role of
the peptide in modulating the KIR interaction [63]. It has been found that residues
7 and 8 of the peptide bound to HLA-I can promote or prevent binding of KIR [20, 44].
KIRs can recognize HLA-A, -B, and -C molecules, and they will have either an in-
hibitory or an activating function on the cytotoxic response of the NK cells towards
tumors and viruses. The inhibitory KIRs (designated by an ‘L’) have long cytoplas-
mic tails that contain two immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motives (ITIM)
which are responsible for the delivery of the inhibitory signal after binding the re-
ceptor.
The activating KIRs (designated by an ‘S’) contains shorter cytoplasmic
regions and requires coupling to an immunodominant tyrosine based activation motif
(ITAM)-containing adaptor protein for the transduction of the activating signals [23].
Figure 1.4: (A) KIR receptors bind to one end of the MHC-I peptide binding groove with
the KIR D1 domain positioned over the MHC-I α1 domain and the D2 over the α2 domain.
Reprinted from [21]. (B) KIR2DL1 binds group C2 allotypes with a strong specificity, while
KIR2DL2 and KIR2DL3 bind group C1 allotypes with a weaker interaction. N, asparagine;
K, lysine. Reprinted from [65]
.
All HLA-I that interact with KIRs contains a well-conserved region between residues
145 to 151 on the α2 helix which interacts with the D2 domains of KIR. In contrast,
the residues on the α1 helix of HLA-I that interact with the D1 domain of the KIR
are more variable and are primarily responsible for determining the specificity of indi-
vidual KIRs for HLA-I [63]. HLA-C molecules have evolved to have more interactions
with NK cells rather than T cells, playing a key role in regulating NK cell response.
HLA-C molecules have less allelic variation compared to HLA-A and -B, with partic-
ular conservation in the α1 helix at the binding site for KIR D1 domain in NK cells.
It has been found that only a few HLA-A and HLA-B alleles code for proteins that
bind KIRs, but all HLA-C alleles express proteins that bind KIRs. KIR3D receptors
can bind to HLA-A3 and -A11 and some HLA-A, and -B proteins containing the
==PAGE:18==
6
1 Introduction
Bw4 motif, which comprises residues 77–83 on the α1 helix of HLA-A and -B; while
KIR2D receptors will recognize predominantly the HLA-C alleles [63, 79].
The specificity of KIR2D for different HLA-C allotypes is defined by a dimorphism at
position 80 of the HLA-C α1 domain, subdividing HLA-C allotypes into two groups,
C1 and C2. HLA-C1 contains an asparagine residue in the position 80 and HLA-C2
contains an lysine in the position 80. The residue 44 in the KIR molecule (methionine
in KIR2DL1/S1 and lysine in KIR2DL2/3) is critical for the interaction with residue
80 of the HLA-C molecule and defining KIR specificity [10, 63, 44]. See Table 1.1 for
a list of inhibitory and activating KIRs and their identified HLA-I ligands.
Table 1.1: NK Cell Receptors that interacts with HLA-I molecules [23, 44, 63, 75]
.
Receptor
Identified Ligand
Inhibitory KIRs
KIR2DL1
HLA-CLys80 (C2:HLA-Cw2,4,5,6,15
KIR2DL2
HLA-CAsn80 (C1:HLA-Cw1,3,7,8)
KIR2DL3
HLA-CAsn80 (C1:HLA-Cw1,3,7,8)
KIR2DL4
HLA-G (non-classical HLA-I)
KIR2DL5
Not determined
KIR3DL1
HLA-A/B-Bw4
KIR3DL2
HLA-A3 and A11
KIR3DL3
N.D.
Activating KIRs
KIR2DS1
HLA-CLys80 (C2:HLA-Cw2,4,5,6,15
KIR2DS2
HLA-CAsn80 (C1:HLA-Cw1)
HLA-A11
KIR2DS4
HLA-CLys80 (C2:HLA-Cw2,4,5)
HLA-CAsn80 (C1:HLA-Cw10,14,16)
HLA-A11
KIR2DS3,5
HLA-class I
KIR3DS1
HLA-Bw4
It has been found that inhibitory KIRs forms stronger and more specific interaction
with C2 allotypes compared to C1 allotypes, and that the specificity for the HLA-C
allotype is inversely correlated with selectivity for peptides (Figure 1.4 A). Therefore
KIR2DL1, which has strong specificity for C2 allotypes, binds C2 in the presence of
most peptides [65], in some cases the peptide has minimal interaction with KIR2DL1
[21]. On the other hand, KIR2DL2 and KIR2DL3, which have weaker interaction
with C1 allotypes, have greater peptide selectivity. The strength of the KIR-HLA-C
interaction correlates with the strength of KIR-mediated inhibition, and therefore the
disease outcome. Weaker inhibitory interactions result in greater NK cell activation
==PAGE:19==
1.2 T cells clinical applications for cancer immunotherapies
7
and better protection from virus infection, or greater susceptibility to autoimmu-
nity, while too strong inhibitions by KIR2DL1–HLA-C2 interactions might prevents
proper NK cell activation. As for activating 2DS KIRs (KIR2DS1 and KIR2DS2),
they present lower affinity and a weaker binding to HLA-C allotypes [65, 49].
Regarding the function of KIRs on T cells, inhibitory KIRs can modulate TCR signal-
ing and reduce CD8+ T cell responses, while activating KIRs can enhance functional
T cell responses. KIR expression starts appearing on effector memory CD8+ cells,
and a large number of terminally differentiated effector T cells contain KIR receptors
[9].
1.2
T cells clinical applications for cancer
immunotherapies
Cancer immunotherapy approaches rely on the surveillance capacity of immune cells,
including cytotoxic T cells, which are able to eliminate cancer cells based on identifica-
tion of tumor antigens bound to HLA-I molecules (Figure 1.5 A). Tumor antigens can
be tumor-associated antigens or tumor- specific neoantigens. The first are antigens
overexpress in tumor cells but can also be expressed in healthy tissues, so their use as
therapeutic targets can lead to normal tissue destruction and toxicity. Tumor-specific
neoantigens originates from mutated genes in tumor cells which results in proteins
that are not expressed on normal cells and therefore have lower risk of generating au-
toimmunity. Neoantigens also have the potential to be highly immunogenic, because
they have never been seen by the immune system and thus never subjected to central
tolerance. Studies have shown that neoepitopes drive effective CD8+ T cell responses
in cancer patients. Therefore, neoantigens are currently exploited as powerful targets
for developing T-cell-mediated personalized cancer immunotherapies, such as vacci-
nation and adoptive cell therapy. Personalized adoptive T-cell therapy (Figure 1.5
B) requires identification of pre-existing T cells reactive to neoantigens from patient
samples, followed by in vitro expansion and induction of these autologous T cells, and
their infusion back into patients to generate an immune-mediated antitumor response
[16, 60]. On the other hand, neoantigen-based vaccines (Figure 1.5 C) aims to activate
tumor-specific T cell response through active immunization. The use of these vaccines
have reported to potentiate the anti-tumor efficacy and direct immune recognition
towards the tumor [2, 60]. One challenge for the development of these therapies is
the development of tools for rapid and efficient detection of antigen-specific T cells
and identification of immunogenic neoantigen candidates.
==PAGE:20==
8
1 Introduction
Figure 1.5: (A) Diagram of the cancer immunity cycle. Tumors will release the antigens
(1) which are taken up and processed by APCs, such as DCs (2). In the lymph nodes, DCs
present the captured antigens on MHC-I molecules to T cells, resulting in the priming and
activation of effector T cell against the presented epitopes (3). The activated effector T
cells traffic to (4) and infiltrate (5) the tumor where they recognize and bind to cancer cells
through the interaction between its TCR and its cognate antigen bound to MHC-I (6), and
kill their target cancer cell (7) Reprinted from [2]. (B) Personalized adoptive T-cell. Tumor-
specific T cells are isolated from patient’s tumor or peripheral blood, isolated, expanded
ex vivo, and reinfused into the patient. Adapted from [58]. (C) Neoantigen-based vaccines
present tumor antigens to APCs to generate antigen-specific T cell responses against tumor
cells. Reprinted from [59]
.
==PAGE:21==
1.3 Technologies for identification of antigen-specific T cells
9
1.3
Technologies for identification of antigen-specific T
cells
1.3.1
MHC class I multimers
MHC-I multimers have been used as a tool to identify T cells specific for viral- and
cancer-associated antigens, including neoantigens. This detection technique exploits
the interaction between a TCR and its peptide-MHC-I (pMHC-I) recognition motif.
The binding of TCR with the MHC–peptide complex is characterized by low affinity
and fast off rates. Therefore, multimerized MHC–peptide complexes are requiered
for T cell detection using flow cytometry, as they are able to bind more than one
TCR on a specific T cell, and thus providing sufficient stability to the TCR-pMHC-I
interactions [3, 6, 66].
Figure 1.6: MHC-I tetramer consist of a complex of four biotinylated pMHC-I monomers
bound to a fluorescent-labelled streptavidin molecule. Binding of MHC-I tetramers to mul-
tiple TCRs results in an increase in the binding affinity and decreased off rate allowing the
staining of antigen-specific T cells. Reprinted from [32]
MHC multimer-based T cell detection technologies have evolved to increase the detec-
tion sensitivity and the number of distinct antigen-responsive T cell populations that
may be identified per sample (Figure 1.7) [6]. The first MHC multimers developed
were based on single staining using fluorescent labeled MHC tetramers. Tetramers
consist of four biotinylated peptide-MHC-I complexes bound to streptavidin conju-
gated with fluorescent dye (Figure 1.6). With this approach, only a few (1-5) different
T cell specificities can be detected per cell sample [3].
==PAGE:22==
10
1 Introduction
The number of distinct populations that could be identified by MHC multimers-based
technology, was later increased by using combinatorial encoding of MHC tetramers
using either fluorescent or metal labels (Figure 1.7). When using combinatorial en-
coding of fluorescently labeled MHC tetramers, each distinct pMHC-I multimer can
be assigned with a unique dual color code [26] or multivalent code [43], which is then
used to identify the T cells binding to a specific pMHC-I molecule. Using this ap-
proach, up to 36 different specificities can be screened per sample. However, up to
109 different antigen-specificities can be screened by combining mass cytometry with
combinatorial pMHC-I tetramer staining using metal labels [43].
Figure 1.7: Evolution of T cell detection technologies. Adapted from [6, 7]
Recently, DNA barcodes have been used to label MHC multimers (Figure 1.7). Bi-
otinylated DNA barcodes and pMHC-I molecules are attached to a fluorochrome-
labeled dextran backbone carrying streptavidin. Each MHC multimer is assembled
in a dextran backbone with a given DNA barcode, so that every pMHC-I epitope
is associated with a unique DNA barcode. All MHC multimers are conjugated to
the same fluorochrome, and its signal intensity is used to sort any T cells that binds
with the multimers. After sorting, the number of reads for a specific DNA barcode,
determined by DNA amplification and sequencing, correlates with the presence of
antigen-responsive T cells. This approach can be applied to screen for more than
1000 specificities in a single sample [7].
==PAGE:23==
1.3 Technologies for identification of antigen-specific T cells
11
1.3.2
MHC class I complex generation
As previously mentioned, peptides binding to MHC peptide-binding groove is essential
for the proper folding and stability of the MHC-I complex. Therefore, MHC multimer–
based T cell detection technologies were limited by the production of pMHC-I molecules
which required an individual folding and purification for each peptide, and large li-
braries of 100 to 1000 different individual pMHC-I complexes were required. MHC
peptide exchange technologies have been developed to facilitate the parallel produc-
tion of multiple pMHC-I molecules with different specificities from a common stock of
MHC-I molecules containing a conditional ligand. The conditional ligand is used to
achieve proper MHC-I complex refolding and provide stability, however, it can later
be cleaved and exchanged with any MHC ligand of interest [6, 62].
Figure 1.8: Diagram of UV-mediated peptide technology. The MHC-I complex contains a
photolabile peptide which is cleaved and disassociates upon exposure to light. The Empty
MHC-I molecules can then be loaded with the peptide of interest. Reprinted from [57]
The most widely used of these technologies is the ultraviolet (UV)–mediated peptide
exchange technology, in which MHC-I monomers are prepared with a photolabile
peptide that gets cleaved upon UV exposure, after which MHC-I molecules can be
loaded with an epitope of choice (Figure 1.8 [57]. Temperature-induced exchange tech-
nology has also been developed, where conditional peptides can form stable pMHC-I
complexes at low temperatures, but dissociate when exposed to a defined elevated tem-
perature [38]. Dipeptide-exchange technology has been investigated in a few MHC-I
alleles, where dipeptides can assist the folding of MHC-I molecules, and due to their
low affinity to MHC-I molecules, they can rapidly be exchanged with high-affinity
peptides. This technology has not yet been applied in larger T cell epitopes mapping
strategies [6, 61]. All these technologies still present some limitations for the pro-
duction of MHC multimers, including an additional peptide exchange process step,
design and optimization of MHC-specific conditional peptides, inefficient peptide ex-
change of low-affinity incoming peptides, time constraints related to duration of the
exchange reaction, and the ability to multimerize only after peptide exchange [62].
==PAGE:24==
12
1 Introduction
1.3.3
Empty-loadable MHC class I molecules
Recently, an alternative technology has been proposed by Hein et al. [28] [48] which
allows the production of functionally empty MHC-I monomers.
They introduced
a disulfide bond to link the α1 and α2 helices close to the F pocket of the peptide-
binding groove mimicking the conformational and dynamic effects of that the binding
of a high- affinity peptide has on the binding-groove, and thus providing stability to
the MHC-I complex even in the absence of peptide.
This technology was firstly demonstrated by designing a disulfide mutant variant of
the murine MHC-I allotype H-2Kb [28], and has been further examined and validated
for efficient detection of antigen-specific T cells in two human disulfide-stabilized (DS)
MHC-I alleles (HLA-A*02:01, HLA-A*24:02) and one murine DS- MHC-I allele (H-
2Kb) [62].
The disulfide mutant variants of the MHC-I protein were designed by
introducing two cysteines at positions 84 and 139, replacing tyrosine and alanine,
respectively. The design was based on molecular dynamics simulations of the free
energy profiles associated with the width of the peptide-binding cleft. The simula-
tions suggested that the disulfide variants had restricted conformational flexibility,
and consequently increased stability of the peptide-free state compare with the wild
type.
Figure 1.9: (A) Crystal structure overlay of DS-2Kb (green) with wt- H-2Kb (gray) in
complex with AVYNFATM peptide.
(B) Overlay of the peptide-binding groove and the
peptide (C) Overlay of the peptide in the binding groove. The C84–C139 disulfide bond is
highlighted in yellow. Adapted from [28]
Validation of the structural and functional properties of the DS-MHC-I showed that
the additional disulfide bond does not alter the conformation of the MHC molecule
or the bound protein, as complete structural overlap was observed with the wild type
structure (Figure 1.9) [28, 62].
==PAGE:25==
1.3 Technologies for identification of antigen-specific T cells
13
The use of peptide-loaded DS-MHC-I (pDS-MHC-I) tetramers demonstrated to im-
prove the detection of antigen specific CD8+ T cells, as they provide a better staining
index compared with wild type (wt) -pMHC-I tetramers prepared by UV-mediated
peptide exchange technology. DS-MHC-I molecules have the advantage that can be
folded without a peptide and can be instantly loaded with the peptide of interest
either in their monomeric or multimerized form without affecting their capacity to
stain T cells as demonstrated by T cell staining using DS-empty loadable tetramers
(ELT) which were post-assembly loaded with the peptide of interest. Furthermore,
empty DS-MHC-I multimers are stable even in the absence of peptide and remain
peptide receptive after long-term storage at -20°C. Empty-loadable DS-MHC mul-
timers allows parallel preparation of pMHC multimers for several specificities in a
single peptide-loading step, proving a fast and convenient tool for antigen-specific T
cells recognition for different applications, including personalized immunotherapies
[43].
1.3.3.1
Production of empty-loadable MHC class I molecules
A general overview of the process followed by [43] to generatw empty DS-MHC-I
monomers and tetramers for CD8++ T cell identification in shown in Figure 1.10.
Figure 1.10: General overview of the process to generating empty DS-MHC-I monomers
and tetramers for CD8+ T cell identification. Adapted from [62]
Briefly, the disulfide variant of MHC-I heavy chains were designed by introducing the
two cysteines at positions 84 and 139 as previously mentioned. The DS-MHC-I heavy
chains and β2m were expressed in E. coli and the denatured proteins were isolated
from inclusion bodies and refolded in the presence of a short peptide (i.e.
dipep-
tide). The refolded MHC-I monomer was purified to obtain pure empty DS-MHC-I
molecules. The empty DS-MHC-I monomers could then be loaded with peptide of
interest and multimerized to generate peptide-loaded DS-MHC-I tetramers. Alterna-
tively, empty DS-MHC-I monomers could be firstly multimerized followed by peptide
loading. The peptide-loaded MHC-I multimers were then used to identify antigen-
specific T cells.
==PAGE:26==
14
1 Introduction
1.4
Role of HLA-C in the immune response
While much is known regarding the role of HLA-A and HLA-B molecules in T cell
immune responses, comparatively little is known about CD8+ T cell recognition of
peptides restricted by HLA-C. HLA-C molecules are usually expressed at the cell sur-
face at much lower levels compared to HLA-A and -B. Although HLA-C expression
levels varies widely across individuals in an allele-specific manner, it is estimated to
be as low as 10% of the levels of HLA-A and -B [31, 79]. Several explanations have
been proposed for the lower surface expression of HLA-C including: lower levels of
mRNA due to gene regulation, transcript instability, poor assembly with β2m, in-
creased dissociation of HLA-C/ β2m complexes, slower rate of exocytosis, and a more
selective peptide binding profile [40, 42, 64, 79].
HLA-C restricted CD8+ T cell response has particularly been observed in chronic in-
fections, such as HIV-1 infections. During HIV-1 infection, HLA-A and -B molecules
are downregulated, while surface expression of HLA-C is unaffected. HLA‐C‐restricted
T cells account for up to 54% of the HIV peptide‐specific CTL response [1, 39]. HLA-
C restricted T cells also plays an important role against other chronic viral infections
[10], such as cytomegalovirus (CMV)[29], Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), and hepatitis
B [70] and hepatitis C virus [45]. In contrast to the immune response against viral
infection, HLA-C alleles have been found to be implicated in a number of diseases,
such as Crohn’s disease [34] and psoriasis [10, 79], possible explaining why evolution
has favored towards lower HLA-C expression levels [51]. However, not always it has
been able to determine if the disease results from the modulating function of HLA-C
restricting CD8+ T response, or from their interaction with KIR on NK cells [10].
1.4.1
Detection of HLA-C restricted tumor-antigen-specific T cells
Recombinant MHC-I multimers have been successfully applied for the detection of
tumor-antigen-specific T cells. However, in most of these studies HLA-C restricted
neoepitopes have been excluded for T cell response evaluation. This is mainly due to
the assumption that HLA-C has a lower immunogenicity and role in T cell response
due to lower surface expression. Additionally, previous unavailability of prediction
algorithms and HLA-C reagents for T cell analyses also contributed to their exception
from these studies [51, 79].
Recent publications have reported HLA-C restricted neoepitopes in different cancers
cohorts, including melanoma, ovarian cancer, gastrointestinal cancers, and a number
of pediatric cancers, and their successful use for identification of tumor-neoepitope-
specific CD8 T cells in peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBLs) and tumor-infiltrating
lymphocytes (TILs) [11, 17, 35, 37, 72, 76]. Ramskov et al. [51] evaluated neoepitope
restricted T cell recognition in three cancer cohorts: renal cell carcinoma (RCC),
Melanoma, and non-small-cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) utilizing DNA barcoded
pHLA multimers, generated by UV-induced peptide exchange. Results showed that
==PAGE:27==
1.4 Role of HLA-C in the immune response
15
despite having lower levels of mRNA and protein expression compared to HLA-A
and -B, HLA-C peptides accounted for the largest fraction of T cell responses in the
Melanoma and NSCLC cohorts, and similar response to HLA-A in the RCC cohort.
Additionally, co-culture of TIL with autologous tumor cell lines, demonstrated that
HLA-C restricted epitopes can be recognize by and activate functional T cells. The
results from these studies suggest that HLA-C plays an important role in tumor T
cell recognition, and HLA-C molecules should be included when assessing tumor re-
active T cells for the identification of tumor-specific neoantigens which can be used
as therapeutic targets.
==PAGE:28==
16
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 2
Context, Hypothesis
and Objective
2.1
Context
The T Cell and Cancer Group at the Technical University of Denmark, Department of
Health Technology, has further expanded the application of disulfide-stabilized MHC-
I technology.
A number of DS-MHC-I molecules, comprising murine DS-H2 and
human DS-HLA-A and -B mutant alleles, have been generated and successfully used
for the identification of viral- and cancer-associated antigen-specific T cells. However,
no HLA-C molecules have yet been attempted to be produced based on this technol-
ogy. Since each type of MHC molecule poses specific stability and peptide binding
features, the DS-MHC approach requires process optimization and validation for each
MHC-I allele.
2.2
Hypothesis
Previously developed disulfide stabilized HLA-A and -B molecules (DS-HLA-A and
-B) have shown to produce stable molecules even in the absence of peptides. It is hy-
pothesized that the introduction of the disulfide bond in HLA-C molecules will also
generate functional and stable DS-HLA-C molecules which can be instantly loaded
with peptides of interest and can be used for the identification of T cells with a de-
tection efficiency equal or higher compared to wild-type HLA-C molecules.
2.3
Objective
The objective of the project is to produce six new disulfide-stabilized empty HLA-C
molecules (DS-HLA-C) for different HLA-C alleles and to validate their capacity for
detection of antigen-specific T cells.
==PAGE:30==
18
2 Context, Hypothesis and Objective
The project will be divided into 4 main goals.
Goal 1: Optimize the production of DS-HLA-C heavy chains.
HLA-C allotypes will be selected to produce disulfide mutant variants of HLA-C
molecules. DS-HLA-C heavy chains and β2m chain will be produced in a bacterial
strain, and purified as inclusion bodies. Heavy and light chains production quality
will be assessed using SDS-PAGE and protein concentration. Established procedures
for wild-type (wt) and DS-MHC-I inclusion bodies production will be followed and
optimized accordingly to meet quality requirements.
Goal 2: Optimize the DS-HLA-C monomer production procedure
DS-HLA-C heavy and light chains will be folded in vitro, by adding a low-affinity
short-peptides which promotes the folding of HLA-C. Folded proteins are then bi-
otinylated and purified by size exclusion chromatography using high-performance
liquid chromatography (HPLC). DS-HLA-C monomers production quality will be as-
sessed using SDS-PAGE, protein estimation assay, and biotinylation efficiency of the
purified DS-MHC-I monomers. Established monomer production procedures will be
followed and optimized accordingly to meet quality requirements.
Goal 3: Validate DS-HLA-C monomers for T cell identification
pDS-HLA-C tetramers will be generated from peptide-loaded DS-HLA-I monomers
and will be used to identify antigen-specific T cells by combinatorial encoding strat-
egy.
T cell staining using pDS-HLA-C tetramers will be compared with staining
by wild-type pHLA-C tetramers to validate the capacity of the disulfide-stabilized
molecules to stain T cells.
Goal 4: Generate of HLA-C restricted CMV peptide libraries
A library of HLA-C-restricted peptides derived from immunodominant HCMV pro-
teins will be generated. In a future project, the peptide library will be screen for
CD8+ T cell response to determine immunodominant epitopes restricted to the se-
lected HLA-C alleles which can be used as positive control peptides for T cell staining
analysis.
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3
Materials and
Methods
3.1
Technology for production of HLA-C molecules
Disulfide-stabilized HLA-C molecules (DS-HLA-C) were produced based on the tech-
nology described in [48] [43] to generate empty HLA-C molecules which can be in-
stantly loaded with peptide of interest and multimerized for the detection of antigen-
specific T cells. This technology was further described in Chapter 1.The overall pro-
duction strategy followed is summarized in Figure 3.1 and will be further described
in this chapter.
Figure 3.1: Process flow for the production of wt- and DS-HLA-C production process
.
==PAGE:32==
20
3 Materials and Methods
The methods described for the production of DS-HLA-C heavy chain proteins, DS-
HLA-C monomers and tetramers, and T cell staining are based on methods described
previously by [62].
Furthermore, wild-type HLA-C molecules were produced in order to evaluate the stain-
ing of CD8+ T cells using DS-HLA-C tetramers compared to wt-HLA-C tetramers.
Wt-HLA-C monomers were produced via UV-mediated peptide exchange technology
as described by [57]. The overall production process followed for wt-HLA-C was the
same as for production of DS-HLA-C monomers (Figure 3.1).
3.2
HLA-C allotypes selection
Six new functionally empty DS-HLA-C molecules were produced: DS-HLA-C*02:02,
DS-HLA-C*03:04, DS-HLA-C*04:01, DS-HLA-C*05:01, DS-HLA-C*06:02, DS-HLA-
C*07:02. The HLA-C alleles were selected based on their frequency in the population
as well as on their role in tumor T cell recognition.
3.3
DS-HLA-C heavy and light chain production
HLA-C- heavy chain and β2m production consist of four major steps: 1) protein
expression in E. coli, 2) isolation of inclusion bodies by cell lysis and centrifugation,
3) purification of inclusion bodies and 4) solubilization of the inclusion bodies. Below
are described the methods followed for each step.
3.3.1
DS-HLA-C heavy and light chains expression in E. coli
3.3.1.1
Expression system
DS-HLA-C heavy chains and β2m chain were separately produced as inclusion bodies
in Escherichia coli strain BL21(DE3)pLysS (Promega). BL21(DE3)pLysS competent
cells are suitable for high-efficiency protein expression of genes from T7 promoter-
based expression vectors, using isopropyl- β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) as an
inducer. This strain contains a chloramphenicol resistant marker.
3.3.1.2
Plasmid design and construction
DS-HLA-C heavy chains and β2m were expressed in E. coli using pET series plasmids
(Novagen). The pET expression system is one of the most widely used systems for
the cloning and in vivo expression of recombinant proteins in E. coli. pET plasmids
contains a T7 promoter to control the expression of the inserted DNA. The vector
pET-30a(+), which contains a kanamycin resistance marker was used for the expres-
sion of all DS-HLA-C heavy chains. pET-3d, which contains a ampicillin/carbenicillin
==PAGE:33==
3.3 DS-HLA-C heavy and light chain production
21
resistance marker, was used for expression of β2m.
The pET-30a(+) plasmids containing the DS-HLA-C heavy chain genes and the pET-
3d plasmid with the β2m gene, were previously designed and constructed in the T
Cell and Cancer Group. The plasmid gene insert for each DS-HLA-C heavy chain
was designed based on the publication by [62]. For their design, the amino acid posi-
tions 84 and 139 from the HLA-C heavy chain extracellular domain were substituted
by cysteines replacing tyrosine and alanine, respectively. Additionally, an AviTagTM
(Avidity LLC) amino acid sequence was added to the heavy chain C-terminal. The
AviTagTM sequence is used for enzymatic conjugation of a single biotin during biotiny-
lation. Table 3.1 shows the extracellular domain sequences of the DS-HLA-C heavy
chains used for the plasmid design. These sequences were obtained from Uniprot
database [73] and modified according to [62].
Table 3.1: Amino acid sequence of DS-HLA-C heavy chains
.
Note: The amino acid substitutions in positions 84 and 139 are marked in red and
the AviTagTM sequence in blue.
==PAGE:34==
22
3 Materials and Methods
3.3.1.3
Cells transformation
Transformation of BL21(DE3)pLysS cells with either one of the heavy chains or the
β2m expression plasmid was performed using heat shock treatment according to sup-
plier’s protocol. Plasmid DNA was added to 10 µl of competent cells and kept on ice
for 10 min. Cells were then heat shock at 42°C for 45 sec and returned to ice for 2
min. SOC media (125 µl) was added to the transformation reaction and incubated for
1 hr at 37°C with shaking (200 rpm). Transformed cells were plated in their respec-
tive plates containing LB agar and appropriate antibiotics, and incubated overnight
at 37°C. Appropriate antibiotics for DS-HLA-C heavy chains transformants are chlo-
ramphenicol (34 µg/mL) and kanamycin (50 µg/mL), and for β2m transformants are
chloramphenicol (34 µg/mL) and carbenicillin (50 µg/mL).
3.3.2
Cell propagation and recombinant protein induction
One colony from each transformation was inoculated in 30 ml of LB media. Bacteria
cultures were escalated into 200 ml LB media and finally into 2 flasks of 1 liter LB
media each. All LB media contained the appropriate antibiotics. Between each scaling
step, cultures were incubated overnight. The 1 liter bacteria cultures were incubated
( 1 hour) until they reached an optical density at 600 nm (OD600) of 0.5-0.6. After
cells reached the desired density, IPTG (0.5 mM) was added to bacteria cultures
and incubated for 4 hours to induce the expression of the heterologous proteins. All
incubations were carried at 37°C and 250 rpm.
3.3.3
Glycerol stock preparations
Glycerol stocks were prepared from the transformed E. coli cells to facilitate the
future production of inclusion bodies, avoiding the cell transformation step. A 1 mL
sample collected from the 30 ml LB media culture used for cell propagation, was
mixed with 1 mL of 50% glycerol and freezed at -80°C until use.
3.3.4
Inclusion bodies isolation
High level expression of recombinant protein in E. coli often results in intracellular
aggregation of partially folded proteins into inclusion bodies. Inclusion bodies are
known to contain almost exclusively the protein of interest reducing and simplifying
the purification steps to recover pure protein [68]. The strategy followed to purify
the DS-HLA-I heavy chains and β2m from inclusion bodies consisted of three steps:
isolation of inclusion bodies from bacteria by cell lysis, purification of inclusion bodies
by washing, and their solubilization in urea.
==PAGE:35==
3.3 DS-HLA-C heavy and light chain production
23
3.3.4.1
Cell harvesting and lysis
Bacteria cultures were collected by centrifugation (10,000 x g, 15 min, 4°C) and the
bacteria pellet was weighed. Inclusion bodies were released from cells using sonica-
tion (60 sec. x 5 cycles, with 30 sec. interval) in lysis buffer [50 mM Tris-HCl (pH
8.0), 25% sucrose, 1 mM EDTA and 2 mg/ml lysozyme (Sigma-Aldrich, L6876)] in
a ratio of cell wet weight to buffer volume of 1:2. The function of Tris and EDTA is
to destabilize and permeabilize the outer membrane of the bacteria envelope to allow
the lysozyme to penetrate through the envelope and digest the peptidoglycan layer
of the bacteria cell wall causing an enzymatic cell lysis and release of the inclusion
bodies [77]. Sonication was used to aid the enzymatic cell lysis to assure complete
cell disruption of the cellular membranes.
Cell lysis was followed by DNA enzymatic digestion by addition of DNase I [10 mM
MgCl2, 1 mM MnCl2, and 50 µg/ml DNase I] to the cell lysate. DNAse I was added
to remove nucleic acids released during cell lysis which can cause viscosity problems
and interference during subsequent chromatography purification steps. The mixture
was incubated in a rotor for 30 min at 4°C. Inclusion bodies were then isolated from
cell debris by centrifugation (40,000 x g, 20 min, 4°C) as they have a relatively high
density.
3.3.4.2
Inclusion bodies purification and solubilization
Inclusion bodies recovered from cell lysate contain several impurities like host pro-
teins and membrane fragments, so need to be removed using several washing steps.
The pellet containing recombinant protein was washed in 25 ml detergent buffer [20
mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 200 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 1% NP40, and 1% Deoxycholic
Acid] and 3 times in 25 ml wash buffer (1 mM EDTA, 0.5% Triton X-100 and 1mM
DTT). Between each washing step pellet was resuspended in the buffer, sonicated
(60 sec. x 2 cycles, with 30 sec. interval), centrifuged (40,000 x g, 20 min, 4°C) and
supernatant discarded.
Proteins aggregated in inclusion bodies were solubilized into denatured proteins in 8
M urea buffer [8 M urea, 50 mM HEPES (pH 6.5), and 0.5 mM ￿-mercaptoethanol]
and incubated for 48 hours at 4°C on a rotor. The solution was then centrifuged
(40,000 x g, 20 min, 4°C) to remove aggregates and the protein was collected in the
supernatant. If inclusion bodies were not completely solubilized, additional buffer
was added and incubated for an additional day.
3.3.5
Protein concentration and analysis on SDS-PAGE
Protein concentration and SDS-PAGE analysis were used as quality control for the
production process of DS-HLA-C heavy chains and β2m from inclusion bodies. The
protein concentration was determined by measuring the OD280 using spectrophotome-
==PAGE:36==
24
3 Materials and Methods
ter. The absorbance measured was divided by the extinction coefficient to calculate
the protein concentration. The protein was diluted using urea solubilization buffer for
a final concentration of 400-750 µM for heavy chain and 1250-1500 µM for β2m The
quality of the preparation was assessed by reducing and non-reducing SDS-PAGE gel
using a 4 to 20% Mini- PROTEAN TGX Gel (Bio-Rad, 4561095) along with a PAGE
ruler prestained protein ladder (Bio-Rad, 1610374) and stained with Coomassie (Bio-
Rad, 161-0786). Samples (0.5 µl) were run with/without β2m-mercaptoethanol (0.1
M). Samples were incubated with β2m-mercaptoethanol for 5 min at 95°C before
loading samples. Proteins were stored at −80°C until they were used for in vitro
folding.
β2m protein expression in E.coli and inclusion bodies isolation and purification method
was described above, however they were previously prepared in the T Cell and Cancer
Group.
3.4
DS- and wt-HLA-C monomer production
HLA-C monomer production consist of four major steps: 1) in vitro protein fold-
ing, 2) buffer exchange and up-concentration of the refolding reaction 3) monomer
biotinylation, and 4) monomer purification.
Different procedures described below
were followed to optimize the monomer production to meet the quality requirements.
DS-HLA-C monomers production quality was assessed using SDS-PAGE, Bradford
protein assay, and biotinylation efficiency of the purified DS-MHC-I monomers.
DS-HLA-C monomers were prepared based on the disulfide-stabilized MHC-I tech-
nology [62]. Wt-HLA-C monomers were prepared by UV-mediated peptide exchange
technology [57] using wt-HLA-C heavy chains previously produced in the T Cell and
Cancer Group.
3.4.1
In vitro protein folding
Solubilized DS-HLA-C heavy chains and β2m were combined and folded in vitro
into their native state withe to form functionally active DS-HLA-C monomers. A
short peptide (e.g. dipeptide, tripeptide) was added to assist the folding reaction, as
they have previously proven to promote the folding of MHC-I [61] and DS-MHC-I
molecules [62]. These short peptides contains 1 or 2 glycyl (G) amino acid to pro-
vide stability to the peptide, however will not interact with the HLA-I molecule, and
a second amino acid which is allotype specific and is selected based on the anchor
residues. A literature search on the HLA-C anchor residues was conducted (Chapter
4, and the dipeptide glycyl-leucine (GL) was selected to assist the folding of the new
DS-HLA-C molecules. Other short peptides were tested, when DS-HLA-C refolding
was not achieved using GL dipeptide (i.e. glycyl-glycyl-methionine (GGM) for DS-
==PAGE:37==
3.4 DS- and wt-HLA-C monomer production
25
HLA-C*03:04 refolding).
In vitro folding of DS-HLA-C molecules was performed by dilution of DS-HLA-C
heavy chain and β2m in a folding buffer [100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 400 mM L-
arginine–HCl, 2 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM oxidized glutathione, 5 mM reduced glutathione,
and 1 tablet/100 ml buffer of protease-inhibitor cocktail (Roche)] with 10 mM glycyl-
leucine (GL) and incubated at 4°C for 5 days with continuous stirring. DS-HLA-C
heavy chain (1 µM) and β2m (2 µM) were added to the folding buffer, according to
Protocol 1 in Figure 3.2, during 3 consecutive days with a 24 hr interval, to reach a
final concentration of 3 µM DS-HLA-C heavy chain and 6 µM β2m.
Figure 3.2: Protocols for peptide, β2m and HLA-C heavy chains additions during monomer
refolding process.
An alternative folding procedure was used for monomers that did not passed the qual-
ity control for monomer preparation. In this case, Protocol 2 in Figure 3.2 was used
for the refolding of DS-HLA-C*03:04. In this refolding protocol, β2m was added at
day 1 to the folding buffer without short peptide or DS-HLA-C heavy chain. Addi-
tions of short peptide, β2m, and DS-HLA-C heavy chain at day 2 and day 3 were
done according to Protocol 2 in Figure 3.2, for a final concentration of 6 µ￿M β2m
and 4 µM DS-HLA-C heavy chain. Two different short peptides, GL dipeptide and
GGM tripeptide, were tested for the refolding.
Folding of wt-HLA-C heavy chains with β2m followed the same procedure as DS-
HLA-C monomer refolding according to Protocol 1 (Figure 3.2). However, wt-HLA-
==PAGE:38==
26
3 Materials and Methods
C required the addition of an HLA-specific UV-conditional peptide (60 mM) to the
folding reaction, instead of the short peptides, to form conditional ligand-HLA-C
complexes (p*HLA-C). In these peptides, an amino acid residue was substituted with
3-amino-3-(2-nitro)-phenylpropanoic acid (J) at a central position, which breaks the
peptide upon exposure to UV light [18, 71]. Table 3.2 shows a list of the UV-liable
peptides used for each HLA-C monomer. These peptides were already available and
not designed during this project.
Table 3.2: UV-sensitive conditional ligands for refolding of wt-HLA-C monomers [18, 71]
HLA-C allele
UV-labile peptide
HLA-C*02:02
RAM-J-NFFPF
HLA-C*03:04
FVYG-J-SKTSL
HLA-C*04:01
QYD-J-AVYKL
HLA-C*05:01
YTDFV-J-EGL
HLA-C*06:02
TRA-J-KMQV
HLA-C*07:02
VRI-J-HLYIL
Only wt-p*HLA-C*05:01 and -C*06:02 monomers were produced during this thesis.
Other wt-p*HLA-C monomers were previously produced by the T-Cell and Cancel
Group.
3.4.2
Buffer exchange and up-concentration
Folding reaction was centrifuged (40,000 x g, 20 min, 4°C) to remove protein aggre-
gates. Vivaflow 50R crossflow ultrafiltration cassette with a 30-kDa cutoff membrane
filter (Sartorius) was used to exchange the folding buffer to phosphate-buffered saline
(PBS), and to concentrate the folded proteins to a volume of 20 ml. GL or GGM
(10 mM) accordingly, was added to the PBS during the buffer exchange of the DS-
HLA-C refoldings. During buffer exchange of the wt-p*HLA-C refoldings, no peptide
was added. Buffer exchange to PBS is necessary to remove the folding buffer, which
affects the BirA activity during biotinylation. The folded proteins were centrifuged
(4,000 x g, 5 min, 4°C) to remove any aggregates and further concentrated using
Amicon Ultra Centrifugal Filter units (10 or 30 kDa cutoff membrane) (Millipore) to
a volume of 5 ml.
3.4.3
Protein biotinylation
Folded DS-HLA-C monomers were then biotinylated to be able to multimerize on
streptavidin and create tetrameric complexes for T cell staining. Biotinylation was
performed with the BirA biotin-protein ligase standard reaction kit (Avidity LLC).
The BirA enzyme adds D-biotin covalently to the AviTag™biotin-acceptor peptide
==PAGE:39==
3.4 DS- and wt-HLA-C monomer production
27
introduced to the C-terminal of the DS-HLA-C heavy chain. Biotinylation was per-
formed according to supplier’s protocol. Briefly, Biomix A (0.5M bicine buffer, pH
8.3), Biomix B (100mM ATP, 100mM MgOAc, 500 µM d-biotin), and BIO200 (500
µM d-biotin) were added to the concentrated monomer. The volume of each reagent
was calculated to be 10% of the final reaction mixture including the monomer volume.
The amount of BirA enzyme was calculated considering that 2.5 µg of BirA is recom-
mended per 10 nmol of protein. GL or GGM (10 mM) and 2 µl of 2.5 mg/ml refolded
β2m were also added to the biotinylation reaction. The reaction was incubated for 1
hr at 30°C. Glycerol (10%) was added after biotinylation to store monomers at -80°C
until purification step. Wt-p*HLA-C monomers were biotinylated likewise, however,
no short peptide neither β2m were added to the reaction.
3.4.4
Monomer purification
Biotinylated wt- and DS-HLA-C monomers were purified by size exclusion-high-
performance liquid chromatography (SEC-HPLC) with a Biosuite preparative chro-
matography column (Waters Corporation). The data was analyzed using the Em-
power Software (Waters Corporation).
For purification of DS-HLA-C monomers, Tris-buffered saline (150 mM Tris-HCL
and 100 mM NaCl) (pH 8.0) was used as the chromatography mobile phase. For
monomers which did not passed the quality control for monomer preparation, short
peptide, 10 mM GL or 10 mM GGM, was added to the mobile phase. Additionally, 2
µl of 2.5 mg/ml refolded β2m was added to the collected peak fraction. Wt-p*HLA-
C monomers were purified using Tris-buffered saline without any peptide addition.
Peaks were collected and then concentrated using Amicon Ultra Centrifugal Filter
units (10 or 30 kDa cutoff membrane) (Millipore) to a volume of 300 µl.
HLA-C monomer concentration was estimated using Bradford protein assay (Bio-
Rad, Quick Start Bradford Protein Assay Kit 5000202), according to the supplier’s
protocol. The Bradford assay is a colorimetric assay that measures the color change
of Coomassie dye upon binding to protein molecules. For the assay, 2 µl of monomer
protein diluted at a proper concentration was mixed with 200 µl of Coomassie dye
and the absorbance at 595 nm was measured in a spectrophotometer. A standard
curve was generated plotting the absorbance vs. concentration of know standards,
and the linear regression equation from the standard curve was used to calculate the
monomer concentration based on their absorbance.
3.4.5
Biotinylation efficiency
Purified HLA-C monomers were tested for biotinylation efficiency by electrophoretic
mobility shift assay (EMSA) using 4-20% Mini- PROTEAN TGX Gel (Bio-Rad,
4561095) along with a PAGE ruler prestained protein ladder (Bio-Rad, 1610374) and
==PAGE:40==
28
3 Materials and Methods
stained with Coomassie (Bio-Rad, 161-0786). Each purified monomer (4 µg samples)
was treated in 3 different ways followed by SDS-PAGE analysis: 1) no treatment
(non-reducing SDS-PAGE), 2) incubated with 2 µg of Streptavidin-plus (ProZyme
SA26) for 20 min at 4°C (mobility shift assay), 3) incubated with β-mercaptoethanol
(0.1 M) for 5 min at 95°C (reducing SDS-PAGE). Biotinylated HLA-C heavy chains
form complexes with streptavidin, migrating slower in the gel compared to free heavy
chains which were not biotinylated, allowing to determine the biotinylation efficiency
from the EMSA.
DS-HLA-C monomers were then diluted with PBS buffer with 10% glycerol, 500 µM
GL or GGM, and 2µl of 2.5 mg/ml refolded β2m, to have maximum final concentration
of 3 mg/mL and stored at −80°C until further use. Wt-p*HLA-C monomers were
diluted for storage in PBS buffer with 10% glycerol.
3.5
Validation of DS-HLA-C tetramers for T cell
identification
T cell staining by pDS-HLA-C tetramers was compared with staining by wild-type
pHLA-C tetramers to evaluate the capacity of disulfide-stabilized molecules to stain
T cells. Wild type pHLA-C tetramers were prepared using UV- light sensitive wt-
p*HLA-C monomers. pDS-HLA-I tetramers were prepared using peptide-loaded DS-
HLA-I monomers.
3.5.1
Peptide-loading to HLA-C monomers
Wt-pHLA-C complexes with desired peptide were generated by UV-mediated peptide
exchange technology by incubating purified wt-p*HLA-C complexes (100 µg/ml) with
200 µM viral peptide, in PBS for 1 hour at 20°C under UV light (366 nm). Upon
exposure to UV light the conditional ligands are cleaved and substituted with the
peptides of interest. For production of pDS-HLA-C complexes with desired peptide,
DS-HLA-C monomers (100 µg/ml) were incubated with 200 µM viral peptide, in PBS
for 30 min at 4°C.
Empty HLA-C complexes (wild-type and disulfide-stabilized) were also generated.
For production of empty wt-HLA-C molecules, purified wt-p*HLA-C complexes were
incubated in PBS for 1 hr at 20°C under UV light (366 nm) without any peptide.
Exposure to UV-light should cleave the UV-sensitive peptide *p, causing the HLA-C
monomer to disintegrate since there is no other peptide available.
In the case of
disulfide-stabilized molecules, DS-HLA-C monomers were incubated in PBS without
any peptide for 30 min at 4°C. DS-HLA-C monomers should remain stable, even with-
out peptide loading. Peptide-loaded and empty- HLA-C complexes were centrifuged
==PAGE:41==
3.5 Validation of DS-HLA-C tetramers for T cell identification
29
for 5 min at 3,300 x g, and supernatants were used to make HLA-C tetramers.
Known HLA-C restricted viral epitopes listed in Table 3.3 were used to generate the
peptide-loaded HLA-C complexes. A 15-mer peptide (IACPIVMRYVLDHLI) was
the only HLA-C*02:02 restricted epitope published [48]. In order to design a 8 to 11
–mer peptide to generate the peptide-loaded HLA-C*02:02 complexes, the published
15- mer sequence was analyzed by netMHC4.1 epitope prediction software [53], and
the 9 –mer peptide listed in Table X was selected as it was the only generated peptide
predicted to be a strong binder to HLA-C*02:02. Peptides were custom-synthetized by
TAG Copengahen A/S, and lyophilized peptides were resuspended in 100% dimethyl
sulfoxide (DMSO) to a concentration of 10 mM and stored at -20°C.
Table 3.3: Published HLA-C restricted viral epitopes.
HLA -C
restriction
Virus
Protein
Peptide sequence
Amino acid
position
Ref.
C*02:02
EBV
BRLF1
IACPIVMRY*
101-109
[48]
C*03:04
EBV
EBNA-2
TSSPSMPEL
377-385
[14]
C*04:01
CMV
pp65
QYDPVAALF
341–349
[33]
C*05:01
EBV
Envelope
glycoprotein B
FLDKGTYTL
276-284
[52]
C*06:02
CMV
pp65
TRATKMQVI
201-209
[55]
C*07:02
CMV
IE1
CRVLCCYVL
309–317
[4]
*Published as IACPIVMRYVLDHLI.
3.5.2
HLA-C tetramer preparation
Peptide-loaded and empty HLA-C complexes (wt and DS) were tetramerized by bind-
ing to Phycoerythrin (PE)- and Brilliant Violet (BV) BV421- conjugated streptavidin
(SA), providing a dual color code to the HLA-C omplexes. SA-PE (0.2 mg/ml stock,
BioLegend, 405204) and SA-BV421 (0.1 mg/ml stock, BD, 563259) were added to
each HLA-complex in separate multimerization reactions at a final concentration of
16 µl/ml and incubated for 30 min at 4°C. D-biotin (27 µM final concentration) (BIO-
200, Avidity) was subsequently added to block any free binding site, and complexes
were incubated for 20 min at 4°C. HLA-C multimers prepared with each fluorochrome-
labeled streptavidin were mixed in a 1:1 ratio and stored at -20°C with 5% glycerol
and 0.55% BSA. For DS-HLA-C*03:04, tetramers were generated using the monomers
refolded with GL dipeptide and with GGM tripeptide.
3.5.3
T cells staining
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC)s isolated from buffy coats (BC)s from
healthy donors were used for T cell staining. All samples were previously HLA typed
==PAGE:42==
30
3 Materials and Methods
and available in the T Cell and Cancer Group. Cryopreserved PBMCs were thawed
and washed in RPMI 1640 media (Fisher Scientific, 61870-044) containing 10% fetal
calf serum (FCS) (Fisher Scientific, 10500-064), washed once in fluorescence-activated
cell sorting (FACS) buffer (PBS + 2% FCS) and resuspended in FACS buffer. For
each staining, 1 µl of pooled fluorescently labeled HLA-C tetramers and 5 µl desatinib
(50 nM final concentration) were added to 1.5 × 106 to 2 × 106 PBMCs in 80 µl total
volume and incubated for 15 minutes at 37°C. Desatinib is a protein kinase inhibitor
that prevent internalization of TCRs after pMHC interaction and hence improves the
staining intensity of CD8+ T cells at lower pMHC concentrations [36].
Cells were then stained with 0.1 µl LIVE/DEAD Fixable Near-IR Dead Stain Kit
(Invitrogen, L10119) and with a 20 µl antibody mix solution containing 2 µl CD8-
BV480 (BD B566121), 1.25 µl CD4-FITC (BD 345768), 3.125 µl CD14-FITC (BD
345784), 6.25 µl CD19-FITC (BD 345776), 2.5 µl CD40-FITC (Serotec, MCA1590F),
1.56 µl CD16-FITC (BD 335035), and 3.315 µl PBS, and incubated for 30 min at 4°C.
The LIVE/DEAD Fixable Near-IR was used as the dead cell marker, the CD8-BV480
antibody was used to stain CD8+ T cells, and the FITC coupled antibodies were used
as dump channel. Cells were then washed twice in FACS buffer (PBS + 2% FCS).
A negative control for each BC was included. For negative contol, cells were stained
with the LIVE/DEAD Fixable Near-IR and the antibody mix solution as described
above, however no fluorescently labeled HLA-C tetramers were added to the cells.
3.5.4
Detection of HLA-C tetramer-binding T cells by flow
cytometry
Stained cells were acquired on a BD LSRFortessa flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson)
using FACSDiva software (Becton Dickinson), and the flow data were analyzed with
FlowJo v10.1 software.
The gating strategy used to identify pHLA-C tetramer-binding T cell populations is
shown in Figure 3.3. Briefly, single-cell lymphocytes were gated based on forward
and side scatter. Live cells were then gated using the near-IR dye. From the com-
bination of single cells and living cells, the CD8+ T cells were gated on the CD8+
dumptextsuperscript- cells, based on the cell surface antibody CD8-BV480 and the
pool of antibodies labelled with FITC forming the dump channel (CD4, CD14, CD19,
CD40, and CD16). Finally, antigen-specific CD8+ T cells binding to the pHLA-C
tetramers, were identified based on the combination of PE and BV412 fluorescence.
The negative control cells were used to determine the PE and BV412 threshold fluo-
rescence values, to set the gate for HLA tetramer-binding positive cells.
==PAGE:43==
3.6 Generation of HLA-C restricted CMV peptide libraries
31
Figure 3.3: Gating strategy for flow cytometry analysis. Antigen specific CD8+ T cells
were identified using a combinatorial color encoding strategy using PE- and BV421- labeled
pHLA-C tetramers.
.
3.6
Generation of HLA-C restricted CMV peptide
libraries
Four human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) peptides were selected for the generation of the
HCMV peptide libraries: Immediate-Early-1 (IE1), and the phosphoprotein proteins
50 (pp50), 65 (pp65), and 150 (pp150). The amino acid sequence of the four HCMV
peptides were analyzed in order to generate libraries of potential HLA-C restricted
epitopes. HCMV peptide sequences were obtained from Uniprot database [73] (Ap-
pendix A. The NetMHC 4.1 algorithm [53] was used to generate unique 8-11 amino
acid long peptides covering the complete IE1, pp50, pp65, and pp150 proteins and
to predict the binding affinity of the generated peptides to HLA-C*01:02, C*02:02,
C*03:04, C*04:01, C*05:01, C*06:02, C*07:01, and C*07:02. A percentage rank of
0.5% or less was used as the threshold value for strong binders. Additionally, a search
of known HLA-C restricted HCMV epitopes was conducted using the Immune Epi-
tope Database and Analysis Resource [IEDB] (http://www.iedb.org/) web server [74].
The published epitopes were included in the peptide libraries, even if their percentage
rank was above 0.5%.
==PAGE:44==
32
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 4
Results
4.1
HLA-C allotype selection for DS-HLA-C monomer
production
The following HLA-C alleles were selected for the production of DS-HLA-C molecules:
HLA-C*02:02, HLA-C*03:04, HLA-C*04:01 HLA-C*05:01 and HLA-C*07:02. These
HLA-C alleles were selected based on their frequency in the population [18, 31] (Figure
4.1), as well as on their reported expression in cancer cells and restricted T cell
recognition of neoepitopes.
Figure 4.1: Frequency of HLA-C alleles in the European and South East Asian population
.
Ramskov et al.
[12] reported HLA-C*03:04, C*04:01, C*05:01, C*06:02, C*07:01,
and C*07:02 -restricted T cell recognition of neoantigens in three cancer cohorts:
RCC, Melanoma and NSCLC, at levels equal or higher compared to HLA-A and -B,
depending on the cohort. Chang et al. [17] identified HLA-C*04:01 (27.0%) and
HLA-C*07:01 (26.7%) to be the most prevalent HLA-C alleles present in a cohort of
504 pediatric cancer patients representing 23 cancer subtypes, including leukemia (n
==PAGE:46==
34
4 Results
= 284), central nervous system tumors (CNS; n = 123), and non- CNS solid tumors
(n = 133). In their study, they also predicted the binding affinity of neoepitopes
encoded by recurrent missense mutations, and some of them predicted to bind HLA-
C*12:03 or HLA-C*03:04.
Furthermore, Boegel et al.
[12] determined HLA type
and HLA expression of 167 cancer and 10 non-cancer cell lines from RNA-Sequencing
data, founding C*07:01 and C*07:02 the most prominent HLA-C alleles. They also
reported HLA expression profile in 10 different cell lines, where in most cases HLA-C
showed a similar or higher expression compared to HLA-A and -B. Zacharakis et
al. [78] identified a HLA-C*04:01 restricted neoepitope which is recognized by two
dominant TCRs in a patient with metastatic breast cancer.
4.2
DS-HLA-C heavy chains
4.2.1
DS-HLA-C heavy chain expression
E. coli cells were successfully transformed with recombinant plasmids containing the
genes for the disulfide-stabilized HLA-C heavy chains. Single colonies of the trans-
formed E. coli cells were picked for each HLA-C allele from the LB agar plate (Figure
4.2) and cultured for the expression of DS-HLA-C heavy chains.
Figure 4.2: LB agar plates with E. coli colonies transformed with expression plasmids
containing the genes for the DS-HLA-C heavy chains inserts.
==PAGE:47==
4.2 DS-HLA-C heavy chains
35
4.2.2
DS-HLA-C heavy chain inclusion bodies preparation
The DS-HLA-C heavy chains were expressed by E. coli after IPTG induction and
aggregated as inclusion bodies. The inclusion bodies were isolated from the cells, pu-
rified by washing steps, and finally solubilized. The concentration of the solubilized
protein for each DS-HLA-C heavy chain is shown in Table 4.1. The protein should
have a concentration between 400-750 µM for heavy chain to be used for the refolding
step. All the solubilized DS-HLA-C heavy chains proteins had a concentration above
400 µM and a dilution to 750 µM was done for DS-HLA-C*04:01, DS-HLA-C*05:01
and DS-HLA-C*07:02. For DS-HLA-C*02:02, additional solubilization buffer was re-
quired to solubilize all inclusion bodies, therefore two batches (Lot 1 and Lot 2) were
produced.
DS-HLA-C heavy chains production quality was assessed using non-reducing and re-
ducing SDS-PAGE (Figure 4.3). The gel revealed a band at 33 kDa that correspond
to the expected molecular weight (MW) of the DS-HLA-C heavy chains. Other bands
with higher MW correspond to multimeric forms of the DS-HLA-C heavy chains, con-
firmed by addition of β2m, a reducing agent which cleaves the protein disulfide bonds,
and thus avoids multimerization of the heavy chains.
Table 4.1: DS-HLA-C heavy chains protein concentration and yield
DS-HLA-C
heavy chains
Bacteria pellet
weight (g)a
Absorbance (OD280)
x dilution factor
Extinction
coefficient
Protein conc.
(￿M)b
Total yield
(ml)
DS-HLA-
C*02:02
15.4
Lot 1: 0.392 x 100
Lot 2: 0.686 x 50
81350
Lot 1: 482 ￿M
Lot 2: 422 ￿M
Lot 1: 6 ml (482 ￿M)
Lot 2: 3 ml (422 ￿M)
DS-HLA-
C*03:04
15.5
0.485 x 100
82390
588 ￿M
4 ml (588 ￿M)
DS-HLA-
C*04:01
11.1
0.646 x 200
84360
1,531 ￿M
16 ml (750 ￿M)
DS-HLA-
C*05:01
16.5
0.799 x 100
75660
1056 ￿M
10 ml (750 ￿M)
DS-HLA-
C*06:02
13.9
0.451 x 100
85760
525 ￿M
3 ml (525 ￿M)
DS-HLA-
C*07:02
16.9
0.832 x 100
67410
1,234 ￿M
9 ml (750 ￿M)
aBacteria pellet was weighed at stationary growth phase, before cell lysis and inclu-
sion bodies isolation.
bThe solubilized protein concentration was determined based
on the absorbance at 280 nm (OD280) divided by its extinction coefficient.
==PAGE:48==
36
4 Results
Figure 4.3: SDS-PAGE analysis of DS-HLA-C heavy chains. Samples were incubated with
and without ￿-mercaptoethanol, followed by SDS-PAGE analysis.
4.3
DS-HLA-C monomer production
4.3.1
Anchor residues identification for monomer refolding
Folding of the DS-HLA-C heavy chain and β2m requires the addition of a short
peptide to form functionally active DS-HLA-C monomers. The anchor residues for
the selected HLA-C alleles (Table 4.2) were obtained from SYFPEITHI database [50]
and from [19]. It can be observed that leucine (L) is an anchor residue at position 9 for
all the selected HLA-C alleles, giving an indication that the dipeptide GL will be able
to bind to the DS-HLA-C alleles and promote their folding. Therefore, GL dipeptide
was used to assist all DS-HLA-C monomers refolding, greatly simplifying this step
of the monomer production process. Several attempts to produce DS-HLA-C*03:04
monomers using GL dipeptide failed, so GGM tripeptide was also tested to support
the monomer refolding, as a second glycyl can provide extra support to the small
peptide and methionine is also reported to be an anchor residue for HLA-C*03:04.
==PAGE:49==
4.3 DS-HLA-C monomer production
37
Table 4.2: Anchor residues at position 9 for selected HLA-C alleles
HLA-C allele
Position
Anchor residues
HLA-C*02:02
2
Alanine (A)
9
Phenylalanine (F)
Tyrosine (Y)
Leucine (L)
Valine (V)
HLA-C*03:04
2
Alanine (A)
9
Leucine (L))
Methionine (M)
HLA-C*04:01
2
Tyrosine (Y)
Proline (P)
Phenylalanine (F)
3
Aspartic Acid (D)
Glutamic Acid (E)
9
Leucine (L)
Phenylalanine (F)
Methionine (M)
HLA-C*05:01
3
Aspartic Acid (D)
9
Leucine (L)
Phenylalanine (F)
HLA-C*06:02
2
Arginine (R)
9
Leucine (L)
Isoleucine (I)
Valine (V)
Tyrosine (Y)
HLA-C*07:02
2
Arginine (R)
Tyrosine (Y)
9
Leucine (L)
Tyrosine (Y)
Phenylalanine (F)
4.3.2
DS-HLA-C refolding and purification
4.3.2.1
Optimization of DS-HLA-C purification
Refolding of DS-HLA-C*03:04 and DS-HLA-C*05:01 monomers was performed ac-
cording to Protocol 1 (Chaper 3, Figure 3.2) using GL dipeptide, followed by up-
concentration, biotinylation and purification by SEC-HPLC. Tris-buffered saline was
used as the chromatography mobile phase without addition of GL dipeptide for pu-
rification of the refolded DS-HLA-C*03:04 and DS-HLA-C*05:01 monomers.
The
SEC-HPLC chromatogram of the DS-HLA-C*03:04 and DS-HLA-C*05:01 monomers
==PAGE:50==
38
4 Results
purification (Figure 4.4 A) shows the elusion peaks collected during purification. The
electrophoretic mobility shift assay (Figure 4.4 B) showed no clear bands for heavy
chains (in the reducing and non-reducing SDS-PAGE), neither any shift after addition
of streptavidin.
Figure 4.4: (A) SEC-HPLC chromatogram of the DS-HLA-C*03:04 and DS-HLA-C*05:01
monomers purification. No GL dipeptide was added to the mobile phase during purification.
DS-HLA-C monomers were collected at the elusion peak marked in the chromatogram. (B)
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay of DS-HLA-C*03:04 and DS-HLA-C*05 monomers after
purification. The suffix -GL indicates that the DS-HLA-C monomer was refolded using GL
dipeptide. P1: Peak 1.
DS-HLA-C monomers purification was optimized by adding GL dipeptide (10mM)
to the chromatogram mobile phase. For the optimization, refolding for all DS-HLA-
C monomers was performed according to Protocol 1 (Chapter 3, Figure 3.2) and
purification by SEC-HPLC, using Tris-buffered saline with 10 mM GL as the chro-
matography mobile phase.
The SEC-HPLC chromatogram of the DS-HLA-C monomers purification (Figure 4.5)
shows the elusion peaks collected during purification. Two elusion peaks (Peak 1:
9.5-11.2 min and Peak 2: 13.4-15.2 min) were collected during DS-HLA-C*07:02 pu-
rification to determine if there was any difference between them. The EMSA from
DS-HLA-C*07:02 (Figure 4.6) showed that the monomer was present in both peaks;
therefore in the purification of DS-HLA-C*02:02, C*04:01, C*05:01, and C*06:02
monomers only one elusion peak was collected between 10.5 to 15.0 minutes. During
purification of DS-HLA-C*03:04, 3 peaks were collected (Figure 4.6); however, the
EMSA (Figure 4.8) showed no clear heavy chain bands (in the reducing and non-
reducing SDS-PAGE), neither any shift after addition of streptavidin.
==PAGE:51==
4.3 DS-HLA-C monomer production
39
Figure 4.5:
SEC-HPLC chromatogram of the DS-HLA-C monomers purification.
GL
dipeptide was added to the mobile phase during purification. DS-HLA-C monomers were
collected at the elusion peaks marked in the chromatograms. The suffix -GL indicates that
the DS-HLA-C monomer was refolded using GL dipeptide. P1: Peak 1; P2: Peak 2; P3:
Peak 3.
Figure 4.6:
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay of DS-HLA-C monomers to determine
biotinylation efficiency.
Purified DS-HLA-C monomer samples were incubated with and
without streptavidin, and with and without β-mercaptoethanol, followed by SDS-PAGE.
The suffix -GL indicates that the DS-HLA-C monomer was refolded using GL dipeptide.
P1: Peak 1; P2: Peak 2.
==PAGE:52==
40
4 Results
Non-reducing SDS-PAGE (without β-mercaptoethanol) (Figure 4.6) for DS-HLA-
C*02:02, C*04:01, C*05:01, C*06:02 and C*07:02 revealed 1 or 2 of bands around
33 kDa, corresponding to partially/fully oxidized heavy chains which have a higher
mobility. The reducing SDS-PAGE (with β-mercaptoethanol) reveals a band of fully
reduced heavy chain isomer, which has a lower mobility compared to the partially/-
fully oxidized species. It is expected that oxidized forms of the heavy chains with the
correct disulfide bond configuration are able to form monomers with the β2m chain.
4.3.2.2
Optimization of DS-HLA-C monomer refolding
An optimization of the monomer refolding procedure was used for DS-HLA-C*03:04.
DS-HLA-C*03:04 monomer was refolded according to Protocol 2 (Chapter 3, Figure
3.2). Two refolding reactions were performed, one with GL dipeptide and a second
one using GGM tripeptide. For SEC-HPLC purification, GL or GGM was added
according to the short peptide added during refolding.
Figure 4.7: SEC-HPLC chromatogram of the DS-HLA-C*03:04-GL and -GGM monomers
purification. DS-HLA-C*03:04 monomers were refolded according to Protocol 2 (Chapter 3,
Figure 3.2 and GL or GGM was added to the mobile phase during purification. DS-HLA-C
monomers were collected at the elusion peaks marked in the chromatograms. The suffix -GL
is used for monomers refolded with GL, and -GGM for monomers refolded with GGM. P1:
Peak 1; P2: Peak 2.
During DS-HLA-C*03:04-GL and -GGM purification, two peaks (Peak 1: approx.
10-13 min and Peak 2: approx. 13-15 min) were collected for further processing and
analysis (Figure 4.7). Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (Figure 4.8) for the purified
DS-HLA-C*03:04 monomers refolded according to Protocol 2 showed bands at 33 kDa
corresponding to DS-HLA-C heavy chains, which were able to bind to streptavidin
and shift in the gel. Both collected peaks for each refolding showed similar results.
==PAGE:53==
4.3 DS-HLA-C monomer production
41
Figure 4.8: EMSA of DS-HLA-C*03:04 monomers to determine biotinylation efficiency.
DS-HLA-C*03:04 monomers were refolded according to Protocol 1 or Protocol 2 (Chapter 3,
Figure 3.2. The suffixes -GL is used for monomers refolded with GL dipeptide, and -GGM
suffix for monomers refolded with GGM tripeptide. P1: Peak 1; P2: Peak 2; P3: Peak 3.
4.3.3
DS-HLA-C biotinylation efficiency and concentration
Biotinylation efficiency was estimated by electrophoretic mobility shift assay based
on a comparison between the gel lanes with and without streptavidin (Figures 4.6
and 4.8). Addition of streptavidin caused the biotinylated DS-HLA-C heavy chains
to form complexes with the streptavidin and shift in the gel due to a higher molecular
weight.
The DS-HLA-C monomer concentration was measured by Bradford assay (Table 4.3).
Biotinylation efficiency was used as a correction factor of the DS-HLA-C monomer
concentration, in order to determine the concentration and yield of only the biotiny-
lated monomer which will be able to multimerize upon addition of streptavidin .
All the DS-HLA-C monomers listed in Table 4.3 passed the quality control used for
monomer preparation in terms of SDS-PAGE, biotinylation efficiency and monomer
concentration, and were used for T cell staining.
==PAGE:54==
42
4 Results
Table 4.3: Summary of the DS-HLA-C monomer production.
4.4
Wt-p*HLA-C monomer production
Wt-p*HLA-C molecules were produced to compare CD8+ T cell staining between
DS-pHLA-C tetramers to wt-p*pHLA-C tetramers. Wt-p*HLA-C*05:01 and C*06:02
monomers were refolded according to Protocol 1 using UV-conditional peptides and
purified by SEC-HPLC without addition of peptides in the chromatography mobile
phase.
The SEC-HPLC chromatogram of the wt-p*HLA-C monomers purification (Figure
4.9 A) shows the elusion peaks collected during purification. One elusion peak was
collected for each monomer. Wt-p*HLA-C*05:01 peak presented a delay compared to
other monomers purification due to a pressure drop in the HPLC. The electrophoretic
mobility shift assay (Figure 4.9 B) from both wt-p*HLA-C monomers a had a very
clear band at 33 kDa for the heavy chain which was able to shift in the gel after
addition of streptavidin.
Monomer concentration, measured by Bradford assay, and biotinylation efficiency,
estimated based on the electrophoretic mobility shift assay, are shown in Table 4.4.
The two wt-p*HLA-C produced passed the quality control used for monomer prepa-
ration in terms of biotinylation efficiency and monomer concentration and were used
for T cell staining.
Other wt-p*HLA-C monomers used for T cell staining validation were previously pro-
duced by the T-Cell and Cancel Group, and production results will not be presented.
==PAGE:55==
4.4 Wt-p*HLA-C monomer production
43
Figure 4.9:
(A) SEC-HPLC chromatogram of the wt-p*HLA-C*05:01 and wt-p*HLA-
C*06:02 monomers purification. wt-p*HLA-C monomers were collected at the elusion peaks
marked in the chromatograms.
(B) Electrophoretic mobility shift assay of wt-p*HLA-
C*05:01 and wt-p*HLA-C*06:02 monomers after purification. P1: Peak 1.
Table 4.4: Summary of the wt-p*HLA-C monomer production.
==PAGE:56==
44
4 Results
4.5
Validation of DS-HLA-C tetramers for T cell
identification
The produced DS-HLA-C monomers were tested to determine if they can be used to
detect antigen-specific CD8++ T cells. For the validation of DS-HLA-C monomers,
T cells stained with peptide-loaded DS-HLA-C tetramers were compared to staining
with peptide-loaded wt-HLA-C monomers. Additionally, T cells were also stained
using empty DS-HLA-C and wt-HLA-C tetramers generated with empty DS-HLA-
C and wt-HLA-C-monomers, respectively. T cells staining using empty DS-HLA-C
tetramers was used to determine if there was an interaction between TCR and HLA-
C molecules, without the presence of a binding peptide. On the other hand, stain-
ing with empty wt-HLA-C tetramers was done to determine background signal from
non-degraded monomers after UV-light exposure due to uncleaved UV-light sensitive
conditional ligands. Only known HLA-C restricted viral epitopes were used for the
validation.
Different donor samples were stained with the empty and peptide-loaded DS- and wt-
tetramers produced using combinatorial encoding strategy. Non-stained cells were
included as control for each PMBC donor sample. Dot plots of T cells stained with
the different HLA-C tetramers are found in Appendix B (HLA-C*02:02 tetramers –
Figure B.1, HLA-C*03:04 tetramers – Figure B.2, HLA-C*04:01 tetramers – Figure
B.3, HLA-C*05:01 tetramers – Figure B.4, HLA-C*06:02 tetramers – Figure B.5, and
HLA-C*07:02 tetramers – Figure B.6). Dot plots show antigen-specific T cells (Q2
quadrant) selected based on binding to the HLA-C multimers coded with two differ-
ent fluorochromes (PE and BV421).
A representative donor sample example for the staining with each different HLA-C
tetramers are shown in Figure 4.10 and Figure 4.11. HLA-C*02:02/ EBV-BRLF1IAC
-specific T cells and C*05:01/EBV-Envelope glycoprotein BFLD -specific T cells were
detected by flow cytometry analysis upon staining with wt-pHLA-C*02:02 and wt-
pHLA-C*05:01 tetramers, respectively (Figure 4.10). However, no antigen-specific T
cells were detected upon staining with DS-pHLA-C tetramers. T cells were neither
detected using the empty wt- or DS-HLA-C tetramers. This T cell detection profile of
PMBC samples stained with HLA-C*02:02 and HLA-C*05:01 tetramers is consistent
for all tested samples shown in Appendix B, Figures B.1 and B.4.
On the other hand, no HLA-C*03:04/EBV- EBNA-2TSS, HLA-C*04:01/CMV- pp65QYD,
HLA-C*06:02/CMV- pp65TRA, or HLA-C*07:02/CMV-IE1CRV -specific T cells were
detected upon staining with wild type or disulfide-stabilized - pHLA-C*03:04, pHLA-
C*04:01, pHLA-C*06:02, and pHLA-C*07:02 tetramers, respectively (Figure 4.11).
This T cell detection profile of PMBC samples stained with HLA-C*03:04, C*04:01,
C*06:02, and C*07:02 tetramers is consistent for all tested samples shown in Ap-
pendix B, Figures B.2, B.3, B.5 and B.6.
==PAGE:57==
4.5 Validation of DS-HLA-C tetramers for T cell identification
45
Figure 4.10: Representative dot plots of flow cytometry analysis for antigen-specific CD8+
T cell detection using HLA-C*02:02 and HLA-C*05:01 tetramers coded with two different
fluorochromes (PE and BV421). HLA-C tetramers were produced using peptide loaded and
empty DS- and wt-monomers.
Staining with wt-pHLA-C*02:02 tetramers reveals 3.44%
specific T cells in CD8+ T cells, while staining with wt-pHLA-C*05:01 reveals 9.39% specific
T cells. No T cells were detected in the staining using pDS-HLA-C tetramers or empty wt-
and DS-HLA-C tetramers.
==PAGE:58==
46
4 Results
Figure 4.11:
Representative dot plots of flow cytometry analysis for antigen-specific
CD8+ T cell detection using HLA-C*03:04, HLA-C*04:01, HLA-C*06:02, and HLA-C*07:02
tetramers coded with two different fluorochromes (PE and BV421). HLA-C tetramers were
produced using peptide loaded and empty DS- and wt-monomers. No T cells were detected
for any staining.
4.6
Generation of HLA-C restricted HCMV peptide
libraries
The fourth goal of the thesis project was to generate libraries of predicted HLA-C
restricted HCMV peptides identified to be strong binders to HLA-C molecules, and
therefore potential epitopes for HCMC-specific CD8+ cell response.
==PAGE:59==
4.6 Generation of HLA-C restricted HCMV peptide libraries
47
The peptide sequences of the HCMV peptides IE1, pp50, pp65, and pp150 (Appendix
A) were analyzed using NetMHCpan 4.1 epitope prediction software [53] to generate
unique 8-11 amino acid long peptides covering the complete IE1, pp50, pp65, and
pp150 proteins. The number of total unique sequences generated for each HCMV
protein was 1,930 for IE1, 1,698 for pp50, 2,210 for pp65, and 4,162 for pp150. Af-
terwards, the predicted binding affinity of the generated peptides to HLA-C*01:02,
C*02:02, C*03:04, C*04:01, C*05:01, C*06:02, C*07:01, and C*07:02, was assessed in
terms of the % rank. Only peptides with a % rank <0.5% were included as they are
considered strong binders with high-affinity interactions. Figure 4.12 shows the num-
bers of unique 8-11 amino acid long peptides for each HLA-C allele having a %rank
<0.5%. A total of 64 peptides were identified for HLA-C*01:02, 45 for HLA-C*02:02,
46 for HLA-C*03:04, 52 for HLA-C*04:01, 40 for HLA-C*05:01, 49 for HLA-C*06:02,
52 for HLA-C*07:01, and 47 for HLA-C*07:02.
A search was then conducted to identify known HCMV-IE1, pp50, pp65, and pp150 -
derived epitopes presented by the different HLA-C alleles. The published epitopes are
listed in Table 4.12 and were included in the peptide libraries, even if their percentage
rank was above 0.5%. The generated libraries of HLA-C restricted predictive CD8+
T cell epitopes for each HCMV protein are found in Appendix C. The IE1 library
was made up of 46 peptides, the pp50 library of 38 peptides, the pp65 library of 63
peptides, and the pp150 library of 94 peptides. Some of these peptides are strong
binders (%rank <0.5%) for more than one HLA-C alleles.
Table 4.5: Published HLA-C restricted HCMV epitopes.
HLA-C
restriction
CMV
protein
Peptide
sequence
Mer
Amino acid
location
%Rank
Ref
C*01:02
pp65
RCPEMISVL
9
7–15
0.0425
[33]
C*01:02
pp65
VAFTSHEHF
9
294-302
1.0073
[33]
C*04:01
pp65
QYDPVAALF
9
341–350
0.002
[33]
C*04:01
pp65
QYDPVAALFF
10
341-350
0.0343
[24]
C*04:01
pp65
KDVALRHVV
9
190-198
16.2
[27]
C*06:02
IE1
QIKVRVDMV
9
88–96
9.0526
[29]
C*06:02
IE1
QIKVRVDM
8
88-95
24.75
[13]
C*06:02
IE1
KQIKVRVDM
9
87-95
3.8953
[69]
C*06:02
pp65
TRATKMQVI
9
201-209
0.0365
[55]
C*07:01
IE1
FCRVLCCYV
9
308-316
60
[69]
C*07:01
IE1
LCCYVLEET
9
312-320
100
[69]
C*07:02
IE1
LSEFCRVL
8
305–313
23.667
[29]
C*07:02
IE1
CRVLCCYVL
9
309–317
6.4697
[4]
C*07:02
pp65
TPRVTGGGAM
10
417-426
8.0194
[4]
==PAGE:60==
48
4 Results
Figure 4.12: Number of unique 8-11 amino acid long peptides derived from HCMV proteins
for each HLA-C allele having a %rank <0.5%.
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
In this project, we aimed to produce new disulfide-stabilized empty HLA-C molecules
(DS-HLA-C) for different HLA-C alleles which can be used to generate DS-HLA-C
multimers as a tool to identify antigen-specific T cells. For this purpose, DS-HLA-C
heavy chains and monomers were produced based on previously described methods
for MHC-I and DS-MHC-I monomers, and optimized accordingly.
Six HLA-C alleles were selected for the production of DS-HLA-C molecules: C*02:02,
C*03:04, C*04:01 C*05:01 and C*07:02. These are some of the most prevalent HLA-
C alleles with high frequencies in the population, and they been reported to have
a high expression in cancer cells and to be restricted to different neoepitopes recog-
nized by CTL. Until now, most screening studies for cancer-associated neoepitopes,
have included only HLA-A and -B types, however HLA-C restricted neoantigens have
shown to play an important role in the T cell response as well. Development of these
DS-HLA-C molecules will provide a useful tool to monitor clinically relevant antigen-
specific T-cell responses restricted to HLA-C, including cancer-associated antigens,
which have been often excluded so far.
The first goal of the thesis was to optimize the production of DS-HLA-C heavy chains.
Production process was based on the methods described by saini2019a. Each step in
the production process is analyzed below and together with the results obtained of
the quality control analysis were used to assess the suitability of the methods used
for the production of DS-HLA-C heavy chains heavy chains.
The disulfide-stabilized mutant variants of HLA-C, previously designed, were success-
fully expressed at high levels in E. coli, which resulted in intracellular aggregation of
the proteins into inclusion bodies. The major advantages associated with the forma-
tion of inclusion bodies are: high level expression of the recombinant protein (50%
or more of the total cell protein); inclusion bodies contains almost exclusively the
protein of interest which helps in reducing the number of purification steps to recover
pure protein; easy isolation of the inclusion bodies from cells due to differences in
their size and density as compared with cellular contaminants; lower degradation of
the protein; resistance to proteolytic attack by cellular proteases; and protection of
the host cell against the toxicity of the recombinant protein [68, 67].
==PAGE:62==
50
5 Discussion
E.coli was selected as expression vector as it has previously been used for high level
expression of MHC-I [5, 57] and DS-MHC-I heavy chains [62] [43]. Other expression
systems, such as mammalian cells, have been used as well for the expression of MHC-I
molecules [15, 25]. Since they are an eukaryotic system, they have the advantage to
contain the mechanisms to do the folding process of the MHC-I heavy chain with the
β2m, producing soluble MHC-I molecules, and avoiding the need of in vitro refolding
[15]. However, the complexity of their production method and the lack of information
about the quantity and identity of the peptides which associate to MHC-I, have lim-
ited the use of mammalian expression systems for the generation of pMHC complexes
[57]. Additionally, they have never been used for the expression of disulfide mutant
variants of MHC-I molecules.
Inclusion bodies were isolated from the E. coli cells after cell lysis using on a combina-
tion of mechanical and enzymatic cell disruption methods. Inclusion bodies then were
easily separated from the cell debris by centrifugation as they have a relatively higher
size and density compared to many of the cellular components [68]. Further purifi-
cation of the inclusion bodies to remove impurities like host proteins and membrane
fragments was performed by a series of washing steps with detergents and reducing
agents. Reducing agents are used to avoid oxidation of cysteines and formation of
disulfide bonds. Washing with low concentration of detergents is a very commonly
used method for purification of inclusion bodies as they help to remove membrane
fragments and thus membrane proteins to obtain highly purified inclusion bodies
(more than 95% purity can be achieved) [68, 67].
The purified inclusion bodies were then solubilized into denatured proteins using high
concentration of urea and β-mercaptoethanol. Proteins aggregated in inclusion bod-
ies are usually solubilized by using high concentrations (6-8 M) of denaturants such
as urea or guanidine hydrochloride along with a reducing agent. Reducing agents
helps to maintain cysteine residues in a reduced state and thus prevents non-native
intra- or inter-disulfide bond formation.
The solubilized protein was produced with a satisfactory concentration and yield
(Table 4.1) for all DS-HLA-C alleles with values comparable to the production of DS-
HLA-A and -B heavy chains and wt-HLA-A, -B and -C heavy chains (data not shown).
The SDS-PAGE gel for the DS-HLA-C heavy chains (Figure 4.3) had the expected
band profile with a clear band at 33 kDa for all the HLA-C alleles, which correspond
to the molecular mass of the DS-HLA-C heavy chains. The gel also contained some
bands of higher molecular weight which were confirmed to be multimeric forms of the
heavy chains by reduced SDS-PAGE. The band profile of the SDS-PAGE gel for the
DS-HLA-C heavy chains was comparable to SDS-PAGE gel from the production of
DS-HLA-A and -B heavy chains and wt-HLA-A, -B and -C heavy chains (data not
shown). Protein concentration and SDS-PAGE analysis were used as quality control
of the production process. These results indicate that the methods used are suitable
for the expression, isolation and purification of DS-HLA-C heavy chains for the six
==PAGE:63==
5 Discussion
51
HLA-C alleles selected.
The second goal of the thesis was to optimize the production of DS-HLA-C monomers.
The DS-HLA-C monomer production process was based on the methods described by
[62] and optimized accordingly to generate stable monomers. The methods followed
and optimization procedure results are discussed below.
The denatured proteins were refolded with β2m and a short peptide into their na-
tive state to form functionally active DS-HLA-C monomers. Critical parameters that
affect the yield during refolding include removal of the solubilization agent, purity
of the protein, temperature, pH, and the composition of the folding buffer. One of
the most common methods used to remove the solubilization agent (i.e. urea) is the
dilution of the solubilized protein in the folding buffer. Removal of urea is critical
since it causes protein denaturation which leads to aggregation of protein molecules
during the folding process. The use of additives (low molecular weight compounds)
in the folding buffer influence both the solubility and stability of the proteins, and
thus helps to avoid protein aggregation and improve the yield of bioactive proteins.
L-arginine-HCl is one of the most commonly used additives and its positive effect
in reducing aggregation has been demonstrated on various proteins.
Refolding of
proteins having multiple disulfide bonds requires oxidation in the presence of both
oxidizing and reducing agents (e.g. thiol reagents) for the formation of disulfide bonds.
One of the most widely used thiol reagents are reduced and oxidized glutathione [68,
67]. As mentioned, pH also affect the refolding process. Refolding of heavy chain
molecules from the completely reduced protein must be done under mildly alkaline
conditions, usually around pH 8.0, as it promotes disulfide bond formation [22]. It
is expected that oxidized forms of the heavy chains with the correct disulfide bond
configuration are able to form monomers with the β2m chain [22]. In vitro folding of
DS-HLA-C monomers was conducted under the conditions described above, by dilu-
tion of the solubilized DS-HLA-C heavy chain and β2m in a folding buffer containing
L-arginine-HCl, reduced and oxidized glutathione, and the buffer maintained the pH
at 8.
Additionally, short peptides were included in the reaction to assist the refolding.
Glycyl-leucine (GL) dipeptide proved to be an efficient short peptide for the refolding
of all DS-HLA-C monomers, additionally also GGM tripeptide showed to assist in the
refolding of DS-HLA-C*03:04. The SEC-HPLC chromatogram showed a peak at the
expected elution time (between the 10 to 15 min) for the monomers. This was further
confirmed by SDS-PAGE which revealed protein bands of the expected mobilities for
heavy chain and β2m. These results were expected as the addition of the short pep-
tide have previously proven to promote the folding of MHC-I [61] and DS-MHC-I
molecules [62] [43], and the short peptides were selected based on the anchor residues
for each HLA-C allele.
The folding process was optimized in terms of the additions of DS-HLA-C heavy chain,
==PAGE:64==
52
5 Discussion
β2m and the short peptide and two protocols were tested (Protocol 1 and 2). Protocol
1 was successful for the refolding of DS-HLA-C*02:02, DS-HLA-C*03:04, DS-HLA-
C*04:01, DS-HLA-C*05:01, DS-HLA-C*06:02 and DS-HLA-C*07:02. This protocol
was previously used for the production of DS-MHC-I monomers [62]; however, did not
proved to work for refolding of DS-HLA-C*03:04. Refolding of DS-HLA-C*03:04 ac-
cording to Protocol 2 was successful to generate monomers using both GL and GGM
short peptides. This can be explained as initial addition of , without short peptide
or DS-HLA-C heavy chain, allows for folding of ￿2m into its tertiary configuration
before addition of the heavy chain. This modified protocol has shown to work for the
production of other wt-HLA-C and DS-HLA-C monomers in the T Cell and Cancer
Group.
The refolded monomers were biotinylated and then purified by size exclusion chro-
matography using HPLC. Purification of biotinylated monomers using SEC-HPLC
has previously been used for purification of MHC-I and DS-MHC-I monomers. SEC-
HPLC was tested for purification of DS-HLA-C*03:04 and C*05:01. In both purifi-
cations, the electrophoretic mobility shift assay showed no bands at the expected
molecular mass for heavy chains or β2m (in the reducing and non-reducing SDS-
PAGE), neither a shift in the gel after streptavidin addition. During purification by
HPLC, the small peptides are known to dissociate from the DS-MHC-I molecules,
leaving an empty monomer. Based on these results, it was assessed that short pep-
tides are required to maintain stability of the DS-HLA-C monomers. Purification
was optimized by adding short peptides to the chromatography mobile phase, which
proved to increase the stability of the purified monomers. The electrophoretic mo-
bility shift assay from purification using short peptides revealed bands for the heavy
chains and b2m, and shift of the heavy chains after streptavidin addition.
Short
dipeptides were therefore also added during other steps of the monomer production
process (i.e the buffer exchange process, biotinylation, and final storage for all the
produced DS-HLA-C monomers, in order to maintain stability of the molecules. Gen-
eration of DS-HLA-C monomers with these low-affinity short peptides, will not affect
peptide-loading with peptides of interest as they can easily be exchanged with peptide
ligands with higher affinity [47]. Addition of short peptides during purification and
other steps of the monomer production process has proven to help maintain stability
of other DS-HLA-C monomers produced in the T Cell and Cancer Group.
DS-HLA-C monomers for HLA-C alleles were successfully produced according on the
optimized protocols, obtaining biotinylated monomers at satisfactory concentrations
and yield.
Wt-HLA-C molecules were also produced to compare CD8+ T cell staining between
DS-pHLA-C tetramers to wt-pHLA-C tetramers. Wt-p*HLA-C*05:01 and -C*06:02
monomers were successfully produced by UV-mediated peptide exchange technology.
These monomers have previously been produced, so no optimization was required.
Monomers had a biotinylation efficiency of 100% with satisfactory concentrations
==PAGE:65==
5 Discussion
53
and yield. Wt-p*HLA-C monomers for the other HLA-C alleles used during T cell
staining were previously produced in the T Cell and Cancer Group.
The third goal of the thesis was to validate DS-HLA-C monomers for T cell identifi-
cation for which antigen-specific T cells stained with DS-pHLA-C were compared to
staining with wt-pHLA-C tetramers.
Flow cytometry analysis from staining of PMBCs using the wt- and DS- pHLA-
C tetramers generated with wt- and DS-HLA-C *03:04, C*04:01, -C*06:02, and -
C*07:02 monomers, respectively, showed no pMHC tetramer–positive cells (Figure
4.11. The fact that no of CD8+ T cells were detected using these tetramers can be
explained by two reasons. The peptides used for peptide loading were selected based
on published HLA-C restricted viral epitopes for common virus in the population
(EBV and CMV) and they are expected to generate a T cell response upon infection.
However, they have never been tested before in the T Cell and Cancer Group for T
cell staining using wt-HLA-C tetramers, so they might not be appropriate epitopes
to test the DS-HLA-C monomers. Another possibility that the donor patients for
the selected samples have never been exposed to the virus from which the epitope is
derived from, so no antigen-specific T cells will be generated and thus detected. Due
to the fact that neither DS-pHLA-C and wt-pHLA-C were able to detect T cells, the
capability of the DS-pHLA-C for T cells staining cannot be determined.
On the other hand, flow cytometry analysis from staining of PMBCs showed wt-
pHLA tetramer-positive cells for tetramers generated with wt-HLA-C*02:02 and –
C*05:01, but no cells were detected for staining with DS-pHLA-C*02:02 or -C*05:01
tetramers. DS-MHC-I multimers have previously shown to provide a better staining
index for antigen-specific T cells compared with multimers prepared with wt- MHC-
I molecules. Therefore, the results obtained were not consistent with what was he
expected and the produced monomers did not proved suitable for T cell staining.
An explanation for these results is that the produced DS-HLA-C molecules were not
stable enough under the conditions produced or stored and further optimization is
required. Moreover, no antigen-specific T cells were detected for staining with the
empty-wt-HLA-C tetramers indicating that there was no background signal generated
from non-degraded monomers after UV-light exposure due to uncleaved conditional
ligands.
It was observed that tetramer-positive CD8 T cells were identified in the eight PMBC
samples stained with wt-HLA-C*02:02 and – C*05:01 tetramers, 4 samples for each
tetramer.
However, this response might have been due to binding of the HLA-C
tetramer to KIR, instead of TCR receptors. KIR receptors are also expressed on the
cell surface of CD8+ T cells and they can recognize HLA-I molecules. Contrary to
HLA-A and HLA-B, for which only a few alleles code for proteins that bind KIRs,
all HLA-C alleles express proteins that bind KIRs. HLA-C*02:02 and HLA-C*05:01
belongs to the HLA-C group C2. It has been reported that the inhibitory KIR2DL1
==PAGE:66==
54
5 Discussion
forms strong and specific interactions with C2 allotypes, therefore have a lower pep-
tide selectivity and can bind C2 in the presence of most peptides.
An anti-KIR
antibody must be included in future T cell staining assays to block the interactions
between KIR and their HLA-I ligands, in order to ensure that multimer-positive CD8T
cells are from binding to TCR and not from KIR. The fourth goal of the thesis was
to generate libraries of HLA-C-restricted peptides derived from immune-dominant
HCMV proteins. The number of published HLA-C restricted viral epitopes is very
limited and this restricts the development of HLA-C monomers, as no relevant viral
peptides are available to be used as positive control during T cell validation of the
produced monomers.
HCMV virus was selected to generate the libraries as it is a virus with high seropreva-
lence frequency (60-90%, depending on the geographical location) in the population.
Additionally, HCMV infection elicit a strong virus specific CD8+T cell immune re-
sponse, and it is known to down regulate the expression of HLA-A and-B on the
surface of infected cells to limit presentation of viral peptides through HLA-C . A few
HLA-C restricted HCMV epitopes have been reported for HLA-C*01:02, -C*04:01,
-C*06:02, -C*07:02, however no epitopes restricted to HLA-C*02:02, C*03:04, or
C*05:01 have been identified.
The four libraries generated of HLA-C restricted peptides derived from HCMV pro-
teins will be tested for CD8T+ response to identify immunodominant epitopes. It is
expected to be able to identify CTL epitopes from the peptide libraries as the four
HCMV proteins selected to generate the peptides (i.e. IE1, pp50, pp65, and pp150)
have been identified to be major targets of the cellular immune response [81], specially
the IE1 and pp65 proteins, from which most of the immunodominant epitopes have
been identified.
Additionally only peptides predicted to be strong binders to the different HLA-C al-
leles or peptides previously reported to be CTL epitopes were included in the libraries.
Identification of HLA-C restricted immunogenic epitopes will provide an essential
tool for the validation of DS-HLA-C molecules for T cell staining as well in future
staining assays for identification of antigen-specific T cells, as they can serve as posi-
tive control peptides.
==PAGE:67==
5.1 Future perspectives
55
5.1
Future perspectives
Despite the successful production of DS-HLA-C monomers for the six selected HLA-C
alleles, assessed based on the monomer production quality controls, their validation
for T cell staining requires further study.
In order to validate the monomers for T cell staining, a larger panel of immunodom-
inant HLA-C-restricted epitopes must be identified for all the HLA-C alleles, which
can be used as positive peptide controls. This will be accomplished by screening the
generated libraries of HLA-C-restricted peptides derived from HCVM proteins, for T
cell response.
The stability of the monomers after storage must be evaluated. Staining with DS-
pHLA-C*02:02 and DS-pHLA-C*05:01 tetramers, suggested that the monomers might
not be stable and therefore not functional for T cell staining. Further optimization
to the monomer production process would be required if they prove not to be sta-
ble. In order to increase the stability of the monomers, other dipeptides, designed
based on the anchor positions as well, can be tested for the monomer production pro-
cess. Tripeptides can also be tested as the additional glycyl can provide additional
stability to the short peptide. Monomer purification can also be tested using fast
protein liquid chromatography (FPLC) (e.g. ÄKTA FPLC chromatography from GE
Healthcare Life Sciences). In contrast to HPLC, the buffer pressure used in FPLC is
relatively low. Using a lower pressure during purification can help to maintain the
small molecules bind to the binding cleft and to produce more stable molecules.
After successful validation of the DS-HLA-C monomers for T cell staining, a protein
stability analysis should be performed to validate the functionality of the monomers
and empty loadable tetramers after term-storage.
The optimized procedures for the production of DS-HLA-C monomers will be tested
for the monomer production of other other DS-HLA-C.
Other disulfide-stabilized HLA-C monomers, such as DS-HLA-C*01:02 and DS-HLA-
C*07:02 will be produced based on the procedures optimized during this project.
These are also important HLA-C alleles with high prevalence in the population [18].
DS-HLA-C multimers are a powerful tool for improved T cell detection which can be
used for diverse applications, such as to further study the HLA-C interactions with
KIR and TCR receptors on NK and CD8+ T cells which are still not completely un-
derstood. HLA-C interaction with KIR seems to be allele dependent, where inhibitory
KIRs recognizing HLA-C1 alleles have a greater peptide selectivity compared to KIRs
recognizing HLA-C2 alleles which can bind in the presence of almost any peptide [65],
even it has been suggested that for HLA-C2 the loaded peptide has minimal interac-
tion with KIR [21]. Regarding HLA-C interaction with TCR, studies conducted in
==PAGE:68==
56
5 Discussion
the group for CD8 T cell identification have shown non-specific binding of pHLA-C
multimers to CD8+ T cells. DS-HLA-C tetramers will be used in a future project
in the T Cell and Cancer Group to study HLA-C interactions with TCR and KIR
receptors. Given the special characteristic that empty DS-HLA-C tetramers are sta-
ble even in the absence of peptides, they will be used to determine if the HLA-C
interaction with TCR and KIR on T cells and on NK cells are independent of peptide
loading. On the other hand, peptide-loaded DS-HLA-C multimers will be used to
study the peptide dependent HLA-C interaction with TCR and KIRs, as well as to
study the function (activating/inhibitory) of KIR on T cell and NK response.
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusions
In this project disulfide-stabilized HLA-C monomers for 6 different HLA-C alleles
(HLA-C*02:02, HLA-C*03:04, HLA-C*04:01, HLA-C*05:01, HLA-C*06:02, and HLA-
C*07:02 ) were produced. This was the first attempt to produce HLA-C monomers
based on this technology.
Methods previously used for the production of other DS-MHC-I heavy chains proved
to be suitable for the production of DS-HLA-C heavy chains. Disulfide mutant vari-
ants of the HLA-C heavy chains for the six HLA-C alleles were successfully expressed
in E. coli, isolated and purified as inclusion bodies and solubilized into denatured
heavy chains. These DS-HLA-C heavy chain proteins met the quality control specifi-
cations to be used for DS-HLA-C monomer production.
DS-HLA-C monomers for the six HLA-C were also successfully produced by optimiz-
ing the refolding and purification procedures used for production of other DS-MHC-I
molecules. These DS-HLA-C monomers met the quality control specifications used for
assessment of the monomer production. Short peptides proved to assist the monomers
folding reaction without the need to add any HLA-C specific peptides, as well as to
be necessary to maintain the stability of the monomers during the production process.
Validation of the DS-HLA-C monomers for T cell identification was inconclusive. For
staining with pHLA-C*03:04, C*04:01, C*06:02 and C*07:02 tetramers, no antigen-
specific T cells were identified using either the DS-pHLA-C or wt-pHLA-C tetramers.
Therefore, the capability of the DS-pHLA-C for T cells staining could not be de-
termined. On the other hand, tetramer-positive CD8 T cells were identified using
wt-pHLA-C*02:02 and -C*05:01 tetramers but not with the DS-pHLA-C tetramers.
This indicates a possibility that the monomers might not be stable enough under the
conditions produced or stored and further optimization may be required.
Identification of HLA-C restricted immunogenic epitopes by screeening of the gener-
ated libraries for T cell response, will provide a larger panel of viral epitopes which
will facilitate the validation of the DS-HLA-C molecules for T cell detection.
==PAGE:70==
58
==PAGE:71==
APPENDIX A
HCMV peptide
sequences
Table A.1: Peptide sequences for HCMV proteins
.
==PAGE:72==
60
==PAGE:73==
APPENDIX B
Flow cytometry
analysis
==PAGE:74==
62
B Flow cytometry analysis
Figure B.1: Dot plots of flow cytometry analysis for antigen-specific T cell detection across
different donor samples using peptide-loaded and empty HLA-C*02:02 tetramers coded with
two different fluorochromes (PE and BV421). Tetramers were generated using wt- and DS-
HLA-C monomers. HLA-C*02:02/ EBV-BRLF1IAC-specific T cells were detected only upon
staining with wt-pHLA-C*02:02 tetramers.
==PAGE:75==
B Flow cytometry analysis
63
Figure B.2: Dot plots of flow cytometry analysis for antigen-specific T cell detection across
different donor samples using peptide-loaded and empty HLA-C*03:04 tetramers coded with
two different fluorochromes (PE and BV421). Tetramers were generated using wt- and DS-
HLA-C monomers.
No T cells (Q2) were detected for any staining with pHLA-C*03:04
tetramers.
==PAGE:76==
64
B Flow cytometry analysis
Figure B.3: Dot plots of flow cytometry analysis for antigen-specific T cell detection across
different donor samples using peptide-loaded and empty HLA-C*04:01 tetramers coded with
two different fluorochromes (PE and BV421). Tetramers were generated using wt- and DS-
HLA-C monomers.
No T cells (Q2) were detected for any staining with pHLA-C*04:01
tetramers.
==PAGE:77==
B Flow cytometry analysis
65
Figure B.4: Dot plots of flow cytometry analysis for antigen-specific T cell detection across
different donor samples using peptide-loaded and empty HLA-C*02:02 tetramers coded with
two different fluorochromes (PE and BV421). Tetramers were generated using wt- and DS-
HLA-C monomers. HLA-C*05:01/ EBV-Envelope glycoprotein B FLD-specific T cells were
detected only upon staining with wt-pHLA-C*05:01 tetramers.
==PAGE:78==
66
B Flow cytometry analysis
Figure B.5:
Dot plots of flow cytometry analysis for antigen-specific T cell detection
across different donor samples using peptide-loaded and empty HLA-C*06:02 tetramers
coded with two different fluorochromes (PE and BV421).
Tetramers were generated us-
ing wt- and DS- HLA-C monomers. No T cells (Q2) were detected for any staining with
pHLA-C*06:012tetramers.
==PAGE:79==
B Flow cytometry analysis
67
Figure B.6: Dot plots of flow cytometry analysis for antigen-specific T cell detection across
different donor samples using peptide-loaded and empty HLA-C*06:02 tetramers coded with
two different fluorochromes (PE and BV421). Tetramers were generated using wt- and DS-
HLA-C monomers.
No T cells (Q2) were detected for any staining with pHLA-C*07:02
tetramers.
==PAGE:80==
68
==PAGE:81==
APPENDIX C
Libraries of HLA-C
restricted peptides
==PAGE:82==
70
C Libraries of HLA-C restricted peptides
Table C.1: Library of HLA-C restricted peptide derived from HCMV-IE1 protein
HCMV
protein
Amino acid
position
Peptide
sequence
Mer
C*01:02
% Rank
C*02:02
% Rank
C*03:04
% Rank
C*04:01
% Rank
C*05:01
% Rank
C*06:02
% Rank
C*07:01
% Rank
C*07:02
% Rank
IE1
158-166
IVPEDKREM
9
0.0433
0.4577
IE1
411-419
TIPLSSVIV
9
0.2182
IE1
21-29
KVPRPETPV
9
0.2322
IE1
157-166
YIVPEDKREM
10
0.2557
IE1
411-418
TIPLSSVI
8
0.3432
IE1
297-305
TMYGGISLL
9
0.39
0.4634
0.4048
0.4793
IE1
401-408
VSPPESPV
8
0.3935
IE1
135-143
KVHEPFEEM
9
0.4042
0.0875
0.1157
IE1
316-324
VLEETSVML
9
0.4556
0.1911
0.0919
IE1
50-58
LGDPLFPEL
9
0.4958
0.3581
0.1412
0.0508
IE1
31-39
KATTFLQTM
9
0.0752
0.1417
0.3891
IE1
315-323
YVLEETSVM
9
0.0958
0.0347
IE1
249-257
YAQKIFKIL
9
0.1402
0.0413
0.4591
IE1
330-338
ITKPEVISV
9
0.1818
0.2935
IE1
58-66
LAEESLKTF
9
0.2262
0.2388
0.2886
IE1
296-304
MTMYGGISL
9
0.0957
IE1
181-189
AANKLGGAL
9
0.2158
IE1
230-238
QAMAALQNL
9
0.233
IE1
177-185
VSKGAANKL
9
0.4938
IE1
132-140
ILDKVHEPF
9
0.2
0.1539
IE1
55-63
FPELAEESL
9
0.3788
IE1
272-280
FMDILTTCV
9
0.4237
0.1913
IE1
256-264
ILDEERDKV
9
0.4356
0.0932
IE1
290-298
TSDACMMTM
9
0.2201
IE1
92-100
RVDMVRHRI
9
0.2435
IE1
49-58
SLGDPLFPEL
10
0.2981
IE1
256-265
ILDEERDKVL
10
0.3403
IE1
367-374
SVDDLRAI
8
0.4647
IE1
315-324
YVLEETSVML
10
0.4807
IE1
267-275
HIDHIFMDI
9
0.4888
IE1
40-48
LRKEVNSQL
9
0.0358
0.0732
0.1817
IE1
331-339
TKPEVISVM
9
0.169
0.4938
0.2382
IE1
96-104
VRHRIKEHM
9
0.2049
0.3057
IE1
449-457
VKSEPVSEI
9
0.2571
IE1
248-256
AYAQKIFKI
9
0.2632
0.3642
IE1
98-105
HRIKEHML
8
0.4497
IE1
87-95
KQIKVRVDM
9
3.89*
IE1
88-96
QIKVRVDMV
9
9.05*
IE1
88-95
QIKVRVDM
8
24.75*
IE1
201-209
RRKMMYMCY
9
0.3433
IE1
196-204
KKDELRRKM
9
0.4875
IE1
308-316
FCRVLCCYV
9
60*
IE1
312-320
LCCYVLEET
9
100*
IE1
107-115
KYTQTEEKF
9
0.3262
IE1
305-312
LSEFCRVL
8
23.6*
IE1
309-317
CRVLCCYVL
9
6.46*
% rank values of <0.5 are considered high-affinity interactions, 0.5-2 medium-affinity inter-
action, and values of >2 are considered of low affinity or nonbinding.
*: Previously published HLA-C restricted epitopes. The % ranks marked with * correspond
to the HLA-C for which the epitope was previously published.
NetMHCpan 4.1 epitope prediction software [53] was used to generated the 8-11 mer peptides
derived from the CMV-IE1 protein and to obtain the %rank values.
==PAGE:83==
C Libraries of HLA-C restricted peptides
71
Table C.2: Library of HLA-C restricted peptide derived from HCMV-pp50 protein
HCMV
protein
Amino acid
position
Peptide
sequence
Mer
C*01:02
% Rank
C*02:02
% Rank
C*03:04
% Rank
C*04:01
% Rank
C*05:01
% Rank
C*06:02
% Rank
C*07:01
% Rank
C*07:02
% Rank
pp50
42-50
FLPTPSLIL
9
0.006
0.2757
0.3056
0.3489
0.4817
pp50
83-91
STPLLGNFM
9
0.1189
pp50
117-125
CAPDFNMEF
9
0.1504
0.32
0.4587
pp50
42-49
FLPTPSLI
8
0.1669
pp50
172-180
KAPCPTGTV
9
0.1694
pp50
186-194
AGPPAIKFI
9
0.2029
pp50
193-201
FILTNGSEL
9
0.2038
0.0608
pp50
41-50
TFLPTPSLIL
10
0.2073
pp50
7-15
LSEPPTLAL
9
0.2131
0.4943
0.0337
0.189
0.0322
pp50
40-48
VTFLPTPSL
9
0.2302
0.395
0.055
pp50
203-211
FTANNRVSF
9
0.3769
0.0227
0.084
0.4877
pp50
40-50
VTFLPTPSLIL
11
0.3943
pp50
83-93
STPLLGNFMYL
11
0.4308
pp50
186-195
AGPPAIKFIL
10
0.463
pp50
116-125
MCAPDFNMEF
10
0.4702
pp50
185-193
HAGPPAIKF
9
0.0451
pp50
95-103
SSKDLTKFY
9
0.0504
0.4005
0.2905
pp50
22-30
TAIQQLRSV
9
0.1396
0.2388
0.1808
pp50
195-203
LTNGSELEF
9
0.1839
pp50
253-261
YVASRNGLF
9
0.2239
pp50
209-217
VSFHGVKNM
9
0.3262
pp50
61-69
ITFNSSCLY
9
0.335
pp50
94-102
TSSKDLTKF
9
0.4213
pp50
185-193
HAGPPAIKF
9
0.1424
0.4071
0.3782
0.493
pp50
244-252
IVTEHDTLL
9
0.2902
0.4615
pp50
78-86
KTINNSTPL
9
0.3556
pp50
118-125
APDFNMEF
8
0.282
pp50
415-423
SEDSVTFEF
9
0.3087
pp50
41-49
TFLPTPSLI
9
0.4921
pp50
107-114
ISDLSAKI
8
0.1642
pp50
107-116
ISDLSAKISM
10
0.2645
pp50
6-15
RLSEPPTLAL
10
0.3203
pp50
5-13
TRLSEPPTL
9
0.0572
0.0499
0.081
pp50
53-61
VRSHCVSKI
9
0.2287
pp50
27-34
LRSVIRAL
8
0.2913
0.4937
pp50
5-15
TRLSEPPTLAL
11
0.4689
pp50
217-226
MRINVQLKNF
10
0.4955
pp50
102-110
FYVQDISDL
9
0.2149
% rank values of <0.5 are considered high-affinity interactions, 0.5-2 medium-affinity inter-
action, and values of >2 are considered of low affinity or nonbinding.
NetMHCpan 4.1 epitope prediction software [53] was used to generated the 8-11 mer peptides
derived from the CMV-pp50 protein and to obtain the %rank values.
==PAGE:84==
72
C Libraries of HLA-C restricted peptides
Table C.3: Library of HLA-C restricted peptide derived from HCMV-pp65 protein.
HCMV
protein
Amino acid
position
Peptide
sequence
Mer
C*01:02
% Rank
C*02:02
% Rank
C*03:04
% Rank
C*04:01
Rank
C*05:01
% Rank
C*06:02
% Rank
C*07:01
% Rank
C*07:02
% Rank
pp65
15-23
LGPISGHVL
9
0.0207
pp65
34-42
VLPHETRLL
9
0.028
pp65
7-15
RCPEMISVL
9
0.0425*
pp65
187-195
VFPTKDVAL
9
0.0609
0.2123
0.4284
pp65
186-195
FVFPTKDVAL
10
0.0923
0.2402
pp65
14-23
VLGPISGHVL
10
0.1107
pp65
34-41
VLPHETRL
8
0.1428
pp65
305-313
LCPKSIPGL
9
0.1939
pp65
13-23
SVLGPISGHVL
11
0.2048
pp65
141-149
HLPVADAVI
9
0.2432
pp65
340-348
RQYDPVAAL
9
0.2439
0.1015
0.1319
0.387
0.1535
0.1282
0.1425
pp65
115-123
ALPLKMLNI
9
0.2846
pp65
309-319
SIPGLSISGNL
11
0.3998
pp65
27-35
FSRGDTPVL
9
0.452
0.1025
0.033
pp65
112-120
YVYALPLKM
9
0.0148
0.0608
0.1582
0.1946
0.2169
pp65
294-302
VAFTSHEHF
9
1.0073*
0.0445
0.1667
pp65
223-231
YVKVYLESF
9
0.1239
pp65
73-81
NQLQVQHTY
9
0.307
0.3631
0.2969
pp65
516-524
DANDIYRIF
9
0.3942
pp65
373-381
YRIQGKLEY
9
0.4074
0.0233
0.005
0.003
pp65
256-264
MTRNPQPFM
9
0.4244
pp65
340-349
RQYDPVAALF
10
0.4314
0.0502
0.485
0.3926
pp65
313-321
LSISGNLLM
9
0.4408
0.3796
pp65
331-339
QAIRETVEL
9
0.4627
0.0603
pp65
500-508
VATVQGQNL
9
0.1081
pp65
114-121
YALPLKML
8
0.2026
pp65
49-57
RVSQPSLIL
9
0.2528
pp65
297-305
TSHEHFGLL
9
0.387
pp65
341-349
QYDPVAALF
9
0.002*
0.3558
0.1276
0.026
pp65
350-357
FFDIDLLL
8
0.0097
0.4265
pp65
341-348
QYDPVAAL
8
0.0153
0.3513
pp65
341-350
QYDPVAALFF
10
0.0343*
0.4736
pp65
342-349
YDPVAALF
8
0.0668
0.4957
pp65
341-351
QYDPVAALFFF
11
0.1332
pp65
514-524
FWDANDIYRIF
11
0.1391
pp65
349-357
FFFDIDLLL
9
0.1543
0.3358
0.2037
0.1627
pp65
339-349
LRQYDPVAALF
11
0.1647
pp65
514-523
FWDANDIYRI
10
0.2906
pp65
514-421
FWDANDIY
8
0.3546
pp65
230-240
SFCEDVPSGKL
11
0.3622
pp65
190-198
KDVALRHVV
9
16.2*
pp65
403-410
GSDSDEEL
8
0.433
pp65
105-113
SQEPMSIYV
9
0.4481
pp65
211-219
TRATKMQVI
9
0.0365*
0.1521
pp65
69-77
HRGDNQLQV
9
0.0497
0.106
0.3164
pp65
48-56
VRVSQPSLI
9
0.062
0.2663
pp65
282-290
IKPGKISHI
9
0.1712
pp65
6-14
RRCPEMISV
9
0.1783
0.1857
pp65
94-102
VHNPTGRSI
9
0.2216
0.2974
0.3941
pp65
339-348
LRQYDPVAAL
10
0.3919
0.429
pp65
257-264
TRNPQPFM
8
0.4357
0.275
0.4986
pp65
264-272
MRPHERNGF
9
0.4634
0.4564
0.2635
pp65
476-484
IHNPAVFTW
9
0.1973
0.2202
pp65
180-188
VYYTSAFVF
9
0.2998
0.0414
pp65
371-381
SQYRIQGKLEY
11
0.3717
0.4484
pp65
372-381
QYRIQGKLEY
10
0.3879
0.3896
pp65
257-265
TRNPQPFMR
9
0.4888
pp65
181-188
YYTSAFVF
8
0.2306
pp65
362-369
QYSEHPTF
8
0.241
pp65
113-121
VYALPLKML
9
0.2492
pp65
365-373
EHPTFTSQY
9
0.2595
pp65
513-521
FFWDANDIY
9
0.4213
pp65
113-120
VYALPLKM
8
0.466
% rank values of <0.5 are considered high-affinity interactions, 0.5-2 medium-affinity inter-
action, and values of >2 are considered of low affinity or nonbinding.
*: Previously published HLA-C restricted epitopes. The % ranks marked with * correspond
to the HLA-C for which the epitope was previously published.
NetMHCpan 4.1 epitope prediction software [53] was used to generated the 8-11 mer peptides
derived from the CMV-pp65 protein and to obtain the %rank values.
==PAGE:85==
C Libraries of HLA-C restricted peptides
73
Table C.4: Library of HLA-C restricted peptide derived from HCMV-pp150 protein
HCMV
protein
Amino acid
position
Peptide
sequence
Mer
C*01:02
% Rank
C*02:02
% Rank
C*03:04
% Rank
C*04:01
% Rank
C*05:01
% Rank
C*06:02
% Rank
C*07:01
% Rank
C*07:02
% Rank
pp150
865-872
VSPATSPL
8
0.0487
pp150
899-907
GVPSLKPTL
9
0.0677
pp150
281-289
SFPQSAHTF
9
0.1079
0.077
0.258
0.0497
pp150
970-979
ILKPGASAAL
10
0.1135
pp150
69-77
HNPDLSSVL
9
0.147
pp150
605-614
APAPAPTPTF
10
0.1616
pp150
624-633
NSPWAPTAPL
10
0.1725
pp150
961-971
NAPPVASPSIL
11
0.1739
pp150
797-804
STPVQGRL
8
0.1746
pp150
606-614
PAPAPTPTF
9
0.1945
pp150
865-874
VSPATSPLSM
10
0.1959
pp150
969-979
SILKPGASAAL
11
0.2032
pp150
289-297
FLGARSPSL
9
0.2039
0.4325
pp150
864-872
VVSPATSPL
9
0.2058
0.098
pp150
281-290
SFPQSAHTFL
10
0.2176
pp150
1015-1024
TGPQPGSAGM
10
0.2485
pp150
848-856
RQPSASASV
9
0.2624
pp150
961-970
NAPPVASPSI
10
0.2638
pp150
898-907
VGVPSLKPTL
10
0.28
pp150
962-970
APPVASPSI
9
0.3318
pp150
865-875
VSPATSPLSML
11
0.3764
pp150
101-109
KARDHLAVL
9
0.3941
0.0762
0.1208
0.3497
0.4925
pp150
604-614
TAPAPAPTPTF
11
0.3961
pp150
810-819
GTPSTVPATL
10
0.4322
pp150
848-857
RQPSASASVL
10
0.4549
pp150
938-945
TTPTYPAV
8
0.4684
pp150
934-942
RAASTTPTY
9
0.0149
0.1959
0.4992
pp150
562-571
SAKPPVTTAY
10
0.0159
0.0643
pp150
291-299
GARSPSLEF
9
0.0382
0.3057
pp150
359-367
AARSAAVGY
9
0.1536
pp150
106-114
LAVLDRTEF
9
0.1826
0.2623
pp150
289-299
FLGARSPSLEF
11
0.1975
pp150
562-570
SAKPPVTTA
9
0.2682
pp150
306-314
LSLGGGSAF
9
0.3265
0.2472
pp150
649-657
ALKNPHLAY
9
0.3653
pp150
787-795
HASARAQTV
9
0.3937
0.3868
0.4734
pp150
86-94
AVARRGYTY
9
0.4509
pp150
933-942
SRAASTTPTY
10
0.4595
0.2345
0.3567
pp150
290-299
LGARSPSLEF
10
0.4773
pp150
771-779
TSTSQKPVL
9
0.4149
pp150
127-135
RALVSAVIL
9
0.4167
pp150
263-270
SADTLLEL
8
0.4269
0.2002
0.0364
pp150
203-211
LVYTGRLIM
9
0.445
pp150
282-290
FPQSAHTFL
9
0.4482
0.1885
pp150
592-600
AAILTPTPV
9
0.4733
pp150
572-580
KFEQPTLTF
9
0.0196
0.4769
0.157
pp150
298-306
EFDDDANLL
9
0.0245
0.494
pp150
395-403
AWEERQQNL
9
0.0735
pp150
571-580
YKFEQPTLTF
10
0.0753
0.303
0.2388
% rank values of <0.5 are considered high-affinity interactions, 0.5-2 medium-affinity inter-
action, and values of >2 are considered of low affinity or nonbinding.
NetMHCpan 4.1 epitope prediction software [53] was used to generated the 8-11 mer peptides
derived from the CMV-pp150 protein and to obtain the %rank values.
==PAGE:86==
74
C Libraries of HLA-C restricted peptides
Table C.5: Library of HLA-C restricted peptide derived from HCMV-pp150 protein (Con-
tinuation)
HCMV
protein
Amino acid
position
Peptide
sequence
Mer
C*01:02
% Rank
C*02:02
% Rank
C*03:04
% Rank
C*04:01
% Rank
C*05:01
% Rank
C*06:02
% Rank
C*07:01
% Rank
C*07:02
% Rank
pp150
296-306
SLEFDDDANLL
11
0.0843
0.328
pp150
297-306
LEFDDDANLL
10
0.0912
pp150
274-282
DFDIYVDSF
9
0.1074
pp150
298-308
EFDDDANLLSL
11
0.1671
pp150
299-306
FDDDANLL
8
0.1889
0.4883
pp150
298-305
EFDDDANL
8
0.2182
pp150
263-271
SADTLLELL
9
0.2732
0.0324
pp150
941-949
TYPAVTTVY
9
0.2902
0.4187
0.1805
0.0263
pp150
244-254
SFDSNYCRNIL
11
0.3373
pp150
811-819
TPSTVPATL
9
0.3411
pp150
260-268
NGDSADTLL
9
0.3773
0.1798
pp150
695-702
AADEVWAL
8
0.3813
0.1126
pp150
278-286
YVDSFPQSA
9
0.3896
0.1855
pp150
570-580
AYKFEQPTLTF
11
0.3963
pp150
866-874
SPATSPLSM
9
0.4029
pp150
344-351
RFEAHGSL
8
0.4356
pp150
282-289
FPQSAHTF
8
0.4897
pp150
721-730
SSDTGSVVSL
10
0.0942
pp150
721-728
SSDTGSVV
8
0.1795
pp150
736-744
SSDYNNDVI
9
0.256
pp150
544-553
RQDPRFTDTL
10
0.2941
pp150
1030-1038
PSDAVQNIL
9
0.3052
pp150
549-556
FTDTLVDI
8
0.3965
pp150
343-351
FRFEAHGSL
9
0.0277
0.0425
0.0413
pp150
9-17
QRRDVVALV
9
0.086
0.2547
pp150
48-56
RRTVLFNEL
9
0.154
0.1061
0.2195
pp150
982-990
RRSTGIAAV
9
0.1571
0.2463
pp150
660-668
FRMPTTSTA
9
0.1605
0.2773
0.4216
pp150
489-497
QRHAAFSLV
9
0.2119
pp150
563-571
AKPPVTTAY
9
0.2408
0.1872
0.0767
pp150
44-52
KRLHRRTVL
9
0.2633
0.1658
0.4905
pp150
68-76
FHNPDLSSV
9
0.2638
0.4337
pp150
360-368
ARSAAVGYY
9
0.2715
0.1067
0.2149
pp150
226-234
ARIQERCKL
9
0.286
0.3297
pp150
896-903
SRVGVPSL
8
0.3672
0.4152
pp150
373-381
KRRERQKRV
9
0.3675
pp150
509-517
VRRDSAWDV
9
0.38
pp150
415-423
RKPGASRRL
9
0.4114
pp150
911-919
AVVGRPPSV
9
0.458
pp150
414-423
TRKPGASRRL
10
0.4823
pp150
140-148
VRETLVTAI
9
0.4968
pp150
292-299
ARSPSLEF
8
0.1872
0.234
pp150
88-96
ARRGYTYPF
9
0.197
0.2542
pp150
414-424
TRKPGASRRLF
11
0.4692
pp150
570-578
AYKFEQPTL
9
0.2317
% rank values of <0.5 are considered high-affinity interactions, 0.5-2 medium-affinity inter-
action, and values of >2 are considered of low affinity or nonbinding.
NetMHCpan 4.1 epitope prediction software [53] was used to generated the 8-11 mer peptides
derived from the CMV-pp150 protein and to obtain the %rank values.
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
[1]
M M Addo et al. “The HIV-1 regulatory proteins Tat and Rev are frequently
targeted by cytotoxic T lymphocytes derived from HIV-1-infected individuals”.
eng. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America 98.4 (2001), pages 1781–1786. issn: 10916490, 00278424. doi: 10.
1073/pnas.98.4.1781,10.1073/pnas.98.4.1781.
[2]
Amanda R. Aldous and Jesse Z. Dong. “Personalized neoantigen vaccines: A
new approach to cancer immunotherapy”. eng. In: Bioorganic and Medicinal
Chemistry 26.10 (2018), pages 2842–2849. issn: 14643391, 09680896. doi: 10.
1016/j.bmc.2017.10.021.
[3]
John D. Altman et al. “Phenotypic analysis of antigen-specific T lymphocytes”.
eng. In: Science (washington D C) 275.5284 (1996), pages 94–96, 94–96. issn:
10959203, 00368075.
[4]
Stefanie Ameres et al. “Presentation of an Immunodominant Immediate-Early
CD8+ T Cell Epitope Resists Human Cytomegalovirus Immunoevasion”. eng.
In: Plos Pathogens 9.5 (2013). Edited by William J. Britt, e1003383. issn:
15537374, 15537366. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003383.
[5]
Arnold H. Bakker et al. “Conditional MHC class I ligands and peptide exchange
technology for the human MHC gene products HLA-A1, -A3, -A11, and -B7”.
eng. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America 105.10 (2008), pages 3825–3830. issn: 10916490, 00278424. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0709717105.
[6]
Amalie Kai Bentzen and Sine Reker Hadrup. “Evolution of MHC-based tech-
nologies used for detection of antigen-responsive T cells”. und. In: Cancer Im-
munology, Immunotherapy 66.5 (2017), pages 657–666. issn: 14320851, 03407004.
doi: 10.1007/s00262-017-1971-5.
[7]
Amalie Kai Bentzen et al. “Large-scale detection of antigen-specific T cells
using peptide-MHC-I multimers labeled with DNA barcodes”. eng. In: Nature
Biotechnology 34.10 (2016), pages 1037–1045. issn: 15461696, 10870156. doi:
10.1038/nbt.3662.
[8]
T. Andrew Binkowski, Susana R. Marino, and Andrzej Joachimiak. “Predicting
HLA Class I Non-Permissive Amino Acid Residues Substitutions”. In: (2016).
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0041710.
==PAGE:88==
76
Bibliography
[9]
Niklas K. Bjorkstrom et al. “CD8 T cells express randomly selected KIRs with
distinct specificities compared with NK cells”. eng. In: Blood 120.17 (2012),
pages 3455–3465. issn: 15280020, 00064971. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-03-
416867.
[10]
Marie-Eve Blais, Tao Dong, and Sarah Rowland-Jones. “HLA-C as a mediator
of natural killer and T-cell activation: spectator or key player?” eng. In: Im-
munology 133.1 (2011), pages 1–7. issn: 13652567, 00192805, 09534954. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2567.2011.03422.x.
[11]
Sara Bobisse et al. “Sensitive and frequent identification of high avidity neo-
epitope specific CD8(+) T cells in immunotherapy-naive ovarian cancer”. eng.
In: Nature Communications 9.1 (2018), page 1092. issn: 20411723. doi: 10.
1038/s41467-018-03301-0.
[12]
Sebastian Boegel et al. “A catalog of HLA type, HLA expression, and neoepitope
candidates in human cancer cell lines”. eng. In: Oncoimmunology 3.8 (2014),
e954893. issn: 2162402x, 21624011. doi: 10.4161/21624011.2014.954893.
[13]
Peter Braendstrup et al. “Identification and HLA-Tetramer-Validation of Hu-
man CD4(+) and CD8(+) T Cell Responses against HCMV Proteins IE1 and
IE2”. eng. In: Plos One 9.4 (2014). Edited by Michael Nevels, e94892. issn:
19326203. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094892.
[14]
Jill M. Brooks et al. “Early T Cell Recognition of B Cells following Epstein-Barr
Virus Infection: Identifying Potential Targets for Prophylactic Vaccination”.
eng. In: Plos Pathogens 12.4 (2016). Edited by Stephen Gottschalk, e1005549,
e1005549. issn: 15537374, 15537366. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005549.
[15]
Rico Buchli et al. “Real-time measurement of in vitro peptide binding to soluble
HLA-A*0201 by fluorescence polarization”. eng. In: Biochemistry 43.46 (2004),
pages 14852–14863. issn: 00062960, 15204995. doi: 10.1021/bi048580q.
[16]
Aude-Hélène Capietto et al. “Mutation position is an important determinant
for predicting cancer neoantigens”. eng. In: Journal of Experimental Medicine
217.4 (2020). issn: 15409538, 00221007. doi: 10.1084/jem.20190179.
[17]
Ti-Cheng Chang et al. “The neoepitope landscape in pediatric cancers”. eng.
In: Genome Medicine 9.1 (2017), pages 78, 78. issn: 1756994x. doi: 10.1186/
s13073-017-0468-3.
[18]
Cynthia X.L. Chang et al. “Conditional ligands for Asian HLA variants facilitate
the definition of CD8+ T-cell responses in acute and chronic viral diseases”.
eng. In: European Journal of Immunology 43.4 (2013), pages 1109–1120. issn:
15214141, 00142980. doi: 10.1002/eji.201243088.
[19]
Moreno Di Marco et al. “Unveiling the peptide motifs of HLA-C and HLA-G
from naturally presented peptides and generation of binding prediction ma-
trices”. eng. In: Journal of Immunology 199.8 (2017), pages 2639–2651. issn:
15506606, 00221767. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1700938.
==PAGE:89==
Bibliography
77
[20]
Lena Fadda et al. “Peptide antagonism as a mechanism for NK cell activation”.
eng. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America 107.22 (2010), pages 10160–10165. issn: 10916490, 00278424. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0913745107.
[21]
Qing R. Fan, Eric O. Long, and Don C. Wiley. “Crystal structure of the human
natural killer cell inhibitory receptor KIR2DL1-HLA-Cw4 complex”. eng. In:
Nature Immunology 2.5 (2001), pages 452–460. issn: 15292908, 15292916. doi:
10.1038/87766.
[22]
Henrik Ferré et al. “Purification of correctly oxidized MHC class I heavy-chain
molecules under denaturing conditions: A novel strategy exploiting disulfide
assisted protein folding”. eng. In: Protein Science 12.3 (2003), pages 551–559.
issn: 1469896x, 09618368, 13595040. doi: 10.1110/ps.0233003.
[23]
Kathryn A. Finton and Roland K. Strong. “Structural insights into activation
of antiviral NK cell responses”. eng. In: Immunological Reviews 250 (2012),
pages 239–257. issn: 1600065x, 01052896. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-065X.2012.
01168.x.
[24]
Monica Ghei, David F. Stroncek, and Maurizio Provenzano. “Analysis of mem-
ory T lymphocyte activity following stimulation with overlapping HLA-A*2402,
A*0101 and Cw*0402 restricted CMV pp65 peptides”. eng. In: Journal of Trans-
lational Medicine 3.1 (2005), pages 23, 23. issn: 14795876. doi: 10.1186/1479-
5876-3-23.
[25]
T F Greten et al. “Direct visualization of antigen-specific T cells: HTLV-1 Tax11-
19- specific CD8(+) T cells are activated in peripheral blood and accumulate
in cerebrospinal fluid from HAM/TSP patients”. eng. In: Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 95.13 (1998),
pages 7568–73, 7568–7573. issn: 10916490, 00278424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.95.
13.7568.
[26]
Sine Reker Hadrup et al. “Parallel detection of antigen-specific T-cell responses
by multidimensional encoding of MHC multimers”. eng. In: Nature Methods
6.7 (2009), pages 520–526. issn: 15487105, 15487091, 15491676, 15491277. doi:
10.1038/nmeth.1345.
[27]
Aisha N. Hasan et al. “A panel of artificial APCs expressing prevalent HLA
alleles permits generation of cytotoxic T cells specific for both dominant and
subdominant viral epitopes for adoptive therapy”. eng. In: Journal of Immunol-
ogy 183.4 (2009), pages 2837–2850. issn: 15506606, 00221767. doi: 10.4049/
jimmunol.0804178.
[28]
Z. Hein et al. “Peptide-independent stabilization of MHC class I molecules
breaches cellular quality control”. eng. In: (2014).
==PAGE:90==
78
Bibliography
[29]
Louise Hosie et al. “Cytomegalovirus-Specific T Cells Restricted by HLA-Cw*0702
Increase Markedly with Age and Dominate the CD8+ T-Cell Repertoire in
Older People”. eng. In: Frontiers in Immunology 8 (2017), pages 1776, 1776.
issn: 16643224. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.01776.
[30]
Sabine Hulpke and Robert Tampé. “The MHC I loading complex: A multitask-
ing machinery in adaptive immunity”. eng. In: Trends in Biochemical Sciences
38.8 (2013), pages 412–420. issn: 13624326, 09680004. doi: 10.1016/j.tibs.
2013.06.003.
[31]
Gurman Kaur et al. “Structural and regulatory diversity shape HLA-C protein
expression levels”. und. In: Nature Communications 8.1 (2017). issn: 20411723.
doi: 10.1038/ncomms15924.
[32]
Paul Klenerman, Vincenzo Cerundolo, and P. Rod Dunbar. “Tracking T cells
with tetramers: New tales from new tools”. eng. In: Nature Reviews Immunology
2.4 (2002), pages 263–272. issn: 14741733, 14741741. doi: 10.1038/nri777.
[33]
E Kondo et al. “Identification of novel CTL epitopes of CMV-pp65 presented
by a variety of HLA alleles”. eng. In: Blood 103.2 (2004), pages 630–638. issn:
15280020, 00064971. doi: 10.1182/blood-2003-03-0824.
[34]
Smita Kulkarni et al. “Genetic interplay between HLA-C and MIR148A in HIV
control and Crohn disease”. eng. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 110.51 (2013), pages 20705–20710.
issn: 10916490, 00278424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1312237110.
[35]
Martin Lauss et al. “Mutational and putative neoantigen load predict clinical
benefit of adoptive T cell therapy in melanoma”. eng. In: Nature Communica-
tions 8.1 (2017), page 1738. issn: 20411723. doi: 10.1038/s41467-017-01460-
0.
[36]
Anna Lissina et al. “Protein kinase inhibitors substantially improve the physi-
cal detection of T-cells with peptide-MHC tetramers”. eng. In: Journal of Im-
munological Methods 340.1 (2009), pages 11–24. issn: 18727905, 00221759. doi:
10.1016/j.jim.2008.09.014.
[37]
Yong Chen Lu et al. “Efficient identification of mutated cancer antigens recog-
nized by T cells associated with durable tumor regressions”. eng. In: Clinical
Cancer Research 20.13 (2014), pages 3401–3410. issn: 15573265, 10780432. doi:
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-0433.
[38]
Jolien J. Luimstra et al. “A flexible MHC class I multimer loading system for
large-scale detection of antigen-specific T cells”. eng. In: Journal of Experimental
Medicine 215.5 (2018), pages 1493–1504. issn: 15409538, 00221007. doi: 10.
1084/jem.20180156.
[39]
Azure T. Makadzange et al. “Characterization of an HLA-C-restricted CTL
response in chronic HIV infection”. eng. In: European Journal of Immunology
40.4 (2010), pages 1036–1041. issn: 00142980, 15214141. doi: 10.1002/eji.
200939634.
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
79
[40]
Jane A. McCutcheon et al. “Low HLA-C expression at cell surfaces correlates
with increased turnover of heavy chain mRNA”. und. In: Journal of Experi-
mental Medicine 181.6 (1995), pages 2085–2095. issn: 15409538, 00221007. doi:
10.1084/jem.181.6.2085.
[41]
Kenneth Murphy, Casey Weaver, and Charles A. Janeway. Janeway’s immuno-
biology. eng. Garland Science, 2017, xx, 904 s. : ill. isbn: 9780815345510, 9780815345053.
[42]
Anne Neisig, Cornelis J.M. Melief, and Jacques Neefjes. “Reduced cell sur-
face expression of HLA-C molecules correlates with restricted peptide bind-
ing and stable TAP interaction”. eng. In: Journal of Immunology 160.1 (1998),
pages 171–179. issn: 00221767, 15506606.
[43]
Evan W. Newell et al. “Combinatorial tetramer staining and mass cytometry
analysis facilitate T-cell epitope mapping and characterization”. eng. In: Nature
Biotechnology 31.7 (2013), pages 623–629. issn: 15461696, 10870156. doi: 10.
1038/nbt.2593.
[44]
Stephen L. Nutt et al. “Cytotoxic T lymphocytes and natural killer cells”.
eng. In: Clinical Immunology: Principles and Practice: Fourth Edition (2013),
pages 215–227. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-7234-3691-1.00015-5.
[45]
Serkan Ocal et al. “Effect of HLA on hepatitis C virus clearance and persistence
in anti-HCV-positive end-stage renal disease patients”. eng. In: Saudi Journal
of Gastroenterology 20.3 (2014), pages 175–181. issn: 19984049, 13193767. doi:
10.4103/1319-3767.133007.
[46]
Peter Parham. “MHC class I molecules and KIRS in human history, health and
survival”. eng. In: Nature Reviews Immunology 5.3 (2005), pages 201–214. issn:
14741733, 14741741. doi: 10.1038/nri1570.
[47]
P. E. Posch and C. K. Hurley. “Histocompatibility. HLA and other systems”.
eng. In: Blood and Bone Marrow Pathology (2011), pages 641–676. doi: 10.
1016/B978-0-7020-3147-2.00039-0.
[48]
Victoria A. Pudney et al. “CD8+ immunodominance among Epstein-Barr virus
lytic cycle antigens directly reflects the efficiency of antigen presentation in
lytically infected cells”. und. In: Journal of Experimental Medicine 201.3 (2005),
pages 349–360. issn: 15409538, 00221007. doi: 10.1084/jem.20041542.
[49]
Sumati Rajagopalan and Eric O. Long. “Understanding how combinations of
HLA and KIR genes influence disease”. und. In: Journal of Experimental Medicine
201.7 (2005), pages 1025–1029. issn: 15409538, 00221007. doi: 10.1084/jem.
20050499.
[50]
Hans Georg Rammensee et al. “SYFPEITHI: Database for MHC ligands and
peptide motifs”. eng. In: Immunogenetics 50.3-4 (1999), pages 213–219. issn:
14321211, 00937711. doi: 10.1007/s002510050595.
[51]
Sofie Ramskov et al. “HLA-C restricted neoepitopes contribute significantly to
the immune recognition of cancer”. eng. In: European Journal of Immunology
49.Suppl. 3 SI (2019), pages 387–387. issn: 15214141, 00142980.
==PAGE:92==
80
Bibliography
[52]
Michael Rasmussen et al. “Describing the Peptide Binding Specificity of HLA-
C”. eng. In: Journal of Immunology 188 (2012). issn: 15506606, 00221767.
[53]
Birkir Reynisson et al. “NetMHCpan-4.1 and NetMHCIIpan-4.0: improved pre-
dictions of MHC antigen presentation by concurrent motif deconvolution and
integration of MS MHC eluted ligand data”. eng. In: Nucleic Acids Research 48.1
(2020), W449–W454. issn: 13624962, 03051048. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkaa379.
[54]
“The Major Histocompatibility Complex”. In: Clinical Immunology (Fifth Edi-
tion). Edited by Robert R. Rich et al. Fifth Edition. London: Content Reposi-
tory Only!, 2019, 79–92.e1.
[55]
Michael Rist et al. “Cross-recognition of HLA DR4 alloantigen by virus-specific
CD8(+) T cells: a new paradigm for self-/nonself-recognition”. eng. In: Blood
114.11 (2009), pages 2244–2253. issn: 00064971. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-
05-222596.
[56]
James Robinson et al. “The IPD and IMGT/HLA database: Allele variant
databases”. eng. In: Nucleic Acids Research 43.1 (2015), pages D423–D431. issn:
13624962, 03051048. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku1161.
[57]
Boris Rodenko et al. “Generation of peptide-MHC class I complexes through
UV-mediated ligand exchange”. eng. In: Nature Protocols 1.3 (2006), pages 1120–
1132. issn: 17502799, 17542189. doi: 10.1038/nprot.2006.121.
[58]
Steven A. Rosenberg and Nicholas P. Restifo. “Adoptive cell transfer as per-
sonalized immunotherapy for human cancer”. eng. In: Science 348.6230 (2015),
pages 62–68. issn: 10959203, 00368075. doi: 10.1126/science.aaa4967.
[59]
Ugur Sahin and Özlem Türeci. “Personalized vaccines for cancer immunother-
apy”. eng. In: Science 359.6382 (2018), pages 1355–1360. issn: 10959203, 00368075.
doi: 10.1126/science.aar7112.
[60]
S K Saini, N Rekers, and S R Hadrup. “Novel tools to assist neoepitope targeting
in personalized cancer immunotherapy”. eng. In: Annals of Oncology 28.suppl12
(2017), pages xii3–xii10, xii3–xii10. issn: 15698041, 09237534. doi: 10.1093/
annonc/mdx544.
[61]
Sunil Kumar Saini et al. “Dipeptides promote folding and peptide binding of
MHC class I molecules”. eng. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences of the United States of America (2013). issn: 10916490, 00278424. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1308672110,10.1073/pnas.1308672110.
[62]
Sunil Kumar Saini et al. “Empty peptide-receptive MHC class I molecules
for efficient detection of antigen-specific T cells”. eng. In: Science Immunology
4.37 (2019), eaau9039–eaau9039. issn: 24709468. doi: 10.1126/sciimmunol.
aau9039.
[63]
Philippa M Saunders et al. “A bird’s eye view of NK cell receptor interactions
with their MHC class I ligands”. eng. In: Immunological Reviews 267.1 (2015),
pages 148–66, 148–166. issn: 1600065x, 01052896. doi: 10.1111/imr.12319.
==PAGE:93==
Bibliography
81
[64]
Leonardo Sibilio et al. “A single bottleneck in HLA-C assembly”. eng. In: Jour-
nal of Biological Chemistry 283.3 (2008), pages 1267–74, 1267–1274. issn: 00219258.
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M708068200.
[65]
Malcolm J. W. Sim et al. “Canonical and Cross-reactive Binding of NK Cell
Inhibitory Receptors to HLA-C Allotypes Is Dictated by Peptides Bound to
HLA-C”. und. In: Frontiers in Immunology 8 (2017). issn: 16643224. doi: 10.
3389/fimmu.2017.00193.
[66]
Stuart Sims, Christian Willberg, and Paul Klenerman. “MHC-peptide tetramers
for the analysis of antigen-specific T cells”. eng. In: Expert Review of Vaccines
9.7 (2010), pages 765–774. issn: 17448395, 14760584. doi: 10.1586/erv.10.66.
[67]
Anupam Singh et al. “Protein recovery from inclusion bodies of Escherichia coli
using mild solubilization process”. eng. In: Microbial Cell Factories 14.1 (2015),
page 41. issn: 14752859. doi: 10.1186/s12934-015-0222-8.
[68]
Surinder Mohan Singh and Amulya Kumar Panda. “Solubilization and refold-
ing of bacterial inclusion body proteins”. eng. In: Journal of Bioscience and
Bioengineering 99.4 (2005), pages 303–10, 303–310. issn: 13474421, 13891723.
doi: 10.1263/jbb.99.303.
[69]
Stefanie L. Slezak et al. “CMV pp65 and IE-1 T cell epitopes recognized by
healthy subjects”. eng. In: Journal of Translational Medicine 5.1 (2007), page 17.
issn: 14795876. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-5-17.
[70]
Anthony T. Tan et al. “Immunoprevalence and immunodominance of HLA-
Cw*0801-restricted T cell response targeting the hepatitis B virus envelope
transmembrane region”. eng. In: Journal of Virology 88.2 (2014), pages 1332–
1341. issn: 10985514, 0022538x. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02600-13.
[71]
Mireille Toebes et al. “Design and use of conditional MHC class I ligands”. und.
In: Nature Medicine 12.2 (2006), page 246. doi: 10.1038/nm1360.
[72]
Eric Tran et al. “Immunogenicity of somatic mutations in human gastrointesti-
nal cancers”. eng. In: Science 350.6266 (2015), pages 1387–1390. issn: 10959203,
00368075. doi: 10.1126/science.aad1253.
[73]
Consortium UniProt. “UniProt: a worldwide hub of protein knowledge”. eng.
In: Nucleic Acids Research 47.D1 (2019), pages D506–D515, D506–D515. issn:
13624962, 03051048. doi: 10.1093/nar/gky1049.
[74]
Randi Vita et al. “The Immune Epitope Database (IEDB): 2018 update”. eng.
In: Nucleic Acids Research 47.1 (2019), pages D339–D343. issn: 13624962,
03051048. doi: 10.1093/nar/gky1006.
[75]
Eric Vivier and Nicolas Anfossi. “Inhibitory NK-cell receptors on T cells: Wit-
ness of the past, actors of the future”. eng. In: Nature Reviews Immunology 4.3
(2004), pages 190–198. issn: 14741733, 14741741. doi: 10.1038/nri1306.
==PAGE:94==
82
Bibliography
[76]
Darin A. Wick et al. “Surveillance of the tumor mutanome by T cells dur-
ing progression from primary to recurrent ovarian cancer”. eng. In: Clinical
Cancer Research 20.5 (2014), pages 1125–1134. issn: 15573265, 10780432. doi:
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-2147.
[77]
Bernard Witholt, Harm Van Heerikhuizen, and Loe De Leij. “How does lysozyme
penetrate through the bacterial outer membrane?” eng. In: Biochimica Et Bio-
physica Acta. Biomembranes 443.443 (1976), pages 534–544. issn: 18792642,
00052736. doi: 10.1016/0005-2736(76)90471-5.
[78]
Nikolaos Zacharakis et al. “Immune recognition of somatic mutations leading
to complete durable regression in metastatic breast cancer”. eng. In: Nature
Medicine 24.6 (2018), pages 724–730. issn: 1546170x, 10788956. doi: 10.1038/
s41591-018-0040-8.
[79]
J ZEMMOUR and P PARHAM. “DISTINCTIVE POLYMORPHISM AT THE
HLA-C LOCUS - IMPLICATIONS FOR THE EXPRESSION OF HLA-C”.
eng. In: Journal of Experimental Medicine 176.4 (1992), pages 937–950. issn:
15409538, 00221007. doi: 10.1084/jem.176.4.937.
