==PAGE:1==
Towards Enhanced Trusted Execution
Environments: Protecting Intel SGX
against Code-Reuse Attacks
Mod forbedrede tillidsfulde eksekveringsmiljøer:
Beskyttelse af Intel SGX mod angreb med genbrug af
kode
Alexander Ellens Stoica Ostenfeld
student#: s140443
Master thesis
August 2020
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet (DTU)
==PAGE:2==
Contents
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
What is Intel SGX?
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
What is Return-Oriented Programming (ROG)?
. . . . . . . . .
7
2
Intel SGX
8
2.1
Instructions in Intel SGX
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Functionality and speciﬁc functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Creating and attacking an enclave
13
3.1
The Guard’s Dilemma: Eﬃcient Code-Reuse Attacks Against In-
tel SGX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Example enclave
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Attack - gaining foothold and preparing payload
. . . . . . . . .
20
3.4
Attack - structures and execution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Analysis
24
4.1
Analysis of ﬁndings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2
Suggestions for improvenments/mitigations
. . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5
Conclusion
29
6
Discussion
30
7
Future Work
31
7.1
Implement the attack in reality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
7.2
Further research into vulnerable functions in the SGX SDK . . .
31
7.3
Further analysis of whether the ﬁx will mitigate the attack vector
entirely
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
7.4
Research into other defensive strategies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
7.5
More focus on best practices when programming
. . . . . . . . .
32
A Appendix
34
A.1 Example program and enclave . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
A.2 SGX SDK Source Code
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
1
==PAGE:3==
1
Introduction
1.1
Abstract
Intel SGX is used to safeguard code and data from interference and observation,
by hiding it in encrypted memory sections called ”enclaves”. There are multiple
papers describing attacks on them, but one particularly interesting one describes
how they can be attacked by an attacker without signiﬁcant privileges on the
machine running the enclave. In this paper this attack vector will be explored,
along with potential defenses against it, both in the form of ﬁxing vulnerabilities
in Intel SGX, and in shape of changing surrounding factors to mitigate the
consequences of the attack, by rendering it unable to inﬂuence the enclave in a
meaningful way.
1.2
Introduction
The purpose of this thesis, is twofold:
1. Explore the possibility of performing the attack described in Biondo et.
al.’s paper ”The Guard’s Dilemma: Eﬃcient Code-Reuse Attacks Against
Intel SGX” in practice
2. Suggest ways to protect Intel SGX against this type of attacks, to achieve
safer trusted execution.
In the thesis there will be a thorough description of how the attack is supposed
to work (subsection 3.1), examples of how an attack could look(subsection 3.3-
3.4), and suggestions to how this type of attack can be mitigated, or prevented
entirely, as well as thoughts as to the impact of an implementation of said sugges-
tions, both on the attack, on the functionality of the enclave, and in cases where
it is relevant, the ease of use and design when creating enclaves.(subsection 4.2)
Finally there will be a discussion of the ﬁndings and approach(section 6), and
suggestions to future work that could cast light on interesting developments and
issues found throughout the writing of this thesis.(section 7)
1.3
Motivation
In recent years, computer security, and especially protection of important data,
has become increasingly important, and an area of growing focus. This develop-
ment has partially been driven by increasing digitization of tasks and data and
digitalization of business and organizational processes, and partly by increased
public and governmental focus on the security of the keeping of conﬁdential and
personal data (e.g. GDPR legislation[5]). As more information is made digi-
tal, it is also made more vulnerable to being intercepted, changed, or stolen by
cyber-criminals, as well as being increasingly centralized and accessible (within
the system), making the potential amount of information that can be gathered
signiﬁcantly larger. Thus, trusted computing has become one of the hot topics
in computing, as it can be a way to ensure that data is protected from digital
2
==PAGE:4==
intruders. A coalition of companies focusing on trusted computing (TCG1) was
founded in 2003, with members including Intel, AMD and Microsoft, amongst
many others.[6] One of the largest platforms for trusted computing is Intels
SGX2, as it is included in most Intel processors from fall 2015 and onwards
(see subsubsection 1.4.3 for more information). However, even this platform is
not without its issues, notably a number of security problems have been found
in recent years, risking the conﬁdentiality of information stored within SGX
enclaves. One especially interesting vulnerability, due in part to how much con-
trol it can gain over the enclave and the information within it, and in part due
to its relatively easy implementation, is described in the paper ”The Guard’s
Dilemma: Eﬃcient Code-Reuse Attacks Against Intel SGX” by Biondo et. al[2],
which will be the primary focus of this thesis.
1.4
What is Intel SGX?
1.4.1
What is SGX?
Intel SGX, is a set of instructions and mechanisms for memory accesses extend-
ing the x86 instruction set, that, combined with a purpose-built programming
language, can be used to ensure that memory containing data, as well as exe-
cutable code for a SGX program, is encrypted, and thus unreadable to the rest
of the system, and is only decrypted when in the CPU, and encrypted again
before being written to memory. These portions of encrypted memory are called
enclaves. There are two versions of SGX at the time of writing:
• SGX1: Allows an application to instantiate an enclave, and establishes
how interaction with it works, and what is allowed, and what is not.
• SGX2: Adds ﬂexibility in runtime management of enclave resources, and
thread execution within an enclave.
Non-executable data within an enclave is marked as uneditable, and thus can’t
be written to by any other process, than one working from within the enclave.
Executable data within an enclave is uneditable, even to a process executing
from within the enclave. (Not actually always the case, but the speciﬁcation
states that it is) This is especially useful for security-critical programs, and data,
such as private encryption keys, and handling of very sensitive data. While
SGX2 would be the most interesting version to work on, being the newest and
most feature-rich, unfortunately it is only veriﬁed as being supported on a sin-
gle consumer device at the time of writing according to this unoﬃcial list on
github[14] (no oﬃcial list exists from Intel, or other authorities), a device that
is not available for the writer at the time of writing. As SGX is built on hard-
ware features, that can’t be emulated in software[11](in the ”about” section),
an emulator is not an option, as that will still require the underlying hardware
to support SGX2. For those reasons, this report will focus on showing how the
1Trusted Computing Group
2Software Guard Extensions
3
==PAGE:5==
attack could look on an SGX1 system, as an attack that works there, inherently
also would work on an SGX2 system thanks to backwards compatibility.
1.4.2
How does it work?
The way Intel SGX works, according to the Intel SGX Reference Guide[3] is:
There are two main data structures associated with an enclave: SECS3 and
TCS4. Each enclave always has exactly one SECS associated with it, but one
or more TCS’s. Multi-threading within an enclave is possible, the maximum
number of threads is limited to the number of TCS’s.
Enclave memory is divided into two parts: address space allocation (the
range of logical addresses that the enclave may use - internally called EL-
RANGE), and memory commitment (assignment of actual memory resources
(pages) within the allocated address space). The reasoning behind this two-
phase approach is to allow more ﬂexible memory allocation, to avoid excessive
use of memory resources.
Enclaves are entered from untrusted application code by using the EENTER
instruction (except when returning from a call to an untrusted application from
inside the enclave, in which case an ORET instruction is used instead) to transfer
control to the enclave code in protected Enclave Page Cache(EPC). The enclave
returns to the caller via the EEXIT instruction. The combination of EENTER
and EEXIT is called an ECALL5.
When entering the enclave, control is transferred by hardware, to the soft-
ware inside the enclave, which switches the stack pointer to one inside the
enclave. when returning from the enclave, the stack pointer is switched back,
before EEXIT is executed.
For an enclave to call untrusted code (code outside the enclave), an OCALL6
is used, which works very similarly to ECALLs, aside from being ”reversed”.
There are some crucial diﬀerences between the two, which will be covered in
section 2.
Only in SGX2: On SGX2-supported processors, an enclave writer may
add memory to an enclave, using the SGX2 instruction set, after the enclave is
built and running, as well as adding new threads to the enclave.
SECS contains metadata used to protect the enclave, and can’t be accessed
by software. This metadata includes MRENCLAVE - which stores the enclave
build measurement value, which is made when the enclave is ﬁrst created (with
ECREATE), and updated every time it’s structure is changed (EADD and EEX-
TEND). MRENCLAVE is locked when the enclave is initialized (EINIT).
TCS contains only one ﬁeld: FLAGS, which may be accessed by software.
A TCS can be created using the EADD instruction, or the SGX2 instruction
3SGX Enclave Control Structure
4Thread Control Structure
5Enclave Call
6Out Call
4
==PAGE:6==
EMODT.
Enclave instructions: The enclave instructions are organized as leaf func-
tions under two instruction mnemonics: ENCLS (ring 0) and ENCLU (ring 3).
Each, uses %eax to specify the leaf function index. In other words, the long form
of an SGX instruction is of the form ENCLx[LEAF MNEMONIC], where ”x”
is either ”S” or ”U”, signifying the privilege-level requirement of a given ”leaf
mnemonic” or instruction. As no instruction exists in both privilege levels, as of
now, the shorthand is used interchangeably (As an example ENCLU[EENTER]
is just referred to as EENTER).
There are many instructions in SGX1 and even more added in SGX2.( note
that SGX2 only adds additional functionality, nothing from SGX1 is altered or
removed, according to Intel’s documentation[3](sec. 1.3), thus ensuring back-
wards compatibility7). However, only a few of instructions are relevant to the
attack, and as such, only these are explained in detail here. An overview of
more instructions can be found in the Intel SGX Reference Guide[3].
The instructions that are relevant to this paper are listed below, and are
elaborated on in subsection 2.1.
All instructions mentioned below are in the ring 3 privilege level (ENCLU).
• ECALL (code outside the enclave calling a function inside the enclave)
• OCALL (a function inside the enclave calling code outside the enclave)
• EENTER (synchronous entry to enclave)
• EEXIT (synchronous exit from enclave)
• AEX (asynchronous exit from enclave)
• ERESUME (asynchronous re-entry to enclave)
• IRET (exception return from enclave)
• ORET (OCALL return to enclave)
1.4.3
How do you get SGX?
Being able to run enclaves
Intel SGX is supported on most Intel processors from the Skylake architecture
and onwards (there are a few outliers in specialized and/or very low-end pro-
cessors that do not support it, but in general any desktop, server, or laptop
processor from late 2015 and onwards are supported. However, not all mother-
boards support it!). To make use of it, it has to be activated in the BIOS of the
computer, by making sure that the setting for SGX is either ”enabled” or ”soft-
ware activated”. As soon as SGX is activated, it will automatically download
the latest drivers for the processor, and as such the only time it is necessary
7backwards compatibility as in that an SGX1 enclave will run on an SGX2 processor, but
SGX2-speciﬁc functionality can not be used on SGX1 processors
5
==PAGE:7==
to manually update them, if is the machine in question is air-gapped (not con-
nected to any network with internet access), or otherwise unable to connect to
the internet. updates can’t be rolled back, and SGX1-compatible processors
can’t be updated to support SGX2, as it requires additional instructions in the
CPU.
In other words, as soon as SGX is enabled in BIOS, the machine should be
able to run any enclave created using a supported version of SGX.
Being able to develop enclaves
To develop SGX enclaves, the SGX SDK is highly recommended by Intel, be-
cause creating safe interfaces to interact with the enclave is a very hard and
time-consuming process, where the slightest error could leave your enclaves
vulnerable to attacks and interception of secret information. Thus, the vast
majority of enclaves are made with the SGX SDK[2](sec. 5, under ”Defensive
Capabilities”), which, amongst other things, provide easy-to-use interfaces to
call functions inside the enclave (ECALLs8), as well as allowing the enclave to
call functions outside it (OCALLs9), the last of which is mostly used for I/O
interaction, as system calls are not allowed inside an enclave. Installing the SDK
is pretty straightforward on a Windows machine - just download it, and install
it as any other program following the prompts. There is support for plugins for
Visual Studio 2015 and 2017 (NB! Newer versions of Visual Studio are NOT
supported at the time of writing (for version 2.10 of the SGX SDK)).
For Linux, the process is more involved. Firstly, not all Linux OS’ are (oﬃ-
cially) supported. At the time of writing (for version 2.10 of the SGX SDK),
the supported OS versions are:
• Ubuntu* 16.04 LTS Desktop 64bits
• Ubuntu* 16.04 LTS Server 64bits
• Ubuntu* 18.04 LTS Desktop 64bits
• Ubuntu* 18.04 LTS Server 64bits
• Red Hat Enterprise Linux Server release 7.6 64bits
• Red Hat Enterprise Linux Server release 8.1 64bits
• CentOS 8.1 64bits
• Fedora 31 Server 64bits
• SUSE Linux Enterprise Server 12 64bits
Once the developer has made sure that their OS is on the list, they can
follow the instructions in the Readme.md on the oﬃcial github repo for the SGX
SDK for Linux[7]. It is important to note that halfway through the installation
8Enclave Calls
9Out Calls
6
==PAGE:8==
you have to go to another repo containing the Intel SGX SDK Driver for Linux,
if your processor does not support FLC10 and Intel(R) AES New Instructions
(more speciﬁcally, if it’s older than 8th generation of Intel Core Processors, or
is an Intel Atom processor without FLC and AES New Instructions). Further-
more, it is important that this driver is installed in a speciﬁc folder on the pc
( /opt/intel/), as the installer can’t ﬁnd the ﬁles otherwise. This is not writ-
ten anywhere in the documentation. Finally, once everything is installed and
(hopefully) working, there is a suite of test programs that the developer can
run manually, to check if all functionality works as intended. An important
thing to not is that SGX can not run on a virtual machine, unless the host
system supports SGX, according to the readme.md on the Intel SGX Qemu git
repo: ”Intel R⃝Software Guard Extensions (Intel R⃝SGX) is an Intel technology
designed to increase the security of application code and data. This repository
hosts preliminary Qemu patches to support SGX virtualization on KVM. Be-
cause SGX is built on hardware features that cannot be emulated in
software, virtualizing SGX requires support in KVM and in the host
kernel. [...]”[11](In section ”Introduction”, subsection ”about” - ﬁrst four lines
- emphasis mine).
1.5
What is Return-Oriented Programming (ROG)?
1.5.1
What is Return-Oriented Programming?
Return-oriented programming is any type of programming where the goal of
the program is to construct another program, made of bits and pieces (so-called
”gadgets”) of other (legitimate) programs. This approach is especially useful,
in situations where you wish to run a program in a place where you do not have
the privileges to execute code, or to circumvent security measures that checks
for existing code, but not code manufactured at runtime, as well as measures
that ensure that writable memory is never executable.[1]
The way the attacker is able to use gadgets to create a malicious program, is
by gaining control of the stack, more speciﬁcally the return address at the end
of a stack frame. As soon as you have control of the return address, you can
direct it to the part of the stack that contains the ﬁrst gadget used to create
the malicious code, and from there create a new program at runtime, without
ever actually calling any functions.
The most common approach for ROP is to use a buﬀer overﬂow to overwrite
the return address of the stack frame containing the buﬀer, e.g. if the buﬀer is
using the vulnerable strcpy-function in C, or using a stack overﬂow to achieve
the same result.
This approach, however, requires a program to be using a
vulnerable function in the ﬁrst place, which is not always the case, especially as
more attention is put on best practices when programming, as well as compilers
warning the programmer of use of unsafe or vulnerable functions. In part due
to this development, a host of other approaches to gaining control of the stack
have been found, most of which are relatively context-dependent. The essence
10Flexible Launch Control
7
==PAGE:9==
is still the same: utilize a vulnerability to allow the attacker to modify the
return address of a stack frame, and then building the attack from there, or
gain control over the instruction pointer directly, and change it to point to the
intended location.
2
Intel SGX
This section elaborates on instructions and relevant functionality in Intel SGX
2.1
Instructions in Intel SGX
2.1.1
EENTER
The EENTER instruction is used for synchronous entry into an enclave. To
be able to use the EENTER instruction, the external (untrusted) software,
must supply an address of a TCS that is part of the enclave to be entered.
This is important, because it means that the location of the TCS can’t be
randomized. According to the Reference Guide, what happens is that: ”When
a logical processor enters an enclave, the TCS is considered busy until the logical
processor exits the encalve.
Intel R⃝SGX allows an enclave builder to deﬁne
multiple TCSs, thereby providing support for multithreaded enclaves.”
More technically, EENTER deﬁnes the Asynchronous Exit Pointer (AEP)
parameter, which contains an external address to return to, along with the
outside (untrusted) stack pointer and base pointer, to return to the respective
CPU registers after a normal EEXIT. It is also the address an exception handler
will return to, using IRET. The location will typically contain the ERESUME
instruction, that transfers control back to the enclave, to the address retrieved
from the enclave threads’ saved state.
The following quote is the description of the functionality of EENTER from
the Intel SGX Reference Guide[3]:
”EENTER performs the following operations:
1. Check that TCS is not busy and ﬂush TLB entries for enclave linear ad-
dressses in the enclave’s ELRANGE.
2. Change the mode of operation to be in enclave mode.
3. Save the RSP (stack pointer), RBP (base pointer) for later restore on
AEX.
4. Save XCRO and replace it with the XFRM value for the enclave.
5. Chack if the enclave is debuggable and the software wishes to debug. If
not then set the hardware so the enclave appears as a single instruction.
6. If the enclave is debuggable and the software wishes to debug, then set
hardware to allow traps, breakpoints, and single steps inside the enclave.
8
==PAGE:10==
7. Set the TCS as busy
8. Transfer control from outside enclave to predetermined location inside the
enclave speciﬁed by the TCS.”
2.1.2
EEXIT
The following quote is the description of the functionality of EEXIT from the
Intel SGX Reference Guide[3]:
”The EEXIT instruction is the method of leaving the enclave under program
control, it performs the following operations:
1. Clear enclave mode and TLB entries for enclave addressses.
2. Mark TCS as not busy.
3. Transfers control from inside the enclave to a location on the outside spec-
iﬁed by the register RBX.”
It is the responsibility of enclave sotware to erase any secret from the registers
prior to envoking EEXIT.
2.1.3
AEX
Synchronous events such as exceptions, interrupts, VM exits, and more, may
occur while executing inside an enclave. These are referred to as EEE’s (Enclave
Exiting Events). Upon an EEE, the processor state is securely saved inside the
enclave (in the threads’ current SSA frame) and then replaced by a synthetic
state, to prevent leakage of secrets. This process is called an AEX. As part of
most EEE’s, the AEP is pushed onto the stack as the location of the eventing
address. This is the location where control will return to after executing the
IRET. The ERESUME can be executed from that point to reenter the enclave
and resume execution from the interrupted point.
NB! After AEX (until IRET or ERESUME) the logical processor is no longer
in enclave mode.
2.1.4
ERESUME
After system software has serviced the event that caused the logical processor to
exit an enclave, the logical processor can re-start execution using ERESUME.
ERESUME restores registers and returns control to where execution was inter-
rupted. If the cause of the exit was an exception or a fault, and was not resolved,
the event will be triggered again if the enclave is re-entered using ERESUME. In
order to handle an exception that occured inside the encalve, software can enter
the enclave at a diﬀerent location and invoke the exception handler within the
enclave by executing the EENTER instruction. The exception handler within
the enclave can attempt to resolve the faulting condition or simply return and
indicate to software that the enclave should be terminated (e.g. using EEXIT).
9
==PAGE:11==
ERESUME restores registers depending on the mode of the enclave (32/64
bit):
32 bit: The 32 bit legacy registers (EAX, EBX, ECX, EDX, ESP, EBP, ESI,
EDI, EIP and EFLAGS) are restored from the threads GPR area of the current
SSA frame. Neither the upper 32 bit of the legacy registers, nor the 64 bit
registers (R8-R15) are loaded.
64 bit: All 64 bit registers (RAX, RBX, RCX, RDX, RSP, RBP, RSI, RDI,
R8...R15) are restored from the GPR area of the current SSA frame.
2.1.5
ECALL
The ECALL mechanism is used to allow untrusted code to call function inside
an enclave. To perform an ECALL the application calls into the uRTS library,
which executes an EENTER, passing the ECALL index in a register. the tRTS
then checks whether an ECALL with that index is deﬁned, and is allowed in
the context (e.g.
during an OCALL, or nested within another ECALL). If
this check passes, the target function is executed inside the enclave.
Once
the function returns, it performs an EEXIT to give control back to the uRTS.
Untrusted memory is allowed to be accessed in this context, to allow passing
and returning of arbitrarily complex data structures. An enclave must expose
at least one ECALL, otherwise there is no way to invoke enclave code.
2.1.6
OCALL
The OCALL mechanism is the opposite of ECALL: It allows trusted code to call
untrusted functions deﬁned by the host application. The reason these are neces-
sary is mostly because system calls are not allowed inside an enclave. Similarly
to ECALLs, each OCALL is identiﬁed by an index. When the enclave code per-
forms an OCALL, it calls into the tRTS, which pushes an OCALL frame onto
the trusted thread stack, storing the current register state. Next it performs an
EEXIT from the current ECALL, passing the OCALL index back to the uRTS.
The uRTS then executes the target function, after which it exacutes a special
variation of an ECALL known as ORET, which will restore the context from
the OCALL frame through a function named asm oret, returning to the trusted
call site. Just as with ECALLs, data is passed via shared untrusted memory.
2.2
Functionality and speciﬁc functions
2.2.1
asm oret
The asm oret function is used to restore CPU context at the end of an OCALL,
with arguments in CPU registers that might’ve been changed during the OCALL.
Unlike normal ECALLs in which control over the CPU registers is kept entirely
within the enclave, OCALLs need to be able to change some CPU registers,
because some system calls return that way, rather than through data structures
that can be saved in unprotected memory. It is important to note that this
function only grants control of some CPU registers, elaborated below.
10
==PAGE:12==
The asm oret function is not speciﬁcally mentioned in the Intel Reference
Guide, but exists in the SDK, and is explored in the Biondo paper[2]
The asm oret function, has control over a selection of CPU registers, includ-
ing the register that holds the ﬁrst function argument (%rdi), and (indirectly)
the instruction pointer (%rip). The prototype for asm oret is
1 sgx_status_t asm_oret(uintptr_t sp, void *ms);
Where the ﬁrst argument sp points to the OCALL frame, which contains the
partial CPU context to be restored. More speciﬁcally the frame gives control
over the following registers (on a x86-64 CPU):
• %rdi
• %rsi
• %rbx
• %rbp
• %r12
• %r13
• %r14
• %r15
Furthermore the values of %rsp and %rip are changed after ORET, depending
on the version of the SGX SDK there is two possiblities:
If the SDK is a version before 2.0, then the stack pointer is set to point
to the ocall ret ﬁled before issuing a ret instruction. This means that the new
instruction pointer will be the location of ocall ret and the new stack pointer
will point to the memory location right after the OCALL frame.
If the SDK version is 2.0 or later, the base pointer is moved into %rsp, %rbp
is popped from the stack, and lastly a ret is issued. Thus, %rbp in the OCALL
frame points to a memory area containing 2 64-bit words: the new value for
%rbp and the return address (the new instruction pointer).
2.2.2
Exception handling
Exception handling in SGX SDK enclaves consists of the following chain of
events:
1. Exception occurs in the trusted code running inside the enclave.
2. Asynchronous exit from the enclave (interrupt) occurs, contacting the ker-
nel interrupt handler of the OS. The faulting state is saved in the SSA11
3. The kernel interrupt handler informs the uRTS of the exception.
11State Save Area
11
==PAGE:13==
4. uRTS re-enters the enclave (speciﬁcally tRTS) using a synchronous entry
(EENTER).
5. tRTS copies the faulting state from the SSA to an exception information
structure on the trusted stack, and changes the SSA so that ERESUME
will continue at a second-phase handler in the tRTS, rather than executing
the failed instruction again.
6. Once the ECALL (from step 4) returns with an EEXIT,
7. the uRTS issues ERESUME for the faulting thread, thus resuming at the
second-phase handler from step 5.
8. The tRTS now traverses the registered exception handlers, to check if any
of them can ﬁx the faulting state. If one can,
9. The tRTS uses the continue execution function, which uses the IRET
instruction to load the information from the (ﬁxed) snapshot on the stack
back into CPU registers, and then the continue execution function re-
sumes enclave execution with the ﬁxed state. Otherwise the enclave is
switched to a crashed state.
2.2.3
IRET
This is the instruction responsible for reading the (ﬁxed) state saved in the SSA
(saved in step 2 of exception handling, ﬁxed in step 8, if possible), and loading it
back into the CPU registers, as part of the process of resuming execution with
the continue execution function. This means that it is used to change the
entire CPU context directly, because an exception can be caused by a wrong
value in any register, even the ﬂags set in %rflags. Consequently, this makes
continue execution very interesting to attackers, because it grants free reigns
to control execution within the enclave.
2.2.4
continue execution
The continue execution function is used to restore the enclave to a ﬁxed state
from an exception, before resuming execution.
As was the case with asm oret primitive, continue execution primitive is
not covered directly in the Intel Reference Guide, but exists in the codebase for
the SDK, and is explored in the Biondo paper[2]
The continue execution function is signiﬁcantly more powerful to control
than the asm oret function, due to the fact that continue execution grants
control over signiﬁcantly more CPU registers via the IRET instruction described
in subsubsection 2.2.3, including direct control over the %rip and %rsp registers,
which grants complete control over execution. The complete list of registers
controlled by the continue execution function is:
• %rax
12
==PAGE:14==
• %rcx
• %rdx
• %rbx
• %rsp
• %rbp
• %rsi
• %rdi
• %r8
• %r9
• %r10
• %r11
• %r12
• %r13
• %r14
• %r15
• %rflags
• %rip
As is the case for asm oret, this function can only be called inside the en-
clave, and as such, requires some degree of access and control to be (ab)used.
More speciﬁcally, the attacker needs control of the stack pointer inside the en-
clave, and control over the ﬁrst argument register in the CPU (%rdi) (because
this argument points to the location of the exception information structure).
3
Creating and attacking an enclave
This section consists of four parts: ﬁrst a summary of the ﬁndings and rele-
vant observations from ”The Guard’s Dilemma: Eﬃcient Code-Reuse Attacks
Against Intel SGX”(subsection 3.1), then an example enclave that will be at-
tacked, along with an application that interacts with it(subsection 3.2).
The
last two parts will focus on preparing(subsection 3.3) and executing the attack
against the example enclave(subsection 3.4)
13
==PAGE:15==
3.1
The Guard’s Dilemma: Eﬃcient Code-Reuse Attacks
Against Intel SGX
The concepts explained so far, are all relevant to the paper that is the main
basis of this thesis (by Biondo et. al[2]), which is summarized in the following
section.
3.1.1
Summary:
The approach described in the Biondo paper is building on many previous ap-
proaches and attacks, as well as introducing some novel techniques (at least
novel in the context of Intel SGX, though based on existing ideas used in other
contexts), that makes the attack vector far more eﬀective, and decreases the
number of steps required to make an eﬀective attack signiﬁcantly.
There are two especially relevant earlier works that the paper is based on,
namely the Dark-ROP attack, presented by Lee et al.[12], and SGX-Shield pre-
sented by Jaebaek Seo et. al[15],
The Dark-ROP paper focused on mapping information within an enclave,
based on the assumption that the distribution of information was consistent in
memory across crashes of the enclave, as the attack caused frequent crashes to
allow mapping of memory, as well as the information in said memory. The attack
required kernel access to function, meaning that the attacker would already
have full control over the machine in question (albeit not access to information
encrypted within the SGX environment).
The SGX-Shield paper focused on implementing Address Space Layout Ran-
domization software for the contents of enclaves. SGX-Shield eﬀectively coun-
teracts the Dark-ROP attack, by randomizing the location of data within the
enclave at every startup (and restart after a crash), rendering the attack useless
against implementations using said software. However, Biondo et al. found that
not all of the enclave was actually randomized, speciﬁcally the part of the SGX
SDK that handles transitions between (unprotected) host code and (protected)
enclave code, tRTS12, was not randomized. This library contains a number of
very useful gadgets, and can be abused by an attacker without kernel privi-
leges. Furthermore, Biondo et. al. found some issues with SGX-Shield, most
interestingly that the implementation doesn’t follow the description in the pa-
per entirely, in that the loader isn’t removed after the enclave is initiated (and
as it loaded the randomization, the memory it resides in isn’t randomized it-
self). Furthermore, it can’t be removed as it was at the time of writing, because
tRTS calls are routed through the loader. They also found that the implemen-
tation described doesn’t make it possible to implement backwards-edge CFI for
i.e. return calls. Finally, it’s implementation makes it impossible to enforce
Writable⊕Executable rules, as it would mean that executable code couldn’t get
its memory location randomized.
In other words, this is not so much an attack on SGX in general, as it is an
attack speciﬁcally on the SGX SDK, and its implementation. As such, it will
12trusted RunTime System
14
==PAGE:16==
only work in its current form, on enclaves created with the SGX SDK for Linux
or Windows. However the idea behind it can likely be implemented on custom
enclaves that do not use the SDK, though it will require a signiﬁcant investment
of time and resources to identify vulnerable functions and their location.
There is a number of assumptions that must be made for the attack to be
possible, regarding the capabilities of the attacker, and enclave being attacked,
according to the paper. (not quoted verbatim, as some information in the pa-
pers listing of assumptions was not relevant to the implementation of the attack.)
Oﬀensive assumptions:
The attacker must have the following capabilities:
• Memory corruption vulnerability. The attacker has knowledge of a
vulnerability in the enclave that allows her to either corrupt stack memory
(e.g., a stack overﬂow) or corrupt a function pointer on the stack, heap, or
other memory areas (e.g., heap overﬂow, use-after-free or type confusion).
• Ability to create fake structures. The attacker can place arbitrary
data at some memory location accessible by the enclave.
A malicious
host process can easily do this given the unrestricted access over its own
address space. An attacker could also possibly achieve this via normal
functionality, for example by steering the application or the enclave into
allocating attacker-controlled data at predictable addresses.
• Knowledge of coarse-grained memory layout. The attacker knows
the victim enclave’s external memory layout, i.e., its virtual address range.
This is known to the process hosting the enclave, as the enclave virtual
memory resides in its address space. Alternatively, information leakage
vulnerabilities inside the enclave could provide this knowledge to an at-
tacker who is not in control of the process.
• Knowledge of the enclave’s binary. The attacker has access to the
victim enclave’s binary allowing her to run static analysis on the binary.
Defensive assumptions:
The following is assumed about the defensive capabilities of the victim enclave:
•
SDK usage. The victim enclave is developed by means of the oﬃcial
SGX SDK from Intel.
• Randomized SGX memory. We also assume that enclave code is addi-
tionally hardened by sophisticated mitigation technologies such as address
space layout randomization (ASLR). That is, we assume that the victim
enclave is protected by means of SGX-Shield.
15
==PAGE:17==
Primitives
The paper deﬁnes two primitives (ORET and CONT), that make use of the asm oret
function (explained in subsubsection 2.2.1 and seen in Listing 9), and the
continue execution function (explained in subsubsection 2.2.4 and seen in
Listing 7), respectively, to gain control over CPU registers, to allow the attacker
to either inject new code, or use existing code in the enclave in an unintended
way.
3.1.2
The ORET primitive
The ORET primitive requires control over the instruction pointer(%rip), and the
stack pointer(%rsp) to be used (e.g. using a stack/buﬀer overﬂow to change the
return address), and grants access to a number of general purpose registers, most
notably %rdi, and indirectly (via the return address) the instruction pointer and
stack pointer.
3.1.3
The CONT primitive
The CONT primitive requires control over the instruction pointer(%rip) and the
ﬁrst argument register (%rdi), to be utilized. This can either be done through
corrupting a function pointer, or via the ORET primitive, which conveniently
gives control over the required registers. The CONT primitive grants complete
control over all the CPU registers, and thus complete control over execution in
the enclave.
3.1.4
the ORET+CONT loop
This is the most straight-forward implementation of the attack, where the at-
tacker either starts out with an ORET primitive, or a CONT primitive, and
then creates a loop of each ORET starting a CONT, and each CONT starting
a gadget, and making that gadget returns to a new ORET. This means that as
soon as the attacker has enough privileges to start either a CONT or an ORET,
they eﬀectively have complete control over execution in the enclave, and can
execute arbitrary code, as long as it ﬁts within the enclave.
3.2
Example enclave
In this section the example enclave used as a basis for the attack is described.
The enclave created consists of four code snippets, all of which can be found in
subsection A.1. The four snippets are:
• enclave.cpp (the functionality within the enclave)
• enclave.edl (contains the classiﬁcation of functions that can interact with
code outside the enclave)
• enclave t.h (the header ﬁle for the (trusted) functionality in the enclave)
16
==PAGE:18==
• app.cpp (an application that interacts with the enclave)
An actual enclave will consist of multiple ﬁles that are not represented here,
including some that are referenced in the snippets mentioned above.
Most
important amongst those is enclave.signed.dll, that is referenced in Listing 6 in
subsection A.1, line 4. enclave.signed.dll is the ﬁnished, signed enclave, ready
to be used.
3.2.1
enclave.cpp
The enclave.cpp snippet contains the functionality within the enclave, and can
be in the form of C or C++ code. The ﬁrst thing that isn’t self-explanatory is
the inclusion of ”#include sgx trts.h” in line 3, which includes the tRTS13,
which is the SGX SDK library that allows interaction between the enclave and
the unprotected part of the memory.
tRTS resides within the enclave, and
handles ECALLs and OCALLs that are used to interact with outside code, as
well as some parts of the setup for the enclave, that are not really interesting
in this context.
There are eight functions in this enclave, each of which is
elaborated on in the following section. Those eight are:
• enclaveChangeBuffer
• enclaveStringSave
• enclaveStringLoad
• enclaveSaveInt
• enclaveLoadInt
• enclaveSecretFunction
• ocallFunction
• loadSecret
enclaveChangeBuﬀer
This function overwrites the buﬀer in the enclave with a pre-set string (”Hello
Enclave!”). Its main purpose is to ”clear” the buﬀer, and to show that contents
in a buﬀer can be changed with a command from outside the enclave, only using
logic inside the enclave.
enclaveStringSave
This function saves a string in a variable to the buﬀer. It is used to change
13trusted RunTime System
17
==PAGE:19==
the contents of the buﬀer, e.g. for using the buﬀer as an intermediate between
reading and writing values. This function has been changed by me to be vul-
nerable to buﬀer overﬂow, using the vulnerable strcpy function, and removing
the length check for input, that was in the original code.
enclaveStringLoad
This function reads a string from the buﬀer, and saves it in a pre-determined
variable inside the enclave, after checking that the length of the information
read is shorter than, or equal to, the length of the buﬀer.
enclaveSaveInt
This function works similarly to enclaveStringSave, except that it writes an
integer to the buﬀer, instead of a string. It also has the same safeguards regard-
ing not surpassing the size of the buﬀer.
enclaveLoadInt
This function works just like enclaveStringLoad, except that it deals with in-
tegers instead of strings.
enclaveSecretFunction
This function writes the value in the savedInt variable to the variable secret,
after changing the value (in this case just by adding two, in a real world example
it could be a hash function).
ocallFunction
This function is a crude example of an OCALL. In this example it makes a
system call, by using the printf function to output the value of a variable to
the Command Line Interface.
loadSecret
This function is the only one that can neither be called from outside the enclave,
nor can make calls outside the enclave. All it does is copying the contents of the
variable secret into the savedInt variable. This function should not ever run,
as it isn’t called inside the enclave, and can’t be called from outside it. It could
be a leftover from testing, or a part of a feature that is not yet implemented.
3.2.2
enclave.edl
What makes this snippet especially interesting (seen in Listing 4), is that it
is here that (un)trusted interfaces are deﬁned for the enclave, including which
type they are (ECALL/trusted or OCALL/untrusted). In this example, there
are six trusted (ECALL) functions:
• enclaveChangeBuffer
• enclaveStringSave
18
==PAGE:20==
• enclaveStringLoad
• enclaveSaveInt
• enclaveLoadInt
• enclaveSecretFunction
and one untrusted (OCALL) function:
• ocallFunction
3.2.3
enclave t.h
This snippet is the header ﬁle for the trusted functionality in the enclave (seen
in Listing 5). The only thing that is interesting to note here is that all of the
functions that interact with anything outside the enclave are forced to be inter-
preted as being C code by the compiler, rather than C++ like the rest of the
code (in this case all functions except loadSecret interact with the outside, but
purely internal functionality can be C++). This is because the Intel Software
Guard Extensions Developer Reference for Linux* OS[4](p. 30, Table 8 (Sum-
mary of Intel R⃝SGX Rules and Limitations)) states that all Enclave interface
functions must be written in C.
3.2.4
app.cpp
This snippet is an example of an application that interacts with an enclave
through ECALLs. The ﬁrst interesting things here is the deﬁnition of the enclave
ﬁle to be used in line 4. next in lines 7-8 the untrusted parts of the SGX SDK
are included (sgxurts being the untrusted RunTime System, and enclave u is
a default ﬁle created by Edgr8r, corresponding to the enclave t-ﬁles for the
trusted side (inside the enclave)). The next point of interest is the creation of
diﬀerent values relevant to the instantiation of the enclave on lines 12-15 (eid
(the enclave ID), ret (variable holding the current status of the enclave) and
token (the launch token for the enclave)). Lines 16-20 are various variables
used throughout the application, none of which are very interesting. On line
22 the enclave is created, using the information written earlier in the snippet.
line 24-27 is just error handling, returning a message if the enclave isn’t created
successfully.
From line 31 to line 74 is various examples of interaction with the enclave
through ECALLs, all of which are legal. The most interesting thing here is line
71, where a new value is saved to the buﬀer (the number ”40”), after which the
enclaveSecretFunction is called, which means that there is a new value in the
secret variable inside the enclave. The enclave is destroyed in line 77. Thus,
the ﬁnal value in secret is never meant to be known outside the enclave, but
rather just to disappear with the enclave when it closes. This value is the target
of the attack.
19
==PAGE:21==
3.3
Attack - gaining foothold and preparing payload
This section describes how the attack is initiated, and how foothold in the enclave
is gained by the attacker.
The ﬁrst step in the attack, is getting access to the relevant machine, and
particularly ring 3 privileges (basic read/write/execute privileges, no kernel priv-
ileges of any kind). The way this is achieved is not particularly relevant in the
context of the paper, but there are plentiful amounts of attack vectors that can
be used to gain a foothold, and escalate privileges, by exploiting vulnerabilities
in either the operating system itself, or in applications running on it. For sim-
plicity, it is assumed that the attacker has already attained the relevant access
and privileges to initiate the attack.
3.3.1
Payload preparation
The ﬁrst step in the attack is to prepare the payload that the attack wishes to
execute. This consists of two sub-steps:
1. Finding Gadgets
2. Designing a Chain Gadget
As mentioned in subsubsection 1.5.1 a ”Gadget” is a piece of non-malicious
code that the attacker can abuse to do something useful (for them). In this
context, we’re looking for are anything that can be used to either get control over
the instruction pointer and the stack, or to get control over the ﬁrst argument
register in the CPU, and the instruction pointer, as well as something that can
be used to output a secret outside the enclave. In the example seen in Listing 3,
based on an example enclave by Lars L¨uhr[13], there are a few pieces of code
that could be interesting in this regard, notably ones that allows unsecured code
to provide input to the enclave. In this example there are two:
• enclaveStringSave
• enclaveSaveInt
both of which allow outside code to provide input to functions in the enclave.
The next important step here, is to ﬁgure out if one of these functions can be
used to get control over the stack and instruction pointer in the enclave. Here
we ﬁnd that the function enclaveStringSave is vulnerable to buﬀer overﬂow,
which allows us to overwrite the return address at the end of the function, thus
granting us control over the instruction pointer and stack pointer!
There are three other interesting function in the enclave code: ocallFunction,
loadSecret and enclaveLoadInt.
The interesting part about ocallFunction is that it allows us to output some-
thing to outside the enclave, thus it can be used as our way to get secret infor-
mation out of the enclave.
Another way of getting the secret out of the enclave is to use the internal (can’t
be called from outside the enclave with an ECALL) function loadSecret()
20
==PAGE:22==
to load the secret into the savedInt variable, and then output it using the
enclaveLoadInt-function, that returns the value to something outside the en-
clave. Both of these attack angles will be explored.
Lastly, we need to ﬁgure out the memory location of the asm oret and
continue execution functions in the enclave. both are in the tRTS, which is
added by the SDK to allow for easier interaction with code and data outside the
enclave, and because SGX Shield is made with the SGX SDK, the tRTS memory
is not scrambled, as it is created by the SDK, thus its location will not change
between enclave restarts.
We are now ready for the next step: To design a ”Chain Gadget”, that chains
multiple CONT and ORET primitives together, to make a loop that allows us
to output secrets from the enclave. This goal is just what is relevant in this
example. The attack can also allow an attacker to gain a permanent foothold
in the enclave (as long as it is running), which can be very interesting if the
enclave is used continuously, instead of being shut down immediately after use.
3.4
Attack - structures and execution
In this section, the focus will be on the fake structures necessary to abuse the
exception handling, to load malicious code/commands into the enclave, or to
use functions within the enclave in an unintended way.
This step in the attack has three sub-steps:
1. Split payload into n pieces, that ﬁt within exception information structures
2. create n fake exception information structures
3. create a fake stack
3.4.1
Split payload
This step is fairly easy, and can largely be automated. The most important
part is that the attacker knows how many functions or gadgets are needed,
and just makes a number of chunks equal to the number of functions and/or
gadgets needed. In the example using the OCALL ocallFunction it is not
necessary to split the payload, as only a single function call is needed. Instead
all that is needed is for the correct values to be loaded into the register to
make it write the secret to the command line interface. In second example, it is
necessary to split it into 2 chunks (one for loading the secret into a variable with
loadSecret, and one for returning said variable to the outside of the enclave
with enclaveLoadInt), which means that we need to run the chain-gadget loop
2 times to load the entire payload into the enclave. This is done by calling the
ﬁrst function loadSecret, and changing its return address to point to asm oret,
with information pointing to the top of the fake stack, which in turn will then
run the second iteration of the chain gadget loop, calling enclaveLoadInt.
21
==PAGE:23==
3.4.2
Fake exception information structures
Here, each chunk of the payload, is loaded into a fake structure. This structure is
what the exception handler of the enclave was supposed to return to the enclave,
with changes to the CPU context that are meant to ﬁx the exception encountered
in the enclave. This information is replaced with values necessary to run our
payload, and pointing to the payload that is located in accessible unsecured
memory. It is important to consider making the exception information structure
return the original value to the stack pointer, to allow the enclave to resume
normal behavior to avoid causing suspicion.
First example (ocallFunction)
The fake exception information structure here should contain all the register
variables necessary to call the function, and return the information we want. In
this case we need to set the instruction pointer to point at the ocallFunction
function, and the ﬁrst argument register to point to the location of the vari-
able secret. In Listing 8 the structure for sgx cpu context t can be seen,
which is the only subset of sgx exception info t that is actually used by the
continue execution function, and in that, all we need to do is change the value
of %rip and %rdi to point to ocallFunction and secret, respectively, and set
%rsp to point to the original stack, and then we’re all set, once the fake stack
is in place, and the attack is launched.
Second example (loadSecret + enclaveLoadInt)
Here, things get a little more complicated, because we have to make use of
multiple functions, and thus we need to loop the ORET+CONT primitives
in order to be able to run the second function. This means that we have to
make sure that the ﬁrst function returns to the second asm oret on the fake
stack, instead of returning to the real stack. This means that the ﬁrst exception
information structure should look like this:
• set %rip to point to the loadSecret function
• set %rsp to point to the second reference to asm oret on the fake stack
(as loadSecret doesn’t take any arguments, we could actually leave out the sec-
ond asm oret entirely, and just load the information necessary to do the second
CONT primitive right away, but to be able to show how a more generalizable
ORET+CONT loop would look, we’re keeping the ORET in, in this example.)
The second exception information should contain the following information:
• set %rip to point to the enclaveLoadInt function
• set %rsp to point to the original stack, to resume normal execution of the
enclave
3.4.3
Fake stack
The ﬁnal piece of the puzzle is creating a fake stack, that can be pivoted to, to
make the enclave think that everything is normal, while executing from a fake
22
==PAGE:24==
stack, containing asm oret references that initiate the ORET+CONT loop. Note
that stacks are written here as they’d appear in the computer, with the last
instruction to be executed on the top, thus they are read ”backwards” from the
bottom up.
First example (ocallFunction)
In the ﬁrst example the fake stack only needs to have two entries, as we only
need to call a single function to achieve our goal. The ﬁrst entry is a reference
to the location of the asm oret function in the tRTS, and the second entry is
an ocall context t structure (seen in Listing 10), containing the necessary
references to initiate the CONT primitive from the fake exception information
in subsubsection 3.4.2. In these examples all text within square brackets [ ] is
descriptions of functionality, where actual code examples would not be useful,
because they would either take up far too much space, or be implementation
dependent e.g.
by referencing a speciﬁc memory address that would change
between attacks. An example of the fake stack can be seen in Listing 1.
1 /* end of _ocall_context_t */
2 [%rip set to point to the continue_execution function]
3 [%rdi (xdi) set to point to the fake exception information structure]
4 /* beginning of _ocall_context_t */
5 [reference to the location of asm_oret]
Listing 1: fake stack for ocallFunction
Second example (loadSecret + enclaveLoadInt
In this example, the fake stack needs to have four entries (two references and
two contexts), because we need to run the ORET+CONT loop more than once,
to be able to execute two separate functions. An example of the fake stack can
be seen in Listing 2
1 /* end of second _ocall_context_t */
2 [%rip set to point to the continue_execution function]
3 [%rdi (xdi) is set to point to the second fake exception information structure]
4 /* beginning of second _ocall_context_t */
5 [reference to the location of asm_oret]
6 /* end of first _ocall_context_t */
7 [%rip set to point to the continue_execution function]
8 [%rdi (xdi) is set to point to the first fake exception information structure]
9 /* beginning of first _ocall_context_t */
10 [reference to the location of asm_oret]
Listing 2: fake stack for loadSecret+enclaveLoadInt
All that the attacker needs to do now, is to read the secret (42) from the
command line interface, or intercept the secret as it is being returned from the
enclave, depending on which of the two approaches was used.
This concludes the attack.
23
==PAGE:25==
4
Analysis
This section contains an analysis of the ﬁndings from the attack
4.1
Analysis of ﬁndings
There is a number of observations that can be made from the example of the
attack. Firstly, it can be seen that in order to make use of a fake stack, it is
necessary to be able to point the stack pointer to an area outside the enclave
memory. Secondly, the entire attack hinges on the code in the enclave having
some sort of vulnerability, either in the context of unintended memory access
outside the allocated area, or hijacking of intended functionality or function
pointers. It is also important to note that the attack does not focus on the issue
of code injection, but only code re-use, although the attack vector also allows
the attacker to inject arbitrary code into the enclave, and then execute it (this
is shown in the example code in the paper by Biondo et. al.[2], where they show
an example of injecting shellcode that extracts the cryptographic key of the
enclave). Finally, it is necessary for the attacker to either know the source code
of the enclave, or have its binary for static analysis, in order to (reasonably)
quickly ﬁnd vulnerable code inside it. While it is possible to ﬁnd this by trial
and error, the time frame for such an approach would make it unlikely, unless
the attacker knows that there is something of great value to them inside the
enclave, or that control of the enclave could be very valuable to them. It is
very likely that the attacker will have access to at least the binary, and likely
also the source code, as the binary would most likely be on the machine it is
executed on, and the source code would be on some developer machine, likely
on the same network, and as the enclave name per default is the same as the ﬁle
name of the source code, it would be trivial to ﬁnd it, if the attacker has access
to the network. Another interesting observation is that the attack requires that
the enclave uses the SGX SDK, although it is very likely that an enclave made
without the SDK would have other vulnerabilities, as all interfaces would have
to be designed in-house before even beginning to actually write the enclave logic,
leaving ample room for errors to sneak into the implementation of interfaces, as
well as in enclave logic.
4.2
Suggestions for improvenments/mitigations
4.2.1
Check OCALL before allowing asm oret
As SGX is currently set up, it is possible to instigate an ORET, regardless of
whether an OCALL has been made beforehand. The reason for this is likely to
be that ORET shares many of its components with normal EENTER/EEXIT
activity, and the only diﬀerence from the enclaves point of view, is that it
receives an instruction to restore a speciﬁc context, instead of using the one
saved when execution the EEXIT. Because control goes through tRTS both
24
==PAGE:26==
when sending the OCALL out, and when receiving the ORET, it should be
possible to check whether an OCALL was made before the resulting ORET.
The downside of this, is that it requires all OCALLs to only receive one ORET
in return (so a call to retrieve multiple pieces of data from the disk would have
to wait for all data to be collected in one ORET, before returning back to the
enclave, rather than being able to feed the data to the enclave in parts, as it is
found, through multiple ORETs. Furthermore, it doesn’t stop attackers from
intercepting legitimate OCALLs, and returning fake ORETs to tRTS faster than
the real ORET, causing the legitimate ORET to be discarded by tRTS.
4.2.2
Check exceptions before allowing continue execution
continue execution is more viable to check before allowing it to run, as it
has no reason to ever be executed, without an exception ﬁrst having taken
place. Thus, requiring exceptions to set a ﬂag in step 8 (see subsubsection 2.2.2
for the steps involved in exception handling), if the exception is handed to an
exception handler, and subsequently checking if said ﬂag is set before allowing
continue execution to be run, would signiﬁcantly lessen the risk this function
poses. However, it would still be possible to abuse it, if the attacker manages
to provoke an exception, just before calling the function, though this raises
the diﬃculty of the attack signiﬁcantly, and requires a lot more work from the
attacker, establishing how to create an exception without causing the enclave to
crash entirely, while managing to exploit a bug in the enclave code during the
duration of said exception, or ﬁnd another way to set the ﬂag without crashing
the enclave. However, just like the suggestion about checking OCALLs before
allowing asm oret to execute, this is symptom treatment, rather than dealing
with the root of the problem: that not all of the enclave is equally protected, and
as such, any code in the tRTS is a vulnerability, because it is not randomized
by SGX-Shield.
4.2.3
Randomize tRTS with SGX-Shield
The seemingly obvious solution is to expand the scope of SGX-Shield, to also
scramble the memory containing tRTS, however this comes with its own prob-
lems. Firstly, SGX-Shield is made with the SGX SDK, thus it has no control
over what the SDK does. This means that SGX-Shield would have to be re-
made without using the SDK, which would increase the workload of writing it,
and ensuring its correctness signiﬁcantly. Secondly, tRTS has to be addressable
by outside functions, to allow the enclave to function in the ﬁrst place (e.g. to
direct ECALLs to the correct place, without whom the enclave would not be
possible to interact with, rendering it virtually useless). This causes an impasse,
where functionality and security are at odds, as it has to be possible for tRTS
to ﬁnd functions in the enclave, and it has to be possible for outside functions
to ﬁnd the address in tRTS that forwards their requests to the correct function.
This means that the entirety of tRTS can never be entirely randomized, at least
without a signiﬁcant redesign of how ECALLs are made in the ﬁrst place. Fi-
25
==PAGE:27==
nally, the maintenance requirements of SGX-Shield would increase dramatically,
because any change in tRTS (and most changes in the SDK in general), would
require a corresponding change in SGX-Shield to preserve functionality.14 In
summary, SGX-Shield has to either become a part of the SGX SDK for this
approach to work, or it would require a signiﬁcant amount of continuous work
from its developers to be safe, while maintaining functionality.
4.2.4
Canaries in functions
Another way entirely to deal with this problem, is to make it harder to execute
code created by the attacker. By adding a ”canary” in the legitimate functions
inside the enclave, and checking for its existence and value before executing
anything, it could be made a lot harder to inject code into the enclave and
execute it. However, this approach doesn’t stop an attacker from abusing al-
ready existing code in ways it wasn’t designed to be used, and it also doesn’t
stop the attacker from being able to inject code, it just makes it signiﬁcantly
harder. If the canary is randomized when the enclave is created, however, and
assuming a wrong/missing canary will crash the enclave, then it is eﬀectively
impossible (or at least extremely improbable, given suﬃcient entropy for the
values of the canary) for an attacker to inject code, without knowing the canary
in advance. This approach does still require the contents of the enclave to be
completely secret, as the attacker would easily be able to copy the canary, if
it can be found, or change the ”correct” canary to one of the attacker choice,
thus making sure that only the attackers code will run inside the enclave. This
could allow an attacker to take over an enclave and its functionality entirely.
Thus this solution can’t stand on its own, but relies on complete secrecy of the
code inside the enclave in general, and especially of the canary. 15
4.2.5
Implement an Information Flow Analysis at compile time
Making a information ﬂow analysis a part of the compilation of an enclave, could
allow a very precise control over which ﬂows of data that are acceptable, and
which are not, thus minimizing the risk of information ﬂowing out of the enclave,
without the developer knowing of the risk in advance. While very eﬀective, in-
formation ﬂow analysis as it exists now is extremely computationally heavy, and
requires the developer to classify all variables in the enclave according to the
conﬁdentiality level, as well as a signiﬁcant amount of work from the develop-
ers of the SGX compiler, to implement an analysis that covers all functionality
in the supported languages (C and a subset of C++), as well as maintaining
it whenever additional functionality is added. Variable classiﬁcation can not
feasibly be automated, as only the developer knows how they intend to make
use of a variable, and where information is supposed to go. Thus, on top of
14this suggestion is based on the suggestions from the Biondo paper[2], which also elaborates
on that the backwards edge CFI issue has to be resolved for this to work
15this suggestion is based on the suggestions in the Biondo paper[2] additional ways of
hardening the approach are also discussed there
26
==PAGE:28==
a potentially very long compile time, this also places the burden of classifying
the conﬁdentiality level of variables correctly, on the developer. Furthermore,
any variable involved in sending information outside the enclave, or receiving
information from outside, are likely to return a warning to the developer of a po-
tentially unintended information ﬂow, which can make it hard for developers to
diﬀerentiate actual issues from intended ﬂows, as many of these ﬂows inherently
will be intentional (e.g. to return a value after a function is ﬁnished inside the
enclave). An additional issue, that would further increase the overhead for in-
formation ﬂow analysis, is the fact that enclaves support multi-threading, which
opens up additional ways for information to ﬂow in unintended ways (bypassing
and correlated ﬂows, in addition to the already existing explicit and implicit
ﬂows).
The four types of information ﬂows are explained brieﬂy in the following list:
• Explicit Flow: An explicit ﬂow is when information is sent directly from
one variable to another, usually through assignment (example: ”a := b”,
there is a ﬂow from ”b” to ”a”.)
• Implicit Flow: An implicit ﬂow, is when you can ﬁnd some information
about the value of a variable, by observing another variable. (example:
”if x<10 then y := 0 else y := 1” - you can’t know the exact value
of ”x” by observing ”y”, but you know whether it’s more or less than 10)
• Bypassing Flow: A bypassing ﬂow happens when two conditions can
be true at the same time (and one of the branches has a condition, while
the other always is true), and the scheduler gets to decide which branch
it takes, and observation of a variable can show which branch was taken,
and thus the potential values of other variables. This can only happen in
non-deterministic systems, or in multithreaded applications. Usually only
is relevant if it is possible to run the program multiple times and observe
the diﬀerent non-deterministic outcomes. (example: you have ”if x = 0
then y := 1” and ”if true then y := 0” running at the same time,
observing multiple runs of the program can show you whether x = 0).
• Correlated Flow: A correlated ﬂow happens when two conditions can
be true at the same time, and the scheduler get to decide which branch
to take, and the information about a variable gives an implicit ﬂow from
another, in one of the branches. (example: you have ”if true x := 0,
y := 0” and ”if true x := 1, y := 1” then you can know the value
of ”x”, by knowing the value of ”y” after the non-deterministic jump.)
In essence, any information ﬂowing from a variable with higher security level into
one with a lower one, will return an error, specifying the type of ﬂow, and where
it happens. In order to choose to ignore an intended ﬂow, the programmer must
then mark that speciﬁc data transfer as ”sanitized”, thus informing the compiler
that the ﬂow is known and intentional, and should be ignored. All information
of information ﬂow analysis, and its components are from the course Language
Based Security (DTU course code 02244) and the accompanying literature from
27
==PAGE:29==
the book ”Program Analysis: An Appetizer”(chapter 7) by Flemming Nielson
& Hanne Riis Nielson(This book has not yet been published, and a citation
referencing ISBN number and so forth is therefore not available, but Flemming
Nielson has accepted per e-mail that i refer to it in this thesis.).
4.2.6
Stricter rules for control transfer
Checking whether the instruction pointer for the enclave is set to point out-
side the enclave, could make this type of attack signiﬁcantly more diﬃcult to
achieve, as this would require the fake stack to be placed within the enclave,
rather than just in memory that can be access by the enclave. By diﬀerentiating
between the stack and instruction pointer used for functions inside the enclave,
and those outside, a lot of the implementation of an attack like the one described
in this thesis could be made a lot harder to pull oﬀfor an attacker. However,
this would also incur a signiﬁcant overhead, as every single change to the stack
pointer and instruction pointer would have to be checked, signiﬁcantly increas-
ing the runtime for execution inside an enclave. It would also make it more
diﬃcult to read memory outside the enclave, as control would have to handed
to execution outside the enclave every time unsecure memory would have to be
accessed, which would incur even more overhead, and severely limit the amount
of data that could be imported at a time. Another, less performance-limiting
approach could be to only enforce these rules for functions such as asm oret
and continue execution, that reside in the tRTS, and can change the CPU
context directly. However this would require a very thorough review of the tRTS
code, and would most likely only focus on known ”problematic” functions, and
only retroactively include future vulnerabilities found in the tRTS or other SDK
libraries.
4.2.7
Better enforcement of best programming practices
As the attack wouldn’t be possible, if the enclave programming didn’t have
bugs in the ﬁrst place, it seems logical to ﬁx this underlying problem, rather
than focus on the functions that can be abused, if the ”correct” type of bugs
are found. Improving the capabilities of the compiler to point out unsafe use
of functions and missing safeguards against overﬂows, could help programmers
avoid making the mistakes that cause the bugs in the ﬁrst place.
However,
this does nothing to address the vulnerabilities in SGX, which deﬁnitely require
attention on their own. However, best practices are always encouraged to be
followed as closely as possible.
28
==PAGE:30==
5
Conclusion
This thesis set out with the goal of protecting Intel SGX against code-reuse at-
tacks, more speciﬁcally the attack vector described in ”The Guard’s Dilemma:
Eﬃcient Code-Reuse Attacks Against Intel SGX”.
The ﬁrst part of protecting against an attack, is to understand how it works,
and which vulnerabilities it makes use of. To achieve this understanding, the
documentation of Intel SGX has been studied extensively, described, along with
the source code of the SGX SDK in section 2, as well as the paper originally
describing the attack vector and a potential attack[2] in subsection 3.1. After
this information has been scoured for clues and information, the next step is to
show how this type of attack could look in practice, as trying to do something
often grants additional understanding of how it works, and what it requires.
Thus an example of an implementation of the attack on an enclave has been
made in subsection 3.2-3.4
Finally, the actual goal of the paper is to try to protect against this type of
attack, and thus a number of suggestions for improvements to SGX in general,
the SGX SDK speciﬁcally, and the surrounding factors increasing the attack
surface, has been made in subsection 4.2, as well as topics for future research
described in section 7.
There are three especially promising ways of ﬁxing the vulnerabilities dis-
cussed in this thesis, from the ones listed in subsection 4.2:
1. Randomize tRTS with SGX-Shield
2. Stricter rules for control transfer
3. Implement Information Flow Analysis at compile time + better enforce-
ment of programming best practices
All three have the potential to ﬁx and/or mitigate the vulnerabilites, but they
also all have drawbacks.
Randomizing tRTS with SGX-Shield either requires external develop-
ers to ﬁx the vulnerability, and with a heavy workload at that, or requires Intel
to take over the project, or develop a similar solution, with a similar, if not
greater workload as a result. However, it will make it very unlikely that anyone
can ﬁnd functions to abuse in the enclave interface, and even if they manage,
the function will have moved next time the enclave is restarted. Execution time
would be impacted to some degree, because more time would be spent jumping
around in memory for the next part of a function.
Stricter rules for control transfer will make it very diﬃcult to make
the attack shown in the thesis possible, as instructions and functions can’t be
loaded from outside the enclave, and likewise a fake stack outside the enclave
wouldn’t be possible to access. However, the implementation would either have
29
==PAGE:31==
a massive impact on execution speed and the ability for legitimate functionality
to communicate with the unsecured part of the machine, or would only focus on
already known vulnerable functions, and thus would still leave vulnerabilities
that are not yet discovered and/or known by Intel. An important note about
this solution, is that it is the only one that would protect already existing en-
claves, without requiring them to be re-compiled.
Implement Information Flow Analysis at compile time + better
enforcement of programming best practices This solution could theoreti-
cally be implemented with no impact on execution time, however the impact on
compilation time would be very high, and the responsibilities of the programmer
making the enclave would increase signiﬁcantly as well. Finally, a more eﬀective
enforcement of Writable⊕Executable would be necessary, because the analysis
only guarantees that the program is correct when it is compiled, not that it
hasn’t been tampered with. Combined with improved checks for dangerous use
of functions (e.g. missing checks for input length, causing risk for buﬀer/stack
overﬂows), it could be used to guarantee the correctness of programs, as well as
of their interaction with the unsecured part of the memory.
In the end, the decision between these three solutions, or one of the others
discussion in the suggestions section, requires further research into the impact
of each of them, as well as a decision about where it would be most useful to
place the responsibility of ﬁxing the vulnerabilites: in the hands of independent
developers making extensions for SGX, in the hands of Intel, or in the hands
of the ”end user” (the person actually making the enclaves).
Regardless of
which solution is chosen, a signiﬁcant amount of work lies ahead, to ﬁx the
vulnerabilities.
6
Discussion
This thesis has been focused on improving trusted execution environments, more
speciﬁcally ”protecting Intel SGX against Code-Reuse Attacks”. In order to do
so, the (at the time of writing) most prominent potential attack found in the
literature has been examined, and an example of how an implementation of
it could look like has been made, to obtain for a deeper understanding of the
vulnerabilities it makes use of, and how these vulnerabilities work. To achieve
the ﬁnal goal of the thesis (protecting Intel SGX against code-reuse attacks),
a number of suggestions has been made in subsection 4.2, to harden enclaves
against code-reuse attacks, as well as mitigating the factors that causes the
vulnerabilities in the enclaves to be possible to exploit in the ﬁrst place. Thus,
the focus on the thesis has primarily been on researching the attack in order to
ﬁnd ways to counteract it, rather than implementing the attack itself.
It is very likely that a practical, working, implementation of a code-reuse
attack such as the type described in the paper by Biondo et. al.[2], could reveal
further avenues to pursue in defending against this type of attack, as well as
mitigating the consequences of it, thanks to an even deeper understanding of
30
==PAGE:32==
the inner workings of the enclave and the attack.
Likewise, an attempt at implementing the defensive suggestions from the
above mentioned paper could grant some interesting insights into the usefulness
of said defenses, and attempting to circumvent them after implementation could
give even more valuable data for further research in the topic, as well as potential
improvements to them.
7
Future Work
7.1
Implement the attack in reality
A very important next step would be to attempt to implement this attack in
reality, and through that verify whether it is plausible that an attacker with
suﬃcient time and resources would be able to break into an enclave, and steal
information, or take over control of the enclave. An implementation in practice
could also reveal other potential countermeasures, that might not be obvious
from a theoretical standpoint.
7.2
Further research into vulnerable functions in the SGX
SDK
Since the SGX SDK is considered trusted, and its use is strongly encouraged
by Intel, additional research into potential vulnerabilities in the SGX SDK in
general, and particularly the parts of it that are loaded into an enclave is war-
ranted, as the functions and instructions explored in this thesis are unlikely to
be the only ones that are responsible for vulnerabilities, directly or indirectly.
7.3
Further analysis of whether the ﬁx will mitigate the
attack vector entirely
All suggestions in subsection 4.2 should be explored more thoroughly, and if
found viable, should be attempted to be implemented in future research and
development, to increase the security and conﬁdentiality of SGX enclaves. Fur-
thermore, the impact on performance and/or usability of enclaves should be
examined and quantiﬁed, to allow for a more enlightened decision from future
developers about whether they consider the protections, and potential draw-
backs they come with, more important than the increased risk of not imple-
menting them.
7.4
Research into other defensive strategies
There is very probably other ways to defend against this type of attacks, than
those that are focused on in this paper. A thorough research of other defensive
measures is important, to identify whether they could be able to do a better
job, either at defending, or provide a better trade-oﬀbetween protection and
performance.
31
==PAGE:33==
7.5
More focus on best practices when programming
The attack examined in this report hinges on an enclave programmer making
a mistake in the ﬁrst place, by leaving a vulnerability in their code that the
attacker can (ab)use to gain the initial foothold in the enclave to launch the at-
tack. While better programming practices are always encouraged, it is unlikely
that future developers will be signiﬁcantly better at avoiding programming pit-
falls than their contemporary counterparts, unless tools to help identify and/or
correct these types of mistakes are made more usable and available, and knowl-
edge of their existence and importance is spread widely among developers. The
subtlety of many of the mistakes that cause these vulnerabilities can be hard to
catch for even experienced developers, as they often are caused by what is not
there, rather than an error in what is actually written (e.g. a missing check for
buﬀer length when writing input to it).
References
[1] Code
Arcana.
Introduction
to
return
oriented
program-
ming
(ROP).
https://codearcana.com/posts/2013/05/28/
introduction-to-return-oriented-programming-rop.html#fn-2.
Visited: 12. August 2020.
[2] Andrea Biondo, Mauro Conti, Lucas Davi, Tommaso Frassetto, and
Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi. The guard’s dilemma: Eﬃcient code-reuse attacks
against intel SGX. In 27th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Secu-
rity 18), pages 1213–1227, Baltimore, MD, August 2018. USENIX Associ-
ation.
[3] Intel Corporation.
Intel Software Guards Extensions Programming Ref-
erence. https://software.intel.com/sites/default/files/managed/
48/88/329298-002.pdf, October 2014.
[4] Intel Corporation.
Intel Software Guard Extensions (Intel SGX) SDK
for Linux* OS. https://download.01.org/intel-sgx/sgx-linux/2.9.
1/docs/Intel_SGX_Developer_Reference_Linux_2.9.1_Open_Source.
pdf, april 2020.
[5] European Union (EU).
REGULATION (EU) 2016/679 OF THE
EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 27 April
2016. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=
CELEX:32016R0679. Visited 12. August 2020.
[6] Trusted
Computing
Group.
Trusted
Computing
Group
-
Mem-
ber Companies.
https://trustedcomputinggroup.org/membership/
member-companies/. Visited: 12. August 2020.
[7] Intel and many individual contributors.
Intel SGX SDK for Linux*.
https://github.com/intel/linux-sgx. Visited: 8. August 2020.
32
==PAGE:34==
[8] Intel
and
many
individual
contributors.
linux-
sgx/common/inc/internal/rts.h.
https://github.com/intel/
linux-sgx/blob/4589daddd58bec7367a6a9de3fe301e6de17671a/
common/inc/internal/rts.h. Visited: 8. August 2020.
[9] Intel
and
many
individual
contributors.
linux-
sgx/common/inc/sgx trts exception.h.
https://github.com/intel/
linux-sgx/blob/4589daddd58bec7367a6a9de3fe301e6de17671a/
common/inc/sgx_trts_exception.h. Visited: 8. August 2020.
[10] Intel
and
many
individual
contributors.
linux-
sgx/sdk/trts/linux/trts pic.S.
https://github.com/intel/linux-sgx/
blob/4589daddd58bec7367a6a9de3fe301e6de17671a/sdk/trts/linux/
trts_pic.S. Visited: 8. August 2020.
[11] Intel and many individual contributors. README.md. https://github.
com/intel/qemu-sgx/blob/master/README.md, april 2020. Visited: 23.
June 2020.
[12] Jaehyuk Lee, Jinsoo Jang, Yeongjin Jang, Nohyun Kwak, Yeseul Choi,
Changho Choi, Taesoo Kim, Marcus Peinado, and Brent ByungHoon Kang.
Hacking in darkness:
Return-oriented programming against secure en-
claves. In 26th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 17), pages
523–539, Vancouver, BC, August 2017. USENIX Association.
[13] Lars L¨uhr. Create and Execute an Intel SGX Enclave. https://ayeks.de/
post/2016-01-05-create-and-execute-an-intel-sgx-enclave/. Vis-
ited: 26 June 2020.
[14] Lars L¨uhr and other contributors. SGX Hardware List. https://github.
com/ayeks/SGX-hardware#hardware-with-sgx2-support.
Visited 11.
August 2020.
[15] Jaebaek Seo, Byoungyoung Lee, Seong Min Kim, Ming-Wei Shih, Insik
Shin, Dongsu Han, and Taesoo Kim. Sgx-shield: Enabling address space
layout randomization for sgx programs. In NDSS, 2017.
33
==PAGE:35==
A
Appendix
A.1
Example program and enclave
enclave.cpp
Example enclave: (written in C++). Based on the example by Lars L¨uhr[13],
but modiﬁed to ﬁt the context of the attack.
The modiﬁcations consist of
changing the enclaveStringSave (l. 26-29) function to be unsafe, and adding
the variable secret (l. 8), along with the functions enclaveSecretFunction,
ocallFunction, and loadSecret.
1 /* enclave.cpp */
2 #include "enclave_t.h"
3 #include "sgx_trts.h"
4 #include <cstring>
5
6 char savedString[100] = "Default Enclave savedText";
7 int savedInt = -1;
8 int secret = 0;
9
10 // change a buffer with a constant string
11 void enclaveChangeBuffer(char *buf, size_t len)
12 {
13
const char *secret = "Hello Enclave!";
14
if (len > strlen(secret))
15
{
16
memcpy(buf, secret, strlen(secret) + 1);
17
}
18
else
19
{
20
memcpy(buf, "false", strlen("false") + 1);
21
}
22 }
23
24 /* write a var to the buffer. Note that this function
25
* is vulnerable to buffer overflow! */
26 void enclaveStringSave(char *input, size_t len)
27 {
28
strcpy(savedString, input);
29 }
30
31 // save the buffer to a var
32 void enclaveStringLoad(char *output, size_t len)
33 {
34
if (len > strlen(savedString))
35
{
36
memcpy(output, savedString, strlen(savedString) + 1);
37
}
38
else
39
{
40
memcpy(output, "false", strlen("false") + 1);
41
}
42 }
43
44 // save a int to a var
34
==PAGE:36==
45 void enclaveSaveInt(int input)
46 {
47
savedInt = input;
48 }
49
50 // return a var
51 int enclaveLoadInt()
52 {
53
return savedInt;
54 }
55
56 /* This function changes an input into something new
57
* which is secret, because an outsider won’t know
58
* what happened, and thus won’t know the new value */
59 void enclaveSecretFunction()
60 {
61
secret = savedInt + 2;
62 }
63
64 /* This function is an example of an OCALL. It isn’t really
65
* doing I/O, but rather just printing a message and a number
66
* to the command line interface */
67 int ocallFunction (int value)
68 {
69
int input = value;
70
printf("The value to be output is: %d \n", input);
71
return 0;
72 }
73
74 /* This function loads the secret into the variable
75
* that is used to output values via enclaveLoadInt */
76 void loadSecret()
77 {
78
savedInt = secret;
79 }
Listing 3: enclave.cpp
enclave.edl
Example enclave deﬁnition ﬁle, written in EDL (Enclave Deﬁnition Language),
deﬁning inteface functions for the enclave. Functions not here, are only available
inside the enclave, but can’t be called from the outside (ECALL), nor access
outside resources (OCALL). Has been modiﬁed to ﬁt the context of the thesis,
in that the functions enclaveSecretFunction and ocallFunction have been
added.
1 /* enclave.edl */
2 enclave
3 {
35
==PAGE:37==
4
trusted
5
{
6
/* ECALLs are defined here. */
7
public void enclaveChangeBuffer([out, size=len] char* buf, size_t len);
8
public void enclaveStringSave([in, size=len] char *input, size_t len);
9
public void enclaveStringLoad([out, size=len] char *output, size_t len);
10
public void enclaveSaveInt(int input);
11
public int enclaveLoadInt();
12
public void enclaveSecretFunction();
13
};
14
15
untrusted
16
{
17
/* OCALLs are defined here. */
18
int ocallFunction(int input);
19
};
20 };
Listing 4: enclave.edl
enclave t.h
header ﬁle for the trusted part of enclave.cpp (in this case, all of it, save ocall-
Function, which is in the corresponding untrusted ﬁle ending with u (not shown
in the report as it isn’t interesting in the context), because OCALLs are inher-
ently considered untrusted). Has been modiﬁed to ﬁt the context of the thesis,
by adding the functions enclaveSecretFunction and loadSecret.
1 /* enclave_t.h */
2 #include "sgx_trts.h"
3 #include <cstring>
4
5 #ifdef __cplusplus
6 extern "C"
7 {
8 #endif
9
10
void enclaveChangeBuffer(char *buf, size_t len);
11
void enclaveStringSave(char *input size_t len);
12
void enclaveStringLoad(char *output, size_t len);
13
void enclaveSaveInt(int input);
14
void enclavesecretFunction();
15
16 #ifdef __cplusplus
17 }
18 #endif
19 void loadSecret();
Listing 5: enclave t.h
36
==PAGE:38==
app.cpp
This is an application in the untrusted part of the computer, that interacts with
the enclave through ECALLs, as well as creating and destroying it. Has been
modiﬁed to ﬁt the context of the thesis, by adding the code on lines 70-74, where
enclaveSaveInt(eid, 40) and enclaveSecretFunction(eid) are called
1 /* app.cpp */
2 #include "stdafx.h"
3
4 #define ENCLAVE_FILE _T("enclave.signed.dll")
5 #define MAX_BUF_LEN 100
6
7 #include "sgx_urts.h"
8 #include "enclave_u.h"
9
10 int main()
11 {
12
sgx_enclave_id_t
eid;
13
sgx_status_t
ret
= SGX_SUCCESS;
14
sgx_launch_token_t token = {0};
15
int updated = 0;
16
char buffer[MAX_BUF_LEN] = "Hello World!";
17
char secret[MAX_BUF_LEN] = "My secret string";
18
char retSecret[MAX_BUF_LEN] = "";
19
int secretIntValue = 0;
20
int *secretIntPointer = &secretIntValue;
21
22
ret = sgx_create_enclave(ENCLAVE_FILE, SGX_DEBUG_FLAG, &token, &updated, &eid
,→, NULL);
23
24
if (ret != SGX_SUCCESS)
25
{
26
printf("\nApp: error %#x, failed to create enclave.\n", ret);
27
}
28
29
// A bunch of Enclave calls (ECALL) will happen here.
30
31
printf("\nApp: Buffertests:\n");
32
33
// Change the buffer in the enclave
34
printf("App: Buffer before change: %s\n", buffer);
35
enclaveChangeBuffer(eid, buffer, MAX_BUF_LEN);
36
printf("App: Buffer after change: %s\n", buffer);
37
38
printf("\nApp: Stringtests:\n");
39
40
// Load a string from enclave
41
// should return the default savedString from the enclave
42
enclaveStringLoad(eid, retSecret, MAX_BUF_LEN);
43
printf("App: Returned Secret: %s\n", retSecret);
44
45
// Save a string in the enclave
46
enclaveStringSave(eid, secret, strlen(secret)+1);
47
printf("App: Saved Secret: %s\n", secret);
48
37
==PAGE:39==
49
// Load a string from enclave
50
// should return our secret string
51
enclaveStringLoad(eid, retSecret, MAX_BUF_LEN);
52
printf("App: Load Secret: %s\n", retSecret);
53
54
printf("\nApp: Integertests:\n");
55
56
// Load integer from enclave
57
// should return defauld savedInt from enclave
58
enclaveLoadInt(eid, secretIntPointer);
59
printf("App: secretIntValue first load: %d\n", secretIntValue);
60
61
// Save integer to enclave
62
enclaveSaveInt(eid, 1337);
63
printf("App: saved a 1337 to the enclave. \n", 1337);
64
65
// Load integer from enclave
66
// should return our saved 1337
67
enclaveLoadInt(eid, secretIntPointer);
68
printf("App: secretIntValue second load after 1337 was saved: %d\n",
,→secretIntValue);
69
70
// A new integer (40) has now been saved into the integer buffer.
71
enclaveSaveInt(eid, 40);
72
/* The secret function is called, and the secret in the enclave
73
* is now updated, based on the latest input */
74
enclaveSecretFunction(eid);
75
76
// Destroy the enclave when all Enclave calls finished.
77
if(SGX_SUCCESS != sgx_destroy_enclave(eid))
78
printf("\nApp: error, failed to destroy enclave.\n");
79
80
getchar();
81
return 0;
82 }
Listing 6: app.cpp
38
==PAGE:40==
A.2
SGX SDK Source Code
continue execution (function)
This is the continue execution function found in the SGX SDK 2.10 (found
in the Intel SGX SDK Linux source code[10](l. 588-637).
1 DECLARE_LOCAL_FUNC continue_execution
2 #ifdef LINUX32
3
mov
%xax, %xcx
4 #else
5
mov
%xdi, %xcx
6 #endif
7
mov
SE_WORDSIZE*0(%xcx), %xax
8
push
%xax
/* push xax */
9
mov
SE_WORDSIZE*1(%xcx), %xax
10
push
%xax
/* push xcx */
11
mov
SE_WORDSIZE*4(%xcx), %xax
/* xax: xsp */
12 /* x86_64 requires a 128-bytes red zone. We need to allocate buffer to avoid
,→touching the red zone. */
13
sub
$(SE_WORDSIZE + RED_ZONE_SIZE), %xax
/* allocate buffer to skip red
,→
zone and save xip */
14
15 /* restore registers except xax, xcx, xsp */
16
mov
SE_WORDSIZE*2(%xcx), %xdx
17
mov
SE_WORDSIZE*3(%xcx), %xbx
18
mov
SE_WORDSIZE*5(%xcx), %xbp
19
mov
SE_WORDSIZE*6(%xcx), %xsi
20
mov
SE_WORDSIZE*7(%xcx), %xdi
21 #ifdef LINUX64
22
mov
SE_WORDSIZE*8(%xcx), %r8
23
mov
SE_WORDSIZE*9(%xcx), %r9
24
mov
SE_WORDSIZE*10(%xcx), %r10
25
mov
SE_WORDSIZE*11(%xcx), %r11
26
mov
SE_WORDSIZE*12(%xcx), %r12
27
mov
SE_WORDSIZE*13(%xcx), %r13
28
mov
SE_WORDSIZE*14(%xcx), %r14
29
mov
SE_WORDSIZE*15(%xcx), %r15
30
push
SE_WORDSIZE*16(%xcx)
31
popf
/* make sure the following instructions do not affect flags */
32 #else
33
push
SE_WORDSIZE*8(%xcx)
34
popf
35 #endif
36
37 #ifdef LINUX64
38
mov
SE_WORDSIZE*17(%xcx), %xcx
39 #else
40
mov
SE_WORDSIZE*9(%xcx), %xcx
/* xcx: xip */
41 #endif
Listing 7: continue execution
39
==PAGE:41==
sgx cpu context t structure
This is the structure for the sgx cpu context t structure, used in the sgx exception info t,
that in turn is used in the continue execution function to store CPU register
states. this structure is found in the Intel SGX SDK Linux 2.10 source code[9](l.
68-104).
1 #if defined (_M_X64) || defined (__x86_64__)
2 typedef struct _cpu_context_t
3 {
4
uint64_t rax;
5
uint64_t rcx;
6
uint64_t rdx;
7
uint64_t rbx;
8
uint64_t rsp;
9
uint64_t rbp;
10
uint64_t rsi;
11
uint64_t rdi;
12
uint64_t r8;
13
uint64_t r9;
14
uint64_t r10;
15
uint64_t r11;
16
uint64_t r12;
17
uint64_t r13;
18
uint64_t r14;
19
uint64_t r15;
20
uint64_t rflags;
21
uint64_t rip;
22 } sgx_cpu_context_t;
23 #else
24 typedef struct _cpu_context_t
25 {
26
uint32_t eax;
27
uint32_t ecx;
28
uint32_t edx;
29
uint32_t ebx;
30
uint32_t esp;
31
uint32_t ebp;
32
uint32_t esi;
33
uint32_t edi;
34
uint32_t eflags;
35
uint32_t eip;
36 } sgx_cpu_context_t;
37 #endif
Listing 8: sgx cpu context t
asm oret function
This is the asm oret function, found in the Intel SGX SDK Linux source
code[10](l. 440-483).
40
==PAGE:42==
1 DECLARE_GLOBAL_FUNC asm_oret
2
mov
%xsp, %xbx
3 #ifdef LINUX64
4
mov
%xdi, SE_WORDSIZE(%xsp)
5
mov
%xsi, 2*SE_WORDSIZE(%xsp)
6 #endif
7
mov
SE_WORDSIZE(%xbx), %xsp
/* restore thread_data.last_sp */
8
9 /* restore extended feature registers */
10
mov
19*SE_WORDSIZE(%xsp), %xdi
11 #ifdef LINUX32
12
mov
%xdi, (%xsp)
13 #endif
14
call
restore_xregs
15
16 /* memset_s */
17
xor
%xax, %xax
18
mov
11*SE_WORDSIZE(%xsp), %xcx
19
sub
%xdi, %xcx
20
sub
$SE_WORDSIZE, %xcx
21
shr
$2, %xcx
22
cld
23
rep stos %eax,%es:(%xdi)
24
25
mov
2*SE_WORDSIZE(%xbx), %xax
/* ocall return value */
26
27 #ifdef LINUX64
28
mov
7*SE_WORDSIZE(%xsp), %r15
29
mov
8*SE_WORDSIZE(%xsp), %r14
30
mov
9*SE_WORDSIZE(%xsp), %r13
31
mov
10*SE_WORDSIZE(%xsp), %r12
32 #endif
33
34
mov
11*SE_WORDSIZE(%xsp), %xbp
35
mov
12*SE_WORDSIZE(%xsp), %xdi
36
mov
13*SE_WORDSIZE(%xsp), %xsi
37
mov
14*SE_WORDSIZE(%xsp), %xbx
38
39
mov
%xbp, %xsp
40
pop
%xbp
41
42
ret
43
/* should not come here */
44
ud2
Listing 9: asm oret
ocall context t structure This is the ocall context t structure, found
in the SGX SDK Linux 2.10 source code[8](l. 40-60), that is used in the asm oret
function to store CPU register states.
41
==PAGE:43==
1 typedef struct _ocall_context_t
2 {
3
uintptr_t shadow0;
4
uintptr_t shadow1;
5
uintptr_t shadow2;
6
uintptr_t shadow3;
7
uintptr_t ocall_flag;
8
uintptr_t ocall_index;
9
uintptr_t pre_last_sp;
10
uintptr_t r15;
11
uintptr_t r14;
12
uintptr_t r13;
13
uintptr_t r12;
14
uintptr_t xbp;
15
uintptr_t xdi;
16
uintptr_t xsi;
17
uintptr_t xbx;
18
uintptr_t reserved[3];
19
uintptr_t ocall_depth;
20
uintptr_t ocall_ret;
21 } ocall_context_t;
Listing 10:
ocall context t
42
