==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
National Food Institute
Genetic and transcriptomic
analysis of thermotolerant
Lactococcus lactis mutants
Author
Mengying Xie
s182621
Supervisors
Robin Dorau
Christian Solem
August, 2020
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Lactococcus lactis (L. lactis) strain SD96 is an industrial strain that used in the
cheese production, and it is citrate-utilizing bacteria that can use citrate as the
energy source and produce volatile compounds, for instance, diacetyl, acetoin,
and butanediol. During cheese production, heating could be applied to remove
the water content from the curd, and higher temperature which could accelerate
the processing and reduce the risk of infection. Thus, thermotolerant strain is in
demand by the industry. Mutated strains JA24, RD01, and RD07 with enhanced
robustness are isolated from SD96. Illumnia sequencing and RNA sequencing
are operated on these strains to identify mutations occurred on mutated strains
and further analyze the speciﬁc mutation that accounts for the thermotolerance
of mutated strains with expression data of all genes.
This thesis is to perform analysis on the thermotolerance of mutated strains in
comparison to SD96 based on the genetic and transcriptomic information of all
four strains, and four comparison levels (mutated strains vs parent strain at
30◦C and 39◦C; a single strain with comparison between 30◦C and 39◦C) are
taken into consideration. The comparison between mutated strains and SD96
could reveal the eﬀect of mutations, and the comparison between temperatures
revels the eﬀect of increased temperature. Log2(fold-change) <-1 or >1 and
adjusted P-value <0.05 are set to identify the diﬀerentially expression gene.
From the analysis on mutation that identiﬁed on JA24 and RD01, the mutation
took place on the coding sequence of regulator CodY is the most important.
Many CodY-regulated genes present diﬀerentially expression, especially genes
encoding branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs). Genes involved in BCAAs
biosynthesis are mostly down-regulated in JA24 compared to SD96, and based
on this, it is suggested that the mutation occurred on CodY in JA24 decreases
==PAGE:4==
ii
the expression of BCAAs, which would further reduce the repression of CodY on
CodY-regulated genes and leads to the over expression of genes. In RD01, the
mutation took place on the upstream of CodY is speculated to account for the
robustness of RD01 under thermal stress, and over expression of some CodY-
regulated genes may leads to the thermotolerance of RD01. Pur operon, which
impacts genes involved in purine biosynthesis and metabolism, are analyzed
to be the main reason that results in the robustness of RD07. The mutation
occurred on Pur operon promotes the expression of pur gene in RD07 compared
to SD96, and enhanced up-regulation presents in RD07 at higher temperature
compared to SD96.
In conclusion, CodY regulator and Pur operon mainly led to the stronger
robustness of JA24, RD01 and RD07, and other mutations involved in the cell
wall metabolism, DNA recombination and replication, and stress response could
also aﬀect the thermotolerance of mutated strains, but their inﬂuence are more
slight. The deletion on the chromosome and plasmid in RD01 and RD07 could
also aﬀect their robustness under thermal stress, thus, more analysis should be
perform on the loss of the plasmid, and deletion on the chromosome as well.
==PAGE:5==
Preface and
acknowledgements
This Master thesis of 30 ECTs is conducted at Technical University of Denmark
(DTU) from March 2020 to August 2020 at National Food Institute under the
supervision of Christian Solem and Robin Dorau. The thesis deals with the
mutation accounts for the thermaltolerance of Lactococcus lactis strains used in
cheese production. The whole analysis performed in this thesis is based on the
genetic and transcriptomic data detected by Robin Dorau.
The outbreak of COVID-19 accompanied by the long term quarantine made
this semester harder, and the lack of biological knowledge of my background
increased the diﬃculty of this project for me. I usually felt that it is still far
away from the completion of my project, but now the amazing thing is that
it is ﬁnished, and I wrote a thesis full of words "gene, mutation ..." that were
actually unfamiliar and uninteresting for me before. So I sincerely want to take
this opportunity to thank all people who gave me support through this project.
Thanks to DTU for providing me two years of experience in studying abroad and
the opportunity to get insight into Denmark and live in Denmark and Europe. I
am sure that these two years would be the most important memory of my life.
Then, I would like to thank my supervisors Christian Solem and Robin Dorau
for providing me with the opportunity to work with this project. Thanks to
Robin for providing data that used for this project, and all helpful suggestions
and timely feedback throughout this project, moreover, your patience on my
broken English and constant questions. I really learned a lot that was new for
==PAGE:6==
iv
me during this project, and I appreciate your support and guidance on me all
these two semesters.
Then, thanks to my friends here. Qian and Nan, thanks to my two beautiful,
sweet, outgoing, and hard-working friends, thanks to your accompany in these
lovely two years. I used to get support on words and also meals from you whenever
I need, and I really feel you are my families. Yichen, thanks to your help to solve
the technical troubles throughout this thesis, and appreciated your accompany
since the ﬁrst day I came here, it is really a beautiful and unforgettable story.
Thanks to Yan and Li for holding activities and preparing food to help us to relax
during this project, although you two always go somewhere together without
telling us.
Thanks to my colleagues of Nihao team: Hang, Afu, Lisa, Windy, Raj, Ming, and
Juan. Thanks for the friendly environment in our restaurant and tasty Chinese
food served by Afu whenever I work there, and our perfect teamwork all the
time, and appreciate Hang for taking priority of my schedule to let me focus to
work on my thesis.
Last but not the least, thanks to my parents for supporting me to study abroad
both on spirit and economy, and giving me encouragement whenever and whatever
I make decisions, although we usually compromise at the end. Thanks to my
brother for reminding me that study is always important.
Wish all the best to all of you!
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
AraT
Aromatic aminotransferase
BCAAs
Branched-chain amino acids
BcaT
Branched chain aminotransferase
CitP
Citrate permease P
CL
Citrate lyase
CP
Carbamoylphosphate
DGE
Diﬀerential gene expression
EMP pathway
Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas pathway
FDP
Fructose-1,6-diphosphate
GlcNAC
N -acetyl-glucosamine
GRAS
"Generally recognized as safe"
HSPs
Heat shock proteins
HTS
High-throughout sequencing
IMP
Inosine monophosphate
LAB
Lactic acid bacteria
LDH
Lactate dehydrogenase
L. diacetylactis
L. lactis subsp. lactis bv. diacetylactis
L. lactis
Lactococcus lactis
ME
Malic enzyme
MurNAC
N -acetyl-muramic acid
NGS
Next-generation sequencing
OMP
Orotate monophosphate
PDH
Pyruvate dehydrogenase
PFL
Pyruvate-formate lyase
PG
Peptidoglycan
ppGpp
Guanosine tetraphosphate
pppGpp
Guanosine pentaphosphate
==PAGE:8==
vi
PRPP
5-phosphoribosyl-1-pyrophosphate
PSs
Polysaccharides
PSP
Polysaccharide pellicle
RNA-Seq
RNA sequencing
TAs
Teichoic acids
UDP
Uridine diphosphate
UMP
Uridine monophosphate
UDP-GlcNAc
Uridine diphosphate-N -acetyl-glucosamine
UDP-MurNAc
Uridine diphosphate-N -acetyl-muramic acid
WTAs
Wall teichoic acids
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface and acknowledgements
iii
Abbreviations
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and thesis objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Lactococcus lactis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.1
Characteristics of Lactic acid bacteria . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.2
Characteristics of Lactococcus lactis
. . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2.3
Metabolism of Lactococcus lactis . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Industrial cheese production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.4
Heat stress response mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.5
Sequencing technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
1.6
Existed studies and project outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2
The methodology
19
2.1
Adaptive laboratory evolution on SD96
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.2
Genetic and transcriptomic analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.2.1
Genetic analysis by Illumina sequencing to detect muta-
tions in mutated trains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.2.2
Transcriptomic analysis by RNA sequencing to calculate
the diﬀerential gene expression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.3
Sequence alignment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.3.1
Sequence alignment by NCBI BLAST . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.3.2
Accession number of reference genome sequences . . . . .
23
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
3
Results analysis and discussion
25
3.1
Mutation analysis on JA24
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.1.1
A mutation on LCP family protein involves in the cell wall
structure in JA24
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.1.2
A mutation on CodY impacts expression of genes involved
in amino acid metabolism in JA24 . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2
Mutation analysis on RD01 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.2.1
A mutation on the upstream of CodY impacts expression
of genes involved in amino acid metabolism in RD01 . . .
36
3.2.2
A mutation on (p)ppGpp synthetase involves in stringent
reaction in RD01 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.2.3
A mutation on UDP-N-acetylmuramate-L-alanine ligase
involves in peptidoglycan synthesis in RD01 . . . . . . . .
43
3.3
Mutation analysis on RD07 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.3.1
A mutation on phenylalanine-tRNA ligase subunit beta
involves in protein biosynthesis in RD07 . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.3.2
A mutation on DNA primase involves in DNA replication
in RD07 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.3.3
A mutation on helicase-exonuclease AddAB subunit AddA
involves in DNA recombination in RD07 . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.3.4
A mutation on Pur operon impacts the gene expression
involved in purine biosyntheiss in RD07 . . . . . . . . . .
47
4
Conclusion
51
A Appendix
53
Bibliography
57
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Background and thesis objectives
Lactococcus lactis (L. lactis), an important industrial microorganism, is exten-
sively used in food fermentation, especially dairy fermentation. L. lactis is the
best-characterized lactic acid bacteria (LAB). In cheese fermentation, L. lactis
ferments on lactose and produces lactic acid and other organic acids, and some
by-products (diacetyl, acetoin, and butanediol) which form the typical aroma of
fermented dairy products. Starter cultures consisting of concentrated LAB are
applied in cheese production because they could rapid processes of acidiﬁcation
and curding, and these processes are crucial for the texture and ﬂavor develop-
ment of the cheese [Mozzi et al., 2010]. In the industrial cheese processing, the
temperature of curding could up to 40◦C. Moreover, the higher fermentation
temperature could accelerate the acidiﬁcation of the curd, and produce less
by-product, and reduce the risk of contamination as well [Chen et al., 2015].
Thus, L. lactis strains that are thermally robust are in high demand by the
industry that seek for eﬃcient production.
SD96, which belongs to L. lactis subsp. lactis bv. diacetylactis (L. diacetylactis),
is an industrial strain that is isolated from an Italian cheese [Dorau et al., 2020].
SD96 is insensitive to phage attack, which is a desirable property of the starter
culture used in cheese fermentation. SD96 grows optimally between 30◦C and
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
37◦C, and three mutants (JA24, RD01, RD07) with increasing tolerance to heat
were isolated previously. The robustness of mutant strains is desired, while the
reasons caused their thermotolerance are unknown.
The objective of this thesis is to speculate on why mutant strains are more robust
than parent strain SD96 at the higher temperature, and this objective would be
achieved by following processes:
1. Analyze the genetic and transcriptomic changes that occurred on mutant
strains in comparison with parent strain SD96.
2. Investigate the functions of all changes that took place on mutant strains.
3. Speculate and critically evaluate what led to the thermotolerance of mutant
strains.
1.2
Lactococcus lactis
1.2.1
Characteristics of Lactic acid bacteria
LAB are a set of gram-positive, low-GC, and acid-tolerant bacteria. LAB are
classiﬁed into diﬀerent families, including Aerococcaceae, Carnobacteriaceae, Ente-
rococcaseae, Lactobacilliaceae, Leuconostcaceae, and Streptococcaceae, which con-
sists of various genera that with diﬀerential characteristics, for instance, shape and
growth requirements. [von Wright and Axelsson, 2011] [Holzapfel and Wood, 2014]
[Lahtinen et al., 2011].
LAB have traditionally been involved with food fermentation because of its
ability to generate lactic acid as the end product of carbohydrate fermentation
[von Wright and Axelsson, 2011]. The generation of lactic acid and by-products
(CO2, organic acids, acetoin, diacetyl, butanediol) promotes the development of
the ﬂavor and texture of fermented food, and additionally, it prohibits bacterial
infection and extends the shelf-life of the product. Based on the fermentative
pathway on glucose, LAB are classiﬁed into homofermentative LAB and het-
erofermentative LAB. Homofermentative LAB utilize glucose via the glycolysis
which is also called Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas (EMP) pathway, and produce
pyruvate which is further converted into lactic acid, while heterofermentative
LAB metabolize glucose by the phosphoketolase pathway, and produce lactate
as well as CO2, ethanol or acetate [Endo and Dicks, 2014].
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Lactococcus lactis
3
1.2.2
Characteristics of Lactococcus lactis
L. lactis, is gram-positive, spherical, non-motile, non-sporulating, mesophilic,
and homolactic phenotypical bacteria, which belongs to the genus Lactococcus
of family Streptococcaceae [von Wright and Axelsson, 2011]. L. lactis utilizes
lactose and generates exclusive L-lactic acid, while it is reported that L. lactis
can also produce D-lactic acid at low pH [Åkerberg et al., 1998]. L. lactis is
extensively utilized in the production of cheese because its metabolites add
unique ﬂavor and taste to the product. Based on its history of being applied
in food fermentation, it has "generally recognized as safe" (GRAS) status
[Wessels et al., 2004].
L. lactis has several subspecies, including L. lactis subsp. lactis, L. lactis subsp.
cremoris, L. lactis subsp. hordniae, and L. lactis subsp. lactis bv. diacetylactis
(L. diacetylactis). Among these subspecies, L. lactis subsp. cremoris and L.
lactis subsp. lactis are generally robust when exposed to the changes in the
environment, and L. lactis subsp. lactis are more insensitive to the changes of
the environment [Kim et al., 1999]. L. diacetylactis is citrate-utilizing bacteria.
It can use citrate as an energy source and produce CO2 and volatile compounds,
such as diacetyl, acetoin, and butanediol [Hugenholtz, 1993].
These aroma
compounds are essential for the ﬂavor development of most fermented dairy
products, whereas they can be regarded as oﬀ-ﬂavors in beer and sausages
[Kowalczyk et al., 2015].
1.2.3
Metabolism of Lactococcus lactis
1.2.3.1
Carbohydrate metabolism
The uptake of carbohydrates supplies L. lactis with carbon and energy sources
that used for their growth and survival in food production as well as laboratory
media. The most abundant sugar in the milk is lactose, which is a disaccharide
composed of galactose and glucose. Some monosaccharides produced by the
hydrolysis of the lactose, for instance, glucose and galactose, are also found in
the milk [Zimmer, 1996].
L. lactis is homofermentative LAB, hence it ferments glucose and produces
only lactate via the homofermentative pathway. When L. lactis is grown on
lactose, lactose enters the cell by the PEP:PTS system, and then is hydrolyzed
to glucose and galactose-6-phosphate. Glucose is then converted to glucose-6-
phosphate catalyzed by glucokinase via glycolysis, while galactose-6-phosphate
is then metabolized by tagatose-6-phosphate pathway, which results in the
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
production of triosephosphate and they are further metabolized by glycolysis
[Lahtinen et al., 2011] [Neves et al., 2010].
Mixed-acid fermentation
Although L. lactis is generally known as homofermentative LAB, it is found that
the homolactic fermentation shifts towards mixed-acid fermentation when L. lac-
tis is grow anaerobically or grown on some carbon substrates such as maltose and
galactose that support its lower growth. Usually, over 90% of glucose is converted
to lactate via homofermentative pathway [Garrigues et al., 1997], whereas the
mixed-acid fermentation causes various chemical compounds produced from pyru-
vate, for instance, acetate, formate and ethanol, and also some aroma compounds.
Higher sugar uptake provokes the higher ﬂux through glycolysis and rapids the
growth and metabolism of the bacteria. The shift to mixed-acid fermentation
has the lower activity of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), and increased activity of
pyruvate-formate lyase (PFL) which leads to reduced production of lactate and
increased formation of formate and other metabolites [Garrigues et al., 1997]
[Garrigues et al., 2001].
Pyruvate metabolism
Pyruvate, which is the ﬁnal product of glycolysis, has various metabolic pathways
that generate diverse metabolites, and the orientation of pathways is aﬀected
by the strains, substrates, and the environmental conditions. The pyruvate
metabolism via mixed-acid metabolism pathway is displayed in Figure 1.1, which
is cited from Kowalczyk and other author’s work in [Kowalczyk et al., 2015].
Lactate is the major metabolite, and the reaction that produces lactate is
catalyzed by lactate dehydrogenase (LDH). LDH is regulated by fructose-1,6-
diphosphate (FDP) and NADH which function as activators, and the intracellular
FDP level reduces when lactose is limited, which leads to the reduced activity of
LDH [Hugenholtz, 1993]. Pyruvate dehydrogenase pathway is used to oxidize
pyruvate to acetyl-CoA by enzyme pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH), and generate
CO2 and NADH. In the pyruvate formate lyase pathway, pyruvate is transformed
into formate and acetyl-CoA by pyruvate-formate lyase (PFL), and enzyme PFL
is inactivated at low oxygen levels [Hugenholtz, 1993]. Acetyl-CoA produced
can be metabolized further into ethanol and acetate by alcohol dehydrogenase
and acetate kinase, respectively, and ATP is also generated with the production
of acetate [Lahtinen et al., 2011]. Diacetyl-acetoin pathway is introduced in
following Section 1.2.3.2.
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Lactococcus lactis
5
Figure 1.1: Pyruvate metabolism via mixed-acid metabolism pathway
in Lactococcus lactis. Reactions are catalyzed by the following
enzymes: 11, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH); 12, pyruvate dehy-
drogenase (PDH); 13, pyruvate formate lyase (PFL); 14, acetalde-
hyde dehydrogenase (ACDH); 15, alcohol dehydrogenase (ADHE);
16, phosphotransacetylase (PTA); 17, acetate kinase (ACK); 18,
α-acetolactate synthase (ALS); 19, α-acetolactate decarboxylase
(ALD); 20, 2,3-butanediol dehydrogenase (BDH); 21, diacetyl reduc-
tase (DR). Adapted from Kowalczyk et al. [Kowalczyk et al., 2015].
==PAGE:16==
6
Introduction
1.2.3.2
Citrate metabolism
In addition to lactate, citrate is also found to be present in milk at concentrations
of 8 to 9 mM [García-Quintáns et al., 1998]. L. diacetylactis has the ability to
metabolize citrate and produce CO2 and volatile compounds (diacetyl, acetoin,
and butanediol) [Kowalczyk et al., 2015]. Diacetyl, which has the butter ﬂavor,
forms the typical ﬂavor of cheese, and CO2 is responsible for the texture of some
cheese. It has been demonstrated that L. diacetylactis could grow at acidic
condition with citrate as the only energy source, but the detected growth of
cell mass is limited [García-Quintáns et al., 1998]. Thus, carbohydrates could
be the main energy source accompanied with citrate utilization for the growth
of L. diacetylactis.
In the citrate utilization of L. diacetylactis, citrate is initially transported into
the cell via citrate permease P (CitP), and this process is pH-dependent with
optimum pH scale from 5.0 to 6.0 [Hugenholtz, 1993]. CitP which is encoded
by the plasmidic citP gene belonging to citQRP operon is a transporter that
exchanges citrate and lactate [García-Quintáns et al., 1998] . The transport of
citrate could aﬀect the uptake of citrate as well as the yield of aroma compounds.
During dairy fermentation, the production of lactic acid would reduce pH which
would lead to the increase of citrate transport because of the induction of CitP
synthesis and increase of the activity of permeases relys on the acidiﬁc condition
[García-Quintáns et al., 1998] [García-Cayuela et al., 2012].
After transported into the cell by CitP, citrate is catalyzed into acetate and
oxaloacetate by citrate lyase (CL). Oxaloacetate is then decarboxylated by
malic enzyme (ME), and produces CO2 and pyruvate which is further metabo-
lized via diacetyl-acetoin pathway [Mozzi et al., 2010] [Kowalczyk et al., 2015].
Diacetyl-acetoin pathway requires the pyruvate surplus which come from the
breakdown of citrate, and it helps releasing acid stress by converting the citric
acid which is present in milk into acetoin or 2,3-butanediol, which are neutral
compounds [Endo and Dicks, 2014] [Lahtinen et al., 2011]. Initially, pyruvate is
metabolized into α-acetolactate by α-acetolactate synthase, and then in one
way α-acetolactate is transformed into acetoin that catalyzed by α-acetolactate
decarboxylase and releases carbon dioxide; in another way, α-acetolactate works
as intermediate and can be oxidized into diacetyl without any enzymatic reac-
tion, and then is metabolized into acetoin by diacetyl reductase. Furthermore,
acetoin is catalyzed into 2,3-butanediol by 2,3-butanediol dehydrogenase and also
generate NAD+. In dairy products, diacetyl, acetoin, and butanediol, which are
metabolized from citrate, forms the typical aroma of fermented dairy products
[Mozzi et al., 2010].
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Lactococcus lactis
7
1.2.3.3
Nitrogen metabolism
Casein degradation
Due to low content of free amino acids and peptides in milk, L. lactis need to de-
grade the external proteins from the milk via proteolytic system coupled with pep-
tide transport, and by this way the bacteria could obtain peptides and essential
amino acids used for its growth and metabolism [von Wright and Axelsson, 2011].
Casein, which is the extracellular protein in milk, is initially degraded to oligopep-
tides by cell wall-bound serine proteinase (PrtP). Then the oligo-, di-, and tripep-
tides are transported into the cell by oligo-, di-, and tri-peptide transport system
(Opp, Dpp, and DtpT system), respectively [Endo and Dicks, 2014]. The intra-
cellular oligopeptides and peptides are hydrolyzed into small peptides and amino
acids by oligopeptidases and peptidases, and then metabolized as the precursors
of aromatic compounds via the amino acid metabolism [Mozzi et al., 2010].
The regulation of three diﬀerent enzymes (PrtP, PepN, PepXP) involved in
the proteolytic system.
PepN and PepXP are two intracellular peptidases.
The activity of PrtP decreases under high peptide concentration, whereas the
repression on the activity of PepN and PepXP depends on the strains. Moreover,
the bacterium would only take control of proteolytic system during the growth
in medium, whereas in milk, the activity of these enzymes is at high levels
[Meijer et al., 1996].
Amino acid metabolism
Amino acid metabolism is important for the transamination of methionine,
branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs) and aromatic amino acids, and transam-
ination of these amino acids would yield α-keto acids which is further used
to the synthesis of various compounds (aldehyde, alcohol, or carboxylic acid)
[Mozzi et al., 2010] [Papadimitriou et al., 2016].
The metabolism of amino acids is regulated by various mechanisms, including
targeted mechanisms and pleiotropic regulators as well [Guédon et al., 2005].
CodY is a global transcriptional regulator in gram-positive, low-GC bacteria, and
it is responsible for the amino acid transport and metabolism. CodY regulon has
been determined on L. lactis MG1363, and a 15-bp sequence called CodY-box
was found that functions as a binding site for CodY [Den Hengst et al., 2005].
Branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs) is crucial for the repression of CodY.
BCAAs refers to three amino acids, including isoleucine, leucine, and valine,
which are essential amino acids for human as well. AraT (aromatic aminotrans-
ferase) and BcaT (branched chain aminotransferase), are two aminotransferases,
which are important for transamination of aromatic amino acids and BCAAs,
==PAGE:18==
8
Introduction
respectively [Papadimitriou et al., 2016]. The intracellular BCAAs pool reveals
the nitrogen availability in the cell, and BCAAs pool is controlled by AraT and
BcaT as well as the availability of these amino acids in the growth medium
[Chambellon and Yvon, 2003] [Papadimitriou et al., 2016]. BCAAs is the senor
of amino acid availability, and the amino acids are mostly supplied by proteolysis
occurred in the milk. In proteolytic system, PrtP proteinase, Opp transporter
and peptidases are involved in the protein degradation, while genes encoding
these proteins are repressed by CodY in response to intracellular BCAAs pool,
and this is a kind of feedback repression of genes involved in the proteolytic
system [Guédon et al., 2001] [Den Hengst et al., 2005]. The relation between
BCAAs and CodY is that When BCAAs present in the cell, CodY senses
BCAA pool and get activated, and CodY-regulated genes would be repressed
by CodY, and the strength of the repression by CodY is aﬀected by BCAAs
[Den Hengst et al., 2005].
In the study on CodY-dependent genes, 45% of them encode enzymes that
involved in amino acid metabolism, and the rest genes are related to nitrogen
supply [Guédon et al., 2005]. The repression of amino acid and peptide transport
systems and metabolisms that mediated by CodY is important to maintain
the nitrogen balance of the bacterium [Den Hengst et al., 2005].
The genes
that regulated by CodY have been already identiﬁed in L. lactis MG1363 and
IL1403. CodY-boxs are found on the upstream and coding region of ilv operon,
which demonstrates the interaction of CodY regulation and ilv. ilv is involved
in BCAAs biosynthesis, bcaT as well.
bcaT encodes the aminotransferase
BcaT that function as enzyme in BCAA biosynthesis [Den Hengst et al., 2005].
Additionally, it has been stated that CodY is responsible for the repression of
genes opp, pepN, pepC, araT, and bcaT as the response to nitrogen availability
[Den Hengst et al., 2005]. The relation among enzymes that involved in the
nitrogen supply (PrtP proteinase, Opp transporter and PepN, PepC peptidases),
BCAAs and CodY repressor demonstrates the important role of CodY in nitrogen
metabolism of the bacterium [Guédon et al., 2001].
Nucelotide metabolism
Nucleotides are composed of a ﬁve-carbon sugar, a nucleobase, and a phosphate
group. Nucleobases are classiﬁed into purines (adenine, guanine) and pyrimidines
(cytosine, thymine, uracil).
Nucleotides are substrates for DNA and RNA
synthesis, and they serve the energy in the form of ATP, GTP, CTP, and UTP
for cellular processes. For instance, ATP, which is a purine nucleotide, is generally
considered to be an important carrier of available energy in the cell. Nucleotide
metabolism is crucial to maintain substrates that support the formation of ATP
and GTP, and it is involved with numerous amino acids reactions, like aspartate
and glutamate. ATP is an activator of pyrimidine synthesis, while CTP which is
a pyrimidine nucleotide is an inhibitor of pyrimidine synthesis. Their regulation
==PAGE:19==
1.2 Lactococcus lactis
9
helps to keep the balance between the amount of purines and pyrimidines. 5-
phosphoribosyl-1-pyrophosphate (PRPP) is a common intermediate in purine
and pyrimidine metabolisms, and it can be used in the synthesis of nucleotides
as well as the salvage of nucleobases [Kilstrup et al., 2005].
In the de novo synthesis pathway of pyrimidine, the end product is uridine
monophosphate (UMP) which is further converted into UTP, CTP, dCTP,
and dTTP. The biosynthetic pathway of pyrimidine following six enzymatic
steps: formation of carbamoylphosphate (CP) utilizing CO2, ATP, and gltamine;
carbamoylasparate is generated from the reaction between CP with aspartate;
formation of dihydroorotate; formation of pyrimidine compound catalyzed by
dihydroorotate dehydrogenases; orotate monophosphate (OMP) is generated
from orotate by PRPP; production of UMP catalyzed by OMP decarboxylase
encoded by pyrF gene [Kilstrup et al., 2005] [Martinussen et al., 2001].
The purine compounds in the milk are not suﬃcient to support the growth of
L. lactis, thus, L. lactis need to synthesize purine nucleotide via the de novo
pathway [Nilsson and Kilstrup, 1998]. The transcription of the de novo synthesis
operons, including purCSQLF and purDEK. These operons have been shown to
be activated by PurR protein when binds to Pur-Box to be motivated. There is a
PRPP binding site on PurR, when the intracellular PRPP pool is at high level as
the response of low exogenous purine nucleotide, the activation by PurR occurs.
Thus, the transcription of the purine biosynthetic operons are regulated by the
PurR regulator in response to purine availability mediated by PRPP pool, and the
binding of PurR to Pur-Box is independent of PRPP pools while the activation
of transcription requires a high concentration of PRPP pool. When bacterium is
starved for purine nucleotide, the PRPP pool would get increased which leads
to promoted activation of PurR-regulated genes [Jendresen et al., 2012].
pur operon which is a cluster consisted of 12 genes was identiﬁed in Bacillus
subtilis, and all these genes encode enzymes that involved in inosine monophos-
phate (IMP) synthesis. The initiation of transcription of pur operon is under
control of a repressor which is encoded by gene purR, and this repressor binds to
a DNA sequence (Pur-Box). A protein in L. lactis was found homologous to the
purR-encoded repressor from Bacillus subtilis with 80% overall similarity, while
this product that encoded by purR is an activator required for purine biosynthe-
sis in L. lactis. In Bacillus subtilis, the PurR protein functions as a repressor
which represses the pur operon when purine nucleotide is present in the medium,
and the DNA binding ability of the PurR protein is detected only when the
concentration of PRPP pool is low level. Thus, it was suggested that the activity
of PurR protein from L. lactis is also aﬀected by the concentration of PRPP
[Kilstrup and Martinussen, 1998] [Jendresen et al., 2012] [Gaudu et al., 2019].
Purine metabolic pathways have three types of reactions, including De novo
==PAGE:20==
10
Introduction
synthesis reactions (IMP formed from PRPP), salvage reactions, and nucleotide
inter-conversion reactions (IMP converted to ATP and GTP) [Ryssel et al., 2014].
Salvage reactions occur between free purines and pyrimidines. The common
reaction happens between free bases and PRPP, which generates nucleotides.
The purine metabolic pathways are displayed in Figure 1.2 which is modiﬁed
from [Ryssel et al., 2014].
Purine nucleotide is synthesized de novo from 5-
phosphoribosyl-1-pyrophosphate (PRPP). IMP is produced via the pathway,
and then it is further converted to AMP and GMP by purA, B and guaA, B,
respectively, and then ATP and GTP are formed. GTP and ATP are crucial
for the bacteria which supply energy for the cell that used in the cell division
and protein synthesis. The purine biosynthesis and C1-folate metabolism are
responsible for supplying purines, and genes that involved in these reactions are
dependent on Pur-Box [Ryssel et al., 2014] [Jendresen et al., 2012].
The metabolic basis of L. lactis MG1363 under acid stress has been studied
in Ryssel’s research. From this study, it indicates that an excess of guanine
nucleotides induces stress sensitivity of L. lactis MG1363. Additionally, high
intracellular guanine nucleotide provides its increased sensitivity to high temper-
atures. This study suggests that L. lactis MG1363 is multi-stress resistant strain
with the absent of any purine source, while exogenous purine would induce its
sensitivity to environmental stresses [Ryssel et al., 2014].
1.2.3.4
Cell wall metabolism
The cell wall of gram-positive bacteria consists of a thick peptidoglycan (PG)
sacculus surrounding with the cytoplasmic membrane, and it is decorated with
teichoic acids (TAs), polysaccharides (PSs), and proteins.
It is important
to maintain the cell shape and integrity of the bacterium.
PG is the ma-
jor component of the cell wall of gram-positive bacteria, and it is essential
to ensure the stability and cell wall strength.
It consists of alternating N -
acetyl-glucosamine (GlcNAc) and N -acetyl-muramic acid (MurNAc) linked via
peptidyl substituents (β-1,4 bonds). The three-dimensional structure formed en-
sures the integrity of the bacterium [Courtin et al., 2006] [Lovering et al., 2012]
[Emanuele Jr et al., 1996] [Chapot-Chartier and Kulakauskas, 2014].
In L. lactis, the amino acid sequence of the stem peptide which is a short ﬁve
amino acid peptides with attachment to MurNAc is L-Ala-γ-D-Glu-L-Lys-D-Ala.
The cross-linking is formed between adjacent peptides, and it occurs between
the D-Ala of peptide chain with the di-amino acid (L-Lys) of another chain.
This interpeptide bridge consists of D-Asp or D-Asn, and ﬁnally it generates
D-Ala-D-Asp/Asn-L-Lys cross bridges in L. lactis as presents in Figure 1.3
[Chapot-Chartier and Kulakauskas, 2014].
==PAGE:21==
1.2 Lactococcus lactis
11
Figure 1.2: Reactions (nucleotide interconversion reactions, salvage
reactions, and de novo synthesis reactions) and involved
genes of purine metabolism in Lactococcus lactis. IMP, in-
osine monophosphate; sAMP, Adenylosuccinate; AR, adenosine;
IR, inosine; XR, xanthosine; GR, guanosine; A, adenine; Hx,
hypoxanthine; X, xanthine; G, guanine; add, adenosine deami-
nase; adk, adenylate kinase (AMP kinase); apt, adenine phospho-
ribosyltransferase; gmk, guanylate kinase (GMP kinase); guaA,
GMP synthase; guaB, IMP dehydrogenase; guaC, GMP reduc-
tase; hprT, hypoxanthine/guanine phosphoribosyltransferase; hpt,
hypoxanthine/guanine phosphoribosyltransferase; pup, purine nu-
cleoside phosphorylase; purA, adenylosuccinate synthase; purB,
adenylosuccinate lyase; pyk, pyruvate kinase; relA, (p)ppGpp syn-
thase; xpt, xanthine phosphoribosyltransferase.
Modiﬁed from
[Ryssel et al., 2014].
==PAGE:22==
12
Introduction
In PG synthesis, uridine diphosphate-N -acetyl-glucosamine (UDP-GlcNAc) is
initially activated via enzymatic reaction. MurA is responsible for the formation
of enolpyruvyl UDP-GlcNAc, and then this product can be converted to uridine
diphosphate-N -acetyl-muramic acid (UDP-MurNAc) by MurB. Following the
generation of UDP-MurNAc, four ligases, including MurC, MurD, MurE and
MurF, catalyze the reactions between UDP-MurNAc with pentapeptide side
chain. MurC to MurF catalyzes the addition of L-alanine (L-Ala), D-glutamic
acid (D-Glu), L-lysine (L-Lys), and a dipeptide D-alanine-D-alanine (D-Ala-D-
Ala) or a depsipeptide (D-Ala-D-Lac) in turn, respectively, which generates a
cytoplasmic precursor of PG (UDP-MurNAc-pentapeptide). D-Asp is added to
L-Lys of the stem peptide by aspartate ligase. Then UDP-MurNAc-pentapeptide
is attached to the lipid transporter and generates lipid I, and then GlcNAc
is added to lipid I which forms lipid II, and lipid II is the basic unit used in
PG assembly [Lovering et al., 2012] [Courtin et al., 2006] [Guillot et al., 2003]
[Chapot-Chartier and Kulakauskas, 2014].
The synthetic process of the precursor of the PG is present in Figure 1.3. Figure
1.3 depicts the structure of PG and main relevant enzymes involved with PG
biosynthesis. The top reaction in Figure 1.3 presents the process that UDP-
GlcNAC is converted to UDP-MurNAC catalyzed by Mur ligases MurA and
MurB.
1.3
Industrial cheese production
L. lactis is broadly applied in fermented food. During the process of fermentation,
L. lactis produces organic acids which extend the shelf-life and decrease the
microbial risk by suppressing bacterial infection, and develop the ﬂavor of the
ﬁnal product as well. Cheese is a classic dairy food that produced by coagulation
of milk protein casein.
In the industrial cheese production, the pretreated milk is pasteurized and cooled
down, and then the starter culture which is usually a mixture of some strains
is added to ferment lactose and produce lactic acid, and the starter culture
used during this step rapids the acidiﬁcation and curdles the milk. Rennet is a
protease enzyme that curdles the casein in milk, and the gel is formed following
the coagulation of casein. After coagulation, the curd is heated to control the
water content in the curd, and this step is called syneresis. During syneresis, the
higher temperature leads to more water removed from the curd, and diﬀerent
temperatures lead to diﬀerent kinds of cheese produced with various hardness
and ﬂavor. While the heat treatment during this process would pose stress
on the strain, and extremely stressful condition would lead to the failure of
==PAGE:23==
1.3 Industrial cheese production
13
Figure 1.3: Structure and enzymes in the biosynthesis of the precur-
sor of peptidoglycan in Lactococcus lactis (L. lactis). In-
side the rectangle dotted frame is the typical stem peptide ex-
isted in L. lactis, and the bold type reveals the implicated en-
zymes during connection between the glycan chains with the
stem peptides.
Inside the circular dotted frame is alternative
interpeptide bridge D-Asp or A-Asn in L. lactis.
This Fig-
ure uses the schematic representation of the structure of PG in
[Chapot-Chartier and Kulakauskas, 2014] as the reference.
==PAGE:24==
14
Introduction
fermentation. Afterwards the rest solid is further processed by salting, forming
and pressing. In curding and separation processes, some lactose and lactate
would be lost with whey, and the rest lactate is mainly converted to lactic
acid in the initial ripening process, and the acidiﬁcation rate depends on the
temperature [McSweeney, 2004] [Tiwari et al., 2013] [Smit et al., 2005]. Cheese
ripening, which is also an important stage because reactions of the breakdown
of proteins, lipids and carbohydrates take place during this process, and these
reactions releases some aroma compounds, for example acetoin and diacetyl.
The biochemical changes occur in ripening, including the primary reactions and
secondary reactions. Lipolysis, proteolysis and glycolysis metabolism are the
primary reactions that produce substrates for the second reaction. The secondary
reaction refers to the production of aroma compounds from amino acids and fatty
acids. The metabolism of amino acids that mainly derived from the hydrolysis
of casein, and also the metabolism of citrate and lactate [McSweeney, 2004]
[Tiwari et al., 2013] [Smit et al., 2005].
1.4
Heat stress response mechanism
Regardless of natural inhabits or dairy processing environments, L. lactis could
suﬀer stressful conditions that vary on temperature, pH, or osmotic pressure.
Under stress, the stress response mechanism of L. lactis would be activated
to adapt the strain to the changed environment [Sanders et al., 1999].
The
thermally robust strain is of more interest by cheese industries, and the stress
mechanism of L. lactis under heat stress would also be of interest for study.
L. lactis is mesophile with the optimal growth temperature of 30◦C, when the tem-
perature is shifted to 42◦C, L. lactis stops growing, while its growth resume occurs
after the temperature shifted to 30◦C again. In addition, heat shock proteins were
also induced when the temperature shifted to 42◦C [Whitaker and Batt, 1991].
L. lactis sense the thermal condition by two pathways. Thermal stress causes the
denaturation of proteins, and accumulation of denatured proteins would induce
the response of strains. Another pathway is by primary thermosensory structures,
including DNA, RNA, and proteins or lipids. CtsR regulator functions as a
thermosensor in L. lactis, and activities of some CtsR proteins are found depends
on the temperature [Papadimitriou et al., 2016].
Chaperone functions in assisting the folding or refolding misfolded proteins, for
instance DnaK, GrpE, and GroEL [Duwat et al., 1999], and heat shock proteins
(HSPs) are produced by cells in response to exposure to stressful conditions,
so HSPs are synthesised at high levels under stressful conditions. While HSPs
usually perform chaperone functions by refolding damaged proteins or stabilizing
==PAGE:25==
1.5 Sequencing technology
15
them to ensure the correct folding, and preventing the unexpected protein
aggregation [Wu, 1995]. Studies on the mutation of HSPs have proved that the
lack of HPSs cause higher sensitivity of cells to heat stress [Kim et al., 2001].
CtsR is a thermosensor that senses the temperature change, and regulates the
expression of the clp gene and other HSP genes. The chaperone systems of
DnaK, and GroEL/GroES are well characterized in L. lactis. Clp family of
proteins in L. lactis are regulated by the transcriptional repressors CtsR and
HrcA [Papadimitriou et al., 2016]. RecA, which is important for the repair and
maintenance of DNA, would be activated by binding partially single-strand
DNA when DNA is damaged [Duwat et al., 1995] [M. Smith et al., 2014]. The
recA gene interacts with the response of L. lactis under heat stress and the
expression of HSPs, while HSPs are induced independently of recA gene in E.
coli [Duwat et al., 1995].
When the cell is exposed to stressful conditions, it would modify the metabolic
activities to adapt to the new environments, which leads to the change of the
utilization of substrates and production of energy [Papadimitriou et al., 2016].
Environmental stresses prohibit the glycolytic pathway and cause the shift of
metabolic pathway to mixed-acid fermentation. While L. lactis generate ATP
mainly by glycolysis and substrate-level phosphorylation, stressful conditions
would inhibit the synthesis of ATP [Zhang et al., 2011]. Stress could also induce
regulation on gene expression, and it could occur at diﬀerent stages of gene
expression. Some regulators, for instance, CodY and Pur operons. the mutations
have been identiﬁed on the coding region of these regulators in mutated strains
of SD96, and their mutations may leads to the regulation or changes on related
gene expression.
1.5
Sequencing technology
Sequencing technology is used in molecular biology to study genomes and the
proteins they encode. Next-generation sequencing (NGS), also known as High-
throughput sequencing (HTS) which provides more comprehensive insights into
the sequence of DNA compared to traditional sequencing method (Sanger se-
quencing). NGS technologies are wildly used to study genomics, transcriptomics,
and epigenomics and it is usually performed by fragmenting the whole genome
into small pieces and sequence multiple fragments at once automatically. Within
HTS technologies, NGS platforms have various applications, including exome se-
quencing, genome sequencing, transcriptome proﬁling (RNA-Seq), DNA-protein
interactions (ChIP-Seq), ribosomal sequencing, and epigenome characterization
[de Magalhães et al., 2010] [Nielsen et al., 2011] [Churko et al., 2013].
==PAGE:26==
16
Introduction
Illumina technology is wildly used as the platform in DNA sequencing, and it
works by identifying DNA bases and the order of bases. Illumina technology
generates sequencing information from paired-end reads which means that se-
quencing is performed on both ends of the original template. RNA sequencing
(RNA-Seq) is applied on transcriptional proﬁling. It measures the presence
and levels of genes by sequencing the transcriptome and determining the fre-
quency of genes in the sequence.
Then the diﬀerential expression between
samples and conditions could be calculated by comparing normalized gene sig-
nals [de Magalhães et al., 2010] [Churko et al., 2013]. Illumina technology and
RNA-Seq would be used to obtain the genetic and transcriptomic information
of all targeted strains in this thesis. The outputs obtained by Illumina method
give insights into the DNA bases which is further used to identify mutations
occurred on mutated strains. Expression levels generated from RNA-Seq would
be analyzed by DESeq2 method to identify the diﬀerentially expressed genes
with expression levels. All these obtained information from NGS technologies
could provides an comprehensive insights into the reason of thermotolerance of
mutated strains. The detailed will be analyzed in Chapter 2.
1.6
Existed studies and project outlook
L. lactis subsp. lactis IL1403 and L. lactis subsp. cremoris MG1363 are two
plasmid-free strains of lactococci. Extensively studies have been conducted on
them and their chromosomal genome have been completely sequenced. The
circular chromosome in L. lactis IL1403 was detected that has 2,365,589 bp and
an average G+C content of 35.4%, and protein-coding genes account for 86% of
the genome. Among all genes that assigned to identify their biological functions,
64.2% were classiﬁed into functional categories, and 20.1% were found to be
matched with hypothetical proteins with unknown function [Bolotin et al., 2001].
L. lactis MG1363 can’t metabolite citrate or produce diacetyl, but it was found
produce acetoin. Gene aldB encodes α-acetolactate which is the intermediate
in diacetyl production, and ilvBN encodes α-acetolactate synthase and also
participates in the formation of the operon that involved in BCAAs biosynthesis
[Swindell et al., 1996]. SD96 is the parent strain in this project, and it belongs to
the same subspecies with IL1403. Moreover, IL1403 has been extensively studied,
and its genome sequence was already completely identiﬁed and annotated, thus,
the annotated sequence IL1403 from NCBI could be a suitable reference to be
aligned with SD96 to identify highly similar sequences.
This project focus on the mutations and diﬀerential expression levels that may
lead to the thermotolerance of mutated strains. The similar study has been pub-
lished by Jun Chen and Jing Shen in [Chen et al., 2015]. In their work, mutant
==PAGE:27==
1.6 Existed studies and project outlook
17
strain TM29 (maximum growth temperature: 40◦C) with higher thermotolerance
was isolated from MG1363 (maximum growth temperature: 38◦C), and TM29
has higher lactate production rate than parent strain. They conducted genome
sequencing to detect mutations and compared the transcriptional proﬁles to ﬁnd
diﬀerentially expressed genes. The mutation occurred on the upstream of gene
groESL which encodes chaperones were detected, and at higher temperature,
overexpression of groESL was found in MG1363 and this was speculated to
partly contribute to the thermotolerance of mutated strain. Besides the muta-
tions involved with chaperones, mutations aﬀect cell membrane, and nutrient
transporters were also identiﬁed [Chen et al., 2015].
This project aims to identify the mutations that responsible for the thermotoler-
ance of mutated strains, and expression levels of detected genes were obtained
to assist the analysis on mutations. This project would provide a genetic basis
for the further research on thermotolerance of L. lactis strains, and also may
provide ideas for industries to achieve more eﬃcient cheese production.
==PAGE:28==
18
Introduction
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 2
The methodology
2.1
Adaptive laboratory evolution on SD96
Adaptive laboratory evolution (ALE) was carried out on L. lactis SD96 to
increase its thermotolerance. SD96 has been used in industrial cheese production,
thus, it has been adapted to this environment and readily grows in milk. When
SD96 grows in milk and reconstituted skim milk (RSM), it survived and grew
at upper temperature of 39◦C. Additionally, SD96 grew slower in ultra-high
temperature (UHT) treated milk, but UHT milk was still chosen as substrate for
ALE as it is sterile and proteolysis as well as caramelization is less obvious as
in autoclaved RSM which is heated at 121◦C for 15 min. Sterility is crucial for
ALE because the growth of SD96 is very slow at the start of incubation, thus,
other milk products are not good choices for substrate due to absence of sterility.
JA24, RD01 and RD07 were isolated from SD96 via diﬀerent adaptation pro-
cedures. When SD96 was exposed to high temperature, mutated strains were
obtained by repeated transfers after presence of obvious solidiﬁcation in UHT
milk. After inoculation, the culture was incubated at 30◦C for 1 h, then at 42◦C
for 1 h, and then again at 30◦C until solidiﬁcation. Then it was repeated follow-
ing the exposure at these three temperatures for 24 times, JA24 was isolated.
While RD01 was isolated after constant exposure to high temperatures (39◦C for
48 h and 40◦C for 48 h), and RD07 was isolated after exposure to 41◦C for 24 h.
==PAGE:30==
20
The methodology
2.2
Genetic and transcriptomic analysis
The genome and transcriptome of mutated strains were sequenced by Illumnia
sequencing technology and RNA sequencing technology individually. Based on
the obtained DNA sequences of mutated strains, mutations occurred on mutated
strains were detected in comparison with sequence of SD96. RNA sequencing was
used to sequence the transcriptome of all strains, and generated expression levels
of them. Following DESeq2 analysis was conducted to compare the expression
levels between diﬀerent strains or diﬀerent temperatures. Then data is ﬁltered
with threshold values to obtain signiﬁcantly diﬀerentially gene expression, and is
used to facilitate the analysis on thermotolerance of mutated strains.
2.2.1
Genetic analysis by Illumina sequencing to detect
mutations in mutated trains
Illumina NGS follows four steps, including library preparation, cluster generation,
sequencing, and data analysis.
In library preparation, DNA molecules are
fragmented into shorter DNA samples and ligated with adapters to both ends
of the fragments. Following is the quality trimming, which purposed to trim
the reads with low quality. Then the fragments are hybridized to the ﬂow cell
and further ampliﬁed into a cluster. The bases are identiﬁed in sequencing
step, and the sequence of DNA nucleotides are obtained [Illumina, 2015]. The
reads obtained from sequencing are aligned to the reference sequence (whole
genome sequence of SD96) via bioinformatic software (Geneious Prime). The
minimum coverage value and variance frequency values are set to conduct the
comparison, and then the diﬀerences between mutated strains (JA24, RD01,
RD07) and SD96 are identiﬁed, and mutations as well. The output result from
the software reveals the information of each mutation, including its reference
position, variance frequency and coverage, mutation type, encoded proteins, and
change on bases as well.
2.2.2
Transcriptomic analysis by RNA sequencing to cal-
culate the diﬀerential gene expression
Generally, RNA-Seq experiment consists of isolating RNA, selecting RNA species
and converting them to complementary DNA (cDNA), preparing RNA-Seq library,
sequencing them on NGS platforms and conducting transcriptome analysis
[Kukurba and Montgomery, 2015].
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Genetic and transcriptomic analysis
21
Figure 2.1:
The process of sequencing and analysis performed on
the genome and transcriptome of thermotolerant strains
by software Genious Prime.
==PAGE:32==
22
The methodology
In order to reveal the transcriptomic changes occurred in the mutant strains JA24,
RD01 and RD07, RNA sequencing was conducted on all mutant strains and SD96
that grew at two diﬀerent temperature levels (30◦C and 39◦C) individually. The
sequencing reads obtained from RNA-Sequencing were aligned to the reference
genome of SD96. With each condition (strain, temperature and replicate), the
sequence is aligned to the reference genome, then 16 alignments (4 strains,
2 temperatures and all in duplicates) were obtained. From each alignment,
expression levels were calculated, DESeq2 compared these alignments/expression
levels and provided the diﬀerential expression levels. Based on expression levels
of strains, diﬀerential gene expression (DGE) analysis was applied to identify
which genes are diﬀerentially expressed with high signiﬁcance. DESeq2 which
tests diﬀerential expression using negative binomial generalized linear models is a
kind of DGE tool, and it uses shrinkage estimators for dispersion and fold-change
to facilitate a more quantitative analysis of RNA-seq data [Love et al., 2014].
DESeq2 generates output ﬁles with logarithmic fold changes (log2(fold-change)),
P-value as well as adjusted P-value for each comparisons. P-value and adjusted
P-value present the statistical signiﬁcance of expression levels, and log2(fold-
change) values reveal the magnitude of diﬀerence. Fold-change is the eﬀect
size estimate which indicates how much the gene’s expression are changed in
comparison, and it is reported on a logarithmic scale to base 2 [Love et al., 2013].
For instance, log2(fold-change) of 1 for comparison of SD96 versus JA24 at 30◦C
represents that the gene’s expression level is increased by a factor of 21 = 2
in JA24 compared to SD96. Although the eﬀect size is estimated by log2(fold-
change), the standard error also exists with estimation. To test whether the data
provides suﬃcient evidence to conclude the existence of diﬀerence, P-value which
represents the probability that a fold-change value is stronger than observed
one or not. Adjusted P-value is BH-adjusted extitP-value which comes from
Benjamini-Hochberg (BH) adjustment [Love et al., 2013]. If the threshold of
adjusted P-value is 0.05 which means that a fraction of 5% false positives are
acceptable. We use the benchmarks with log2(fold-change) < -1 or > 1 along
with adjusted P-value < 0.05 for identifying signiﬁcantly diﬀerentially expressed
genes.
2.3
Sequence alignment
2.3.1
Sequence alignment by NCBI BLAST
L. lactis IL1403 which belongs to the same subspecies as SD96 has been exten-
sively studied, while the annotation of each gene and translated protein of SD96
==PAGE:33==
2.3 Sequence alignment
23
is with insuﬃcient evidence, and the annotation of SD96 from National Center
for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) system lacks of credibility. Moreover,
further analysis on the strains in this project demand the credible gene name
to get related researches and references. Thus, the nucleotide sequence of each
gene in SD96 that to be analysed are aligned with the whole genome of IL1403
to ﬁnd the highly similar gene and speciﬁc gene information (name, encoded
protein, etc.) in IL1403, which could ensure the accuracy of gene information on
SD96 during mutation analysis.
Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) is a sequence similarity search
program which is a practical tool to compare a query to the sequence of databases
[Johnson et al., 2008]. NCBI nucleotide BLAST are applied in sequence align-
ment to ﬁnd highly similar sequences (megablast program) in IL1403 and obtain
more credible annotation of gene and translated protein, which facilities further
analysis of mutations on thermotolerant strains.
2.3.2
Accession number of reference genome sequences
Mutation occurred on SD96 led to the derivation of robust strains JA24, RD01,
and RD07. All genome sequences referred in this project are cited from NCBI.
The transcript was annotated by being mapped with gene annotations provided
by the reference genome, and the reference number of all genomes referred in
this project are present as follows: L. lactis SD96 (NZ_CP043523.1), L. lactis
NZ9000 (CP002094.1), L. lactis IL1403 (AE005176.1, NC_002662.1), L. lactis
MG1363 (NC_009004.1).
The complete genome of L. lactis IL1403 has two resources, AE005176.1 from
GenBank and NC_002662.1 from NCBI reference sequence. NC_002662.1 has
updated genome information but with insuﬃcient annotations on gene, for
instance, the gene name. Therefore, both these two resources of its genome
are used in sequence alignment, and annotation on speciﬁc gene is referred to
AE005176.1 from GenBank.
==PAGE:34==
24
The methodology
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 3
Results analysis and
discussion
Mutations occurred on mutated strains JA24, RD01, and RD07 were identiﬁed
by aligning their sequences that were detected by Illumnia sequencing with the
sequence of parent strain SD96. The diﬀerential expression levels that compared
between strains (SD96, JA24, RD01, and RD07) and conditions (30◦C and 39◦C)
were also calculated based on expression levels detected by RNA sequencing
and analyzed by DESeq2. All this information obtained is used as the basis of
analysis on the thermotolerance of mutated strains.
As present in Table 3.1, mutations occurred at various positions led to diﬀerent
base substitutions and following diverse eﬀects on encoded proteins. From Table
3.1 some identical mutations could be found. RD01 shares two mutations with
RD07 (RD01-1 to RD07-3, RD01-4 to RD07-8). In addition, some mutations
occurred are found to be silent mutations, which means that mutations don’t
have an observable eﬀect on the phenotype of the cell. Silent mutations don’t
change the amino acid sequence of the resulting protein. Thus, they usually have
less eﬀect on overall gene expression. Moreover, a large deletion was found in
the chromosome of RD01 and RD07, and the deletion gap in these two mutated
strains are identical, and the loss of plasmid was also found in these two strains.
The deletion caused the loss of a series of genes, while among these deleted genes,
most of proteins encoded by them are hypothetical proteins.
==PAGE:36==
26
Results analysis and discussion
Figure 3.1 presents an overview of the expression levels and signiﬁcance in all
strains with elevated temperatures. As the temperature increased from 30◦C to
39◦C, all strains have genes that are up-regulated (red dots) and down-regulated
(green dots), while the distribution is diﬀerent. It seems that RD01 and RD07
have more genes that are down-regulated compared to up-regulated genes, while
SD96 and JA24 have a more balanced distribution of up- and down-regulated
levels. Moreover, RD01 and RD07 have a deletion in the chromosome, which
leads to that SD96 and JA24 have more plots than the other two strains.
Comparing these strains, the log2(fold-change) value of some genes in SD96
and JA24 are approximately around -10 or 10 with extremely high signiﬁcance,
while the largest and the smallest log2(fold-change) values in RD01 and RD07
are near 5 and -5. The lower scale of the log2(fold-change) value in mutated
strains suggests that the increase of temperature causes fewer changes in gene
expression in mutated strains compared to SD96.
Regarding the y-axis value, the adjusted P-values in RD01 and RD07 are lower
than SD96 and JA24, moreover, the adjusted P-values in SD96 are higher than
that in mutated strains. This phenomenon maybe is resulted from the higher
variation between the replicates in mutated strains and large deletion in RD01
and RD07.
3.1
Mutation analysis on JA24
Two mutations were identiﬁed on the JA24, and both of these two mutations
are single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP), which were caused by the change
of single base. The reference position of one mutation is 1531408, and the
substitution of a single base on one DNA strain is from Guanine (G) to Thymine
(T), which is in the coding sequence of LCP family protein, while this codon
change didn’t alter the translated protein.
The other mutation (Reference
position: 1814364) occurred at the coding sequence of pleiotropic transcriptional
regulator CodY, where the codon change from Guanine (G) to Thymine (T)
causes the shift of expressed protein from Arginine (R) to Serine (S).
3.1.1
A mutation on LCP family protein involves in the
cell wall structure in JA24
LCP (LytR-CpsA-Psr) family protein, is a conserved family of transferases,
which is involved in the attachment of secondary polymers such as TA to the
==PAGE:37==
3.1 Mutation analysis on JA24
27
Figure 3.1: Volcano plots of the four strains (parent strain SD96 and
mutated strains JA24, RD01 and RD07) with tempera-
ture from 30◦C to 39◦C displaying signiﬁcance and gene
expression on the y and x axis, respectively.
Dots with
log2(fold-change) >1 and adjusted P-value <0.05 are colored red,
and dots with log2(fold-change) <-1 and adjusted P-value <0.05
are colored green. Dots with no signiﬁcant expression are colored
grey. The dashed grey lines show where log2(fold-change) is 1 and
-1, and the horizontally dashed blue line shows where adjusted
P-value is 0.05.
==PAGE:38==
28
Results analysis and discussion
Mutation ID
Reference position a
Mutation type b
Changed
Protein
Amino acid
JA24-1
FTN78_RS07905
SNP
G→T
LCP family protein
Silent mutation
JA24-2
FTN78_RS09305
SNP
G→T
GTP-sensing pleiotropic transcriptional regulator CodY
Arg→Ser
RD01-1
FTN78_RS03040
SNP
C→T
EamA family transporter
Silent mutation
RD01-2
FTN78_RS09305
DIP
A(6)→A(5)
Upstream of CodY
No change
RD01-3
FTN78_RS10010
SNP
C→G
Bifunctional (p)ppGpp synthetase
Val→Leu
RD01-4
FTN78_RS11940
SNP
T→G
UDP-N-acetylmuramate-L-alanine ligase
Phe→Leu
RD01-Gap
1823878 to 1897135
DEL
-
-
-
RD07-1
FTN78_RS00265
SNP
C→A
Phenylalanine-tRNA ligase subunit beta
Arg→Ser
RD07-2
FTN78_RS00795
SNP
T→A
Hypothetical protein
Val→Glu
RD07-3
FTN78_RS03040
SNP
C→T
EamA family transporter
Silent mutation
RD07-4
FTN78_RS10440
SNP
G→T
DNA primase
Ala→Ser
RD07-5
FTN78_RS10530
SNP
C→G
Upstram of ATP-dependent metalliopepyidase FtsH
No change
RD07-6
FTN78_RS10615
SNP
C→A
Helicase-exonuclease AddAB subunit AddA
Asp→Tyr
RD07-7
FTN78_RS10700
SNP
G→A
Pur operon activator
Gly→Ser
RD07-8
FTN78_RS11940
SNP
T→G
UDP-N-acetylmuramate-L-alanine ligase
Phe→Leu
RD07-Gap
1823878 to 1897135
DEL
-
-
-
RD07-RNA
1153923 to 1153923
Truncation
G→T
Hypothetical protein
Ser-Stop codon
Table 3.1: Mutations occurred on the mutant strains JA24, RD01, and RD07.a refers to the genome sequence
of L. lactis SD96 (NCBI reference sequence: NZ_CP043523.1). bSNP, single nucleotide polymorphism; DIP,
deletion; DEL, large deletion.
==PAGE:39==
3.1 Mutation analysis on JA24
29
cell wall PG of gram-positive bacteria [Sadovskaya et al., 2017].
In L. lactis MG1363, polysaccharide pellicle (PSP) is a chain exposed at the
surface. Besides it, an additional polysaccharide rhamnan, which is a neutral
polysaccharide, is reported to be present in its cell wall, and these two chains
are linked to form a heteropolysaccharide, while the synthesis of these two
polysaccharides is independent. PSP presents in a outer layer of the cell wall,
whereas, rhamnan presents in the inner layer of the cell wall. After rahmnan
is exported to the outside of membrane via transporter system, it is anchored
covalently to PG. LcpA, which is encoded by lcpA gene, is suggested to be the
main ligase involved with the linkage of rhamnan to PG [Sadovskaya et al., 2017]
[Theodorou et al., 2019].
L. lactis NZ9000 is the mutant strain of L. lactis MG1363, and three lcp
paralogs were detected in L. lactis NZ9000, including lcpA (llnz_02385), lcpB
(llnz_03815), and lcpC (llnz_08240), and only lcpA and lcpB were found to
be functional [Sadovskaya et al., 2017]. The deletion of lcpA or lcpB leads to
reduced wall teichoic acids (WTAs) levels, and when all these three genes are
deleted, WTAs would be loss completely. Furthermore, compared to LcpB, LcpA
is more important in attaching the rhamnan to PG, and decreased expression of
LcpA leads to disorganization of the cell wall [Sadovskaya et al., 2017].
The nucleotide sequence of lcpA from L. lactis NZ9000 was found with 87.24%
identity to the mutation position of JA24-1 with locus tag (FTN78_RS07905).
Thus, we can speculate the mutation JA24-1 is involved with enzyme LcpA
belonging to LCP family protein, and it is further related to the linkage of
rhamnan to PG. Then diﬀerential expression levels were calculated as displayed
in Table 3.2, while no signiﬁcantly diﬀerential expression levels are found.
From the exited studies, the decreased expression of gene lcpA would lead to the
inadequate attachment of rhamnan to PG. However, the mutation occurred on
the gene that similar to lcpA didn’t alter the translated protein or expression
levels at diﬀerent conditions. Thus, we can say that mutation JA24-1 didn’t
account for the main part of thermotolerance of JA24, but lcpA is crucial for the
attachment of rhamnan to PG, and rhamnan is essential for cell division and
growth, so this mutation may aﬀect the structure and construction of the cell
wall which may further inﬂuence the cell wall integrity during cell growth and
division [Sadovskaya et al., 2017]. Because the existed study on gene lcpA was
performed on MG1363 which is a L. lactis subsp. cremoris strain, moreover, the
identity between two sequence is 87.24% rather than 100%, thus, the conclusion
we obtain is with uncertainty, and further gene identiﬁcation could be conducted
to get more speciﬁc and reliable conclusion.
==PAGE:40==
30
Results analysis and discussion
Comparison items
Log2(fold-change)
Adjusted P-value
30◦C SD96 - JA24
-0.13
0.51
39◦C SD96 - JA24
0.34
0.02
30◦C - 39◦C SD96
-0.28
0.02
30◦C - 39◦C JA24
0.15
0.23
Table 3.2: Expression levels of the gene that encodes LCP family
protein with comparison between temperatures (30◦C and
39◦C) or strains (SD96 and mutated strain JA24).
3.1.2
A mutation on CodY impacts expression of genes
involved in amino acid metabolism in JA24
The second mutation in JA24 is on the coding sequence of CodY which is a
pleiotropic transcription regulator, and many genes that involved in the amino
acids biosynthesis and transport, peptide transport and degradation, and some
cellular processes are repressed by CodY.
CodY homologues have been identiﬁed in many low-GC gram-positive bacteria,
and function as the transcriptional repressor in the nitrogen metabolism of L.
lactis. When BCAAs present in the cell, CodY sense its existence and is activated
to bind to CodY-box, and then the transcription of CodY-regulated genes are
repressed. CodY-box also exists in the upstream region of CodY which means
that CodY also regulates its own synthesis [Den Hengst et al., 2006].
More than 100 genes that potentially regulated by CodY were identiﬁed in
L. lactis IL1403 [Guédon et al., 2005]. In order to analyze eﬀects of mutation
occurred on the coding sequence of CodY, the nucleotide sequence of all CodY-
regulated genes of IL1403 were aligned to the genome sequence of SD96 to ﬁnd
the similar speciﬁc genes in SD96, and the expression data of these matched
genes are used to facilitate the mutation analysis of CodY in JA24.
When comparing the expression level of CodY-regulated genes between SD96
and JA24 at 30◦C and 39◦C, individually, the results are present in Table 3.3.
At 30◦C, 30 genes are signiﬁcantly down-regulated in JA24 compared to SD96,
while only 4 genes involved in intermediary carbon metabolism (glgC, D, A, apu
are signiﬁcantly up-regulated. Among those signiﬁcantly down-regulated genes,
most of them are involved in amino acid biosynthesis, nitrogen metabolism, and
carbon metabolism. While at 39◦C, 17 genes are signiﬁcantly down-regulated
and 16 genes are up-regulated in JA24. Genes involved in BCAAs are more
strongly down-regulated in JA24 with approximate 3-fold decreased expression
at 30◦C, which means that the expression of BCAAs in JA24 is less reduced at
==PAGE:41==
3.1 Mutation analysis on JA24
31
higher temperature. Thus, higher temperature may enhance the repression of
CodY due to the higher BCAAs pool. From the down-regulated expression of
BCAAs in JA24 compared to SD96, it can be speculated that BCAAs pool in
JA24 would be less than SD96 and this leads to the alleviated repression of CodY
in JA24. Both at 30◦C and 39◦C, genes involved in BCAAs biosynthesis are
most down-regulated, so the mutation occurred on CodY reduced expression of
BCAAs biosynthetic genes. The decreased BCAAs pool would also alleviate the
repression of CodY, and it leads to the derepression on CodY-regulated genes
and following enhanced expression in JA24. Among these derepressed genes
that regulated by CodY, some may also involved in the virulence or tolerance to
stresses, and their over expression accounts for the thermal tolerance of JA24.
The expression levels of strains between temperatures are compared both in
SD96 and JA24. The comparison in SD96 with temperature elevated from 30◦C
to 39◦C is present in Table 3.4. At higher temperature, 36 CodY-regulated
genes are down-regulated in SD96, and 9 CodY-regulated genes are signiﬁcantly
up-regulated. Moreover, the majority of genes involved in BCAAs biosynthesis
are 2-fold or 3-fold down-regulated in SD96 at higher temperature. Thus, the
increase of temperature decreased the expression of BCAAs genes, and may lead
to the alleviation of CodY repression, however most CodY-regulated genes are
also controlled by other regulators, it is hard to explain the reason of change on
the expression of all CodY-regulated genes. For the comparison in JA24 between
temperatures as present in Table 3.5, 8 of CodY-regulated genes are up-regulated
and 13 CodY-regulated genes are down-regulated at higher temperature. In
both SD96 and JA24, higher temperature decreased the expression of BCAAs
biosynthesis genes, which causes reduction of repression system by CodY.
Overall, the comparison of expression were conducted between both strains (SD96
and JA24) and temperatures (30◦C and 39◦C), thus, there are four levels of com-
parison. Genes leuB, C, D and ilvB, C, N present signiﬁcantly down-regulated
expression in JA24 in comparison to SD96 at 30◦C, and leuB, C, D almost
also signiﬁcantly down-regulated at 39◦C. BCAAs is known as the eﬀector and
activator of CodY, and it is concluded that the repression of CodY is prohibited
in JA24 because the expression of most genes involved in BCAAs are almost
signiﬁcantly down-regulated in JA24 at both low and high temperatures. This
mutation occurred on JA24 causes the derepression of CodY. Whereas, in both
SD96 and JA24, genes involved in the biosynthesis of BCAA are mostly down-
regulated at higher temperature. It has been suggested in some studies that the
decrease of the intracellular BCAA pools would further alleviates the repression
of CodY on regulated genes, and the promoted expression of CodY-regulated
genes allows the bacteria to adapt to stressful environment [Guédon et al., 2005].
Therefore, the mutation took place of the coding sequence of CodY leads to the
derepression of CodY-regulated genes, and the over expression of some genes
reinforces the adaptation of JA24 to thermal stress environment. The expression
==PAGE:42==
32
Results analysis and discussion
Functional categorya
Gene nameb
Fold-change (30◦C)
Adjusted P-value ( 30◦C)
Fold-change ( 39◦C)
Adjusted P-value ( 39◦C)
Amino acid biosynthesis
Asparate
hom
-
-
2.47
4.45E-14
thrB
-
-
3.28
2.58E-25
Aromatic
aroH
-
-
0.21
1.14E-26
lctO
-
-
0.28
7.54E-19
Glutamate
gltA
0.38
1.41E-13
0.45
4.93E-04
citB
0.35
7.94E-19
-
-
Branched chain
leuB
0.12
2.06E-25
0.32
7.44E-04
leuC
0.09
7.89E-21
0.47
1.56E-02
leuD
0.12
2.41E-20
0.31
3.69E-03
ilvD
0.26
1.46E-37
-
-
ymeB
0.11
2.57E-18
0.22
7.10E-04
ilvB
0.24
1.83E-33
-
-
ilvN
0.23
1.10E-20
-
-
ilvC
0.27
3.06E-23
-
-
Serine
cysD
0.16
9.10E-15
3.07
2.25E-18
serC
0.29
8.71E-11
0.52
6.39E-10
serA
0.33
1.78E-13
0.52
1.59E-08
serB
0.41
1.17E-07
0.52
1.07E-08
Nitrogen source and peptide degradation
Amino acids, peptides, amines
ctrA
0.27
2.21E-12
-
-
optS
0.20
5.14E-46
-
-
optA
0.24
1.15E-34
-
-
optB
0.33
2.58E-35
0.41
8.00E-14
optC
0.36
1.10E-20
0.35
1.34E-19
optD
0.35
2.82E-10
0.32
4.88E-24
optF
0.40
4.20E-10
0.35
2.56E-15
yibG
-
-
3.08
4.65E-10
Transporter systems
cadA
-
-
15.20
3.79E-142
feoA
-
-
0.28
2.84E-31
feoB
-
-
0.42
1.85E-10
ybiK
-
-
0.43
2.20E-10
lmrP
-
-
2.78
1.14E-11
yweA
-
-
2.47
8.15E-10
Continued on next page
==PAGE:43==
3.1 Mutation analysis on JA24
33
Functional categorya
Gene nameb
Fold-change (30◦C)
Adjusted P-value ( 30◦C)
Fold-change ( 39◦C)
Adjusted P-value ( 39◦C)
Intermediary carbon metabolism
Glycogen and internal polysaccharides
glgC
2.09
7.15E-06
3.39
3.21E-22
glgD
2.02
3.99E-04
3.65
5.79E-21
glgA
2.10
5.78E-03
3.26
1.98E-20
glgP
1.93
4.76E-08
2.59
8.05E-19
apu
2.49
8.55E-16
2.97
6.50E-18
amyL
0.36
3.59E-07
0.46
1.31E-11
ymhC
0.45
8.72E-06
0.32
1.01E-14
Organic acid and alcohol
ypjH
0.24
1.33E-14
-
-
Regulatory functions
glnB
2.13
0.10
2.69
1.39E-03
ymhA
0.32
1.49E-09
0.28
2.59E-23
Other cellular processes
Communication/bacteriocin
yaiE
0.24
1.21E-17
-
-
yaiF
0.26
1.70E-24
-
-
yxdF
0.47
5.06E-06
1.99
3.91E-05
yxdG
0.44
3.24E-10
-
-
yaiH
0.14
4.22E-51
-
-
Detoxiﬁcation
ahpC
-
-
3.18
7.09E-13
ahpF
-
-
3.16
6.33E-12
Other
yneC
-
-
2.67
5.41E-06
Table 3.3: Diﬀerential expression values of CodY-regulated genes in JA24 compared to SD96 at 30◦C
and 39◦C.
aCodY-regulated genes are classiﬁed into various categories based on their functions and the
classiﬁcation method is referred to [Guédon et al., 2005].
bGene name is referred to genome sequence of
L. lactis IL1403 (GenBank accession is AE005176.1). Values in red (up-regulated): fold-change >2 and
adjusted P-value <0.05; in black (down-regulated): fold-change <0.5 and adjusted P-value <0.05; underlined:
fold-change < 2 or > 0.5 and P-value <0.05.
==PAGE:44==
34
Results analysis and discussion
Functional categorya
Gene nameb
Fold-change
Adjusted P-value
Amino acid biosynthesis
Asparate
hom
0.27
3.00E-34
thrB
0.17
1.47E-68
thrA
0.24
1.64E-65
Aromatic
aroH
3.64
2.08E-27
lctO
3.78
3.43E-23
Undeﬁned
bar
0.50
5.99E-07
Glutamate
gltD
0.51
2.04E-15
citB
0.36
1.32E-11
Branched chain
leuB
0.11
7.14E-33
leuC
0.13
6.59E-28
leuD
0.11
3.39E-26
ilvD
0.18
1.28E-56
ymeB
0.18
4.13E-12
ilvB
0.16
3.58E-56
ilvN
0.13
3.84E-23
ilvC
0.15
1.13E-44
Histidine
hisZ
0.21
4.66E-04
hisD
0.39
1.62E-02
hisB
0.36
2.50E-02
ymdC
0.36
2.45E-02
Nitrogen source and peptide degradation
Amino acids, peptides, amines
ctrA
0.23
6.61E-78
oppA
0.51
6.43E-10
optS
0.25
1.12E-03
yibG
0.17
6.05E-37
Transporter systems
cadA
0.04
2.01E-268
feoA
7.97
2.45E-96
feoB
6.38
1.66E-72
ybiK
5.47
4.52E-47
lmrP
0.25
6.56E-29
yweA
0.19
2.00E-54
Intermediary carbon metabolism
Glycogen and internal polysaccharides
glgC
0.43
2.06E-14
glgD
0.35
5.77E-19
glgA
0.49
1.10E-06
glgP
0.45
2.87E-14
apu
0.51
5.81E-08
ymhC
5.92
5.62E-83
Organic acid and alcohol
ypjH
0.44
3.68E-21
mleP
1.95
6.52E-10
Regulatory functions
glnB
0.32
1.37E-05
ymhA
8.46
1.60E-149
Other cellular processes
Communication/bacteriocin
yaiE
0.28
1.26E-16
yaiF
0.14
1.23E-82
yxdF
0.19
3.29E-44
yxdG
0.19
9.38E-43
yaiH
0.10
5.00E-63
Detoxiﬁcation
yneH
2.47
7.45E-15
yneG
1.95
1.64E-06
Other
yeiD
0.22
4.82E-05
yﬁD
0.48
0.49
yohD
2.59
1.68E-03
Table 3.4: Diﬀerential expression values of CodY-regulated genes in
SD96 with temperature increased from 30◦C to 39◦C. Values
in red (up-regulated): fold-change >2 and adjusted P-value <0.05;
in black (down-regulated): fold-change <0.5 and adjusted P-value
<0.05; underlined: fold-change < 2 or > 0.5 and P-value <0.05.
==PAGE:45==
3.1 Mutation analysis on JA24
35
Functional categorya
Gene nameb
Fold-change
Adjusted P-value
Amino acid biosynthesis
Asparate
hom
0.56
6.68E-12
thrB
0.47
8.79E-18
thrA
0.50
2.62E-15
Undeﬁned
yncA
1.87
2.04E-10
Branched chain
leuB
0.31
9.75E-03
leuD
0.27
2.35E-02
ilvD
0.42
1.41E-08
ilvB
0.47
4.28E-07
ilvN
0.32
3.30E-03
ilvC
0.37
1.15E-07
Histidine
hisD
0.31
7.00E-03
hisB
0.37
3.69E-02
ymdC
0.31
3.43E-02
Serine
cysD
10.64
8.16E-121
Nitrogen source and peptide degradation
Amino acids, peptides, amines
yibG
0.36
3.43E-21
yshA
0.52
8.80E-12
Transporter systems
feoB
1.94
2.07E-18
ybiK
1.97
1.41E-09
lmrP
0.52
1.06E-09
yweA
0.29
7.22E-44
Intermediary carbon metabolism
Glycogen and internal polysaccharides
amyL
1.91
5.70E-13
ymhC
4.04
1.16E-61
Organic acid and alcohol
mleS
2.03
1.68E-18
mleP
2.79
2.23E-36
Regulatory functions
glnB
0.39
6.26E-07
ymhA
7.02
1.12E-138
Other cellular processes
Detoxiﬁcation
ahpC
2.26
1.97E-30
ahpF
2.54
3.67E-37
yneH
2.70
2.78E-20
yneG
1.98
1.68E-08
Table 3.5: Diﬀerential expression values of CodY-regulated genes in
JA24 with temperature increased from 30◦C to 39◦C. Values
in red (up-regulated): fold-change >2 and adjusted P-value <0.05;
in black (down-regulated): fold-change <0.5 and adjusted P-value
<0.05; underlined: fold-change < 2 or > 0.5 and P-value <0.05.
==PAGE:46==
36
Results analysis and discussion
levels of gene codY are also calculated, but there are no signiﬁcant diﬀerential
expression of all four comparison levels, thus, the expression of CodY itself didn’t
aﬀected by this mutation. While many CodY-regulon genes are also aﬀected
by other regulators [Guédon et al., 2005], thus, it’s hard to identify the speciﬁc
genes that accounts for the thermal tolerance of JA24 based on obtained data,
and the introduction of related genes into the cell could be further conducted to
determine the speciﬁc genes.
3.2
Mutation analysis on RD01
5 mutations, consisting of 3 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) (Mutation
ID: RD01-1,3,4), a deletion on the upstream of encoding sequence of CodY
(mutation ID: RD01-2), and a larger deletion which starts at 1823878 and ends
at 1897135, were identiﬁed on RD01. Mutation RD01-1 is silent mutation, and
mutation RD01-3, 4 are occurred on the coding sequences of enzymes, moreover,
RD01-2 took place on the upstream of CodY which is a repressor regulator that
impacts gene expression invlved in the amino aicd metabolism, thus, mutation
RD01-2 is speculated to mainly accounts for the thermotolerance of RD01.
Mutation RD01-1 occurred on locus Tag of FTN78_RS03040, and the genome
sequence at this position was aligned with genome sequence of L. lactis IL1403
(NCBI Reference Sequence: NC_002662.1). Genome sequence of the scale from
924977 to 925909 on IL1403, which encodes EamA family transporter, is 99.89%
identical to SD96. Eama, which was called DUF6 (domain unknown function)
previously, is named after the O-acetyl-serine/cysteine export gene in E. coli. The
function of many members of this family are still unknown and are speculated
to be integral membrane proteins, and some proteins are found involved in
nucleotide-sugar transport. However, there is no suﬃcient annotation or existed
studies on this protein in L. lactis. Additionally, this mutation didn’t change the
expression of resulted protein. Therefore, it could be neglected during mutation
analysis on RD01.
3.2.1
A mutation on the upstream of CodY impacts ex-
pression of genes involved in amino acid metabolism
in RD01
This mutation occurred on the upstream of the coding sequence of CodY, and
the deletion of one codon didn’t change the encoded protein. However, CodY
is a pleiotropic regulator and a series of genes are aﬀected by CodY repression,
==PAGE:47==
3.2 Mutation analysis on RD01
37
thus, the analysis on the expression levels of CodY-regulated genes is essential,
although the mutation didn’t alter the encoded protein. The analysis of CodY-
regulated genes in RD01 follows the same analysis in JA24 as present in Section
3.1.2.
Comparison items
Log2(fold-change)
Adjusted P-value
30◦C SD96 - RD01
-2.66
3.09E-95
39◦C SD96 - RD01
-2.85
3.04E-92
30◦C - 39◦C SD96
0.14
0.32
30◦C - 39◦C RD01
-0.04
0.93
Table 3.6: Diﬀerential expression levels of the gene that encodes
CodY with comparison between temperatures (30◦C and
39◦C) or strains (SD96 and mutated strain RD01). Values
in red (down-regulated): log2(fold-change) <-1 and adjusted P-value
<0.05.
Table 3.6 presents the expression level of codY. Among these four comparison
levels, the expression of codY in RD01 are signiﬁcantly down-regulated in RD01
in comparison to SD96 at both 30◦C and 39◦C. However, the diﬀerence resulted
from temperature on expression in SD96 and RD01 are not obvious. Therefore,
the mutation occurred on the upstream of CodY reduces the expression of codY,
and its eﬀects on the repression system of CodY would be analyzed relying on
the expression of CodY-regulated genes as following.
The diﬀerential expression levels of CodY-regulated genes in RD01 in comparison
with SD96 at both 30◦C and 39◦C are present in Table 3.7. Obviously, most
CodY-regulated genes are signiﬁcantly up-regulated in RD01 compared to SD96,
especially genes involved in BCAAs biosynthesis. At 30◦C only 4 genes related
to BCAAs biosynthesis are up-regulated with approximate 1.5-fold increased
expression.
Whereas, 8 genes involved in BCAAs biosynthesis present up-
regulation in RD01 at 39◦C, and the diﬀerences are more distinct. Genes ilvB,
C, N even have more than 2-fold increased expression in RD01 compared to
SD96. The signiﬁcantly increased expression of BCAAs genes would increase the
intracellular level of BCAAs. BCAAs function as the activator of CodY, thus,
the elevated level of BCAAs would lead to the promotion of repression system
of CodY, and following the enhanced repression from CodY on CodY-regulated
genes. Comparing these two expression levels at both low and high temperatures,
it can be suggested that the mutation occurred on the upstream of the coding
sequence of CodY may reinforce and activate the function of CodY due to the
increased expression of BCAAs, but the expression by codY itself is not obviously
aﬀected by the deletion.
Table 3.8 displays the expression levels in RD01 by comparing 30◦C and 39◦C.
==PAGE:48==
38
Results analysis and discussion
Functional categorya
Gene nameb
Fold-change (30◦C)
Adjusted P-value ( 30◦C)
Fold-change ( 39◦C)
Adjusted P-value ( 39◦C)
Amino acid biosynthesis
Aromatic
aroH
-
-
0.18
1.88E-32
lctO
-
-
0.25
2.99E-22
Glutamate
gltD
2.05
7.47E-17
4.61
2.89E-56
gltA
1.96
5.02E-08
-
-
citB
3.04
1.23E-25
2.16
4.60E-06
icd
2.64
1.92E-17
-
-
Branched chain
leuB
-
-
3.70
1.72E-06
leuC
-
-
3.09
1.92E-05
leuD
-
-
3.49
1.22E-04
ilvD
2.72
1.00E-22
3.62
1.30E-18
ymeB
-
-
2.54
1.32E-02
ilvB
2.88
1.27E-20
4.30
5.01E-23
ilvN
2.45
3.37E-11
4.33
1.34E-08
ilvC
3.04
2.82E-19
4.40
1.88E-24
Serine
cysD
0.37
7.13E-05
3.19
3.01E-20
Nitrogen source and peptide degradation
Amino acids, peptides, amines
ctrA
-
-
2.82
1.40E-26
oppA
-
-
2.00
2.44E-07
optS
2.44
1.36E-16
2.43
7.39E-05
yibG
-
-
2.15
3.89E-05
Transporter systems
cadA
0.40
7.40E-10
13.33
9.18E-130
feoA
1.93
2.09E-10
0.38
1.06E-18
feoB
2.06
9.08E-14
-
-
lmrP
-
-
1.94
2.08E-05
yweA
-
-
2.47
3.33E-08
Continued on next page
==PAGE:49==
3.2 Mutation analysis on RD01
39
Functional categorya
Gene nameb
Fold-change (30◦C)
Adjusted P-value ( 30◦C)
Fold-change ( 39◦C)
Adjusted P-value ( 39◦C)
Intermediary carbon metabolism
Glycogen and internal polysaccharides
glgC
2.11
3.17E-06
1.95
2.73E-07
glgD
2.16
3.85E-05
2.50
4.15E-11
glgA
2.01
7.90E-03
2.09
1.56E-08
apu
1.97
4.34E-09
-
-
ymhC
0.29
1.55E-14
0.308
7.09E-70
Organic acid and alcohol
glpK
-
-
3.16
6.33E-12
glpD
-
-
3.16
6.33E-12
glpF2
-
-
0.42
4.95E-06
ypjH
-
-
2.29
1.11E-09
Regulatory functions
ymhA
0.21
2.30E-18
0.06
6.26E-109
Other cellular processes
Communication/bacteriocin
yaiE
-
-
3.47
3.45E-10
yaiF
-
-
5.15
8.69E-45
yxdF
2.93
4.13E-13
10.79
5.82E-57
yxdG
2.92
9.81E-19
9.39
2.55E-72
yaiH
-
-
6.73
1.60E-31
Detoxiﬁcation
ahpC
-
-
3.42
6.04E-15
ahpF
-
-
3.49
2.07E-14
Other
yneC
-
-
2.45
2.94E-05
Table 3.7: Diﬀerential expression values of CodY-regulated genes in RD01 compared to SD96 at 30◦C
and 39◦C.
aCodY-regulated genes are classiﬁed into various categories based on their functions and the
classiﬁcation method is referred to [Guédon et al., 2005].
bGene name is referred to genome sequence of
L. lactis IL1403 (GenBank accession is AE005176.1). Values in red (up-regulated): fold-change >2 and
adjusted P-value <0.05; in black (down-regulated): fold-change <0.5 and adjusted P-value <0.05; underlined:
fold-change < 2 or > 0.5 and P-value <0.05.
==PAGE:50==
40
Results analysis and discussion
Functional categorya
Gene nameb
Fold-change
Adjusted P-value
Amino acid biosynthesis
Asparate
hom
0.34
1.18E-06
thrB
0.27
1.89E-10
thrA
0.35
7.36E-06
Undeﬁned
bar
0.50
2.75E-02
Glutamate
gltA
0.30
4.50E-10
citB
0.26
5.30E-14
Branched chain
leuB
0.36
7.69E-04
leuC
0.36
1.05E-03
leuD
0.32
6.97E-05
ilvD
0.24
6.87E-13
ymeB
0.44
9.50E-03
ilvB
0.24
2.51E-12
ilvN
0.24
7.94E-12
ilvC
0.23
1.26E-17
Histidine
hisD
0.35
5.80E-03
hisB
0.29
3.39E-02
Serine
cysD
4.92
1.14E-06
Nitrogen source and peptide degradation
Amino acids, peptides, amines
ctrA
0.45
5.50E-03
optS
0.25
2.01E-16
yibG
0.28
3.74E-04
Transporter systems
ybiK
1.89
1.21E-03
lmrP
0.46
3.72E-03
yweA
0.38
9.50E-03
Intermediary carbon metabolism
Glycogen and internal polysaccharides
glgC
0.40
1.31E-04
glgD
0.41
8.92E-04
glgP
0.46
3.53E-06
glgA
0.51
9.22E-03
apu
0.47
1.05E-04
Regulatory functions
ymhA
2.51
2.84E-03
yohC
0.42
1.10E-02
Other cellular processes
Communication/bacteriocin
yaiF
0.41
1.07E-06
yaiH
0.46
4.61E-05
Detoxiﬁcation
ahpF
2.05
3.66E-02
Table 3.8: Diﬀerential expression values of CodY-regulated genes in
RD01 when temperature is increased from 30◦C to 39◦C.
Values in red (up-regulated): fold-change >2 and adjusted P-value
<0.05; in black (down-regulated): fold-change <0.5 and adjusted
P-value <0.05; underlined: fold-change < 2 or > 0.5 and P-value
<0.05.
==PAGE:51==
3.2 Mutation analysis on RD01
41
It can be seen that most CodY-regulated genes are down-regulated in RD01 at
higher temperature. Only three genes cysD, ymhA, and ahpF are signiﬁcantly
up-regulated. The expression levels of BCAAs genes are mostly 1-fold or 2-fold
down-regulated at higher temperature, which leads to the alleviation of repression
from CodY regulator. The eﬀect of higher temperature on CodY and BCAAs in
RD07 is consist with that in JA24 which has been analysed in Section 3.1.2.
3.2.2
A mutation on (p)ppGpp synthetase involves in strin-
gent reaction in RD01
When aligned with the genome sequence of L. lactis IL1403, a sequence in
IL1403 was found highly similar with that of RD01-3 (100% identity). From
the genome annotation of IL1403, this sequence encodes bi-functional (p)ppGpp
synthetase/guanosine-3’, 5’-bis (diphosphate) 3’-pyrophosphohydrolase.
Guanosine pentaphosphate (pppGpp) and guanosine tetraphosphate (ppGpp)
are collectively referred to as (p)ppGpp, and they are formed from GDP and
GTP, respectively. Moreover, pppGpp could be converted to ppGpp catelyzed by
pppGpp pyrophosphatase (GppA). (p)ppGpp are involved in regulating growth
and stress response in bacteria [Hauryliuk et al., 2015]. (p)ppGpp could inhibit
ribosomal RNA synthesis which has impact on protein translation and growth
rate, and also aﬀect amino acids uptake and biosynthesis. In addition, (p)ppGpp
could bind to enzymes involved in nucleotide biosynthesis and uptake to regulate
nucleotide metabolism. (p)ppGpp also plays a role as alarmone in bacteria.
When the bacteria exposed to thermal stress, the concentration of (p)ppGpp
would increase. Then the stringent response, which is important for the regula-
tion of bacterial virulence, is induced by the increased synthesis of (p)ppGpp
[Wolz et al., 2010] [Papadimitriou et al., 2016] [Hauryliuk et al., 2015].
In B. subtilis, (p)ppGpp modulates rRNA transcription by changing GTP concen-
tration which also directly aﬀects the repression of CodY [Papadimitriou et al., 2016].
However, CodY in L. lactis is proposed only sense to BCAA pools which has
been described in Section 3.1.2. When GTP levels arrive to a threshold, GTP
would inhibit the growth of the cell, thus, (p)ppGpp is essential to maintain
the stability of GTP and further derepress the inhibition from high GTP. As
for the regulation that mediated by (p)ppGpp, various molecular targets were
found in various species. In E. coli, GuaB, which is IMP dehydrogenase, was
identiﬁed as the main target of (p)ppGpp. While in B. subtilis, HprT and
GmK which are involved in the salvage reactions of IMP and GMP are strongly
repressed [Papadimitriou et al., 2016]. The process can refer to Figure 1.2. The
RelA-SpoT homologue (RSH) family of bi-functional proteins help to synthesize
and degrade (p)ppGpp. RelA and SpoT present in E. coli are activated to
==PAGE:52==
42
Results analysis and discussion
assist (p)ppGpp synthesis under amino acid starvation, and the activation of
RelA is mediated by uncharged tRNAs. The RelA-SpoT homologue identiﬁed
in ﬁrmicutes is Rsh, which is bi-functional protein with (p)ppGpp synthetase
and hydrolase activity [Wolz et al., 2010]. In ﬁrmicutes, some small proteins
are found homologous with (p)ppGpp synthase domain of RelA, and all these
homologues are characterized by only one synthase domain [Wolz et al., 2010].
In B. subtilis, yjbM and ywac are identiﬁed that encoding proteins of these
homologues, and similar genomes of them are identiﬁed in SD96 with around
74% identity, but they didn’t show signiﬁcantly diﬀerential expression in RD01.
Comparison items
Log2(fold-change)
Adjusted P-value
30◦C SD96 - RD01
-0.28
0.14
39◦C SD96 - RD01
-0.20
0.39
30◦C - 39◦C SD96
-1.53
2.25E-29
30◦C - 39◦C RD01
-1.44
7.97E-07
Table 3.9: Diﬀerential expression levels of the gene that encodes
(p)ppGpp synthetase with comparison between tempera-
tures (30◦C and 39◦C) or strains (SD96 and mutated strain
RD01). Values in red (down-regulated): log2(fold-change) <-1 and
adjusted P-value <0.05.
From Table 3.9, this mutation occurred on (p)ppGpp synthetase didn’t cause
obvious diﬀerence on the expression of this gene in RD01 compared to SD96.
However, the increase of temperature reduced the expression of genes encoding
(p)ppGpp synthetase in both SD96 and RD01. In conclusion, what this mutation
accounts for the thermal tolerance of RD01 is still unclear, but it can seen that
it didn’t cause obvious diﬀerence on that. (p)ppGpp is known as alarmone that
implicated in stringent reaction of bacteria under stressful conditions, and it
involves in the purine metabolism especially in the catabolism and metabolism of
GTP, GDP and ATP which are substrates for (p)ppGpp. Thus, we can surmise
that this mutation occurred on the coding sequence of (p)ppGpp synthetase may
modulate the nucleotide pools and (p)ppGpp levels when RD01 exposed at the
thermal condition, and(p)ppGpp levels are correlated with stress response, and
then it further increases the tolerance of RD01. Further investigations need to
establish the speciﬁc regulation and mechanism that mediated by (p)ppGpp in
L. lactis.
==PAGE:53==
3.3 Mutation analysis on RD07
43
3.2.3
A mutation on UDP-N-acetylmuramate-L-alanine lig-
ase involves in peptidoglycan synthesis in RD01
From the NCBI annotation of this mutated gene, it encodes UDP-N-acetylmuramate-
L-alanine ligase which involves in peptidoglycan (PG) biosynthesis, and the
metabolism and structure of the cell wall metabolism has been introduced in
Section 1.2.3.4 .
UDP-N-acetylmuramate-L-alanine ligase (MurC), which encoded by gene MurC,
is an enzyme which catalyzes the bond formation between UDP-N-acetylmuramate
and L-alanine with ADP formed during the reaction, as present in Figure 1.3.
This reaction is ATP-dependent ligation of the ﬁrst amino acid to the sugar moi-
ety of the peptidoglycan precursor. MurC and other three ligases (MurD, MurE,
and MurF) catalyze the reaction between UDP-MurNAc with the pentapeptide
side chain [Emanuele Jr et al., 1996] [Liger et al., 1995].
As so far, the mutation on encoding sequence of UDP-N-acetylmuramate-L-
alanine ligase is directly involved with the PG synthesis of L. lactis RD01. The
PG is the major composition of the cell wall, and the cell wall of bacteria is
responsible for maintaining the cell shape and stability during bacterial growth
and division[Chapot-Chartier and Kulakauskas, 2014]. Based on the expression
data, the gene on this mutated position are not diﬀerentially expressed st all
comparison levels. Thus, we can say that this mutation may has positive eﬀect
on the bonds formation catalyzed by MurC which promotes the process of PG
synthesis, and furthermore enhances the stress resistance of the bacteria.
3.3
Mutation analysis on RD07
A total of 10 mutations, including 8 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (RD01-
RD08), 1 truncation (on the coding sequence of hypothetical protein) and 1 large
deletion on chromosome of RD07. Among 8 SNP mutations most of them took
place on the coding sequence of proteins, while one mutation (RD07-5) occurred
on the upstream of protein coding sequence.
Mutation RD07-2 occurred at the position FTN78_RS00795 of SD96, and this
encodes hypothetical protein based on NCBI annotation. This mutation causes
the codon change from GTA to GAA, which leads to the translated protein shift
from valine to glutamic acid. Whereas this gene and its product haven’t been
characterized, more experimental evidence are in demand to predict and analyze
this mutation and following eﬀects on thermal tolerance of RD07, and mutation
==PAGE:54==
44
Results analysis and discussion
RD07-7 which also encodes hypothetical protein is also skipped in analysis.
Mutation RD07-3 took place on the coding sequence of EamA family transporter,
while this mutation on DNA codon didn’t change the the translated protein.
Moreover, the position and codon change of this mutation occurred on RD07 is
same with that on RD01, as analyzed in Section 3.2.
Mutation RD07-5 occurred at the upstream of the gene that encoding ATP-
dependent metallopeptidase FtsH. In E. coli, HﬂB/FtsH protein is deduced to
be an chaperone or protease, and ftsH was found essential for its growth. In
previous study, when ftsH gene form E. coli was inserted into L. lactis, the
L. lactis mutant was found to be more sensitive to stressful conditions caused
by heat, salt, and cold [Nilsson et al., 1994]. Therefore, FtsH is deduced to be
relevant to the robustness of L. lactis under stresses. While there was no change
occurred on its codon, and no diﬀerential expression of this genes present, which
means that the mutation on the upstream of FtsH didn’t make obvious diﬀerence
on the expression of this gene in RD07.
Mutation RD07-8 occurred on the coding sequence of UDP-N-acetylmuramate-
L-alanine ligase. This mutation took place at the same position with RD01-4,
and the encoded protein from the genome sequence at this position is UDP-N-
acetylmuramate-L-alanine ligase by sequence aligning with IL1403. The eﬀect
caused by this mutation on resulted protein is same with mutation RD01-4 which
has been displayed in Section 3.2.3, and the gene encoding this ligase is found
without the diﬀerential expression at all comparison levels in RD07.
3.3.1
A mutation on phenylalanine-tRNA ligase subunit
beta involves in protein biosynthesis in RD07
Phenylalanine-tRNA ligase subunit beta is a highly conserved enzyme belonging
to the aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase family. It is encoded by PheT. Phenylalanine-
tRNA ligase catalyzes the following reaction which is a key step in protein
biosynthesis [Beyer et al., 2004] :
ATP + L-phenylalanine + tRNA
AMP + diphosphate + L-phenylalanyl-
tRNA
This reaction is AMP-forming reaction, and the ligase which catalyzes the forma-
tion of carbon-oxygen bonds between aminoacyl-tRNA and related compounds
is involved in the biosynthesis of phenylalanine and tyrosine. Phenylalanine is
an essential amino acid, and it is the precursor of tyrosine which is further used
to synthesize proteins in the bacteria.
==PAGE:55==
3.3 Mutation analysis on RD07
45
The genome sequence of gene PheT is fount to be located at locus tag of
FTN78_RS00265 on SD96. The diﬀerential expression levels of this gene at
diﬀerent strains and conditions are calculated and present in Table 3.10. Obvi-
ously, the expression of PheT is signiﬁcantly up-regulated at higher temperature
in SD96, while it is absent in RD07. Additionally, comparing RD07 to SD96,
the expression of PheT is down-regulated in RD07 at 39◦C compared to SD96,
while log2(fold-change) value is near 1.0 with high signiﬁcance, and it could be
considered with the increased expression in RD07 at 30◦C compared to SD96.
However, it is hard to draw the conclusion on this mutation due to the irregular
data.
Comparison items
Log2(fold-change)
Adjusted P-value
Signiﬁcant diﬀerencea
30◦C SD96 - RD07
0.76
0.004
N
39◦C SD96 - RD07
-1.23
4.46E-21
Y(down-regulated)
30◦C - 39◦C SD96
1.72
4.25E-49
Y(up-regulated)
30◦C - 39◦C RD07
-0.26
0.04
N
Table 3.10: Diﬀerential expression levels of PheT gene that encodes
phenylalanine-tRNA ligase subunit beta with comparison
between temperatures (30◦C and 39◦C) or strains (SD96
and mutated strain RD07.aN: no signiﬁcantly diﬀerential ex-
pression; Y: It is signiﬁcantly up-regulated (log2(fold-change) >1
and adjusted P-value <0.05) or down-regulated (log2(fold-change)
<-1 and adjusted P-value <0.05).
3.3.2
A mutation on DNA primase involves in DNA repli-
cation in RD07
This mutation, which changed the codon as well as the eﬀect of product, occurred
at the coding sequence of DNA primase. The codon changed from GCT to TCT
which leads to the change of expressed protein from alanine to serine. The highly
similar sequence was found in L. lactis IL1403 with 100% identity (GenBank:
AE005176.1). This similar sequence (with 100% identity) is encoded by gene
ps105, and the encoded protein in IL1403 is prophage ps1 protein 05, DNA
primase.
DNA primase, belongs to RNA polymerase, is an enzyme implicated with DNA
replication. During DNA replication, DNA primase creates RNA primer which
is essential for DNA replication. Primers, which are short RNA sequences, are
catalyzed by primases and then operate as the starting point for DNA synthesis.
Therefore, DNA primase creates the foundation in DNA replication. Regarding
to the expression data, there is no diﬀerential expression of the gene encoding
==PAGE:56==
46
Results analysis and discussion
DNA primase are identiﬁed in RD07. Thus, this mutation occurred on DNA
primase didn’t make obvious diﬀerence on the expression of this gene in RD07.
3.3.3
A mutation on helicase-exonuclease AddAB subunit
AddA involves in DNA recombination in RD07
This mutation occurred on coding sequence of helicase-exonuclease AddAB
subunit AddA which is encoded by addA gene.
Homologous recombination is an essential process implicated in the repair of
damaged DNA. Double-strand DNA break is harmful for the cell, but it can
be repaired by homologous recombination [Chédin and Kowalczykowski, 2002].
Homologous recombination has been most studied in E. coli. When double-
strand DNA breaks, the bacteria would be repaired by RecBCD pathway, and
when the breaks occur on single-strand DNA, it is repaired by RecF pathway
[Rocha et al., 2005].
RecBCD are important enzymes that initiate the DNA recombination in E.
coli, they have both DNA helicase and nucleus activities to degrade the double-
stranded DNA. In B. subtilis and L. lactis, homologous enzymes AddAB are found
exist in the cell, and they are homologous with RecBCD enzymes functionally
[Chédin and Kowalczykowski, 2002].
RecBCD enzyme has only one domain
which leads to its desire for degradation from 3’-terminated strand, whereas,
AddAB enzymes process degradation on both two strands balancedly due to the
presence of two domains [Chédin and Kowalczykowski, 2002].
From the structural homology, AddA subunit is the homologue of the RecB
subunit, and its known that AddA and AddB subunits degrade two strands of
DNA, and it is deduced each subunit degrades one strand speciﬁcally. From
existed studies on RecB, AddA is speculated to be degrade DNA strand from 3’
to 5’ polarity. AddA subunit processes as helicase and unwind DNA strand with
energy supplied from ATP hydrolysis [Chédin and Kowalczykowski, 2002]. It has
been stated that inactivation of addA or addB causes the increased sensitivity
of cells to DNA-damaging treatments and lower frequencies of homologous
recombination. Moreover, mutation on AddA subunit leads to defectiveness for
DNA homologous recombination of the cell [Chédin and Kowalczykowski, 2002].
No diﬀerential expression of addA gene is found from all comparison data in RD07,
thus, this mutation changed the codon which led to the change of translated
protein, but it didn’t cause the diﬀerential expression of addA in RD07.
==PAGE:57==
3.3 Mutation analysis on RD07
47
3.3.4
A mutation on Pur operon impacts the gene expres-
sion involved in purine biosyntheiss in RD07
This mutation occurred on the coding sequence of Pur operon, which controls
the transcription of pur operon for purine biosynthesis. From the annotations of
SD96 and IL1403 genome sequence, this mutated sequence is encoded by gene
purR.
As present in Section 1.2.3.3, PurR binds to Pur-box and then activates tran-
scription of purR-regulated genes with the co-activator PRPP. The PurR-
regulated genes in L. lactis are classiﬁed as diﬀerent categories with various
functions, and these genes are transcribed from Pur-box-containing promoters
[Jendresen et al., 2012]. The list of PurR-regulated genes in L. lactis is present
in Table 3.12 which refer to the Jendresen’s work in [Jendresen et al., 2012].
Table 3.11 presents the expression of pur in RD07 at diﬀerent comparison levels.
It can seen that increase of temperature didn’t make obvious diﬀerence on the
expression of pur in SD96 and RD07. While compared to SD96, pur has a
slightly increased expression in RD07 at both 30◦C and 39◦C, and this slight
increase on the expression of pur may accounted by the mutation took place on
RD07.
At 39◦C, all PurR-regulated genes except bmpA present signiﬁcantly diﬀerential
expression in RD07 compared to SD96, and all of them are up-regulated which
means they have increased expression in RD07, as shown in Table 3.12. Whereas,
at 30◦C, all only 13 PurR-regulated genes are diﬀerentially expressed and they
have increased expression in RD07, including genes purQ, D, F, E, H, M,
N, guaC, purA, pbuX, fusA, xbt and hprT. Thus, PurR-regulated genes have
increased expression in RD07 at 30◦C, and the increase is more signiﬁcant at
higher temperature. It can be speculated that purine biosynthesis and uptake,
and also other metabolic pathways related to purine biosynthesis were promoted
in RD07, and that more purines and GTP are formed. This would reinforce
energy and purine supply, which increased the robustness of RD07.
When compare the expression levels of strains between temperatures (30◦C and
39◦C), it present diﬀerent results in SD96 and RD07. When the temperature
increased from 30◦C to 39◦C, the expression of most PurR-regulated genes in
SD96 are reduced, except for purF that has a fold-change value of 1.03 with
extreme low signiﬁcance. Among these down-regulated genes that under the
control of PurR, half of them have signiﬁcantly diﬀerential expression at higher
temperature in SD96, and it is displayed in Table 3.13. Among these genes, purS,
Q, L, purA, hprT, phnB, C, E, relA and fusA were found to be signiﬁcantly
down-regulated in SD96, while the signiﬁcance of purH is out of the scale
==PAGE:58==
48
Results analysis and discussion
(Fold-change<0.5) but it is still near the boundary.
As temperature increased, most PurR-regulated genes were repressed in SD96.
Additionally, genes involved in de novo synthesis of IMP are most repressed,
which may leads to the activation of salvage reactions of purines and following
conversion to GTP. From the existed study, it was suggested that the improved
conversion of guanosine via the salvage pathway would increase the level of
guanine nucleotides, which would further induce the sensitivity of the cell to
the high temperature [Ryssel et al., 2014]. Thus, it can be speculated that the
activation of salvage reactions of purines increased the sensitivity of SD96 to
the heat stress, which results in the occurrence of repressed expression of most
PurR-regulated genes in SD96 at higher temperature.
As for the expression in RD07 at elevated temperature, only relA was found to
be signiﬁcantly down-regulated in RD07 at 39◦C, and purN and fusA are both
down-regulated as present in Table 3.14. Therefore, the elevated temperature
did not cause signiﬁcant eﬀects on the expression of PurR-regulated genes in
RD07.
Comparison items
Log2(fold-change)
Adjusted P-value
30◦C SD96 - RD07
0.97
8.29E-07
39◦C SD96 - RD07
0.88
2.97E-05
30◦C - 39◦C SD96
0.12
0.49
30◦C - 39◦C RD07
0.03
0.87
Table 3.11: Diﬀerential expression levels of the gene that encodes Pur
operon with comparison between temperatures (30◦C and
39◦C) or strains (SD96 and mutated strain RD07).
Genes
with fold-change <0.5 and adjusted P-value <0.05 are considered
to be down-regulated; fold-change >2 and adjusted P-value <0.05
are considered to be up-regulated.
==PAGE:59==
3.3 Mutation analysis on RD07
49
Functional categories
Gene namea
Fold-changeb
Adjusted P-valuec
Purine biosynthesis
purB
3.01
4.92E-27
purC, S, Q, L, F
6.11
7.52E-56
purD, E
4.11
6.36E-29
purH
4.02
4.05E-40
purM, N
9.06
4.79E-57
Purine inter-conversions
guaC
9.30
1.29E-129
purA
3.65
1.43E-43
Purine uptake
bmpA
1.89
5.53E-07
pbuX
4.14
5.13E-38
Purine salvage
xpt
4.06
5.12E-44
hprT
4.96
9.34E-25
C1-folate metabolism
glyA
2.75
8.34E-28
fhs
2.32
1.75E-15
folD
2.23
5.65E-14
Phosphate-related
phnB, C, E
4.60
7.01E-46
Translation-related
relA
2.55
1.01E-14
fusA
2.63
2.01E-19
Table 3.12: Expression of genes that under PurR control in RD07
compared to SD96 at 39◦C. aGene name is from the annotation
of genome sequence of L. lactisIL1403 which share similar homology
with SD96 (GenBank accession is AE005176.1).
bFold-change
presents the highest ratio of underlined gene of each cluster; the
fold-change value in regular is signiﬁcantly up-regulated (fold-
change >2 and adjusted P-value <0.05); the underlined fold-change
value is near this boundary of diﬀerential expression with high
signiﬁcance. c Refers to the adjusted P value of underlined gene.
==PAGE:60==
50
Results analysis and discussion
Functional categories
Gene name
Fold-change
Adjusted P-value
Purine biosynthesis
purS
0.46
1.66E-18
purQ
0.50
9.98E-14
purL
0.28
5.22E-44
purH
0.53
9.64E-15
Purine inter-conversions
purA
0.49
5.53E-19
Purine uptake
pbuX
0.51
2.65E-11
Purine salvage
hprT
0.45
1.26E-11
Phosphate-related
phnC
0.32
1.57E-43
phnB
0.32
1.45E-37
phnE
0.32
1.82E-30
Translation-related
relA
0.35
2.25E-29
fusA
0.41
8.46E-21
Table 3.13: Down-regulated genes that under PurR control in SD96
when the temperature increased from 30◦C to 39◦C. Genes
with fold-change <0.5 and adjusted P-value <0.05 are considered
to be down-regulated. Underlined fold-change value is near this
boundary and with P-value <0.05.
Functional categories
Gene name
Fold-change
Adjusted P-value
Purine biosynthesis
purN
1.99
1.13E-08
Translation-related
relA
0.49
1.29E-20
fusA
0.52
5.82E-17
Table 3.14: Down-regulated genes that under PurR control in RD07
when the temperature increased from 30◦C to 39◦C. Genes
with fold-change <0.5 and adjusted P-value <0.05 are considered
to be down-regulated; fold-change >2 and adjusted P-value <0.05
are considered to be up-regulated. Underlined fold-change value is
near the boundary and with P-value <0.05.
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 4
Conclusion
The expression level of all genes in parent strains SD96 and mutated strains
JA24, RD01 and RD07 are compared at four levels to see the diﬀerence resulted
from the mutations occurred and increased temperature from 30◦C to 39◦C.
The mutation took place on CodY is found to be main reason that results in
the thermotolerance of mutated strains JA24 and RD01. In JA24, only two
mutations were identiﬁed, and one of them is silent mutation with no alteration
on translated proteins. Plenty of CodY-regulated genes present diﬀerentially
expression (log2(fold-change)<1 or >-1 and adjusted P-value <0.05) under the
comparison on temperatures or strains, while the expression of codY gene itself
didn’t cause distinct diﬀerence on its expression. Comparing expression of CodY-
regulated genes in JA24 to SD96, genes involved in the biosynthesis of BCAAs
which is the activator and sensor for CodY present reduced expression at both
30◦C and 39◦C. And the comparison between temperatures in both SD96 and
JA24 reveals that expression of BCAAs genes are mostly down-regulated. Thus,
the mutation occurred on CodY in JA24 decreases the expression of BCAAs,
and it would reduce the repression of CodY on CodY-regulated genes, and the
increase of temperature has the same eﬀect.
In RD01, the mutation occurred on the upstream of CodY repressed the expres-
sion of codY. Comparing the expression of CodY-regulated genes in JA24 to
SD96, most of genes encoding BCAAs present signiﬁcantly up-regulated at both
==PAGE:62==
52
Conclusion
30◦C and 39◦C, ans this is opposite to JA24 where most BCAAs genes present
reduced expression compared to SD96. Additionally, higher temperature rein-
forced the up-regulation on genes encoding BCAAs in RD01, which is consistent
with that in JA24, but the diﬀerence is more distinct in RD01. The diﬀerence
only resulted from temperature on BCAAs genes in RD01 is similar to JA24, and
higher temperature repressed the expression of BCAAs. CodY-regulated genes
are also under the regulation of other regulators, but BCAAs is the only sensor
for CodY and functions with CodY-box to activate the repression of CodY, thus,
the speciﬁc genes aﬀected by the mutation that accounts for the robustness
of JA24 and RD01 are still unknown, however, the diﬀerence present on gene
encoding BCAAs provides a direction to speculate the eﬀect on the mutation
on CodY repression system which impacts the amino acid metabolism as well
as nitrogen and carbon metabolism of the bacterium. The mutation occurred
on UDP-N-acetylmuramate-L-alanine ligase didn’t aﬀect the expression of this
gene in RD01, so it shouldn’t be main reason accounts for the thermotolerance
of RD01. As for the mutation on (p)ppGpp synthetase, signiﬁcant diﬀerence
is found as temperature increasing in SD96 and RD01, but absent with the
mutation. Overall, the mutation that took place on the upstream of CodY is
speculated to account for the robustness of RD01 under thermal stress, and then
cause the over expression of some CodY-regulated genes, and some of them may
related to the virulence of strains.
Compared to other mutated strains, RD07 has more mutated positions, and
among these mutations, both the mutation and increase of temperature didn’t
carry signiﬁcant diﬀerence on the gene expression of most them, except for Pur
operon. Pur operon is also involved in the expression of many genes that impact
purine biosynthesis and mechanism in L. lactis. Regarding to the expression levels
of pur gene, the increase of temperature didn’t alter its expression in SD96 and
RD07. However, a slight increased expression can be seen by comparing RD07 to
SD96, and the diﬀerence is more distinct at lower temperature. This phenomenon
could be caused by the mutation occurred on RD07, thus, the mutation occurred
on Pur operon slightly promotes the expression of pur in RD07 compared to
SD96. Furthermore, genes under Pur control present signiﬁcantly increased
expression in RD07 compared to SD96 at 39◦C, and it would reinforce the purine
uptake, biosynthesis and metabolism in the cell. The eﬀects on genes under Pur
control carried by the temperature are not obvious in RD07.
The genes that present diﬀerentially expression during analysis are also under the
control or regulation by other regulators, so the result obtained from sequencing
technology is caused by multi mechanisms in the strain. Moreover, the genome
sequence of SD96 hasn’t been deeply studied. Thus, all the analysis is not
completely reliable, but it could give a insight to understand the robustness of
mutated strains under the heat stress. Further analysis are in demand to obtain
a more speciﬁc and precise conclusion on the robustness of mutated strains.
==PAGE:63==
Appendix A
Appendix
The expression levels of genes involved in three COG categories, including amino
acid metabolism, nucleotide metabolism, and carbon metabolism, are plotted in
Figure A.1 A.2 A.3 in Appendix, individually.
In Figure A.1, it can be seen that SD96 has the most genes diﬀerentially expressed
as temperature increasing, and following is JA24, RD01, and RD07, in turn with
less diﬀerentially expressed genes. Comparing JA24 to SD96, some genes involved
in amino acid metabolism are up-regulated with extreme high signiﬁcance, while
there are less in SD96. Considering about the mutation on CodY in JA24, the
present of these signiﬁcantly up-regulated genes maybe is resulted from the over
expression of CodY-regulated genes. Comparing RD01 with RD07, RD07 have
less diﬀerentially expressed genes in amino acid and nucleotide metabolism.
==PAGE:64==
54
Appendix
Figure A.1: Volcano plots of the signiﬁcance (y axis) and expression
(x axis) of genes belonging to amino acid metabolism and
transport COG category in four strains (parent strain
SD96 and mutated strains JA24, RD01 and RD07) with
temperature from 30◦C to 39◦C. Dots with log2 Fold-change
>1 and adjusted P-value <0.05 are colored red, and dots with
log2 Fold-change <-1 and adjusted P-value <0.05 are colored
green. Dots with no signiﬁcant expression are colored grey. The
dashed grey lines show where log2 Fold-change is 1 and -1, and
the horizontally dashed blue line shows where adjusted P-value is
0.05.
==PAGE:65==
55
Figure A.2: Volcano plots of the signiﬁcance (y axis) and expression
(x axis) of genes belonging to nucleotide metabolism and
transport COG category in four strains (parent strain
SD96 and mutated strains JA24, RD01 and RD07) with
temperature from 30◦C to 39◦C. Dots with log2 Fold-change
>1 and adjusted P-value <0.05 are colored red, and dots with
log2 Fold-change <-1 and adjusted P-value <0.05 are colored
green. Dots with no signiﬁcant expression are colored grey. The
dashed grey lines show where log2 Fold-change is 1 and -1, and
the horizontally dashed blue line shows where adjusted P-value is
0.05.
==PAGE:66==
56
Appendix
Figure A.3: Volcano plots of the signiﬁcance (y axis) and expression
(x axis) of genes belonging to carbohydrate metabolism
and transport COG category in four strains (parent
strain SD96 and mutated strains JA24, RD01 and RD07)
with temperature from 30◦C to 39◦C. Dots with log2 Fold-
change >1 and adjusted P-value <0.05 are colored red, and dots
with log2 Fold-change <-1 and adjusted P-value <0.05 are colored
green. Dots with no signiﬁcant expression are colored grey. The
dashed grey lines show where log2 Fold-change is 1 and -1, and
the horizontally dashed blue line shows where adjusted P-value is
0.05.
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[Åkerberg et al., 1998] Åkerberg, C., Hofvendahl, K., Hahn-Hägerdal, B., and
Zacchi, G. (1998).
Modelling the inﬂuence of pH, temperature, glucose
and lactic acid concentrations on the kinetics of lactic acid production by
Lactococcus lactis ssp. lactis ATCC 19435 in whole-wheat ﬂour. Applied
Microbiology and Biotechnology.
[Beyer et al., 2004] Beyer, D., Kroll, H. P., Endermann, R., Schiﬀer, G., Siegel,
S., Bauser, M., Pohlmann, J., Brands, M., Ziegelbauer, K., Haebich, D., Ey-
mann, C., and Brötz-Oesterhelt, H. (2004). New class of bacterial phenylalanyl-
trna synthetase inhibitors with high potency and broad-spectrum activity.
Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy, 48(2):525–532.
[Bolotin et al., 2001] Bolotin, A., Wincker, P., Mauger, S., Jaillon, O., Malarme,
K., Weissenbach, J., Ehrlich, S. D., and Sorokin, A. (2001). The complete
genome sequence of the lactic acid bacterium lactococcus lactis ssp. lactis
IL1403.
[Chambellon and Yvon, 2003] Chambellon, E. and Yvon, M. (2003).
CodY-
regulated aminotransferases AraT and BcaT play a major role in the growth
of Lactococcus lactis in milk by regulating the intracellular pool of amino
acids. Applied and Environmental Microbiology.
[Chapot-Chartier and Kulakauskas, 2014] Chapot-Chartier,
M. P. and Ku-
lakauskas, S. (2014). Cell wall structure and function in lactic acid bacteria.
Microbial Cell Factories.
[Chen et al., 2015] Chen, J., Shen, J., Ingvar Hellgren, L., Jensen, P. R., and
Solem, C. (2015). Adaptation of Lactococcus lactis to high growth temperature
leads to a dramatic increase in acidiﬁcation rate. Scientiﬁc Reports.
==PAGE:68==
58
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Churko et al., 2013] Churko, J. M., Mantalas, G. L., Snyder, M. P., and Wu,
J. C. (2013). Overview of high throughput sequencing technologies to elucidate
molecular pathways in cardiovascular diseases.
[Chédin and Kowalczykowski, 2002] Chédin, F. and Kowalczykowski, S. C.
(2002). A novel family of regulated helicases/nucleases from gram-positive bac-
teria: insights into the initiation of dna recombination. Molecular Microbiology,
43(4):823–34, 823–834.
[Courtin et al., 2006] Courtin, P., Miranda, G., Guillot, A., Wessner, F.,
Mézange, C., Domakova, E., Kulakauskas, S., and Chapot-Chartier, M. P.
(2006). Peptidoglycan structure analysis of Lactococcus lactis reveals the
presence of an L,D-carboxypeptidase involved in peptidoglycan maturation.
Journal of Bacteriology.
[de Magalhães et al., 2010] de Magalhães, J. P., Finch, C. E., and Janssens, G.
(2010). Next-generation sequencing in aging research: Emerging applications,
problems, pitfalls and possible solutions. Ageing Research Reviews, 9(3):315–
323.
[Den Hengst et al., 2006] Den Hengst, C. D., Groeneveld, M., Kuipers, O. P.,
and Kok, J. (2006). Identiﬁcation and functional characterization of the
Lactococcus lactis CodY-regulated branched-chain amino acid permease BcaP
(CtrA). Journal of Bacteriology.
[Den Hengst et al., 2005] Den Hengst, C. D., Van Hijum, S. A., Geurts, J. M.,
Nauta, A., Kok, J., and Kuipers, O. P. (2005). The Lactococcus lactis CodY
regulon: Identiﬁcation of a conserved cis-regulatory element.
Journal of
Biological Chemistry.
[Dorau et al., 2020] Dorau, R., Chen, J., Jensen, P. R., and Solem, C. (2020).
Complete Genome Sequence of Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis bv. diacetylactis
SD96 . Microbiology Resource Announcements.
[Duwat et al., 1995] Duwat, P., Ehrlich, S. D., and Gruss, A. (1995). The recA
gene of Lactococcus lactis: characterization and involvement in oxidative and
thermal stress. Molecular Microbiology.
[Duwat et al., 1999] Duwat, P., Ehrlich, S. D., and Gruss, A. (1999). Eﬀects of
metabolic ﬂux on stress response pathways in Lactococcus lactis. Molecular
Microbiology.
[Emanuele Jr et al., 1996] Emanuele Jr, J. J., Jin, H., Jacobson, B. L., Chang,
C. Y., Einspahr, H. M., and Villafranca, J. J. (1996). Kinetic and crystal-
lographic studies of escherichia coli udp-n-acetylmuramate: L-alanine ligase.
Protein science, 5(12):2566–2574.
==PAGE:69==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
59
[Endo and Dicks, 2014] Endo, A. and Dicks, L. M. (2014). Physiology of the
LAB. In Lactic Acid Bacteria: Biodiversity and Taxonomy.
[García-Cayuela et al., 2012] García-Cayuela, T., Gómez de Cadiñanos, L. P.,
Peláez, C., and Requena, T. (2012). Expression in Lactococcus lactis of
functional genes related to amino acid catabolism and cheese aroma formation
is inﬂuenced by branched chain amino acids. International Journal of Food
Microbiology.
[García-Quintáns et al., 1998] García-Quintáns, N., Magni, C., De Mendoza, D.,
and López, P. (1998). The citrate transport system of Lactococcus lactis subsp.
lactis biovar diacetylactis is induced by acid stress. Applied and Environmental
Microbiology.
[Garrigues et al., 2001] Garrigues, C., Goupil-Feuillerat, N., Cocaign-Bousquet,
M., Renault, P., Lindley, N. D., and Loubiere, P. (2001). Glucose metabolism
and regulation of glycolysis in Lactococcus lactis strains with decreased lactate
dehydrogenase activity. Metabolic Engineering.
[Garrigues et al., 1997] Garrigues, C., Loubiere, P., Lindley, N. D., and Cocaign-
Bousquet, M. (1997). Control of the shift from homolactic acid to mixed-acid
fermentation in Lactococcus lactis: Predominant role of the NADH/NAD+
ratio. Journal of Bacteriology.
[Gaudu et al., 2019] Gaudu, P., Yamamoto, Y., Jensen, P. R., Hammer, K.,
Lechardeur, D., and Gruss, A. (2019). Genetics of Lactococci. Microbiology
Spectrum.
[Guédon et al., 2001] Guédon, E., Serror, P., Ehrlich, S. D., Renault, P., and
Delorme, C. (2001). Pleiotropic transcriptional repressor CodY senses the in-
tracellular pool of branched-chain amino acids in Lactococcus lactis. Molecular
Microbiology.
[Guédon et al., 2005] Guédon, E., Sperandio, B., Pons, N., Ehrlich, S. D., and
Renault, P. (2005). Overall control of nitrogen metabolism in Lactococcus
lactis by CodY, and possible models for CodY regulation in Firmicutes.
Microbiology.
[Guillot et al., 2003] Guillot, A., Gitton, C., Anglade, P., and Mistou, M. Y.
(2003). Proteomic analysis of Lactococcus lactis, a lactic acid bacterium.
Proteomics.
[Hauryliuk et al., 2015] Hauryliuk, V., Atkinson, G. C., Murakami, K. S., Ten-
son, T., and Gerdes, K. (2015). Recent functional insights into the role of
(p)ppGpp in bacterial physiology.
[Holzapfel and Wood, 2014] Holzapfel, W. H. and Wood, B. J. (2014). Introduc-
tion to the LAB.
==PAGE:70==
60
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Hugenholtz, 1993] Hugenholtz, J. (1993). Citrate metabolism in lactic acid
bacteria. FEMS Microbiology Reviews.
[Illumina, 2015] Illumina (2015). An introduction to Next-Generation Sequenc-
ing Technology.
[Jendresen et al., 2012] Jendresen, C. B., Martinussen, J., and Kilstrup, M.
(2012). The PurR regulon in Lactococcus lactis - Transcriptional regulation of
the purine nucleotide metabolism and translational machinery. Microbiology
(United Kingdom).
[Johnson et al., 2008] Johnson, M., Zaretskaya, I., Raytselis, Y., Merezhuk, Y.,
McGinnis, S., and Madden, T. L. (2008). NCBI BLAST: a better web interface.
Nucleic acids research.
[Kilstrup et al., 2005] Kilstrup, M., Hammer, K., Jensen, P. R., and Martinussen,
J. (2005). Nucleotide metabolism and its control in lactic acid bacteria.
[Kilstrup and Martinussen, 1998] Kilstrup, M. and Martinussen, J. (1998). A
transcriptional activator, homologous to the bacillus subtilis purr repressor,
is required for expression of purine biosynthetic genes in lactococcus lactis.
Journal of Bacteriology, 180(15):3907–3916.
[Kim et al., 1999] Kim, W. S., Ren, J., and Dunn, N. W. (1999). Diﬀerentiation
of Lactococcus lactis subspecies lactis and subspecies cremoris strains by their
adaptive response to stresses. FEMS Microbiology Letters.
[Kim et al., 2001] Kim, W. S., Ren, J., and Dunn, N. W. (2001). Assessment of
the tolerance of Lactococcus lactis cells at elevated temperatures. Biotechnology
Letters.
[Kowalczyk et al., 2015] Kowalczyk,
M.,
Mayo,
B.,
Fernández,
M.,
and
Aleksandrzak-Piekarczyk, T. (2015). Updates on Metabolism in Lactic Acid
Bacteria in Light of "Omic" Technologies. In Biotechnology of Lactic Acid
Bacteria: Novel Applications: Second Edition.
[Kukurba and Montgomery, 2015] Kukurba, K. R. and Montgomery, S. B.
(2015). RNA sequencing and analysis. Cold Spring Harbor Protocols.
[Lahtinen et al., 2011] Lahtinen, S., Ouwehand, A. C., Salminen, S., and von
Wright, A. (2011). Lactic acid bacteria: Microbiological and functional aspects,
fourth edition.
[Liger et al., 1995] Liger, D., Masson, A., Blanot, D., Van Heijenoort, J., and
Parquet, C. (1995). Over-production, puriﬁcation and properties of the uridine-
diphosphate-n-acetylmuramate: l-alanine ligase from escherichia coli. European
journal of biochemistry, 230(1):80–87.
==PAGE:71==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
61
[Love et al., 2013] Love, M., Anders, S., and Huber, W. (2013). Diﬀerential
analysis of RNA-Seq data at the gene level using the DESeq package.
[Love et al., 2014] Love, M. I., Anders, S., and Huber, W. (2014). Diﬀerential
analysis of count data - the DESeq2 package.
[Lovering et al., 2012] Lovering, A. L., Safadi, S. S., and Strynadka, N. C. (2012).
Structural Perspective of Peptidoglycan Biosynthesis and Assembly. Annual
Review of Biochemistry.
[M. Smith et al., 2014] M. Smith, W., H. Soomro, A., and S. Turner, M. (2014).
Molecular mechanisms of stress resistance in lactococcus lactis.
[Martinussen et al., 2001] Martinussen, J., Schallert, J., Andersen, B., and Ham-
mer, K. (2001). The pyrimidine operon pyrRPB-carA from Lactococcus lactis.
Journal of Bacteriology.
[McSweeney, 2004] McSweeney, P. L. (2004). Biochemistry of cheese ripening.
In International Journal of Dairy Technology.
[Meijer et al., 1996] Meijer, W., Marugg, J. D., and Hugenholtz, J. (1996).
Regulation of proteolytic enzyme activity in Lactococcus lactis. Applied and
Environmental Microbiology.
[Mozzi et al., 2010] Mozzi, F., Raya, R. R., and Vignolo, G. M. (2010). Biotech-
nology of Lactic Acid Bacteria: Novel Applications.
[Neves et al., 2010] Neves, A. R., Pool, W. A., Solopova, A., Kok, J., Santos,
H., and Kuipers, O. P. (2010). Towards enhanced galactose utilization by
lactococcus lactis. Applied and Environmental Microbiology.
[Nielsen et al., 2011] Nielsen, R., Paul, J. S., Albrechtsen, A., and Song, Y. S.
(2011). Genotype and snp calling from next-generation sequencing data. Nature
Reviews Genetics, 12(6):443–451.
[Nilsson and Kilstrup, 1998] Nilsson, D. and Kilstrup, M. (1998). Cloning and
expression of the lactococcus lactis purdek genes, required for growth in milk.
Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 64(11):4321–4327.
[Nilsson et al., 1994] Nilsson, D., Lauridsen, A. A., Tomoyasu, T., and Ogura, T.
(1994). A Lactococcus lactis gene encodes a membrane protein with putative
ATPase activity that is homologous to the essential Escherichia coli ftsH gene
product. Microbiology.
[Papadimitriou et al., 2016] Papadimitriou, K., Alegría, Á., Bron, P. A., de An-
gelis, M., Gobbetti, M., Kleerebezem, M., Lemos, J. A., Linares, D. M., Ross,
P., Stanton, C., Turroni, F., van Sinderen, D., Varmanen, P., Ventura, M.,
Zúñiga, M., Tsakalidou, E., and Kok, J. (2016). Stress Physiology of Lactic
Acid Bacteria. Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews.
==PAGE:72==
62
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Rocha et al., 2005] Rocha, E. P., Cornet, E., and Michel, B. (2005). Compar-
ative and evolutionary analysis of the bacterial homologous recombination
systems.
[Ryssel et al., 2014] Ryssel, M., Meisner Hviid, A. M., Dawish, M. S., Haaber, J.,
Hammer, K., Martinussen, J., and Kilstrup, M. (2014). Multi-stress resistance
in Lactococcus lactis is actually escape from purine-induced stress sensitivity.
Microbiology (United Kingdom).
[Sadovskaya et al., 2017] Sadovskaya, I., Vinogradov, E., Courtin, P., Arma-
lyte, J., Meyrand, M., Giaouris, E., Palussière, S., Furlan, S., Péchoux, C.,
Ainsworth, S., Mahony, J., van Sinderen, D., Kulakauskas, S., Guérardel, Y.,
and Chapot-Chartier, M. P. (2017). Another brick in the wall: A rhamnan
polysaccharide trapped inside peptidoglycan of lactococcus lactis. mBio.
[Sanders et al., 1999] Sanders, J. W., Venema, G., and Kok, J. (1999). Environ-
mental stress responses in Lactococcus lactis.
[Smit et al., 2005] Smit, G., Smit, B. A., and Engels, W. J. (2005). Flavour
formation by lactic acid bacteria and biochemical ﬂavour proﬁling of cheese
products.
[Swindell et al., 1996] Swindell, S. R., Benson, K. H., Griﬃn, H. G., Renault, P.,
Ehrlich, S. D., and Gasson, M. J. (1996). Genetic manipulation of the pathway
for diacetyl metabolism in Lactococcus lactis. Applied and Environmental
Microbiology.
[Theodorou et al., 2019] Theodorou, I., Courtin, P., Palussière, S., Kulakauskas,
S., Bidnenko, E., Péchoux, C., Fenaille, F., Penno, C., Mahony, J., Van
Sinderen, D., and Chapot-Chartier, M. P. (2019). A dual-chain assembly
pathway generates the high structural diversity of cell-wall polysaccharides in
Lactococcus lactis. Journal of Biological Chemistry.
[Tiwari et al., 2013] Tiwari, B. K., Norton, T., and Holden, N. M. (2013). Sus-
tainable Food Processing.
[von Wright and Axelsson, 2011] von Wright, A. and Axelsson, L. (2011). Lactic
acid bacteria: An introduction. In Lactic Acid Bacteria: Microbiological and
Functional Aspects, Fourth Edition.
[Wessels et al., 2004] Wessels, S., Axelsson, L., Bech Hansen, E., De Vuyst, L.,
Laulund, S., Lähteenmäki, L., Lindgren, S., Mollet, B., Salminen, S., and
Von Wright, A. (2004). The lactic acid bacteria, the food chain, and their
regulation.
[Whitaker and Batt, 1991] Whitaker, R. D. and Batt, C. A. (1991). Characteri-
zation of the heat shock response in Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis. Applied
and Environmental Microbiology.
==PAGE:73==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
63
[Wolz et al., 2010] Wolz, C., Geiger, T., and Goerke, C. (2010). The synthesis
and function of the alarmone (p)ppGpp in ﬁrmicutes.
[Wu, 1995] Wu, C. (1995). Heat Shock Transcription Factors: Structure and
Regulation. Annual Review of Cell and Developmental Biology.
[Zhang et al., 2011] Zhang, J., Wu, C., Xue, F., Du, G., and Chen, J. (2011).
Stress responses of lactococcus lactis. Stress Responses of Lactic Acid Bacteria,
pages 199–218.
[Zimmer, 1996] Zimmer, J. P. (1996). Handbook of Milk Composition. Journal
of Human Lactation.
