==PAGE:1==
Master of Science in
Industrial Engineering and Management
Investigating the stages of
sustainable entrepreneurship:
towards strong sustainability
Author: Giorgia Scartozzi
==PAGE:2==
Supervisor: Associate Professor Francesco Rosati
Co-supervisor: Assistant Professor Argyro Nikiforou
DTU Entrepreneurship
Centre for Technology Entrepreneurship
Technical University of Denmark
Diplomvej
Building 371
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
I wish to express my deepest gratitude to my supervisors, Associate Professor Francesco
Rosati and Assistant Professor Argyro Nikiforou, for the inspiration and the assistance
provided during my study. They have been both essential in defining the path of my
research and in guiding me through these challenging times. I couldn’t ask for anything
more.
I wish also to acknowledge the support and love of my family: my parents, Anna Maria
and Ferdinando, my sister, Silvia, and my brother-in-law, Marco. Despite the COVID-
19 pandemic has been keeping us apart, I could constantly feel their presence beside
me. They kept me going on and this thesis would not have been possible without their
wholehearted support.
Finally, to my darling Alessandro, the life we are building together and all the dreams
we are yet to achieve. For his love saved me eight years ago, and it’s still saving me.
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This thesis intends to shed some light on the discourse about the sustainability spec-
trum in the entrepreneurship literature. Since it seems to be a topic not fairly explored
yet, this thesis aims at developing some knowledge about the distinguishing character-
istics, and thus the main differences, of the weak, intermediate, and strong paradigms
of sustainable entrepreneurship.
A further aim of this research is the uncovering of
potential correlations between background factors, that might trigger the intention of
entrepreneurs to start a venture, and the integration of sustainability within the venture.
The principles underlying these stages and the different components of the traditional,
sustainable and strongly sustainable business models are retrieved through literature
review and then used to explore their application in real entrepreneurial cases, through
the use of semi-structured interviews with seventeen Danish ventures.
The answers
given by the participants of the study have been analyzed through a deductive thematic
analysis.
The general result of this analysis shows that the elements underlying the ventures
object of this study are in accordance with the majority of the sustainability principles
and business model’s components found in the literature, with only a few discrepancies
that led to the revision and formalization of those elements for the entrepreneurship
literature.
Several background factors (working experience, education, volunteering,
personal motivation and sensing) have been also analysed so to uncover and discuss the
potential and existing connection between each of these factors and a certain stage of
sustainability. Moreover, correlations between the combination of two or more factors
and the level of integration of sustainability within their ventures have been found.
The main theoretical contribution of this thesis is about helping formalize and
broaden the theoretical knowledge on the specific sustainability principles and business
model components that distinguish the weakly, intermediately, and strongly sustainable
entrepreneurship, filling the gap on the sustainability spectrum. The formalization of
the principles and business model’s components might also allow their divulgation in the
form of guideline to be handed over to consultancies and other policy institutions, but
further research would be needed to actually transform these elements in proper guide-
lines. Moreover, the thesis could serve as incentive for the introduction of courses in uni-
versity programs to clarify theoretical aspects about sustainability, boosting knowledge
about the physical ecological limits of the planet and its capacity to support economic
and social activities (especially in technical universities, where this topic seems to be
poorly addressed and students are found to be more encouraged towards a ‘profit-first
mentality).
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Acknowledgements
i
Abstract
ii
Contents
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Research question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Literature review
6
2.1
The sustainability spectrum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Sustainable entrepreneurship . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
Business model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4
Sustainable business model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.5
Preliminary research framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3
Methodology
27
3.1
Research design and methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2
Data collection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3
Data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4
Analysis and findings
35
4.1
Weakly sustainable entrepreneurship
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.1.1
Organizational perspective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.1.2
Understanding of sustainability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.1.3
Stakeholder perspective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.1.4
Economic growth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.1.5
Business model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.1.5.1
Value proposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.1.5.2
Value creation & delivery system . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.1.5.3
Value capture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.2
Intermediately sustainable entrepreneurship
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.2.1
Organizational perspective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.2.2
Understanding of sustainability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
==PAGE:6==
iv
Contents
4.2.3
Stakeholder perspective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.2.4
Economic growth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.2.5
Business model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.2.5.1
Value proposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.2.5.2
Value creation & delivery system . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.2.5.3
Value capture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.3
Strongly sustainable entrepreneurship . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.3.1
Organizational perspective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.3.2
Understanding of sustainability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.3.3
Stakeholder perspective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.3.4
Economic growth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.3.5
Business model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.3.5.1
Value proposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.3.5.2
Value creation & delivery system . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.3.5.3
Value capture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.4
Factors influencing the orientation taken by each business typology
. . .
58
4.4.1
Working experience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.4.2
Education . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.4.3
Volunteering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
4.4.4
Personal motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.4.5
Sensing the opportunity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
4.5
Combinations of factors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
4.5.1
Education, sensing and economic growth . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
4.5.2
Personal motivation and organizational perspective . . . . . . . .
65
4.5.3
Personal motivation and sensing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
4.5.4
Education and personal motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
5
Discussion
71
5.1
The sustainability spectrum applied to entrepreneurship
. . . . . . . . .
71
5.2
The role of background factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
5.2.1
Education, sensing and economic growth . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
5.2.2
Personal motivation and organizational perspective . . . . . . . .
82
5.2.3
Personal motivation and sensing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
5.2.4
Education and personal motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
6
Conclusion
85
6.1
Theoretical contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
6.2
Practical contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
6.3
Limitations and suggestions for future work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
Appendix
91
Bibliography
94
==PAGE:7==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
“Sustainability demands an integration of social and environmental issues
with economic issues. What this exactly means and what the consequences
are for business is far from clear.” (Dyllick & Muff, 2016, p. 162)
Over the last century, we have witnessed an extensive economic growth and increases
in the quality of life (Biloslavo, Bagnoli, & Edgar, 2018; Dean & McMullen, 2007) largely
due to the development of factories for large-scale production. This was possible thanks
to the widespread adoption of electricity and the introduction of mechanized, later au-
tomated, assembly line in factories. The significant increases in efficiency lowered the
cost of the end process, leading to a vast adoption of the mass production worldwide.
Nevertheless, this industrial development and the focus of firms on economic per-
formance, rather than on an integration of economic, social, and environmental per-
formance, was achieved at a major cost to the environment and society. In fact, big
firms are considered by many to be the main players creating social and environmental
problems (Brozovic, 2020; Cohen & Winn, 2007; Schaltegger & Wagner, 2011; Upward
& Jones, 2016) such as depletion of natural resources, pollution of air, water and soil,
deforestation, and climate change. These long-term negative impacts are showing to be
quite substantial because a large portion of the world’s economy is dependent upon the
availability of natural systems (Biloslavo et al., 2018; Dean & McMullen, 2007).
In order to reduce their impacts, many companies have attempted to improve en-
ergy consumption and limit the depletion of natural resources through eco-design and
eco-efficiency approaches (N. M. Bocken, Short, Rana, & Evans, 2014). Sustainability is
increasingly becoming the pillar of many corporate strategies, which have taken on the
directives from policymakers and from public pressure to improve their environmental
performance, with nearly every major firm having a vice-president level executive with
the term “sustainability” in his or her title (Cohen & Winn, 2007; Hall, Daneke, & Lenox,
2010). As a matter of fact, many of these ameliorations have been driven by a growing
environmental and social consciousness of the community, most markedly through the
issues of global warming, the overconsumption of limited natural resources, and the toxic
substances deployed in various industrial manufactures from food systems to children’s
toys. That resulted in a change in the patterns of buying behaviours, inducing a signif-
icant shift in institutional thinking and the development of close relationships between
politics, ecology, and economy (Biloslavo et al., 2018).
Incumbents engaging in activities and strategies directed towards sustainability are
considered by some to be the enablers of sustainable transformations of products and
services on a large-scale (Cohen & Winn, 2007) because of their strong influence on
==PAGE:8==
2
Introduction
markets, society, and environment.
In this connection, it is claimed by many that
sustainable development can only be achieved if the totality of markets and society,
or at least very large parts, become more sustainable. Mass market incumbents have
the added advantage of having large market shares, but they are often seen to give
sustainability a marginally low priority. (Hockerts & Wüstenhagen, 2010; Schaltegger,
Lüdeke-Freund, & Hansen, 2016)
Most of the present literature on corporate sustainability (what Cohen and Winn
(2007) also call ’corporate greening’) has focused on how incumbents can reduce their
environmental impacts and how sustainability might affect their competitive advantage
(Cohen & Winn, 2007; Hall et al., 2010). However, the impact of their activities is not
really reflected in studies monitoring the global state of the environment and society:
this results in a big disconnect between the “micro-level” progress of businesses and the
“macro-level” deterioration of the Earth (Dyllick & Muff, 2016). The rate of change that
incremental solutions like eco-design or eco-efficiency approaches offer will not be enough
to offset the rising resource use and environmental impacts associated with a growing
developing global population: in fact, the resulting efficiency improvements often lead
to increased product and service use as they become more affordable and accessible to
anyone, reflecting the concept of ‘rebound effect’ (Biloslavo et al., 2018; N. M. Bocken
et al., 2014). In this sense, industrial sustainability efforts are directed to the right path,
but with the general supposition that businesses can continue largely as usual under
current assumptions of growth and incremental improvement (N. Bocken, Short, Rana,
& Evans, 2013; Brozovic, 2020; Cohen & Winn, 2007; Hall et al., 2010).
Given these premises, it seems apparent that continuing with business as usual is no
longer an option for a sustainable future (N. M. Bocken et al., 2014; Brozovic, 2020).
Considering the broadly accepted definition of Sustainable Development as “development
that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations
to meet their own needs” (World Commission on Environmental Development, 1987), a
fundamental transformation and an integrated approach that go beyond eco-efficiency
initiatives and reconceives how businesses operate are required to reduce the detrimental
impacts created by our currently unsustainable business practices, particularly with
regard to respecting the ecological limits of planetary boundaries and the needs of future
generations, as, for example, addressed in the United Nations Sustainable Development
Goals (N. M. Bocken et al., 2014; Hall et al., 2010; Landrum, 2018; Schaltegger, Lüdeke-
Freund, & Hansen, 2016; United Nations General Assembly, 2015).
Albeit corporations are not the only relevant agents of environmental and societal
deterioration, the current situation should act as a wake-up call for businesses, because
their intentions and initiatives have proven to be insufficient to meaningful sustainable
improvements (N. Bocken et al., 2013; Dyllick & Muff, 2016). Incumbents are in fact
mostly focused on the exploitation of existing production processes, distribution chan-
nels, market segments, and so on, often neglecting the exploration of new approaches
and market potential (Schaltegger, Lüdeke-Freund, & Hansen, 2016). They often take
poorly decisive approaches towards sustainability: most of what companies did so far
was ‘reducing unsustainability’, ignoring larger human, social, and environmental con-
cerns, and only trying to adjust and accommodate to the demands of environmentalists,
==PAGE:9==
Introduction
3
while striving to maintain the status quo (Dyllick & Muff, 2016; Landrum, 2018).
This perspective is characteristic of the weak sustainability paradigm, which is based
on the assumption that all capital stocks (therefore, also natural resources and assets) are
mutually substitutable: investments in human and man-made capitals would compensate
for the depletion of natural capital stock. In this sense, confident that there will be some
positive (or at least neutral) effects for some social or environmental challenges, most of
the sustainability initiatives fostered by large companies are to be considered only as a
means to achieve their primary economic goal.
Companies with a business-as-usual modus operandi rarely ask themselves what their
contribution to resolving sustainability issues on a regional or global scale could be and
should be, and this reflects the underlying economic goals that characterize them: to
reduce costs and business risks, to increase reputation, to respond to new customer de-
mands and thereby increase profits, competitiveness and shareholder value. Their suc-
cess is purely economic-related, focusing on serving the business economic goals that are
oriented towards shareholder value (Dyllick & Muff, 2016). Accordingly, the economic
factor plays a crucial role in the decision-making of these businesses and can provide
mechanisms to substitute environmental services and human welfare to continue exploit-
ing natural resources (de Oliveira Neto, Rodrigues Pinto, Castro Amorim, Giannetti, &
Villas Bôas de Almeida, 2018), meaning that natural capital stock is assumed to be so
abundant that man-made capital stock and technical progress can overcome resource
constraint by increasing the productivity of the natural capital faster than its depletion.
Thus, the weak sustainability approach does not seem to adhere to the ongoing concerns
about environmental limits to economic growth (Buriti, 2019).
This position is in contradiction with the strong sustainability paradigm, which con-
siders capital stocks as separate, non substitutable, and thus to be preserved over time.
Specifically, natural capital is characterised by the phenomenon of irreversibility, mean-
ing that it can disappear if the prior deterioration have been to excessive to enable it to
replenish itself (Pelenc & Ballet, 2015). The primary end of strong sustainability is thus
the generation of value beyond profit, which is considered only as a means, and making
a real positive contribution to overcome social and environmental issues.
Building upon the contraposition of ‘weak versus strong paradigms’, various types
and stages of corporate sustainability have been theorized over the last decade, from
the ‘very weak’ to the ‘very strong’ stage. Nevertheless, it has been found that, when
integrated in a firm, the highest level of sustainability in most corporations is aligned
with the so-called intermediate sustainability, an in-between position that intends to
“do more good” (de Oliveira Neto et al., 2018; Dyllick & Muff, 2016; Landrum, 2018),
therefore failing to reach and integrate the strong sustainability perspective theorized
in the corporate literature (Landrum, 2018). This may be due to the aforementioned
mechanisms in which incumbents are held.
On the other hand, entrepreneurs is considered a potent force for triggering the essen-
tial transformation towards a sustainable future (Hahn, Spieth, & Ince, 2018; Schaltegger
& Wagner, 2011; Stål & Bonnedahl, 2016), because it often results in creative destruction
and radical innovation (Schumpeter, 1934), and thanks to the more flexibility and less
inertia that characterize an entrepreneurial venture. Unlike incumbents, usually more
==PAGE:10==
4
Introduction
inclined towards a short-term perspective when deciding on strategies and activities to
adopt, new ventures can have the possibility to discover, create, and exploit opportuni-
ties, often unrecognized by incumbents, since they are not stuck in complex mechanisms
difficult to untie and are more prone to think ‘out of the box’.
Because usually entrepreneurs have the possibility to ‘start from scratch’, they can
choose to embrace strong sustainability principles for their venture, even if they may
still have preconceptions from past experiences that can bias their values and inten-
tions: thanks to the ability of discovering, creating, and exploiting new opportunities,
entrepreneurs have the chance to realise sustainability innovations aimed at the mass
market. However, since sustainability principles are not common knowledge in prac-
tice, it is not clear to what extent entrepreneurs recognize and integrate sustainability
principles within their ventures and business models, and therefore what stage of the
sustainability spectrum they fall under (weak, intermediate or strong).
1.1
Problem statement
Many intellectuals support the idea of entrepreneurs as ‘panacea’ for many social and
environmental issues (“Panacea hypothesis”, Hall et al. (2010)), a position that gave
rise to a new research field, that is the sustainable entrepreneurship. While conventional
entrepreneurs are mostly focused on creating customer value for financial profits, sus-
tainable entrepreneurs aim at resolving environmental and social issues through their
actions, striving thus to combine the mission of contributing to sustainable development
with the entrepreneurial process of discovering, evaluating, and exploiting economic
opportunities (Belz & Binder, 2017; Cohen & Winn, 2007; Neumeyer & Santos, 2018;
Schaltegger, Lüdeke-Freund, & Hansen, 2016).
However, in the entrepreneurship literature the discourse about weak versus strong
sustainability is not quite as wide.
There seems to be only a few studies theoriz-
ing about the distinguishing characteristics of weakly sustainable entrepreneurship and
strongly sustainable entrepreneurship (Parrish, 2010; Shepherd & Patzelt, 2011; Stål &
Bonnedahl, 2016). These studies are mainly intended to be guidelines, and no case stud-
ies have been carried out yet to analyse in practice the distinction between the various
paradigms (weak, intermediate, strong) in new ventures. For entrepreneurs, fostering
strong sustainability principles from the beginning of their venture could be a major
breakthrough in the contribution to a true sustainable development.
For this purpose, findings in corporate literature could serve as a baseline framework
to explore in a multiple case study the main characteristics, and thus the main differences,
between ventures adopting strong sustainability principles and the ones that do not
fully integrate them throughout their businesses (hence falling under either the weak
or intermediate sustainability paradigms). Insights and principles from the corporate
literature about the sustainability spectrum and the different types of business models
will be retrieved and then used to explore their application in real entrepreneurial cases,
so to broaden the knowledge of the sustainability stages for the entrepreneurial research
==PAGE:11==
1.2 Research question
5
field. Moreover, there seems to be no detailed understanding of the factors that might
trigger the intention of entrepreneurs to start a venture based on principles from the
weak, intermediate or strong paradigms; therefore, a further aim of this research is the
uncovering of potential correlations between background factors and the integration of
sustainability within the venture.
1.2
Research question
Given the above, the research questions of this study is as following:
1.
a) What are the main characteristics that distinguish strongly sustainable en-
trepreneurship from weakly and intermediately sustainable entrepreneurship?
b) What are the elements of the strongly sustainable business model that differ
from the ones of the sustainable business model?
2.
a) Do the principles in the studied ventures comply with the characteristics
mapped out for the strong, intermediate, and weak sustainability?
b) Do the business models in the studied ventures comply with the elements
identified for the sustainable business model and the strongly sustainable
business model?
3.
a) Is there a correlation between the motivations that led entrepreneurs to start
their ventures and how they embed sustainability throughout the organiza-
tions?
b) Is there a correlation between the background of the entrepreneurs and how
they integrate sustainability in their business models?
The thesis will be structured as follows:
• Chapter 2 presents a review of the literature about the most relevant theories
for the research: sustainability spectrum, sustainable entrepreneurship, business
model, and sustainable business model.
• Chapter 3 will illustrate how the research process was conducted, how the data
was collected and what kind of method was used for the analysis.
• Chapter 4 will focus on the analysis and reporting of the findings, with the aim of
providing answers to the remaining research questions.
• Chapter 5 will cover the discussion of the findings, with the aim of answering the
research questions.
• Lastly, the general conclusions will be presented in Chapter 6, including also the
limitations of this research and suggestions for future work.
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 2
Literature review
2.1
The sustainability spectrum
The concept of sustainability became popular from the end of the Eighties onwards,
thanks to the Brundtland Report “Our Common Future” that described sustainable de-
velopment as “development that meets the needs of the present without compromising
the ability of future generations to meet their own needs” (World Commission on Envi-
ronmental Development, 1987, p. 15). It is considered a powerful statement by many:
it got more and more popularity thanks to the breadth of the definition itself, where
the Brundtland Commition was able to integrate social, economic, and environmental
considerations in a new concept of ‘development’. Under this rationale, it dictates that
future generations should be allowed for the same level of social, environmental, and
economic opportunities as available today.
The two key concepts of sustainable development are (Buriti, 2019; Lüdeke-Freund,
2010; World Commission on Environmental Development, 1987):
• the concept of ‘needs’, which reflects the essential needs of the poorest people of
the world and thus appeals to the urgency of alleviating poverty and reducing
inequalities;
• the idea of ‘limitation’, so to enable the preservation of ecosystems and their life-
supporting functions, which will require determination of limits to growth based
on technological development, social organization of environmental resources, and
the ability of the biosphere to absorb the effects of human activities.
Yet, on account of that broad definition, many diverging interpretations of the im-
plications of sustainable development emerged, especially about how to handle natural
resources in their economic function as natural capital to the same extent for the present
and future generations (Buriti, 2019). The notion of natural capital was first introduced
in ecological economics in the Nineties, and it depicts a set of complex systems that
interact to determine the capacity of an ecosystem to directly and/or indirectly provide
human society with a variety of functions and services. The term soon started to be
used to support sustainability studies because of the suitability of it for depicting the
socio-economic uses of the environment for pushing environmental issues into economic
thinking and decision-making (Buriti, 2019; Pelenc & Ballet, 2015). At the same time,
there are other capital stocks that need to be considered and sustained with respect to
==PAGE:13==
2.1 The sustainability spectrum
7
the generation of wealth and human wellbeing: manufactured capital, encompassing all
man-made material goods; human capital, which relates to individuals’ capacities and
skills; and social and organizational capital, that corresponds to networks and structures
contributing to an efficient and cohesive society by facilitating social and intellectual in-
teractions (Buriti, 2019; Shepherd & Patzelt, 2011).
However, little consensus has been achieved concerning the proper combination of the
capital stocks necessary to generate wealth in the long term (Brand, 2009; Buriti, 2019).
As a consequence, two major concepts of sustainability emerged: weak sustainability and
strong sustainability. These are becoming the most influential (even if not extensively
used yet) paradigms in the discourse on sustainable development.
In the weak sustainability approach, the only thing that matters is the total capital
stock, which should be at least maintained, or ideally added to, for the sake of future
generations. All capital stocks are considered substitutes; therefore, also natural capital
(comprising natural resources, such as minerals, water, and wood, and natural assets,
such as biodiversity, endangered species, and ecosystems) can be substituted by other
forms of capital. The proponents of this current presume that, for a sustainable devel-
opment, savings from using nonrenewable resource should be invested in man-made and
human capital so as to allow for compensation for the devalued natural capital (Buriti,
2019; Stål & Bonnedahl, 2016).
In contrast, strong sustainability considers each type of capital to be preserved and
intact over time, viewing in particular the natural and man-made capitals as separate
and complements (Buriti, 2019; Stål & Bonnedahl, 2016). Man-made capital requires
natural capital for its production, so it cannot be a complete substitute for natural
capital. The proponents of this approach support the preservation of natural capital at
the same level for present and future generation (Landrum, 2018), as natural capital is
characterised by the phenomenon of irreversibility: the amount of manufactured capital
can be increased or decreased at will, whereas natural capital, that can provide different
services simultaneously, can disappear if the prior deterioration have been too excessive
to enable it to replenish itself (Pelenc & Ballet, 2015).
Consequently, from a strong sustainability perspective, some functions of natural cap-
ital (i.e. ecosystem services, such as freshwater resources, climate regulation, and fertile
soils) can be considered ‘critical’ due to their unique contribution to human well-being
(Brand, 2009; Pelenc & Ballet, 2015). However, due to the multidimensionality that
characterize natural capital, it is still unclear what makes that capital so irreplaceable
that needs to be considered ‘critical’; for this matter, Brand (2009) tried to shed some
light on this by identifying six domains in which ecosystem services can fall under that
interpretation:
• socio-cultural, when they are critical for a particular social group in terms of non-
materialistic needs (health, recreation, cultural identity, and so on);
• ecological, considering, for instance, biodiversity;
• sustainability, which refers precisely to the discourse about weak versus strong
perspective, as natural capital are considered non-substitutable, therefore critical;
==PAGE:14==
8
Literature review
• ethical, when the loss of ecosystem services can be morally disadvantageous, due
to moral values being violated;
• economic, in the event of a high economic costs that the loss of natural capital
might bring;
• human survival, because ecosystem services become critical when human life would
not be possible without them.
Clearly, ecosystem services can have various degrees of criticality, as it depends on
the amount of domains under which the natural capital is valued and the amount of
significance within one domain of criticality (Brand, 2009). Hence, criticality is depen-
dent on ecological criteria, but also on economic, political, and social criteria, that is
to say that the definition of criticality requires both a scientific understanding of the
functioning of a particular socio-ecological system and an extensive discussion of the
values and objectives of the various stakeholders belonging to that system (Pelenc &
Ballet, 2015). The interweaving of those domains makes it difficult to assess the level of
criticality of an ecosystem service and, thus, the substitutability of the natural capital.
There are certain situations where improvements in one dimension of well-being can’t
replace the deterioration in another dimension, a reflection that forms the basis of the
strong sustainability approach, and there is large uncertainty about the risks that a nat-
ural capital might be irreversible and not substitutable by other capitals (Buriti, 2019;
Pelenc & Ballet, 2015). Moreover, societies are now becoming highly adverse to the
depletion of natural capital because of the functions (ecosystem services) that directly
provide human well-being, and the increased consumption favoured by the weak sus-
tainability approach cannot be considered an appropriate substitute for that depletion
(Buriti, 2019). The main differences between the two paradigms are presented in Table
2.1.
These interpretations lead us to the need to distinguish between those companies
that do and those that do not make effective contributions to sustainable development
(Dyllick & Muff, 2016). There is an emerging strong consensus that sustainability is hav-
ing and will continue to have a big impact on a business’ strategies and operations, as
well as an increase in competitiveness and brand reputation. Nonetheless, environmental
and social issues keep arising and growing, therefore not regressing. Dyllick and Muff
(2016) refer to this as the big disconnect between the “micro-level” progress of businesses
and the “macro-level” deterioration of natural capitals. Without wishing to diminish or
neglect all the achievements and contributions made by companies, ‘reducing unsustain-
ability’ and ‘creating sustainability’ are not the same thing: most of what companies
did so far can be connected to the approach of reducing unsustainability, ignoring larger
human, social and environmental concerns, but only trying to adjust and accommodate
to the demands of environmentalists, while striving to maintain the status quo (Dyllick
& Muff, 2016; Landrum, 2018).
All these approaches of corporate sustainability can be related to the weak sustain-
ability paradigm, as the rate of change that those initiatives offer appears inadequate
to address growing global challenges (N. Bocken et al., 2013; Stål & Bonnedahl, 2016).
==PAGE:15==
2.1 The sustainability spectrum
9
Table 2.1. Weak versus Strong sustainability. Source: Buriti (2019)
Weak sustainability
Strong sustainability
Natural, human, and reproducible cap-
ital can be substituted for each other.
Natural capital cannot always be sub-
stituted with reproducible or human
capital.
Natural, human, and reproducible cap-
ital are an aggregate, homogeneous
stock.
Natural, reproducible, and human capi-
tal cannot be viewed as a homogeneous
stock.
Natural capital should be used effi-
ciently over time.
As long as depleted natural capital is
replaced with even more valuable repro-
ducible and human capital, then the
value of the aggregate stock will in-
crease.
Certain environmental sinks, processes,
and services are unique and essential
and subject to irreversible loss; and
there is uncertainty over their future
value and importance.
Maintaining and enhancing the value of
this aggregate capital stock is sufficient
for sustainability.
Maintaining and enhancing the value of
the aggregate capital stock is necessary
but not sufficient.
Sustainability also requires preserva-
tion of unique and essential natural cap-
ital.
What is rarely done is to look at the relationship of business and society the other
way around, by asking how a firm can contribute effectively to solving global challenges.
Dyllick and Muff (2016) raise the possibility that for firms to become strongly sustain-
able, an “outside-in” perspective needs to be adopted, that is looking at the external
environment within a company operates and asking what can be done to help overcome
critical challenges.
As a matter of fact, the most significant idea that distinguishes
strongly sustainable businesses is the departure from seeking to minimize the negative
impacts to getting to understand how the firm can create a meaningful positive impact
in critical areas for society and the environment (Dyllick & Muff, 2016).
Hence, in line with Parrish (2010), the primary objectives of a strongly sustainable
business should be the generation of value beyond financial and making a positive con-
tribution to overcome social and environmental issues, with profit only considered as a
means to reach that higher and noble purpose. Obviously, the capability for having a
meaningful impact will vary largely between companies because of different strategies,
purposes, and resources, but also due to different sectors and societal contexts.
==PAGE:16==
10
Literature review
In the de Oliveira Neto et al. (2018) study, eight specific organizational practices to
be applied simultaneously in order to promote strong sustainability have been identified,
aimed at improving the functions of the ecological system, while ensuring sustainable de-
velopment, by maintaining an equilibrium between economic, environmental, and social
factors (bold in the original):
1. increasing the efficiency of resource consumption to preserve natural re-
sources for future generations through energy calculations;
2. limiting the consumption of renewable resources according to their re-
generation rates so that they do not become a limiting factor for economic
development;
3. reducing greenhouse gas emissions to prevent atmospheric pollution and changes
in living conditions;
4. reusing waste as inputs in other processes to minimize environmental and
social impacts;
5. substituting toxic inputs with organic materials to protect human health
and mitigate environmental impacts (e.g. impacts on soil and water quality);
6. substituting non-renewable energy resources with renewable alterna-
tives to avoid depletion of finite resources;
7. increasing affordability of basic items to improve health and living conditions
for low-income individuals;
8. increasing sustainable manufacturability with fair compensation to increase
purchasing power and stimulate local economies.
The sustainability spectrum is a theory developed mostly in ecological sciences, and
served to few authors active in a more managerial context as basis for the analysis of the
various levels of understanding and integration of sustainability in corporations, so as to
have a micro-level view of the orientations towards sustainability from the perspective
of the firm.
Four different typologies of business have been proposed by Dyllick and Muff (2016),
from business-as-usual to what they call “True business sustainability”. The current
economic paradigm, or business-as-usual, is based on the determination to produce eco-
nomic value in the form of profit, market value or shareholder value. It does not take
into consideration sustainability, or, where considered, it is only seen as a compliance
to regulations.
Dyllick and Muff (2016) allege that the first step that helps introducing sustainability
into the business-as-usual is the recognition that there are challenges resulting from
environmental and social concerns that can create new opportunities for business (see
also Cohen and Winn (2007) and Dean and McMullen (2007)). This leads to what they
==PAGE:17==
2.1 The sustainability spectrum
11
refer to as “Business sustainability 1.0”, the characteristics of which match the elements
of weak sustainability: in fact, even with the introduction of sustainability practices
into the firm, confident and aware that there will be positive effects for some social or
environmental challenges, the primary goal remains economic. This can be associated to
the “Business-centered” stage of corporate sustainability identified by Landrum (2018),
that equates that stage with the weak position because of the incremental enforcement
of sustainability initiatives in the firm (where sustainability is understood to mean “do
less bad”) to increase strategic competitiveness.
The second step proposed by Dyllick and Muff (2016) is the management of the triple
bottom line, leading to the identification of the “Business sustainability 2.0”. Landrum
(2018) refers to this stage as “Systemic” sustainability. In this case, it is acknowledged
that there is the need to broaden the stakeholder perspective, including also the social
and environmental values in the value creation process, and to pursue a triple bottom
line approach (Dyllick & Muff, 2016). With still an “inside-out” perspective in mind, the
understanding of sustainability by the firms is to “do more good”, but they continue to
promote a managerial control position in relation to nature and business solutions (Dyl-
lick & Muff, 2016; Landrum, 2018). Within the sustainability spectrum, this position
can be referred to as intermediate sustainability (de Oliveira Neto et al., 2018; Landrum,
2018).
Lastly, in the view of Dyllick and Muff (2016), the main purpose of a ‘truly’ (i.e.
strongly) sustainable business should be making a positive contribution to overcome
sustainability issues and serving the common good. In this “Business sustainability 3.0”,
a more “outside-in” approach is pursued by reviewing the pressing sustainability chal-
lenges that society is facing, and then by engaging in developing new strategies and
business models that can overcome these. According to Landrum (2018), this “Regen-
erative” stage of corporate sustainability is characterized by the intent to repair the
damage of the unsustainable business practices, acknowledging the limits imposed by
natural capitals (see the aforementioned eight specific actions to promote strong sustain-
ability proposed by de Oliveira Neto et al. (2018)): many activities are oriented, in this
sense, towards restoring and regenerating nature, without seeking increase in scale, but
rather engaging on a sectorial or cross-sectorial level (i.e. collaborative partnerships)
where common sustainability practices can be shared by all members in an industry and
along supply chains (Dyllick & Muff, 2016). This is a profound change in perspective,
because the firm would also look at what kind of abilities they can exploit to lessen one
or more of the environmental or social issues, leading to a re-evaluation of what they can
do to better utilize their capabilities to make a more positive impact (Dyllick & Muff,
2016).
In the same vein, Upward and Jones (2016) define “an organization that only en-
abled strongly sustainable outcomes as one that creates positive environmental, social,
and economic value throughout its value network, thereby sustaining the possibility that
human and other life can flourish on this planet forever” (p.103), having thus as primary
objectives not only to do no harm, but also to create social benefit while regenerating
the environment (“doing good”) to be economically sustainable (i.e. treating profit only
as a means).
==PAGE:18==
12
Literature review
It is worth mentioning that the sustainability spectrum comprises also two very
opposite positions, the very weak sustainability (business-as-usual complying with regu-
lations, briefly mentioned before) and the very strong sustainability (a co-evolutionary
approach, with strong moral obligations to nature). However, Landrum (2018) reached
the conclusion that, when integrated in a business, the highest level of sustainability in
most corporations is aligned with the intermediate sustainability, failing to reach and
integrate the strong (and consequently the very strong) sustainability perspective.
Table 2.2 shows the different business typologies identified by Dyllick and Muff (2016)
and Landrum (2018) based on the five positions forming the sustainability spectrum.
The weak, intermediate, and strong positions and the relative business typologies will be
taken into account in the research, while the very weak and the very strong positions will
not be considered because of their extreme views: the weak sustainability position would
not be of much interest as it depicts business as usual in compliance with regulations,
whereas the little (if not even inexistent) knowledge about a successful integration of
the very strong sustainability position could lead the research to inconclusive results.
Table 2.2. Business typologies based on sustainability spectrum
Very weak
Weak
Intermediate
Strong
Very strong
Dyllick
and
Muff (2016)
Business as
usual
Business
Sustainability 1.0
Business
Sustainability 2.0
Business
Sustainability 3.0
—
Landrum
(2018)
Compliance
Business-centered
Systemic
Regenerative
Co-
evolutionary
2.2
Sustainable entrepreneurship
Many are skeptical about the ability of established firms to lead the change for a sustain-
able future, and strongly believe that entrepreneurs are the driving force for bringing
about a transformation to innovative sustainable products and processes, with numerous
intellectuals supporting entrepreneurship as a ‘panacea’ for many social and environmen-
tal concerns (Cohen & Winn, 2007; Hall et al., 2010).
As a matter of fact, the growing awareness about the urge to halt environmentally de-
grading activities, combined with a willingness to pay for the reduction of these activities,
is perceived as an opportunity for entrepreneurial action to bolster sustainable economies
(Dean & McMullen, 2007). However, it is still questioned to what extend entrepreneurs
have the potential to disrupt business-as-usual’s practices and most importantly how
different sustainability-oriented entrepreneurs are from traditional entrepreneurs.
One of the earliest studies on entrepreneurship was conducted by Schumpeter (1934),
that referred to entrepreneurial activities as “creative destruction” because of their ca-
pability to innovate and create competitive advantage, linking inventions with market
success (Hall et al., 2010; Schaltegger & Wagner, 2011).
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Sustainable entrepreneurship
13
Entrepreneurship can describe various phenomena. It can represent the process of
creating and establishing a new company (start-ups); entrepreneurs can be seen as actors
enlarging companies and expanding businesses (sometimes also called intrapreneurs); it
can be interpreted as a social movement or another kind of environmental grassroots
or social concern movement; lastly, to entrepreneurs can be attributed some charac-
teristics of a leader such as ambition, leadership, team building, personal involvement,
and commitment (Schaltegger & Wagner, 2011; Shepherd & Patzelt, 2011). Generally
speaking, entrepreneurs and entrepreneurial ventures can discover, create, and exploit
opportunities leading to institutional and market transformations.
In the last decade or so, the academic discourse on sustainable development within
the entrepreneurship literature has been growing, exploring the relationship between the
two research streams and opening the way to a new research field, namely the sustainable
entrepreneurship.
This new stream of entrepreneurship research with environmental
and social objectives is characterized by some fundamental aspects of entrepreneurial
activities, less oriented towards management systems, but naturally more focused on
personal initiative and skills to reach meaningful impacts with environmental and/or
societal innovations: in this sense, sustainability issues are treated as central to the core
business since the sustainability performance of the business is strictly related to the
economic success (Belz & Binder, 2017; Hahn et al., 2018; Schaltegger & Wagner, 2011).
Conventional entrepreneurs have a quite narrow focus on creating customer value
for financial profits, while sustainable entrepreneurs try to solve ecological and social
problems through their business activities and aim at value creation for various stake-
holders (Lüdeke-Freund, 2020).
Ideally, sustainable entrepreneurship can be seen as
a mechanism for preserving nature, life support, and community while providing eco-
nomic and non-economic gains for investors, entrepreneurs, and societies (Shepherd &
Patzelt, 2011), a configuration that strive to combine the noble mission of contributing to
sustainable development with the entrepreneurial process of discovering, evaluating, and
exploiting economic opportunities (Belz & Binder, 2017; Cohen & Winn, 2007; Neumeyer
& Santos, 2018; Schaltegger, Lüdeke-Freund, & Hansen, 2016). In other words, sustain-
able entrepreneurship is a multilevel phenomenon connecting social, environmental and
economic dimensions between entrepreneurial processes, market transformations, and
large-scale societal developments (Johnson & Schaltegger, 2019).
Schaltegger and Wagner (2011), assert that sustainable entrepreneurship can be de-
scribed as an ‘innovative, market-oriented and personality driven form of creating eco-
nomic and societal value by means of break-through environmentally or socially beneficial
market or institutional innovations’ (p.226). Therefore, sustainable entrepreneurship,
rather than profit-driven, should be a mission-driven process of solving environmental
and social problems of unsustainability by means of the exploration and exploitation of
market opportunities [Dean and McMullen (2007); Shepherd and Patzelt (2011); Schal-
tegger, Lüdeke-Freund, and Hansen (2016); Johnson and Schaltegger (2019)].
This can be seen from the perspective of the Schumpeterian creative destruction
previously mentioned: sustainable entrepreneurship aims to disrupt business-as-usual
production methods or products, and conventional market structures and consumption
patterns by replacing them with more sustainable (or at least less unsustainable) prod-
==PAGE:20==
14
Literature review
ucts, services, and praxes (Schaltegger, Lüdeke-Freund, & Hansen, 2016).
Despite the previous description though, the terminology used in this particular
research stream is not yet definite. Other than ‘sustainable entrepreneurship’, a wide
range of terms and definitions are used to describe ventures that aim to improve social
or ecological sustainability while striving for financial independence – unlike non-profit
organization. Among these terms we can find hybrid organizations, sustainability-driven
organizations, environmental entrepreneurship, social entrepreneurship (even if this term
captures also the non-profit organization), ecopreneurship and green entrepreneurship
(Hahn et al., 2018; Hall et al., 2010).
This lack of clarity on a conventional and accepted terminology among scholars can
be the result of the early stage of this field of research. However, due to the ‘double
bottom line approach’ that a social or environmental entrepreneur might pursue, for the
sake of this study the term sustainable entrepreneur will be used hereinafter, because of
the intrinsic sense of balancing the triple bottom line of economic, social, and ecological
goals derived from the concept of ‘sustainable development’ (Belz & Binder, 2017).
The starting point of the ‘sustainable’ creative
destruction
Due to the recent development of the sustainable entrepreneurship research stream, few
are the studies investigating the process of recognition and exploitation of opportuni-
ties in social and environmental contexts, and the integration of a triple bottom line
approach.
Patzelt and Shepherd (2011) refers to these opportunities as ‘sustainable development
opportunities’, that is the ones “that sustain the natural and/or communal environment
as well as provide development gain for others” (p.632).
In that regard, the triple
bottom line is implied in the ‘development gain for others’, as this denotes economic,
environmental, and social gains for the society. They suggest that the recognition by
entrepreneurs of sustainable development opportunities depends on interdependencies
between the entrepreneurial knowledge (defined as knowledge of markets, ways to serve
markets, and customer problems), their motivation for personal gains, the knowledge
about environmental and/or social concerns, and their motivation to develop gains for
others (or altruism), showing that this recognition process could be in practice more
complex than the one for non-sustainable opportunities motivated solely by economic
gains for the entrepreneur (Patzelt & Shepherd, 2011).
In the same vein, Wagner (2012) found that the process of pursuing a sustainability-
related opportunity originates from a strong entrepreneurial intent, and that this oppor-
tunity is then exploited in such a way that the entrepreneur builds its venture with at
its core the objective of relieving environmental and social issues.
A different perspective is given by Kuckertz and Wagner (2010)’s study. Here, it
was examined how sustainability orientation and entrepreneurial intentions are related
in practice, indicating that the first is linked to the latter to some degree. They point
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Sustainable entrepreneurship
15
out that the exploitation of sustainability-oriented entrepreneurial opportunities is more
likely to vanish as business experience is gained. This result is in line with Choi and
Gray (2008), that showed that most sustainable entrepreneurs have little or no business
experience, founding thus their companies not knowing about the complexities and trade-
offs of profits and principles, but rather leaning on their sensitivity towards a social or
environmental problem.
Belz and Binder (2017) identify the recognition of a social or ecological problem
encountered first-hand in the private or professional life as the potential origin of the
sustainable entrepreneurship process. It has been suggested that relevant life experiences
(called also ‘experience corridors’) can provide information on and awareness about
particular areas (e.g. unmet social needs) that shape opportunity development (Belz &
Binder, 2017). From that, they characterize as “social or environmental opportunity”
the link between the recognition of a problem and the identification of a solution to
it. Moreover, they took a stand against previous studies (see Choi and Gray (2008)’s
and Kuckertz and Wagner (2010)’s results): most of the co-founders interviewed in their
multiple case study did have formal education and/or experience in business, and are
aware of the difficulties and trade-offs between economic, social and ecological goals.
Hockerts and Wüstenhagen (2010) noticed that sustainable entrepreneurs are often
led by idealistic ideas, so that they are less likely to be caught in a specific technological
mindset and more prone to try other innovative approaches. On that note, Schaltegger
and Wagner (2011) assert that sustainable entrepreneurs mostly influence their venture
with their personal values so that these are directly reflected in the company’s goals.
Moreover, sustainable entrepreneurship is found to be associated with the internal
balancing of values, motives, and perceived capabilities in the research presented by
Vuorio, Puumalainen, and Fellnhofer (2018). From one perspective, entrepreneurs are
driven by the economic gains that the exploitation of sustainability-related opportunities
can develop (as they need to earn a living somehow), but by contrast, they are eager to
have a positive influence on environmental and/or societal issues despite the potential
loss in personal economic gain.
Cohen and Winn (2007), in line with the findings of Dean and McMullen (2007),
point out that each market imperfection - i.e. inefficient firms, externalities, flawed pric-
ing mechanisms and information asymmetries - leads to socio-environmental problems
but at the same time creates entrepreneurial opportunities, which, if identified and ex-
ploited, can create entrepreneurial rents for the firms, improve market performance, and
introduce more sustainable interactions with the natural environment.
This observation was also presented by Stål and Bonnedahl (2016).
They indi-
cate that the sustainable entrepreneurship literature shares with the conventional en-
trepreneurship theory the assumption that entrepreneurs are motivated by the possibil-
ities of obtaining entrepreneurial rents through the exploitation of opportunities arising
from environmentally relevant market failures. However, this interpretation is indicative
of the entrepreneurs’ dependence upon markets and market mechanisms, which are un-
reliable by nature: therefore, it is argued that sustainable entrepreneurship is principally
at odds with the objectives of sustainable development (Stål & Bonnedahl, 2016). In
describing how the principles of strong sustainability (see Section 2.1) can be introduced
==PAGE:22==
16
Literature review
to entrepreneurship, it has been underlined that entrepreneurs, rather than being de-
pendent upon market-related means, should be directed towards the end of sustaining
critical natural capital, creating and exploiting new means and reinforcing the link with
the biosphere (ibid.).
Accordingly, in the study conducted by Parrish (2010), it has been pointed out that
(conventional) entrepreneurs might have as primary motivation the creation of a prof-
itable venture while considering sustainability only a means to achieve profit objectives
(i.e. opportunity-driven entrepreneurs). Conversely, and in line with the strong sustain-
ability position, he suggests that sustainability-driven entrepreneurs see the contribution
to sustainability as primary motivation, having values and motives based on the equanim-
ity between the self, other people, and nature, whereas a viable and profitable venture
is a means to that end.
In conclusion, sustainable entrepreneurs could definitely act as ‘creative problem-
solvers’ (Schumpeter, 1934) thanks to the ability of recognizing sustainability-related
opportunities arising from market failures or imperfections, an ability resulting from
the interrelations of business and life experiences, motivations for personal (economic)
gains, concerns about environmental and/or social issues, and altruism. However, in
order to effectively contribute to sustainable development, sustainable entrepreneurs
should be directed and motivated from the beginning towards a higher purpose than
obtaining entrepreneurial gain (which should be only a means to earn a living), that
is an extended value creation that relates to the sustaining of critical natural capital
(Parrish, 2010; Stål & Bonnedahl, 2016).
2.3
Business model
At the present time, it is common knowledge that companies of any size and complexity
needs to have a profit generation scheme in order to survive and thrive. The business
model, among its various applications, can be extremely useful for this purpose.
The concept of business model became popular in the Nineties, during the dot-com
era/revolution, when companies that started operating in the e-commerce introduced
new forms of transactions, forcing other companies also to rethink how they do business
(Magretta, 2002; Osterwalder, Pigneur, & Tucci, 2005; Richardson, 2008). Since then,
the business model vocabulary has been used by researchers and practitioners to describe
the overall structure and activities of ventures, which are required to achieve a strategic
outcome (Goyal, Kapoor, Esposito, & Sergi, 2017). Many scholars have suggested their
interpretation of the concept of business model; modern discourse is mostly framed
around the value logic in terms of creating, delivering, and capturing value (Biloslavo et
al., 2018). Nonetheless, there is little consensus on an universal definition, as it adapts
depending on the intention for which the business model is used (Zott, Amit, & Massa,
2011).
The lack of agreement among scholars on a more operational definition of what a
business model is has been widely studied in the research of Massa, Tucci, and Afuah
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Business model
17
(2017). They trace the root problem back to the relationship between the terms “business
model” and “strategy”. Based on their thorough analysis on extant literature, the general
conclusion is that the business models research is essentially neither another way to refer
to strategy nor a completely new field, but an extension of the strategy research stream
complementing each other.
In the same vein, in Biloslavo et al. (2018) review of business models’ studies, it is
argued that the core concepts of the business model converge towards some long-standing
and well-known managerial concepts to which they relate, but from which at the same
time differ. In fact, although a business model captures key components of a business
plan, there are some operational issues in the latter that extend beyond the business
model. Moreover, they posit that a business model is not a business strategy, even if
it includes a number of strategy elements. In their view, a business model is thus “a
kernel of business strategy that includes the “Who, What, How, and Where?” of the
business but not elements of the organisation model and competition” (Biloslavo et al.,
2018, p. 748).
An overview of the most commonly used definitions in the literature can be found in
Table 2.3.
One of the earliest definition has been proposed by Amit and Zott (2001), arguing
that the business model is an integrative framework, which gets theoretical contribution
from different strategic management theories, i.e. value chain analysis, Schumpeter’s the-
ory of innovation (novelty), resource-based view (complementarities), strategic network
theory (lock-in), and transaction cost economics (efficiency) (Goyal et al., 2017).
In Zott and Amit (2010), they rework these concepts, indicating that there are “two
sets of parameters that activity systems designers need to consider: design elements -
content, structure, and governance - that describe the architecture of an activity system;
and design themes - novelty, lock-in, complementarities, and efficiency – that describe the
sources of the activity system’s value creation” (p.216-217). Here, they consider the ac-
tivity system perspective fundamental as it should encourage the company in a systemic,
holistic thinking when engaged in business model design, rather than concentrating on
optimizing details (Zott & Amit, 2010).
In the work of Magretta (2002), the development of a business model within a firm
is compared to writing a new story: “At some level, all new stories are variations on old
ones, reworkings of the universal themes underlying all human experience. Similarly, all
new business models are variations on the generic value chain underlying all businesses”
(p.4). More broadly, the business model depicted in his paper is seen as a system that
can describe how the pieces of a business fit together. Also, he stated that the business
model should not deal with competition (Magretta, 2002).
On the other hand, in Osterwalder and Pigneur (2010), it has been emphasized that
the logic behind the development of a business model needs to be “simple, relevant and
intuitively understandable, while not oversimplifying the complexities of how enterprises
function” (p.15). Based on these concepts, they created the so-called business model
canvas, a nine-blocks framework that should help companies identify how they intend to
make money. The business model canvas has become a de facto reference standard, and
it is a tool used in management and entrepreneurship education worldwide, proving to be
==PAGE:24==
18
Literature review
Table 2.3. Prevalent definitions of Business Model
Authors
Definitions
Amit and Zott (2001)
“[the] business model depicts the content, structure, and
governance of transactions designed so as to create value
through the exploitation of business opportunities”
Chesbrough
and
Rosenbloom (2002)
“a focusing device that mediates between technology de-
velopment and economic value creation”
Osterwalder
and
Pigneur (2002)
“nothing else than a description of the value a company
offers to one or several segments of customers and the
architecture of the firm and its network of partners for
creating, marketing and delivering this value and rela-
tionship capital, in order to generate profitable and sus-
tainable revenue streams”
Osterwalder
et
al.
(2005)
“A business model is a conceptual tool that contains
a set of elements and their relationships and allows ex-
pressing the business logic of a specific firm.
It is a
description of the value a company offers to one or sev-
eral segments of customers and of the architecture of
the firm and its network of partners for creating, mar-
keting, and delivering this value and relationship capital,
to generate profitable and sustainable revenue streams.”
Morris, Schindehutte,
and Allen (2005)
“a concise representation of how an interrelated set of
decision variables in the areas of venture strategy, archi-
tecture, and economics are addressed to create sustain-
able competitive advantage in defined markets.”
Richardson (2008)
“a conceptual framework that helps to link the firm’s
strategy, or theory of how to compete, to its activities,
or execution of the strategy. The business model frame-
work can help to think strategically about the details of
the way the firm does business.”
Osterwalder
and
Pigneur (2010)
“[the business model] describes the rationale of how an
organization creates, delivers, and captures value” - “[it
is] like a blueprint for a strategy to be implemented
through organization structures, processes and systems”.
Teece (2010)
“A business model describes the design or architecture
of the value creation, delivery and capture mechanisms
employed.”
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Sustainable business model
19
a quite powerful framework for formulating profit-normative business models (Upward
& Jones, 2016).
The logic behind the business model canvas can be traced also in the earlier definition
given by Osterwalder et al. (2005). In the paper, they outlined that the business model
is a link between strategy, business organization, and information and communication
technology (Goyal et al., 2017).
To support this argumentation, Morris et al. (2005) refer to the business model as a
strategic framework for conceptualizing a value-based venture, providing a useful setting
for strategically adapting fundamental elements of a business.
To further remark the mismatch between the concepts of business model and strat-
egy, Richardson (2008) argues that the business model, organized around three main
components – value proposition, value creation and delivery, and value capture - can be
seen as the architectural implementation of the business strategy, or in other terms as
a nexus between the strategy of a firm and the activities performed to execute it.
Last but not least, Zott et al. (2011) assert that the core idea of a business model
comprises a firm’s revenues and costs, its value proposition to the customer, and the
mechanisms to capture value, which also form the basis of the more explicative defini-
tion proposed by Teece (2010): “The essence of a business model is that it crystallizes
customer needs and ability to pay, defines the manner by which the business enterprise
responds to and delivers value to customers, entices customers to pay for value, and
converts those payments to profit through the proper design and operation of the various
elements of the value chain” (p.191). More simply, in his view the business model should
include implicit assumptions about customers, their needs, and the behavior of revenues,
costs, and competitors (N. M. Bocken et al., 2014).
In summary, the definition of business model may often vary, as it depends on the
context and application depicted from each article. Therefore, according to the extant
literature, the most common elements of a business model that will be taken into account
in this research are: market offerings including the value proposition, followed by value
creation and delivery system, and, finally, the revenue model and market conditions,
which contribute to the firm’s value capture.
2.4
Sustainable business model
To many, profit-oriented business models are a major constraint impeding progress in
sustainability (Upward & Jones, 2016). Not fully engaged with the era of sustainability,
traditional business models appear to exclude natural and social aspects of organizational
context, and tend to neglect the interrelationships between economic and non-economic
actors and trade-offs (Biloslavo et al., 2018). One of the key challenges is the designing of
the business model in such a way that enables the firm to capture economic value for itself
through delivering at the same time social and environmental benefits (N. M. Bocken et
al., 2014). Even so, adopting a sustainability lens in the process of business model design
is considered interesting as it has the opportunity to highlight the value creation logic
==PAGE:26==
20
Literature review
of an organization and potentially allows for new governance forms such as cooperatives,
public private partnerships, or social businesses, thus helping transcend narrow for-profit
and profit-maximizing models (Schaltegger, Hansen, & Lüdeke-Freund, 2016).
From the extant literature, several attempts have been presented to “extend” the tra-
ditional business model frameworks to include sustainability (Dyllick and Muff (2016)
refer to this as “a simple bolt-on sustainability”, p.161), though failing a profound assim-
ilation into business’ practices (Biloslavo et al., 2018; Brozovic, 2020; Joyce & Paquin,
2016).
This has been partly attributed to the lack of a comprehensive analysis for
identifying the gaps in business model frameworks relating to the requirements needed
for sustainability (Biloslavo et al., 2018). The traditional business model is considered
inadequate for addressing challenges like climate change or resource shortages as it is
market-oriented, focused on delivering value or service to customers as the primary stake-
holders and with a short-term perspective (Brozovic, 2020; Johnson & Schaltegger, 2019).
On the other hand, the designing of a sustainable business model has the added complex-
ity of aligning conflicting interests of the diverse stakeholders involved (Lüdeke-Freund,
2020), environment and society above all.
There is a strong emerging consensus that sustainability is having and will continue
to have significant implications on a company’s strategies and operations. It is more
and more acknowledged that sustainability-related strategies are necessary to be com-
petitive today and even more so in the future (Dyllick & Muff, 2016). In incorporating
sustainability at the core of the business operations, the gains accrue to the environment
and to society, but also to the companies themselves through tangible and intangible
benefits, such as: better access to certain markets; differentiated products; revenue from
selling green technology; better risk management and relations with external stakehold-
ers; lower cost of material, energy, and services; lower cost of capital; lower cost of
labor; increased brand reputation; increased attractiveness to talent; and increased com-
petitiveness (N. M. Bocken & Geradts, 2019; Dyllick & Muff, 2016; Hall et al., 2010;
Landrum, 2018).
It has been largely pointed out though that the concept of sustainable business
model has not been sufficiently clarified as the theory is still in its infancy, resulting in
a widely dispersed knowledge and mirroring in a way the aforementioned confusion in
the business model research and terms (Dentchev et al., 2018; Lüdeke-Freund, Carroux,
Joyce, Massa, & Breuer, 2018; Neumeyer & Santos, 2018). However, it can be said that
common definitions of sustainable business models are aligned with the triple bottom
line approach (Neumeyer & Santos, 2018).
Taking into consideration sustainability management as an integrated approach “to
transform organizations in a way that they contribute to the sustainable development of
the economy and society, within the limits of the ecosystem” (Schaltegger, Hansen, &
Lüdeke-Freund, 2016, p. 4) and the sustainable business model as a supportive tool to
reach that transformation, different definitions have been proposed of what a sustainable
business model is, all built upon the general idea of identifying solutions that allow firms
to capture economic value whilst generating environmental and social value.
Stubbs and Cocklin (2008) assert that sustainable business models use both a sys-
tems and firm-level perspective, build on the triple bottom line approach to define the
==PAGE:27==
2.4 Sustainable business model
21
firm’s purpose and measure performance, and include a wide range of stakeholders – in
particular environment and society.
Lüdeke-Freund (2010) posits that a sustainable business model is “a business model
that creates competitive advantage through superior customer value and contributes to a
sustainable development of the company and society” (p.23).
Following the same approach, Lüdeke-Freund et al. (2018) resume the same concept
of creating significantly increased positive and/or significantly reduced negative effects
for the natural environment and society through changes in the way a company create,
deliver, and capture value.
N. Bocken et al. (2013) suggest a value mapping tool to assist firms in better under-
standing sustainable value creation within their business activities, in order to develop
new business models with sustainability at their core. These new sustainable business
models should seek to go beyond delivering only economic value, so to reach a better
balance of value creation for a wider range of stakeholders, considering specifically the
environment and society as key stakeholders (N. Bocken et al., 2013; Dyllick & Muff,
2016; Lüdeke-Freund, 2020).
Reworking on this concept, N. M. Bocken et al. (2014) stress that a sustainable
business model aligns interests of all stakeholder groups, and explicitly considers the
environment and society as key stakeholders. They provide a set of sustainable business
model archetypes, addressing the lack of integration across different perspectives on
sustainability and the lack of academic interest in practical applications (Biloslavo et
al., 2018).
Thanks to an outside-in approach (where a firm can adapt or translate
an ‘outside’ business model archetype to the organization) sustainable business model
archetypes allow the exploration of potential impacts of innovating towards different
types of business models form of creative confrontation or cross-pollination of diverse
ideas (Joyce & Paquin, 2016).
Schaltegger, Hansen, and Lüdeke-Freund (2016) argue that all the latest approaches
to sustainable business models have in common their focus on value creation, which
has been deliberately extended towards social and ecological values. In their view, it
is this extension and the emphasis given to organizational, market, and societal trans-
formations that distinguish the discourse on business models for sustainability from
the traditional antecedents, that in contrast have the focus on organizational value ap-
propriation, namely profit maximization, without considering the consequences for the
wider social and ecological contexts (Lüdeke-Freund et al., 2018; Schaltegger, Hansen,
& Lüdeke-Freund, 2016).
A more comprehensive definition of sustainable business model has been suggested
by Schaltegger, Lüdeke-Freund, and Hansen (2016): “A business model for sustainability
helps describing, analyzing, managing and communicating (i) a company’s sustainable
value proposition to its customers and all other stakeholders, (ii) how it creates and deliv-
ers this value, (iii) and how it captures economic value while maintaining or regenerating
natural, social and economic capital beyond its organizational boundaries” (p.268). This
definition de facto reframes Teece (2010)’s notion of business model value flows, empha-
sizing however the balance of economic, social, and environmental sustainability, deemed
as primary goal of the sustainable business model (Brozovic, 2020).
==PAGE:28==
22
Literature review
On the other hand, reworking on and extending the Osterwalder and Pigneur (2010)’s
business model canvas, Joyce and Paquin (2016) developed the ‘triple layered business
model canvas’: in order to support an integrated triple bottom line perspective of or-
ganizational impact, they added an environmental layer based on life-cycle perspective
and a social layer based on stakeholder perspective. They argue that the tool can help
users understand interconnections and relationships between organizations’ current ac-
tions and its economic, environmental and social impacts, providing thus ‘horizontal’
coherence within each canvas layer, and ‘vertical’ coherence integrating value creation
across the three canvas layers.
Building upon the notion of strong sustainability (see Section 2.1), Upward and
Jones (2016) assert that a strongly sustainable business model, which still must describe
elements of financial viability, must ensure ethically and practically appropriate decisions
(“right” things to do) and corresponding actions (doing things “right”): in this sense,
the identification of the “right” actions will require the conceptualization of a firm’s
value propositions, and to describe how those actions will be “done right” will require
understanding how the firm acts to create the value.
In making an eco-critical review of the 20 most often cited business model frameworks,
Biloslavo et al. (2018) come to the conclusion that a sustainable business model should:
define its purpose from economic, environmental, and social aspects simultaneously; use
a triple bottom line approach in measuring performance; take into account the needs of
several stakeholders and do not favour shareholders; treat nature as a stakeholder and
promote environmental stewardship; and encompass the broader system as well as the
narrow firm level perspective. They propose a new business model framework termed
“Value Triangle”, which includes the value proposition (intended to be for a broader
group of stakeholders that comprises society and natural environment), the value co-
creation and co-delivery system, and the value capture system. The resulting “Value
Triangle business model canvas”, shaped in a way that its components are presented
as triangles in order to reorient users to thinks in a circular way, has nine components:
society (including natural environment with its ecosystem services), value proposition,
customers, products (both goods and services), key operational activities, capital (not
only financial, but also intellectual, human, social, and natural), partners, benefits, and
costs.
One of the latest definition of sustainable business model is given by Kennedy and
Bocken (2019). They posit that business model for sustainability should define “how
an organization creates, delivers and captures value for its stakeholders in a way that
supports a safe and just operating space for humanity and all living entities to flourish”
(Kennedy & Bocken, 2019, p. 2), utilizing the three central components of the business
model and recognizing that the outcomes of business activities should aid the capacity
of actors to manage the socio-ecological system within the planetary boundaries and
above social foundations.
Even if only under a natural-oriented perspective, the three central elements of the
business model were also used by Brozovic (2020) to identify the characteristics of a
strongly sustainable business model. The value proposition, including nonfinancial value
types, should preserve, regenerate, and benefit nature, which is considered as primary
==PAGE:29==
2.4 Sustainable business model
23
stakeholder. Therefore, whichever activities a firm wants to engages in, it should consider
the effects on natural resources, or more generally, on natural capital. Moreover, when it
comes to value creation and delivery system, all the resources, activities and strategies
adopted should reflect the limitations of local and global natural ecosystems. Lastly,
in terms of value capture, Brozovic (2020) found that the growth of those businesses
embracing a strongly sustainable business model is deliberately limited: there is skep-
ticism about a sustainable scalability because, according to those businesses, it would
still suppose limitless resources and contribute to the destruction of natural ecosystems.
Also, it has been pointed out that other kind of values are being sought beyond financial,
but that it might be hard to express them withing the scope of a traditional economic
models.
In conclusion, there are several sustainable business model common denominators
that can be definitely outlined.
Building upon Breuer, Fichter, Lüdeke-Freund, and
Tiemann (2018)’s study, four guiding principles are presented for the development of a
sustainable business model.
Guiding principles:
1. Sustainability orientation: economic sustainability must be balanced with social
and environmental sustainability (triple bottom line). This concept needs to be
clarified in the purpose, vision, and mission of the organisation in terms of social,
environmental, and economic outcomes (Stubbs & Cocklin, 2008);
2. Extended value creation: value creation process needs to be extended towards social
and ecological elements besides the economic one (triple bottom line) (Schaltegger,
Hansen, & Lüdeke-Freund, 2016). A sustainable business model should then seek
to generate value for market and non-market actors in monetary and non-monetary
terms.
3. System thinking: third parties’ activities needs to be integrated into the organiza-
tion’s sustainable business model, which is seen as an open and interactive system
so to embrace both an internal and external perspective.
4. Stakeholder integration: a broader group of stakeholder must be considered, includ-
ing nature and society, so to reach a multi-stakeholder view on value propositions.
==PAGE:30==
24
Literature review
2.5
Preliminary research framework
In the light of the foregoing, a preliminary research framework (Table 2.4) has been gen-
erated, revolving around specific themes that have been more frequently adopted in the
literature: the organisational perspective used by the ventures, their understanding of
sustainability, the relationship with stakeholders, and their consideration on economic
growth. Every theme has naturally a different interpretation for each typology of sus-
tainable entrepreneurship identified.
The basic understanding of sustainable entrepreneurs as problem-solvers of envi-
ronmental and social problems caused by unsustainability practices entails the general
assumption that they have first and foremost the ability to discover challenges resulting
from environmental and social concerns that can create new opportunities for a business.
How and for what reason this process of opportunity recognition was triggered for each
of the business typology will be a subject of this research, and the potential correlation
between this and the organizational perspective adopted by the new venture will be
investigated as well. To this purpose, several factors have been recognized as having
possible effects in the sustainability orientation taken by a business:
• Working experience: in compliance with what has been found in the literature, this
is to investigate whether having a working experience (in other business entities,
startups or both) is a common aspect among the participants interviewed.
• Education: taking this factor into consideration will provide a further insight for
the examination of the interviewees’ background.
• Volunteering: given the altruistic attitude that usually depicts sustainable en-
trepreneurs, the occurrence of this kind of life experienced has been analysed.
• Personal motivation:
for this factor, several are the drivers that might influ-
ence the direction taken by each venture. These are impact-driven motivations,
independence-driven motivations, and frustration.
• Sensing the opportunity: this regards the recognition of sustainable development
opportunities through a market pull approach or a technology push approach.
Moreover, to fully comprehend how the social and environmental dimensions have
been embedded throughout the venture, the research will also cover the analysis of the
business models adopted. In that regard, the business model elements that will be taken
into account are the value proposition, the value creation and delivery system, and the
value capture.
Table 2.5 presents the different elements as understood for each business typology.
While the elements of the ‘strongly sustainable business model’ will be characteristic of
the correspondent business typology, the elements of the ‘sustainable business model’
presented in the table will be associated to both the weakly and the intermediately
==PAGE:31==
2.5 Preliminary research framework
25
Table 2.4. Preliminary research framework
Weakly sustainable
entrepreneurship
Intermediately sustainable
entrepreneurship
Strongly sustainable
entrepreneurship
Organizational
perspective
Business-oriented
(Landrum, 2018);
inside-out approach
(Dyllick & Muff, 2016)
Business-oriented
(Landrum, 2018);
inside-out approach
(Dyllick & Muff, 2016)
Nature-oriented
(with
nature
comprising
both
environment
and society) (Landrum, 2018);
outside-in approach
(Dyllick & Muff, 2016)
Understanding
of sustainability
“Do less bad”
(Landrum, 2018)
“Do more good”
(Landrum, 2018)
Repair damage of
unsustainability practices
(Landrum, 2018);
creating sustainability
(Dyllick & Muff, 2016)
Stakeholder
perspective
Refined shareholder value
(Dyllick & Muff, 2016);
internal
firm-centric
view
(Landrum, 2018)
Triple bottom line: the three
realms of sustainability are
integrated in the value creation
process (Dyllick & Muff, 2016;
Landrum, 2018)
Collaborative partnership
(Dyllick & Muff, 2016)
Economic
growth
Pursuit of growth
(Landrum, 2018);
Profit = end |
Sustainability = means
(Dyllick & Muff, 2016)
Pursuit of growth
(Landrum, 2018);
Profit = end |
Sustainability = means
(Dyllick & Muff, 2016)
Qualitative development without
growth; (Landrum, 2018)
Profit = means |
Sustainability = end
(Dyllick & Muff, 2016)
==PAGE:32==
26
Literature review
sustainable entrepreneurship, given that the potential distinction between the two sus-
tainable business models is not clear yet, and that the specific components might just
slightly differ from one stage to another (blurry edges).
This overall structure and themes of this preliminary research framework are intended
to lead the analysis of the collected data from the semi-structured interviews.
Table 2.5. Components of business models
Components
Traditional
business model
Sustainable
business model
Strongly sustainable
business model
Value
proposition
Value proposition
(market offering)
Sustainable value
proposition including the
three realms of
sustainability
(economic,
social, environmental)
Preservation and
regeneration
of
critical
natural capitals
(Brozovic, 2020)
Value creation &
delivery system
Customer relationships,
resources, partners,
processes and activities
Multi-stakeholder
perspective; sustainability
incorporated with the help
of innovation
Environment and society
as key stakeholders;
operating
within
the
planetary boundaries and
above social foundations
(Brozovic, 2020; Kennedy
& Bocken, 2019)
Value capture
Cost structure and
revenue streams
Long-term perspective
Deliberately limited
growth; value captured is
beyond financial
(Brozovic, 2020)
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 3
Methodology
3.1
Research design and methods
This research builds on a qualitative strategy involving a multiple-case study design,
using semi-structured interviews as primary data collection method.
Given that its
main intention is to shed some light on strongly sustainable entrepreneurship, a field at
its infancy, this study can be described as an exploratory research based on an abductive
approach.
Generally speaking, a research can be either qualitative or quantitative, based on the
data that will be collected, or even a mix of the two. Quantitative research emphasizes
quantification in the collection of numerical data through the use of polls, questionnaires,
or surveys, and in the analysis of those data with statistical procedures so as to examine
the relationship among the variables (Bryman & Bell, 2011; Creswell & Creswell, 2018).
By contrast, qualitative research usually emphasizes words rather than numbers, and
it is used to understand behaviours and specific characteristics of a set of individuals
or groups so as to address a phenomenon which is lacking understanding in the current
literature (Bryman & Bell, 2011; Creswell & Creswell, 2018).
Largely used in social sciences, this type of research can now be found in many differ-
ent areas within the ‘discipline’ of business, management, and organisational research,
including for instance accounting, finance, information system, and marketing. Also,
it is common to use qualitative research for the generation rather than the testing of
theories. However, there are examples in which qualitative research has been employed
to test rather than to generate theories (Bryman & Bell, 2011).
A research can also be defined based on its purpose. When the ultimate goal is to de-
scribe and provide a general overview of a phenomenon, analysing the what, where, when,
and how, but not the why, the approach is known as descriptive. However, especially
when it is necessary to have a prior overview of the phenomenon of which it is needed to
collect data, this approach should be thought of as a means to draw further conclusions
rather than an end in itself (Saunders, Lewis, & Thornhill, 2009). On the other hand, an
explanatory approach (also causal) investigates the cause-effect relationship between two
variables, and it is more focused on addressing the how and why questions (Saunders et
al., 2009; Yin, 2003). Lastly, the exploratory approach is appropriate when the research
aims to provide an in-depth understanding of a phenomenon in order to determine the
nature of it (Saunders et al., 2009; Yin, 2003). Usually, an exploratory research aims to
tackle subjects on which little or no previous research has been done, which is precisely
==PAGE:34==
28
Methodology
the purpose of the study.
Moreover, a research can be often supported by a specific reasoning approach. The
traditional reasoning approaches have been those of deduction, induction, and abduction.
In general, deductive researches are the ones that entail a process that goes from a
general law or theory to specific observations or findings. For that reason, this kind of
reasoning is most suitable for testing existing theories, not generating new ones (Bryman
& Bell, 2011; Saunders et al., 2009). The deductive reasoning is mostly used for quanti-
tative researches because of the need to explain causal relationships between variables,
but it can be found in the qualitative ones as well (Saunders et al., 2009). The logical
sequence of deduction, highly structured, starts with a literature review, in which a
theory is found and from which conclusions can be derived so as to present them in the
form of hypotheses and propositions. These are empirically tested, and then the general
conclusions will serve as corroboration or falsification of the hypotheses and propositions
(Bryman & Bell, 2011; Saunders et al., 2009).
Contrary to this procedure, the inductive reasoning, typically used in qualitative
researches, moves from a specific case or a collection of findings to a general theory,
a process that makes it a perfect reasoning for creating new theories (Bryman & Bell,
2011; Saunders et al., 2009). In this case, the logical sequence, usually more flexible
than the deductive one, starts with findings about the world that will lead first to some
propositions, and then to the generalization of these into a (new) theoretical framework
(Bryman & Bell, 2011; Saunders et al., 2009).
If deduction follows a “from theory to case to conclusions” logic and induction fol-
lows a “from case to conclusions to theory” one, the third type of reasoning approach
follows yet another process, “from theory to conclusions to case”, and takes the name of
abduction (Kovács & Spens, 2005; Mitchell, 2018).
The abductive approach derives from the insight that most studies, to date, actually
followed neither a reasoning of pure deduction nor one of pure induction, but a combina-
tion of the two (Kovács & Spens, 2005; Mitchell, 2018). First described by Aristotle as
a form of syllogism, abductive reasoning usually uses creativity or intuition to develop
(never to create or test) knowledge or theories. Creativity is necessary, in this sense,
to break out of the limitations of deductive and inductive reasonings, which establish
relations between already known constructs (Kovács & Spens, 2005).
Broadly speaking, abduction emphasizes the search for the ‘most likely’ theory to
explain an empirical observation: an abduction is correct if the theory used to explain
the conclusions gets enough empirical validations that the probability of that theory
being the right one can be assumed to be a reasonable certainty, and if there is no other
theory explaining the empirical observations just as well.
Abduction usually starts out with some predetermined theoretical knowledge. Com-
paring these prior theories with more empirical observations, that implies a process of
learning loop, it may happen than an ‘anomaly’ or ‘gap’ is found, bringing forth a ‘cre-
ative iterative process’ so as to extend the theory or find a new matching framework
(Kovács & Spens, 2005). However, a research supported by an abductive approach can
also introduce a ‘creative element’ by applying a revisited theory to existing cases, which
is essentially re-contextualizing existing phenomena within a contextual framework, by
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Data collection
29
examining them from a new perspective (ibid.). This last perspective is indeed the one
used in this research, given that previous knowledge in the corporate literature about
the analysis of the integration of sustainability principles (from the weak, intermediate,
and strong paradigms) will be exploited by means of a theoretical framework to analyse
real-life cases in the entrepreneurial scenario.
In that regard, the literature review played a significant role in this study. Google
Scholar has been mainly used to find relevant articles, which would be downloaded via
the DTU digital library, to support the acquisition of knowledge in the subject and thus
the development of the research questions. Focused in the beginning on broader topics,
the search started by key phrases such as: ‘sustainability’; ‘strong’ AND ‘weak’ AND
‘sustainability’; ‘sustainable’ AND ‘entrepreneurship’; ‘business’ AND ‘model’; ‘business’
AND ‘model’ AND ‘innovation’; ‘sustainable’ AND ‘business’ AND ‘model’. Gradually,
the topics were also narrowed down so to deepen the knowledge on specific themes.
The literature review has led to a preliminary theoretical framework to be used to
analyse the case studies. A multiple-case study design was chosen because it generally
helps improving theory building or development, as it can be easier, with this design,
to establish the circumstances in which a theory will or will not hold (Bryman & Bell,
2011; Yin, 2003). Yin (2003) explains that when a research is based on multiple case
study, unlike the single case study, the data are analysed within each situation and across
different situations in order to understand the similarities and differences between the
cases, which is an objective of this study.
Since the focus of this research is on new ventures that have a sustainability orien-
tation, some restrictions have been put on the sampling of those cases to confine the
ventures within a determined context. Considering a “start-up” as a venture in early
stages of funding, the sample strategy of this research were to select start-ups based in
Denmark, aged between 1 and 10 years, in the ‘energy’ or ‘food & agriculture’ industries.
The selection of these two sectors is due to the acknowledged major impact that busi-
nesses belonging to these categories have on environment and society. To identify new
ventures that meet those criteria, the author’s preexisting network, the ‘+impact’ com-
munity platform and a simple web research were used, and a total of 66 start-ups have
been eventually contacted. Of those, 17 start-ups agreed to have and fully participated
in a semi-structured interview (response rate of 25,75%).
3.2
Data collection
This research adopts a multiple-case study design where the cases were chosen with a
sampling strategy based on the aforementioned criteria, deemed relevant to best address
the research questions. According to Yin (2003), interviews are one of the most impor-
tant sources of case study information because it allows for respondents’ insights and
perspectives on a specific topic. However, this could also be considered a limitation
given the subjectivism that underlies this method: interviews are often subject to com-
==PAGE:36==
30
Methodology
mon problems of bias, poor recall, and poor articulation, a problem that however could
be bypassed by adding information from other sources for corroboration.
To understand the phenomena under study, semi-structured interviews with open-
ended questions were used as primary data source so to allow interviewees to reply in
their own terms.
Structured interviews use questionnaires based on a standardised identical set of
questions, usually with pre-coded answers, and are used to collect quantifiable data (also
referred to as ‘quantitative research interviews’) (Bryman & Bell, 2011; Saunders et al.,
2009). By contrast, semi-structured interviews used a non-standardised list of questions
and themes to be covered, generally in the form of an interview guide (Saunders et al.,
2009). With this method, the questions and their order may vary from interview to
interview, depending on the flow of the conversation, or even be omitted considering
a particular organizational context (Bryman & Bell, 2011). The flexibility that this
kind of interviews offer allows respondents to expose their insights and perspective on
the preset open-ended questions (Bryman & Bell, 2011), and it is the reason why this
method was chosen as primary data source.
An interview guide has been designed prior to the interviewing so to address relevant
topics necessary to answer the research questions. Preparing the interview guide followed
an iterative process: it was reviewed several times in order to be fully understandable for
the respondent and to avoid repetitions or questions that could lead to a biased answer
because of the way it was formulated. The interview guide can be found in Appendix A.
It consists of four major themes: background and introductory questions, sustainability
orientation, business model, and stakeholders.
Furthermore, before performing semi-structured interviews, there are some ethical
considerations that need to be taken into account in order to preserve the integrity of
the research. Bryman and Bell (2011) presents some ethical principles grouped into four
main areas:
• Harm to participants: the researcher must ensure that respondents are in no way
directly harmed or adversely affected as a result of their participation in the study.
This means that anonymity and confidentiality must be preserved.
• Lack of informed consent: participants should be given as much information about
the purposes and the nature of the research as possible so to make an informed
decision about whether or not to become involved.
• Invasion of privacy: linked with the notions of informed consent, anonymity, and
confidentiality, personal or sensitive information must be kept confidential, and
the participants should have the possibility to refuse to answer certain questions
if these delve into private realms or cover areas that they find sensitive or they do
not wish to make public (regardless of the anonymity).
• Deception: intended here as the deviation from the real nature of the study, it
should be minimized, even if it is typical that researchers tend to limit the partic-
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Data collection
31
ipants’ understanding of the nature of the study so that they could respond more
naturally.
All these ethical points have been considered during the interviewing process. Con-
fidentiality has been preserved during the entire study by making sure that the data
collected during the interview would be treated anonymously. The participants have
been informed of the nature of the study both in the first request sent via email or
through LinkedIn and at the beginning of the interview itself. Also, when requested,
they were given even more details about the topics or themes that the questions would
have covered prior to the interview. All the interviews were recorded with the consent
of each participant.
The interviews have been conducted during the period from March 25th to June 3rd.
Table 3.1 reports the details for each interview: a brief description of each star-up and
the industry it belongs to, the age of the venture, the interviewee’s position, the date
in which the interview was conducted, and what kind of platform has been used. The
duration of the interviews was between 30 minutes and 1 hour. A face-to-face interview
was never feasible because of the Covid-19 pandemic.
In order to retrieve more information about each start-ups and validate part of the
data collected with the interviews, secondary data have been collected as well, mainly
through the start-ups’ websites and LinkedIn pages (to serve as a sort of triangulation
of data).
Table 3.1. Overview of the interviews
Age
Interviewee’s
position
Industry
Sector
Description
Date
Platform
#1
5
Founder
(ex CEO)
Energy
Portable solar energy
system for the developing
world
March 25th
Skype
#2
4
CEO
& Founder
Energy
Portable solar energy
system for the developing
world
March 30th
Skype
#3
2
CEO
& Founder
Food &
Agriculture
Helping vulnerable female
farmers in Kenya by
buying coffee beans directly
from them and by providing
them with training for
professional development
April 16th
Phone
#4
4
CEO
& Founder
Food &
Agriculture
Development of digital tools
for implementing and
managing regenerative
farming practices
April 16th
Skype
==PAGE:38==
32
Methodology
#5
10
CEO
& Founder
Energy
Plug and play solution
providing continuous energy
and real-time data
connectivity to autonomous
instruments and machinery
in the sea thanks to the
power generated by waves
April 21st
Skype
#6
3
CEO
& Founder
Food &
Agriculture
Natural beverages obtained
by processing leaves from
coffee trees
April 22nd
Skype
#7
10
Business
development
and sales
Energy
Production of solar rooves
that can completely replace
a traditional roof and solar
panels
April 23rd
Skype
#8
2
Co-founder
Food &
Agriculture
Production of super-protein
and fiber-rich ingredients for
dry and drinkable products
by using the brewers’ spent
grains from the beer
industry
April 27th
Phone
#9
2
CEO
& Founder
Food &
Agriculture
Indoor
vertical
farming
with hydroponic cultivation
method
April 29th
Skype
#10
1
CEO
& Founder
Food &
Agriculture
Easy and quick calculation
of the CO2 emissions on
food purchases by taking a
picture of the receipt with a
smartphone
April 30th
Phone
#11
4
Business
development
and sales
&
Co-
founder
Food &
Agriculture
It provides services and
equipment for establishing
and
maintaining
seaweed
farms in marine areas
May 6th
Skype
#12
8
CEO
& Founder
Food &
Agriculture
It develops tailored
agroforestry models for both
food and non-edible
industries
May 20th
Phone
#13
2
CEO
& Founder
Food &
Agriculture
Indoor vertical farming and
hydroponics combined with
high-tech and robotics
May 25th
Google
Meet
==PAGE:39==
3.3 Data analysis
33
#14
1
CEO
& Founder
Food &
Agriculture
Currently developing tools
for
pest
management
to
reduce
(bio)pesticide
usage
for
regenerative
agro-ecosystems
May 27th
Skype
#15
4
Co-founder
Food &
Agriculture
Production of free-range
edible snail meat
June 2nd
Phone
#16
8
Founding
partner
Food &
Agriculture
Solution
for
recycling
food waste in professional
kitchens to convert residues
into biomass
June 3rd
Phone
#17
6
CCO
Energy
Production and installment
of solar field with special
lenses made of
nanostructured foils
June 3rd
Zoom
3.3
Data analysis
Data analysis is a process that intends to transform and use collected data to extract
something meaningful for the purpose of the research.
To avoid the laborious and
time-consuming process of hand coding, the qualitative computer data analysis program
NVivo has been used as aid tool for storing and analyzing the data (transcribed semi-
structured interviews) faster and more efficiently. A thematic analysis has been used
as primary method to analyse the data. A qualitative data analysis generally involves
sequential steps. Creswell and Creswell (2018) suggest five steps to be followed:
• Step 1 Organize and prepare the data for analysis: this initial phase concerns
structuring the data collected in a consistent way. Given the use of semi-structured
interviews as primary data source in this study, this step has involved the tran-
scription of the interviews, all recorded with the consent of each participant, as
mentioned before.
• Step 2 Read or look at all data: this phase consisted of a general review of the
data so to reflect on the overall meaning of the information gathered through the
interviews. This step was also partially conducted during data collection, with the
generation of notes after each interview as preliminary observations.
• Step 3 Start coding all of the data: generally speaking, coding is a process for
analysing qualitative data and establishing links between data and concepts. It
involves taking text data gathered during data collection, segmenting sentences or
paragraphs into categories and labeling them with a term. However, in the case
of this thesis, a concept-driven approach has been used: basically, it means using
==PAGE:40==
34
Methodology
a predefined set of codes based on the theory being examined before, and fitting
or matching the data to them. The codes used for the analysis of the data in this
research are specifically all the elements presented in tables 2.4 and 2.5 (which
forms the so-called qualitative codebook).
• Step 4 Generate themes: for this phase as well, the major themes were gener-
ated by clustering the predefined set of codes, and they are ‘Weakly sustainable
entrepreneurship’, ‘Intermediately sustainable entrepreneurship’, ‘Strongly sustain-
able entrepreneurship’, and ‘Factors influencing the orientation taken by each busi-
ness typology’. These themes are the same that appear as headings in the findings
section of this study (see section 4).
• Step 5 Representing the themes: in this phase, it should be advanced how the
themes will be represented in the qualitative narrative. The finding section in
this research display multiple perspectives from the semi-structured interviews
and these are supported by diverse quotations to corroborate the results of the
analysis. Moreover, descriptive information about each venture are conveyed in a
summary table.
The interpretation of all these findings will be then presented in Chapter 5, and will
include the summary of the overall findings, the comparison of the findings to the litera-
ture, so to confirm or diverge from past knowledge, and a discussion by interconnecting
themes, with the aim of answering the research questions.
Validity and Reliability
Checking the validity of a research generally means to verify if the data collection method
accurately measure what it was intended to measure (Saunders et al., 2009). The term
reliability, instead, refers to the extent to which data collection technique will yield
consistent findings so that similar observations or conclusions could be reached by other
researchers (ibid.) In the case of a qualitative research, validity requires checking for the
accuracy of the findings by employing certain procedures, whereas reliability indicates
that the chosen approach is consistent across different researchers and among different
projects (Creswell & Creswell, 2018).
Hence, in ensuring validity and reliability for this thesis, as already mentioned, differ-
ent data sources have been triangulated so to build a coherent presentation and descrip-
tion of the findings. Moreover, data collection strategies have been reported in detail in
order to provide an overview of the methods used in this study. Dependability is also
assured as the same interview guide has been followed for each participant, deviating
from it only according to the progress of the conversation, but always covering all the
major themes (Appendix A). Also, all recorded interviews have been transcribed and
are provided in the form of a separate appendix. The frameworks used for the analy-
sis, the codes, and the themes have been critically described for anyone interested in
transferability (i.e. a reader that wishes to apply these findings to his own context).
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 4
Analysis and findings
In this chapter, the empirical findings collected through the semi-structured interview
are presented with the aim of answering the research questions listed in Section 1.2. The
analysis was carried out by using a deductive thematic approach. As already mentioned,
the elements presented in Tables 2.4 and 2.5 have been used as codes by which to
interpret the answers given by the seventeen participants, so to investigate under which
paradigm (weak, intermediate or strong) each aspect of each firm falls.
In the first three sections, the findings relative to the weakly, intermediately, and
strongly sustainable entrepreneurship are presented in light of the sustainability princi-
ples and business model components identified in Section 2.5. The fourth section then
illustrates the factors influencing the orientation taken by each business typology. From
that, potential correlations and patterns between the background of the participants in
the study and the integration of sustainability within their venture are also examined.
4.1
Weakly sustainable entrepreneurship
4.1.1
Organizational perspective
From the literature review, it follows that the organizational perspective of a weakly
sustainable business is generally business-oriented with an inside-out approach, that
is to say, the company wishes to pursue a sustainability strategy for gaining business
benefits, which then makes them the starting point for all planning and action.
According to the analysis and concerning this first sustainability principle, four ven-
tures have been identified as weakly sustainable for showing this orientation, namely
ventures #5, #7, #15, and #17. Despite sustainability (be it environmental, social, or
both) may be regarded as baseline in each of these venture, the focus revolves around
another pillar, meaning the business itself. The sustainability commitment seems to be
mostly instrumental to reaching an industrial gain, rather than being the end goal.
Taking as an example venture #5, it was founded starting from a technology that
utilize sea waves to generate green power. Because big projects might be financially
onerous for customers and might turn out as a failure, thus risky, they are starting with
small systems now so to follow the success of the Danish wind turbines. Moreover, there
are a number of applications for this technology, but the production of enough energy
==PAGE:42==
36
Analysis and findings
to meet (part of) the global demand seems to form the basis for a growing strategy to
get more industrial gain.
“By starting small, we learn all the tricks in the trade, how to efficiently manufacture
small systems and make them really cost effective, because later on when we increase
the size, then it makes more power. But we learn in each step, just like the Danish
wind turbines.”
“...for example, the energy market in the world [...] I could hardly understand how big
the requirement is, it’s enormous. And that’s why as a small company, you know, we
go in the beginning for some good applications where we can make a difference, but
we are just scratching the surface. So eventually, it should not be a small company
to develop it, you know, our company should be put into a much bigger context.”
Likewise, another example is venture #7. The product they developed, a roof with
integrated solar panels, is proposed first of all as a solution with a more aesthetically
pleasing design compared to the “ugly” solar panels or P.V. on the market that need to
be mounted on the roof. The strategy here seems to be to leverage their technology not
only because it may address an environmental issue, but because the pleasing design of
this roof would be likely to attract more customers in the first place (i.e. facing a choice
between mounting a solar integrated roof and building a roof with solar panels on top,
with the same functionalities on the whole, the customers could turn to the most pleasing
design). This ‘prioritization’ is also evident from their homepage, where the pleasing
design is the first characteristic of this solution to be emphasised, followed by savings
and profitability for the customers and the environmental sustainability commitment.
“The problem so far has been [...] that if you want P.V., it has been ugly so far, until
now. And that’s why they actually made it [the solar roof, ed.], because there was
a huge market gap in making beautiful P.V., between producing your own electricity
and having a good looking solution.”
4.1.2
Understanding of sustainability
In corporate literature, for all the companies labelled as weakly sustainable, sustainabil-
ity is intended as “do less bad”, which is about incremental improvements still based
on resource exploitation and with a more business-centric view. Among the seventeen
ventures under study, only two (ventures #7 and #15) show a kind of understanding of
sustainability close to the one found in the literature for the weak perspective.
In the case of venture #7, the solar integrated roof is indeed a green and better
solution as against unsustainable resources (e.g. fossil fuels), and in this sense they still
contribute in their own way to sustainability. However, what they seem to stress is what
a beautiful solution they developed (instead of remarking how sustainable it may be)
and how people can show off that they were the first movers on this market.
==PAGE:43==
4.1 Weakly sustainable entrepreneurship
37
“...you’re actually able to see that it is solar panels and that it’s a beautiful roof.
Because many people like the fact that they can show off that they are first movers on
this market without having to have the ugly solar panels.”
“And, you know, having this, you’re having your own kind of like ecosystem within the
house and everything. And especially engineers and technical people love that, that
can heat their own Jacuzzi or charge their own car. That geeky thing is important to
many.”
Considering instead venture #15, which produces free-range edible snail meat and
caviar, their understanding of sustainability as it is right now does not seem to go beyond
the intention of becoming certified organic. Their premise is the need for alternative
farming for the future and, as insects are becoming a popular alternative food source,
they believe snails can reach the same trend. However, so far they have been selling only
to higher end restaurants, that makes it even more important to be certified organic.
“The cooks have to prepare the snail meat for their own dishes. And that’s where
the market in Denmark is at the moment, because of a lot of restaurants, Michelin
restaurants. But we want to go in retail, we don’t know yet when and how, but we
will try to find ways to do that.”
“...it is very important for us actually to be organic, and it’s very important for us
also to speak about this future alternative to meat and try to be a part of it and be a
part of this change in people’s mind of food.”
4.1.3
Stakeholder perspective
Concerning the stakeholder perspective, four ventures (#5, #7, # 9, and #17) seem to
match what has been found in the literature, namely that the success of a company is still
evaluated from an economic view and that it is still quite oriented, while not exclusively,
towards the shareholder value rather than taking into account social and environmental
(i.e. non-monetary) values through a stakeholder dialogue aimed at making important
contributions in those areas.
For the venture #5, when the interviewee was asked about investors for example,
it was stated that they like the vision and are interested in investing in sustainable
solutions, but their primary expectation as investors is to make money. This could shift
the attention of the company from the potential sustainability gains to the obligation
towards investors.
“When they invest, they also expect to make money. So, you can say, my biggest job
is to develop the company, so it grows and makes money.”
In the same way, the interviewee from venture #7 declared something similar about
its partners, suggesting that their ultimate goal is to make business together, and without
really contemplating a system thinking to make contributions towards sustainability.
==PAGE:44==
38
Analysis and findings
“We all hope for a synergy, I hope that they can sell more roofs and they expect that
I will reach them or reach out to them when I have a roof that I need to be mounted.
So we all want to scale together.”
Venture #9 sells leafy green vegetables and herbs grown in an indoor vertical farm
with a hydroponic cultivation method.
The ultimate intention is claimed to be the
development of a permanent solution for the problems that traditional farming methods
create, which is moving some of the agriculture to the cities (in vertical farms) so as
to be able to re-convert agricultural land into forests. However, the relationship with
stakeholders does not seem to cover an inclusive approach, rather the decision-making
is quite exclusively an internal process.
“All of them have different comments to the business model and the strategy. But my
work was done on such thorough manner that I was able to convince them that their
input was welcome, but we already thought of all the opportunities that they had.”
Venture #17’s product is, broadly speaking, a magnifying glass working as a solar
panel, made of particular nanostructured foils, that can generate heat at temperatures
above 120 degrees Celsius and at a lower cost compared to other existing and more
complex solution. When it comes to stakeholder perspective, the venture seems to be
still projected towards a quite traditional approach, without clearly bringing forward
social and environmental contributions in the stakeholder dialogue.
“...it’s simple to understand that none of the existing solutions out there today are
able to do anything like this. So you’re looking into a very, very, very large heat
demand with a solution which seems to be unique, so you should be able to become
very rich if you invest, if not anything else goes wrong.”
4.1.4
Economic growth
In line with the firm-centric stance that distinguishes the weakly sustainable businesses,
an increased growth orientation has been found to be a peculiar aspect of the companies
belonging to this business typology.
In this sense, ventures #5, #7, #15, and #17
show a clear desire for further growth and profit, meaning basically that sustainability
is perceived as a means to reach a profit objective.
For example, venture #7 clearly stated that they had a high turnover before the
Coronavirus pandemic hit, and that they would like to hit also other markets in Europe.
“And the first quarter of 2020 we actually had a five times higher turnover than in
2019, but then the Corona [COVID19, ed.] hit.”
“...we have a very good traction. We have only been on the market for three years, but
we are scaling a lot, both money wise and sales, the amount of rooves. We do well
both in Denmark and in Germany and within 2020 we are going to hit the French
market, hopefully, and the Spanish market.”
==PAGE:45==
4.1 Weakly sustainable entrepreneurship
39
In the same vein, it seems that venture #15 understands that Danish market cannot
be that much profitable, which makes them consider export as a possibility for scaling
up.
“...if we want to scale up, it’s going to be impossible for us to do everything. And if
he wants to, for example, export, we probably hit a market and we need to scale up,
and that’s going to be labor, that is going to be huge costs.”
Venture #17 presents a broader perspective: in fact, not only they seek much profit
for themselves, but they understand that their business partners could have an even
higher revenue by pursuing an economy of scale.
“...if we can produce cheaper than gas, then our business partners, the utilities, wher-
ever it is, they can profit as well. So if we can sell to them at 25, and they can sell
to the customer at 35, then they make a profit.”
4.1.5
Business model
4.1.5.1
Value proposition
Thanks to the literature review, it is now clear that the value proposition for a sustainable
business model shall generally integrate the triple bottom line approach.
However, as things currently stand, ventures #7 and #15 have not expressed a value
proposition clearly encompassing the three realms of sustainability: potentially, they
could have a more sustainable value proposition, describing more strongly what are the
benefits that their solution, service and/or product could bring both to the environment
and society. Nonetheless, such considerations are sometimes implied.
For instance, venture #7, that produces solar integrated rooves, greatly emphasizes
the attribute that they use as selling point, the uniqueness that distinguishes them both
from rooves manufacturers and P.V. producers, namely the pleasing design of a roof that
can make electricity.
“Everything is as easy as plug and play, both installing the roof and installing battery.
[...] The overall economy will become way better and there will be very, very self-
supplying. Well, that is a couple of value propositions, but the core value proposition
is that it is a beautiful roof that makes electricity. That’s the simple sentence. But
there is a lot of benefits to it.”
With regard to venture #15, instead, the focus right now seems to be on the quality
of snail meat and caviar, rather than the low environmental impact or the benefits on
the growing population that an alternative farming system like this one can have.
“[The value proposition is that the product, ed.] is gourmet and it is high end, very
much high end, and especially caviar...”
==PAGE:46==
40
Analysis and findings
4.1.5.2
Value creation & delivery system
In a sustainable business model, this component should be characterized by a multi-
stakeholder perspective. Here in fact, it becomes necessary to have a greater inclusion
of stakeholders in the value creation process and, in general, a holistic approach (system
thinking).
Reflecting what has been depicted earlier for the stakeholder perspective, in the ven-
tures #5, #7, #9, and #17 a weaker approach has been noticed, falling as a matter of
fact outside the characteristics of the value creation & delivery system of a sustainable
business model. The relationships with partners, investors, and customers, and the pro-
cesses and activities performed can be associated to more traditional methods: therefore,
the characteristics of the value creation & delivery system of these ventures can be said
to match the ones of a traditional business model.
In producing and installing the rooves, for instance, venture #7 does not seem to
foster a real system thinking, but maintain a basic and traditional business partnership.
“...we keep everybody very informed on what’s going on inside.
If they have like
ownership, then they are very informed on what’s going on because then they have a
say. With our partners, like all of the carpenters, I wouldn’t say that we have a deep
relationship with any of them...”
The same occurs for venture #17. When the interviewee was asked about the rela-
tionship with and influence of their partners, he stated that, even if they can talk over
with partners, they do not have any kind of leverage on the decisions they make.
“...they give us inspiration. They’re good to discuss with, what’s good, what could
work and what couldn’t work. But they do not have any kind of leverage or so as it
is right now. We listen.”
4.1.5.3
Value capture
The value capture in a sustainable business model shall usually incorporate a long-term
perspective.
This means that the activities carried out by the companies, the costs
revenue streams should be thought also in terms of benefits to society and environment,
transcending the time span of a short-term strategy planning, so to ensure also a more
stable future and growth to the company. In this regard, ventures #5, #7, #15, and
#17 seem to include this long-term perspective.
As mentioned before, venture #5 is starting with small waves system in the hope of
following the success of the Danish wind turbines, going beyond a short-term strategy
and to some extent planning to reach new markets.
“So what we are concentrating on are small systems in the beginning, and then we
are following the success of the Danish wind turbines.”
In the case of venture #7, this long term perspective is seen not only from the
company’s point of view, because they understand that the market in foreign countries
==PAGE:47==
4.2 Intermediately sustainable entrepreneurship
41
will be easier to reach, but also from the customer’ one, since they will be able to become
self-sustaining and it will not be required to buy more energy.
“Many people love the fact that they become self-supplying and that in the summer
months they won’t have to buy a single kilowatt hour. And, you know, having this,
you’re having your own kind of like ecosystem within the house and everything.”
“...it’s easier to sell people solar roofs everywhere, because it’s relatively cheaper for
them to buy. So I think [given, ed.] this success in Denmark, it should be quite easy
to have success anywhere else.”
Considering the venture #15, the long term perspective, implied also in the realisa-
tion of a need for alternative sustainable farming system in the future, is pointed out
in the intention of having a financially viable business, for which they need to scale up
and export in other countries where snails and mollusks are more appreciated.
“So we believe that there’s a need for other sources for meat in the future. And when
we’re talking about insects, why not snail meat? And we also believe that there is
a potential for this kind of alternative farming and small mollusks like snails. But
we also believe that Denmark is a very small market, Danes are not very much into
mollusks like land snails as French and Spain and Italy. So we believe that we also
have to export at some point for actually make a sustainable business. So we also
have to work in this area for export.”
Lastly, venture #17 clearly understands that, for end users to get a cheaper and
appealing price, and thus for selling more solar fields to utility companies and other
businesses, the venture needs to get into the market as fast as possible, prioritizing in
this sense the acquisition of a larger market share rather than profit itself.
“What we want to do is we want to get into the market as fast as possible. And that’s
more important than making as much money as possible. Because if you look at this
from the customers point of view, they buy a solar field and they need to finance it.
[...] so the more solar fields we generate, the lower interest will be, the cheaper the
energy becomes to the customer. So that’s why we want to scale. That’s why that’s
much more important than profit margins. Of course we shouldn’t sell with a loss,
but we don’t need to optimize it, we don’t need to go to ‘How much can we get out of
this?’”
4.2
Intermediately sustainable
entrepreneurship
4.2.1
Organizational perspective
From the corporate literature, it emerges that an intermediately sustainable business
should usually be characterized by a business-oriented organizational perspective and
==PAGE:48==
42
Analysis and findings
an inside-out approach; in that respect, it does not differ from a weakly sustainable
business. Nevertheless, except the four ventures in section 4.1.1 showing this orientation,
none of the remaining thirteen ventures under study has been found to adopt any of
those aspects.
Three ventures (#10, #13, and #16) seem to be characterized by a more nature-
oriented perspective, reflecting at least a partial integration of environmental and social
concerns into their planning and structure, which is usually a distinctive aspect of strong
sustainable businesses. However, a strong sustainable business presents an outside-in ap-
proach as well, meaning that they start out by recognizing the pressing sustainability
challenges that the world is facing, and then define their sustainability strategy as so-
lution to them. In this case, those three ventures doesn’t show this aspect, but rather
keep an inside-out approach.
Take for example venture #10. It was founded as a spin-off of another startup (same
founders) and aims at calculating, with their app, the CO2 emissions that individuals
produce through food, so to make them aware of the climate impact of the food that
is bought. In this case, their strategy can be defined as more nature-oriented, because
environmental and social concerns are really part of their planning, but they still adopt
an inside-out approach: by working in the other startup, it was soon noted that they
were able to assign a climate labeling on the items they were already detecting.
“... so back in the days when we started working on *the other company*, we had
the idea that at some point we would probably be so good at recognizing items and
defining what they are that we could start doing climate labeling on them. And that
happened almost a year ago. We got to the point where you know, I was sitting there
with our algorithms, saying to the crew ‘I think we’re kind of there, should we try to
play with it?’”
“And the idea here is that our main objective with *the company under study* is to
enlighten people, because we’re not going to tell you what’s wrong, or right. I’m not
going to tell everybody to go vegan or whatever would be a fair solution. What we’re
trying to do is to kind of empower the consumer to make the choices that matter.”
Venture #16 developed a system supplemented by an I.T. platform for recycling
food waste in professional kitchens. This solution includes the installation of a machine
system for the collection of food waste into a ‘storage sink’ and the transportation of
that, through external partners, to bio-gas plants, where they are converted into green
energy and later organic fertilizer. In this case, their inside-out approach, which is rather
about the founding aspects and the structure of the venture, balances the nature-oriented
approach, quite clear being a venture working in favour of circular economy.
“We’ve tried to do a low cost concept, so for example we don’t have our own trucks, we
just hire them in. And we don’t have our own biogas plants, we just deliver to them.
Two years ago almost, we actually hired our own guys for services and installation
because we spent so much money on sub supplies. Then, it was a better case to hire
them also. But we are an environmental company, of course, with a low cost model.”
==PAGE:49==
4.2 Intermediately sustainable entrepreneurship
43
4.2.2
Understanding of sustainability
As seen from the literature review, the understanding of sustainability that marks inter-
mediately sustainable businesses can be described as “do more good”, for which sustain-
ability is defined by and in favour of more external ecological or societal interests. From
the analysis, it emerged that several are the ventures showing a kind of understanding
of sustainability close to the one found in the literature for the intermediate paradigm:
#5, #8, #9, #10, #13, #16, and #17.
If we look at the wave energy solution developed by venture #5, being the system
still too small, it can be mainly used for feeding power to instruments in sea and to
power satellite communication, as a tsunami early warning system, and also in offshore
oil and gas fields to monitor if there is a blowout. However, even if the current system
might not generate much energy because of its size, the energy that a bigger solution
could potentially generate in the near future will be used to replace diesel generators
in coastal areas. The intention, in that regard, is to be able to empower all people in
coastal areas that lack access to electricity and internet access.
“When we go to the next size, let’s say 30 kilowatts or 300 kilowatts, they will mainly
be used to replace diesel generators in coastal areas. [...] So the idea is, first of all,
get rid of diesel generators, replace it with wave energy, provide electricity, internet,
and also desalination...”
Venture #8 reuses brewers’ spent grains from the beer industry for the production
of fiber- and protein-rich food products. Clearly engaged in circular economy activi-
ties, their understanding of sustainability is based on the safe assumption that future
population will be in need of new methods for supplying food without utilizing further
resources.
“...it’s about resource recovery and we’re working with food that has already been used
once, and as you know we have a growing population, we don’t have enough food for
everyone. So we need to come up with new ways for supplying food for people without
spending the resources of the world. And there are very few products that are actually
capable of doing that.”
As things stand right now for venture #9, their vertical farming system aims at a
better quality of the plant and content of nutriments, food safety, the increase of the
shelf-life, and better taste, so to incentivize more consumption of vegetables; however
in the long term, the intention is to promote the re-conversion of agricultural land into
forests first, and then help other countries realize that is possible to stop cutting forests
for agricultural purposes.
“...we did exactly what they are doing in Brazil now. So we can’t really blame them,
but we can take responsibility and prove that they can stop cutting down the forest by
removing the incentive, and we can prove that we can reforest our own agricultural
land. [...] We can help developing countries going directly to the service society. As
long as they have enough food, then they don’t have to go into intensive farming.”
==PAGE:50==
44
Analysis and findings
Ventures #13, which designs indoor vertical farming systems with hydroponics method
combined with high-tech and robotics solutions, acknowledges the long-term benefits of
a vertical farm systems, addressing both the environmental and social sides.
“...all the benefits of vertical farming are the 95% less water use and 60% less fertil-
izer, no excess fertilizer going into water, all that stuff. We believe that by being a
technology supplier for a turnkey system, you, of course, enable more farmers, more
greenhouse operators to be more sustainable.”
4.2.3
Stakeholder perspective
When referring to the stakeholder perspective in an intermediately sustainable busi-
ness, a broader set of stakeholders is considered in order to pursue a triple bottom
line approach. In this direction, the non-monetary values are taken into consideration,
extending thus the idea of stakeholders as only customers and business partners to a
multi-stakeholder perspective. For this principle as well, several are the ventures show-
ing a multi-stakeholder perspective, in which social and environmental values are taken
into account with the aim of reaching a significant contributions in those areas. These
ventures are #4, #8, #10, #13, #15, and #16.
For example, venture #4, that develops software for the implementation and man-
agement of regenerative farming practices, work with multiple partners (e.g. schools) to
achieve a common goal, emphasising the central role of the trees and farmers well-being
in their model.
“...the software architectures is built around this way of thinking where trees are central
part. In other software it’s kind of the other way around, the trees are some kind of
addition that you kind of put on and that makes it really hard to have an integrated
analysis and integrated into the whole mapping and the whole process. So they are
really a central part of the way that we build the software...”
As a separate case, even if it was engaged in projects with universities and is now part
of an accelerator program, venture #15 doesn’t have partners or investors involved at
the moment, and it is struggling also to receive some support from government or public
authorities. Nevertheless, it seems that a more intermediately kind of relationships in
this case is sought, as it was mentioned that:
“...there must be some kind of philanthropy in this. You have to have love for food,
otherwise it’s difficult, we don’t want somebody on our neck all the time only talking
about profit. We want somebody to actually share knowledge and share ideas and
share networks, so to actually develop together, right?”
4.2.4
Economic growth
Similar to what has been found for weakly sustainable business in the corporate litera-
ture, a distinctive trait of the intermediately sustainable businesses has been found to
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Intermediately sustainable entrepreneurship
45
be the pursuit of growth, that is an orientation aimed at achieving a profit objective and
in which sustainability just acts as means.
Besides the four ventures in section 4.1.4 having this orientation, ventures #10, #11
#13, #14, and #16 seem to show this trait. However, in these cases, the intention of
growing complements a higher interest in reaching a larger number of customers or end
users, so to be able to have an even greater social and/or environmental impact.
A clear example is venture #10. Being a very young startup, their efforts are con-
centrated on reaching a larger clientele in the future by working with supermarkets on
a B2B solution.
“So, I think slowly, we’re probably going to expand, but for right now, we are focusing
most of our effort on supermarkets with the aim to reach most consumers.”
For example, when the interviewee of venture #13 was asked about how they are
trying to get investors on board, he stated that the first investors they have contacted
seem to be very interested and see potential in scaling up their robotics solution to be
integrated in vertical farming systems, possibly implying that the venture are planning
to pursue a growing strategy.
“...it is mainly the economic and scaling part that we see the investors are looking
for. So for us, it’s always a nice bonus to say that we’re enabling green production or
climate friendly farming. But at the end of the day, if it’s a climate friendly and not
that scalable or good business, then it’s not really going to be investment worthy.”
With regard to venture #16, an interesting comment concerning their position to-
wards economic growth came out while talking about intellectual properties for their food
waste handling system. Since the interviewee stated that they took known technologies
and combined them into a new concept, the current strategy seems to be to disregard
the filing of intellectual properties so to be able to concentrate on the acquisition of a
big market share.
“So we talked about, to begin with, how much should we do with these intellectual
properties. But the thing is that you can use a lot of money, a lot of time on it, but
we made the decision that we would rather use the time on selling it and getting a
big market share.”
4.2.5
Business model
4.2.5.1
Value proposition
As previously mentioned in section 4.1.5.1, a sustainable business model generally im-
plies a value proposition that incorporate the triple bottom line approach. While in the
ventures identified in said section the value proposition was lacking this kind of integra-
tion of the triple bottom line, eight ventures have been labelled as intermediately for
==PAGE:52==
46
Analysis and findings
showing a value proposition more inclined towards the inclusion of all three realms of
sustainability. These are #4, #5, #8, #9, #10, #13, #16, and #17.
For example, the value proposition of venture #4 addresses primarily agricultural
consultants, since the company sells the software for the adoption of regenerative prac-
tices directly to them. However, it was recognized that this first product will still benefit
farmers, and that for the second product, for which the farmers will be the direct cus-
tomers, the value proposition will change, possibly detailing more clearly those benefits.
“We’re the first product for the agricultural consultants. It’s really about them saving
time and providing the best solution for their customers. They are not really reaping
the benefits of the systems that are being implemented, that’s the farmers. So it’s
quite simple like cost reduction and better quality of their solutions. For the farmers,
the benefits are quite different, and that’s for the second phase, for the second product
for the farmers it’s going to be a different value proposition.”
The venture #9’s value proposition is a perfect example of this integration: it covers
both the better quality of leafy green vegetables and herbs that the consumers would
have and the contribution towards environment.
“...the consumer can get more nutrition and better taste in their daily consumption.
They are more motivated to eat vegetables and green leaves because the quality is high
and consistent. [...] So they can actually help fight the climate change by eating
more green leaves and participate indirectly in converting agricultural land back into
forest.”
Along the same lines, through the app for the end users and the B2B solution, the
value proposition of the venture #10 refers not only to the educational and awareness
purposes of the app towards consumers, but also to the establishment of a sense of com-
mitment of supermarkets and other companies in supporting a sustainability strategy.
“So for the end user, that’s mostly just about delivering some insights and some
motivation. So it’s just an empowerment, right? You can actually do something,
check this out and see how easy it is. [...] ...the supermarkets and other food delivery
services, they’re getting more aware at least of how that matters and how they can
make some choices for the consumer. That’s one part of the value propositions. And
the other one is that they can actually deliver tools to their consumers that will help
them make the right choices, right?”
A comprehensive value proposition was also presented by venture #16, which intends
with their food waste handling system to address concurrent social and environmental
issues.
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Intermediately sustainable entrepreneurship
47
“The first one is the working environment, we want to make a better working environ-
ment for the kitchen of course; we want to reuse the food waste for green energy, we
want the green energy to...so in food waste, there’s actually a lot of phosphate that
we need to put back on the land fields. If we burn this, we will burn out all nutrition
that is actually in the food waste, so instead of burning it all we want to put it back
on the fields. We want to cut down the emission of transporting food waste, and then
we want to make a good economy for the customer.”
Another example is the value proposition presented by venture #17, that aims at
generating high-temperature heat through a particular solar panel shaped like a mag-
nifying glass. This heat would be undoubtedly free of emissions; also they claim they
would be able to prevent any kind of financial risks for the end users.
“That we deliver risk free, emission free heat at unsubsidized cost, below the cost of
natural gas, anywhere. That’s what we claim.”
4.2.5.2
Value creation & delivery system
Reflecting what has been found before with regard to the stakeholder perspective, the
same six ventures (#4, #8, #10, #13, #15, and #16) show a greater inclusion of
stakeholders in the value creation process, that goes then beyond the shareholder value
and includes social and environmental values. In that respect, these venture seem to
relate economic, environmental, and social concerns to the triple bottom line values of
sustainability.
Taking venture #8 as an example, that reuses waste products from the beer industry
to produce super protein and fibre rich ingredients, the interviewee seemed to imply that,
thanks to being a circular model, the decisions to be taken are often discussed with their
stakeholders so to work for the same sustainability purpose.
“...it’s always an iterative process. It’s also about what opportunities are there, so
you can decide on something but then you see whether it works. So of course all
stakeholders, either they agree with you and work in the same direction or else, if
they don’t agree with you, then it’s probably very difficult to get them to be really good
partners.”
Even more clearly, the multi-stakeholder perspective appears to be fostered by the
venture #10. The decisions and strategies to adopt, revolving mostly around the tool
used to get an overview of how much CO2 emissions the purchased food emits, are being
made through extensive dialogues with partners, investor, and the B2B customers.
“With the companies, it’s a huge discussion, you know, and that sounds a bit a debate
on how can we deliver most information without being annoying and all of this. And
I can tell you that people are very much a part of this journey when we have the
discussions with them.
So yes, we have a lot of talks about that on a corporate
level...”
==PAGE:54==
48
Analysis and findings
“It’s been an ongoing discussion. Once we started the thinking, as I told you about
‘Okay, now we can actually do it. We can actually build something around it’, every
time we talked about the company, we talked about what’s the best area to ‘attack’ on
this, because there are so many options actually with this one, because nobody’s done
it, really, before.”
4.2.5.3
Value capture
In the same way as the weak position, the value capture should include a long-term
perspective for the intermediately sustainable ventures as well. This means that the
underlying objective of this type of ventures is to embrace sustainability concerns in
an economically sound and profitable manner. The ventures falling into this category
therefore are #8, #9, #10, #11 #13, #14, and #16.
With regard to venture #9, for example, it was implied the intention of exploiting
growth opportunities in connection with the ultimate mission of turning agricultural
land back into the original states, i.e. forests.
“So if vertical farming is a success, then you need less agricultural land, and you can
convert the agricultural land back into forests.”
“...there would be a lot of growth opportunities after the business was started.”
Likewise, venture #11, which provides services and equipment for establishing and
maintaining seaweed farms in marine areas, believes that the investors wish that the
company will grow so that it could benefit the coastal regions (also environmentally, as
seaweeds capture both nitrogen and CO2) and the fishermen in the future.
“Of course they want us to succeed, but it’s difficult to say what their expectation
is. They give money because they believe in us and because they want to support us
growing our company.”
“They really see that by doing what we do, we can really achieve a great impact. Then
at the same time I also think it’s because seaweed farming could really serve as a great
business potential for the Danish society by providing jobs for coastal regions, also due
to the fact that we have a huge coastal line, so it could really become a big business
area for Denmark. I think it’s because of both the green impact and the potential of
creating jobs within Denmark.”
Venture #16, instead, seems to have considered a long term strategy from the very
beginning, since the developing of an I.T. platform to manage the whole food waste
handling system makes it possible to scale up without further cost.
“The key for getting better earnings is a critical mass, which means more customers.
And possibly this I.T. platform like a low cost model, we are also very scalable because
we made this I.T. platform, which means we can have twice the amount of customers
we have now.
And we don’t necessarily need to hire more people.
So that’s very
important for us.”
==PAGE:55==
4.3 Strongly sustainable entrepreneurship
49
4.3
Strongly sustainable entrepreneurship
4.3.1
Organizational perspective
As already discussed in section 4.2.1, from the literature review it emerged that a strongly
sustainable business shall generally present a nature-oriented organizational perspective
with an outside-in approach. This indicates that the company is able to integrate deci-
sive environmental and social strategies into their planning and structure, after having
recognized sustainability issues and having decided to take a stand in the resolution of
those. Along these lines, ten ventures were found to be characterized by this perspective,
namely #1, #2, #3, #4, #6, #8, #9, #11, #12, and #14.
Take venture #1 as an example. It was founded after acknowledging that a billion
of people don’t have access to energy and that the current power generation systems are
polluting and, in some parts of the world, not very reliable. Therefore their solution, a
portable pay-as-you-go solar energy system, was designed in order to solve two issues at
once: exploiting the sunlight in Kenya to generate green energy in rural areas that lack
access to energy, providing an alternative solution for candles and kerosene.
“...we saw a huge challenge or a problem that a billion of people don’t have access
to energy, and that’s one problem. Another one is the fact that we are polluting so
much because we are mainly driven by fossil fuels. [...] So, we looked into it: do we
have any technologies that can help solve these problems? And then solar panel is a
very obvious solution because since 2005 it’s actually been cheaper to use solar than
to power an economy by fossil fuels.”
A similar portable solar energy solution has been developed by venture #2, and also
in this case it was founded with the mission of resolving a fundamental problem in Africa,
that is access to energy, at an affordable price.
“We were just thinking “if this is a problem or need in Denmark, it would probably
also be in other places, for instance in Africa”. [...] Then we tried to make some of
those prototypes, and I asked my board if they wanted us to go to Africa and try these,
they said no, because it was too risky. Then I quit my job and started by myself.”
In the case of venture #3, whose intent is to help vulnerable female farmers in Kenya
by buying coffee beans directly from them and selling them in Denmark, being directly
involved has been recognized as an essential part of the concept they created to solve a
social issue in Africa, namely the exploitation of female farmers by middlemen.
“Because when you sit in Denmark and believe that we can have certificates and
standards and fair trade... believing that all these standards are doing good in the end
for the small farmers, that for me is to close our eyes and think that we are doing
what we can, because we can do a lot more. When you go down there and see and feel
how it actually works in the everyday work, you know, that it’s not enough. We need
to be there and be actively involved, and we need to question why the normal crevices,
why the culture thing is going on, why they’re doing what they do.”
==PAGE:56==
50
Analysis and findings
Venture #12 develops agroforestry models, starting from West Africa, with the ob-
jective of reversing climate change and secure who’s suffering from it. Its planning was
the result of an epiphany the founder had in Gambia, when he understood that his
knowledge from being a greenkeeper could be transferred for somebody who actually
needs it.
“And then I realized that my professional life of being a greenkeeper in a golf course
didn’t make sense to me anymore, now that I could see a purpose of transferring that
knowledge for somebody who actually needed it. Instead of cutting grass for pensioners
to play a game, I would be able to design ecosystems for people who needed something
to actually improve their livelihood.”
Another example is venture #14, which was started because she realized that to solve
the pressing question of how to feed this growing population, her extensive scientific
knowledge could serve to this purpose and create something useful: in this case, new
farming practices developed by integrating science and tech systems to grow food, re-
build biodiversity, and heal the planetary ecosystems.
“So we actually have a lot of scientific evidence on how immunity works, on this
mechanistic level, what the mechanism is, how it’s been activated, and what we should
measure. And instead of actually going to the lab, we actually want to leverage having
real time data on immunity [...] if immunity is active, there is no need maybe for you
to spray (pesticides, ed.), but if immunity is not active we inform you that immunity
is not active in the plants and (we tell you, ed.) what are the further steps that you
should do to optimize crop protection strategies.”
4.3.2
Understanding of sustainability
Concerning the understanding of sustainability, eight ventures (#1, #2, #3, #4, #6,
#11, #12, and #14) seem to match the literature findings, that is repairing damages of
the unsustainability practices and creating sustainability. A strongly sustainable busi-
ness shall make a positive contribution to overcome sustainability issues, thus fostering
the dedication to serving the common good.
For example, in developing software for the implementation of regenerative farming
systems, the interviewee from venture #4 clearly stated which SDGs they are working
on, encompassing both social and environmental concerns in the attempt of creating
sustainability.
“...we are working with the SDGs, for one thing, but we’re complementing that with
the drawdown. So the focus is on climate drawdown or carbon drawdown. So we are
kind of working with two frameworks to kind of have a more broader approach. And
what we’re mainly working with within the SDGs is food security, resilient agriculture
and preventing deforestation, and the certification. And then there’s also something
where we’re working with the life on land and life in water. [...] so SDGs: 2, 12, 13,
14 and 15.”
==PAGE:57==
4.3 Strongly sustainable entrepreneurship
51
Venture #6 has developed the world’s first marketable beverages made from coffee
leaves. They have the characteristic of not being bitter, which makes them a natural
sugar-free alternative to iced tea. The coffee leaves are bought from coffee farmers in
West Africa, that increases the family income and allows for parents to be able to send
their children to secondary school.
“So one of the things that is the most easy for us to sort of document is the increase in
annual wages or income for the farmers or the families. It’s easy for us to document
how many jobs we create.
It’s easy for us to document what kind of increase in
livelihood this (increase in income, ed.) means.”
“...as a company, we want the best for our farmers and we want them to, you know,
be great and do good, but it’s not our lives, it’s their lives. It’s their moral choices. If
they want to piss away all the money, I mean, I’m not going to sit here in Copenhagen
and tell them not to, because I simply don’t believe in that.”
With the farming and production of seaweed, venture #11 relates to several SDGs
to explain their commitment towards sustainability. Similarly to venture #4, they try
to address both environmental and social concerns, so to be able to repair damages of
non-sustainable practices, thanks to for example the capturing of CO2 and nitrogen from
coastal areas, and bring prosperity to fishermen.
“...from scaling the production of seaweed, we provide food for the growing population,
so it contributes to the SDG 2, then we also ensure a stable management and use of
the natural resources, so that will be the SDG 12. We capture CO2, that will be the
SDG 13, and then we restore the balance of the ocean by using seaweed as a biofilter,
so that will be SDG 14. [...] And then at the same time, the seaweed farms provide
shelters for fish, so smaller fish had a better chance of growing big, which then means
that you actually add more fish to the ocean by farming seaweed. So it brings a lot of
benefits and the more you can lower the production costs, the better and alternative
seaweed becomes for so many different industries.”
If we look at the agroforestry model developed by venture #12, the system has been
designed so that it could benefit both the farmers and the environment.
“So not only do we give them the entire package, with which to farm, we also buy the
products from them. So in that way they have been transitioned from being some just
subsistence farmers into being commercial farmers.”
“...we purify the air, we purify the soil, we purify the rain that comes out of the air
and runs into the river, all the environmental media that we have, so air, soil and
water.”
==PAGE:58==
52
Analysis and findings
4.3.3
Stakeholder perspective
As seen from the literature review, for all the companies identified as strongly sustainable,
one distinctive characteristic is the collaborative approach between stakeholders, so that
the three realms of sustainability can be pursued with an inclusive and collaborative
effort. This can be done for example by creating transparency, sharing practices, and
defining and setting standards. In that direction, several are the ventures showing this
inclusive perspective, namely #1, #2, #3, #6, #11, #12 and #14.
Venture #1, for example, works in collaboration with local banks and companies so
to have a meaningful impact and reach a larger number of people, instead of working
with NGOs (whose impact, in the interviewee’s opinion, could be limited). This decision
was because those partners seem to understand the kind of impact the venture could
achieve with their portable and relatively cheap solar energy system, especially consider-
ing the big interest from them in helping moving Kenya from a fossil fuel economy into
a renewable energy nation.
“...if you look only at sustainability you’ll get an NGO often, that is like all into
sustainability, but when you look at how many system they can actually roll out,
how large impact will they actually have to engage in a partnership, it would be very
limited. [...] So, we are more like, if we can work with some of the largest commercial
banks in Kenya and roll it out as part of their green strategy, that’s much better than
working with small partners who don’t have any access to customers.”
Similarly, venture #2 collaborates with small local entrepreneurs that can give them
useful insights knowing the local culture, but they also work with non-profit organiza-
tions that want to provide acceleration programs for local entrepreneurs. This collabo-
ration is said to be based on a bottom-up approach, by expanding the network through
people they already know and trust.
“...it is also about profit, but the reason why they joined was mainly because we could
provide a product that could help communities in a kind of commercial way. So, it’s
not that we give our product away, we try to figure out how we can make a commercial
solution that is affordable, because in my opinion and also in my partners’ opinion,
that’s the only sustainable way of doing it. Because if you give things away or if
you subsidize it, then when these subsidies are closed or finished, the families cannot
afford it anymore. So, we needed to figure out how we can do it in a commercial
way.”
A very clear example of the inclusion of society into the stakeholder dialogue can be
found in venture #3. Here, the collaboration with the women in Kenya has been set from
the very beginning of the company, trying to understand what had to be done for their
well-being, and building up trust. Moreover, the relationship with other stakeholders
is based on a constructive dialogue aimed at improving the steps in the value chain,
showing thus to strongly adopt a collaborative approach.
==PAGE:59==
4.3 Strongly sustainable entrepreneurship
53
“...we started out by having workshops and we also involve a lot of the women and
we have team leaders. So, they give me feedback on what they need and how we can
do better. So, the main thing is that I’m not coming with all the answers, it’s part of
the journey that we do this together.”
“...when they are down there and when they see a need, everything I do, they of course
sometimes ask questions and sometimes they find small things that we can do better.
[...] we have regular meetings where we discuss how we can improve every step in the
value chain.”
Another example is venture #14, where the integration of a collaborative approach
for the enhancement of the agro-ecosystem is acknowledged directly by the interviewee.
“And this is also (about) some of the technology that we are also partnering with,
like, for example, satellite imagery data, and from there, like going deeper into the
ecosystem, like with high resolution photo drones and then, you know, like assessing
exactly what is the health (of plants) and what to do about it, and then for all these
companies, how to make future products. And this is exactly collaborative approach...”
4.3.4
Economic growth
From the literature, it emerges that the position taken by strongly sustainable business
with regard to the economic growth is that profit is not seen as the ultimate goal. On
the contrary, profit is a means to achieve a higher purpose, seeking thus a qualitative
development without a quantitative growth. In this respect, eight ventures (#1, #2,
#3, #4, #6, #8, #9, and #12) show that they treat profit only as means to an end, i.e.
making significant contributions to society and environment.
One example could be venture #4. When asked about the relationship with stake-
holders, the interviewee indicated that they try to reach a common understanding about
what they want from running this business, and specifically it was stated that the ven-
ture is seen more as a tool than the end goal, specifying that it would be a good thing
if other companies would compete with him so to reach a big impact faster.
“The premises are that, where we start, this is where we want to go, what we dream of.
And then we kind of take it one step at a time. So I think that’s a lot of expectations
for where it’s going to be in the future.”
“...the business is more of a tool than an end goal, if that makes sense. So it’s also
a matter of if someone else comes and competes with me, it’s a really good thing
because then we’re going to reach that goal faster. That’s the way we’re approaching
the competition, that it’s really a good thing. And because it’s forcing us also to be
more aggressive in how we are accelerating.”
Venture #6, by developing alcohol and non-alcohol beverages made from processing
coffee leaves, seems to realize that, in order to make a positive contribution to the farmers
from which they buy the coffee leaves, they need to sell flavourful beverages that will
==PAGE:60==
54
Analysis and findings
push consumers to buy again. Otherwise, if they can’t enter the market and sell the
beverages, they would not be able to make a difference for the farmers. In this sense,
striving for economic growth can be seen as a means to keep having a significant impact.
“ And it ties together with the one thing that we come back to a lot when we talked to
people about this: for once, there’s a one to one benefit, like the more you drink, the
better it will be for the farmers.”
“I mean, we all dream of being purchased by Unilever or something. [laughing] I mean,
I guess they all bought into the premise that maybe in the next round, or the round
after that, they can always sell their shares for much more worth what it is now. I
think they believe that we can actually execute on this idea, how big nobody knows.”
When talking about the received investments, venture #8 seems to share the view
that, for its products to have a part in the fight against hunger and feed the growing
population, the business needs to grow.
“...they want to see the company grow and they want to see us fulfill our mission.”
The same viewpoint is shared by venture #9, which acknowledged the necessity of
enter the mass markets to eventually achieve the purpose of re-converting agricultural
land into forests.
“...in order to make a difference and fulfill the vision that I just described, then
eventually I have to go to the mass markets to have the biggest impact.”
4.3.5
Business model
4.3.5.1
Value proposition
With regard to the value proposition of a strongly sustainable business model, seven
ventures (#1, #2, #3, #6, #11, #12 and #14) seem to match what has been found
in the literature review, that is the preservation and regeneration of critical natural
capitals. It should be recalled that they encompass several domains, amongst which the
socio-cultural, the ecological, the economic, and human survival ones can be considered
of particular relevance in the context of a business. In this sense, the value proposition
of a strongly sustainable business should address to some extent those domains.
For example, venture #1, by proposing an affordable portable solar energy system,
refers to the emancipation that it brings to individuals and small entrepreneurs in Africa:
they not only use green energy, but have also the possibility to power different instru-
ments for different purposes, from opening an haircut saloon to improving their harvest
operations.
“...we power all the end goals of the users, whatever they would like electricity to do
for them”
==PAGE:61==
4.3 Strongly sustainable entrepreneurship
55
Following the same approach, the value proposition of venture #2 addresses the
empowerment of human capabilities that the portable solar system solution can create.
“...we provide a solution that can be used for the benefit of our customer’s own
innovation.
[...]
and this is also why we can operate and partner up with other
companies that are selling power, for instance micro grid companies. Because then
they can use our battery solution for some of their customers, where cannot put line
in the ground because it’s too expensive. Then they can use the battery for carrying
power home. Also, for small hospitals, as backup system. So, our main focus is “how
can we provide something that is very portable and has many many use cases?””
In the case of venture #11, their service aims at providing new opportunities for
fishermen and at the same time capturing CO2 and nitrogen, repairing thus the damages
on coastal lines caused by the current intensive farming systems.
“...we lower the production cost of seaweed farming, which then make seaweed farming
profitable, and thereby we provide a new business opportunity for fishermen who are
struggling to stay in the business due to the decreasing amount of fish in the ocean.”
Another example is the value proposition proposed by venture #14. Here, protecting
environment and society (farmers in this case) is strongly stressed as the primary value
that their technologies can bring.
“...reducing chemical pesticides, chemical fertilizers, switching to biological crop pro-
duction, organic, and beyond organic, regenerative farming systems. So this is where
they see that, you know, they can save their money, save their time, have peace of
mind that, you know, their crops are safe because, you know, there are tools that
actually take care of it.”
4.3.5.2
Value creation & delivery system
Echoing what has been found for the stakeholder perspective of a strongly sustainable
business, in the ventures #1, #2, #3, #6, #11, #12 and #14 a strong position has been
noticed, showing that nature (i.e. society and environment) is considered and treated
as key stakeholder in the multi-stakeholder approach that underlies these ventures.
It has already been shown in section 4.3.3 that venture #2 fosters a collaborative
approach between stakeholder, but additionally they were engaged in a direct dialogue
with the first customers from the very beginning so to create a solution that would reflect
and solve their needs. Moreover, they are committed to promote the product especially
in terms of examples of real-life use cases thanks to which their life could improve.
“...we started with a prototype which we made ourselves in a backyard, in a garage,
and we went to Kenya with 10 of these systems, and then we got feedbacks from
families there, what were their needs, what do they like, and then we went back and
created another prototype with the functionalities that they wanted and they could
afford...”
==PAGE:62==
56
Analysis and findings
“...we try to promote the different use cases, but it’s very important that our customers
can see these use cases themselves, because we cannot put a use case down on top of
the customers if they don’t see it themselves. So, it’s important to show possibilities
to them.”
Another point of view is offered by venture #6. In this case, the identification of
nature as key stakeholder might seem not directly covered, but this is due to the fact
that they prefer to rely on partners that would have the capabilities to focus on the
preservation of nature rather than say that they have, for instance, a direct impact on
climate change.
“...for instance, in Kenya, but also in Ethiopia, the organizations that we work with
are very ‘nature-conservatives’ organizations, so they work with biodiversity. They
work with making sure that the forest stay there (because) for instance, one of the
things that happens in Kenya, which is really bad, is that they cut down a lot of forest
and then they make coffee fields, because then you can get an organic certification
faster. [...] I think from our point of view, we would rather highlight that these are
the type of organizations that we work with, instead of saying that we have a direct
impact on climate change.”
“...one of our philosophies is that we should not do what we’re bad at, we should do
what we’re good at. And we don’t know Africa that well, and we don’t know East
Africa that well.”
4.3.5.3
Value capture
From the literature review, it emerged that a strongly sustainable business model shall
include a value capture characterized by a deliberately limited growth, meaning that the
primary objective is the development of a business that contributes to the well-being of
nature, with the specification that the company can grow if only this increase doesn’t
negatively affect well-being. In this direction, six ventures (#1, #2, #3, #4, #6 and
#12) showed this perspective.
Take for example venture #1. In this case, the interviewee made clear the reluctance
to sell their portable solar system to rich tourists, because their goal is to raise the
standards of living of individuals in emerging markets.
“It’s a real game-changer, it’s changing their lives. We wanted to have the impact,
that’s why we’re not selling it to rich tourists who want to use it for their tents or
going camping or these kinds of things. So, we zoomed in on emerging markets.”
Another example is venture #3, where it is clear that an economically sustainable
business is needed to pursue a real contribution directed towards the improvement of
the well-being of female farmers in Kenya.
==PAGE:63==
4.3 Strongly sustainable entrepreneurship
57
“...the most important thing is that this is a sustainable business, both when it comes
to economics and when it comes to helping deep down in the value chain. Because if
I don’t earn any money and if I cannot sell the coffee, there’s no business. [...] It
depends really on the customer, especially in Denmark, if they see this as a great and
a good coffee to begin with, people drink coffee, but it has to be quality coffee before
they will come back again. So, for me, this is a business, but it’s really a business
built on the DNA that we want to do good for those who deliver the coffee. [...] I’m
not a social entrepreneur, I’m more or less trying to build a business model where
every step is to optimize how we can do better on the ground in Kenya.”
An even stronger position has been taken by venture #12. In this case, the inter-
viewee clearly discerns between the financial viability and the economic sustainability,
indicating that what they are trying to accomplish with their agroforestry models is not
making profit, but rather saving the planet.
“...I very much try to distinguish the ability to sustain from the financial viability.
When I say financial viability, I don’t talk about economic sustainability. So... we
are not actually interested in making profit, we’re just trying to save the planet.”
==PAGE:64==
58
Analysis and findings
4.4
Factors influencing the orientation taken
by each business typology
From the literature review, it is inferred that several factors might play a significant role
in starting a venture and consequently influence the orientation of the same towards a
specific sustainability stage (cf. Section 2.4).
These factors can be for instance the business and/or life experiences (Belz & Binder,
2017; Choi & Gray, 2008; Kuckertz & Wagner, 2010), that is why the interviews covered
some background questions about the working experiences of the different founders, their
education, and whether they had any experiences in volunteering, as it was considered
a particular life experience associated to altruistic attitudes (Hockerts & Wüstenhagen,
2010; Patzelt & Shepherd, 2011). Also, the analysis has addressed the personal motiva-
tions, the context and the reasons for which the venture was founded.
At the end of each subsection, a graph is presented to report the occurrence of the
various aspects of a factor among ventures in the six business categories, so to be able
to establish whether there is a correlation between these background and motivational
aspects and the degree of integration of sustainability throughout the venture and the
corresponding business model.
4.4.1
Working experience
Regarding working experience, there are conflicting results from the literature. Kuckertz
and Wagner (2010), for instance, along the same lines of Choi and Gray (2008), found
that entrepreneurs with the intention of exploiting sustainability-oriented opportunities
have little or no business experience, rather leaning on their sensitivity towards a social
or environmental problem.
On the contrary, Belz and Binder (2017) have reported that entrepreneurs from their
study did have some kind of business experience. In this direction, the analysis took into
consideration this aspect as well. What resulted from it is that, with a few exceptions,
at least one founder of each venture did have business experience. The distinction for
this factor can be made based on the type of business the entrepreneur worked for/was
the founder of, therefore among business entities (small or medium-sized businesses, or
larger enterprise), startups, or both.
Figure 4.1 shows for each business typology whether and how many ventures in that
category have founders with past experiences in other business entities, startups, both,
or with other types of working experiences.
As a matter of fact, only three ventures have been found to have at least one founder
having past experience in both startups and other business entities. These are venture
#2 (S), venture #4 (I →S), and venture #8 (I →S), and in two of these cases their
experience in a startup comprises also being a co-founder.
==PAGE:65==
4.4 Factors influencing the orientation taken by each business typology
59
Figure 4.1. Working experience
On the other hand, five are the ventures with at least one founder having experience
only in other business entities, whereas startups have never been part of their work-
ing background, thereby making this the first startup ever founded by them. These
five ventures are #3 (S), #7 (W), #9 (*), #10 (I), and #15 (W →I). In turn, the
entrepreneurs having had experiences with other startups by working for them or found-
ing them are those of ventures #1 (S), #5 (W →I), #6 (S) and #17 (W). So, in this
case, they never experienced working for bigger entities.
Lastly, the analysis showed five ventures whose founders had other experiences. For
instance, for venture #11 (I →S) no business experiences have been reported for any
of the founders: the startup was founded after having won a university green contest,
going from being students to entrepreneurs directly. Similarly, the founders of venture
#13 (I) have had only student jobs experiences before embarking on this endeavour.
Concerning venture #12 (S), the founder, who was formerly a greenkeeper, declared
that he never considered himself an entrepreneur before founding the current venture,
even if he started a few small projects before (e.g. the service offered by the canteen
at school wasn’t good, so he started a toast shop when he was 13 years old). Founders
of venture #14 (I →S), instead, followed a pure academic career. Lastly, founder of
venture #16 (I) declared to have worked as freelancer.
4.4.2
Education
Looking at the educational background, Belz and Binder (2017) found that most of the
co-founders interviewed in their multiple case study did have a formal education. In
==PAGE:66==
60
Analysis and findings
accordance with this finding, this analysis revealed that all founders but one (venture
#12) completed a higher educational program. Here, the distinction should be made
based on the type of education: technical, under the social science category, or both.
The graphical representation of this distinction examined in this thesis, differentiat-
ing among the six business typologies, is shown in Figure 4.2.
As regards an exclusively technical education, the founders of ventures #2 (S), #4
(I →S), #5 (W →I), #11 (I →S), and #17 (W →I) have achieved a technical
degree. On the other hand, ventures whose founders obtained a degree in one of the
branches of social science (be it business, public relations, finance, etc...) are #1 (S),
#3 (S), #6 (S), #8 (I →S), #9 (*), and #14 (I →S). On the contrary, the analysis
found that some ventures, namely #7 (W), #10 (I), #13 (I), #15 (W →I), and #16
(I), have been started by at least one co-founder having a higher technical education and
another one with a degree in one of the social science’s branches.
Figure 4.2. Education
4.4.3
Volunteering
A kind of life experience that can be analysed is volunteering.
This experience can
be connected to, for instance, the altruistic attitude found in sustainability-oriented
entrepreneurs (Patzelt & Shepherd, 2011), but also to the ‘experience corridors’ men-
tioned by Belz and Binder (2017) that can provide information on and awareness about
a specific environmental or social need.
==PAGE:67==
4.4 Factors influencing the orientation taken by each business typology
61
During data collection, information about volunteering experiences in two ventures
(#7 (W) and #17 (W →I)) was not retrieved due to the fact that the interview was
not conducted with the founder of the company. As for the other ventures, only in six of
them the founders did not have volunteering experiences, namely ventures #2 (S), #4
(I →S), #5 (W →I), #11 (I →S), #13 (I), and #16 (I), while the other nine have
had volunteering experiences of various kinds. For this factor as well, a graph has been
created to show the occurrence of this life experience for the ventures of each business
typology (Figure 4.3).
Figure 4.3. Volunteering
4.4.4
Personal motivation
In accordance with what multiple authors proposed (Choi & Gray, 2008; Hockerts &
Wüstenhagen, 2010; Patzelt & Shepherd, 2011; Schaltegger & Wagner, 2011; Vuorio et
al., 2018; Wagner, 2012), personal motivations to become an entrepreneur or start the
venture are to be considered a fundamental aspect in order to be able to understand
what kind of orientation has been pursued, and why.
Figure 4.4 presents the different personal motivations as occurred in the ventures of
the six business typologies.
In this study, for the same aforementioned reason, in ventures #7 (W) and #17
(W →I) it was not possible to clearly understand what moved founders to start their
startups. Among the other fifteen ventures under study, instead, in about 3
4 of them
==PAGE:68==
62
Analysis and findings
Figure 4.4. Personal motivation
the founders showed to have been guided by an impact-driven motivation, that is to say,
they were eager to have a positive impact on environmental and/or social issues.
In eight ventures, namely #1 (S), #2 (S), #3 (S), #4 (I →S), #8 (I →S),
#10 (I), #12 (S), and #14 (I →S), founders declared to have been driven by solely
impact-driven values and motives, while ventures #6 (S) and #11 (I →S) had both an
impact-driven motivation and the desire of being independent that led them to become
entrepreneurs. In the case of venture #9 (*), instead, the impact-driven motivation was
complemented by the frustration of being a ‘normal office worker’, a routine condition
from which the founder wanted to escape. Similarly, the interviewee of venture #15
(W →I) stated that the frustration of an office job pushed them towards the search for
new business opportunities.
Regarding ventures #5 (W →I), #13 (I) and #16 (I), their founders seem to have
been guided mostly by the desire of being independent, therefore of not being managed
by any boss, so to have more autonomy.
4.4.5
Sensing the opportunity
From the literature, it emerges that the recognition of sustainable development oppor-
tunities shall occur through the interweaving of different elements, for example a strong
entrepreneurial intent, the knowledge about environmental and/or social concerns, the
aforementioned altruism, idealist ideas, and market imperfections (Cohen & Winn, 2007;
Dean & McMullen, 2007; Hockerts & Wüstenhagen, 2010; Parrish, 2010; Patzelt & Shep-
==PAGE:69==
4.4 Factors influencing the orientation taken by each business typology
63
herd, 2011; Schaltegger & Wagner, 2011; Stål & Bonnedahl, 2016; Vuorio et al., 2018;
Wagner, 2012).
Accordingly, this analysis tried to uncover how sustainability opportunities have been
recognized by the entrepreneurs under study (sensing). For that purpose, the graph in
Figure 4.5 shows how many ventures for each business typology used a specific approach
in the sustainability opportunity recognition.
Figure 4.5. Sensing
Four ventures, namely #1 (S), #2 (S), #3 (S) and #14 (I →S), have been founded
by using a market pull approach, in which an environmental or social problem has
been identified and for which a valid solution, technology, product or service has been
developed to resolve it.
In three cases, ventures #8 (I →S), #9 (*), #12 (S), this market pull approach has
been guided by serendipity: as a matter of fact, these ventures have been started after
the founders fortuitously recognized a sustainability problem, thus an entrepreneurial
opportunity, in a specific situation in which they were (e.g. vacation), driving them to
the intention of solving it.
For other seven ventures, namely #5 (W →I), #6 (S), #11 (I →S), #13 (I), #15
(W →I), #16 (I), and #17 (W →I), founders stated that they set up the startups
because of a coincidence, but in these cases a technology push approach has led them to
the definition of the business elements on the basis of a specific technology, product or
service, so as to be able to use it in a specific context and solve a sustainability issue.
Lastly, ventures #4 (I →S), #7 (W) and #10 (I) seem to have been directed by a
technology push approach only, in which a certain technological background led to the
intention of using a known technology for solving a specific sustainability problem.
==PAGE:70==
64
Analysis and findings
4.5
Combinations of factors
In the previous section, the five background factors have been analysed so to establish
whether there is a correlation between each of them and the different business categories.
What is possibly more interesting is that combinations of two or more factors might help
to establish if a specific background (consisting thus of a specific type of education, life
experiences, and reasons for which the venture was founded) may facilitate the adoption
of specific principles or is a prerequisite towards either a weak, intermediate, or strong
approach. For this purpose, the most relevant combinations of factors will be analysed
in the following subsections.
4.5.1
Education, sensing and economic growth
Building on Table 5.3, that shows to which business category each venture falls into,
Table 4.1 represents the combination of two factors, education and sensing, taking into
consideration the economic growth principle that each venture showed. The first part of
each ‘code’ represents the education: B when both technical and social science education
are present, T when only a technical education is present, and Ss when the founder(s)
had an education in social sciences only. The second part of the code stands for the
kind of approach the ventures pursued: Tp when it was technology push, Mp when
it was market pull. Lastly, the third part of the code is about the economic growth
principle: since the weak and intermediate sustainability share the same principle, G is
used when there is a clear pursuit of growth by the venture, S is instead used to indicate
the intention of ventures to treat profit as a means.
Table 4.1. Education, sensing and economic growth. B indicates the presence of both technical
and social science educations, T stands for technical education, Ss stands for social science
education. Tp represents the technology push approach, Mp the market pull approach. G is
used when there is a clear pursuit of growth by the venture, S is instead used to indicate the
intention of ventures to treat profit as a means
Weakly
Weakly →
Intermediately
Intermediately
Intermediately
→Strongly
Strongly
Wild Card
B - Tp - G
T - Tp - G
B - Tp - G
T - Tp - S
Ss - Mp - S
Ss - Mp - S
B - Tp - G
B - Tp - G
Ss - Mp - S
T - Mp - S
T - Tp - G
B - Tp - G
T - Tp - G
Ss - Mp - S
Ss - Mp - G
Ss - TP - S
/ - Mp - S
==PAGE:71==
4.5 Combinations of factors
65
From the table, one can easily notice that when the founder(s) of a venture had a
technical education, either alone (T) or in combination with social science education
of another founder (B), a technology push approach (Tp) has been used in the sustain-
ability opportunity recognition process, and the pursuit of growth (G) is the principle
underlying these ventures (in business typologies W, W →I and I; only one venture in
I →S category). On the other hand, when the founder(s) had an exclusively social sci-
ence education (Ss), the venture used a market pull approach (Mp) in the sustainability
opportunity recognition process, and profit is only a means (S).
There are however a few exceptions. One case is characterized by a technical ed-
ucation (T) and a technology push approach (Tp), but the profit has been considered
as means (S) (in business category I →S). In the same category, another venture
has showed to have a social science education (Ss) and to have adopted a market pull
approach (Mp), that might suggest a strong position as regard to the economic growth
principle; however, the venture clearly showed the intention of growing in the future (G).
In business typology S, one venture, which considers profit only as means (S) through
a market pull approach (Mp), had instead a technical education (T). In another case
in the same category, founders of the venture had a social science education (Ss) and
declared to treat profit as means (S), but the sustainability opportunity recognition
process started with a technology push approach (Tp).
4.5.2
Personal motivation and organizational
perspective
A similar pattern can be noticed by taking into consideration the personal motivation
factor in relation with the organizational perspective of a venture. In fact, Table 4.2 shows
that, taking the different possible motivations of each venture and the corresponding
organizational perspective, there is a specific connection between the two.
Having the first part of the ‘code’ indicating the personal motivation factor, A denotes
the desire for autonomy that has led the founder(s) to start their venture (independence-
driven motivation), F is the frustration, I stands for impact-driven motivation, AI refers
to the cases where there were both an independence-driven and an impact-driven moti-
vations, IF where the impact-driven motivation was complemented by frustration. The
second part of the code in this case represents the organizational perspective, that may
be of three different types: Bi, business-oriented with inside-out approach; Ni, nature-
oriented with inside-out approach; and No, nature-oriented with outside-in approach.
From this table, the thing that clearly stands out is the close connection between the
nature-oriented organizational perspective with an outside-in approach (No), typical of
stronger sustainable ventures (in business categories I →S, S and *), and an impact-
driven motivation (I), even when in combination with an independence-driven motivation
(AI) or frustration (IF). On the contrary, in weaker sustainable ventures (in business
categories W →I and I, as it was not possible to retrieve that personal motivation
information for the venture labelled as weakly sustainable) the solely independence-
==PAGE:72==
66
Analysis and findings
Table 4.2. Personal motivation and organizational perspective. A denotes an independence-
driven motivation, F is the frustration, I refers to an impact-driven motivation, AI stands for
the co-presence of independence- and impact-driven motivations, IF indicates the co-presence
of impact-driven motivation and frustration. Bi stands for business-oriented inside-out ap-
proach, Ni nature-oriented inside-out approach, No nature-oriented outside-in approach.
Weakly
Weakly →
Intermediately
Intermediately
Intermediately
→Strongly
Strongly
Wild Card
/ - Bi
A - Bi
I - Ni
I - No
I - No
IF - No
F - Bi
A - Ni
I - No
I - No
/ - Bi
A - Ni
AI - No
I - No
I - No
AI - No
I - No
driven motivation (A) seems to be more commonly associated to an inside-out approach,
either with a business-oriented (Bi) or a nature-oriented (Ni) organizational perspective.
The only exceptions are the impact-driven motivation (I) in one of the venture in
the I business category, that has a nature-oriented organizational perspective with an
inside-out approach (Ni), and a venture in the W →I category, characterized by a
business-oriented organizational perspective with an inside-out approach (Bi), that has
as primary motivation the frustration (F).
4.5.3
Personal motivation and sensing
The two tables just presented can also serve to cross-check the sensing and personal
motivation factors in the ventures under study, as similar trends can be easily identified
in both the weaker and stronger ventures.
Taking again into consideration the economic growth principle (Table 4.3), there
seems to be a strong correlation (in business categories I →S, S and *) between a
specific background, consisting of an impact-driven motivation (I) and a market pull
approach (Mp), and the intention of making an impact before profit (S).
On the contrary, it can be noticed that weaker sustainable entrepreneurs (W →I
and I) are as such because they had as primary motivation the creation of the venture
for entrepreneurial rents, while considering sustainability only a means to achieve those
profit objectives: the pursuit of growth principle is also clearly evident in the same ven-
tures, making them resembling the more conventional opportunity-driven entrepreneurs
cited by Parrish (2010).
==PAGE:73==
4.5 Combinations of factors
67
Table 4.3. Personal motivation, sensing and economic growth. A denotes an independence-
driven motivation, F is the frustration, I refers to an impact-driven motivation, AI stands for
the co-presence of independence- and impact-driven motivations, IF indicates the co-presence
of impact-driven motivation and frustration. Tp represents the technology push approach, Mp
the market pull approach. G is used when there is a clear pursuit of growth by the venture, S
is instead used to indicate the intention of ventures to treat profit as a means.
Weakly
Weakly →
Intermediately
Intermediately
Intermediately
→Strongly
Strongly
Wild Card
/ - Tp - G
A - Tp - G
I - Tp - G
I - Tp - S
I - Mp - S
IF - Mp - S
F - Tp - G
A - Tp - G
I - Mp - S
I - Mp - S
/ - Tp - G
A - Tp - G
AI - Tp - G
I - Mp - S
I - Mp - G
AI - Tp - S
I - Mp - S
Exceptions in this case are: a venture in which, despite there being an impact-driven
motivation (I), a technology push approach (Tp) has been used, leading to strive for
economic growth (G); this is opposed to other two ventures in which, with a similar
background (I and Tp in one case, and AI and Tp in the second one), the profit has
been considered as means (S); lastly, in a venture with impact-driven motivation (I)
and market pull approach (Mp), the economic perspective is more oriented towards the
pursuit of growth (G).
In the same way, from Table 4.4, a certain organizational perspective seems to be
related to a specific combination of personal motivation and sensing factors. Ventures
in W →I and I business categories show that a business-oriented organizational per-
spective and especially an inside-out approach (Bi and Ni) are linked to a background
comprising an independence-driven motivation and a technology push approach. On
the contrary, a background formed by an impact-driven motivation (I) and a market
pull strategy (Mp) is closely tied to a nature-oriented organizational perspective with
an outside-in approach (No).
The only exceptions are one venture having a nature-oriented organizational perspec-
tive with an inside-out approach (Ni) and a technology push strategy, but presenting
an impact-driven motivation (I), and three ventures having been guided by an impact-
driven motivation (I) or by a combination of independence- and impact-driven motiva-
tions (AI), with an organizational perspective being nature-oriented with an outside-in
approach (No), but that used a technology push strategy (Tp).
==PAGE:74==
68
Analysis and findings
Table 4.4.
Personal motivation, sensing and organizational perspective.
A denotes an
independence-driven motivation, F is the frustration, I refers to an impact-driven motivation,
AI stands for the co-presence of independence- and impact-driven motivations, IF indicates the
co-presence of impact-driven motivation and frustration. Tp represents the technology push
approach, Mp the market pull approach. Bi stands for business-oriented inside-out approach,
Ni nature-oriented inside-out approach, No nature-oriented outside-in approach.
Weakly
Weakly →
Intermediately
Intermediately
Intermediately
→Strongly
Strongly
Wild Card
/ - Tp - Bi
A - Tp - Bi
I - Tp - Ni
I - Tp - No
I - Mp - No
IF - Mp -
No
F - Tp - Bi
A - Tp - Ni
I - Mp - No
I - Mp - No
/ - Tp - Bi
A - Tp - Ni
AI - Tp - No
I - Mp - No
I - Mp - No
AI - Tp -
No
I - Mp - No
4.5.4
Education and personal motivation
Taking into consideration now education and personal motivation factors, a similar in-
terpretation of the trends in each business typology can be presented, both in relation
to the economic growth and the organizational perspective principles.
Table 4.5 represents the combination of education and personal motivation back-
ground with the considerations that the ventures under study have on economic growth.
First of all, when the founder(s) of a venture had a technical education, either alone
(T) or in combination with social science education of another founder (B), and the
desire of being independent (A), the intention of seeking growth and scalability (G) is
present (mostly in business categories W, W →I, and I). On the other hand, in stronger
sustainable ventures (I →S, S and *) the solely impact-driven motivation (I) seems to
be connected to an educational background of the founder(s) in one of the branches of
social sciences (Ss) and to treating profit as means (S).
However, there are a few exceptions. In business typology I, despite there being an
impact-driven motivation (I), the founders of a venture pursue the intention of growing
(G) with both a technical education and social science education (B). Also, two cases (in
business categories I →S and S) present an impact-driven motivation (I) and consider
profit as means (S) despite a technical educational background. On the contrary, one
venture in business typology I has a social science background (Ss) and has been guided
by the desire to have an impact (I), but the consideration on economic growth is related
==PAGE:75==
4.5 Combinations of factors
69
Table 4.5. Education, personal motivation and economic growth. B indicates the presence of
both technical and social science educations, T stands for technical education, Ss stands for
social science education. A denotes an independence-driven motivation, F is the frustration,
I refers to an impact-driven motivation, AI stands for the co-presence of independence- and
impact-driven motivations, IF indicates the co-presence of impact-driven motivation and frus-
tration. G is used when there is a clear pursuit of growth by the venture, S is instead used to
indicate the intention of ventures to treat profit as a means.
Weakly
Weakly →
Intermediately
Intermediately
Intermediately
→Strongly
Strongly
Wild Card
B - / - G
T - A - G
B - I - G
T - I - S
Ss - I - S
Ss - IF - S
B - F - G
B - A - G
Ss - I - S
T - I - S
T - / - G
B - A - G
T - AI - G
Ss - I - S
Ss - I - G
Ss - AI - S
/ - I - S
to a purpose of scalability (G). Lastly, two cases (in business categories I →S and S) both
characterized by the combination of independence-driven and impact-driven motivations
(AI) show an interesting juxtaposition: one has a technical education (T) and show the
intention of growing in the future (G), while the other has an educational background
in one of the branches of social science (Ss) and considers profit as means (S).
Similarly, Table 4.6 shows the combination of the same two factors with the organi-
zational perspective principle. In this case, a certain organizational perspective seems to
be related to a specific combination of educational background and personal motivation.
A business-oriented organizational perspective and especially an inside-out approach
(Bi and Ni) seems to be related to a technical education, alone (T) or in combination
with social science education of another founder (B), and to the desire for autonomy (A),
while the combination of a solely social science education (Ss) with the intention to make
a positive impact (I) seems to be a prerogative of stronger sustainable ventures presenting
a nature-oriented organizational perspective with an outside-in approach (No).
Exceptions in this case are: an intermediately sustainable venture that, even with
an impact-driven motivation (I), presents a nature-oriented organizational perspective
with inside-out approach (Ni) backed by a combination of technical and social science
educations (B); in business categories I →S and S, three ventures with a similar back-
ground (T and I in two cases, and T and AI in the third one) present an organizational
perspective characterized by a nature-oriented outside-in approach (No).
==PAGE:76==
70
Analysis and findings
Table 4.6. Education, personal motivation and organizational perspective.
B indicates the
presence of both technical and social science educations, T stands for technical education,
Ss stands for social science education. A denotes an independence-driven motivation, F is
the frustration, I refers to an impact-driven motivation, AI stands for the co-presence of
independence- and impact-driven motivations, IF indicates the co-presence of impact-driven
motivation and frustration. Bi stands for business-oriented inside-out approach, Ni nature-
oriented inside-out approach, No nature-oriented outside-in approach.
Weakly
Weakly →
Intermediately
Intermediately
Intermediately
→Strongly
Strongly
Wild Card
B - / - Bi
T - A - Bi
B - I - Ni
T - I - No
Ss - I - No
Ss - IF - No
B - F - Bi
B - A - Ni
Ss - I - No
T - I - No
T - / - Bi
B - A - Ni
T - AI - No
Ss - I - No
Ss - I - No
Ss - AI - No
/ - I - No
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
In this chapter, the first section will be dedicated to the discussion of the findings relative
to the weakly, intermediately and strongly sustainable entrepreneurship, with the aim
of answering research questions 1.a), 1.b), 2.a) and 2.b). The second part of the chapter
will instead address the discussion about the background factors and their interweaving
in relation to the different business categories, so to uncover possible patterns and answer
research questions 3.a) and 3.b).
5.1
The sustainability spectrum applied to
entrepreneurship
What has been found through the thematic analysis provides an answer to research
question 2.a) (“Do the principles in the studied ventures comply with the characteristics
mapped out for the strong, intermediate and weak sustainability?”) and research question
2.b) (“Do the business models of those new ventures comply with the elements identified
for the sustainable business model and the strongly sustainable business model?”). The
general result of this analysis shows that the elements underlying the ventures object
of this study are in accordance with the majority of the sustainability principles and
business model’s components found in the literature (Section 2.5).
First of all, it should be recalled that most of the studies which the theoretical back-
ground referred to come from the corporate literature, because of the little knowledge
on the sustainability spectrum in the entrepreneurship one. The sustainability spectrum
comprises five stages, going from the very weak to the very strong positions. For this
thesis, only the three central positions have been taken into account, i.e. the weak, the
intermediate and the strong sustainability stages, while the other two, at either end,
have been excluded for their extreme views (Section 2.1).
Thanks to few authors active in a more managerial context that theorized these
elements and studied their integration throughout the firms, it was possible to identify
four principles that might be considered fundamental for sustainable entrepreneurship:
organizational perspective, understanding of sustainability, stakeholder perspective, and
economic growth (Dyllick & Muff, 2016; Landrum, 2018).
Every principle has been
presented as understood for each business typology, which were labelled as: weakly
sustainable entrepreneurship, intermediately sustainable entrepreneurship, and strongly
sustainable entrepreneurship.
==PAGE:78==
72
Discussion
Mapping out these elements have resulted in Table 2.4 (Section 2.5) providing also
an answer to research question 1.a) (“What are the main characteristics that distin-
guish strongly sustainable entrepreneurship from weakly and intermediately sustainable
entrepreneurship?”)
The elements in said table have been used as codes in the deductive thematic analysis,
and what emerges from it seems to confirm that most of the notions from the corporate
literature can be applied to the entrepreneurship one.
However, discrepancies have
been found in two elements: the economic growth principle in the strongly sustainable
entrepreneurship, and the organizational perspective in the intermediately sustainable
entrepreneurship:
• The principle of economic growth found for strongly sustainable business, ac-
cording to which the firm should pursue a qualitative development without growth,
with profit only considered as a means to the purpose of contributing towards sus-
tainability (Landrum, 2018; Parrish, 2010; Stål & Bonnedahl, 2016; Upward &
Jones, 2016), seems to be poorly applicable in strongly sustainable entrepreneur-
ship. Most of the sustainable ventures under study showing typical features of
a strongly sustainable business have repeatedly mentioned the wish to make an
impact before profit. Even so, if this qualitative growth principle was to be applied
to the letter, pursuing that purpose might not be economically sustainable for the
venture in the long term.
Taking up the point made in Chapter 1, mass market incumbents that are engaged
in sustainability practices have the added advantage of having large market shares,
resulting in the possibility to easily reach a significant impact towards environment
and society: for incumbents, a sustainability strategy linked to the qualitative de-
velopment growth principle should imply essentially not seeking further scalability
in support of the preservation of ecosystem services (Dyllick & Muff, 2016; Lan-
drum, 2018), and this can be potentially feasible thanks to their position in the
market (Cohen & Winn, 2007; Hall et al., 2010).
In case of startups, this might not always be possible, logically speaking: en-
trepreneurs would need to strive to be able to reach the same impact as the incum-
bents, forcing them to seek growth and increase in scale. Therefore, the idea of
a strongly sustainable venture that focusses only on the positive impact it might
have may be wrong and at odds with the insights of the corporate literature. A
startup could definitely treat profit as a means (Parrish, 2010), but not increasing
in scale would truly be hamstringing the capacity of the startup to stay in business
in the long run: if one considers this from the triple bottom line approach, that
is, placing social and environmental objectives on equal footing with economic ob-
jectives, now and for future generations (Hall et al., 2010; Schaltegger & Wagner,
2011), startups should be able to be economically sustainable to continue to have
and even increase the positive environmental and social impact.
Thus, according to this analysis, the principle of economic growth retrieved in
corporate literature, by which a strongly sustainable venture should not seek a
==PAGE:79==
5.1 The sustainability spectrum applied to entrepreneurship
73
quantitative development but only a qualitative development without production,
consumption and growth (Dyllick & Muff, 2016; Landrum, 2018), might not really
be applicable in the entrepreneurial field. The mismatch between entrepreneurship
and corporate research leads to the conclusion that, while still treating profit as
means, strategies of scaling up and quantitatively growing should be pursued in
these strongly sustainable ventures in order to survive and thrive. In this sense,
the venture can scale up and increase its efficiency, as long as this growth does not
affect negatively the environment and society (Brozovic, 2020).
• Another thing that became apparent during the analysis is the singular aspect
revealed by some ventures about their organizational perspective. From the
literature review, an intermediately sustainable business should usually be charac-
terized by a business-oriented perspective with an inside-out approach, meaning
that the company wishes to pursue a sustainability strategy for gaining business
benefits, which then makes them the starting point for their planning and action
(Dyllick & Muff, 2016; Landrum, 2018). In fact, the sustainability commitment in
these cases seems to be mostly instrumental to reaching an industrial gain, rather
than being the end goal.
However, findings show that three of the seventeen ventures under study, present-
ing traits of an intermediately sustainable business, seem to be characterized by
a more nature-oriented organizational perspective: this might reflect a (partial)
integration of environmental and social concerns directly into their planning and
structure, an element usually distinctive of strongly sustainable businesses (Dyllick
& Muff, 2016), though maintaining an inside-out approach and thus still consider-
ing the business as key factor.
This structure is inconsistent with the ‘egocentric view’ that was found to be a
typical feature for the weakly and intermediately sustainable firms in the corporate
literature (Landrum, 2018). Hence, this may suggest that there should be a revision
of this principle for the intermediate sustainability, from the business-oriented to
the nature-oriented organizational perspective, with still an inside-out approach.
It is however unclear if this trait is detectable only in sustainable entrepreneurship,
therefore if it should be revised only for that field, or also for the corporate one.
Tables 2.4 (Section 2.5), showing all the principles for the sustainable entrepreneur-
ship and divided by business categories, has been revised accordingly. With the proper
modifications, Tables 5.1 below intends to contribute to formalizing and broadening the
theoretical knowledge on the specific principles that distinguish the weakly, intermedi-
ately, and strongly sustainable entrepreneurship.
From the literature review, a similar procedure has led to the identification of the
components of the business models, under the terms of value proposition, value creation
& delivery system, and value capture (Osterwalder & Pigneur, 2010; Richardson, 2008;
Teece, 2010), for weakly, intermediately and strongly sustainable entrepreneurship.
Thanks to Table 2.5 (Section 2.5), the differences between the elements of traditional
business model, sustainable business model, and strongly sustainable business model have
==PAGE:80==
74
Discussion
Table 5.1. Principles of the sustainable entrepreneurship divided by business typologies
Weakly sustainable
entrepreneurship
Intermediately sustainable
entrepreneurship
Strongly sustainable
entrepreneurship
Organizational
perspective
Business-oriented
(Landrum, 2018);
inside-out approach
(Dyllick & Muff, 2016)
Nature-oriented (with nature
comprising both environment
and society);
inside-out approach
Nature-oriented
(with
nature
comprising
both
environment
and society) (Landrum, 2018);
outside-in approach
(Dyllick & Muff, 2016)
Understanding
of sustainability
“Do less bad”
(Landrum, 2018)
“Do more good”
(Landrum, 2018)
Repair damage of
unsustainability practices
(Landrum, 2018);
creating sustainability
(Dyllick & Muff, 2016)
Stakeholder
perspective
Refined shareholder value
(Dyllick & Muff, 2016);
internal
firm-centric
view
(Landrum, 2018)
Triple bottom line: the three
realms of sustainability are
integrated in the value creation
process (Dyllick & Muff, 2016;
Landrum, 2018)
Collaborative partnership
(Dyllick & Muff, 2016)
Economic
growth
Pursuit of growth
(Landrum, 2018);
Profit = end |
Sustainability = means
(Dyllick & Muff, 2016)
Pursuit of growth
(Landrum, 2018);
Profit = end |
Sustainability = means
(Dyllick & Muff, 2016)
Quantitative growth as needed;
Profit = means |
Sustainability = end
(Dyllick & Muff, 2016)
==PAGE:81==
5.1 The sustainability spectrum applied to entrepreneurship
75
been clarified, providing an answer, in this case, to research question 1.b) (“What are
the elements of the strongly sustainable business model that differ from the ones of
the sustainable business model?”). Since it was unclear from the literature what type
of business model a weakly or intermediately sustainable business might adopt, it was
assumed that the two business typologies might both adopt a sustainable business model.
The components collected in the table were used as codes in the thematic analysis.
What results from the analysis is that the components adopted by the seventeen ven-
tures generally match the components of either the sustainable business model or the
strongly sustainable business model, with even the (expected) result that principles such
as stakeholder perspective and economic growth are reflected in the value creation &
delivery system and the value capture components.
Nonetheless, ventures showing a weaker approach to sustainability seem to present
components closer to the ones of a traditional business model, rather than a sustainable
business model: this suggests that what has been envisaged at the beginning of this
research (that is, the sustainable business model components can be associated to both
the weakly and intermediately sustainable entrepreneurship) cannot be verified. These
weakly sustainable ventures do not seem to reflect the general definition of sustainable
business model given by many authors (Biloslavo et al., 2018; N. M. Bocken et al.,
2014; Kennedy & Bocken, 2019; Schaltegger, Lüdeke-Freund, & Hansen, 2016; Stubbs
& Cocklin, 2008).
On the contrary, one can draw the conclusion that it is unlikely that sustainable
ventures presenting a weaker approach can fully adopt a sustainable business model,
precisely because of the way they were structured and conceived: in fact, even if they
seem to introduce sustainability practices into the venture, the primary goal remains
economic, in the effort of increasing their strategic competitiveness (Dyllick & Muff, 2016;
Landrum, 2018). The business model’ components presented in Table 2.5 (Section 2.5),
divided by business categories, has been revised accordingly. The outcome is shown in
Table 5.2 below, that intends to contribute to formalizing and broadening the theoretical
knowledge on the specific business models for the weakly, intermediately and strongly
sustainable entrepreneurship.
Another topic that needs elucidation is the sustainable business categories that
were used as basis for the analysis. Based on what has been found so far, it was possible
to identify the ventures in which all the elements match the principles of one of the three
business typologies (Tables 2.4 and 2.5, Section 2.5), therefore classifiable as purely
weakly W (venture #7), purely intermediately I (ventures #10, #13 and #16) and
purely strongly S sustainable (ventures #1, #2, #3, #6 and #12). The other eight,
instead, match principles from different business typologies, making them more ‘hybrid’.
In light of this, it might be useful to define two other business typologies alongside
the others: the ‘Weakly →Intermediately’ (W →I), where ventures #5, #15 and
#17 seem to have some aspects matching the weak sustainability and others matching
the intermediate sustainability; and the ‘Intermediately →Strongly’ (I →S), where
a few elements of the ventures #4, #8, #11 and #14 seem to match the intermediate
sustainability principles and others seem to match the strong sustainability principles.
One of the ventures, instead, seems to match the principles of all the three categories,
==PAGE:82==
76
Discussion
impeding its classification in one of the five business typologies and therefore labelled as
Wild card (*). The overall categorization of the ventures in the six business categories
just outlined is shown in Table 5.3.
Table 5.2. Revised components of business models
Components
Weakly sustainable
business model
Intermediately
sustainable
business
model
Strongly sustainable
business model
Value
proposition
Value proposition
(market offering)
Sustainable value
proposition including the
three realms of
sustainability
(economic,
social, environmental)
Preservation and
regeneration
of
critical
natural capitals
(Brozovic, 2020)
Value creation &
delivery system
Customer relationships,
resources, partners,
processes and activities
Multi-stakeholder
perspective; sustainability
incorporated with the help
of innovation
Environment and society
as key stakeholders;
operating
within
the
planetary boundaries and
above social foundations
(Brozovic, 2020; Kennedy
& Bocken, 2019)
Value capture
Long-term perspective
Long-term perspective
Deliberately limited
growth; value captured is
beyond financial
(Brozovic, 2020)
Table 5.3. Sustainable business typologies and list of ventures
Weakly
Weakly
→
Intermediately
Intermediately
Intermediately →
Strongly
Strongly
Wild
Card
#7
#5
#10
#4
#1
#9
#15
#13
#8
#2
#17
#16
#11
#3
#14
#6
#12
==PAGE:83==
5.1 The sustainability spectrum applied to entrepreneurship
77
Following, Table 5.4 and Table 5.5 show the hybrid ventures that match principles,
respectively, from the weak and the intermediate positions and from the intermediate
and strong positions. As it can be noticed, shared principles from one typology or the
other among the ventures W →I, and likewise among the ventures I →S, cannot be
identified. Therefore, a generalization of the peculiar principles of these hybrids positions
cannot be outlined.
Table 5.4. Weakly →Intermediately (W →I): the table shows that the three ventures falling
into this business category do not share the same interpretation of the sustainability principles
and business model components
#5
#15
#17
Organizational
perspective
Business-oriented;
inside-out approach
Business-oriented;
inside-out approach
Business-oriented;
inside-out approach
Understanding
of sustainability
“Do more good”
“Do less bad”
“Do more good”
Stakeholder
perspective
Refined shareholder
value
Triple bottom line
approach
Refined shareholder
value
Economic
growth
Pursuit of growth
Pursuit of growth
Pursuit of growth
Value
proposition
Intermediately
Weakly
Intermediately
Value creation &
delivery system
Weakly
Intermediately
Weakly
Value capture
Long-term
perspective
Long-term
perspective
Long-term
perspective
The mismatch of those ventures with the three business typologies identified thanks
to the literature review may be caused by several things: one of those may be communi-
cation problems during data collection, as not all participants in a qualitative study as
such are equally articulate and perceptive in providing information (Creswell & Creswell,
2018); also, it can be due to a disconnect between corporate and entrepreneurship liter-
ature, because of the different attributes that distinguish a well established firm from a
venture, as already mentioned throughout this thesis; and also it may be due to a gen-
eral discourse related to the age or ‘novelty’ of the startup itself, whose purpose and/or
==PAGE:84==
78
Discussion
structure sometimes are yet to be fully determined, complicating the characterization of
it as exclusively weakly, intermediately or strongly sustainable.
The outline of these hybrid positions does not mean necessarily that these ventures
cannot be ultimately categorized in one of the three ‘basic’ categories. This categoriza-
tion in fact shouldn’t be totally ruled out, but it could be the basis for future work,
since some of these issues might be overcome: for example, further research in the en-
trepreneurship field may lead to a greater knowledge on the sustainability spectrum and
to new practical testing, that will confirm or lead to a revision of these results.
Table 5.5. Intermediately →Strongly (I →S): the table shows that the four ventures falling
into this business category do not share the same interpretation of the sustainability principles
and business model components
#4
#8
#11
#14
Organizational
perspective
Nature-oriented;
outside-in
approach
Nature-oriented;
outside-in
approach
Nature-oriented;
outside-in
approach
Nature-oriented;
outside-in
approach
Understanding
of sustainability
“Creating
sustainability”
“Do more good”
“Creating
sustainability”
“Creating
sustainability”
Stakeholder
perspective
Triple bottom
line approach
Triple bottom
line approach
Collaborative
approach
Collaborative
approach
Economic
growth
Profit = means
Profit = means
Pursuit of
growth
Pursuit of
growth
Value
proposition
Intermediately
Intermediately
Strongly
Strongly
Value creation &
delivery system
Intermediately
Intermediately
Strongly
Strongly
Value capture
Value
capture
beyond financial
Long-term
perspective
Long-term
perspective
Long-term
perspective
5.2
The role of background factors
It has been discussed that the business models of the ventures under study generally
comply with what has been seen in the literature. Furthermore, the elements encountered
are mirrored in the components of the business model of the corresponding venture,
==PAGE:85==
5.2 The role of background factors
79
thereby establishing coherence in the integration of sustainability within their structure
and planning.
However, the process of recognition and exploitation of opportunities in social and
environmental contexts, and thus the process behind the integration of sustainability
within the venture, is not universally agreed on yet. Several are the factors and motiva-
tions that might drive an entrepreneur to exploit a sustainable development opportunity
(working and life experiences, entrepreneurial intent, market imperfections...), but it is
not clear, especially in the entrepreneurship literature, if certain background factors
(and their interweaving) play a major role in the orientation towards a specific business
typology.
In order to provide an answer to research questions 3.a) (“Is there a correlation
between the motivations that led entrepreneurs to start their businesses and how they
embed sustainability throughout the organizations?”) and 3.b) (“Is there a correlation
between the background of the entrepreneurs and how they integrate sustainability in
their business models?”), these factors (listed in Section 2.5) have been examined in
the Chapter 4 so to be able to recognize potential correlations and/or patterns between
the backgrounds and motivations of the participants and the level of integration of
sustainability (from weak to strong) within their venture.
Below, observations on the tendency of every factor for each business typology will
be discussed, followed by the uncovering and discussion of possible patterns arising from
the interweaving of those factors in the different business typologies.
1. Working experience: generally speaking, not considering the five ventures that
had different experiences (e.g. freelance work, academic career, no experience at
all...), entrepreneurs from every business category did have some sort of working
experience. In that respect, this result goes against what Choi and Gray (2008)
and Kuckertz and Wagner (2010) have affirmed in their researches, namely that
the capability of recognizing and exploiting sustainability-related opportunities is
more likely to vanish as business experience is gained.
For instance, from Figure 4.1, it can clearly be noticed that strongly sustainable
ventures (category S) show a variety of work experience, and that no specific
business experience can be considered a prerequisite of a certain business category.
Therefore, the working experience factor is indeed a common attribute and starting
point in the sustainable entrepreneurial process, as Belz and Binder (2017) pointed
out in their study, but it does not seem to have a fundamental role in the level of
integration of sustainability in the ventures.
2. Education: concerning education, an interesting result can be observed from
Figure 4.2. An exclusively social science education seems to be a unique and dis-
tinguishing trait of ventures belonging to the I →S, S and * business categories,
while in other categories it is always in combination with a technical education.
This suggests that an educational background in social sciences alone may be a
prerequisite for designing strongly sustainable ventures.
It can be then deduced that a technical education may set a limit for the achieve-
==PAGE:86==
80
Discussion
ment of stronger stages of sustainability. Being this thesis carried out at DTU, in
the Department of DTU Entrepreneurship, this aspect is of particular relevance.
In fact, a technical education might not always include or cover conceptual notions
about environmental or social concerns (e.g. knowledge about the ecological limits
of the planet and its capacity to support economic and social activities, Strachan
(2018)) and their implications for technologies.
In confirmation with what Lourenço, Jones, and Jayawarna (2013) assert in their
study, this missed link between sustainability theory and technology could be the
cause of the limited integration of sustainability principles within the firms that stu-
dents would possibly create (the technical education factor has been encountered
to a large degree in the weaker sustainable ventures). In this sense, despite not
being totally disregarded, sustainability is only treated as subordinate (Lourenço
et al., 2013).
For these reasons, an entrepreneurship education embedding notions on sustainable
development might have the potential to support the development of (strongly) sus-
tainable entrepreneurs: in fact, a ‘sustainable entrepreneurship education’ might
be able to provide the competencies for entrepreneurs to make decisions that take
account of the ecological and social impacts as well as the economic consequences
(Strachan, 2018).
3. Volunteering: in this case, it is worth noting that the occurrence of this kind
of life experience clearly increases together with the increase of the integration of
sustainability (Figure 4.3).
In this sense, confirming what Parrish (2010), Patzelt and Shepherd (2011), and
Stål and Bonnedahl (2016) have stated in their studies, an altruistic attitude may
be linked to a stronger approach of a venture towards sustainability. Moreover, a
volunteering experience may be also considered part of the ‘experience corridors’
mentioned by Belz and Binder (2017), namely all those life experiences that raise
awareness about a specific areas that might shape opportunity development. Get-
ting to understand how the venture can create a meaningful positive impact in
critical areas for society and the environment (in this case, through volunteering
experiences) is also an approach directly linked to the need of an “outside-in” per-
spective proposed by Dyllick and Muff (2016).
For that reason, confirming these past studies, it can be concluded that an en-
trepreneur having had a life experience as such might be more inclined to recog-
nizing certain social and/or environmental issues, therefore more likely to design
a stronger sustainable venture.
4. Personal motivation: for this factor (Figure 4.4), as one would expect based
also on the discussion about the volunteering experience, a predisposition to the
impact-driven motivation is a trait distinctly more common as the level of inte-
gration of sustainability in the venture is stronger (it is more frequent gradually
from the I to the S business categories), while the independence-driven motivation
proves to be more common in the low levels of integration.
==PAGE:87==
5.2 The role of background factors
81
The trend of the personal motivation factor in the different business categories
clearly confirms what have been found in the literature. As a matter of fact, both
Hockerts and Wüstenhagen (2010) and Schaltegger and Wagner (2011) assert that,
in general, sustainable entrepreneurs are led by some idealistic ideas that directly
influence and shape the venture’s objectives. Additionally, Vuorio et al. (2018) as
well state that sustainable entrepreneurs are eager to have a positive impact on en-
vironmental and/or social issues in spite of the potential loss in personal economic
gain. In this case, it has been found that, among the sustainable ventures under
study, this inclination is verifiable and more evident for the stronger sustainable
ones.
5. Sensing: here, the net distinction between the more weakly sustainable ventures
and the more strongly sustainable ones is obvious by looking at Figure 4.5. In fact,
from that analysis one can easily draw the conclusion that a market pull strategy
might be essential for strong sustainability; this result is in line with what several
authors have explained in their articles, that is, a strongly sustainable business
acts by first recognizing a market need (or problem: in this case a sustainability-
related issue) and then engaging in developing new strategies, products or business
models that can overcome it (Dyllick & Muff, 2016; Stål & Bonnedahl, 2016).
Therefore, the “outside-in” perspective that a strongly sustainable business should
have (Dyllick & Muff, 2016) can be directly referred to this sensing factor as well,
and specifically to the market pull approach, which is evident in all the stronger
sustainable ventures under study. On the contrary, it seems that a technology push
approach might be linked to a weaker approach, where there seems to be a more
‘egocentric’ view (Landrum, 2018). However, using a technology push strategy does
not necessarily mean that the entrepreneur will not be able to recognize a specific
sustainability problem to be solved and design a strongly sustainable venture (as
it can be seen in three of the stronger sustainable ventures in Figure 4.5).
5.2.1
Education, sensing and economic growth
From the analysis, by combining education and sensing factors and taking into con-
sideration the implications on the economic growth principle, it seems to be quite
evident that a technical education is closely linked to a technology push approach in
the sustainability opportunity recognition. However, this is something that might go
against the notion of strongly sustainable business as an organization that recognizes an
environmental or social issue (therefore opportunity) that could be exploited through
the development of products, technologies, services or business models as solution to
the problem. This assertion may be confirmed from the less frequently technology edu-
cation and/or technology push approach in the ventures presenting stronger traits and
principles. Likewise, an exclusively social science education and a market pull approach
are most common in the stronger categories.
==PAGE:88==
82
Discussion
This suggests that a technical education, which seems to set a limit to the integration
of sustainability within the ventures because often it is not inclusive of notions about
environmental or social concerns (Lourenço et al., 2013; Strachan, 2018), might have the
adoption of a technology push strategy as direct consequence. Finding also a connection
between a background of technical education with a technology push approach and
the pursuit of growth substantiates the study of Lourenço et al. (2013), that affirms
that students (though not only of technical degree programs in their study) are often
encouraged to treat everything as subordinate to profit (‘profit-first’ mentality, which
has no regard for moral considerations or social responsibilities). This would explain
why most of the ventures presenting a technical education background seem to set the
pursuit of growth as their primary objective.
5.2.2
Personal motivation and organizational
perspective
Taking into consideration the implications that the personal motivation factor might
have on the organizational perspective principle, it has been observed that even if
the desire for independence can be defined as a distinguishing trait of any entrepreneur
(Schaltegger & Wagner, 2011; Shepherd & Patzelt, 2011; Wagner, 2012), the presence of
a more idealistic motivation, namely having a positive impact on environmental and/or
social issues, should be the least indispensable factor for designing a stronger sustainable
venture (Parrish, 2010; Stål & Bonnedahl, 2016). This confirms both the studies of
Hockerts and Wüstenhagen (2010) and Schaltegger and Wagner (2011) that state that
the idealistic ideas motivating entrepreneurs are directly reflected in the venture’s goals.
5.2.3
Personal motivation and sensing
Interweaving the personal motivation and sensing factors and taking into consid-
eration their effect on the economic growth principle, there seems to be a strong
correlation between the desire to make a positive impact and a market pull approach, a
result that is in line with Parrish (2010) and Stål and Bonnedahl (2016) that state that
strongly sustainable ventures should see the contribution to sustainability as primary
goal, before profit. This seems also to confirm Vuorio et al. (2018)’s study, where it is
suggested that sustainable entrepreneurs are eager to have a positive impact on envi-
ronmental and/or social issues despite the potential loss in personal economic gain, an
inclination that seems to be usually more evident in the stronger sustainable ventures.
On the contrary, it can be noticed that weaker sustainable entrepreneurs (W →I
and I) are as such because they had as primary motivation the creation of the venture
for entrepreneurial rents, while considering sustainability only a means to achieve those
profit objectives: the pursuit of growth principle is also clearly evident in the same ven-
tures, making them resembling the more conventional opportunity-driven entrepreneurs
cited by Parrish (2010).
==PAGE:89==
5.2 The role of background factors
83
By instead taking into consideration the organizational perspective principle, the
correlation with personal motivation factor and sensing principle seems to be even
reinforced. One can draw the general conclusion that while the ventures driven by the
desire for independence have only used a technology push approach (most of them be-
longing to the weaker business categories), the market pull strategy seems to be linked
to the impact-driven motivations (a combination most common in the stronger business
categories). The desire to make a positive impact might lead entrepreneurs to adopt a
market pull approach for the process of recognition and exploitation of opportunities in
social and environmental contexts, leading them to the designing of a stronger sustain-
able venture. These results confirm what has been found by Stål and Bonnedahl (2016)
and Dyllick and Muff (2016).
5.2.4
Education and personal motivation
Interweaving the education and personal motivation factors and taking into account
their effect on the economic growth principle, it can be seen that the correlation
between the technical education factor and the pursuit of growth might be emphasised
by the fundamental role that an independence-driven motivation seems to play.
This is an interesting result, because it seems to confirm again the studies of Lourenço
et al. (2013) and Vuorio et al. (2018). First of all, the correlation between a technical
education and the intention of pursuing growth substantiates the findings of Lourenço
et al. (2013) about the ‘profit-first’ mentality, which influences and encourages students
to treat everything as subordinate to profit. Considering also the detected exceptions,
it seems to be that the personal motivation factor might play a fundamental role. In
two of the exceptions, it can be noticed that a technical education (T) combined with
an impact-driven motivations (I) results in conceiving profit as means (S): this result
can be explained thanks to the study of Vuorio et al. (2018), that found that when
entrepreneurs are driven by the desire of having a positive influence, they tend to focus
less on the possibility to gain entrepreneurial rents. However, this would not explain
the case where the intermediately sustainable venture, having had both a technical and
social science educations (B), has been guided by an impact-driven motivation but aims
at obtaining profit (G).
At the same time though, from other two exceptions, in which both an independence-
and an impact-driven motivation (AI) have been found, it has been observed that having
a technical education (T) in one of the two seems to result in the pursuit of growth (G),
while having an educational background in social science (Ss) seems to result in a stronger
approach toward profit (S). However, conclusions on this particular correlation between
the technical background (T) or the social science education (Ss) and the combination of
independence- and impact-driven motivations (AI) cannot be drawn, as it would require
further research.
Nevertheless, one can draw the conclusion that there might a solid correlation be-
tween the type of education that the founder(s) had and the personal motivation. In
this sense, this result is confirmed from Lourenço et al. (2013), which stated that despite
==PAGE:90==
84
Discussion
in some ‘nascent entrepreneurs’ there might be a ‘profit-first’ mentality, their ability to
learn notions about sustainable development is not affected, suggesting that there might
be a value in introducing learning content related to sustainable entrepreneurship both
to students in universities (Strachan, 2018) and to nascent entrepreneurs with that kind
of mentality (e.g. business start-up programmes, accelerator programmes...).
By instead including the education factor to the personal motivation factor and
organizational perspective principle, it has been found that the combination of a
technical background and an independence driven motivation are specifically linked to a
weaker type of organizational perspective. On the other hand, confirming the studies of
Parrish (2010), Hockerts and Wüstenhagen (2010), Schaltegger and Wagner (2011) and
Stål and Bonnedahl (2016), the presence of a more idealistic motivation in combination
with an exclusively social science education might be an indispensable factor for design-
ing stronger sustainable ventures having that outside-in approach indicated by Dyllick
and Muff (2016) in their conception of organizational perspective (No).
==PAGE:91==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
In this section, the final conclusions for this thesis will be presented, highlighting the
contributions to the entrepreneurship literature about the sustainability spectrum, and
the contributions from both practical and policy perspectives. Finally, the boundaries
and limitation of this thesis are presented and possible new orientations for further
research are suggested.
6.1
Theoretical contribution
One of the main purpose of this study was to shed some light on the discourse about the
contraposition of weak versus strong sustainability in the entrepreneurship literature: in
particular, building on the theory about the sustainability spectrum, this thesis aimed
at developing some knowledge about the distinguishing characteristics of the stages of
sustainable entrepreneurship, a topic that seems to be not fairly explored yet. To this
end, an extensive literature review has served to outline the fundamental elements of
the weak and strong sustainability paradigms, but also the intermediate sustainability
position, and the different business typologies that incorporate these principles.
In this direction, the thesis could have had the second purpose of assessing the
boundaries of the framework created: since the elements were mostly retrieved from the
corporate literature, the study has somehow verified the transferability of the elements
themselves, from the corporate to the entrepreneurship field. After testing these ele-
ments in real entrepreneurial cases, generally speaking, it could be said that they could
be transferred to entrepreneurship, though some of them have been revised as it was
found that there wasn’t a perfect match. Therefore, with the proper modifications on the
economic growth principle for strongly sustainable entrepreneurship, the organizational
perspective principle for intermediately sustainable entrepreneurship, and the business
model components for weakly sustainable entrepreneurship, Table 5.1 and 5.2 were gen-
erated in order to contribute to formalizing and broadening the theoretical knowledge
on the specific sustainability principles and business model components that distinguish
the weakly, intermediately, and strongly sustainable entrepreneurship.
These findings contribute to theory by filling the gap in entrepreneurship literature
on sustainability spectrum, since very few are the studies covering similarities and differ-
ences between the three sustainability stages. Moreover, they could be used as starting
point for future research on this matter, as the tables could orientate researches to a
preliminary assessment of the level of integration of sustainability in new ventures.
==PAGE:92==
86
Conclusion
In particular, organizing these elements in the form of a framework could help clarify
the substantial differences between stages: mirroring what has been found in the cor-
porate literature (Dyllick & Muff, 2016; Landrum, 2018), the different positions (weak,
intermediate, and strong) can be considered ‘developmental stages’ that could provide
insights about the actions required to increasingly contribute to sustainability. For ven-
tures, this would probably mean understanding first their ‘nature’ and then pivoting
their focus in the right direction, making that ‘paradigm shift’ (Landrum, 2018) neces-
sary to achieve a sustainable future.
In order to expand the academic debate on entrepreneurial opportunities, this thesis
contributes to the work of Cohen and Winn (2007). In their study, they suggest that
future research should focus on the role of contextual variables like demographic factors,
country of origin, or prior work experience affecting entrepreneurs in identifying and
exploiting sustainable entrepreneurship opportunities. Despite further research still need
to be done, this has partially be explored through this thesis; in fact, some background
factors have been analysed also in relation to the recognition and exploitation of those
opportunities, contributing thus to the understanding of the opportunity identification
process by founders of sustainable ventures.
Moreover, Cohen and Winn (2007) suggested the investigation of the relationship
between new venture creation and the triple bottom line approach. Clearly, considering
the last development that sustainable entrepreneurship is having as research stream, not
only this thesis was built on the general assumption that sustainable entrepreneurs can
be considered a potent force in enabling the world to change its path (Cohen & Winn,
2007), but it contributed to this research stream by making an additional step, that
is analysing and formalising the different typologies of sustainable entrepreneurship so
to understand how much sustainable a venture should be to offer coming generations a
sustainable future.
This work seems to address also the study of Stål and Bonnedahl (2016), which
was more of ‘conceptual nature’. They suggested further testing of their assumptions
and principles about strongly sustainable entrepreneurship, that were partially verified
through this thesis: for instance, the assumption by which the process of entrepreneurial
opportunity recognition in strongly sustainable entrepreneurship should be directed to-
wards the end of sustaining critical natural capital, which was also a point made by
Brozovic (2020).
However, as they also stated, the sustainable entrepreneurship lit-
erature is just emerging, hence there’s still room for more discussions regarding the
principles underlying the different stages of sustainable entrepreneurship.
Another contribution could be made to the business model research stream, in par-
ticular the sustainable business model.
In the study of Brozovic (2020), arguments related to strongly sustainable business
model about limiting a firm’s economic growth, organizing in cooperatives, and develop-
ing value propositions with nature as the primary stakeholder have been made, aware
that these assumptions may raise controversies. In this sense, this thesis might con-
tribute to the prospect of Brozovic (2020), because it was found that, for instance, a
limited economic growth perspective could be hard to embrace even in strongly sus-
tainable ventures, especially if in contexts like industrialized countries. However, new
==PAGE:93==
6.2 Practical contribution
87
insights on the strongly sustainable business model are needed, therefore recommenda-
tions from Brozovic (2020) for further research are supported.
The thesis might address also the study of Massa et al. (2017). In their suggestion for
future research, they ask how components of business model are different when taking
a sustainability lens. Concerning entrepreneurship, this thesis could address quite well
that question, going even beyond by making distinctions between the components of
the weakly, intermediately and strongly sustainable business models. Obviously, further
research will be needed to corroborate these preliminary findings.
6.2
Practical contribution
On a more practical level, the contribution of this thesis consists of a few aspects.
First of all, the formalization of the principles and business model’s components that
underlie the different stages of sustainable entrepreneurship might allow their divulgation
in the form of guidelines: entrepreneurs that want to start a new sustainable venture
might use them to understand what kind of practices they should promote, but also
already active entrepreneurs could improve their sustainability impact by understanding
their position in the spectrum and engaging in more effective sustainability practices.
This, however, would not be exempt from subjectivity, so further research would be
needed to actually transform the elements in the tables in proper guidelines. Indeed,
it would be possible to use the framework to guide entrepreneurs in selecting specific
strategies (to be supplemented in their business model) directed towards, for instance, a
greater inclusion of stakeholders so to reach a real collaborative partnership, or directed
towards a greater account of the need for repairing the damages caused by unsustain-
ability practices.
These guidelines could be handed over to management consulting firms, for instance,
so that they would be able to establish the level of sustainability integration within a
venture, therefore establish what kind of strategies it should adopt to move on to the
next stage. In the same way, accelerator programs or incubators could benefit from these
guidelines as they could introduce learning content related to sustainable development
(Lourenço et al., 2013) and push nascent entrepreneurs in the right direction. That kind
of procedure could also be the cue to a longitudinal approach in future research, so to
be able to observe the outcomes and what kind of barriers a venture might encounter in
adopting new strategies to achieve the subsequent stage in the sustainability spectrum.
From a policy perspective, these potential guidelines could serve as an assessment tool.
Any funding organization interested in supporting sustainable development, for instance,
could make use of the guidelines to evaluate the level of integration of sustainability
practices and strategies within a venture applying for funds: in this way, they could
be able to understand if the venture aims truly to contribute to sustainability or if
its characteristics are more along the lines of an opportunity-driven venture, therefore
‘pretending’ to be sustainable.
==PAGE:94==
88
Conclusion
Another noteworthy aspect of the practical contribution of this thesis is the role that
education has in shaping the forma mentis of entrepreneurs. It can be in fact deduced
from the analysis and the discussion that a technical education may set a limit for the
achievement of stronger stages of sustainability. Being this thesis carried out at DTU,
in the Department of DTU Entrepreneurship, this aspect is of particular relevance.
From the analysis, it is possible to conclude that a technical education typically does
not educate students (thus potential future entrepreneurs) that are capable of dealing
with the more theoretical side of sustainability. A technical education in sustainable
energy, for example, does not always include or cover conceptual notions about envi-
ronmental or social concerns, e.g. planetary boundaries and social thresholds, and their
implications for technologies, an assertion proven also by the study of Strachan (2018).
In line with what Lourenço et al. (2013) assert in their study, this missed link between
theory and technology could be the cause of the limited integration of sustainability
principles within the firms that students would possibly create (the technical education
factor in this thesis has been encountered to a large degree in the weaker sustainable
ventures).
Therefore, in support of sustainable development, this thesis could serve as incentive
to introduce, for instance, an ad hoc course at DTU, aimed at clarifying certain theo-
retical aspects about sustainability, boosting knowledge about the ecological limits of
the planet and its capacity to support economic and social activities, (Strachan, 2018),
and, most importantly, clarifying how they could benefit from and relate to technolo-
gies. As a matter of fact, Lourenço et al. (2013) found that, even if students are often
encouraged to treat everything as subordinate to profit so much that they would end
up reflecting this mentality in a future venture (‘profit-first’ mentality), there might be
a value in introducing learning content related to sustainable development both to stu-
dents in universities (“sustainable entrepreneurship education”, Strachan (2018)) and
to ‘nascent entrepreneurs’ through for instance business start-up programs. There are
opportunities to design sustainability courses that could promote self-interest by iden-
tifying the benefits associated with ‘green’ business ideas (Cohen & Winn, 2007; Dean
& McMullen, 2007), development of sustainable innovation (Hockerts & Wüstenhagen,
2010), and competitive advantage based on the principles of sustainable development
(Parrish, 2010). Therefore, a sustainable entrepreneurship education might be able to
stimulate entrepreneurial behaviour and to build awareness of the opportunities and
relevance of sustainable development in multiple subjects, providing entrepreneurs with
competencies to make decisions that take account of the ecological and social impacts
as well as the economic consequences (Lourenço et al., 2013; Strachan, 2018).
6.3
Limitations and suggestions for future work
One of the main limitations for this thesis is that during data collection only two indus-
trial sectors (energy and food & agriculture) were taken into consideration. Even if the
selection of these two sectors has been justified by the acknowledgement of the major
==PAGE:95==
6.3 Limitations and suggestions for future work
89
impact that businesses belonging to these categories might have on environment and
society, it put a limit on the amount of startups that were contacted. Moreover, this
limit was accentuated from choosing to focus only on ventures based in Denmark. Thus,
further research will be needed for other industrial sectors (e.g. fashion industry) and
countries, especially to assess if the same results stand, therefore deepen even more the
knowledge on sustainable entrepreneurship.
Partially related to the choice of focusing only on ventures based in a specific country,
another limitation of this thesis could be seen from a context-related perspective. The
context in which the ventures operate was not taken into consideration in this thesis, so
one question that could naturally come up from this thesis is whether a strongly sustain-
able business (as theorized in the literature) is really feasible in industrialized countries.
The ‘profit-first’ mentality (Lourenço et al., 2013) might be so common and prepon-
derant that extra effort would be required to rethink all the unsustainable practices to
which industrialized countries are accustomed.
That is why it is of crucial importance introducing and effectively implementing
sustainable development courses within universities, and, as seen, especially within tech-
nical ones. The sustainable ventures under study that have been recognized as purely
strongly are based in Denmark, but they are actively involved in developing countries
(e.g. Africa), where the recognition of pressing social or environmental issues might be
easier. Thus, considerations of the context in which a venture operates should probably
be made in future studies on the matter.
One constraint could be considered the CoVid-19 pandemic. Even if maybe it didn’t
affect the thesis directly, the process of data collection was slowed down. This led to the
necessity for an extension of the thesis of 6 weeks, thanks to which the data collection
could be eventually finalized. Moreover, the psychological effect that the lock-down could
have brought to the participants of the study are not known; therefore, the disposition
and reliability of each participant could have been undermined.
It has been discussed earlier about the necessity to introduce learning content related
to sustainable development both to students in universities and to nascent entrepreneurs.
This necessity could arise from the fact that, especially in technical universities, students
would not be sufficiently informed about those sustainability-related concepts.
This
might connect to the creation of ‘academic spin-offs’, namely startups that originate in
the academic world, often based on the development of new technologies. This could
naturally lead to a technology push approach, which was found to be characteristic of
weaker sustainable ventures.
These spin-off startups are often supported by public and private investors, and this
might have an indirect influence on the level of integration of sustainability practices
within the venture. During data collection, in fact, it emerged that it is/was difficult for
some of the participants to get investors on board, as they are currently more interested
in investing in technologies: with them, they see that they could easily make profit.
On the other hand, entrepreneurs that do not build their venture around a specific
technology, or that have impact as primary objective before profit, might not receive as
much attention from these investors, either because they might find it hard to understand
what the company is really about or because they don’t want to end up being just
==PAGE:96==
90
Conclusion
‘philanthropists’. This assertion might go against one hypothesis proposed by Lüdeke-
Freund (2020), according to which “[c]ompanies that promote a sustainable product or
service and a corresponding business model narrative are more successful in attractive
private funding than companies without such a narrative” (p.677).
Therefore, this financial perspective should be further explored in future researches,
so to clearly understand if the interest of these investors for technologies somehow in-
fluences the commitment that nascent entrepreneurs might have towards sustainable
development, especially in relation to the possibility of introducing theoretical notions
about sustainability within the universities where the startups originate.
A suggestion for future work could also regard the use of a qualitative comparative
analysis (QCA) method to statistically analyze the combination of variables (in this
case, the background factors taken into consideration for the analysis) and to establish
the existence of causal mechanisms between them.
This thesis also took into account two important human capitals, namely education
and experience, as they are considered a critical resource for success in entrepreneurial
firms (Unger, Rauch, Frese, & Rosenbusch, 2011). However, the academic discourse
on human capital within the sustainable development literature and, in particular, the
sustainable business model research, is not deeply explored yet, therefore future research
should address the implications of combining human capital research stream with notions
of sustainable development and, in specific, principles of sustainable business model.
Besides, this preliminary study about the correlation between background factors
(and their interweaving) and the business typologies could also be used as starting point
for similar studies in corporate literature.
Finally, the introduction of two hybrid business categories (Weakly →Intermediately
and Intermediately →Strongly) could set the basis for future investigation on the matter,
as the results of this thesis couldn’t be considered sufficiently consistent to develop an
early theory.
==PAGE:97==
Appendices
==PAGE:98==
APPENDIX A
Interview guide
Company name: –
Company age: –
Interviewee position: –
Date: –
Background and introductory questions:
1. Where are you from?
2. What did you study?
3. What is your working experience? Have you ever worked for a startup before?
4. Did you ever participate to a volunteering program? If yes, what kind?
5. What was the key driving force to become an entrepreneur?
6. How did the idea for your business come about?
7. Can you briefly describe the main characteristics of the product/service of your
company?
8. Was it the same since the beginning of the company or did it change over time?
Based on the previous answers:
9. Why did you choose that application for your product/service?
10. Why did you choose to work with other companies (B2B) instead of individuals
(B2C) - or the other way around?
Why did you decide to address that particular customer?
Why that particular market?
11. Why did you decide to work in that region/area?
Do you think the impact will be higher there than other geographical regions?
What about the profit?
==PAGE:99==
Appendix A Interview guide
93
Questions about sustainability:
1. Which of the burning environmental/societal/economic issues are you trying to
resolve by dedicating your resources, competencies, talents, and experiences?
2. What are the core activities that your company consider fundamental for the issue
you’re committed to resolve?
Questions about business model:
1. How would you characterize your business model?
Specifications:
2. Who are your target customers?
3. What are the core value propositions of your company, the ones that you want to
deliver to your customers?
4. Do you think you generate value beyond profit? If so, what kind of value?
5. Do you ever talk about these values to the customer, and if so, in what terms?
6. How do you reach them, through which channel?
7. Do you think that what you’re doing reaches the customers’ needs better than
your competitors?
8. What key resources are required for your product/service?
9. What are the most important costs in your company?
10. What are your revenue streams?
Questions about stakeholders:
1. What are your main external stakeholders (other than the customers)?
2. In your opinion, why did they decide to support/work with your organisation?
How do you usually persuade them to support/work with you?
3. How do you manage relationships with these stakeholder groups?
4. Do you have any external partner that had some influence on the business model
of your company?
5. What do you think the future expectations about your company from these stake-
holders are?
==PAGE:100==
Bibliography
Amit, R., & Zott, C. (2001). Value creation in e-business. Strategic Management Journal,
22, 493–520. doi: 10.1002/smj.187
Belz, F. M., & Binder, J. K.
(2017).
Sustainable Entrepreneurship: A Convergent
Process Model. Business Strategy and the Environment, 26, 1–17. doi: 10.1002/
bse.1887
Biloslavo, R., Bagnoli, C., & Edgar, D. (2018). An eco-critical perspective on busi-
ness models: The value triangle as an approach to closing the sustainability gap.
Journal of Cleaner Production, 174, 746–762. Retrieved from https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.10.281 doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.10.281
Bocken, N., Short, S., Rana, P., & Evans, S. (2013). A value mapping tool for sustainable
business modelling. Corporate Governance, 13(5), 482–497. doi: 10.1108/CG-06
-2013-0078
Bocken, N. M., & Geradts, T. H.
(2019).
Barriers and drivers to sustainable
business model innovation:
Organization design and dynamic capabilities.
El-
sevier.
Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lrp.2019.101950
doi:
10.1016/j.lrp.2019.101950
Bocken, N. M., Short, S. W., Rana, P., & Evans, S.
(2014).
A literature and
practice review to develop sustainable business model archetypes.
Journal of
Cleaner Production, 65, 42–56.
Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.jclepro.2013.11.039 doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2013.11.039
Brand, F. (2009). Critical natural capital revisited: Ecological resilience and sustainable
development.
Ecological Economics, 68(3), 605–612.
Retrieved from http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2008.09.013
doi: 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2008
.09.013
Breuer, H., Fichter, K., Lüdeke-Freund, F., & Tiemann, I.
(2018).
Sustainability-
oriented business model development: Principles, criteria and tools. International
Journal of Entrepreneurial Venturing, 10(2), 256–286. doi: 10.1504/IJEV.2018
.092715
Brozovic, D. (2020). Business model based on strong sustainability: Insights from an
empirical study.
Business Strategy and the Environment, 29(2), 763–778.
doi:
10.1002/bse.2440
Bryman, A., & Bell, E. (2011). Business Research Methods - Third edition. Oxford
University Press.
Buriti, R. (2019). Encyclopedia of Sustainability in Higher Education. Encyclopedia of
Sustainability in Higher Education. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-63951-2
==PAGE:101==
Bibliography
95
Chesbrough, H., & Rosenbloom, R.
(2002).
The role of the business model in
capturing value from innovation:
evidence from Xerox Corporation’s technol-
ogy spin-off companies. Industrial and Corporate Change, 11(3), 529–555. doi:
10.1093/icc/11.3.529
Choi, D. Y., & Gray, E. R.
(2008).
The venture development processes of “sus-
tainable” entrepreneurs.
Management Research News, 31(8), 558–569.
doi:
10.1108/01409170810892127
Cohen, B., & Winn, M. I. (2007). Market imperfections, opportunity and sustainable
entrepreneurship.
Journal of Business Venturing, 22(1), 29–49.
doi: 10.1016/
j.jbusvent.2004.12.001
Creswell, J., & Creswell, J. D. (2018). Research and Design Qualitative, Quantitative
and Mixed Methods Approaches.
Dean, T. J., & McMullen, J. S. (2007). Toward a theory of sustainable entrepreneurship:
Reducing environmental degradation through entrepreneurial action. Journal of
Business Venturing, 22(1), 50–76. doi: 10.1016/j.jbusvent.2005.09.003
Dentchev, N., Rauter, R., Jóhannsdóttir, L., Snihur, Y., Rosano, M., Baumgartner, R., …
Jonker, J. (2018). Embracing the variety of sustainable business models: A prolific
field of research and a future research agenda. Journal of Cleaner Production, 194,
695–703. doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.05.156
de Oliveira Neto, G. C., Rodrigues Pinto, L. F., Castro Amorim, M. P., Giannetti,
B. F., & Villas Bôas de Almeida, C. M. (2018). A framework of actions for strong
sustainability.
Journal of Cleaner Production, 196, 1629–1643.
doi: 10.1016/
j.jclepro.2018.06.067
Dyllick, T., & Muff, K. (2016). Clarifying the Meaning of Sustainable Business: Intro-
ducing a Typology From Business-as-Usual to True Business Sustainability. Orga-
nization and Environment, 29(2), 156–174. doi: 10.1177/1086026615575176
Goyal, S., Kapoor, A., Esposito, M., & Sergi, B. S. (2017). Understanding business model
- literature review of concept and trends. International Journal of Competitiveness,
1(2), 99. doi: 10.1504/ijc.2017.084715
Hahn, R., Spieth, P., & Ince, I.
(2018).
Business model design in sustainable en-
trepreneurship: Illuminating the commercial logic of hybrid businesses. Journal of
Cleaner Production, 176, 439–451. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jclepro.2017.12.167 doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.12.167
Hall, J. K., Daneke, G. A., & Lenox, M. J.
(2010).
Sustainable development and
entrepreneurship:
Past contributions and future directions.
Journal of Busi-
ness Venturing, 25(5), 439–448. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.jbusvent.2010.01.002 doi: 10.1016/j.jbusvent.2010.01.002
Hockerts, K., & Wüstenhagen, R. (2010). Greening Goliaths versus emerging Davids
- Theorizing about the role of incumbents and new entrants in sustainable en-
trepreneurship.
Journal of Business Venturing, 25(5), 481–492.
Retrieved
from http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusvent.2009.07.005
doi:
10.1016/
j.jbusvent.2009.07.005
Johnson, M. P., & Schaltegger, S. (2019). Entrepreneurship for Sustainable Development:
A Review and Multilevel Causal Mechanism Framework. Entrepreneurship: Theory
==PAGE:102==
96
Bibliography
and Practice, 1–33. doi: 10.1177/1042258719885368
Joyce, A., & Paquin, R. L. (2016). The triple layered business model canvas: A tool to de-
sign more sustainable business models. Journal of Cleaner Production, 135, 1474–
1486.
Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.06.067
doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.06.067
Kennedy, S., & Bocken, N. (2019). Innovating Business Models for Sustainability: An
Essential Practice for Responsible Managers. The Research Handbook of Respon-
sible Management, 0–16.
Kovács, G., & Spens, K. M. (2005). Abductive reasoning in logistics research. Interna-
tional Journal of Physical Distribution and Logistics Management, 35(2), 132–144.
doi: 10.1108/09600030510590318
Kuckertz, A., & Wagner, M.
(2010).
The influence of sustainability orientation on
entrepreneurial intentions - Investigating the role of business experience. Journal
of Business Venturing, 25(5), 524–539. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10
.1016/j.jbusvent.2009.09.001 doi: 10.1016/j.jbusvent.2009.09.001
Landrum, N. E. (2018). Stages of Corporate Sustainability: Integrating the Strong
Sustainability Worldview. Organization and Environment, 31(4), 287–313. doi:
10.1177/1086026617717456
Lourenço, F., Jones, O., & Jayawarna, D. (2013). Promoting sustainable development:
The role of entrepreneurship education.
International Small Business Journal,
31(8), 841–865. doi: 10.1177/0266242611435825
Lüdeke-Freund, F. (2010). Towards a Conceptual Framework of Business Models for
Sustainability. Knowledge Collaboration & Learning for Sustainable Innovation
ERSCP-EMSU conference, Delft, The Netherlands, 49(0), 1–28. doi: 10.13140/
RG.2.1.2565.0324
Lüdeke-Freund, F. (2020). Sustainable entrepreneurship, innovation, and business mod-
els: Integrative framework and propositions for future research. Business Strategy
and the Environment, 29(2), 665–681. doi: 10.1002/bse.2396
Lüdeke-Freund, F., Carroux, S., Joyce, A., Massa, L., & Breuer, H. (2018). The sus-
tainable business model pattern taxonomy—45 patterns to support sustainability-
oriented business model innovation. Sustainable Production and Consumption, 15,
145–162. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spc.2018.06.004
doi:
10.1016/j.spc.2018.06.004
Magretta, J. (2002). Why business models matter. Harvard Business Review, 3–8.
Massa, L., Tucci, C. L., & Afuah, A. (2017). A critical assessment of business model
research. Academy of Management Annals, 11(1), 73–104. doi: 10.5465/annals
.2014.0072
Mitchell, A. (2018). A review of mixed methods, pragmatism and abduction techniques.
Electronic Journal of Business Research Methods, 16(3), 103–116.
Morris, M., Schindehutte, M., & Allen, J. (2005). The entrepreneur’s business model:
Toward a unified perspective. Journal of Business Research, 58(6), 726–735. doi:
10.1016/j.jbusres.2003.11.001
Neumeyer, X., & Santos, S. C. (2018). Sustainable business models, venture typolo-
gies, and entrepreneurial ecosystems: A social network perspective. Journal of
==PAGE:103==
Bibliography
97
Cleaner Production, 172, 4565–4579. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jclepro.2017.08.216 doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.08.216
Osterwalder, A., & Pigneur, Y. (2002). An e-business model ontology for modeling
e-business. 15th Bled Electronic Commerce Conference. Retrieved from http://
aisel.aisnet.org/bled2002/2/
Osterwalder, A., & Pigneur, Y. (2010). Business Model Generation: A Handbook for
Visionaries, Game Changers, and Challengers.
Osterwalder, A., Pigneur, Y., & Tucci, C. L. (2005). Clarifying Business Models: Ori-
gins, Present, and Future of the Concept. Communications of the Association for
Information Systems, 16(16), 1–25. Retrieved from http://aisel.aisnet.org/
cais%5Cnhttp://aisel.aisnet.org/cais/vol16/iss1/1 doi: 10.1.1.83.7452
Parrish, B. D. (2010). Sustainability-driven entrepreneurship: Principles of organization
design. Journal of Business Venturing, 25(5), 510–523. Retrieved from http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusvent.2009.05.005
doi: 10.1016/j.jbusvent.2009
.05.005
Patzelt, H., & Shepherd, D. A.
(2011).
Recognizing opportunities for sustainable
development.
Entrepreneurship:
Theory and Practice, 35(4), 631–652.
doi:
10.1111/j.1540-6520.2010.00386.x
Pelenc, J., & Ballet, J. (2015). Strong sustainability, critical natural capital and the
capability approach. Ecological Economics, 112, 36–44. Retrieved from http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2015.02.006 doi: 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2015.02
.006
Richardson, J.
(2008).
The business model: an integrative framework for strategy
execution. Strategic Change, 17(5-6), 133–144. doi: 10.1002/jsc.821
Saunders, M., Lewis, P., & Thornhill, A. (2009). Research Methods for Business Students,
Fifth edition. Pearson Education.
Schaltegger, S., Hansen, E. G., & Lüdeke-Freund, F.
(2016).
Business Models for
Sustainability: Origins, Present Research, and Future Avenues. Organization and
Environment, 29(1), 3–10. doi: 10.1177/1086026615599806
Schaltegger, S., Lüdeke-Freund, F., & Hansen, E. G.
(2016).
Business Models for
Sustainability: A Co-Evolutionary Analysis of Sustainable Entrepreneurship, In-
novation, and Transformation. Organization and Environment, 29(3), 264–289.
doi: 10.1177/1086026616633272
Schaltegger, S., & Wagner, M. (2011). Sustainable entrepreneurship and sustainability
innovation: Categories and interactions. Business Strategy and the Environment,
20(4), 222–237. doi: 10.1002/bse.682
Schumpeter, J. (1934). THE THEORY OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT: An In-
quiry into Profits, Capital, Credit, Interest, and the Business Cycle. Transaction
Publisher.
Shepherd, D. A., & Patzelt, H. (2011). The New Field of Sustainable Entrepreneurship:
Studying Entrepreneurial Action Linking ”What Is to Be Sustained” With ”What
Is to Be Developed”. Entrepreneurship: Theory and Practice, 35(1), 137–163. doi:
10.1111/j.1540-6520.2010.00426.x
Stål, H. I., & Bonnedahl, K. (2016). Conceptualizing strong sustainable entrepreneurship.
==PAGE:104==
98
Bibliography
Small Enterprise Research, 23(1), 73–84. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/
10.1080/13215906.2016.1188718 doi: 10.1080/13215906.2016.1188718
Strachan, G. (2018). Can Education for Sustainable Development Change Entrepreneur-
ship Education to Deliver a Sustainable Future? Discourse and Communication
for Sustainable Education, 9(1), 36–49. doi: 10.2478/dcse-2018-0003
Stubbs, W., & Cocklin, C. (2008). Conceptualizing a ”sustainability business model”.
Organization and Environment, 21(2), 103–127. doi: 10.1177/1086026608318042
Teece, D. J. (2010). Business models, business strategy and innovation. Long Range
Planning, 43(2-3), 172–194. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.lrp
.2009.07.003 doi: 10.1016/j.lrp.2009.07.003
Unger, J. M., Rauch, A., Frese, M., & Rosenbusch, N. (2011). Human capital and
entrepreneurial success: A meta-analytical review. Journal of Business Venturing,
26(3), 341–358. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusvent.2009
.09.004 doi: 10.1016/j.jbusvent.2009.09.004
United Nations General Assembly. (2015). Transforming our world: The 2030 agenda
for sustainable development.
doi: 10.1201/b20466-7
Upward, A., & Jones, P. (2016). An Ontology for Strongly Sustainable Business Models:
Defining an Enterprise Framework Compatible With Natural and Social Science.
Organization and Environment, 29(1), 97–123. doi: 10.1177/1086026615592933
Vuorio, A. M., Puumalainen, K., & Fellnhofer, K. (2018). Drivers of entrepreneurial in-
tentions in sustainable entrepreneurship. International Journal of Entrepreneurial
Behaviour and Research, 24(2), 359–381. doi: 10.1108/IJEBR-03-2016-0097
Wagner, M. (2012). Ventures for the Public Good and Entrepreneurial Intentions: An
Empirical Analysis of Sustainability Orientation as a Determining Factor. Journal
of Small Business and Entrepreneurship, 25(4), 519–531. doi: 10.1080/08276331
.2012.10593587
World Commission on Environmental Development. (1987). The Brundtland Report:
’Our Common Future’. Oxford University Press. doi: 10.1080/07488008808408783
Yin, R. K. (2003). Case Study Research, Design and Methods, Third Edition.
Zott, C., & Amit, R. (2010). Business model design: An activity system perspective.
Long Range Planning, 43(2-3), 216–226.
Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.lrp.2009.07.004 doi: 10.1016/j.lrp.2009.07.004
Zott, C., Amit, R., & Massa, L. (2011). The business model: Recent developments
and future research. Journal of Management, 37(4), 1019–1042. doi: 10.1177/
0149206311406265
