==PAGE:1==
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike
sharing system at DTU.
Master Thesis
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
Master Thesis
August, 2020
By
Helena Carla Yarritu Sánchez
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil Engineering, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 0
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Civil Engineering, with the
specialization on Urban Planning and Construction Management.
Helena Carla Yarritu Sánchez - s182203
Signature
Date
ii
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:5==
Chapter 0
MSc Thesis
Abstract
The aim of this thesis is to find a solution to the mobility issues suffered on campus and
with colliding municipalities. The solution proposed is a Bike sharing system. Hence,
throughout the project, some aspects will be studied.
First of all, it is necessary to assess whether the demand is enough for being a feasible
solution. Data that has been obtained through a survey. Afterward, it is necessary to
present the different scenarios that will be assessed. (i) Danish Technical University cam-
pus on Lyngby, (ii) Both the campus and the accommodations owned by the university,
and (iii) The campus and the city of Lyngby.
To continue with the design phase, a mathematical model has been created to obtain the
number of bikes, station size and unmet demand. This data will be used to assess the
market penetration of the different scenarios.
Afterward, the final evaluation will be carried out by a sustainability assessment, that
enables the inclusion of social, environmental, and economic impact. Hence, an indicator
framework will be developed, which will collaborate to confirm (i) if the demand is sufficient
to obtain revenues, (ii) whether there is an improvement within connectivity, and (iii) even
if it helps to improve the interaction user-building.
Results obtained have shown that all scenarios are beneficial, but slightly. Moreover, all
scenarios have had similar results, what can be due to the use of an equitably pondering,
between other reasons.
In conclusion, a bike sharing system can help to solve mobility issues but should be stud-
ied deeper with more restrictions in order to get a solution more concrete.
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
iii
==PAGE:6==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 0
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisors Per Sieverts Nielsen and Dario
Pacino, for supporting me during the whole process and for bringing me so much valu-
able knowledge and guidance. Also to my supervisors from the Polytechnical University
of Valencia, Francisco Javier Camacho Torregrosa, and David Llopis Castelló for their
patience and support.
Thank you to the Polytechnic University of Valencia, for bringing me the opportunity to do
the double MSc. within Civil Engineering, and for all the training provided during both the
Bachelor and the Master.
I would like to thank my family for being by my side unconditionally, in the bad and in the
good moments. And for all the support during the last years, especially during this period
of change.
iv
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
3
2
Background
7
2.1
Danish Technical University . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
DTU Accommodations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Public Transport
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3
Theoretical background
19
3.1
Sustainable transportation systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.2
Micromobility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.3
Bike Sharing System. Guidelines for designing and implementing . . . . . . 25
4
Problem description
35
4.1
Research questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.2
Assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
4.3
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
4.4
Base Scenario
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5
Methodology
43
5.1
Data collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5.2
Data processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
5.3
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
5.4
Sustainability assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6
Scenarios
49
6.1
Scenario 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
6.2
Scenario 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
6.3
Scenario 3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
7
Analysis of the demand
57
7.1
Representativeness of the survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
7.2
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
8
Design
61
8.1
Typology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
8.2
Mathematical model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
8.3
Distribution of the stations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
8.4
Cost estimate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
9
Development of indicators
75
9.1
Indicators framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
10 Data collection and evaluation
77
10.1 Social Indicators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
v
==PAGE:8==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 0
10.2 Environmental Indicators
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
10.3 Economic Indicators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 98
11 Summary
107
12 Discussion and conclusion
109
Bibliography
113
A Appendix: Bike sharing systems (BSS)
119
B Appendix: Correspondence with stakeholders
121
B.1 Campus Service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
B.2 Human resources and administrative . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
C Appendix: Light rail information
123
D Appendix. Campus plan images
127
E
Appendix: Survey
135
E.1 Main survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135
E.2 Short survey
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 157
F
Appendix: Design
167
F.1
Data sets: explanation of the process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167
F.2
Tables of results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 169
F.3
Stations distribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 175
G Appendix: Sustainability Assessment
179
G.1 Universities with Bike sharing systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 183
vi
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 0
MSc Thesis
Definitions
Bike lane: a part of a road that is separated by a line from the rest of the road, for the use
of people riding bicycles. [Cambridge-dictionary n.d.]
Bike path: a path or marked route that is intended for people riding bicycles [Cambridge-
dictionary n.d.]
Bike sharing system: short-term bicycle rental available at unattended urban locations
Bike (Cycle) network: an interconnected set of safe and direct cycling routes covering a
given area or city
Abbreviations
DTU = Danish Technical University (Danmarks Tekniske Universistet).
BSS = Bike Sharing System.
BS = Bikeshare.
ITDP = Institute for Transport & Develpment Policy.
MaaS = Mobility as a service.
CAS = Campus Service
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
1
==PAGE:10==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 0
2
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
Nowadays, people are pushed by society to be as productive as they can be. Working
around eight hours a day and supplementing it with activities and social life. Therefore,
there is a need to have a good infrastructure that allows people to move from one activity
to another as quickly as possible. But this infrastructure must be complemented by public
transportation systems.
Having a sustainable transportation system in a city is being one step closer to a bet-
ter quality of life. It is taking care of the environment while improving citizens access
to facilities and ensuring safety. One of the main goals of sustainable transportation is
to reduce short trips made by motorized vehicles. This can be achieved by encourag-
ing citizens’ awareness, fostering non-motorized transportation and creating or improving
existing sidewalks and bike lanes [UNESCAP and CITYNET 2012].
Many people uses private vehicles instead of public transportation due to bad connections
with their destinations. Bad connections lead to long ways on foot before reaching the
destination. For instance, walking around one mile from home to public transport or from
the public transport to the destination. What is known as the first/last mile problem. This
problem is also present on large university campuses.
Figure 1.1: First mile - Last mile graphic scheme.
While traffic congestion increases and corporations try to find out solutions by drive-less
cars and sharing car systems [Möller et al. 2019], some other focus on the potential of
traditional vehicles, like the bicycle.
This ”movement” leads to the emergence of many start-ups related to bicycle sharing.
Small companies that grow fast due to the current increasing demand. One popular ex-
ample could be Mobike [Cox 2018], founded in 2015 in Beijing, China, and that in 2018 it
was already operating over 200 cities around the world. Donkey Republic is also a pop-
ular company that started in 2015 in Copenhagen and already in 2017 had 1000 active
bikes over 30 places around the world [REPUBLIC 2017].
This does not only involve cities, but universities are also jumping into this new trend. For
instance, Jordan University of Science and Technology (JUST) has implemented a bike
sharing system called “Darajty”, which means ”my bicycle” in arabic. It is a minute renting
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
3
==PAGE:12==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 1
system that has improved the students’ routines. Mohammad, a student from Jordan
university, talks about the problem that existed before the bike sharing system arrived.
I used to run a lot in order not to miss my lectures. [Freij 2018]
JUST has an area of 1.4 sq.km. which is similar to Lyngby DTU’s campus area ( 1.06
sq.km.). Considering that DTU is located on the outskirts of Copenhagen, and there-
fore many people gets there by public transport. And that generally, students, staff and
professors spend most of their day on campus. Moving from one lecture to another can
mean walking up to twenty minutes. Hence, a solution must be found for this first/last mile
problem encountered on campus.
Thorough this thesis is going to be designed and assessed the feasibility of a bike shar-
ing system at DTU. This system will have the improvement of connectivity as its main
objective. The study will take into account different scenarios in order to reach the most
beneficial solution.
This project will have different chapters where necessary aspects to understand or de-
velop the solution are presented.
First of all, it has two background chapters (2 & 3). The first one will present the area of
study. This is the university and its location history. Moreover, since there are different
scenarios, it is necessary to introduce the accommodations provided by the university and
how they work. Finally, the operation of the transport network in Copenhagen and more
specifically on DTU campus will be explained. This section is very important to understand
the connection problem with neighbor cities.
The second background is called a theoretical background. This is because introduces
all the theory necessary to understand the process followed on the project. It starts with
an introduction to sustainable transportation systems. Followed by the new concept of
micromobility, what it means, its typology, and benefits and drawbacks. Finally, some
guidelines for designing and implementing a bike sharing system are presented.
Chapter 4 is focused on describing the problem. It also includes some sections. One
focused on explaining the research questions that will help evaluate important aspects
during the process. Two presenting the assumptions taken during the thesis and its limi-
tations. And one explaining the base scenario that will be the starting point for the design.
The scenario is based on the implementations planned for 2025 [Universitet 2019c]. This
is new bike lanes, the arrival of the light rail and other aspects mentioned in chapter 4.4.
Afterward, there is chapter 5. Which explains the methodology followed in the thesis.
It includes the process of data collection, data processing, design of the system and its
evaluation. The latter includes both the framework and the normalized scale assessment.
Every evaluation will be based on whether there is a positive or negative change in sce-
nario zero.
Once the background and the methodology has been explained, it is time to introduce
the scenarios in chapter 6. Followed by the analysis of the demand and the design of the
system in chapters 7 & 8, respectively.
Subsequently, a sustainability assessment is going to be carried out, which will consider
three main groups: Social, Environmental and Economical. The development of indica-
tors, data collection and its evaluation will be developed in chapters 9 & 10.
Finally, there is a summary, the discussion and conclusions. The process is shown in
figure 1.2.
4
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
MSc Thesis
Chapter 4: Problem description
Research
questions
Assumptions
& Limitations
Base
Scenario
Lyngby
Campus
Campus &
Accommodations
Campus &
Lyngby city
Chapter 1: Introduction
Chapter 2:
Background
Chapter 5: Methodology
Data
collection
Data
processing
Design
Sustainability
assessment
Chapter 3:
Theoretical
background
Background
Chapter 6: Scenarios
Chapter 7: Analysis of the demand
Chapter 8: Design
Typology
Mathematical
model
Distribution
of stations
Cost estimate
Social
Environmental
Economic
Chapter 9: Development of indicators
Chapter 10: Data collection and evaluation
Chapter 11: Summary
Chapter 12: Discussion and conclusions
Figure 1.2: Thesis diagram
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
5
==PAGE:14==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 1
6
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:15==
2
Background
The current chapter aims to introduce the environment of the project. This is the physical
location and characteristics where it is taking place, as well as the main topics linked, in
this case, public transportation.
The project is located at the Danish Technical University (DTU), specifically on Lyngby
Campus. Therefore, DTU, its location history and development, the different campuses,
facilities, and interesting agreements with organizations are explained.
Moreover, to understand the problem statement in section 4, it is necessary to understand
the characteristics of public transportation in Denmark, developed in section 2.3.
2.1
Danish Technical University
The Danish Technical University was founded in 1829. First located in the city of Copen-
hagen [Universitet 2019a] and due to the fast growing number of students and the need
of space for laboratories, it was moved to its current location (Lundtofte, Lyngby) between
the 1960s and 70s, concurring with the movement introduced in Europe after the second
world war according to Pierre Merlin:
”The American notion of a campus was exported to Europe after the Second
World War, when rapid expansion —in the case of some universities— made
it necessary to acquire land, which was only available on the urban periphery,
in order to set up badly needed scientific departments. Thus the notion of
campus came to be associated with sites outside, but connected to, the city,
on land that allowed buildings to be spread out.” [Merlin n.d.]
The decision was not only because of the space and the multiplication of students. There
were many economic aspects, like the price and availability of the land. And aspects
related to the space versatility the outskirts of the city were bringing: car accessibility,
availability of land, etc. [Merlin n.d.]
Nowadays, DTU is divided into three campus. Lyngby is the main campus, is 106 hectare
and it has more than one hundred buildings divided into 4 sectors. This campus is mainly
focused on Master studies. The second one is located in Ballerup (around 10km from
Copenhagen), its focus is on Bachelor studies and the main teaching language is danish.
The campus is one large building complex of 42, 000m2 surrounded by courtyards and
gardens. Finally, there is another campus in Risø, which is 40km west Copenhagen and
is the biggest one with 262 hectare site. Its main function is research [Tonsberg 2020].
Throughout this thesis the focus will be on Lyngby campus due to lack of information
obtained from Ballerup campus, attributable to the few means available to spread the
survey, imputable to the Corona virus pandemy lock-down.
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
7
==PAGE:16==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 2
Figure 2.1: Location of Lyngby campus
In the last decade, universities are trying to recover their relationship with cities and at DTU
is not different. Lyngby is 2km away from the campus and it represents a big transportation
hub for the surroundings. The campus is connected with the town, almost 24h, by bus. It
has also some bike lanes that are being improved [C. V. Jørgensen 2020], and the light rail
will arrive soon [Skotte 2019]. Nevertheless, according with Juliana’s study [Apli 2019],
students do not choose to live in Lyngby, they prefer to live in Copenhagen and commute
to university.
In 2012, an organization called ”the city of knowledge” was created to change this. Their
main goal is to develop Lyngby into one of the leading knowledge-intensive university
towns in Northern Europe (...). It has a strong focus on urban life, start-up businesses,
internationalisation, mobility and sustainable solutions” [Lyngby 2012]. And together with
DTU and the big knowledge businesses, is trying to develop Lyngby towards a friendly
university-town. They want to be:
• One of Europe’s leading knowledge and university cities with a world-class level of
research and education.
• A centre for innovation and development of knowledge-intensive business clusters
• An attractive hub for national and international talented individuals characterised by
a high quality of life
• A living laboratory for sustainable urban and business development
8
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
MSc Thesis
Figure 2.2: Where would DTU students prefer to live? [Apli 2019].
On the other hand, DTU’s mission is to develop and utilize natural sciences and technical
sciences for the benefit of society. And its values are focused on sustainability, integration
and being at an elite level. In order to achieve these goals, DTU’s starategy is focusing
on four aspects: Landscape, architecture, utilities and mobility [Universitet 2019c]. Being
the last one the core of this thesis.
DTU has made a study which shows that many students and employees go by bike to
university, specifically 41 and 30% respectively. Their goal to 2023 is to increase those
percentages to 50 and 40%, and they want to achieve it by implementing bicycle paths to,
from and within the campus, as well as bike parking facilities [Universitet 2019b]. Network
that will be used as a starting point for the design of the bike-sharing system.
More facilities are provided on DTU campus. There is a sports hall with climbing walls,
basketball court and football field, a complete gym and dance lectures. Moreover, there
are many study rooms around campus (silent or for group-work), a library and a bookstore
on Building 101. There are also canteens in buildings 101, 358, 342 and 220; Cafés in
101, 202 and 306; And street food stalls around campus. Laboratories also abound on
campus. In addition, there is a special place called DTU Skylab, which is a hub for start-
up businesses and innovative entrepreneurs. Many workshops, meetings, and events are
carried out in this 373 building. [Tonsberg 2020]
DTU also provides students with accommodation as far as possible. There are many
reasons to do so, but the main one is the lack of available housing in Copenhagen and
the large number of international students coming to DTU either for an exchange semester
or for studying a two-year master. This topic is further explained in next section (2.2).
2.2
DTU Accommodations
Denmark, and especially Copenhagen, has a big issue with housing. There are more
people who wants to live in than available houses and that is making housing costs grow
fast.
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
9
==PAGE:18==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 2
Growth in housing demand is galloping ahead of home building, causing higher-
than-ever housing costs. [O’Sullivan 2016]
Consequently, DTU has a foundation called Boligfonden DTU [DTU n.d.] that owns some
accommodations, and whose purpose is to provide accommodation for international guests
and students [Viborg 2019], ensuring they will have dwelling at least for the first year.
Due to the housing shortage, there are many terms and conditions when applying for
accommodation in Boligfonden DTU:
•
”... rents out accommodations for fixed periods. When you accept the offer
of accommodation, you also accept that the rental agreement is binding
for the full period stated in the offer and can NOT be changed or shortened.
Neither is it possible to sublet to others ...”
•
”Because of the housing shortage (...) Boligfonden DTU is able to make
you one offer only. If you decline this offer, you accept that you will not
automatically be offered another accommodation.”
Boligfonden has accommodations in many municipalities, but generally in Lyngby-Taarbæk,
DTU campus or neighboring municipalities. Table 2.1 colors differentiate where are lo-
cated:
• Green: dormitories at DTU Lyngby Campus
• Orange: located in Lyngby-Taarbæk municipality
• Black: otherwise
10
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2
MSc Thesis
Figure 2.3: Sketch of all accommodations presented on table 2.1
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
11
==PAGE:20==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 2
Name
#people
For DTU
NOTE
Built
Price
DTU
Campus Village
160
160
100%
2001
3350
DTU
Hempel Kollegiet
200
200
100%
2017
4220
Shared
Kagså Kollegiet
309
16
5%
Accomodation Office administrates about 16 rooms
1969
3400
DTU
Kampsax Kollegiet
521
521
100%
1969
3250
DTU
Linde Alle Student Residence
300
300
100%
4200
DTU
Nordvej Student Residence
312
312
100%
2019
4225
Shared
P.O.Pedersen Kollegiet
274
27
10%
LIMITED
1964
2794
Shared
Paul Bergsøe Kollegiet
383
35
9%
352 single rooms, 31 apartments;
LIMITED single rooms
1967
2888
Shared
Professor Ostenfeld Kollegiet
288
28
10%
276 single rooms, 12 apartments;
LIMITED amount for DTU
1968
3213
Shared
Rebæk Søpark Kollegiet
361
15
4%
15 rooms for DTU
1977
2772
DTU
Shared apartment - Lyngby
Hovedgade
3
3
100%
in Lyngby
5000
DTU
Shared apartment - Lystoftevej
3
3
100%
1 single, 1 double room in Lundtofte
2850
DTU
Student house - Caroline
Amalievej
6
6
100%
4 single, 1 double room in Lundtofte
2500
DTU
Student house - Lundtofte
Skolestræde
12
12
100%
3 single, 3 double, 1 triple room in Lundtofte
2500
DTU
Student house - Lundtoftevej
6
6
100%
4 single, 1 double room in Lundtofte
3150
DTU
Student house - Lystofteve
9
9
100%
2950
DTU
Student house - Nordre Fasanvej
8
8
100%
4950
DTU
Student house - Odinsvej
4
4
100%
3400
DTU
Student house - Prof. Ostenfeld
Kollegiet
6
6
100%
ala: The Inspector house
3263
DTU
Student house - Tempovej
10
10
100%
DTU
Student house - Thorsvej
8
8
100%
4 single, 2 double rooms
2750
DTU
Student house - Viggo
Stuckenbergsvej
9
9
100%
5 single, 2 double rooms
3150
DTU
Student house - Virumgade 3
4
4
100%
3250
DTU
Student house - Virumgade 3A
8
8
100%
3150
DTU
Student house - Virumgade 3B
4
4
100%
DTU
Student house - Virumgade 3C
11
11
100%
3150
DTU
Studio apartment - Skelhøjvej
2
2
100%
7500
DTU
Studio apartments -
Egedalsvænge
45
45
100%
DTU register 45 rooms in the complex
2850
DTU
Studio apartments - Hyrdevangen
40
40
100%
4300
Shared
Studio apartments - Tåsingegade
44
22
50%
DTU has 22 rooms for international students
3250
DTU
Villum Kann Rasmussen Kollegiet
84
84
100%
42 double rooms
3787
Shared
William Demant Kollegiet
100
10
10%
100 rooms, LIMITED amount for DTU
4262
Table 2.1: Details of the accommodations that Boligfonden manages. [Apli 2019]
2.3
Public Transport
Copenhagen’s public transportation is very efficient. Different bus, train, light rail, metro
and ferry lines, integrate the transport network. All well interconnected by bike lanes
complemented with a wide variety of micromobility systems in the city center, for exam-
ple bike-sharing systems or e-scooters (See section 3.2 for further explanation of this
concept).
Copenhagen municipality seeks sustainable mobility for its city, as it is shown in its Action
Plan for Green Mobility and the CPH 2025 Climate Plan.
Copenhagen prioritises mobility, and has a target that 75% of all movement
will be on foot, by bike or by public transport. (...) To facilitate this, the City
of Copenhagen is putting considerable effort into providing an integrated, effi-
cient and green transport network. [Technical and Administration n.d.]
The municipality believes that the more cyclists, pedestrians, and public transport the
more space will be on roads for those who really need to use motorized vehicles. For
instance, commercial traffic or people who really need these means in their commutes.
Public transportation is not cheap, but it gives you a wide range of options when traveling.
To use public transport it is needed a card called ”rejsekort”. This card is for checking
in every time you get into a mean of transport and for checking out only when the trip
has been finished. In case check out is not done, after 2 hours the card charges the
12
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2
MSc Thesis
most expensive journey possible (70 dkk). It exists the possibility of purchasing one-way
or round-trip ticket, but it is usually more expensive. There are different ”rejsekort”, the
general one is impersonal and allows to travel anywhere within Sjælland, including Malmö
station in Sweeden.
Concerning the price of the journey, it depends on how many sectors do you cross from
origin to destination (Figure 2.7). The higher the distance (and therefore the number of
sectors) the more expensive. But, if the time of the journey does not correspond with
the one estimated by the system, the price may increase. This is because the system
understands that more lines than the usual to get to that destination have been used from
the starting point. For example, checking-in near your home, picking up a friend from a
station in the countryside and then check out in the city center. Maybe the estimated time
was 10 minutes and you have spent 30 minutes in total, therefore an extra percentage
cost is applied to your journey.
Regarding the service, depending on the mean of transport, the frequency and working
hours change [Mcomish 2019]:
• Metro: It works 24/71 with a high frequency, 2-4 minutes in rush hour and 3-6 minutes
otherwise. In total there are 39 stations shared between 3 lines: M1, M2 and M3.
Being the last one the circular line, which was opened in September 2019. The
municipality is planning a fourth line to connect with Nordhavn.
Figure 2.4: Copenhagen metro lines map.
• Train: There are two types of train, the S-tog which runs in the city and in some of
the neighbour municipalities, and the fast train that travels all around the country.
The most usual in commutes is the S-tog, which is a light rail. It runs from 05:00 to
00:30. Depending on the line the frequency goes from 4 to 10 or even 20 minutes.
On weekends, these trains run at night (from 01:00 to 05:00) every hour, except line
F that does it every half an hour.
124 hours 7 days a week
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
13
==PAGE:22==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 2
Figure 2.5: Copenhagen S-tog lines map.
• Bus: Even at night you can easily find different lines operative. Every bus has a
letter that shows which hours or in what area operate.
– Buses with the letter A are city buses. their frequency is very good, 3-7 minutes
in peak hours and 10 minutes otherwise. They also operate at night, but with
a lower frequency.
– The letter S indicates suburban buses. It has fewer stops and operates from
06:00 to 01:00. Their frequency goes from 5 minutes in rush hours to 20 min-
utes outside.
– Buses with letter E are express buses. They only work during peak hours in
the suburban areas, having less stops than S buses.
– Other letter that can be found on buses is P. This type of bus operates locally,
at daytime and has a circular route, starting and ending on the same stop.
– There are buses that only work at night-time. This is the case of buses with
letter N. Their frequency is 10 minutes Fridays and Saturdays, and 20 minutes
during the week.
14
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 2
MSc Thesis
– Finally, there are buses without letter. Those run during daylight hours and
finish their route around 19:00.
• Ferry: The ferry operates during daytime, from 07:00 to 20:00 on weekdays and
10:00 to 20:00 on weekends. Only have 6 stops ans works in zone 2.
An important aspect to know of the public transportation in Denmark is whether you can
or cannot travel with your bike. Which actually depends on the mean of transport you are
taking. Bikes can be carried for free only when traveling in S-togs, where there is an area
enabled (Figure 2.6). On fast trains, the metro and the bus it is possible to travel, but you
have to pay a fare. In the case of the buses, it will only be possible if the bus has enough
space. Hence, hardly anyone travels with the bicycle on buses.
Figure 2.6: S-tog internal bike parking.
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
15
==PAGE:24==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 2
Figure 2.7: Public transportation map of the Greater Copenhagen area.
16
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 2
MSc Thesis
2.3.1
Public transportation service on DTU Lyngby campus
On DTU Lyngby campus there are fifteen bus stops, two along the highway and the rest
spread around the main arteries. The lines operating are 150S and 15E along the highway,
which destination is Copenhagen. And 30E, 40E, 300S, 180, 181 and 190 lines around
campus, which have Lyngby Station among their main stops. In 2025, three stops will be
added with the implementation of the first phase of the Greater Copenhagen Light Rail,
called ”ring 3”, that will cross DTU campus [Skotte 2019]. Moreover, this year a driverless
bus will be tested on campus. In case it is approved it will connect the 29 light rail stations
with its surroundings. During the test period it will give service from Netto to somewhere
in between sector 4xx and 3xx [].
Looking into the quality of campus connection by public transport, it can be said that is
adequate depending on the time of the day and the destination.
Travel time by bus from Anker Engelunds Vej to Lyngby St. ranges from 16 to 17 minutes.
On foot is 35 minutes (2.8 km) and by bike 10 minutes. After 19:00, the frequencies
of buses with this travel time drop from 10 minutes to 30 minutes. Being half an hour
the alternatives offered. Moreover, according to the explanation in section 2.3 and after
checking the app ”Rejseplanen” [Rejseplanen n.d.], it has been proved that after 00:30
there is no proper connection with Lyngby Station. At least not with a travel time smaller
than one hour, which includes walking 1.6km to the bus stop. It comes back to usual
frequencies at 6:30 in the morning, when daytime buses start operating again.
On the other hand, Copenhagen’s connection does not stop at night, but the frequency
increases to one hour.
With the arrival of the light rail in 2025, some lines will be eliminated or cut at some areas
(See figure D.4. At DTU, the bus line 300S will be competing with the light rail in some
areas, and therefore it will be cut in those departures only running between Gladsaxe
Trafikplads and Lyngby station and between Lyngby station and Naerum station [Ander-
sen, Landex, and Nielsen 2006].
The light rail will increase by three the number of nodal connections on campus (Akademivej
DTU, Anker Engelunds Vej DTU and Rævehøjvej). It will have 29 stops throughout the
first phase route, from Ishøj to v/Lundtofte, what will improve DTU connections with the
southern part of the campus.
The timetable of the light rail will start, from Monday to Saturday, at 05:10 and it will give
the last service at 00:30. On Sundays it will start one hour later. Extra service will be given
from 06:04 to 18:44 (Monday to Friday) and 07:04 to 15:44 on Saturdays (See Figure C.1).
This extra service will be a fast line variant that will only stop at the most important stops
based on transfer possibilities and expected passenger loads [Andersen, Landex, and
Nielsen 2006]. Frequency on both lines will be 20 minutes and the estimated travelling
time of the normal line is shown in Table 2.2.
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
17
==PAGE:26==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 2
Station
Travelling time
(estimated)
Lundtofte
0
Rævehøjvej
1
Anker Engelunds Vej
3
Akademivej
5
Fortunbyen
7
Lyngby Centrum (Nærum Line)
10
Lyngby station (S-tog)
11
Table 2.2: Estimated travelling time between the light rail stops in Lyngby municipality.
Driverless vehicles are allowed in Denmark but must pass an evaluation process before
going into service. It is a 15 step approval process [Pernestal 2020]:
1. Vehicle approval application sent to Danish Road Traffic Authority
2. Processing of vehicle approval application
3. Vehicle approval
4. Prepare site assessment report for test site
5. Send site assessment report to project’s assessor
6. Processing of site assessment report
7. Approval of site assessment report by assessor
8. Send approved site assessment report to Danish Road Directorate
9. Processing of site assessment report
10. Consolidation act sent to public hearing
11. Consolidation act approved by the Transport Committee
12. Final approval of consolidation act by Minister for Transport
13. Prepare and initiate site acceptance test
14. Site acceptance test approved by project’s assessor/Danish Road Directorate
15. Test start with passengers
DTU’s driverless bus is on the last stage. The test was supposed to start on March 2020,
but due to the coronavirus lockdown it has been postponed, hopefully, to September 2020
[]. The test will give service from Netto to somewhere between sector 4xx and 3xx. More-
over, an App is being developed and it will be tested together with the driverless bus.
The app seeks to find the fastest route to passengers’ destination, modifying the route
depending on which passengers are on the bus [Simonsen n.d.].
”The light rail and the driverless buses will, in general, help ensure that we also
have smart, green and flexible ways to transport us collectively in the future.
The upcoming light rail is a decisive step, but the driverless buses can create
better connections when the light rail is finished and thus ensure that even
more people will choose green and collective transport.”
Steen Christiansen, Mayor, City of Albertslund [Pernestal 2020]
18
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:27==
3
Theoretical background
3.1
Sustainable transportation systems
Sustainable transportation is crucial for having a livable city with high quality of life. Sus-
tainable transportation is defined based on the definition of sustainable development given
by the World Commission on Environment and Development, Which according to CAI-
Asia, the definition is as follows
...set of transport activities together with relevant infrastructure that collec-
tively does not leave problems or costs for future generations to solve or bear
present builders and users of the system should pay such costs today. These
costs are not limited to environmental externalities, but also include social and
other economic impacts caused by transportation. [UNESCAP and CITYNET
2012]
A key aspect of sustainable transport lies in the organization of urban space, with an
adequate distribution of goods and services people do not need to travel long distances
or use transport, but can reach their destination on foot. This objective seeks to reduce
environmental and economic impact by reducing the demand of transport. [UNESCAP
and CITYNET 2012]
Moreover, connectivity is very important. It is necessary to have a proper transport net-
work to avoid ”transportation gaps”. ”For instance, there are places that people travel
to, but are too far to walk or too close to drive.”[UNESCAP and CITYNET 2012]. In or-
der to avoid the use of personal motorized vehicles or walk long distances, systems like
bike-sharing or e-scooters could be the solution in these cases. This is promoting green
vehicles, car sharing and non-motorized vehicles.
By promoting public transportation and non motorized transportation the trans-
portation system is made more efficient to both the providers and the users. As
less people uses personal vehicles, the lower is the level of traffic congestion
and demand for new roadways. [UNESCAP and CITYNET 2012]
Public transportation must be integrated and balanced to reach as many groups of the
population as possible. And has to provide proper connections with the main areas of
activity, like the city center, malls, sports facilities, etc.
Transportation does also includes the movement of goods, which is between 10 to 18%
of trips in urban areas and represents 40% of pollution caused by the transport sector.
Moreover, freight transport causes part of the traffic congestion in urban areas due to
the time needed for the loading and unloading process. Since this service cannot be
banned on cities, the creation of freight hubs and Intelligent Transport Systems should be
implemented to reduce as far as possible its impacts. [UNESCAP and CITYNET 2012]
On the other hand, accessibility and affordability of transportation are crucial for the de-
velopment of the city since ensures access to work and essential services.
...the benefits of having a sustainable transportation system is not limited to
mitigating traffic congestion and improving air quality only but it also helps to
reduce poverty and brings economic prosperity to the city. [UNESCAP and
CITYNET 2012]
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
19
==PAGE:28==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 3
Therefore, the main objectives of sustainable transportation systems according to UN-
ESCAP and CITYNET 2012 are the following:
1. Reduce the travel demand, particularly by motorized modes by reducing the number
of trips and trip lengths
2. Greater use of truly sustainable modes (i.e. walking and other non-motorized trans-
port)
3. Efficient use of existing systems and reducing the use of all resources – natural,
physical and financial
4. Increasing energy efficiency and emission standards of motorized vehicles.
And the measures proposed to reach these goals are five.
1. Organization of urban space – land use planning and finding better solution to meet
the needs through action in other areas
2. Making services and opportunities accessible by walking and non-motorized trans-
port
3. Development of a balanced integrated transport system that ensures efficient travel
using multiple modes
4. Technological standards (vehicle, fuel, emission etc.) and
5. Improvement in efficiency of urban freight logistics through organization of freight
distribution and delivery facilities and services.
To achieve a sustainable transportation system is important to have a strong methodology
which with measure the progress towards sustainability. Thorough this project, objective
(2) and part of (1) are followed. And for achieving them, a solution based on measures
(2), (3) and (4) somehow, will be sought. The methodology followed will be based on
social, environmental, and economic indicators.
3.2
Micromobility
Before going into the concept of micromobility, it is important to understand what MaaS
means.
Mobility as a Service (MaaS) is the integration of various forms of transport
services into a single mobility service accessible on demand. To meet a cus-
tomer’s request, a MaaS operator facilitates a diverse menu of transport op-
tions, be they public transport, ride-, car- or bike-sharing, taxi or car rental/lease,
or a combination thereof. For the user, MaaS can offer added value through
use of a single application to provide access to mobility, with a single payment
channel instead of multiple ticketing and payment operations...
...The aim of MaaS is to provide an alternative to the use of the private car
that may be as convenient, more sustainable, help to reduce congestion and
constraints in transport capacity, and can be even cheaper. [Alliance n.d.]
Micromobility definition
Micromobility is a trendy new concept that officially appeared in 2017 when business and
technology analyst Horace Dediu was giving an speech, although can be found earlier as
a technical term in computer science [Granath 2020]. The idea behind micromobility is
to have an efficient and environmentally-friendly way of getting around cities. [Dictionary
2019]
20
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 3
MSc Thesis
Because of its novelty, there are many definitions but none official. However, they all have
similarities, as shown below.
Analyzing the root of the word ”micromobility”, a definition can be obtained. Two primitive
words can be found: ”micro” and ”mobility”. Meaning ”micro” minimal or small, and ”mo-
bility” the ability to move or be moved freely and easily. Therefore, micromobility could be
simply defined as the ability of movement through minimalistic means. [Dediu 2019]
A more technical definition could be: personal transportation using any vehicles whose
gross weight is less than 500 kg as stated by Granath 2020.
Other organizations like the Institute for Transportation & Development Policy (ITDP),
defines micromobility as a range of small, lightweight devices operating at speeds typically
below 25 km/h and is ideal for trips up to 10 km. [ITDP n.d.]
If all these definitions are combined into one, a general and complete definition can be
obtained. Hereby, micromobility is the ability of movement through minimalistic means,
whose gross weight is less than 500 kg, operates at speeds typically below 25 km/h and
is ideal for trips up to 10 km.
One of the objectives of micromobility is to solve the first-last mile issue that most cities
are struggling with (Figure 1.1).This problem can appear even in cities with a great public
transportation system and is referred to the space between the station and home, or
the transfer between buses or any distance that is too close to drive, but too far to walk
[Granath 2020].
Not everybody can possibly live or work within easy walking distance of a tran-
sit station or bus stop. Thus, cities still suffer from traffic congestion, parking
problems, and excessive auto emissions.[Witzel 2018]
On the other hand, to solve this problem, more transportation routes cannot be simply
added because of the high cost. And meanwhile, people refuses using MaaS because of
this first/last mile issue.
If people lack a convenient, affordable way to get on a bus or train, they are
far more likely to opt for a personal vehicle(...). Or, perhaps worse, they may
opt to not travel, forgoing job opportunities, access to healthy food, preventa-
tive medical care, and more. The first-mile/last-mile problem (...) can create
“transit deserts”—areas with transit-dependent populations that lack adequate
public transit service. [Zarif, Pankratz, and Kelman 2019]
Micromobility is demonstrating in many cities that can be the solution for the first/last
mile problem. In China, Mobike has doubled accessibility with a dockless bike sharing
system. This has been reached by including their bikes in areas located further than
meters from public transport. Achieving that half of the trips made by bike sharing are
part of commutes. [Zarif, Pankratz, and Kelman 2019]
An integrated transportation system that includes public transportation and
such flexible alternatives as micro-mobility vehicles can help fill in the gaps.
(...) city planners, micro-mobility companies, and the public need to work out
the best and safest ways to implement these new solutions. [Witzel 2018]
Vehicles and systems
Micromobility includes a wide range of vehicles, but the most popular ones are e-scooters
and bikes (human- or pedal-assisted). Moreover, there are different working systems,
usually grouped into station-based and dockless systems. The first ones have specific
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
21
==PAGE:30==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 3
spots where bikes can be parked, and the second one defines a limited area, usually
the limit of the city where vehicles can move freely. It is very important to know their
differences in order to choose the most adequate for each situation.
The benefit for MaaS players of station-based micromobility is the predictability
and clarity around where the vehicles can be parked. Dockless of course bring
in more unpredictability about where they will be at given times and where they
can be parked. [B. Cohen 2020a]
Benefits and challenges
There are many benefits it can be obtained from micromobility, but there are three that
bright over the others according to Consulting 2020.
1. Environmental footprint. Urban air is improved by reducing the CO2 emmissions,
and therefore increasing the quallity of air and reducing climate change.
2. Get people out of their cars. Thanks of the improvement of connectivity towards
public transportation, people is more open to use multi-modal transport.
3. Efficient mobility. Convenient and flexible transportation help people moving to-
wards green mobility and MaaS.
As mentioned in section 3.1, one of the main challenges to achieving sustainable trans-
portation and hereby, quality of life, is to reduce pollution and congestion in cities. Accord-
ing to Consulting 2020, smart policies and infrastructures will not be enough to transform
European cities into car-free hubs, without noise and pollution. Rather, ”a fundamental
shift in mobility habits and behavior” would be needed. At this point is where bike sharing
and e-scooters play a role. By making alternative and public transit systems more acces-
sible and convenient, (...) can serve as a catalyst toward shared and low-carbon mobility.
[Consulting 2020]
”Shared mobility is part of the bigger plan of creating a livable, sustainable and
accessible city with places that are pleasant to stay in. MaaS and micromobility
are key in our plans,” say Eindhoven MaaS experts, Astrid Zwegers and Jan
Willem van der Pas. [Consulting 2020]
But these systems also faced challenges, which have a more or less impact depending
on the city and its culture.
• Regulations
Due to the fast growing path of this technology, there was a lack of regulations and
authorities have had to quickly create them.
local authorities are unavoidably going through a stage of trial and error,
where they experience that some regulatory approaches or specific rules
may work better than others.
Other cities have had conflicts with some companies which have followed the ap-
proach “better to beg forgiveness than ask permission”. This lead to the spread of
e-sooters and dockless bikes around the city without authorization to local officials.
Therefore, many cities have created severe regulations when not totally banned this
type of mobility. One example is San Francisco’s scooter war. [Zarif, Pankratz, and
Kelman 2019]
Hereby, while some are happy to include this new means into their mobility, others
are prohibiting the operation because of the impact they cause on the streets and
22
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 3
MSc Thesis
sidewalks. [Insigths 2019]
To unlock their potential, it’s vital that governments and cities implement
policies while addressing the challenges. That includes making clear reg-
ulations that foster responsible and sustainable behavior and enabling
access to micromobility infrastructure, such as parking and lanes. [Con-
sulting 2020]
Hence, regulations need to be flexible to embrace rapid changes and enable more
pro-active interventions. [Bidasca et al. 2020] Which will avoid overwhelming of local
governments when new services flood into a city, like it already happened with Uber,
Cabify, etc. and it is now happening with micromobility companies. [Zarif, Pankratz,
and Kelman 2019]
• City infrastructure
Cities are trying to come back to their origins, when with their infrastructure they
supported people’s well being and not motorized vehicles. But even now, many
cities still do not have specific parking spots, bike lanes or separate paths for the
safe use of micromobility devices. According to B. Cohen 2020b,
... we need to see dedicated pedestrian areas, dedicated non-motorized
micromobility lanes (e.g.
pedal-powered bikes, skateboards, etc) and
dedicated motorized micromobility lanes. If we really want to improve
safety of our cities and of e-scooter use, the best way to achieve this,
in my opinion, is reduce the availability of public infrastructure for private
cars and turn over that space to more people-friendly and environmentally
friendly infrastructure for movement.
Nowadays, due to the COVID pandemic, the lack of cars on the streets has shown
the benefits that green mobility can bring to the planet. Now is the time to take action
and make temporary cycling infrastructure permanent, plus add policies to maintain
the modal shift that we have observed back to cycling and walking. [Sutton 2020]
According to Tom Nutley, an expert in artificial intelligence of BICO AI,
It is in our hands to make the small changes to create a large ongoing
effect for the benefit of our planet. It is much less about size vs avail-
able space and more to do about repurposing, change of infrastructure,
sustainable option availability and knowledge. [Sutton 2020]
• Safety feeling
The feeling of safety comes together with the availability of proper infrastructures.
Available data has shown that users rather use sidewalks or bike lanes (when exis-
tent) than share the street with high-speed vehicles. [Zarif, Pankratz, and Kelman
2019]
some pedestrians, suddenly sharing space with motorized vehicles, have
understandable safety concerns. [Zarif, Pankratz, and Kelman 2019]
Moreover, as policy expert Emily Warren stated, dockless bikes and scooters that
users can conveniently drop off anywhere can create unkempt public spaces and
even safety issues. [Zarif, Pankratz, and Kelman 2019]
This problem is being approached in some places by painting on the streets of the
city some areas where dockless systems can be parked or implementing station-
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
23
==PAGE:32==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 3
based systems, which are not as flexible but, in the long term, with higher initial
investments can be as productive as a dockless system.
• Profitability
Micromobility systems have low profits when they start and, if they are small, usually
are subsidized by the local government. Therefore,
While some companies may fail along the way, the companies that do
survive will likely thrive in this multi-billion-dollar market, as they provide
urbanites with a viable solution to their transportation woes and offer a
greener alternative to cars. Covid-19 has accelerated the potential con-
solidation of the space, but also driven demand in a time where one-rider,
open-air transportation solutions are highly desirable. [Insigths 2019]
Differences are focus on the type of system. Station-based systems have a higher
implementation cost due to the cost of the station, but dockless have huge cost
because of the relocating and charging process. One solution that some compa-
nies have adopted for avoiding relocating, is flooding the market with bikes. [Zarif,
Pankratz, and Kelman 2019]
Companies that succeed, grow fast. For instance,
Bird hit 10 million scooter rides within 12 months of first appearing on
Southern California streets and sidewalks,6 while Lime users took 34 mil-
lion trips across the company’s platform of vehicles—including e-scooters,
electric and pedal-assist bikes, and carsharing—in that company’s first
year. [Zarif, Pankratz, and Kelman 2019]
Europe is one of the opportunity places some investors interested in micromobility
are looking at. It has dense populations and in the past decade, bike lanes have
increase exponentially. [Insigths 2019]
For a micromobility system grow fast, two aspects are necessary
1. Start in a conductive environment where users have already test this kind of
mobility solutions, and
2. Being economically profitable for the users (Although when they are private
operators, fares can be pretty expensive) .
It’s in many ways easier for companies to scale up micromobility assets
compared with car-based sharing solutions. While thousands of dollars
are often required to purchase a car, the current acquisition cost of an
electric scooter is about $400. [Granath 2020]
• Vandalism
This is the main problem of micromobility, the bike sharing system Velib in Paris is a
station based system and has suffered from theft or damage in 80% of their bikes.
[Granath 2020]
Many start-ups have been ejected from the bussiness due to theft, vandalism and
damage. Even though it is a strong hit to every company.
In order to solve this issue, companies are continuously changing their designs to
make it difficult for thieves removing wheels, batteries, etc.
24
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 3
MSc Thesis
• Equipment’s lifetime
The resilience of the different devices is an important aspect when designing these
systems. The longer they endure, the cheaper for the company.
Some important companies, like Bird ans Lime, have reported that their scooters
last around two months. [Granath 2020]
In an effort to increase their lifespan, Bird upgraded to a more durable
“Bird Zero” model in 2018, featuring solid-core tires. [Insigths 2019]
As mentioned before, companies are always looking at new prototypes, tweaking
shapes, sizes, and wheel arrangements for vehicles to serve different transportation
needs and comfort levels. (...) Ultimately, models that prove to be sustainable, more
durable, and safer for riders will likely win out. [Insigths 2019]
• Weather and geographic conditions
Rain, snow and wind can be tricky, if not dangerous when riding. The northern
countries of Europe usually have this weather conditions, but they are also used to
them, being countries with a strong bicycle culture. Even though, it is very typical to
see e-bikes to save geographic obstacles like hills.
Some micromobility companies offer to its users gloves and hats, but reality shows
that usually companies are forced to take off the street their devices. [Insigths 2019]
Regarding the contribution of micromobility in the transition to low-carbon cities, they do
contribute, but they still have room for improvement. Oliver Bruce, stated that
as durability of the scooter hardware increases, coupled with continually im-
proving efficiency of their batteries we are likely to see even further improve-
ments in e-scooter’s contribution to lower carbon cities. [B. Cohen 2020b]
Together, investment toward micromobility infrastructure, effective policies, in-
novation and responsible business practices can help cities reach their climate
goals, reclaim space for citizens and improve their quality of life. [Consulting
2020]
According to Zarif, Pankratz, and Kelman 2019, the way we travel today is changing fast.
MaaS is evolving towards individual mobility and is creating a new ecosystem. We are
just at the beginning, and we should expect to see new and diverse designs in a near
future (shape, size and capability), together with the development of up-to-date informa-
tion technology. Moreover, it is important in this process to consider aspects like unifying
platforms, since it has been proved that people hates to download new apps [B. Cohen
2020a].
3.3
Bike Sharing System. Guidelines for designing and
implementing
Bike Sharing Systems are one type of Micromobility that is being implemented all around
the world. However, planning a BSS is not easy, many variables must be taken into
account.
... the city’s density, topography, and weather; its commitment to investing in
infrastructure; and its political will to support active transportation, for example.
[A. Cohen et al. 2018]
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
25
==PAGE:34==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 3
Governments with long-term plans for cycling should take into account the BS as an op-
portunity to raise the number of cyclists. Bikeshare accelerates the implementation of
infrastructure and it is usually employed as a tool to reduce vehicle trips.
For example, in California, Santa Monica adopted a Bike Action Plan in 2011,
which designated bikeshare as a high priority project toward the city’s goal to
reduce vehicle trips. [A. Cohen et al. 2018]
There are many steps when planning and implementing a Bike Sharing System. Accord-
ing to the Institute of Transportation and Development Policy, seven phases are needed
with their respective processes. All guidelines are going to be explained but emphasizing
those points that are going to be developed throughout the thesis. Hereby, points from
one to three will be further explained than others.
1. Getting started First of all, there is a need of political will. This means that without
interest on the system it is very difficult to move along and arrive to the implemen-
tation phase. Hence, benefits of BSS must be shown and studied for each specific
location. Moreover, the system must be equitable and accessible to everyone. For
example, allowing different methods of payment for including those without a bank
account (e.g. exchange students). However, equity can lead to higher cost for the
operator.
The purpose of bikeshare cannot be forgotten at any step, which is
enabling any user to pick up a bike in one place and return it to another,
removing the complications of having to own or maintain a personal bike,
yet still providing a convenient, environmentally-friendly mode for short
trips. [A. Cohen et al. 2018]
2. Goal Setting and Initial planning Four steps must be taken into account on this
phase.
• Identify goals of BS, for instance reduce CO2 emissions, improve mobility,
solve first/last mile issue, generate employment, etc.
• A Request for Expression of Interest (RFEI)
• Examine feasibility and choose a system type.
The feasibility study includes from basic system metrics (defining service area:
number of bikes, stations and docks; User types: Casual, per trip and long-
term; define system size and market penetration with parameters: bikes per
1000 residents(10-30), bike density, station density (10-16 per km2), docks
per bike(2-2.5), trips per bike per day(4-8)...) to evaluate potential investment
and revenue resources. It is also recommended to create a contracting model.
Regarding the system type, there are three types:
– Station-based: which require to pick up and return bikes to specific points.
– Dockless: Does not need specific point to be locked, it is usually unlocked
by an app using a QR or a code. It has an operational area predefined
where bikes can be used. Two sub-types can be found:
(a) Lock-to: bikes must be locked to a fixed object.
(b) Wheel lock: bikes are self locked by a locker usually located on the
back wheel.
26
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 3
MSc Thesis
– Hybrid: Is a mixed system that allow users to decide whether locate a bike
on a station or leave it within geofenced hubs. Different choices for users
are:
(a) Pick up and return a bike to a station (station-based model)
(b) Pick up on a station and lock it anywhere
(c) Pick up anywhere and return it to a station
(d) Pick up and return from and to anywhere (Dockless model)
All systems have their strengths and weaknesses.
From the point of view
of cities, station-based have high capital and operating costs but are more
longevity and have better public space management. On the other hand, dock-
less have lower capital costs but has a big public space impact and inconsistent
availability. Looking into the user’s perspective, station-based are more afford-
able and reliable while being less accessible and it has the risk of not availability
of bike or docks. regarding dockless systems, it is more flexible and convenient
but it is more expensive and sometimes not accessible depending on the fleet’s
size. Hybrid systems have the strengths from both types, while still having part
of the weaknesses: public space impacts, inconsistent availability, additional
usage fees, and a new one, user confusion. The latter is because the system
has too many possibilities and sometimes users have not clear where cannot
end their trip and end up paying some extra usage fees.
All these systems can be implemented with human- or electric-powered bikes
changing some of the characteristics like the type of stations. There are two
types of electric powered bikes, throttle (works like a motorbike) or pedal as-
sisted (the electric motor helps when pedaling, having three options: low, medium
and high assistance, being the latter for cycling faster without sweating and the
first for workout). [Pete 2013]
• Draft financial planning estimates Once the size of the system and the typol-
ogy are chosen, a rough financial analysis can be obtained. The analysis aims
to assess if the system is economically sustainable. Usually includes an esti-
mated capital outlay, the projected revenue and operational costs.
The draft has to consider different aspects depending on whether the operator
is private, or it is public (or has public-funded).
– Public funded:
Capital and Operating costs per Bike:
For station-based systems, an estimation of capital costs and op-
erating costs can be calculated by multiplying the number of bikes,
docks, and stations against an average cost for each type of as-
set. Capital and operating costs are a function of system technol-
ogy and are straightforward to determine, but revenue depends on
usage levels and can only be fully estimated in the infrastructure
planning stage. Usually the revenue scenarios are based on ex-
pectations of demand using both a conservative estimate (...) and
an optimistic scenario (...). [A. Cohen et al. 2018]
Capital
costs =
Total
cost
of
the
system
Total
number
of
bikes
in
the
system
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
27
==PAGE:36==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 3
Operating costs vary depending on the system and the city. Estimates
range them between 900 −3, 500$ annually per bike.
CAPITAL COSTS
OPERATIONAL COSTS
Bikes
Rebalancing
Stations
Maintenance and rebalancing staff
Rebalancing vehicles/equipment
Call center staff
Control center
IT system fees ans servicing
Table 3.1: Aspects considered in capital and operational costs. [A. Cohen et al. 2018]
Operating costs per Trip:
The cost-per-bike estimate may be useful in the planning stage to
size the system financially, but to analyze system performance af-
ter the system launches, a per-bike analysis is not recommended
because bike fleet size varies from day to day. Some have used
the per-dock metric for analyzing annual operating costs as a more
stable, and therefore, more comparable basis. However, this guide
recommends evaluating the cost efficiency of a system after it opens
by looking at operating costs per trip. [A. Cohen et al. 2018]
Estimating revenue:
Incomes can be estimated through three parameters: uptake rate, farebox
recovery and trips by type of user. The first parameter aims to calculate
revenue by multiplying the estimated demand and the proposed revenue
structure. There are three scenarios: conservative, middle and optimistic
(3%, 6% and 9% of population respectively) For instance, Mexico uses
10% due to the high commuters in the area. This parameter is used to
estimate the demand of the system.
The farebox is used to calculate the financial health of the system which is
meassured by the percentage of operating costs that are covered by mem-
bership, security deposit and user fees.[A. Cohen et al. 2018].Measuring if
it is self-sustaining or other sources like advertising will be needed to cover
these costs.
Finally, the latter parameter is defining the number of casual or perma-
nent users. This is because normally casual users are charged with higher
fares. Generally, the percentage of casuals declines as the system grows
and long-term members increase.
– Privately funded:
Both capital costs and revenues are obtained in the same way as for public-
funded, but for operational costs some extras may be included, as annual
permits fee, permit review fee, administrative fee, performance bond, non-
compliance fee and In-lieu fee.
3. System planning and design
This section has differences depending on the type of system. Station-based will be
focused on siting and designing stations, while dockless will draft the requirements
28
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 3
MSc Thesis
for managing operations by private companies. A common aspect to both systems
will be the identification of potential infrastructure improvements and bike models.
When implementing a BSS, having a proper cycling infrastructure is important but
not absolutely necessary. Nevertheless,
pairing the construction of new bike lanes with the opening of a bikeshare
system can add to public acceptance and improve safety for users of the
new system, as well as personal bike riders. (...)
Additionally, data generated from bikeshare trips can provide evidence of
the impact of bicycle network improvements, whereas it can be difficult to
gather this data from private bike users. [A. Cohen et al. 2018]
IT is very important in BSS because it is the link between all components. Therefore,
it has to support the front end which includes:
• Registration of new users,
• payment and subscriptions,
• general information about the system and customer data management,
• website portal or apps,
• station and bike location monitoring,
• rebalancing of bikes,
• defect and maintenance issues,
• biling,
• customer data, and
• use of card technology for permanent users to unlock faster.
But it also has to serve casual users and tourists. Hence sometimes bikes are
implemented with keypads.
Regarding the type of bikes, some characteristics are valuable when designing.
Normally there is only one size and style of bike, but the seat must be adjustable
without allowing to remove it (to avoid vandalism). It is recommended to use a step
through frame with long seat post because it adjusts to a wide range of height and
allow riders to wear skirts or dresses. Moreover, bikes must be robust because its
greater use in comparison with personal bikes. It is recommended to have bikes
with an average life-span from 3 to 5 years. Another characteristic is their low-
maintenance, but being careful of not loosing ride quality. The docking system must
be well designed to be easily lock and unlock to discourage theft. At the same time,
the bike must be equipped with safety components like reflectors, bells, brakes and
lights. Each bike must have an identification code and include storage (front basket
or similar).
Bikes maintenance is an important factor, being the tires, brakes, drivetrains and
lightning the most typical issues.
Modern bikeshare systems are typically based on a standardized bicy-
cle with specially designed or proprietary components built solely for the
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
29
==PAGE:38==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 3
system. This ensures durability and security so that the parts cannot be
easily stolen and/or resold. [A. Cohen et al. 2018]
(a) Traditional.
(b) Pedal-assisted.
Figure 3.2: Traditional bikeshare bikes. [Divvy n.d.]
(a) Lock-to.[Sawers 2018]
(b) Wheel lock.[Lime n.d.]
Figure 3.3: Dockless bikeshare bikes.
Nowadays some dockless systems are implementing stations for charging e-bikes,
like JUMP in figure 3.3a.
4. Encouraging Ridership through community engagement
Once phase 3 is finished and the design is clear, a marketing strategy needs to be
developed.
A bikeshare system needs a clear, consistent identity—a strong brand—
that presents a professional, modern image and distinguishes it from other
urban transport options.
Ridership must be encouraged through a strategic combination of brand-
ing, marketing and education campaigns, community engagement, and
reducing barriers to entry. [A. Cohen et al. 2018]
5. System operations
Bikeshare systems can be public, private or a combination of both. Moreover, it can
have one or multiple operators as it can be observed in Appendix A, table A.1.
30
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 3
MSc Thesis
This phase must focus on defining an organizational structure for system operations,
expectations for quality of service delivery and enforcement of regulations.
Different responsibilities must be assigned in the organizational structure phase.
The implementing agency will be in charge of supervising the planning, implemen-
tation and operations of the system. The operators, public or private, is responsible
of planning, expanding the system and day-to-day operations like rebalancing. It
is also important to define the ownership of the asset. There are different ways of
doing it, but usually the operator owns, supplies and operates the infrastructure of
the BSS and the city provides the space needed (in case of station-based systems)
[A. Cohen et al. 2018]
Regarding the contracting structure, it will depend on the systems procurement. For
publicly procured, more than one contract can be done for achieving all components.
Nevertheless, for privately procured is the operator who must provide all the equip-
ment. Systems can be Public-Private Partnership (PPP) or Privately-Operated. The
latter has three differences, publicly owned and operated, publicly owned and pri-
vately operated, and privately owned and operated.
Finally, the quality of service must be defined and mechanisms for enforcement
should be established. Moreover, it is important the exchange of information be-
tween operator and city government in order to improve public transportation and
infrastructure.
Contracts and permits with bikeshare operators should require them to
share real-time data with the city (...) that will better inform system-level
operation, infrastructure, and integration with public transit. [A. Cohen et
al. 2018]
6. Financial model
A complete financial model will include expenses and incomes. Expenses are gen-
erally capital and operational costs and revenues are from users payments, govern-
ment fundings or sponsorships.
Capital costs:
• Bycicles: in station-based systems are a small part of the capital cost compared
with stations. Cost can range from 100 −2, 000$ depending on its technical
specifications. Portland’s BIKETOWN bikes cost around 1, 500$ because of its
solar-powred LCD screen, automatic lights and chainless shaft.[A. Cohen et al.
2018] In dockless systems bikes are the major component of the capital cost.
• Stations: are the main cost for station-based systems, non-existing in dockless.
It ranges from 40, 000 −50, 000$
• Software:
...software can be purchased outright, developed, or licensed, and
each option will have a different impact on the capital costs and the
longer-term operational costs. Developing software is the most expen-
sive option (...). Buying (...) is initially more expensive, it is a one-time
cost, with perhaps an annual service cost. (...) Licensing software can
be a good initial solution to help offset capital costs, but can be a cost
burden on the system down the line.
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
31
==PAGE:40==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 3
• Control center, Depot, Maintenance and redistribution units:
The control center is where the central management of the bikeshare
system is housed, the depot is where bikes are held while being ser-
viced or stored, and the mobile maintenance unit is the unit responsible
for responding to requests for repairs.
Many cities have depots and maintenance areas that can be beneficial for the
system and help reducing costs. However, depots must be secure to avoid
loosing equipment. When repositioning, it is important to find a non-emission
vehicle to reduce CO2 emmissions of the system. Other cost to consider is the
flatbed trucks or trailers behind vans, which can be pretty expensive.
Operating costs:
• Rebalancing: Is by far the most expensive component of operational costs.
...is broadly defined as the relocating of bicycles from stations that are
near or at capacity to stations that are close to empty. Successful re-
balancing is critical to the viability of the system from the customer’s
perspective, and is one of the greatest logistical challenges of operat-
ing a bikeshare system. Rebalancing can account for anywhere from
30% to over 50% of operating costs. If an operator has an adequate
IT system, rebalancing becomes predictive, and is better thought of as
pre-distribution—the movement of bicycles to areas where users will
need them and away from areas where users will be dropping them
off. [A. Cohen et al. 2018]
• Staffing: Cost depend on local regulations and employment cost of the city.
Staff need to include administration, management, rebalancing, mechanical
and customer service.
• Maintenance: Together with rebalancing is one of the most expensive parts of
operational costs. It is usually repairing docks, removing graffiti, fixing punc-
tures, chains and brakes.
Maintenance is an important aspect to achieve high levels of safety, reliability
and image.
• Marketing is another initial cost that has to be taken into account. It can be
printed posters or more elaborated campaigns in media.
• Insurance: It is really important to have a good insurance that covers all security
aspects as well as theft.
Some operators estimate a 10% annual theft rate, and integrate the
costs of replacement bikes into their financial models. [A. Cohen et al.
2018]
Revenues: User fees are the stable part of revenues, even though usually are not
enough for having a financial self-sustaining system. In big cities like Chicago, can
compensate up to 80% of operational costs, but in small cities like Colorado, the
farebox can recover just up to 35% of costs. Hence this gap must be covered with
other income sources.
32
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 3
MSc Thesis
• Government funding:
Government funding can be used to cover capital costs—which means
the government owns the assets—and is sometimes used for operat-
ing costs. Not unlike many public transportation systems, bikeshare
systems often have difficulty covering operating expenses from mem-
bership and usage fees alone. Because of this, subsidies may be
necessary to cover operational expenses and can come in the form of
earmarked funds for sustainable development, innovative initiatives,
or even specifically for bikeshare. [A. Cohen et al. 2018]
• Sponsorship: This method has benefits and drawbacks. While it can cover
capital, operational or both costs, it can limitate the advertising potential. More-
over, if the entity has image problems it can affect the bikesharing image as
well. All these aspects must be assessed in a long-term perspective before
closing a deal.
• The system can also obtain private investment or loan financing.
• Advertising: This has two types, outdoor or on bike asset advertising. There
is an study from JCDecaux that link general outdoor advertising with annual
revenues of 60€ million.
7. Implementation
Implementation can be with a pilot period or a soft launch. Which includes user
feedback, test run and media coverage. Once the system is implemented is very
important to analyze success and the possibility of the system expansion. Parame-
ters that can measure its performance are:
• Reduction in CO2 emissions
• Improvement of air quality
• Time and cost savings
• Increase in local economy
• Reduce road fatalities
• Accessibility, meaning the location of the asset (stations or dockless bikes)
Planning for an unknown future rests on the ability to be flexible and respon-
sive to unforeseen developments and having mechanisms in place to measure
their impact on existing policies and procedures. The bikeshare landscape is
constantly changing; now, cities have the opportunity to capitalize on these
new applications of technology to facilitate a more sustainable transportation
network. [A. Cohen et al. 2018]
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
33
==PAGE:42==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 3
Figure 3.1: ITDP Micromobility infographic. [ITDP n.d.]
34
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:43==
4
Problem description
Nowadays time is precious and for this reason, people always try to reduce the time of
their tasks in order to have more time for themselves. But normally, the most common
way of winning some time is in your daily commutes.
This event also happens at the university. Students and professors cannot reduce the
length of the lectures, neither their schedule. Thus, the only way for having more time
at lunch or arriving soon at home is to commute faster. The problem is that DTU Lyngby
campus is pretty big, connectivity between buildings is not very good and not everybody
has a bike to move around. Hence, you can spend between 20 and 40 minutes walking
to reach your destination.
In 2025, with the arrival of the light rail and the driverless bus, this problem may be palliated
when commuting from home to DTU campus, or vice versa. And also for those students
with the Ungdomskort, which is a monthly card for students that gives access to public
transport with no need of checking in/out. Nevertheless, the rest of the population may
need to commute inside the campus and want to do it in a sustainable but economically
accessible manner.
On the other hand, there is a connectivity issue with Lyngby’s town. Nowadays, after
18:00 the frequency plummets, and from 00:30 at night to 06:00 in the morning, there is no
connection. The light rail may reduce evening connectivity problems, but not completely
eliminated if bus 300S frequency is reduced [Andersen, Landex, and Nielsen 2006]. And
night connection will continue nonexistent even on weekends (Figure C.1).
The lack of connection during the last time zone commented is considered a problem
because DTU’s library is open 24h, but students that have a group delivery or just want to
study until late, can end up walking 35 minutes to Lyngby station if they stay because of
the lack of public transport, what does not make sense. Moreover, on weekends, there are
many night events that finish later than 00:30 (last public transport service) and therefore,
there is no way home if you need public transport.
These problems are for people living in Lyngby-Taarbæk municipality or in municipalities
below. Those living through the 150S bus route have service every hour at night, and
every 10 to 20 minutes during the day. Considering that the city of knowledge is looking
to create a university friendly town [Apli 2019], and taking into account the connectivity
problems already commented, a solution is needed. Moreover, increasing mobility could
lead to more housing opportunities around DTU.
The objective of this thesis is to reduce travel time by improving the connections within the
campus and with Lyngby St., as well as reduce the use of motorized vehicles by improving
commute options. To do so, it is going to be designed a bike sharing system and it will
be analyzed its feasibility from a sustainable point of view. To guide this project, some
research questions have been presented that will be studied during the thesis. During the
thesis, some assumptions will be taken and the limitations of the project will be presented.
4.1
Research questions
How could connectivity be improved by implementing new infrastructure?
Nowadays, many people need to take a private vehicle to get to their job place because
there is no efficient public transportation route they can take. This is the already mentioned
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
35
==PAGE:44==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 4
first/last mile problem of today’s public transportation. While MaaS is really efficient to
move large amounts of passengers, still needs to solve this connectivity issue.
If people lack a convenient, affordable way to get on a bus or train, they are far
more likely to opt for a personal vehicle, (...) Or opt to not travel, forgoing job
opportunities, access to healthy food, preventative medical care, and more.
[Zarif, Pankratz, and Kelman 2019]
Hence, a solution to these “transit deserts” must be found. Micromobility has been pre-
sented as the best option to solve this situation. However, no transportation system can
succeed without the proper infrastructure that transmits safety to its users. For instance,
a bus driving on a dirt road is not as appealing as one on a paved road. The same hap-
pens with bicycles and e-scooters, without an appropriate network they cannot reach its
maximum efficiency, or do not succeed at all.
Connectivity is improved by both infrastructure and systems, being the infrastructure the
key aspect. Therefore, this two aspects are going to be commented and assessed through
the thesis. The first one as bike lanes, roads and tracks, and the second one as buses,
trains and bicycle systems.
Is the actual demand enough for being a feasible solution?
Every system needs to have revenues to be a good business. Hence, the first aspect that
can show us whether is profitable or not, is the demand.
However, other aspects interfere. Aspects like social and environmental benefits. This
is the reason why, even if the demand obtained in this project is not enough for being a
feasible solution, a sustainability evaluation will be carried out to have a complete overview
of the benefits of the solution.
The demand has been obtained through a survey, where many questions have been
asked, as shown in Appendix E. The structure is explained in section 5.1, and the evalu-
ation has been carried out in chapter 7 and through the indicators in chapter 9.
How this network would improve the interaction between users and buildings?
The interaction user-building is referred to the ability of the user to change the indoor
climate to its preferences. More fresh air, different levels of lightning, shadow, etc. How-
ever, these aspects may lead to a high energy demand and shortened span-life of the
equipment.
Current building interaction knowledge is facilitated through user-building in-
terfaces. Enabling user control has been shown to have a positive impact on
overall user satisfaction with a building’s interior. (...)
However, increased user control of building systems often result in poor overall
building performance... [Kalvelage and Dorneich 2014]
At DTU, there are plenty of different buildings with different indoor environments. When
looking for a fresh area to study, canteens outside rush hours can be a perfect place,
on the contrary, the library in 101 can fit perfectly for people hunting warm places. On
the other hand, if what the user is looking for is a quiet place surrounded by nature and
protected from the weather, building 324 would fulfill these requirements (Figure 4.1). The
objective of these examples is to show that when the user-building interaction cannot be
fully satisfactory, people try to find other locations where they feel comfortable for studying
or meeting. At DTU, nowadays there is already a wide range of opportunities to have a
propitious interaction, and the spaces and buildings will increase in number in the following
years. But the large distances between buildings make it difficult the decision of change
36
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 4
MSc Thesis
even when productiveness is dropping. This is because it is not the same moving in 5
minutes than in 15.
(a) Glashus.
(b) Atrium.
(c) Studiepladser.
Figure 4.1: Building 324 on DTU campus. ”The glass building” [P. Jørgensen n.d.].
Therefore, through this project, the direct interaction user-building is not treated, but it is
given a solution for those users that want to change the conditions where they are and
continue with their tasks, by moving to other buildings in an easy and quick manner.
4.2
Assumptions
Some assumptions have been needed to progress with the project, and are enumerated
below.
• It is assumed that the municipality will share the space needed for the implementa-
tion of the stations.
• Because of the high number of bike sharing systems in Copenhagen it is assumed
that the regulations are favourable.
• It is considered that DTU will build the bike lanes proposed in its Campus Plan and
will share some parking space for the system.
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
37
==PAGE:46==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 4
• It is assumed that people would not use the light rail as a shortcut on campus unless
strictly necessary, due to the generally high cost of the public transportation.
• Calculus comparing time on foot or by bike always include 5 minutes extra for unlock
and lock the bike. Hence it is assumed everybody is able to do this process in that
period of time.
• Commutes are taken into account when the time it takes by bike is shorter than on
foot. If they are equal, commutes are reduced 50%.
4.3
Limitations
• Prices are indicatives and can variate.
• Answers from the survey are considered reliable and a proper representation of real
commutes on campus. Even tough, up to 5% of error can be assumed.
• The evaluation of some indicators is open to high levels of subjectivity. The solution
given has been to gather different evaluations from different people and obtain the
average value.
• The mathematical model does not take into account distances between stations
when deciding which demand will remain unattended.
4.4
Base Scenario
Scenario zero is the common starting point for all scenarios. It is the current situation of
Lyngby campus but considering some of the near future implementations contemplated
on Campus Plan 2019-2023 [Universitet 2019c].
The description of the sectors and their main activities will be described first, followed by
the current bike lanes and the ones planned, together with the public transportation and
the new arrivals. After, how this aspects will affect the traffic of motorized vehicles will
be commented. And finally, new sidewalks and other facilities like parking for bikes or
markets will be implemented as stated on Universitet 2019c.
The campus, as mentioned in section 2.1, is divided into 4 sectors. Each sector has many
buildings with different functions, from teaching to research and even office space for
administrative and maintenance staff. And each building number starts with the number
of the sector (1, 2, 3 or 4), continuing with two more numbers. For example, the library
is in building 101, which means that is in sector 1 and the building has the number 01.
Below there is a brief explanation of each sector and its activities.
• Sector 1: It is located in the north-east of the campus. It has one building lab (119)
and other for researchers and educators offices (118). There are two designated to
lectures (116 & 127), and finally one of the biggest buildings on campus, building
101. This building has divided its functions into 4, administrative offices, library,
sport hall and canteen and cafeteria.
Therefore, this sector can be divided into 3 sub-sectors depending on the purpose:
– Research and offices.
– Students oriented.
– General facilities.
38
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 4
MSc Thesis
Being the third one with general facilities, building 101, the most visited in the whole
campus.
• Sector 2: Is on the north-west separated from sector one by a parking lot. Here, in
building 202, is located the National Food Institute. This sector has many buildings
designated to lectures, like 210, 208 and 204. And some for offices like 207.
This sector has one of DTU’s accommodation, located on Nordvej. Moreover it has
some open sport facilities like the Rugby club.
• Sector 3: This sector is pretty diverse regarding its functionalities. There are some
important hubs for research in buildings 373A, 381 and 343 called DTU Skylab, DTU
Science Park and Fotonik respectively. And the biggest buildings for lectures are
303, 340, 341 and 358 among others. Building 358 is shared with offices together
with 328 and 324.
Moreover, there are three accommodations: William Demant Kollegiet, Campus
Village and Hempel Kollegiet.
• Sector 4: Finally, sector 4 is located in the south-est, in front of sector 3 and di-
vided by a parking lot, as happens between sectors 1 and 2. This sector has two
accommodations: Villum Kann Rasmussen Kollegiet and Kampsax Kollegiet.
Offices for educators are in buildings 426 to 423. Lectures are given in buildings
from 421 to 413. And Campus service is located in building 402. This sector also
has a supermarket, Netto, between the two accommodations.
Regarding the bike lanes on campus, nowadays there are located just in the surroundings
and in street Anker Engelunds Vej, crossing the campus from east to west, as it can be
observed in figure D.1. But in the following years more bike lanes will be included. Actually
a whole redistribution of the campus plan will be done. [Universitet 2019c]
The street crossing from north to south (Nils Koppels Allé and Knuth-Winterfeldts Allé)
will be a two-way cycle path with also wide areas for pedestrians. Cycle lanes will be
added together with road traffic on streets Akademivej and Kollegiebakken, and the one
on Nordvej will be completed (Figure D.2). Also a bike path has been projected by the mu-
nicipality of Lyngby-Taarbæk via the Sustainability Fund, and will go from DTU to Lyngby
St. This lane will have 2.3km and it is scheduled to be finished by September 2020.[C. V.
Jørgensen 2020]
Moreover, parking for bikes will be established and distributed as shown in Figure D.3.
Bicycle parking options are established, which relate to three levels on cam-
pus: the campus level, at the squares and at the local level. The three levels
cover different needs. The solutions must signal that DTU appreciates that
many people choose the bicycle as their daily means of transport. [Universitet
2019c]
On the other hand, transverse paths will be designed for pedestrians and bicycles, having
the pedestrians the preference in these areas. (Figure 4.2)
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
39
==PAGE:48==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 4
Figure 4.2: Transverse paths for pedestrians and cyclists on campus.
Regarding the redistribution of the traffic, many car parking buildings will be created in
the surroundings of the campus in order to avoid traffic inside (Figure D.6). In addition,
the access to those parking lots that will still be located inside, vehicles will have only one
access, as shown in figure D.5, depending on which parking are they going. For instance,
for going to the parking lot located between sectors 3 and 4, streets Anker Engelunds Vej
or Akademikvej will be the ones used to get into Kollegiebakken and arrive to Vagn Aa.
Jeppesens Vej which will be the only access to that parking lot. The same will happen
between sectors 1 and 2, but having access from two streets: Nordvej and Lundtoftevej.
Markets, hubs and bridges will be implemented to create more life on campus. These
spaces are located around campus as shown in figure 4.3b. The most representative one
will be Origo, between buildings 101 ans 202, being the main entrance of DTU (figure
4.3a).
(a) Origo.
(b) Market and gathering ar-
eas.
Figure 4.3: Projected markets and gathering areas on campus.
This new distribution is due to the arrival of the light rail and the desire of having a compact,
40
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 4
MSc Thesis
sustainable and friendly campus, seeing the arrival of the light rail as an advantage and
integrating it on campus life.
Figure 4.4: Sketch of light rail in Anker Engelunds Vej. [GPA n.d.]
In conclusion, scenario zero in this project is considering the arrival of the light rail and
all changes that this will lead. Considering that buses from public transport will remain
the same as nowadays, even if some will be rescheduled or eliminated. This is because
there is a lack of information regarding which ones will be actually removed.
Location of new squares as gathering areas, bike paths and new bicycle and car parking
buildings will be taken into account when designing the bike sharing system. So it will the
new pedestrian and bicycle bridges, the electric network and the Service, Operation and
Rescue network, in case of need establishing bicycle stations.
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
41
==PAGE:50==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 4
42
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:51==
5
Methodology
This chapter is focused on explaining the process followed to elaborate the project, from
data collection to the sustainability assessment. The objective is to have an overview of
the process that has been followed and the research methods.
5.1
Data collection
For the feasibility assessment of a bike-sharing system, lots of different data are needed:
The number of commuters, the percentage of people interested, the demand profile, the
conditions for cycling, current modal split, existing transit, bicycle and pedestrian net-
works, and existing major attractions that will draw people to the area. [Gauthier et al.
2013]. To achieve all of them at once, the realization of a survey was chosen as a method-
ology, together with a deep research of the Campus Plan Strategy.
On the other hand, to evaluate the indicators, data collection is needed. This type of
process has been different. It is based on articles, books, and web pages obtained through
deep online research. Every document that has been used to assess or explain something
of this project, it is mentioned in the bibliography (Chapter 12).
Survey
The survey has been developed with Google Forms. And was addressed to the whole
DTU’s population (DTU’s professors, staff, and students) from both Ballerup and Lyngby
campus. It is structured with different types of questions: multi-choice, drop-down, check-
boxes, short answer, paragraph, time, linear scale, and tick box grid, as it can be observed
in Appendix E. Being the multiple-choice and drop-down type the most frequent ones.
The information gathered is organized in sections. First of all, there is a section that
obtains general data to generate a profile of the surveyed. This includes from aspects
like age and gender to the distance they live from campus.
The second section is related to their interest in the bike sharing system. Here, after an
explanation of the characteristics of the system, respondents are asked regarding the
different fares and prices they would be interested in.
The third section is divided into two. The first one referring to their daily commutes, which
have been asked by providing a tick box grid where they had to check the boxes that
were representing their schedule. For profiles working or studying on Lyngby campus,
a mapping of DTU with different sub-sectors was presented to group their answers and
appeal to their memory (Figure 5.2), since it is easy to remember the location than the
number of the building. And the second one was related to their hobbies in their leisure
time. This question was focused on understanding the need of a bike network in the whole
municipality of Lyngby.
Depending on their profile, questions were changing in order to get significant information
and make it as short as possible for the respondents. The different paths that can be
followed are presented on Appendix E, section E.1.
To obtain the maximum number of answers, different broadcasting methodologies were
used. The main one was WhatsApp, the link was shared in different groups and asked
to be shared with their colleagues. Facebook groups were also used to broadcast the
survey, as well as the internal messaging tool of DTU inside. A massive diffusion through
e-mail was done to reach professors and DTU’s staff. And finally, an on-site diffusion was
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
43
==PAGE:52==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 5
planned on both campuses, Ballerup and Lyngby, but due to the coronavirus lockdown,
the latter method was impossible to perform.
The survey was opened for 43 days (almost one month and a half), and the curve of
answers was continuously followed. Whenever the tendency of the curve was getting flat,
more broadcasting was done, finally achieving 307 answers. (Figure 5.1)
Figure 5.1: Progression over time of survey responses.
44
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 5
MSc Thesis
Figure 5.2: DTU’s Lyngby campus divided into sub-sectors for the realization of the survey.
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
45
==PAGE:54==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 5
5.2
Data processing
Firstly, rough data obtained in the survey has been treated and transformed into the for-
mat needed for the mathematical model. The information was gathered in data sets that
were divided with commas and square brackets. This data represents the commuting on
campus and the transformation process has been carried out using the Microsoft Excel
tool. Moreover, for the evaluation of the indicators, this tool has been employed to analyze
the data obtained in the survey.
For processing the data sets and implementing the mathematical model, an optimization
program is needed. In this project, IBM CPLEX Optimization Studio has been the tool
chosen for that purpose.
Finally, to better understand the scenarios and the results obtained, some maps have
been created with the ArcGIS Desktop tool.
5.3
Design
Phases one to three explained in section 3.3 are the reference to this design. However,
the process will not be strictly followed.
The first step to design the bike sharing system will be the decision of the typology, which
will be based on the characteristics of the area. This is going to be explained and devel-
oped in section 8.1.
Secondly, the design of the bike sharing system will be based on the results of the math-
ematical model (section 8.2). The outputs will be the number of bikes, number of ports
needed at each node and amount of demand unmet. With these data some parame-
ters like bikes per 1,000 inhabitants and trips per bike will be obtained to understand the
market penetration and the infrastructure usage. (See figure 5.3)
Once the number of bikes and the minimum number of bike racks at each node is known,
the calculus of how many stations are needed and its distribution over the sub-sectors
will be done (section 8.3). Together with a financial estimation (section 8.4) that will be
obtained with indicative values obtained from the bibliography consulted in section 3.3.
Finally, a sustainability assessment will be carried out to evaluate which of the three pro-
posed scenarios is the most feasible from a social, environmental and economic per-
spective. These indicators will be based on results from the different phases mentioned
above.
46
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 5
MSc Thesis
Figure 5.3: System performance based on trips per bike and trips per 1,000 residents.
[Gauthier et al. 2013]
5.4
Sustainability assessment
DTU has a sustainability policy that aims to create ”functional, safe, and inspiring settings
for good study and working life on its campuses”. Part of this policy is focused on mobility
and strives for supporting green mobility and safe, accessible, and healthy infrastructure.
[Munck 2019]
Therefore, the feasibility assessment of this project is made through a sustainability as-
sessment, which according to Sala, Ciuffo, and Nijkamp 2015 is defined as follows.
Sustainability assessment (SA) is a complex appraisal method. It is conducted
for supporting decision-making and policy in a broad environmental, economic
and social context, and transcends a purely technical/scientific evaluation.
The evaluation will be carried out through indicators that will be evaluated in a qualitative
and/or quantitative manner.
5.4.1
Framework
The indicator framework is needed to properly define the analysis criterion and ensure
that the preset objectives of the project will be reached.
In order to achieve an equitable evaluation, three indicators will be chosen for each pillar.
And those indicators will be assessed by two or three sub-indicators. The process followed
to obtain the indicator set can be explained in a few steps. These steps consider domain-
based and goal-based framework methods presented by Masnavi 2007. And consists of
two stages for the definition process, theory level (steps 1 to 5) and research level (steps
6 to 7).
1. Background research.
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
47
==PAGE:56==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 5
2. Benefits and disadvantages of a BSS from all three points of view (Social, environ-
mental and economic).
3. Brainstorming.
4. Selection of the most adequate sub-indicators.
5. Group them into indicator sets.
6. Data collection.
7. Selection of the ones that are measurable either in a qualitative and/or a quantitative
manner.
With a deeper analysis of domain-based and goal-based framework, it can be noticed
that goals are the qualitative terms, while the indicators are the quantitative terms of the
analysis. Using both methodologies, an evaluation with appropriate links between goals
and indicators can be provided.
5.4.2
Scale assessment
To evaluate the indicators it is necessary to create a normalized scale in order to have
a clear criterion when assessing. In this project, a scale ranging from -3 to 3 has been
defined. The score ranges from worse outcome possible to the best one. Having a zero
value for those scenarios where the indicator does not affect in the current situation.
• -3: the change applied will greatly worsen the current situation.
• -2: the change applied will worsen the current situation
• -1: the change applied will slightly worsen the current situation
• 0: the change applied will not change the current situation
• 1: the change applied will slightly improve the current situation
• 2: the change applied will improve the current situation
• 3: the change applied will greatly improve the current situation
48
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:57==
6
Scenarios
Deciding the scope of the project is really important. Designing for a big area could be
pretty expensive and do not give the benefits you could expect from the system. On
the other hand, being too cautious could unnecessarily reduce revenue. For this reason,
is important to assess more than one scenario using the same indicators and grading
system.
Throughout this chapter, three scenarios are presented, with their limitations, novelties
and theoretical advantages.
6.1
Scenario 1
This scenario is the most basic one. Aims not to be ambitious and to focus on solving
the main problem of connectivity between buildings on campus and with Lyngby station.
Therefore, the area of influence in this scenario will be DTU Lyngby campus and the main
s-tog station in Lyngby (See Figure 6.1).
Figure 6.1: Area of implementation for scenario 1.
The idea is to establish bike stations in all sectors and in the two main bus stops: Ræve-
højvej, DTU and Klampenborgvej (Helsingørmotorvejen).
The reason why these two
stops are so important is due to the large influx of people coming from Copenhagen.
Figure 6.2, clearly reflects that almost 50% of students live in Copenhagen. The most
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
49
==PAGE:58==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 6
forthright route to get to DTU from Copenhagen is the use of bus lines 150S or 15E.
These two lines have two stops on campus, that are Rævehøjvej, DTU and Klampen-
borgvej (Helsingørmotorvejen).
To know how many bikes and stations are needed in each sector, the daily commutes of
people around the campus were asked in the survey [Appendix E]. With this data it will be
design the exact location and size of the parking stations and the number of bikes needed.
Which is developed in chapter 8.
Despite the scenario aims to be small to avoid excessive initial investment. On the other
hand, it is limiting the number of users interested and as a result, the incomes.
The expected outcomes, or advantages, of this scenario are the following.
• Simplicity; since the system is small, it is very easy for the user to understand where
the stations are and where you can use the bike sharing system.
• Economy; because of its area, it is expected less amount of bikes and stations and
therefore a smaller initial inversion.
• Social impact; it is expected to have a clear and fast impact after the implementation
of the system.
• Environmental; aims to increase the use of public transpor and reduce the traffic of
motorized vehicles on campus.
Although this scenario is not supposed to take into account the accommodations some of
them are integrated in the campus, and therefore included in the study. However, are not
taken into consideration as specific entry or exit, but as internal movements.
Figure 6.2: Where do DTU students currently live in the metropolitan area? [Apli 2019]
50
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 6
MSc Thesis
6.2
Scenario 2
Scenario 2 increases the area of study. Its objective is to include commutes of exchange
students from their dormitories, what will increase the incomes. Hence, the area will be
scattered around DTU. It will include the same areas as in Scenario 1, plus some of the
DTU accommodations.
The decision of which accommodations will be included have been based on the following
aspects stated below.
• The distance to DTU Lyngby campus,
• The percentage of rooms DTU owns at each Boligfonden DTU accommodation,
• Whether the accommodations is a student house or a dormitory, and
• The information obtained from the survey: if it is representative or not of the interest
on the network, and the number of commutes obtained from each accommodation.
There are 4 types of accommodation. Student houses, which are houses rented to stu-
dents and usually have a capacity of 4 to 10 people. Dormitories, which are large buildings
where students have their own dormitory and usually share the kitchen with 10 other peo-
ple. Studio apartments, which are rooms where the bed, the study table, and the kitchen
are in the same space. And apartments, which are like student houses but in a building.
There are 32 accommodations offered by Boligfonden DTU (see table 2.1), of which 14 are
student houses, 2 are shared apartments, 4 are studio apartments and 12 are dormitories.
DTU owns 25 of the 32 accommodations offered. And from the other 7 that are shared,
the percentage of rooms owned by DTU ranges from 4 to 50% of the dormitory’s capacity
(10 to 35 rooms).
Therefore, for this scenario some decisions have been made.
From the survey it is known that only 17% of people living in accommodations is minded
to cycle more than 10 kilometers to go to campus (Figure 6.3). Moreover, micromobility
solutions like the BSS are ideal for trips up to 10km, as mentioned in section 3.2. There-
fore, it has been stated a limit area of 10km from Lyngby campus. This leaves only the
accommodations that can be observed in Figure 6.4.
Regarding the students living in student houses (50% exchange - 50% general students)
there is an interest in renting a bike to go to University that ranges from 27 to 36%. How-
ever, implementing a parking station is pretty expensive and locate it near a student house
would not make it accessible except for the 4 to 10 people living there. In addition, student
houses are usually located near dormitories, where it will be parking stations for renting
a bike. Hence, student houses are not considered either in this scenario.
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
51
==PAGE:60==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 6
Figure 6.3: Percentage of people minded to cycle to university.
On the other hand, a future study when the system have been running for one year would
be recommended. Above all, for those student houses on the western part of DTU cam-
pus.
Looking at the number of rooms owned by DTU on the dormitories left outside the campus:
Kågså Kollegiet, Linde Alle Student Residence, P.O. Pedersen Kollegiet, Paul Bergsøe
Kollegiet and Professor Ostenfeld Kollegiet. It can be observed in table 6.1 that from
Kågså there are no answers and DTU owns only 5% of the dormitory. Hence it will not be
considered due to the lack of data. Linde Alle is completely owned by DTU and it has had
a representation of 5% in the survey, therefore it will be considered in this scenario. In the
last 3 dormitories, DTU owns 10% of the rooms and there is around a representation of
7%, 9% and 18% respectively, of the total rooms owned by DTU. And represents around
1% of the whole dormitory. Thus, these three will be also considered in the study.
Answers
Rooms owned by DTU
Representation
Campus Village
6
160
4%
Hempel Kollegiet
1
200
1%
Kampsax Kollegiet
4
521
1%
Linde Alle Student Residence
16
300
5%
Nordvej Student Residence
22
312
7%
P.O. Pedersen Kollegiet
2
27
7%
Paul Bergsøe Kollegiet
3
35
9%
Professor Ostenfeld Kollegiet
5
28
18%
Studio apartment Tåsingegade
3
22
14%
Table 6.1: Number of answers from the different accommodations and its representative-
ness.
In regards to the dormitories located on campus, they are all included in this study although
there are some without representation from the survey (Villum Kann Rasmussen Kollegiet
and William Demant Kollegiet). Nevertheless, a parking station will be added based on
the number of movements to that sector in general.
52
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 6
MSc Thesis
In conclusion, 10 stations will be added to the system:
• Campus Village
• Hempel Kollegiet
• Kampsax Kollegiet
• Linde Alle Student Residence
• Nordvej Student Residence
• P.O.Pedersen Kollegiet
• Paul Bergsøe Kollegiet
• Professor Ostenfeld Kollegiet
Figure 6.4: Boligfonden DTU accommodations located within a 10 km range.
6.3
Scenario 3
This scenario aims to increase the flow of people between Lyngby and DTU campus,
supporting the idea of creating a student-friendly university town [Lyngby 2012] and the
economic growth of the municipality.
To achieve this goal, some parking stations will be implemented around Lyngby. The
decision of where locating them as been made from the results obtained in the survey.
The questionnaire asked where they will go in their leisure time if they were on campus.
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
53
==PAGE:62==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 6
Some options where given, but also the possibility of an open answer. The options are
stated below.
• Visit Lyngby
• Go to Lyngby Storecenter
• Watch a film at Lyngby’s cinema
• Take the train and visit Copenhagen
• Go to the swimming pool
• Other ...
The open answer shows that many people goes to building 101, either for study in the
library, do sport or go to the s-huset. Therefore the parking station in this building should
ensure the availability of free ports. Other answers indicate the interest of many people
for going to the dyer park, what could increase the 12-24h rentals.
Moreover, participants were asked whether they would take the bike to go to those places
and if it would be probable that the frequency of their activities would increase with the
implementation of the bike-sharing system. The answers show that 65% would take the
bike and from those, 40% may increase the frequency.
In view of this data, it has been decided that from all these places it will be studied the
movement to the following locations.
• Lyngby Hovedgade and Lyngby’s library for those who want to visit Lyngby or the
lakes,
• the Storecenter,
• the Cinema, and
• the swimming pool.
Moreover, Lyngby St. will be reinforced with extra ports in order to supply the extra de-
mand of parking to go visit Copenhagen by train.
Finally, the area of study will be distributed as shown in Figure 6.5.
54
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 6
MSc Thesis
Figure 6.5: Area of implementation for scenario3.
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
55
==PAGE:64==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 6
56
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:65==
7
Analysis of the demand
Having a good infrastructure is an important aspect to improve citizen’s quality of life. But
not only the infrastructure is necessary, different transportation systems are also needed
to improve the connectivity between different places. And depending on the scale you
are looking at, these connections can be between buildings, cities, countries or even
continents. Therefore, to understand which systems and infrastructures are needed, it is
important to have an overview of the demand within the area of study. In this section the
demand of a bike sharing system is going to be analysed using the results obtained from
a survey.
7.1
Representativeness of the survey
To obtain a representative sample from a known population, the Slovin’s formula has been
used.
n =
N
1 + Ne2
(7.1)
Where
• N is the size of the population, and
• e the margin of error of the sample, obtained from the confidence level which is
normally assumed to be 95%
This formula states that for a population of 15390 inhabitants, considering a representa-
tiveness percentage of 95%, the size of the sample must be 390 inhabitants. Since the
sample obtained at DTU has had a size of 307, the representativeness of DTU’s popu-
lation drop to 94.3% with a margin of error of 5.7%. Therefore, it can be concluded that
for a sample to be representative of a population with these parameters, the number of
answers needed must represent the 2% of the population.
The survey has return percentages from 1 to 3%, being the students the most represented
(Table 7.1).
Students
(2018)
8653.5
3%
SURVEY
242
Staff
(2020)
2919
1%
SURVEY
40
Professors
(2020)
3818
1%
SURVEY
25
Table 7.1: Representation of students, staff and professors in the survey.
Moreover, exchange students are considered to be 9% of students’ population. From the
students that have answered the survey, exchange students are the 10%, which assuming
a ± 3% error can be stated that is clearly representative of reality (See table 7.2.
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
57
==PAGE:66==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 7
All students
(2018)
11538
9%
Exchange students
981
All students
SURVEY
242
10%
Exchange students
25
Table 7.2: Representation of exchange students in the survey.
On the other hand, the heterogeneity of the sample is another important aspect that must
be taken into account. Gender, age and roles are important characteristics in our pop-
ulation that can state the heterogeneity of our sample. Results show that percentages
of gender, for professors and students, concur exactly with DTU’s statistics [Toft 2018].
Therefore, it can be also consider the results of staff, as representative gender values of
the population.
Survey results
DTU statistics
Gender
Female
Male
Female
Male
No.
%
No.
%
Total
%
%
Exchange student at DTU
11
45.83%
13
54.17%
24
–
–
Professor at DTU
3
12.50%
21
87.50%
24
12%
88%
Staff at DTU
19
48.72%
20
51.28%
39
–
–
Student at DTU
84
39.07%
131
60.93%
215
38%
62%
Total
117
185
302
Table 7.3: Comparison between the survey’s results and the parameters published by
DTU regarding gender.
When comparing role with age distribution, it shows the most common ranges of age
regarding its role. For instance, exchange students never exceed the age of thirty, being
18 to 25 its most common range. Students in general have a larger range, from 18 to 50
years, having some differences between genders. Professors start at 30 and is extended
to more than 60 years old. Finally, the role of staff is the most heterogeneous one, going
from 25 to more than 60.
Due to the wide ranges observed, it can be concluded that all roles are well represented
when talking about age distribution.
Female
Most common
Male
Most common
Exchange student
18 - 30
18 - 25
18 - 30
18 - 25
Professor at DTU
30 - 50
40 - 50
30 - More than 60
50 - 60
Staff at DTU
25 - More than 60
50 - 60
18 - More than 60
25 - 40
Student at DTU
18 - 40
18 - 25
18 - 50
18 - 25
Table 7.4: Age distribution of population obtained in the sample.
Finally, focusing on the role, it can be observed that students are majority in DTU with a
56% in front of 20% for staff and 24% of professors. Compared with the results, professors
and staff have not answer as much as students, with proportions of 8%, 13% and 79%
respectively. Therefore, the representativeness is not as good as expected in this field,
but can be compensated by the other parameters.
58
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 7
MSc Thesis
7.2
Analysis
Different aspects of the demand are going to be analysed. First, the interest towards the
Bike sharing system shown in the survey. Secondly, which type of demand do we have.
And finally, the methods to forecast the data of commutes for designing the system.
In order to assess the potential number of users, the interest on different fares are going
to be evaluated. 89% of population is interested at some type of fare. To know how many
regular users the system will have, the focus has to be on the semester fares. This value
shows that 44% will usually use the system. Moreover, 37% will use it sometimes, renting
by minute, and 8% may do excursions using this system. (Table 7.5).
Pay a fare per semester
177
44%
Minute renting fare
148
37%
12h or 24h renting fare
33
8%
Not interested
45
11%
Table 7.5: Interest on the different bike sharing fares.
The survey has shown that only 11% of population would not be interested in renting a
bike from this system.
Therefore, it can be concluded that the interest in the system is pretty high. These results
can be related to the huge amount of commutes that occur on campus. But in can also
be pretty related with the low average age and the biking culture of Copenhagen.
Regarding the methodology to forecast the demand, the Institute for Transportation and
Development Policy (ITDP) in one of its Guides for Bikeshare planning defines two meth-
ods [Gauthier et al. 2013].
1. To create a Price-Elasticity of Demand (PED) analysis according to various customer
types.
2. To create an estimation of demand based on a percentage of the population, known
as the uptake rate.
In this project, it has been decided to follow the second methodology. But, despite the
positive result in the interest analysis, the system cannot be designed for such a high
percentage of population.
...Paris saw a 6 percent uptake, meaning that 6 percent of the population used
the system. (...) New York City ran three scenarios: a 3 percent uptake by the
existing population, a 6 percent uptake and a 9 percent uptake... [Gauthier
et al. 2013]
Mexico City’s Ecobici is close to 10%, which may be explained by the heavy
commuter population that enters the service area (and uses Ecobici) but does
not live within that area. [A. Cohen et al. 2018]
Due to the high interest shown and the large amount of commutes on campus, it has been
decided to forecast the demand with a 10% uptake of population. Nevertheless, during
the design stage, parameters as bikes per 1,000 inhabitants and Trips per bike, will be
checked to ensure that this percentage is the appropriate.
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
59
==PAGE:68==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 7
60
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:69==
8
Design
Throughout this section, it is going to be chosen the type of bike sharing system, the
number of bikes needed, and the stations’ location and size. Anything related to the
number of bikes and stations will be calculated with a mathematical model explained and
developed in section 8.2.
8.1
Typology
Throughout this section is going to be developed the characteristics of the system: type
of system, type of bikes, fees offered, and specific details recommended.
System model
For this project it has been decided to choose a station-based system with e-bikes. The
reasons are the following.
• The area of study is a university campus, which means that the number of young
people is higher than in other places. Hence, the probability of being less careful
and organized with bikes increases. In order to maintain an arranged landscape,
station-based systems are the best solution.
• Moreover, stations can give a greater degree of service. For instance, bikes can
remain dry by establishing ceilings over them, which in Denmark is an important
aspect.
• Regarding the type of bikes, due to the location of the campus, those coming from
Lyngby St. will experience a 4km uphill ride. Hence, for giving to users the option
of working out or having a pleasant ride to get to university, and trying to gather the
maximum number of users, a pedal-assisted bike has been chosen.
• On the other hand, it has been proved that people will ride longer distances if bikes
are electric (Figure 8.1). Hereby, to obtain as many users as possible, and thinking
in the accommodation’s scenario (2), this bike has been considered the best option.
Figure 8.1: Assessment of whether e-bikes will increase user’s travel distances. [E]
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
61
==PAGE:70==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 8
Characteristics
The system will offer payment through the app by credit card or in bike stations, both by
credit card or by cash to include also exchange students without danish bank accounts.
The BSS will allow booking a bike 10 minutes in advance (paying a penalty fee in peak
hours if they do not take it afterward). Once the bike has been unlocked the app will ask
the user whether he wants to book a rack in their destination. The app will show a map with
all stations and the number of racks available, so if the preferred station-destination is full,
the user will be able to check nearby stations and choose to book one available rack. The
time of the booking will be the google’s estimation for the route plus 10 minutes to include
all user’s speeds. (Other options like 20 minutes on campus, 1h30’ for accommodations
and 30 minutes from campus to Lyngby can be also considered). Nevertheless, it will be
possible to use the system without booking.
We believe in the future, we will be able to increase the predictability of a
scooter being available at certain times. In the meantime, it would greatly
benefit users and MaaS operators if micromobility companies would support
reservations of 15 minutes or so in advance. Even if the user’s journey is
longer than that, Iomob could at least automatically reserve a scooter within
the 15 minute arrival time if the user requests this. [B. Cohen 2020a]
In the case of including accommodations, an option of locking bikes outside stations (Lock-
to bikes) will be considered to avoid that after riding long distances they do not have racks
available. This will release the system on campus and to promote the use of stations, the
fact of locking them outside will have an extra cost of 20 dkk (This is an indicative value
that must be studied and increased in case of not being effective). This option will turn
the system towards an hybrid system.
The locking and unlocking process will be done by QR codes or DTU card. Therefore, sta-
tions must have the option of delivering cards for those paying a minute package without
the app.
Fees
In reference to the fees offered, two groups will be made: casual and long-term users.
Having different options inside these two groups.
Long-term users: Fees for long term were stated in the survey as 6-month fees. Prices
were asked, ranging from free to more than 250 dkk. The percentage of users interested
in this type of fees is 50% (See table 8.3).
Two sub-groups can be differentiated, Campus users and Accommodation users.
• Campus users: Answers in graph 8.2a show that for having the demand satisfied in
more than 50%, the maximum price per semester should be between 100 and 150
dkk (satisfying 71% of the demand). Thus, to obtain the maximum revenue, 150 dkk
per semester has been chosen as campus fee.
• Accommodation users: Since different fares are proposed to people living at ac-
commodations, the graph varies (Graphic 8.2b), as it does the situation. Pricing for
people in accommodations has to be competitive because it has to compete against
private rentals of 175 dkk per month. These companies bring the benefit of owning
a bicycle during that period. Hence, taking a look to the graphic, it can be observed
that the most popular fee ranges from 100 to 150 dkk. Following the method of
choosing the maximum value to get the most revenue, will leave a difference of
25 dkk with the competition. It has been considered that the risk of loosing users is
62
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 8
MSc Thesis
pretty big with such a small difference. Therefore, even if the revenue gets reduced,
the price has been set to 100 dkk per month. With the decision, the whole population
will be considered, and the difference of revenue is small (900 dkk/month) [Calculus
explained below in table 8.1].
DTU’s population is 15,400 people, for this system a 10% of population has been considered when designing. Hence
1,540 people, but only 10% are from accommodations, from those only 32% is interested in renting a bike, and just
67.7% is interested on monthly fees. Therefore, population interested is 105 people from accommodations.
Users
Fee [dkk/month]
% population interested in that fee
Revenue [dkk/month]
34
100
100
3,400
34
150
84
4,284
The difference is not big and will avoid that users choose the competition
-884
Table 8.1: Calculus for deciding accommodation’s monthly fee
(a) Survey question: If you are interested in
a semester fare, how much would you be
willing to pay per semester?
(b) Survey question: Given that the most popu-
lar renting company offers fares around 175 dkk/-
month. What fare you would be willing to pay for
DTU’s monthly renting network (internal and exter-
nal use)?
Figure 8.2: Survey graphs for deciding bike fees.
Casual users: Casual users are those who do not pay a semester or monthly fee, but do
make use of the system by paying per minute or renting bikes for a period of time. There
are two sub-groups:
• Minute renting: BSS usually offer rides with a first 30 minutes free. Considering that
distances on campus does not take that long, and aiming to obtain some revenues,
the minute renting fee has been based on Copenhagen’s bycyklens. This is pur-
chasing tickets that can be from 30 minutes to 4 hours, the greater the cheaper the
minute of ride will cost. There are five packages, which are explained below [By-
cyklen n.d.]. The interest of population on this type of fee, according to the survey
results, is 41%.
– 30 minutes: It costs 1dkk/minute (30 dkk in total).
– 2 hours: 80 dkk package, which means 0.67 dkk per minute.
– 10 hours: The package is 300 dkk and the minute 0.50 dkk.
– 20 hours: The price is 500 dkk which means 0.42 dkk/minute.
– 40 hours: Finally this package is 900 dkk, 0.38 dkk per minute.
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
63
==PAGE:72==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 8
• Period renting of 12 or 24 hours in a row. This renting aims to encourage users to
take DTU bikes for day excursions. In order to be more economic than the minute
fee, the 12 hours must be less than 300 dkk and the 24 hours less than 500dkk.
Hence, it has been decided to state them to 225 dkk and 300dkk after comparing
with a Copenhagen’s bike rental shop (see table 8.2). The interest on period renting
is the lowest, being the 9% of population.
Timeslot
City Bike
City bike with
a childseat
Electric bike
Family bike
Family bike
premium
Helmet
Up to 3 hours
90
120
200
450
500
40
Up to 6 hours
110
140
250
500
550
40
Up to 24 hours
120
150
300
600
650
40
2 days
180
210
400
850
900
50
3 days
230
260
500
1000
1050
60
4 days
280
310
600
1100
1150
70
5 days
330
360
700
1300
1350
80
6 days
380
410
800
1500
1550
90
1 week
430
460
900
1600
1650
100
Add day
+50
+50
—
—
—
+10
2 weeks
600
630
—
—
—
170
3 weeks
700
730
—
—
—
210
Table 8.2: Copenhagen’s bike rental shop (prices in dkk) [Bicycles n.d.]
Below, it can be observed the different percentages of population who is interested in
each type of fee.
Type of renting
Accomodations
Campus
Total interest per type [%]
12/24h
8
25
9%
Minute fee
10
138
41%
Semester fee
22
155
50%
Table 8.3: Interest on the different fees offered
It has to be considered that all these specifications are recommendations for this specific
case considering the characteristics of the area of study and its population.
8.2
Mathematical model
8.2.1
Objective
The model aims to obtain the minimum number of bikes needed in the system so the
supply of the demand can be ensured, while avoiding large parking stations.
Repositioning is not considered during the day. It will be done every night forecasting the
demand for the next day based on the data gathered with the survey.
Moreover, it has to be mentioned that this model aims to obtain a rough estimation of the
bikes needed by establishing some conditions. However, for a detailed solution, distances
between stations, and therefore, priorities when fulfilling the demand, must be taken into
account in the future.
64
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:73==
Chapter 8
MSc Thesis
8.2.2
Sets
V: Set of nodes. Made up of sub-sectors, bus stops and other points of interest depending
on the scenario.
W: Set of all nodes, adding a source and a sink to the set V (V + 2 ).
T: Set of time steps. It includes the periods of time shown in table 8.4. It starts with value
2 and ends in t+11.
TS: All time steps, which include the set T plus a virtual time step for entering bikes in the
system and other for taking them out to the sink.
Time step
1
2
3
4
5
Time of the day
8:00h
12:00h
13:00h
17:00h
20:00h
Table 8.4: Time steps.
8.2.3
Parameters
n: Number of nodes in set V.
source: Node that works as a source of bikes during the first time step (n+1). It works as
a virtual node since it actually does not exist.
sink: Node that works as a sink of bikes during the last time step. (n+2). It is also a virtual
node to ensure all bikes arrive to the end of the process.
t: Number of time steps in set T.
tstart: First time step in set TS, representing the time step needed for the bikes moving
from the source to the nodes in set V.
tend: Last time step in TS, representing the time step needed for the bikes moving from
the nodes in set V to the sink. (t+2)
dt
outi: Theoretical demand going out of a node (i) at a time step (t).
CostA: Cost of including a bike in the system. [Cost/bike]
CostB: Cost of leaving the demand unfulfilled, either because of not having bikes available
at the node or because there are no ports available to park them. [Cost/bike]
CostC: Cost of implementing a station. [Cost/bike]
Values chosen for these costs are related between each other. The prices are based on
the ones stated in The Bikeshare Planning Guide [A. Cohen et al. 2018], where says that
a bike with high technology can cost up to 2,000$, and a station can cost between 40,000$
and 50,000$. Considering that a medium size station has between 10 and 15 bikes, the
cost per bike will go from 5,000$ to 3,000$ approximately. If the average is obtained
(4,000$), it is exactly double of the cost of buying a bike. Therefore, in the model the
cost A and C have been stated as 5 and 10 respectively. And the cost of unmet demand
(Cost B) has been stated to 11, a bit higher than A and C to avoid large amounts of unmet
demand. With this assumption it has been calculated a margin of error of 2.6%.
1t value explained in section 8.2.3.
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
65
==PAGE:74==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 8
8.2.4
Decision Variables
xt
i,j: Number of bikes actually moving from node (i) to node (j) at time step (t).
gt
i,j: Unmet demand from node (i) to node (j) at time step (t).
si: Minimum number of ports needed at each station to be able to park at each node and
time step, the number of bikes we are serving (xt
ij).
y: Total number of bikes in the system.
8.2.5
Mathematical model
minimize
yCostA +
∑
t∈T
∑
i∈V
∑
j∈V
gt
i,jCostB +
∑
i∈V
siCostC
(8.1)
s.t.
∑
i∈W
∑
j∈W
xt
i,j = y
∀t ∈TS
(8.2)
xt
i,j = dt
outi,j −gt
i,j
∀t ∈T, i ∈V, j ∈V {i ̸= j}
(8.3)
∑
j∈W{j=source}
xt−1
j,i −
∑
j∈V
xt
i,j = 0
∀t ∈TS{t = tstart + 1}, i ∈V
(8.4)
∑
j∈V
xt−1
j,i −
∑
j∈V
xt
i,j = 0
∀t ∈T{t > tstart + 1}, i ∈V
(8.5)
∑
j∈V
xt−1
j,i −
∑
j∈W{j=sink}
xt
i,j = 0
∀t ∈TS{t = tend}, i ∈V
(8.6)
si ≥
∑
j∈V
xt
j,i
∀t ∈T, i ∈V
(8.7)
• (8.1) The objective function aims to minimize the number of bikes in the system,
while penalizing the unmet demand and optimizing the size of the parking stations.
• (8.2) This constraint is defining variable y. Which is the number of bikes in the
system. Hence, this number has to be the same in every time step.
• (8.3) Defines variable xt
i,j as the demand minus the unmet demand.
• (8.4,8.5 and 8.6) are equations for flow conservation. This means that everything
that goes into a node has to go out at each time step. Equations (8.4) and (8.6) are
specific for the entry and exit. These two are constraining the flow from the source
to all nodes in the set V at time step 1 (the ones that are no source or sink), and
from all nodes in set V to the sink at time step tend.
• (8.7) The last constraint is obtaining the minimum number of ports at each node to
park all the bikes that are actually arriving to each node (xt
i,j) taking into account
also, those that stay in the node (xt
i,i).
The model is not taking into account the capacity of each node, obtaining the number of
bikes established by the demand. This is because the design is starting from zero and the
nodes are wide areas, thus it has been decided to leave it free. Nevertheless, a capacity
could be easily added to the model by limiting si at each node or in general with a new
capacity parameter (si ≤capacity
∀i ∈V ).
66
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:75==
Chapter 8
MSc Thesis
The re-positioning is assumed to be done once at the end of the day. Repositioning is a
big issue that every bike sharing system has. Some papers bring solutions to this problem
with mathematical models, [Høyer 2015] and [Sayarshad, Tavassoli, and Zhao 2011]. But
in this project, the repositioning is considered at the end of the day or very early in the
morning.
8.2.6
Data sets
Data sets have been completely obtained from the data acquired in the survey. Com-
mutes around campus have been obtained thanks to the schedule that respondents have
provided. And the mean of transport they use to get to university has been obtained from
the questions: ”How do you get to DTU”, ”In case of using diverse means of transport,
how do you combine them?” and ”In case you take the bus 150S, which stop do you use
more frequently?”. These data has been employed in all scenarios, but the differences
between scenarios have modified it to adequate it to the case.
• Scenario 1: The list of mean of transport used by people just includes Lyngby St,
Rævehøjvej, DTU and Klampenborgvej (Helsingørmotorvejen). People going by
car, their own bike, or on foot have not been considered as users of the network
when entering or exiting the system.
• Scenario 2: To include people coming from accommodations, the data has been
modified. In this scenario, the entrance and the exit of the system can be done
from the three nodes stated in scenario 1 plus eight DTU accommodations: Nordvej,
Linde Alle, P.O. Pedersen, Kampsax, Campus Village, Ostenfeld, Hempel, and Poul
Bergsøe Kollegiet.
• Scenario 3: This scenario considers people’s commutes during their leisure time,
namely when finishing their lectures on DTU campus. Therefore, the entrance to the
system is the same as scenario 1, but the exit changes. Some facilities or interesting
places are added: Visit Lyngby, Storecenter, Cinema, and Swimming pool. These
four nodes are representing the answers obtained from the questions: ”During my
leisure time on campus I usually like to ...” and ”Would you like to get there by bike?”.
The answers considered where obtained from those who said yes to get there by
bike. And the most common replies were the default answers presented in the
survey: Go home, Visit Lyngby, Go to Lyngby Storecenter, Watch a film at Lyngby’s
cinema, Take the train and visit Copenhagen, and Go to the swimming pool, together
with open answers like Visit the deer park and Go for a walk to Lyngby lakes.
Once these decisions are understood, the process for the data treatment, which has been
done with Microsoft Excel, has been carried out. This process is further explained in
Appendix F. But it can resume in a few steps.
1. Primitive data is transformed into four tables per day. Corresponding to time periods
8-12, 12-13, 13-17, and 17-20.
2. Then, these tables are joined into 5 (each per weekly day).
3. Afterward, four lists with the mean of transport that is used by the respondent for
exiting and entering in the system. And the times when this is done.
4. Pivot tables are created to analyse commutes, and finally data sets are obtained in
the format required by IBM CPLEX Studio Optimization.
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
67
==PAGE:76==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 8
8.2.7
Results & interpretation
Results obtained after the process explained in section 8.2.6, have shown high number
of docks at each station, above all in stations located in public transportation nodes (See
Appendix F, tables F.10, F.11 and F.12). Therefore, data sets have been refined.
Commutes going from or to adjacent sectors, have been evaluated. Checking whether
was faster going by bike or on foot (adding 5 minutes for locking and unlocking the bike)
and eliminating or reducing those that were faster on foot. Thus, table F.9 has been
obtained. As it can be observed, those trips that were faster by bike have been stated in
the table as ”BY BIKE” and those on foot, as ”ON FOOT”. For cases where the travel time
was the same, for the evaluation it has been considered half of commutes. This process
has been included in step 5 explained in section 8.2.6.
After this calculus, the mathematical model has been run again. Obtaining new, but similar
solutions.
• Docks have been reduced in most stations, being the general reduction around 20%
of the initial calculus. The same has happened with the number of bikes in the
system, which have been reduced around 15%.
It has to be considered that stations can be relocated after some weeks of the imple-
mentation if the operator notices that some are inadequately located and no users
are making use of them. However, this is only for an specific type of station, the
modular ones. For other type it will be more difficult.
If a station location is found to be inadequate after it is built—as is some-
times discovered after some weeks of operation—modular stations can be
fairly easily relocated to a place with better demand. Stations like this are
also more easily scaled up or down, adding or removing docking spaces
or racks as real usage is determined after opening. [Gauthier et al. 2013]
• Unmet demand takes place in its majority at 08:00 and 17:00 from and to transporta-
tion nodes respectively. Usually to and from sectors 3 and 4. This result makes
sense considering the number of lectures that take place in those two sectors. And
taking into account that it happens at peak hours when the most population is start-
ing and finishing the day.
With the new evaluation, unmet demand has slightly increased regarding the initial
calculus. However, it is always around 20% of the theoretical demand (g/d = 20%).
Due to the mathematical model limitations, unmet demand is now spread around
campus, sometimes being big for long distances. Considering that our model only
takes into account on repositioning at the end of the day, these problems can be
solved by repositioning more than once (two to four as recommended by Shu et al.
2013).
when the total number of bicycles invested in the system is more than
30,000, frequent periodic redistribution does not add much to the number
of bicycle trips supported by the system. Furthermore, a small number
of daily redistributions (e.g., two to four) suffices, since more frequent re-
distribution will not add much to total supported bicycle trips. [Shu et al.
2013]
Other solution could be painting some parking areas where bikes can be parked by
paying an extra fare of 20dkk, if there is no space. Or stablishing ”corrals” where
68
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:77==
Chapter 8
MSc Thesis
bikes can be dropped at specific times. The latter is a method used by Capital
bikeshare to avoid complaints regarding empty or full docks [Maus 2016]. But this
could lead into future problems of unmet demand if more bikes are not added to the
system since it will work as a dockless system.
In order to design and fulfill the demand obtained from the data sets processed by the
mathematical model, the greater number of bikes is going to be chosen for each scenario.
This will mean that for quiet days like Fridays (see Appendix F, tables F.5, F.5 and F.5),
there will be more bikes than those calculated by the model. Hence, it is logical to think that
unmet demand will be reduced while still having an optimized bike-sharing system. On
the other hand, unmet demand obtained for the busiest day of the week (usually Monday
or Tuesday), will not increase either decrease since the number of bikes available will be
exactly the one obtained from the model.
The number of bikes and docking stations decided for each scenario are the ones pre-
sented in table 8.6.
Market penetration is defined as trips per residents. And some parameters like Trips per
bike per day, bikes per 1,000 residents and trips per 1,000 residents can help assessing
this aspect. Table 8.5 shows the results obtained in each scenario for these parameters.
It is considered a good market penetration when
• Trips per bike per day should be between 4 and 8.
• Bikes available per 1,000 residents should range from 10 to 30.
• Trips per 1,000 residents does not have a clear range, but systems with high market
penetration like Mexico has 105, being this value the highest between the systems
analysed in A. Cohen et al. 2018. And a lower value will be around 10 bikes per
1,000 residents.
DTU population: 15400
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
Trips/bike/day
5
5
6
Bikes/1,000
26.1
28.1
28.8
Trips/1,000
139.4
153.7
171.9
Table 8.5: Market penetration
As it can be observed, all three scenarios would be well introduced into the market if
assumptions taken are correct (e.g. 10% of population will make use the system).
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
69
==PAGE:78==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 8
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
Number of bikes
402
432
443
Docks
Rævehøjvej, DTU
157
79
43
Klampenborgvej
39
33
24
Lyngby St
158
176
202
S1a
11
12
29
S1b
21
27
33
B101
157
170
162
S2a
12
12
11
S2b
11
11
6
S2c
37
37
34
S3a
82
94
61
S3b
37
34
54
S3c
85
85
101
S4a
24
26
44
S4c
12
12
23
Nordvej S.R.
–
70
–
Linde Alle S.R.
–
28
–
P.O. Pedersen K.
–
6
–
Kampsax Kollegiet
–
6
–
Campus Village
–
7
–
P. Ostenfeld K.
–
6
–
Hempel Kollegiet
–
6
–
Poul Bergsøe K.
–
2
–
Visit Lyngby
–
–
25
Storecenter
–
–
70
Cinema
–
–
6
Swimming pool
–
–
23
Table 8.6: Number of bikes in the system and docks per area of study.
8.3
Distribution of the stations
When deciding how many stations are necessary and where to locate them, some pa-
rameters must be taken into account. These parameters are the station density and the
docks per bike. Before assessing these aspects, it has to be decided where stations are
going to be located. The optimum characteristics are presented below.
On sidewalk
On street
• Sunny, minimal tree cover
• Close to intersections
• At least 2 meters of clear walking space
• Close to public transit stations
• Close to intersections
• High visibility and street lighting
• Close to public transit stations
• Low volume of cars, low speed limits
• High-visibility area and street lighting
• Adjacent to bicycle infrastructure
• Easy access for users, as well as maintenance
and rebalancing vehicles
• Not blocking manhole cover, storm drain, etc.
• Close to bicycle infrastructure
Table 8.7: Ideal station location characteristics. [A. Cohen et al. 2018]
70
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:79==
Chapter 8
MSc Thesis
Following these instructions and taking into account the characteristics of scenario 0 (light
rail, new bike lanes and bridges), some locations have been chosen as it can be observed
in figures F.1, F.2 & F.3.
Considering this data and calculating the area of influence at each scenario, the market
penetration can be assessed. (Table 8.8) The station density must be between 10 and
16 stations per square kilometer, and the number of docks per bike in medium and large
systems are recommended to round from 2 to 2.5.
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
Docks/bike
2.10
2.17
2.15
Area [sq. km.]
1.9
14
2.3
Stations
20
28
25
Station density
[per sq. km.]
10.5
2.0
10.9
Table 8.8: Market penetration from station point of view
As observed, all docks per bike are withing the range, but regarding the station density,
Scenario 2 is outside the range with a very low value of 2. And even if scenarios 1 and 3
are within the range, they are pretty near to the lower limit.
8.3.1
Software
The software is an important aspect to take into account when designing a micromobility
solution. Everything works through an application. Choosing the fee, booking a bike,
starting/ending rental, and the payment between others. Therefore, it is interesting to
know which options are available that can make the operator save some money.
For instance, there are many ”white label” apps that let you customize the interface. These
apps already include the basic functions needed to make the system work. Velvioo and
Devathon are two examples of apps that are already assembled. The operator just has
to change the interface and introduce the codes of the equipment (bikes in this project).
This brings many advantages: The app is working in a few weeks rather than months. It
is more affordable than hiring a third party. The payments are received by credit cards. It
has inbuilt analytics. It is already prepared for both Android and IOS. And finally, there is
free support.
Velvioo offers an app that does not need to code anything. It is a customizable, self-
service and data-driven app. As they say, made by operators to operators. It includes
analytics to get an insight of the market and being able to understand business behavior.
The functioning is very simple as it can be seen in figure 8.3.
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
71
==PAGE:80==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 8
Figure 8.3: How Velvioo app works. [Velivoo]
Devathlon is the app that companies like LIME, BIRD or BOUNCE are using. It is pretty
similar to Velvioo. It brings the opportunity of customization and analytics. And the cost
is one time 999$ or monthly 99$ plus 5$ per vehicle added to the system.
Figure 8.4: How Devathon app looks like to customers. [Devathon n.d.]
On the other hand, it exists the option of developing your own app. But this will be more
time consuming, which will lead to a late release. And it is more expensive because of
the hours of the workforce needed.
8.4
Cost estimate
In order to obtain a rough estimation of the costs, the capital costs and expected revenue
from fees offered have been calculated.
72
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 8
MSc Thesis
Capital costs include the price of bikes and stations. Rebalancing vehicles or equipment
and the control center must be included in a more detailed budget. Operational costs
include rebalancing and staff. This cost has not been obtained because the range is too
wide and changes from country to country [A. Cohen et al. 2018].
Revenues consist of incomes from long-term and casual users. Sponsorships, govern-
ment funds, advertisements, etc have not been considered because are very variable
numbers.
There are two long-term fees has stated before. One for accommodations (100 dkk/-
month) and other for the campus (150 dkk/semester). The calculus has been done over
the 50% of population in Scenarios 1 and 2. Scenario 3 has been divided into two groups:
90% with campus fee and 10% with accommodation’s fee. To the first one a 48% has
been applied. For the latter, over the 32% of people interested in renting, it has been
applied the 55% that interested in long-term fees. After summing them, a 10% has been
applied because is the percentage of population considered interested in the system.
For casual users, some assumptions have been necessary. The same calculus as before
has been carried out, but with different percentages. Scenarios 1 and 3 with a 41%.
Scenario 2, for campus a 44% has been applied and for accommodations 25% over the
32% commented.
Moreover, it has been obtained from which amount of trips per month a long-term fee
is more profitable considering an average trip of 9 minutes (Table 8.9). Different time
horizons have been presented depending on the package. For the evaluation, a 1 year
horizon has been chosen for doing the comparisons. Therefore, the 2h and 10h packages
are the ones in that group. The 2h package has been chosen for the revenue calculations
because it is cheaper and therefore a conservative decision. And the 10h package has
been used for the accommodation’s minute fee (Scenario 2).
Packages offered
Cost of the
package [dkk]
Trips/semester
(Assuming an
average trip of
9 minutes)
After how many trips/month the
long-term fee is more profitable
in a time horizon of 1 year?
Time horizon
30 min
30
3.3
2.78
6 months
2h
80
13.3
4.17
1 year
10h
300
66.7
5.56
1 year
20h
500
133.3
6.67
2 years
40h
900
266.7
7.41
3 years
Table 8.9: After how many trips per month the long-term fee is more profitable in a time
horizon of 1 year?
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
73
==PAGE:82==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 8
BUDGET
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
Capital costs (CC)
Bikes
-3,823,020
-4,108,320
-4,212,930
dkk
Stations
-5,706,000
-7,988,400
-7,132,500
dkk
Rebalancing vehicles
-
-
-
Control center
-
-
-
Revenues (R )
Funding/sponsorship/advertisement
-
-
-
Long-term campus
231,000
207,900
231,000
dkk/year
Long-term accommodations
-
40,035
-
dkk/year
Minute renting
101,024
90,921
101,024
dkk/year
Minute renting accommodations
-
7,392
-
dkk/year
TOTAL revenue [dkk per month]
332,024
346,248
332,024
dkk/year
Table 8.10: Financial estimate
74
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:83==
9
Development of indicators
Thorough this section, the data collection and evaluation of each indicator is going to
be explained. There are nine indicators in total, three per each pillar of sustainability:
social, environmental and economic. All indicators will have sub-indicators that will cover
different aspects related to the indicator.
Moreover, to decrease subjectivity on the assessment, a few interviews have been carried
out, asking them to grade the sub-indicators within a goal-based framework. The purpose,
decreasing the weight of the subjective assessment.
On the other hand, domain-based indicators can be measured following the SMART
methodology [Gudmundsson et al. 2016] (Specific, Measurable, Attainable, Relevant, and
Timely) and therefore, giving more precise and objective results.
9.1
Indicators framework
In order to reach a sustainable based solution, the three pillars of sustainability and their
interdependence have been considered (Figure 9.1). And the indicator framework has
been developed following the methodology explained in section 5.4.1.
Figure 9.1: Sustainability pillars
Nine indicators (three per pillar) have been considered necessary to evaluate the feasibil-
ity of the project, as well as the accuracy of the scenarios. These indicators include from
two to three sub-indicators each to complete the evaluation and cover as many related
aspects as possible.
When possible, a combination of domain-based and goal-based framework has been
used to reach the maximum accuracy of each indicator. The objectives followed for the re-
alization of the framework are focused on the three pillars of sustainability. A bike sharing
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
75
==PAGE:84==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 9
system has to reduce travel times, increase the value of the university, and be inclusive.
Moreover, it has to improve mobility and health. Finally, enhances economic growth and
prestige, while being affordable for the users and the operator.
Description
Measurement
Evaluation
Inclusion
The indicator will evaluate how
much impact would have a BSS
within inclusion.
Use of station density.
Negative=worst impact,
0=Steady,
Positive=better impact
Quality of life
How the living conditions will
vary with the implementation
of a BSS
Travel times (Google),
on foot travel times on
campus (Survey), Fees
(Survey)
Negative=worst impact,
0=Steady,
Positive=better impact
Values
How the BSS can bring value
to the university ans its users
Number of stations,
number of parking lots,
number of bike lanes and
streets, number of buildings
Negative=worst impact,
0=Steady,
Positive=better impact
Healthiness
Health benefits that the BSS
can provide to its users.
% of interest in long-term
fees, 12/24h renting fees
Negative=worst impact,
0=Steady,
Positive=better impact
Mobility
Assess the improvement on
mobility.
Number of Public transport
stops, means of transport used
by population (Survey),
distance to DTU (Survey),
benefits users will experience
from using the network (Survey)
Negative=worst impact,
0=Steady,
Positive=better impact
Awareness
Measures the awareness
towards environment.
benefits users will experience
from using the network (Survey),
car sharing (Survey)
Negative=worst impact,
0=Steady,
Positive=better impact
Investment
Measure whether investments
are reasonable or not regarding
the size of the system
Station price estimation, user fee
incomes, expected number of
repositioning per day
Negative=worst impact,
0=Steady,
Positive=better impact
Economic growth
Economic impact of the BSS
on DTU
Minimum number of employees
to run the system, location of
canteens (Campus Plan), location
of stations
Negative=worst impact,
0=Steady,
Positive=better impact
Prestigious
How the image of DTU can
be affected by a BSS
Number of universities with
BSS implemented
Negative=worst impact,
0=Steady,
Positive=better impact
Table 9.1: Description of indicators and the measurements needed to evaluate them
76
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:85==
10
Data collection and evaluation
10.1
Social Indicators
10.1.1
Inclusion
Northern countries are well known by its cycling culture,
Netherlands, Denmark and Germany have made bicycling a safe, convenient
and practical way to get around their cities. (...) Extensive cycling rights of way
are complemented by ample bike parking, full integration with public transport,
comprehensive traffic education and training of both cyclists and motorists,
and a wide range of promotional events intended to generate enthusiasm and
wide public support for cycling. [Pucher and Buehler 2008]
Moreover, ”biking” is one of the most usual topics in a conversation, at least between
foreign students. Usual questions between the students of DTU are: Do you ride your
own bike? Have you tried the new e-bike sharing system? Does it make your commute
to university way easier?. And this is because, using a bike gives you the freedom of
movement. It is the perfect mean of transport for short distances since it is faster than
some public transportation, commonly cheaper and covers parts of the city that does not
have a proper connection.
Therefore, people end up using a bike. But what if you do not know how to ride a bike?
Bicycles from bike sharing systems are very stable and easy to use, what can help the
most fearful people to try. And it helps people to become more mobile, independent,
confident, and empowered [Jennings 2018] as it has been proven in Amsterdam city with
the Mama Agatha’s course.
Social inclusion
Description: This indicator aims to assess any improvement of social inclusion derived
of the implementation of a bike sharing system. It is believed, that cycling can be a way of
bridging cultural differences. People that participated in the documentary of Mama Agata,
stated that cycling provides empowerment and societal inclusion. [Jennings 2018]
“The physical mobility cycling provides, actually comes with social mobility and
personal freedom.” [Goodyear 2015]
The World Bank Group defines social inclusion as [Group n.d.]:
1. The process of improving the terms for individuals and groups to take
part in society, and
2. The process of improving the ability, opportunity, and dignity of those
disadvantaged on the basis of their identity to take part in society.
In Copenhagen, a female foreign student tells how difficult it was for her to attend the
meetings with her friends without knowing how to ride a bike. ”It is a new culture, new
friends, and you need to adapt up to some extent if you want to consolidate a group”.
Therefore, her landlord lent her a bike and she learnt how to ride by herself. Nowadays,
she has her own bike and is very happy with the freedom of movement it gives to her.
”You can go anywhere faster than with public transportation, you can meet up with friends
and do excursions. I am glad I have learnt”.
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
77
==PAGE:86==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 10
Calculus method: The indicator will be graded based on how much impact would have
this service within social inclusion on the different scenarios.
1. Scenario 1: On-campus there are always new students from different nationalities,
seeking new friends. During the firsts weeks you are new, do not know how the pub-
lic transport works or how long it takes to arrive to the next lecture. A bike sharing
system established on campus, could help those students to easily move around,
get to know their surroundings, and feel more comfortable in their new home. More-
over, while renting a bike is a perfect excuse to talk to someone, ask them regarding
how it works, where is the building you are looking for. This will make a connection
and at least you will smile at each other next time you meet if not becoming friends.
2. Scenario 2: Including the accommodations would not but increase this phenomenon.
People living next to each other will meet on the stations everyday and if you are
doing the same commute, why not starting a conversation?
3. Scenario 3: Going to the cinema, the mall or the swimming pool is more fun with
friends. Establishing stations on these places will help to meet people with the same
hobbies. Moreover, in these places it is more probable to meet people from outside
university, increasing your network and being more included in the local community.
Numerical evaluation: The grading in this indicator is attached to subjectiveness, hence
four people has been asked to grade it. The results are:
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
Person 1
1
2
2
Person 2
1
2
3
Person 3
2
2
1
Person 4
1
2
1
Result
1.25
2
1.75
Table 10.1: Social inclusion evaluation for three scenarios
Meeting point
Description: When meeting, having clear references to find your friends is very impor-
tant. Everyone uses popular shops, restaurants or public transport stops to meet up with
their companions, but having a bike-sharing station can be an interesting meeting point.
Because you may use it later when you are together to visit a place, or probably some of
your colleagues are going to arrive by using this system. These stations are very visible,
they are well announced, and normally, are called and located near the most representa-
tive thing of the street. Moreover, they are covered to remain bikes dry and there is plenty
of space for meeting. According to Cambridge dictionary a meeting point is ”an area in
a large public place, such as an airport or station, where people can arrange to meet”
[Cambridge-dictionary n.d.], which can be applied to bike stations and its surroundings.
This indicator aims to assess how beneficial these stations can be in each scenario.
Calculus method: Every scenario is going to be evaluated to have an understanding on
how those stations can help people socialize.
1. Scenario 1: On campus is pretty easy to arrange meetings. The most usual place
is at the door of any building, but sometimes there is more than one door, which
can lead to confusion. The stations for bike sharing are normally located near to the
78
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:87==
Chapter 10
MSc Thesis
main door, and since it will be geolocated with the mobile app, it will eliminate those
few misunderstandings.
2. Scenario 2: In the case of including the accommodations, the bike sharing stations
will create a new and interesting meeting point. People living in those accommoda-
tions may meet before going to their lectures, and if using the system, which place
better than the station itself. Moreover, it will make visitor’s life a bit easier, since
DTU accommodations usually have the same look from the outside and it is difficult
to get oriented if it is the first time you go there.
3. Scenario 3: In the street is very important to have references, and the stations can
help a lot to find a friend or an establishment. Moreover, it will be very useful when
meeting for going to the cinema, the swimming pool or any other facility where you
prefer to wait for your companions before going in.
Numerical evaluation: The assessment is based on the observations mentioned above.
It can lead to subjectiveness, hence the same method as before is going to be used. Four
people will evaluate the scenarios and the average will be taken.
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
Person 1
1
3
3
Person 2
3
2
1
Person 3
2
3
1
Person 4
2
2
1
Result
2
2.5
1.5
Table 10.2: Meeting point evaluation for three scenarios
Accessibility of the system
Description: A bike sharing system is accessible to everyone, but it does have some
exemptions. There are age restrictions (users generally need to be more than 16 years
old). Moreover, some systems only accept payments by credit cards. And there is a big
handicap for those with some disabilities that cannot reach this type of service because
of the limitations of the system or just due to its own physical limitations. For instance, a
deaf person would be able to use the system, but not a visually impaired one. The same
happens with people with mobility disability, some special bikes could be included to the
system in order to decrease the number of people without access. But these special bikes
are not being considered in this assessment, even though the possibility of doing it in the
future should be studied.
Another aspect that should be included in the accessibility evaluation, is the distance
between stations or the density per square kilometer. Being from 250 to 300m the most
recommended distance, and from 10 to 16 stations per square kilometer [A. Cohen et al.
2018]. In section 8.3 the stations have been designed and organized. Therefore it can be
evaluated whether it is accessible or not using these parameters.
Calculus method: The indicator seeks to measure the accessibility impact of a bike-
sharing system on people. Despite not everyone will have access, it will not affect neg-
atively either to their current situation. On the other hand, it will have a good impact in
part of the population, because their transport possibilities will be increased with the im-
plementation of a bike sharing system.
On the other hand, from the point of view of the stations density, the evaluation will follow
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
79
==PAGE:88==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 10
a criterion where 0 will be a situation without bikes. Because the current accessibility
situation cannot worsen with the implementation of a bike sharing system. And the values
from 1 to 3 will be assigned as follows:
• 1 if density is equal or lower than 10 stations, or whether distance between stations
is equal or greater than 500 meters.
• 2 if density is in between 10 and 15 stations, or whether distance between stations
is around 250 to 500 meters.
• 3 if density is equal or greater than 15 stations, or whether distance between stations
is equal or less than 250 meters.
Numerical evaluation: The numerical assessment for this indicator is +2 for scenarios 1
and 3, and +1 for scenario 2. Results according to table 8.8 and the evaluation mentioned
above.
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
+2
+1
+2
Table 10.3: Evaluation of accessibility for the three scenarios
10.1.2
Quality of life
The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) uses eleven in-
dicators to measure the quality of life in each country. These are housing, income, jobs,
community, education, environment, civic engagement, health, life satisfaction, safety and
work-life balance. Depending on the country, the importance that people give to each in-
dicator is different. Generally in Europe, health, education and environment have been
stated as the most important aspects to people. [Economic Cooperation and Develop-
ment 2016]
Denmark’s quality of life index is above the average stated by the OECD in many aspects,
except income and wealth. Nevertheless, its average grade is 7.6 which is higher than
the OECD average of 6.5 [Economic Cooperation and Development n.d.]. Either way,
quality of life is an aspect that can always improve and the aspects that define it, are in
continuous change.
According to Britannica dictionary, the term ”quality of life” has two senses:
The term quality of life (...) can refer both to the experience an individual
has of his or her own life and to the living conditions in which individuals find
themselves [Britannica n.d.].
This indicator aims to evaluate the second part of the definition, how the living conditions of
DTU’s population will vary with the implementation of a bike sharing system. To meet this
purpose, three sub-indicators are going to be assessed: time saving, accessible pricing
and traffic.
Time saving
Description: Nowadays time is precious, and many people prefer to use a non-sustainable
way in their daily commutes in order to arrive as fast as possible to their destination. How-
ever, with the implementation of micromoblity solutions, like the bike sharing system, the
time of many commutes gets very similar to motorized vehicles, that due to traffic jams
can become slower.
80
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:89==
Chapter 10
MSc Thesis
The implementation of this system will help improve not only access to public transport
but also the communication between buildings. It is considered that the average speed
on foot is 5 km / h, while cycling at a moderate speed is 20 km / h. Hence, the use of
bikes will lead to reducing the travel time by approximately 75 %.[Kaloc 2018]
Calculus method: This indicator aims to measure the impact of establishing a bike shar-
ing system in time saving. To measure how beneficial it can be, the time it takes on foot or
by public transport will be compared to the time it will take using a bicycle. Five minutes
will be added to the bicycle trip to take into account the unlocking and locking of the bike.
The data will be obtained from Google Maps or, for the displacements on campus, from
the answers of the survey.
Numerical evaluation: Each scenario will be assessed independently since distances
are different. The numerical evaluation will be negative if travel time is increased with the
use of the bike, zero if there is no change, and positive if it gets reduced. For both the
increase and the decrease, up to 25% will be ± 1, from 25 to 50% ± 2 and greater than
50% will be ± 3.
1. Scenario 1: To evaluate if the bike sharing system will reduce commuting times,
the results from the survey have been consulted. On DTU Lyngby campus, people
spends an average of 16 minutes walking around campus, being the maximum time
53 minutes and the minimum 2 minutes (Graphic 10.1). Considering that bike trips
can reduce this time by 75%, the average trip will be done in 9 minutes, 4 minutes for
the trip and 5 minutes for locking-unlocking the bike. Therefore, the positive impact
is pretty clear. Travel time is reduced almost to half to what it will take on foot (44%
of reduction). And hereby, numerical evaluation is (+2).
Figure 10.1: How long is your longest route on foot around campus?
2. Scenario 2: This scenario has two clear differences, accommodations located within
the campus and the ones located outside. Calculus has been made from the ac-
commodation to building 101 in order to have a clear reference. Building 101 has
been chosen because it is the central building and the most visited one.
Hardly anyone uses public transportation to get around campus if there is a more
affordable alternative [Appendix E, section E.2]. This can be due to the elevated
cost of commuting on campus, which is minimum 16 kroner. Therefore, the time-
saving comparison on campus will be done between commuting on foot or by bike.
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
81
==PAGE:90==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 10
On the other hand, for those accommodations outside campus, it is more usual to go
by public transportation. Thus, the comparison will focus on the difference between
using public transport or a bike.
Table 10.4 shows that biking is usually the fastest way to arrive at university, and
when it is not, the difference is within 1 to 3 minutes range.
Scenario 2
To B101
Going by bike increases
or decreases travel time?
Accommodations
On foot
By bike
Public
transport
Km
On foot
vs Bike
Public transport
vs Bike
Campus Village
13
3
5
8
11
1
-5 minutes
-38%
-3 minutes
-27.27%
Hempel Kollegiet
10
2
5
7
8
0.8
-3 minutes
-30%
-1 minute
-12.50%
Kampsax Kollegiet
5
2
5
7
-
0.4
2 minutes
40%
No service
No service
Linde Alle Student Residence
57
17
5
22
21
4.9
-35 minutes
-61%
1 minute
4.76%
Nordvej Student Residence
12
3
5
8
13
1
-4 minutes
-33%
-5 minutes
-38.46%
P.O.Pedersen Kollegiet
59
20
5
25
24
4.7
-34 minutes
-58%
1 minute
4.17%
Paul Bergsøe Kollegiet
56
16
5
21
22
4.5
-35 minutes
-63%
-1 minute
-4.55%
Professor Ostenfeld Kollegiet
10
3
5
8
9
0.8
-2 minutes
-20%
-1 minute
-11.11%
Lyngby St
38
11
5
16
15
3
-22 minutes
-58%
1 minute
6.67%
Color legend with numerical evaluation
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
(Data in minutes)
Table 10.4: Travel time comparison for scenario 2.
Following the criterion stated above, values have been assigned to the results in
table 10.4, a positive average evaluation of 1 has been obtained for those living on
campus and an small negative average of -0.2 for those living outside (Table 10.5).
Considering that accommodations located on campus will be also considered in
scenario 1, it can be concluded that the evaluation of this scenario is negative with
a value of -0.2 .
Quantity
On campus
Outside campus
Numerical Evaluation
Foot vs Bike
Public transport vs Bike
-3
0
0
-2
1
0
-1
0
3
0
0
0
1
0
2
2
3
0
3
0
0
Average
1.00
-0.20
Table 10.5: Numerical evaluation of time saving in scenario 2.
3. Scenario 3: For the third scenario, the travel time comparison has been done be-
tween bike and public transport, because extra stations are located outside campus.
(Table 10.6)
82
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:91==
Chapter 10
MSc Thesis
Scenario 3
To B101
Going by bike increases
or decreases travel time?
On foot
By bike
Public transport
Km
Public transport vs Bike
Swimming pool
21
6
5
11
12
1.7
-1 minute
-8.33%
Lyngby storecenter
30
8
5
13
16
2.3
-3 minutes
-18.75%
Cinema
30
10
5
15
17
2.4
-2 minutes
-11.76%
Lyngby Hovedgade
34
10
5
15
16
2.7
-1 minute
-6.25%
Lyngby Bibliotek
32
10
5
15
24
2.5
-9 minutes
-37.50%
Lyngby St
38
11
5
16
15
3
1 minute
6.67%
Color legend
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
(Data in minutes)
Table 10.6: Travel time comparison for Scenario 3
In two out of six stations, the travel time gets reduced by more than 2 minutes, and
only in one station it increases by one minute comparing to public transport (Table
10.7).
Quantity
Numerical Evaluation
Public transport vs Bike
-3
0
-2
0
-1
1
0
0
1
4
2
1
3
0
Average
0.83
Table 10.7: Numerical evaluation of time saving in Scenario 3
It is important to point out that these numbers are from google maps and they are not
considering traffic jams. Hence, long distances must be observed deeper, because as
stated by Karolina [Karolina 2018], in Denmark with a bike you can save loads of time
and become independent of public transport.
Accessible pricing
Description: A reasonable pricing when implementing a system is very important for both
the user and the operator. Denmark’s public transport is expensive, and therefore people
usually commutes with their own bike or mixing means of transport to reduce the price.
According to UNESCAP and CITYNET 2012, for a sustainable service be affordable the
percentage of total income that people spent on using the transport system should be less
than 15 – 20 percent and the cost of travel using a public transit should be much lower
than the cost of using a personal transport.
Moreover, according to Henderson-Bird 2020,
By implementing more accessible pricing programmes and other equity-focused
services as well as through the CBO partners, there is a concerted effort to im-
prove the quality of life for the broadest spectrum of people through expanded
mobility offerings.
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
83
==PAGE:92==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 10
Survey respondents have been asked, what would be the right price for them, and which
types of fares would they be interested at. The options given for a semester fare were,
from less than 100 dkk to more than 250 dkk. And types of fares offered were semester
fare, 12/24h renting and minute fare.
As decided in section 8.1, semester fares will cost 150 dkk and minute renting will be
1dkk/min (Or less depending on the package chosen). For accommodations, the price
will be 100 dkk/month. If these fares are compared with the price of public transportation
( minimum 16 dkk within the same sector, even if it is just one stop), the bike sharing
system is definitely more accessible. [Rejseplanen n.d.]
Calculus method: In order to evaluate this indicator, it is going to be considered as
”accessible price” if the semester price satisfies more than 50% of population. Being 3
when the value is ∈[0, 10] ∪[90, 100], 2 for the percentage ∈]10, 30[∪]70, 90[, and finally 1
for those ∈[30, 50[∪]50, 70]. Values will be negative from 0 to 50 and positive otherwise.
Numerical evaluation: Graph 8.2a shows that demand is satisfied in more than 50%
when choosing 150 dkk as a semester fare. It satisfies 71% of the demand, which gives
a numerical value of +2. This evaluation is valid for both, scenario 1 and 3, but will be
different for scenario 2.
Since different fares are proposed to people living at accommodations, the graph varies,
as it does the situation. Pricing for people in accommodations has been decided to be
100 dkk/month in section 8.1. This means taking into consideration 100% of the demand.
Therefore, it will be assessed with a value of +3.
Traffic
Description: It has been proved that giving better access to public transport, car rides
are reduced. [Consulting 2020] Which is understandable after the first/last mile problem
commented in section 3.2.
e-scooters have the potential to serve as a catalyst toward post-car inner cities
by becoming the missing last-mile complement to public transport and helping
change urban mobility habits [Consulting 2020]
Moreover, an study carried out in Eindhoven by mobility experts has shown that enhancing
shared mobility can reduce car usage. Also Voi launched a survey to its users from where
it obtained that 63% of them combine e-scooters with public transport. And according to
Consulting 2020 12% of e-scooter rides replace cars, taxi or ride hailing.
...researchers in France found that the best predictor of switching between a
car ride and public transit was easier access to public transport, rather than
an improved public transport quality. [Consulting 2020]
One of the benefits stated by Consulting 2020 is getting people out of their cars:
Commuter trips and car replacement increase over time. This suggests that
as a service matures, the more likely it is to be used for commuting purposes
rather than leisure. This could be linked to increased reliability of service, and
to the fact that citizens have now had the time to integrate the new service in
their daily commutes.
This indicator aims to assess the reduction of traffic on and towards DTU campus due to
the bike sharing system.
Calculus method: Taking into consideration the data commented above, no calculus
84
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:93==
Chapter 10
MSc Thesis
is needed. It has been demonstrated that micromobility reduces car usage. This data
shows a general number that includes cars, taxi and ride hailing. And the value is not
very high. Hence, every scenario will have the same evaluation (+1), which means that
an improvement in the reduction of traffic will be noticed, but slightly.
The overall evaluation of Quality of life is summarized below.
Quality of life
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
Time saving
+2
-0.2
+0.83
Accessible pricing
+2
+3
+2
Traffic
+1
+1
+1
Average
+1.67
+1.27
+1.28
Table 10.8: Summary table of sub-indicator: Quality of life
10.1.3
Values
The word ”Value” has different meanings, but the one chosen for this indicator is the
following.
The regard that something is held to deserve; the importance, worth, or use-
fulness of something.[Oxford n.d.]
Nowadays, everyone owns many things, some are trivial and others more valuable. For
instance, comparing between throwing a mobile phone or a framed photo, people rarely
will decide to throw the phone. This is because the photo can be printed again for a few
coins, while the mobile phone will cost way more to fix. The purpose of this example
is to show that everything has a value, when talking about economics it is easier to see
preferences. But when looking into people’s hobbies, friendships or food tastes it is difficult
to generalize.
However, some daily preferences are general, like efficient mobility. Almost everyone
wants to arrive to their destination in the most efficient and fast way. And bike sharing can
bring that to DTU campus.
Achieving better connections can improve the value of the campus from a staff-proffesor-
student perspective. Also, the environmental approach that a bike sharing system can
bring, could improve the attractiveness of the campus, making people stay longer, so-
cialize, and do group activities. Finally, but not least, the implementation of bike lanes
on campus and towards Lyngby will increase the safety feeling and create prosperous
conditions for the use of the bike sharing system as it has been commented in section
3.2.
Along this section, three sub-indicators are going to be assessed to complete the indi-
cator definition of Value. These sub-indicators are attractiveness, cyclability and building
connectivity.
Space released
Description: A station-based bike sharing system can bring space and neat seeing to
the place where it is located. This system will reduce the number of cars on campus, as
mentioned in section 10.1.2, realising some of the car-parking spots that can be reused
to bike sharing stations or to create new space for leisure.
According to Consulting 2020, a micromobility parking is way more productive than a
car parking . This is because devices in sharing systems are continuously moving while
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
85
==PAGE:94==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 10
private cars are parked 95% of the time.
Bikeshare stations enable more potential consumers to access a commercial
area compared to vehicle parking, (...). A parking space would have to turn
over 10.3 times per day to generate the same amount of revenue generated
by a seven-dock bikeshare station.[Gauthier et al. 2013]
A parking space is 2.5x5 meters. If a bike usually does between 4 to 8 trips (when the
system is properly designed) and according to figure 10.2 7 bikes can be accommodated
in one car-parking area. If we compare capacities, the car can carry between 1 and 5
people and the station minimum 7. Being up to 24 or 56 people if bike usage is taken
into account. Considering that the average passenger occupancy in a car is 1.2, it can be
clearly seen how bike sharing stations are way more efficient.
Therefore stations will not create negative landscape impacts or reduce space on campus,
rather will bring new spaces while reducing car usage.
(a) Perpendicular bike parking.
(b) Angled bike parking.
Figure 10.2: Light rail ring 3
Including in this evaluation the safety feeling of bike lanes that will be implemented ac-
cording to Universitet 2019c. Attractiveness of the network will increase.
Therefore, this indicator is evaluating the use of space and all the new implementations
on campus that may lead to greater use of bicycles.
Calculus method: The number of stations needed and the space occupied in each sce-
nario will be obtained. And it will be compared with the 12% reduction of car usage.
Hence, whether or not the space needed is greater/minor than the space released by
cars, the evaluation will be negative or positive respectively.
Therefore, if the final space released is from 0 to 4% of total parking lots, the evaluation
will be up to ±1, between 4 and 8% up to ±2 and from 8 to 12% up to ±3.
Numerical evaluation: Considering a total of 1384 parking lots (table 10.9) which dimen-
sions are 5x2.5 meters (12.5 sq. m.). The 12% reduction will lead to release 2076 square
meters.
86
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:95==
Chapter 10
MSc Thesis
Parking lot Amount
Building 116
110
Building 325
100
Building 421
134
Between quadrants 1 and 2
536
Between quadrants 3 and 4
504
Table 10.9: Number of parking space at each parking lot [Þrastarson 2017]
On the other hand, a bike parked perpendicular occupies an area of 2x0.6 meters (1.2 sq.
m.). Therefore, depending on the Scenario, it can be compared whether or not the space
released thanks to micromobility systems is actually released or reused by the system
itself.
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
Number of docks needed
843
939
951
Space needed for stations [sq. m.]
1011.6
1126.8
1141.2
Space released by cars [sq. m.]
2076
Difference [sq.m.]
1064.4
949.2
934.8
% of parking lot
6.15%
5.49%
5.40%
Table 10.10: Space released by implementing the BSS.
Summing up, the evaluation for each scenario will be the following.
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
Evaluation
+1.54
+1.37
+1.35
Table 10.11: Caption
Cyclability
Description: Having an adequate infrastructure is really important when attracting peo-
ple. No matter how amazing your system is, if the infrastructure supporting it is not appro-
priate, users will not make use of it. Therefore, this indicator aims to assess how many
bike lanes or paths are in the area of study of each scenario.
Calculus method: This indicator will count the kilometers of bike lanes on each scenario
over the streets in the area of influence. In the case of the accommodations the shorter
route will be chosen and evaluated.
Numerical evaluation: The assessment will consider that half of the streets with a bike
lane will be an steady situation (0). Then if they are more or less the evaluation will take
positive or negative values.
Forty-five streets have been counted on DTU Lyngby campus. Scenario 1, has eighteen
bike lanes. Scenario 2 has 18 plus 7.9, from the 8 accommodations chosen. This 7.9 is
because around 10% of the path towards Linde Allé is cycling friendly but not a bike lane.
And Scenario 3, has been evaluated as 18 plus 4.9. Being the 0.9 because the path to
the swimming pool is not considered as bicycle friendly.
Therefore, evaluation for these 3 scenarios, considering that for accommodations and
Lyngby locations only one street has been considered (the shorter path), is the following.
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
87
==PAGE:96==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 10
Streets
Bike lanes
Evaluation
Scenario 1
45
18
40%
-0.60
Scenario 2
53
25.9
49%
-0.07
Scenario 3
50
22.9
46%
-0.25
Table 10.12: Evaluation of indicator: Cyclability
Physical building connections
Description: Every construction, from a park to a building needs good infrastructure and
access to be connected with the rest of the world and attract people. When being on a
university campus, there are sometimes forgotten buildings. This mean that even though
they may have access through sidewalks or small streets, the network available does not
invite to discover them.
On DTU, people is pretty busy and usually goes to study/work and comes back home.
And in case they have small breaks they will go to their comfort areas. Hence, those
unknown buildings will remain the same. But what if a BSS is implemented and stations
are established nearby?
Karolina 2018 says in her post
I visited many incredible places which I would not have been able to see when
traveling by bus, or would have been too lazy to walk to.
Thus, the indicator seeks the evaluation of how new stations can help improving/deterio-
rating physical connections.
Calculus method: A list of buildings has been created and the number of modes of trans-
port that can be used to get there have been counted (in a 300 meters range, considering
it accessible by car if there is a parking lot next to it). Considering scenario 0 as the cur-
rent situation and scenarios 1,2,3 for the evaluation. The percentage of them that suffer
from an improvement or a deterioration in its connections will be the method to measure
this indicator.
The values will be from -3 to +3 depending on the percentage of buildings that have an
improvement, stays steady or the connections suffer from a deterioration.
Numerical evaluation: Table G.1 shows the results of the study and the following table
(10.13) shows the evaluation. It has been assessed by obtaining a percentage of im-
provement over the total number of buildings. Hence, if improvement goes from ±0 to
34% will be evaluated up to ±1, from ±34 to 67% will be up to ±2 and from ±67 to 100%
will be up to ±3.
Buildings
DETERIORATES
STEADY
IMPROVES
Evaluation
Scenario 1
97
0
5
92
94.85%
+2.69
Scenario 2
105
0
5
100
95.24%
+2.71
Scenario 3
101
0
5
96
95.05%
+2.70
Table 10.13: Evaluation of indicator: Physical building connections.
88
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:97==
Chapter 10
MSc Thesis
10.1.4
Overall social evaluation
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
Inclusion
1.75
1.83
1.75
Quality of life
1.67
1.27
1.28
Values
1.21
1.34
1.27
Overall evaluation
1.54
1.48
1.43
Table 10.14: Overall assessment of Social Pillar.
Figure 10.3: Spider graph comparing the results of the three scenarios for the social pillar.
10.2
Environmental Indicators
10.2.1
Healthiness
Being and feeling healthy should be a priority to everyone, and sometimes is as easy as
walking or cycling everyday for a period of time. However, not everyone has the time
to do so. Bike sharing systems can solve this problem by introducing a workout in daily
commutes.
To be fit and healthy you need to be physically active. Regular physical activity
can help protect you from serious diseases such as obesity, heart disease,
cancer, mental illness, diabetes and arthritis. Riding your bicycle regularly is
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
89
==PAGE:98==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 10
one of the best ways to reduce your risk of health problems associated with a
sedentary lifestyle...[Health 2013]
Cycling is a low impact exercise, time-efficient and accessible to people of all ages. When
using a bike on an everyday basis, there is a large list of benefits it can be obtained.
[Health 2013]
• increased cardiovascular fitness
• increased muscle strength and flexibility
• improved joint mobility
• decreased stress levels
• improved posture and coordination
• strengthened bones
• decreased body fat levels
• prevention or management of disease
• reduced anxiety and depression.
In order to assess how benefitial or not would be a bike sharing system on the scenarios
presented in this project, two indicators will be evaluated: Benefits of including biking on
daily commutes and Outdoor activities.
Benefits of including biking on daily commutes
Description: Being fit does not necessarily mean go to the gym. Sometimes workout is
as simple as taking the bike or walking to your job place.
Researchers from London investigated the relationship between various com-
muting methods and obesity risk. Data from 150,000 participants revealed
that both walking and cycling showed better results than taking a car or public
transport. Walking was associated with significantly reduced BMI and body
fat, but to a lesser extent than cycling. The average study participant who cy-
cled to work would weigh about 5 kg less than a similar person commuting by
car.” [Kaloc 2018]
Moreover, according to Kaloc 2018, Cycling is more time-efficient, burns more calories,
and is better at keeping you fit and slim. However, it has a drawback, which is maintenance
of the bike. You can end up enjoying it, as stated in the article, or you can use a bike
sharing system and skip that ”tough” part of cycling.
Calculus method: Considering that around 50% of DTU’s population is interested in long-
term fees, it can be assumed that this percentage will make use of the BSS and therefore
improve their healthy habits. Dividing the total population into three (0-34%,34-67% and
67-100%) benefits will be assessed.
Numerical evaluation: Due to the usage assumption, which considers that only 10%
of population will make use of the bike sharing system and applying the 50% of long-
term fees, only 5% of population will have healthier habits due to the BSS. Therefore for
scenarios 1 and 3 the evaluation will be up to +1.
For scenario 2 calculus must be adjusted. And hereby, those coming from the accommo-
dations must be included (10% of total DTU’s population). If 32% is interested in renting
and 67% in long-term fees, 0.21% must be applied. And therefore, from the interest of
90
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:99==
Chapter 10
MSc Thesis
people on campus, the 5% will be converted in a 4.5% after applying the 90% of the total
population. Hence, 4.71% of population will benefit form the BSS. This assigns +1 to the
evaluation.
Interest in long-term fee
Evaluation
Scenario 1
5.00%
0.15
Scenario 2
4.71%
0.14
Scenario 3
5.00%
0.15
Table 10.15: Evaluation of indicator: Benefits of including biking on daily commutes
Outdoor activities
Description: The system offers rentals of 12 or 24 hours. Considering that a person
experiences a general improvement on health only with two to four hours a week of exer-
cise, this renting fee aims to encourage people to do biking excursions. Moreover, since
the system designed is with pedal assisted bikes, everyone will be able to make long
excursions without fear of running out of energies.
This indicator seeks the evaluation of how many people from DTU would be interested in
this type of renting, and therefore how many people will increase their healthy habits.
Calculus method: The interest in 12/24 hours renting obtained from the survey will be
assessed. As it has been done previously, three stages will be evaluated (0-34%,34-67%
and 67-100%), going from zero (no change) to +3 (the whole population gets benefits
from it).
Numerical evaluation: According to results from the survey, 8% of respondents in sce-
nario 1 and 3 will be interested on that renting (survey that has been considered repre-
sentative of population). Considering that the system is based on the assumption of ”only
10% of population will make use of the system”, 0.8% of population will benefit from this
fare.
Regarding scenario 2, the 20% of accommodation users is interested on that fare. But it
has to be taken into account that only 10% of population comes from accommodations and
from those only 32% is interested in renting bikes to go to DTU. Hence, it represents an
interest of 0.64% (20% x 32% x 10% ). Therefore, from the 90% of popoulation remaning,
the interest is the already mentioned 8%. Hereby, 7.2% (8% x 90% ) will be interested.
Again, considering only the 10% of DTU’s population as interested people in the system,
0.784% of population [(0.64% + 7.2% ) x 10% ] is interested in renting a bike with a 12/24
hours fare in scenario 2.
Interest in 12/24h fare
Evaluation
Scenario 1
0.80%
0.0240
Scenario 2
0.78%
0.0235
Scenario 3
0.80%
0.0240
Table 10.16: Evaluation of indicator: Outdoor activities
10.2.2
Mobility
According to Cambridge-dictionary n.d. dictionary, mobility is defined as
the ability to move freely or be easily moved.
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
91
==PAGE:100==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 10
But in order to be moved, some systems are needed. For instance, buses, metro, train,
bikes etc. And these systems need established stations where to stop and pick-up/leave
the passengers. However, sometimes available stations are not enough and cannot be
increased. Hence, a backing from other systems is necessary.
This reinforcement of the transportation system can be done by micromobility solutions,
as it has been mentioned throughout the whole project. This new way of moving aims to
create multi-modal stations where transfers get easier. According to Consulting 2020,
“The main upside of micromobility is that it contributes to building a more sus-
tainable city, with well-connected seamless mobility while reducing traffic. We
aim to provide citizens with a shared mobility network that improves urban
sustainability by encouraging multi-modal transport rather than cars.” Chris-
tian Humpert.
Throughout the following sub-indicators it is going to be assessed whether mobility is
going to be improved with the implementation of a bike sharing system.
Multi-modal stations
Description: Station is defined by Cambridge-dictionary n.d. as
a building and the surrounding area where buses or trains stop for people to
get on or off.
But bus stations can be as simple as canopies in the middle of a street. Therefore, stations
are buildings or small structures, like canopies, where generally buses or trains stop for
people to get on or off.
Hence, a multi-modal stations are those where more than one mode of transport stops.
At DTU campus, on scenario 0, there are 2 light rail stations, 14 bus stops, and a multi-
modal station on Rævehøjvej, DTU where both light rail and bus stops.
This indicator aims to assess whether the BSS will increase multi-modal stations.
Calculus method: The calculus will be simple. For instance, if 10 stations are imple-
mented and all of them are multi-modal stations, the indicator will measure a 100% im-
provement within the system.
Numerical evaluation: The numerical evaluation will follow the system implemented in
section 10.2.1. Which is dividing the total population into three groups (0-34%,34-67%
and 67-100%) being assessed as 1,2 or 3.
Five stations are multi-modal in scenario 1, the two bus stops on the highway (Ræve-
højvej, DTU and Klampenborgvej), one in sector 3a, other in sector 4b and finally one in
Lyngby St.
Scenario 2 has all these five stations plus one in Poul Bergsøe Kollegiet. Having a total
of 6 multi-modal stations.
Finally, in scenario 3 the bibliotek, the cinema, the storecenter and the swimming pool
stations are included as multi-modal stations. This lead to a total of 9.
Comparing these numbers with the total numbers of stations implemented, already men-
tioned in table 8.8, to obtain the percentage.
92
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:101==
Chapter 10
MSc Thesis
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
Multi-modal stations
5
6
9
Total stations
20
28
25
Percentage
25.0%
21.4%
36.0%
Evaluation
0.75
0.64
1.08
Table 10.17: Assessment of multi-modal indicator
Variability of means of transport used by DTU’s population
Description: There is a wide variety of means of transport arriving to DTU or that can
be combined to reach the campus. The most common ways are buses, trains, cars and
bikes. People who lives far away has the tendency of change more frequently the mean
of transport to get to their destination. This can be observed on Figure 10.4, where the
further they live the more transport means they use.
Figure 10.4: Variability of means of transport used by DTU’s population depending on
distance to campus.
Focusing on the means of transport used, people that uses a private car usually just make
use of that mean of transport, the same happens with people who owns a bike. And those
who rent a bike rarely use another mean of transport.
On the other hand, bus and train are the ones with a wide variety of options, meaning that
are not used as the preferred mean, being more obvious in the case of the train, where
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
93
==PAGE:102==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 10
almost no-one use it as unique mean of transport. Walking is equitably distributed, and
the same happens with shared car. (Figure 10.6)
Figure 10.5: Population percentage depending on
the distance they have to travel to get to DTU.
Potential users of the network are
those living far away and often
changing the mean of transport,
since indicates predisposition to
different alternatives. This is peo-
ple living further than 5km as
shown in Figure 10.4. Hence, go-
ing deeper into population’s pro-
files, the percentage of people liv-
ing further than 5 km is 68%,
which has been obtained from fig-
ure 10.5.
This indicator aims to assess how
many people will benefit from the
implementation of a bike sharing
system. According to the number
of means of transport that they use
and therefore, due to their predis-
position towards trying new systems.
Figure 10.6: Means of transport used by DTU’s population.
94
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:103==
Chapter 10
MSc Thesis
Calculus method: To obtain the percentage of people who is probable that will benefit
from the system, the percentage of people living further than 5 kilometers has been ob-
tained. Which is 68% as already mentioned in the description. But these percentage is
including population who only uses one mean of transport. Hence, these people will be
eliminated. Finally, 36% of population will get benefit from the system, which will probably
improve their daily mobility.
Means of transport
One
Two
Three
Four
Total
0 to 2 km
66%
32%
2%
0%
44
2 to 5 km
75%
20%
5%
0%
56
5 to 10 km
46%
39%
14%
2%
57
10 to 15 km
50%
26%
18%
5%
92
more than 15 km
45%
24%
24%
7%
58
Table 10.18: Representation of the variability within the different distance ranges.
Numerical evaluation: This indicator has the same evaluation for all scenarios since
it is considering DTU’s population distance to the campus. Applying the methodology
already commented, dividing into three blocks the percentage from zero to one hundred,
this indicator has a value of +1.07.
More than 5 km
67%
Minus those using only one mean
36%
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
1.07
1.07
1.07
Table 10.19: Caption
Crowdedness of public transportation
Description: Even though the light rail is comming, many people will still use the bus
and the train. Actually, many people takes the train even if takes longer because of the
crowdedness of the 150S. Having alternatives to release the public tranportation is very
important and a bike sharing system can help in these aspect.
Throughout the survey, respondents were asked ” How do you think a BSS would improve
your daily routine?”. 36% answered that ”It will allow me to go to Lyngby without using
public transport” and ”It would let me choose whether I want to take the train or the bus
to get to DTU”. These results show that at least 36% is interested in avoiding public
transportation when other options are available.
Calculus method: Considering the facts mentioned above, and taking into account that
the most crowded mean of transport is usually the bus. Crowdedness of buses will be
reduced in a 36% maximum.
Numerical evaluation: Considering that an augment of the users will have a negative
punctuation, this indicator will be measured from -100% of change and 100%. Being -100
duplicating the amount of people on buses and 100 being empty.
Scenario 1 and 3 will have the same grade, with a reduction of 36%. But regarding sce-
nario 2, it will only reduce its crowdedness when deciding how to get to Lyngby. Therefore
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
95
==PAGE:104==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 10
it will be reduced in a 21%.
Crowdedness
Evaluation
Scenario 1
-36%
1.081
Scenario 2
-21%
0.628
Scenario 3
-36%
1.081
Table 10.20: Data and evaluation of indicator: Crowdedness of public transportation
10.2.3
Awareness
From a few years ago the term ”eco friendly” is present in our everyday life, which means
designed to have little or no damaging effect on the environment. [Cambridge-
dictionary n.d.]
Governments implement sustainable policies, the television is continuously telling us that
the planet needs our help. Plastic, CO2 emissions, non-renewable energies and other
important aspects must be reduced if we want future generations to live safely. Even
some young celebrities have become viral on social media transmitting this important
message.
Despite all these efforts, there are still people using their private cars when other options
are available, usually as cheap as walking. But on the other hand, there are many people
who has internalized this problem and is now aware of the huge environmental problem
that our planet is facing.
Bike sharing systems and in general micromobility and MaaS, try to help the environ-
ment by improving mobility and discouraging people from using private motorized vehi-
cles. Throughout the survey, the feeling of being more environmentally friendly and the
importance that people give to it have tried to be evaluated.
Environmental awareness
Description: Environmental awareness is ...
...being aware of the natural environment and making choices that benefit–
rather than hurt–the earth. [Sullivan 2019]
These choices can be switching off the lights when are not necessary, closing the tap when
brushing our teeth, and using environmentally friendly solutions when traveling. DTU is a
university dedicated toward sustainability. The 17 SDGs are something that every course
has implemented in its summary.
Hence, this indicator aims to evaluate the awareness people have of sustainable mobility.
Not everyone gives the importance that it has using eco-friendly solutions when commut-
ing to work. Then, how many people has this awareness in DTU?. Throughout the survey,
the answer to this question has been searched.
Calculus method: The percentage of people that answered that a bike sharing system
will help them to be more environmentally friendly will be counted. The evaluation process
will be the same as in indicator 10.2.2 Crowdedness of public transportation.
Numerical evaluation:
96
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:105==
Chapter 10
MSc Thesis
Awareness
Evaluation
Scenario 1
13%
0.402
Scenario 2
16%
0.474
Scenario 3
13%
0.402
Table 10.21: Evaluation of indicator: Environmental awareness
Use of sharing mobility systems
Description: Another indicator of environmental awareness is the use of shared means
of transport for daily commutes. This practice denotes interest towards the environment
and is an important step towards having an eco friendly life.
People organize to drive together, usually to save time or money. But intentionally or not,
they are collaborating in the fight against climate change.
This indicator aims to measure how many people choose this mean of transport when
going to university.
Calculus method: From Graphic 10.6, it can be observed that at least one person uses
car sharing for commuting everyday. Followed by people using two or four means of
transport per week. And finally, those using 3 means of transport are the potential users
of car sharing. In total 3% of DTU’s population makes use of car-sharing for commuting.
Numerical evaluation: The value obtained is really low and so it is its evaluation, which
is positive but almost steady.
Awareness
Evaluation
Scenario 1
3%
0.08
Scenario 2
3%
0.08
Scenario 3
3%
0.08
Table 10.22: Caption
10.2.4
Overall Environmental evaluation
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
Healthiness
0.09
0.08
0.09
Mobility
0.97
0.78
1.08
Awareness
0.24
0.28
0.24
Overall evaluation
0.43
0.38
0.47
Table 10.23: Overall assessment of Environmental Pillar.
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
97
==PAGE:106==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 10
Figure 10.7: Spider graph comparing the results of the three scenarios for the social pillar.
10.3
Economic Indicators
10.3.1
Investment
One of the best manners to assess an economic impact is looking into the costs of imple-
mentation and the incomes. In a bike sharing system this is the cost of bikes, stations,
repositioning equipment, process and staff. Software is also a high cost in this systems
because is the core of the system for it to functioning.
On the other hand, there are incomes that can help with the amortization of the system.
However, the system usually is not economically sustainable. Meaning that incomes from
users fees does not cover operational costs neither the capital. But incomes does not
only come from the fees, sponsorship, government funds and advertising are some of the
most common procedures to get a profitable system.
Indicators will bring some examples of bike sharing systems in order to evaluate them.
Capital bikeshare and Ecobici have been chosen for being two extreme cases. Capital
bikeshare has a low market penetration while Ecobici is one of the systems with the most
impact in the market. [A. Cohen et al. 2018]
Capital costs
Description: Costs in station-based systems are pretty high because of the stations cost.
Stations are the larger cost in this type of systems, so it is in the one presented in this
project.
According to A. Cohen et al. 2018, stations cost between 40,000 and 50,000$. And bikes
cost from 100 to 2,000$, being 1,500$ a normal price for a bicycle with high specifications.
This indicator aims to evaluate whether the cost is similar to other systems. Once it is
known to what extent is similar, it will be evaluated from -3 to -1. In scenario zero university
do not spend money (0). But when implementing a bike sharing system, it is spending
98
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:107==
Chapter 10
MSc Thesis
money on the equipment. Therefore, even if afterwards generates benefits, the initial
investment is always negative.
Calculus method: Considering the case of Mexico (Ecobici), Virginia and Washintong
DC (capital bikeshare), it would be possible to understand whether the cost has been
properly forecasted or not. Whashington is including costs of planning and implementing
the network, hence it has not be considered for the interpolation. Data of number of bikes
and stations is from the first implementation in order to be compared with the initial costs.
Table 10.24 shows that there is a difference between real initial investment and the fore-
cast. Considering that the forecast is not taking into account the rebalancing vehicles/e-
quipment neither the control center.
Bikes
Stations
Initial cost [$]
Cost Estimate [$]
Difference [$]
Ecobici
1,000
85
5,750,000
5,325,000
425,000
Virginia
54
6
400,000
351,000
49,000
Capital bikeshare
400
49
5,000,000
2,805,000
2,195,000
Interpolation
The case
Scenario 1
402
20
1,348,101
1,503,000
-154,899
Scenario 2
432
28
1,889,873
1,908,000
-18,127
Scenraio 3
443
25
1,686,709
1,789,500
-102,791
Table 10.24: Capital costs forecast and comparison with real cases
The costs are within the ranges provided. Therefore, it is considered representative.
Numerical evaluation: The system presented is an small system that covers a small
area even in scenario 2. Hence, it has been considered that even if costs are big, it could
be even bigger if the system is expanded to a medium or large system. And therefore,
the evaluation considers a slight negative change (-1) from scenario 0. Assessment that
is generalized to all scenarios.
Evaluation
Scenario 1
-1
Scenario 2
-1
Scenario 3
-1
Table 10.25: Evaluation of indicator: Capital costs
Incomes
Description: Some bike sharing systems are for free, which leads to no user incomes.
But usually cover its expenses (operational costs) with sponsorships, advertisements on
the vehicles and stations, or government funds.
In the case at hand, the latter parameters are unknown and would need to be established
by the operator or the owner of the system. But fees are known and can be used to
forecast annual incomes. This has been done in section 8.4. Results obtained show that
only with those incomes it will not be enough to compensate the initial investment.
Therefore, with this indicator is going to be measured whether the fees proposed are
within the usual ranges or not.
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
99
==PAGE:108==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 10
Calculus method: A comparison between different systems will be carried out. This
systems are the same as mentioned before in indicator ”Capital costs”.
Capital bikeshare
Ecobici
This case
Fees
Monthly
28
$
-
16
$
Annual
85
$
480
$
47
$
single trip
2
$
-
-
24h
8
$
108
$
47
$
3 days
17
$
216
$
-
7 days
-
360
$
-
Free travel of
30
min
45
min
-
Table 10.26: Comparison of different fares. Sources: [bikeshare n.d.] & [Ecobici n.d.]
It can be concluded from table 10.26 that the system presented is cheaper than others
when speaking about long-term fees. Regarding casual user fees, the 24h show that
the system is in between both cases. Moreover, travel time is calculated by maps, and
extra free 15 minutes are added to ensure users can arrive without paying any extra.
Nevertheless, if they overcome this time, extra costs will be imputed as other companies
do.
The evaluation will be -1 is it is cheaper than others, -2 if it is in between and -3 if is more
expensive.
Numerical evaluation: The system is less expensive and more permissive in some fares,
and it is in between for casual users. Hence, it has been decided to evaluate it with a value
of -1.5. Negative because not being free for users, and in between -1 and -2 due to the
differences from long-term or casual user fees.
Operational costs
Description: A bike sharing system has many costs, and operational is a group of them.
It includes from the process of repositioning itself to the cost of employing staff.
The system has been designed to repositioning only once a day. However, unmet demand
is 20% of the total displacements. Thus, at least one repositioning must be added.
According to Shu et al. 2013, repositioning should be done from 2 to 4 times a day. More
will be excessive and will increase the costs of the process. Moreover, repositioning is
estimated to be 50% of the total operational costs. The rest will be assigned to employees.
Calculus method: Studying the number of repositions done by other companies, it has
been dicovered that Ecobici has to add bikes on certain stations on rush hours (morning
generally) and remove them from stations with high demand of docks [Aguinaga, Ramirez-
Nafarrate, and Moncayo-Martínez 2016]. Others do a continuous repositioning by volun-
teers who get points for each bike they rebalance from a full station to an empty one
[Vanderbilt 2018]. These points are usually for membership extensions or gift cards.
This indicator aims to assess in a qualitative manner, whether the operational costs of the
system will be high (-3), average (-2) or low (-1).
Numerical evaluation: From the design point of view, the system only has to be rebal-
anced at night which will lead to low operational costs. From the unmet demand perspec-
tive, it needs to be rebalanced more times in order to reduce from 20% of unmet demand
to 2-5% maximum [Aguinaga, Ramirez-Nafarrate, and Moncayo-Martínez 2016].
100
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:109==
Chapter 10
MSc Thesis
Therefore, even if the design is focused on one rebalancing (-1) the system needs more,
and therefore the evaluation is going to rise to -2.
Overall evaluation of inversion
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
Capital costs
-1
-1
-1
Incomes
-1.5
-1.5
-1.5
Operational costs
-2
-2
-2
-1.5
-1.5
-1.5
Table 10.27: Evaluation of indicator: Investment
10.3.2
Economic growth
When implementing new transportation systems objectives can go further than improving
mobility in the area. An example could be to boost economic growth. This could sound
confusing, but looking deeply into it when connectivity is improved it also improves the
access to some business (restaurants, shops, even pharmacies). This could lead to an
increment of incomes to them and therefore an overall improvement in the economy.
But not only from the customer point of view. With greater mobility options, workers can
choose to expand their area of job hunting. Therefore, employers have a wider range for
hiring the appropriate employee, resulting in better job matches.
Better job matches lead to more productive employees, resulting in higher
wages, greater employee job satisfaction, and more profitable businesses.
More productive job matches promote business expansion and faster eco-
nomic growth. Furthermore, since many jobs have moved from the central city
to suburbs, increased mobility makes it easier for residents in the inner city to
find jobs, expanding opportunities for lower-income residents. [Krol 2017]
In conclusion,
The real value of transportation systems is in promoting mobility and, there-
fore, economic activity. [Krol 2017]
Along this section three sub-indicators will be evaluated in order to obtain an overview
of how bike sharing systems can contribute in the economic growth of Lyngby-Taarbæk
kommune.
Generation of employment
Description: As in any other business, bike sharing systems need employees to operate.
There are many functions that need to be covered. Call center staff, and manteinance and
rebalancing staff are the most important. But there are more positions like IT technician,
administrative staff, marketing staff and accountants between others.
According to ROUGE 2016, different staff is needed from the implementation and the
operational phase.
Implementation:
• Launch Manager (who could transition to the Operations Manager post-launch),
• a Marketing and Promotions Coordinator,
• events staff (these could be contract employees),
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
101
==PAGE:110==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 10
• and staff to assemble and install the equipment and set-up the back-end operations
system (depending on the equipment vendor, these services may be provided)
After launch, as a minimum, the following employees must be included:
• an Operations Manager,
• a Marketing and Promotions Coordinator (ideally this person or the Executive Direc-
tor would also be the sponsorship liaison),
• a Station Technician who understands the back-end software and its interface with
the stations,
• a Field Checker who addresses problems with the stations and the bicycles in the
field and may also rebalance the fleet, and
• a Bicycle Mechanic to repair and maintain the bicycles.
Legal, accounting and other similar services can be contracted to a third party (depending
on the business model).
Calculus method:This evaluation is going to be divided by the size of the business. Ac-
cording to Data 2017, business can be divided into 4 groups: micro, small, medium-sized
and large enterprises. This division depends on the number of employees:
• Up to 10 employees, from 10 to 49 employees, from 50 to 249 employees, and 250
or more.
Therefore, the assessment will range from 0 to 3. It starts at zero because job creation is
seen as a positive aspect of economic growth.
Numerical evaluation: According with the staff presented in the definition, seven employ-
ees will be necessary. Consequently, the evaluation will be 0.975 for the three scenarios.
Although time for repositioning may be larger in Scenarios 2 and 3. But this will not mean
more employees but more hours working.
Evaluation
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
0.975
0.975
0.975
Number of employees
7
Table 10.28: Evaluation of indicator: Generation of employment
Facilities popularity
Description: Bike sharing system can help to discover some places or at least making
them more accessible. For instance Lyngby cinema and storecenter. These two stops
are critical for the economic growth of Lyngby. They are both near the city center where
apart from these two big businesses, there are restaurants and grocery shops.
On the other hand, inside DTU campus there are many facilities that can also be benefited
from the connectivity provided by the network. These are the canteens and cafeterias
located as shown in figure G.1.
This indicator aims to assess the accessibility and therefore the potential economic growth
of some business near the stations.
102
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:111==
Chapter 10
MSc Thesis
Calculus method: The number of stations that are next to canteens or have the ”name”
of a facility will be counted over the total number of stations. This will show whether a
scenario is focused on using mobility towards economic growth.
Numerical evaluation: Scenario 1 has 9 stations located near canteens or cafés (Figures
G.1 % ??). Scenario 2 has the same amount because stations on accommodations will be
focused on those buildings and not in its surroundings. Scenario 3 adds three interesting
places: The storecenter, the cinema and the swimming pool. In table 10.29 are shown
the results of the evaluation.
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
Stations
20
28
25
Stations next to facilities
9
9
12
Percentage
45%
32%
48%
Evaluation
1.35
0.96
1.44
Table 10.29: Evaluation of indicator: Facilities popularity
10.3.3
Prestigious
The economic impact of a bike sharing system also affects the university that implements
it. When thinking about economic impacts the first thing it comes to our minds is expenses.
But implementing a service that improves mobility within campus can bring incomes in an
indirect manner.
Being an innovative and environmentally friendly university can increase the prestige of
the university and attract new students, researchers, etc. Moreover, the bikes can provide
the university with a ”free” marketing. This can help the university to get noticed in the
surroundings and become more popular.
Columbia’s 1st ranking was achieved for its electric and alternative fuel vehicle
fleet; sustainable commuting options; bicycle-friendly amenities; carpool and
car share incentives; and high percentage of students, faculty and staff that
utilize sustainable transportation. [University 2018]
Marketing
Description: When implementing a bike sharing system, sponsors give some money to
the system in order to advertise themselves. Their logo or advertisement is located on
the rare wheel. This practice is commonly used by, usually, fast food restaurants to obtain
some extra revenues. These sponsors are looking for expanding their marketing to other
groups of people that traditional advertisement may not reach.
But looking it from the university’s perspective. This system may be an opportunity to
expand its name around other villages. For example with the accommodations, the logo
will move around Nærum thanks to Linde Alle and Paul Bergsøe.
This indicator aims to assess how beneficial or not this marketing can be.
Calculus method: The methodology will be based on a qualitative assessment. Values
will strictly follow the scale assessment stated on section 5.4.2. The wider the area the
higher the impact these bikes will have on marketing.
Numerical evaluation: The area between scenarios varies. Hence, different evaluations
will be obtained.
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
103
==PAGE:112==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 10
Scenario 1 will have no impact on marketing since bikes will move around people who
is already at the university and therefore knows about it. This scenario will be evaluated
with 0. No change expected.
Scenario 2 is the one with a wider area of influence, 14 sq.km. Therefore its influence
will be higher. Nevertheless, since only two municipalities will be crossed, Lyngby and
Nærum, the evaluation will be 2. Which means that there will be an improvement on
DTU’s marketing.
Finally scenario 3 is focused on Lyngby. Arguments are pretty similar to scenario 2. But
since only one municipality is crossed, it has been considered an evaluation of 1. An
slightly improvement.
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
Person 1
0
2
1
Person 2
0
1
2
Person 3
0
1
2
Person 4
0
3
3
Result
0
1.75
2
Table 10.30: Evaluation of indicator: Marketing
Recruitment and retention
Description: The better the facilities and the higher the ranking of the university, the more
students want to study there. Nowadays, DTU is a highly prestigious university, which is
ranked 85 in the ranking of the best European universities. But this position may rise if
mobility on campus is improved. And therefore, students, researchers or PhD students
looking for a university to develop their skills may get interested.
According to Bikeshare 2018, bike sharing systems can bring to universities many advan-
tages.
• Distinguishing amenity,
• student recruitment and retention,
• commitment to environment, and
• alternative transportation.
Moreover, the more technologies the more popular and innovative will be the campus.
If these aspects are compared with the number of universities that have bike sharing
systems on their campus, results become interesting.
Calculus method: This indicator is directly related to the image the university gives to
population and its ranking among other universities worldwide. In order to calculate how
much impact this bike sharing system will have on the number of students, PhD, and
researchers when choosing a university, it is going to be compared with the number of
universities that already have a bike sharing system and its ranking position.
Table ?? shows a list with the universities who have a bike sharing system included in its
campus. Some of them are ranked worldwide within the first best universities.
It can be observed that in Europe universities does not have their own bike sharing sys-
tems. Some in england have rental possibilities, like at the university of Nottingham. And
104
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:113==
Chapter 10
MSc Thesis
others allow bike sharing systems established in cities nearby to have stations or oper-
ate in the campus. Hence, DTU would be the first university in Europe to include a bike
sharing system on its campus.
Numerical evaluation: The evaluation is going to be in a qualitative manner. Depending
on the scenario, it will be evaluated how studetns would be attracted by the university’s
facilities. Four evaluations will be given from different people to reduce subjectivity.
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
Person 1
1
3
2
Person 2
1
3
2
Person 3
2
1
1
Person 4
1
2
3
Result
1.25
2.25
2
Table 10.31: Evaluation of indicator: Recruitment and retention
10.3.4
Overall Economic evaluation
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
Investment
-1.50
-1.50
-1.50
Economic growth
1.16
0.97
1.21
Prestigious
0.63
2.00
2.00
Overall evaluation
0.10
0.49
0.57
Table 10.32: Overall assessment of Economic Pillar.
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
105
==PAGE:114==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 10
Figure 10.8: Spider graph comparing the results of the three scenarios for the economic
pillar.
106
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:115==
11
Summary
This chapter aims to present the results of the sustainability assessment. Table 11.1
shows the numerical values and Figure 11.1 helps visualizing them with a radar chart.
The overall score from the scenarios has been obtained through an average of all indica-
tors’ values. According to these results, scenario 3 is the most feasible from a sustain-
ability point of view. However, all scenarios are very similar, sometimes with very close
results.
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
Inclusion
1.75
1.83
1.75
Quality of life
1.67
1.27
1.28
Social
Values
1.21
1.34
1.27
Healthiness
0.09
0.08
0.09
Mobility
0.97
0.78
1.08
Environmental
Awareness
0.24
0.28
0.24
Investment
-1.50
-1.50
-1.50
Economic growth
1.16
0.97
1.21
Economic
Prestigious
0.63
2.00
2.00
Overall Evaluation
0.69
0.78
0.82
Table 11.1: Assessment summary
Despite all scenarios have a positive impact, changes with respect to scenario 0 are min-
imums. Moreover, the fact that all pillars have been considered with the same weigh
influences this result. Hence, if another weighing system is considered, solutions will
probably differ more ones from the others.
Another reason why these solutions are so similar could be that it has been assumed that
only the 10% of the population will use the system. These have decreased the impact of
many indicators within the environmental pillar. For instance, healthiness. Which could
have risen to 0.9, 0.8, and 0.9 respectively if benefits were measured for the whole pop-
ulation. However, this has been considered not representative of reality and that is why
the 10% has been applied.
Scenario 1 varies from the others in quality of life and prestigious aspects. Being higher in
quality of life and lowers in prestigious. The latter is because sub-indicator ”marketing” has
been evaluated as 0, and even though the fact of having a BSS on campus will attract more
students, in comparison with scenarios 1 and 2 this change is minimal. Regarding the
quality of life, time -saving is the main responsible of this upturn. However, this parameter
must be studied deeply. Because time has been obtained with google maps and traffic
jams are not considered. Thus, at peak hours the difference in time-savings may rise in
the benefit of bikes. Mainly for scenario 2 and in a less extent for scenario 3.
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
107
==PAGE:116==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 11
Figure 11.1: Radar chart showing the assessment summary
From the graph, it can be concluded that the implementation of a shared bicycle system
has a great impact on social aspects. As it does with prestige and mobility but to a lesser
extent.
108
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:117==
12
Discussion and conclusion
Throughout the project it has been presented a solution for the lack of connection between
buildings and some other interesting places, like Lyngby and DTU’s accommodations.
Firstly, this project has been focused on analyzing demand. Once the demand has been
studied and results have shown to be positively high, the design of the network for the
three different scenarios has been done. Where the market penetration recommended
by the Bike Sharing Guide has been checked [A. Cohen et al. 2018]. Finally, an indica-
tor set has been created and the feasibility has been evaluated through a sustainability
assessment.
One important aspect derived from the analysis of the demand, is the percentage of pop-
ulation interested in using the network. Usually, people tend to answer questionnaires
that they feel appealing to their interests. Hence, percentages of interest must not be fully
trusted but applied to a percentage of the population.
After some research, it was observed that normally systems are designed for three to nine
percent of the whole population, depending on the characteristics of the area and the pop-
ulation itself. It has been found that cities with large amounts of commuting people uses
large percentages of the population when designing, almost 10% (Mexico city, Ecobici).
Due to a large number of commuters on university campuses and the high interest ob-
tained in the survey, it was decided to do the design with a 10%.
On the other hand, it is important to know that after the implementation of any bike sharing
system, a period of observation is needed. Because some locations chosen for the sta-
tions may be unused, others may need more tracks, or a lot/ too little people are using the
system and therefore must be incremented or reduced. If it turns out that not that many
people was interested, the initial investment on huge stations like the one in Rævehøjvej,
DTU will be lost. Hence, my proposal will be to do a trial of a few months with 50 bikes
with GPS and see how it responds. Whether bikes do not stop running at any time, will
mean that the system may succeed.
The survey has also shown how people’s commuting around DTU, its hobbies and sched-
ules. But it has also shown the acceptance of the future light rail and the driver-less bus.
According to the second survey launched, ”the short survey”, 90% has never used buses
to commute on campus. But 50% will consider the use of the light rail, and 60% will be
up for using the driver-less bus. However, it has been recognized that other means of
transport like BSS or scooters, would be more used due to the flexibility it brings and the
lower fares. Another aspect to take into consideration is the amount of students using
the Ungdomskort, which give them free access and therefore they will use other means
rather than paying a BSS.
Regarding the design of the system, some aspects should be discussed.
In the first place, the decision of designing a station-based system. The main reasons for
choosing this system were, ensuring tidiness on campus and protecting bikes from the
weather. However, after looking at the results obtained in the sustainability assessment,
with such a small general impact, other solutions may be studied. It must be considered
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
109
==PAGE:118==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 12
that the whole design is based on this decision. Hence, if the system changes to a dock-
less or hybrid system, results will substantially change, and the mathematical model will
need to be rearranged.
Another interesting aspect is the evaluation of market penetration. The assessment is
carried out by a few parameters that solely depend on the number of bikes and stations,
the area of study, and the population. With these parameters and their interpretation with
the use of some graphics, the number of bikes and stations needed per square kilometer
can be estimated. But in this project, while still obtaining estimated values, some deeper
research has been sought. Therefore, a mathematical model was created to understand
how many bikes and stations would be necessary. But, it is really important to have a
look at the unmet demand. Usually, BSS seeks to reduce the unmet demand to 3-2% of
the total demand. In our system, this value raises to 18-20%. This can be reduced as
much as zero in the calculation, but looking for an initial balance between docks, cost,
and demand, it was decided to leave it with that pondering. For future calculus, this can
be changed and better results will be obtained, but also more bikes and therefore docks.
One of the factors commented to measure market penetration of BSS is the number of
stations per sq. km. Thanks to the mathematical model, results of bike and dock quanti-
ties, have lead to well introduced systems. The only parameter that has created trouble
is related to the number of stations. However, this has been decided using the model’s
results but not being a variable within the same.
Considering results obtained in table 8.5 & 8.8, it can be stated that scenario 2 is not
fulfilling all the parameters for market penetration. The result makes sense due to the
amount of stations spread around Nærum and Lyngby municipalities. Since only one
station is being located on accommodations and these are not nearby each others, this
parameter drops exponentially.
Hence, scenario 2 does not fulfil all the conditions for having a good market penetration.
But in case the operator wants to include it on the scheme, it is still possible but will not
have the same revenues as other solutions. However, a most feasible solution can be
reached. For instance, give the option of owning a rented bike by paying a fee per month.
Which will remove the necessity of parking the bikes at any specific location. Hence, the
cost of the station at the accommodations will be removed. Reducing initial investment
and still receiving incomes from the accommodations.
It has to be considered that some departments of DTU already have established a rough
bike sharing system. This system shares one or two bikes between professors and re-
searchers to move around DTU Lyngby campus. Information obtained from the comments
in the survey.
On the other hand, the location of stations has been decided following the recommenda-
tions of the A. Cohen et al. 2018. Nevetheless, it is pretty subjective and many aspects
must be taken into account. For instance, whether are going to be solar powered or if
an electric connection will be needed. For this, campus plan should work close to the
planning group to ensure that all these small aspects are covered.
Finally, the mathematical model aims to take into account commutes on campus, but it is
not a real visualization of commutes. A further study using microsimulations should be
done. This will help visualizing and getting an overview of the crowdedness of the public
transportation on rush hours.
It must be taken into account that some stations need many racks and therefore a wider
110
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:119==
Chapter 12
MSc Thesis
area. This aspect has not been detailed in this project, but it has been considered when
deciding the locations.
Regarding the fees, many universities that have BSS are usually free. However, I they do
not fully follow the structure of bike sharing systems like LIME or Donckey Republic. They
are bikes painted in the same way and located around campus so everyone can take it
and park it wherever it fits them best. Others, do have different fees available, like those
hired with Zagster. And usually more expensive than the ones proposed on this project.
Hence a revision of the fees must be done by future operators if university wants to cover
part of the operational costs with the fees.
Technology and anti-theft security are included in the model proposed. This is due to the
different locations where the system will be located. For instance, in scenarios 2 and 3
station will be in isolated areas where it will be no security. On the contrary, if the system
is implemented only on campus, this specifications may be more relaxed and reduce the
initial investment. An example of a more relaxed system would be the use of automated
key boxes. This system is used by the university of Yale and has been greatly successful.
[Parker 2014]
Once the planning stage arrives to the point were it is necessary to search for an operation.
There are some companies, like Zagster and Onbikeshare, that provides the equipment
necessary to start the business as soon as possible. This companies may be interesting,
since it removes all worries related.
Concerning the set of indicators and its evaluation, some aspects should be discussed.
First of all, indicators are not an exact science. They are always partly subjective, either
when choosing them, when deciding the calculus methodology, or when evaluating them.
Anyhow, in this project, subjectiveness has been tried to be reduced by involving four
different people in the evaluation. It has not been in all indicators, but in those with no
quantitative part.
On the other hand, focusing on the indicators framework. It has been tried to gather as
many aspects as possible, looking for variability and ensuring objectiveness as far as
possible. Parameters from market penetration have been incorporated as far as possible
in the calculus method. With the purpose of ensuring harmony between the two methods,
the market penetration and the sustainability assessment.
However, some others have not been possible to include, as it is the case of casual users.
It is very difficult to include these groups of people without knowing their frequency of
usage. Some may use the system once a week, but others a month or even once a
semester. This can have influenced the results of the Sustainability assessment, since a
41% of population demand is not being considered.
There are many unknowns that must be clarified before continuing with the project. All
related to decisions that must be taken by the operator of the system. For instance, oper-
ational costs. Rebalancing is very expensive, but for evaluating its cost some decisions
like number of rebalances, number of employees, which vehicle will be used, etc. There
are many systems that have started using bikes to rebalance bikes [Maus 2016]. This is
a way of giving example of their own service and encouraging people to do the same.
Other unknown would be the type of system, publicly funded or privately funded. Or the
typology of the stations, solar, electric, etc.
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
111
==PAGE:120==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 12
The typology of bikes is also important when choosing the system, but e-bikes are more
expensive. Hence, considering the results from the assessment, either a sponsor is found,
or the change towards traditional bikes must be seriously considered.
Even though a BSS cannot improve the relation user-building from an specific building,
it does improve the connections with other buildings where the user may feel more com-
fortable. Moreover, by implementing new infrastructure it is enhanced the incorporation
of systems that could make use and profit from the infrastructure. Which will be given in
return to the community as services.
In conclusion, the three scenarios presented are feasible. But scenario 3 is the most
beneficial to the area. Followed by scenario 2, that has been disregarded due to the low
station density. And scenario 1, which is the one with better quality of life levels.
The solution has been highly accepted since it is more efficient than waiting for buses and
less time-consuming than walking. Many students have commented their interest due to
the freedom that bring them not to depend on schedules.
Nevertheless, variants and other solutions must be studied in order to obtain the most
efficient one. In fact, this thesis was looking for including Ballerup campus in one of
its scenarios, but due to the COVID lockdown it has been impossible to reach enough
students. Hence, this could be studied in future projects since it will be very interesting to
know how many students have lectures in both campus and how do they commute from
one to another.
Future studies should also include more accommodations, once the characteristics of the
system are known (Typology of bike and system). One accommodation that has not been
included but it had enough information and interest, is Tåsingegade studio-apartment.
This studio is in the city center and many students live there and commute to campus by
150S, or by bike (10km).
Moreover, some answers have shown the interest of having an station also in Norreport,
Copenhagen. In order to be able to commute around the city without having to take the
bike from campus.
I believe, and results have shown, that a bike sharing system can be beneficial for an uni-
versity like DTU. Because it can help solving some of the mobility and connectivity issues
around campus and within the areas next to it. It will bring social inclusion and quality
of life to students, professors and staff. While still being environmentally friendly and in-
creasing the prestige of the university. On the other hand, a station-based system may
be too expensive and complicated. Hence, outsourcing it to companies like Onbikeshare
and Zagster could be the best solution.
112
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:121==
Bibliography
Aguinaga,
Fernanda,
Adrian
Ramirez-
Nafarrate, and Luis A Moncayo-Martínez
(Oct. 2016). Optimal Inventory in Bike
Sharing Systems.
Alliance, MaaS (n.d.). What is MaaS? URL:
https://maas-alliance.eu/homepage/what-
is-maas/. (accessed: July, 30th 2020).
Andersen, Jonas Lohmann Elkjær, Alex
Landex, and Otto Anker Nielsen (2006).
“Light rail project in Copenhagen the Ring
2½ corridor”. In:
Apli, Julianna (2019). “Lyngby as a student-
friendly university town: A sustainability
assessment of Lyngby from a student
perspective”. In:
Bicycles,
Copenhagen
(n.d.).
BICYCLE
RENTAL IN COPENHAGEN. Rent a bike
in central Copenhagen today! URL: https:
//copenhagenbicycles.dk/bicycle/electric-
bike/. (accessed: August, 9th 2020).
Bidasca,
Luana
et
al.
(2020).
Micro-
mobility: challenges and opportunities for
cities & regions. URL: https : / / revolve .
media / micro - mobility - challenges - and -
opportunities - for - cities - regions/. (ac-
cessed: July, 30th 2020).
bikeshare, Capital (n.d.). Capital bikeshare.
URL: https://www.capitalbikeshare.com/.
(accessed: August, 5th 2020).
Bikeshare, On (2018). Bike Share for Uni-
versities and Colleges. URL: https : / /
onbikeshare . com / bikeshare - for - colleges .
html. (accessed: August, 9th 2020).
Britannica, Encyclopedia (n.d.). Encyclope-
dia Britannica. URL: https : / / www .
britannica.com/topic/quality-of-life. (ac-
cessed: July, 16th 2020).
Bycyklen (n.d.). Bycyklen. URL: https : / /
bycyklen.dk/en/prices/. (accessed: July,
29th 2020).
Cambridge-dictionary
(n.d.).
Dictionary.
URL: https://dictionary.cambridge.org/
dictionary/english/. (accessed: July, 15th
2020).
Cohen, Alison et al. (2018). “The Bikeshare
Planning Guide”. In:
Cohen,
Boyd
(2020a).
Micromobility
&
MaaS: 4 Dichotomies. URL: https : / /
medium.com/iomob/micromobility-maas-
4- dichotomies- 436e4bdfb4ac. (accessed:
July, 20th 2020).
– (2020b). Micromobility and its Role in Ur-
ban Mobility Ecosystems. URL: https :
/ / medium . com / @boyd _ 19249 /
micromobility - and - its - role - in - urban -
mobility - ecosystems - 29885134cdea. (ac-
cessed: July, 20th 2020).
Consulting, EY (2020). Micromobility: Mov-
ing cities into a sustainable future. URL:
https : / / www . voiscooters . com / wp -
content/uploads/2020/03/20200316_EY_
Micromobility _ Moving _ Cities _ into _ a _
Sustainable_Future.pdf. (accessed: July,
16th 2020).
Cox, Laura (2018). The 5 Biggest Bike
Share Businesses Disrupting Mobility.
URL: https : / / disruptionhub . com / bike -
share-companies-disrupting-mobility/. (ac-
cessed: June, 5th 2020).
Data, OECD (2017). Enterprises by busi-
ness size. URL: https://data.oecd.org/
entrepreneur/enterprises-by-business-size.
htm#:~:text=In. (accessed: August, 9th
2020).
Dediu, Horace (2019). The Micromobility
Definition. URL: https : / / micromobility .
io/blog/2019/2/23/the- micromobility-
definition. (accessed: July, 16th 2020).
Devathon (n.d.). Devathon. URL: https://
devathon.com/electric-bike-scooter-rental-
app-development/#email-us. (accessed:
July, 14th 2020).
Dictionary (2019). WHAT DOES MICRO-
MOBILITY MEAN? URL: https : / /
www . dictionary . com / e / tech -
science / micromobility/. (accessed: July,
30th 2020).
Divvy (n.d.). Unlock a bike. Unlock Chicago.
URL: https://www.divvybikes.com/. (ac-
cessed: August, 8th 2020).
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
113
==PAGE:122==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 12
DTU, Boligfonden (n.d.). Boligfonden DTU.
URL: https://bdtu.dk/. (accessed: April,
15th 2020).
Ecobici (n.d.). Ecobici. URL: https://www.
ecobici.cdmx.gob.mx/. (accessed: August,
5th 2020).
Economic Cooperation, The Organization
for and Development (2016). When it
comes to quality of life, what matters
to you? URL: https : / / www . youtube .
com/watch?v=yYNjXRVFnTc. (accessed:
July, 17th 2020).
– (n.d.). Better Life Index. URL: http : / /
www.oecdbetterlifeindex.org/. (accessed:
July, 17th 2020).
Freij,
Muath
(2018).
JUST
turns
‘bike
friendly’ with self service bicycles avail-
able for students. URL: https : / / www .
jordantimes.com/news/local/.
Gauthier, Aimee et al. (2013). “THE BIKE-
SHARE PLANNING GUIDE”. In:
Goodyear, Sarah (2015). Learning to Live
in Amsterdam by Learning to Ride Bikes.
URL: https : / / www . bloomberg . com /
news / articles / 2015 - 08 - 28 / the -
new - documentary - mama - agatha - looks -
at - teaching - immigrants - to - bike - in -
amsterdam. (accessed: July, 15th 2020).
GPA
(n.d.).
THE
GREATER
COPEN-
HAGEN LIGHT RAIL. URL: https://www.
ghb-landskab.dk/en/projects/the-greater-
copenhagen-light-rail. (accessed: August,
5th 2020).
Granath, Erika (2020). What micromobility
is and how it is shaking up urban trans-
portation worldwide. URL: https://www.
intelligent- mobility- xperience.com/what-
micromobility- is- and- how- it- is- shaking-
up - urban - transportation - worldwide - a -
903875/. (accessed: July, 16th 2020).
Group, World Bank (n.d.). SOCIAL INCLU-
SION. URL: https://www.worldbank.org/
en/topic/social-inclusion. (accessed: July,
15th 2020).
Gudmundsson,
Henrik
et
al.
(2016).
Sustainable Transportation. Indicators,
Frameworks, and Performance Manage-
ment. Springer Texts in Business and
Economics.
Springer-Verlagg,
Heidel-
berg Germany and Samfundslitteratur,
Frederiksberg Denmark. ISBN: 978-3-
662-46923-1.
Health, Better (2013). Cycling - health ben-
efits. URL: https : / / www . betterhealth .
vic.gov.au/health/healthyliving/cycling-
health - benefits. (accessed: July, 31st
2020).
Henderson-Bird, Maurice (2020). “How mi-
cromobility can support a green eco-
nomic
recovery
post-COVID-19”.
In:
URL: https : / / www . intelligenttransport .
com / transport - articles / 101057 / how -
micromobility - can - support - a - green -
economic - recovery - post - covid - 19/. (ac-
cessed: July, 15th 2020).
Høyer, Asger Fuhr (2015). “Relocating bi-
cyles in a shared-bike system”. In:
Insigths, CBN (2019). The Micromobility
Revolution: How Bikes And Scooters Are
Shaking Up Urban Transport Worldwide.
URL: https : / / www . cbinsights . com /
research/report/micromobility-revolution/.
(accessed: July, 30th 2020).
ITDP (n.d.). Defining Micromobility. URL:
https : / / www . itdp . org / multimedia /
defining- micromobility/. (accessed: July,
20th 2020).
Jennings, Gail (Apr. 2018). “BIKING TO-
WARDS SOCIAL INCLUSION A collec-
tion of creative bicycle ideas - by Olivia
Svensson, Henrik Nolmark, Maria Der-
mitzaki (Living Cities and Pedalista)”. In:
Jørgensen, Christa Visholt (2020). New
marked bicycle path will link DTU and
Lyngby. URL: https : / / www . inside .
dtu . dk / en / dtuinside / generelt /
generelle - meddelelser / meddelelser /
meddelelsevisning?id=%7B7e28d1af-e4df-
4d07-8262-9dd9f4943175%7D. (accessed:
May, 17th 2020).
Jørgensen, Peter (n.d.). Nyt glashus på
DTU. URL: https://www.byggeplads.dk/
byggeri/foto/dtu/43224. (accessed: Au-
gust, 6th 2020).
Kaloc, Jiri (2018). “What Is Better: 10,000
Steps or an Hour of Cycling?” In: URL:
https : / / www . welovecycling . com / wide /
2018/10/17/what-is-better-10000-steps-
or-an-hour-of-cycling/#:~:text=Cycling.
(accessed: July, 15th 2020).
114
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:123==
Chapter 12
MSc Thesis
Kalvelage, Kelly Jo and Michael C. Dorne-
ich (2014). “A User-Centered Approach
to User-Building Interactions”. In:
Karolina (2018). Bikes. Bikes everywhere.
URL: https : / / int - studentblog . dtu . dk /
bikes - bikes - everywhere. (accessed: Au-
gust, 5th 2020).
Krol, Robert (2017). Transportation, Mobil-
ity, and Economic Growth. URL: https :
/ / www . mercatus . org / commentary /
transportation - mobility - and - economic -
growth. (accessed: August, 9th 2020).
Lime (n.d.). Lime. URL: https : / / www . li .
me / electric - assist - bike. (accessed: Au-
gust, 8th 2020).
Lyngby,
Science
City
(2012).
Lyngby-
Taarbæk City of Knowledge. URL: https:
/ / vidensby . dk / en / about/. (accessed:
April, 17th 2020).
Masnavi, M.R. (2007). “Measuring Urban
Sustainability: Developing a Conceptual
Framework for Bridging the Gap Between
theoretical Levels and the Operational
Levels”. In: pp. 188–197. ISSN: 1735-
6865. URL: http://www.bioline.org.br/
pdf?er07024.
Maus, Jonathan (2016). Portland now us-
ing pedal-powered trikes to help rebal-
ance bike share stations. URL: https://
bikeportland.org/2016/09/07/portland-
now-using-pedal-powered-trikes-to-help-
rebalance-bike-share-stations-191007. (ac-
cessed: August, 8th 2020).
Mcomish, Freya August (2019). How to Use
Public Transport in Copenhagen. URL:
https : / / www . scandinaviastandard . com /
public - transport - in - copenhagen/. (ac-
cessed: July, 18th 2020).
Merlin, Pierre (n.d.). The campus or back to
the city? City-University spatial relation-
ships. URL: http://www.ceut.udl.cat/
wp- content/uploads/Merlin- en.pdf. (ac-
cessed: July, 13th 2020).
Möller, Timo et al. (2019). The future of
mobility is at our doorstep. URL: https :
/ / www . mckinsey . com / industries /
automotive - and - assembly / our - insights /
the-future-of-mobility-is-at-our-doorstep.
(accessed: May, 26th 2020).
Munck, Susanne (2019). Sustainability pol-
icy for DTU’s campuses. URL: https://
www . dtu . dk / english / about / strategy -
policy / policies / sustainability - policy. (ac-
cessed: July, 24th 2020).
Nicolaisen, Morten, Mette Olesen, and Kris-
tian Olesen (Oct. 2017). “Vision vs. Eval-
uation – Case Studies of Light Rail Plan-
ning in Denmark”. In: European Journal
of Spatial Development, pp. 1–26.
O’Sullivan, Feargus (2016). Even Copen-
hagen Makes Mistakes. URL: https : / /
nextcity.org/features/view/copenhagen-
affordable - housing - sustainable - cities -
model. (accessed: July, 18th 2020).
Oxford (n.d.). Dictionary. URL: https : / /
www.lexico.com/en/definition. (accessed:
July, 31st 2020).
Parker,
Holly
(2014).
Success
on
two
wheels. URL: https://www.parking.org/
wp-content/uploads/2016/01/TPP-2014-
09 - Success - On - Two - Wheels . pdf. (ac-
cessed: August, 8th 2020).
Pernestal, Anna (2020). Understanding the
legislative framework to test autonomous
vehicles on public streets -ZOOM IN 2.
URL: https://www.uia-initiative.eu/en/
news/understanding-legislative-framework-
test- autonomous- vehicles- public- streets-
zoom-2. (accessed: July, 30th 2020).
Pete (2013). Understanding Electric Bike
Modes: Throttle vs. Pedal Assist (Ped-
elec). URL: https : / / electricbikereport .
com / electric - bike - throttle - pedal - assist -
pedelec/. (accessed: August, 8th 2020).
Pucher, John and Ralph Buehler (2008).
“Making
Cycling
Irresistible:
Lessons
from The Netherlands, Denmark and
Germany”.
In:
Transport
Reviews
28.4, pp. 495–528. DOI: 10 . 1080 /
01441640701806612. eprint: https : / /
doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 01441640701806612.
URL: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 /
01441640701806612.
Rejseplanen
(n.d.).
Rejseplanen.
URL:
https://www.rejseplanen.dk/. (accessed:
July, 13th 2020).
REPUBLIC, DONKEY (2017). DONKEY
REPUBLIC.
Company
Profile.
URL:
https://www.donkey.bike/wp- content/
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
115
==PAGE:124==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 12
uploads/2017/05/EN_Donkey_Republic_
Company _ Profile . pdf. (accessed: June,
5th 2020).
ROUGE, CITY OF BATON (2016). Bike
Share
Business
and
Implementation
Plan. URL: https://static1.squarespace.
com/static/56bba43086db4378db7e026d/
t
/
5813b5b1d482e97e5eb54ca0
/
1477686710889 / 2016 _ 10 _ 19 _ 5518 _
BatonRougeBikeshare+. (accessed: Au-
gust, 9th 2020).
Sala, Serenella, Biagio Ciuffo, and Peter Ni-
jkamp (2015). “A systemic framework for
sustainability assessment”. In: Ecologi-
cal Economics 119, pp. 314–325. ISSN:
0921-8009. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 .
1016/j.ecolecon.2015.09.015. URL: http:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0921800915003821.
Sawers, Paul (2018). Uber launches Jump
electric bike charging stations as part of
sustainable mobility push. URL: https://
venturebeat . com / 2018 / 09 / 26 / uber -
launches - jump - electric - bike - charging -
stations- as- part- of- sustainable- mobility-
push/. (accessed: August, 4th 2020).
Sayarshad, Hamidreza, Sepideh Tavassoli,
and Fang Zhao (2011). “A multi-periodic
optimization formulation for bike planning
and bike utilization”. In:
Shu, Jia et al. (Nov. 2013). “Models for
Effective Deployment and Redistribution
of Bicycles Within Public Bicycle-Sharing
Systems”. In: Operations Research 61,
pp. 1346–1359. DOI: 10.1287/opre.2013.
1215.
Simonsen, Jonathan Storm (n.d.). Self-
driving shuttle finds the fastest route to
your destination using a new app. URL:
https : / / lincproject . dk / en / self - driving -
shuttle- finds- the- fastest- route- to- your-
destination-using-a-new-app/. (accessed:
July, 30th 2020).
Skotte, Emilie Koch (2019). While we wait
for the Light Rail. URL: https : / /
transforming . dtu . dk / english / Mobility /
Light-Rail. (accessed: April, 27th 2020).
Sullivan,
Nate
(2019).
Environmental
Awareness: Definition, History & Im-
portance. URL: https : / / study . com /
academy/lesson/environmental-awareness-
definition - history - importance . html# : ~ :
text = Environmental. (accessed: August,
5th 2020).
Sutton, Mark (2020). AI expert shares
formula
for
micromobility
and
shar-
ing service success. URL: https : / /
cyclingindustry . news / micromobility - and -
bike - sharing/. (accessed: July, 30th
2020).
Technical, The and Environmental Admin-
istration (n.d.). Mobility in Copenhagen.
URL: https://urbandevelopmentcph.kk.dk/
artikel / mobility - copenhagen. (accessed:
July, 18th 2020).
Toft, Katja Clausen (2018). Gender Equal-
ity and Diversity. URL: https : / / www .
dtu . dk / english / about / strategy - policy /
policies / diversity - and - gender - statement.
(accessed: June, 19th 2020).
Tonsberg, Claus (2020). DTU Lyngby Cam-
pus. URL: https://www.dtu.dk/english/
about/campuses/dtu-lyngby-campus. (ac-
cessed: July, 13th 2020).
UNESCAP and CITYNET (2012). “Sustain-
able Urban Transportation Systems. An
Overview”. In:
Universitet, Danmarks Tekniske (2019a).
History of DTU. URL: https://www.dtu.
dk / english / about / profile / history. (ac-
cessed: July, 13th 2020).
– (2019b). More cyclists. URL: https : / /
transforming.dtu.dk/english/Mobility. (ac-
cessed: April, 27th 2020).
– (2019c). Strategisk Campus Plan. DTU
Lyngby
Campus.
URL:
https : / /
transforming.dtu.dk/vision- og- strategi/
strategisk - campusudvikling. (accessed:
May, 28th 2020).
University, Columbia (2018). Columbia Uni-
versity Named 1st School for Sustain-
able Transportation. URL: https : / /
transportation . columbia . edu / news /
columbia - university - named - 1 - school -
sustainable - transportation# : ~ : text =
Columbia. (accessed: August, 9th 2020).
Vanderbilt, Tom (2018). The Angel Who
Keeps Citi Bike Working for New York.
URL: https : / / www . outsideonline . com /
116
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:125==
Chapter 12
MSc Thesis
2332671 / purest - form - bike - angel. (ac-
cessed: August, 8th 2020).
Viborg, Birgitte Connie (2019). Accommo-
dation. URL: https : / / www . dtu . dk /
english / education / student - guide / living -
in - denmark / accommodation. (accessed:
April, 21st 2020).
Witzel, Sandra (2018). How Micro Mobility
Solves Multiple Problems in Congested
Cities. URL: https://skedgo.com/how-
micro- mobility- solves- multiple- problems-
in-congested-cities/. (accessed: July, 30th
2020).
Zagster (2020). COVID-19 Rider Updates.
URL: https://www.zagster.com/covid-19-
letter. (accessed: August, 11th 2020).
Zarif, Rasheq, Derek Pankratz, and Ben
Kelman (2019). Small is beautiful. Making
micromobility work for citizens, cities, and
service providers. URL: https://www2.
deloitte.com/us/en/insights/focus/future-
of-mobility/micro-mobility-is-the-future-
of-urban-transportation.html. (accessed:
July, 30th 2020).
Þrastarson, Ragnar Þór (2017). “DTU Cam-
pus Development”. In:
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
117
==PAGE:126==
MSc Thesis
Chapter 12
118
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:127==
A
Appendix: Bike sharing systems (BSS)
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
119
==PAGE:128==
MSc Thesis
Chapter A
Financing
Coordination with city
Service delivery
Weaknesses
SINGLE OPERATOR
(PPP) Barcelona, London,
Manchester, New York
City, Rio de Janeiro
Long-term contract
between a private operator
and the city establishes a
long-term commitment
to financial sustainability.
Goals of both parties align
through revenue-sharing
agreements.
Often responding to an RFP,
operator understands and
agrees to meet city demands
to secure a contract. City has
significant involvement in
major decisions, i.e., station
locations, data sharing.
A contracted operator is expected
to meet service-levels for maintenance,
rebalancing, marketing, customer
service, etc set by the city. Failure to do
so results in penalties. Thus, operators
are financially incentivized to provide
quality service.
Traditional singleoperator
bikeshare contracts are
multiyear (sometimes 10
or more), which may not
encourage innovation or
incorporation of new
technologies that would
improve service delivery.
MULTIPLE PRIVATE
OPERATORS Seattle,
Singapore, Tianjin
Requiring no upfront costs
to the city for bikeshare
assets reduces the time
needed for planning and
implementation, and can be
more politically palatable
than the city providing
funding to start a bikeshare
program.
Cities that demand certain
operating standards using a
regulatory framework (permit,
MOU, code of conduct, etc.)
can achieve optimal outcomes
including public space
management, equitable access
to bikeshare, data sharing and
transit integration, etc.
Competition between operators for
rides encourages constant improvement
on and responsiveness to the user
experience.
The city relegates routine
operational decisions to
private companies. Without
regulation, dockless bikeshare
will neither be thoughtfully
integrated into city goals nor
connected with the transportation
network. Oversupply leading to
negative outcomes, such as bike
piles and underutilized bikes,
could occur.
SINGLE (PPP) OPERATOR
& PRIVATE OPERATOR(S)
Guangzhou, Washington, DC
Service area expansion
becomes fiscally viable
if private operators are
able to “fill in the gaps,”
providing service in areas
where the PPP operator
could not afford to expand
into.
City staff and processes already
in place to coordinate with an
existing bikeshare operator will
likely provide capacity and support
when drafting and implementing
new policies that allow for a
multi-operator system.
Different systems (i.e., station-based,
dockless) and bike types (i.e., e-bikes,
lightweight models) can be provided,
offering a range of choices to riders
that may encourage more trips made
by bike.
Requires users to navigate
multiple platforms to find
and rent a bike, and may
present additional coordination
challenges between the city, PPP
operator and private companies.
Table A.1: Comparing Bikeshare Operator Scenarios [A. Cohen et al. 2018]
120
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:129==
B
Appendix: Correspondence with
stakeholders
B.1
Campus Service
Query to Anders B. Møller (09/04/20):
1. (...) The number of students/staff/professors on each campus and those that have
lectures in both Lyngby and Ballerup campus. With this information, I will be able to
ensure that the data obtained from a survey is representative. I have found some
general data at DTU’s web page but does not differentiate between campuses.
2. Section drawing of Asmussens Allé with the implementation of the light rail. I would
like to know how the main road will look like in 2025, to adjust the bike lane design.
I have found general drawings of the route, but any detailed one.
3. Self-driving Bus: Do you know if it will be free? And regarding its route, it will go
around campus or just from the light rail to specific stops? I need an overview of the
different means of transport to assess the need of the network.
4. DTU: Do you know if a bike network would sound interesting to DTU and if so,
whether it exists any kind of economic support? Like for instance if there are specific
grants for mobility projects. (...)
Answer Anders B. Møller (13/04/20):
@Rikke will you send an updated drowning off the light rail tracks
1. This information i don’t have, i believe that you can have this from education AUS.
department.
2. Rikke will send this to you
3. The Selfdriving busses are just a test and are not yet allowed to drive at campus,
they are planned to go from “Netto” to crossover between 4xx to 3xx near by Skylab,
I hope we will be able to test in september.
www.lincproject.dk/en/
4. No there are no economic support to transportation from DTU, this is not allowed, but
i hope we are able to establish a bike shop, from our sustainable CAS department
where used bikes can be dispatched sold from DTU bike shop to students
Answer from Rikke Brinkø Berg (20/04/20):
Dear Helena
I forwarded your email below to the project manager in charge of the lightrail
project at CAS, and received the attached file back.
Hope it suits your needs.
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
121
==PAGE:130==
MSc Thesis
Chapter B
B.2
Human resources and administrative
Number of students, professors and staff on the different DTU campus.
Query to Claus Tonsberg (19/05/20):
Dear Claus,
...I need to know how many people belong to each DTU campus. I have found some
data on the web page https://www.dtu.dk/english/about/facts-and-figures/education and
https://www.dtu.dk/english/about/facts-and-figures/human_resources, but I think this data
is general for the whole DTU not from each campus. Could you please tell me where I can
find that information or at least a rough percentage of each category for each campus?
I would be pleased if you can share with me this information. (...)
Answer (20/05/20):
Hi Helena Unfortunately, I cannot give you an accurate answer to your ques-
tion or refer you to a statement as many students receive tuition at several
of our campus areas.
Furthermore they are not enrolled at a specific ad-
dress. However, I believe that 35% of our students have their daily walk at
the Ballerup Campus and 75% at the Lyngby Campus.
Query (21/04/20):
I would like to ask regarding the number of students, professors and staff at DTU Lyngby
and Ballerup campus, as well as those who have lectures/work in both. (...) I hope you
can share with me this data or give me some percentages.
Answer from Peter Nam Pham (27/05/20):
Below please find the numbers of employees at DTU in the three campuses
(per 18 May 2020):
DTU Lyngby: 6736 employees DTU Risø: 388 employees DTU Ballerup: 364
employees
The numbers above represent the number of staff (in persons) in the three
different campuses, and are not the number of full-time equivalents (FTE).
122
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:131==
C
Appendix: Light rail information
Figure C.1: Schedule of the Greater Copenhagen Light Rail. First proposed schedule in
[Andersen, Landex, and Nielsen 2006]
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
123
==PAGE:132==
MSc Thesis
Chapter C
Figure C.2: Light rail ring 3 Greater Copenhagen. [Nicolaisen, M. Olesen, and K. Olesen
2017]
124
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:133==
Chapter C
MSc Thesis
Figure C.3: Light rail ring 3 Greater Copenhagen when passing by DTU campus.
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
125
==PAGE:134==
MSc Thesis
Chapter C
126
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:135==
D
Appendix. Campus plan images
Figure D.1: Current bike lanes on campus. Source: Google maps.
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
127
==PAGE:136==
MSc Thesis
Chapter D
Figure D.2: Projected bike lanes on campus [Universitet 2019c]
128
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:137==
Chapter D
MSc Thesis
Figure D.3: Projected bike parking on campus [Universitet 2019c]
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
129
==PAGE:138==
MSc Thesis
Chapter D
Figure D.4: Public transport lines on campus [Universitet 2019c]
130
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:139==
Chapter D
MSc Thesis
Figure D.5: Projected car network on campus [Universitet 2019c]
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
131
==PAGE:140==
MSc Thesis
Chapter D
Figure D.6: Projected car parking on campus [Universitet 2019c]
132
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:141==
Chapter D
MSc Thesis
Figure D.7: Electricity network on campus [Universitet 2019c]
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
133
==PAGE:142==
MSc Thesis
Chapter D
Figure D.8: Service, Operation and Rescue Network on campus [Universitet 2019c]
134
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:143==
E
Appendix: Survey
E.1
Main survey
Survey path
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
135
==PAGE:144==
NE W  B IK E  S HA RING S YS T E M  A T  DT U
W E LC OM E
In c ampus
Longest route on foot, necessity of BSS, grade
the connections between DTU and Lyngby St.
Personal  i nformat i on (Profi l e)
Where do you l i ve?
DT U Ac c ommodat i on 
DT U S t udent -house 
Non-DT U Dormi t ory
Apart ment
House
Ot her
Ac c ommodat i on i nf ormat i on
and rent i ng i nt erest
BS S  on c ampus
BS S
F ees
How woul d i mpr ove your
dai l y r out i n e?
When  woul d you c yc l e
i n st ead of  wal k i n g?
In t er n al  an d ex c l usi ve ser vi c e
f or  ac c ommodat i on
1.
2.
3.
Where do you st udy/work?
BALLE RUP
LYNGBY
LYNGBY &
BALLE RUP
Your sc hedul e 
When are you i n
Bal l erup c ampus?
C omment s and
suggest i ons
Do you go t o bot h c ampus t he same day?
When are you i n DT U Lyngby?
Duri ng my l ei sure t i me on
c ampus I usual l y l i ke t o...
F ees
How woul d i mpr ove
your  dai l y r out i n e?
When  woul d you c yc l e
i n st ead of  wal k i n g?
1.
2.
3.
Your  sc hedul e
T HA NK  YOU
==PAGE:145==
==PAGE:146==
==PAGE:147==
==PAGE:148==
==PAGE:149==
==PAGE:150==
==PAGE:151==
==PAGE:152==
==PAGE:153==
==PAGE:154==
==PAGE:155==
==PAGE:156==
==PAGE:157==
==PAGE:158==
==PAGE:159==
==PAGE:160==
==PAGE:161==
==PAGE:162==
==PAGE:163==
==PAGE:164==
==PAGE:165==
Chapter E
MSc Thesis
E.2
Short survey
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
157
==PAGE:166==
==PAGE:167==
==PAGE:168==
==PAGE:169==
==PAGE:170==
==PAGE:171==
==PAGE:172==
==PAGE:173==
==PAGE:174==
MSc Thesis
Chapter E
166
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:175==
F
Appendix: Design
In this appendix tables of results, processes and figures needed for the design phase in
section 5.3 are going to be displayed.
F.1
Data sets: explanation of the process
1. First of all, the primitive data has been transformed into four tables, one per time
period (8-12, 12-13, 13-17, and 17-20). This is because the initial data came in
tables where the respondent said at what times was at what building (Example in
table F.1).
ID Fila
Tuesday * [I don’t go to DTU]
Tuesday * [S 1a]
Tuesday * [S 1b]
Tuesday * [B 101]
Tuesday * [S 2a]
Tuesday * [S 2b]
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
12-13, 13-17, 17-20
0
8-12
0
0
0
Tuesday * [S 2c]
Tuesday * [S 3a]
Tuesday * [S 3b]
Tuesday * [S 3c]
Tuesday * [S 4a]
Tuesday * [S 4b]
0
0
0
0
8-12 , 12-13, 13-17
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Table F.1: Data before any treatment. Examples of profiles 1 and 7.
These new tables used Excel formulas to find the time step in the initial one, and
mark it with a number in the new table (Table F.2). The formula used is the fol-
lowing: IFERROR(FIND(value; INDEX(range; MATCH(value; range; exact coinci-
dence); IFS(conditional; value)));””).
8-12
XX
S1a
S1b
B101
S2a
S2b
S2c
S3a
S3b
S3c
S4a
S4c
1
1
7
1
Table F.2: Data treatment step 1. (Profiles 1 and 7 are at sectors S4a and S1b at time
step 8-12 on Tuesdays respectively).
2. After creating these tables for all weekdays and time steps, it is needed to change
the number to the sector name. For this, the formulas ”IF, INDEX, and MATCH”
have been used again to transform data from table F.2 to table F.3. The formula is
the following: IFERROR(INDEX(range; 1; MATCH(value; range; -1)); ”No answer”).
TUESDAY
8-12
12-13
13-17
17-20
1
S4a
S4a
S4a
No_answer
2
S3c
B101
B101
B101
3
S3c
No_answer
No_answer
No_answer
4
S4a
B101
B101
S2c
5
No_answer
No_answer
No_answer
No_answer
6
XX
B101
S3b
B101
7
S1b
XX
XX
XX
Table F.3: Example of the schedule after data treatment.
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
167
==PAGE:176==
MSc Thesis
Chapter F
3. Now, the entrance and exit time to the system is needed, therefore another table is
created, where Entry building, time of entry exit building and time of exit is stated.
The formula used is a simple chain of ”IF”, where is asking whether there is an
answer or not in table F.3. If the condition is fulfilled, that building will be the entrance
one.
4. The fourth step is organizing the data in columns to create pivot tables, from where it
can be obtained the number of displacements at each time step. In total 5 tables are
needed for entering, 5 for the exit, and 3 for the internal commutes. The first ten ta-
bles gather the number of displacements from the mean of transport to the entrance
building and vice versa. The internal commutes are collecting the displacements
between buildings on campus. For instance, the appearance of the pivot table on
Mondays for entering into the system at time step one, is as shown in Table F.4.
Entry time
8-12
S1a
S1b
B101
S2b
S2c
S3a
S3b
S3c
S4a
S4c
Total
Klampenborgvej (Helsingørmotorvejen)
1
3
1
2
3
10
Lyngby St
2
4
5
5
5
10
9
4
2
26
72
Rævehøjvej, DTU
3
7
6
2
5
1
11
6
4
14
59
#N/D
5
6
240
251
Internal
5
6
2
5
4
2
7
4
1
17
53
B101
1
1
3
3
3
1
3
1
16
Storecenter
1
4
3
2
1
4
15
Swimming pool
1
4
1
1
1
2
4
14
Cinema
1
1
2
Visit Lyngby
1
2
1
1
1
3
9
Total
11
19
21
8
13
22
18
36
25
15
313
501
Table F.4: Example of pivot table with the number of commutes on campus at 08:00.
5. Now is time to join all these tables into five (one per time step), remove those un-
necessary movements (i.e. B101 to B101), and multiply the commutes by the per-
centage of the population for which is going to be designed the system.
6. Finally, this data has to be assembled in the format asked by the optimization pro-
gram ”IBM CPLEX Optimization”. The formula that has been used for this purpose
is TEXTJOIN, obtaining sets like the following one, which is representing the com-
mutes on Monday on campus for the five time steps.
[[[0, 0, 0, 16, 36, 41, 0, 11, 21, 51, 11, 66, 36, 21], [0, 0, 0, 6, 0, 11, 0, 0, 0, 0, 6, 26,
6, 11], [0, 0, 0, 11, 21, 26, 0, 0, 31, 31, 61, 46, 21, 11], [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0,
0, 0, 0], [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0], [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0], [0,
0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0], [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0], [0, 0, 0, 0, 0,
0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0], [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0], [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0,
0, 0, 0, 0, 0], [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0], [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0,
0], [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0]] ,
[[0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 36, 0, 0, 11, 0, 11, 6, 11, 0], [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 6, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 6, 0, 0], [0, 0,
0, 6, 0, 26, 0, 0, 0, 6, 6, 6, 0, 0], [6, 0, 11, 0, 11, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0], [0, 0, 0, 0, 0,
36, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 6], [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 6, 11, 0, 6, 0, 0], [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0,
0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0], [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 11, 0, 0, 6, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0], [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 31, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0,
0, 6, 0], [21, 0, 16, 0, 6, 31, 0, 6, 6, 0, 0, 6, 0, 0], [6, 0, 11, 0, 0, 11, 0, 0, 0, 6, 0, 0, 6,
0], [16, 0, 6, 6, 6, 41, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0], [11, 6, 11, 0, 0, 16, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0],
[6, 0, 0, 0, 0, 6, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0]] ,
[[0, 0, 0, 0, 6, 0, 0, 0, 0, 11, 6, 6, 0, 0], [0, 0, 0, 0, 6, 0, 6, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 6, 0], [0, 0, 0,
168
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:177==
Chapter F
MSc Thesis
0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 16, 6, 21, 0, 0], [0, 0, 6, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 6], [0, 0, 6, 0, 0, 6,
6, 0, 0, 0, 0, 6, 0, 0], [16, 6, 11, 0, 31, 0, 21, 11, 31, 51, 16, 41, 11, 11], [0, 0, 0, 0, 0,
0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0], [6, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0], [6, 0, 11, 0, 6, 0, 6, 0, 0,
0, 6, 0, 0, 0], [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 6, 0, 0, 0, 0, 6, 0, 0, 0], [0, 0, 6, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 6, 0, 21,
0, 0], [0, 0, 11, 0, 6, 6, 0, 0, 0, 11, 6, 0, 0, 0], [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 6, 0, 0, 6, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0], [0,
0, 0, 0, 6, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 6, 0, 0]] ,
[[0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0], [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0], [0, 0, 0,
0, 0, 6, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0], [6, 6, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0], [46, 6, 11, 0, 0, 0,
0, 0, 0, 0, 6, 0, 0, 6], [36, 0, 16, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 6, 0, 6, 0], [11, 6, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0,
6, 0, 0, 0, 6, 0], [6, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0], [16, 0, 0, 0, 0, 16, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0,
0, 6, 0], [21, 6, 41, 0, 0, 26, 6, 0, 0, 0, 0, 6, 0, 0], [11, 0, 36, 0, 0, 11, 0, 0, 6, 0, 0, 0,
0, 0], [36, 21, 51, 0, 0, 0, 6, 0, 0, 0, 16, 0, 6, 0], [21, 6, 16, 0, 0, 6, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0,
6], [6, 0, 6, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0]] ,
[[0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0], [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0], [0, 0, 0,
0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0], [6, 0, 6, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0], [6, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0,
0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0], [36, 0, 31, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0], [6, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0,
0, 0, 0, 0], [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0], [11, 0, 11, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0,
0], [0, 6, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0], [11, 6, 21, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0], [6,
11, 6, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0], [21, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0], [11, 11, 6,
0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0]]];
F.2
Tables of results
Scenario 1
y
All commutes
With reduction
Monday
447
402
Tuesday
487
391
Wednesday
420
344
Thursday
465
384
Friday
345
288
Maximum
487
402
-17%
Table F.5: Number of bikes needed obtained for each day from the mathematical model
in Scenario 1
Scenario 2
y
All commutes
With reduction
Monday
485
432
Tuesday
506
406
Wednesday
453
384
Thursday
505
422
Friday
343
288
Maximum
506
432
-15%
Table F.6: Number of bikes needed obtained for each day from the mathematical model
in Scenario 2
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
169
==PAGE:178==
MSc Thesis
Chapter F
Scenario 3
y
All commutes
With reduction
Monday
452
421
Tuesday
514
443
Wednesday
433
367
Thursday
460
384
Friday
337
206
Maximum
514
443
-14%
Table F.7: Number of bikes needed obtained for each day from the mathematical model
in Scenario 3
170
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:179==
Chapter F
MSc Thesis
1
2
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
COMPARISON
Rævehøjvej, DTU
Klampenborgvej
S1a
S1b
B101
S2a
S2b
S2c
S3a
S3b
S3c
S4a
S4b
1
Rævehøjvej, DTU
-1
-3
-2
2
Klampenborgvej
2
4
S1a
-1
-3
0
2
5
S1b
-3
-3
0
-3
-1
0
6
B101
-2
0
1
1
1
0
7
S2a
0
-3
1
8
S2b
2
-1
1
1
-1
9
S2c
0
1
-1
-2
1
10
S3a
1
-2
-5
0
11
S3b
-5
0
0
3
12
S3c
0
1
-2
13
S4a
0
1
0
0
1
1
14
S4b
2
3
-2
1
Table F.8: Comparison between travel time on foot and by bike in minutes
1
2
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
COMPARISON
Rævehøjvej, DTU
Klampenborgvej
S1a
S1b
B101
S2a
S2b
S2c
S3a
S3b
S3c
S4a
S4b
1
Rævehøjvej, DTU
ON FOOT
ON FOOT
ON FOOT
2
Klampenborgvej
BY BIKE
4
S1a
ON FOOT
ON FOOT
50%
BY BIKE
5
S1b
ON FOOT
ON FOOT
50%
ON FOOT
ON FOOT
50%
6
B101
ON FOOT
50%
BY BIKE
BY BIKE
BY BIKE
50%
7
S2a
50%
ON FOOT
BY BIKE
8
S2b
BY BIKE
ON FOOT
BY BIKE
BY BIKE
ON FOOT
9
S2c
50%
BY BIKE
ON FOOT
ON FOOT
BY BIKE
10
S3a
BY BIKE
ON FOOT
ON FOOT
50%
11
S3b
ON FOOT
50%
50%
BY BIKE
12
S3c
50%
BY BIKE
ON FOOT
13
S4a
50%
BY BIKE
50%
50%
BY BIKE
BY BIKE
14
S4b
BY BIKE
BY BIKE
ON FOOT
BY BIKE
Table F.9: Conclusions of the comparison between travel time on foot and by bike in table F.8.
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
171
==PAGE:180==
MSc Thesis
Chapter F
Scenario 1
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
All commutes
With reduction
All commutes
With reduction
All commutes
With reduction
All commutes
With reduction
All commutes
With reduction
1
Rævehøjvej, DTU
263
157
261
159
221
98
236
137
166
58
2
Klampenborgvej
45
39
37
30
33
33
49
29
31
34
3
Lyngby St
125
158
172
164
161
170
170
157
143
135
4
S1a
12
11
35
22
11
6
18
12
11
11
5
S1b
43
21
44
28
37
16
68
32
48
27
6
B101
174
157
181
145
184
138
158
141
96
96
7
S2a
23
12
11
11
6
6
6
6
11
11
8
S2b
11
11
6
6
12
12
22
18
6
6
9
S2c
37
37
32
34
29
29
27
27
18
16
10
S3a
82
82
67
68
65
54
67
66
33
27
11
S3b
46
37
66
38
44
43
49
43
34
24
12
S3c
91
85
103
93
72
72
89
75
85
89
13
S4a
28
24
54
44
80
39
45
40
47
47
14
S4c
17
12
17
17
31
30
26
11
16
6
Table F.10: Docks needed per area in scenario 1
172
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:181==
Chapter F
MSc Thesis
Scenario 2
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
All commutes
With reduction
All commutes
With reduction
All commutes
With reduction
All commutes
With reduction
All commutes
With reduction
1
Rævehøjvej, DTU
154
79
147
69
163
82
106
49
76
28
2
Klampenborgvej
12
33
47
35
40
51
28
33
41
29
3
Lyngby St.
205
176
176
161
150
133
179
149
136
108
4
Nordvej S.R.
58
70
60
60
42
45
35
35
33
38
5
Linde Alle S.R.
23
28
18
33
18
19
38
25
17
24
6
P.O. Pedersen K.
6
6
6
6
5
5
9
12
0
0
7
Kampsax Kollegiet
6
6
12
7
12
6
12
6
6
6
8
Campus Village
6
7
11
12
6
18
14
12
11
11
9
P. Ostenfeld K.
6
6
12
10
6
12
17
23
11
10
10
Hempel Kollegiet
6
6
0
1
0
6
0
1
6
6
11
Poul Bergsøe K.
2
2
6
6
6
0
11
6
6
6
12
S1a
15
12
35
23
12
6
24
12
11
11
13
S1b
49
27
50
28
42
16
67
34
42
27
14
B101
181
170
198
164
190
144
187
168
85
81
15
S2a
12
12
11
11
6
6
6
6
11
11
16
S2b
15
11
6
6
18
12
22
12
8
6
17
S2c
37
37
32
34
29
29
27
27
18
16
18
S3a
100
94
65
58
79
54
52
52
39
33
19
S3b
46
34
75
50
51
50
49
43
35
24
20
S3c
86
85
103
93
79
79
93
81
76
76
21
S4a
33
26
54
44
69
44
45
40
47
47
22
S4c
17
12
23
23
23
31
47
23
16
6
Table F.11: Docks needed per area in scenario 2
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
173
==PAGE:182==
MSc Thesis
Chapter F
Scenario 3
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
All commutes
With reduction
All commutes
With reduction
All commutes
With reduction
All commutes
With reduction
All commutes
With reduction
1
Rævehøjvej, DTU
147
93
154
43
103
60
149
26
170
82
2
Klampenborgvej
24
33
22
24
18
34
33
18
47
18
3
Lyngby St
134
140
159
202
219
163
131
185
111
101
4
Visit Lyngby
23
22
24
25
22
9
18
12
0
0
5
Storecenter
30
34
85
70
34
46
48
45
0
0
6
Cinema
18
18
6
6
9
13
6
18
0
0
7
Swimming pool
41
30
20
23
17
12
46
35
0
0
8
S1a
22
11
35
29
12
12
18
6
11
11
9
S1b
49
33
50
33
56
16
68
36
37
6
10
B101
160
158
185
162
179
138
156
158
59
22
11
S2a
12
12
11
11
6
6
6
6
11
11
12
S2b
11
11
6
6
18
12
18
18
6
0
13
S2c
35
35
32
34
29
29
27
27
27
13
14
S3a
80
80
72
61
72
64
62
62
28
16
15
S3b
51
34
57
54
55
54
49
43
29
18
16
S3c
85
85
111
101
72
72
95
80
64
60
17
S4a
32
24
54
44
67
56
45
40
47
44
18
S4c
17
12
23
23
23
17
38
17
16
6
Table F.12: Docks needed per area in scenario 3
174
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:183==
Chapter F
MSc Thesis
F.3
Stations distribution
Figure F.1: Proposal of station locations on campus following recommendations in table
8.7.
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
175
==PAGE:184==
MSc Thesis
Chapter F
Figure F.2: Proposal of station locations on Scenario 2 following recommendations in
table 8.7.
176
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:185==
Chapter F
MSc Thesis
Figure F.3: Proposal of station locations on Scenario 3 following recommendations in
table 8.7.
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
177
==PAGE:186==
MSc Thesis
Chapter F
178
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:187==
G
Appendix: Sustainability Assessment
Buildings
By car
By bus
On foot
By light rail
By bike
Scenario 0
Scenario X
Results
101
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
113
NO
YES
YES
YES
YES
3
4
IMPROVES
114
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
115
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
116
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
117
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
118
YES
YES
YES
NO
YES
3
4
IMPROVES
119
YES
YES
YES
NO
YES
3
4
IMPROVES
120
YES
NO
YES
NO
YES
2
3
IMPROVES
121
YES
NO
YES
NO
YES
2
3
IMPROVES
122
YES
NO
YES
NO
YES
2
3
IMPROVES
201
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
204
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
205
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
206
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
207
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
208
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
209
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
210
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
221
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
222
YES
YES
YES
NO
YES
3
4
IMPROVES
223
YES
YES
YES
NO
YES
3
4
IMPROVES
224
YES
YES
YES
NO
YES
3
4
IMPROVES
227
YES
YES
YES
NO
YES
3
4
IMPROVES
228
YES
YES
YES
NO
NO
3
3
STEADY
229
YES
YES
YES
NO
YES
3
4
IMPROVES
232
YES
YES
YES
NO
YES
3
4
IMPROVES
233
YES
YES
YES
NO
YES
3
4
IMPROVES
234
YES
YES
YES
NO
YES
3
4
IMPROVES
237
YES
YES
YES
NO
YES
3
4
IMPROVES
239
YES
YES
YES
NO
YES
3
4
IMPROVES
240
YES
YES
YES
NO
NO
3
3
STEADY
301
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
302
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
303
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
304
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
305
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
306
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
307
NO
YES
YES
YES
YES
3
4
IMPROVES
Table for assessing indicator: Physical building connections
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
179
==PAGE:188==
MSc Thesis
Chapter G
Buildings
By car
By bus
On foot
By light rail
By bike
Scenario 0
Scenario X
Results
308
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
309
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
311
NO
YES
YES
YES
YES
3
4
IMPROVES
312
NO
YES
YES
YES
YES
3
4
IMPROVES
314
NO
YES
YES
YES
YES
3
4
IMPROVES
321
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
322
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
325
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
326
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
327
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
329
YES
YES
YES
NO
YES
3
4
IMPROVES
341
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
342
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
343
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
344
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
345
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
346
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
347
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
348
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
349
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
352
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
353
YES
YES
YES
YES
NO
4
4
STEADY
354
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
355
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
356
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
358
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
371
YES
YES
YES
NO
YES
3
4
IMPROVES
372
YES
YES
YES
NO
YES
3
4
IMPROVES
373
YES
YES
YES
NO
YES
3
4
IMPROVES
375
YES
YES
YES
NO
YES
3
4
IMPROVES
376
YES
YES
YES
NO
YES
3
4
IMPROVES
377
YES
YES
YES
NO
YES
3
4
IMPROVES
378
YES
YES
YES
NO
YES
3
4
IMPROVES
382
YES
YES
YES
NO
YES
3
4
IMPROVES
384
YES
YES
YES
NO
YES
3
4
IMPROVES
402
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
403
YES
YES
YES
YES
NO
4
4
STEADY
404
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
411
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
412
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
413
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
414
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
415
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
416
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
417
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
418
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
421
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
423
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
424
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
425
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
426
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
427
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
435
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
441
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
445
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
447
YES
YES
YES
YES
NO
4
4
STEADY
450
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
451
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
Table for assessing indicator: Physical building connections
180
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:189==
Chapter G
MSc Thesis
Buildings
By car
By bus
On foot
By light rail
By bike
Scenario 0
Scenario X
Results
Campus Village
YES
YES
YES
NO
YES
3
4
IMPROVES
Hempel Kollegiet
YES
YES
YES
NO
YES
3
4
IMPROVES
Kampsax Kollegiet
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
Linde Alle S.R.
YES
YES
NO
NO
YES
2
3
IMPROVES
Nordvej S.R.
YES
YES
YES
NO
YES
3
4
IMPROVES
P. Ostenfeld K.
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
4
5
IMPROVES
P.O. Pedersen K.
YES
YES
NO
NO
YES
2
3
IMPROVES
Poul Bergsøe K.
YES
YES
NO
NO
YES
2
3
IMPROVES
Storecenter
YES
YES
NO
YES
YES
3
4
IMPROVES
Swimming pool
YES
YES
NO
NO
YES
2
3
IMPROVES
Cinema
YES
YES
NO
YES
YES
3
4
IMPROVES
Visit Lyngby
YES
YES
NO
YES
YES
3
4
IMPROVES
Table G.1: Table for assessing indicator: Physical building connections
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
181
==PAGE:190==
MSc Thesis
Chapter G
Figure G.1: Canteens, cafés and street food on DTU campus
182
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
==PAGE:191==
Chapter G
MSc Thesis
G.1
Universities with Bike sharing systems
Those with the provider Zagster may have closed due to the COVID impact on the busi-
ness:
Some bikeshares will be shutting down permanently due to the impact of
COVID-19 on Zagster’s business. If your bikeshare is impacted, you will be
notified via email. [Zagster 2020]
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
183
==PAGE:192==
Worldwide 
 ranking
Country
University
Type of 
system
Link
Comments
37 Canada
University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver 
Bikesharing
https://students.ubc.ca/ubclife/biking-campus
India
Indian Institute of 
Science, Bangalore 
Bikesharing
http://www.nammacycle.in/simple-technology/strategy/
India
Birla Institute of Technology, 
Mesra, Ranchi 
Bikesharing
https://web.archive.org/web/20151106103336/http://desiwh
eels.in/team.html#aboutus
Private (by students with the desire of expanding)
India
Indian Institute of 
Technology, Bombay 
Bikesharing
https://www.zoomcar.com/pedl-host-tnc
Seems to be something general not from the university
Jordan
Jordan University of Science and 
Technology, Irbid 
Bikesharing
https://www.jordantimes.com/news/local/just-turns-
%E2%80%98bike-friendly%E2%80%99-self-service-bicycles-
available-students
Mexico
National Autonomous University 
of Mexico, Mexico City 
Bikesharing
https://www.dgsgm.unam.mx/bicipuma
Bicipuma
United Kindom
University of Nottingham
Renting of bikes
https://www.nottingham.ac.uk/studentservices/services/bike-
hire.aspx
Several cycle hire schemes in UK towns and cities overlap 
their university areas, e.g. the one at Stirling. Others, e.g. 
Leeds, offer longer-term cycle hire. Kingston University 
are reported to have a scheme called KU Bikes due to 
begin in early 2018, while Derby anticipates that 
Hourbike will run a scheme in Derby operating electric 
bikes, around the same time.
1 United States
Harvard University, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts 
Renting of bikes
https://www.crimsonbikes.com/
8 United States
Yale University, New Haven, 
Connecticut 
Bikesharing
https://news.yale.edu/2013/04/22/yale-introduces-new-bike-
share-program
Provider: Zagster. May be closed dur to COVID
10 United States
University of Chicago, Chicago, 
Illinois 
Removed on 
2014
https://www.facebook.com/ucoia/posts/718937701507245
Bike sharing system closed. Now is complemented with 
Divvy's Bikes (operator in the city of Chicago)
20 United States
Pennsylvania State 
University, State College, 
Pennsylvania 
BIKESHARING
https://news.psu.edu/story/621859/2020/06/01/campus-
life/zagster-ends-operations-nationwide-search-underway-
new-bike
Closed permanently due COVID (provider Zagster), 
university is looking for other providers
22 United States
Cornell College, Mount Vernon, 
Iowa 
Renting of bikes
https://news.cornellcollege.edu/2011/05/purple-bikes-on-a-
roll/
26 United States
New York University, New York 
City 
BIKESHARING
https://www.nyu.edu/life/travel-and-transportation/biking-at-
nyu/get-a-bike.html
From the city, university has discounts
29 United States
Duke University, Durham, North 
Carolina 
Bikesharing
https://today.duke.edu/2014/09/zagster
Provider:Zagster. May be closed due to COVID
44 United States
Georgia Institute of 
Technology, Atlanta, Georgia 
Bikesharing
https://pts.gatech.edu/bicycling-georgia-tech#node-312
Provider: Relay. From the city of Atlanta
50 United States
University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 
Bikesharing
https://move.unc.edu/bike/bikeshare/
==PAGE:193==
United States
Belmont University, Nashville, 
Tennessee 
Renting of bikes
https://news.belmont.edu/belmont-launches-bike-share-
program/
Bikes available at certain hours. Check in and out at one 
location on campus
United States
California State University, East 
Bay, Hayward, California 
Bikesharing
https://www.csueastbay.edu/parking/alt-trans/zagster.html
Closed permanently due COVID (provider Zagster), 
university is looking for other providers
United States
College of Charleston, Charleston, 
South Carolina 
Renting of bikes
http://bike.cofc.edu/bike-share-program/index.php
Bikes available at certain hours. Check in and out at one 
location on campus
United States
Cornell University, Ithaca, New 
York 
Bikesharing
https://bigredbikes.cornell.edu/
Provider:Zagster. May be closed due to COVID
United States
Emory University, Druid Hills, 
Georgia 
Renting of bikes
https://transportation.emory.edu/bike-emory
Offers semester rental, year rental or summer rental.
United States
Florida State 
University, Tallahassee, Florida 
Renting of bikes
https://transportation.fsu.edu/bicycles
Semester or year  rentals
United States
Hamilton College, Clinton, New 
York 
Bikesharing
https://www.hamilton.edu/news/story/golden-bicycles
Free system, bikes available without lock
United States
Hampshire College, Amherst, 
Massachusetts 
Bikesharing
http://bike.hampshire.edu/
Free system, bikes available without lock
United States
Illinois State University, Normal, 
Illinois 
Bikesharing
https://sustainability.illinoisstate.edu/efforts/transportation/r
eggie_ride.php
Bikes available at certain hours. Check in and out at one 
location on campus
United States
Keene State College, Keene, New 
Hampshire 
Renting of bikes
https://www.keene.edu/news/stories/detail/1510671571767/
United States
Kent State University, Kent, Ohio 
Bikesharing
https://www.kent.edu/today/news/flashfleet-debuts-new-
bike-share-program
United States
Northern Arizona 
University, Flagstaff, Arizona 
Renting of bikes
https://in.nau.edu/green-nau/yellow-bike-program/
Periods up to 7 days
United States
Oakland University, Rochester, 
Michigan 
Bikesharing
https://oaklandpostonline.com/18530/campus/bike-share-
program/
Free system, bikes available without lock. Has suffered 
from theft. Now they are painting the bikes to avoid 
students take them home.
United States
Occidental College, Los Angeles, 
California 
Renting of bikes
https://www.oxy.edu/academics/areas-study/urban-
environmental-policy/our-projects/bike-share-program
Periods up to 7 days
United States
Ohio State University, Columbus, 
Ohio 
Bike shop
https://news.osu.edu/buckeye-bike-hub-to-help-keep-
campus-bicycles-on-the-move/
United States
Olin College, Needham, 
Massachusetts 
Bikesharing
https://www.olin.edu/sites/default/files/go_bikes_info_bike_
qa.pdf
United States
St. Olaf College, Northfield, 
Minnesota 
Renting of bikes
https://www.stolaf.edu//news/index.cfm?fuseaction=NewsDe
tails&id=5196
United States
Saint Xavier University, Chicago, 
Illinois 
Bikesharing
https://www.cr80news.com/news-item/bike-rentals-are-
newest-green-initiative-at-st-xavier/
United States
Santa Clara University, Santa 
Clara, California 
Bikesharing
https://www.scu.edu/rsfaculty/get-started/transit/
Provider:Zagster. May be closed due to COVID
United States
Southwestern 
University, Georgetown, Texas 
Bikesharing
https://www.southwestern.edu/life-at-southwestern/pirate-
bikes/
Free system, bikes available without lock. 
United States
Stony Brook University, Stony 
Brook, New York 
Bikesharing
https://www.stonybrook.edu/commcms/sustainability/transp
ortation/_Wolf_Ride_Bike_Share/
==PAGE:194==
United States
University of California, 
Irvine, Irvine, California 
Bikesharing
https://parking.uci.edu/zotwheels/main.cfm
United States
University of 
Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio 
Renting of bikes
https://www.uc.edu/af/pdc/sustainability/campus_initiatives/
transportation/bike_share.html
Bikes available at certain hours. Check in and out at one 
location on campus
United States
University of Kentucky, Lexington, 
Kentucky 
Renting of bikes
https://www.uky.edu/transportation/bike/wildcatwheels
Rental and resuse of abandoned bikes on campus
United States
University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania 
Bikesharing
https://www.publicsafety.upenn.edu/penncycle-launches-
pilot-bicycling-program/
United States
University of South 
Florida, Tampa, Florida 
Renting of bikes
https://www.usf.edu/student-affairs/campus-rec/outdoor-
recreation/outdoor-resource-center-equipment-rentals.aspx
Two types of bike.  Day, weekend, week, month or 
semester rentals
United States
University of Tulsa, Tulsa, 
Oklahoma 
Renting of bikes
https://utulsa.edu/bike-program/
Rent for a semester
United States
University of Vermont, Burlington, 
Vermont 
Bikesharing
http://www.redstoneaptsvt.com/aptcatma.html#:~:text=The%
20Bicycle%20User's%20Group%20(BUG,Center%2C%20Redsto
ne%20and%20Trinity%20Campus.
United States
Trinity College 
(Connecticut), Hartford,CT 
Bikesharing
https://www.trincoll.edu/news/blue-gold-and-lime/
Lime company has some stations on campus
United States
Washington State 
University, Pullman, Washington 
Bikesharing
https://news.wsu.edu/announcement/green-bikes-back/
Free use with university card
==PAGE:195==
Chapter G
MSc Thesis
Design and feasibility assessment of a bike sharing system at DTU.
187
==PAGE:196==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
