==PAGE:1==
Sine Palm (s144307)
Evaluating the eﬀects of
hearing-aid processing on
conversational dynamics
Master Thesis, Spring 2020
==PAGE:2==
This report was prepared by:
Sine Palm, s144307
Advisors:
Ewen MacDonald, Associate Professor
Department of Health Technology, Technical University of Denmark
Anna Joseﬁne Munch Sørensen, Ph.D Student
Department of Health Technology, Technical University of Denmark
Eline Borch Petersen, Clinical Research Engineer
WS Audiology A/S
Submission Date:
August, 8th 2020
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
How we communicate with each other is not just talking and listening, but a much more
complex process, which requires a lot of resources in order to sustain normal ﬂuid switches
of talking turns. These resources are known to be reduced when suﬀering from hearing loss.
Today’s hearing solutions as hearing aids are well known to assist the wearer particularly
in diﬃcult environments as noisy situations. The processing feature in charge of this is
known as directional ampliﬁcation or beamforming. In this study beamforming beneﬁts
were identiﬁed from analysis of conversational dynamics and subjective communication
eﬀort.
The study aimed to investigate how hearing-impaired people can beneﬁt from hearing
aids with beamforming. It was hypothesised that these beneﬁts could be discovered as
a reduction in communication diﬃculty, when conversing in noise.
Speech production,
conversational dynamics and subjective ratings were used as diﬃculty indicators.
A conversational experiment was designed to test native-Danish pairs of a younger
normal-hearing and an older hearing-impaired, solving a spot-the-diﬀerence task known as
the "Diapix task" in diﬀerent conditions composed of background noise and hearing-aid
processing strategy combinations. However, in this work all participants reported normal
hearing as the worldwide Covid-19 situation restricted the group of test persons to younger
people. When including normal-hearing participants it was hypothesised that wearing the
hearing aids were more likely to challenge the wearer, than to reduce challenges as its
purpose when worn by hearing impaired persons.
The recorded conversations were analysed in the same manner as Sørensen et al. [2020a]
and Sørensen et al. [2020b], using a voice activity detection algorithm together with a
classiﬁer. From this, the length of utterances and ﬂoor-transfer oﬀsets were investigated.
They where both hypothesised to increase in the presence of noise, but this eﬀect was
seen. However, the ﬁndings suggested that being normal-hearing and wearing hearing aids
would aﬀect one’s conversational dynamics. In contrast to what was hypothesised, the
time the participants needed to solve the task did not increased when noise was played,
suggesting that the noise was not suﬃciently challenging in order to aﬀect the eﬃciency of
the conversation.
The participants rated their communication eﬀort immediately after each conversation,
and these ratings revealed some eﬀects of the processing. Interestingly, the eﬀect of pro-
cessing was found for both talkers.
Overall, it was not possible to determine how the hearing aids aﬀected the two normal-
hearing talkers and if the processing had an impact on the measured factors in this study.
i
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This report has been written to fulﬁl the requirements to obtain the Master’s degree
in Biomedical Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) by stud. polyt
Sine Palm.
The project was assigned to a workload of 30 ECTS points, which corresponds to
approximately 840 working hours. The project spanned over a seven month period from
the 6th of January 2020 to the 8th of August 2020.
Due to the worldwide situation
concerning the Covid-19 virus, this project has been extended with 9 weeks and the scope
of the study has been revised in order to be able to follow the guidelines from the Danish
Health Authority.
The data collection was carried out at DTU, Lyngby campus, Denmark from May
to June and strictly included participants who were not in the risk group deﬁned by the
authorities. As participants were tested in couples of two, it was further a requirement that
they lived together and thus were not expelled for further spread of infectious disease with
their participation. As a consequence of this, it was only possible to include normal-hearing
participants.
Sine Palm, s144307
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgments
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the people who have supported me and
helped me through the preparation of this thesis. First of all, a great thank to the Hearing
Systems group at DTU for a close cooperation and for making a range of resources available
for the project. Also, a thank you to WS Audiology A/S for providing the hearing aids
and the needed ancillary accessory.
A sincere thank you to the people at Hearing Systems, who have been very friendly and
welcomed me to the oﬃce, and for the support and advice during the months I spent there.
I want to express my gratitude to my three supervisors for their valuable insights on
the ﬁeld of conversational dynamics and hearing aids, from which I have learnt a lot. Our
weekly meetings have been very guiding and fruitful, and for that I am very grateful. And
for their always quick replies on almost any time at the day on every possible media, pre-
venting me from getting stuck with a question, also a great thank you. Their constant
guidance, availability and help were essential for the course of this thesis.
A special thank you goes to PhD. student Anna Joseﬁne Sørensen, who has been a
front-runner for the project and has supervised me throughout the project. Thank you for
helping me with the practical aspects of the experimental part of this project.
Finally, I want to thank my roommates from my dormitory. Their participation made
it possible for me to explore the hypothesis, and test and evaluate the project in spite of
the Covid-19 situation and the consequent restrictions. Last but not least, my gratitude
goes to my family and friends for their constant and unconditional support throughout my
project, and for their company which has made this thesis easier to write.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Abbreviations and Nomenclature
Abbreviations and symbols
α
Directional parameter when determining beamforming patterns
AIC Akaike information criterion
ANOVA Analysis of variance
BTE Behind the ear
dBA A-weighted decibel
dB Decibel
FTO Floor-transfer oﬀset
HATS Head-and-torso simulator
HA Hearing aid
HI Hearing impaired
HL Hearing loss
IQR Interquartile range
MPO Maximum power output
NH Normal hearing
OFA Optical ﬂow analysis
PTA Pure tone average
RIC Receiver in the canal
RITE Receiver in the ear
RMS Root-mean-square
ROD Region of disintrest
ROI Region of interest
iv
==PAGE:7==
ABBREVIATIONS AND NOMENCLATURE
SNHL Sensorineural hearing loss
SNR Signal-to-noise ratio
SPL Sound pressure level
VAD Voice activity detection
VAI Voice activity indication
Nomenclature and glossary
Bilateral beamformer Design of a beamformer with both hearing aids (four micro-
phones)
Floor transfer oﬀset The interval between when one talker stopped and another started
speaking
Overlap-between When an overlap happens between two talkers’ ﬂoor-transfer (negative
FTO)
Overlap-within When the entire utterance of one talker happens within the other talker’s
turn
Sensorineural hearing loss Hearing loss caused by damages to the inner ear and/or the
auditory nerve system
Transition From one turn of talking to another
Unilateral beamformer Design of a beamformer with an individual hearing aid (two
microphones)
Utterance Speech tokens separated with silecnce less than 180 ms
v
==PAGE:8==
Table of Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgments
iii
Abbreviations and Nomenclature
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Conversational Dynamics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Hearing Aids and Beamforming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Previous Approaches to Examine Beneﬁts of Hearing-Aid Processing . . . .
6
1.4
Aims and Hypotheses
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Experimental Design
9
2.1
Conversation Elicitation Task . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Subjective Ratings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Procedure Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Experimental Setup
15
3.1
Experimental Equipment and Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Hearing-Aid Setting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
Background Noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4
Calibration of Talker Level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4
Experimental Procedure
23
4.1
Introduction and Hearing-Aid Fitting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3
Testing Procedure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5
Data Processing and Modelling
26
5.1
Processing of Speech Recordings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.1.1
Calculation of Speech Level in dB SPL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2
Processing of Video Recordings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
vi
==PAGE:9==
5.3
Statistical Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6
Results
32
6.1
Eﬀectiveness: Completion Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.2
Subjective Communication Eﬀort: Ratings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6.3
Eﬀect on Speech Production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.4
Floor-Transfer Oﬀset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.5
Balance of Speech Contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.6
Quantity of Motions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7
Discussion
41
7.1
The Task Elicited Conversations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7.2
Subjective Ratings of Communication Eﬀort . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7.3
Speech Production and Conversational Dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.4
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
8
Conclusion
47
9
Future Work
49
Bibliography
56
A Further Results
57
A.1 Additional Visualisations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
A.1.1
Subjective Ratings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
A.1.2
Floor-Transfer Oﬀset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
A.2 Summary of Signiﬁcant Eﬀects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
B Further Explanations and Supplements
60
B.1
Audiogram
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
B.2
Exploration of Beamforming Patterns
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
B.3
Examples of Diapix Scenes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
B.4
Subjective Ratings: Danish Questionnaire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
B.5
Instructions for the Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
C MATLAB Code
67
C.1 Execution of Conversational Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
C.2 Processing of Recorded Speech Signals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
C.2.1
Calculation of Speech Level in dB SPL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
C.3 Calibration and Variability of Talker Levels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
vii
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER1
Introduction
Being able to have a conversation is an essential part of our social life and human
interactions. It often happens without any further thoughts as a natural thing. Truly,
having a conversation is not simply speech production and listening, but involves well-
developed skills in taking turns; predicting when our conversational partner will pass the
turn (Wiemann and Knapp [1975]). The complex task of having a conversation requires
individuals to both comprehend the speech from their interlocutor and produce their own
comprehensible speech.
When living with a hearing impairment this task becomes more diﬃcult as a con-
sequence of a multifaceted loss of hearing ability. The challenge is further increased in
noisy environments and to follow the speech of one particular talker in the presence of
multiple-competing talkers is even more challenging. Assisting hearing-impaired people
with hearing aids might help making sounds more audible, but hearing aids cannot assist
the listener in choosing which talker to pay attention to in the presence of multiple talk-
ers, because only the listener knows which talker is the target, and since the target may
change as the conversation proceeds. However, diﬀerent hearing-aid processing features as
directional ampliﬁcation are implemented to help overcome the problem of focusing on the
target source in a noisy environment. Furthermore, speakers and listeners can draw on a
variety of behavioural strategies as moving closer, turning the head, speaking louder and
slower to aid communication in noisy environments (Hadley et al. [2019]).
The intention of this project was to investigate how hearing-impaired people can beneﬁt
from hearing aids with directional ampliﬁcation. For this purpose an experiment including
pairs of a normal-hearing and an aided hearing-impaired talker was designed. The conver-
sational pair was seated facing one-another performing a collaborative task while presented
with noise and diﬀerent settings of the hearing aids resulting in diﬀerent signal-to-noise
ratios (SNRs). This project attempts to identify the beneﬁts of directional ampliﬁcation in
hearing aids when conversing with one’s interlocutor in the presence of background noise.
Traditionally, the evaluation of this signal-processing feature is studied in terms of speech
intelligibility tests performed in laboratories. This study seeks to investigate the real-life
beneﬁts and thus examines if the eﬀects of this hearing-aid processing can be measured
and evaluated on diﬀerent aspects of conversational dynamics.
1
==PAGE:11==
2
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Thesis Structure
This introductory chapter will present the main components of this thesis with a short
introduction to conversational dynamics, classiﬁcation of talker transitions, hearing-aid
processing, and how these subjects previously have been studied. Since this study aims
to investigate the eﬀects of hearing-aid signal processing in a real-life setting, a conver-
sational experiment was designed and conducted. The experimental design is described
in Chapter 2 followed by speciﬁcations for the setup and procedure in Chapter 3 and 4,
respectively. Finally, a description of the tools and software used for the data analysis and
the test results are presented in Chapter 5 and 6, respectively, followed by a discussion and
suggestions to future work with the study in closing.
Furthermore, the appendices includes:
Appendix A: Includes additional results from the experiment as illustrations and statis-
tical tables.
Appendix B: Includes further useful explanations, elaborations and supplements for this
report.
Appendix C: Includes MATLAB code employed to run the experiment and extract measures
of interest for further statistical analysis and visualisation in R.
1.1
Conversational Dynamics
Both speakers and listeners work collaboratively to create a successful conversation by
taking turns at talking. This required complex turn-taking behaviour is the core of the
study by Sacks et al. [1974], who deﬁned a general qualitative model for organisation of
turn-taking for conversations. To sustain conversation this rapid switching between talking
and listening (i.e. production and comprehension) needs to be performed at a high rate
implying that overlaps between the speech production and comprehension must sometimes
occur. Several studies have shown that speech production has latencies of around 600 ms
and above, while talker transitions average around 200 ms (Levinson and Torreira [2015],
Heldner and Edlund [2010]). This supports the implication of an overlap and thus a listener
has to prepare an answer while their interlocutor’s turn is still unﬁnished. This was also
noted by Sacks et al. [1974] who proposed that there must be a projection (i.e. prediction)
of turn-ends by the listener in order for the turn-taking system to operate at the high speed.
This projection is helped by the myriad of auditory and visual cues produced and perceived
by both conversational partners during a face-to-face conversation. Here, speakers produce
a number of cues to indicate that their turn is about to end and they are ready to give up
the conversational ﬂoor (Latif et al. [2018]).
These studies sum up to the conclusion that interlocutors must 1) simultaneously mon-
itor and understand the speech of their partner, 2) plan an appropriate response and
physically prepare the response action, and lastly 3) predict the upcoming turn exchange
(i.e. when a talker is about to ﬁnish their turn) using multiple cues.
When classifying talker transitions in conversations, diﬀerent intervals of the conver-
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:12==
1.2. HEARING AIDS AND BEAMFORMING
3
sation are examined. These include intervals within one talker’s speech stream as well
as between speakers or at the turn change. This study uses the terminology from Sacks
et al. [1974], who deﬁned three categories of transitions between talkers; gap, overlap, and
neither-gap-nor-overlap. From the two last-mentioned, further sub-categories are deﬁned
resulting in the following ﬁve categories as used in Sørensen et al. [2020a,b], Watson et al.
[2020]; utterances, gaps, overlaps-between, overlaps-within and pauses. Speech tokens sep-
arated by acoustic silence of less than 180ms is named an utterance. A break in one talker’s
speech stream is simply deﬁned as a pause, whereas silence due to a change of talker refers
to a gap. An overlap-between is found when transitions between talkers overlap (i.e joint
speech during ﬂoor transfer)). Contrary, an overlap-within is joint speech during the ut-
terance of one talker, that does not result in a ﬂoor transfer. This happens when a talker
is interrupted by the complete utterance of his/her partner.
The ﬁve types of intervals are illustrated in Figure 1.1. To describe the transition inter-
val between talkers, the term ﬂoor-transfer oﬀset (FTO) is introduced. FTO is measured
as the duration between turns, thus a positive FTO implies a gap, whereas an overlap-
between is found with a negative FTO. Studies of turn-taking investigate FTOs and their
distributions to examine diﬀerent hypothesis and aims (e.g. Levinson and Torreira [2015],
Heldner and Edlund [2010], Sørensen et al. [2020a,b], Watson et al. [2020]).
Figure 1.1: Illustration of talker transition and utterance classiﬁcations from Sørensen [2017].
Gaps, overlaps-within, overlaps-between and pauses during a conversation between Talker 1 and
Talker 2 are labeled. In this conversation there are two ﬂoor-transfer oﬀsets (FTOs): the gap and
the overlap-between.
1.2
Hearing Aids and Beamforming
This section brieﬂy introduces the complex aspects of the functionality of hearing aids
and is heavily inspired by Dillon [2012] and Launer et al. [2016]. The reader is encouraged
to seek further details on the subject of hearing-aid signal processing in these references.
A hearing loss (HL) can have diﬀerent origins and is from that classiﬁed as either con-
ductive or sensorineural (SN); damage in the outer or middle ear preventing sounds from
being conducted, or damages in the inner ear or the nerves creating the auditory pathway,
respectively. These damages causing a SNHL are often caused by aging or noise exposure,
but can be genetic or caused by medications and drugs. Diagnosing a hearing loss can
include several tests performed by an audiologist, but the main tool is an audiogram that
states one’s ability to hear tones presented at diﬀerent frequencies. From the pattern of
the audiogram diﬀerent types of hearing loss can be determined. This study only focuses
on SNHL.
Commercial assistive listening devices such as hearing aids are known for the ability to
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:13==
4
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
overcome the deﬁcits associated with a hearing loss using diﬀerent processing strategies as
example-wise ampliﬁcation. However, they meet some limitations. Even when sounds have
been ampliﬁed by hearing aids, a person suﬀering from a SNHL needs a higher SNR than
their normal-hearing peers to understand speech in noise, as a result of the auditory deﬁcits.
Hearing aids are best understood consisting of multiple functional blocks of diﬀerent
components. Initially, one or more microphones (also known as transducers) pick up the
external sound and convert the analog sound waves into digital signals. This digital signal
is passed through a 15-band ﬁlterbank and thus processed into 15 individual frequency
bands. As a hearing loss is measured for diﬀerent ranges of frequencies the processing
of the signal is applied to all these bands. The magnitude of these small signals picked
up by the microphones is increased by the hearing-aid ampliﬁer. Generally, ampliﬁers are
classiﬁed as linear or nonlinear; amplifying a given frequency (i.e frequency-speciﬁc) with a
constant gain regardless of presentation level, or providing ampliﬁcation varying with the
signal amplitude, respectively. An ampliﬁer can turn down its own gain as the input to
the ampliﬁer increases. This mechanism is termed compression. The ampliﬁer constitutes
the second functional block together with additional signal-processing features in more
sophisticated devices. Thirdly, the ampliﬁed, manipulated signal is converted back into
sound by the receivers (i.e small headphones).
Hearing aids are individually ﬁtted to the user with diﬀerent types of hearing aids,
receivers and domes. Further, the hearing aids can be operated via switches on the case
of the hearing aid or by remote control often through a smartphone application devel-
oped by the manufacturer. Last but not least, a hearing aid cannot function without the
electrical power provided from batteries which are either for single-time use or rechargeable.
Directional Ampliﬁcation Systems
Among a variety of signal-processing strategies as frequency-speciﬁc gain and amplitude
compression that have been proposed to improve audibility and speech recognition in noisy
surroundings, the most successful strategy to improve SNR and enhance source selection
uses directional ampliﬁcation, also called spatial ﬁltering or more generally beamforming
(Kidd Jr et al. [2015], Kompis and Dillier [1994]). Directional systems use multiple mi-
crophones and the timing of sound arrival to suppress noise coming from some directions,
while retaining good sensitivity to sounds origination from a speciﬁc direction relative to
the aid-wearer’s head. This strategy provides signiﬁcant enhancement to sound source se-
lection provided that the competing sources are suﬃciently separated relative to the target
source, but cannot assist in choosing target source.
Most commercial behind-the-ear (BTE) hearing aids commonly uses two omni-directional
microphones as sound inlets to archive directionality. This dual-microphone is designed
by pairwise combining the electrical outputs from the two omni-directional microphones
on each hearing aid in diﬀerent ways. This is known as an unilateral beamformer and its
counterpart is a bilateral beamformer, which combines all four microphones. However, this
bilateral beamformer requires a fast and precise wireless communication between the two
hearing aids which is currently a challenging factor for the industry. With the unilateral
beamformer it is possible to obtain either a omni-directional system or a directional sys-
tem. When an omni-directional system is wanted, the output of a single microphone is
selected or a sum of both microphone outputs, whereas a directional system is obtained
by combining the output from the two microphones in a diﬀerent way. Here the electrical
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:14==
1.2. HEARING AIDS AND BEAMFORMING
5
outputs of each microphone are subtracted once the output of the rearward microphone
has been electrically delayed. This delay-and-subtract process produces more sensitivity
in the forward direction than in any other direction and thus creates the beamformer.
The directional sensitivity of a beamformer (deﬁned as the ratio of the size of the
output voltage to the size of the input sound pressure) is commonly indicated on a polar
sensitivity pattern, where each concentric circle represents a 5 dB change in sensitivity. As
an omni-directional beamformer has equal sensitivity to sounds coming form all directions,
it has the shape of a circle when plotted in a polar plot, whereas the polar pattern design
of a directional beamformer can have diﬀerent shapes indicating attenuation of sounds
from diﬀerent angels. These shapes are determined by a directional parameter indicating
how the incoming signals from the two microphones are weighted in the calculation of the
ﬁnal output. Examples of patterns for diﬀerent values of the directional parameter are
presented in Figure 1.2. A directional system can either be ﬁxed with a speciﬁc selected
pattern or be adaptive in which case the hearing aid will adapt to the acoustic situation
by selecting the optimal pattern.
Figure 1.2: Diﬀerent directional patterns measured in free ﬁeld. The second pattern in this ﬁgure
shows an omni-directional pattern. The last ﬁgure in the ﬁrst row and the second ﬁgure in the
second row are common directional patterns referred to as cardioid or hypercadioid, respectively.
The last ﬁgure in the second row is called a bipolar pattern (ﬁgure from an internal paper from
WSA A/S).
As many directional systems combine the microphone signals to produce a single-
channel output, a drawback is a distortion of natural binaural information. This altering
of the interaural cues may have negative consequences for the hearing-aid user, as binaural
information including interaural time and level diﬀerences help locate sound sources. To
overcome this problem commercial implementations attempt to preserve or restore spatial
cues in directional systems by combining processed with unprocessed signals or only apply-
ing beamforming to some of the frequency bands of the signal. Generally, researchers seek
to design beamformers for hearing-aid applications with a balance between SNR improve-
ments and spatial-cue preservation (Van den Bogaerta et al. [2008, 2009]). As a result of
this compromise, directional systems may not provide beneﬁts as large as those that are
theoretically possible.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:15==
6
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
1.3
Previous Approaches to Examine Beneﬁts of Hearing-Aid
Processing
The beneﬁts of wearing a hearing aid as hearing impaired are well established in terms
of both noise reduction and more advanced signal-processing algorithms as beamforming
(Hawkins and Yacullo [1984], Leeuw and Dreschler [1991], Valente et al. [1995]). How to
assess the performance and patient beneﬁts of these signal-processing algorithms in real-
life environments is another story. This assessment should include diﬀerent dimensions of
beneﬁts based on both objective and subjective measures as speech intelligibility, commu-
nication eﬀort and performance levels, as well as appropriate technical measures. When
examining the beneﬁts of beamformers in hearing aids, researchers have resorted to com-
binations of these dimensions with tests of speech intelligibility (e.g. Saunders and Kates
[1997], Luts et al. [2004]), objective and subjective measures of listening eﬀort (Picou and
Ricketts [2018], Picou et al. [2017]), and performance of a given task as indications of
beneﬁts. These studies all reported clear improvements of using a directional beamformer
compared to an omni-directional beamformer.
However, some studies did not ﬁnd signiﬁcant evidence for the eﬀects of directional
processing when evaluating a measure of listening eﬀort. An example is Hornsby [2013]
who found that hearing-aids wearers showed reduced listening eﬀort compared to listeners
without hearing aids, but the advanced processing (in this case directional processing) of-
fered no additional beneﬁts in terms of listening eﬀort. The author explained this ﬁnding
with the study methodology, as the background noise presented at 55 dBA may not have
been high enough to activate the directional processing nor noise reduction algorithms. Wu
et al. [2014] join the group of researchers whose studies fail to demonstrate beneﬁts of direc-
tional processing for listeners with hearing loss. Their work included measures of listening
eﬀort for two dual-task paradigms, wherein participants performed a speech recognition
task simultaneously with either a driving task in a simulator or a visual reaction-time task
in a sound-treated booth. Yet, the study found a signiﬁcant eﬀect when testing a group of
normal-hearing participants. Therefore, the authors hypothesised that the used task was
too diﬃcult to be sensitive to the eﬀects of directional processing for the older hearing-
impaired participants.
Although the existence and magnitude of the beneﬁts of this directional processing
feature varies across these studies depending on the used methodologies (stimuli and pro-
cedure), there is a compelling evidence suggesting, that listeners with hearing loss can
beneﬁt from beamforming in hearing aids.
Additionally, studies have shown an interaction between reverberation and the beneﬁts
of beamforming (Picou et al. [2017]), where results indicated presence of beneﬁts only in
rooms with moderate reverberation and not in environments with low reverberation. These
ﬁndings suggest that results obtained in an audiometric test booth with little reverberation
may not generalise to rooms with more reverberation.
How conversational behaviour changes in noisy settings and how noise and hearing loss
eﬀect communication, have recently been of interest for many researchers. Recent studies
suggest that conversation eﬀort could be assessed via measures of speech production and
turn-taking behaviour (Beechey et al. [2018], Hadley et al. [2019], Sørensen et al. [2020a,b]).
The ﬁndings of these studies showed that increasing noise levels resulted in the interlocutors
modifying their speech in terms of acoustic parameters and pattern of the speech. When
speaking in a noisy environment, speakers tend to increase their vocal intensity, adjust the
duration of utterances, include more pauses, and move closer together even though they
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:16==
1.4. AIMS AND HYPOTHESES
7
did not gain much beneﬁt. For example, in a study conducted by Hadley et al. [2019]
interlocutors only gained a beneﬁt of 0.32 dB SPL speech level per 1 dB noise increase
by moving closer together. While many previous studies have investigated speaking and
listening in isolation when having the participants placed in separate booths, this study
enable visual cues to the talkers, with the argument that separating interlocutors removes
important aspects of natural interaction and listening eﬀort is shown to be increased (Picou
et al. [2013]). This is veriﬁed by Latif et al. [2018], who demonstrated the inﬂuence of visual
and auditory cues as complementary roles in turn-end predictions.
1.4
Aims and Hypotheses
The primary aim of this study was to evaluate if the eﬀects of the hearing-aid signal-
processing feature, beamforming, can be observed in conversational dynamics, when the
conversational partners are seated face-to-face.
Secondary aims were 1) to explore the
quantitative relation between processing strategy and diﬀerent speech modiﬁcations and
turn-taking behaviour, 2) to investigate how the hearing impaired and interlocutor per-
ceived the challenges when conversing aided and unaided in noise presented at a level
conﬂicting with the level of a normal conversation, and 3) enable inspection of the ad-
vantages having visual cues available in order to predict turn-ends and improve timing of
turn-taking by a comparison of the results from this study with the ones found by Sørensen
et al. [2020b].
This study will test and evaluate the three hypotheses that 1) suﬀering from a hearing
loss aﬀects the eﬃciency of a conversation, 2) conversational diﬃculty can be measured
from speech production, turn-taking behaviour and subjective ratings of communication
eﬀort, and 3) hearing-impaired can beneﬁt from directional processing in hearing-aids when
positioned in a noisy environment.
To examine the listed hypotheses, diﬀerent assessment tools inspired by ﬁndings from
years of research, were used. In the following lines the diﬀerent expectations for each ben-
eﬁcial indicator are explained. For all cases it was expected that conversations were least
challenging in quiet environments compared to ones with background noise. Within the
noisy conditions, it was assumed most diﬃcult when the hearing-impaired was unaided,
second most diﬃcult when hearing aids in an omni-directional setting were worn and least
diﬃcult when the directional beamformer was activated.
A spot-the-diﬀerence task requires eﬀective transfer of information during the conver-
sation to be solved. The time needed to complete this task was therefore used as a
measure of how well the conversation went. It was hypothesised that background noise
would challenge the participants and thus increase the time needed to solve the task.
It was further hypothesised, that an improvement in SNR obtained with the directional
hearing-aid setting would reveal a shorter completion time. Moreover, it was anticipated
that a learning eﬀect of the task was unavoidable and thus the completion time was pre-
sumed to decrease as the experiment proceeded.
Speech production and conversational dynamics in aspects of utterance length,
speech levels and talker-transitions intervals were considered the main evidences of the
achieved beneﬁts of the directional processing. In agreement with the Lombard eﬀect,
it was assumed that increased speech levels and longer utterances were seen in most
challenging condition (i.e.
unaided in presence of background noise).
This also ap-
plies to conditions with omni-directional hearing-aid setting relative to a directional
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:17==
8
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
setting. A distribution of FTOs has been shown to broaden for normal-hearing and
hearing-impaired interlocutors in the presence of background noise, indicating a higher
processing load on interlocutors impacting their ability to predict turn-ends (Sørensen
et al. [2020a,b]). Hence, an increased delay in turn-taking should be noticed between
quiet and noise, but when wearing the hearing aids with a directional beamformer in
noisy surroundings this delay was expected to shorten.
Subjective eﬀort rating was an additional indicator of assessing the eﬀects of the
hearing-aid processing.
Subjective ratings related to the success of the conversation
were hypothesised to decrease when the noise was turned on, but expected to be higher
for conversations performed with hearing aids set in the directional setting relative to the
omni-directional setting or no hearing aids. A question regarding the desire to improve
the situation was expected to show increasing scores in background noise, but the scores
were hypothesised to decrease when hearing aids were worn and further decrease when
the directional beamformer was activated. While low scores were similarly expected in
quiet for the question of conversation eﬀorts, the beamformer was expected to improve
the intelligibility with an increased SNR, and thus enhance the score among the noisy
conditions.
Balance of speech contribution was inspected to determine if one talker tend to dom-
inate the conversations and if so, which talker. It was assumable, that the talker having
the most diﬃculties would overrule his/her interlocutor and dominate the conversation
as Sørensen et al. [2020b] found.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER2
Experimental Design
During the following sections, the speculations and decisions about the design of the
conversational experiment will be explained. A "spot the diﬀerence"-task paradigm and
subjective ratings were used to assess objective and subjective communication eﬀort, re-
spectively, and thus to explore the beneﬁts of hearing-aid processing. The task was per-
formed by conversational pairs seated in a moderate reverberate room, facing each other
in diﬀerent conditions with background noise and hearing-aid settings as variables.
The design of this experiment was done in preparation of testing hearing-impaired sub-
jects, and thus the argumentation in the following is in view of this even-though the test
group in this study was limited to contain normal-hearing subjects.
2.1
Conversation Elicitation Task
To investigate the hypotheses of this study, recordings of dialogues were crucial. Prefer-
ably, the dialogues should be as natural as possible and should persists long enough to have
an adequate amount of data to investigate the eﬀects of the testing conditions. The con-
versation could be free, but it could be a challenge for the participants as they were not
familiarised with each other. Providing the participants with speciﬁc subjects to talk about
was also a possibility. However, it is not possible to ensure that the conversation is bal-
anced. Thus, to overcome the dependency of the relation between the participants and
their personality (i.e if they are shy or pushy) and to record ﬂuent, dynamic, and balanced
conversations while encouraging engagement, participants were asked to solve a task. Us-
ing a task has the main advantage that the completion time can give an estimate of the
eﬃciency of the communication (Van Engen et al. [2010], Baker and Hazan [2011]). A
long completion time intuitively indicates diﬃculties and a less eﬀectiveness of information
transfer and vise versa. Thus, a task enables quantiﬁcation of the impact of hearing-aid
processing on the information transfer eﬃciency and the ease of casual conversation, which
was an aim of this study.
In order to elicit conversation, diﬀerent tasks have been developed and used across
studies. "The Map Task" in which speakers must collaborate verbally to reproduce a route
9
==PAGE:19==
10
CHAPTER 2. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
printed on one participant’s map on the other’s empty map, was designed by Anderson
et al. [1991]. A disadvantage of this task, is the distribution of roles in the conversation
as one is the instruction giver and the other the instruction follower, which makes the
conversation unbalanced.
The well known and widely-practised "Sudoku puzzle" used
by Cooke and Lu [2010] and Aubanel and Cooke [2013] is further a communication task
employed by previous studies, but due to its popularity outside the ﬁeld of research, there
are diﬀerent levels of familiarity with the task. Opposite to this task, which can be solved
both individually and in pairs, Beechey et al. [2018] designed "The Path Task", which
necessitates cooperation and communication between participants. In this approach the
pairs are given a puzzle of a 10 by 10 grid with each square containing a tangram image
and a colour. The task is to ﬁnd the unique path from the start square to the end square
by moving between squares containing identical colours or pictures. This task requires a
lot of instructions and leads to conversations containing mostly repeated words describing
colours, directions and tangrams. On the other hand, the task ensures that neither of the
participant holds more information than the other and that contributions are balanced
since neither participant can opt for a passive role. These advantages are also valid for
"The Diapix Task" designed by Van Engen et al. [2010]. In this collaborative task, the
participants are given two nearly identical pictures and the task is to ﬁnd the diﬀerences
as missing or altered items. In order to solve the task, the participants need to collaborate
and thus the participants cannot complete any part of the task alone. This ensures that
both actively participate in the conversation. Contrary to the structured workaround when
solving "The Path Task", "The Diapix Task" requires more visual inspection and periods
of visual search which may halt the conversation.
Baker and Hazan [2011] updated the Diapix task (named DiapixUK) with an extension
of the set of picture materials, an equal diﬃculty across the 12 picture sets, and a conclusion
of no learning eﬀect after completing the task. Even though Baker and Hazan [2011] found
no training eﬀect, Sørensen [2017] found contradictory evidence of a training eﬀect. Baker
and Hazan [2011] further showed a balanced contribution from both speakers (51% vs
49%).
This spot-the-diﬀerence task was used in this study as it was found to facilitate ﬂuent,
balanced conversations which are as representative of everyday verbal communication as
possible. Further, it was assumed to have an appropriate degree of diﬃculty and thus not
too diﬃcult as the results from Wu et al. [2014] reﬂected (see Section 1.3). This study
employs the updated Diapix (DiapixUK) translated into Danish, where the 12 picture pairs
were divided into three scenes; four in a beach scene, four in a farm scene, and four in
a street scene. An example of a picture pair is given in Figure 2.1 and examples of each
scene in the DiapixUK are found in the Appendix B.3.
2.2
Subjective Ratings
As mentioned in Section 1.3, studies have shown that communication eﬀort can be re-
duced by improving audibility via the use of hearing aids (e.g. Picou et al. [2013]) and by
reducing background noise through hearing-aid signal-processing features such as beam-
forming (e.g. Picou et al. [2017]). Thus, the eﬀort of conversing was in this study used
as an additionally indicator of the beneﬁts of the hearing-aid processing strategy. As an
alternative to physiological measures as skin conductance and pupillometry, a way of as-
sessing communication eﬀort is through subjective ratings. Picou et al. [2017] and Picou
and Ricketts [2018] both investigated subjective ratings as an attempt to measure listening
eﬀort. They concluded that a subjective rating of a listener’s desire to improve the conver-
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:20==
2.3. PROCEDURE DESIGN
11
Figure 2.1: Example of a Diapix picture pair where 12 diﬀerences are hidden (e.g the colour of the
rubbish bin). This picture pair is from the DiapixUK corpus from Baker and Hazan [2011].
sational situation was a valid measure of listening eﬀort as it was signiﬁcantly related to
objective measures of listening eﬀort. However, subjective ratings rely on the assumption
that the listener can accurately report the eﬀort they experienced and is consistent with
their ratings.
The questions were designed by inspiration of the questions used in Picou and Ricketts
[2018] and sounded:
1) How successful do you think the conversation was?
2) If this scenario occurred in a real life situation, how likely would you be to improve
the situation (e.g move to a quiet place or ask your partner to speak louder etc.)?
3) How hard was it to talk?
4) How hard was it to listen?
The questions were printed on one piece of paper together with an individual horizontal
number line below each one. The number lines showed equally spaced demarcations from
0 to 10 with numbers marked in each demarcation, where 0 meant "not at all" and 10
meant "very". The questions used in the experiment were formulated in Danish and are
found in Appendix B.4.
Based on ﬁndings from Picou and Ricketts [2018] suggesting ratings from a question
regarding control to be more closely related to objective listening eﬀort, scores from the
second question should decrease when the participants were more challenged. As Picou
et al. [2017] suggested that subjective reports of work were more highly correlated with
word recognition performance than objective listening eﬀort, an expectation of ﬁnding a
correlation of ratings of question 3 and 4 with the performance of solving the task, was
supported.
2.3
Procedure Design
The participants were tested in a total of ﬁve conditions, which varied by the hearing-
aid and the processing (unaided, omni-directional and directional) and by noise presence.
In this study, a 20-talker babble is chosen as noise stimuli. The combinations of these,
constituting the ﬁve conditions are:
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:21==
12
CHAPTER 2. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
• Background: Quiet, HA: oﬀ
• Background: Quiet, HA: omni-directional setting
• Background: Noise, HA: oﬀ
• Background: Noise, HA: omni-directional setting
• Background: Noise, HA: directional setting
The pairs were tested twice in each of the ﬁve hearing-aid/noise combinations. Before
each block, the participants were instructed to present their name and age one at the time
in quiet. This was done in order to enable calculations of the speech levels which is further
described in Section 5.1.1.
The participants were naive to the condition and the research hypotheses. However,
the hearing aids were physically removed in unaided conditions and thus the participants
were not completely naive to these conditions. The presentation order of the conditions
was randomised within each of the two blocks and the Diapix picture pairs were balanced
across all 10 pairs. The Diapix pictures were attached each condition following the rules of
a Latin square, meaning that (1) every Diapix picture pair has to be represented the same
number of times in each of the conditions and (2) at least one Diapix picture pair from
each of the three scenes (i.e beach, street and farm) should be represented in each block.
The corpus of translated Diapix included 12 pairs of pictures, but only 10 were used in this
design. The selection of the two picture pairs to exclude from the corpus was done with
knowledge of the mean completion time for each picture pair from Sørensen [2017] (Figure
13), and thus pair 3 and 9 were not used in the design as they had the most extreme means.
These two excluded picture pairs were used as training pictures (see Section 2.4).
2.4
Training
Prior to the experiment, the participants were familiarised with the task, the back-
ground noise, and the hearing aids through two training sessions. Training was included,
since the completion time of the task was used as a measure of the eﬃciency of the conver-
sation, and a too evident learning eﬀect was unwanted. Hence, the training was conducted
to both introduce the task and setup, and to avoid learning eﬀect.
Solving the task was estimated to take 10 minutes per picture pair based on Sørensen
et al. [2020b] and with ﬁve conditions in two testing blocks the experiment would last for
200 minutes excluding breaks. In order to not tire the participants the training should be
held short. An additional limitation was the number of Diapix picture pairs available for
the training as the used corpus only contained 12 picture pairs and thus only leave two
pairs for training. However, the used Diapix corpus (Van Engen et al. [2010]) included a
training picture pair and this pair was included in the pool of training pictures, and could
be used in case of a defect loudspeaker, loose connection or other unpredictable scenarios,
where a substitute picture could be needed.
The training was initialised outside the room, where the task was explained and the
participants started ﬁnding diﬀerences under supervision, to ensure that the task was fully
understood. In this session, the participants were able to ask questions regarding the task.
Next, a training session similar to a test condition was run inside the room to familiarise the
participants with the setup. It was assumed that both participants would need some time
to adjust and getting used to the background noise, and the participant wearing the hearing
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:22==
2.5. PARTICIPANTS
13
aids would further adapt to the occlusion eﬀect and the sound of voices. In this training
session, one participant was ﬁtted with the hearing aids with the omni-directional setting,
and the participants were asked to initially ﬁnd ﬁve diﬀerences in quiet. Afterwards, they
were ask to ﬁnd additionally ﬁve diﬀerences in the presence of background noise. If the
participants had no questions or concerns the actual experiment was initialised.
2.5
Participants
Two subjects constituted a conversation pair in this conversational experiment. The
experiment was designed to include pairs constituted of a young normal-hearing subject
ranging from 18-30 years and an older hearing-impaired (age range 65 to 75 years). The
construction of the pairs was designed in this way based on two possible issues; ﬁnding
older normal-hearing adults without the risk of a hidden HL, and HL in young hearing-
impaired participants would more likely be induced and not age-related. The experiment
could be repeated with participants in the same age to overcome potentially social barriers
induced by age diﬀerence and thus explore a behavioural aspect of the study.
The hearing-impaired participants should have clinical documentation of having essen-
tially symmetrical mild-to-moderate sensorineural hearing loss (20 to 70 dB HL between
125Hz and 8kHz). This hearing loss is in Bisgaard et al. [2010] referred to as N2/N3 and
a standard audiogram used for classifying hearing loss is based on Bisgaard et al. [2010]
and can be found in Appendix B.
Due to the worldwide Covid-19 situation, testing with older hearing-impaired partici-
pants was precluded. Consequently, the pairs participating in this study were constructed
of two young normal-hearing subjects ranging from 18-30 years (µ=23.2 years, σ=1.85).
However, it was possible to avoid recruiting friendly pairs while still following the guide-
lines and restrictions. The test group consisted of 14 men and 6 women, all native-Danish
talkers, constituting a total of 10 pairs of both same and mixed gender.
All participants provided informed consent and all experiments were approved by the
Science-Ethics Committee for the Capital Region of Denmark (reference H-16036391).
Following informed consent, but prior to the testing, participants underwent hearing testing
using standard audiological procedures in an audiometric sound booth. This was done to
ensure they fulﬁlled the criteria of being normal hearing (-10 to 20 dB HL between 125 Hz
and 8 kHz). The audiograms for the 20 participants are seen in Figure 2.2, and as appears,
the PTA for all participants was below 25 dB HL classifying them as normal hearing. A
paired t-test showed no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the PTAs from subjects in group
of talkers assigned with hearing-aids and those in the group who were not [t(9)=-0.553,
p<.594]. Additionally, no diﬀerence in the age was found [t(9)=-0.802, p<.443].
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:23==
14
CHAPTER 2. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
Figure 2.2: Mean audiometric thresholds (solid line) as a function of frequency averaged across
left and right ears for the participants. The shaded areas represent the standard deviation and the
dashed lines indicate the minimum and maximum measured values of hearing threshold.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER3
Experimental Setup
This chapter introduces the equipment used in the conversational experiment and how
it was calibrated. In order to calibrate the talker level, a pilot study was carried out to
explore the application of the receiver’s microphone as reference, rather than using a third
on-stand microphone placed one meter away, which is a common calibration method also
used by Sørensen [2017]. The pilot study explored how diﬀerent scenarios, occurring during
this experiment, can aﬀect the recorded signals and thus if this method of calibration is
reliable.
3.1
Experimental Equipment and Setup
The data collection was completed in a sound attenuated chamber with dimensions
7.52 m*4.75 m*2.8 m, designed in accordance to the IEC 268-13 standard [1985], which
acoustically reﬂects an "average living room" and has a moderate reverberation time of
approximately 400 ms. The noise stimuli, a 20-talker babble, was presented by playback at
70 dBA SPL and routed through a sound card (RME Fireface UCX) to four single channel
ampliﬁers (Bang&Olufsen Beolab 200) and ﬁnally to four passive loudspeakers (Dynaudio
Acoustics BM6). The loudspeakers were placed on stands in a height of approximately
120 cm and equidistantly spaced surrounding the conversational pair, pairwise positioned
2 m horizontally from each participant (-90◦azimuth and 90◦azimuth). This loudspeaker
setup was chosen as it was hypothesised to aﬀect the beamformer the most. Participants
were seated facing each other in a distance of approximately 1.3 m. They were seated in
chairs without wheels in order to prevent altering of the chair position. The position of the
participants were randomised as well as the choice of who was going to wear the hearing
aids since both participants in this setup were normal hearing. An outline of the setup and
its connections can be seen in Figure 3.1 and pictures of the setup are shown in Figure 3.2.
Both participants were equipped with a DPA 4088 omni-directional headset micro-
phone ﬁxed at the right cheek in a distance of approximately 1.5 cm to the corner of the
mouth. The wire of the headset microphone was ﬁxed to the clothes of the participant with
a clip. The hearing-impaired subject was furthermore bilaterally ﬁtted with commercially
available hearing aids EVOKE Fusion 2 RIC/RITE 440 provided by WSA A/S together
with S-receivers and closed, non-customised eartips. S-receivers are used as the maximum
15
==PAGE:25==
16
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
Figure 3.1: The outline of the experimental setup inside the sound attenuated room, showing
the loudspeakers (N) presenting the noise, the camera placement and the position of the two
participants. The wire connections enabling the playback of the noise, recording and the the use
of the talk-back microphone are further presented.
Figure 3.2: Pictures of the experimental setup in the sound attenuated room.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:26==
3.2. HEARING-AID SETTING
17
power output (MPO) is stated to be 118 dB SPL and thus protects the normal-hearing
wearer against damages if any unwanted problems occurs. M-receivers should be used if
the experiment was conducted with hearing-impaired subjects. The ﬁtting procedure is
described in Section 4.1.
The Diapix pictures were attached to a clipboard, each provided to the participants
along with a pen to mark the diﬀerences on their picture when solving the task. The exper-
iment was monitored and controlled from the outside of the room, and in order to guide or
correct the participants through the experiment, a talk-back microphone (Sennheiser MAT
133-S B) was used and wired to be played on one loudspeaker using a Mic-to-Line device
(RME QuadMic II 4 channel Portable Mic Preamp) connected to the sound card. The
participants’ microphones were routed to the AUX output of the computer to facilitate the
experimenter to follow their conversation.
In addition to the speech recordings from the microphones, the conversations were
recorded from a video camera (JVC GZ-GX1BE) placed perpendicular to the pair, with
the microphones wired as inputs like stated in Figure 3.1. The acquired video recordings,
and analysis and interpretation hereof, were not of main interest in this study, but was
obtained with the purpose of enabling future processing and analysis of relevant hypotheses.
Nevertheless, the recorded videos were superﬁcially processed and brieﬂy analysed in this
work.
All recordings were performed at a sampling frequency of 48 kHz, and in total two chan-
nels were recorded through the sound card using MATLAB 2019b. Both playback of noise
and the simultaneous recordings were performed using a MATLAB application designed for
the purpose of this experiment.
The level of the noise stimuli was calibrated with a sound level meter (Brüel&Kjær Type
2250) held in the position of the centre of the participant’s head with the participant absent.
In RME Totalmix, the level of the presented noise was adjusted such that the readings
on the A-weighting sound level meter reached the desired level at 70 dBA SPL. Moreover,
gain adjustments were made to avoid clipping of the recorded signals. Calibration of the
microphones included a pistonphone (Brüel&Kjær Sound Level Calibrator Type 4230, 89
dB SPL at 1kHz) and the calibration procedure is more detailed described in Section 3.4.
3.2
Hearing-Aid Setting
The hearing aids were programmed to encompass two manually accessible programs
with diﬀerent processing algorithms.
Program 1 was ﬁxed to a beamformer with an
onmi-directional pattern, and program 2 to a beamformer with a directional pattern. A
smartphone with a manufacturer application enabled easy change of program (here Widex
EVOKE).
This study used a ﬁxed directional system, with a speciﬁc value of the directional
parameter, here named α, and appurtenant pattern. The inﬂuence of α and head positions
relative to the speakers was laboratory explored. The most aggressive beamformer (i.e. the
beamformer providing most attenuation of sounds from the rear) was selected to proceed
with. The selected pattern was obtained with α = 0.25 and is presented in Figure 3.3 where
the position of the head-and-torso simulator (HATS) was positioned exactly between the
loudspeakers (see Figure B.2 in Appendix B.2). The measured polar plots for the remaining
settings can be found in Appendix B.2. In order to keep a ﬁxed setting, the key feature,
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:27==
18
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
ﬂuid sound analyser, which analyses the sound environment to prioritise and select the
most important sound sources, was turned oﬀ.
Figure 3.3: Beamformer pattern for α = 0.25. Each concentric circle represents a 5 dB change
in sensitivity.
Left pane: Unilateral beamforming pattern for left ear, right pane: Unilateral
beamforming pattern for right ear. It is important to note that the patterns were measured on
HATS and not in the free ﬁeld and from far fewer loudspeaker positions. Thus, the patterns are
much less ideal than presented in Figure 1.2.
3.3
Background Noise
The babble used in this study originates from a mixture of 20 talkers from the corpus
in Sørensen et al. [2018] and is the same that is used in Sørensen et al. [2020b] and Watson
et al. [2020]. The noise was split into four tracks designed with a ﬁve minute delay in
the noise to ensure uncorrelated noise. Additionally, a beep of 10 ms was added to one
of the tracks followed by a silent gap of 70 ms before the noise commenced. The three
remaining tracks were similarly manipulated to initiate with 80 ms of silence before the
babble. This was implemented as an indicator of the onset of the conversation with the
purpose of letting the participants know when to start and ease the procedure of clipping
the recordings in the pre-processing.
Sørensen [2017] used measured speech levels to determine the presentation level of the
noise and found 70 dBA SPL as a suitable level. The level at which the background noise
is presented in this study is partly based on the argumentation from Sørensen [2017] and
partly with the knowledge of a minimum level of 50-55 dB SPL for the hearing aids to
be able to activate the beamformer (Kuk [2017], note that this reference is concerning
BEYOND product, but apply to EVOKE products). However, laboratory ﬁndings from
Hornsby [2013] suggest that a level of 55 dB SPL is too low to activate the directional
system. In conclusion, the background noise is in this study presented at a level of 70 dBA
SPL in order to exceed the directional threshold and ensure to see eﬀects in the conversa-
tional domain.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:28==
3.4. CALIBRATION OF TALKER LEVEL
19
3.4
Calibration of Talker Level
A new approach of calibrating the talker level was introduced with a small pilot test
in this work. Usually, the talker level is found from a sound level meter placed in a normal
speaking distance (often chosen to be 1 meter). In this approach, the idea was to use the
partner’s microphone to estimate the talker level assumed to be the level picked up at the
ear of the receiver. However, diﬀerent scenarios had to be investigated in order to accept
this method as accurate and stable enough to be applied for calibration.
The inﬂuence of three factors was examined in this pilot study. First, it was inves-
tigated how the relative positions of the microphones aﬀected the level received at the
listeners ears. Second, the eﬀect of inducing a blockage in the stream of speech was ex-
plored and third, the distance between the microphones was challenged. These three tests
were chosen to be examined, as they reﬂected diﬀerent situations possible of occurring in
the experiment; for example if the participants turn around, block their speech stream
with the clipboard or lean forward. Each of the tests were conducted twice for a total of
three participating test pairs. Both participants were equipped with a microphone and in
the third test an empty clipboard was additionally provided to each talker. Pictures from
the three tests can be found in Figure 3.4.
In each of the tests, the attenuation of the talker level from the talker’s microphone to
the receiver’s microphone, was found. This was found by computing the arbitrary RMS
value in dB of the talkers speech segments on both channels and ﬁnd the attenuation be-
tween these in the diﬀerent segments of the recording.
In the ﬁrst test, the participants were initially sitting facing each other. This initial
position is referred to as 0 degrees azimuth. After the talker spoke in this position, he/she
moved to the following positions: 90 degrees to the right, 45 to the right, 0, 45 to the left
and 45 to the right. This procedure enclosed one round of seven talker positions. The
receiver now turns and points 45 degrees to the left and the talker repeats to speak in each
of the seven positions. Next, the receiver pointed 90 degrees to the right and so on so
forth. This resulted in ﬁve recordings consisting of seven segments for each of the talkers.
Note here, that for this structure, the measurement with the talker in position 0 was done
three times for each receiver position and thus a mean value of these was used as repre-
sentation of that position. The results from this test are found in Table 3.1 and Figure 3.5a.
The second test was completed with diﬀerent combinations where the clipboards were
down or placed in front of the head, outputting one record of ﬁve segments for each talker.
The ﬁve combinations were: 1) both clipboards are down, 2) talker has clipboard up, while
the receiver has it down, 3) both clipboards are up, 4) talker lowers the clipboard while
the receiver’s board is still up and 5) they are both down again. Here the combination of
both boards being lowered are repeated twice and as in the ﬁrst test, the mean attenuation
from these repetitions is used. The results from this test are shown in Figure 3.5b.
Lastly, the participants were asked to sit with three diﬀerent distances to each other;
normal distance, far apart and closer together. Thus, the result was one recording of three
segments for each talker. The results obtained here are visualised in Figure 3.5c.
Results
The outcome of the ﬁrst test is noted in Table 3.1 which states the attenuation of each
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:29==
20
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
(a) Example of case where both the talker and
receiver are turned 45 degrees to the right.
(b) Example of how the speech stream was
blocked by the clipboard in the second test.
(c) Illustration of the maximum distance be-
tween the talkers.
(d) Illustration of the minimum distance be-
tween the talkers.
Figure 3.4: Illustrations of the three tests conducted in this pilot study. The upper left panel shows
an example of talking position and the upper right shows a case of blocking the speech stream with
the clipboards. The lower panel shows the third test concerning the distance between the talkers
and shows the two most extreme distances.
position combinations of the talker and receiver relative to the position where the talkers
are facing each other. Note, that the microphone were placed on the right side of the head
of both talkers.
For the second test, the attenuation in each setting was computed relative to the case
of both clipboards being down. An increased attenuation of 0.916 dB SPL was found when
the talker raised the clipboard. Contrary, when only the receiver had the clipboard up an
increase of 0.248 dB SPL was found. Finally, the attenuation dropped by 0.757 dB SPL
when both clipboards were raised. From the third test it was found that leaning back
increased the attenuation with 0.886 dB SPL compared to normal distance whereas by
leaning forward it decreased with 2.78 dB SPL.
The relative attenuation found in each condition of the tests are shown in Figure 3.5,
where the point states the mean and the error bars indicate the standard deviations.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:30==
3.4. CALIBRATION OF TALKER LEVEL
21
Position of
Position of Receiver
talker
-90L
-45L
0
+45R
+90R
-90L
1.42
1.20
2.45
1.84
1.47
-45L
0.65
0.37
1.58
0.90
0.39
0
0
0
0
0
0
+45R
1.06
0.94
2.45
1.15
0.92
+90R
1.73
1.18
2.79
1.53
0.98
Table 3.1: Mean attenuation relative to when the participants were facing each other. Here referred
to as position 0.
(a) Results from the ﬁrst test. Each line indi-
cates the receiver position (45 and 90 degrees to
left and right, respectively, and the zero position.
(b) Calculated attenuation values in diﬀerent
combinations of having the clipboard up or
down.
(c) The inﬂuence of leaning back and fourth on
the received level between the two microphones.
Figure 3.5: Visualisation of the results of the three tests. It was tested whether position or speech
stream blockage inﬂuenced the calculation of the talker levels. Dots indicates mean attenuation
value and error bars are the standard deviation.
Summary
A statistical analysis revealed that the attenuation between the microphones changed sig-
niﬁcantly with the position of the talker [p<.025]. Furthermore, the eﬀect of blockage
and distance between the talkers were additionally found signiﬁcant: [F(4,20)=10.661,p<
8.593e-5] and [F(2,10)=13.336, p<.001], respectively. From a post hoc analysis of the three
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:31==
22
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
tests, a maximum variance of 4 dB SPL was estimated. From these results, the speech
level of the talkers could in the ensuing be estimated with a maximum variance of 4 dB
obtained from the eﬀects of the participants movements or adjustment of the clipboard.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER4
Experimental Procedure
This chapter gives an overview of the entire procedure including all steps, from wel-
coming the participants at their arrival, to thanking them for their time to participate.
Initially, the procedure for ﬁtting the hearing aids and training are explained followed by
the procedure on the testing. The complete experiment lasted about 2.5 hours in total per
pair, and its structure is illustrated with a ﬂowchart in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Procedure of the entire conversational experiment represented as a ﬂow diagram.
4.1
Introduction and Hearing-Aid Fitting
When the participants arrived, they were verbally informed about the consent of the
experiment and their rights to leave the experiment at any time. Hereafter, both partic-
ipants signed written consent forms allowing the usage of speech and video recordings in
this and other future studies. Hereafter, they were briefed about the experimental proce-
dure (instructions can be found in Appendix B.5). Prior to the testing, a simple audiogram
was measured for each of the participants in a sound booth to ensure their hearing proﬁle
23
==PAGE:33==
24
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE
fulﬁlled the requirements in this study. The audiogram was not measured by an audi-
ologist, but by the experimenter in order to ease the process and due to extraordinary
circumstances on account of Covid-19.
Initially, the hearing aids were individually ﬁtted to one of the participants with the
right type of receiver with a suitable length and a rightsized dome. Secondly, the hearing
aids were ﬁtted to the hearing characteristics of the participant with the use of the software
COMPASS GSP. Since, a normal-hearing person was wearing the hearing-aids in this
study, the hearing aids were set with a constant gain of 25 dB for all frequencies and not
adjusted individually as if hearing-impaired participants were included. This adjustment
of audiometry conditions was followed by a feedback test ensuring that the vent eﬀect was
kept in a suitable level (< 3.0 mm estimated vent size). If the vent eﬀect is too large, the
ﬁtting is considered open, and thus the ear will receive a direct sound input which was
undesired in this study.
4.2
Training
After the ﬁtting procedure, the participant could remove the hearing aids for a while
as a training session should be completed before the test. The ﬁrst training session was
conducted outside the room, where one picture from the DiapixUK corpus was given to
each of the participants. They were told to ﬁnd diﬀerences between their pictures only
by verbally communicate their observations, while being observed by the experimenter to
ensure that the task was understood. Following the ﬁrst session, the participants moved
to the room where they were equipped with microphones, and the hearing aids were given
back to the one participant. The second training session with a new picture pair from the
corpus was then completed inside the room with the hearing aids on and in both quiet
and noisy conditions. The participants were seated in the room facing one-another at a
distance of 1.3 m and asked not to alter the chair position. They were further instructed
to begin the task when a beep sounded and stop when the number of diﬀerences had been
found or they were interrupted by the experimenter. The conversational test was then
started if the participants had no questions or objections.
4.3
Testing Procedure
The participants received information about the beginning of the testing and its design,
and were told to solve the Diapix task in ﬁve diﬀerent conditions, repeated twice resulting
in 10 picture pairs to solve. Again, the participants were instructed that they could speak
freely and verbally share any information about their picture, but they could not show
their picture to each other. Additionally, they were notiﬁed of a maximum time of 10
minutes given to solve the task.
The order of the test conditions were randomised within each block and the experi-
menter presented the content of each condition prior to its start, and provided hearing-aids
if scheduled. The camera recording was started and the participants were yet again in-
structed to await the beep before initialising their conversation. Immediately following
solving the Diapix task in each test condition, the participants rated the perceived level
of eﬀort required to speak and listen to the speech of their conversational partner. The
questionnaire is included in Appendix B.4.
Prior to each block, the participants were told to present their name and age one at a
time. These recordings were later used to calculate the speech levels (further explained in
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:34==
4.3. TESTING PROCEDURE
25
Section 5.1.1). Between the two testing blocks the participants were oﬀered the opportunity
to take a break.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER5
Data Processing and Modelling
The tools used for processing and analysing the recordings from the conversational
experiment are presented and described in this chapter. For the acoustic analysis of speech,
a voice activity detection (VAD) algorithm and a classiﬁcation algorithm were applied using
MATLAB. These algorithms were developed by Sørensen [2017] with inspiration from Heldner
and Edlund [2010] and used in this work with small modiﬁcations described in the following.
A section stating the outline of how speech levels are calculated are further presented here.
A scrap of the used MATLAB code can be found in Appendix C.
As this study brieﬂy broaches an investigation of spontaneously employed behavioural
strategies as motion, the processing of the video recordings and motion analysis was done
with the employment of a free, open-source software called FlowAnalyzer (Barbosa [2017]).
5.1
Processing of Speech Recordings
The speech recordings obtained in the conversational experiment are processed in prepa-
ration for analysis and interpretation. The method from Sørensen [2017] was used, as it
has been proven to be eﬃcient and suitable for this type of data. Sørensen [2017] found in-
spiration in a classiﬁcation framework from Heldner and Edlund [2010] to enable detection
of speech segments and classiﬁcation of the conversation recording into the ﬁve categories
mentioned in Section 1.1; gaps, pauses, overlaps-between, overlaps-within and utterances.
The ﬁrst step is a detection of speech segments, here referred to as voice activity detec-
tion. This VAD binary labels the recordings as speech or silence from a number of criteria
in terms of duration and amplitude. The waveform is analysed in windows with a size of 5
ms overlapping with 1 ms resulting in a temporal resolution of 4 ms and from each window,
the squared RMS value is found. This RMS value is compared to a threshold, resulting in
a binary array (here called voice activity indication (VAI)), where ones indicate segments
of speech and silent segments are marked with zeros. In the original version, the threshold
to deﬁne whether the segment is voice activity or not, is determined to be twice a power
threshold that is given as input to the algorithm. The modiﬁed version used in this work,
checks for RMS values larger than triple the power threshold. Further, the VAD accounts
for the duration of the segments that fulﬁl the RMS value requirement, in terms of bridging
26
==PAGE:36==
5.1. PROCESSING OF SPEECH RECORDINGS
27
gaps smaller than 180 ms and ignoring spurts shorter than 90 ms. An example of how the
VAD algorithm operates is shown in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Example of how the voice activity detection detects speech units from silence. The
speech signal is seen in the upper panel followed by its power, and the bottom panel shows the
binary voice activity indication (VAI) (Sørensen [2017]).
From each conversation, two binary VAI arrays were extracted, and these were used in
a frame-by-frame basis algorithm in the classiﬁcation of the talker transitions. Changes in
these VAI arrays were found by a comparison of consecutive frames. Further, utterances
before and after turn-takings were saved explicitly in order to explore, if the duration of
these utterances were connected to the duration of the ﬂoor transfer.
Thus, the output from these algorithms enables analysis of utterance duration, FTOs,
balance of the talkers’ speech contributions and the calculation of speech levels which will
be further described in Section 5.1.1.
For each talker in each conversation, a suitable individual power threshold was set and
fed to the VAD algorithm. An initial value was set and the result of the VAD was inspected
by listening to the recording in the free, open source, cross-platform audio software Au-
dacity. The value was then modiﬁed if needed until veriﬁed and saved. Since cross-talk
was introduced in this study due to the experimental setup, the number one priority when
determining the power threshold value was to avoid speech from one talker to be detected
as activity on the other talker’s microphone. In order to follow this, compromises had to
be made as increasing the power threshold to avoid the cross-talk, other sounds with less
energy or duration may not be detected. Especially the "s" sounds in ends of utterances
as "yes" suﬀer from a higher power threshold. In worst cases, some conﬁrming utterances
as "Mmm" were neither detected.
5.1.1
Calculation of Speech Level in dB SPL
In order to convert the RMS levels of the microphone recordings into dB SPL and thus
estimate the speech levels of the talkers, the below procedure was followed.
Initially, the RMS was calculated for a recording with the pistonphone for each of the
two microphones. With the knowledge of the pistonphone playing a 1 kHz tone at 89 dB
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:37==
28
CHAPTER 5. DATA PROCESSING AND MODELLING
SPL, a conversation value between actual dB SPL level and the RMS level of the recorded
signal was found for each of the microphones. Next, the attenuation between the two mi-
crophones was found from the block-initial recordings of the talkers presenting themselves.
The attenuation was estimated as the relative diﬀerence in the computed average RMS
level of the speech segments detected by the VAD algorithm. Practically, it implies ﬁnd-
ing the talker’s speech segments in both channels and calculate their diﬀerence. From an
average of these attenuation values, one attenuation conversion value was found for each
microphone. Hence, the speech level of the talker received at the position of the listener’s
ear was estimated by determine the average RMS of the speech, adding the microphone
conversation value and lastly subtract the attenuation value for the corresponding micro-
phone.
The designed MATLAB function used for calculating the conversion values, the RMS level
and converting into dB SPL is stored in Appendix C.2.1.
5.2
Processing of Video Recordings
The free software FlowAnalyzer (Barbosa [2017]) is based on Optical Flow Analysis
(OFA) for extracting motion in two-dimensional videos. FlowAnalyzer allows indicating a
region of interest (ROI) in the frame and is thus a suitable tool for analysing the talkers’
movements.
The software provides multiple tools and functions written in Python but is functional
as a stand-alone application developed for Mac OSX systems. This stand-alone application
provides a GUI for loading the video and marking one or more ROIs. Additionally, regions
of disinterest (ROD) can be marked if necessary. The interface of the software is shown
in Figure 5.2. By default, the software analyses all frames in the given video but provides
the option of selecting a range of frames.
Figure 5.2: FlowAnalyzer GUI with marked ROIs and RODs (Barbosa [2017]).
OFA is a method of measuring motion in video which uses a computer vision algorithm
referred to as Optical Flow. This algorithm computes displacements in the pixels between
consecutive frames in the video sequence, and outputs these as an array of velocity vectors
comprising the optical ﬂow ﬁeld. From these vectors inside each ROI, a single measure is
computed for each frame and horizontal, vertical and magnitude motion signals are calcu-
lated as a function of time. These motion signals are automatically saved in a hdf ﬁle and
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:38==
5.2. PROCESSING OF VIDEO RECORDINGS
29
a xml ﬁle both containing a structure with a time vector and sums of movements in the de-
ﬁned ROIs. For every ROI, the movements in each direction are saved as a vector of actual
movement values with a positive or negative value indicating movements from the position
in the initial frame and a magnitude vector with the absolute amount of motion in that
particular direction. A visualisation of the computed motion signals can be seen in Figure
5.3. The coordinates of the deﬁned ROIs and RODs can additionally be outputted if ticked.
Figure 5.3: Example of a motion signal indicating the amount of vertical and horizontal movements
together with the magnitude of the sum of all movements in the analysed frames.
The videos were recorded from a proﬁle view and thus horizontal movements in a frame
reﬂects the participants leaning back and forth and vertical frame movements reﬂect their
up and down movements. The ROI for each talker was chosen to be half the horizontal
frame size and vertically from the seat height and up, and thus include the entire torso of
the participant. This was chosen to be the most fair region deﬁnition for all recordings as
an inspection of the recordings found that some talkers changed position from sitting much
leaned forward to sitting upright. Thus, their head would be out of the ﬁxed region, when
the region was deﬁned from the position of their head in the initial frame. It was further
seen, that some talkers moved the clipboard or marker up and down during the recordings,
while others had it placed in the lap the entire time. Hence, these movements would aﬀect
the computed motion if the clipboard or marker was close to the head. With this decision
the purpose of the videos in this study changed to an overall inspection of how the amount
of motion changed within each condition. When the regions were deﬁned for each pair,
they were saved and loaded to the next video in order to keep the ROIs constant for each
pair. An example of the marked regions on one of the recordings are shown in Figure 5.4.
Using MATLAB and a hdf-ﬁle reading script provided by Barbosa [2017], the computed
motion signals for each pair in each of the ﬁve test conditions were extracted for statistical
analysis and interpretation. The results are stated in Section 6.6.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:39==
30
CHAPTER 5. DATA PROCESSING AND MODELLING
Figure 5.4: An example of the FlowAnalyzer software applied to one of the recorded videos. As
mentioned the ROI for each talker is chosen as half the framesize starting from the height of the
chair and kept constant across all conditions.
5.3
Statistical Modelling
In order to explore and test the listed hypotheses, linear mixed eﬀect regression models
were ﬁtted to the variables of interest using the lmer function from the lme4 package in
R (Bates et al. [2015]). The factors of interest in this study were background, hearing-aid
setting, talker and session and their interactions.
Even though no eﬀect of the time (i.e. sessions) were found for the speech production
and FTO measures in Sørensen [2017], but only for the completion time, it was decided
to include the eﬀect of session in all models in this study. A session eﬀect would be at-
tributed to a tiring of the participants, which could aﬀect some measures of conversational
dynamics. Thus, this eﬀect of session was added to the portion of main eﬀects, which were
the background, hearing-aid setting, talker and session.
A random intercept were further added to the models, but it was decided to included
diﬀerent intercepts for the investigated measures. For subjective ratings, the eﬀect of per-
sons was added as random intercept, as they were based on individual ratings from each
talker, and their rating was assumed unaﬀected by their partner’s rating. When modelling
the factors from the conversation between the two participants, the intercept of pairs is
included to account for diﬀerences between the pairs.
According to the design of this experiment, the hearing-aid setting had three levels
(no hearing aids, omni-directional and directional) whereas the background and talker had
two levels (noise and quiet, and unaided and aided, respectively). Similarly, the session
factor had two levels corresponding to the two blocks. For analysing the eﬀect of these
factors and the combination of these on various measures, analysis of variance (ANOVA)
tables were provided. The models were reduced using the step function and an updated
ANOVA of the ﬁnal model was provided. If factors of interest were found signiﬁcant with
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:40==
5.3. STATISTICAL MODELLING
31
a signiﬁcance level of 5 %, a post hoc analysis of multiple comparisons was performed, to
investigate which factors were diﬀerent from each other. This pairwise comparisons were
computed using the emmeans function (emmeans package) comparing least-squares means
of the signiﬁcant eﬀects using the Satterthwaite approximated degrees-of-freedom and the
Bonferroni correction as adjustment.
Additionally, a one way ANOVA was made for the completion time for each of the 10
employed Diapix picture pairs.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER6
Results
This chapter presents the results from the analysis of the recorded speech signals and
videos from the conversational experiment. The statistical tools applied in the analysis
and interpretation of the results are those described in Section 5.3.
Initially, a quantitative measure of the participants’ eﬀectiveness computed as the av-
erage completion time in the diﬀerent conditions is presented, together with a boxplot
showing the average completion time for each Diapix picture pair. Furthermore, the re-
sults from the subjective ratings indicating subjective conversation eﬀort are illustrated and
modelled. Next, an investigation of the inﬂuence of the adverse environments (hearing-aid
processing strategy and noise) on the participants’ speech level is demonstrated together
with the eﬀects on the median length of their utterances in the ﬁve environment combi-
nations. Additionally, the impact of the hearing-aid processing and background noise on
conversational dynamics is presented by a comparison of the median FTOs in the ﬁve test
conditions along with the interquartile range (IQR) of these. Finally, the balance of speech
contributions is examined, and lastly, the average amount of motion for each talker in each
of the conditions is presented.
A table showing the eﬀects, which were found signiﬁcant in each of the measures, is
displayed in Appendix A.2.
6.1
Eﬀectiveness: Completion Time
The completion time of the task was deﬁned as the time needed to ﬁnd 10 diﬀerences in
the Diapix picture pair and was used in order to quantify the eﬀectiveness of the commu-
nication between the participants. A pairwise comparison revealed a signiﬁcant decrease
in completion time between the two sessions [F(1,81)=6.980, p<.01]. Overall, the time
needed to complete the task decreased with 36 ms between the two sessions. This eﬀect of
the session implies a training eﬀect which was expected, as participants were assumed to
improve their performance in spotting the diﬀerences by e.g. focus on signs and colours.
Figure 6.1 shows the averaged completion time in each of the ﬁve test conditions for the
two sessions. Especially, the adaption to the noise was apparent, as a faster completion
32
==PAGE:42==
6.1. EFFECTIVENESS: COMPLETION TIME
33
was seen in the presence of noise.
Figure 6.1: Overall mean of completion times for each of the ﬁve test conditions averaged across
all pairs, presented in the two sessions. Points represent mean value and error bars indicate the
standard error.
Figure 6.2: Completion time for each Diapix picture pair visualised in a boxplot. Picture 1-4 are
beach scenes, 5-9 is farm scenes and 9-12 are street scenes. An example of each scene is shown in
Appendix B.3.
Figure 6.2 contains a boxplot showing the completion time for each of the 10 used
Diapix picture pairs. Note, that picture pair number 3 and 9 were used in the training
sessions and were consequently not included here. In the design of the experiment, the
picture pairs were balanced across all conditions with the design of a full Latin square
and thus a possible eﬀect of diﬀerent completion times per picture should equal across
conditions. From the statistical analysis the diﬀerence in completion times across the 10
pictures was not found signiﬁcant.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:43==
34
CHAPTER 6. RESULTS
6.2
Subjective Communication Eﬀort: Ratings
The participants were presented with four questions after each condition with regard
to their experience with the conversation. The questions are listed in Section 2.2 and the
results from these subjective ratings collapsed over pairs and sessions, are presented in the
four panels of Figure 6.3. Table 6.1 gives an overview of the signiﬁcant inﬂuencing factors
found from the diﬀerent analyses described in the following.
(a) Question 1: Success of the conversation
(b) Question 2: Desire to improve the situation
(c) Question 3: Listening eﬀort
(d) Question 4: Talking eﬀort
Figure 6.3: Visualisation of the ratings from the talkers averaged across pairs in the two sessions
for each of the four questions. The points indicates means whereas the bars show the standard
deviations.
Common for all results was a clear impact of the presence of background noise. With
this ﬁnding along with the fact, that this study was designed to evaluate the eﬀects of
hearing aids in noise, an extraction of the conditions with presence of noise was justiﬁed.
Hence, the analysis of each question included an initial analysis of the entire data frame
followed by a more thorough analysis of the results within the noisy conditions.
The ﬁrst question was concerning the success of the conversation. From the illustration
in Figure 6.3a the mentioned eﬀect of noise resulting in lower rating is clearly observed,
conﬁrmed by the statistic analysis [F(1,176)=137.334, p<2e-16].
A signiﬁcant interac-
tion between the background and the hearing-aid processing was found [F(1,176)=5.048,
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:44==
6.2. SUBJECTIVE COMMUNICATION EFFORT: RATINGS
35
Main eﬀect
Subjective rating question
1. Success
2. Desire
3. Listening eﬀort
4. Talking eﬀort
Full data frame
Background
✓
✓
✓
✓
Processing
-
-
✓
✓
Talker
-
-
-
-
Background:Processing
✓
-
-
-
Background:Talker
-
✓
✓
✓
Subset; Noise conditions
Processing
✓
-
✓
-
Talker
-
-
-
-
Session
-
✓
-
-
Processing:Talker
-
-
-
✓
Processing:Talker:Session
-
-
-
✓
Table 6.1: Signiﬁcant main eﬀects along with their interaction indicated by a colon. Only interac-
tions found signiﬁcant in any of the four questions are listed here.
p<.026], which further led to an inspection of the noise conditions, in which the eﬀect of
the processing appeared signiﬁcant [F(2,98)=4.386, p<.015]. A post hoc analysis of mul-
tiple comparisons showed that the ratings between the unaided condition versus the aided
with an omni-directional setting condition was estimated to decrease with approximately
1 on the score board. This drop was found signiﬁcant [t(98)=-2.908,p<.014].
One further notices a hint of a group diﬀerence when both participants were unaided.
A t-test rejected the null hypothesis of equal means and thereby conﬁrmed a signiﬁcant dif-
ference in the mean ratings from the two groups given in quiet [t(27.594)=-2.065, p<.048].
However, this diﬀerence evened out in noise [t(31.442)=-1.508, p<.142]. It was speculated
if the eﬀect of wearing a hearing aid and the following adaption had a role in this diﬀer-
ence. Thus, a subset was extracted and modelled. The extracted subset contained only
aided talkers, divided into two groups; one group consisting of those being unaided in the
initial test condition, and the other group including those who started aided. A compar-
ison between the success rating in the quiet unaided condition between the two sessions
were made, but no signiﬁcant eﬀect was found. Thus, the origin of why a normal-hearing
person who at some point in the experiment wore a hearing aid, rated more success when
conversing without, cannot be examined from data obtained in this study.
Second, the participants rated how likely they would be to improve the situation by
e.g. speaking louder or moving to a quiet place and again the noise was a crucial eﬀect
[F(1,178)=620.947, p<2e-16], as also observed in Figure 6.3b. Additionally, the interac-
tion between the background setting and talker was proven signiﬁcant [F(1,178)=5.146,
p<.025], but a post analysis revealed that these diﬀerences lay between the background
setting for each of the talkers. Thus, no diﬀerence was found between the talkers within
each background setting.
The follow up analysis on a subset of data within the noise
conﬁrmed this by not revealing signiﬁcance of neither the background nor the processing.
However, an eﬀect of the session [F(1,99)=4.477, p<.037] appeared, suggesting a half score
increase from the ﬁrst to the second session [t(99)=-2.116, p<.037].
A collapse of the
scores from the two sessions could no longer be justiﬁed, and therefore, the ratings from
each session were visualised separately in Figure A.1 in Appendix A.1.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:45==
36
CHAPTER 6. RESULTS
Visually, the interaction between the background setting and the talker is obvious in
the third question (see Figure 6.3c). Further, a diﬀerence between the two talker groups
and an eﬀect of the processing on the aided talker’s rating is not unlikely. The analy-
sis of these listening eﬀort ratings conﬁrmed the mentioned interaction [F(1,176)=25.011,
p<1.372e-6] and further revealed signiﬁcant eﬀects of the background setting and the
processing strategy; [F(1,176)=410.114, p<2.2e-16] and [F(2,176)=3.248, p<.041], respec-
tively. Excluding the quiet conditions, a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in processing strategy was
found, [F(2,98)=3.610, p<.031],but no signiﬁcant eﬀect of wearing the hearing-aid was
seen in spite of the mentioned trend was spotted in the visualisation of the data. A multi-
ple comparison post hoc analysis stated a nearly signiﬁcant rating diﬀerence between the
two beamformer settings [t(98)=-2.408, p<.054] and additionally between unaided and the
omni-directional beamformer [t(98)=2.236, p<.083] both showing a 0.5 to 1 score lower
rating when presented with the omni-directional setting.
From the visualisation of the results from the fourth and last question, the inﬂuence of
noise is once again observed [F(1,176)=419.401, p<2.2e-16]. Furthermore, a small trend
of a processing impact on both talkers are spotted, and this was statistically conﬁrmed
[F(2,176)=4.880, p<.009], together with the interaction between the background setting
and talker [F(1,176)=8.042, p<.005]. The signiﬁcance of the processing strategy did not
persist when analysing the subset of noisy conditions. Yet, its eﬀect was expressed in an
interaction with the talker [F(2,90)=3.641, p<.030]. This relationship further interacted
with the the session as a signiﬁcant third order interaction [F(2,90)=3.492, p<.035].
6.3
Eﬀect on Speech Production
The ﬁrst investigated eﬀect on speech production, was the average RMS level of each
of the talkers converted to dB SPL. This was done in each test condition in the two session
resulting in 200 data points. Data from the two sessions of each hearing-aid setting and
noise source combination were averaged and can be seen in Figure 6.4.
Consistent with the Lombard eﬀect, the participants on average raised their voice with
about 13.75 dB SPL in noise and this main eﬀect was expectedly found signiﬁcant [F(1,184)
= 2163.488, p<2.2e-16]. The statistical analysis further revealed a signiﬁcant eﬀect of the
talker and the interaction between the hearing-aid processing and talker; [F(1,184)=9.989,
p<.002] and [F(2,180)=3.291, p<.039], respectively.
From the visualisation of the data, one gets an interesting impression of a slightly
decreasing speech level of the aided talker between the hearing-aid settings. In contrast,
the unaided talker seemed to speak at a consistently level within both quiet and noise
irrespectively of their partner’s exposure to diﬀerent haring-aid settings. Despite of no
statistical evidence of this impression, it was decided to investigate it further by analysing
a subset of the data containing only noisy conditions. This was justiﬁed, with the design of
the experiment and the possible limitation of power in the chosen statistical model caused
by the small sample size. The signiﬁcance of the diﬀerence wearing a hearing aid, still
hold ([F(1,109)=4.785, p<.031], but the diﬀerence between the talkers’ speech levels was
estimated to be only 0.7 dB.
Interestingly, the slightly higher speech level of the aided talker also applied to the
unaided conditions. A t-test accepted the null hypothesis and thus reject a diﬀerence in
the mean ratings from the two groups in the quiet condition [t(35.799)=-1.802 ,p<.080].
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:46==
6.3. EFFECT ON SPEECH PRODUCTION
37
However, the presence of noise were found to induce a signiﬁcant diﬀerence [t(36.12)=
-2.057, p<.047]. Again, it was speculated what caused this diﬀerence. It could be driven
by the random sample (i.e the persons assigned to wear the hearing aids were just louder
talking persons) or due to the eﬀect of wearing hearing aids in the experiment, which gives
the wearer a feeling of occlusion and thus may raise the voice. An analysis similar to the
one performed in the case of the ﬁrst subjective rating was wanted. However, it was not
possible, to investigate this further with the acquired data in this work, as only one pair
began the experiment unaided in noise.
Figure 6.4: Speech levels of the talkers converted to dB SPL estimated at the position of the
listener.
Secondly, the duration of the utterances was examined by determining the median
length of all utterances for each talker in each of the 10 rounds (i.e ﬁve test conditions
replicated twice). While the assumed eﬀect of the background noise was absent, the un-
aided participant on average spoke 115 ms longer than their interlocutor. This was also ex-
pressed in Figure 6.5, visualising the median utterance length of each talker averaged across
pairs and sessions. The statistics conﬁrmed this substantial group eﬀect [F(1,189)=15.858,
p<9.734e-5].
Figure 6.5: Median of the duration of utterances for the two group of talkers in the ﬁve test
conditions.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:47==
38
CHAPTER 6. RESULTS
6.4
Floor-Transfer Oﬀset
An investigation of the pairs’ conversational dynamics relied on a measure of the tim-
ing of their turn-taking. Here, the median FTO values were examined together with the
interquartile ranges. The median was chosen over the mean as FTOs were expected to be
slightly skewed. The median FTO was found together with IQR of FTOs for each talker
in each of the conditions across the sessions. As prevoiously mentioned a negative FTO
reﬂects an overlap between the talkers whereas a positive FTO indicates a gap between
the talkers during a turn-taking transition (see Section 1.1).
The statistical analysis demonstrated a signiﬁcant eﬀect of the background noise for the
median [F(1,189)=8.270, p<.004] and an interaction between background and hearing-aid
settings for the IQR ([F(1,186)=7.312, p<.007]. Yet, the median FTOs was only estimated
to increase with 38 ms. Visualisations of the two measures are found in the left and right
panel of Figure 6.6.
(a) Mean median FTO.
(b) Mean FTO interquartile range (IQR).
Figure 6.6: An average of each pair’s median and and interquartile range of ﬂoor-transfer oﬀsets
in conditions of diﬀerent hearing-aid setting, with and without background noise. Points indicate
means and error bars indicate standard errors.
Background setting was found to inﬂuence the FTOs in terms of the median and the
IQR, and thus a follow up analysis of the noisy conditions was performed. This revealed
a session diﬀerence in the median FTO [F(1,109)=4.500, p<.036] with an estimate of 37.7
ms longer FTOs in the second session. No factors were signiﬁcantly aﬀecting the IQR.
Figure A.2 in Appendix A shows the mean median FTO visualised separately in the two
sessions.
6.5
Balance of Speech Contribution
Based on ﬁndings from Sørensen et al. [2020b] and Watson et al. [2020] it was inves-
tigated if a pattern of a dominant speaker was present and if so which talker tended to
dominate the conversation. Figure 6.7 shows the average proportion the two participants
talked in each of the conditions. Their portion of speech was calculated as the total dura-
tion of active speech from the talker (determined by VAD) divided with the sum of active
speech during the conversation contributed from both talkers. In contrast to what was
hypothesised from Watson et al. [2020] the unaided talker dominates the conversation in
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:48==
6.6. QUANTITY OF MOTIONS
39
all conditions. This observation was statistically veriﬁed [F(1,18)=14.71, p<.001] with an
estimated diﬀerence of 16 %.
Figure 6.7: Speaking time (the percentage of time a person speaks during the conversation) in the
ﬁve test conditions for two normal-hearing listeners of whom one was sometimes wearing hearing
aids.
6.6
Quantity of Motions
Due to experiment error, the video recordings were unfortunately incomplete as one
recording was missing. Therefore, the movements in the quiet with omni-directional set-
ting condition was based on only one session for this pair.
As the camera was included only as an interesting factor for further analysis, and no
hypotheses with regard to movements were listed in this study, only a brief analysis was
made here. From a statistical evaluation eﬀects of the background, processing strategy
and session ([F(1,179)=4.683, p<.032],[F(2,179)=3.3564, p<.037] and [F(1,179)=6.8362,
p<.010]) were found together with a second and third order interaction. From the work
with the video recordings, it was noticed, that the setup and following choice of processing
method was not suitable, and thus an investigation of this is beyond the scope of this
project.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:49==
40
CHAPTER 6. RESULTS
Figure 6.8: Average amount of movements found in a region of interest, embracing the torso of the
participant. The sum of horizontal and vertical movements, averaged across pairs and sessions, are
seen as points for each talker.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER7
Discussion
The results from previous chapter are in the following more detailed described and
interpreted. Since, this study was designed for testing with hearing-impaired participants,
but conducted with normal-hearing subjects, the listed hypotheses are not valid. Even-
though it is not well documented how hearing aids aﬀect wearers with normal hearing, it
was anticipated that the participant wearing hearing aids would be challenged since some
of their spatial cues were removed. With the activation of the directional beamformer
providing an increased SNR, the communication diﬃculties should be reduced. The results
are interpreted to the best of one’s ability as expectations of how a normal-hearing subject
would be aﬀected by the hearing aids.
7.1
The Task Elicited Conversations
The time the pairs needed to complete the task and ﬁnd the 10 diﬀerences was assumed
to indicate the eﬃciency of the conversation. The participants on average solved the task
about 20 % faster in the second session implying a learning eﬀect. Even though Van Engen
et al. [2010] found no training eﬀect, Sørensen et al. [2020a] found a signiﬁcant decrease in
the completion time from the ﬁrst to the second session clearly implying the opposite. This
was also the case in the results obtained in this study. A possible eﬀect of the diﬀerent
degrees of diﬃculty among the picture pairs was ignored by the statistical analysis and the
design of the experiment accounting for a possible eﬀect.
Interestingly, the presence of noise did not seemed to challenge the participants suf-
ﬁciently to be reﬂected in their completion time, as expected based on the ﬁndings from
Sørensen et al. [2020a] exploring conversations between normal-hearing people, and Sørensen
et al. [2020b] investigation conversations between hearing impaired and normal-hearing
participants. The participants in Sørensen et al. [2020a] needed in the area of 300 to 380
ms to complete the task in all tested conditions varying with background setting (quiet or
noise) and performance language (Danish or English), whereas this project’s participants
in general needed less time to ﬁnd the diﬀerences. This could be a eﬀect of enabling visual
cues in this setup contrary to the setup in Sørensen et al. [2020a], where participants were
separated. Having visual cues available and being able to use gestures, seemed to make
communication easier and thus increased the eﬃciency of the conversation to an extend
41
==PAGE:51==
42
CHAPTER 7. DISCUSSION
where the eﬃciency was maintained in the presence of noise. Further, the speech produced
when solving the task was highly contextual speech as their pictures are almost identical
and thus the listener can easier guess the words that might not be heard. This also helps
to maintain the eﬃciency and reduce the completion time.
As mentioned in Section 2.1 the Diapix task was employed as it was designed to create a
natural conversation. Another argument for the use of this Diapix task was a statement of
eliciting conversations with each talker contributing equally to the conversation, since the
task cannot be solved individually. Van Engen et al. [2010] stated equally distribution of
speech from the two talkers whereas the contribution of the speakers in this study showed
a skewed distribution of speaking time where one talker dominated the conversation (58
% vs. 42 %). This was also the case in Sørensen [2017] with pairs of normal hearing,
and in Sørensen et al. [2020b] investigating conversations between a normal hearing and
an impaired partner. Sørensen et al. [2020b] encountered the person with the most diﬃ-
culties during the conversation (i.e the hearing impaired) to take the lead and dominate.
With this anticipation the balance found in this work suggests the talker not wearing the
hearing aid to generally have more diﬃculties. This is an interesting suggestion, which
will be compared with other measures investigated in this study. Though it is important
to keep in mind, that the participants were required to solve the task as a pair, and thus,
any eﬀects could arise from changes in the behaviour of the two talkers.
The speaking time imbalance could have multiple explanations. Basically, it could be
an eﬀect of the fact that socially some people dominates more than others by nature.
It could also be attributed the processing and the sensitivity of the VAD missing some
utterance as a consequence of avoiding cross-talk. Thirdly, it was speculated if the person
wearing the hearing-aid needed a short time to adjust when the noise was turned oﬀand
thus had a delay in starting their turn, resulting in their unaided partner to grab the
initial lead and thus carry the conversation. Due to time limitations, this theory was not
investigated in this work.
7.2
Subjective Ratings of Communication Eﬀort
As hypothesised the subjective ratings showed a clear impact of the background noise
in all four questions. The eﬀect of the hearing-aid processing was found signiﬁcant for
some questions, but how the hearing-aids aﬀected the two talkers were not clear.
Ratings of how successful the participants found the conversations clearly dropped in
the presence of noise. The statistics further showed an eﬀect of the processing strategy in
the noisy conditions indicating that the omni-directional beamformer resulted in the least
successful conversation for both talkers. This was opposite of what would be expected if
hearing-impaired subjects were tested, but here it indicates that the hearing aids had a
negative eﬀect on normal-hearing listeners. As the results interestingly showed, the un-
aided talker also had an experience of a less successful conversation when their partner was
aided. This indicates actual eﬀect of the hearing-aid setting and not simply lower rating
from the unaided talker, based on their knowledge of their partner wearing a hearing aid.
The unaided conditions were assumed to function as baseline for the comparisons in
this study. Thus, when diﬀerences between the two talker groups show up, one gets curious.
Statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences was found between the two talker groups, when both
being unaided and conversing in quiet. A simple guess could be that the unaided talker
ran the conversation (i.e spoke the most, see Figure 6.7) and thus found it less successful
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:52==
7.3. SPEECH PRODUCTION AND CONVERSATIONAL DYNAMICS
43
as they had to put more eﬀort in the conversation. Moreover, it was speculated if this
could be attributed to the eﬀect of being normal hearing and wear hearing aids. However,
a statistical evidence of these thoughts were not found and thus leave this speculation open
for further investigation. If this speculation was to be more deeply investigated, the design
should account for the initial conditions by e.g. having half of the pairs start in unaided
condition and the other half to start with the hearing aids.
When the participants rated their desire to improve the situation, they both agreed
that the presence of noise was undesirable. Yet, no eﬀect of the diﬀerent processing strate-
gies was found in this measure, when exploring the ratings given in the presence of noise.
One could argue, that this was not a surprising result as the participants were still able
to perform the task in noise, based on no diﬀerence in the completion time between quiet
and noise. Table 6.1 stated an appearance of signiﬁcant session eﬀect. The higher rating
for the noisy conditions in the second session may be a consequence of the extend of the
experiment tiring the participant or simply that the participants felt more annoyed by the
noise.
With regard to the communication eﬀort it was hypothesised that the aided talker would
have diﬃculties listening in noise, when wearing hearing aids in omni-directional setting,
and thereby aﬀect their interlocutor to feel more challenged in talking and sustaining
the conversation. The activation of the directional beamformer was assumed to ease the
diﬃculties for both talkers in these terms.
Consistent with this hypothesis, the pairs
found it more diﬃcult to communicate in the presence of noise, and the assumption of an
increased listening eﬀort in aided conditions with omni-directional setting, was additionally
conﬁrmed, as the pairs slightly increased their rating in these conditions compared to the
other hearing-aid settings (i.e unaided and directional). However, this interestingly applied
to both talkers and wearing a hearing aid seemed to be of no importance.
From Figure 6.3c it is interpreted, that the unaided talker experienced listening more
exacting than their at times aided partner in the presence of noise, and the summary
statistics supported this showing the unaided talker to ﬁnd listening 43 % harder than
their partner. This was also the case in the fourth question where the unaided talkers rat-
ings were 13 % higher. However, this impression was not statistically justiﬁed. A possible
explanation for the missing statistical evidence is the small sample size combined with the
numerous modelled main eﬀects, resulting in limited amount of power in the model. A
further investigation of this requires more observations providing more power to the model.
In general, there was surprising small eﬀects of wearing hearing aids on any of the sub-
jective ratings. However, the models employed in this work, suggested, that the processing
had an impact of the participants ratings in noise, but it remains unclear if the processing
aﬀected the two talkers in the same manner.
7.3
Speech Production and Conversational Dynamics
The overall hypothesis was that increasing the conversational diﬃculty by adding noise,
would impose altered speech production strategies as raised levels and lengthening of ut-
terances. Additionally, a challenging conversation would require more cognitive resources
and thus aﬀect one’s turn-taking behaviour, as fewer resources are available for planning
speech and predict turn endings of one’s interlocutor. A reﬂection of this was expected
to show as a delayed response time (i.e. larger values of FTOs) and incorrectly predicted
turn endings, resulting in a broader FTO distribution (i.e. larger values of the IQR).
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:53==
44
CHAPTER 7. DISCUSSION
It was presented in Section 6.3, that both participants on average raised their voice
with about 14 dB SPL in noise as envisaged. It was further anticipated, that the dominant
talker spoke with a higher level than their partner. However, this work seemed more likely
to show the opposite, even-though the non-dominant talker only spoke 0.6 dB SPL louder.
In this setup, the unaided talker’s own auditory feedback remains unchanged through-
out the experiment. On the other hand, the aided talker perceives an altered feedback
according to the hearing-aid setting. It was assumed that one would increase the voice,
if the surrounding changes (for example by adding noise) or if one’s partner signals lis-
tening diﬃculties.
An adaptive behaviour from the normal-hearing talker adapting to
their challenged partner, as found between interlocutors in Sørensen et al. [2020a], could
be anticipated coherently with the assumption of diﬀerent levels of diﬃculty between the
hearing-aid settings. The unexpected impression of a nearly constant speech level of the
unaided talkers in noise found here, could be explained by their aided partner experiencing
minimal eﬀects of the hearing aid and were thus did not signalling hearing diﬃculty. How-
ever, these thoughts were without any statistical justiﬁcation, which leaves the speculation
open for further studies.
It was observed that in rounds of no hearing aids involved, a diﬀerence seemed to appear
between the two groups even-though, they were both normal hearing and exposed to the
same feedback. This was expressed as the signiﬁcant interaction between the processing
and the fact of wearing hearing aids, but the group diﬀerence was only conﬁrmed in quiet.
One of the speculations of this observations was if the talker who were sometimes wearing
the hearing aids needed to adjust to the occluded experience, and thus was biased in the
sense of had tried to wear a hearing aid. It was speculated that they spoke diﬀerently
between the two sessions in the unaided condition without noise. A further investigation
of this was not possible in this study, due to the limited amount of data. Thus, the reason
for this surprising ﬁnding remained unclear and warrant further investigation, with a more
proper designed experiment.
If this speculation was to be explored, the design should
account for the initial conditions by e.g. having half of the pairs start in unaided condition
and the other half to start with the hearing aids.
When interpreting these changes in speech levels an important note is the inspected
variance and accuracy of the procedure used to compute the speech levels. It was experi-
mentally found that the speech levels could vary with 4 dB SPL depending on the position
of the talker and is anything was held in front of the microphones.
The model of which the interpreted results rely on, was designed with a random inter-
cept of the pairs. One could argue, that an intercept of person should be included, as some
persons are just louder speaking by nature. However, it was speculated if the talker would
adapt to the level of their interlocutor. Diﬀerent models based on diﬀerent assumptions,
could be explored when a larger sample size was available.
In terms of how conversational diﬃculties aﬀect the length of ones utterances, ﬁndings
appeared to be contradictory. Hadley et al. [2019] found the participants to shorten their
utterances in the presence of noise when facing each other. Other studies (Sørensen et al.
[2020a], Watson et al. [2020]) found the participants lengthened their utterances in noise.
However, these studies were conducted with participants separately seated, and are thus
not comparable to the ﬁnding from Hadley et al. [2019]. In conclusion, it is not clear if
talkers would employee the strategy of extending their turn, and if the noise would aﬀect
this measure of speech production, if talkers were seated together. The results obtained in
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:54==
7.4. LIMITATIONS
45
this experiment did not clearly support any of these ﬁndings by not revealing an impact
of the noise, but instead an eﬀect of the hearing aids. As also the case in the measure of
the conversation eﬃciency, a reasonable explanation is that the noise did not challenge the
participants.
The unaided talkers’ utterances were found signiﬁcantly longer than their partner’s.
This was not a surprise, since Figure 6.7 appointed this talker group to dominate the
conversation.
Being the dominant talker when solving the task, implies more detailed
descriptions of the picture and asking questions, while the partner is giving more simple
responses. Finding the longest utterances for the unaided talker further supported the
interpretation, that they were more challenged (Sørensen et al. [2020b]).
In summary, this measure was not sensitive to the noise conﬁguration or hearing aid
setting, but after all, an eﬀect of wearing hearing aids seemed to be present.
Increased processing demands were furthermore expected to show a delay and more
variability in the turn-taking timing (i.e higher median values and IQRs of the FTOs).
The ﬁndings in this study showed a small but signiﬁcant increase with noise, suggesting a
more rapid conversation when the participants were challenged. However, no broadening
of the FTOs was found in the presence of noise stating, that the participant manage to
maintain their accuracy in predicting their interlocutor’s turn-ends. If a less precise turn-
taking was found, one would expect it to inﬂuence the eﬃciency of the conversation, which
was not the case in these ﬁndings.
From the additional analysis investigating the changes between conditions in noise, a
surprising eﬀect of time appeared, estimating the FTOs to be around 38 ms longer in the
second session. This signiﬁcant discovery suggests a tiring of the participants, which was
not unlikely, as the experiment was extensive. Specially the unaided talker could be more
likely to feel bored and become unfocused.
Moreover, the assumed eﬀects of the diﬀerent hearing-aid processing failed to happen.
However, if assumed stabilised, the second block slightly reﬂects the assumed eﬀect since
it at ﬁrst seems that the omni-directional setting resulted in a longer response time for
the aided talker, whereas the directional setting reduced this time. Though, this slightly
higher value was seen with huge variation, and no support from the statistical analysis and
thus not interpretable.
Together, these results suggest that the ability to predict the timing of turn-ends was
not inﬂuenced by wearing hearing aids nor which program they were set with.
7.4
Limitations
The main limitations met in this project was the amount and consent of collected data.
The experiment was designed to include hearing-impaired but was instead conducted with
pairs of young normal-hearing listeners wearing hearing aids. In terms of the setup, it was
decided to place the conversational pairs towards each other and not in separated booths as
the setup have been in previous studies. This induced cross talk in the speech recordings,
which was diﬃcult to handle. A power threshold was manually set for each conversation
as best as one can, but compromises had to be done. A main concern was if the used VAD
was not sensitive enough to handle cross-talk. The large variances seen in the collected
data could be a consequence this processing procedure.
The small subset of only 10 pairs limited the power provided to the statistical models
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:55==
46
CHAPTER 7. DISCUSSION
and aﬀecting the accuracy and stability. During the work with the statistical modelling
slightly diﬀerent models produced considerable diﬀerences. Thus, the choice of main eﬀects
and random intercepts should be carefully considered.
A way to get arround some of these limitations was to include more participants and
maybe additionally increase the number of sessions. However, tiring of the participants
was proven in some measures, and this should be kept in mind.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:56==
CHAPTER8
Conclusion
This study investigated how the beneﬁts of directional processing in hearing aids can
be evaluated by an examination of speech production, conversational dynamics and sub-
jective eﬀort ratings. A conversational experiment was designed to examine recordings of
conversations between a normal-hearing person and a person with a hearing loss, when
those were seated face-to-face. However, in this work, the experiment was conducted with
pairs of two normal-hearing persons collaborating to solve a spot-the-diﬀerence task called
"Diapix task" (Van Engen et al. [2010]) in a total of ﬁve testing conditions varied with
noise/no noise and diﬀerent beamforming settings on the worn hearing aids. After each
conversation, the participants rated their perceived communication eﬀort.
The acquired speech recordings was processed to investigate the transitions in each
conversation. The recordings were categorised into diﬀerent talker transitions describing if
speech segments (here named utterances) were overlapping (overlap-between and overlap-
within) and if portions of silence was found between utterances of one talker (a named
a pause) or between talkers (named a gap). From these categories a ﬂoor-transfer oﬀset
(FTO) was computed as a combination of the gaps and overlaps-between. This processing
was completed using a voice activity detection (VAD) algorithm and a classiﬁer developed
by Sørensen [2017].
It was hypothesised that noise would impose a need of more time to complete the
task and high scores of the communication eﬀort. Contrary, the noise did not reveal an
increase in the completion time suggesting, that when facing each other the noise did not
challenge the participants. As expected, the subjective ratings of the perceived success of
the conversation dropped, while the eﬀort ratings increased with noise. From the subjective
ratings, some small eﬀects of the processing was found, but in was unclear in what way
and if the processing aﬀected the wearer and his/her partner in the same manner.
Expectedly, the participants increased their voice in noise, but their speech levels were
not directly inﬂuenced by the hearing-aid processing, but wearing the hearing aids had an
eﬀect on the voice level of both talkers. Patterns of the length of utterances and FTOs
was not fully consistent with expectations based on ﬁndings form other studies, and this
was attributed to the limited amount of data, the under-powered used models, and simply
47
==PAGE:57==
48
CHAPTER 8. CONCLUSION
the fact of a normal-hearing wearer might not be challenged enough by the noise to be
reﬂected in these dynamical measures.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER9
Future Work
Collecting conversations from pairs of a younger normal hearing and a hearing-impaired
person is the road ahead for the future work with this study. Since the design of the this
study was intended to test this participant group, the listed hypotheses could be fully
explored. However, it was here shown, that a larger sample size would be needed in order
to do so.
Due to the limited time, this project did not get to the bottom of the acquired data
from this experiment and more analysis can be done. As a future progress with the data,
one could make more throughout comparisons of the diﬀerent speech production measures
with studies having the pairs conversing in separate sound booths. For example, the ar-
ticulation rates from the unaided conditions in noise and quiet could be computed and
held against the ﬁndings from Sørensen [2017]. Similarly, diﬀerences in the distributions of
overlaps and gaps from being separated to have visual cues available would be a compari-
son of interest. A more exhaustive investigation of the statistical modelling could further
be of interest, as the applied models in this study suﬀered from under-powering leading to
unstable models and interpretations of the output hereof.
This present work could be extended to include more complex processing tools with
regard to both the speech and video recordings. The employed VAD algorithm struggled
with the handle of the cross talk. Another activity detection tool could be examined in
order to avoid the compromises necessitated in this processing and thus be more accurate.
Renewing of the processing tool could also be tried with regard to the video analysis, as the
applied software FlowAnalyzer showed some limitations, from which the analysis suﬀered
from.
Other studies successfully implemented equipment capable of tracking head- and/or
eye movements (e.g Hadley et al. [2019]). This approach could be considered in a renewed
design of this work, in order to examine whether gestures are correlated with conversation
diﬃculty.
From the ﬁndings of a group diﬀerence where both talkers had the same unaided con-
49
==PAGE:59==
50
CHAPTER 9. FUTURE WORK
ditions, a follow up study could be conducted with the purpose of investigate this. Such a
study would example-wise be designed with half of the pairs starting wearing the hearing
aids and the other half starting unaided. A further interesting expansion of the designed
study could be made by including a third talker, in order to simulate another real-life
scenario at for example a dinner party.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:60==
List of Figures
1.1
Illustration of talker transitions and utterance classiﬁcation
. . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Examples of diﬀerent beamformer patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1
Example of a Diapix picture pair . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Participants’ audiometric thresholds
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1
Experimental setup and connections
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Pictures of the experimental setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Selected beamformer pattern
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4
Illustrations of the pilot tests of talker level calibration . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.5
Results from the pilot study on talker level calibration . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.1
Experimental procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.1
VAD example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2
FlowAnalyzer GUI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.3
Example of a motion signal
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.4
FlowAnalyzer software applied to a recorded video
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6.1
Completion time in each test condition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.2
Completion time for each Diapix picture pair. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.3
Visualisation of subjective ratings.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6.4
Speech levels of the talkers converted to dB SPL estimated at the position
of the listener.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.5
Median of the duration of utterances for the two group of talkers in the ﬁve
test conditions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.6
Visualisation of resulting FTOs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.7
Balance of speaking time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.8
Average amount of movements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
A.1 Ratings displayed for the two sessions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
A.2 Median FTOs for each session . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
B.1
Standard audiogram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
B.2
Setup for measuring beamforming patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
B.3
α=0.06, red position. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
51
==PAGE:61==
52
LIST OF FIGURES
B.4
α=0.06, green position. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
B.5
α=0.06, blue position. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
B.6
α=0.4, red position.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
B.7
α=0.4, green position. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
B.8
α=0.4, blue position. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
B.9
Examples of each Diapix scene
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
C.1 Application for the execution of the experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:62==
List of Tables
3.1
Attenuation of calibration test 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
6.1
Signiﬁcant main eﬀects in subjective ratings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
A.1 Overview of signiﬁcant factors.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
53
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
A. H. Anderson, M. Bader, E. G. Bard, E. Boyle, G. Doherty, S. Garrod, S. Isard,
J. Kowtko, J. McAllister, J. Miller, C. Sotillo, H. S. Thompson, and R. Weinert. The
hcrc map task corpus. language and speech. Language and speech, 34(4):351–366, 1991.
doi: 10.1177/002383099103400404.
V. Aubanel and M. Cooke.
Strategies adopted by talkers faced with ﬂuctuating and
competing-speech maskers. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 134(4):
2884–2894, 2013. doi: 10.1121/1.4818757.
R. Baker and V. Hazan.
Diapixuk:
task materials for the elicitation of multiple
spontaneous speech dialogs.
Behavior Research Methods, 43(3):761–770, 2011.
doi:
10.3758/s13428-011-0075-y.
A. V. Barbosa. Flowanalyzer, 2017.
D. Bates, M. Mächler, B. Bolker, and S. Walker. Fitting linear mixed-eﬀects models using
lme4. Journal of statistical software, 67(1), 2015. doi: 10.18637/jss.v067.i01.
T. Beechey, J. M. Buchholz, and G. Keidser. Measuring communication diﬃculty through
eﬀortful speech production during conversation. Elsevier, pages 18–29, 2018. doi: 10.
1016/j.specom.2018.04.007.
N. Bisgaard, M. S. M. G. Vlaming, and M. Dahlquist. Standard audiograms for the iec
60i 18-15 medtu ﬁnasurements procedure. Trends in Ampliﬁcation, 14(2):113–120, 2010.
doi: 10.1177/1084713810379609.
M. Cooke and Y. Lu. Spectral and temporal changes to speech produced in the presence of
energetic and informational maskers. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
128(4):2059–2069, 2010. doi: 10.1121/1.3478775.
H. Dillon. Hearing Aids. Thieme, 2012.
L. V. Hadley, W. O. Brimijoin, and W. M. Whitmer.
Speech, movements, and gaze
behaviours during dyadic conversation in noise.
pages 1–7, 2019.
doi:
10.1038/
s41598-019-46416-0.
D. Hawkins and W. Yacullo. Signal-to-noise ratio advantage of binaural hearing aids and
directional microphones under diﬀerent levels of reverberation. Journal of speech hear
disord, 49(3):278–286, 1984.
54
==PAGE:64==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
55
M. Heldner and J. Edlund. Pauses, gaps and overlaps in conversations. Journal of Pho-
netics, 38(4):555–568, 2010. doi: 10.1016/j.wocn.2010.08.002.
B. W. Y. Hornsby. The eﬀects of hearing aid use on listening eﬀort and mental fatigue
associated with sustained speech processing demands. Ear and hearing, 34(5):523–534,
2013.
IEC 268-13 standard. Sound system equipment part 13: Listening tests on loudspeaker.,
1985.
G. Kidd Jr, C. R. Manson, V. Best, and J. Swaminathan. Beneﬁts of acoustic beamforming
for solving the cocktail party problem. Trends in Hearing, 19:1–15, 2015. doi: 10.1177/
2331216515593385.
M. Kompis and N. Dillier. Noise reduction for hearing aids: Combining directional micro-
phones with an adaptive beamformer. he Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
96(3):1910–1913, 1994. doi: 10.1121/1.410204.
F. Kuk. The science, research, and technology behind eﬀortless hearing. Hearing review,
2017.
N. Latif, A. Alsius, and K. Munhall. Knowing when to respond: the role of visual informa-
tion in conversational turn exchanges. Atten Percept Psychophys, 80:27–41, 2018. doi:
10.3758/s13414-017-1428-0.
S. Launer, J. A. Zakia, and B. C. J. Moore.
Hearing aid signal processing.
Springer
Handbook of Auditory Research, 56:93–130, 2016.
A. Leeuw and W. Dreschler. Advantages of directional hearing aid microphones related to
room acoustics. Audiol, 30(6):330–344, 1991.
S. C. Levinson and F. Torreira. Timing in turn-taking and its implications for processing
models of language. Front. Psychol, 6(731), 2015. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00731.
H. Luts, J.-B. Maj, and W. S. J. Wouters. Better speech perception in noise with an
assistive multimicrophone array for hearing aids. EAR HEARING, 2004. doi: 10.1097/
01.aud.0000145109.90767.ba.
E. M. Picou and T. A. Ricketts. The relationship between speech recognition, behavioural
listening eﬀort, and subjective ratings. International journal of audiology, 57(6):457–467,
2018. doi: 10.1080/14992027.2018.1431696.
E. M. Picou, T. A. Ricketts, and B. W. Hornsby. How hearing aids, background noise, and
visual cues inﬂuence objective listening eﬀort. Ear and Hearing, 34:52–64, 2013. doi:
10.1097/AUD.0b013e31827f0431.
E. M. Picou, T. M. Moore, and T. A. Ricketts.
The eﬀects of directional processing
on objective and subjective listening eﬀort. Journal of speech, language, and hearing
research, 60:199–211, 2017. doi: 10.1044/2016_JSLHR-H-15-0416.
H. Sacks, A. Schegloﬀ, and G. Jeﬀerson. A simplest systematics for the organization of
turn taking for conversation. Language, 50(4):696–735, 1974. doi: 10.2307/412243.
G. H. Saunders and J. M. Kates. Speech intelligibility enhancement using hearing-aid array
processing. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 102(3):1827–1837, 1997.
doi: 10.1121/1.420107.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:65==
56
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A. J. Sørensen. Inﬂuence of Noise and Second Language on Conversational Dynamics.
Technical University of Denmark, 2017.
A. J. Sørensen, M. Fereczkowski, and E. MacDonald. Task dialog by native-danish talkers.
in danish and english in both quiet and noise. Zenodo, 7, 2018. doi: http://doi.org/10.
5281/zenodo.1204951.
A. J. Sørensen, M. Fereczkowski, and E. MacDonald. Eﬀects of noise and l2 on the timing
of turn taking in conversation. 7, 2020a.
A. J. Sørensen, E. MacDonald, and T. Lunner. Timing of turn taking between normal-
hearing and hearing-impaired interlocutors. Proceedings of the International Symposium
on Auditory and Audiological Research, 7:37–44, 2020b.
M. Valente, D. Fabry, and L. Potts. Recognition of speech in noise with hearing aids using
dual microphones. Journal of the American Academy of Audiology, 6(6):440–449, 1995.
T. Van den Bogaerta, S. Doclo, J. Wouters, and M. Moonen. The eﬀect of multimicrophone
noise reduction systems on sound source localization by users of binaural hearing aids.
The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 124:484–497, 2008. doi: 10.1121/1.
2931962.
T. Van den Bogaerta, S. Doclo, and J. W. andMarc Moonen. Speech enhancement with
multichannel wiener ﬁlter techniques in multimicrophone binaural hearing aids.
The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 125(1):360–371, 2009.
doi: 10.1121/1.
3023069.
K. J. Van Engen, M. Baese-Berk, R. E. Baker, A. Choi, M. Kim, and A. R. Bradlow. The
wildcat corpus of native- and foreign-accented english: communicative eﬃciency across
conversational dyads with varying language alignment proﬁles. Language and Speech, 53
(4):510–540, 2010.
S. Watson, A. J. Sørensen, and E. MacDonald. The eﬀect of conversational task on turn
taking in dialogue. Proceedings of the International Symposium on Auditory and Audi-
ological Research, 7:61–68, 2020.
J. M. Wiemann and M. L. Knapp. Turn-taking in conversations. Journal of communication,
25(2):75–92, 1975.
Y.-H. Wu, N. Aksan, M. Rizzo, E. Stangl, X. Zhang, and R. Bentler. Measuring listening
eﬀort: Driving simulator versus simple dual-task paradigm. Ear and Hearing, 35(6):
623–632, 2014.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:66==
APPENDIXA
Further Results
A.1
Additional Visualisations
A.1.1
Subjective Ratings
Figure A.1: Visualisation of the collected data from the second question in the questionnaire for
subjective ratings. The question revealed the participants desire to improve the given situation.
Ratings are averaged all pairs.
57
==PAGE:67==
58
APPENDIX A. FURTHER RESULTS
A.1.2
Floor-Transfer Oﬀset
Figure A.2: An eﬀect of the session was found, and thus the median FTOs for each session are
seen here.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:68==
A.2. SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT EFFECTS
59
A.2
Summary of Signiﬁcant Eﬀects
Eﬀect
Completion
Subjective ratings
Level
Utterance
FTO
Speech
Motion
time
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Median
IQR
contribution
Success
Desire
Listening
Talking
Full data frame
Background
-
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
-
✓
-
-
✓
Processing
-
-
-
✓
✓
-
-
-
-
-
✓
Talker
-
-
-
-
-
✓
✓
-
-
-
-
Session
✓
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
✓
Background:Processing
-
✓
-
-
-
-
-
-
✓
-
✓
Background:Talker
-
-
✓
✓
✓
-
-
-
-
-
-
Background:Session
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Processing:Talker
-
-
-
-
-
✓
-
-
-
-
-
Background:Processing:Session
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
✓
Subset; Noise conditions
Processing
✓
-
✓
-
-
-
-
Talker
-
-
-
-
✓
-
-
Session
-
✓
-
-
-
✓
-
Processing:Talker
-
-
-
✓
-
-
-
Talker:Session
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Processing:Talker:Session
-
-
-
✓
-
-
-
Table A.1: An overview of the main eﬀects and interactions found signiﬁcant in this study.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:69==
APPENDIXB
Further Explanations and Supplements
B.1
Audiogram
Figure B.1: Standard audiograms from Bisgaard et al. [2010]. Standard audiograms deﬁned by
the Nordic Cooperation on Disability (NSH, 2003): (A) mild SNHL, (B) moderate sensorineural
loss, (C) severe SNHL, (D) profound SNHL, and (E) precipitous SNHL.
60
==PAGE:70==
B.2. EXPLORATION OF BEAMFORMING PATTERNS
61
B.2
Exploration of Beamforming Patterns
In order to explore diﬀerent patterns of beamforming, the hearing aids were mounted
on a head-and-torso simulator (HATS) which was placed surrounded by ﬁve loud speakers.
The beamformer patterns were measured for three diﬀerent values of the directional pa-
rameter α with the HATS placed in three diﬀerent positions. The three diﬀerent values of
the directional parameter were 0.06, 0.25 and 0.4 and the position of HATS were changed
25 cm back and forth from a position on line with two of the loudspeakers. An outline of
the setup is shown in Figure B.2.
Figure B.2: Setup for measuring patterns of diﬀerent values of the directional parameter.
The resulting patterns are presented in the following ﬁgures, where the values of the
directional parameter is indicated together with a colour referring to the position of HATS.
Figure B.3: α=0.06, red position.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:71==
62
APPENDIX B. FURTHER EXPLANATIONS AND SUPPLEMENTS
Figure B.4: α=0.06, green position.
Figure B.5: α=0.06, blue position.
Figure B.6: α=0.4, red position.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:72==
B.2. EXPLORATION OF BEAMFORMING PATTERNS
63
Figure B.7: α=0.4, green position.
Figure B.8: α=0.4, blue position.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:73==
64
APPENDIX B. FURTHER EXPLANATIONS AND SUPPLEMENTS
B.3
Examples of Diapix Scenes
(a) Beach 4A
(b) Beach 4B
(c) Farm 8A
(d) Farm 8B
(e) Street 12A
(f) Street 12B
Figure B.9: An example of each of the three Diapix scenes; beach (1-4), farm (5-8) and street
(9-12) used in this experiment (Baker and Hazan [2011]).
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:74==
Par: 
Condition:  
Dato: 
Taler:  
Blok:  
 
1 
 
 
 
(1) Hvor succesfuld synes du, at samtalen var? 
 
Slet ikke 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meget 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
 
 
(2) Hvis denne situation opstod i din hverdag, hvad er sandsynligheden for, at du ville forsøge at 
forbedre situationen (fx flytte til et stille rum, bede din partner om at tale højere)? 
 
 
Lille 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Stor 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
 
 
(3) Hvor hårdt synes du, at det var at tale? 
 
Meget let 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meget hårdt 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
 
 
(4) Hvor hårdt synes du, at det var at lytte? 
 
Meget let 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meget hårdt 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B.4. SUBJECTIVE RATINGS: DANISH QUESTIONNAIRE
65
B.4
Subjective Ratings: Danish Questionnaire
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:75==
Instruktioner 
Tak for, at I vil være med. Før vi går i gang med dagens eksperiment, vil jeg lave en kort høretest 
på jer begge. Derefter vil den ene af Jer få et sæt høreapparater på, som bruges i dele af forsøget.  
 
 
Vejledning til Diapix session 
Dagens eksperiment vil bestå af en samarbejdsopgave, som kaldes ”the Diapix task”. 
 
I forsøget kommer I til at sidde overfor hinanden i et rum med hver jeres mikrofon på, og I får 
hvert et billede. Jeres billeder er næsten identiske og jeres opgave er at samarbejde om at finde 
de forskelle, der er mellem dem. 
 
Forskellene kan bl.a. være et manglende element på et billede eller en ændring mellem de to 
billeder. Når I finder en af disse forskelle, skal I markere det og skrive ned eller tegne det 
manglende/ændrede element direkte på billedet. 
 
Hvis en kvinde fx har en halskæde på på ét billede, men ikke på det andet, skal I tegne en cirkel og 
skrive ”halskæde”, hvor den mangler. 
 
I skal ikke bekymre jer om at tegne og skrive perfekt, så længe forskellene mellem dit og din 
partners billede er tydelige. 
 
I skal finde 10 forskelle i alt. Prøv at finde dem så hurtigt og præcist som muligt, men husk, at det 
ikke er en konkurrence mellem jer; I skal samarbejde som et team, om at finde de 10 forskelle. I vil 
få højst 10 minutter til at finde forskellene, før vi går videre til det næste billede. 
 
Først vil der være en træningsrunde i to dele. I den første får i et billede hver og skal sammen  
finde forskellene, så I lærer systemet at kende. 
 
I den anden del får i et nyt billede hver og skal gøre det samme, men her sidder I inde i rummet og 
den ene af jer har høreapparater på. Først er der ingen baggrundsstøj, og derefter får I et nyt sæt 
billeder, hvor der vil være baggrundsstøj. Dette er for at vænne jer til, hvordan resten af 
eksperimentet vil forløbe. 
 
Herefter begynder det egentlige eksperiment. 
 
I vil gennemgå to sessioner i alt. I hver session skal I løse opgaven med fem forskellige billeder, 
altså i alt 10 billeder fordelt på to sessioner. For hver af de fem billeder i hver session er der en ny 
tilstand: nogle er i baggrundsstøj og andre i stilhed, kombineret med hvornår høreapparterne skal 
være på.  Rækkefølgen af disse tilstande er tilfældige. Jeg vil fortælle jer hvilken tilstand I er i, så I 
skal ikke bekymre jer om alle detaljerne her. Der vil lyde et bip, når opgaven må påbegyndes. 
 
Før hver session vil I blive bedt om kort at sige jeres navn og alder.  
66
APPENDIX B. FURTHER EXPLANATIONS AND SUPPLEMENTS
B.5
Instructions for the Experiment
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:76==
APPENDIXC
MATLAB Code
C.1
Execution of Conversational Experiment
Figure C.1: Interface of the designed application developed to ease the execution of the conversa-
tional experiment.
1 c l a s s d e f
audioPlayerRecorderApp < matlab . apps . AppBase
2
3
% Properties
that
correspond
to app components
4
p r o p e r t i e s
( Access = public )
5
UIFigure
matlab . ui . Figure
6
GridLayout
matlab . ui . container . GridLayout
7
LeftPanel
matlab . ui . container . Panel
8
TrainingsessionsLabel
matlab . ui . control . Label
9
MicrecordingsLabel
matlab . ui . control . Label
10
ExperimentLabel
matlab . ui . control . Label
11
ResetButton
matlab . ui . control . Button
12
CalibrationLabel
matlab . ui . control . Label
67
==PAGE:77==
68
APPENDIX C. MATLAB CODE
13
OnlytestrunCheckBox
matlab . ui . control . CheckBox
14
PairEditFieldLabel
matlab . ui . control . Label
15
PairEditField
matlab . ui . control . NumericEditField
16
TrainingDropDownLabel
matlab . ui . control . Label
17
TrainingDropDown
matlab . ui . control . DropDown
18
MictestingDropDownLabel
matlab . ui . control . Label
19
MictestingDropDown
matlab . ui . control . DropDown
20
BlockDropDownLabel
matlab . ui . control . Label
21
BlockDropDown
matlab . ui . control . DropDown
22
ConditionDropDownLabel
matlab . ui . control . Label
23
ConditionDropDown
matlab . ui . control . DropDown
24
MicrophoneLabel
matlab . ui . control . Label
25
MicrophoneDropDown
matlab . ui . control . DropDown
26
BlockDropDown_2Label
matlab . ui . control . Label
27
BlockDropDown_2
matlab . ui . control . DropDown
28
RightPanel
matlab . ui . container . Panel
29
UIAxes
matlab . ui . control . UIAxes
30
StopButton
matlab . ui . control . Button
31
StartButton
matlab . ui . control . Button
32
RecLampLabel
matlab . ui . control . Label
33
RecLamp
matlab . ui . control .Lamp
34
end
35
36
% Properties
that
correspond
to
apps with auto−reflow
37
p r o p e r t i e s
( Access = private )
38
onePanelWidth = 576;
39
end
40
41
p r o p e r t i e s
( Access = public )
42
P;
43
B;
44
C;
45
Mic ;
46
T;
47
end
48
p r o p e r t i e s
( Access = private )
49
stopButtonPressed % s e l f
explanatory
50
recordedAudio % f u l l
recorded
audio
51
end
52
53
54
% Callbacks
that
handle component
events
55
methods ( Access = private )
56
57
% Value changed
function :
PairEditField
58
function
PairEditFieldValueChanged2 (app ,
event )
59
value = app . PairEditField . Value ;
60
app .P = value ;
61
end
62
63
% Value changed
function :
TrainingDropDown
64
function
TrainingDropDownValueChanged (app ,
event )
65
value = app . TrainingDropDown . Value ;
66
app .T = value ;
67
end
68
69
% Value changed
function :
MictestingDropDown
70
function
MictestingDropDownValueChanged (app ,
event )
71
value = app . MictestingDropDown . Value ;
72
app . Mic = value ;
73
end
74
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:78==
C.1. EXECUTION OF CONVERSATIONAL EXPERIMENT
69
75
% Value changed
function :
BlockDropDown
76
function
BlockDropDownValueChanged (app ,
event )
77
value = app . BlockDropDown . Value ;
78
app .B = value ;
79
end
80
81
% Value changed
function :
ConditionDropDown
82
function
ConditionDropDownValueChanged (app ,
event )
83
value = app . ConditionDropDown . Value ;
84
app .C = value ;
85
end
86
87
% Button pushed
function :
StartButton
88
function
StartButtonPushed (app ,
event )
89
% warnings
90
i f
isempty ( app .P)
| |
app .P == 0
91
f i g = app . UIFigure ;
92
message = s p r i n t f ( ’Woops !
\n Remeber to
f i l l
in
the
pair
index . ’ ) ;
93
u i a l e r t ( fig , message , ’ Warning ’ , ’ Icon ’ , ’ warning ’ ) ;
94
return
95
e l s e i f
isempty ( app .T) && isempty ( app . Mic )&& isempty ( app .B) &&
isempty ( app .C)
96
f i g = app . UIFigure ;
97
message = s p r i n t f ( ’Woops !
\n
F i l l
in
the
t e s t
condition . ’ ) ;
98
u i a l e r t ( fig , message , ’ Warning ’ , ’ Icon ’ , ’ warning ’ ) ;
99
return
100
e l s e i f
~isempty ( app . Mic ) && ~isempty ( app .T) . . .
101
| |
~isempty ( app .T) && ~isempty ( app .B) . . .
102
| |
~isempty ( app .B) && isempty ( app .C) && isempty ( app . Mic )
. . .
103
| |
isempty ( app .B) && ~isempty ( app .C)
104
f i g = app . UIFigure ;
105
message = s p r i n t f ( ’Woops !
\n Wrong combination ’ ) ;
106
u i a l e r t ( fig , message , ’ Warning ’ , ’ Icon ’ , ’ warning ’ ) ;
107
return
108
end
109
110
%s p e c i f y i n g
v a r i a b l e s
111
f s = 48000;
112
devName = "ASIO F i r e f a c e USB";
113
recChans = [1
2 ] ;
114
playChans = [1
2 3
4 ] ;
115
frameLen = f s ;
116
app . stopButtonPressed = f a l s e ;
117
118
%writing
object
119
f i l e W r i t e r = dsp . AudioFileWriter ( ’tmpAudi . wav ’ , ’ FileFormat ’ , ’WAV
’ , ’ SampleRate ’ , f s ) ;
120
121
%reading
s i g n a l s :
noise+c l i c k
and
s i l e n c e+c l i c k
122
fileReader1_quiet = dsp . AudioFileReader ( ’ s i l e n c e C l i c k . wav ’ , ’
SamplesPerFrame ’ , frameLen ) ;
123
fileReader2_quiet = dsp . AudioFileReader ( ’ s i l e n c e . wav ’ , ’
SamplesPerFrame ’ , frameLen ) ;
124
fileReader3_quiet = dsp . AudioFileReader ( ’ s i l e n c e . wav ’ , ’
SamplesPerFrame ’ , frameLen ) ;
125
fileReader4_quiet = dsp . AudioFileReader ( ’ s i l e n c e . wav ’ , ’
SamplesPerFrame ’ , frameLen ) ;
126
127
fileReader1_noise = dsp . AudioFileReader ( ’ noiseTrack1 . wav ’ , ’
SamplesPerFrame ’ , frameLen ) ;
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:79==
70
APPENDIX C. MATLAB CODE
128
fileReader2_noise = dsp . AudioFileReader ( ’ noiseTrack2 . wav ’ , ’
SamplesPerFrame ’ , frameLen ) ;
129
fileReader3_noise = dsp . AudioFileReader ( ’ noiseTrack3 . wav ’ , ’
SamplesPerFrame ’ , frameLen ) ;
130
fileReader4_noise = dsp . AudioFileReader ( ’ noiseTrack4 . wav ’ , ’
SamplesPerFrame ’ , frameLen ) ;
131
132
%playrec
object
133
aPR = audioPlayerRecorder ( ’ SampleRate ’ , fs , ’ PlayerChannelMapping ’
, playChans , . . .
134
’ RecorderChannelMapping ’ , recChans , ’ Device ’ ,devName) ;
135
136
% i f
no values
are
entered :
137
i f
isempty ( app .T) && isempty ( app . Mic ) && isempty ( app .B) &&
isempty ( app .C)
138
fileReader1 = fileReader2_quiet ;
fileReader2 =
fileReader2_quiet ;
139
fileReader3 = fileReader2_quiet ;
fileReader4 =
fileReader2_quiet ;
140
fname = [ ’ recording_ ’ , datestr (now , ’dd_mm_yyyy_HH_MM_SS’ ) , ’ .
wav ’ ] ;
141
end
142
143
% i f
t r a i n i n g :
play
the
r i g h t
s i g n a l s
144
i f
~isempty ( app .T)
145
i f
strcmp ( app .T, ’ Quiet ’ )
146
fileReader1 = fileReader1_quiet ;
fileReader2 =
fileReader2_quiet ;
147
fileReader3 = fileReader3_quiet ;
fileReader4 =
fileReader4_quiet ;
148
e l s e i f
strcmp ( app .T, ’ Noise ’ )
149
fileReader1 = fileReader1_noise ;
fileReader2 =
fileReader2_noise ;
150
fileReader3 = fileReader3_noise ;
fileReader4 =
fileReader4_noise ;
151
end
152
fname = [ ’ pair ’ , num2str ( app .P) , ’ _training_ ’ , app .T, ’ . wav ’ ] ;
153
end
154
155
% i f
mic
t e s t i n g :
156
i f
~isempty ( app . Mic )
157
fileReader1 = fileReader1_quiet ;
fileReader2 =
fileReader2_quiet ;
158
fileReader3 = fileReader3_quiet ;
fileReader4 =
fileReader4_quiet ;
159
fname = [ ’ pair ’ , num2str ( app .P) , ’ _micTesting_ ’ , app . Mic , ’
_block_ ’ , num2str ( app .B) , ’ . wav ’ ] ;
160
end
161
162
% i f
r e a l
t e s t i n g
163
i f
~isempty ( app .B) && ~isempty ( app .C)
164
i f
strcmp ( app .C, ’ 1 ’ )
| |
strcmp ( app .C, ’ 2 ’ )
165
fileReader1 = fileReader1_quiet ;
fileReader2 =
fileReader2_quiet ;
166
fileReader3 = fileReader3_quiet ;
fileReader4 =
fileReader4_quiet ;
167
e l s e
168
fileReader1 = fileReader1_noise ;
fileReader2 =
fileReader2_noise ;
169
fileReader3 = fileReader3_noise ;
fileReader4 =
fileReader4_noise ;
170
end
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:80==
C.1. EXECUTION OF CONVERSATIONAL EXPERIMENT
71
171
fname = [ ’ pair ’ , num2str ( app .P) , ’ _block ’ , num2str ( app .B) , ’
_cond ’ , app .C, ’ . wav ’ ] ;
172
end
173
174
%a c t u a l l y
record
from
here
175
disp ( ’ recording now ’ )
176
app . StartButton . BackgroundColor = ’ g ’ ;
177
app . StartButton . Enable = f a l s e ;
178
app . ResetButton . Enable = f a l s e ;
179
app . StopButton . Enable = true ;
180
nStart = 1;
181
while ~app . stopButtonPressed
182
nEnd = nStart+frameLen −1;
183
184
audioToPlay1 = fileReader1 () ;
185
audioToPlay2 = fileReader2 () ;
186
audioToPlay3 = fileReader3 () ;
187
audioToPlay4 = fileReader4 () ;
188
audioFromDevice = [ audioToPlay1 ,
audioToPlay2 ,
audioToPlay3 ,
audioToPlay4 ] ;
189
190
acquiredAudio ( nStart : nEnd , : ) = aPR( audioFromDevice ) ;
191
%f i l e W r i t e r ( acquiredAudio ( nStart : nEnd , : ) ) ;
192
t ( nStart : nEnd) = [ nStart : nEnd ]/ f s ;
193
194
%plot
realtime
195
%hold ( app . UIAxes , ’ on ’ ) ;
196
i f
nEnd < frameLen∗6
197
plot ( app . UIAxes , t ( nStart : nEnd) , acquiredAudio ( nStart : nEnd
, : ) ) ;
198
xlim ( app . UIAxes , [ t ( nStart )
t (nEnd) ] )
199
e l s e
200
plot ( app . UIAxes , t (nEnd−frameLen ∗5:nEnd) , acquiredAudio (
nEnd−frameLen ∗5:nEnd , : ) ) ;
201
xlim ( app . UIAxes , [ t (nEnd−frameLen ∗5)
t (nEnd) ] )
202
end
203
nStart = nEnd+1;
204
drawnow ;
205 %
lh =
legend ( app . UIAxes , ’ Talker
1 ’ , ’ Talker
2 ’ , ’ Camera CH1
’ , ’ Camera CH2’ ) ;
206 %
app . UIAxes . UserData = lh ;
207
%legend ( app . UIaxes , ’ f i r s t _ l a b e l ’ , ’ second_label ’ )
208
end
209
f i l e W r i t e r ( acquiredAudio () ) ;
210
app . StartButton . BackgroundColor = [ 0 . 9 6 , 0 . 9 6 , 0 . 9 6 ] ;
211
app . recordedAudio = acquiredAudio ;
212
213
r e l e a s e ( f i l e W r i t e r )
214
r e l e a s e (aPR)
215
disp ( ’ objects
r e l e a s e d ’ )
216
217
% write
wavefile
218
%fname = [ ’ recording_ ’ , datestr (now , ’dd_mm_yyyy_HH_MM_SS’ ) , ’ . wav
’ ] ;
219
audiowrite ( fname , acquiredAudio , fs , ’ BitsPerSample ’ ,24) ;
220
app . StartButton . Enable = true ;
221
end
222
223
% Button pushed
function :
StopButton
224
function
StopButtonPushed (app ,
event )
225
app . stopButtonPressed = true ;
226
app . ResetButton . Enable =true ;
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:81==
72
APPENDIX C. MATLAB CODE
227
app . StopButton . Enable = f a l s e ;
228
disp ( ’ recording
stopped ’ )
229
end
230
231
% Button pushed
function :
ResetButton
232
function
ResetButtonPushed (app ,
event )
233
app . TrainingDropDown . Value = ’ ’ ;
app .T = [ ] ;
234
app . MictestingDropDown . Value = ’ ’ ;
app . Mic = [ ] ;
235
app . BlockDropDown . Value = ’ ’ ;
app .B = [ ] ;
236
app . ConditionDropDown . Value = ’ ’ ;
app .C = [ ] ;
237
end
238
239
% Callback
function
240
function
CheckBoxValueChanged (app ,
event )
241
value = app . OnlytestrunCheckBox . Value ;
242
app . MicBlock = value ;
243
end
244
245
% Changes arrangement
of
the app based on UIFigure
width
246
function
updateAppLayout (app ,
event )
247
currentFigureWidth = app . UIFigure . Position (3) ;
248
i f ( currentFigureWidth <= app . onePanelWidth )
249
% Change to a 2x1
grid
250
app . GridLayout . RowHeight = {580 ,
580};
251
app . GridLayout . ColumnWidth = { ’ 1x ’ };
252
app . RightPanel . Layout .Row = 2;
253
app . RightPanel . Layout . Column = 1;
254
e l s e
255
% Change to a 1x2
grid
256
app . GridLayout . RowHeight = { ’ 1x ’ };
257
app . GridLayout . ColumnWidth = {292 ,
’ 1x ’ };
258
app . RightPanel . Layout .Row = 1;
259
app . RightPanel . Layout . Column = 2;
260
end
261
end
262
end
263
264
% Component
i n i t i a l i z a t i o n
265
methods ( Access = private )
266
267
% Create
UIFigure and components
268
function
createComponents ( app )
269
270
% Create
UIFigure and hide
u n t i l
a l l
components
are
created
271
app . UIFigure = u i f i g u r e ( ’ V i s i b l e ’ ,
’ o f f ’ ) ;
272
app . UIFigure . AutoResizeChildren = ’ o f f ’ ;
273
app . UIFigure . Position = [100
100 967
5 8 0 ] ;
274
app . UIFigure .Name = ’UI Figure ’ ;
275
app . UIFigure . SizeChangedFcn = createCallbackFcn (app ,
@updateAppLayout ,
true ) ;
276
277
% Create
GridLayout
278
app . GridLayout = uig ri d la yo ut ( app . UIFigure ) ;
279
app . GridLayout . ColumnWidth = {292 ,
’ 1x ’ };
280
app . GridLayout . RowHeight = { ’ 1x ’ };
281
app . GridLayout . ColumnSpacing = 0;
282
app . GridLayout . RowSpacing = 0;
283
app . GridLayout . Padding = [0
0 0
0 ] ;
284
app . GridLayout . S c r o l l a b l e = ’ on ’ ;
285
286
% Create
LeftPanel
287
app . LeftPanel = uipanel ( app . GridLayout ) ;
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:82==
C.1. EXECUTION OF CONVERSATIONAL EXPERIMENT
73
288
app . LeftPanel . Layout .Row = 1;
289
app . LeftPanel . Layout . Column = 1;
290
291
% Create
TrainingsessionsLabel
292
app . TrainingsessionsLabel = u i l a b e l ( app . LeftPanel ) ;
293
app . TrainingsessionsLabel . FontSize = 18;
294
app . TrainingsessionsLabel . FontWeight = ’ bold ’ ;
295
app . TrainingsessionsLabel . Position = [20
358 154
2 5 ] ;
296
app . TrainingsessionsLabel . Text = ’ Training
s e s s i o n s ’ ;
297
298
% Create
MicrecordingsLabel
299
app . MicrecordingsLabel = u i l a b e l ( app . LeftPanel ) ;
300
app . MicrecordingsLabel . FontSize = 18;
301
app . MicrecordingsLabel . FontWeight = ’ bold ’ ;
302
app . MicrecordingsLabel . Position = [20
270 134
2 5 ] ;
303
app . MicrecordingsLabel . Text = ’ Mic
recordings ’ ;
304
305
% Create
ExperimentLabel
306
app . ExperimentLabel = u i l a b e l ( app . LeftPanel ) ;
307
app . ExperimentLabel . FontSize = 18;
308
app . ExperimentLabel . FontWeight = ’ bold ’ ;
309
app . ExperimentLabel . Position = [21
151 104
2 4 ] ;
310
app . ExperimentLabel . Text = ’ Experiment ’ ;
311
312
% Create
ResetButton
313
app . ResetButton = uibutton ( app . LeftPanel ,
’ push ’ ) ;
314
app . ResetButton . ButtonPushedFcn = createCallbackFcn (app ,
@ResetButtonPushed ,
true ) ;
315
app . ResetButton . BackgroundColor = [0.8745
0.9137
0 . 9 2 1 6 ] ;
316
app . ResetButton . FontSize = 22;
317
app . ResetButton . Position = [208
17 71
3 5 ] ;
318
app . ResetButton . Text = ’ Reset ’ ;
319
320
% Create
CalibrationLabel
321
app . CalibrationLabel = u i l a b e l ( app . LeftPanel ) ;
322
app . CalibrationLabel . FontSize = 18;
323
app . CalibrationLabel . FontWeight = ’ bold ’ ;
324
app . CalibrationLabel . Position = [20
442 106
2 5 ] ;
325
app . CalibrationLabel . Text = ’ Calibration ’ ;
326
327
% Create
OnlytestrunCheckBox
328
app . OnlytestrunCheckBox = uicheckbox ( app . LeftPanel ) ;
329
app . OnlytestrunCheckBox . Text = ’ Only
t e s t
run ’ ;
330
app . OnlytestrunCheckBox . FontSize = 20;
331
app . OnlytestrunCheckBox . Position = [78
536 136
2 4 ] ;
332
333
% Create
PairEditFieldLabel
334
app . PairEditFieldLabel = u i l a b e l ( app . LeftPanel ) ;
335
app . PairEditFieldLabel . FontSize = 18;
336
app . PairEditFieldLabel . FontWeight = ’ bold ’ ;
337
app . PairEditFieldLabel . Position = [20
490 45
2 4 . 9 8 ] ;
338
app . PairEditFieldLabel . Text = ’ Pair : ’ ;
339
340
% Create
PairEditField
341
app . PairEditField = u i e d i t f i e l d ( app . LeftPanel ,
’ numeric ’ ) ;
342
app . PairEditField . ValueChangedFcn = createCallbackFcn (app ,
@PairEditFieldValueChanged2 ,
true ) ;
343
app . PairEditField . FontSize = 16;
344
app . PairEditField . Position = [80
493 38
2 2 ] ;
345
346
% Create TrainingDropDownLabel
347
app . TrainingDropDownLabel = u i l a b e l ( app . LeftPanel ) ;
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:83==
74
APPENDIX C. MATLAB CODE
348
app . TrainingDropDownLabel . HorizontalAlignment = ’ r i g h t ’ ;
349
app . TrainingDropDownLabel . FontSize = 16;
350
app . TrainingDropDownLabel . Position = [51
325 66
2 2 ] ;
351
app . TrainingDropDownLabel . Text = ’ Training : ’ ;
352
353
% Create TrainingDropDown
354
app . TrainingDropDown = uidropdown ( app . LeftPanel ) ;
355
app . TrainingDropDown . Items = { ’ ’ ,
’ Quiet ’ ,
’ Noise ’ };
356
app . TrainingDropDown . ValueChangedFcn = createCallbackFcn (app ,
@TrainingDropDownValueChanged ,
true ) ;
357
app . TrainingDropDown . FontSize = 16;
358
app . TrainingDropDown . Position = [131
325 103
2 2 ] ;
359
app . TrainingDropDown . Value = ’ ’ ;
360
361
% Create
MictestingDropDownLabel
362
app . MictestingDropDownLabel = u i l a b e l ( app . LeftPanel ) ;
363
app . MictestingDropDownLabel . HorizontalAlignment = ’ r i g h t ’ ;
364
app . MictestingDropDownLabel . FontSize = 16;
365
app . MictestingDropDownLabel . Position = [27
236 90
2 2 ] ;
366
app . MictestingDropDownLabel . Text = ’ Mic
t e s t i n g : ’ ;
367
368
% Create
MictestingDropDown
369
app . MictestingDropDown = uidropdown ( app . LeftPanel ) ;
370
app . MictestingDropDown . Items = { ’ ’ ,
’ S i l e n c e ’ ,
’ Talker 1 ’ ,
’
Talker 2 ’ };
371
app . MictestingDropDown . ValueChangedFcn = createCallbackFcn (app ,
@MictestingDropDownValueChanged ,
true ) ;
372
app . MictestingDropDown . FontSize = 16;
373
app . MictestingDropDown . Position = [132
236 103
2 2 ] ;
374
app . MictestingDropDown . Value = ’ ’ ;
375
376
% Create BlockDropDownLabel
377
app . BlockDropDownLabel = u i l a b e l ( app . LeftPanel ) ;
378
app . BlockDropDownLabel . HorizontalAlignment = ’ r i g h t ’ ;
379
app . BlockDropDownLabel . FontSize = 16;
380
app . BlockDropDownLabel . Position = [65
121 51
2 2 ] ;
381
app . BlockDropDownLabel . Text = ’ Block : ’ ;
382
383
% Create BlockDropDown
384
app . BlockDropDown = uidropdown ( app . LeftPanel ) ;
385
app . BlockDropDown . Items = { ’ ’ ,
’ 1 ’ ,
’ 2 ’ };
386
app . BlockDropDown . ValueChangedFcn = createCallbackFcn (app ,
@BlockDropDownValueChanged ,
true ) ;
387
app . BlockDropDown . FontSize = 16;
388
app . BlockDropDown . Position = [131
121 106
2 2 ] ;
389
app . BlockDropDown . Value = ’ ’ ;
390
391
% Create ConditionDropDownLabel
392
app . ConditionDropDownLabel = u i l a b e l ( app . LeftPanel ) ;
393
app . ConditionDropDownLabel . HorizontalAlignment = ’ r i g h t ’ ;
394
app . ConditionDropDownLabel . FontSize = 16;
395
app . ConditionDropDownLabel . Position = [39
86 79
2 2 ] ;
396
app . ConditionDropDownLabel . Text = ’ Condition : ’ ;
397
398
% Create ConditionDropDown
399
app . ConditionDropDown = uidropdown ( app . LeftPanel ) ;
400
app . ConditionDropDown . Items = { ’ ’ ,
’ 1 ’ ,
’ 2 ’ ,
’ 3 ’ ,
’ 4 ’ ,
’ 5 ’ };
401
app . ConditionDropDown . ValueChangedFcn = createCallbackFcn (app ,
@ConditionDropDownValueChanged ,
true ) ;
402
app . ConditionDropDown . FontSize = 16;
403
app . ConditionDropDown . Position = [130
86 107
2 2 ] ;
404
app . ConditionDropDown . Value = ’ ’ ;
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:84==
C.1. EXECUTION OF CONVERSATIONAL EXPERIMENT
75
405
406
% Create
MicrophoneLabel
407
app . MicrophoneLabel = u i l a b e l ( app . LeftPanel ) ;
408
app . MicrophoneLabel . HorizontalAlignment = ’ r i g h t ’ ;
409
app . MicrophoneLabel . FontSize = 16;
410
app . MicrophoneLabel . Position = [20
409 96
2 2 ] ;
411
app . MicrophoneLabel . Text = ’ Microphone : ’ ;
412
413
% Create MicrophoneDropDown
414
app . MicrophoneDropDown = uidropdown ( app . LeftPanel ) ;
415
app . MicrophoneDropDown . Items = { ’ ’ ,
’ Quiet ’ ,
’ Noise ’ };
416
app . MicrophoneDropDown . FontSize = 16;
417
app . MicrophoneDropDown . Position = [130
409 105
2 2 ] ;
418
app . MicrophoneDropDown . Value = ’ ’ ;
419
420
% Create BlockDropDown_2Label
421
app . BlockDropDown_2Label = u i l a b e l ( app . LeftPanel ) ;
422
app . BlockDropDown_2Label . HorizontalAlignment = ’ r i g h t ’ ;
423
app . BlockDropDown_2Label . FontSize = 16;
424
app . BlockDropDown_2Label . Position = [64
203 51
2 2 ] ;
425
app . BlockDropDown_2Label . Text = ’ Block : ’ ;
426
427
% Create BlockDropDown_2
428
app . BlockDropDown_2 = uidropdown ( app . LeftPanel ) ;
429
app . BlockDropDown_2 . Items = { ’ ’ ,
’ 1 ’ ,
’ 2 ’ };
430
app . BlockDropDown_2 . FontSize = 16;
431
app . BlockDropDown_2 . Position = [130
203 105
2 2 ] ;
432
app . BlockDropDown_2 . Value = ’ ’ ;
433
434
% Create
RightPanel
435
app . RightPanel = uipanel ( app . GridLayout ) ;
436
app . RightPanel . Layout .Row = 1;
437
app . RightPanel . Layout . Column = 2;
438
439
% Create UIAxes
440
app . UIAxes = uiaxes ( app . RightPanel ) ;
441
t i t l e ( app . UIAxes ,
’ Recorded
s i g n a l ’ )
442
xlabel ( app . UIAxes ,
’ time
[ s ] ’ )
443
ylabel ( app . UIAxes ,
’ amplitude ’ )
444
app . UIAxes . PlotBoxAspectRatio = [1.82051282051282 1
1 ] ;
445
app . UIAxes . FontSize = 16;
446
app . UIAxes .YLim = [−1
1 ] ;
447
app . UIAxes . Position = [44
135 587
4 0 3 ] ;
448
449
% Create
StopButton
450
app . StopButton = uibutton ( app . RightPanel ,
’ push ’ ) ;
451
app . StopButton . ButtonPushedFcn = createCallbackFcn (app ,
@StopButtonPushed ,
true ) ;
452
app . StopButton . BackgroundColor = [1
0
0 ] ;
453
app . StopButton . FontSize = 22;
454
app . StopButton . Enable = ’ o f f ’ ;
455
app . StopButton . Position = [425
38 108
6 3 ] ;
456
app . StopButton . Text = ’ Stop ’ ;
457
458
% Create
StartButton
459
app . StartButton = uibutton ( app . RightPanel ,
’ push ’ ) ;
460
app . StartButton . ButtonPushedFcn = createCallbackFcn (app ,
@StartButtonPushed ,
true ) ;
461
app . StartButton . BackgroundColor = [0.0863
0.7804
0 . 0 8 6 3 ] ;
462
app . StartButton . FontSize = 22;
463
app . StartButton . Position = [186
37 108
6 3 ] ;
464
app . StartButton . Text = ’ Start ’ ;
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:85==
76
APPENDIX C. MATLAB CODE
465
466
% Create RecLampLabel
467
app . RecLampLabel = u i l a b e l ( app . RightPanel ) ;
468
app . RecLampLabel . HorizontalAlignment = ’ r i g h t ’ ;
469
app . RecLampLabel . Position = [18
545 60
2 3 ] ;
470
app . RecLampLabel . Text = ’ Rec ’ ;
471
472
% Create RecLamp
473
app . RecLamp = uilamp ( app . RightPanel ) ;
474
app . RecLamp . Position = [93
546 20
2 0 ] ;
475
476
% Show the
f i g u r e
a f t e r
a l l
components
are
created
477
app . UIFigure . V i s i b l e = ’ on ’ ;
478
end
479
end
480
481
% App creation
and
d e l e t i o n
482
methods ( Access = public )
483
484
% Construct app
485
function
app = audioPlayerRecorderApp
486
487
% Create
UIFigure and components
488
createComponents ( app )
489
490
% Register
the app with App Designer
491
registerApp (app ,
app . UIFigure )
492
493
i f
nargout == 0
494
c l e a r
app
495
end
496
end
497
498
% Code that
executes
before
app
d e l e t i o n
499
function
d e l e t e ( app )
500
501
% Delete
UIFigure when app
i s
deleted
502
d e l e t e ( app . UIFigure )
503
end
504
end
505 end
Listing C.1: Application used for the execution of the conversational experiment.
C.2
Processing of Recorded Speech Signals
The main script used in this thesis is shown below, and as seen multiple tools were
used in the processing of the recorded conversations. Initially a voice activity detection
algorithm was used together with a classiﬁcation of talker transitions. Both algorithms
from Sørensen [2017]. In the application of the VAD in this connection, the VAI array
was set to zero if the mean power of the active portion was below three times the power
threshold instead of the original setting neglecting portions with less twice the threshold.
Additionally, a function calculating the speech level of each talker was used. This function
further appears in the following lists.
1 % This
s c r i p t
performs VAD a n a l y s i s
on the
recorded
data .
The outputs
of
2 % the VAD and CSC are
saved
in
the
v a r i a b l e
’CH’ .
3
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:86==
C.2. PROCESSING OF RECORDED SPEECH SIGNALS
77
4 % OBS,
remember to
run
s c r i p t
startup .m before
the main
s c r i p t !
5
6 %% I n i t i a l i z a t i o n
7
8 % Load
i n d i v i d u a l
powerthresholds
f o r
a l l
recordings
9 load ( ’ powerThres . mat ’ )
10
11 %% Perform
a n a l y s i s
12
13 f o r n = 1: nTestConditions
14
f o r
i = 1: nTestPairs
15
f o r
k = 1: nRepetitions
16
% Load audio
17
dirName = [ dirEdited
f i l e s e p
’ pair ’
num2str ( i )
f i l e s e p
’ pair ’ . . .
18
num2str ( i )
’ _block ’
num2str (k)
’_cond ’
num2str (n)
’ _cropped . wav ’
] ;
19
20
[ signal ,
Fs ] = audioread ( dirName ) ;
21
22
f o r
j = 1: nTalkers
23
% Setting
the
i n d i v i d u a l
powerThreshold
24
powerThresh = powerThres (n , i , k , j ) ;
25
26
% Voice
Activity
Detection
(VAD)
27
[ CHarray{n , i , k , j } ,
t {n , i , k , j } , on{n , i , k , j } ,
o f f {n , i , k , j } , . . .
28
tRes ] = voiceActivityDetection ( s i g n a l ( : , j ) ,
. . .
29
Fs ,
powerThresh ,
blockSize ,
blockSkip ,
plotVAD) ;
30
31
% Speech
l e v e l
c a l c u l a t i o n
32
from = on{n , i , k , j };
to = o f f {n , i , k , j };
time = t {n , i , k , j };
33
avgSpeechLeveldBSPL (n , i , k , j ) = . . .
34
calculateSpeechLeveldBSPL ( s i g n a l ( : , j ) , Fs , j ,
from ,
to ,
time ) ;
35
end
36
% Communicative
State
C l a s s i f i c a t i o n
(CSC)
37
CHarr = [ CHarray{n , i , k ,1} ’
CHarray{n , i , k , 2 } ’ ] ;
38
CH{n , i , k} = CSC(CHarr ,
nTalkers ,
blockSize ,
tRes ) ;
39
40
% indexing : CH{n , i , k}{kk}
41
end
42
i
43
end
44
n
45 end
46 %% Save
r e s u l t s
47 % saveDir = [ ’ results_newCSC_ ’
datestr (now , ’dd_mm_yyyy_HH_MM_SS’ )
’ . mat ’ ] ;
48 % save ( saveDir )
Listing C.2: Main script for handling the recorded conversations.
C.2.1
Calculation of Speech Level in dB SPL
1 function
avgSpeechLeveldBSPL = calculateSpeechLeveldBSPL ( sig ,
Fs ,
talker ,
from ,
to ,
t )
2 % CALCULATESPEECHLEVELDBSPL
3 %
Calculates
the
speech
l e v e l
in dB SPL of
each
of
the
t a l k e r s
recorded
4 %
in
the
experiment .
The
l e v e l
i s
c a l c u l a t e d
as
the mean value
of
the
5 %
l e v e l
of
a l l VAD segments
in
the
speech
s i g n a l .
The
l e v e l
i s
i n i t i a l l y
6 %
ca l cu la te d
at
the
cheek
of
the
t a l k e r
the
f i n a l
r e s u l t
i s
an estimate
7 %
of
the
l e v e l
at
the
receiver ’ s
ear .
8 %
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:87==
78
APPENDIX C. MATLAB CODE
9 %
Inputs :
10 %
−s i g :
waveform
of
t a l k e r
[1 x∗double ]
11 %
−Fs :
sampling
rate
[1 x1 double ]
12 %
−from :
sample
idx
f o r
a c t i v i t y
onset
[1 x∗double ]
13 %
−to :
sample
idx
f o r
a c t i v i t y
o f f s e t
[1 x∗double ]
14 %
−t :
time
array
with mid−points
of
each
of
the
15 %
a n a l y s i s
windows
[1 x∗double ]
16
17 %
Outputs :
18 %
−avgSpeechLeveldBSPL :
s p e e c h l e v e l
of
the
t a l k e r
estimated
at
the
ear
19 %
of
the
r e c e i v e r
[1 x∗
l o g i c a l ]
20 %
21 % AUTHOR:
22 % Sine Palm Gummesen
23 % sine_palm@live . dk
24 % Version :
v1 . 1 ,
June 2020
25
26 %% I n i t i l i z a i t o n
27 load ( ’ I n i t i a l i z a t i o n . mat ’ ) ;
28
29 % Setting
one
o v e r a l l
powerthreshold
30 powerThresh = 2.5 e −7;
31
32 %% Calculate
a mean convertion
value
f o r
each mic ( only done once and saved )
33 calculateConvVals = f a l s e ; % set
to
true
to
c a l c u l a t e
and save new convVals
34 i f
calculateConvVals
35
f o r
i = 6:10
36
f o r
j = 1: nTalkers
37
fileName = [ dirEdited
f i l e s e p
’ pair ’
num2str ( i )
f i l e s e p
’ pair ’
. . .
38
num2str ( i )
’ _micTesting_Talker
’
num2str ( j )
’ _calibrate . wav ’
] ;
39
[ mic ,
Fs ] = audioread ( fileName ) ;
40
micCalibration ( i −5, j ) = 20∗log10 ( rms ( mic ) ) ;
41
end
42
end
43
pistonPhone = 89; % Registred dBSPL value
from the
pistonPhone
44
convVal = [ pistonPhone−mean( micCalibration ( : , 1 ) ) . . .
45
pistonPhone−mean( micCalibration ( : , 2 ) ) ] ; % Converting
values
f o r
mic1
and mic2
46
47
save ( ’RMS_to_dBconvValues . mat ’ , ’ convVal ’ )
48 end
49 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
50
51 %% Calculate
the
attenuation
from
t a l k e r
to
r e c e i v e r
f o r
each mic ( only done
once and saved )
52 % Find a constant
f a c t o r
of
attenuation
from
t a l k e r
to
l i s t e n e r
from the
53 % s i l e n c e
"hey my name
i s "
recordings . Can be
c a l c u l a t e d
once ,
saved and
54 % loaded when needed .
55 calculateAttvVals = f a l s e ;
56 i f
calculateAttvVals
57
f o r
i = 1: nTestPairs
58
f o r
k = 1: nRepetitions
59
f o r
j = 1: nTalkers
60
fileName = [ dirEdited
f i l e s e p
’ pair ’
num2str ( i )
f i l e s e p
’
pair ’
. . .
61
num2str ( i )
’ _micTesting_Talker
’
num2str ( j ) . . .
62
’ _block ’
num2str (k)
’ . wav ’ ] ;
63
[ signal ,
Fs ] = audioread ( fileName ) ;
64
65
[~ ,
t ,
on ,
off ,
~] = voiceActivityDetection ( s i g n a l ( : , j ) , . . .
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:88==
C.3. CALIBRATION AND VARIABILITY OF TALKER LEVELS
79
66
Fs ,
powerThresh ,
blockSize ,
blockSkip ,
true ) ;
67
68
i f
j == 1;
r = 2;
e l s e ;
r = 1;
end
69
f o r
a = 1: length ( on )
70
att (a , 1 ) = . . .
71
(20∗log10 ( rms ( s i g n a l ( t ( on ( a ) ) ∗Fs : t ( o f f ( a ) ) ∗Fs , j ) ) ) )
. . .
72
−(20∗log10 ( rms ( s i g n a l ( t ( on ( a ) ) ∗Fs : t ( o f f ( a ) ) ∗Fs , r ) ) )
) ; % l e v e l
of
the
t a l k e r s
speech on the
receiver ’ s mic
73
end
74
attenuation ( i , j , k) = mean( att ) ;
75
end
76
end
77
end
78
attVal = [ mean(mean(mean( attenuation ( : , 1 , : ) ) ) ) mean(mean(mean(
attenuation ( : , 2 , : ) ) ) ) ] ;
79
save ( ’ attenuationValuesMics . mat ’ , ’ attVal ’ )
80 end
81 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
82
83 %% Calculating
the
average
speech
l e v e l
of
the
input
s i g n a l
84 % Load convertion and attenuation
values
85 load ( ’RMS_to_dBconvValues . mat ’ )
86 load ( ’ attenuationValuesMics . mat ’ )
87
88 %RMSspeechSegment = zeros ( length ( from ) ,1) ; % p r e a l l o c a t i n g
89 f o r
idx = 1: length ( from )
90
RMSspeechSegment ( idx , 1 ) = 20∗log10 ( rms ( s i g (( t ( from ( idx ) ) ∗Fs ) : ( t ( to ( idx ) )
∗Fs ) ,1) ) ) ;
91 end
92 avgSpeechLevel = mean( RMSspeechSegment ) ;
93
94 % Convert
the
speech
l e v e l
to dBSPL estimated
at
the
ear
of
the
r e c e i v e r
95 avgSpeechLeveldBSPL = avgSpeechLevel + convVal ( t a l k e r ) −attVal ( t a l k e r ) ;
96
97 end
Listing C.3:
Calculation of speech level in dB SPL from the detected speech segments, the
calibration ﬁles from piston phone and the recordings of the participants’ presentations prior to
each of the two sessions.
C.3
Calibration and Variability of Talker Levels
In the application of the VAD in this connection, the VAI array was set to zero if the
mean power of the active portion was below three times the power threshold instead of the
original setting neglecting portions with less twice the threshold.
1 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
2 % Experiment
1:
Influence
of
angle
d i f f e r e n c e s
(7 x5 )
3 %
( r e c e i v e r
p o s i t i o n
order :
0 , 45L,
90L,
45R 90R)
4 %
( t a l k e r
p o s i t i o n
order :
0 , 90R,
45R,
0 , 45L,
90L,
0)
5
6 % Experiment
2:
Influence
of
distance
(1 x3 )
7 %
Position
of
both
t a l k e r
and
r e c e i v e r :
Normal distance ,
separate ,
c l o s e
8
9 % Experiment
3:
Influence
of
blockage
(1 x5 )
10 %
TD/RD, TU/RD, TU/RU, TD/RU, TD/RD (T=TALKER, R=RECEIVER, U=UP, D=DOWN)
11
12 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
13 % For each
pair ,
each
of
the
three
experiments
are
recorded
twice
( once
f o r
14 % each
t a l k e r ) .
15 % For each
conversation ,
the
d i f f e r e n t
segments
are
found and the rms are
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:89==
80
APPENDIX C. MATLAB CODE
16 % ca l c u l at ed
f o r
each segment .
The
r e s u l t
i s
the
converted
to dB SPL using
17 % the
c a l i b r a t i o n
of
the
microphones
with
the
pistonphone .
18 % In
the
f i r s t
experiment
the 0
p o s i t i o n
of
the
t a l k e r
were measured
three
19 % times ,
and in
the
f i n a l
result ,
the mean value
of
the
three
measurements
20 % are
used .
Further ,
the
recordings
were
in
the
order
of
0 , 90R,
45R,
0 ,
21 % 45L,
90L and 0 −thus ,
the
f i n a l
r e s u l t
matrix
i s
f l i p e d
in
order
to
22 % have the
r e s u l t s
expressed
as
the
t a l k e r
i s
moving from
l e f t
to
r i g h t .
23
24
25 % OBS!
Pair
1 ,
t a l k e r
2 ,
case
’90R’
and
pair
1 ,
t a l k e r
1 ,
case 3
26 % OBS!
change
silThresh
value
in
voice
a c t i v i t y
detection
to
700ms
27
28 %% I n i t i a l i z a t i o n
29 c l o s e
a l l ;
c l e a r
a l l ;
c l c
30
31 dirRec = ’ recordings ’ ;
32 dirTools = ’ functions ’ ;
33 addpath ( genpath ( dirRec ) , genpath ( dirTools ) ) ;
34
35 % Number of
t e s t
p a i r s
36 nTestPairs = 3;
37
38 % Number of
t a l k e r s
39 t a l k e r s = { ’A’ ,
’B ’ };
40 nTalkers = numel ( t a l k e r s ) ;
41
42 % Load " conditions "/ p o s i t i o n s
43 load ( ’ p o s i t i o n s . mat ’ )
44
45 % Setting
s i z e
of
block
46 blockSize = 8e −3;
47 blockSkip = 4e −3; % also
c a l l e d
’ stepSize ’
48
49 %% Run 1:
t e s t
of
angles / d i r e c t i o n
50 % Plot VAD
51 plotVAD = f a l s e ;
52 powerThresh = 5.4 e −9; % Suits
f o r
a l l
p a i r s
53
54 % Number of
t e s t
conditions
55 nTestConditions = numel ( p o s i t i o n s {1}) ; % ’90L’ , ’ 4 5L’ , ’ 0 ’ , ’ 4 5R’ , ’ 90R’
56 talkerPos = { ’ 0 ’ , ’ 90R ’ , ’ 45R ’ , ’ 0 ’ , ’ 45L ’ , ’ 90L ’ , ’ 0 ’ };
57
58 f o r n = 1: nTestConditions % NOTE n
i s
the
r e c e i v e r
p o s i t i o n s
59
f o r
i = 1: nTestPairs
60
f o r
j = 1: nTalkers
61
fileName = [ dirRec
f i l e s e p
’ pair ’
num2str ( i )
f i l e s e p
. . .
62
’ pair ’
num2str ( i )
’_’
t a l k e r s { j }
’ _talk_ ’
p o s i t i o n s {1 ,1}{n}
’ . wav ’ ] ;
63
[ signal ,
Fs ] = audioread ( fileName ) ;
64
65
[~ ,
t ,
on ,
off ,
~] = voiceActivityDetection ( s i g n a l ( : , j ) , . . .
66
Fs ,
powerThresh ,
blockSize ,
blockSkip ,
plotVAD) ;
67
68
i f
j == 1;
r = 2;
e l s e ;
r = 1;
end
69
f o r
a = 1: length ( on )
70
attenuation {a , i , j }{n} = . . .
71
(20∗log10 ( rms ( s i g n a l ( t ( on ( a ) ) ∗Fs : t ( o f f ( a ) ) ∗Fs , j ) ) ) ) . . .
72
−(20∗log10 ( rms ( s i g n a l ( t ( on ( a ) ) ∗Fs : t ( o f f ( a ) ) ∗Fs , r ) ) ) ) ;
% l e v e l
of
the
t a l k e r s
speech on the
receiver ’ s mic
73
end
74
end
75
end
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:90==
C.3. CALIBRATION AND VARIABILITY OF TALKER LEVELS
81
76 end
77 % Find mean of
the
three
0
p o s i t i o n s
78 f o r n = 1: nTestConditions
79
f o r
i = 1: nTestPairs
80
f o r
j = 1: nTalkers
81
attenuation {1 , i , j }{n} = mean ( [ attenuation {1 , i , j }{n } ; . . .
82
attenuation {4 , i , j }{n } ; . . .
83
attenuation {7 , i , j }{n } ] ) ;
84
end
85
end
86 end
87
88 attenuation = [ attenuation ( 1 : 3 , : , : , : ) ; attenuation ( 5 : 6 , : , : , : ) ] ;
89
90 % Define
absolute
and
r e l a t i v e
attenuations
91 attenuationAbs = attenuation ;
92
93 f o r n = 1: nTestConditions
94
f o r
i = 1: nTestPairs
95
f o r
j = 1: nTalkers
96
f o r
a = 1:5
97
attenuationRelative {a , i , j }{n} = attenuation {a , i , j }{n}−
attenuation {1 , i , j }{n };
98
end
99
end
100
end
101 end
102
103 save ( ’ attAngles . mat ’ , ’ attenuationAbs ’ , ’ attenuationRelative ’ )
104
105 %% Run2 :
t e s t
of
blockage
106 % Plot VAD
107 plotVAD = f a l s e ;
108 powerThresh = 3e −8; % Suits
f o r
a l l
p a i r s
109
110 f o r
i = 1: nTestPairs
111
f o r
j = 1: nTalkers
112
fileName = [ dirRec
f i l e s e p
’ pair ’
num2str ( i )
f i l e s e p
. . .
113
’ pair ’
num2str ( i )
’_’
t a l k e r s { j }
’ _talk_blocked . wav ’ ] ;
114
[ signal ,
Fs ] = audioread ( fileName ) ;
115
116
[~ ,
t ,
on ,
off ,
~] = voiceActivityDetection ( s i g n a l ( : , j ) , . . .
117
Fs ,
powerThresh ,
blockSize ,
blockSkip ,
plotVAD) ;
118
119
i f
j == 1;
r = 2;
e l s e ;
r = 1;
end
120
f o r
a = 1: length ( on )
121
attenuation (a , i , j ) = . . .
122
(20∗log10 ( rms ( s i g n a l ( t ( on ( a ) ) ∗Fs : t ( o f f ( a ) ) ∗Fs , j ) ) ) ) . . .
123
−(20∗log10 ( rms ( s i g n a l ( t ( on ( a ) ) ∗Fs : t ( o f f ( a ) ) ∗Fs , r ) ) ) ) ; %
l e v e l
of
the
t a l k e r s
speech on the
receiver ’ s mic
124
end
125
end
126 end
127 %
128 attenuationAbs ( 1 , : , : ) = mean( attenuation ( [ 1
5 ] , : , : ) ) ;
129 attenuationAbs ( 2 : 4 , : , : ) = attenuation ( 2 : 4 , : , : ) ;
130 attenuationRelative ( : , : , : ) = attenuationAbs ( : , : , : ) −attenuationAbs ( 1 , : , : ) ;
131 save ( ’ attBlock . mat ’ , ’ attenuationAbs ’ , ’ attenuationRelative ’ )
132
133 %% Run3 :
t e s t
of
distance
134 % Plot VAD
135 plotVAD = f a l s e ;
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:91==
82
APPENDIX C. MATLAB CODE
136 powerThresh = 3e −8; % Suits
f o r
a l l
p a i r s
137
138 f o r
i = 1: nTestPairs
139
f o r
j = 1: nTalkers
140
fileName = [ dirRec
f i l e s e p
’ pair ’
num2str ( i )
f i l e s e p
. . .
141
’ pair ’
num2str ( i )
’_’
t a l k e r s { j }
’ _talk_back_for . wav ’ ] ;
142
[ signal ,
Fs ] = audioread ( fileName ) ;
143
144
[~ ,
t ,
on ,
off ,
~] = voiceActivityDetection ( s i g n a l ( : , j ) , . . .
145
Fs ,
powerThresh ,
blockSize ,
blockSkip ,
plotVAD) ;
146
147
i f
j == 1;
r = 2;
e l s e ;
r = 1;
end
148
f o r
a = 1: length ( on )
149
attenuation (a , i , j ) = . . .
150
(20∗log10 ( rms ( s i g n a l ( t ( on ( a ) ) ∗Fs : t ( o f f ( a ) ) ∗Fs , j ) ) ) ) . . .
151
−(20∗log10 ( rms ( s i g n a l ( t ( on ( a ) ) ∗Fs : t ( o f f ( a ) ) ∗Fs , r ) ) ) ) ; %
l e v e l
of
the
t a l k e r s
speech on the
receiver ’ s mic
152
end
153
end
154 end
155 attenuationAbs = attenuation ;
156 attenuationRelative ( : , : , : ) = attenuationAbs ( : , : , : ) −attenuationAbs ( 1 , : , : ) ;
157
158 save ( ’ attDist . mat ’ , ’ attenuationAbs ’ , ’ attenuationRelative ’ )
Listing C.4: Main script for handling the recorded conversations in the pilot study on calibraiton
of talker levels.
Technical University of Denmark
