==PAGE:1==
Route Optimizarion for Cargo Vessels 
with Wind Assisted Propulsion 
Systems 
Esperanza Ruiz Carrio   
Master’s Thesis
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Department of Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
There is a growing need for developing new technologies to drive the global ship-
ping into a carbon-neutral industry. This Master’s Thesis presents a generic route op-
timization model for cargo vessels with wind assisted propulsion systems. An early
stage tool to predict environmental savings by ﬁnding optimal routes for cargo vessels
equipped with any sailing device.
Systematic studies are developed for the optimization parameters in order to observe
their inﬂuence on the optimization performance. The route optimization model is used
for a wind-assisted cargo vessel for route crossing the North Atlantic as an example ap-
plication.
i
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
The author would like to acknowledge the opportunity given by DNV-GL. In special
the hospitality from all the people involved in the ﬂuid engineering and structural de-
partments.
Big thanks to Ole Hympendahl to be my main guidance and referent during the devel-
opment of the thesis even with the difﬁculties in the time being.
I want to thank the conﬁdence that Hasso Hoffmeister have expressed in me as well as
his constant and honest companionship.
Moreover I would like to thank the support and motivation given by Hans Liwang as
supervisor from KTH, Royal Institute of Technology and Poul Andersen as supervisor
from the Denmark Technical University.
ii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Objectives
2
2.1
Joint project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
3
Wind Assisted Propulsion Systems
3
4
Optimization
6
4.1
Principles of the Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4.1.1
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.1.2
Free variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.1.3
Constraints
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.2
Multi-objective approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.3
Optimization algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.4
Genetic Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.4.1
Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm - NSGA-II
. . . . . .
12
4.4.2
Design of Experiment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
5
Route Optimization Model (ROM)
15
5.1
Functional structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.2
Route Evaluation Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.3
Environmental conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.3.1
Weather data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.3.2
Wind pattern
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.3.3
Wave pattern
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.3.4
Currents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.4
Optimization problem formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.5
FS-Optimizer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6
Systematic studies on optimization parameters
29
6.0.1
NSGA-II - Perturbation parameter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.0.2
Initial population size - DOE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.0.3
NSGA-II - Number of generations and population size . . . . . .
34
6.0.4
NSGA-II - Crossover rate
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
iii
==PAGE:6==
CONTENTS
CONTENTS
6.1
Computational effort of ROM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7
Route optimization evaluation
43
7.1
Route comparison between Orthodromic distance and optimized route .
46
7.1.1
Calm water
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7.1.2
Seaway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
7.2
Route comparison between cargo vessels with WAPS and pure motor
sailing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
8
Conclusions
64
iv
==PAGE:7==
Chapter 1
Introduction
There is an imperative need to reduce the greenhouse gas emissions from the global
shipping industry. The 90% of global trade takes place in the ocean. Marine opera-
tions are one of the major contributors to the greenhouse gas emissions. Nitrogen and
sulphur oxides, NOx and SOx respectively, are the two main pollutants of the ship’s
emissions. Those emissions have disastrous effects on the ozone layer which inﬂuence
the greenhouse effect and, therefore, the global warming. Between 3% and 5% of the
global greenhouse gas emissions are generated by the shipping industry.
There is the necessity of developing new technologies in order to drive global shipping
to an eventual carbon-neutral industry. However, this is a large term objective. IMO
resolution 2030/2050 targets to reduce the greenhouse gas emissions in a 50% by 2050
[10]. This goal is not reachable at the time being with the existing technologies. It is
crucial to drive the shipping industry into a transition process where new solutions are
implemented.
It is a fact that wind is one of the primary sources of energy. New solutions such as
wind assisted propulsion systems are implemented on existing vessels as well as on
new constructions in order to reduce the fuel consumption and, thus, carbon emis-
sions. Routing technologies for vessels with wind propulsion devices can play a major
role in the fuel reduction by using the weather conditions in beneﬁt of the sailing de-
vices.
Wind may not be the deﬁnitive solution to drive global shipping into a carbon-neutral
industry but can play a key role in the transition process to a greener future.
1
==PAGE:8==
Chapter 2
Objectives
The object of this Master’s Thesis is to generate a generic route optimization model
(ROM) in order to predict fuel savings of cargo vessels with Wind Assisted Propul-
sion Systems. The main scope is to increase the fuel savings and therefore, reduce the
carbon emissions by taking maximum beneﬁt of the environmental conditions. Route
Optimization Model is an early design stage tool that predicts potential savings of the
cargo vessels when implementing Wind Assisted Propulsion Systems as a retroﬁt on
existing or new-construction cargo vessels.
The route is optimized with the main intention to reduce the fuel consumption, nonethe-
less, keeping track of the Estimated Arrival Time (ETA) which is a crucial factor in the
shipping industry. The environmental conditions are exploited in maximum beneﬁt of
the sailing devices.
ROM aims to be a generic tool that can be used for any cargo vessel with Wind Assisted
Propulsion Systems, regardless of the purpose of the vessel, its dimension or the wind
devices it uses. Moreover, ROM is suitable for any global sea trade route.
2.1
Joint project
This Master’S Thesis is a joint project with Performance Prediction Program for Wind-
Assisted Cargo Ships done by Martina Reche Vilanova.
2
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 3
Wind Assisted Propulsion Systems
It is a fact that there is a growing need for ﬁnding new technologies in order to be able
to reduce carbon emissions in the global shipping.
Wind-propulsion technologies sound to be the obvious solution when dealing with the
CO2 emission reduction. However, pure wind sailing appears to be a complex solution
since the ocean wind may not have constantly the ideal conditions to maintain the
desired speed and heading of the sailing vessel. On top of the the dimensions that a
single or a group of sailing devices need to entirely propel a merchant vessel.
With the scope of CO2 emission reduction, Wind Assisted Propulsion Systems (WAPS)
are an auspicious solution. It is a versatile solution since it can be installed as a retroﬁt
on existing vessels or implemented on new constructions. WAPS use the thrust gener-
ated by the sailing devices in order to reduce the fuel consumption of the vessel.
There are different solutions to take advantage of the wind as a source of energy to
generate thrust. It is a growing market where different technologies are being explored.
The most common devices are ﬂettner rotors, rigid sails, soft sails or kite sails. The
following Figure shows the ﬂettner rotor in the top-left, rigid sail in the top-right, soft
sails in the bottom-left and kite sail in the bottom right.
3
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 3. WIND ASSISTED PROPULSION SYSTEMS
Figure 3.1: Different Wind Propulsion Systems. Sources: top-left - www.stormgeo.com,
top-right - www.walleniusmarine.com, bottom-left - www.dykstra.com, bottom-right -
www.skysails-group.com.
The four images show completely different technologies but all of them pursuit the
same aim, reduce the fuel consumption of the vessel by generating thrust by making
use of its sailing devices. More than one sailing devices are usually installed in order
to maximize the thrust generated.
Beside of those, the market for such technologies is expanding and new devices are
appearing. Reefable rigid and soft sails are under development in order not to have
difﬁculties in strong wind conditions as well as while loading or unloading the cargo
they transport at the harbour.
Wind Assisted Propulsion Systems are on-going techniques under development. How-
ever, they are promising technologies with a clear aim of driving to a more sustainable
shipping.
4
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 3. WIND ASSISTED PROPULSION SYSTEMS
Performance Prediction Program
As mentioned in Chapter 2, this is a joint project with Performance Prediction Program
for Cargo Wind Assisted Vessels.
In order to know how the vessel performs depending on variables of the vessel itself,
such as its speed, as well as external conditions as wind or waves, it is needed a Per-
formance Prediction Program (PPP).
The Performance Prediction Program calculates the power required by the engines de-
pending on different parameters:
• Ship speed
• True Wind Speed
• True Wind Angle
• Signiﬁcant wave height
Those have been considered the most relevant parameters to constitute the input for
the Performance Prediction Program. In order to obtain the output desired, i.e. de-
livered power of the engines, the PPP uses a balance algorithm based on Newton’s
Method to ﬁnd the equilibrium between the hull and sail forces.
A Performance Prediction Program has been considered instead of Velocity Prediction
Program because the main objective is to lower the CO2 emissions while meeting the
Estimated Arrival Time. The PPP calculates the delivered power for any combina-
tion of the different input parameters within a certain range. Oppositely, the Velocity
Prediction Problem calculates the velocity that the vessel could perform by the com-
bination of the mentioned parameters. A VPP is commonly used in sailing races or
situations where the main objective is the speed.
5
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 4
Optimization
4.1
Principles of the Optimization
Optimization is the improvement of an existing system. The root of the word optimiza-
tion is optimal, which means best. The concept best varies depending on the objective
the system has. Therefore, optimization can be understood as ﬁnding the best solution
over all the feasible solutions with regards to a speciﬁc objective.
A regular optimization problem formulation process can be deﬁned by the following
bullet points:
• Necessity for optimization
• Objective function formulation
• Optimization variables election
• Constraints determination
• Variable bounds arrangement
• Optimization algorithm selection dependent on the characteristics of the opti-
mization problem
• Optimal solution ﬁnding
After knowing the formulation process of an optimization problem, the problem itself
can be deﬁned. A general constrained optimization problem can be deﬁned in general
terms as follows:
min, max
f (x)
subject to
gi(x) = ci f or i = 1, ..., n
f or equality constraints
hj(x) ≥dj f or j = 1, ..., m
f or inequality constraints
(4.1.1)
Where f (x) deﬁnes the function that wants to be minimized or maximized and g(x)
and h(x) deﬁne the equality and inequality constraints functions respectively. The
6
==PAGE:13==
4.1. PRINCIPLES OF THE OPTIMIZATION
CHAPTER 4. OPTIMIZATION
constraints are the bounds that need to be satisﬁed in the optimization process (see Ch.
4.1.3).
The aim of a constrained optimization problem is to ﬁnd the optimal maximum or
minimum of the objective function f (x) over the points that satisfy the constraints.
4.1.1
Objectives
In optimization an objective (f (x)) is the function that is desired to be minimized or
maximized, depending on the optimization problem. Cost or energy functions are
examples of objectives that are usually desired to be minimized. Contrarily, reward or
utility functions are commonly demanded to me maximized.
4.1.2
Free variables
The free variables (xn) are the parameters that are allowed to be tuned in order to ﬁnd
the optimal solution. This parameters have a valid range where they can be altered
to ﬁnd the most suitable value for each variable in any particular problem. As wider
this range is, more computational effort is needed since there are more values to check.
The same happens with the number of free variables of the optimization problem. A
greater number of free variables will have a signiﬁcant cost in terms of computational
time.
4.1.3
Constraints
Constraints are the bounds in the optimization problem. The constraints represent
utilitarian relation between the free variables and other design parameters that limit
the design space due to physical phenomena or resource limitations. There exist two
types of constraints:
• Inequality constraints. The utilitarian relations among the variables have to be
larger than / smaller than or equal to a given value.
• Equality constraints. The utilitarian relations in this case have to be equal to a
given value.
Hard constraints are required to be satisﬁed while soft constraints are preferred but
not required to be satisﬁed. In the development of this thesis only hard constraints are
considered.
To stay competitive in the shipping industry it is crucial to follow optimal routes at
any time. There are many different optimization methods in order to approach the
7
==PAGE:14==
4.2. MULTI-OBJECTIVE APPROACH
CHAPTER 4. OPTIMIZATION
problem under study. It is crucial to correctly formulate the objective and constraints
of the optimization problem in order to succeed in the optimization process. Multi-
objective approach is the method used in order to solve the route optimization problem
for vessels with Wind Assisted Propulsion Systems since more than one competing
objectives aim to be met at the time. See Ch.5.4.
4.2
Multi-objective approach
Multi-objective optimization is not only used in mathematical procedures. In most of
the daily life conﬂicts is it necessary to ﬁnd the best solution over multiple clashing
objectives. The main particular of the multi-objective optimization consists of having
multiple solutions. When talking about optimization it is common to think that it exists
only one optimal solution with regards to the objectives and that fulﬁlls the constraints
but this is often not the case for real world optimization problems. The answer for
a Multi-objective optimization is able to ﬁnd of a set of solutions that deﬁne the best
trade-off between the conﬂicting objectives. The Pareto-front delimits the feasible de-
sign region, where the solutions are located, and the unfeasible one.
Figure 4.1: Pareto-front representation between confronting objectives. Adapted graph from
www.mathworks.com
Multi-objective optimization problem differs from Single-objective one in multiple as-
pects, according to [13]:
8
==PAGE:15==
4.2. MULTI-OBJECTIVE APPROACH
CHAPTER 4. OPTIMIZATION
• More than one targets for the optimization. These targets have conﬂict between
each other.
• Pareto-optimal set as answer of the Multi-objective optimization problem.
According to the second bullet point, the Pareto-optimal front is a non-dominated set
of optimal solutions. A non-dominated set is a group of solutions P′ that are not dom-
inated by any of the feasible solutions of the problem P.
The non-dominated set of solution is the so-called Pareto-optimal front. This front
varies depending if the objective functions are minimized or maximized. The follow-
ing ﬁgure shows an example of the different Pareto-optimal fronts for a Multi-objective
optimization with two objectives:
Figure 4.2: Pareto-optimal front for different combinations of objective functions. [13]
It can be clearly seen that the Optimal-front differs between the four cases depending
on the objective functions (f1 and f2). The non-dominated set P′ (represented by the
black continuous curve) is placed in a different place of the feasible solution region
(represented by the solid grey). The top-left and bottom-right sketches represent the
two objective functions minimized and maximized, respectively. The top-right and
bottom-left in this case have one of the objective functions that needs to be minimized
and, the other one, maximized. The top-right sketch has a discontinuity in the Pareto-
optimal front which is given by the shape of the feasible design region.
There are a great number of solutions that build this Pareto-optimal set that represents
the best trade-off between the competing objectives, but when optimizing it is com-
9
==PAGE:16==
4.3. OPTIMIZATION ALGORITHMS
CHAPTER 4. OPTIMIZATION
monly desired to ﬁnd the only optimal solution.
A clever arrangement could be to collect the ideal objective vectors. This is, collecting
the optimal solution with regards to each objective in order to build the ideal objec-
tive vector. However, the ideal objective vector is the so-called Utopian vector which
represents a non-existing solution for the problem. In Figure 4.1 the Utopian plot is
represented and it can be clearly seen that is located in the unfeasible region.
There are two different ways to ﬁnd the optimal solution, according to [13].
• Ideal Multi-objective optimization procedure.
This procedure consists of analyzing the Pareto-optimal solutions after they are
computed with higher-level of information than the one used to get the set of
solutions. This information can be usually not technical or qualitative in order to
ﬁnd the optimal solution among all the others.
• Preference based Multi-objective optimization procedure.
The preference based method has as its foundation the construction of a single
objective function. The new objective function is built as the sum of the origi-
nal objective functions where the weight of them is proportional to its preference
over the other objectives. With this procedure, the Multi-objective optimization
problem becomes a Single-objective optimization problem. The solution for this
new problem will become a single optimal result. However, this is a more subjec-
tive method than the ideal process due to the relative weighting of the objectives.
4.3
Optimization algorithms
An optimization algorithm is an iterative procedure which compares various solutions
until the optimal is found. There are two main types of optimization algorithms:
• Deterministic algorithms.
Deterministic algorithms are characterized by having explicit criteria to step from
solution to solution within the population.
• Stochastic algorithms.
Stochastic algorithms are a nature-inspired optimization algorithms with inher-
ent randomness that have probabilistic transition rules while displacing among
solutions.
Biological models follow stochastic processes. Stochastic algorithms are remarkably
more complex than deterministic algorithms. However, they can also solve complex
problems with several local optimal solutions and still be able to ﬁnd the global optimal
set of solutions. The route optimization is a sophisticated problem due to the numerous
10
==PAGE:17==
4.4. GENETIC ALGORITHMS
CHAPTER 4. OPTIMIZATION
factors that affect the optimization process. Factors such as, ship performance and
weather conditions are key but also complex when solving the optimization problem.
A stochastic algorithm is required in order to deal with the route optimization problem.
The main family within the stochastic algorithms are the Evolutionary Algorithms. An
important sub-group of the Evolutionary Algorithms are the Genetic Algorithms.
4.4
Genetic Algorithms
A Genetic Algorithm is a stochastic population-based optimization method that works
as an analogy to nature. Genetic algorithms follow biological evolutionary processes.
The principle of these algorithms could be summarized in one sentence: the ﬁttest indi-
viduals of each generation are the ones which survive. This is the so-called elitism that
characterizes genetic algorithms. The new individuals are created by interchanging
genetic material from the previous solutions (their parents). A solution or individual
is represented as a chromosome, an array that contains information about each solu-
tion. In order to create the new generations, genetic operations such as crossover or
mutation are used. Crossover is the action where one or more bits are interchanged be-
tween two arrays at random positions. In mutation, bits from the chromosome array
are altered in random positions.
The structure of a regular Genetic algorithm can be summarized according to [15].
Firstly, the optimization problem is transformed so it can be understood by the al-
gorithm, binary language it is commonly used. In order to follow, an initial random
population is generated. Each point or chromosome is evaluated according to the ob-
jective functions. The ﬁtness of each solution is determined by comparing it to the rest
of chromosomes. After, with the ﬁtter individuals a subset population is created, the
less favoured individuals are eliminated. Pairs of the subset population are selected
randomly in order to create a new generation by using mutation and crossover tech-
niques. When the optimal solution is found this process can be stopped, otherwise
more individuals need to be evaluated until the optimal one is encountered.
It has been decided to work with genetic algorithms due to their hard points:
• Robustness. Genetic algorithms consider a population of chromosomes. Every
chromosome means a possible solution. A large population number avoids the
possibility of ﬁnding a local optimal solution and confuse it with the global opti-
mal solution before encountering it. The population size affects the possibility of
ﬁnding the optimal solution, thus, it is important to allow a relatively large pop-
ulation number. The population size is required to be as large as it needs to ﬁnd
the optimal solution but not too broad because this will mean an unnecessary
number of searches and thus, a massive computational effort.
11
==PAGE:18==
4.4. GENETIC ALGORITHMS
CHAPTER 4. OPTIMIZATION
• Simplicity.
Genetic algorithms are characterized for being quite generic algo-
rithms that do not need a large knowledge of the search space. Pure mathe-
matical methods are often too complex, which is not desired when approaching
a practical optimization problem, what is the case in this thesis.
• Efﬁciency for problems that involve a great number of variables. In this optimization
problem a relatively large number of free variables will be used. See Ch.5.4.
Genetic algorithms have the drawback of presenting high computational effort when
solving problems with complex constraints. This drawback can be balanced with the
easy implementation of the algorithm in parallel architecture that speeds up the opti-
mization procedure.
The Genetic Algorithm used is the Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm due to
the experience that DNV-GL has with this algorithm together with the broad sources
of literature available.
4.4.1
Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm - NSGA-II
The main intention of a Multi-objective optimization algorithm is to ﬁnd the maximum
number of Pareto-optimal solutions in order to be able to ﬁnd the optimal solution
vector. Which is achieved by improving the adaptive ﬁt of a population to ﬁnd the
Pareto-optimal set.
As a genetic algorithm, the descendant population (Qt) is generated by interchanging
genetic material from the parent population (Pt), with a population size of N each. The
genetic material is combined by using genetic operators such as crossover or mutation.
After that, Pt and Qt are mixed to ﬁnd a new generation (Rt) which will have a size of
2N.
NSGA-II is a non-dominated sorting algorithm which classiﬁes the population into the
different non-dominated fronts (Fn). Within that front, none of the solutions can be
improved with regards to one objective without degrading the other objectives. This
is done for the entire population Rt. The new parent population Pt+1 is populated
ﬁrst with points of the ﬁrst non-dominated front (F1) and continues with the second
(F2), third (F3) and successively. The total size of the population Rt is 2N, therefore, it is
possible that not all the fronts are placed in the N vacancies. Since the number of fronts
is limited, the fronts that can not be allocated are discarded. When reaching the last
front that can be accommodated, the slots available in this front will be reserved for the
points from that front which give the higher diversity of the entire set of points instead
of an automatic discard of points [7][13]. The procedure of NSGA-II is schematized in
the following ﬁgure.
12
==PAGE:19==
4.4. GENETIC ALGORITHMS
CHAPTER 4. OPTIMIZATION
Figure 4.3: Illustration of the NSGA-II procedure. [3].
NSGA-II is the evolution of the Non-Sorting Genetic Algorithm (NSGA) which was
one of the earliest Evolutionary Algorithms. NSGA has been broadly used to solve
Multi-objective optimization problems. However, with the emergence of new algo-
rithms over the pass of the years, NSGA have been criticized due to lacks in the per-
formance of the algorithm. The main problems with the original NSGA were, as ex-
plained in [3], the large computational complexity of the non-dominated sorting, the
lack of elitism of the algorithm. These problems are the ones amended in the NSGA-II.
4.4.2
Design of Experiment
It is required to develop a Design of Experiment (DOE) table as starting point for an
optimization process. A DOE is a statistical approach used to collect information re-
garding the design space of the optimization problem. The DOE studies the tendencies
of the optimization variables in beneﬁt of the objectives of the optimization. With this
ﬁrst sampling it is observed which are the optimal regions to run the optimization pro-
cess. The DOE will be used by the main algorithm to start the optimization process in
the most convenient region with the already known main tendencies of the optimiza-
tion variables.
In order to obtain a DOE is a random quasi-random number sequence frequently used.
Quasi-random sequences are characterized by its low discrepancy. The discrepancy
measures how in-homogeneous a set of vectors is distributed in a unit hyper-cube.
Different quasi-random sequences have been published, such as Faure, Halton, Nieder-
reiter or Sobol [14]. Sobol is the one used here due to the stable and straightforward
implementation in the optimizer used.
13
==PAGE:20==
4.4. GENETIC ALGORITHMS
CHAPTER 4. OPTIMIZATION
Two samplings of the same design space have been done using a random and the
quasi-random Sobol numerical sequences respectively. Both plots are shown in the
ﬁgure below:
Figure 4.4: Representation of the Random sequence and the quasi-random Sobol sequence.
It can be observed that the quasi-random Sobol sequence presents a better sampling of
the design space. As expected, the spreading is more effective than the one offered by a
random distribution. That is why, the sampling of the so-called Design of Experiments
(DOE) is generated using the quasi-random Sobol sequence.
14
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 5
Route Optimization Model (ROM)
The Route Optimization Model (ROM) is the result of multiple parts working together.
The key parts of ROM are the optimizer itself and two main algorithms: the route eval-
uation algorithm and the multi-objective algorithm. The different parts are developed
in this chapter.
5.1
Functional structure
As mentioned above, the optimization process involves many different parts. In order
to be able to explain all the mechanisms involved in ROM and all the parts that builds
the model, its functional structure is ﬁrstly schematized in Figure 5.1 and brieﬂy sum-
marized after.
Figure 5.1: Functional structure of ROM.
It is composed by three main parts:
• Route Evaluation Algorithm
• Route Optimization Algorithm
• Optimizer
15
==PAGE:22==
5.2. ROUTE EVALUATION ALGORITHM
CHAPTER 5. ROM
The optimizer randomly selects a set of free variables. The route optimization algo-
rithm builds the route with the given free variables. The optimizer checks if the route
is violating the constraints at any point of the route. In case it does, the route becomes
invalid and, thus, discarded right away. In case the constraints are satisﬁed, the algo-
rithm calculates the objectives according to the free variables selected. These objectives
are feedback for the optimizer and the Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm II. A
new selection of free-variables will is based on this feedback. This process is repeated
until the Pareto-optimal set is found.
5.2
Route Evaluation Algorithm
The concept behind the route evaluation algorithm consists of perturbing the Ortho-
dromic route in beneﬁt of the the weather pattern to take maximum advantage of the
sailing devices. The Orthodromic route represents the shortest distance between two
points on the Earth surface, which is also known as Haversine or Great Circle line.
This perturbation approach consists of the deviation of the vessel from the Ortho-
dromic route, therefore, from the shortest route in distance in order to ﬁnd an different
routes with known fuel consumption and sailing time. This approach also considers
the non-constant speed of the vessel.
The methodology that this algorithm follows is explained in the following bullet points.
• Orthodromic route deﬁnition
The shortest route in distance between the departure and arrival points is com-
puted. This route is the one that aims to be perturbed in order to ﬁnd the optimal
one. Supposing departure and destination points given by Cartesian Coordi-
nates, (φ1, λ1) and (φ2, λ2) where φ represents the latitude of the coordinate and
λ, the longitude, the Haversine can be expressed according the following equa-
tion:
Haversine = 2 · R · arcsin(
q
sin(∆φ/2)2 + cos(φ1)cos(2) ∗sin(∆λ/2)2)
(5.2.1)
Where ∆φ and ∆λ are the latitude and longitude variations respectively and R
represents the Earth radius.
16
==PAGE:23==
5.2. ROUTE EVALUATION ALGORITHM
CHAPTER 5. ROM
• Orthodromic route discretization
In this step the Orthodromic route is discretized with a ﬁxed number of equally
spaced way-points. The number of way-points for a speciﬁc route is selected de-
pending on the level of accuracy required to deﬁne the route and, therefore have
more ﬁne results regarding fuel consumption and carbon emissions. The num-
ber of way-points is a trade-off between the accuracy needed to ﬁnd the optimal
route and quantify savings in a precise way and the computational effort of the
model. For each control point considered, a great number of interpolations are
required regarding ship performance and weather patterns, what is highly costly
in computational terms. Moreover, the number of free variables that the opti-
mization faces is increased by two for each way-point considered.
• Orthogonal shifts
The route to be evaluated is created by perturbing the Orthodromic route. This
model consists of an orthogonal deviation on each way-point, changing in this
way the course of the vessel. The orthogonal shifts together with the ship speed
for each leg will later be used as free variables for the optimization process.
Figure 5.2: Sketch of the orthogonal shifts concept. The blue dots represent some of the
potential orthogonal deviations from the Orthodromic route (represented by a non-continuous
curve).
This model deviates from [1], who used the splines in order to get a smooth
course line. Contrarily to that approach (motor-ship), here the objective with the
orthogonal shifts approach is to allow tacking into the wind. The pronounced
course changes allow the vessel to set a sail conﬁguration for each leg. The or-
thogonal deviation in each way point allows the Course Over Ground to have a
less or more large variation. The maximum orthogonal deviation is also a vari-
able that can be adjusted depending on how distant the vessel should be from
17
==PAGE:24==
5.2. ROUTE EVALUATION ALGORITHM
CHAPTER 5. ROM
the Orthodromic route.
Therefore, Course Over Ground plays a key role in route modeling for wind as-
sisted vessels since it determines the True Wind Angle.
The True Wind Angle (TWA) is the relation between True Wind Direction (TWD)
and Course Over Ground. TWD and COG are relative to the North direction.
The Course Over Ground (COG) can be expressed as the heading in addition
to the leeway which is the side-way drift of the desired course. However, the
Performance Prediction Program already studies the leeway, thus, in this thesis,
heading and Course Over Ground (in the following denoted as course) will not
be differentiated.
In order to determine the course and distance between the way-points, the rhumb
line equations are used:
course = arctan


∆λ · cos
 φ1+φ2
2

∆φ


(5.2.2)
distance =
60 · ∆φ
cos(course)
(5.2.3)
Where ∆φ and ∆λ are the latitude and longitude variations respectively.
• Compute the new positions
Given the orthogonal deviation in relation to the Great Circle Line at each way-
point, the new locations at each control point can be computed. As said previ-
ously, there are unlimited number of route combinations by changing the position
of the control points. At this stage the exact position of the way points for each
route will be known by making use of the orthogonal deviation in relation to the
GCL.
After the exact position of the way-points are known, it is necessary to determine
the distance between and the course between them. The distance is used to de-
termine the time of arrival at each way-point as well as the total sailing time. The
course, together with the time are key to compute the fuel consumption.
18
==PAGE:25==
5.2. ROUTE EVALUATION ALGORITHM
CHAPTER 5. ROM
• Weather interpolation (wind, waves and currents)
The weather data relevant for the development of the model (see Ch.5.3) needs
to be known in order to evaluate the route. To proceed the weather data set ac-
quired is interpolated for the exact latitude and longitude of each control point
as well as the moment of time that the vessel will cross that coordinate. This is
done by a multivariate interpolation with a uniformly spaced regular grid.
As stated in Ch.5.3, the True Wind Speed, True Wind Direction, signiﬁcant wave
height and surface type will be known for the control points at a speciﬁc time.
By knowing the wind components, the True Wing Angle is extracted from the
course of the vessel between two way-points previously computed. The True
Wind Angle together with the True Wind Speed and the signiﬁcant wave height
(when considering seaway) are the parameters extracted from the weather data
needed in order to apply the Performance Prediction Program at the control
points.
• Performance Prediction Program application
At this stage, after knowing the weather data in the control points, the cargo
vessel is introduced in the ROM by using its Performance Prediction Program
(PPP). As said previously, this model is suitable for any cargo vessel with Wind
Assisted Propulsion Systems. ROM is a broad model that can host any cargo ves-
sel by making use of its Performance Prediction Program.
In order to apply the Performance Prediction Program to the route, it is again
used, a multivariate interpolation. The input information for the PPP is listed
below.
– Ship speed
– True Wind Speed
– True Wind Angle
– Signiﬁcant wave height
With these inputs at each control point, the model interpolates the corresponding
delivered power and, thus, the fuel consumption can be approximated in each of
the legs of the route.
f uel consumption = SFC · PD · time
(5.2.4)
This equation deﬁnes the fuel consumption in each leg of the route. Where SFC
stands for Speciﬁc Fuel Consumption and PD refers to the Delivered Power.
19
==PAGE:26==
5.3. ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS
CHAPTER 5. ROM
• Time and Fuel Consumption computation
Eventually this algorithm calculate the total sailing time and the fuel consump-
tion in order to evaluate the different routes. Both magnitudes are integrated over
all the legs that constitute the route to ﬁnd the total time and fuel consumption
invested for each route evaluated.
5.3
Environmental conditions
In the route modelling topic is crucial to consider the environmental conditions. The
decision process is totally inﬂuenced by the weather conditions. The most relevant
environmental conditions for the route modeling are wind, waves and currents.
5.3.1
Weather data
As explained in the objective of this project (Ch.2), the Route Optimization Model is a
tool to evaluate potential savings by studying the scenario where the vessel regularly
sails. ROM is not meant to do a dynamic control of the route. If ROM would be used
to suggest the best route for a planned journey, it would be advisable to use ensemble
forecasts [2]. Which is used to calibrate the uncertainties in the initial weather condi-
tions.
Historical Weather Data has been the solution used in order to evaluate the weather
conditions relevant for the route building. Historical data sources are meteorological
models calibrated with measurements. The weather data is obtained from Copernicus
- Marine Environment Monitoring Service (CMEMS)[16] which has a regional domain of
the entire global ocean. The data has a spatial resolution lower than 1 degree, both in
latitude and longitude where an hourly-mean value is given. With this information
it is possible to interpolate the weather data for the way-points deﬁned on the route.
Therefore, it is possible to simulate a route optimization for a certain period of time
using historical results.
5.3.2
Wind pattern
The main consideration when thinking about route building for vessels with Wind
Assisted Propulsion Systems is the wind pattern. The wind pattern together with the
course will determine the orientation of the sailing devices.
20
==PAGE:27==
5.3. ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS
CHAPTER 5. ROM
The variables used in order to build the route with regards to the wind conditions are
the following ones:
• Wind speed
• Northward wind component
• Eastward wind component
As mentioned above, is essential to know the True Wind Angle that the vessel expe-
riences at each leg of the route. As it is not included directly in the model data, it is
calculated from the northward and eastward wind components, vo and uo respectively.
vo and uo deﬁne the True Wind Direction which subtracted to the course of the vessel
deﬁnes the True Wind Angle.
It could be possible the case where the wind speed is that high that the stability of the
vessel is compromised. The Performance Prediction Program considers reeﬁng of the
sails in case of high wind speeds.
5.3.3
Wave pattern
Waves can be described as a disturbance of the free surface. They are commonly gener-
ated by local wind but also by atmospheric pressure gradients, gravitational attractions
or underwater phenomena like seismic oscillations.
Sea waves are described by multiple parameters such as amplitude, wave length and
phase velocity. It is considered a scenario with deep seas. The wave particulars rele-
vant for this case are the wave height and the wave period.
For regular waves the wave height (Hi) can be deﬁned as the surface elevation dif-
ference between the wave trough and the wave crest. The wave period (Ti) is deﬁned
as the time interval between two successive up-crossing points. However, in this case
an irregular sea state is considered which is characterized by a signiﬁcant wave height
and a mean wave period.
The Performance Prediction Program calculates the added resistance in waves using as
input parameters the signiﬁcant wave height and wave period at each leg of the route.
This calculation is done by a semi-empirical method used at DNV-GL for high level
assessment of the added resistance in a seaway.
21
==PAGE:28==
5.3. ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS
CHAPTER 5. ROM
In order to separate the different waves in the recorded wave time series, the so-called
zero up-crossing method is used which consists of localizing the zero up-crossing (or
down-crossing) points. In the domain, two consecutive up-crossing points constitute
an isolated wave. All the waves obtained by the zero up-crossing method are orga-
nized depending on their height in order to compute the wave scalars [16]. In this
case, the relevant wave scalars for the route building are the spectral signiﬁcant wave
height and the wave period at spectral peak.
• Spectral signiﬁcant wave height.
The signiﬁcant wave height Hs is a term that deﬁnes the mean of the highest one
third of the waves that arise in a wave spectrum. It is a way to deﬁne a standard-
ized statistic that describes the height of the arbitrary waves. The reason behind
is that higher waves are usually more compelling that the smaller ones. The way
it is deﬁned, coincides to the averaging of the waves that a sailor could do from
on-board. As a rule of Thumb, the largest individual wave that can be confronted
could double this signiﬁcant wave height, even though this fact would be spo-
radic.
• Mean wave period
The wave period is described as the time measured between two consecutive
wave crests when observing from a ﬁxed point. The mean period Tm is deﬁned
as an average from the whole ensemble of wave components.
The signiﬁcant wave height and the wave period are directly related to the added re-
sistance and, thus, to the fuel consumption, which will be later treated as an objective
for the optimization problem (See Ch.5.4). Since the objective functions aim to be min-
imized, the optimization favors the solutions with lower signiﬁcant wave height and
lower wave period. What is the same as avoiding large waves. That is the reason why
Hs and Tm are not treated as constraints. ROM aims to be a generic tool that in a sim-
ple way predicts emission savings. The signiﬁcant wave height and wave period that
a cargo vessel can encounter depend on multiple factors. These factors could be the
vessel itself or the loading conditions among others.
The consideration of Hs and Tm as constraints would increase the complexity of ROM.
For the purpose of estimating fuel savings it is sufﬁcient to consider the seaway by
the added resistance. However, for practical applications, the wave height should be
considered as a constraint.
The range of signiﬁcant wave height and the wave period used for the generation of
the Performance Prediction Program is extracted from IACS Recommendation No. 34,
[9] for the example case studied (see Ch.7)
22
==PAGE:29==
5.3. ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS
CHAPTER 5. ROM
Figure 5.3: Probability of sea-states in the North Atlantic described as occurrence per 100000
observations. Derived from BMT’s Global Wave Statistics. Source: [9].
In Table 1 of that document appears the probability of sea-states in the North Atlantic
described as concurrence per 100000 observations.
The signiﬁcant wave height and wave periods with higher probability to develop are
the ones considered in this optimization model. According to IACS Recommendation
No. 34, the following intervals are the ones considered:
• 4.5s < Tm < 15.5s
• 0 < Hs < 11.5m
However, it has been observed that when considering the sea state in the optimization
process, the computational effort has been dramatically increased. The generation of
the Performance Prediction Program with the ﬁve inputs stated is too costly for this
early stage optimization tool. Moreover, the ranges under study of the signiﬁcant wave
height and the wave period are signiﬁcantly broad. That is why the wave period is
treated as a dependency of the signiﬁcant wave height as shown in equation 5.3.1.
Tm = 2π
g
r
g · Hs
0.16
(5.3.1)
The performance Prediction Program delivers a wave period dependent on the signif-
icant wave height. Instead of having ﬁve inputs in the generation of the PPP, four are
needed now. This modiﬁcation decreases drastically the computational effort.
5.3.4
Currents
Ocean water is a system that continuously moves. Ocean currents are abiotic factors of
the environment that signiﬁcantly affects the seas in all water depths. Ocean currents
are mainly caused winds, water density, water temperature and tides. The Coriolis
effect also plays a key role in the current generation. Coriolis effect is caused by the
23
==PAGE:30==
5.4. OPTIMIZATION PROBLEM FORMULATION
CHAPTER 5. ROM
Earth rotation what forbids the ocean to water to follow a straight course while travel-
ing along the rotating planet [17].
There are surface and deep currents, surface currents are the most relevant ones for
this thesis since they will affect the course of the vessel. Global wind systems drive
large-scale ocean surface currents which have a great impact on the international ship-
ping routes. That is the reason why it has been considered crucial to acknowledge for
currents in the Route Optimization Model.
Speed Through Water (STW) accounts for the velocity of the vessel with respect to the
sea. The Speed Over Ground refers to the velocity relative to the ground, as illus-
trated by its name. The Speed Through Water can be derived from the Speed Over
Ground and the current velocity components. The velocity components for the cur-
rents (ucurr and vcurr) are obtained from CMEMS. The absolute direction of the cur-
rents and its speed can be obtained by using the following equations respectively:
rabscurr = arctan
ucurr
vcurr

(5.3.2)
Vabscurr =
q
u2curr + v2curr
(5.3.3)
The direction and the velocity of the current relative to the vessel can be described by:
rrelcurr = rabscurr −course
(5.3.4)
Vrelcurr = Vabscurr ∗cos(rrelcurr)
(5.3.5)
Eventually, the Speed Through Water can be obtained using the known Speed Over
Ground of the vessel and the relative velocity to the vessel of the current as shown in
the following equation:
STW = SOG −Vrelcurr
(5.3.6)
5.4
Optimization problem formulation
The route modeling consists of creating a track between the departure and destination
harbour. Knowing the origin and arrival points, there is an uncountable number of
tracks that can be built. One of them could be the shortest route in terms of distance
i.e. Orthodromic route.
Great Circle Line navigation could be the optimal solution to the studied problem
if the cargo vessel would purely sail with engine propulsion. Moreover, the Ortho-
dromic distance is only optimal if environmental conditions are not considered. Even
if the cargo vessel would not have sailing devices to assist its propulsion, considering
environmental conditions such as wind, wave or current patterns would provoke a
deviation from the shortest route in distance in beneﬁt of time and possibly fuel con-
sumption.
24
==PAGE:31==
5.4. OPTIMIZATION PROBLEM FORMULATION
CHAPTER 5. ROM
The wind, together with the wave pattern will play a key role in the route optimization
for a vessel with wind assisted propulsion systems.
The optimization problem is deﬁned according to Ch.4.1.
Need for optimization
Therefore, there is the need of optimization for the route between the departure and
arrival coordinates. This optimization needs to be done according to an objective.
Objective function formulation
As mentioned previously, the main scope of this thesis is to reduce the carbon emis-
sions of cargo vessels with wind assisted propulsion systems. This goal is achieved
by reducing the fuel consumption of the vessel. The drawback with the mentioned
objective is that it would be possible to indeﬁnitely reduce the CO2 emissions since the
vessel could slowly sail using its sailing devices to the harbour of destination. This is
not a feasible option since ETA (Estimated Arrival Time) is crucial to be competitive in
the shipping industry. That is why the optimization needs a second objective, time, in
order to stay competitive.
Therefore, the problem will be treated as a Multi-objective optimization problem with
two clear objectives:
• Fuel consumption.
The ﬁrst objective function can be expressed as f1(x) = f uel consumption.
• Time.
The second objective function is deﬁned as f2(x) = sailing time.
Time could be also treated as a constraint instead of as a second objective. This would
convert the Multi-objective optimization problem into a Single-objective optimization
problem. Only one solution would emerge from the Single-objective problem rather
than a set of Pareto-optimal solutions.
As mentioned in the Ch.2 this is an early stage design tool in order to predict potential
savings. Therefore, Multi-objective optimization allows a greater number of solutions.
There is a large number of optimal solutions depending on the fuel consumption limi-
tations or the sailing time limitations which can be found in the same optimization.
Following this argument, the Ideal Multi-objective procedure (see Ch.4.2) is the one
used in this optimization task. The optimal solution is selected with higher informa-
tion level such as Estimated Time of Arrival. From a broad Pareto-optimal front, the
optimal solution is selected depending on external needs.
25
==PAGE:32==
5.4. OPTIMIZATION PROBLEM FORMULATION
CHAPTER 5. ROM
Variables election
After deﬁning the objectives of the optimization problem the free variables need to be
established. As explained in (Ch.4.1.2), the free variables are the parameters modiﬁed
within a certain range during the optimization process. A proper value or combination
of values for an speciﬁc problem will mean the encountering of an optimal solution.
The free variables in this problem are:
• Position
• Speed
in each of the control points located in the route. These control or way-points are
equally spaced in the virtual curve that the vessel will follow. The exact position of
those way points and the speed that the vessel will perform between the mentioned
control points are the free variables in the optimization problem. An optimal solution
will be represented by a proper combination of values.
The number of control points and thus, the number of free variables is chosen based
on multiple factors such as the precision desired in the solutions of the optimization
process or the computational effort among others. The number of free variables will
be increased by two for each control point added in the route optimization. Therefore,
the computational effort and time involved in the optimization process will be signiﬁ-
cantly increased.
Constraints determination
As mentioned in the previous chapter, the one studied here is a constrained optimiza-
tion problem. This means that the optimization problem is bounded to a constraint
that limits the design space. The only constraint considered in the optimization pro-
cess is:
• Land avoidance
It is a logical a land avoidance constraint while building a route for vessels. The route at
any point can approach the coast. In order to implement the land avoidance constraint
it has been used a data base which differentiates the surface type in a global chart using
a binary code from Copernicus - Marine environment monitoring service.
The surface type is set to 1 if there is land on the chart and 0 in case there is water.
Therefore, an equality constraint has been set. The constraint represents the addition
of the surface type value in every control point deﬁned in the route. No matter how
26
==PAGE:33==
5.5. FS-OPTIMIZER
CHAPTER 5. ROM
many control points exist, the sum of all values need to be equals to zero, what means
that the vessel does not approach land in any case. Since there is only one constraint:
h(x) = 0
(5.4.1)
In case the free variables that represent the position go on top of the land, this solution
would be automatically dropped because it does not fulﬁll the constraint.
For shallow water an inequality constraint based on water depth would be necessary.
For reasons of simplicity, only land avoidance is considered here.
Validity range arrangement
The design variables need bounds that deﬁne which is their freedom in the design
space. This freedom is commonly stated as a validity range under which they can be
tuned in order to ﬁnd the optimal Parerto-optimal set of solutions to the optimization
problem. In this case the bounds will be differentiated for the position ones and the
speed ones.
• Position free variables. The range of validity of the position variables will depend
on each speciﬁc problem. The default value has been set to an orthogonal devi-
ation of 10% of the total Orthodromic distance (between arrival and destination
points) on each side from the Great Circle Line. This is, the optimization process
is allowed to build a route that deviates perpendicularly a 10% of the Haversine
between departure and destination coordinates.
• Speed free variables. The validity range of the speed free variables are dependent
on each speciﬁc cargo vessel. The range of velocities is the one compressed be-
tween the minimum and maximum speed that the cargo vessel can perform. The
validity range is provided by the Performance Prediction Program.
Algorithm selection
Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm (NSGA-II) is the algorithm used to solve
this optimization problem. The implementation of the optimization algorithm is fur-
ther explained in Chapter 6 where its parameters are studied in order to have the the
most suitable conﬁguration to solve the optimization problem.
5.5
FS-Optimizer
The optimizer used in the development of this Thesis is FS-Optimizer provided by
DNV-GL. FS-Optimizer is a generic optimization toolkit that enables the user to build
up a process chain from a selection of algorithms and programs in order to generate
new designs. The designs are improved by using controlling parameters and tools in
27
==PAGE:34==
5.5. FS-OPTIMIZER
CHAPTER 5. ROM
order to ﬁnd superior designs and, eventually, the optimal solutions.
As mentioned previously, the optimization algorithm used due to its suitability with
the problem under study is the Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm. FS-Optimizer
allows a number of controlling parameters to evaluate the design features, the design
space and to generate the new individuals in the more optimal way. The most impor-
tant parameters are listed below:
Parameters of the optimization
• Number of generations. Describes the maximum number of generation within the
population. (Default value equals to 100)
• Population number. Describes the number of individuals per generation. (Default
value equals to 20)
• Crossover rate. Describes the percentage of population where two-bit crossover is
applied. The remaining parents are mutated. (Default value equals to 0.2)
• Perturbation.
– Standard deviation. Deﬁnes the deviation for parameter perturbation rela-
tive to the feasible domain. (Default value equals to 0.01).
28
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 6
Systematic studies on optimization
parameters
In this chapter it is shown how the optimization parameters have been set in order to
have a better performance in the optimization process with the aim of having more
accurate results or reduced computational effort.
In order to do the systematic studies, an example route has been ﬁxed. The route
studied crosses the North Atlantic Ocean which allows to observe disparities on the
parameter settings due to the considerable Orthodromic distance between the depar-
ture and destination coordinates.
Figure 6.1: Orthodromic distance between departure and destination coordinates for the
example route.
29
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 6. OPTIMIZATION PARAMETERS
The route departs from the north of Spain (43 °00’00.0”N, 12 °00’00.0”W) and crosses
the Atlantic Ocean to the west coast of North America to meet the destination point
(40 °00’00.0”N, 70 °00’00.0”W). The Orthodromic distance is equals to 2600 nautical
miles. As mentioned previously, the orthogonal deviation allowed to model the route
is 10% of the Orthodromic distance. Therefore, 260 nautical miles. In order to keep
a relatively low computational effort the number of way-points has been ﬁxed to 11.
Thus, 10 legs are evaluated. The number of free variables ascend to 19. This is, 9 rela-
tive to the position (the initial and ﬁnal way-points have ﬁxed position) and 10 relative
to the speed.
A simple Performance Prediction Program has been used at this stage of the project
in order to ﬁnd suitable parameters for the optimization in a fast way. The Prediction
Performance Program considers the True Wind Speed, True Wind Angle and the speed
of the vessel. The wave patterns are not added at this phase due to the complexity of
the wave interpolation modules.
An optimization problem consists of ﬁnding the best solution with regards to an spe-
ciﬁc objective from all the feasible solutions. In this case two objectives are met at the
time. The number of objectives together with free variables and the constraints make
every optimization problem unique. Therefore, an iterative process has been followed
in order to study the values that best suit the different optimization parameters. The
most representative plots for the iterative process are the ones shown in this chapter.
In order to start analyzing the parameters to improve the optimization performance, a
ﬁrst optimization is run with the default values.
Each red circle in the diagrams in this chapter represents the evaluation of one route
candidate, deﬁned by one set of free variables.
30
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 6. OPTIMIZATION PARAMETERS
Figure 6.2: First optimization with default values and initial population number equals to
100, showing fuel consumption over sailing time.
Figure 6.2 shows both objectives plotted against each other, the total sailing time on
the horizontal axis for a route candidate versus the total fuel consumption for that can-
didate on the vertical axis. As both objectives shall be minimized in the process, the
Pareto-optimal is the lower left boundary of the design space, according to ﬁgure 4.2.
It can be clearly seen that the generation of the Pareto-optimal front is not smooth.
Even though a high number of solutions are evaluated.
31
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 6. OPTIMIZATION PARAMETERS
6.0.1
NSGA-II - Perturbation parameter
Figure 6.3: Representation of one free variable, an example of position variable on the left and
a speed free variable on the right, against the number of designs evaluated. First optimization
with default values and DOE population number equals to 100.
Figure 6.3 shows a plot with an example of one position and speed free variable against
the number of designs. Thus, illustrates the evolution of that variable during the opti-
mization process. It can be seen that the free variables are clustered in a small number
of values, both for the speed and the position variable.
With this plot it has been determined that the perturbation parameter is very relevant
in the optimization process. The default standard deviation value used proves to be
insufﬁcient since a small number of values, within the range of the free variables, are
used. The standard deviation is the parameter that controls how large the perturba-
tions are with respect to the allowed range of a certain parameter.
By following an iterative process it has been determined that by enlarging the standard
deviation parameter and, thus, allowing a greater deviation beneﬁts the encountering
of the Pareto-optimal set. When close to an optimum, the perturbation is the most ef-
fective trigger for the optimization.
The default value for the standard deviation parameter is 0.01. After completing the
iterative process it has been seen that 0.2 is the value that better suits the optimization
process for the given number of objectives, free variables and constraints. Figure 6.4
shows an optimization with default values, with standard deviation set to 0.2.
32
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 6. OPTIMIZATION PARAMETERS
Figure 6.4: Optimization with default values. Standard deviation equals to 0.2.
It can be clearly seen the difference of the Pareto-optimal front only by enlarging the
standard deviation parameter.
This parameter is set constant for the rest of optimization processes.
6.0.2
Initial population size - DOE
During the ﬁrst phase of the optimization process, it has been observed that the ini-
tial population of the design space (DOE) is crucial to have a good performance of the
optimization algorithm, in this case NSGA-II. As mentioned previously, quasi-random
sequences present effective spreading of solutions in the feasible space. The number of
designs that compose the initial population is essential. An insufﬁcient number of de-
signs and, therefore, a poor DOE table impedes the detection of a convenient starting
point for a focused optimization problem. The default number for the initial popula-
tion is set to 100. Nonetheless, this is a low value that offers a poor DOE. Thus, the
initial population of the design space is not dense enough to guide the optimization.
An iterative process has been followed in order to ﬁnd a number that suits the problem.
It has been discovered that between three thousand and eight thousand of evaluations
33
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 6. OPTIMIZATION PARAMETERS
in total are required in order to ﬁnd the Pareto-optimal set of solutions for the studied
cases. Thus an initial population number of 1500 designs suits any optimization within
this range of evaluations. For the studies of parameters of NSGA-II in this chapter, the
DOE can be saved and used in multiple optimization always that the objectives, free
variables and constraints are maintained the same.
6.0.3
NSGA-II - Number of generations and population size
Two other relevant parameters for the optimization have turned to be the number of
generations within the population and the population number in every generation. An
empirical process has been followed in order to observe whether is better to increase
the number of generations and decrease the population number of each generation or
vice-versa.
In order to maintain the total number of designs, the same numbers have been used for
both experiments. For the ﬁrst case, the maximum number of generations within the
population is set to the maximum allowed, i.e. 100. The population number allowed
in each generation is ﬁxed to the default value, i.e. 20. Both are the default values in
the optimizer. The Pareto-front obtained can be seen in the following ﬁgure.
Figure 6.5: Case 1: Optimization done for numbers of generations equals to 100 and
population number equals to 20.
The same optimization is visualized with the number of designs in the x-axis and the
fuel consumption (left) and time (right) in the y-axis. The Pareto-optimal solutions are
34
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 6. OPTIMIZATION PARAMETERS
represented by the green dots.
Figure 6.6: Case 1: Representation of the fuel consumption (left) and time (right) against the
number of designs. Optimization done for numbers of generations equals to 100 and
population number equals to 20. The green dots represent the Pareto-optimal solutions.
For the second case, the parameters have been reversed. Thus the maximum number
of generations is set to 20 and there are 100 individuals in each generation. The same
plots as in the ﬁrst case are presented in order to compare both cases.
Figure 6.7: Case 2: Optimization done for numbers of generations equals to 20 and
population number equals to 100.
35
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 6. OPTIMIZATION PARAMETERS
Figure 6.8: Case 2: Representation of the fuel consumption (left) and time (right) against the
number of designs. Optimization done for numbers of generations equals to 20 and population
number equals to 100. The green dots represent the Pareto-optimal solutions.
The two cases are compared in order to see which combination of parameters better
suit the optimization process. Firstly, a comparison between the plots where the two
objectives are represented (Figures 6.5 and 6.7) is carried out. It can be seen that the
ﬁrst case (with large number of generations) the Pareto-optimal front appears to be
smoother for the slower routes. On the other case (with large population number on
each generation), the Pareto-optimal front presents better performance on the faster
routes. On top of that, both cases present fairly similar results with reasonably good
sampling of the Pareto-optimal front.
On the other hand, the plots where the fuel consumption objective is plotted against
the number of designs (Figures 6.6 (left) and 6.8 (left)) show signiﬁcant differences. In
the ﬁrst case, it can be seen that the design space is situated in a narrower space than in
case 2. Nonetheless, the optimization in case 1 is able to ﬁnd the ﬁrsts Pareto-optimal
solutions between the 1500 and 2000 evaluations. These Pareto-optimal designs do not
cover the entire fuel consumption range of solutions. Between 3000 and 3500 evalu-
ation are needed in order to cover the entire fuel consumption range. To obtain the
same amount of Pareto-optimal solutions in the second case, a number close to 3000
evaluations are needed. Nonetheless, these Pareto-optimal designs are distributed in
the entire fuel consumption range of solutions.
The same tendency can be visualized for the time objective plotted against the number
of designs (Figures 6.6 (right) and 6.8 (right)). The Pareto-optimal solutions are found
with less number of evaluations in the ﬁrst case. However, a better sampling of the
design space is shown in the second case.
36
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 6. OPTIMIZATION PARAMETERS
The convergence of the optimization process can be observed in the lower limit of
the graphs where the objectives are plotted against the number of evaluations (Figures
6.6 and 6.8) . In both cases it can be identiﬁed a clear convergence for both objectives.
In order to conclude, both cases present different beneﬁts and drawbacks. In order
to solve a route optimization problem where a low fuel consumption and therefore,
spending more time sailing is not a dilemma, the ﬁrst case (greater number of gen-
erations with a lower number of individuals within each generation) should be used.
In the opposite and regular case where the time is a restraint, the second case (with a
larger number of individuals for a lower number of generations) will be adopted.
Here, the second case, where the Pareto-optimal front presents better performance in
the Pareto-optimal solutions for faster routes, has been further developed.
Figure 6.8 shows that the Pareto-optimal solutions are found in the last evaluations
of the optimization process. A greater number of evaluations are simulated in order
to see how the performance of the population varies. To do so, the same tendency of
case two is followed. The population number is maintained to 100 and the number of
generations is duplicated to 40. Now for each generation, 40 individuals are evaluated.
Figure 6.9: Optimization done for numbers of generations equals to 40 and population
number equals to 100.
The Pareto-front between the competing objectives of this new parameter setting proves
to be smoother that the one presented in case 2 (with half number of generations).
37
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 6. OPTIMIZATION PARAMETERS
Moreover, when observing the position of the Pareto-optimal front it can be seen that
is located closer to both axes, thus, more optimal solutions are found when increasing
the number of evaluations. The Pareto-optimal front displays a general improvement
of 0.5 tonnes while having the same voyage time. Looking at a central point of the
Pareto-optimal set, for example for a voyage time of 200 hours the fuel consumption
is reduced from 6 to 5.5 tonnes if comparing Figure 6.7 and Figure 6.9. Which can be
translated to an improvement of 10% of optimization performance.
Figure 6.10: Representation of the fuel consumption (left) and time (right) against the
number of designs. Optimization done for numbers of generations equals to 40 and population
number equals to 100. The green dots represent the Pareto-optimal solutions.
In Figure 6.10, where the objectives are plotted against the number of designs, show
substantial differences when comparing to the ones from case 2 (Figure 6.8).
The
Pareto-optimal set of solutions, represented in green, are found in after larger number
of designs are evaluated. The ﬁrst optimal solutions appear after around 3000 design
evaluations. However, more optimal solutions are found. The convergence of both
objectives can be clearly observed in these plots.
Figure 6.11 shows a representation of one free variable (position on the left and velocity
on the right) against the number of evaluations. There have been selected the same
variables as in Figure 6.3. The aim of these plots is to show that with a wide initial
sampling population and the appropriate parameter setting the entire free variable
range is used, even though clear tendencies on the most favoured values can be seen.
38
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 6. OPTIMIZATION PARAMETERS
Figure 6.11: Representation of one free variable, example of position variable on the left and a
speed free variable on the right, against the number of designs evaluated. Optimization done
for numbers of generations equals to 40 and population number equals to 100.
6.0.4
NSGA-II - Crossover rate
In order to continue with the improvement of the optimization process, the crossover
rate has been studied. This parameter studies the percentage of population where two-
bit crossover is applied. The default value for the standard deviation is set to 0.2. An
iterative process has been followed here in order to see which is the value that best
suits this parameter with regards to the optimization process. All the optimizations
processes shown so far have been done using a the default value for this parameter.
Figure 12 shows the Pareto-optimal front for the competing objectives for the most
distinct crossover rate parameters.
39
==PAGE:46==
6.1. COMPUTATIONAL EFFORT OF ROM
CHAPTER 6. OPTIMIZATION PARAMETERS
Figure 6.12: Optimization done for numbers of generations equals to 40 and population
number equals to 100. Crossover rate equals to 0.2 (left) and 0.9 (right)
The default value (0.2) for the cross over rate is proved to be the one that best suits the
optimization process. It can be clearly seen that the Pareto-optimal set of solutions for
the default value is located closer to both axis. For the crossover rate equals to 0.9 there
are not Pareto-optimal solutions for the slowest routes. Beside of that, the population
is more homogeneous for the default value. Therefore, 0.2 is the value used for the
crossover rate.
6.1
Computational effort of ROM
In an optimization process is essential to keep in mind the computational effort needed
to run all the procedures in the ranges stated. Normally these procedures are substan-
tially complex and the ranges of allowance of free the free variables are wide in order
to ensure that the optimal solution is found.
The generation of solutions is done for the range of validity of the free variables. FS-
Optimizer allows to tune the spacing (number of bits) within the range of validity. The
default number of bits is 16. This means that for a cargo vessel that can sail between 0
and 20 knots, its validity range of velocity is compressed between 0 an 20 with a spac-
ing of 16 bits. What is the same, within this range there are 216 potential speeds that
are evaluated. Therefore the velocities are evaluated with a precision of 0.00031 knots.
The same happens with the position free variables. There is an orthogonal deviation
of the position in each control point of 10% of the Orthodoromic distance. The Ortho-
dromic distance in this speciﬁc case is equals to 2600 nautical miles. Therefore, there
range of validity of the position free variables is equals to 260 nautical miles. Thus,
there is a precision of 216 within a range of 260 nautical miles. The positions with this
40
==PAGE:47==
6.1. COMPUTATIONAL EFFORT
CHAPTER 6. OPTIMIZATION PARAMETERS
conﬁguration are evaluated with a precision of 0.004 nautical miles.
Both numbers are senseless when optimizing Atlantic routes for a cargo vessel.
The number of bits within the range of the free variables, affects signiﬁcantly the com-
putational effort. A systematic study on the reduction of these parameters has been
carried out.
A drastic reduction of these parameters has been implemented in order to evaluate
the performance of the optimization process in relation to the computational time. The
number of bits are reduced to 5 for both free variables. This means a resolution of 0.625
knots for the validity range of speed and 8.155 nautical miles for the range of position.
Figure 6.13: Optimization done for 5 bits of resolution for speed and position
Figure 6.13 shows that a resolution of 5 bits is not enough to perform a competitive
optimization, even though the computational effort is drastically reduced.
The number of bits have been reduced to 7 bits for the speed free variables and 8 bits
for the position free variables. What means a resolution of 0.156 knots and a resolution
of 1 nautical mile. The computational effort has been reduced in more than a 50% and
the sampling of the Pareto-optimal solution does not present relevant differences with
the optimization done for the default number of bits in the free variables range.
41
==PAGE:48==
6.1. COMPUTATIONAL EFFORT
CHAPTER 6. OPTIMIZATION PARAMETERS
Figure 6.14: Left: Optimization done with 7 and 8 bits of resolution for speed and position
free variables respectively. Right: Optimization done with 16 bits of resolution for speed and
position free variables.
42
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 7
Route optimization evaluation
In this chapter different route optimizations are presented in order to evaluate the
model. In order to be able to directly compare all the optimizations done, the ves-
sel used for all of them is the same. The vessel under study is an hypothetical vessel
which is not existing. The main particulars for this vessel are presented in the follow-
ing table.
Length between perpendiculars (LPP)
70 m
Beam in water line (BWL)
8 m
Block coefﬁcient (Cb)
0.6
Sail area (Asail)
1000 m2
Windage area (Are f )
50 m2
Table 7.1: Main particulars for cargo vessel studied.
A Performance Prediction Program is generated for this vessel. The ﬁnal Performance
Prediction Program generated in the Master’s Thesis: Performance Prediction Program
for Wind-Assisted Cargo Ships done by Martina Reche, has not been applied due to the
parallel development of both projects.
The Performance Prediction Program (PPP) considered here is based on a more com-
plex model than the one used for the systematic studies on optimization parameters.
The PPP considers windage force, sailing force and hull resistance. Seaway is consid-
ered in some of the evaluations using Kreitner approach [7]. The sail system has been
simpliﬁed. The vessel does not have a real conﬁguration for the wind propulsion sys-
tems but has an overall sail area of 1000 m2 as stated in Table 7.1. The inﬂuence of the
thrust that the sailing system can generate in relation to the total power demand the
can be observed in Figure 7.1. The sailing force module applies a coefﬁcient model,
which is based on the True Wind Direction (TWD). Current patterns are considered in
all optimizations.
43
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 7. EVALUATION
The route is the same one which has been studied in Chapter 6. A route crossing the
North Atlantic Ocean from East to West from North-West of Spain to the West Coast
of the United States. Winter time has been considered a signiﬁcant season to realize
the route optimization evaluation due to the high seaways and large wind conditions
that characterize the North Atlantic in this season. Therefore, the departure time of the
vessel takes place the ﬁrst of January of 2020. All the optimizations that are studied in
this chapter have the same departure time.
Four different conﬁgurations are studied in order to evaluate the route optimization
model:
• Vessel without WAPS for calm waters.
• Vessel without WAPS considering wave pattern.
• Vessel with WAPS for calm waters.
• Vessel with WAPS considering wave pattern.
Four polar diagrams are represented in order to observe the difference between the
four conﬁgurations.
The polar plots represent the power demand from the engine for a certain True Wind
Speed in relation to the True Wind Angle. This is done for the range of velocities that
the vessel can perform. For this case, the vessel has a maximum velocity of 16 knots
(see legend in Figure 7.1).
44
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 7. EVALUATION
Figure 7.1: Polar diagrams for the four different conﬁgurations with constant wind speed of
20 knots. Where the power demand is stated in KW. The plots on the top row are generated for
the vessel without WAPS. The ones on the bottom row, for the vessel with WAPS.
The ones from the top row represent a cargo vessel without wind assisted propulsion
systems, only motor. While the two bottom plots represent the same vessel with addi-
tional sailing devices.
It can be clearly seen the inﬂuence of the sailing devices on the power demand if the
bottom plots. The delivered power is signiﬁcantly reduced for True Wind Angles be-
tween 50 and 180 degrees. In special for the range comprised between 90 and 135
degrees, the so-called broad reach course. However, it can be seen that the inﬂuence of
the sailing devices does not exceed 20% the fuel consumption for the most favorable
True Wind Angles supposing a True Wind Speed of 20 knots.
When looking to the delivered powers, it can be clearly seen that the polar plots where
45
==PAGE:52==
7.1. ROUTE COMPARISON BETWEEN ORTHODROMIC DISTANCE AND
OPTIMIZED ROUTE
CHAPTER 7. EVALUATION
the seaway is considered have larger power demands. The added resistance is in-
creased due to the waves and, therefore, the power as well.
It can be observed that these also have an off-set center. The Performance Prediction
Program considers the wave direction is the same that the True Wind Direction. The
added resistance is lower for aft waves.
According to Ch.6, he parameters used for all the optimizations of this chapter are
described in Table 7.2.
Standard deviation
0.2
Design of Experiments (DOE)
1500
Number of generations
20
Population size
100
Crossover rate
0.2
Table 7.2: Optimization parameters used in Chapter 7.
7.1
Route comparison between Orthodromic distance and
optimized route
The scope of this section is to test ROM. Different comparisons are done between non-
optimized and optimized routes. In order analyze the route optimization, the shortest
route in distance i.e. Orthodromic distance is compared with the optimized route for a
certain speed. For this case the positional free variables are assumed to be zero. There
is not orthogonal deviation in any of the way-points. The velocity free variables are
considered ﬁxed to a certain value. A constant speed of 10 knots has been considered
reasonable to study the optimization performance. It is a moderate speed which allows
the study of other factors, in special wind inﬂuence. The Froude number of the vessel
for 10 of speed is calculated by using the following equation:
Fr =
V
p
g · L = 0.196
(7.1.1)
The Froude number for merchant vessels commonly oscillate between 0.15 and 0.25 or
even 0.28 for the faster ships. A constant speed of 10 knots represents a Froude number
that does not deviate from this range.
46
==PAGE:53==
7.1. ROUTE COMPARISON BETWEEN ORTHODROMIC DISTANCE AND
OPTIMIZED ROUTE
CHAPTER 7. EVALUATION
7.1.1
Calm water
Vessel without WAPS for calm water.
The ﬁrst route optimization has been done for the vessel without Wind Assisted Propul-
sion Systems, therefor it can only motor sail. The optimization does not consider sea-
way. Only wind pattern is considered in this case.
By using a constant speed of 10 knots, the shortest route in distance i.e. Orthodromic
distance has been computed. The time and fuel consumption needed are listed in the
following table:
Time
260 hours
Fuel consumption
3.55 tonnes
Table 7.3: Time and fuel consumption for Orthodromic distance for vessel without WAPS for
calm waters for constant speed of 10 kn.
An optimization is done for this case in order to ﬁnd a better route with regards to the
time and fuel consumption objectives. The aim here is to ﬁnd a route that allows the
vessel to reduce the fuel consumption while maintaining the Estimated Arrival Time
by making use of the environmental conditions.
The Pareto graph between the competing objectives are presented in Figure 7.9.
47
==PAGE:54==
7.1. ROUTE COMPARISON BETWEEN ORTHODROMIC DISTANCE AND
OPTIMIZED ROUTE
CHAPTER 7. EVALUATION
Figure 7.2: Optimization done for vessel without WAPS and calm waters. Green: selected
route evaluation with same sailing time as shortest distance and ﬁxed speed.
The optimization presents a smooth Pareto-front with a wide range of optimal so-
lutions. 3500 evaluations have been needed in order to achieve this Pareto-optimal
set. According to the Ideal Multi-Objective approach, a solution is selected basing in a
higher-level of information. In this case the ETA is known, therefore, an optimal solu-
tion is selected from the Pareto-optimal front based on that.
The green dot represents the Pareto-optimal solution for a voyage time of 260 hours.
The fuel consumption used for a 260 hours of voyage, according to the optimal set of
solutions, 3.52 tonnes.
Time
260 hours
Fuel consumption for Orthodromic distance
3.55 tonnes
Fuel consumption optimized
3.52 tonnes
fuel consumption reduction
1%
Table 7.4: Objectives comparison between Orthodromic distance and optimization for vessel
without WAPS for calm waters.
In Table 7.4 it can be seen the difference between fuel consumption for the shortest
48
==PAGE:55==
7.1. ROUTE COMPARISON BETWEEN ORTHODROMIC DISTANCE AND
OPTIMIZED ROUTE
CHAPTER 7. EVALUATION
route in distance and the optimized route. The optimization only beneﬁts the fuel con-
sumption in 0.03 tonnes of fuel in this ﬁrst case. However, as mentioned above, this
ﬁrst optimization is done for pure motor sailing for calm water only considering the
wind and current patterns. Therefore, the optimization in terms of fuel consumption
is only dependent on the windage caused by hull and superstructure i.e. added re-
sistance due to wind, and the current patter. Both factors present residual impact on
the optimization process. Nonetheless, despite not being signiﬁcant, a reduction in the
fuel consumption has been achieved.
Vessel with WAPS for calm water.
In this second case it is studied the vessel with Wind Assisted Propulsion Systems
for calm water. The same systematic is used as in case one. Thus, the Orthodromic
distance is calculated for 10 knots of constant speed. Equal conditions are applied here.
However, the Performance Prediction Program includes a wind propulsion system in
this second situation.
Time
260 hours
Fuel consumption
3.22
Table 7.5: Time and fuel consumption for Orthodromic distance for vessel with WAPS for
calm waters for constant speed of 10 kn.
If comparing Table 7.3 and 7.5 it can be observed that 9% of reduction in fuel consump-
tion can be achieved by simply using the sailing devices where possible but without
adapting speed and course.
The optimization for this case can be seen in Figure 7.3, where the confronted objectives
are represented.
49
==PAGE:56==
7.1. ROUTE COMPARISON BETWEEN ORTHODROMIC DISTANCE AND
OPTIMIZED ROUTE
CHAPTER 7. EVALUATION
Figure 7.3: Optimization done for vessel with WAPS and calm water. Green: selected route
evaluation with same sailing time as shortest distance and ﬁxed speed.
It can be seen that the Pareto-optimal front is slightly less smooth in this case than in
the previous one. 3500 designs are also evaluated in this case. The addition of the Wind
Assisted Propulsion Systems difﬁcult the optimization process. More parameters need
to be taken into account. Therefore, is more difﬁcult to ﬁnd the Pareto-optimal solu-
tions.
The computational effort is intended to be maintained as low as possible that is why
the number of evaluations has been kept to 3500 to maintain the balance between com-
putational time and performance.
The green dot represents the optimal solution for a voyage time of 260 hours. If the
route is optimized, the vessel consumes 2.76 tonnes of fuel, which is an additional
saving of 14.2% of fuel consumption.
50
==PAGE:57==
7.1. ROUTE COMPARISON BETWEEN ORTHODROMIC DISTANCE AND
OPTIMIZED ROUTE
CHAPTER 7. EVALUATION
Time
260 hours
Fuel consumption for Orthodromic distance
3.22 tonnes
Fuel consumption optimized
2.76 tonnes
fuel consumption reduction
14,2%
Table 7.6: Objectives comparison between Orthodromic distance and optimization for vessel
with WAPS for calm waters.
The wind pattern plays a key role in this optimization. Wind Assisted Propulsion Sys-
tems can strategically use the wind conditions in their beneﬁt. The power required by
using the thrust generated by the sailing devices can be drastically decreased when
cleverly use the wind resources.
Figure 7.4 shows the True Wind Angle for the Orthodromic and optimized routes in
order to study whether the optimizer is able to exploit the sailing devices by the given
weather conditions.
Figure 7.4: True Wind Angle in the different way-points, The blue curve represents the TWA
that the vessel would experience if following the Orthodromic route. The orange curve
represents the TWA the vessel would experience in the optimized route. Vessel with WAPS for
calm water.
It can be clearly seen that the True Wind Angles is maintained within the range of an-
gles that are more proﬁtable in order to reduce the fuel consumption. According to
Figure 7.1, this interval is TWA ϵ [70,150] deg.
51
==PAGE:58==
7.1. ROUTE COMPARISON BETWEEN ORTHODROMIC DISTANCE AND
OPTIMIZED ROUTE
CHAPTER 7. EVALUATION
A 14,2% of reduction has been achieved by making use of ROM for the conﬁguration
where the vessel has sailing devices only calm water is considered.
7.1.2
Seaway
Vessel without WAPS considering seaway
This optimization is done for pure motor vessel, which does not have any sailing de-
vices installed. The seaway is considered in this case.
Table 7.7 shows the fuel consumption if the Orthodromic route was followed by the
vessel with a constant speed of 10 knots.
Time
260 hours
Fuel consumption
16.35 tonnes
Table 7.7: Objectives for vessel without WAPS with seaway for constant speed of 10 kn.
An optimization is carried out for this speciﬁc case. Figure 7.5 shows the confronting
objectives in each axis.
Figure 7.5: Optimization done for vessel without WAPS and seaway. Green: selected route
evaluation with same sailing time as shortest distance and ﬁxed speed.
52
==PAGE:59==
7.1. ROUTE COMPARISON BETWEEN ORTHODROMIC DISTANCE AND
OPTIMIZED ROUTE
CHAPTER 7. EVALUATION
This graph promptly shows a drastic general increase of fuel consumption. A signiﬁ-
cant increase of fuel consumption is to be expected due to the season and the high sea
stated encountered (see Figure 7.7), thus the results are considered plausible.
It can be observed at ﬁrst sight that the Pareto-optimal front presents some roughness.
The addition of the wave pattern drastically increases the complexity of the optimiza-
tion. The presence of steeper gradients due to the seaway inclusion difﬁcult the en-
countering of optimal solutions. More designs need to be evaluated in this case. 5900
evaluations have been necessary in order to ﬁnd the Pareto-optimal set of solutions
illustrated in Figure 7.5. Which represents nearly twice the amount needed when the
seaway was not considered. Therefore, the addition of seaway highly increases the
computational effort of the optimization.
The green dot represents the Pareto-optimal solution for the sailing time of 260 hours.
The optimized route for this optimal solution is represented in Figure 7.6.
Figure 7.6: Route optimized for vessel without WAPS and seaway.
The fuel consumption for the optimized route is shown in comparison with the fuel
consumption for the Orthodromic route.
53
==PAGE:60==
7.1. ROUTE COMPARISON BETWEEN ORTHODROMIC DISTANCE AND
OPTIMIZED ROUTE
CHAPTER 7. EVALUATION
Time
260 hours
Fuel consumption for Orthodromic distance
16.35 tonnes
Fuel consumption optimized
9.21 tonnes
fuel consumption reduction
43,6%
Table 7.8: Objectives comparison between Orthodromic distance and optimization for vessel
without WAPS considering seaway.
The route optimization shows high fuel savings when comparing the consumption
with the one from the Orthodromic route.
The crossing of North Atlantic Ocean during winter time against prevailing wind di-
rection can trigger the encountering of considerable wave heights above. Which is the
case here. Figure 7.7 shows the signiﬁcant wave height if following the Orthodromic
route with the blue curve. Orange curve represents the encountered signiﬁcant wave
heights in the optimized route.
Figure 7.7: Wave height in way-points. The blue curve represents the wave height the vessel
would encounter if following the Orthodromic route. The orange curve represents the wave
height the vessel would encounter in the optimized route. Vessel without WAPS considering
seaway.
It can be seen that there are two important peaks in the wave pattern for Orthodromic
route. The vessel encounters huge waves that trigger the high demand of fuel con-
sumption. However, the optimized route avoids the two large peaks. The optimization
is able to ﬁnd a route with reasonably low signiﬁcant wave heights in order to dimin-
ish the added resistance and, therefore, the fuel consumption.
54
==PAGE:61==
7.1. ROUTE COMPARISON BETWEEN ORTHODROMIC DISTANCE AND
OPTIMIZED ROUTE
CHAPTER 7. EVALUATION
However, the added resistance due to waves considered in the Performance Prediction
Program, as said previously on this chapter, has been calculated by using the Kreitner
approach. It is possible that this approach overestimates the added resistance for the
large wave heights observed here. Therefore, the fuel consumption could also be over-
estimated.
Figure 7.8 and 7.9 capture the most visible differences between the Orthodromic and
optimized routes according to the wind speed.
Figure 7.8: Wind chart at way-point number 6. The direction of the arrow correspond to the
True Wind Direction and the colors of correspond to the True Wind Speed. Comparison
between Orthodromic route and optimized route. Vessel without WAPS with seaway. Where
the dark blue represents a True Wind Speed of 7 knots and the intense red represents 50 knots
of True Wind Speed.
In these captions it can be clearly observed that the optimized route avoids high head-
winds while crossing way-point number 6. The vessel is able to navigate a relatively
calm condition instead.
55
==PAGE:62==
7.1. ROUTE COMPARISON BETWEEN ORTHODROMIC DISTANCE AND
OPTIMIZED ROUTE
CHAPTER 7. EVALUATION
Figure 7.9: Wind chart at way-point number 9. The direction of the arrow correspond to the
True Wind Direction and the colors of correspond to the True Wind Speed. Comparison
between Orthodromic route and optimized route. Vessel without WAPS with seaway. Where
the dark blue represents a True Wind Speed of 7 knots and the intense red represents 50 knots
of True Wind Speed.
In these captions the most signiﬁcant aspect is that the optimized route sails further
north in order not to cross an area with high head winds that would be crossed if
sailing along the Orthodromic route.
Vessel with WAPS considering seaway
In this last case, it is studied the route optimization for the vessel with Wind Assisted
Propulsion Systems considering seaway.
The fuel consumption when sailing at a constant speed of 10 knots following the Or-
thodromic route is stated in Table 7.9.
Time
260 hours
Fuel consumption
16.05 tonnes
Table 7.9: Objectives for vessel with WAPS with seaway for constant speed of 10 kn.
If comparing Table 7.7 and Table 7.9 it can be observed that the reduction of fuel con-
sumption by simply using the sailing devices without adjusting the course and speed
is less than 2%.
In order to reduce this amount of fuel stated in Table 7.9, an optimization is carried
out. Figure 7.10 represents the competing objectives.
56
==PAGE:63==
7.1. ROUTE COMPARISON BETWEEN ORTHODROMIC DISTANCE AND
OPTIMIZED ROUTE
CHAPTER 7. EVALUATION
Figure 7.10: Optimization done for vessel with WAPS and seaway. Green: selected route
evaluation with same sailing time as shortest distance and ﬁxed speed.
Is also visible in this case that the Pareto-optinal front has roughness. The compu-
tational effort is kept as low as possible in all the cases. After 7000 evaluations the
optimization has been stopped in order to keep the balance between precision of re-
sults and computational effort.
The Pareto-optimal route according to the sailing time for a constant speed of 10 knots
is represented by a green dot. The optimized route is represented in Figure 7.11.
57
==PAGE:64==
7.1. ROUTE COMPARISON BETWEEN ORTHODROMIC DISTANCE AND
OPTIMIZED ROUTE
CHAPTER 7. EVALUATION
Figure 7.11: Route optimized for vessel with WAPS and seaway.
The vessel deviates substantially from the Orthodromic distance in order to avoid non-
desired weather conditions.
By optimizing the route it is possible to achieve considerable savings. The difference
in fuel consumption for both routes is stated in Table 7.10.
Time
260 hours
Fuel consumption for Orthodromic distance
16.05 tonnes
Fuel consumption optimized
8.65 tonnes
fuel consumption reduction
46,1%
Table 7.10: Objectives comparison between Orthodromic distance and optimization for vessel
with WAPS considering seaway.
This amount of reduction when following the optimized route instead of the Ortho-
dromic route is obtained since the vessel avoids large wave heights. In Figure 7.12 is
it possible to see the signiﬁcant wave heights the vessel encounters if following the
shortest route in distance or the optimized route.
58
==PAGE:65==
7.1. ROUTE COMPARISON BETWEEN ORTHODROMIC DISTANCE AND
OPTIMIZED ROUTE
CHAPTER 7. EVALUATION
Figure 7.12: Wave height in way-points. The blue curve represents the wave height the vessel
would encounter if following the Orthodromic route. The orange curve represents the wave
height the vessel would encounter in the optimized route. Vessel with WAPS considering
seaway.
As well as for the vessel without sailing devices, the optimization proves to be able to
avoid large waves. Therefore reducing the added resistance and the fuel consumption.
It is clear that during winter time and with the large waves encountered the main
objective is to avoid large wave heights. However, the True Wind Angle that the vessel
experiences has been studied in order to observe the capability of the optimizer to ﬁnd
routes suitable for the sailing devices according to the True Wind Angle. Figure 7.13
represents the different TWA that the vessel experiences in each leg of the optimization.
59
==PAGE:66==
7.1. ROUTE COMPARISON BETWEEN ORTHODROMIC DISTANCE AND
OPTIMIZED ROUTE
CHAPTER 7. EVALUATION
Figure 7.13: True Wind Angle in the different way-points. The blue curve represents the
TWA that the vessel would experience if following the Orthodromic route. The orange curve
represents the TWA the vessel would experience in the optimized route. Vessel with WAPS
considering seaway.
Figure 7.13 shows that the main peak with head wind for the Orthodromic route is
avoided in the optimized route. Moreover, the TWA is maintained within the range
of angles where the sailing devices can generate more thrust, according to Figure 7.1
TWA ϵ [70,150] deg.
The weather systems can be visualized in the following ﬁgures between the Orthogo-
nal route and the optimized route in the most relevant way-points.
In this case with Wind Assisted Propulsion Systems it can be observed that the vessel
also avoids head winds while avoiding large wave heights.
60
==PAGE:67==
7.2. ROUTE COMPARISON BETWEEN CARGO VESSELS WITH WAPS AND PURE
MOTOR SAILING
CHAPTER 7. EVALUATION
Figure 7.14: Wind chart at way-point number 6. The direction of the arrow correspond to the
True Wind Direction and the colors of correspond to the True Wind Speed. Comparison
between Orthodromic route and optimized route. Vessel with WAPS with seaway. Where the
dark blue represents a True Wind Speed of 7 knots and the intense red represents 50 knots of
True Wind Speed.
Figure 7.15: Wind chart at way-point number 9. The direction of the arrow correspond to the
True Wind Direction and the colors of correspond to the True Wind Speed. Comparison
between Orthodromic route and optimized route. Vessel with WAPS with seaway. Where the
dark blue represents a True Wind Speed of 7 knots and the intense red represents 50 knots of
True Wind Speed.
7.2
Route comparison between cargo vessels with WAPS
and pure motor sailing
In the previous section, four cases have been studied. The fuel savings of the vessel
when having sailing devices installed or not diverge substantially.
Table 7.11 and 7.12 present the fuel consumption reduction in both cases for the chosen
route.
61
==PAGE:68==
7.2. ROUTE COMPARISON BETWEEN CARGO VESSELS WITH WAPS AND PURE
MOTOR SAILING
CHAPTER 7. EVALUATION
Calm water
Time
260 hours
Fuel consumption motor sailing
3.52 tonnes
Fuel consumption WAPS
2.76 tonnes
fuel consumption reduction
21.6%
Table 7.11: Objectives comparison between optimized routes for vessel without WAPS and
vessel with sailing devices for calm water.
Seaway
Time
260 hours
Fuel consumption motor sailing
9.20 tonnes
Fuel consumption WAPS
8.65 tonnes
fuel consumption reduction
6.0%
Table 7.12: Objectives comparison between optimized routes for vessel without WAPS and
vessel with sailing devices considering seaway.
The inclusion of the Wind Assisted Propulsion Systems in the optimization process
has a high impact on the results. When observing fuel reduction due to the addition
of sailing devices for calm water it can be clearly seen how the vessel deviates from
the Orthodromic route in beneﬁt of the sailing devices. The main objective is to ﬁnd
the most suitable course, so the vessel experiences True Wind Angles that allow to
generate the maximum thrust according to Figure 7.1 and, thus, lower the total fuel
consumption.
The reductions achieved have different magnitude when contemplating the wave pat-
tern. It has been observed that if following the Orthodromic route the vessel would
encounter large wave heights which radically increase the added resistance. The main
aim of the optimizer is to avoid the large wave heights; Figure 7.12, in order to be able
to reduce the added resistance and, therefore, the fuel consumption. However, the
optimized route for the vessel with Wind Assisted Propulsion Systems proves to ﬁnd
suitable True Wind Angles for the vessel, Figure 7.13. The vessel is able to take proﬁt
of the thrust generated by sailing devices while avoiding high seaways.
62
==PAGE:69==
7.2. ROUTE COMPARISON BETWEEN CARGO VESSELS WITH WAPS AND PURE
MOTOR SAILING
CHAPTER 7. EVALUATION
Figure 7.16: True Wind Angle comparison for vessel with WAPS for calm water condition on
the left and considering seaway on the right.
It is important to observe that the True Wind Angles for the optimized route for calm
water are clustered in a smaller range. This range is comprised between 70 and 140
degrees (with the exception of way-point number 10). According to Figure 7.1 they are
the TWA for which more thrust can be generated.
On the other side, the TWA for the optimized route with seaway are still suitable for
the thrust generation but not with the same magnitude. The optimizer prioritize the
large wave heights avoidance over the thrust generation.
It is obvious that the seaway can not be neglected in route modeling since there is a
substantial difference in the magnitude of the results. Therefore, for this case under
study, the implementation of Wind Assisted Propulsion Systems can beneﬁt the fuel
reduction in terms of route optimization in a 6% when comparing to pure motor sail-
ing.
63
==PAGE:70==
Chapter 8
Conclusions
The main objective in this Master’s Thesis was to build a generic tool in order to pre-
dict fuel savings when optimizing a route for a cargo vessel with any Wind Assisted
Propulsion System.
The model which has been developed is suitable for any cargo vessel with or with-
out Wind Assisted Propulsion Systems. ROM has proven to be able to ﬁnd optimal
routes for both cases for a given sailing time. Moreover, the model can predict the fuel
savings when comparing the optimized routes between pure motor sailing and sail as-
sisted sailing.
Systematic studies for the optimization parameters have been developed in order to
improve the performance of the optimization process. Proper settings for those pa-
rameters have been found which notably reduce the computational effort while giving
reliable results.
Moreover, the route optimization model has been exempliﬁed by applying it to a cargo
vessel. Different optimizations have been carried out considering the same scenario for
the case where the vessel entirely sails using its engines and the case where the vessel
is provided with Wind Assisted Propulsion Systems. Signiﬁcant reduction in fuel con-
sumption has been achieved when optimizing the route for the motor sailing. How-
ever, even higher savings are obtained from the route optimization when installing
wind-assited sailing devices. The optimization proves to avoid high sea states while
meeting the Estimated Arrival Time stated.
Furthermore, a signiﬁcant reduction of fuel consumption has been shown when com-
paring the route optimizations between the vessel with and without sailing devices in
beneﬁt of the Wind Asisted Propulsion Systems.
64
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 8. CONCLUSIONS
Further development
In order to further develop the route optimization model, some suggestions are stated
in the following paragraph.
Computational effort has been the main issue in the thesis development. It is crucial
to reduce the computational effort of the model in order to be able to achieve more
precision in the obtainment of the results for practical applications. In order to keep
the computational time reasonably low to test the model, only eleven way-points are
evaluated in a route which crosses the Atlantic Ocean. Therefore, it has been consid-
ered that the environmental conditions are constant for the entire leg that separates
two consecutive way-points. A larger number of way-points would trigger to have
more reliable results.
A greater number of way-points, as mentioned, means the addition of two free vari-
ables per way-point. A possibility to avoid the extension in the free variable num-
ber could be to have control points in between the way-points in order to evaluate
the weather conditions and the Performance Prediction Program at those points. The
course would not be modiﬁed in the control points but the precision of the results
would be highly improved. For all way-points and control points, weather and PPP
interpolations will be carried out which are highly computational costly. However, the
introduction of free variables could be avoided.
For this Master’s Thesis, it has been considered important to evaluate the entire set of
solutions. In all the optimizations shown, the design space has not been constrained.
However, for practical application of the Route Optimization Model, another sugges-
tion could be to constraint the sailing time and the fuel consumption depending on
speciﬁc needs. By doing that the Pareto-optimal front could be reduced in size and the
optimization could be focused in a smaller area which would decrease the computa-
tional effort.
65
==PAGE:72==
References
PAPERS
[1] Hinnenthal, J., (2008). Robust Pareto - Optimum Routing of ships utilizing De-
terministic and Ensemble Weather Forecasts. Technischen Universit¨at Berlin, Berlin,
Germany.
[2] G. D. S. Davies and T. Waseda (2019). Optimal Routing of a Wind-Powered Cargo
Vessel Using Ensemble Weather Forecast Data. London, UK.
[3] Deb, K., Pratap, S. Agarwal, S. and Meyarivan, T. (2001). A Fast and Elitist Mul-
tiobjective Genetic Algorithm: NSGA-II, KanGal, Indian Institute of Kanpur, Kanpur,
India.
[4] Naderi, B., Sadeghi, H. (2011). A Multi-objective Simulated Annealing Algorithm
for Solving the Flexible no-wait Flowshop Scheduling Problem with Transportation
Times. Qazvin Branch, Islamic Azad University, Qazvin, Iran.
[5] Lalwani, S., Singhal, S., Kumar, R. and Gupta, N. (2013). A Comprehensive Survey:
Applications of Multi-Objective Particle Swarm Optimization (MOPSO) Algorithm.
[6] N. Srinivas and K. Deb. (1995). Multiobjective Function Optimization Using Non-
dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithms Evol. Comput., vol. 2, pp. 221–248.
[7] KREITNER, J. (1939), Heave, pitch and resistance of ships in a seaway, Trans. Insti-
tution of Naval Architects 81.
[8] Rostan, P., Rostan, A. (2013). Testing Quasi-random Versus Pseudorandom Num-
bers on Option Pricing. AESTIMATIO, the IEB international journal of ﬁnance, 2013.
6: 96-115.
[9] IACS Recommendation No. 34, Standard Wave Data (1992)(Rev.1 June 2000)(Corr.
November 2001).
66
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 8. CONCLUSIONS
[10] Third IMO GHG Study 2014. International Maritime Organization (IMO) LON-
DON, United Kingdom. (2015). Smith, T. W. P., Jalkanen, J. P., Anderson, B. A., Cor-
bett, J. J., Hanayama, S., O’Keeffee, E., Parker, S., Johanssom, L., Aldous, L., Raucci,
C., Traut, M., Ettinger, S., Nielssen, D., Lee, D. S., Ng, S., Agrawal, A., Winebrake, J. J.,
Hoen, M., Chesworth, S., Pandey, A.
BOOKS
[12] Thomsen, K., (2014). Offshore Wind. A Comprehensive Guide to Successful Off-
shore Wind Farm Installation Book. 2nd ed. London: Academic Press.
[13] Deb K., Deb K. (2014) Multi-objective Optimization. In: Burke E., Kendall G. (eds)
Search Methodologies. Springer, Boston, MA.
[14] Press, W. H., Flannery, B. P., Teukolsky, S. A. and Vetterling, W. T. (1988): Numeri-
cal recipies in C, Cambridge University Press, New York
[15] Birk, L. and Harries, S. (Editors) (2003): OPTIMISTIC – Optimization in Marine
Design, Mensch Buch Verlag, Berlin, ISBN 3-89820-514-2
WEB SITES
[16] Copernicus - Marine Environment Monitoring Service. (www.marine.copernicus.eu)
[17] United States National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. (www.noaa.gov)
67
==PAGE:74==
==PAGE:75==
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Section of Fluid Mechanics, Coastal and Maritime Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Nils Koppels Allé, Bld. 403
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark
Phone: +45 4525 1360
Fax: +45 4525 1961
www.mek.dtu.dk
July 2020
