==PAGE:1==
Development of a life-cycle-based
tool for environmental screening of
wind turbines
Master Thesis in Environmental Engineering
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
supervisors:
Alexis Laurent & Justine Beauson
DTU Management, DTU Wind Energy
Technical University of Denmark
August 9, 2020
==PAGE:2==
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Abstract
In this thesis an Excel-based tool for screening possible environmental impacts associated
with onshore, geared wind turbines of the size 0.6-5MW is developed, building on LCA
framework, data from literature, and the LCA database ecoinvent. Material relations for
calculating the needed amounts of materials from a wind turbine’s simple parameters are
derived and tested for accuracy; the relations in general underestimate material needs
for smaller turbines and overestimate for larger turbines due to an outlier 5MW turbine
in the data utilised for deriving the relations. Environmental proﬁles are constructed
from assessing unit processes from ecoinvent in the LCA software SimaPro using the
LCIA method ReCiPe 2016 v1.1 midpoint, hierarchist version. These are combined in
the screening tool with the material amounts calculated by the material relations to give
impact scores for the modelled wind turbine. The accuracy of the results are tested by
remodelling LCA studies from the literature and comparing the global warming potential
results; the screening tool does reasonably well, but generally overestimates impacts from
larger turbines, most likely because of the overestimation of materials from the material
relations. Improvements can be made by collecting more data to derive better material
relations and expand the screening tool to also include oﬀshore turbines and with direct
drivetrain, and by adding more materials, especially new and upcoming being researched
for use in future wind turbines.
1
==PAGE:3==
CONTENTS
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Contents
1
Introduction
4
2
Description of the Screening Tool
5
2.1
LCA information: Goal and Scope, Functional Unit, System Boundaries . .
6
2.2
Turbine specs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Material relations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Environmental proﬁles from ecoinvent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5
Detailed model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5.1
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.5.2
Processes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5.3
End of Life
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.5.4
Transport . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.5.5
Installation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.5.6
Maintenance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.5.7
Decommissioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.6
Electricity grid mixes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.7
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3
Testing/Validation
22
3.1
Redoing bills of materials of studies delivering data for the material relations 23
3.2
Testing bills of materials from other studies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3
Testing Global Warming Potential results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.4
Component contribution comparisons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4
Uncertainties
33
4.1
Material relations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Modelling choices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3
Environmental proﬁles from ReCiPe2016 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
2
==PAGE:4==
CONTENTS
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
4.4
Sensitivity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5
Conclusions and future work
40
6
Bibliography
42
A Information from literature
46
A.1 Adjusted End of Life processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
A.2 Electricity processes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
B Electricity grid mix
56
C Testing BOMs
59
D Testing BOMs from other studies
63
E Remodelling of studies
67
E.1
Redoing Alsaleh and Sattler (2019) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
E.2
Redoing Gomaa et al. (2019) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
E.3
Redoing Bonou et al. (2016) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
E.4
Redoing Garrett and Rønde (2013) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
E.5
Redoing Guezuraga et al. (2012) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
F Testing GWP
88
G Characterisation factors for GWP
89
H Component Contribution Comparisons
90
H.1 Alsaleh and Sattler (2019) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
H.2 Gomaa et al. (2019) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
H.3 Garrett and Rønde (2013) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
I
Literature review
92
3
==PAGE:5==
1
INTRODUCTION
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
1
Introduction
In the transition from fossil fuels towards more sustainable energy sources with less or
no eﬀects on climate change, horizontal axis wind turbines constitute one technology al-
ready in commercial use which is continuously developed and improved upon for more
powerful and eﬃcient harvesting of wind energy. There are, however, more environmental
aspects besides climate change to consider relating to wind turbines (and all other tech-
nologies). Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) is an ISO (14044) standardised method used to
assess the possible environmental impacts associated with products and services to get a
comprehensive overview so that burden-shifting from one area to another can be avoided.
Several LCA case studies of wind turbines have been conducted over the past few
decades (see the literature study in appendix I), and attempts have been made to compare
these diﬀerent studies in meta-analyses by harmonising the various system boundaries,
assumptions, and Life Cycle Impact Assessment (LCIA) methods used (see e.g. Dammeier
et al. (2019), Mendecka and Lombardi (2019), Kaldellis and Apostolou (2017), Dolan and
Heath (2012), Caduﬀet al. (2012) or Price and Kendall (2012)).
Because LCIA methods often diﬀer in which environmental areas of concern they
include in their impact categories, the assumptions behind how their impact scores are
calculated, which substances are included, and the units used to report the impact scores,
Global Warming Potential (GWP) – which builds on the work by the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change, IPCC1 – has been the only impact category compared in the
meta-studies identiﬁed in the literature study conducted in relation to this thesis.
This lack of comprehensive comparability between studies makes it hard for researchers
and developers of wind turbine components and technologies to consider environmental
concerns in their research. DTU Wind Energy (DTU WE) is one institution conducting
research on wind turbines, and as part of their initiatives to work with sustainability, they
wish for a tool to assess (or screen) the environmental impacts associated with the wind
turbines they develop.
1www.ipcc.ch
4
==PAGE:6==
2
DESCRIPTION OF THE SCREENING TOOL
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
This thesis is about the development of an Excel-based tool for screening the possible
environmental impacts related to the entire life cycle of wind turbines for the researchers
at DTU WE to use in their research. The screening tool is based on the LCA framework,
drawing on the LCA database ecoinvent (ecoinvent, 2019) for processes to model the
wind turbine system and using the LCIA method ReCiPe 2016 v1.1 (H) (Huijbregts et al.,
2017b) in the LCA software SimaPro 9.1 for converting these processes into environmental
proﬁles of materials, processes etc. Input data are gathered from previous LCA studies
on wind turbines for deriving material relations used in the screening tool to calculate the
amounts of material required for a generic model of a wind turbine, and further studies
are used for testing and validating the results of the screening tool.
This ﬁrst version of the screening tool has limited usability because it is sparsely
populated with data and is rather a proof of concept than a comprehensive tool. It works
best for turbines of size 0.6-5MW, see further details in the conclusions.
In the following, the workings of the screening tool are described in detail, including
the material relations translating simple parameters entered by the user into a bill of
material for the wind turbine, and how this is combined with environmental proﬁles to
obtain LCIA results for the modelled wind turbine. Then a series of tests for validating
the accuracy of the screening tool is shown and discussed, followed by a discussion of the
uncertainties related to the results. Lastly, further work on improving the screening tool
is given together with conclusions.
2
Description of the Screening Tool
This section explains the setup of the screening tool and documents the work done for
building it. As the screening tool is performing a wind turbine speciﬁc LCA, ﬁrstly the
information required of an LCA is given.
5
==PAGE:7==
2
DESCRIPTION OF THE SCREENING TOOL
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
2.1
LCA information: Goal and Scope, Functional Unit, System
Boundaries
DTU WE intends to use the results obtained from the screening tool for research funding
applications, where sustainability considerations have begun to have a higher weight than
previously. The results are also intended to be used in everyday research for making
decisions on which wind turbine blade designs are better, where ”better” can include
economic aspects, social aspects, and – with this screening tool – environmental aspects.
It is possible to use the results from the screening tool for both hot spot analysis and
comparisons. However, due to the limited number of materials and processes included in
this ﬁrst version, the user should carefully state the limitations and assumptions made
during the analysis when communicating the results.
The target audience of the screening tool is the researchers of DTU WE, but could
in the future – if the screening tool is further developed – also include the wind turbine
industry. Depending on the aim of a speciﬁc model done in the screening tool, the results
are then communicated from the users of it (i.e. DTU WE) to the receivers, who could
be the committee of funding applications or other researchers within the group.
The functional unit used in the screening tool is:
The production of 1kWh electricity by a wind turbine as speciﬁed by the
settings in the screening tool.
Within the screening tool it is possible to deﬁne the speciﬁcations of the wind turbine
(nameplate power, blade length, hub height, load factor, lifetime; these are the ”how well”
questions of the functional unit), the year of its construction and of its decommissioning
(the ”when” and temporal scope of the functional unit) - but not the location of its
manufacture, installation, or disposal (the geographical scope of the functional unit), as
this normally aﬀects which LCA database processes are chosen for the model and this
level of adaptation is not yet possible in the screening tool.
The model in the screening tool is build around one entire wind turbine through all
6
==PAGE:8==
2
DESCRIPTION OF THE SCREENING TOOL
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
its life cycle stages; materials extraction, manufacture of components, use phase including
maintenance, end of life treatments, and transport of components between sites. The
calculations are done for the entire wind turbine (detailed in the following sections), and
then divided by the lifetime electricity production of the wind turbine to obtain the
possible environmental impacts per produced kWh.
The modelling framework has as far as possible followed the ISO 14044 (ISO, 2006)
recommendations on allocation of using system expansion wherever possible; the ecoinvent
database version ”consequential” has been used because it includes system expansion by
substitution of avoided products.
The foreground system of the screening tool includes materials for, processing of, and
end of life treatment of the four components of rotor (blades and nose cone), nacelle
(drivetrain, generator, breaks, cover, etc.), tower, and foundation, transport from manu-
facture site to installation site, maintenance during the useful lifetime (inspection trips,
oil, replacements of parts), and the mix of electricity used for manufacture of the wind
turbine and for the end of life treatments. In the background system are extraction and
processing of materials, production of electricity and heat for processing in the foreground
system, and transport processes. Outside the system boundaries are the cables connect-
ing the wind turbine to the grid, transformer stations, other infrastructure related to
entire wind farms, and electricity line and conversion losses. See ﬁgure 1 for a schematic
representation of this.
The processes included in the screening tool are all taken from the LCA database
ecoinvent version 3.6 (ecoinvent, 2019), and while they may be representative for the
years around 2020, they will most likely be outdated at the end of life for wind turbines
with lifetimes of 20+ years. Among the processes included, those geographically close to
Denmark have been favoured, because the screening tool is intended to be used by DTU
WE situated in Denmark.
The processes have all been assessed in SimaPro 9.1 using the LCIA method ReCiPe
2016 v1.1 midpoint, hierarchist version (Huijbregts et al., 2017b).
This method was
7
==PAGE:9==
2
DESCRIPTION OF THE SCREENING TOOL
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Figure 1: Schematic representation of the system boundaries in the screening tool.
chosen because it is one of the most recently updated and comprehensive LCIA methods
and available in SimaPro. Midpoints are preferred to endpoints because they are easier
to communicate due to their names, and have lesser uncertainties connected to them than
endpoints.
Figure 2 gives an overview of the tables and their data ﬂow in the screening tool. Each
of the tables shown in the ﬁgure is explained in the following sections.
2.2
Turbine specs
The user can generate a simple model of a wind turbine by entering the ”simple param-
eters” in the table ”Turbine specs” and then press the macro button ”Generate simple
WT model”. The simple parameters, listed in table 1, are used as input in the material
relations (see section 2.3) for calculating the amount of material used in the model, ex-
cept the lifetime and the capacity factor, which are used for calculating the annual and
lifetime electricity production of the wind turbine, which in turn are used for normalising
the impact scores to 1kWh produced electricity. If the user knows the annual electricity
production, this can be entered instead of using the capacity factor.
8
==PAGE:10==
2
DESCRIPTION OF THE SCREENING TOOL
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Figure 2: Data ﬂow in the screening tool. The user can adjust inputs and numbers in the
tables marked in green, the red denote background data in the screening tool, and the yellow
boxes indicate the sources of the background data.
Table 1: Simple input parameters in the Tool.
Simple parameters
Description
Nameplate power
(MW) The maximum rated power of the wind turbine.
Hub height
(m) Height above ground of the nacelle.
Blade length
(m) Length of a single blade from tip to root.
Site
Choice between onshore and oﬀshore.
Drivetrain
Choice between gear and direct.
Lifetime
(years) Assumed operational time for the wind turbine.
Capacity factor
(unitless) Fraction of the time where the turbine is run-
ning at maximum (nameplate) power. Can be used in-
stead of annual electricity production.
Annual electricity pro-
duction
(MWh) The amount of electricity produced by the wind
turbine during one year. Can be used instead of capacity
factor.
9
==PAGE:11==
2
DESCRIPTION OF THE SCREENING TOOL
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
2.3
Material relations
The studies by Sieros et al. (2012), Caduﬀet al. (2012), Padey et al. (2013), and Sham-
mugam et al. (2019) calculate material requirements for future wind turbines based on
upscaling principles in the form of power laws:
m = axb
(1)
where m is the mass of the component in kg, x is the scaling parameter with its corre-
sponding unit, and a (unit according to input parameter x) and b (unitless) are constants
derived from regressions of collected data. The mentioned studies all use the rotor diam-
eter as the scaling parameter x for the total mass of each component. A similar approach
is adopted in this thesis, but four simple parameters – nameplate power, blade length,
hub height, and combined mass of rotor, nacelle, and tower – are tested for correlations
and the relations are made for each material in each component in the following way:
Bills of materials for 15 wind turbines were collected from the literature study (see
supporting material). The data were divided into four categories of onshore or oﬀshore,
and geared or direct drivetrain, because it is assumed these will have diﬀerent designs
and hence diﬀerent material demands. The conﬁguration of onshore and geared wind
turbines contained the most turbines (6 wind turbines), so these were used as the starting
point for the material relations, including also 2 turbines that did not specify either site
or drivetrain, and 2 other onshore turbines which did not specify drivetrain.
The collected data (Chen et al. (2011), Crawford (2009), Haapala and Prempreeda
(2014), Mart´ınez et al. (2009a), Rashedi et al. (2013), Xie et al. (2020)) contained many
diﬀerent materials and levels of speciﬁcity, so for practical reasons for making material
relations these were grouped as listed in appendix table A2.
Power law correlations of the form in equation 1 between each material for each com-
ponent and the simple parameters nameplate power, rotor diameter, blade length, hub
height, and combined mass of rotor, nacelle, and tower were calculated using Excel (the
10
==PAGE:12==
2
DESCRIPTION OF THE SCREENING TOOL
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Table 2: Material relations coeﬃcients a and b with their corresponding R2 values and the
number of datapoints used to derive the coeﬃcients. These are used in the screening tool in
equations of the form m = axb for calculating m, the amount of materials (kg), for a generic
wind turbine based on its simple parameters x.
a
b
R2
datapoints
rotor
Glass ﬁbre (kg)
1.27E+00
2.41
0.81
10
Resin, epoxy (kg)
1.52E+01
1.72
0.78
10
Iron (kg)
1.71E+00
2.40
0.83
7
Steel (kg)
4.61E-02
3.37
0.86
8
nacelle
Glass ﬁbre (kg)
9.33E+02
0.642
0.50
8
Resin, epoxy (kg)
8.59E+02
1.16
0.59
5
Copper (kg)
1.27E+03
1.37
0.85
10
Iron (kg)
1.27E+04
0.897
0.86
7
Steel (kg)
1.62E+04
1.09
0.69
10
Aluminium (kg)
8.58E+02
1.46
0.35
5
Plastic (kg)
4.94E+02
1.30
0.68
6
Silica (kg)
2.99E+02
-0.0653
0.0075
4
tower
Steel (kg)
1.69E-01
3.12
0.73
10
Paint, alkyd (kg)
8.18E+00
1.15
0.996
3
foundation
Steel (kg)
1.06E-02
1.23
0.77
9
Concrete (kg)
1.04E+02
0.716
0.89
9
results of all these are given in appendix ﬁgure A1).
For the sake of utilising all simple parameters in a proof of concept for this ﬁrst version
of the screening tool, it is decided to use the blade length as scaling parameter for the
rotor, the nameplate power as scaling parameter for the nacelle, the hub height for the
tower, and the combined mass of rotor, nacelle, and tower as scaling parameter for the
foundation, even though these parameters not always has the highest R2 values in the
derived correlations. The coeﬃcients and their R2 values are shown in table 2, and these
are the values used in the material relations of this ﬁrst version of the screening tool.
The studies by Sieros et al. (2012), Caduﬀet al. (2012), Padey et al. (2013), and
Shammugam et al. (2019) all derived values of exponent coeﬃcient b between 1.5 and
3.4, and R2 values of 0.84 or above for those studies listing them, see appendix table A1.
11
==PAGE:13==
2
DESCRIPTION OF THE SCREENING TOOL
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Compared to this, the values derived in this thesis are generally lower, and the R2 values
are also lower, which means the correlations are generally less signiﬁcant. This can stem
from the more detailed approach taken in this thesis of modelling each material of each
component instead of modelling the entire mass of the component. Future work would
be to test if a more solid approach is calculating the total mass of each component from
power laws and then use derived percentages for the material contributions.
2.4
Environmental proﬁles from ecoinvent
The data in the table ”Model details” (explained in section 2.5 and subsections) are
combined with environmental proﬁles of the corresponding materials and processes (man-
ufacture, transport, end of life treatments, installation, maintenance, decommissioning).
These environmental proﬁles are unit processes from the LCA database ecoinvent 3.6,
consequential system model, which have been assessed in SimaPro 9.1 using the LCIA
method ReCiPe v1.1 2016 midpoint, Hierarchist version (Huijbregts et al., 2017b).
Processes in ecoinvent have been selected to most closely represent the processes used
for manufacturing a wind turbine in Denmark, i.e. processes with Denmark as geograph-
ical scope has been preferred, then neighbouring countries like Germany or Sweden, next
European ones, and lastly global processes unless it is materials bought of the global mar-
ket. The technological and temporal scope is limited in ecoinvent, as normally only one
process is available for each technology type. The included processes are mentioned in the
sections below (and a list of processes used in other studies is given in the supplementary
material.).
2.5
Detailed model
The table ”Model details” in the screening tool speciﬁes all the particulars of the modelled
wind turbine and is divided into the following sections:
• Rotor
12
==PAGE:14==
2
DESCRIPTION OF THE SCREENING TOOL
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
• Nacelle
• Tower
• Foundation
• Installation
• Maintenance
• Decommissioning
where the four components have subsections of materials used including their end of life
treatment options, processes used for manufacture, and transport of the component from
manufacture site to installation site.
The user can choose between generating a simple model from the simple parameters, or
entering/ adjusting the amounts of each material in each component, changing materials
in the drop-down menus, specifying the maintenance scenarios etc. For the processes
listed, the input value is the mass of material being treated in the process, so if e.g.
3000kg resin is being manufactured into a wind turbine blade by injection moulding then
the injection moulding process should also be 3000kg. As the materials and their processes
are not coupled in the screening tool, the user has to ensure the numbers are consistent
between materials and their processes.
The following is an explanation of the various subsections of the ”Model details” table
in terms of which ecoinvent processes are included, the assumptions made, how the impact
scores are calculated, and what their default values are for the simple modelling.
2.5.1
Materials
Due to time limitations, only one material for each of those most commonly used in the
literature has been included in this ﬁrst version of the screening tool. The list is given
in table 3 together with the default end of life treatment fractions used for the simple
modelling (more on this in section 2.5.3).
13
==PAGE:15==
2
DESCRIPTION OF THE SCREENING TOOL
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Table 3: Materials used in the default setup of a generic wind turbine, the ecoinvent processes used for modelling them, which component(s)
they are used in, and their default end of life treatment fractions.
Materials
ecoinvent process
used in
landﬁll
incineration
recycling
reuse
Glass ﬁbre
Glass ﬁbre {RER}| production | Conseq, S
rotor
nacelle
0.2
0.8
0
0
Resin, epoxy
Epoxy resin {RER}| epoxy resin production | Con-
seq, S
rotor
nacelle
0.2
0.8
0
0
Iron
Cast iron {RER}| production | Conseq, S
rotor
nacelle
0.1
0
0.9
0
Steel
Reinforcing steel {RER}| production | Conseq, S
rotor
nacelle
tower
foundation
0.1
0
0.9
0
Copper
Copper {GLO}| market for | Conseq, S
nacelle
0.1
0
0.9
0
Aluminium
Aluminium, primary, ingot {UN-EUROPE}| pro-
duction | Conseq, S
nacelle
0.1
0
0.9
0
Plastic
Polyethylene,
high density,
granulate {GLO}|
market for | Conseq, S
nacelle
0.1
0.9
0
0
Silica
Silica sand {GLO}| market for | Conseq, S
nacelle
1
0
0
0
Paint, alkyd
Alkyd paint, white, without water, in 60% solu-
tion state {RER}| market for alkyd paint, white,
without water, in 60% solution state | Conseq, S
tower
0.1
0.9
0
0
Concrete
Concrete, medium strength {GLO}| market group
for concrete, medium strength | Conseq, S
foundation
0.2
0
0.8
0
14
==PAGE:16==
2
DESCRIPTION OF THE SCREENING TOOL
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Table 4: List of the processes included in the ﬁrst version of the screening tool. Electricity and
heat consumptions have been removed from each process before assessing it in SimaPro, and
the amounts of energy have been included with the environmental proﬁle in the screening tool.
Tool process
ecoinvent process
InjectionMould
Injection moulding {RER}| processing | Conseq, U
Steel hot rolling
Hot rolling, steel {RER}| processing | Conseq, U
PolymerFoaming
Polymer foaming {RER}| processing | Conseq, U
The impact scores for each of the 18 impact categories i (of the ReCiPe 2016 LCIA
method) for each material are calculated as:
impactsi = kg-material · impacts/kgi
(2)
where kg-material is the mass of the material as entered in the ”Model details” table,
and impacts/kgi is the vale from the environmental proﬁle of the material for the impact
category i.
2.5.2
Processes
As with the materials, only a limited number of processes have been included in this ﬁrst
version of the screening tool; they are listed in table 4.
For the processes, the electricity and heat consumptions are removed from the chosen
ecoinvent process before assessing it in SimaPro to obtain their environmental proﬁles.
The amounts of energy are included with the environmental proﬁles in the screening tool,
so that the impacts from the needed energy can be calculated from the user speciﬁed
electricity and heat grid mixes (further described in section 2.6).
The calculation of impact scores for each process for each impact category i is:
impactsi = kg-process·(impacts/kg-processi
+ kWh-el/kg-process · impacts/kWh-el,gridmixi
+ MJ-heat/kg-process · impacts/MJ-heat,gridmixi)
(3)
where kg-process is the amount of material being treated in the process as speciﬁed in the
15
==PAGE:17==
2
DESCRIPTION OF THE SCREENING TOOL
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
”Model details” table, impacts/kg-processi is the impacts from the environmental proﬁle
of the process, kWh-el/kg-process and MJ-heat/kg-process are the electricity and heat
consumption respectively of the process (the amounts deleted from the ecoinvent process
before assessing it), and impacts/kWh-el,gridmixi and impacts/MJ-heat,gridmixi are the
impacts from respectively 1 kWh electricity and 1 MJ heat from the user deﬁned mixes
(the calculation of these are given in equation 10 in section 2.6).
2.5.3
End of Life
There are four diﬀerent options for end of life treatment for materials in the screening
tool: landﬁll, incineration, recycling, and reuse. The assumptions behind are:
• Landﬁll: the material is being deposited to a standard, inert landﬁll. Pretreatment
(e.g. crushing) of the material is modelled as burning of diesel in building machine.
• Incineration: the material is incinerated in a municipal solid waste incinerator, and
the recovered energy and heat substitute the end of life grid mix deﬁned by the user.
• Recycling: the material is treated (e.g. crushed) and recycled as something else, in
this ﬁrst version the only option is recycling as ﬁller in cement. Thereby production
of new cement is avoided, and the avoided impacts from the substituted product are
credited to the modelled wind turbine system. The only exception is steel, which is
recycled as steel.
• Reuse: it is assumed that the (part of the) component is reused directly as it is,
without any need for refurbishing, hence no impacts at all are ascribed to this end
of life treatment.
In this ﬁrst version of the screening tool, ”steel” and ”concrete” are treated with
processes speciﬁc to these materials, whereas all other materials are treated as ”general
waste”. The processes used are shown in table 5 and detailed in appendix A.1.
16
==PAGE:18==
2
DESCRIPTION OF THE SCREENING TOOL
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Table 5:
Processes used to model end of life treatment in the screening tool.
Note that
incineration of concrete is not a possible option in this version, and that recycling of concrete
and general waste is modelled with the same process.
See appendix A.1 for details on the
modiﬁed processes.
Material
EoL treat-
ment
ecoinvent process used
Concrete
landﬁll
Waste concrete {CH}| treatment of, inert material land-
ﬁll | Conseq, S
incineration
(not modelled)
recycling
General waste - recycling, 80% substituting cement | jlm
Steel
landﬁll
Scrap steel {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment of
scrap steel, inert material landﬁll | Conseq, S
incineration
Scrap steel {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment of
scrap steel, municipal incineration | Conseq, S
recycling
Waste reinforcement steel CH— treatment of, recycling
| Conseq, S
General
waste
landﬁll
General waste - landﬁll | jlm
incineration
General waste - incineration | Municipal solid waste
{DK}| treatment of, incineration | Conseq, U - jlm
recycling
General waste - recycling, 80% substituting cement | jlm
The impacts from the end of life stage for each impact category i for each material
are calculated as:
impactsi = kg-material·(flandfill · impacts-landﬁll/kg-mati
+ fincin · impacts-incin/kg-mati
+ frecycl · impacts-recycl/kg-mati)
(4)
where kg-material is the amount of material in the ”Model details” table (the same
number as used in equation 2), flandfill, fincin, and frecycl are the fractions speciﬁed in
”Model details” of the material being landﬁlled, incinerated, and recycled respectively,
and impacts-landﬁll/kg-mati, impacts-incin/kg-mati, and impacts-recycl/kg-mati are the
impacts from the environmental proﬁles associated with each of the end of life treatments.
Reuse is omitted from the calculations as no impacts are assumed to be associated with
the process of reuse (besides transport included in the transportation calculations).
17
==PAGE:19==
2
DESCRIPTION OF THE SCREENING TOOL
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
End of life fractions for each material in the simple model are based on values from
the literature shown in appendix table A6, and the default values are listed in table 3.
2.5.4
Transport
Two modes of transport are included in this ﬁrst version: lorry modelled with ”Transport,
freight, lorry >32 metric ton, EURO5 {GLO}| market for | Conseq, S” and train modelled
with ”Transport, freight train {RoW}| diesel, with particle ﬁlter | Conseq, S”. Impacts
for each impact category i from transport are calculated as:
impactsi = km-distance · mcomp · impacts/tkmi
(5)
where km-distance is the value entered in ”Model details” table of the distance over
which the component is transported (e.g. from manufacture site to installation site, or
from installation site to end of life treatment site), mcomp is the mass in metric tonnes
of the component being transported (the sum of the material amounts entered in the
”Model details” table for the component), and impacts/tkmi are the impacts from the
environmental proﬁle of transporting 1 ton 1 km with the given mode of transporta-
tion. Contributions from each mode of transport are summed to give the total possible
environmental impacts.
The default values in the simple model for transportation distances are 200km by lorry
for the rotor and nacelle, 200km by lorry and 100km by train for the tower, and 150km by
lorry for the foundation (the cement truck); the numbers are based solely on guesses and
distances within Denmark, because I have not been able to ﬁnd anything in the literature.
2.5.5
Installation
Installation of the wind turbine is modelled as consumption of diesel burned in building
machines “Diesel, burned in building machine {GLO} | processing | Conseq, U”, which has
the output of MJ. This is based on the literature sources listed in appendix table A3. The
amount of diesel input varies a lot over the studies investigated, this could be because the
18
==PAGE:20==
2
DESCRIPTION OF THE SCREENING TOOL
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
energy consumption for constructing the foundation is included in some but not others.
The default value in the screening tool for installation is 50000MJ; this is a value in
between those used by Li et al. (2020) and Chen et al. (2011); the value listed by Gomaa
et al. (2019) is very high because also the construction of the foundation is assumed to
be included here, whereas in the screening tool this is included in the foundation section,
and the value listed by Ozoemena et al. (2018) is very low and based on an old study
which was not obtained because it was deemed outside the time scope of the literature.
Impact scores for each impact category i are calculated:
impactsi = MJ-diesel · impacts/MJi
(6)
where MJ-diesel is the amount of diesel entered in ”Model details”, and impacts/MJi are
the impacts from the environmental proﬁle of burning 1MJ diesel.
2.5.6
Maintenance
Maintenance is modelled in various ways and to varying degrees in the studies listed in
appendix table A4; in the screening tool it is modelled as follows:
Inspection trip frequency (times/year) and Inspection roundtrip distance (km) mod-
elled as passenger car, “1 km Transport, passenger car, large size, petrol, EURO 5 {RER}
| transport, passenger car, large size, petrol, EURO 5 | Conseq, U”. The impact scores
from this are calculated as:
impactsi = km-distance · impacts/kmi · trip-frequency (1/year) · WT-lifetime (year) (7)
where km-distance is the value entered in the ”Model details” table, impacts/kmi is from
the environmental proﬁle of the process mentioned above, trip-frequency is the number
of inspection trips conducted each year, and WT-lifetime is the operational lifetime of
the wind turbine (which is one of the simple parameter speciﬁed in the ”Turbine specs”
table). Default values are: 3 inspection trip each year of 150km roundtrip distance.
19
==PAGE:21==
2
DESCRIPTION OF THE SCREENING TOOL
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Lubricating oil amount (kg) and Lubricating oil change frequency (times/year), mod-
elled with “1 kg Lubricating oil {RER} | market for lubricating oil | Conseq”. Impact
scores are calculated as:
impactsi = kg-oil · impacts/kgi · change-frequency (1/year) · WT-lifetime (year)
(8)
where kg-oil is the amount of oil changed each time entered in ”Model details”, impacts/kgi
is from the environmental proﬁles, change-frequency is how many times per year the oil
is changed, and WT-lifetime is the operational lifetime of the turbine. Default values are:
Change frequency every 5 years (=0.2 years) and amount changed each time is 300kg.
Replacement fraction and Replacement frequency of rotor (one blade would be 0.33);
the impact scores from this is calculated as:
impactsi = impacts-from-entire-rotori · fraction · frequency (1/year) · WT-lifetime (year)
(9)
where impacts-from-entire-rotori is the sum of impacts from materials, processes, and
transport of the rotor as calculated in the component section of the ”Model details”
table, fraction is how much of the rotor is replaced, frequency how often it is replaced,
and WT-lifetime is the operational lifetime of the turbine. Default values are replacement
of one blade, i.e. 33%, over the entire lifetime of the turbine.
Replacement fraction and replacement frequency for nacelle are modelled the same
way as the rotor. Default values are 15% of the nacelle replaced over the lifetime of the
wind turbine.
2.5.7
Decommissioning
Decommissioning is very sparsely modelled in the reviewed literature. Most studies dis-
cuss end of life of materials under this heading (i.e. recycling, incineration etc.), which in
the screening tool has been modelled as part of the materials. Transport of the decommis-
sioned wind turbine as a single unit from installation site to end of life treatment facilities
20
==PAGE:22==
2
DESCRIPTION OF THE SCREENING TOOL
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Table 6: Table showing the electricity grid mix options and their recommended values for
Denmark in the years 2020 and 2040.
Electricity source
2020
2040
Coal
0.22
0
Natural gas
0.07
0
Oil
0.01
0
Nuclear
0
0
Biomass (wood)
0.20
0.03
Solar
0.04
0.34
Wind
0.46
0.63
Hydro
0
0
is included in this stage as transport by lorry (200km) and train (50km), default values in
brackets and calculations as in equation 5. See appendix table A5 for how other studies
have modelled this stage; default here is to use the same amount of energy consumption
as for the installation stage using the same process and the same calculation method.
2.6
Electricity grid mixes
The user has to deﬁne the electricity grid mix used at the time of construction and at
time of decommissioning of the wind turbine. The reason for this split is to allow for
evolution of the grid mix during the lifetime of the wind turbine. There are eight possible
electricity sources to mix from, and the user enters the fraction of each of the total mix.
The screening tool gives warnings if the sum does not equal 100%, but the user has to
ensure the mix adds up.
The possible electricity sources are listed in table 6 including the recommended mix
for Denmark for 2020 and 2040 – further description of the processes chosen can be found
in appendix A.2, and of sources for the recommended grid mix can be found in appendix
B.
The impacts for each impact category i from 1kWh electricity of the user-deﬁned grid
mix are calculated as:
21
==PAGE:23==
3
TESTING/VALIDATION
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
impacts/kWh-el,gridmixi =
X
tech
ftech · impacts/kWh-eltech,i
(10)
where ftech is the fraction (f) of the respective technology (tech), and impacts/kWh-eltech,i
are the impacts from the environmental proﬁle of 1kWh from ecoinvent for the technology.
In a future version of the screening tool the heat mix could be calculated in a similar
manner; for now the heat mix only consists of heat from natural gas, ”Heat, district or
industrial, natural gas {RER}| market group for | Conseq, S”.
2.7
Results
Contributions to each of the 18 impact categories from all the diﬀerent components and life
cycle stages are summed and displayed in the ”Results” sheet of the screening tool. There
are two options to show results either for 1 kWh produced electricity (corresponding to the
functional unit), or get the accumulated impact scores for the entire lifetime of the turbine.
The results are also disaggregated into manufacture of each of the four components (rotor,
nacelle, tower, foundation), the end of life impacts for each component, total transport
over the entire life cycle, maintenance, and installation+decommissioning.
A standard graph is showing the contributions to each impact score for a quick sanity
check of results. Furthermore, a crude comparison with other electricity generating tech-
nologies is given; the processes behind the technologies used for comparison are the same
as those used in the user-deﬁned electricity grid mix, detailed in appendix A.2.
3
Testing/Validation
The screening tool is tested in order to check the accuracy of its results compared to the
studies which it is based upon and other similar wind turbine LCAs. Two areas of the
screening tool are tested: the accuracy of the calculated material amounts based on the
simple parameters, and the accuracy of the LCA results exempliﬁed by the Global Warm-
ing Potential (GWP) impact category, because this is included in all LCIA methods and
22
==PAGE:24==
3
TESTING/VALIDATION
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
based on IPCC recommendations and hence (more or less) comparable between studies
even when they use diﬀerent LCIA methods.
Two tests are done for estimating the accuracy of the material relations: the calculated
material amounts based on the simple parameters using the studies on which the material
relations are made, are compared for each component and each material with the actual
numbers stated in those studies, detailed in section 3.1.
Secondly, the same is done
for other studies containing bills of materials, but which were not used for deriving the
material relations. Most of these only have aggregated bills of materials, and so they can
not be used for validating the material split in diﬀerent components, see section 3.2.
For testing the results of the LCA, also two tests are done: GWP/kWh values are
identiﬁed in literature studies and these studies are redone in the screening tool in two
ways, one from entering the simple parameters, and one with as detailed a model as can
be extracted from the paper, as shown in section 3.3. A further test is comparison of
the component and life cycle contribution as stated in literature studies and how they
look when modelled in the screening tool with simple parameters and with a detailed
modelling; this is done in section 3.4.
3.1
Redoing bills of materials of studies delivering data for the
material relations
The wind turbine studies which delivered data for the material relations (Crawford (2009),
Mart´ınez et al. (2009a), Chen et al. (2011), Rashedi et al. (2013), Haapala and Prempreeda
(2014), Xie et al. (2020)) are re-done by entering the simple parameters nameplate power
(MW), hub height (m), and blade length (m) into the screening tool and then running
the “Generate simple WT model” macro. The amounts of materials calculated by the
screening tool for each of the four components are copied into a table next to the original
values, and the fractional error, ∆, for each material for each component is calculated:
∆= mtool–morg
morg
(11)
23
==PAGE:25==
3
TESTING/VALIDATION
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
where mtool is the mass of the material calculated by the tool, and morg is the value from
the given study from literature.
Thence, (par, ∆)-graphs are made for each component showing ∆for all the materials
in relation to the simple parameter used for calculating the material consumption for the
component (blade length for rotor, nameplate power for nacelle, hub height for tower, and
total wind turbine mass (without the foundation) for foundation), and linear regressions
are made for each material for each component, see the left graph in ﬁgure 3 for the
graphs and regressions including R2 values for the rotor – similar graphs and regressions
for all four components can be found in appendix ﬁgures C1, C3, C5, and C7.
The errors on most materials stay within a factor 2 of the value stated in the original
study (corresponding to ∆values between -0.5 and 1). The main outliers in this regard
for the rotor are one instance of glass ﬁbre (∆= 1.5), and two instances for steel ∆= 1.1
and ∆= −0.53
All linear regressions for all components have very small inclinations (i.e. close to
zero) and are placed above the horizontal axis, which means the tool in general is overes-
timating the material amounts. Exceptions are aluminium in the nacelle and steel in the
foundation (shown in appendix), which both have a negative slope, i.e. the prediction of
the screening tool is overestimating the amount of these materials for small turbines and
underestimating for large turbines. R2 values for all the linear regressions are below 0.08,
and 10 out of 18 are even below 0.01; There are no clear trends in how the fractional error
evolves with the parameters tested.
However, for all four graphs it can be seen that there is an outlier for the largest
value of the simple parameter that ∆is plotted against. This stems from the 5MW wind
turbine from the study by Rashedi et al. (2013) (the other studies are of wind turbines
of sizes 0.6 to 3MW). If this study is excluded from the graphs the regressions change,
indicating that the material relations are heavily inﬂuenced by this one 5MW study. See
the right graph in ﬁgure 3 for the rotor – and graphs without the 5MW turbine for all
four components can be found in appendix ﬁgures C2, C4, C6, and C8.
24
==PAGE:26==
3
TESTING/VALIDATION
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Figure 3: Fractional error, ∆= mtool–morg
morg
, for materials in the rotor plotted against the blade
length (which is the simple parameter used in the screening tool for calculating the amount of
material in the rotor). To the left is shown when all 10 studies delivering data for the material
relations are included, to the right when the outlier of the 5MW turbine is excluded.
The
positive slope mean that the screening tool will underestimate the material amounts for small
turbines, and overestimate for large turbines.
Although the R2 values are still below 0.3 for 11 out of 17 regressions (ignoring paint
in the tower because it only has two datapoints and hence R2=1), they have increased
for most materials across the four components. For the rotor and nacelle the trend is
that the screening tool will underestimate the material amounts for small turbines, and
overestimate it for large turbines, whereas in regards to the tower and the foundation the
screening tool will overestimate amounts for small turbines and underestimate for large
turbines.
This calls for more and better data to build the material relations from. This ﬁrst
version of the screening tool is built on studies of wind turbines in the range 0.6-5MW,
whereas the current research in turbines is of 10MW or higher, which is outside the range
where the screening tool can be reliably used.
25
==PAGE:27==
3
TESTING/VALIDATION
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
3.2
Testing bills of materials from other studies
Next test is modelling other studies from their simple parameters, and compare the ma-
terial amounts calculated by the screening tool with what is listed in those studies. Two
studies (Alsaleh and Sattler (2019) and Angelakoglou et al. (2014)) list the bill of mate-
rials for each of the four components, whereas four other studies (Gomaa et al. (2019),
Bonou et al. (2016), Garrett and Rønde (2013), Guezuraga et al. (2012)) only give the
aggregated bills of materials for the entire wind turbine. For this test materials are aggre-
gated for the entire turbine including the detailed studies, in order to be able to compare
between them. (See appendix ﬁgure D1 for a table of the values from the studies next to
the values calculated by the screening tool.)
Again, (par, ∆)-graphs are made to evaluate the accuarcy of the screening tool in
calculating the material amounts. The graph using the simple parameter blade length
can be seen in ﬁgure 4 including linear regressions for each material, their equations, and
R2 values.
The plastics series only has 3 datapoints of which one is a stark outlier with a value
of ∆=7.4, so this series is excluded from further analysis; likewise with the paints series,
which only contains 2 datapoints. The series for resin and iron are both dominated by
outliers stemming from the study by Angelakoglou et al. (2014); they model an onshore
3MW Vestas turbine of 90m rotor diameter, but do not cite where the data are from.
They do not list any resin or iron used in the nacelle, and their listed amount of resin
is much lower than for other similar studies; for this reason these two datapoints are
excluded from further analysis - graphs including all datapoints and all series and for all
three simple parameters nameplate power, blade length, and hub height can be found in
appendix ﬁgures D2, D4 and D6.
As the values of nameplate power between the six studies only contain three values –
2MW (3 studies), 2.3MW (1 study) and 3MW (2 studies) – the regressions made from this
simple parameter are less robust. Keeping this in mind, what can be seen from the graph
and the regressions (in appendix) is that the screening tool in general is overestimating
26
==PAGE:28==
3
TESTING/VALIDATION
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Figure 4: Fractional diﬀerences, ∆, in relation to the simple parameter blade length for 6
studies from literature. ∆values equal to 0 mean the screening tool calculates the same amount
as listed in the paper, negative values mean the tool underestimates and positive values that
it overestimates. For similar graphs and regressions with nameplate power and hub height see
appendix ﬁgures D3 and D7.
the amount of material for bigger turbines. The nameplate power is the simple parameter
used for calculating the amount of material in the nacelle, which includes all the listed
materials except concrete. The R2 values are still rather low for all regressions, but highest
for glass ﬁbre, resin, and iron, which are all materials that are used in large amounts in
the nacelle.
When looking at ﬁgure 4, the picture changes for resin and iron; according to the test
on these 6 studies, the screening tool tends to underestimate the amount of resin and iron
for larger turbines based on the blade length (which is used for calculating the materials
in the rotor).
As the materials used in this test are aggregated for the entire wind turbine, the eﬀects
of underestimating materials for the blades for larger turbines might cancel out the eﬀects
of overestimating materials in the nacelle for larger turbines.
What can be seen for all three ﬁgures (in the appendix) is that steel and concrete tend
27
==PAGE:29==
3
TESTING/VALIDATION
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
to be overestimated for larger turbines and underestimated for smaller turbines (the ideal
would be that all regressions lines were situated on the horizontal axis). This is the same
conclusion as in the above section, and this is most likely due to the 5MW turbine having
a big eﬀect on the material relations.
Further work would be to reﬁne the material relations, either by removing the 5MW
turbine an recalculate the material relations and then redo these tests, or by including
data on more turbines of a wider range.
3.3
Testing Global Warming Potential results
Testing the LCIA results involves redoing LCAs from literature for comparing their ob-
tained values with the values calculated by the screening tool. This is only possible if the
same functional unit, system boundaries, assumptions, and LCIA method are used in the
studies being compared.
The literature was searched for studies meeting these criterias; most LCA studies
of wind turines use a functional unit like ”generation of 1kWh electricity from a wind
turbine/ a wind farm” and even though the system boundaries can vary in how much
infrastructure is included (e.g. cables connecting the turbine(s) to the grid, transformer
stations, or access roads - none of which are included in this ﬁrst version of the screening
tool) as well as the assumptions made and inventory processes chosen, seven studies
were identiﬁed as useful for this test: Alsaleh and Sattler (2019), Gomaa et al. (2019),
Ozoemena et al. (2018), Bonou et al. (2016), Al-Behadili and El-Osta (2015), Garrett and
Rønde (2013), and Guezuraga et al. (2012). Also included were 8 LCA reports from Vestas
from their 4.2MW series (3 reports, Vestas (2019a), Vestas (2019b), Vestas (2019c)) and
their 3.45MW series (5 reports, Vestas (2017a), Vestas (2017b), Vestas (2017c), Vestas
(2017d), Vestas (2017e))
However, none of these studies use the ReCiPe 2016 midpoint (H) LCIA method, so
direct comparison of all impact categories is not possible.
Global Warming Potential
(GWP) is included in the seven studies and this impact category builds on the recom-
28
==PAGE:30==
3
TESTING/VALIDATION
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
mendations from IPCC2 for all the used LCIA methods, so this is chosen as the best
doable comparison - which is also what previous (meta)studies have used for comparing
studies (see e.g. Dammeier et al. (2019), Mendecka and Lombardi (2019), Kaldellis and
Apostolou (2017), or Price and Kendall (2012)).
The GWP is calculated in two ways in the screening tool; a ”simple” (and quick)
and a ”detailed” (more time consuming) way. For the ”simple” approach, the simple
parameters nameplate power, hub height, and blade length together with lifetime and
the annual electricity production are entered into the screening tool for all 7 studies to
be redone, and the result for GWP read of from the ”Results” sheet. Five of the seven
literature studies contain information enough for a ”detailed” remodelling, where the
material amounts stated in the article are entered into the ”Model details” section of the
screening tool and values for installation, maintenance, end of life etc. are adjusted to
what is written in the article; each remodelling is detailed in appendix E.
In ﬁgure 5 the value of GWP from each study and report is plotted against the
value calculated by the screening tool for that study; if the two values are the same the
datapoint will be located on the marked x=y line, if it falls below then the screening tool
is underestimating the value of GWP, and if it falls above then the tool is overestimating.
(See appendix ﬁgure F1 for tables with exact values and further details on the remodelled
studies.)
Most datapoints cluster around the x=y line which is the desired result. There are
however also some outliers and trends to notice:
The outlier in the lower right corner is from the study by Alsaleh and Sattler (2019);
this study obtains a signiﬁcantly higher value for GWP than the two other studies included
in the test which model similar turbines of 2MW, blade length around 42m, hub height
around 80m (Garrett and Rønde (2013), Guezuraga et al. (2012)). Also, TRACI generally
employs lower characterisation factors for substances in GWP than ReCiPe does3 which
would lead to a lower impact score for GWP, but this is not the case; their high value
2Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, www.ipcc.ch
3see appendix G for a comparison of a few selected substances.
29
==PAGE:31==
3
TESTING/VALIDATION
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Figure 5: Global Warming Potential from studies plotted against the value calculated by the
screening tool for that same study. Simple means the study has been redone using only the
simple parameters, whereas detailed mean the study has been modelled in detail, see appendix
E for all details on this.
might in part come from their modelling of installation in which a huge amount of diesel
is burned. When this study is redone in detail, this diesel consumption drives the impact
scores up - and it becomes the outlier in the top of the graph in ﬁgure 5.
The semi-outlier below the x=y line in the middle of the graph stems from the study
by Ozoemena et al. (2018); They model a turbine of 1.5MW, blade length 34m, and hub
height 65m, which should all be within the recommended range of this ﬁrst version of the
screening tool. They use a recycled content approach (for metals) which does not include
crediting as is the approach in the screening tool; this might be why the screening tool
gives lower values.
There are trends seen in the two Vestas series; the turbines with longer blades and
higher towers also have higher GWP impacts both from the Vestas reports and from the
remodelling in the screening tool. However, there is a clear trend that the overestimation
by the screening tool becomes bigger, the bigger the turbine is in terms of blade length
30
==PAGE:32==
3
TESTING/VALIDATION
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
and tower height. (See also table in appendix ﬁgure F1 for speciﬁc numbers behind the
datapoints.) This, again, is most likely due to the 5MW turbine aﬀecting the material
relations.
3.4
Component contribution comparisons
A second test for the GWP results is a comparison between original and remodelled studies
of the components’ contributions to the total impact value.
Three of the remodelled
studies also contained suﬃcient information to do this. Only the study by Alsaleh and
Sattler (2019) contained a detailed contribution analysis so that the comparison could be
done for each component and life cycle stage, whereas the study by Garrett and Rønde
(2013) grouped rotor, nacelle, and tower together, and Gomaa et al. (2019) had grouped
all four components together. See ﬁgure 6 for the comparisons and see appendix H for
the numbers behind.
It’s not easy to derive trends from just three tests as is the case here. In the case of
Alsaleh and Sattler (2019) the detailed remodel gives higher values than the original and
the simple remodel gives lower; this is opposite for the study by Gomaa et al. (2019),
and for Garrett and Rønde (2013) both remodels give lower values than the original. The
turbines modelled by Alsaleh and Sattler (2019) and Garrett and Rønde (2013) are fairly
equal in their speciﬁcations, both being 2MW turbines and with hub heights of 78m and
80m respectively, and blade lengths 42m and 39m. The turbine modelled by Gomaa et al.
(2019) is a large turbine of 3MW, hub height 119m and blade length 60m; again we see
the screening tool underestimates materials for the smaller turbines and overestimates for
bigger.
It is interesting that the detailed remodel of Alsaleh and Sattler (2019) gives about
double the impacts from foundation than the original study when the same amounts
of materials have been used, especially when comparing with the study by Garrett and
Rønde (2013) where the detailed remodel matches the impacts from the foundation of the
original study. These diﬀerences could stem from diﬀerent processes chosen between the
31
==PAGE:33==
3
TESTING/VALIDATION
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Figure 6: Component contribution to Global Warming Potential compared between the original
paper (org), the detailed remodelling in the screening tool (detail) and the simple remodelling
(simp). The studies are Alsaleh and Sattler (2019), Garrett and Rønde (2013), Gomaa et al.
(2019).
two studies and this thesis, and/or in the chosen LCIA methods.
Even though the life cycle stages transport, maintenance, and installation+ decom-
missioning contribute less than the materials used for manufacture of the wind turbine,
big diﬀerences are seen in the impact scores from these between the original studies and
their two remodelling approaches. This is likely due to the uncertain and inconsistent
modelling and reporting in the literature, on which this ﬁrst version of the screening tool
has been built.
32
==PAGE:34==
4
UNCERTAINTIES
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
The main conclusions here are that more data are needed for deriving the material
relations calculating the material amounts in the simple model and for making assump-
tions about other life cycle stages before redoing these tests – and generally that LCA
studies of wind turbines diﬀer a lot in their assumptions and included life cycle stages
and thereby makes hard to compare and make generalisation from them.
4
Uncertainties
The uncertainties on the results from the screening tool are not quantitatively calculated,
as the uncertainties on each of the numbers used are barely known. In this section follows
a discussion of the various sources of uncertainties and a qualitative discussion of their
likely eﬀects on the results.
Uncertainties on the results stem from several sources; the derived material relations,
the environmental proﬁles from ecoinvent, and the assumptions made in the default setup –
and behind each of these are further sources of uncertainties. The uncertainties are smaller
when the user enters their own material amounts, transport distances, maintenance sce-
narios etc. because the uncertainties from the material relations and the assumptions in
the default setup are avoided.
4.1
Material relations
Uncertainties on the bills of materials from the literature were not given in any of the
studies. I presume they are rounded to 2 maybe 3 signiﬁcant digits.
As the derived material relations are based on only 10 wind turbines – of which we
have seen that the 5MW is an outlier driving the calculated material consumption up
for larger turbines – and the R2 values are generally low for all regressions on which the
coeﬃcients are based (see appendix ﬁgure A1), fairly large uncertainties on the calculated
material amounts are to be expected when using the simple modelling from the simple
parameters, especially if the screening tool is used to assess turbines outside of the range
33
==PAGE:35==
4
UNCERTAINTIES
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
0.6-3MW turbines (onshore, geared). The tests done in sections 3.1 and 3.2 also conﬁrm
this. A way to estimate the inﬂuence of this on the results is to do a sensitivity analysis
on the amounts of materials used, see section 4.4 for an example of this.
4.2
Modelling choices
In the simple modelling from the simple parameters a lot of assumptions are made: the
default maintenance scenarios might not be valid for the actual turbine being modelled,
the default transport distances might be fairly low because they reﬂect average distances
within Denmark, and the end of life treatment scenarios are also modelled based on Danish
standards, which could be very diﬀerent if the turbine is decommissioned and disposed of
in another country.
Also in regards to choosing processes from ecoinvent, those best representing Denmark
are favoured. In this ﬁrst version of the screening tool only two options for recycling
are present; recycling of steel and substituting cement; of which the latter might be
appropriate for concrete, but less so for glass ﬁbre and resin and the other materials
present.
The processes chosen for modelling the electricity grid mix represent technology in
use around 2020 which might be suitable for the manufacture stage but less so for the
end of life treatment 20+ years in the future - e.g. the process for wind energy in the
electricity grid mix is based on a 2MW onshore wind turbine, which in the future likely
will be replaced by much bigger oﬀshore turbines.
Generic processes for all materials and processes are chosen from ecoinvent, and they
may not be well representing the actual materials and processes used for wind turbines.
Further work here is to consult experts on wind turbine manufacture to select the most
representative materials and processes available in ecoinvent, or modify processes to better
reﬂect the reality. This is especially important for materials being used in large amounts,
such as glass ﬁbre, resin, steel, and concrete, and materials known to have big environ-
mental impacts such as copper.
34
==PAGE:36==
4
UNCERTAINTIES
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
There are currently big uncertainties related to the amount of energy used for in-
stallation and decommissioning, and even if the energy for installation mainly covers the
casting of concrete and then should be included in the component, or if it is separate and
covers only cranes for lifting and installing tower, nacelle, blades. Again, consultation of
experts is necessary to sort this.
4.3
Environmental proﬁles from ReCiPe2016
The environmental proﬁles used in the screening tool are calculated from combining in-
ventory processes from ecoinvent with characterisation factors from ReCiPe.
The processes in ecoinvent often come with uncertainty ranges on the amounts of
materials and electricity used, and substances emitted. LCA software like SimaPro can use
Monte Carlo methods to obtain uncertainties on the life cycle inventory, before calculating
the impact results. That is, however, not possible in the screening tool, where each process
is assessed on its own to obtain the environmental proﬁles, before combining them to
obtain the total impact score.
The documentation behind ReCiPe 2016 v1.1, does not include a quantitative eval-
uation of uncertainties connected to each of the characterisation factors in each impact
category (Huijbregts et al. (2017a) including their supporting material, and Huijbregts
et al. (2017b)). Instead, this LCIA method uses three cultural perspectives ”to group
similar types of assumptions and choices”. They are:
”1. The individualistic perspective is based on the short-term interest, impact
types that are undisputed, and technological optimism with regard to human
adaptation.
2. The hierarchist perspective is based on scientiﬁc consensus with regard to
the time frame and plausibility of impact mechanisms.
3. The egalitarian perspective is the most precautionary perspective, taking
into account the longest time frame and all impact pathways for which data
is available.” (Huijbregts et al., 2017b, p.20)
35
==PAGE:37==
4
UNCERTAINTIES
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
The hierarchist version is chosen for use in the screening tool because it is based on
scientiﬁc consensus, and is neither overly optimistic or excluding uncertain impact types
as the individualist perspective, nor overly precautionary as the egalitarian perspective.
In the documentation, each impact category is discussed including the ”value choices”
and uncertainties following from these choices. The hierarchist perspective includes sub-
stances and methods for calculating characterisation factors which may still be under
development and/or disputed, which leads to higher uncertainties (than the individualist
perspective).
The most speciﬁc statements in the report about uncertainties are:
”Uncertainty is relatively high for ecotoxicity eﬀect factors in cases involving
a low number of tested species” (Huijbregts et al., 2017b, p.75) and
”The factors for terrestrial ecosystems are considered very uncertain” (Hui-
jbregts et al., 2017b, p.82)
In other words, uncertainties cannot, at the current state, be propagated to the results
of the screening tool, because they are not assessable for the values in the environmental
proﬁles, which are based on characterisation factors from ReCiPe 2016.
4.4
Sensitivity analysis
Because uncertainty values on the results cannot be obtained, sensitivity analyses can be
conducted by perturbing the values of various parameters such as lifetime, annual electric-
ity production, material amounts, transport distances, and maintenance percentages just
to name a few. Scenarios can also be made for diﬀerent end of life mixes, combinations
of transport means, or materials selected (in this ﬁrst version of the screening tool there
are very few materials included so this a very limited option).
One way of calculating the sensitivity of a parameter is:
change = −ISnew −ISbasis
ISbasis
(12)
36
==PAGE:38==
4
UNCERTAINTIES
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
where ISnew is the impact score for the perturbed model and ISbasis is the impact score
for the basis model; this calculation is done for all the impact categories. If the new value
is higher (worse) than the baseline, then the sensitivity change is negative, if it is lower
(better) then the change is positive. It is up to the analyst to deem which ”change” values
are important and which are not.
Here follows an example of sensitivity analysis for a simple model of an onshore, geared
2MW turbine with hub height 78m, blade length 42m, lifetime 20years, and capacity fac-
tor 0.3, where the material amounts are generated in the screening tool. The following
parameters have been perturbed by 20% to test their sensitivity: lifetime, annual elec-
tricity production, glass ﬁbre in blade, copper in nacelle, steel in tower, and concrete
in foundation. Furthermore, two scenarios are tested for sensitivity: Longer transport:
200km by lorry changed to 500km by lorry and 1000km by train for rotor and nacelle, for
tower changed from 200km by lorry and 100km by train to 500km by lorry and 1000km
by trains, and for foundation changed from 150km to 300km by lorry (decommissioning
transport not changed); and More maintenance: Inspection trip frequency pr year changed
from 3 to 6, Inspection roundtrip distance changed from 150km to 300km, Lubricating
oil chance frequency changed from every ﬁfth year to once a year, and Lubricating oil
amount changed each time changed from 300kg to 500kg.
The sensitivity changes are displayed in table 7; colour coding is applied so that impact
scores lowered by 10% or more are marked in green, yellow marks increases in impact score
between 5 and 10%, and in red increases bigger than 10%.
Lifetime and annual electricity production are in this test sensitive parameters, where
a increase of 20% leads to a decrease in impact score of 14-17% for all impact categories
except land use (10%) in the case of lifetime.
Glass ﬁbre in the rotor in this case comes out as a non-sensitive parameter; increasing
the amount of glass ﬁbre leads to increases in impacts scores of maximum 3%.
The
increased maintenance scenario also displays only small increases in most impact scores.
For increasing the use of concrete the changes are mainly positive, especially land use; this
37
==PAGE:39==
4
UNCERTAINTIES
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
stems from the end of life treatment where concrete is recycled and substitutes production
of cement.Furthermore, the amount of copper seems sensitive in terms of especially the
toxicity categories, whereas steel seems sensitive to mainly human health categories.
As is shown here, sensitivity does not necessarily scale linearly and equally between
the various impact categories. Also, the conclusions on which parameters are sensitive in
this example analysis should not be generalised to other models.
38
==PAGE:40==
4
UNCERTAINTIES
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Table 7: Sensitivity test for a simple model of a 2MW turbine generated in the screening tool. In green are marked lowering of impact scores
by 10% or more, yellow are marked increases in impact score between 5 and 10%, and in red increases bigger than 10%.
IMpact category
longer
lifetime
more
elecprod
more
glassﬁbre
more
copper
more
steel
more
concrete
longer
transport
more main-
tenance
Global warming
0.15
0.17
-0.01
-0.01
-0.10
0.07
-0.05
-0.03
Stratospheric ozone de-
pletion
0.14
0.17
-0.03
-0.05
-0.04
0.01
-0.06
-0.05
Ionizing radiation
0.14
0.17
-0.03
0.00
-0.07
0.02
-0.02
-0.01
Ozone formation, Hu-
man health
0.15
0.17
-0.01
-0.03
-0.07
0.01
-0.09
-0.03
Fine particulate matter
formation
0.15
0.17
-0.01
-0.06
-0.06
0.01
-0.02
-0.01
Ozone formation, Ter-
restrial ecosystems
0.15
0.17
-0.01
-0.03
-0.07
0.01
-0.09
-0.04
Terrestrial acidiﬁcation
0.15
0.17
-0.01
-0.08
-0.05
0.01
-0.03
-0.01
Freshwater eutrophica-
tion
0.15
0.17
0.00
-0.10
-0.04
0.01
0.00
-0.01
Marine eutrophication
0.15
0.17
-0.01
-0.06
-0.04
-0.01
-0.01
-0.01
Terrestrial ecotoxicity
0.15
0.17
0.00
-0.17
-0.01
0.00
-0.02
-0.01
Freshwater ecotoxicity
0.15
0.17
0.00
-0.18
-0.01
0.00
0.00
-0.01
Marine ecotoxicity
0.15
0.17
0.00
-0.18
-0.01
0.00
0.00
-0.01
Human
carcinogenic
toxicity
0.15
0.17
0.00
-0.01
-0.07
0.00
0.00
0.00
Human
non-
carcinogenic toxicity
0.15
0.17
0.00
-0.16
-0.02
0.00
0.00
-0.01
Land use
0.10
0.17
-0.02
-0.15
-0.19
0.31
-0.37
-0.02
Mineral
resource
scarcity
0.15
0.17
0.00
-0.04
-0.08
0.01
0.00
-0.01
Fossil resource scarcity
0.15
0.17
-0.01
-0.01
-0.06
0.00
-0.05
-0.08
Water consumption
0.15
0.17
-0.01
-0.01
-0.06
-0.01
-0.01
-0.01
39
==PAGE:41==
5
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
5
Conclusions and future work
In this thesis, an excel-based tool is developed, which can screen the possible environmen-
tal impacts of onshore, geared wind turbines. The screening tool builds on an extensive
literature review, which delivered inspiration and data for deriving material relations for
calculating material amounts needed based on the wind turbine’s parameters nameplate
power, blade length, and hub height. Although the correlations are not as good in terms
of R2 values as those found in the literature, they provide a more detailed approach than
previously, because they calculate the amounts of each material in each component rather
than the total mass. A relatively quick way to possibly improve the material relations
would be to remove the outlier 5MW turbine and recalculate the coeﬃcients (and redo
the tests).
Future work for improving the material relations include collecting more data for a
broader range of wind turbine sizes (nameplate power, hub height, blade length) so that
the reliable range of the screening tool can be expanded from the current 0.6-3MW –
this could preferably be done in collaboration with wind turbine manufacturers. Another
aspect is collecting data on the other three types of wind turbines onshore-direct drive,
oﬀshore-geared, and oﬀshore-direct drive, so these can be included as well. With these
data obtained, it can also be investigated if material relations for blades/rotor depend on
site or drivetrain; if not, then all data despite site or drivetrain can be used for deriving
material relations for blades – and likewise investigate if the materials of the nacelle
depend on site.
Future work could also be to test if a more robust approach is calculating the total
mass of each component and then use percentages derived from literature for the material
contributions to each component.
The LCA database ecoinvent is utilised for accessing materials and processes used
during the lifetime of a wind turbine; these are assessed to ”environmental proﬁles” to be
included in the screening tool, to calculate the possible environmental impacts from these
and the material amounts. As this ﬁrst version of the screening tool is a proof of concept
40
==PAGE:42==
5
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
rather than a fully developed tool, only a few processes are included. Further work will
be to ensure the most representative processes for materials and processes from ecoinvent
are included in the screening tool after consultation with wind turbine manufacturing
experts.
Additional further work in this regard is the inclusion of new materials like bio-based
resins, bamboo and plywood for the blades, recycled steel for the tower and similar ma-
terials being researched – this has high priority because DTU Wind Energy wishes to
use the screening tool for their research in new materials. It will most likely be challeng-
ing to obtain processes or LCAs for newly developed materials; a possible approach will
be to model the materials in LCA software like SimaPro and assess those models into
environmental proﬁles.
41
==PAGE:43==
REFERENCES
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
6
Bibliography
References
Al-Behadili, S. and W. El-Osta
2015. Life cycle assessment of Dernah (Libya) wind farm. Renewable Energy, 83:1227–
1233.
Alsaleh, A. and M. Sattler
2019. Comprehensive life cycle assessment of large wind turbines in the US. Clean
Technologies and Environmental Policy, 21(4):887–903.
Angelakoglou, K., P. N. Botsaris, and G. Gaidajis
2014. Issues regarding wind turbines positioning: A benchmark study with the ap-
plication of the life cycle assessment approach. Sustainable Energy Technologies and
Assessments, 5:7–18.
Ardente, F., M. Beccali, M. Cellura, and V. Lo Brano
2008. Energy performances and life cycle assessment of an Italian wind farm. Renewable
and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 12(1):200–217.
Bonou, A., A. Laurent, and S. I. Olsen
2016.
Life cycle assessment of onshore and oﬀshore wind energy - from theory to
application. Applied Energy, 180:327–337.
Caduﬀ, M., M. A. J. Huijbregts, H.-j. Althaus, A. Koehler, and S. Hellweg
2012.
Wind power electricity: The bigger the turbine, the greener the electricity?
Environmental Science and Technology, 46:4725–4733.
Chen, G. Q., Q. Yang, and Y. H. Zhao
2011. Renewability of wind power in China: A case study of nonrenewable energy cost
and greenhouse gas emission by a plant in Guangxi. Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Reviews, 15(5):2322–2329.
Crawford, R. H.
2009. Life cycle energy and greenhouse emissions analysis of wind turbines and the eﬀect
of size on energy yield. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 13(9):2653–2660.
Dammeier, L. C., J. M. Loriaux, Z. J. Steinmann, D. A. Smits, I. L. Wijnant, B. Van
Den Hurk, and M. A. Huijbregts
2019. Space, time, and size dependencies of greenhouse gas payback times of wind
turbines in Northwestern Europe. Environmental Science and Technology, 53(15):9289–
9297.
Demir, N. and A. Ta¸skin
2013. Life cycle assessment of wind turbines in PInarba¸sI-Kayseri. Journal of Cleaner
Production, 54:253–263.
42
==PAGE:44==
REFERENCES
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Dolan, S. L. and G. A. Heath
2012. Life cycle greenhouse gas emissions of utility-scale wind power: Systematic review
and harmonization. Journal of Industrial Ecology, 16(1):S136–S154, S136–S154.
ecoinvent
2019. Ecoinvent 3.6. https://www.ecoinvent.org/.
Garrett, P. and K. Rønde
2013. Life cycle assessment of wind power: Comprehensive results from a state-of-the-
art approach. International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment, 18(1):37–48.
Gomaa, M. R., H. Rezk, R. J. Mustafa, and M. Al-Dhaifallah
2019. Evaluating the environmental impacts and energy performance of a wind farm
system utilizing the life-cycle assessment method: A practical case study. Energies,
12(3263):1–25.
Guezuraga, B., R. Zauner, and W. P¨olz
2012. Life cycle assessment of two diﬀerent 2 MW class wind turbines. Renewable
Energy, 37(1):37–44.
Haapala, K. R. and P. Prempreeda
2014. Comparative life cycle assessment of 2.0 MW wind turbines. International Journal
of Sustainable Manufacturing, 3(2):170–185.
Huang, Y. F., X. J. Gan, and P. T. Chiueh
2017. Life cycle assessment and net energy analysis of oﬀshore wind power systems.
Renewable Energy, 102:98–106.
Huijbregts, M. A., Z. J. Steinmann, P. M. Elshout, G. Stam, F. Verones, M. Vieira,
M. Zijp, A. Hollander, and R. van Zelm
2017a. ReCiPe2016: a harmonised life cycle impact assessment method at midpoint
and endpoint level. International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment, 22(2):138–147.
Huijbregts, M. A. J., Z. J. N. Steinmann, P. M. F. Elshout, G. Stam, F. V. M. D. M.
Vieira, A. Hollander, M. Zijp, and R. van Zelm
2017b. ReCiPe 2016 v1.1 - a harmonized life cycle impact assessment method at mid-
point and endpoint level - report I: Characterization. Technical report, National In-
stitute for Public Health and the Environment, P.O. Box 1, 3720 BA Bilthoven, The
Netherlands. RIVM Report 2016-0104a, https://www.rivm.nl/en.
ISO
2006. Environmental management – life cycle assessment – requirements and guidelines
(ISO 14044:2006).
Kaldellis, J. K. and D. Apostolou
2017. Life cycle energy and carbon footprint of oﬀshore wind energy. comparison with
onshore counterpart. Renewable Energy, 108:72–84.
Li, J., S. Li, and F. Wu
2020. Research on carbon emission reduction beneﬁt of wind power project based on
life cycle assessment theory. Renewable Energy, 155:456 – 468.
43
==PAGE:45==
REFERENCES
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Mart´ınez, E., F. Sanz, S. Pellegrini, E. Jim´enez, and J. Blanco
2009a.
Life-cycle assessment of a 2-MW rated power wind turbine: CML method.
International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment, 14(1):52–63.
Mart´ınez, E., F. Sanz, S. Pellegrini, E. Jim´enez, and J. Blanco
2009b. Life cycle assessment of a multi-megawatt wind turbine. Renewable Energy,
34(3):667–673.
Mendecka, B. and L. Lombardi
2019. Life cycle environmental impacts of wind energy technologies: A review of sim-
pliﬁed models and harmonization of the results. Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Reviews, 111:462–480.
Ozoemena, M., W. M. Cheung, and R. Hasan
2018. Comparative LCA of technology improvement opportunities for a 1.5-MW wind
turbine in the context of an onshore wind farm. Clean Technologies and Environmental
Policy, 20(1):173–190.
Padey, P., R. Girard, D. Le Boulch, and I. Blanc
2013. From LCAs to simpliﬁed models: A generic methodology applied to wind power
electricity. Environmental Science and Technology, 47(3):1231–1238.
Price, L. and A. Kendall
2012. Wind power as a case study - improving life cycle assessment reporting to better
enable meta-analyses. Journal of Industrial Ecology, 16(s1):S22–S27.
Rashedi, A., I. Sridhar, and K. J. Tseng
2013. Life cycle assessment of 50 MW wind ﬁrms and strategies for impact reduction.
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 21:89–101.
Shammugam, S., E. Gervais, T. Schlegl, and A. Rathgeber
2019. Raw metal needs and supply risks for the development of wind energy in Germany
until 2050. Journal of Cleaner Production, 221:738 – 752.
Sieros, G., P. Chaviaropoulos, J. D. Sørensen, B. H. Bulder, and P. Jamieson
2012. Upscaling wind turbines: theoretical and practical aspects and their impact on
the cost of energy. Wind Energy, 15(1):3–17.
Tremeac, B. and F. Meunier
2009. Life cycle analysis of 4.5 MW and 250 W wind turbines. Renewable and Sustain-
able Energy Reviews, 13(8):2104–2110.
Vestas
2017a. Life cycle assessment of electricity production from an onshore V105-3.45 MW
wind plant. Technical report, Vestas Wind Systems A/S, Hedeager 42, Aarhus N, 8200,
Denmark. 31st July 2017, Version 1.1.
Vestas
2017b. Life cycle assessment of electricity production from an onshore V112-3.45 MW
wind plant. Technical report, Vestas Wind Systems A/S, Hedeager 42, Aarhus N, 8200,
Denmark. 31st July 2017, Version 1.1.
44
==PAGE:46==
REFERENCES
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Vestas
2017c. Life cycle assessment of electricity production from an onshore V117-3.45 MW
wind plant. Technical report, Vestas Wind Systems A/S, Hedeager 42, Aarhus N, 8200,
Denmark. 31st July 2017, Version 1.1.
Vestas
2017d. Life cycle assessment of electricity production from an onshore V126-3.45 MW
wind plant. Technical report, Vestas Wind Systems A/S, Hedeager 42, Aarhus N, 8200,
Denmark. 31st July 2017, Version 1.1.
Vestas
2017e. Life cycle assessment of electricity production from an onshore V136-3.45 MW
wind plant. Technical report, Vestas Wind Systems A/S, Hedeager 42, Aarhus N, 8200,
Denmark. 31st July 2017, Version 1.1.
Vestas
2019a. Life cycle assessment of electricity production from an onshore V117-4.2 MW
wind plant. Technical report, Vestas Wind Systems A/S, Hedeager 42, Aarhus N, 8200,
Denmark. 1st November.
Vestas
2019b. Life cycle assessment of electricity production from an onshore V136-4.2 MW
wind plant. Technical report, Vestas Wind Systems A/S, Hedeager 42, Aarhus N, 8200,
Denmark. 1st November.
Vestas
2019c. Life cycle assessment of electricity production from an onshore V150-4.2 MW
wind plant. Technical report, Vestas Wind Systems A/S, Hedeager 42, Aarhus N, 8200,
Denmark. 1st November.
Wang, S., S. Wang, and J. Liu
2019. Life-cycle green-house gas emissions of onshore and oﬀshore wind turbines. Jour-
nal of Cleaner Production, 210:804–810.
Xie, J. b., J. x. Fu, S. y. Liu, and W. s. Hwang
2020. Assessments of carbon footprint and energy analysis of three wind farms. Journal
of Cleaner Production, 254:120159.
45
==PAGE:47==
A
INFORMATION FROM LITERATURE
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
A
Information from literature
Table A1: Material relations from literature where the rotor diameter was used as parameter.
References are Sieros et al. (2012), Caduﬀet al. (2012), Padey et al. (2013), and Shammugam
et al. (2019).
study
component
a
b
R2
Sieros
nacelle mass (ton)
1.31E-2
1.9542
nacelle mass, d>80m
2E-4
3.3942
blade mass (ton)
1.24E-4
2.4974
0.9995
Caduﬀ
rotor mass (kg)
1.995
2.22
0.93
nacelle mass (kg)
4.365
2.19
0.95
tower mass (kg)
21.88
1.70
0.97
foundation mass (kg)
27.54
1.58
0.84
Shammugam
rotor mass (ton)
4.57E-4
2.56
nacelle mass (SCIG) (ton)
5.75E-2
1.59
nacelle mass (PMSG-DD) (ton)
3.98E-4
2.70
tower mass (ton)
6.026E-5
3.22
Padey
Nacelle mass (kg)
4.4507
2.1656
0.9454
Tower mass (kg)
54.472
1.7984
0.8509
Rotor mass (kg)
1.0035
2.3822
0.9407
46
==PAGE:48==
A
INFORMATION FROM LITERATURE
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Table A2: Materials from literature and how they have been approximated in this study. Note that the split between glass ﬁbre and resin
Haapala and Xie is assumed in this study based on ??.
This
study
Chen
et
al.
(2011)
Crawford
(2009)
Haapala
and
Prempreeda
(2014)
Mart´ınez et al.
(2009a)
Rashedi et al.
(2013)
Xie
et
al.
(2020)
Steel
Steel
Steel
Steel
Steel
Steel
Steel
Stainless steel
Steel engineering
Iron
Iron
Cast iron
Cast iron
Iron
Cast iron
Cast iron
Cast iron
Glass
ﬁ-
bre
Fibre glass
Fibre glass
Fibreglass
Carbon ﬁbre
Fibreglass
reinforced plastic
(40% of it)
Fibre glass
Glass ﬁbre
Fibreglass
Epoxy, ﬁbreglass,
birch et al. (40%
of it)
Resin
Resin
Epoxy
Epoxy
Fibreglass
reinforced plastic
(60% of it)
Resin
Epoxy
Epoxy resin
Epoxy,
ﬁbre-
glass,
birch
et
al. (60% of it)
Concrete
Concrete
Concrete
Concrete
Concrete
Reinforced
concrete
Copper
Copper
Copper
Copper
Copper
Copper
Copper
Aluminium
Aluminium
Aluminium
Aluminium
Aluminium
Plastics
Plastic
PVC
PET
Plastic
Silica
Silica
Silica sand
Silica
Silica sand
Paint
Paint
Alkyd paint
47
==PAGE:49==
A
INFORMATION FROM LITERATURE
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Figure A1:
Screenshot of calculated coeﬃcients and R2 values for correlations between materials of each component and the simple
parameters. Colour coding is added to the R2 values to highlight high and low values.
48
==PAGE:50==
A
INFORMATION FROM LITERATURE
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
A.1
Adjusted End of Life processes
Landﬁll: See ﬁgure A2. This covers dumping on an inert material landﬁll. Builds on
process: “Inert waste, for ﬁnal disposal {CH}| treatment of inert waste, inert material
landﬁll | Conseq, U”, which constitutes of landﬁll “plant” and “process speciﬁc burden”,
of which the electricity and heat has been separated.
Figure A2: Screenshot of the process in SimaPro used for landﬁll of general waste.
Incineration: In this EoL scenario the material is incinerated in an MSW plant.
Substitution of heat from natural gas (the only heat process so far in the Tool) and of
electricity of the User speciﬁed EoL electricity grid mix. Based on the process “Municipal
solid waste {DK}| treatment of, incineration | Conseq, U” where the credited heat and
electricity processes have been deleted before the process was assessed and the results
applied in the Tool. Further work: incineration speciﬁc eﬃciency for the User to update.
Recycling: See ﬁgure A3. This covers energy for shredding or melting the material
in the form of “Diesel, burned in building machine {GLO}| market for | Conseq, U” based
on the process “Waste cement-ﬁbre slab {CH}| treatment of, recycling | Conseq, U”. 80%
of the material substitutes cement production “Cement, alternative constituents 21-35%
49
==PAGE:51==
A
INFORMATION FROM LITERATURE
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
{Europe without Switzerland}| market for | Conseq, U” Further work: more speciﬁc EoL
recycling options!
Figure A3: Screenshot of the process in SimaPro used for recyling where 80% of the recycled
material substitutes cement.
Reuse: In this end of life scenario the (sub-)component/ material is reused as it is
without any treatment. No impacts are assigned except from transport from site to reuse
facility.
50
==PAGE:52==
A
INFORMATION FROM LITERATURE
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Table A3: Sources detailing who they modelled the installation phase, and how their numbers have been adapted to this study. Diesel density:
0.832kg/L source https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diesel_fuel, Diesel heating value: 42MJ/kg source: https://www.world-nuclear.
org/information-library/facts-and-figures/heat-values-of-various-fuels.aspx
Source
quote
Derived MJ diesel
Ardente
et
al.
(2008)
“The installation of wind towers is generally carried out by cranes and other typical
construction machines and tools. Their fuel consumption has been directly measured
during the building phase.”
(the number is not in their arti-
cle)
Ozoemena
et
al.
(2018)
“Chataignere and Boulch (2003) provided data on on-site energy requirements which
was given as 556 MJ for one unit of turbine. This was used to represent diesel for
the building machines”
556MJ/turbine
Chen
et
al.
(2011)
“In a three months’ peak construction period, the power consumption load is
2000.0kWh/day, and the water consumption of 300.0m3/day is supplied by a reser-
voir about 1km away from the wind farm”
2000kWh/day * 3.6MJ/kWh *
90days/3-months / 24WT (this
includes construction of the foun-
dation), 27000MJ/WT
Li
et
al.
(2020)
“construction phase of the project mainly encompass the consumption of infrastruc-
ture construction materials and the energy and resource consumption generated by
the operation of various machinery equipment.” “The carbon emissions generated
in the operation of machinery equipment are mainly from the consumption of diesel,
gasoline, electricity and other resources.” Onshore, 33 1.5MW turbines
65ton
diesel/33turbines
*
42MJ/kg
*
1000kg/ton,
82700MJ/WT
Gomaa
et
al.
(2019)
“Setting up of the control building, laying underground cables for the entire project,
and preparing the access roads to the project site. The foundation for the onshore
turbine consists of plate foundations made with reinforced concrete. Production
of the concrete was included in this phase.” “The diesel quantity to complete the
construction of each turbine consisted of 21,600 liters of diesel. The amount of fuel
was calculated as follows: ten pieces of heavy equipment (2 excavators, 2 loaders,
3 heavy trucks, bulldozer, crane, and grader) working simultaneously for periods
of up to 12 h/day at an average diesel consumption rate of 30 liters/h. According
to this timetable, starting from Wednesday, 6 November 2013–Thursday, 9 October
2014 (338 calendar days), excluding weekends and public holidays in Jordan (totaling
110 days), the resulting working days totaled 228 working days. Therefore, 10 heavy
equipment * 12 h/day * 228 days * 30 liters/h)/38 = 21,600 liters/turbine.”
21600L/turbine * 0.832kg/L *
42MJ/kg, 754780MJ/turbine
51
==PAGE:53==
A
INFORMATION FROM LITERATURE
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Table A4: Maintenance as modelled in literature. A ”-” denotes that the study does not include this aspect.
Study
Inspection, trip distances
Oil and lubricants
Replacement of parts
Ardente et al. (2008)
Inspection 2-3times/year
Total: 7000kg-diesel/20years
(111.2kg lubricating oils, but does
not state how often it is changed)
One blade and 15% of the gener-
ator for each WT
Chen et al. (2011)
-
-
-
Ozoemena
et
al.
(2018)
8h-crane-use/inspection
Inspection van every 6 months,
120km roundtrip
320L gear oil/5 years
Lubricating oils 16kg/year
50% of generator
Shammugam
et
al.
(2019)
-
-
(detailed table of failure rates for
various components)
Mart´ınez
et
al.
(2009a)
-
-
One replacement generator
Mart´ınez
et
al.
(2009b)
-
One complete oilchange /service life
Regular lubrication of gears
(no numbers provided)
-
Rashedi et al. (2013)
Inspection 4times/year, 275km
roundtrip in passenger car
-
-
Vestas2019,
V150
4.2MW onshore
Transport of personnel in typical
vehicles (no numbers)
Change of oil and ﬁlters (no num-
bers)
Renovation/ replacement of worn
parts (no numbers)
Li et al. (2020)
-
Lubricating oil change every 3
years of 549kg/WT
Hydraulic oil change every 2 years
of 14.85kg/WT
-
Alsaleh
and
Sattler
(2019)
200km roundtrip every 6 months,
diesel passenger truck
Lubricant: 375kg every 2 years
Brake system replaced every 5
years Control system replaced
every 10 years
Tremeac and Meunier
(2009) (in Alsaleh and
Sattler (2019))
100km roundtrip every 4 months
-
One blade and 15% of the gener-
ator for each WT
Gomaa et al. (2019)
2 times/year by diesel truck (no
km mentioned)
Lubricant: 375kg every 5 years
-
52
==PAGE:54==
A
INFORMATION FROM LITERATURE
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Table A5: Literature approaches to modelling of decommissioning.
Study
Quote
Ardente et al. (2008)
“Impacts related to disassembly are supposed to be equal to those assessed for
the installation with the same employment of building machines.”
Chen et al. (2011)
“The plant’s disassembly and disposal is unpredictable. No completely detailed
data are available regarding the Yulin wind farm case.” Then they list recycling
percentages, but nothing else for decommissioning.
Ozoemena
et
al.
(2018)
“The turbines are assumed to be disassembled using a mobile crane and trans-
ported 500 km by road (40t truck) to a disposal facility requiring another nine
trips to transport one unit of 1.5-MW wind turbine.
Energy requirements
for dismantling at the facility are assumed to be 2625 m3 [JLM: 1.3GJ/WT]
of natural gas and 26.3 MWh [JLM: 1.2MJ/WT] of electricity as stated in
Chataignere and Boulch (2003)”
Bonou et al. (2016)
“Dismantling of turbine site: Has been estimated as a percentage (75%) of
resources used during establishment of site” Otherwise no speciﬁc numbers.
Haapala
and
Prem-
preeda (2014)
“It is assumed that the recycling location is 50 km from the wind park.”
Otherwise no speciﬁcs except recycling percentages.
Guezuraga
et
al.
(2012)
”There is also an energy input requirement during the dismantling stage, which
normally account of 2% of the total electricity generated”
53
==PAGE:55==
A
INFORMATION FROM LITERATURE
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Table A6: End of Life treatments from reviewed literature studies.
Material
Landﬁll
Incineration
Recycled
Reused
Comment
Metals
10%
-
90%
-
Gomaa et al. (2019),
Mart´ınez et al. (2009b)
Huang et al. (2017)
Bonou et al. (2016)
Guezuraga et al. (2012)
Demir and Ta¸skin (2013)
Wang et al. (2019)
Xie et al. (2020)
Ardente et al. (2008)
Polymers
50%
50%
-
-
Gomaa et al. (2019)
Prepreg
100%
-
-
-
Mart´ınez et al. (2009b)
Rubber, plastics
(except PVC)
-
100%
-
-
Huang et al. (2017)
Bonou et al. (2016)
Guezuraga et al. (2012)
Glass ﬁbre, PVC
100%
-
-
-
Huang et al. (2017)
Epoxy+glass ﬁbres
-
100%
-
-
Bonou et al. (2016)
Guezuraga et al. (2012)
Epoxy+glass ﬁbres
10%
-
90%
-
Xie et al. (2020)
Blade materials
80%
-
20%
-
Wang et al. (2019)
Blade
2%
-
98%
-
Xie et al. (2020)
Blade material
80%
-
20%
-
Ardente et al. (2008)
Lubricants
-
100%
-
-
Gomaa et al. (2019)
Concrete
100%
-
-
-
Gomaa et al. (2019)
Guezuraga et al. (2012)
Wang et al. (2019)
Concrete, gravel
-
-
90%
-
Bonou et al. (2016)
-
-
-
-
Crawford (2009): not including cus material
recovery as EoL cannot be guaranteed
54
==PAGE:56==
A
INFORMATION FROM LITERATURE
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
A.2
Electricity processes
Coal: “1 kWh Electricity, high voltage {DE} | electricity production, hard coal | APOS,
S”. German process used as proxy for Denmark.
Natural gas: “1 kWh Electricity, high voltage {DK} | heat and power co-generation,
natural gas, conventional power plant, 100MW electrical | APOS, S”. Danish process.
Oil: “1 kWh Electricity, high voltage {DK} | electricity production, oil | APOS, S”.
Capacity 500MW. The only process available for Denmark. Nuclear: “1 kWh Electricity,
high voltage {DE} | electricity production, nuclear, pressure water reactor | APOS, S”
Germany used as a proxy to Denmark. Other technologies are boiling water reactor; PWR
is chosen because Wikipedia states it is the most common type of nuclear PP.
Biomass: “1 kWh Electricity, high voltage {SE} | ethanol production from wood |
APOS, S”. Multioutput process of ethanol and electricity, economic allocation. Sweden
chosen as the closest proxy to Denmark. Other processes with electricity from biomass/
biofuels are similar multioutput processes.
Solar: “1 kWh Electricity, low voltage {DK} | electricity production, photovoltaic,
3kWp slanted-roof installation, multi-Si, panel, mounted | APOS, S”. Ecoinvent also
contains processes for solar thermal power plants of 20 or 50MW which might be more
appropriate as they are power plant sized as are the Wind Turbines modelled in the Tool;
however, these power plants need diesel or heat input to work, and there are no process
for Denmark.
Wind: “1 kWh Electricity, high voltage {DK} | electricity production, wind, 1-3MW
turbine, onshore | APOS, S”. Other options in Ecoinvent were <1MW and >3MW; this
is approximated with a 2MW turbine assumed to be the average of the installed capacity
on the Danish/European market.
Hydro: “1 kWh Electricity, high voltage {DK} | electricity production, hydro, run-
of-river | APOS, S”. This is the only Danish process. Other technologies available in
ecoinvent are pumping storage and reservoir.
55
==PAGE:57==
B
ELECTRICITY GRID MIX
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
B
Electricity grid mix
Electricity gridmix recommendation for 2020 is based on numbers from the Danish Energy
Agency’s site https://ens.dk/service/statistik-data-noegletal-og-kort/
maanedlig-og-aarlig-energistatistik from the downloadable ﬁle ”Figurer - Energis-
tatistik 2018” (in Danish, accessed 21/7 2020). The numbers are from 2018 and used as
a proxy for the gridmix for 2020. From this ﬁle, the table ”Elproduktion fordelt efter
anvendt brændsel” (Electricity production allocated by used fuel) is used, and the fuels
divided as shown in table B1, which also shows the recommended electricity gridmix for
Denmark in 2020.
Electricity grid mixes for 2040 and 2050 have been recommended based on numbers
from https://comets.tokni.com/tab2 (in Danish). The ﬁgures used are shown in ﬁg-
ures B1 and B2, and the values from those ﬁgure (read by mouse-over on the site) are
listed in tables B3 and B2, respectively. I have calculated percentages based on these.
Table B1:
The percentage split used for the electricity grid mix in 2020.
The ﬁrst part
of the table is data from https://ens.dk/service/statistik-data-noegletal-og-kort/
maanedlig-og-aarlig-energistatistik, the ﬁle ”Figurer - Energistatistik 2018”, the second
part how these categories and numbers have been adjusted to this thesis; as electricity from
waste is not included in the current version of the screening tool this category has been left out
and the other categories adjusted upwards to make the recommended fractional split sum to 1.
Direkte energiindhold [TJ]
2018
my
recommended
Elproduktion i alt (brutto)
109 350
category
fractions
DK 2020
Olie
949
oil
0.0087
0.01
- heraf orimulsion
-
Naturgas
6 926
natural gas
0.0633
0.7
Kul
23 654
coal
0.2163
0.22
Overskudsvarme
-
Aﬀald, ikke-bionedbrydeligt
2 533
(waste)
0.0232
-
Vedvarende energi
75 288
Solenergi
3 431
solar
0.0314
0.04
Vindkraft
50 036
wind
0.4576
0.46
Vandkraft
54
hydro
0.0005
0
Biomasse
19 005
biomass
0.1991
0.20
- Halm
1 708
- Træ
14 196
- Bioolie
5
- Aﬀald, bionedbrydeligt
3 096
Biogas
2 762
(biomass)
56
==PAGE:58==
B
ELECTRICITY GRID MIX
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Table B2: From the table ”Danmarks samlede energiforbrug og VE-andel” from the site https:
//comets.tokni.com/tab2.
Categories left out from the table: benzin, diesel, kerosene, as
these are assumed to bu transportation fuel rather than fuel for electricity production.
In
these numbers are probably also included energy for heat production (besides the electricity
production).
PJ
2020
2040
2050
aﬀald
33.6
0.072
32.55
0.064
32.55
0.060
brænde
24.79
0.053
16.53
0.032
16.53
0.030
geoterm
-
5.15
0.010
4.31
0.008
halm
41.76
0.090
22.31
0.044
25.54
0.047
kul
81.09
0.174
23.21
0.045
26.81
0.049
naturgas
96.09
0.206
17.11
0.034
12.00
0.022
sol
-
95.27
0.187
103.82
0.191
træﬂis
55.14
0.118
59.41
0.116
65.21
0.120
træpiller
67.58
0.145
89.31
0.175
96.19
0.177
vind
65.44
0.141
149.53
0.293
159.51
0.294
Figure B1: Screenshot from the website.
57
==PAGE:59==
B
ELECTRICITY GRID MIX
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Figure B2: Screenshoot of ﬁgure from website.
Table B3: From the table: ”El-produktion” on site https://comets.tokni.com/tab2.
PJ
2020
frac.
2040
frac.
2050
frac.
aﬀald
3.76
0.031
7.83
0.034
7.84
0.032
gas
8.91
0.074
0.000
0.000
havvind
32.14
0.265
78.66
0.338
81.25
0.332
kul
16.12
0.133
0.000
0.000
kul og biomasse
14.23
0.117
0.000
0.000
landvind
33.31
0.275
70.87
0.305
71.99
0.294
solceller
2.96
0.024
75.21
0.323
83.75
0.342
træ
9.73
0.080
0.000
0.000
58
==PAGE:60==
C
TESTING BOMS
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
C
Testing BOMs
Figure C1: Fractional diﬀerences, ∆= mtool–morg
morg
, between the material amount listed in the
studies and the amount calculated by the screening tool in relation to the simple parameter
”blade length” for the rotor. Including also linear regression for each material and the equations
and R2 for these.
Figure C2: Same as C1 but excluding the largest, stemming from the 5MW turbine. Note:
horisontal axis have diﬀerent scale.
59
==PAGE:61==
C
TESTING BOMS
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Figure C3: Fractional diﬀerences, ∆= mtool–morg
morg
, between the material amount listed in the
studies and the amount calculated by the screening tool in relation to the simple parameter
”nameplate power” for the nacelle. Including also linear regression for each material and the
equations and R2 for these.
Figure C4: Same as C3 but excluding the largest, stemming from the 5MW turbine. Note:
horisontal axis have diﬀerent scale.
60
==PAGE:62==
C
TESTING BOMS
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Figure C5: Fractional diﬀerences, ∆= mtool–morg
morg
, between the material amount listed in the
studies and the amount calculated by the screening tool in relation to the simple parameter
”hub height” for the tower. Including also linear regression for each material and the equations
and R2 for these.
Figure C6: Same as C5 but excluding the largest, stemming from the 5MW turbine. Series
”paints” has an R2 = 1 because it has only two datapoints. Note: horizontal axis have diﬀerent
scale.
61
==PAGE:63==
C
TESTING BOMS
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Figure C7: Fractional diﬀerences, ∆= mtool–morg
morg
, between the material amount listed in the
studies and the amount calculated by the screening tool in relation to the simple parameter ”total
wind turbine mass without foundation” for the foundation. Including also linear regression for
each material and the equations and R2 for these.
Figure C8: Same as C7 but excluding the largest, stemming from the 5MW turbine. Note:
horisontal axis have diﬀerent scale.
62
==PAGE:64==
D
TESTING BOMS FROM OTHER STUDIES
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
D
Testing BOMs from other studies
Figure D1: Screenshot of table from Excel with values for materials from literature studies
next to those calculated by the screening tool. Delta means ∆= mtool–morg
morg
.
63
==PAGE:65==
D
TESTING BOMS FROM OTHER STUDIES
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Figure D2: Fractional diﬀerences, ∆= mtool–morg
morg
, between the aggregated material amount
listed in the studies and the amount calculated by the screening tool. The series ”paints” only
includes two datapoints. Nameplate power is used for calculating the amount of materials in
the nacelle.
Figure D3: As above, but the two series plastics and paints have been removed, as has the
two outliers for resin and iron, respectively, and the linear regressions are updated.
64
==PAGE:66==
D
TESTING BOMS FROM OTHER STUDIES
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Figure D4: Fractional diﬀerences, ∆= mtool–morg
morg
, between the aggregated material amount
listed in the studies and the amount calculated by the screening tool. The series ”paints” only
includes two datapoints. Blade length is used for calculating the amount of materials in the
rotor.
Figure D5: As above, but the two series plastics and paints have been removed, as has the
two outliers for resin and iron, respectively, and the linear regressions are updated.
65
==PAGE:67==
D
TESTING BOMS FROM OTHER STUDIES
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Figure D6: Fractional diﬀerences, ∆= mtool–morg
morg
, between the aggregated material amount
listed in the studies and the amount calculated by the screening tool. The series ”paints” only
includes two datapoints. Hub height is used for calculating the amount of materials in the tower.
Figure D7: As above, but the two series plastics and paints have been removed, as has the
two outliers for resin and iron, respectively, and the linear regressions are updated.
66
==PAGE:68==
E
REMODELLING OF STUDIES
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
E
Assumptions and screening tool setup for detailed
remoddelling of studies from literature
E.1
Redoing Alsaleh and Sattler (2019)
Using their material amounts (not those generated by the screening tool) from their tables
3, 4, and 5. As they model glass ﬁbre and resin together as “glass ﬁbre reinforced plastic”
an assumption has been made that the mass is equally split between glass ﬁbre and
resin. Using their listed transport distances from their table 7, except they list 8325km
by transoceanic ship which is currently not present in the screening tool, so here it is
modelled as 4000km train (my guess that those two numbers might be equivalent, but
will need to check the inﬂuence of this assumption).
Installation from their table 8:
“17640 gallons of diesel” corresponds to 66775L, which with Diesel density: 0.832kg/L4
and Diesel heating value: 42MJ/kg5 becomes
66775L · 0.832kg/L · 42MJ/kg = 2, 333, 386MJ
Which includes making of the foundation – and it’s a very large number compared to
my recommended value.
Maintenance is taken from their table 9. For replacements “Brake system replaced
every 5 years (per manufacturer information) and control system every 10 years” is con-
verted to no replacement of rotor, and 0.15 replacement fraction of nacelle every 10 years.
End of Life treatment percentages have been updated for all materials as according to
their table 10. Resin has been modelled as plastics. There is no information on the end of
life treatment for concrete, so it is assumed that all has been landﬁlled. No information on
energy consumption for decommissioning, or transport distances to end of life treatment
facilities, so these are left out (set to 0).
They also include 1/200 of a substation, because the modelled wind turbine is part of
a wind farm consisting of 200 turbines; that is not included here.
They list two diﬀerent wind speeds for calculating the lifetime electricity production
4https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diesel_fuel
5https://www.world-nuclear.org/information-library/facts-and-figures/
heat-values-of-various-fuels.aspx
67
==PAGE:69==
E
REMODELLING OF STUDIES
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
of one wind turbine, and it is not clear to me which value they use for normalising their
results in their table 13; from reading the text I assume they use the optimal value of
constant wind speed of 8m/s leading to annual electricity production of 6840MWh – the
other value is from a wind rose at a nearby airport, giving a value of 2935MWh.
The setup in the screening tool is shown in table E1.
Table E1: Values used in the screening tool to redo the study by Alsaleh and Sattler (2019),
with annual electricity production 6840MWh and lifetime 20years.
rotor
landﬁll
incineration
recycled
reused
Glass ﬁbre
kg
7411
1
0
0
0
Resin, epoxy
kg
7411
0.1
0
0.9
0
Iron
kg
9446
0.02
0
0.98
0
Steel
kg
10203
0.02
0
0.98
0
total mass
kg
34471
processes
InjectionMould
kg
7411
-
-
-
-
Steel hot rolling
kg
10203
-
-
-
-
transport of rotor:
lorry, EURO5
km
650
-
-
-
-
train
km
4000
-
-
-
-
nacelle
landﬁll
incineration
recycled
reused
Glass ﬁbre
kg
863
1
0
0
0
Resin, epoxy
kg
863
0.1
0
0.9
0
Copper
kg
1803
0.02
0
0.98
0
Iron
kg
23638
0.02
0
0.98
0
Steel
kg
37343
0.02
0
0.98
0
Aluminium
kg
1035
0.02
0
0.98
0
Plastic
kg
145
0.1
0
0.9
0
Silica
kg
0
0
0
0
0
total mass
kg
65690
processes
68
==PAGE:70==
E
REMODELLING OF STUDIES
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Table E1 continued from previous page, redoing of Alsaleh and Sattler (2019)
PolymerFoaming
kg
0
-
-
-
-
InjectionMould
kg
863
-
-
-
-
Steel hot rolling
kg
37343
-
-
-
-
transport of nacelle:
lorry, EURO5
km
650
-
-
-
-
train
km
4000
-
-
-
-
tower
landﬁll
incineration
recycled
reused
Steel
kg
188179
0.02
0
0.98
0
Paint, alkyd
kg
580
1
0
0
0
kg
total mass
kg
188759
processes
Steel hot rolling
kg
188179
-
-
-
-
kg
transport of tower
lorry, EURO5
km
650
-
-
-
-
train
km
4000
-
-
-
-
foundation
landﬁll
incineration
recycled
reused
Steel
kg
58537
0.02
0
0.98
0
Concrete
kg
1116000
1
0
0
0
Iron
kg
0.02
0
0.98
0
total mass
kg
1174537
processes
-
-
-
-
transport of founda-
tion
lorry, EURO5
km
0
-
-
-
-
train
km
0
-
-
-
-
69
==PAGE:71==
E
REMODELLING OF STUDIES
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Table E1 continued from previous page, redoing of Alsaleh and Sattler (2019)
total WT mass
kg
1463457
Installation
Diesel, building
MJ
2333386
Maintenance
Inspection
trip
fre-
quency
pr year
2
Inspection
roundtrip
distance
km
200
Lubricating oil chance
frequency
pr year
0.5
Lubricating oil
kg
375
replacement fraction,
rotor
-
0
replacement
fre-
quency, rotor
pr year
1
replacement fraction,
nacelle
-
0.15
replacement
fre-
quency, nacelle
pr year
0.1
Decommissioning
Diesel, building
MJ
0
lorry, EURO5
km
0
train
km
0
70
==PAGE:72==
E
REMODELLING OF STUDIES
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
E.2
Redoing Gomaa et al. (2019)
Their listed BOM is not divided into components; therefore I have modelled rotor, nacelle,
tower in the “nacelle” component in the screening tool. Foundation has its own table in
their article and has been modelled accordningly.
I have adapted their BOM as following:
• Glass ﬁbre: Ceramic/glass
• Resin: Thermoplastics, Thermoplastic elastomers, Elastomers/elastomeric compounds,
Duromers, Polymeric compounds
• Copper: Copper, Copper alloys
• Iron: Steel and iron materials (unspeciﬁed), Cast iron, Lights alloys, cast and
wrought alloys
• Steel: Low and Unalloyed materials, High alloyed, steel
• Aluminium: Aluminum and aluminum alloys
• Paint: Lacquers
• Lubricating oil: Lubricants (in maintenance section)
• Concrete: Concrete in pedestal, Concrete in slab, Blinding [sic] concrete (converted
to kg by using density of 2400kg/m3)
• Left out: Zinc alloys, Special metals, Adhesives, sealants, Modiﬁed natural materi-
als, Other materials, Electronics, Electrics, Magnet
Transport has been estimated with their table 4. As there is currently no option for
sea transport in the screening tool, 5000km by train has been entered instead of 8325km
(nacelle + blades) and 5850km (tower) by sea. Transport for foundation, mainly the
cement, has been estimated by me to 50km.
Installation: 21,600 liters/turbine corresponding to 754780MJ/WT (calculations in
the maintenance section).
71
==PAGE:73==
E
REMODELLING OF STUDIES
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Inspection trips are cited as 2/year, but no distance is given in the paper; I have
chosen the value of 200km. The value of 1273kg of lubricating oil is given for each wind
turbine; I assume that is over its entire operational lifetime. No replacement of parts are
discussed in the article and are left out.
End of life treatment fractions have been updated from their table 6.
Decommissioning is not mentioned on its own and it is assumed the same energy
consumption as for installation. Distance to EoL treatment facilities also not mentioned;
value of 100km by lorry is chosen.
The setup in the screening tool is shown in table E2.
72
==PAGE:74==
E
REMODELLING OF STUDIES
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Table E2: Values used in the screening tool to redo the study by Gomaa et al. (2019),
annual electricity production 8892MWh and lifetime 20years.
rotor
landﬁll
incineration
recycled
reused
Glass ﬁbre
kg
0
Resin, epoxy
kg
0
Iron
kg
0
Steel
kg
0
total mass
kg
0
processes
InjectionMould
kg
0
-
-
-
-
Steel hot rolling
kg
0
-
-
-
-
transport of rotor:
lorry, EURO5
km
0
-
-
-
-
train
km
0
-
-
-
-
nacelle
landﬁll
incineration
recycled
reused
Glass ﬁbre
kg
24000
0.5
0.5
0
0
Resin, epoxy
kg
21001
1
0
0
0
Copper
kg
4858
0.1
0
0.9
0
Iron
kg
66001
0.1
0
0.9
0
Steel
kg
244727
0.1
0
0.9
0
Aluminium
kg
3424
0.1
0
0.9
0
Plastic
kg
0
Silica
kg
0
total mass
kg
364011
processes
PolymerFoaming
kg
0
-
-
-
-
InjectionMould
kg
21001
-
-
-
-
Steel hot rolling
kg
244727
-
-
-
-
transport of nacelle:
lorry, EURO5
km
195
-
-
-
-
73
==PAGE:75==
E
REMODELLING OF STUDIES
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Table E2 continued from previous page, redoing of Gomaa et al. (2019)
train
km
5000
-
-
-
-
tower
landﬁll
incineration
recycled
reused
Steel
kg
0
Paint, alkyd
kg
758
1
0
0
0
kg
total mass
kg
758
processes
Steel hot rolling
kg
0
-
-
-
-
kg
transport of tower
lorry, EURO5
km
195
-
-
-
-
train
km
5000
-
-
-
-
foundation
landﬁll
incineration
recycled
reused
Steel
kg
37136
0.1
0
0.9
0
Concrete
kg
1034400
1
0
0
0
Iron
kg
0
total mass
kg
1071536
processes
-
-
-
-
transport
of
founda-
tion
lorry, EURO5
km
50
-
-
-
-
train
km
0
-
-
-
-
total WT mass
kg
1436305
Installation
Diesel, building
MJ
754780
Maintenance
74
==PAGE:76==
E
REMODELLING OF STUDIES
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Table E2 continued from previous page, redoing of Gomaa et al. (2019)
Inspection
trip
fre-
quency
pr year
2
Inspection
roundtrip
distance
km
200
Lubricating oil chance
frequency
pr year
0.05
Lubricating oil
kg
1273
replacement fraction,
rotor
-
0
replacement
fre-
quency, rotor
pr year
0
replacement fraction,
nacelle
-
0
replacement
fre-
quency, nacelle
pr year
0
Decommissioning
Diesel, building
MJ
754780
lorry, EURO5
km
100
train
km
0
75
==PAGE:77==
E
REMODELLING OF STUDIES
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
E.3
Redoing Bonou et al. (2016)
Their turbine G2. The BOM is not divided in components so all components are modelled
under “nacelle”; except concrete which is under “foundation” (because that is where the
only entry for concrete is in the screening tool).
EoL from their table 3. Glass ﬁbre substitutes sand and clay in their model, in the
screening tool the only option is substitution of cement. Metals: 90% are collected, and
of this 90% are recycled (i.e. 81% of the total are recycled), the remaining 9% of the
collected I assume to be landﬁlled. Concrete: 50% are collected and the rest left on site;
of this 90% are recycled substituting gravel; again, in the screening tool the only option
so far is to substitute cement. Plastics are assumed all collected and all incinerated.
As written just above their table 3, the future grid mix was set to: coal 11%, gas 25%,
nuclear 22%, hydro 16%, biomass 6%, wind 13%, solar 7%.
No speciﬁc data on installation, and decommissioning is 75% of installation resources
from their appendix table S1; I use the default 50000MJ for installation, and then 75%
of that for decommissioning. In the same table it’s stated that maintenance is modelled,
but again no speciﬁc numbers; I use default values.
No numbers on transport distances; use default 200km for all materials, except con-
crete for foundation where 150km is used.
The setup in the screening tool is shown in table E3.
Table E3: Values used in the screening tool to redo the study by Bonou et al. (2016), annual
electricity production 11169MWh and lifetime 20years.
rotor
landﬁll
incineration
recycled
reused
Glass ﬁbre
kg
0
Resin, epoxy
kg
0
Iron
kg
0
Steel
kg
0
total mass
kg
0
processes
InjectionMould
kg
0
-
-
-
-
Steel hot rolling
kg
0
-
-
-
-
76
==PAGE:78==
E
REMODELLING OF STUDIES
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Table E3 continued from previous page, redoing of Bonou et al. (2016)
transport of rotor:
lorry, EURO5
km
0
-
-
-
-
train
km
0
-
-
-
-
nacelle
landﬁll
incineration
recycled
reused
Glass ﬁbre
kg
17850
0
0
1
0
Resin, epoxy
kg
21420
1
0
Copper
kg
12495
0.09
0
0.81
0
Iron
kg
32130
0.09
0
0.81
0
Steel
kg
365925
0.09
0
0.81
0
Aluminium
kg
12495
0.09
0
0.81
0
Plastic
kg
14280
1
Silica
kg
total mass
kg
476595
processes
PolymerFoaming
kg
0
-
-
-
-
InjectionMould
kg
21420
-
-
-
-
Steel hot rolling
kg
365925
-
-
-
-
transport of nacelle:
lorry, EURO5
km
200
-
-
-
-
train
km
-
-
-
-
tower
landﬁll
incineration
recycled
reused
Steel
kg
0
Paint, alkyd
kg
0
kg
total mass
kg
processes
Steel hot rolling
kg
0
-
-
-
-
kg
77
==PAGE:79==
E
REMODELLING OF STUDIES
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Table E3 continued from previous page, redoing of Bonou et al. (2016)
transport of tower
lorry, EURO5
km
0
-
-
-
-
train
km
0
-
-
-
-
foundation
landﬁll
incineration
recycled
reused
Steel
kg
0
Concrete
kg
1299480
0
0
0.45
0
Iron
kg
total mass
kg
1299480
processes
-
-
-
-
transport
of
founda-
tion
lorry, EURO5
km
150
-
-
-
-
train
km
-
-
-
-
total WT mass
kg
1776075
Installation
Diesel, building
MJ
50000
Maintenance
Inspection
trip
fre-
quency
pr year
3
Inspection
roundtrip
distance
km
150
Lubricating oil chance
frequency
pr year
0.2
Lubricating oil
kg
300
replacement fraction,
rotor
-
0.33
78
==PAGE:80==
E
REMODELLING OF STUDIES
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Table E3 continued from previous page, redoing of Bonou et al. (2016)
replacement
fre-
quency, rotor
pr year
0.05
replacement fraction,
nacelle
-
0.15
replacement
fre-
quency, nacelle
pr year
0.05
Decommissioning
Diesel, building
MJ
37500
lorry, EURO5
km
200
train
km
50
79
==PAGE:81==
E
REMODELLING OF STUDIES
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
E.4
Redoing Garrett and Rønde (2013)
Their V80 2.0MW turbine (IEC I High wind). The BOM is only given as percentages of
total weight in their ﬁgure 4, and as there is no concrete listed, I assume it is without
foundation. ”Steel and iron” I have divided so 10% of the amount listed is modelled as
iron, and 90% as steel. ”Aluminium and alloys” are modelled as aluminium, ”copper
and other metals” are modelled as copper. ”Polymer materials” are modelled as resin,
and ”glass and other compounds” are modelled as glass ﬁbre. ”Electronics and electrics”,
”Fuels and auxiliary materials”, and ”Unspeciﬁed” are not modelled here. Since no value
is given in the paper for the amount of concrete used, I use the material relation for
calculating materials (steel and concrete) in the foundation, because the total mass of the
turbine is given in the paper (272000kg) and in the screening tool the material relations for
the foundation use the total mass of the three other components to calculate the needed
amount of materials.
Transport, installation, maintenance, and decommissioning are all mentioned but no
data at given in the paper. Also, no EoL percentages are given, but: “environmental
credits are assigned for recycling of metals only”. Vestas report (2011) on the V80-2MW
turbine, section 3.4.4 and table 2 are used for identifying EoL treatment fractions. Same
source section 3.4.9 and table 3 are used for transport distances. As all components are
remodelled together, the transport distances cannot be split on component level, and I
have chosen to just use 1200km; the blades are transported only 600km, but the tower is
also transported 8050km by sea which is not modelled here. Transport for maintenance
is stated as 2160km/year/plant, and each plant has 25 wind turbines; (2160/25)km has
been ascribed to the remodelled turbine.
The setup in the screening tool is shown in table E4.
Table E4: Values used in the screening tool to redo the study by Garrett and Rønde (2013),
annual electricity production 8269MWh and lifetime 20years.
rotor
landﬁll
incineration
recycled
reused
Glass ﬁbre
kg
Resin, epoxy
kg
Iron
kg
80
==PAGE:82==
E
REMODELLING OF STUDIES
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Table E4 continued from previous page, redoing of Garrett and Rønde (2013)
Steel
kg
total mass
kg
processes
InjectionMould
kg
-
-
-
-
Steel hot rolling
kg
-
-
-
-
transport of rotor:
lorry, EURO5
km
-
-
-
-
train
km
-
-
-
-
nacelle
landﬁll
incineration
recycled
reused
Glass ﬁbre
kg
19040
1
0
0
0
Resin, epoxy
kg
8160
0.5
0.5
0
0
Copper
kg
2720
0.1
0
0.9
0
Iron
kg
23664
0.1
0
0.9
0
Steel
kg
212976
0.1
0
0.9
0
Aluminium
kg
2720
0.1
0
0.9
0
Plastic
kg
0
Silica
kg
0
total mass
kg
269280
processes
PolymerFoaming
kg
0
-
-
-
-
InjectionMould
kg
8160
-
-
-
-
Steel hot rolling
kg
212976
-
-
-
-
transport of nacelle:
lorry, EURO5
km
1200
-
-
-
-
train
km
-
-
-
-
tower
landﬁll
incineration
recycled
reused
Steel
kg
Paint, alkyd
kg
81
==PAGE:83==
E
REMODELLING OF STUDIES
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Table E4 continued from previous page, redoing of Garrett and Rønde (2013)
kg
total mass
kg
processes
Steel hot rolling
kg
-
-
-
-
kg
transport of tower
lorry, EURO5
km
-
-
-
-
train
km
-
-
-
-
foundation
landﬁll
incineration
recycled
reused
Steel
kg
48477
0.1
0
0.9
0
Concrete
kg
809407
1
0
0
0
Iron
kg
0
total mass
kg
857884
processes
-
-
-
-
transport
of
founda-
tion
lorry, EURO5
km
50
-
-
-
-
train
km
0
-
-
-
-
total WT mass
kg
1127164
Installation
Diesel, building
MJ
50000
Maintenance
Inspection
trip
fre-
quency
pr year
1
Inspection
roundtrip
distance
km
86.4
82
==PAGE:84==
E
REMODELLING OF STUDIES
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Table E4 continued from previous page, redoing of Garrett and Rønde (2013)
Lubricating oil chance
frequency
pr year
0.2
Lubricating oil
kg
300
replacement fraction,
rotor
-
0.33
replacement
fre-
quency, rotor
pr year
0.05
replacement fraction,
nacelle
-
0.15
replacement
fre-
quency, nacelle
pr year
0.05
Decommissioning
Diesel, building
MJ
50000
lorry, EURO5
km
200
train
km
0
83
==PAGE:85==
E
REMODELLING OF STUDIES
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
E.5
Redoing Guezuraga et al. (2012)
No detailed BOM, so all components are modelled under nacelle.
Material amounts
from their table 2. Their material “epoxy” is modelled as resin in the screening tool.
Aluminium is not included in their listed materials. EoL percentages are given in their
table 1. Transport distance for all materials (except concrete) is given in their section 3.3.
No mentioning of installation energy use.
For maintenance: “It is expected that over a 20 years lifetime, turbine 2.0 MW-geared
will require one gearbox replacement every 7 years.”, which I estimate as 15% of the
nacelle; since the entire turbine is modelled as one I chose 5% instead. No mentioning of
inspection trips or oil changes, so I keep with default values.
For decommissioning: “energy input requirement during the dismantling stage, which
normally account of 2% of the total electricity generated”. With annual electricity produc-
tion of 5980MWh, lifetime of 20 years, and conversion factor 3600MJ/MWh this becomes
5980MWh/year · 20years · 3600MJ/MWh ∗2% = 8, 611, 200MJ
which is MUCH higher value than the 50000MJ I recommend. I use the default value,
because the value calculated above gives a very big contribution to impacts.
The setup in the screenig tool is shown in table E5.
Table E5: Values used in the screening tool to redo the study by Guezuraga et al. (2012),
annual electricity production 5980MWh and lifetime 20years.
rotor
landﬁll
incineration
recycled
reused
Glass ﬁbre
kg
Resin, epoxy
kg
Iron
kg
Steel
kg
total mass
kg
processes
InjectionMould
kg
-
-
-
-
Steel hot rolling
kg
-
-
-
-
transport of rotor:
84
==PAGE:86==
E
REMODELLING OF STUDIES
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Table E5 continued from previous page, redoing of Guezuraga et al. (2012)
lorry, EURO5
km
-
-
-
-
train
km
-
-
-
-
nacelle
landﬁll
incineration
recycled
reused
Glass ﬁbre
kg
24300
0
1
0
0
Resin, epoxy
kg
10000
0
1
0
0
Copper
kg
2400
0.1
0
0.9
0
Iron
kg
39350
0.1
0
0.9
0
Steel
kg
296400
0.1
0
0.9
0
Aluminium
kg
0
Plastic
kg
2400
0
1
0
0
Silica
kg
0
total mass
kg
374850
processes
PolymerFoaming
kg
0
-
-
-
-
InjectionMould
kg
10000
-
-
-
-
Steel hot rolling
kg
296400
-
-
-
-
transport of nacelle:
lorry, EURO5
km
2700
-
-
-
-
train
km
-
-
-
-
tower
landﬁll
incineration
recycled
reused
Steel
kg
Paint, alkyd
kg
kg
total mass
kg
processes
Steel hot rolling
kg
-
-
-
-
kg
transport of tower
85
==PAGE:87==
E
REMODELLING OF STUDIES
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Table E5 continued from previous page, redoing of Guezuraga et al. (2012)
lorry, EURO5
km
-
-
-
-
train
km
-
-
-
-
foundation
landﬁll
incineration
recycled
reused
Steel
kg
0
Concrete
kg
1164000
1
0
0
0
Iron
kg
total mass
kg
processes
1164000
-
-
-
-
transport
of
founda-
tion
lorry, EURO5
km
50
-
-
-
-
train
km
0
-
-
-
-
total WT mass
kg
1538850
Installation
Diesel, building
MJ
0
Maintenance
Inspection
trip
fre-
quency
pr year
3
Inspection
roundtrip
distance
km
150
Lubricating oil chance
frequency
pr year
0.2
Lubricating oil
kg
300
replacement fraction,
rotor
-
replacement
fre-
quency, rotor
pr year
86
==PAGE:88==
E
REMODELLING OF STUDIES
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
Table E5 continued from previous page, redoing of Guezuraga et al. (2012)
replacement fraction,
nacelle
-
0.05
replacement
fre-
quency, nacelle
pr year
0.142857
Decommissioning
Diesel, building
MJ
8611200
lorry, EURO5
km
200
train
km
0
87
==PAGE:89==
F
TESTING GWP
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
F
Testing GWP
Figure F1: Screenshots of table with Global Warming Potential values for comparing literature
with the accuracty of the screening tool. These are used for making the graph in ﬁgure 5.
88
==PAGE:90==
G
CHARACTERISATION FACTORS FOR GWP
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
G
Characterisation factors for GWP
Figure G1:
Characterisation factors of a selection of substances for the Global Warming
Potential impact category used by the studies remodelled in section 3.3.
89
==PAGE:91==
H
COMPONENT CONTRIBUTION COMPARISONS Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
H
Component Contribution Comparisons
Figure H1: Numbers used for generaing the column charts in ﬁgure 6.
H.1
Alsaleh and Sattler (2019)
No numeral values were given in their article, so values for Global Warming (Global
Warming Potential) were read of from their ﬁgures 2 and 5.
Read oﬀfrom their ﬁgure 2 showing impacts by phase of wind turbine life cycle:
materials: 90%, transport: 2%, installation 7%, maintenance 1%
Read oﬀfrom their ﬁgure 5 showing impacts by turbine part: Nacelle: 26%, Founda-
tion: 10%, Rotor: 22%, Tower: 42%
Assuming that their ﬁgure 5 is showing the split of the life cycle phase ”materials”
from their ﬁgure 2 the split becomes: rotor 19.8%, nacelle 23.4%, tower 37.8%, foundation
9%, transport 2%, maintenance 1%, installation+decommissioning 7%.
90
==PAGE:92==
H
COMPONENT CONTRIBUTION COMPARISONS Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
H.2
Gomaa et al. (2019)
Their table 8 provides numeral values Global Warming in kg-CO2-eq for the four life cycle
stages Raw materials: 4.58E+07, transportation: 8.29E+05, Installation: 1.48E+07, and
Operations: 1.88E+05. It’s for the entire lifecycle of the wind turbine, but it will give the
same percentage split as if the numbers were normalised to 1kWh.
H.3
Garrett and Rønde (2013)
Read of graph in their ﬁgure 5: site parts: 12%, Installations: 2%, foundation: 16%,
tower: 30%, nacelle: 18%, hub 4% (nacelle + hub are modelled as nacelle), blades: 10%,
Vestas factories: 3%, replacements/ servicing 5%.
Transport: 8% from in article text just below their table 2.
Site parts (12%) and Vestas factories (3%) are not modelled in the screening tool.
Transport is not included in their ﬁgure 5; I chose to include the 8% transport as they
are and divided the remaining 7% equally between all seven categories (i.e. 1% each).
91
==PAGE:93==
I
LITERATURE REVIEW
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
I
Literature review
The literature review was conducted using mainly the Goolge Scholar search engine6 for
identifying the articles, and DTU FindIt7 for accessing them.
Among the search results the following criteria were used to select articles for further
investigation:
- the title or abstract should indicate that the study is an LCA of horizontal axis wind
turbines, wind farms, or components of wind turbines.
- it should be written in English (maybe Danish),
- it should be a peer reviewed article or report (i.e. not student report or master thesis),
or proceedings,
- it should be available through DTU FindIt, or online for free,
- it should be published within the past deacade (2010-2020).
Searched keywords were “allintitle: LCA wind” (24/3 2020) and “allintitle: life cycle
assessment wind turbine” (25/3 2020). The initil articles were skimmed for relevant data
(to be used for materials relation), for references to data sources (such as LCA reports
from wind turbine manufacturers), and for references to previous LCA studies of wind
turbines or wind farms.
Next, these references were found and skimmed through in
the same manner. During this process, articles published between 2000 and 2010 were
also included when their topic was clearly relevant to my project, and when the same
reference appeared in multiple articles. Finally, Google Scholar’s tool ”Cited by” was
used to identify the most recent publications in the ﬁeld.
Sometimes conferences proceeding and posters appeared in the search; these were
seldom relevant in terms of data collection, but could be used for further literature search.
A list af all investigated articles can be found in table Z and a list of wind turbine
manufacturer webpages can be found in table W.
While reading the articles it became clear that many wind turbine LCA studies build
on data from each other, or on LCAs and datasheets from the main manufacturers Vestas,
Enercon, and Siemens Gamesa. Hence only studies with ”ﬁrst hand” data were saved for
later data extraction, so as to not include the same wind turbine multiple times – unless
the article had more detailed data than the original (e.g. material split for components
instead of for the entire turbine, or including more materials). Only articles and reports
containing data of wind turbine materials mass in mass units (kg or tonnes, not in %) were
saved, and the data from these studies were extracted and collected for later manipulation.
6https://scholar.google.com/
7https://findit.dtu.dk/
92
==PAGE:94==
Table Z: Literature list for the literature review.
Reference
Title
Type of
study
Data
used
Comments
Abeliotis and Pactiti (2014)
Assessment of the environmental impacts
of a wind farm in central Greece during its
life cycle
LCA
No BOM, very short
Al-Behadili
and
El-Osta
(2015)
Life Cycle Assessment of Dernah (Libya)
wind farm
LCA
No detailed BOM. Builds on a master the-
sis and Schleisner (2000)
Allen et al. (2008)
Energy analysis and environmental life cy-
cle assessment of a micro-wind turbine
LCA
No details
Alsaleh and Sattler (2019)
Comprehensive life cycle assessment of
large wind turbines in the US
LCA
(x)
Detailed BOM for components. Builds on
Gamesa WTs
Amponsah et al. (2014)
Greenhouse gas emissions from renewable
energy sources: A review of lifecycle con-
siderations
review
Meta analysis
Angelakoglou et al. (2014)
Issues regarding wind turbines position-
ing: A benchmark study with the applica-
tion of the life cycle assessment approach
LCA
(x)
Has detailed BOM for Vestas V90 for each
component
Ardente et al. (2008)
Energy performances and life cycle assess-
ment of an Italian wind farm
LCA
x
Used by Caduﬀet al. (2012), Hertwich
et al. (2015)
Arvesen et al. (2013)
The importance of ships and spare parts
in LCAs of oﬀshore wind power
(LCA)
Very detailed LCI in the SuplMat; prob-
ably the same as Arvesen and Hertwich
(2011)
Arvesen and Hertwich (2012)
Assessing the life cycle environmental im-
pacts of wind power: A review of present
knowledge and research needs
review
Comparative literature study
Arvesen and Hertwich (2011)
Environmental implications of large-scale
adoption of wind power: A scenario-based
life cycle assessment
LCA
Based on Mart´ınez et al. (2009a), Ves-
tas (2006) and other Vestas reports (plus
some cost articles). No new data
Asdrubali et al. (2015)
Life cycle assessment of electricity produc-
tion from renewable energies: Review and
results harmonization
review
Meta analysis building on Vestas work and
articles included in this list
I
LITERATURE REVIEW
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
93
==PAGE:95==
Table Z continued from previous page
Reference
Title
Type of
study
Data
used
Comments
Aso and Cheung (2015)
Towards greener horizontal-axis wind tur-
bines: Analysis of carbon emissions, en-
ergy and costs at the early design stage
(LCA)
Builds on Vestas (2006), a MSc thesis, and
a few other studies which are not detailed
enough for my purpose
Atilgan and Azapagic (2016)
An integrated life cycle sustainability
assessment of electricity generation in
Turkey
-
Comparison of all diﬀerent energy tech-
nologies in Turkey; wind part is based on
article(s) by Kouloumpis, which I cannot
ﬁnd
Besseau et al. (2019)
Past, present and future environmental
footprint of the Danish wind turbine ﬂeet
with LCA WIND DK, an online interac-
tive platform
(LCA)
Model generating LCI to make statistics;
no BOM
Birkved et al. (2013)
Selection
of
environmental
sustainable
ﬁber materials for wind turbine blades -
a contra intuitive process?
(LCA)
Focus on turbine blades, materials, an-
other article from Corona2015 on mate-
rials - builds on previous stuﬀby Corona;
look to those for LCI
Blanc et al. (2013)
Web
tool
for
energy
policy
decision-
making through geo-localized LCA mod-
els:
A focus on oﬀshore wind farms in
Northern Europe
(LCA)
Web tool based on LCA; where are their
background data from?
Bonou et al. (2016)
Life cycle assessment of onshore and oﬀ-
shore wind energy - from theory to appli-
cation
LCA
x
Average data for dear and direct drive
trains. Siemens WT
Caduﬀet al. (2012)
Wind power electricity:
The bigger the
turbine, the greener the electricity?
review
Metastudy to make correlations between
eg. mass and impacts. Detailed LCI in-
puts in Supplemantary Material, Craw-
ford (2009) one of them
Camara et al. (2010)
Environmental impact of modern wind
power under LCA methodology
-
Part of the Martinez-gang
I
LITERATURE REVIEW
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
94
==PAGE:96==
Table Z continued from previous page
Reference
Title
Type of
study
Data
used
Comments
Carbajales-Dale (2017)
Life Cycle Assessment: Meta-analysis of
Cumulative Energy Demand for Wind En-
ergy Technologies
(LCA)
No BOM
Chen et al. (2011)
Renewability of wind power in China: A
case study of nonrenewable energy cost
and greenhouse gas emission by a plant
in Guangxi
(LCA)
x
Has LCI
Chipindula et al. (2018)
Life cycle environmental impact of on-
shore and oﬀshore wind farms in Texas
LCA
Has detailed BOM in appendix BUT does
not state the sources of their data, only in
text ” based on technical data and LCA
studies of turbine manufacturing compa-
nies such as Vestas, General Electric (GE),
WinWind, and Gamesa”.
Left out be-
cause of lack of transparency
Crawford (2009)
Life cycle energy and greenhouse emis-
sions analysis of wind turbines and the ef-
fect of size on energy yield
(LCA)
x
Detailed input LCI, used by Caduﬀet al.
(2012) Hertwich et al. (2015)
Cucurachi et al. (2017)
No Matter – How? Dealing with Matter-
less Stressors in LCA of Wind Energy Sys-
tems
(LCA)
Focus on noise impact category,
with
Wind turbines as example, use same case
study as Caduﬀet al. (2012)
Dammeier et al. (2019)
Space, Time, and Size Dependencies of
Greenhouse Gas Payback Times of Wind
Turbines in Northwestern Europe
review
Compares studies (all included in this list)
I
LITERATURE REVIEW
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
95
==PAGE:97==
Table Z continued from previous page
Reference
Title
Type of
study
Data
used
Comments
Davidsson et al. (2012)
A review of life cycle assessments on wind
energy systems
review
Metastudy
using
results
from
Ar-
dente et al. (2008),
Crawford (2009),
Guezuraga et al. (2012), Lee and Tzeng
(2008) Lee2006, Mart´ınez et al. (2009a),
Mart´ınez et al. (2009b), Schleisner (2000),
Tremeac and Meunier (2009), Vestas2011
V112, Weinzettel et al. (2009), White
(2006)
Demir and Ta¸skin (2013)
Life cycle assessment of wind turbines in
PInarba¸sI-Kayseri
LCA
Only BOM in percentages, no absolute
numbers.
Builds on their references
(Mart´ınez et al. (2009a), Mart´ınez et al.
(2009b),
Crawford
(2009),
Guezuraga
et al. (2012), Vestas (2006))
Dolan and Heath (2012)
Life Cycle Greenhouse Gas Emissions of
Utility-Scale Wind Power: Systematic Re-
view and Harmonization
review
Meta analysis
Fleck and Huot (2009)
Comparative life-cycle assessment of a
small wind turbine for residential oﬀ-grid
use
(LCA)
WT too small for my scope
Fthenakis and Kim (2009)
Land use and electricity generation:
A
life-cycle analysis
(LCA)
Builds on studies from before 2009; too
old for my scope
Garrett and Rønde (2013)
Life cycle assessment of wind power: Com-
prehensive results from a state-of-the-art
approach
LCA
Based on data from Vestas LCA reports
from 2011 on their V80, V90 and V100
Gomaa et al. (2019)
Evaluating the Environmental Impacts
and Energy Performance of a Wind Farm
System Utilizing the Life-Cycle Assess-
ment Method: A Practical Case Study
LCA
Builds on Vestas V112-3.3
I
LITERATURE REVIEW
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
96
==PAGE:98==
Table Z continued from previous page
Reference
Title
Type of
study
Data
used
Comments
Greening and Azapagic (2013)
Environmental impacts of micro-wind tur-
bines and their potential to contribute to
UK climate change targets
LCA
WT of 6kW; too small for my scope for
now
Guermont et al. (2013)
Environmental impact for oﬀshore wind
farms:
Geolocalized Life Cycle Assess-
ment (LCA) approach
(LCA)
Web tool, same as Blanc et al. (2013)
Guezuraga et al. (2012)
Life cycle assessment of two diﬀerent 2
MW class wind turbines
LCA
Uses GEMIS software?, used by Demir
and Ta¸skin (2013). Intransparent
Hapke et al. (2010)
Life cycle assessment of modern wind
power plants
LCA
Build on Vestas V82 LCAs
Hertwich et al. (2015)
Integrated
life-cycle
assessment
of
electricity-supply
scenarios
conﬁrms
global
environmental
beneﬁt
of
low-
carbon technologies
LCA
Builds on Vestas (2006) and articles by
Arvesen (same group).
Supplementary
material for details
Huang et al. (2017)
Life cycle assessment and net energy anal-
ysis of oﬀshore wind power systems
LCA
Theoretical study building on Vestas re-
ports
Haapala
and
Prempreeda
(2014)
Comparative life cycle assessment of 2.0
MW wind turbines
LCA
x
LCI of Vestas 2MW and Gamesa G80
Jani and Rangan (2018)
Life cycle energy and carbon footprint
analysis of large MW scale grid connected
wind power systems in India
LCA
Vestas V90 and Gamesa G80. No detailed
BOM
Jensen (2019)
Evaluating the environmental impacts of
recycling wind turbines
-
Recycling of materials
Ji and Chen (2016b)
LCA-based carbon footprint of a typical
Wind farm in China
(LCA)
Intransparent
Ji and Chen (2016a)
Carbon footprint accounting of a typical
wind farm in China
LCA
No BOM, no refrences to it - similar to Ji
and Chen (2016b)
Jungbluth et al. (2005)
Life cycle assessment for emerging tech-
nologies:
Case studies for photovoltaic
and wind power
LCA
Ecoinvent 2 report; need special ecoinvent
v2 login to access those. Too old for my
scope
I
LITERATURE REVIEW
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
97
==PAGE:99==
Table Z continued from previous page
Reference
Title
Type of
study
Data
used
Comments
Kabir et al. (2012)
Comparative life cycle energy, emission,
and economic analysis of 100 kW name-
plate wind power generation
LCA
Cannot obtain their original data sheets;
links are dead. Turbines are also rather
small for my study, left out
Kadiyala et al. (2017)
Characterization of the life cycle green-
house gas emissions from wind electricity
generation systems
LCA
Review building on earlier studies; no new
data in this
Kaldellis
and
Apostolou
(2017)
Life cycle energy and carbon footprint of
oﬀshore wind energy.
Comparison with
onshore counterpart
review
Review of previous studies
Kubiszewski et al. (2010)
Meta-analysis of net energy return for
wind power systems
review
Builds on old studies, before 2010
Kumar et al. (2016)
Input-output life cycle environmental as-
sessment of greenhouse gas emissions from
utility scale wind energy in the United
States
LCA
Based on work from before 2010, no de-
tailed BOM
Lee and Tzeng (2008)
Development
and
life-cycle
inventory
analysis of wind energy in Taiwan
LCA
Gross
LCI.
Builds
on
Vestas
V-47
(0.66MW) and V-66 (1.75MW), and Ener-
con E-40 (0.6MW). Too old for my scope
Lenzen
and
Munksgaard
(2002)
Energy and CO2 life-cycle analyses of
wind turbines—review and applications
review
Comparing 72 wind LCAs on GHG emis-
sions and energy
Leung and Yang (2012)
Wind energy development and its environ-
mental impact: A review
review
Overview of world wind energy scenarios;
ref’s are too old for my scope
Li et al. (2020)
Research on carbon emission reduction
beneﬁt of wind power project based on life
cycle assessment theory
LCA
(x)
Has BOM
Li et al. (2016)
Life cycle assessment (LCA) and environ-
mental beneﬁts analysis of one wind farm
in China
(LCA)
Not detailed enough: no info on turbine
specs
I
LITERATURE REVIEW
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
98
==PAGE:100==
Table Z continued from previous page
Reference
Title
Type of
study
Data
used
Comments
Mallia and Lewis (2013)
Life cycle greenhouse gas emissions of elec-
tricity generation in the province of On-
tario, Canada
LCA
Builds on Vestas V82. Not transparent
Marimuthu and Kirubakaran
(2013)
Carbon pay back period for solar and wind
energy project installed in India: A criti-
cal review
LCA
Build on Vestas (2006)
D´ıaz Mart´ın et al. (2016)
Evaluation of the environmental beneﬁts
of recycling materials in the moving parts
of a wind turbine using the life cycle as-
sessment (LCA)
LCA
Not detailed enough.
Data are from a
Nordex N50/800 plant
Mart´ınez et al. (2018)
Life cycle assessment of a wind farm re-
powering process
LCA
Upgrading an old farm to higher MW. Has
simple BOM. Builds on their study from
2009
Mart´ınez et al. (2015)
Comparative evaluation of life cycle im-
pact assessment software tools through a
wind turbine case study
(LCA)
Compares LCA softwares based on their
study from Mart´ınez et al. (2009a)
Mart´ınez et al. (2010)
LCA
sensitivity
analysis
of
a
multi-
megawatt wind turbine
LCA
Series of 4 (?) articles on same work
Mart´ınez et al. (2009a)
Life-cycle assessment of a 2-MW rated
power wind turbine: CML method
LCA
x
Same case as Mart´ınez et al. (2009b).
Used by Caduﬀet al. (2012), Demir and
Ta¸skin (2013)
Mart´ınez et al. (2009b)
Life cycle assessment of a multi-megawatt
wind turbine
LCA
x
Same case as Mart´ınez et al. (2009a).
Used by Demir and Ta¸skin (2013)
McCulloch et al. (2000)
Life-Cycle Value Assessment of a Wind
Turbine
(LCA)
Detailed input LCI, used by Caduﬀ2012.
Too old, not peer-reviewed
Mendecka
and
Lombardi
(2019)
Life cycle environmental impacts of wind
energy technologies: A review of simpli-
ﬁed models and harmonization of the re-
sults
review
Metastudy
I
LITERATURE REVIEW
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
99
==PAGE:101==
Table Z continued from previous page
Reference
Title
Type of
study
Data
used
Comments
Mendecka et al. (2018)
Analysis of life cycle thermo-ecological
cost of electricity from wind and its ap-
plication for future incentive mechanism
LCA
No BOM. Builds on other studies (all in-
cluded in this list)
Merugula et al. (2010)
Comparative Life Cycle Assessment: Re-
inforcing Wind Turbine Blades with Car-
bon Nanoﬁbers
LCA
No details on how the LCA was con-
ducted; no supporting information
Mo et al. (2014)
Key Technology of LCA on Small Wind
Power Generation System
?
Not available through DTU FindIt
Nagashima et al. (2017)
Hybrid input–output table method for
socioeconomic and environmental assess-
ment of a wind power generation system
(LCA)
(x)
Builds on Vestas V82
Nian et al. (2019)
Life cycle cost-beneﬁt analysis of oﬀshore
wind energy under the climatic conditions
in Southeast Asia – Setting the bottom-
line for deployment
LCA
(x)
Has BOM for 4.1MW. Builds on Yang
et al. (2018)
Noorollahi et al. (2018)
Life Cycle Energy and Greenhouse Gas
Emission Assessment of a Wind Turbine
Installed in Northeast of Iran
LCA
Builds on Vestas V47 0.66MW
Nugent and Sovacool (2014)
Assessing the lifecycle greenhouse gas
emissions from solar PV and wind energy:
A critical meta-survey
review
metastudy
Oebels and Pacca (2013)
Life cycle assessment of an onshore wind
farm located at the northeastern coast of
Brazil
LCA
LCA of a ﬁctive plant based on ”survey-
ing the general studies on wind energy”
and ”Collection of primary data during a
ﬁeld study” without further detail; too in-
transparent
Ozoemena et al. (2018)
Comparative LCA of technology improve-
ment opportunities for a 1.5-MW wind
turbine in the context of an onshore wind
farm
LCA
x
Builds on work from a phD thesis from
2010 by Papadopoulos, which again builds
on work from the ECLIPSE project from
2003 and Enercon E66 WT
I
LITERATURE REVIEW
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
100
==PAGE:102==
Table Z continued from previous page
Reference
Title
Type of
study
Data
used
Comments
Padey et al. (2013)
From LCAs to simpliﬁed models:
A
generic
methodology
applied
to
wind
power electricity
(?)
Material relations in appendix S3
Padey et al. (2012)
A Simpliﬁed Life Cycle Approach for
Assessing Greenhouse Gas Emissions of
Wind Electricity
LCA
Up-scale ecoinvent 800kW WT to ﬁt their
little data from Nordex, Gamesa, Vestas,
Enercon. Too intransparent for my use
Padey et al. (2011)
Investigation of LCA simpliﬁcation ap-
proach: the wind power electricity case
?
Conference
proceedings,
not
available
through DTU FindIt, same as Padey et al.
(2012)
Pehnt et al. (2008)
Consequential environmental system anal-
ysis of expected oﬀshore wind electricity
production in Germany
(LCA)
Conceptual model for consequential mod-
elling. Too old for my scope
Piasecka et al. (2019)
Life cycle analysis of ecological impacts of
an oﬀshore and a land-basedwind power
plant
LCA
Very intransparent!
I think they base
their LCA on Siemens SWT-6.0-154?
Poujol et al. (2020)
Site-speciﬁc life cycle assessment of a pi-
lot ﬂoating oﬀshore wind farm based on
suppliers’ data and geo-located wind data
LCA
(x)
BOM only for entire turbine. 6MW wind
turbines, Haliade 150 model, pilot project
Price and Kendall (2012)
Wind Power as a Case Study - Improving
Life Cycle Assessment Reporting to Better
Enable Meta-analyses
review
Extra studies in their supplementary ma-
terial; only until 2010
Rajaei and Tinjum (2013)
Life Cycle Assessment of Energy Balance
and Emissions of a Wind Energy Plant
LCA
Builds on Vestas V90-1.8
Rashedi et al. (2013)
Life cycle assessment of 50 MW wind ﬁrms
and strategies for impact reduction
LCA
x
Builds
on
REpower
(now
Senvion),
NREL2009; can’t ﬁnd those sources so I
use this
Reimers et al. (2014)
Greenhouse gas emissions from electricity
generated by oﬀshore wind farms
LCA
x
Oﬀshore, with BOM
I
LITERATURE REVIEW
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
101
==PAGE:103==
Table Z continued from previous page
Reference
Title
Type of
study
Data
used
Comments
Rule et al. (2009)
Comparison of life cycle carbon dioxide
emissions and embodied energy in four
renewable electricity generation technolo-
gies in New Zealand
(LCA)
Not transparent
Raadal et al. (2014)
GHG emissions and energy performance
of oﬀshore wind power
LCA
Oﬀshore, conceptual foundations. Rotor,
nacelle, tower based on the NREL 5MW
reference turbine (Jonkman2009)
Raadal et al. (2011)
Life cycle greenhouse gas (GHG) emis-
sions from the generation of wind and hy-
dro power
review
Based on 63 LCAs published between 1990
and 2010; too old
Sacchi et al. (2019)
Exploring technologically, temporally and
geographically-sensitive life cycle invento-
ries for wind turbines: A parameterized
model for Denmark
LCA
Builds on work from 2003
Schleisner (2000)
Life cycle assessment of a wind farm and
related externalities
LCA
Good inventory! But too old for my scope.
Used by Caduﬀet al. (2012)
Schreiber et al. (2019)
Comparative life cycle assessment of elec-
tricity generation by diﬀerent wind tur-
bine types
LCA
(x)
Detailed BOM for 3 3MW-class WT;
builds on Vestas, Enercon, Gamesa
Shaﬁee et al. (2016)
A parametric whole life cost model for oﬀ-
shore wind farms
-
No BOM (thought that LC cost could
have that)
Siddiqui and Dincer (2017)
Comparative assessment of the environ-
mental impacts of nuclear,
wind and
hydro-electric power plants in Ontario: A
life cycle assessment
LCA
Comparing nuclear, hydro and wind; wind
is based on Vestas V90, Elsam report from
2004
da Silva et al. (2018)
Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) and Wind
Power Generation:
Application of the
Methodology and the Generator to Power
System
-
Discussion study of LCA
I
LITERATURE REVIEW
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
102
==PAGE:104==
Table Z continued from previous page
Reference
Title
Type of
study
Data
used
Comments
Smoucha
and
Fitzpatrick
(2016)
Life Cycle Analysis of the Embodied Car-
bon Emissions from 14 Wind Turbines
with Rated Powers between 50 Kw and
3.4 MW
LCA
Use data from Kabir et al. (2012), Craw-
ford (2009), Mart´ınez et al. (2009a)
Songlin et al. (2011)
Life cycle analysis of wind power: A case
of Fuzhou
LCA
Has BOM, but only one or two materials
for each of four components; not detailed
enough
Soerensen et al. (2016)
Feasibility and LCA for a Wave Dragon
platform with wind turbines
-
Not wind turbine
Tomporowski et al. (2018)
Comparison Analysis of Blade Life Cycles
of Land-Based and Oﬀshore Wind Power
Plants
-
No speciﬁc data
Tremeac and Meunier (2009)
Life cycle analysis of 4.5 MW and 250 W
wind turbines
LCA
Uses data from Vestas V90, and ECLIPSE
project. Used by Caduﬀet al. (2012)
Tsai et al. (2016)
Life Cycle Assessment of Oﬀshore Wind
Farm Siting:
Eﬀects of Locational Fac-
tors,
Lake Depth,
and Distance from
Shore
LCA
Builds on Vestas V112 3MW oﬀshore WT
Uddin and Kumar (2014)
Energy, emissions and environmental im-
pact analysis of wind turbine using life cy-
cle assessment technique
(LCA)
Small scale 500W, too small for my scope
Valori et al. (2013)
Life Cycle Assessment of Micro-Wind
Generators
LCA
Small scale 30kW, too small - and no LCI
inputs
Vargas et al. (2015)
Life cycle assessment: A case study of two
wind turbines used in Mexico
LCA
Vestas, 2MW, gets data from Mart´ınez
et al. (2009a). No turbine specs!
Varun et al. (2009)
LCA of renewable energy for electricity
generation systems-A review
review
Too old for my scope
Wachsmann (2005)
Geograﬁcal variability in LCA - the case
of wind turbines in Brazil and Germany
LCA
Too old
I
LITERATURE REVIEW
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
103
==PAGE:105==
Table Z continued from previous page
Reference
Title
Type of
study
Data
used
Comments
Wagner et al. (2011)
Life cycle assessment of the oﬀshore wind
farm alpha ventus
LCA
Not transparent: no LCI inputs
Wang et al. (2019b)
Life-cycle green-house gas emissions of on-
shore and oﬀshore wind turbines
LCA
Not transparent where data is from, looks
like it’s from Elsam 2004 but no details on
turbine model
Wang et al. (2019a)
A comparative life-cycle assessment of
hydro-, nuclear and wind power: A China
study
(LCA)
Not detailed enough
Wang and Teah (2017)
Life cycle assessment of small-scale hori-
zontal axis wind turbines in Taiwan
review
Small scale
Wang and Sun (2012)
Life cycle assessment of CO2 emissions
from wind power plants:
Methodology
and case studies
LCA
Builds on Vestas V82, and V90, plus
a Chinese wind farm (data in Chinese).
Comparing wind and hydro
Weinzettel et al. (2009)
Life cycle assessment of a ﬂoating oﬀshore
wind turbine
LCA
Builds on a WT from sway.no. BOM only
of total WT, not divided to various parts.
Old; left out
White (2006)
Net energy payback and CO2 emissions
from three midwestern wind farms: An
update
-
No detailed BOM - and old
Wiedmann et al. (2011)
Application of hybrid life cycle approaches
to emerging energy technologies - The case
of wind power in the UK
(LCA)
Builds on ecoinvent process for 2MW tur-
bine as described in EcoInvent v2 report
(by Burger and Bauer)
Xie et al. (2020)
Assessments of carbon footprint and en-
ergy analysis of three wind farms
LCA
(x)
Builds on Lee and Tzeng (2008) but has
more detailed BOM; but the numbers are
very precise, no detail about how they ob-
tained them
Xu et al. (2018)
Life cycle assessment of onshore wind
power systems in China
LCA
Only reports BOM as kg/kWh, and I can-
not ﬁnd their data source
Xue et al. (2015)
A life cycle co-beneﬁts assessment of wind
power in China
LCA
(x)
Chinese WT
I
LITERATURE REVIEW
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
104
==PAGE:106==
Table Z continued from previous page
Reference
Title
Type of
study
Data
used
Comments
Yang et al. (2018)
The life-cycle energy and environmental
emissions of a typical oﬀshore wind farm
in China
LCA
(x)
3 Chinese oﬀshore WT
Zhong et al. (2011)
LCAs of a polycrystalline photovoltaic
module and a wind turbine
LCA
Builds on Jungbluth2005 = ecoinvent v2,
Vestas, and a student report by Nalukowe
from 2006 of Vestas V90
Zimmermann (2013)
Parameterized tool for site speciﬁc LCAs
of wind energy converters
LCA
Turbine specs are not detailed enough for
me to use. Conceptual ”standard” turbine
for tool to model from
Zimmermann
and
G¨oßling-
Reisemann (2012)
Inﬂuence of Site Speciﬁc Parameters on
Environmental Performance of Wind En-
ergy Converters
(LCA?)
x
simple BOM, Enercon turbine
I
LITERATURE REVIEW
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
105
==PAGE:107==
Table W: Webpages from the literature review.
Company
webpage
Accessed
comment
Vestas
https://www.vestas.com/en/about/
sustainability#!available-reports
4/6 2020
23 LCA reports from 2007 and later.
Data aggregated for entire WT except
for the one from 2007
Vattenfall
https://group.vattenfall.com/who-we-are/
sustainability
4/6 2020
sustainability reports and general LCA
report, but w/o data
Siemens Gamesa
https://www.siemensgamesa.com/en-int/
sustainability/environment
4/6 2020
one brochure with envirnmental product
declaration of one wind turbine, no data
Enercon
https://www.enercon.de/home/
4/6 2020
no LCAs or sustainability reports
LM Wind Power
https://www.lmwindpower.com/en/
sustainability/reporting
4/6 2020
WT blade manufacturer. No LCAs, only
general sustainability reports
GE Renewable Energy
https://www.ge.com/renewableenergy/
wind-energy
4/6 2020
no details on BOM or LCAs
Leitwind
https://www.leitwind.com/en/
4/6 2020
no details on BOM or LCAs
Vergnet
http://www.vergnet.com/our-solutions/
wind-energy/
4/6 2020
Medium scale WT; not relevant
Xant
http://xant.com/
4/6 20
small scale ( 100kW); not relevant
I
LITERATURE REVIEW
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
106
==PAGE:108==
Bibliography for literature review
Abeliotis, K. and D. Pactiti
2014. Assessment of the environmental impacts of a wind farm in central greece during its
life cycle. International Journal of Renewable Energy Research, 4(3):580–585.
Al-Behadili, S. and W. El-Osta
2015. Life cycle assessment of Dernah (Libya) wind farm. Renewable Energy, 83:1227–1233.
Allen, S. R., G. P. Hammond, and M. C. McManus
2008. Energy analysis and environmental life cycle assessment of a micro-wind turbine. Pro-
ceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part A: Journal of Power and Energy,
222(7):669–684.
Alsaleh, A. and M. Sattler
2019. Comprehensive life cycle assessment of large wind turbines in the US. Clean Technologies
and Environmental Policy, 21(4):887–903.
Amponsah, N. Y., M. Troldborg, B. Kington, I. Aalders, and R. L. Hough
2014. Greenhouse gas emissions from renewable energy sources: A review of lifecycle consid-
erations. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 39:461–475.
Angelakoglou, K., P. N. Botsaris, and G. Gaidajis
2014. Issues regarding wind turbines positioning: A benchmark study with the application of
the life cycle assessment approach. Sustainable Energy Technologies and Assessments, 5:7–18.
Ardente, F., M. Beccali, M. Cellura, and V. Lo Brano
2008. Energy performances and life cycle assessment of an Italian wind farm. Renewable and
Sustainable Energy Reviews, 12(1):200–217.
Arvesen, A., C. Birkeland, and E. G. Hertwich
2013. The importance of ships and spare parts in LCAs of oﬀshore wind power. Environmental
Science and Technology, 47(6):2948–2956.
Arvesen, A. and E. G. Hertwich
2011. Environmental implications of large-scale adoption of wind power: A scenario-based life
cycle assessment. Environmental Research Letters, 6:045102.
Arvesen, A. and E. G. Hertwich
2012.
Assessing the life cycle environmental impacts of wind power: A review of present
knowledge and research needs. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 16(8):5994–6006.
Asdrubali, F., G. Baldinelli, F. D’Alessandro, and F. Scrucca
2015. Life cycle assessment of electricity production from renewable energies: Review and
results harmonization. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 42:1113–1122.
Aso, R. and W. M. Cheung
2015. Towards greener horizontal-axis wind turbines: Analysis of carbon emissions, energy
and costs at the early design stage. Journal of Cleaner Production, 87(C):263–274.
Atilgan, B. and A. Azapagic
2016. An integrated life cycle sustainability assessment of electricity generation in Turkey.
Energy Policy, 93:168–186.
I
LITERATURE REVIEW
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
107
==PAGE:109==
Besseau, R., R. Sacchi, I. Blanc, and P. P´erez-L´opez
2019. Past, present and future environmental footprint of the Danish wind turbine ﬂeet with
LCA WIND DK, an online interactive platform. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,
108:274–288.
Birkved, M., A. Corona, C. M. Markussen, and B. Madsen
2013. Selection of environmental sustainable ﬁber materials for wind turbine blades - a contra
intuitive process? In Proceedings of the Risø International Symposium on Materials Science,
34, Pp. 193–202.
Blanc, I., C. Guermont, B. Gschwind, L. Menard, C. Calkoen, and H. Zelle
2013. Web tool for energy policy decision-making through geo-localized LCA models: A focus
on oﬀshore wind farms in Northern Europe. EnviroInfo 2012 - 26th International Conference
on Informatics for Environmental Protection, Dessau : Germany (2012).
Bonou, A., A. Laurent, and S. I. Olsen
2016. Life cycle assessment of onshore and oﬀshore wind energy - from theory to application.
Applied Energy, 180:327–337.
Caduﬀ, M., M. A. J. Huijbregts, H.-j. Althaus, A. Koehler, and S. Hellweg
2012. Wind power electricity: The bigger the turbine, the greener the electricity? Environ-
mental Science and Technology, 46:4725–4733.
Camara, E. M., E. J. Macias, J. B. Fernandez, and M. P. de la Parte
2010. Environmental impact of modern wind power under LCA methodology. In Wind Power,
S. M. Muyeen, ed., chapter 23, Pp. 521–536. InTech.
Carbajales-Dale, M.
2017. Life cycle assessment: Meta-analysis of cumulative energy demand for wind energy
technologies.
In Wind Energy Engineering: a Handbook for Onshore and Oﬀshore Wind
Turbines, T. M. Letcher, ed., chapter 21, Pp. 439–473. Elsevier Inc.
Chen, G. Q., Q. Yang, and Y. H. Zhao
2011. Renewability of wind power in China: A case study of nonrenewable energy cost and
greenhouse gas emission by a plant in Guangxi. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,
15(5):2322–2329.
Chipindula, J., V. S. V. Botlaguduru, H. Du, R. R. Kommalapati, and Z. Huque
2018. Life cycle environmental impact of onshore and oﬀshore wind farms in Texas. Sustain-
ability (switzerland), 10(6):2022.
Crawford, R. H.
2009. Life cycle energy and greenhouse emissions analysis of wind turbines and the eﬀect of
size on energy yield. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 13(9):2653–2660.
Cucurachi, S., C. C. van der Giesen, R. Heijungs, and G. R. de Snoo
2017. No matter – how?: Dealing with matter-less stressors in LCA of wind energy systems.
Journal of Industrial Ecology, 21(1):70–81.
da Silva, M. T., V. Z. Rebutini, and F. N. Mancini
2018. Life cycle assessment (LCA) and wind power generation: Application of the methodology
and the generator to power system. Brazilian Archives of Biology and Technology, 61(Sp. Iss.
SI):e18000470.
I
LITERATURE REVIEW
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
108
==PAGE:110==
Dammeier, L. C., J. M. Loriaux, Z. J. Steinmann, D. A. Smits, I. L. Wijnant, B. Van Den Hurk,
and M. A. Huijbregts
2019. Space, time, and size dependencies of greenhouse gas payback times of wind turbines
in Northwestern Europe. Environmental Science and Technology, 53(15):9289–9297.
Davidsson, S., M. H¨o¨ok, and G. Wall
2012. A review of life cycle assessments on wind energy systems. International Journal of
Life Cycle Assessment, 17(6):729–742.
D´ıaz Mart´ın, R., F. J. P´erez Trujillo, J. F. Morales Garc´ıa, C. Mayo del R´ıo, E. Batue-
cas Fern´andez, and A. Guardiola Mouhaﬀel
2016. Evaluation of the environmental beneﬁts of recycling materials in the moving parts
of a wind turbine using the life cycle assessment (LCA). International Journal of Applied
Engineering Research, 11(5):2990–2995.
Demir, N. and A. Ta¸skin
2013. Life cycle assessment of wind turbines in PInarba¸sI-Kayseri. Journal of Cleaner Pro-
duction, 54:253–263.
Dolan, S. L. and G. A. Heath
2012. Life cycle greenhouse gas emissions of utility-scale wind power: Systematic review and
harmonization. Journal of Industrial Ecology, 16(1):S136–S154, S136–S154.
Fleck, B. and M. Huot
2009. Comparative life-cycle assessment of a small wind turbine for residential oﬀ-grid use.
Renewable Energy, 34(12):2688–2696.
Fthenakis, V. and H. C. Kim
2009. Land use and electricity generation: A life-cycle analysis. Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Reviews, 13(6-7):1465–1474.
Garrett, P. and K. Rønde
2013. Life cycle assessment of wind power: Comprehensive results from a state-of-the-art
approach. International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment, 18(1):37–48.
Gomaa, M. R., H. Rezk, R. J. Mustafa, and M. Al-Dhaifallah
2019. Evaluating the environmental impacts and energy performance of a wind farm system
utilizing the life-cycle assessment method: A practical case study. Energies, 12(3263):1–25.
Greening, B. and A. Azapagic
2013. Environmental impacts of micro-wind turbines and their potential to contribute to UK
climate change targets. Energy, 59:454–466.
Guermont, C., L. M´enard, and I. Blanc
2013. Environmental impact for oﬀshore wind farms: Geolocalized life cycle assessment (LCA)
approach. OCOSS 2013 - Conference on Ocean & Coastal Observation: Sensors and observing
systems, numerical models & information Systems, Nice : France (2013).
Guezuraga, B., R. Zauner, and W. P¨olz
2012. Life cycle assessment of two diﬀerent 2 MW class wind turbines. Renewable Energy,
37(1):37–44.
Haapala, K. R. and P. Prempreeda
2014. Comparative life cycle assessment of 2.0 MW wind turbines. International Journal of
Sustainable Manufacturing, 3(2):170–185.
I
LITERATURE REVIEW
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
109
==PAGE:111==
Hapke, H. M., K. R. Haapala, Z. Wu, and T. K. A. Brekken
2010. Life cycle assessment of modern wind power plants. In ASME Conference Proceedings
2010, Pp. 395–403.
Hertwich, E. G., T. Gibon, E. A. Bouman, A. Arvesen, S. Suh, G. A. Heath, J. D. Bergesen,
A. Ramirez, M. I. Vega, and L. Shi
2015. Integrated life-cycle assessment of electricity-supply scenarios conﬁrms global environ-
mental beneﬁt of low-carbon technologies. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
112(20):6277–6282.
Huang, Y. F., X. J. Gan, and P. T. Chiueh
2017. Life cycle assessment and net energy analysis of oﬀshore wind power systems. Renewable
Energy, 102:98–106.
Jani, D. and B. Rangan
2018. Life cycle energy and carbon footprint analysis of large MW scale grid connected wind
power systems in India. In E3S Web of Conferences, volume 64, P. 08002. EDP Sciences.
Jensen, J. P.
2019.
Evaluating the environmental impacts of recycling wind turbines.
Wind Energy,
22(2):316–326.
Ji, S. and B. Chen
2016a. Carbon footprint accounting of a typical wind farm in China. Applied Energy, 180:416–
423.
Ji, S. and B. Chen
2016b. LCA-based carbon footprint of a typical wind farm in China. Energy Procedia, 88:250–
256.
Jungbluth, N., C. Bauer, R. Dones, and R. Frischknecht
2005. Life cycle assessment for emerging technologies: Case studies for photovoltaic and wind
power. International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment, 10(1):24–34.
Kabir, M. R., B. Rooke, G. D. Dassanayake, and B. A. Fleck
2012. Comparative life cycle energy, emission, and economic analysis of 100 kW nameplate
wind power generation. Renewable Energy, 37(1):133–141.
Kadiyala, A., R. Kommalapati, and Z. Huque
2017. Characterization of the life cycle greenhouse gas emissions from wind electricity gener-
ation systems. International Journal of Energy and Environmental Engineering, 8(1):55–64.
Kaldellis, J. K. and D. Apostolou
2017. Life cycle energy and carbon footprint of oﬀshore wind energy. comparison with onshore
counterpart. Renewable Energy, 108:72–84.
Kubiszewski, I., C. J. Cleveland, and P. K. Endres
2010.
Meta-analysis of net energy return for wind power systems.
Renewable Energy,
35(1):218–225.
Kumar, I., W. E. Tyner, and K. C. Sinha
2016.
Input-output life cycle environmental assessment of greenhouse gas emissions from
utility scale wind energy in the United States. Energy Policy, 89:294–301.
I
LITERATURE REVIEW
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
110
==PAGE:112==
Lee, Y. M. and Y. E. Tzeng
2008. Development and life-cycle inventory analysis of wind energy in Taiwan. Journal of
Energy Engineering, 134(2):53–57.
Lenzen, M. and J. Munksgaard
2002. Energy and CO2 life-cycle analyses of wind turbines—review and applications. Renew-
able Energy, 26(3):339 – 362.
Leung, D. Y. and Y. Yang
2012. Wind energy development and its environmental impact: A review. Renewable and
Sustainable Energy Reviews, 16(1):1031–1039.
Li, J., S. Li, and F. Wu
2020. Research on carbon emission reduction beneﬁt of wind power project based on life cycle
assessment theory. Renewable Energy, 155:456 – 468.
Li, Z., F. Zhang, and G. Song
2016. Life cycle assessment (LCA) and environmental beneﬁts analysis of one wind farm in
China. Fresenius Environmental Bulletin, 25(11):4537–4546.
Mallia, E. and G. Lewis
2013. Life cycle greenhouse gas emissions of electricity generation in the province of Ontario,
Canada. International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment, 18(2):377–391.
Marimuthu, C. and V. Kirubakaran
2013. Carbon pay back period for solar and wind energy project installed in India: A critical
review. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 23:80–90.
Mart´ınez, E., J. Blanco, E. Jim´enez, J. C. Saenz-D´ıez, and F. Sanz
2015. Comparative evaluation of life cycle impact assessment software tools through a wind
turbine case study. Renewable Energy, 74:237–246.
Mart´ınez, E., E. Jim´enez, J. Blanco, and F. Sanz
2010. LCA sensitivity analysis of a multi-megawatt wind turbine. Applied Energy, 87(7):2293
– 2303.
Mart´ınez, E., J. I. Latorre-Biel, E. Jim´enez, F. Sanz, and J. Blanco
2018. Life cycle assessment of a wind farm repowering process. Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Reviews, 93:260–271.
Mart´ınez, E., F. Sanz, S. Pellegrini, E. Jim´enez, and J. Blanco
2009a. Life-cycle assessment of a 2-MW rated power wind turbine: CML method. Interna-
tional Journal of Life Cycle Assessment, 14(1):52–63.
Mart´ınez, E., F. Sanz, S. Pellegrini, E. Jim´enez, and J. Blanco
2009b. Life cycle assessment of a multi-megawatt wind turbine. Renewable Energy, 34(3):667–
673.
McCulloch, M., M. Raynolds, and M. Laurie
2000. Life-cycle value assessment of a wind turbine. Technical report, Pembina Institute,
Alberta, Canada.
Mendecka, B. and L. Lombardi
2019. Life cycle environmental impacts of wind energy technologies: A review of simpliﬁed
I
LITERATURE REVIEW
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
111
==PAGE:113==
models and harmonization of the results. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 111:462–
480.
Mendecka, B., L. Lombardi, and W. Stanek
2018. Analysis of life cycle thermo-ecological cost of electricity from wind and its application
for future incentive mechanism. Energy Conversion and Management, 170:73–81.
Merugula, L. A., V. Khanna, and B. R. Bakshi
2010.
Comparative life cycle assessment:
Reinforcing wind turbine blades with carbon
nanoﬁbers. Proceedings of the 2010 Ieee International Symposium on Sustainable Systems
and Technology (issst), Pp. 6 pp., 6 pp.
Mo, Q. Y., S. S. Li, F. Deng, L. B. Tang, and K. Y. Zhang
2014. Key technology of LCA on small wind power generation system. In Computers and Infor-
mation Processing Technologies I, volume 571 of Applied Mechanics and Materials, Pp. 925–
929. Trans Tech Publications Ltd.
Nagashima, S., Y. Uchiyama, and K. Okajima
2017. Hybrid input–output table method for socioeconomic and environmental assessment of
a wind power generation system. Applied Energy, 185:1067 – 1075.
Nian, V., Y. Liu, and S. Zhong
2019. Life cycle cost-beneﬁt analysis of oﬀshore wind energy under the climatic conditions in
Southeast Asia – setting the bottom-line for deployment. Applied Energy, 233-234:1003–1014.
Noorollahi, Y., S. M. Bina, and K. Rahmani
2018. Life cycle energy and greenhouse gas emission assessment of a wind turbine installed in
Northeast of Iran. International Journal of Energy Policy and Management, 3(1):8–15.
Nugent, D. and B. K. Sovacool
2014. Assessing the lifecycle greenhouse gas emissions from solar PV and wind energy: A
critical meta-survey. Energy Policy, 65(February):229–244.
Oebels, K. B. and S. Pacca
2013. Life cycle assessment of an onshore wind farm located at the northeastern coast of
Brazil. Renewable Energy, 53:60–70.
Ozoemena, M., W. M. Cheung, and R. Hasan
2018. Comparative LCA of technology improvement opportunities for a 1.5-MW wind tur-
bine in the context of an onshore wind farm. Clean Technologies and Environmental Policy,
20(1):173–190.
Padey, P., I. Blanc, and D. Le Boulch
2011. Investigation of LCA simpliﬁcation approach: the wind power electricity case. In 21st
Setac Europe Annual Meeting, May 2011, Milan, Italy, Pp. 183–184.
Padey, P., I. Blanc, D. Le Boulch, and Z. Xiusheng
2012. A simpliﬁed life cycle approach for assessing greenhouse gas emissions of wind electricity.
Journal of Industrial Ecology, 16(1):S28–S38, S28–S38.
Padey, P., R. Girard, D. Le Boulch, and I. Blanc
2013. From LCAs to simpliﬁed models: A generic methodology applied to wind power elec-
tricity. Environmental Science and Technology, 47(3):1231–1238.
I
LITERATURE REVIEW
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
112
==PAGE:114==
Pehnt, M., M. Oeser, and D. J. Swider
2008. Consequential environmental system analysis of expected oﬀshore wind electricity pro-
duction in Germany. Energy, 33(5):747–759.
Piasecka, I., A. Tomporowski, J. Flizikowski, W. Kruszelnicka, R. Kasner, and A. Mrozi´nski
2019. Life cycle analysis of ecological impacts of an oﬀshore and a land-basedwind power
plant. Applied Sciences (switzerland), 9(2):231.
Poujol, B., A. Prieur-Vernat, J. Dubranna, R. Besseau, I. Blanc, and P. P´erez-L´opez
2020. Site-speciﬁc life cycle assessment of a pilot ﬂoating oﬀshore wind farm based on suppliers’
data and geo-located wind data. Journal of Industrial Ecology, 24(1):248–262.
Price, L. and A. Kendall
2012. Wind power as a case study - improving life cycle assessment reporting to better enable
meta-analyses. Journal of Industrial Ecology, 16(s1):S22–S27.
Raadal, H. L., L. Gagnon, I. S. Modahl, and O. J. Hanssen
2011. Life cycle greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from the generation of wind and hydro
power. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 15(7):3417–3422.
Raadal, H. L., B. I. Vold, A. Myhr, and T. A. Nygaard
2014. GHG emissions and energy performance of oﬀshore wind power. Renewable Energy,
66:314–324.
Rajaei, M. and J. M. Tinjum
2013. Life cycle assessment of energy balance and emissions of a wind energy plant. Geotech-
nical and Geological Engineering, 31(6):1663–1670.
Rashedi, A., I. Sridhar, and K. J. Tseng
2013. Life cycle assessment of 50 MW wind ﬁrms and strategies for impact reduction. Re-
newable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 21:89–101.
Reimers, B., B. ¨Ozdirik, and M. Kaltschmitt
2014. Greenhouse gas emissions from electricity generated by oﬀshore wind farms. Renewable
Energy, 72:428–438.
Rule, B. M., Z. J. Worth, and C. A. Boyle
2009. Comparison of life cycle carbon dioxide emissions and embodied energy in four renewable
electricity generation technologies in New Zealand. Environmental Science and Technology,
43(16):6406–6413.
Sacchi, R., R. Besseau, P. P´erez-L´opez, and I. Blanc
2019. Exploring technologically, temporally and geographically-sensitive life cycle inventories
for wind turbines: A parameterized model for Denmark. Renewable Energy, 132:1238–1250.
Schleisner, L.
2000.
Life cycle assessment of a wind farm and related externalities.
Renewable Energy,
20(3):279–288.
Schreiber, A., J. Marx, and P. Zapp
2019. Comparative life cycle assessment of electricity generation by diﬀerent wind turbine
types. Journal of Cleaner Production, 233:561–572.
I
LITERATURE REVIEW
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
113
==PAGE:115==
Shaﬁee, M., F. Brennan, and I. A. Espinosa
2016. A parametric whole life cost model for oﬀshore wind farms. International Journal of
Life Cycle Assessment, 21(7):961–975.
Siddiqui, O. and I. Dincer
2017.
Comparative assessment of the environmental impacts of nuclear, wind and hydro-
electric power plants in Ontario: A life cycle assessment.
Journal of Cleaner Production,
164:848–860.
Smoucha, E. A. and K. Fitzpatrick
2016. Life cycle analysis of the embodied carbon emissions from 14 wind turbines with rated
powers between 50 kW and 3.4 MW. Journal of Fundamentals of Renewable Energy and
Applications, 6(4).
Soerensen, H. C., E. Friis-Madsen, I. Russel, S. Parmeggiani, and J. Fern´andez-Chozas
2016. Feasibility and LCA for a wave dragon platform with wind turbines. Proceedings of the
International Oﬀshore and Polar Engineering Conference, 2016-:570–575.
Songlin, T., Z. Xiliang, and W. Licheng
2011. Life cycle analysis of wind power: A case of Fuzhou. Energy Procedia, 5:1847–1851.
Tomporowski, A., I. Piasecka, J. Flizikowski, R. Kasner, W. Kruszelnicka, A. Mrozi´nski, and
K. Bieli´nski
2018. Comparison analysis of blade life cycles of land-based and oﬀshore wind power plants.
Polish Maritime Research, 25(1):225–233.
Tremeac, B. and F. Meunier
2009. Life cycle analysis of 4.5 MW and 250 W wind turbines. Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Reviews, 13(8):2104–2110.
Tsai, L., J. C. Kelly, B. S. Simon, R. M. Chalat, and G. A. Keoleian
2016. Life cycle assessment of oﬀshore wind farm siting: Eﬀects of locational factors, lake
depth, and distance from shore. Journal of Industrial Ecology, 20(6):1370–1383.
Uddin, M. S. and S. Kumar
2014. Energy, emissions and environmental impact analysis of wind turbine using life cycle
assessment technique. Journal of Cleaner Production, 69:153–164.
Valori, L., M. Bravi, and R. Basosi
2013. Life cycle assessment of micro-wind generators. International Journal of Energy &
Technology, 5:1–6.
Vargas, A. V., E. Zen´on, U. Oswald, J. M. Islas, L. P. G¨uereca, and F. L. Manzini
2015. Life cycle assessment: A case study of two wind turbines used in Mexico. Applied
Thermal Engineering, 75:1210–1216.
Varun, I. K. Bhat, and R. Prakash
2009. LCA of renewable energy for electricity generation systems-a review. Renewable and
Sustainable Energy Reviews, 13(5):1067–1073.
Vestas
2006. Life cycle assessment of oﬀshore and onshore sited wind power plants based on Vestas
v90-3.0 MW turbines. Technical report, Vestas Wind Systems, Aarhus.
I
LITERATURE REVIEW
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
114
==PAGE:116==
Wachsmann, U.
2005. Geograﬁcal variability in LCA - the case of wind turbines in Brazil and Germany. The
4th Australian LCA Conference, February 2005, Sydney.
Wagner, H. J., C. Baack, T. Eickelkamp, A. Epe, J. Lohmann, and S. Troy
2011. Life cycle assessment of the oﬀshore wind farm alpha ventus. Energy, 36(5):2459–2464.
Wang, L., Y. Wang, H. Du, J. Zuo, R. Yi Man Li, Z. Zhou, F. Bi, and M. P. Garvlehn
2019a. A comparative life-cycle assessment of hydro-, nuclear and wind power: A China study.
Applied Energy, 249:37–45.
Wang, S., S. Wang, and J. Liu
2019b. Life-cycle green-house gas emissions of onshore and oﬀshore wind turbines. Journal of
Cleaner Production, 210:804–810.
Wang, W. C. and H. Y. Teah
2017. Life cycle assessment of small-scale horizontal axis wind turbines in Taiwan. Journal
of Cleaner Production, 141:492–501.
Wang, Y. and T. Sun
2012. Life cycle assessment of CO2 emissions from wind power plants: Methodology and case
studies. Renewable Energy, 43:30–36.
Weinzettel, J., M. Reenaas, C. Solli, and E. G. Hertwich
2009. Life cycle assessment of a ﬂoating oﬀshore wind turbine. Renewable Energy, 34(3):742–
747.
White, S. W.
2006. Net energy payback and CO2 emissions from three midwestern wind farms: An update.
Natural Resources Research, 15(4):271–281.
Wiedmann, T. O., S. Suh, K. Feng, M. Lenzen, A. Acquaye, K. Scott, and J. R. Barrett
2011. Application of hybrid life cycle approaches to emerging energy technologies - the case
of wind power in the UK. Environmental Science and Technology, 45(13):5900–5907.
Xie, J. b., J. x. Fu, S. y. Liu, and W. s. Hwang
2020. Assessments of carbon footprint and energy analysis of three wind farms. Journal of
Cleaner Production, 254:120159.
Xu, L., M. Pang, L. Zhang, W. R. Poganietz, and S. D. Marathe
2018. Life cycle assessment of onshore wind power systems in China. Resources, Conservation
and Recycling, 132:361–368.
Xue, B., Z. Ma, Y. Geng, P. Heck, W. Ren, M. Tobias, A. Maas, P. Jiang, J. A. Puppim
De Oliveira, and T. Fujita
2015. A life cycle co-beneﬁts assessment of wind power in China. Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Reviews, 41(1):338–346.
Yang, J., Y. Chang, L. Zhang, Y. Hao, Q. Yan, and C. Wang
2018. The life-cycle energy and environmental emissions of a typical oﬀshore wind farm in
China. Journal of Cleaner Production, 180:316–324.
Zhong, Z. W., B. Song, and P. E. Loh
2011. LCAs of a polycrystalline photovoltaic module and a wind turbine. Renewable Energy,
36(8):2227–2237.
I
LITERATURE REVIEW
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
115
==PAGE:117==
Zimmermann, T.
2013.
Parameterized tool for site speciﬁc LCAs of wind energy converters.
International
Journal of Life Cycle Assessment, 18(1):49–60.
Zimmermann, T. and S. G¨oßling-Reisemann
2012.
Inﬂuence of site speciﬁc parameters on environmental performance of wind energy
converters. Energy Procedia, 20:402 – 413. Technoport 2012 - Sharing Possibilities and 2nd
Renewable Energy Research Conference (RERC2012).
I
LITERATURE REVIEW
Jette Louise Marcher, s170254
116
