==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Debugging in Model Based Software Engi-
neering – Designing a debugging frame-
work for the ECNO tool
Christopher Holten Pind (s103468)
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
This aim of this project was to design and implement a framework and tool for
debugging ECNO applications on the same level of abstraction that the application
is programmed on. A design was made for a tool which would not require any change
in functionality of the existing ECNO tools.
We found that the debugging framework, as designed and implemented, can pro-
vide an almost complete overview of the running state of the ECNO application. In
this regard, the framework and provided tools are a significant improvement on the
existing java debugging tools for Eclipse, particularly in that the ECNO debugging
framework provides information at the same level of abstraction the program was
developed in.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This masters thesis was prepared with Associate Proffessor Ekkart Kindler
Kongens Lyngby, August 11, 2020
Christopher Holten Pind (s103468)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
2
ECNO
3
2.1
Example: The DTU Kiosk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
Analysis and Discussion
11
4
Design of the Framework
13
4.1
feature designs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5
Implementation
19
5.1
ECNO brief overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.2
Debugger Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.3
Zest and the Graph View
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.4
Modifications of existing software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
6
Evaluation
23
6.1
Evaluation Criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6.2
Testing the software
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
7
Further topics
25
8
Conclusion
27
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The Event Coordination Notation (ECNO) is a model-based system which permits
the combination of structural modelling and behavioral modeling through a new mod-
elling notation in order to create models of fully executable software systems that can
be implemented automatically, by generating the source code from the designed mod-
els. The ECNO allows the user to describe how certain structural elements of the
system can jointly participate in an event, when permitted by those elements inter-
nal behavior-states. The conditions for these events are defined on the model level
using a coordination diagram, and such a coordination in practice is referred to as an
interaction.
The automated generation of the ECNO applications results in an implementation
of the system on a code-level while the system was designed on a model-level. Without
knowledge of how the code is generated it is difficult for a developer to quickly find
and eliminate bugs in the models.
To improve the tools for ECNO to this project aims to provide debugging capa-
bilities on the model level by designing a framework for debugging ECNO that is not
dependent on the generated code. We will also utilize the framework to design some
debugging features which would help a developer understand how the models work
in practice without having to look at the generated code. In the process of doing so,
this project will examine the nature of debugging in model-based software engineering
and the specific challenges of a system like ECNO.
Once a framework is in place we will determine which type of debugging features
would be useful for this style of software-development and what the use-cases for them
should be, as well as in what manner the relevant information should be presented to
the user. Some traditional debugging features, such as breakpoints, are not necessarily
useful when debugging ECNO which is a parallelized system. While the ability to view
the internal state of the system might be crucial for a developer to understand why
some interactions are possible while others are not. Upon completion, this project
will deliver a prototype debugging framework with some debugging tools for ECNO
and in the process further the understanding of debugging model-based software.
==PAGE:10==
2
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 2
ECNO
In this chapter we will discuss the Event Coordination Notation and gain an under-
standing of what it is, and how it works as well as look some examples.
The Event Coordination Notation (ECNO) is a model-based software-engineering
system which combines the structural modelling through, typically, class diagrams
with behavioral modeling such as petri-nets to create executable applications. This is
done by defining a co-ordination diagram in which the structural elements of a domain
can be integrated with the behavior models for those elements using events. With
events we can define how elements can come together to jointly execute a behavior
which is known as an interaction.
The overall ECNO system has three distinct software components: The editor
tools allow users to define and program the application. The generator tools allow
users to generate the code required to run an ECNO application, including the au-
tomata for each of the elements and GUI for the application. The ECNO execution
engine is the environment in which the applications are executed.
The ECNO execution engine is a form of search-engine for interactions. It will
search through the graph of elements and their relations to discover which interactions
are possible to execute. It is possible to run an ECNO application only using the
execution engine and the generated GUI.
2.1
Example: The DTU Kiosk
As an example we model a simple shop environment: The DTU Kiosk. In the DTU
Kiosk there are items on shelves for customers to buy, and a cash register where the
customers can pay.
==PAGE:12==
4
2 ECNO
Figure 2.1: Class diagram of the Shop domain.
This environment is expressed by the structural domain model in 2.1 in which we
see the concrete relations of the different element types. The Items which are goods
for purchase are part of the inventory of the Store.
Figure 2.2: Object diagram of the DTU Kiosk instance.
==PAGE:13==
2.1 Example: The DTU Kiosk
5
The Customer is visiting a particular Store, and the Store can have any number
of shoppers. Customers have a certain amount of money with them, and Items have
a specific cost. Note that the Setting type is part of the domain for practical reasons
as it in practice provides an object in which all other objects are contained.
Figure 2.3: The behavioral model of the customer type.
Once we have the structure of our application we can begin to think about the
behavior. Figure 2.3 shows a form of petri-net designed for the purpose of use with
ECNO, an ECNO-net. The customers have a number of distinct states. Starting from
outside the store they can enter the store. Note that for simplicity the customers know
before-hand which store they wish to shop at so there is no decision to make there.
Once inside the store customers can take items, replace items they have taken, leave
the store or enter the queue to check out. Each of the transitions in this petri-net
is annotated with a label and sometimes more than one. The most important ones,
however, are the event-bindings such as:
e = enter(customer=self());
This binding defines that taking this transition in the net is part of the event enter
and that the customer parameter of the event should be the object performing the
transition i.e. self(). However, for the customer to be able to enter, there must be a
concrete store to enter into.
==PAGE:14==
6
2 ECNO
Figure 2.4: The coordination diagram of the store application.
Figure 2.4 shows the coordination diagram of the application, there’s a lot to
consider, but for now we will focus on the event-type enter which is marked in light
pink. Here the event has been defined and the parameters declared. To coordinate
the store and the customer with the event we create a coordination set for the event
enter in each of the classes, here seen as the light pink boxes with the captions enter
in the Customer and Store element types.
Once we have done so, we can create
coordination annotations, or synchronizations on the relations visiting and shoppers.
enter->ONE
The syntax of the synchronization implies that for customer to be able to perform the
enter event, there must be one store at the end of the visiting relation which is also
able to participate in that event. The alternative to the ONE requirement is the ALL
requirement which demands that every element on the relation is able to participate
before the event can be performed, however the ALL condition is not used in this
example.
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Example: The DTU Kiosk
7
Figure 2.5: The behavioral model of the store type.
Now that we have defined the global behavior between Store and Customer we
need to also define the local behavior of Store so that it is able to participate in an
interaction for the enter event. Figure 2.5 shows the simple lifecycle of the store,
which is always able to make any transition, the DTU Kiosk is a 24 hour kiosk.
Going back to Figure 2.2 we can see a lot annotations besides the event bindings we
have discussed. In addition, we have action bindings which define some action to be
performed as a transition is fired, such as
self().getBasket().add(t.item);
Which is a piece of java code which will be executed whenever the transition with the
event binding
t = takeItem(customer=self());
is fired. Here the t.item references the item parameter of the takeItem event where the
‘t’ references the local name for that event. The ‘getBasket()’ is part of the generated
code for the structural model we saw in Figure ?? and will return the containment
list of the customers basket relation with the Item type.
The final type of annotation is the condition binding in which a pre-condition
to participate in an event is given. For instance for the customer to exit without
proceeding to check-out the requirement is set
self().getBasket().isEmpty()
Which is a java boolean expression, notably lacking a semicolon. As we discussed
earlier, when the ECNO execution engine performs a search of the available interac-
tions it can execute it will also evaluate any such conditions, and if false, will not
consider the exit event possible for the customer.
Using the action bindings and condition bindings we can program here in the
behavior model of the customer what will happen when the customer decides to go to
==PAGE:16==
8
2 ECNO
check-out. Once the customer performs the enterQueue event the price of the items
the customer has taken is calculated and a cash register is assigned to the customer
self().setRegister(q.register);
for(dk.dtu.imm.se.ecno.examples.shop.shop.Item i : self().getBasket()){
self().setItemTotal(self().getItemTotal()+ i.getPrice());
};
Here the price of each item in the basket is calculated and stored in the itemTotal
field of the customer class. In order to perform the checkOut event, the customer
must have brought enough money as required by the condition binding
self().getItemTotal() <= self().getMoney()
Should the customer have enough money, then when the checkOut interaction is
executed, money will be deducted from the customer, shopping basket cleared and
the customer transitioned to once again being outside the store. Once all the diagrams
are in place, we can create an instance of the domain model and generate the code
to run an ECNO application.
Figure 2.6: The default GUI for the DTU Kiosk ECNO application.
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Example: The DTU Kiosk
9
Figure 2.6 shows what the running application looks like. Each button represents
an event, and it is enabled or disabled based on whether the execution engine has
found an interaction for the given event.
==PAGE:18==
10
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 3
Analysis and
Discussion
In this chapter we discuss the nature of debugging.
Debugging refers to the discipline of examining a software for errors, identifying
the causes of the errors, and determining a solution to prevent such errors from
occurring. Without any specialized tools to acquire information, the programmer
must simply guess at what is causing a fault in the software and attempt to fix it
through trial and error. This approach is, of course, hopelessly inefficient, and there
is no guarantee that the programmer will ever find the actual root problem.
When discussing debugging it is necessary for us to distinguish between two dis-
crete types of errors. Compiler errors, and runtime errors. A compiler error is typ-
ically a problem with syntax or semantics, the code that was written could not be
resolved by the compiler and therefore cannot be executed properly. This type of
bug is quite easy to diagnose with squiggly red lines and an error message from the
compiler:
ERROR unexpected token on line 43:23 expected ‘;’ was ‘)’
Runtime errors, however, are much more nefarious. Once correctly compiled and run-
ning, the software might not be behaving as the programmer had originally intended,
or a function might cause a runtime error which leads to a crash of the software with
an error message.
Debugging is about determining the cause and effect in a running software, and
the method used depends on the programmer, however, knowledge and information
lies at the heart of the matter.
Research [] identified seven categories of information which contribute to successful
debugging:
1. knowledge of the intended program, I/O, behavior, and implementa-
tion
2. knowledge of the actual program, I/O, behavior, and implementation
3. understanding of the programming language
==PAGE:20==
12
3 Analysis and Discussion
4. general programming expertise
5. knowledge of the application domain
6. knowledge of bugs
7. knowledge of debugging methods
Most of these points rely on the expertise of the programmer, both as a pro-
grammer in the given environment and as a debugger.
A reasonably experienced
programmer with knowledge of the intended program might be able to identify a bug
and create a solution when provided with knowledge of the actual program. The de-
bugging tools offered by the Eclipse IDE which this project was developed in provides
some useful features for debugging. Central to this is the concept of the breakpoint,
a line of code designated by the programmer at which point execution of the software
will be paused. After pausing the programmer can then examine the values of the
variables and execute the software one step at a time in an effort to understand the
interactions which may cause errors and obtain knowledge of the actual program.
In this way, the debugging tools do not find the bug, nor do they fix it. But
as tools they can help the programmer learn what caused the bug and possibly also
illustrate how to solve it.
When debugging ECNO we should begin by once again distinguishing between
the compiler error and the runtime error. In the context of ECNO a compiler error
is a problem with the models.
As described in Chapter 2, and ECNO program
necessarily has three types of models: A structural model outlining the element types
and their parameters, behavioral models for the internal behavior of the elements, and
a coordination diagram describing how these models interact. Each of these model
types comes with its own editor which has its own model validation function which
can check that each model is well-formed, and in the case of the java code written in
labels of the behavioral models the regular java compiler will catch any errors in that
code in which case the developer will have to correct the faulty syntax or semantic
and then generate the code again.
It is possible to debug a runtime eclipse application using the existing debugging
tools provided with the IDE, however, in the case of ECNO the knowledge required by
the programmer to debug using these tools is different from the knowledge required to
develop a program. Particularly knowledge of the actual program is a problem, since
the intended program is described, and developed, at a different level of abstraction.
The tools we develop for this project are intended to aid in the debugging of running
ECNO applications.
Our method of doing this relies on providing the user with
critical knowledge of the actual program which when combined with knowledge of
the intended program can help the programmer identify logical flaws in the models.
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 4
Design of the
Framework
In this chapter we will look at the design of the ECNO Debugger Framework and the
design features it possesses. While we will not discuss technical detail of implemen-
tation an understanding of the how ECNO works is necessary in order to understand
why specific design decisions are made.
As discussed in (previous chapter) our priority is to create a framework for soft-
ware features which will allow a user to debug an ECNO application, by presenting
information about the running program which can provide a knowledge of the run-
ning program at the same level of abstraction that the software was developed. To
preserve the integrity of ECNO, its dependencies, and any existing ECNO programs
we have, as much as it is possible, avoided changing any of the functionality of the
original ECNO implementations. This project has made a few additions to existing
ECNO source but has avoided any changes to the existing functionality. The specific
changes are outlined in section (SECTION of CHAPTER 5 HERE).
Our first concern is to show how the ECNO engine perceives the setting, or in-
stance, of the domain which has been provided. We do this by providing an object
diagram of the elements which have been encountered by ECNO. This is the center-
piece of the system, as from here, the user can interact with each individual element
to learn more about its internal state i.e. the state of the individual objects behavior.
Additionally, with a specific element selected we can show the user what interactions
the element can participate in as well as the values of any potential parameters of
that element. In this project we have provided some examples of ways to present this
information with the graph as the core of the system.
The system, of course, does not exist in a vacuum and must interface with the
existing ECNO systems and the Eclipse platform on which everything is running.
The concern here is a framework which is robust, extendable, and offers users the
practicality of being able to work with multiple ECNO programs simultaneously. We
need to be able to associate each individual ECNO engine with a separate graph.
This is accomplished by creating an ECNO Debug Registry which maps each engine
with an object which contains the data extracted from the engine necessary to draw
a graph.
==PAGE:22==
14
4 Design of the Framework
4.1
feature designs
Here we will go over the designs of debugging features and tools which have been
developed for the framework.
4.1.1
Debug Engines View
ECNO applications are typically launched through the Eclipse file-system.
The
eclipse feature-plugin for ECNO defines an action which can be performed on “.be-
haviourstates” files in order to launch an ECNO engine. Once launched a GUI panel,
the ECNO Engine Registry allows the user to keep track of the running engines, as
well as terminating and performing other actions on the engines.
Figure 4.1: The engine registry view.
In line with the notion of keeping the debugging features for ECNO as closely
related to the existing tools as possible. The method for launching an engine with a
debugger attached is the same as the method for regularly launching an engine, and
the interface modified to a new debug version.
Figure 4.2: The debug engine registry view.
==PAGE:23==
4.1 feature designs
15
The added features include a new button which sets the selected engine as the
current engine of the DebugRegistry and, if the graph view is open, redraws the
graph to represent the new engine. Additionally, a new column has been added to
describe whether a behaviour-model resource has been attached to an engine. This is
a practical feature related to the behaviour model state-visualization feature described
in the next section.
Insight into the states of the behavior-models for the elements in your ECNO
applications can help illuminate why certain interactions are possible while others
are not. For this reason, we have chosen to focus on this as a feature for the debugger.
While ECNO was not designed specifically to use Petri-nets as behavior models, that
is what is primarily used in the examples and what has been concretely implemented
for use with ECNO. There already exists a modeling tool for Petri-nets as a series of
plug-ins for Eclipse called the ePNK which has features to create and edit Petri-net
models, as well as define ‘applications’ to run on the nets.
4.1.2
ePNK application
An ePNK application is a method by which a developer can simulate how a Petri-net
will behave when transitions are performed. The simulations are visualized by over-
laying the transitions and places with colored annotations, and numbers representing
the number of tokens in a place and the legal transitions in the net. SCREENSHOT
(simple epnk simulation application) here an application simulated by mouse inter-
actions of the transitions. Here the task of the ECNO debugger is to create a bridge
from the representations of the ECNO elements shown in the Graph View to the
ePNK Petri-net editor, and then to run an ePNK application on the Petri-net model
based on the behavior state of the ECNO element in question.
In order to open a Petri-net in the ePNK editor we must first open the ‘pnml’-file
in which the net is stored. Unfortunately, there is no reasonable way to automatically
detect this file, as it is not required for the ECNO engine to run. Therefore, for this
feature to work, the user must specify a resource file for the debugger to open. The
simplest way for doing this was to add a context-sensitive action to ‘pnml’ files in
the Eclipse workspace allowing the user to associate the chosen pnml file with the
currently displayed ECNO engine.
Figure 4.3: The UI action for defining a PNML resource set for an ExecutionEngine.
Once a resource has been set, a reference to it will be displayed in the Debug
Engine Registry view as shown previously. To keep things simple the references to
these files are stored in the Debug Registry and mapped to an engine.
==PAGE:24==
16
4 Design of the Framework
While the other basic ePNK applications described in the ePNK manual fully
simulate the petri-net, the ECNO debugger does not need to do so. ECNO when
on petri-net models is already a big multi-petri-net simulator, so the real task is
to extract the behavior-model data concerning the subject element from the engine,
converting it to the format required by an ePNK application and then generating the
annotations. The format in question includes flattening the places of a net into an
array of integers with the index referencing the place and the value representing the
number of tokens in said place.
Fortunately, and perhaps not coincidentally the format of Petri-nets stored in the
ECNO behaviour model objects for the elements is exactly the same as the format of a
flattened petri-net obtained with the ePNK API and thus a one-to-one translation can
be made between the two and based on the tokens in the places the legal transitions
can be highlighted.
Figure 4.4: An example of the running Petri-net simulation application. The possi-
ble transitions of the net are highlighted in green, the blue number ’1’
indicates the location and number of the tokens..
As a part of the ePNK tools, the ePNK: Applications-view allows the user to
manage ePNK applications as well as switch between which ones to display. For ease
of use, each ECNO Petri-net application is named after the graph element that it was
created from.
==PAGE:25==
4.1 feature designs
17
Figure 4.5: The Petri-net application GUI provided with ePNK.
4.1.3
Filter View
The graph of all the ECNO elements can theoretically be infinitely large. Therefore,
it is necessary to have some form of filtering capability for the graph. The Filter View
allows the user to create a filter based on any number of the three criteria: Element
Name (as displayed I the graph), Element Type, and/or Event type. Once a filter is
applied, only elements of the given types are shown in the graph. And only elements
with the given name, or elements with a connection to an element with the given
name are shown.
Figure 4.6: The filters view.
4.1.4
Interactions View
This simple view allows the user to see which interactions can be immediately per-
formed by a highlighted element in the graph.
==PAGE:26==
18
4 Design of the Framework
Figure 4.7: The interactions view shows the type of each of the possible interactions
the selected element can participate in..
4.1.5
Properties View
In the Eclipse workspace, it is typical to have some adaption of the elements the user
can interact with in the properties view. Model-based systems such as ecore make use
of the properties view as an editor. As a matter of consistency, the properties view
has been adapted to show information about the highlighted element in the graph, if
any.
Figure 4.8: The properties view shows the parameters of a selected graph element.
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 5
Implementation
In this chapter we will discuss details regarding the technology used as well as details
of the concrete implementation of the ECNO debugging framework.
ECNO is an eclipse plug-in application which works within the eclipse development
environment. While the core of ECNO itself is not dependent on eclipse to run, all
the additional features, code-generation and everything that is part of the complete
package depend on the eclipse environment.
The core of the ECNO runtime application is the “ExecutionEngine” object. The
ExecutionEngine is a container for all the data objects discovered in relation to run-
ning the ECNO application as well as an engine to discover what interactions can be
performed by means of a search through the graph of elements. During such a search
any new elements and their associated behavior objects that might be encountered
this way are stored in a table. The main API of the ExecutionEngine in this regard
is the “IController” interface which allows an application to be notified whenever the
ExecutionEngine discovers new elements or removes existing elements.
5.1
ECNO brief overview
ECNO is an eclipse plug-in application which works within the eclipse development
environment. While the core of ECNO itself is not dependent on eclipse to run, all
the additional features, code-generation and everything that is part of the complete
package depend on the eclipse environment.
The core of ECNO is the “ExecutionEngine” object. The ExecutionEngine is a
container for all the data objects discovered in relation to running the ECNO appli-
cation as well as an engine to discover what interactions can be performed by means
of a search through the graph of elements. During such a search any new elements
and their associated behavior objects that might be encountered this way are stored
in a table. The main API of the ExecutionEngine in this regard is the “IController”
interface which allows an application to be notified whenever the ExecutionEngine
discovers new elements or removes existing elements.
==PAGE:28==
20
5 Implementation
5.2
Debugger Overview
The goal of the ECNO Debugger is to visualize the running ECNO application in
such a way that it helps the developer understand from a model-level perspective
what state the application is in. The primary means we have chosen to do this is to
draw a graph of all the elements.
The software can be separated into three separate components shown in figureX.
The “DebugRegistry” is the overarching structure which primarily correlates “Ex-
ecutionEngine” instances to Debugger instances. Having this structure allows the
view-component of the system to be independent of ECNO. To completely this the
“DebugRegistry” has the important variable, the “currentEngine” which represents
the ECNO application which is currently being displayed.
The “Debugger”, in its current form, acts like a mediator between the view-
component and the engine. Here all the elements encountered by the engine as it
completes searches are stored so they can be accessed by the view component. By go-
ing through the DebugRegistry, the GraphView can register itself with the Debugger
instance associated with the “currentEngine” using the “IViewListener” API.
Likewise, when constructed, an instance of the “Debugger” will be able to reg-
ister itself with an engine through the engines “IController” API which allows the
debugger to be notified whenever a new element is discovered by the engine. If a view
component has registered itself the debugger is able to pass the notification from the
engine immediately to the viewer.
When the GraphView receives unique new element from the engine via the Debug-
ger a new ElementNode object is created containing information about the element
and added to the graph. Overall, this design allows for a single graph viewer but
multiple concurrent engine and debugger pairs with the ability to switch between
which ECNO engine is being displayed as a graph, as well as start new engines to
view those.
5.3
Zest and the Graph View
To draw the graph, we use an existing graphing library known as the Eclipse GMF
Zest library. Chosen for its relative simplicity, this library allows the developer to
specify some collection of objects as input and then define through API how to display
those elements and the connections between them in a graph. Such as what text to
display on nodes and arcs as well as what kind of lay-out algorithm to use. In our
case, we opted for a mostly default appearance of the graph with a default tree-layout
algorithm. The names of the nodes and arcs being drawn from the ElementNode
objects previously mentioned.
==PAGE:29==
5.4 Modifications of existing software
21
5.4
Modifications of existing software
For some of the functions developed for the debugging framework to work, a few
modifications were made to the existing ECNO source code. This section is intended
as a guide for the reader wishing to understand how the ECNO debug framework
When an ECNO engine is created, it immediately begins discovering elements.
This usually means that once the debugger is hooked in, the engine has long since fin-
ished exploring. For this reason a new interface is required in the engine to extract the
discovered object once the debugger is hooked in. In dk.dtu.imm.se.ecno.engine.ExecutionEngine
the following has been added:
** XXX CHP
* return the key-set of object2behevior
* @return object2behavious.keySet();
*/
public synchronized Set<Object> getObjects(){
return object2behaviour.keySet();
}
This method will return all objects the engine has found which have a behavior
element attached. Elements with an attached behavior are the elements we wish to
display in the graph.
When an ECNO behavior element is changed, it notifies all subscribed listeners.
For reasons of optimization, listeners are removed once notified to avoid cascades of
notifications. This feature, however, prevents the accurate representation of the graph
and any other feature which relies on receiving updates from behavior elements.
Without changing any of the original functionality the following has been added
to dk.dtu.imm.se.ecno.runtime.AbstractElementBehaviour:
// XXX CHP
private List<IChangeListener> permanentListeners;
// ###
and
// XXX CHP
public synchronized void registerPermanentListener(IChangeListener listener) {
if (!permanentListeners.contains(listener))
permanentListeners.add(listener);
}
public synchronized void unregisterPermanentListener(IChangeListener listener) {
permanentListeners.remove(listener);
}
// ###
==PAGE:30==
22
5 Implementation
An additional field permanentListeners and supporting methods allow an alterna-
tive method of registering listeners. To complete the update the notification method
is changed
final protected void notifyChangeListeners() {
// eki: note that every listener is notified about a change at most once
List<IChangeListener> listenersList = getAndRemoveListeners();
for (IChangeListener listener : listenersList) {
listener.notifyChange(this);
}
// XXX CHP
for (IChangeListener plistener : permanentListeners) {
plistener.notifyChange(this);
}
// ###
}
A final change is not provided by the code included with this project as it is part
of the ePNK source and not specifically related to ECNO.
In org.pnml.tools.epnk.applications.Application the ‘final’ tag was removed from
the dispose method to allow for an inheriting class dk.dtu.imm.se.ecno.debug.petrinet.application.ECNO
to override this method
public void dispose() { //XXX CHP Removed final tag
The change is required to ensure all references to the application are removed when
it is disposed.
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 6
Evaluation
In this chapter we will outline criteria for the performance of the ECNO Debugging
framework as a debugging tool, and determine how well the tools provided meet those
criteria. Then we will also briefly discuss how the software has been validated.
6.1
Evaluation Criteria
We consider the following criteria for measuring how well the debugging framework
can help a user to obtain knowledge of the actual program as discussed in Chapter 3
given the available debugging tools provided for the framework.
1. how does the framework compare with the default Eclipse debugging functions,
is the information provided equivalent, or better?
2. How well does the framework depict the running state of an ECNO application
6.1.1
Comparison to the default tools
When comparing the framework and the Eclipse java debugger we note that the
primary function of the java debugger is to set a breakpoint to pause the execution
of the software, and then at that point allow the programmer to inspect the values
of variables at that point as well as to sequentially step through the lines of code to
see how the variables are manipulated.
In the ECNO Debugger framework, the properties view allows the user to inspect
the values and the parameters of each of the elements in the graph. While there is
no means of applying a breakpoint, ECNO applications do not do anything unless
a valid interaction has been chosen by a user, therefore the notion of a breakpoint
system for ECNO as it is typically realized, does not make sense.
In these terms, the ECNO Debugger framework succeeds in providing the user the
same information about the elements which could be gleamed by setting a breakpoint
during the execution of some interaction and then inspecting the elements that were
involved to see the values of the parameters.
==PAGE:32==
24
6 Evaluation
6.1.2
Completeness of depicted information
At any given time, an ECNO application is in one particular state which can be repre-
sented by the set of interactions that are currently possible and the set of interactions
that are currently not possible.
The ECNO Debug Petri-net application allows the user to see the state of the
behavior model for each individual element. From here the user can technically see
everything that the element can theoretically do, with each possible transition in the
Petri-net corresponding to a potential interaction.
Additionally, the Interactions View allows the user to see at a glance which types
of interactions a highlighted element can participate in. A planned feature for this
view was to highlight the elements of a graph which could participate in a selected
interaction from the view, however, it was not completed in time for the submission
of this thesis.
With regard to interactions that are not possible, no immediate information is
provided by the debugging tools. In this case, a knowledge of the intended program
is required, as it is only possible to learn which types of interactions are not possible
for a particular element by knowing all the possible interaction types for that element
and subtracting those that were provided by the engine.
It is possible to learn why a specific interaction might not be possible for an
element by inspecting the element and its connected elements thoroughly. By under-
standing which relation in the domain model the interaction is defined for we can
determine if there is a candidate element in that relation, and if there is, we can
inspect the behavior model of that element to learn what state it is in, and if it is
in a state where we expect a transition to be possible, we can examine any potential
condition bindings of that transition and compare any possible checks with the val-
ues of the parameters of the element we can obtain from the properties view we can
determine the reason why the interaction is not possible. As stated, this requires a
fairly complete knowledge of the intended program and there might still be situations
in which the debugging tool is not able to provide the required information to learn
why an interaction is not possible. For this reason, the debugging tools only partially
succeed in providing a picture of the running state of an ECNO application.
6.2
Testing the software
Nearly every part of this framework is developed as graphical user interface (or GUI)
which can be difficult to test. The primary reason for this is because the actual inter-
faces are hosted within threads and utilize code libraries that are part of the eclipse
platform, but not necessarily related to ECNO or the debugging framework.
For
this reason the robustness and quality of each component was validated by manually
determining the use-cases for all the possible sequences of actions a user might take,
and then attempting to perform those sequences to see whether it would cause the
software to break.
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 7
Further topics
Existing work in this topic ECNO is a novel system and not much work has been
done in the specific field of developing debugging tools for it. There exist two prior
projects which tackle this matter.
Designing and Implementing a debugging component for the ECNO tool - Rúni
E. Vørmadal
In which a tool for debugging interactions is designed and implemented.
The
resulting tool was not made available to this project.
A visual inspection tool for the behaviour of ECNO programs -
The result of the project was originally meant to be the foundation for this the-
sis to continue development on with the concerns of graphical representation of the
current situation of a running program taken care of. However, the version of the
implementation that was provide was unfortunately not stable and unsuitable for
further developments. This project was then refocused to
==PAGE:34==
26
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
This project consisted of the design and implementation of a framework and tool
for debugging ECNO applications on the same level of abstraction that the appli-
cation is programmed on. To accomplish this, we investigated the basic knowledge
requirements for a programmer to identify a bug in Chapter 3.
Given the assumption that armed with knowledge of the actual program and
knowledge of the intended program a programmer can find any potential bugs, a
design was made for a framework which would not require any change in functionality
of the existing ECNO tools.
Upon implementation evaluation we found that the debugging framework, as it is,
can provide an almost complete overview of the running state of the ECNO applica-
tion. In this regard, the framework and provided tools are a significant improvement
on the existing java debugging tools for Eclipse, particularly in that the ECNO de-
bugging framework provides information at the same level of abstraction the program
was developed in.
==PAGE:36==
28
==PAGE:37==
==PAGE:38==
