==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
MSc in Civil Engineering
Earthquake response of pile
foundations for bridges
A finite element approach
Nikolaos Bompotas
Supervised by Varvara Zania and Lars Lundorf Nielsen
July 2020
==PAGE:2==
Nikolaos Bompotas
Earthquake response of pile foundations for bridges
MSc in Civil Engineering, July 2020
Supervisors: Varvara Zania and Lars Lundorf Nielsen
Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
Department of Civil Engineering
Masters Degree in Civil Engineering
Brovej, Building 118
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis is my original, unpublished, independent work and reﬂects my re-
search eﬀort in regards to the topic of soil-pile interaction for bridges. It is the
ﬁnal project within the master’s programme M.Sc. in Civil Engineering held at
the department of Civil Engineering, Technical University of Denmark and was
composed over a period of 28 weeks during the spring semester of 2020.
My interest in earthquake and bridge engineering was profound since the be-
ginning of my studies in the University of Patras, situated in a location of high
seismicity and right next to Rio-Antirio bridge, in Greece. My diploma thesis
back in 2017, supervised by Professor Apostolos Papageorgiou, comprised of a
dynamic soil-structure interaction study for bridges with shallow foundations
using the substructure method and mainly focusing on the response of the
superstructure.
With the current project, I had the opportunity to expand my knowledge on
the soil-structure interaction topic from an extended geotechnical perspective,
dealing with deep foundations, implementing soil non-linearities and performing
ﬁnite element modelling and seismic analyses to complement ideally my previous
work. The right guidance was provided by Associate Professor Varvara Zania
who possess the technical expertise of such matters.
The nature and the mechanisms of the problem make it diﬃcult to follow a
straightforward approach for design purposes and thus results to diﬃculties in
practice. COWI’s Technical Director in Bridges Department, Lars Lundorf Nielsen,
expressed his interest for minimizing such diﬃculties and for an eﬀort to seek
answers to some ambiguities in codes. This led to a pleasant cooperation, the
outcome of which is the current document.
Nikolaos Bompotas
iii
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I want to dedicate this part to all the people contributed in the realization of this
Master thesis.
First and foremost, I want to acknowledge the hard work and commitment of
my main supervisor, Associate Professor Varvara Zania, who devoted her time
guiding me during all this period. I had the luck to work with a person that
approached this thesis with the same interest as me and was always willing to
spend extra time for constructive and intriguing discussions. Her experience and
ideas were the key to the present study.
Next, I want to thank Lars Lundorf Nielsen, Technical Director in COWI, who
paved the way for my collaboration with a company of solidiﬁed expertise in
bridge engineering. I am grateful of his eﬀorts to provide me with data, equip-
ment and access to Plaxis3D, as well as of his valuable practical experience.
Of course, I should also give credits to all the people within COWI that helped
me in this regard.
My girlfriend deserves also a special recognition in this part, as she is the unseen
hero in this part of my life. She was always present for me to comfort and
motivate me and helped me rally through the hard times. I truly thank her for
her patience, support and understanding. I would have never made it without
her.
Last but not least, I want to thank my family who showed me the way and gave
me the possibility to pursue my degree. I am very fortunate to be in such position
and largely is because of them. They always believe in me and they continuously
and tirelessly show their love and support.
Nikolaos Bompotas
v
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
On 9/8/2020 6:28 .., Nick Bompotas wrote:
Pile foundations are essential supporting elements for massive structures such
as wind turbines, high-rise buildings and bridges. The dynamic behaviour of
the supported superstructure can be signiﬁcantly aﬀected by soil-pile-structure
interaction (SPSI) eﬀects, possibly resulting to huge monetary damages, or even
worse, loss of life. Unfortunately, seismic codes around the globe, do not provide
a systematic approach on the design for occasions where SPSI is detrimental.
In addition, there is only few information as to when interaction phenomena
should be considered.
This thesis intends to shed some light on SPSI by evaluating kinematic and inertia
interaction eﬀects, using a ﬁnite element (FE) approach in both Plaxis 2D and 3D.
The study is based on parametric analyses inspired by the real case scenario of the
Mumbai Trans Harbour Link bridge in India, according to data kindly provided
by COWI. A set of four diﬀerent soil proﬁles, three earthquakes and two bridges
is adopted. Due to the large number of analyses, remote scripting capabilities
of Plaxis are exploited to set up the models and accommodate data acquisition.
A non-linear time-history approach is thereafter developed, based on a number
of diﬀerent implementations, showcasing the capabilities and limitations of the
adopted methods. Extended validation is performed based on rigorous solutions
from literature (e.g. kinematic response factors) and subsequent ﬁndings are
justiﬁed accordingly. The piles are modelled in Plaxis2D software as equivalent
plate elements of same ﬂexural rigidity as the original piles and the results
are compared to a more realistic modelling in Plaxis3D. It is shown that under
certain circumstances the plane strain conditions can be satisfactory as a ﬁrst
step approximation, but overall it cannot completely capture the pile behaviour,
an essentially 3D problem.
Non-linear site response analyses are performed and the soil behaviour is evalu-
ated and the observed tendencies are reported. Inertia components extracted
vii
==PAGE:8==
from direct analyses are compared with the kinematic derived by separate anal-
yses in terms of stress resultants, i.e. shear forces and moments, quantities of
major importance in the engineering practice. Results of a case representing
conditions similar to the ones indicated by Eurocode 8, validate the importance
of inclusion of soil-structure interaction in the analyses of similar cases. The pre-
sented method can be further extended to incorporate more complex phenomena,
eventually turning into a vastly sophisticated approach.
Keywords: Soil-Pile interaction; bridges; ﬁnite element; Plaxis; kinematic inter-
action; inertia interaction; soil hardening
viii
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
Abstract
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Research objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theoretical Background
5
2.1
Ground response analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Numerical modelling in Plaxis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.1
Boundary conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.2
Time and mesh discretization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.3
Hardening Soil small . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.4
Rayleigh damping
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3
Standard Penetration Test (SPT)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.1
Corrections of SPT-N ﬁeld values . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3.2
Correlations for shear wave velocity . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3.3
Correlations for other engineering parameters
. . . . . .
18
2.4
Kinematic induced bending moments: Analytical solutions . . . .
19
2.4.1
Method of Dezi et al., 2010 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.4.2
Method of Di Laora et al., 2012
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Case Study
21
3.1
Site conditions and soil properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Seismic actions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3
Prototype bridge section and pile foundation . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3.1
Pile foundation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3.2
Bridge
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Numerical Modelling
31
ix
==PAGE:10==
4.1
Soil modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Site response analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2.1
Plaxis 2D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2.2
Plaxis 3D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.2.3
Case study: Site response analyses . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.3
Kinematic response
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.3.1
Plaxis 2D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.3.2
Plaxis 3D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.3.3
Case study: Kinematic interaction analyses . . . . . . . .
57
4.4
Bridge modelling and direct analyses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.4.1
Plaxis 2D - SDOF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.4.2
Plaxis 3D - SDOF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.4.3
Case study: Direct analyses
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5
Results and discussion
61
5.1
Site response analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.2
Kinematic response
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5.2.1
Plaxis 2D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5.2.2
Plaxis 3D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
5.3
Kinematic Vs Direct
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
5.3.1
Plaxis 2D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
5.3.2
Plaxis 3D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
5.4
Overall comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
6
Conclusions
89
7
Bibliography
93
A
Appendix A
101
B
Appendix B
105
C
Appendix C
107
List of Tables
113
List of Figures
114
x
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
This thesis is an attempt to bring some clarity to the phenomenon of soil-structure
interaction in civil engineering applications and more speciﬁcally in bridge-piers
founded on piles and subjected to earthquake motions. In practice, engineers
follow guidelines clearly stated by code standards (such as Eurocode, AASHTO
etc.), which provide explicit and comprehensible instructions for approaching
many problems, serving as a valuable tool in their eﬀorts and helping them
to design safe structures. What happens when such guidelines are missing,
though? Then, engineers should come up with a realistic solution under various
assumptions. This increases the factor of uncertainty and creates confusion,
which consequently leads to raise of costs. These are key design aspects, especially
in high-stake projects such as bridges, wind turbines or high-rise buildings,
for which at most times the soil-structure interaction phenomenon cannot be
neglected a priori. Speciﬁc guidelines from code standards are absent, especially
when compared to other civil engineering problems.
Society has evolved dramatically and demands for infrastructure have raised
signiﬁcantly over the past century. The need for safe and reliable design has
led to codiﬁed methodologies for many engineering applications. Even though
soil-structure interaction has been studied for over 50 years now and many
advancements are reported in the academic society, the tie with the guidelines
provided by codes is weak. Although some provisions can be found in codes
and some state-of-the-art solutions developed by researchers on this ﬁeld have
been included in some codes, speciﬁc instructions as to how the problem at hand
should be dealt with are generally non-existent.
With the current project, eﬀorts are focused on identifying interesting patterns
that could prove valuable to the designers on determining whether or not they
should consider soil-pile-bridge interaction under seismic motion and if the eﬀects
are more likely to be detrimental or beneﬁcial. An important highlight of the
project is that soil non-linearities are taken into consideration, as opposed to the
majority of the proposed methods of earlier years in the literature. Recent years’
booming development of technology has brought increasing attention to the use
of numerical methods such as ﬁnite element and boundary element modelling in
1
==PAGE:12==
geotechnical applications, as they can represent more accurately and eﬃciently
the true behaviour of the soil and structure, limiting simplistic assumptions. The
research is concentrated on 2-D models using Plaxis software as it is widely
available in DTU and can accommodate more sophisticated soil models. Its
performance and limitations are explored as the nature of the problem at hand
is in reality three-dimensional. Comparisons are performed with analytical and
approximate solutions available in the literature and by 3D models with emphasis
on the stress resultants in the piles. The investigation is composed of three main
parts: site-response analysis, kinematic interaction and global-level analyses.
1.2
Research objectives
The main objectives of the thesis are as follows:
• Demonstrate the eﬀect of soil non-linearities in the seismic response of the
soil and the piles
• Showcase the most important design parameters that aﬀect the kinematic
and inertia interaction with focus on design parameters such as the shear
and moment distribution in pile and the response of the superstructure
• Derive kinematic and inertia forces from a single model and highlight the
eﬀects of the two response components for real-case examples to identify
consistent patterns
• Illustrate the capabilities of Plaxis 2D (plane strain) to suﬃciently capture
the response of a pile, originally a highly 3D-phenomenon
• Examine the beneﬁts and drawbacks of using advanced Finite Element
Analysis (FEA) as approach solution
1.3
Methodology
In order to reach the objectives, an extensive literature review is required. The
study of the literature is constant throughout the course of the project and
depending on the needs. The solution approach will be based on a 2D and 3D
FEM model using the software Plaxis. At ﬁrst, site conditions are determined
according to data kindly provided by COWI for a real case study. Correlations
and engineering judgement are used to acquire realistic soil properties and
reasonable assumptions are made in order to set up a non-linear model that can
better represent the true behaviour of soil deposits under dynamic conditions.
Extensive literature study is made to avoid erroneous results in absence of speciﬁc
2
Chapter 1
Introduction
==PAGE:13==
tests. Thereafter, a parametric study is decided according to four idealized soil
proﬁles. Three seismic motions and two levels of peak ground accelerations
are furthermore considered in order to account for frequency and intensity
variability of the excitation, whereas two simpliﬁed lumped mass parameter
models of diﬀerent natural periods are employed for representing the original
bridge structure and an assumed alternative. The analyses are divided in site-
response, kinematic and direct analyses and in Plaxis 2D and 3D solutions.
In order to proceed to the main part of the analyses, a proper validation and
exploration of the limitations and capabilities of the software and the incorpo-
rated approaches is done at ﬁrst. Validation is based on formulas and charts from
analytical and rigorous solutions gradually building the complexity. Evidently,
a huge amount of analyses is required. On top of that, data extraction and
manipulation can be quite time-consuming task. Therefore, Python scripting is
utilised in order to automate the interaction with Plaxis. The scripts are used
for both modelling and data acquisition purposes, while built subroutines are
used to store data in a format such that they can be easily recognized to be later
retrieved and post-processed. This is an important step, because working with
such amount of data can easily lead to introduction of mistakes and human errors.
Data reading and post-processing is done in Matlab as it is also preferred for the
plotting of ﬁgures used herein. Conclusions for the eﬀect of soil-pile-interaction
and of soil-pile-structure-interaction are drawn from observation made along
the course of both the validation steps and the results of the parametric anal-
yses. Non-linear site response analyses according to Plaxis 2D are assessed to
investigate mechanisms of soil response and how this can aﬀect the kinematic in-
teraction of the pile. Results of kinematic and direct analyses showcase the eﬀect
of the inertial component in the pile when the bridge structure is included in the
model and also the eﬀect of the compliant base to the dynamic characteristics
of the structure itself. A comparison of a set of approaches used in Plaxis 3D is
also compared to the 2D models, to illustrate the capabilites and limitations of
modelling a pile as a plate in plane strain conditions and whereas the later can
suﬃciently capture the response of a pile.
1.3
Methodology
3
==PAGE:14==
==PAGE:15==
2
Theoretical Background
This segment contains brieﬂy some aspects that are relevant with the discussions
that appear in later chapters and the concepts used for the formulation of the
problem, its numerical implementation and methods visited for the interpretation
of data and results. More speciﬁcally, one can herein ﬁnd some principles
relevant to the geotechnical earthquake engineering, the non-linear dynamic
behaviour of soils and their numerical implementation in computer codes, as
well as information about SPT corrections and correlations for determining soil
properties, followed by a summary of some solutions from literature regarding
the calculation of bending moments of piles at the interface between soil layers.
2.1
Ground response analysis
Ground response analysis (GRA) is one of the most common problems encoun-
tered in the ﬁeld of geotechnical earthquake engineering and refers to the deter-
mination of the response of a soil deposit to the forced motion of the bedrock
directly beneath it due to earthquake excitation. There are multiple predictive
relationships based on one- two- or three-dimensional wave propagation princi-
ples according to the dimensionality of the problem to be adressed and that are
often used in conjuction with seismic hazard assessment of the site to simulate
the bedrock motion characteristics.
The one-dimensional technique for performing GRA is valid only under the
assumption that the soil medium is composed of horizontal boundaries and that
extends inﬁnetely in the horizontal direction. It is used for simulating motion
caused by vertically propagating SH-waves, i.e. waves that their particle motion
and direction of propagation are polarized such that they are always contained
in a horizontal plane. Some terms that are usually found in literature and will
also be used throughout the current text are deﬁned with the help of Fig. 2.1.
Free-surface motion refers to the motion at the surface of the soil deposit, bedrock
motion is the motion at the top of bedrock, while rock outcropping motion is the
motion at a location where the bedrock is exposed at the ground surface.
In case of linear systems, the ground response analysis takes its simplest form,
that of transfer functions. The transfer functions determine the ampliﬁcation or
deampliﬁcation of each frequency component of the bedrock input motion due
5
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.1.: Terminology of ground response (source: Bardet and Tobita, 2001)
to the presence of the soil deposit above the bedrock. Although the procedure is
suitable for linear systems as already mentioned, non-linear behavior can also be
approximated by an iterative procedure with equivalent linear soil properties.
The latter procedure has been coded and can be found in widely used software
like SHAKE, DEEPSOIL etc. or as an Excel add-in like EERA. More accurate
non-linear behavior can be simulated with non-linear approaches based on the
ﬁnite diﬀerence scheme and explicit or implicit integration calculation methods.
Despite its increasing complexity in its formulation, an excel add-in has also
been developed similar to EERA, called NERA, using the Iwan (1967) and Mroz
(1967) model which assumes that the hysteretic stress-strain loop follows the
Masing rule (1926), while i.e. DEEPSOIL provides numerous soil model options
to incorporate non-linearities and allows for non-Masing rule as well.
In the current, only one case that is used later in Chapter 4 is presented: that
of a linear, uniform, damped soil on rigid rock. For more information and
other transfer functions one can look up at Kramer’s book (1996). The transfer
function, which gives the ratio of the surface motion amplitude to bedrock motion
amplitude for the aforementioned case, is expressed as
|퐹(휔)| =
1
q
cos2 (휔퐻/푉푠) + [휉(휔퐻/푉푠)]2
(2.1)
where 휔is the excitation angular frequency, 퐻the height, 푉푠the shear wave
velocity and 휉the damping of the soil deposit. Obviously, the ampliﬁcation is
dependent on the excitation frequency. An example of the inﬂuence of excitation
frequency and damping is given in Fig. 2.2.
6
Chapter 2
Theoretical Background
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.2.: Inﬂuence of excitation frequency and of damping on the ampliﬁcation as
given by the transfer function for a linear elastic soil layer overlying a
geological bedrock(source: Lang, 2004)
The positions of local maxima indicate the natural frequencies of the soil deposit
which depend on the geometry and material properties as it is evident also by
Eq. (2.2), which gives its 푛th natural frequency. The fundamental shapes of
vibration for the ﬁrst 3 natural frequencies are illustrated in Fig. 2.3.
휔푛≈푉푠
퐻
휋
2 + 푛휋

푛= 0, 1, 2, . . . , ∞
(2.2)
Figure 2.3.: Mode shapes of vibration (source: Kramer et al., 1996)
2.1
Ground response analysis
7
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.4.: Alternative concept for calculating the fundamental period of soil based on
SDOF (source: Wang et al., 2018)
The natural period of vibration, or otherwise called characteristic site period, is
given for 푛= 0 from Eq. (2.2) above:
푇= 2휋
휔0
= 4퐻
푉푠
(2.3)
However, it should be noted that the above equation is most appropriately ap-
plicable to soils with constant shear wave proﬁle with depth and is likely to
overestimate the fundamental period by as much as 20%. A more recent an-
alytical solution has been developed by Wang et al. (2018), which utilizes the
concept of a single degree of freedom system (SDOF) as shown in Fig. 2.4 and
that provides 21.5% lower period estimations compared to Eq. (2.3). The upper
part of the soil layer is viewed as a particle mass and the lower portion as a
weightless shear bar. The equivalent mass and stiﬀness of the particle-bar model
are shown in the ﬁgure, 푚푒and 푘푒, respectively, where 휌is the density, while 퐴
is the cross-sectional area of soil column, which is conveniently simpliﬁed when
calculating the natural period:
푇= 2휋
r푚e
푘e
= 2휋
s
0.5휌퐴퐻
퐺퐴/0.5퐻= 휋퐻
푉
(2.4)
Other rigorous solutions for the calculation of the characteristic soil period can be
found in literature (Dobry et al., 1976,Wang et al., 2018) for diﬀerent distributions
of shear wave velocity with depth (linear, power-law etc.). Herein, EERA will be
mostly used and therefore further discussion is non relevant. In case of a seismic
excitation, the fundamental period can be used in combination with the Fourier
spectrum of the signal to examine whether the soil will exhibit resonance or if
its response will be severely ampliﬁed by checking the predominant frequency
content of the earthquake in comparison to the fundamental frequency of the
8
Chapter 2
Theoretical Background
==PAGE:19==
soil. The worst case scenario is reached when these frequencies along with the
natural frequency of the structure coincide.
By performing a site-response analysis, the ground surface motion can be com-
puted when the response is known at a diﬀerent depth. Usually earthquake
signals are recorded at rock outcrop conditions. Once the free-surface motion
is retrieved, response spectra can then be constructed in order to determine
the design conditions for the structure. The opposite process where the ground
surface motion is known and the motion i.e. at bedrock is needed, is called
deconvolution and is of particular interest for the interpretation of actual ground
motions recorded at the surface of soil deposits. In general, the reliability of
SSI analyses depends also on the level of precision of the derived deconvolved
motions at depth. For practical purposes, Mejia and Dawson (2006) explain the
process of deconvolution by means of the SHAKE code (or equivalently EERA)
and present some commonly encountered cases in practice. Although this is
focused on the application of the deconvolved signal in FLAC models, the process
holds true also for Plaxis models with a slight modiﬁcation when it comes to the
use of a compliant instead of a rigid base. The mentioned technique is a solution
in the frequency domain and requires Fourier transformation to convert to and
from the time-domain. This creates a number of issues when the deconvolved
signal is to be subsequently used in a FE time-domain analysis. The main prob-
lems arise due to the diﬀerences in damping formulation and the inconsistency of
the boundary conditions between SHAKE and FEM programs. Also, SHAKE can
only be used for the deconvolution of the horizontal component of the seismic
motion. Poul and Zerva, 2018 have developed a phase-amplitude modiﬁcation
procedure for deconvolving both horizontal and vertical seismic components
by means of FEM, involving an iterative procedure for optimizing the Rayleigh
damping and showed that using deconvolved base motions directly from SHAKE
in FE time-domain analyses can result to considerable errors.
2.2
Numerical modelling in Plaxis
In the current section, an overview of some important aspects of the numerical
modelling in FE software in general and in Plaxis in particular are presented.
2.2.1
Boundary conditions
The soil medium is modeled as a ﬁnite soil volume under the FE principle by
the creation of a geometry model. The boundaries of such model should be
located in a distance from the area of interest such that they do not inﬂuence the
2.2
Numerical modelling in Plaxis
9
==PAGE:20==
deformation behavior and the results, i.e. located far away. In static calculations
this distance is much smaller than in dynamic calculations. In dynamic analyses,
moving the vertical boundaries to such a distance so that wave reﬂections and
distortions are minimized, would require too many elements and thus, the
analysis would become highly ineﬃcient and costly. Plaxis provides the user with
the option of using special boundary conditions, which are summarized below:
• Viscous boundaries: their formulation is done with the use of dampers
according to the method described by Lysmer and Kuhlemeyer, 1969.
Plaxis manual suggests that this type should be used when the dynamic
source generating the waves is inside the mesh.
• Free-ﬁeld boundaries: they refer to free-ﬁeld elements coupled to the main
grid at vertical boundaries (only) by viscous dashpots. This type of elements
reduces signiﬁcantly the domain to the area of interest and it is prefered
in application where the excitation comes from a source outside the mesh,
i.e. earthquakes.
• Tied degrees of freedom: this option ties the respective nodes at the lateral
boundaries such that they undergo the same displacements in the horizon-
tal direction and that they have no vertical component. In order for this to
work, the nodes at the lateral boundaries should be of the same number
and have the same elevation. This option is only available in Plaxis2D
version.
• Compiant base: the compliant base is of similar concept with the free-ﬁeld
boundaries but it is only available for the base of the model. It diﬀers to
the free-ﬁeld elements only in respect to the coeﬃcients of the modelled
dashpots which are multiplied by a factor of 2 in order to simulate the
absorption of half the stresses(resulting from the downward waves) and
accommodate the propagation of only the upward incoming waves. This
option is used for reducing the size of the model when the same soil material
extends to larger depths or in case of outcrop earthquake motions.
2.2.2
Time and mesh discretization
The mesh of the soil domain is suggested to be discretized in such a manner that
no information is lost during the travelling of waves. Lysmer and Kuhlemeyer,
1969 have proposed the element size ℎ푒to be smaller than one eighth of the
wavelength corresponding to the maximum frequency of interest. This essentially
translates to:
10
Chapter 2
Theoretical Background
==PAGE:21==
ℎ푒< 푉푠,푚푖푛
8 푓푚푎푥
(2.5)
Generally, the automatic mesh generation results to an unstructured mesh, while
the ﬁneness depends also on the model size, the presence of structures and
interfaces etc. The mesh procedure can be aided with the manual creation of
points, lines and surfaces and by using coarseness factors to reﬁne/coarsen
separate areas and volumes in the model.
The proper deﬁnition of time increment in dynamic calculations ensures better
accuracy by not allowing a wave to travel a distance larger than the minimum
dimension of an element during an integration step. This restriction can be
expressed as
훿푡푐푟= ℎ푒
푉푠
(2.6)
The time step used by Plaxis is constant and equal to
훿푡=
훥푡
푚· 푛
(2.7)
where 훥푡is the dynamic time interval, 푚is the number of max-steps and 푛the
number of sub-steps. The total number of steps for the time discretization are
given by the multiplication in the denominator, while 푚speciﬁes the number
of steps that will be available for plots in the output. Thus, larger 푚provides
more detailed plots. When using an earthquake signal of duration 훥푡, it is
recommended that 푚is set equal to the number of the data points used to
represent the signal in the input ﬁle, while 푛should be selected according to
Eq. (2.7) in order to fulﬁll Eq. (2.6).
2.2.3
Hardening Soil small
The Hardening Soil small (HSs) model that will be employed for modelling the
soil behaviour is the most appropriate for dynamic calculations in Plaxis. Addi-
tionally to the original Hardening Soil (HS) model that considers the dependency
of stiﬀness characteristics of soil to the stress levels, HSs further accounts for
stiﬀness reduction according to increasing strain amplitudes and allows for the
simulation of the development of hysteretic damping under cyclic loading. The
decay of the stiﬀness modulus is non-linear and when plotted against log(strain)
results to a S-shaped curve as seen in Fig. 2.5.
2.2
Numerical modelling in Plaxis
11
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.5.: Stiﬀness reduction curve based on strain levels and characteristic exhibited
strain ranges in diﬀerent engineering applications (source: Brinkgreve et al.,
2020)
HSs essentially deﬁnes the relation between the dynamic soil stiﬀness (i.e. stiﬀ-
ness at very small strains, 퐺0 or 퐺푚푎푥) to the stiﬀness at larger strains by a
hyperbolic law. Hardin and Drnevich, 1972 proposed the following:
퐺푠
퐺0
=
1
1+ |
훾
훾푟푒푓|
(2.8)
where 퐺푠is the current secant shear modulus at shear strain 훾and 훾푟푒푓a reference
shear strain. This expression was later modiﬁed by other researchers in order to
achieve better agreement with reduction curves produced on laboratory tests on
diﬀerent soil types. Corrections from Vardanega and Bolton, 2011 and Santos
et al., 2003 include a power exponent or a multiplicative factor, respectively, for
the strain ratio in the denominator. Plaxis formulation utilizes the latter with
the multiplicative factor being 0.385 for a reference strain 훾푟푒푓= 훾0.7 which
corresponds to a value of shear modulus reduced to 72.2% of its initial. Thus,
the stress-strain (휏−훾) relationship is deﬁned as
휏= 퐺푠훾=
퐺0훾
1 + 0.385 훾
훾0.7
(2.9)
12
Chapter 2
Theoretical Background
==PAGE:23==
However, Plaxis solver does not directly apply the secant modulus as it uses the
tangent stiﬀness matrices. The used tangent shear modulus 퐺푡comes from the
derivative of the above equation w.r.t. the shear strain:
퐺푡=
퐺0

1 + 0.385 훾
훾0.7
2
(2.10)
In HSs the reduction curves are bounded by a lower limit after which the shear
modulus cannot decrease further as it has reached the plastic domain. This
applies when 퐺푡reaches the unloading-reloading stiﬀness 퐺푢푟. Then further
stiﬀness reduction occurs due to plastic straining according to the original HS
model. The associated shear strain is called 훾푐푢푡−표푓푓and is calculated as
훾푐푢푡−표푓푓=
1
0.385
 r
퐺0
퐺푢푟
−1
!
훾0.7
(2.11)
Several correlations have been developed for the estimation of the value of the
reference shear strain, but not all studies agree on the threshold set. Herein, the
correlations as seen in Obrzud and Truty, 2012 for a common reference strain
훾0.7 that Plaxis expects as input are reported.
• Cohesionless soils
Darendeli and Stokoe, 2001:
훾0.7 = 훾ref
0.7
 푝′
푝푎
0.35
(2.12)
with reference strain threshold 훾ref
0.7 (푝푎) = 1.26 · 10−4 and reference pres-
sure 푝푎= 1 atm ≈100 kPa
Wichtmann and Triantafyllidis, 2004:
훾0.7 = 8.75 · 10−5 푝′
푝ref + 훾ref
0.7 for 푝′ ≤< 400kPa
(2.13)
with reference strain threshold 훾ref
0.7 (푝푟푒푓) = 1· 10−4 and reference pressure
푝푟푒푓= 100 kPa
• Cohesive soils
2.2
Numerical modelling in Plaxis
13
==PAGE:24==
Vucetic and Dobry, 1991:
훾0.7 = 훾ref
0.7 + 5 · 10−6퐼푃
for 퐼푃< 15
훾0.7 = 101.15 log(퐼푃)−5.1
for 퐼푃≥15
(2.14)
with reference strain threshold 훾ref
0.7 (퐼푝= 0) = 1 · 10−4 and plasticity index
퐼푝in %
Stokoe et al., 2004:
훾0.7 = 훾ref
0.7 + 5 · 10−6퐼푃OCR0.3
(2.15)
with reference strain threshold 훾ref
0.7 (퐼푝= 0, 푂퐶푅= 1) = 1 · 10−4,
• All soils
Darendeli, 2001:
훾0.7 = (푎1 + 푎2퐼푃· OCR푎3) 휎푎4
0
(2.16)
with reference strain threshold 훾0.7 and plasticity index 퐼푝in %, 휎0 =
푝′
0/푝푟푒푓normalized conﬁning pressure, 푝′
0 = (2퐾0 + 1)휎′
휈0/3 in situ mean
eﬀective stress in kPa, 푝푟푒푓≈100 kPa reference pressure, and coeﬃcients
훼1 = 1.25 exp −2, 훼2 = 3.7 exp −4, 훼3 = 0.3 and 훼4 = 0.35
As the damping curves that simulate the hysteretic behaviour are directly pro-
duced according to the selected parameters 퐺0 and 훾0.7, separate discussion
is not included in the current for sake of brevity. The reader is encouraged to
seek information in the studies presented for the 훾0.7 correlations, in addition to
Brinkgreve et al., 2007 and Brinkgreve et al., 2020 for issues relevant to Plaxis,
as well as in Benz, 2007 for better understanding of the HSs concept.
2.2.4
Rayleigh damping
In dynamic problems, the equation of motion that is used to describe the time-
dependent movement 푢under the inﬂuence of a dynamic load 퐹in a MDOF is
the well known:
M¥u + C¤u + Ku = F
(2.17)
where M, C and K are the mass, damping and stiﬀness matrices and u, ¤u, ¥u, F
are the displacement, velocity, acceleration and load vectors, respectively. The
latter can be also formulated in terms of prescribed displacements, velocities or
accelerations. Matrix C simulates the material damping which, in principle, is
14
Chapter 2
Theoretical Background
==PAGE:25==
developed due to friction or due to irreversible deformations in case of plasticity
or viscosity. However, damping can be essentially used with the use of C matrix
even in assumed elasticity by considering the damping as portions of the mass
and stiﬀness matrices (Rayleigh principle):
C = 푎푅M + 훽푅K
(2.18)
where 푎푅and 훽푅are parameters that can be calculated by solving for the fre-
quencies of interest, 휔푛푖, the linear system of equations:
푎푅+ 훽푅휔2
1
=
2휔1휉
푎푅+ 훽푅휔2
2
=
2휔2휉
(2.19)
Brinkgreve et al., 2007 discussed the importance of using an additional Rayleigh
damping even when hysteretic damping is modelled with the use of HSs. Since
the hysteretic damping in the HSs is unable to capture the damping at small
strains (only able for strains larger than 10−4 −10−2 %, Brinkgreve et al., 2020),
it is suggested that a Rayleigh damping associated to a small damping ratio (0.5
- 2 %) is included.
2.3
Standard Penetration Test (SPT)
Despite the criticism, many correlations of the penetration resistance and diﬀer-
ent soil properties have been developed over the years, making the test attractive.
Although SPT is the most widely used in-situ technique used in practice due
to its practicality and its low-cost, it is well documented that it can provide
misleading results if the data collected are misinterpreted. Diﬀerent techniques,
manufacturers, as well as operators, introduce multiple factors of uncertainties
on top of those attributed to ground conditions, etc (see Table A-1 in Kulhawy
and Mayne, 1990). Over the last decades many attempts have been made to
standardize the test procedure and many researchers have proposed relations
for normalizing the ﬁeld measurements to a common basis to reduce the vari-
ability of the results. Albeit, a confusion still exists. In India, guidelines for
test execution and corrections exist thereof (see IS: 2131-1981, reaﬃrmed in
2002), but they are admittedly insuﬃcient when compared to other standards.
Above all, while the equipment for soil sampling that is largely available in the
country complies with ASTM D1586 and EN ISO 22476-3 and the procedure
adopted is essentially based on these standards, the Indian Standards do not
2.3
Standard Penetration Test (SPT)
15
==PAGE:26==
propose any corrections for the eﬃciency of the hammer equipped as e.g. in
EN1997-2:2007 (see §4.6.3(3)). Hammer eﬃciency is generally regarded as one
of the most important corrections of the recorded SPT-N values during the test
and its absence raises questions. Perhaps this can be attributed to the confusion
surrounding some of the correlations employing the SPT-N values for estimating
soil properties, for which it is unclear if the corrected or uncorrected N-values
should be used. On the other hand, IS: 2131-1981 contains corrections for
dilatancy and overburden stress.
2.3.1
Corrections of SPT-N ﬁeld values
Several factors inﬂuencing the SPT results can be addressed by the inclusion of
correction coeﬃcients. Skempton (1986) allowed for diﬀerent test set-ups to be
accounted for, introducing a standardized blowcount termed as 푁60:
푁60 = 푁퐶퐵퐶푅퐶푆퐶퐸
(2.20)
where 푁= measured SPT blowcounts, 퐶퐵= correction for borehole diameter,
퐶푅= correction for rod length, 퐶푆= correction for sampler barrel and 퐶퐸= cor-
rection for hammer energy eﬃciency for normalizing according to the theoritical
eﬃciency of 60% of the original SPT (Mohr) hammer calculated as 퐶퐸= 퐸푅/60,
with 퐸푅= hammer eﬃciency (in %).
For cohesionless soils, it is seen that in-situ overburden stress is altering the
penetration resistance. A correction is proposed with the introduction of an extra
correction coeﬃcient, 퐶푁, resulting to the normalized value, 푁1, that would have
been measured if at the depth of the SPT the eﬀective overburden stress would
equal the atmospheric pressure (≈100 kPa):
푁1 = 푁퐶푁
(2.21)
A chart for the selection of proper 퐶푁factor is readily available in IS:2131-1981
while it can be calculated through the expressions derived by Seed, 1975, Peck
et al., 1974, Skempton, 1986, Bazaraa, 1967, Kayen et al., 1992 and Liao and
Whitman, 1986. The chart in the Indian Standard presents an upper bound of
2.0 for 퐶푁, whereas Youd and Idriss, 2001 and Cetin et al., 2004 employed a
maximum of 1.7 and 1.6. The value of 푁1 should be furthermore corrected in case
16
Chapter 2
Theoretical Background
==PAGE:27==
of saturated stratum that consists of ﬁne sand and silt if 푁1 > 15 (IS:2131-1981,
1981 adopted from Terzaghi and Peck, 1948):
푁′
1 = 15 + 푁1 −15
2
·
(2.22)
Inserting Eqs. (2.21) and (2.22) in Eq. (2.20) will result to the corrected values
(푁1)60 and  푁′
1

60, accounting for overburden stress and pore pressure, respec-
tively, along with energy and equipment corrections. Lastly, in certain occasions
an improvement can be achieved by implementing a calibration of the SPT-N
values considering also the ﬁnes content of the soil, resulting to (푁1)60,푐푠and
 푁′
1

60,푐푠, accordingly. The transition to equivalent clean sand condition can be
succeeded using the correlations proposed by Youd and Idriss, 2001, Cetin et al.,
2004 and Anbazhagan and Sitharam, 2008.
Despite not being mentioned as a practice to correct the SPT-N values for hammer
eﬃciency, researchers also from within India have expressed the need of this issue
to be addressed (Anbazhagan et al., 2016). Hammer eﬃciency is found to vary
within the same hammer and drop mechanism or even with depth in the same
borehole (Anbazhagan et al., 2016). Skempton, 1986 and later Clayton, 1990
reported the diﬀerence in hammer eﬃciencies for multiple countries and release
mechanisms and the energy transferred was seen to range between roughly 40%
to 90%. For the automatic-trip hammer system used to obtain the SPT-N values
in the current study case, a report from Maryland Department of Transportation
(Sherif Aggour and Rose Radding, 2001) presented a 퐶퐸range of 0.80 to 1.67.
More recent studies do not employ such a large upper bound value of 퐶퐸, but
they still state the high ER of automatic-trip hammers, which is typically as high
as 90% (Youd et al., 2008, Lukiantchuki et al., 2017). Biringen and Davie (2008)
reported a lower and upper limit of 55% and 90% in his extended literature
review. This range is not normally acceptable in design and can signiﬁcantly aﬀect
the measured SPT-N values. Therefore, in order to capture a wider spectrum
and account for such uncertainty, the aforementioned correction is chosen to
be taken into consideration herein as characteristic values of soil properties
are later calculated based on a range of values. Other corrections related to
equipment such for rod length and sampler conﬁguration (with or without liners)
are omitted with the assumption that the procedure was standardized.
2.3.2
Correlations for shear wave velocity
When it comes to the correlations of SPT-N values and shear wave velocity, 푉푠,
most of the researchers have utilized uncorrected values, especially in earlier
2.3
Standard Penetration Test (SPT)
17
==PAGE:28==
years. Dating back at 70’s, though, researchers from Japan started incorporating
the soil type and geological age in their correlations (e.g. Ohba and Toriumi,
1970, Ohsaki and Iwasaki, 1973, Ohta and Goto, 1978) and soon afterwards
other corrections started to show up. Apart from the corrections for energy, rod
length, sampler dimensions etc. which obviously introduce bias, Rollins et al.,
1998 stated that the estimation of the shear wave velocity can be improved with
the inclusion of the eﬀective overburden stress 휎′
휈in the correlation procedure, a
statement that is backed up also by recent studies from Andrus et al., 2004 and
Brandenberg et al., 2010. Andrus et al., 2004 also incorporated the inﬂuence of
ﬁnes content using the approach from Youd and Idriss, 2001. Other expressions
to adjust the blow counts according to ﬁnes content can be found in articles
related to liquefaction and seismic microzonation such as Cetin et al., 2004 and
Anbazhagan and Sitharam, 2008. Several researchers also developed correlations
with both uncorrected and corrected blow counts for the same soil samples,
observing only small variation of the predicted values (Maheswari et al., 2010,
Mhaske and Choudhury, 2011), while others failed to correlate the corrected
values (Lee and Tsai, 2008).
There exist many correlations and rich literature for estimating the shear wave
velocity from SPT-N values, but apparently lots of ambiguities emerge as well. As
an example, Mhaske and Choudhury, 2011 have recently developed a formula
for Mumbai region, but it is based on shear wave velocities estimated using other
correlations and its accuracy is not directly veriﬁed against laboratory or other
in-situ methods for measuring 푉푠, a method that seems doubtful. Obviously, a
lot of experience is required when using correlations and when available, tests
should be held for veriﬁcation purposes.
Herein, a number of correlations will be used and a characteristic value will be
determined based on a range of estimations, taking into account all the afore-
mentioned aspects and corrections (soil type, ﬁnes content, dilatancy, hammer
eﬃciency and overburden stress) in agreement with each correlation recommen-
dations. Such correlations are summarized in Chapter A.
2.3.3
Correlations for other engineering parameters
A similar literature review to what was reported for the shear wave velocity is
performed also for other engineering parameters of interest such is the relative
density and friction angle for the cohesionless soils and the undrained shear
strength for clayey soils. Extended reference is omitted due to lack of space, but
some of the correlations used can be found in Chapter A. Caution is advised as the
18
Chapter 2
Theoretical Background
==PAGE:29==
assumptions behind the correlations should be reviewed as discrepancies arise
between correlations as to what they consider uncorrected SPT value. Anyhow,
this goes beyond the scope of the work.
2.4
Kinematic induced bending moments: Analytical
solutions
Kinematic bending of piles for layered soil has been studied by several researchers.
Some have managed to derive formulas for estimating the moments induced at
the interface of the layers (Nikolaou et al., 2001, Dezi et al., 2010, Di Laora et al.,
2012). The last two methods are used later on for comparison purposes and are
brieﬂy presented below.
2.4.1
Method of Dezi et al., 2010
The procedure developed by the authors Dezi et al. (2009) was used for a para-
metric study of end-bearing piles with variable diameter, bedrock location and
shear wave velocity for the soil above (a total of 120 cases). Based on the para-
metric study the tendencies of exponential trend that were reported were used to
derive the following empirical formula for the moment at rock-soil interface:
푀푚푎푥 푃퐺퐴
0.25푔푀400(푑, 퐻)푒푓(푑,퐻)(푉푠−400)
(2.23)
with
푀400(푑, 퐻) =  55.5푑3 + 414푑2 −189푑+ 23.4  −0.001퐻2 + 0.0718퐻−0.2
푓(푑, 퐻) = (0.000122퐻−0.01103)(−0.05푑+ 0.864)
(2.24)
where 푀400 is the moment for a soil shear wave velocity 푉푠= 400 m/s, 푑is the
pile diameter and 퐻the thickness of the soil layer. As the method was originally
developed for piles embedded on bedrock, it seems more suitable for investigating
the eﬀects of the layer interface for highly contrasting soil properties. One should
notice, though, that the above formula is purely empirical and is derived on the
basis of assumed linearity for the soil and the pile, using an Euler-Bernoulli beam
for the ﬁrst and a Winkler-type medium model for the latter.
2.4
Kinematic induced bending moments: Analytical solutions
19
==PAGE:30==
2.4.2
Method of Di Laora et al., 2012
This method comes to further improve the ﬁndings of Dobry and O’Rourke, 1983
and Mylonakis, 2001 by developing a regression formula based on FE data for
the kinematic bending strains originated at the interface between two soil layers
of sharply diﬀering stiﬀness. This regression formula is used to deﬁne a strain
transmisibility function and is expressed as:
휀푝
훾1
= 휒
"
−1
2
ℎ1
푑
−1
+
 퐸푝
퐸1
−0.25
(푐−1)0.5
#
(2.25)
with ℎ1 the thickness of upper layer, 푑the pile diameter, 퐸푝and 퐸1 the elasticity
modulus of the pile and the upper soil layer and 푐= (퐺2/퐺1)0.25 as a ratio of the
shear modulus of below and upper layers. The ﬁrst term in the bracket refers to
site-response and the second to the stiﬀening eﬀect of the layered stratigraphy.
휒is a regression coeﬃcient which is typically close to unity (about 0.93), but
can be taken as 1 for practical applications. The strain transmisibility function
from above can be afterwards utilized for calculating the maximum moment at
the interface. The authors presented three alternatives to do so, with the more
straightforward being the following:
푀max =
2퐸푝퐼푝
푑
휀푝
훾1
 푃퐺퐴휌1ℎ1
퐺1
훷1,푠
(2.26)
where 퐼푝is the pile moment of inertia, 휌1 the mass density of upper layer and
훷1,푠a factor usually taken as 1 for a conservative estimate.
20
Chapter 2
Theoretical Background
==PAGE:31==
3
Case Study
The current section summarizes the data and their interpretation to ﬁnally
illustrate the site conditions, seismic excitations and the prototype section of the
pile-bridge systems considered. A summary of the parametric analyses is deﬁned
along with case abbreviations, to better accommodate the reading of the rest of
the document. The case study got inspiration from the Mumbai Trans Harbor
Link (MTHL) in India.
3.1
Site conditions and soil properties
For the sake of simplicity, the geo-morphology of the site is idealized as a ﬂat
and layered homogeneous medium. SPT and other test data are given for a
number of diﬀerent type of soils encountered in the ﬁeld from two boreholes
at close proximity to the prototype bridge section examined. Three types of
soil are met (one sandy and two clayey), namely GRM-B, CLA-A and CLA-B,
and the most relevant parameters that characterize each of them is shown in
Table 3.1. In this table only the highest and lowest reported SPT values and their
corresponding depths of measurement are shown(푧푚푎푥and 푧푚푖푛, respectively).
For some soils, though, these are also the solely available values inside the same
borehole. These properties are used in conjunction with the eﬀective stresses
calculated according to the original soil stratigraphy, in order to determine a
range for the engineering properties presented in the previous chapter under
Section 2.3 based on numerous appropriate SPT correlations. The original soil
stratigraphy as reported in one of the boreholes and a summary of the employed
correlations are shown in Fig. B.1.
21
==PAGE:32==
Table 3.1.: Borehole and test data for the 3 soil types
GRM-B
CLA-A
CLA-B
USCS
SC/SM
CH
CH
Gravel [%]
16
-
-
Sand [%]
49
1
12
Silt [%]
25
35
38
Clay [%]
10
64
50
MC [%]
36
54
51
LL [%]
37
78
67
PL [%]
26
29
28
PI [%]
11
49
57
FC [%]
35
99
88
푧푚푎푥[m]
1.5
8.0
4.5
푧푚푖푛[m]
3.0
12.0
10.5
SPT(푧푚푎푥)
30
8
22
SPT(푧푚푖푛)
25
6
11
훾[kN/m3]
19.33
16.60
16.30
An overview of the calculated estimations for the shear wave velocities, friction
angle and undrained shear strength is shown in Figs. 3.1 to 3.3. For each used
correlation, two values are obtained as a lower and upper bound. The logic
of this lies to the fact that SPT results can vary signiﬁcantly according to the
uncertainties discussed in the previous chapter. Since no eﬃciency is available
from the data at hand for the SPT hammer, a minimum of 55% and maximum
of 90% are applied for the ER (see Section 2.3.1), resulting eventually to the
aforementioned range of upper and lower bounds. Thereafter, a ﬁltering is
introduced to disregard erroneous results and engineering judgement is used to
facilitate the derivation of characteristic values based on the method proposed
by Schneider 1999. The calculated properties from the diﬀerent correlations
are treated as non-test values and according to the relevant approach from H.R.,
1999 the characteristic value 푥푘is then estimated as:
22
Chapter 3
Case Study
==PAGE:33==
푥푘= 푥푚

1 −푉푥
2

(3.1)
with
푥푚= 푎+ 4푏+ 푐
6
and
푉푥=
푐−푎
푎+ 4푏+ 푐
(3.2)
where 푥푚is the mean value, 푉푥the coeﬃcient of variation, 푎=estimated min-
imum value, 푏= most likely value and 푐= estimated maximum value. The
estimations 푎, 푏and 푐are originally based on personal judgement, documented
regional experience as well as typical published values. Herein, these values are
replaced with the average of minima, catholic average and average of maxima,
extracted from the grouped minimum and maximum results for all correlations
collectively. This way a weighted average is obtained, accounting also for the
variations due to hammer eﬃciency and the diﬀerent correlations, established,
however, on the basis of the SPT reported values rather than typical values of the
engineering property directly. Results for the average minima and maxima along
with the mean and characteristic values are included also in Figs. 3.1 to 3.3.
Figure 3.1.: Calculated GRM-B properties from SPT correlations and the respective
derivation of the characteristic (푘) value
3.1
Site conditions and soil properties
23
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.2.: Calculated CLA-A properties from SPT correlations and the respective
derivation of the characteristic (푘) value
Figure 3.3.: Calculated CLA-B properties from SPT correlations and the respective
derivation of the characteristic (푘) value
A summary of the characteristic soil properties is presented in Table 3.2. In the
same table, the properties of the underlying rock that is later used in the analyses
are included as well. As it pertains to the rock deposit, meaningful data were
reported only for basalt types BAS-B and BAS-C, whereas for BAS-A hardly any
24
Chapter 3
Case Study
==PAGE:35==
data were available. Therefore, BAS-A is disregarded. However, BAS-B is the
predominant material underlying the soil deposit in a provided geotechnical
proﬁle of the surrounding area, while BAS-C is reported mainly at deeper depths
and is considered as perfect reﬂected bedrock (푉푠> 4000m/s), where motion is
eventually applied. The properties of BAS-B are simply averages of the reported
values and 푉푠is calculated according to the reported value of the initial elasticity
modulus 퐸푖= 16 GPa and Poisson’s ratio 휈= 0.165.
Table 3.2.: Soil proﬁles and natural frequencies of each layer in the soil deposits
Soil/Rock name
훾[kN/m3]
퐷푟[%]
휙[deg]
푠푢[kPa]
휈
푉푠[m/s]
GRM-B
19.33
66
37
-
0.2
255
CLA-A
16.60
-
-
45
0.2
180
CLA-B
16.30
-
-
106
0.2
225
BAS-B
24.60
-
-
-
0.165
1654
The stratigraphy is later idealized as mainly a one or two-layered soil deposit
overlying a rock material resting at a perfectly reﬂective bedrock. As the param-
eters that inﬂuence the problem are numerous, the thickness of the soil and rock
deposits are kept constant, namely 13.5 m and 12.5 m, resulting to a proﬁle of
26 m deep. Ground water table is located at soil surface to simulate saturated
conditions. In total, four soil proﬁles are considered for the parametric analyses,
summarized in Table 3.3 under the abbreviations "SP푛" where 푛is the number
of the relevant soil proﬁle. Table 3.3 contains also the calculated eigenperiods
for each layer according to Eq. (2.3).
3.1
Site conditions and soil properties
25
==PAGE:36==
Table 3.3.: Soil proﬁles and natural periods of each layer in the soil deposits
Soil proﬁle
Layer No.
Layer height
Soil type
푉푠,푖
푓푛,푖
푇푛,푖
[m]
[m/s]
[Hz]
[s]
SP1
L1
13.5
GRM-B
255
4.72
0.21
L2
12.5
BAS-B
1654
33.08
0.03
SP2
L1
13.5
CLA-A
180
3.33
0.30
L2
12.5
BAS-B
1654
33.08
0.03
SP3
L1
13.5
CLA-B
225
4.17
0.24
L2
12.5
BAS-B
1654
33.08
0.03
SP4
L1
4.5
GRM-B
255
14.17
0.07
L2
9.0
CLA-A
180
5.00
0.20
L3
12.5
BAS-B
1654
33.08
0.03
3.2
Seismic actions
The original accelerograms considered are outcome of probabilistic hazard anal-
ysis. A target spectrum is obtained for site-speciﬁc conditions as an envelope of
the spectra from the hazard analysis and the recommendations from the Indian
seismic code. The design is based on 2 levels of earthquake intensity, MCE and
DBE, corresponding to 2 diﬀerent peak ground accelerations (PGAs). A set of 4
accelerograms are artiﬁcially produced, to match the target spectrum. Although
similar, the accelerograms present slightly diﬀerent PGA values to account for
stochastic variability in the ground motion, seen in Table 3.4.
Table 3.4.: PGA values (in g) for the 4 diﬀerent site-speciﬁc accelerograms in MCE and
DBE conditions and their average
Accelerogram No.
Level
1
2
3
4
Avg
MCE
0.329
0.282
0.324
0.331
0.317
DBE
0.176
0.154
0.169
0.179
0.169
Herein, due to the similarity of the four above-mentioned accelerograms, only
the second is elected to be used in the parametric analyses, but scaled to the
average PGA from all four as seen in Table 3.4. This eartquake motion will
be thereafter referred to as site-speciﬁc (SS). A series of accelerograms of real
26
Chapter 3
Case Study
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.4.: Accelerograms and spectra of the considered earthquakes for MCE level
reported earthquakes are collected and analyzed to examine their predominant
periods and frequency range in which most of the energy is concentrated. Two
more seismic actions of similar duration are picked apart from this analysis,
namely Imperial Valley (IV) and Northridge (NR), also scaled to the same PGA
value mentioned earlier for the two design conditions, MCE and DBE, to account
for variability in the frequency content and intensity of the excitation. Only the
horizontal component of the seismic action is to be used. The accelerograms for
the horizontal component, Fourier Amplitude and acceleration (PSA) spectra are
shown in Fig. 3.4, with the latter plotted for two damping ratios. The motion is
applied as a within at the top of the perfect bedrock (at depth of 26 m) due to lack
of information for their recording conditions. Furthermore, since the soil proﬁles
are also altered for the sake of the parametric analysis and a non-linear analysis is
to be performed, a deconvolution analysis with e.g. EERA as an equivalent linear
approach would not be the most appropriate and would result to inconsistencies
either way.
3.2
Seismic actions
27
==PAGE:38==
3.3
Prototype bridge section and pile foundation
An overview of the bridge system and the pile foundation is presented in the
current. The relative assumptions for the following analyses are stated and a
summary of the main characteristics such the dimensions, mass and stiﬀness can
be found hereunder. As a common assumption, because of the relatively small
contribution of the rebars to the overall stiﬀness and mass of the system, it is
chosen to neglect them in the modelling for both the piles and the bridge. On
the contrary, what is diﬀerent, is that the modulus of elasticity is reduced in the
pile in comparison to the bridge above (퐸푝푖푙푒= 25.5 GPa, 퐸푝푖푒푟= 35.5 GPa) to
account for concrete cracking that generally develops in the pile.
3.3.1
Pile foundation
The pile foundation of the case study at the bridge section for which drawings
are available, consists of an asymmetrical pile group of 2x3 circular piles in
rectangular conﬁguration. Due to time and license limitations, the pile group
eﬀects are not part of the current study. Also, the relatively high distance between
them implies that the group eﬀects may be insigniﬁcant. Either way, it is believed
that 2D conditions do not form an appropriate approach for valuable results
of the kinematic interaction eﬀects in the piles. Therefore, the foundation is
reduced to a single pile, keeping the singular dimensions of the remaining pile
the same as the original and assigning to it a pile cap that corresponds to a single
pile by equally distributing its mass over the initially 6 piles. The pile has a length
of 19 m and a diameter of 1.5 m.
3.3.2
Bridge
The original bridge section is founded on the group of piles mentioned in the
previous segment and consists of three piers independent to each other and of
similar heights and cross section. This accommodates the assumption discussed
above, that of an equivalent singular pile-bridge system. Such idealization is
seen also in Tombari et al., 2012, even for a bridge with a pier cap connecting
the diﬀerent piers. Anyhow, the bridge section is idealized as one of a singular
pier to facilitate the parametric analyses and the results interpretation.
In summary, the bridge deck is rested on a single squared column bent (and
thereafter on a single drilled pile). Due to high rigidity of the deck, a lumped
mass at the top of the pier is used to represent the deck eﬀect of the adjacent
spans of the viaduct by assigning half mass for each of the adjacent spans on both
sides. The bridge can be idealized that it behaves the same way in both transvese
28
Chapter 3
Case Study
==PAGE:39==
Table 3.5.: Case study bridge corresponding to a single pile
Case
퐸푐
휌푐
퐻푝푖푒푟
퐴푝푖푒푟
푚푝푖푒푟
푚푐푎푝
푚푑푒푐푘
푇퐹퐵
[GPa]
[kg/m3]
[m]
[m2]
[kg]
[kg]
[kg]
[s]
BMH
35.50
2400
18.50
2.828
88 800
129 780
324 000
0.858
BML
9.25
0.304
and longitudinal direction, i.e. as a cantilever beam. This can be assumed since
there is no cap beam at the top of the pier to provide hindrance for its rotation
transversely, nor the deck is ﬁxed to the columns of the bridge to prevent rotations
due to longitudinal vibrations as POT-PTFE bearings are placed in between the
pier and the deck that allow for rotations. Also, the pier is square shaped and
thus, has the same moment bending stiﬀness in both directions. Of course, in
order for this to hold true, the mass of the superstructure should be viewed as
concentrated at the top and not as distributed longitudinally as it would be more
appropriate. However, this procedure with a simplistic SDOF idealization and
a concentrated mass in place of the deck is what is proposed by AASHTO and
Eurocode, which provides guidelines also as to how the fundamental frequency
of isolated continuous bridge systems should be calculated. The fundamental
period of the ﬁxed base structure can be calculated as a SDOF system, i.e.:
푇= 2휋
r푚푡표푡
푘푠푢푏
(3.3)
where 푘푠푢푏= (3퐸퐼/퐻3)푝푖푒푟is the stiﬀness of the substructure (pier only in this
case) and 푚푡표푡is the total mass at top, herein taken as the complete mass of the
deck plus a fraction of 50% of pier’s mass. The mass and stiﬀness of the original
structure are used to calculate the natural period of the structure and thereafter,
the mass corresponding to the one pile is used to derive an equivalent square
cross-section for the pier, the stiﬀness of which results to the same natural period
of the original structure, while keeping the height of the pier constant. The
equivalent properties are shown in Table 3.5, in which two cases are reported:
one of a pier height same to that of the original bridge section and one of a
lower pier alternative, i.e. BMH and BML. As the altering of the height results to
diﬀerent stiﬀness, a 50% reduction of the height for the case of BML is selected
in a way such that the corresponding natural period of the stiﬀer structure is
located at a more unfavorable position in the acceleration spectrum to account
for the inﬂuence of the bridge dynamic properties in the direct SPSI analyses.
3.3
Prototype bridge section and pile foundation
29
==PAGE:40==
==PAGE:41==
4
Numerical Modelling
This chapter describes the process of the numerical modelling and encloses
some important validation steps. The numerical modelling of the case study is
done both in Plaxis2D and 3D in a similar fashion using mostly an automated
procedure and exploiting the advantages of the interaction with software through
scripting in Python. This resulted to an easy manipulation of the parameters and
eﬀortless data extraction for further post-processing. In order to ensure that the
models work properly and that they are optimized in terms of a combination of
calculation time and accuracy, or to investigate any limitations, some preliminary
studies have been made. These are separated in three main parts: the free-ﬁeld
response of the soil, the response of the pile and thereafter the modelling of
the superstructure and the soil-pile-bridge system on its totality, preceded by
a section mainly summarizing the parameters for modelling the soil behaviour
according to Hardening Soil small material model.
4.1
Soil modelling
In order to use the HSsmall some necessary assumptions needed to be made
in absence of speciﬁc laboratory tests. The reasoning of these assumptions
underlying the ﬁnal used parameters are based solely on typical ranges and
values often observed in practice. For reference about the mentioned parameters
hereunder, Brinkgreve et al., 2020 should be looked upon. Further elaboration
would be unnecessary as their derivation is not based on tests and are not of
primary importance for the current.
First of all, for the sandy proﬁle (GRM-B) a drained behaviour is incorporated
in the analyses, assuming that pore water can drain out of the soil matrix since
a considerable amount of gravel is also present (see Table 3.1) and it is not a
loose deposit. For clay undrained conditions are necessary as the permeability
of the material does not permit the escape of water usually not even for static
conditions. It should be stated that Plaxis recommends the use of Undrained A in
general. Undrained B has the disadvantage that stiﬀness is no longer dependent
with stress (constant with depth). However, it better captures the soil strength
and ensures the correct shear strength path to be followed since the undrained
shear strength is a direct input parameter, whereas for Undrained A an equivalent
31
==PAGE:42==
strength should be achieved through the eﬀective parameters, cohesion and
friction angle. Since the undrained shear strength is derived from the SPT
interpretation and it is readily available, Undrained B is elected to be used and
any erroneous results are investigated later in the current chapter. An alternative
for incorporating also the stress dependency of stiﬀness could be to perform tests
in SoilTest module of Plaxis in order to ﬁnd the corresponding stiﬀness values for
diﬀerent conﬁning stresses and then model multiple layers with depth-increasing
stiﬀness according to the test values. This is out of scope of the thesis, though.
Note that since the stress-dependency is lost with the use of Undrained B material
behaviour, the value for the power law 푚is not of importance as it essentially
describes the dependency of stiﬀness on the conﬁning stress. A proper value
though would be 푚= 0.5 and 푚= 1 for overconsolidated clays (OCR>1) and
normally consolidated clays, respectively, while for sandy soils with ﬁnes like the
herein, 푚= 0.6 is a reasonable value. CLA-B soil is assigned a value of OCR of 3
based on indications from the expressions of Mayne and Kemper, 1988 and its
plasticity index. This is not so important directly to the problem at hand, albeit,
it results to diﬀerent 훾푟푒푓
0.7 values that eventually inﬂuence the stiﬀness reduction
in HSs and thus the pile response. The reference strain is calculated according
to the relevant formulas seen in Chapter 2 and the stiﬀness reduction curves are
illustrated in Figs. 4.1 to 4.3. In the same, the Plaxis curves for both 퐺푠푒푐and
퐺푡푎푛are illustrated to showcase the ﬁtting to the curves reported in literature.
Figure 4.1.: Stiﬀness reduction curves for GRM-B soil
32
Chapter 4
Numerical Modelling
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.2.: Stiﬀness reduction curves for CLA-A soil
Figure 4.3.: Stiﬀness reduction curves for CLA-B soil
Damping curves are omitted due to sake of brevity and since they are not explicitly
calibrated as they are solely linked to the input of 훾푟푒푓
0.7 and = 퐺푟푒푓
0 . Indicatively,
and since it will be referred in the following validation steps, the damping curve
of only the CLA-B soil in Fig. 4.3.
4.1
Soil modelling
33
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.4.: Damping curve for CLA-B soil (after Plaxis)
The stiﬀness parameters are derived on the basis of the characteristic shear wave
velocity as it is the most important aspect that governs the soil-pile interaction
problem. Therefore, after calculating 퐺[
0푟푒푓] (= 휌푉2
푠) and subsequently 퐸푟푒푓
0
(= 퐺푟푒푓
0 /(2(1+휈))), some typical empirical ratios correlating the diﬀerent stiﬀness
values required as input in HSs are necessarily employed.
As it pertains the sandy soil, the ratio 퐸0/퐸푢푟is in betweeen 2-4 with 2-3 referring
to loose sands and 3-4 to dense sands. A ratio of 3 is adopted as GRM-B is a
medium stiﬀmaterial. Thereafter, 퐸푢푟/퐸50 = 4 for a normally consolidated sand
to lie in the mean of the reported range of 2-6 where 3-6 is for loose sands and 2-4
for dense sands (Plaxis default is 3). 퐸푟
표푒푑푒푓is simply set equal to 퐸푟
50푒푓, which is
the main practice in absence of speciﬁc tests. Brinkgreve et al., 2010 have derived
some empirical formulas to extract the model parameters of HSs for cohesionless
soils according to the relative density of sand, 퐷푟, which is a known quantity
from the SPT interpretation. However, these formulas are based on the default
reference stress 푝푟푒푓= 100 kPa and this resulted to a considerable diﬀerent
estimation of 퐺푟푒푓
0 , while such empirical set of expressions are not available for
clay. In order to be consistent throughout, this approach is eventually dismissed
and the ratios mentioned above are used. In addition to the stiﬀness values
and the rest of the parameters that are met for undrained conditions, dilatancy
angle (휓) should also be provided for drained drainage type. Provided that
friction angle (휙) is larger than 30◦, dilatancy can be reasonably approximated
34
Chapter 4
Numerical Modelling
==PAGE:45==
as 휓= 휙−30◦. Therefore, 휓= 7◦, whereas a small value of cohesion is used as
input to account for the high amount of ﬁnes content in the soil mixture.
For the clay soils, Brinkgreve et al., 2007 mentions a range of 2.5-10 for 퐸0/퐸푢푟,
with 2.5 corresponding to harder and 10 to softer soils. These are generic bounds,
though. More speciﬁcally, ratios for clays of 4-8 are mostly reported. To account
for the diﬀerence in stiﬀness of CLA-A and CLA-B ratios of 5 and 4 are assigned,
respectively. The ratio for 퐸푢푟/퐸50 ranges between 5-8 for normally consolidated
clay and for over-consolidated clay the value of 4 provides a decent estimation.
According to this, 퐸푟푒푓
50 = 6퐸푟푒푓
푢푟for CLA-A and 퐸푟푒푓
50 = 4퐸푟푒푓
푢푟for CLA-B. Again,
퐸푟
표푒푑푒푓= 퐸푟
50푒푓is further adopted.
Unlike 푅푓which is not altered, the parameter 푝푟푒푓is chosen to not be kept at its
default value (=100 kPa), but to use in its place the horizontal stresses reported
at an average depth between the depths where the two SPT tests were performed
and according to which the characteristic soil properties were derived. This is
done as an attempt to represent as much as possible the site conditions. For
GRM-B, though, 푝푟푒푓parameter is tweaked slightly (21 kPa instead of 32.5 kPa)
in order to obtain a value of mean average shear wave velocity along the depth
that is the same as the characteristic value of the determined 푉푠from the SPT
correlations in Chapter 3. Otherwise, a less stiﬀproﬁle is obtained, with an
average shear wave velocity of about the same value as the one reported for
CLA-B. The idea of having the same shear wave velocity at the depth were the
SPTs were performed is dropped, since this would lead to a very stiﬀlayer, for
which SSI is not so relevant. The variation of the shear wave velocity with depth
in the GRM-B soil deposit is shown in Fig. 4.5.
Figure 4.5.: Shear wave velocity proﬁle for GRM-B soil (stress dependent)
4.1
Soil modelling
35
==PAGE:46==
Of course, the abovementioned assumptions and procedure to acquire reasonable
soil properties based on limited soil data and lack of speciﬁc tests cannot replace
a more sophisticated analysis of designated experimental techniques. Albeit, the
quantities are compared with a numerous publications and extended data to
avoid erroneous modelling. Such inspiration can be found in Benz, 2007, Obrzud
and Truty, 2012, etc.
Lastly, due to the issue reported in Chapter 2 regarding the behaviour of the
hysteretic damping in lower strain, the inclusion of a small Rayleigh damping
ratio is considered. Typically this is taken between 0.5% and 2%. Herein, a
value of 1% is modelled with target frequency values equal to the bounds of
the concentrated energy of each earthquake motion as seen from the Fourier
Amplitude spectra in Fig. 3.4. This approach was preferred over the proposed by
Hudson et al., 1994 due to the high fundamental frequencies of the soil media
that would have to be set as ﬁrst target value, omitting consequently a major part
of energy content for the seismic intensity prior to these frequencies. The relative
parameters 푎푅and 훽푅for modelling the Rayleigh damping are calculated for
each case from Eq. (2.19). The ranges where the predominant energy content of
the earthquake excitations are taken as: [1, 7], [1, 11] and [1, 13] for IV, NR
and SS accelerograms, accordingly.
An overview of the input parameters for the HSs is available in Table 4.1, while
for the basalt layer a linear elastic behaviour is suﬃcient due to its high stiﬀness.
Input parameters for the latter can be seen in Table 3.2.
36
Chapter 4
Numerical Modelling
==PAGE:47==
Table 4.1.: Input parameters for HSs for the diﬀerent soils considered in the parametric
analyses
GRM-B
CLA-A
CLA-B
Material model
HSsmall
HSsmall
HSsmall
Drainage type
Drained
Undrained B
Undrained B
훾푠푎푡
19.33
16.60
16.30
kN/m3
퐸푟푒푓
50
25.63
4.39
12.62
MPa
퐸푟푒푓
표푒푑
25.63
2.19
12.62
MPa
퐸푟푒푓
푢푟
102.50
26.32
50.47
MPa
푚
0.6
0.9
0.5
-
푐푟푒푓
2.5
45
106
kPa
휙
37
0
0
°
휓
7
0
0
°
훾푟푒푓
0.7
9.09E-05
2.95E-04
4.36E-04
-
퐺푟푒푓
0
128.13
54.83
84.12
MPa
퐸푟푒푓
0
307.51
131.58
201.88
MPa
퐺푟푒푓
푢푟
42.71
10.97
21.03
MPa
푣푢푟
0.2
0.2
0.2
-
푝푟푒푓
21
90.5
74
kPa
푅푓
0.9
0.9
0.9
-
4.2
Site response analysis
The understanding of Plaxis limitations and performance in conducting site
response analysis is ﬁrst looked upon. This part is used for validation of the
model in terms of its dynamic behaviour and in order to examine the implications
of the incorporated boundary conditions and the achieved accuracy of the solution
according to element sizes and time discretization.
4.2.1
Plaxis 2D
A linear soil 20 m deep and a sinusoidal input motion is initially assumed before
introducing any non-linearities and seismic input signals. This way, the inﬂuence
of the boundaries can be studied by comparing the response of the soil with
4.2
Site response analysis
37
==PAGE:48==
the closed form solutions presented in Chapter 2. The characteristics of the soil
layer utilized for this study are presented in Table 4.2. The imposed motion is
modelled as a line prescribed displacement at the base boundary with horizontal
sinusoidal component only, representing vertically propagating S-waves. The
sinusoidal motion is chosen to be of acceleration type with amplitude of 1 m/s2
and frequency of 1.882 Hz, which is the calculated eigenfrequency of the soil
layer according to Eq. (2.3). This way, the ampliﬁcation at ground surface under
resonance conditions should match the one computed from the transfer function
(see Eq. (2.1)). The model width is varying to explore the disturbances caused
by the vertical boundaries. Other parameters such is the time-step are also
looked upon, to ensure that the condition of suﬃciently small time increments
for accuracy improvement holds true.
Table 4.2.: Properties of linear soil used for validation of the numerical model
Soil model
훾
퐸
휈
푉푠
휉
푓0
AF( 푓0)
[kN/m3]
[kN/m2]
[-]
[m/s]
[-]
[Hz]
[-]
Linear
15.45
100 · 103
0.40
150.59
0.05
1.882
12.732
As a starting point, a soil column of 1 m width is used, imposing tied degrees
of freedom and ﬁxed boundary conditions for the sides and base, respectively.
This way a 1-D site response analysis of a soil column over rigid bedrock is
performed, by conveniently tying the nodes at the sides so that they have the
same response in horizontal direction and eliminating any vertical component at
the same time.
A suﬃcient amount of cycles is needed for the soil to reach its steady-state
response which is dependent also on the damping selected. The not so unrealistic
5% damping is conveniently assumed in order to reduce the time for reaching
convergence as it is expected that steady state response is reached faster for
higher damping ratios. It is found that an almost perfect convergence with
error below 0.5% is achieved at around 20-25 cycles. Although a very coarse
mesh (resulting to element sizes of around 1.5 m) is suﬃcient according to
Eq. (2.5), diﬀerent mesh sizes are applied with the time step determination
option set to either Automatic and Semi-automatic and the required steps used
by Plaxis solver are observed in order to examine the applicability of Eq. (2.6).
The condition of Eq. (2.6) is veriﬁed that it is always respected and the Semi-
automatic method of time discretization is preferred to be used. In order to
38
Chapter 4
Numerical Modelling
==PAGE:49==
reduce post-processing times, the Automatic method results by default to very
few maxsteps (and consequently data points) by increasing accordingly the
substeps, making it inadequate to properly represent a time-history. Manual
method requires the time step to be manually calculated per case, while also
knowing the minimum element size (which is not easy to ﬁnd in more complex
meshes) and is therefore rejected. Although, a sensitivity study showed that
when accuracy is not a priority it can be sometimes useful even when Eq. (2.6)
is not respected and it was from time to time employed for quick observations.
With the Semi-automatic method, only the number of maxsteps is an input and
it is determined based on the desired amount of data points that can provide
a smooth time-history curve, while the critical time step is automatically taken
care of.
Once the amount of cycles and the time step determination method are decided
and the accuracy of Plaxis solver is checked, the soil domain is modelled as
a wide homogeneous layer and free-ﬁeld boundaries are incorporated at the
sides. This is done because the tied degrees of freedom can no longer be used
when a structure is introduced as 2-D wave propagation occurs in such case.
The performance of the Plaxis free-ﬁeld boundaries is evaluated by varying the
model width and once again checking the convergence with the transfer function
as well as the results from the column model employed previously in terms of
shear stresses. Although free ﬁeld boundaries are used to absorb waves reaching
the boundaries of the model to simulate free-ﬁeld conditions, there is still an
aﬀected neighbouring zone. The distance where the eﬀects are signiﬁcant are
herein investigated. Fig. 4.6 shows the error between the obtained PGA along
the width of the model in comparison to the analytical solution. It is evident that
for smaller model sizes the error ampliﬁes and boundaries introduce noise due
to wave reﬂection that becomes signiﬁcant when the location of interest is not
far enough. The detected sag fades away for widths larger than 200 m, where a
concave emerges, and almost perfect convergence is achieved for width of 500 m.
This translates to the dimensionless ratio of 푊/퐻= 25, which was also veriﬁed
with two other cases for heights of 10 and 15 m.
4.2
Site response analysis
39
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.6.: Inﬂuence of free-ﬁeld boundaries on peak surface acceleration for diﬀerent
model widths
What is notable to mention is that it is easier to eliminate the sag mentioned
above when an interface is introduced at the bottom of the model, even if it
remains inactive in the calculation phases. Fig. 4.7 demonstrates the quicker
development of the concave behaviour, which is now apparent already from the
case of a model with ratio 푊/퐻= 10, resulting to an error below 5% at the
middle of the model. Owing to the fact that a large set of parametric analyses
40
Chapter 4
Numerical Modelling
==PAGE:51==
will follow, particular attention is paid to this model which shows potential for
satisfactory accuracy in beneﬁt of computation times.
Figure 4.7.: Bottom interface eﬀect to peak surface acceleration proﬁle (푊/퐻= 10)
The performance of the boundaries is also checked for the next two eigenfre-
quencies and the proﬁle of the peak surface accelerations is found to be more
sensitive to the higher frequency bands. Although, Fig. 4.8 the proﬁle is not
completely stable, PGA errors generally lie within acceptable limits.
Acceptable error
Figure 4.8.: PGA error for the ﬁrst 3 soil eigenfrequencies (푊/퐻= 10)
The above results regarding the boundary disturbances hold true also in case of a
modelled compliant base. The results can be checked in the same manner, making
sure to derive ratios of the surface motion with the altered base motion looking
at a node inside the model in Plaxis. As mentioned in Chapter 2, compliant base
is modelled with the aid of dampers for absorbing downward propagating waves
and inevitably a modiﬁcation of the prescribed motion takes place due to the
movement of the dashpots. Furthermore, Plaxis expects as input both upward
and downward propagating waves (so called within motion) when modelling
a reﬂective boundary and in a similar manner only the upward propagating
waves for the compliant base. However, since the input is not an earthquake
4.2
Site response analysis
41
==PAGE:52==
signal, the true prescribed motion is not really important. What is of interest is
the ampliﬁcation of the base motion for a node inside the model in comparison
to the surface and according to the principle of the ampliﬁcation ratio, the
referred motion should be the total one. Extracting the motion from Plaxis
gives for both cases the total response (upward and downward components).
Therefore, as long as the motion at the correct nodes is extracted, only the ratio
is of importance. Then their ratio can be compared i.e. with EERA when the
same setup is introduced and as long as the two approaches are consistent. For
instance, if the motion is prescribed in Plaxis in the same manner as in the
ﬁxed base for the previous analyses, meaning as a within motion, the same
input motion should be prescribed as inside in EERA at top of the “bedrock"
layer. Although, the latter layer has the same properties as the overlying one to
represent the halfspace. In such case, the same ampliﬁcation is obtained with
Eq. (2.1), despite the latter was presented for a rigid bedrock. This is illustrated
in Fig. 4.9.
Figure 4.9.: EERA halfspace(inside motion) vs transfer function of Eq. (2.1) for rigid
bedrock
After the validation for a harmonic excitation, the free-ﬁeld response of Plaxis
in case of earthquake signal is compared with EERA. At ﬁrst stage, a linear
soil is utilized in order to make sure that the proper input is also given in the
EERA spreadsheet in conjuction with the previous discussion for the compliant
base and for checking the agreement of the solutions for a simple case. Both
Within and Outcrop options for applying the acceleration signal are compared to
ensure proper application of the prescribed motion. Thereafter, soil non-linearity
is introduced and the behaviour of HSsmall soil model and the Undrained B
drainage type of Plaxis is checked in comparison to equivalent linear site response
analysis. Soil CLA-B and the site-speciﬁc accelerogram no. 4 are used for both
linear and non-linear analyses. For the linear case, no water content is present
42
Chapter 4
Numerical Modelling
==PAGE:53==
and no stiﬀness reduction and damping curves are used in EERA. For the sake of
consistency, for the non-linear case the mentioned curves are the ones directly
extracted from Plaxis according to the parameters set for the HSsmall model
(see Figs. 4.3 and 4.4). The Plaxis model used for the comparisons is a soil
column of 1 m width and 20 m height with tied degrees of freedom and ﬁxed
base boundaries.
Plaxis results for the linear soil match almost perfectly the results obtained
from EERA but with the motion prescribed as within. Fig. 4.10 demonstrates
the agreement of the two solutions in terms of shear and acceleration proﬁles
over the entire depth, as well as of spectra. Prescribing the motion as outcrop
leads to deviations when compared to a model with ﬁxed base in Plaxis. This
option however is seen to correspond to a Plaxis case with a compliant base
(for representing a halfspace), where half the motion is purposely ﬁltered out to
account only for the upward propagating waves as input motion. These results
are not included here for the sake of brevity.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.10.: Plaxis comparison with EERA (linear soil)
4.2
Site response analysis
43
==PAGE:54==
With respect to the non-linear case, the results are presented in terms of spectra
in Fig. 4.11. No signiﬁcant divergence is noticed between the two procedures
that could indicate an inappropriate behaviour of the Undrained B drainage type
of Plaxis. EERA displays a higher peak spectral acceleration and estimates larger
PGA value but Plaxis spectra are in accord, presenting almost the same peaks
and overall follow the same trajectory. The displacement spectra are in better
agreement and only show a drift between them at higher periods, which was
apparent even in the linear case.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.11.: Plaxis comparison with EERA (non-linear soil)
4.2.2
Plaxis 3D
Free-ﬁeld analyses are conducted in the same manner also in Plaxis 3D, to
examine any diﬀerences in comparison to the 2D solver. Fig. 4.12 displays the
results for two diﬀerent boundary conditions: reﬂective(none) and free-ﬁeld
푌푚푖푛−푌푚푎푥boundaries, as the former are seen to have been used in the past
in other studies. The boundaries at the other vertical sides and horizontally,
are the same as in Plaxis 2D. The model has an out of plane depth of 1 m, and
comparable mesh to simulate the same conditions as in Plaxis 2D plane strain.
In comparison to 2D, the 3D response is slightly smaller by a roughly constant
factor with the free-ﬁeld boundary elements, while the out of plane reﬂective
boundaries perform in a worse manner and are therefore declined. Decreasing
the model width does not eﬀect this deviation any further. Fig. 4.13 shows an
underestimation of the response by the same factor but overall the behaviour is
similar and the results lie within acceptable accuracy limits.
44
Chapter 4
Numerical Modelling
==PAGE:55==
Analytical solution = 12.732
Figure 4.12.: Comparison of site response analysis between Plaxis 2D and 3D
(푊/퐻= 25)
Analytical solution = 12.732
Figure 4.13.: Comparison of site response analysis between Plaxis 2D and 3D
(푊/퐻= 10)
4.2.3
Case study: Site response analyses
After these necessary preliminary studies, the site response analyses for the cases
showcased in Chapter 3 are conducted. For better and faster results, the site
response analyses are performed separately from the models with the pile and
only in Plaxis 2D. The familiar concept with a soil column of 1 m width with tied
degrees of freedom is adopted. This way the disturbances from the boundaries
and the reﬂected waves due to the presence of the pile are non existent. The
domain is modelled including the rock stratum, essentially including an elastic
rock (see Kramer et al., 1996), a decision motivated by the desire to obtain the
complete bending moment and shear force diagrams for the pile later on, not
losing any information inside the rock layer. At the base of the model, a ﬁxed
base boundary is used, simulating perfect bedrock conditions. The accelerograms
provided also in Chapter 3 are directly used as input motion without performing
a deconvolution analysis as the signals were already picked apart according to
their frequency content etc. for sake of the parametric analyses. Indicatively, the
4.2
Site response analysis
45
==PAGE:56==
structured mesh generation for the soil proﬁles SP1 and SP2 is shown below in
Fig. 4.14. Note the smaller element sizes at the top of SP1 in comparison to SP2.
Owed to the assumed Drained conditions for GRM-B soil material, the reduction
of shear wave velocity close to the ground surface (stiﬀness dependency with
depth/stress in HSs, not exhibited in Undrained B used for CLA-A in SP2), leads
to a smaller minimum element size (see also Eq. (2.5)).
Figure 4.14.: Mesh generation for 1D site response analysis(left: SP1, right: SP2)
4.3
Kinematic response
This section describes the process of modelling the pile behaviour in an equivalent
manner in Plaxis 2D plane strain and in Plaxis 3D with two diﬀerent concepts,
one of a superimposed beam element and one with a volume pile.
4.3.1
Plaxis 2D
Pile behaviour is in reality a pure 3D phenomenon and the plane strain conditions
of Plaxis 2D most certainly have limitations. Attempts have been made to model
piles in Plaxis 2D using either the recently developed concept of embedded beam
row, plate elements or node-to-node anchors. The ﬁrst incorporates interfaces
46
Chapter 4
Numerical Modelling
==PAGE:57==
which are herein chosen to be avoided, while the latter are entirely incapable
of capturing the interaction of the structural element with the soil in the lateral
direction, limiting their applicability to axially loaded piles. Therefore, a plate is
the only reasonable alternative, even though it is realized that not all possible
engineering aspects can be accurately represented. A plate in the plane strain
model of Plaxis 2D implies that neither soil ﬂow is allowed around the pile, nor the
stresses around its circumference are properly distributed. Owing to the fact that
the lateral bending stiﬀness is mostly what is of interest, an equivalent plate could
be idealized in order to represent the stiﬀness of the original pile, resembling
the traditional 2D analytical methods in literature. While interfaces have been
used before to better capture soil-structure interaction, their performance in
dynamic applications is questionable as their optimization and validation has
been made for mainly static problems. Their application adds to the uncertainty
of the approach in hand, and thus, are omitted from the analyses. An added
beneﬁt of this decision is that analytical solutions from literature can be directly
checked under the same assumption, i.e. no separation, slippage and gap closure.
Recently, as mentioned in ??, attempts have been made for taking such non-
linearities into account, but most solutions have been derived on the basis of
ignoring such aspects, which are rather complicated phenomena on their own.
Besides, i.e. Tombari et al., 2017 showed that for earthquakes with short duration
the formation of gapping does not signiﬁcantly aﬀect the pile behaviour, so its
inﬂuence can in fact for most cases be ignored.
To model the plate, the bending stiﬀness of the original pile is ﬁrst calculated.
Keeping the same modulus of elasticity, the inertia of the pile and the plate are
equated and due to the plane strain conditions that assume an expansion out of
plane of 1 m, the only unknown that is left to be determined is the thickness of
the equivalent plate. Thereafter the axial stiﬀness can be directly calculated as
well.
The validation of the plate is based on the kinematic response factors obtained
from the analyses and using the graphs from Fan et al., 1991 and Anoyatis et al.,
2013 as a comparison. The ﬁrst concerns a pile embedded in a halfspace with free-
head and free-tip conditions, while the latter are used to simulate the presence of
a bedrock with a ﬁxed-tip and free-head setup. For the study, the linear soil with
the properties seen in Table 4.2 is adopted, keeping the height of the model at
20 m. Owing to consistency with Fan et al., 1991 the pile properties conform to
the ratios 퐸푝/퐸푠= 1000 and 10000, 퐿/푑= 20 and 휌푠/휌푝= 0.70. The free-ﬁeld
motion necessary to obtain the kinematic response factors is performed ﬁrst for
4.3
Kinematic response
47
==PAGE:58==
diﬀerent widths and checked as discussed in the previous section. Generally,
for free-ﬁeld analyses with a compliant base the error for the ampliﬁcation
ratio is found to be less than 4%. Fig. 4.15 summarizes a series of analyses
for two diﬀerent width models and for multiple dimensionless frequencies 푎0,
showing that no further improvement is achieved with a wider model and when
minimizing the boundary disturbances even further. Therefore the selection of
the width of the model is suﬃcient in that regard. The obtained points present
a very good agreement for lower frequencies, while show underestimation and
overestimation of the pile head response for intermediate and higher frequencies,
respectively. Signiﬁcant divergence starts to occur for the case of 퐸푝/퐸푠= 10000
for a dimensionless frequency of 푎0 = 0.20, which however translates to a
frequency that is really close to the third eigenfrequency of the soil deposit. Most
importantly, it should be marked that the results are in better agreement with
the solutions of Fan et al., 1991 for the smaller pile-soil stiﬀness ratio.
Figure 4.15.: Comparison of 2D plate with Fan et al., 1991 kinematic response factors
48
Chapter 4
Numerical Modelling
==PAGE:59==
Due to the inconsistency of the results to clearly follow the corresponding slen-
derness ratio 퐿/푑, a sensitivity analysis is done to examine the limitations and
limits of application. For this reason, some cases with a slenderness ratio (퐿/푑)
of 10 and 40, additionally to the 20 seen already, are looked upon. Moreover,
keeping the slenderness ratio constant, diﬀerent plate lengths are investigated.
The study is performed for 푎0 = 0.20 and is illustrated in Fig. 4.16. It is clearly
evident that for a slenderness ratio as high as 40, the behaviour response is
largely underestimated while for the smaller ratio of 10 the opposite holds true.
Even though no solution is available for the latter case in Fan et al., 1991, it is
highly unlike that such ampliﬁcation occurs when looking at the derived curves
for the case of 20 and 40. It can also be noted that the response is not only
dependent on the dimensionless slenderness ratio but it seems to be aﬀected
by the change in the absolute dimensions, while it seems to stabilize for larger
plate lengths. The sensitivity to the dimensions might imply an analogical mesh
reﬁnement around the pile, but this is not a computationally viable solution.
Fan (1991)
Fan (1991)
Fan (1991)
Fan (1991)
Figure 4.16.: Sensitivity analysis for the performance of plate with various slenderness
ratios 퐿/푑and for diﬀerent lengths (푎0 = 0.20)
4.3
Kinematic response
49
==PAGE:60==
From the graphs discussed above, an indication of a fairly good performance
under some limited circumstances is issued. Better results is believed that can be
achieved for cases with 10 < 퐿/푑< 20 for lengths often seen in practical applica-
tions and with lower pile to soil stiﬀness ratios, excited by lower dimensionless
frequency ranges. For the case study later on, 퐸푝/퐸푠< 1000 and 퐿/푑= 9 are
reported. At this point, it should be emphasized that the results of this study
concern harmonic motions, which produce a vastly diﬀerent response and have
a more profound eﬀect than the transient motions induced by earthquakes.
Fan et al., 1991 approach is based on FE, essentially capturing 3D phenomena
and is therefore often used as a comparison tool for developed methods. Since
the method concerns ﬂoating piles, a further validation is employed here to
examine the dynamic behaviour of end-bearing piles. Rigorous solutions have
been developed for the kinematic response factors in Anoyatis et al., 2013 for
diﬀerent boundary conditions. Herein the case of a ﬁxed-tip/free-head pile is
employed with the convenience of graphs once again for visualization purposes.
A ﬁxed base boundary is used to model the presence of a bedrock, while an
additional rotational constraint is used at the tip of the plate. The plate is equal
to the height of the model (퐿= 퐻= 20 m) and 퐿/푑= 20, 퐸푝/퐸푠= 1000 is
assumed. These parameters yield a mechanical slenderness of 퐿= 5.59. Results
are reported in Fig. 4.17 where the transfer function is included to mark the
studied excitation frequencies.
50
Chapter 4
Numerical Modelling
==PAGE:61==
Figure 4.17.: Comparison of kinematic response factors between Plaxis 2D and Anoyatis
et al., 2013 for ﬁxed-tip/free-head BCs
At ﬁrst glance Fig. 4.17 shows an irregular scatter but on closer inspection a
pattern where local minimum occur at the soil eigenfrequencies is observed,
illustrating the inability of pile head to follow the motion induced by the soil, as
the kinematic response factors are highly underestimated at these frequencies.
A dot grey line illustrates the trend of the points to showcase the development of
minima which deviate more with increasing frequencies. Points that are situated
at the cavities of the transfer function are generally seen to follow better the solid
line (휆퐿> 5). The deviations are predominantly apparent for the translational
kinematic response factor, while the rotational presents a better agreement. It is
believed that such behaviour occurs due to the inability of the soil to ﬂow around
the structural element, which alters signiﬁcantly the induced harmonic motion
and therefore the deformation pattern of the plate.
4.3
Kinematic response
51
==PAGE:62==
4.3.2
Plaxis 3D
The modelling of the single pile in Plaxis 3D is done mainly with two approaches.
One refers to the use of a simple beam element with the dimensions and the
shape of the pile, and the other to a volume pile. Beams in Plaxis are actually
semi-1D elements based on Mindlin’s theory and they do not occupy any space
in the 3D model, as they are created as a line, but share the same nodes with
the surrounding soil. Again, the embedded beam element is rejected owing
to the same reasons discussed for the embedded beam row in Plaxis 2D. The
interfaces are avoided in an attempt to better relate to some of the solutions in
literature that do not allow for soil-pile separation. Furthermore, the ability of
the element to capture forces due to skin interaction are not of importance as
the nature of the loading is not static (for which the special integrated interface
is optimized for) and the focus is on the lateral response. Furthermore, the
advantage of the embedded beam that can cross the solid elements with any
arbitrary orientation is not relevant herein as the pile is vertical and a quality
mesh can be generated without diﬃculties, unlike i.e. for inclined piles. Volume
piles are generally used as they have the advantage of modelling more accurately
the stress ﬁeld around the pile but their accordance with the beam theory is
not exact as they are composed of solid elements and their resulting stiﬀness
is eventually somewhat diﬀerent. In the current, the adopted approach for the
volume pile tries to take advantage of the 3D phenomena that develop in the
circumference of the pile without losing signiﬁcant information for the internal
forces of the pile and by incorporating a concept of a soft beam element that
can be used to conveniently extract the force distribution more accurately, even
at sections where singularities arise and volume elements have diﬃculties to
cope with. More about the modelling and explanations on this, along with
the validation of the concept are included in Chapter C. However, it should be
mentioned that the volume pile concept was added to the study at a later stage,
as initially the beam was selected for the reasons described above and in order
to accommodate the parametric analyses with a smaller amount of elements.
Questions as to if the simple beam could actually capture the forces accurately
enough led to the inclusion of the volume pile in the study afterwards, since at
ﬁrst the validation was done only according to the kinematic response factors.
This validation study follows hereunder.
The validation for both approaches takes place with reference to the same graphs
presented for the case of Plaxis 2D. The pile is initially situated at the middle of
the model. For the 3D case, the extra dimension introduced should be determined,
52
Chapter 4
Numerical Modelling
==PAGE:63==
i.e. the out-of-plane depth of the model and the sensitivity both to this depth and
the width of the model is examined at ﬁrst. The sensitivity analysis is depicted in
Fig. 4.18 for the beam element. With the indication from the induced errors in
the site-response analysis and for being consistent with the 2D model, a width of
200 m is tried at ﬁrst with the same pile and soil properties starting with a depth
of 3 m (corresponding to 6푑). Thereafter, the model width is increased and the
kinematic response factors are compared to the value from Fan et al., 1991. The
same is repeated for an out-of-plane depth of 5 m (10푑). This sensitivity analysis
is performed for a dimensionless frequency 푎0 = 0.30 which was one of the
frequencies which was seen to diverge from the actual solution for the case of 2D
and the improvement is clear (29% for 2D as opposed to 17% even for the worst
setup in 3D). Fig. 4.18 shows the stronger dependency of the results to the third
dimension, since even the case with the smaller width for the larger depth gives
substantially better results than the wider model for smaller depth, while an
increase of the width for the former does not show a signiﬁcant improvement.
Fan et al. (1991)
Figure 4.18.: Sensitivity analysis for width and out-of-plane depth dimensions of Plaxis
3D model w.r.t. Fan et al., 1991 (푎0 = 0.30)
The previous sensitivity analysis indicated the strong dependency of the response
to the out-of-plane depth and therefore a convergence analysis is performed
to examine the relation between them. A diﬀerent dimensionless frequency is
looked upon (푎0 = 0.25) as an attempt to minimize the analyses in Plaxis 3D
and to examine whether the tendency observed for 푎0 = 0.30 can be generalized
for other frequencies. The model width is kept constant (W = 200) as it is seen
to not dramatically aﬀect the accuracy and for consistency with Plaxis 2D. The
4.3
Kinematic response
53
==PAGE:64==
convergence analysis is illustrated in Fig. 4.19, showing that for an out-of-plane
depth of 10푑the solution is no longer highly sensitive to the third dimension.
Fan et al. (1991)
Figure 4.19.: Convergence analysis for out-of-plane depth dimensions of Plaxis 3D model
w.r.t. Fan et al., 1991 (푎0 = 0.25)
Once the width and depth are determined some additional analyses are made
to capture a broader spectrum of frequencies and check the performance of the
beam. In the same sense as illustrated for Plaxis 2D in Fig. 4.15, the results
are reported for the beam case in Fig. 4.20. One should keep in mind that the
derivation of the kinematic response factor associated with the rotation of the
pile head 퐼휙is approximate, based on the displacements of the two topmost
nodes of the beam as no direct way could be found to extract the rotations for the
element as was done for the plate. Overall, the results present a close agreement
with the graphs. Unfortunately, other slenderness ratios 퐿/푑could not be tried
due to time limitations. Instead, the focus is decided to be situated towards the
graphs of Anoyatis et al., 2013 for which 2D plane strain conditions presented
erroneous results.
54
Chapter 4
Numerical Modelling
==PAGE:65==
Figure 4.20.: Comparison of kinematic response factors between Plaxis 3D and Fan
et al., 1991 for ﬁxed-tip/free-head BCs
4.3
Kinematic response
55
==PAGE:66==
The results for the comparison with Anoyatis et al., 2013 are displayed in Fig. 4.21.
Points representing excitation under the eigenfrequencies of the soil are reported
with diamond markers and the rest with squares. Both beam and volume pile
results are reported in the current distinguished by diﬀerent color. Again, the
focus should be mainly on the translational kinematic response factor 퐼푢, which
indeed is captured much better in the 3D domain. An underestimation can be
reported in comparison to the analytical solution, but due to the diﬀerences in
the nature of the method and the sensitivity of FE analyses to the mesh and other
factors, a non-absolute match should be anticipated. It is believed that with a
more reﬁned meshing etc., the results can be slightly improved but that would
require signiﬁcantly more time consuming analyses. In comparison to the simple
beam, Fig. 4.21 indicates a slightly diﬀerent behaviour of the volume pile, which
overestimates and underestimates the response of the pile head for smaller and
larger dimensionless frequencies (휔/휆푉푠), respectively.
Figure 4.21.: Comparison of kinematic response factors between Plaxis 3D and Anoyatis
et al., 2013
56
Chapter 4
Numerical Modelling
==PAGE:67==
4.3.3
Case study: Kinematic interaction analyses
The kinematic response analyses of the pile for the examined case study in 2D
and 3D is based on the remarks and conclusions showcased in the preceeding
sections for the behaviour of a single pile. A model width of W = 200 m for both
Plaxis 2D and 3D is selected. For the latter, the depth of the model is 15 m (i.e.
10푑) for the beam model and 7.5 m for which the symmetry is exploited and only
half of the pile and domain are modelled. Free-ﬁeld boundaries are used for all
vertical boundaries in both 2D and 3D. The soil formation is the same as already
used in the site-response analyses, based on Chapter 3. The properties of the
plate and for both beam and volume pile are contained collectively in Tables 4.4
to 4.6 while the mesh discretization is shown in Fig. 4.22 (at a deformed state).
4.4
Bridge modelling and direct analyses
Before proceeding to the global analyses, for which the complete soil-pile-bridge
system is analyzed, the validation of the dynamic properties of the bridge should
be ensured. As discussed in Chapter 3, the bridge is idealized as lumped mass
model. The pier provides the stiﬀness to the substructure and participates with
50% of its mass to the masses of the deck and that of the pile-cap. At ﬁrst stage,
the ﬁxed SDOF model of the bridge is evaluated.
4.4.1
Plaxis 2D - SDOF
In Plaxis 2D the pier and the deck are represented with the use of plates. The
pier plate has the original length of the substructure (i.e. 18.5 and 9.25 m
for BMH and BML cases as reported in Table 3.5) and its bending stiﬀness is
calculated in the same manner as the reported equivalency between the pile
and the corresponding plate. The pier plate is assigned with zero weight. On
the contrary, the plate for the deck is given a very large bending and axial
stiﬀness such that it is considered rigid, while the weight is calculated as the
distributed force resulting from the total mass of the deck and of the pier (as
50% contribution) per running meter of length. An horizontal length of 2 m
is assumed, with 1 m from each side of the pier. Implicitly, the connections
between structural members in Plaxis are modelled as monolithic. The properties
of the members can be seen in Table 4.4. Note that the displayed length for the
piers is smaller by 0.5 m which is assigned to plates relating to the pile-cap as
will be seen later. In order for Plaxis to generate a mesh and therefore perform
calculations, a soil domain needs to be deﬁned. A very small domain of very
stiﬀmaterial is modelled and a point described displacement is prescribed at
4.4
Bridge modelling and direct analyses
57
==PAGE:68==
the base of the pier to constraint it from any translation and rotation. A static
load of 1000 kN is applied laterally at the deck position and then released to let
the structure vibrate freely. No damping is assigned to the structural elements
yet, for easier comparisons with the analytically derived eigenfrequency of the
structure. Two types of veriﬁcation are performed, ﬁrst the static deﬂection and
then the eigenfrequency. The modelled structure presents the correct deﬂection
shape and dynamic behaviour as seen in the comparison displayed in Table 4.3.
4.4.2
Plaxis 3D - SDOF
The validation of the 3D bridge model follows the same principle as in 2D.
Instead of plates though, beam elements are used. Therefore, the dimensions
and properties of the pier are directly deﬁned. Again, pier beam has zero mass.
The deck for convenience is modelled as an extension of the pier upwards, but
with a very high density, which when multiplied with the volume of the element
should give the summation of the deck’s and 50% of the pier’s mass. A rigid
plate is placed at the bottom of the pier beam to simulate the ﬁxity conditions.
Results of this validation are shown in Table 4.3.
4.4.3
Case study: Direct analyses
Once the response of both the pile and the bridge is ensured that is properly
modelled, the direct analyses are performed. The structure is added atop of
the pile with an intermediate plate and beam in between for 2D and 3D cases,
respectively. This intermediate element is introduced to simulate the presence of
the pile-cap as a lumped mass and it is given a length of 0.5 m. It has the same
properties with the structural element used for the representation of the pier,
only with the addition of the mass of the pile-cap and the rest 50% of the pier
in the same manner as done for the deck elements. Rotations at the base of the
bridge structure should now be allowed to capture the eﬀect of the compliance of
the soil, therefore the prescribed constraints used for the validation of the ﬁxed
base model are released. Transference of forces is allowed from the structure to
the foundation since the connection between structural elements is monolithic as
already discussed. Tables 4.4 to 4.6 summarize the properties used for modelling
the structural components. Direct analyses are not performed for the case of
volume pile due to lack of time. The mesh discretization for the beam in the
direct analyses is reported in Fig. 4.23.
58
Chapter 4
Numerical Modelling
==PAGE:69==
Table 4.3.: Validation of bridge structure numerical model assuming a SDOF lumped
mass system
Case
훿푚푎푥,푠푡푎푡푖푐[cm]
푇0 [sec]
Plaxis2D
Plaxis3D
Analytical
Plaxis2D
Plaxis3D
Analytical
BMH
8.9
9.1
9.0
0.857
0.857
0.858
BML
11.4
11.5
11.3
0.309
0.312
0.304
Table 4.4.: Plate properties for Plaxis 2D model
Structural
L
퐸퐴
퐸퐼
푤
휈
member
[m]
[kN/m]
[kNm2/m]
[kN/m/m]
[-]
Pile
19.0
36.69 · 106
6.33 · 106
VAR
0.15
Cap
0.5
70.00 · 106
23.33 · 106
3417
Pier
18.0/8.75
-
Deck
2.0
10.67 · 1012
2.00 · 1012
1012
Table 4.5.: Beam properties for Plaxis 3D model
Structural
Beam
Diameter/Width
L
퐸
훾
member
type
[m]
[m]
[kN/m2]
[kN/m3]
Pile
Circular (solid)
1.500
19.0
25.5 · 106
VAR
Cap
Rectangular
1.682
0.5
35.5 · 106
1208
Pier
18.0/8.75
-
Deck
0.1
7159
Table 4.6.: Volume pile properties for Plaxis 3D model with incorporated soft beam
Element
Beam
Diameter
퐸
훾
type
type
[m]
[kN/m2]
[kN/m3]
Solid
-
-
25.5 · 106
24
Beam
Circular (solid)
1.5
25.5
-
4.4
Bridge modelling and direct analyses
59
==PAGE:70==
Figure 4.22.: Mesh discretization in volume pile shown at a deformed state
Figure 4.23.: Mesh discretization for beam element (direct analysis)
60
Chapter 4
Numerical Modelling
==PAGE:71==
5
Results and discussion
5.1
Site response analysis
The results of the site response analysis are very important to understand the
behaviour of the soil-pile-bridge system examined later. By investigating trends
in the response of the soil proﬁles considered under the selected earthquakes and
PGA levels, some valuable conclusions can be drawn. The results are presented
collectively for MCE and DBE levels of PGA on a side-by-side comparison, both
in a fashion of earthquake impact on each of the soil deposits and of soil proﬁle
inﬂuence when the same earthquake is applied.
Fig. 5.1 illustrates the developed shear strains in the diﬀerent soil proﬁles under
the seismic motions considered. Only the soil layers are brought to view. It is
evident that all soil proﬁles except SP1 display a similar pattern of generally
increasing strains with depth. Additionally, the strain levels close to the surface
are at relatively low levels such that no permanent deformation would typically
occur (< 10−4 −10−3) for all three soil proﬁles. This is not the case for SP1,
which experiences large levels of shear strain deformations also at surface level.
Furthermore, the proﬁle of shear strains along the depth is considerably diﬀerent,
where a clear pattern of increasing strains is no longer visible, while for NR and
SS earthquakes the absolute maximum value is developed closer to the surface
rather than to the rock-soil interface. The particular soil proﬁle diﬀers from the
rest primarily in the sense that its siﬀness is stress-dependent. The same soil
material is found in SP4 as well, but the presence of the clay layer beneath seem
to drastically aﬀect the behaviour of the sandy deposit on top. The strain levels
in SP1 imply permanent deformation, which means that sediment grains are
disrupted and try to reach a new equilibrium state. Given the density of the
sand deposit and its consolidation state, this probably means particles rolling
over each other creating new porosity and increasing the soil volume - a process
commonly known as dilatancy (Manga and Wang, 2007). In general, diﬀerent
earthquakes seem to not aﬀect sensibly the strain levels, and the almost half PGA
in DBE condition results to approximately halved strains in comparison to MCE.
Soil proﬁles appear to have the most prominent eﬀect on the level of shear strains
developed. For instance, SP2 and SP4 which both consist entirely or primarily of
softer clay than the one present in SP3, developed even 4-5 times higher shear
61
==PAGE:72==
(a) MCE level
(b) DBE level
Figure 5.1.: Earthquake inﬂuence on maximum strains proﬁle for both PGA levels
strains, while similar levels to SP3 are reported for the stiﬀer portion close to
the rock-soil interface in SP1.
Moving forward to the proﬁle of the maximum accelerations experienced in the
soil and rock mediums, illustrated in Fig. 5.2, it is evident that for all earthquakes,
SP3 displays the largest PGAs, while mostly SP2 and SP4 behave in a like manner.
Furthermore, for all soil proﬁles and for both MCE and DBE conditions, the SS
signal results to the highest accelerations along the depth and at the ground
surface, while IV and NR earthquakes have virtually similar eﬀect in all cases.
The oxymoron of the proﬁles depicted in this ﬁgure is the response experienced
by the basalt layer. The maximum acceleration at the top of basalt is around
two times higher than the peak acceleration of the input motion, while the
acceleration proﬁle along the depth is typical to the pattern of the ﬁrst vibration
mode of an elastic homogeneous soil medium (recall Fig. 2.3). However, this
can be explained when looking at the acceleration spectra in Fig. 3.4 and the
fundamental period of the basalt layer from Table 3.3. Basalt is seen to have
a natural period of vibration of 0.030 s according to Eq. (2.3) and from the
examined earthquakes only the SS shows a peak for such low period, resulting
to resonance conditions. This peak is seen to correspond to an acceleration
ampliﬁcation of around two times for the case of 10% damping and as high as
four times for 1% damping. Since basalt is modelled with 1% damping rather
62
Chapter 5
Results and discussion
==PAGE:73==
(a) MCE level
(b) DBE level
Figure 5.2.: Inﬂuence of the diﬀerent soil proﬁles on maximum accelerations proﬁle for
both PGA levels
than 10%, one may wonder why its acceleration ampliﬁcation matches better
the latter. Rayleigh damping, which is frequency dependent, was modelled for
target frequencies of 1.5 to 13 Hz and it is expected that for frequencies out of
this range damping will be even higher and the acceleration corresponding to
the spectrum for 1% damping will not be reached. However, this alone does
not explain such a high diﬀerence. Using the alternative way for calculating
the eigenperiod for constant shear wave velocity soil layers (Eq. (2.4)), which
shares the same concept of a SDOF as the derivation of the spectra, one may
obtain a 20% lower value, i.e. 푇= 0.024 s. For this value the agreement of the
acceleration ampliﬁcation from the spectrum with the one observed in Fig. 5.2 is
almost perfect. This ampliﬁcation is of course slightly altered by the presence of
the soil column above, which was previously omitted.
For better examining the real inﬂuence of each soil to the response, the am-
pliﬁcation/deampliﬁcation chart of Fig. 5.3 is looked upon. In this ﬁgure, the
ampliﬁcation w.r.t. the peak acceleration observed at the top of the basalt layer
is shown, to account for the magniﬁed accelerations discussed for the case of
SS earthquake. It is evident that SP2 and SP4 experience deampliﬁcation for
the case of MCE, while for DBE the response is rather steady along the depth
and ampliﬁes at the surface in all earthquakes but SS. Both proﬁles have in
common that they consist mostly of soft soils as the presence of CLA-A is dom-
inant, while GRM-B is seen at SP4 in shallow depths, where according to its
stress-dependent stiﬀness is less stiﬀas well. Due to the high PGA induced, large
displacements (and therefore large strains) are expected, especially at looser
5.1
Site response analysis
63
==PAGE:74==
(a) MCE level
(b) DBE level
Figure 5.3.: Ampliﬁcation and attenuation ratios w.r.t. accelerations at top of basalt
soils. This was already depicted with Fig. 5.1. Larger strain levels essentialy
lead to higher damping according to the HSs material behaviour and therefore
an attenuation of motion occurs that result to lower peak surface accelerations.
This is why for DBE conditions deampliﬁcation is only experienced for SS, which
generated higher accelerations at the top of the basalt. On the other hand, SP1
and SP3, which are composed of stiﬀer soils than the other two proﬁles, present
an ampliﬁed response in general, even for MCE level, due to lower strain levels.
Exemption is again seen for SS, but only for SP1, owing to the fact that CLA-B in
SP3 is modelled with Undrained B and has lost its stress-dependency, resulting
to a stiﬀer topmost layer than GRM-B in SP1. These observations agree well
with the ﬁndings of Lubkowski et al., 2017, in which non-linear ground response
analysis of soft soils showed mainly deampliﬁcation for PGA > 0.15g.
Fig. 5.4 shows the spectra produced based on the free-ﬁeld motion acquired
by the site-response analysis. In the spectra, the input motion is included to
showcase the ampliﬁcation that resulted with the inclusion of the eﬀect of the
64
Chapter 5
Results and discussion
==PAGE:75==
soil layers and the shift of the predominant periods to the right. The eigenperiods
of the two considered bridge structures as ﬁxed SDOFs are also marked. It is
important to note that the ampliﬁcation occurred in the spectra takes place
until periods of around 1 s, with the eﬀect for more ﬂexible structures being
diminished after this point. Within the range of the two eigenperiods of the
bridge cases, though, there is a considerable ampliﬁcation for all earthquakes
and for all soil proﬁles. Again, a similar behaviour is noticed for SP1, SP3 and
SP2, SP4, accordingly. Apart from the accordance of the spectra (overall shape,
peaks occurrence, acceleration levels) for the two groups of soil proﬁles, the ﬁrst
results to more detrimental accelerations for periods closer to the one of the
stiﬀer structure, while the second for periods closer to the more ﬂexible structure.
However, the latter seems to fade away for the SS earthquake as for BMH all
proﬁles have more or less the same eﬀect. SS earthquake also presents multiple
peaks at the lower periods but that is certainly not a range of interest for the
structure and it is attributed to its artiﬁcial nature.
(a) MCE level
(b) DBE level
Figure 5.4.: Pseudo-acceleration spectra for both PGA levels
Table ?? summarizes how the predominant periods changed for the diﬀerent
soil proﬁles in comparison to the input motion. The predominant periods of the
motions resulted at the top of the basalt layer are included as well. Spectra of
the aforementioned motions were not included previously in Fig. 5.4 as they are
vastly the same as the ones produced for the input motion, for the periods of
5.1
Site response analysis
65
==PAGE:76==
Table 5.1.: Comparison of predominant periods for input, top-of-basalt and surface
motions
IV
NR
SS
SS(EERA)
MCE
DBE
MCE
DBE
MCE
DBE
MCE
푇푖푛푝푢푡
-
0.25a
0.18
0.13
푇퐵푎푠푎푙푡,푇표푝
-
0.13
0.18
0.03
푇푠푢푟푓푎푐푒
SP1
0.31
0.26
0.41
0.26
0.35
0.29
0.31
SP2
0.47
0.40
0.41
0.41
0.36b
0.36
0.45
SP3
0.26
0.27
0.26
0.29
0.29b
0.28
0.31
SP4
0.47
0.47
0.40
0.41
0.44b
0.36b
0.46
a About the same peak for 푇= 0.13 s
b Second largest peak, as the ﬁrst occurs for 푇= 0.03 s due to the basalt inﬂuence
interest (see Fig. B.2. For all the cases considered there is a shift to the right,
meaning that the predominant periods have signiﬁcantly increased. The results
are also in relatively good agreement with EERA and for SS-MCE earthquake for
which free-ﬁeld analysis were undertaken.
Such analyses as the one currently conducted are very important in seismic
design and showcase the variations that can be introduced by ground motion
parameters such diﬀerent PGA levels and frequency content of earthquakes, as
well as the dynamic soil parameters.
5.2
Kinematic response
The kinematic interaction of the soil-pile system is presented herein with a main
focus on the forces relevant for the design of the piles, namely shear forces and
moments. The axial force is not of importance as the considered excitation does
not contain a vertical component. Therefore, the kinematic interaction caused
by vertical propagating S-waves does not signiﬁcantly aﬀect the pile in the axial
direction and is herein excluded.
5.2.1
Plaxis 2D
Fig. 5.5 displays the maximum and minimum shear envelopes in a manner where
soil proﬁles are compared with each other when subjected to the same earthquake.
Results are presented for both PGA levels. Overall, the absolute maximum shear
occurs approximately half a meter below the rock-soil interface for all cases and
kinematic interaction mostly inﬂuences the pile response at depths greater than
1/3 of its total length. The response is very similar for the most unfavorable
proﬁle group SP2/SP4, resulting to almost the same maximum shear, with the
66
Chapter 5
Results and discussion
==PAGE:77==
exemption of SS and IV earthquakes for MCE and DBE levels, respectively. Soil
proﬁles SP1 and SP3 have similar responses only for the IV excitation, with the
ﬁrst being the less severe in general for all the cases considered.
(a) MCE level
(b) DBE level
Figure 5.5.: Shear force envelopes due to kinematic interaction
The envelopes regarding bending moments are greatly identical to the ones
for shear forces elaborated previously. Fig. 5.6 illustrates the maximum and
minimum envelopes in the same fashion that the shear forces presented. The
absolute maximum moment is now located directly at the rock-soil interface
and in a similar manner the most detrimental soil proﬁles are SP2/SP4, while
the least aﬀected is SP1 and SP3 is lying in between. This is due to the more
pronounced diﬀerence between the stiﬀness of the layers at the interface with
5.2
Kinematic response
67
==PAGE:78==
the rock for SP2 and SP4. Furthermore, for the latter, the interface between the
soil layers does not have any considerable eﬀect due to their similar shear wave
velocities at this depth (recall the stress-dependency of GRM-B material and the
shear wave velocity proﬁle of Fig. 4.5). This illustrates the signiﬁcance of the
stiﬀness contrast to the kinematic bending strains. Taking a closer look at the
moment envelope shape of SP3, one can see that it is slightly diﬀerent than the
rest, with a stenosis observed at intermediate depths. This is an indication of
a diﬀerent deformation pattern of the pile in the particular soil proﬁle due to
the eﬀect of the soil modelling. In particular, a point of contraﬂexure (푀= 0)
is apparent at medium depths, probably due to the higher stiﬀness of CLA-B at
shallower depths providing a stronger restraint at the pile head. On the contrary,
the rest show an "umbrella" shaped envelope proﬁle which implies moments
of the same sign along the entirety of the depth at times in which most severe
deformations occur.
Table 5.2 presents in a tabular form the absolute maximum values seen in Fig. 5.5
and Fig. 5.6 and reveals the shear force and moment increments due to the
ampliﬁcation in PGA level. The least ampliﬁcation is observed for the site-speciﬁc
signal, with a minor exemption for SP3. Examining the increment of the stress
resultants from the point of view of the proﬁle groups mentioned earlier, soil
proﬁles SP2/SP4 display higher sensitivity to PGA level ampliﬁcation for the case
of NR excitation, while SP1/SP3 are most aﬀected by the transition from DBE to
MCE conditions for the IV earhquake. Indeed, biggest overall jump is reported
for SP1 and IV seismic motion, reaching a shear and moment ampliﬁcation factor
of roughly 2.5 (144.7%). On the whole, SP3 is the only proﬁle that displays
ampliﬁcation factors over 2 for all three earthquakes considered. The above
observations reveal the high sensitivity of non-linear time domain analysis to
the excitation characteristics (PGA, frequency content, duration). It is therefore
recommended to evaluate the response according to a set of input signals to
properly cover all these aspects. This requirement is also stated in seismic design
codes, e.g. Eurocode 8 suggests seven artiﬁcial or recorded accelerograms that
their mean matches the one sugeested by the code.
Due to time and licence limitations, as well as some similarities observed for the
soil proﬁles, the analyses for the remaining part are narrowed down. Moving
forward, only SP1 and SP2 are studied further to cover the most beneﬁcial and
most detrimental eﬀect, respectively. Also, only SS earthquake is elected to be
used with both PGA levels for the 2D analyses, while for the 3D analyses MCE
conditions are assumed.
68
Chapter 5
Results and discussion
==PAGE:79==
(a) MCE level
(b) DBE level
Figure 5.6.: Moment envelopes due to kinematic interaction
5.2.2
Plaxis 3D
The kinematic interaction based on the 3D model follows after a brief showcase of
the performance of the volume pile. As it was discussed in Chapter C, capturing
the exact stress resultants in the pile when using continuum elements is a
challenging task. The concept of the "soft" beam (without any plate at the
location of the interface) against the solid continuum elements is illustrated in
Fig. 5.7. In this ﬁgure, the stress resultants at two distinct times are shown as
extracted from Plaxis with the option Structural forces in volume piles for the solid
elements and by a scaling analogy for the integrated beam without a plate at
the interface. Solid and dashed lines are used, respectively, and a diﬀerent color
distinguishes the two times 푡1, 푡2. Since the modulus of elasticity of the beam is
modelled with a missing factor of 106 as the stiﬀness was assigned in the solid
5.2
Kinematic response
69
==PAGE:80==
Table 5.2.: Maximum shear forces and moments associated with kinematic interaction
and their relative ampliﬁcation from DBE to MCE condition
Shear force, 푄
Moment, 푀
Soil
EQK
DBE
MCE
Amp
DBE
MCE
Amp
proﬁle
[kN]
[kN]
[%]
[kNm]
[kNm]
[%]
SP1
IV
830
2031
144.7
1521
3732
145.4
NR
632
1229
94.5
1151
2243
94.9
SS
607
1080
77.9
1129
2003
77.4
SP2
IV
1325
2579
94.6
2460
4748
93.0
NR
965
2256
133.8
1811
4155
129.4
SS
1466
2472
68.6
2711
4551
67.9
SP3
IV
872
2050
135.1
1652
3859
133.6
NR
811
1658
104.4
1519
3104
104.3
SS
1023
2237
118.7
1932
4205
117.7
SP4
IV
1769
2549
44.1
3242
4686
44.5
NR
1072
2281
112.8
1984
4189
111.1
SS
1405
1991
41.7
2593
3660
41.1
elements, and it is furthermore situated at the boundary owing to the modelling
of the half domain (see Chapter 4), the forces in the beam are multiplied by a
factor 1/2 · 106 to account for the inertia of half the pile and the correct Young’s
modulus (recall principle eplained in Chapter C. It should be mentioned that this
technique has been used previously and was even proposed from Plaxis Expert
Services in a case study of Deltares for seismic soil-structure interaction. As
elaborated already, the integrated beam is supposed to better capture the forces
relevant to the design, while an added advantage is that the force envelopes of
the are whole time-history are readily available, as opposed to the forces in the
solid elements that are only shown for the current step. The transformed stress
resultants of the soft beam are seen to agree perfectly with the forces obtained
from the solid elements, except at the rock-soil interface for the case of shear,
for which solid elements result to signiﬁcantly smaller shear inside the rock.
This showcases the inconsistencies that can arise by such an approach and that
were predicted using the validation step in Chapter C. Results for the case of a
soft beam with an additional plate element at the rock-soil interface were not
included in Fig. 5.7 for convenience of vizualization purposes, as they are vastly
similar to the solid elements (although some small diﬀerences are reported).
70
Chapter 5
Results and discussion
==PAGE:81==
(a) SP1
(b) SP2
Figure 5.7.: Internal force distribution with a soft beam (without plate at the interface)
and with solid elements for two distinct time steps
5.2
Kinematic response
71
==PAGE:82==
The kinematic response is thereafter examined with the three modelling tech-
niques used, namely the simple beam and the volume pile with and without
integrated plate at the rock-soil interface. Only the resulting forces in the soft
beam (i.e. not in the continuum elements), hereafter referred to as volume pile
(VP), are further presented in order to illustrate the diﬀerences with the simple
beam modelled with its true bending stiﬀness but without properly representing
the volume of the pile inside the domain owing to the one dimensional nature of
the element. Figs. 5.8 to 5.9 show that the modelling approaches result to vastly
the same shape for the bending moments, but diﬀerences are pronounced in the
shear envelope for the case of the presence of the plate, where no clear trend
of shear reversal is apparent at ﬁrst glance, while the maximum is predicted
slightly above the interface instead of below. It is also evident that the proﬁle of
the volume pile is shifted slightly upwards, predicting the maxima at diﬀerent
locations than the simple beam (approximately 0.5 m diﬀerence). These observa-
tions agree well with what was reported in Chapter C. The moment is expected
to be under-predicted and the discretization close to the interface controls the
extent of the underestimation. Logically, therefore, the simple beam results to
higher moments. On the other hand, though, the shear forces should be more
cautiously reviewed due to the singularity issue highlighted in Chapter C.
Figure 5.8.: Kinematic 3D interaction in Plaxis 3D (SP1)
72
Chapter 5
Results and discussion
==PAGE:83==
Figure 5.9.: Kinematic interaction in Plaxis 3D (SP2)
From literature, a shape more like the one developed by the other two methods
in Fig. 5.8 was anticipated for the shear envelope of the volume pile with the
included plate. Although, an explanation to this can be the diﬀerence in the
adopted methods, as usually such problems are tackled with a beam on Winkler
foundation type of approach. For instance, reported results incorporating a FE
approach are highly identical (i.e. Dezi et al., 2009). Therefore, in order to
support Fig. 5.8, Fig. 5.10 is included. This ﬁgure shows the internal forces at a
distinct time step, that of the development of maximum moment. The distribution
of the shear stresses can be veriﬁed that is reasonable and no erroneous results
are present. Maxima and minima for the shear are reported just below and
above the interface, crossing zero exactly at the interface. The values may not
be perfectly accurate, but if accuracy is sought, a more reﬁned mesh around the
vicinity of the rock-soil intreface will likely further improve the results.
5.2
Kinematic response
73
==PAGE:84==
Figure 5.10.: Comparison of volume pile with and without plate at rock-soil vicinity for
time of occurrence of |푀푚푎푥| (SP1)
5.3
Kinematic Vs Direct
5.3.1
Plaxis 2D
Direct analyses were performed as speciﬁed in Chapter 4 for the two diﬀerent
structures and the inﬂuence of the inertia component introduced by the presence
of the bridge is looked upon. A side-by-side comparison of the two soil proﬁles
for the same PGA level, grouped by shear and moment envelopes is depicted in
Figs. 5.11 to 5.12. It is interesting to note that for both bridge conﬁgurations
the eﬀect of the inertia component fades away at larger depths. The response
close to the rock soil-interface where maxima occur is highly dominated by the
kinematic interaction. Despite the fact that stress resultants due to kinematic
interaction for the case of stiﬀer material in SP1 are less important than in SP2,
they are still predominant in the lower portion of the pile. Interestingly, the
maximum moments are now seen at the pile head for all cases but SP2-MCE and
for short piers (BML).
74
Chapter 5
Results and discussion
==PAGE:85==
(a) MCE level
(b) DBE level
Figure 5.11.: Shear envelopes in Plaxis 2D - Kinematic vs direct
5.3
Kinematic Vs Direct
75
==PAGE:86==
(a) MCE level
(b) DBE level
Figure 5.12.: Moment envelopes in Plaxis 2D - Kinematic vs direct
Although the second alternative for the structure was selected in order to be
located at a highly diﬀerent position in the acceleration spectra compared to
the original structure according to the ﬁxed base assumption, Figs. 5.11 to 5.12
reveal that the resulting diﬀerence is non-existent. Moments at the top of the pile
head are logically larger in the case of a higher structure for SP2, even though
76
Chapter 5
Results and discussion
==PAGE:87==
for DBE conditions this diﬀerence is very small. Unexpectedly, however, the shear
development at pile head is smaller for the stiﬀstructure which was seen to be
in a more unfavorable position in the acceleration spectrum. For evaluating this
odd behaviour, case SP1 for DBE conditions is elaborated further.
From the time history of the shear development in the deck and the pile-cap as
extracted from Plaxis, shown in Fig. 5.13 for the time period of 10-20 s for easier
visualization purposes, it is evident that the two inertia components produced by
the masses of the relevant structural members are out of phase. This results to a
resultant that is smaller than any of the two individual components, the peak of
which corresponds to the value observed at at the pile-head in the earlier shear
diagrams. However, the shear forces seen at deck level are higher for the stiﬀer
structure (BML) as expected. By a comparison of the aforementioned shear with
a simpliﬁed approach where the shear is calculated as the resultant modelled
mass of each structural component multiplied with the acquired accelerations
at the respected elevations, a good agreement is acquired. Therefore, the shear
observed is directly linked to the accelerations induced in each component.
However, as seen in Fig. 5.4 much higher accelerations were anticipated.
(a) BMH
(b) BML
Figure 5.13.: Phase diﬀerence of shear components of deck and pile-cap
In order to investigate why such a diﬀerence occurred and whether it is a
modelling issue or if it can be attributed to altered motion and dynamic properties
5.3
Kinematic Vs Direct
77
==PAGE:88==
of the structure, the derived spectra from the accelerations at the pile-cap and
the deck are visited, shown in Fig. 5.14. The peaks in the spectra related
to the deck acceleration indicate that the eigenperiod of the structures has
signiﬁcantly increased. The accelerations of the pile-cap spectrum at periods for
which the peaks for the deck acceleration were reported, matches the maximum
accelerations reported at the deck. The peak seen in the pile-cap spectrum below
the one of the deck in the case of BML is the reason why the shear developed in
the latter is generally larger than the one for BMH as reported in Fig. 5.13. Also,
this is the same reason as to why the moments at pile-head are not signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent to each other for BMH and BML cases. While the latter has the half level
arm, it also presents higher lateral forces at the deck (around 2 times larger),
which eventually closes the gap between the two.
(a) BMH
(b) BML
Figure 5.14.: Spectra for deck and pile-cap accelerations
The altering of the eigenperiod of the structure due to its compliant base has
been reported in the past and it is a well-known outcome of the consideration
of SSI in the analyses. This is usually of beneﬁcial eﬀect but this cannot be
predetermined and highly depends on the spectra of the considered motion, as
this shift can coincide with higher accelerations as the ones for a ﬁxed base. In
the current, however, the increment of the eigenperiod is admittedly very high
and this resulted to move to a point in the spectra where smaller accelerations
are observed, showcasing the beneﬁcial contribution for the bridge.
The eigenperiod increased by a factor of 2.5 and 4 for BMH and BML cases
(2.17 s and 1.23 s, respectively). An attempt to simulate such an increase is
78
Chapter 5
Results and discussion
==PAGE:89==
Table 5.3.: Comparison of natural periods of bridge
structure (in s)
Bridge
Fixed-base
Plaxis 2D
Zania, 2014
BMH
0.86
2.17
1.59
BML
0.3
1.23
0.79
a Calculated with reduced stiﬀness at max rota-
tion/moment
done based on the method proposed by Zania, 2014 in a simpliﬁed manner by
using the static stiﬀness coeﬃcients for the pile as derived by Gazetas, 1984 for
end-bearing ﬂexible piles, which are included also in EN1998-5. The formulas
for an inhomogeneous soil proﬁle with increasing stiﬀness with depth according
to 퐸= 퐸푠
p
푧/푑were considered, where 퐸푠is the stiﬀness at a depth of 푧= 푑.
Using the static stiﬀness values is of course not an exact representation as the
tru stiﬀness is dependent on frequency. Though, Gazetas, 1984 showed that no
dramatic variation occurs and for most practical applications using the static
stiﬀnesses would not introduce large errors. What is most important is that the
pile cannot be considered perfectly ﬂexible as 퐿< 퐿푎(active length 퐿푎= 15.4
m, calculated also according to Gazetas, 1984) and the non-linear behaviour of
the soil causes stiﬀness reduction, while there is also the presence of the mass
of the pile-cap which is considerable and surely aﬀects the natural period of
vibration. Nevertheless, the approach can be used as a measure of comparison to
interpret the results and if actually such an increase can be realistic. Therefore,
the method from Zania, 2014 is used for static stiﬀnesses available also in the
design codes and not with the dynamic stiﬀnesses from Novak and Nogami,
1977 as in the original method and no calibration according to the excitation
frequency is performed. Results are presented in Section 5.3.1. It should be
mentioned that if frequency dependency of the stiﬀnesses were to be taken into
account, signiﬁcant reduction of the latter quantities could cause the eigenperiod
to further increase.
5.3.2
Plaxis 3D
The comparison of the kinematic and global responses elaborated for the case of
2D analyses holds true also for the 3D. At least for the only case that is examined,
i.e. BMH, the kinematic interaction is predominant at the lower portion of the
pile and governs the local maxima at the rock-soil interface. The results are
illustrated in Figs. 5.15 and 5.16 for soil proﬁles SP1 and SP2, respectively. Only
MCE conditions are considered and because the direct analyses were performed
5.3
Kinematic Vs Direct
79
==PAGE:90==
only with the approach of a simple beam, the results from kinematic analyses
with the volume pile are not included. Similar to what reported for the 2D case,
the maximum moment occurs again at the pile head for SP1, while for SP2 is
now located to the interface showing that the most severe impact is attributed
to the kinematic component due to its higher stiﬀness contrast in comparison
to SP1. Furthermore, the impact of the inertial component attenuates faster in
the clay soil and stress resultants due to kinematic interaction represent a major
portion of that of global analysis at shallow depths, unlike in SP1.
Figure 5.15.: Kinematic vs direct in Plaxis 3D for SP1
80
Chapter 5
Results and discussion
==PAGE:91==
Figure 5.16.: Kinematic vs direct in Plaxis 3D for SP2
5.4
Overall comparison
The results presented in the previous sections for the common analyses performed
in both Plaxis 2D and Plaxis 3D are gathered and compared to evaluate the
performance of the plane strain model and the diﬀerent modelling approaches.
Results are reported for kinematic interaction are reported in Fig. 5.17.
5.4
Overall comparison
81
==PAGE:92==
(a) SP1
(b) SP2
Figure 5.17.: Kinematic interaction - Plaxis 2D vs 3D
82
Chapter 5
Results and discussion
==PAGE:93==
From Fig. 5.17 it is evident that for the sandy proﬁle the examined methods
present a very similar envelope shape of the internal forces. The plate follows
the behaviour of the 3D beam element both in terms of shear and moment, until
a depth close to 10-11 m where the beam starts to diverge, eventually resulting
to higher stress resultants at a section around the rock-soil interface. At the
same elevation, the slope of the bending moment changes for the volume pile,
too. The change in slope happens due to the presence of the stiﬀness contrast
underneath and the sign reversal for the moment distribution owing to the forced
deformed shape of the pile from the induced soil motion. This slope is expected
to become sharper when this contrast increases and when 퐸푝/퐸푠becomes smaller,
i.e. when pile is "softer". Evidence of the ﬁrst is seen when comparing the two
diﬀerent soil proﬁles. Both in SP1 and SP2 this point is not clearly visible for
the plate owing to a diﬀerent deformation pattern at the topmost section that
results to a moment distribution of the same sign for the prevailing part of the
pile. This is evident from Fig. 5.18 where the displacement and moment proﬁles
for the diﬀerent approaches are shown for the time of development of 푀푚푎푥. In
the same, the free-ﬁeld motion from the site-response analysis is plotted for the
corresponding time and it is clear that the plate presents a more rigid behaviour,
while the volume pile follows better the soil response overall. However, the stress
resultants are captured quite nicely due to a similar translation of the pile-head,
while it is interesting to note that the time of development of maximum moment
at the interface matches for all cases.
5.4
Overall comparison
83
==PAGE:94==
Figure 5.18.: Comparison of soil and pile deformations at time of occurrence of |푀푚푎푥|
and the corresponding bending moment distribution along the pile (SP1)
Similar presentation to that of the Fig. 5.18 for SP1 is shown for the case of
SP2, in Fig. 5.19. To accommodate the interpretation of the diﬀerences, the
deformations of the pile directly above and below the interface are zoomed in.
The plate is obviously underestimating the horizontal translation at the pile head
and generally once again presents a diﬀerent deformed shape, with curvature of
the same sign. The free-ﬁeld motion indicates reasonance or near-reasonance
conditions and the plate presents inability to follow the soil movement, eventually
underestimating the response, much like what was discussed in Chapter 4. The
beam and the volume pile are in better agreement and present almost the same
deﬂected shape along their length, therefore the almost matching moments in
the majority of their embedded part in the soil. In the zoomed in section of the
ﬁgure,the discretization is also visible and can be used in order to explain why
the beam presents the highest moment since it underestimates the translation. A
reason as to why this happens is probably due to that the beam is less reﬁned,
and the curvature is locally over-predicted.
84
Chapter 5
Results and discussion
==PAGE:95==
Figure 5.19.: Comparison of soil and pile deformations at time of occurrence of |푀푚푎푥|
and the corresponding bending moment distribution along the pile (SP2)
Next, the methods of Di Laora et al., 2012 and Dezi et al., 2010 that were pre-
sented in Chapter 2 are visited to see how they compare with the FE analyses. It
should be mentioned that these methods are empirical and semi-empirical, so
their application is limited and caution is advised on the interpretation of their
results as a number of assumptions should be met for proper comparisons. Both
methods have been developed on a basis of stiﬀnesses constant with depth, lin-
earity for both the soil and the pile, as well as a perfect bonding at the interfaces.
Di Laora et al., 2012 state that some of their ﬁndings might require revision in
case of non-linearities and high-amplitude earthquake shaking. Furthermore,
the method of Dezi et al., 2010 was based on ﬁxed-head piles, but Di Laora et al.,
2012 showed that the strains at the interface are almost identical for free-head
piles as well, except if they behave as short and/or rigid (i.e. when 퐿< 퐿푎). Since
for this study the piles belong only marginally in the latter category, the method
can be applied but some diﬀerences may be present due to this aspect, too. The
damping that was used in the aforementioned studies was 10%, which is not far
from the expected damping according to the modelled hysteretic behaviour and
strain levels reported during the excitation. All in all, the methods are used as
5.4
Overall comparison
85
==PAGE:96==
a measure of comparison mostly in terms of magnitude order than as an exact
target value.
If the parameters in the formulas presented in Section 2.4 are input according to
the non-reduced stiﬀness values, and additionally for SP1 by employing a mean
stiﬀness (originally non-constant 퐺), the results are in reasonable agreement
with the reported maximum values of the FE analyses (see Table 5.4). For the
PGA in
Table 5.4.: Maximum moment comparison of FE methods with analytical expressions
푀푚푎푥,푖푛푡푒푟푓푎푐푒[kNm]
Method
SP1
SP2
Di Laora et al., 2012
2451
5126
Dezi et al., 2010
2250
4341
Plaxis 2D - Plate
2003
4551
Plaxis 3D - Beam
2444
7432
Plaxis 3D - Volume Pile(w/p)
1835
5673
The results of the direct approach are seen in Fig. 5.20 for both Plaxis 2D and the
single beam. The reported tendencies are similar with both methods resulting
to about the same moment and shear at top. The beam in SP1 shows a slightly
higher value for both the shear and the beam, which indicate a diﬀerent position
in the spectra, resulting to higher accelerations. For SP2, the reported diﬀerence
lies only at the vicinity of the rock-soil interface and this is attributed solely on
the kinematic interaction as was seen before. Therefore, in the latter case the
kinematic component is dominant in the case of the 3D analysis, while the plate
shows its maximum at the pile head, due to the inertial interaction. Most certainly,
the kinematic interaction is more relevant to very soft soils, especially when
high stiﬀness contrast is present in the soil deposit, and needs to be investigated
thoroughly.
86
Chapter 5
Results and discussion
==PAGE:97==
(a) SP1
(b) SP2
Figure 5.20.: Direct method - Plaxis 2D Vs 3D
5.4
Overall comparison
87
==PAGE:98==
==PAGE:99==
6
Conclusions
A numerical procedure to perform non-linear time-history analyses under earth-
quake excitation is presented by means of ﬁnite element formulation in both
2D and 3D conditions, using Plaxis. Python scripts are incorporated in order
to perform numerous analyses that otherwise would be more time-consuming
and such that human error is minimized. In general, ﬁnite element calculations
are not advised for parametric analyses due to their complexity and the com-
putational cost. However, more accurate behaviour can be captured by using
sophisticated material models to eﬀectively include non-linearities induced by
strong ground motions. Hardening Soil small model is used for modelling the
dynamic behaviour of the soil resulting to considerable diﬀerences with linear
alternatives.
This was showcased with the free-ﬁeld study of the diﬀerent soil proﬁles and
seismic intensities. Softer soil deposits developed signiﬁcantly higher shear
strains at the vicinity of the interface with the rock, leading to a higher hysteretic
damping and attenuation of motion towards the surface. This eﬀect is more
pronounced with the increase of the intensity of the excitation accelerations and
it was seen that the higher the intensity, the more likely a deampliﬁcation to
be encountered in softer soils. The non-linearities resulted also to a signiﬁcant
change in the predominant periods of the soil deposits and highlighted the need
to account for diﬀerent earthquakes and intensities when conducting time-history
analysis, as the resulting motion at surface is highly inﬂuenced by such aspects.
The results of the free-ﬁeld analyses are directly linked to the forces the pile
is experiencing. The position where the maximum strains were reported, i.e.
the rock-soil interface is the point of development of maximum shear force and
moment in the pile governed mainly by the movement of the pile top, since free-
head conditions are assumed. The kinematic forces become more detrimental
with higher intensity earthquakes and with increased stiﬀness contrast between
soil layers. Forces at the interface of small stiﬀness contrast that were encountered
in case of SP4 proﬁle hardly had any eﬀect in the force distribution. A comparison
of the internal forces induced by kinematic interaction from diﬀerent earthquakes
and peak accelerations, did not yield any clear pattern other than that the
kinematic interaction was mostly relevant for a depth greater than around one
third of pile’s length.
89
==PAGE:100==
Techniques for modelling the pile in 3D are discussed and their advantages and
disadvantages are discussed. It is generally shown that accurately capturing
moments and especially shear forces at singularity positions with FE is not a
tedious task and reﬁned meshing is key for quality results. This highly increases
the computational costs and presents the major drawback for such an approach.
This may be the reason that in literature the focus is on the bending moments
and usually results for shear forces are not presented. The validation part showed
also that the free-ﬁeld elements are not working properly and still a considerable
distance to the point of interest should be accounted for to minimize boundary
disturbances, further increasing running times.
Due to similarities of some cases reported with Plaxis 2D, two diﬀerent soil
proﬁles were analyzed further under the direct approach and for the kinematic
interaction in case of Plaxis 3D. In comparison to those two soil proﬁles, SP2
showed a more pronounced non-linear behaviour and a pronounced preferred
direction of deformation under SS earthquake. For this case, the maximum
bending moment of all the analyses is met as it is the softer material with very
high stiﬀness contrast to the rock beneath. The value reported was 7.4 MNm
and it was predicted by the single beam approach. It is of engineering interest
that the developed maximum bending moment can be suﬃciently resisted by a
properly reinforced pile of a 1.5 m diameter without reaching its yield capacity,
even at such levels of accelerations and stiﬀness contrasts.
In comparison of 2D and 3D kinematic analyses, maxima were reported at the
same time for all approaches. It should be highlighted that the plate showed a de-
cent performance, at least one that was not expected according to the validation
with more rigorous solutions and its performance under a harmonic excitation.
However, the observed tendency of the underestimation of the response (espe-
cially at resonance or near-resonance conditions) holds true also in the case of
seismic excitation with included non-linearities, as the one reported for the case
of SP2.
For direct analyses both methods predicted approximately the same response,
with the beam, though, presenting the maximum moment at the interface and
showing a predominant kinematic component as opposed to the plate. Also, for
the latter, a severe increment of the natural period of the bridge was reported.
Although a pronounced elongation of the period was obtained with a simplistic
application of a rigorous analytical expression, it is believed that such a large
shift is not realistic. This is most probably due to the rotational stiﬀness of the
plate and its deformation pattern.
90
Chapter 6
Conclusions
==PAGE:101==
Overall, it is shown that non-linearities can signiﬁcantly aﬀect the results, ob-
taining possibly higher stress resultants owing to the stiﬀness reduction with
increased strains. It is highly recommended to incorporate more realistic soil
models as it is found that they are predominantly aﬀecting the problem at hand.
High stiﬀness contrasts at layered stratigraphies imply a high kinematic interac-
tion component and require particular attention as showed in the current study.
Finally, what should be highlighted, is that the current ﬁndings agree perfectly
with the recommendations from Eurocode (EN1998-5, clause 5.4.2) as CLA-A
material is classiﬁed as soil type D and soil proﬁle SP2 contains consequtive
layers of sharply diﬀering stiﬀness, while the acceleration levels exceed the the
reported thereof.
91
==PAGE:102==
==PAGE:103==
7
Bibliography
Anbazhagan, P, Ayush Agrawal, and D Prakash (2016). “Eﬀect of energy eﬃciency
of hammer on liquefaction potential of soil”. In: Proceedings of IGC, pp. 15–17.
Anbazhagan, P and TG Sitharam (2008). “Seismic microzonation of Bangalore,
India”. In: Journal of Earth System Science 117.2, pp. 833–852.
Andrus, Ronald D, Paramananthan Piratheepan, Brian S Ellis, Jianfeng Zhang,
and C Hsein Juang (2004). “Comparing liquefaction evaluation methods using
penetration-VS relationships”. In: Soil dynamics and earthquake engineering
24.9-10, pp. 713–721.
Anoyatis, George, Raﬀaele Di Laora, Alessandro Mandolini, and George My-
lonakis (2013). “Kinematic response of single piles for diﬀerent boundary
conditions: analytical solutions and normalization schemes”. In: Soil Dynamics
and Earthquake Engineering 44, pp. 183–195.
Association, Japan Road et al. (1980). “Speciﬁcations for highway bridges, part v
earthquake resistant design”. In: JRA.
Association, Japan Road et al. (1990). “Speciﬁcations for highway bridges”. In:
Part V Earthquake-resistant design (in Japanese).
Bardet, JP and T Tobita (2001). “NERA: a computer program for nonlinear
earthquake site response analyses of layered soil deposits”. In: Department of
Civil Engineering, University of Southern California.
Bazaraa, Abdel Rahman Sadik Said (1967). “Use of the standard penetration test
for estimating settlements of shallow foundations on sand”. PhD dissertation.
University of Illinois, Champaign-Urbana, Ill, USA.
Benz, Thomas (2007). “Small-strain stiﬀness of soils and its numerical conse-
quences”. In:
Biringen, Emre and John Davie (2008). “SPT Automatic Hammer Eﬃciency
Revisited”. In:
Brandenberg, Scott J, Naresh Bellana, and Thomas Shantz (2010). “Shear wave
velocity as function of standard penetration test resistance and vertical eﬀective
stress at California bridge sites”. In: Soil Dynamics and Earthquake Engineering
30.10, pp. 1026–1035.
93
==PAGE:104==
Brinkgreve, RBJ, E Engin, and HK Engin (2010). “Validation of empirical formulas
to derive model parameters for sands”. In: Numerical methods in geotechnical
engineering, pp. 137–142.
Brinkgreve, RBJ, MH Kappert, and PG Bonnier (2007). “Hysteretic damping in a
small-strain stiﬀness model”. In: Proc. of Num. Mod. in Geomech., NUMOG X,
Rhodes, pp. 737–742.
Brinkgreve, RBJ, S Kumarswamy, WM Swolfs, D Waterman, A Chesaru, PG
Bonnier, et al. (2020). “PLAXIS V20 Manuals”. In: PLAXIS bv, the Netherlands.
Brown, Timothy and Hiroshan Hettiarachchi (2008). “Estimating shear strength
properties of soils using SPT blow counts: An energy balance approach”. In:
GeoCongress 2008: Characterization, Monitoring, and Modeling of GeoSystems,
pp. 364–371.
Cetin, K Onder, Raymond B Seed, Armen Der Kiureghian, Kohji Tokimatsu,
Leslie F Harder Jr, Robert E Kayen, and Robert ES Moss (2004). “Standard
penetration test-based probabilistic and deterministic assessment of seismic
soil liquefaction potential”. In: Journal of geotechnical and geoenvironmental
engineering 130.12, pp. 1314–1340.
Clayton, CRI (1990). “SPT energy transmission: theory, measurement and signif-
icance”. In: Ground Engineering, pp. 35–43.
Darendeli, MB and KH Stokoe (2001). “II.(2001).“Development of a new family of
normalized modulus reduction and material damping curves.”” In: Geotechnical
Engineering Report.
Darendeli, Mehmet Baris (2001). “Development of a new family of normalized
modulus reduction and material damping curves”. In:
Dezi, F, S Carbonari, and G Leoni (2008). “Kinematic interaction in pile foun-
dations”. In: The 14th World Conference on Earthquake Engineering, Beijing,
China, October, pp. 12–17.
Dezi, F, S Carbonari, and G Leoni (2010). “Kinematic bending moments in pile
foundations”. In: Soil Dynamics and Earthquake Engineering 30.3, pp. 119–132.
Dezi, Francesca, Sandro Carbonari, and Graziano Leoni (2009). “A model for the
3D kinematic interaction analysis of pile groups in layered soils”. In: Earthquake
Engineering & Structural Dynamics 38.11, pp. 1281–1305.
Di Laora, Raﬀaele, Alessandro Mandolini, and George Mylonakis (2012). “Insight
on kinematic bending of ﬂexible piles in layered soil”. In: Soil Dynamics and
Earthquake Engineering 43, pp. 309–322.
Dikmen, Ünal (2009). “Statistical correlations of shear wave velocity and pen-
etration resistance for soils”. In: Journal of Geophysics and Engineering 6.1,
pp. 61–72.
94
Chapter 7
Bibliography
==PAGE:105==
Dobry, R and MJ O’Rourke (1983). “Discussion of “Seismic response of end-
bearing piles” by Raul Flores-Berrones and Robert V. Whitman (April, 1982)”.
In: Journal of geotechnical engineering 109.5, pp. 778–781.
Dobry, Ricardo, Issa Oweis, and Alfredo Urzua (1976). “Simpliﬁed procedures
for estimating the fundamental period of a soil proﬁle”. In: Bulletin of the
Seismological Society of America 66.4, pp. 1293–1321.
Fan, Ke, George Gazetas, Amir Kaynia, Eduardo Kausel, and Shahid Ahmad
(1991). “Kinematic seismic response of single piles and pile groups”. In: Journal
of Geotechnical Engineering 117.12, pp. 1860–1879.
Gazetas, George (1984). “Seismic response of end-bearing single piles”. In:
International Journal of Soil Dynamics and Earthquake Engineering 3.2, pp. 82–
93.
H.R., Schneider (1999). “Determination of characteristic soil properties”. In:
Geotechnical engineering for Transportation Infrastructure, Rotterdam, pp. 12–
17.
Hanumantharao, C and GV Ramana (2008). “Dynamic soil properties for micro-
zonation of Delhi, India”. In: Journal of earth system science 117.2, pp. 719–
730.
Hardin, Bobby O and Vincent P Drnevich (1972). “Shear modulus and damping in
soils: design equations and curves”. In: Journal of Soil Mechanics & Foundations
Div 98.sm7.
Hatanaka, Munenori and Akihiko Uchida (1996). “Empirical correlation between
penetration resistance and internal friction angle of sandy soils”. In: Soils and
foundations 36.4, pp. 1–9.
Hudson, Martin, IM Idriss, and Mohsen Beikae (1994). QUAD4M: a computer
program to evaluate the seismic response of soil structures using ﬁnite element pro-
cedures and incorporating a compliant base. Center for Geotechnical Modeling,
Department of Civil and Environmental ...
IS:2131-1981 (1981). Method for standard penetration test for soils. Standard.
New Delhi, India.
Iwan, Wilfred D (1967). “On a class of models for the yielding behavior of
continuous and composite systems”. In:
Jafari, Mohammad Kazem, A Shaﬁei, and Arash Razmkhah (2002). “Dynamic
properties of ﬁne grained soils in south of Tehran”. In:
Kayen, Robert E, James K Mitchell, RB Seed, A Lodge, Shin’ya Nishio, Roberto
Coutinho, et al. (1992). “Evaluation of SPT-, CPT-, and shear wave-based meth-
ods for liquefaction potential assessment using Loma Prieta data”. In: Proceed-
ings of the 4th Japan-US Workshop on Earthquake Resistant Design of Lifeline
95
==PAGE:106==
Facilities and Countermeasures for Soil Liquefaction, Hamada, M. and O’Rourke,
TD, eds.
Kiku, H (2001). “In-situ penetration tests and soil proﬁling in Adapazari, Turkey”.
In: Proc. 15th ICSMGE TC4 Satellite Conference on Lessons Learned from Recent
Strong Earthquakes, August 25, 2001, Istanbul, Turkey, pp. 259–265.
Kitazawa, G, K Takeyama, K Suzuki, H Ogawara, and Y Ohsaki (1959). “Subsoil
Map of Tokyo”. In: Gihodo Co.
Kramer, Steven Lawrence et al. (1996). Geotechnical earthquake engineering.
Pearson Education India.
Kulhawy, Fred H and Paul W Mayne (1990). Manual on estimating soil properties
for foundation design. Tech. rep. Electric Power Research Inst., Palo Alto, CA
(USA); Cornell Univ., Ithaca.
Lang, Dominik H (2004). “Damage potential of seismic ground motion consider-
ing local site eﬀects”. PhD thesis.
Lee, Chyi-Tyi and Bi-Ru Tsai (2008). “Mapping Vs30 in Taiwan”. In: TAO: Terres-
trial, Atmospheric and Oceanic Sciences 19.6, p. 6.
Lee, Shannon Hsien-Heng (1990). “Regression models of shear wave velocities in
Taipei basin”. In: Journal of the Chinese Institute of Engineers 13.5, pp. 519–532.
Liao, Samson SC and Robert V Whitman (1986). “Overburden correction factors
for SPT in sand”. In: Journal of geotechnical engineering 112.3, pp. 373–377.
Lubkowski, Z, JE Go, and M Vasileiadis (2017). “THE USE OF NON-LINEAR SITE
RESPONSE ANALYSIS TO INCORPORATE VERY SOFT SOIL RESPONSE IN
ASSESSING MAN-INDUCED SHAKING HAZARD”. In:
Lukiantchuki, Juliana Azoia, George de Paula Bernardes, and Edmundo Rogerio
Esquivel (2017). “Energy Ratio (ER) for the Standard Penetration Test Based
on Measured Field Tests”. In: Soils and Rocks 40.2, pp. 77–91.
Lysmer, John and Roger L Kuhlemeyer (1969). “Finite dynamic model for inﬁnite
media”. In: Journal of the Engineering Mechanics Division 95.4, pp. 859–878.
Maheswari, R Uma, A Boominathan, and GR Dodagoudar (2010). “Use of sur-
face waves in statistical correlations of shear wave velocity and penetration
resistance of Chennai soils”. In: Geotechnical and Geological Engineering 28.2,
pp. 119–137.
Manga, Michael and CY Wang (2007). Earthquake hydrology. Vol. 4.
MASING, Georg (1926). “Eigenspannumyen and entschungung bei messing”. In:
Proc. Inter. Congress for Applied Mechanics, pp. 332–335.
Mayne, Paul W and JB Kemper (1988). “Proﬁling OCR in stiﬀclays by CPT and
SPT”. In: Geotechnical testing journal 11.2, pp. 139–147.
96
Chapter 7
Bibliography
==PAGE:107==
Mejia, LH and EM Dawson (2006). “Earthquake deconvolution for FLAC”. In: 4th
International FLAC symposium on numerical modeling in geomechanics. Citeseer,
pp. 04–10.
Meyerhof, GG (1959). “Compaction of sands and bearing capacity of piles”. In:
Transactions of the American Society of Civil Engineers 126.1, pp. 1292–1322.
Mhaske, Sumedh Yamaji and Deepankar Choudhury (2011). “Geospatial contour
mapping of shear wave velocity for Mumbai city”. In: Natural Hazards 59.1,
pp. 317–327.
Mroz, Zi (1967). “On the description of anisotropic workhardening”. In: Journal
of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 15.3, pp. 163–175.
Mylonakis, George (2001). “Simpliﬁed model for seismic pile bending at soil
layer interfaces”. In: Soils and foundations 41.4, pp. 47–58.
Nikolaou, Stella, G Mylonakis, G Gazetas, and T Tazoh (2001). “Kinematic pile
bending during earthquakes: analysis and ﬁeld measurements”. In: Geotech-
nique 51.5, pp. 425–440.
Novak, Milos and Toyoaki Nogami (1977). “Soil-pile interaction in horizontal
vibration”. In: Earthquake Engineering & Structural Dynamics 5.3, pp. 263–281.
Obrzud, R and A Truty (2012). “The hardening soil model-a practical guidebook
z soil”. In: PC100701 Rep.
Ohba, S and I Toriumi (1970). “Dynamic response characteristics of Osaka Plain”.
In: Proceedings of the annual meeting AIJ (in Japanese).
Ohsaki, Yorihiko and Ryoji Iwasaki (1973). “On dynamic shear moduli and
Poisson’s ratios of soil deposits”. In: Soils and Foundations 13.4, pp. 61–73.
Ohta, Hideki (1972). “Analysis of deformations of soils based on the theory of
plasticity and its application to settlement of embankments”. In:
Ohta, Yutaka and Noritoshi Goto (1978). “Empirical shear wave velocity equa-
tions in terms of characteristic soil indexes”. In: Earthquake engineering &
structural dynamics 6.2, pp. 167–187.
Peck, Ralph Brazelton, Walter Edmund Hanson, and Thomas Hampton Thornburn
(1974). Foundation engineering. Vol. 10. Wiley New York.
Pitilakis, KD, A Anastasiadis, and D Raptakis (1992). “Field and laboratory
determination of dynamic properties of natural soil deposits”. In: Proceedings
of the 10th world conference on earthquake engineering. Vol. 5, pp. 1275–1280.
Poul, Masoud Khazaei and Aspasia Zerva (2018). “Eﬃcient time-domain decon-
volution of seismic ground motions using the equivalent-linear method for
soil-structure interaction analyses”. In: Soil Dynamics and Earthquake Engi-
neering 112, pp. 138–151.
97
==PAGE:108==
Rollins, Kyle M, Mark D Evans, Nathan B Diehl, and William D Daily III (1998).
“Shear modulus and damping relationships for gravels”. In: Journal of Geotech-
nical and Geoenvironmental Engineering 124.5, pp. 396–405.
Santos, Jaime Alberto dos, A Gomes Correia, Arézou Modaressi, F Lopez-Caballero,
and R Carrilho Gomes (2003). “Validation of an elastoplastic model to predict
secant shear modulus of natural soils by experimental results”. In:
Seed, H Bolton and IM Idriss (1981). “Evaluation of liquefaction potential sand
deposits based on observation of performance in previous earthquakes”. In:
ASCE national convention (MO), pp. 481–544.
Seed, H Bolton, IM Idriss, and Ignacio Arango (1983). “Evaluation of liquefaction
potential using ﬁeld performance data”. In: Journal of Geotechnical Engineering
109.3, pp. 458–482.
Seed, Harry Bolton (1975). “Evaluation of soil liquefaction potential during
earthquakes”. In: Rep. EERC.
Sherif Aggour, M and W Rose Radding (2001). Standard penetration test (SPT)
correction. Tech. rep. research report, Maryland state highway administration,
oﬃce of policy and ...
Sivrikaya, O and E Toğrol (2002). “Relations between SPT-N and qu”. In: 5th
Intern. Congress on Advances Civil engineering, Istanbul, Turkey, pp. 943–952.
Skempton, AW (1986). “Standard penetration test procedures and the eﬀects
in sands of overburden pressure, relative density, particle size, ageing and
overconsolidation”. In: Geotechnique 36.3, pp. 425–447.
Stokoe, KH, MB Darendeli, FY Menq, and WK Choi (2004). “Comparison of the
linear and nonlinear dynamic properties of gravels, sands, silts and clays”. In:
Proc. V ICSDEE & III ICEGE, Berkeley, USA.
Sykora, DE and KH Stokoe (1983). “Correlations of in-situ measurements in
sands of shear wave velocity”. In: Soil Dynamics and Earthquake Engineering
20.1, pp. 125–136.
Terzaghi, Karl and Ralph B Peck (1948). Soil Mechanics in Engineering Practice.
John Wiley & Sons.
Tombari, Alessandro, Francesca Dezi, and Mohamed Hesham El Naggar (2012).
“Soil-pile-structure interaction under seismic loads: Inﬂuence of ground motion
intensity, duration and non linearity”. In: Fifth International Conference on
Earthquake Geotechnical Engineering.
Tombari, Alessandro, M Hesham El Naggar, and Francesca Dezi (2017). “Impact
of ground motion duration and soil non-linearity on the seismic performance
of single piles”. In: Soil Dynamics and Earthquake Engineering 100, pp. 72–87.
98
Chapter 7
Bibliography
==PAGE:109==
Vardanega, PJ and MD Bolton (2011). “Strength mobilization in clays and silts”.
In: Canadian Geotechnical Journal 48.10, pp. 1485–1503.
Vucetic, Mladen and Ricardo Dobry (1991). “Eﬀect of soil plasticity on cyclic
response”. In: Journal of geotechnical engineering 117.1, pp. 89–107.
Wang, Su-Yang, Yang Shi, Wei-Ping Jiang, Er-Lei Yao, and Yu Miao (2018). “Esti-
mating Site Fundamental Period from Shear-Wave Velocity ProﬁleEstimating
Site Fundamental Period from Shear-Wave Velocity Proﬁle”. In: Bulletin of the
Seismological Society of America 108.6, pp. 3431–3445.
White, F, P Ingram, and DP Nicholson (2019). “An update of the SPT-cu rela-
tionship proposed by M. Stroud in 1974”. In: Proceedings of the XVII European
Conference of Soil Mechanics Geotechnical Engineering, Reykjavik.
Wichtmann, Triantafyllidis and Th Triantafyllidis (2004). “Inﬂuence of a cyclic
and dynamic loading history on dynamic properties of dry sand, part I: cyclic
and dynamic torsional prestraining”. In: Soil Dynamics and Earthquake Engi-
neering 24.2, pp. 127–147.
Yoshida, Yasuo, Motonori Ikemi, and T Kokusho (1988). “Empirical formulas of
SPT blow-counts for gravelly soils”. In: International Symposium on penetration
testing; ISOPT-1. 1, pp. 381–387.
Youd, T Leslie, Hannah W Bartholomew, and Jamison H Steidl (2008). “SPT
hammer energy ratio versus drop height”. In: Journal of geotechnical and
geoenvironmental engineering 134.3, pp. 397–400.
Youd, T Leslie and Izzat M Idriss (2001). “Liquefaction resistance of soils: sum-
mary report from the 1996 NCEER and 1998 NCEER/NSF workshops on
evaluation of liquefaction resistance of soils”. In: Journal of geotechnical and
geoenvironmental engineering 127.4, pp. 297–313.
Zania, Varvara (2014). “Natural vibration frequency and damping of slender
structures founded on monopiles”. In: Soil dynamics and Earthquake engineering
59, pp. 8–20.
99
==PAGE:110==
==PAGE:111==
A
Appendix A
This appendix contains some of the used correlations that are used in order to
derive the characteristic values in Chapter 3. Not all the employed correlations
are shown herein. The correlations are applied appropriately and according
to the assumption about the corrections for hammer eﬃciency or dilatancy as
discussed in Chapter 2. The correlations are only included here for reference
and the assumptions lying underneath each of them should be reviewed before
applying them as discrepancies arise due to the eﬃciency of the hammer and
other parameters in each study. Thus, caution is advised.
• SPT correlations for friction angle
Hatanaka and Uchida, 1996: 휙= (20푁78)0.5 + 18 or 휙= (20(푁1)60)0.5 + 20
JRA 1990 : 휙= (15푁60)0.5 + 15 ≤45 (푁60 > 15)
Peck et al., 1974: 휙= 27.1 + 0.3푁60 −0.00054푁2
60
Kulhawy and Mayne, 1990: 휙′ = tan−1
"
푁60
12.2+20.3
 휎′표
푝푎

#0.34
Brown and Hettiarachchi, 2008: 휙′ = 1
훽tan−1  0.25푁60
푝푎
휎′

Kitazawa et al., 1959: 휙= (20푁60)0.5 + 15
Meyerhof, 1959: 휙= 28 + 0.15퐷푟
• SPT correlations for undrained shear strength
Terzaghi and Peck, 1967 as in (Kulhawy and Mayne, 1990): 푠푢= 6.25푁60
Sanglerat, 1972: 푠푢= 12.5푁or also 푠푢= 10푁
White et al., 2019: 푠푢= 5.7푁
Sowers, 1975: 푠푢= 12.5푁
Nixon, 1982: 푠푢= 12푁
Sivrikaya and Toğrol, 2002: 푠푢= 4.85푁
Sivrikaya and Toğrol, 2002: 푠푢= 6.82푁60
Brown and Hettiarachchi, 2008: 푠푢= 0.3535100
8.5 푁60
• SPT correlations for shear wave velocity: cohesionless soils
101
==PAGE:112==
Yoshida et al., 1988: 푉푠= 퐶1(훾푧)0.14푁0.25
60
where C1 = 49, 56, 60 or 55 for ﬁne
sand, 25% gravel, 50% gravel and for all soils, respectively.
Ohta, 1972: 푉푠= 87푁0.36 for sands
Ohsaki and Iwasaki, 1973: 푉푠= 59푁0.47 for cohesionless soil
JRA ,1980: 푉푠= 80푁0.33 for sands
Seed et al., 1983: 푉푠= 56.5푁0.50 for sands
Sykora and Stokoe, 1983: 푉푠= 106.7푁0.27 for granular soil
Lee, 1990: 푉푠= 57푁0.49 for sands
Hanumantharao and Ramana, 2008: 푉푠= 79푁0.434 for sands
Raptakis et al., 1995: 푉푠= 100푁0.24 for medium dense sands
Pitilakis et al., 1992: 푉푠= 162푁0.17 for silty sand
• SPT correlations for shear wave velocity: clayey soils
Imai, 1977: 푉푠= 80.2푁0.292 for clays
Raptakis et al., 1995: 푉푠= 184.2푁0.17 for stiﬀclays
Raptakis et al., 1995: 푉푠= 105.5푁0.33 for soft clays
Pitilakis et al., 1992: 푉푠= 165.7푁0.19 for soft clays
Kalteziotis et al., 1992: 푉푠= 76.6푁0.45 for cohesive soils
Jafari et al., 2002: 푉푠= 27.7푁0.73 for clays
JRA 1980: 푉푠= 100푁0.33 for clays
Lee, 1990: 푉푠= 114.43푁0.31 for soft clays
• SPT correlations for shear wave velocity: all soils
Hanumantharao and Ramana, 2008: 푉푠= 82.6푁0.43 for all soils
Jafari et al., 2002: 푉푠= 22푁0.85 for all soils
Kiku, 2001: 푉푠= 68.3푁0.292 for all soils
Dikmen, 2009: 푉푠= 58푁0.39 for all soils
Mhaske and Choudhury, 2011: 푉푠= 72푁0.4 for all soils (site-speciﬁc)
Mhaske and Choudhury, 2011: 푉푠= 40(푁1)0.47
60,푐푠e.q.t. clean sands
Andrus et al., 2004: 푉푠= 87.8(푁1)0.25
60,푐푠for all soils
Choudhury et al., 2011: 푉푠= 72푁0.4 for all soils
102
Chapter A
Appendix A
==PAGE:113==
Ohta, 1972: 푉푠= 85.3푁0.35 for all soils
Ohsaki and Iwasaki, 1973: 푉푠= 82푁0.39 for all soils
Seed and Idriss, 1981: 푉푠= 61푁0.5 for all soils
Athanasopoulos, 1995: 푉푠= 107.6푁0.36 for all soils
Hanumantharao and Ramana, 2008: 푉푠= 82.6푁0.43 for all soils
103
==PAGE:114==
==PAGE:115==
B
Appendix B
Figure B.1.: Original soil stratigraphy and reported SPT values from provided data
105
==PAGE:116==
(a) MCE level
(b) DBE level
Figure B.2.: Spectra of input motion and motion at top of basalt
106
Chapter B
Appendix B
==PAGE:117==
C
Appendix C
The validation of the concept of an embedded beam of dummy stiﬀness in
the longitudinal axis of the volume pile to measure its internal forces is done
according to the rigorous problem of the cantilever beam. The steps followed
are presented in a way so that the logic of the modelling is better perceived. The
main idea lies in the theory of the Euler-Bernoulli beam, according to which, the
internal forces are directly linked with the curvature 푤. It is well-known that
the bending moment and shear in the beam are expressed as:
푄= −푑
푑푥

퐸퐼푑2푤
푑푥2

(C.1)
푀= 퐸퐼푑2푤
푑푥2 and 푄= −푑
푑푥

퐸퐼푑2푤
푑푥2

(C.2)
The beam is given a dummy stiﬀness, one such that it is very soft and can follow
the deformations induced by the surrounding solid elements which are in turn
given the actual stiﬀness. The developing stresses in the beam can then be
calculated according to the deﬂected shape and since the ﬂexural rigidity 퐸퐼is
linearly coupled, the stresses can afterwards be multiplied by a factor to obtain
the genuine forces. This factor depends on the modelled stiﬀness of the beam
at ﬁrst. For the current study, the true moment of inertia 퐼is used, while in
order to represent a concrete material, 퐸= 25 kN/m2 is given at the beam, i.e.
106 smaller than the original elasticity modulus. Thus, the obtained results for
the beam are consequently multiplied by this factor. This is done in order to
directly and easily observe the results in Plaxis 푂푢푡푝푢푡. The eﬀect on the results
is negligible as it will be seen afterwards.If wanted, however, a unity stiﬀness
can be analogously assigned.
The validation is formulated in the following way:
1. Setup of a small soil domain assigning to it a rock-like material of very high
stiﬀness to simulate ﬁxed base conditions; a cylindrical cantilever beam of
1 m diameter and 10 m height vertically above ground and laterally load it
at the top with a static force of 1000 kN. The cantilever is composed by
"soil" (solid) elements given concrete properties (퐸= 25.5 · 106 kN/m2)
107
==PAGE:118==
and the dummy beam at its normal axis as discussed above (input of actual
diameter, but dummy stiﬀness 퐸= 25.5 kN/m2). A visualization of Plaxis
model is shown in Fig. C.1, where the deformations and mesh is also visible.
2. Extract and transform the stress resultants of the embedded beam after
multiplying with the factor of 106.
3. Check how the deﬂection shape and internal force distribution compare
with the exact solutions: 훿푚푎푥= 0.2663 m, 푄= 1000 kN (const.) and
푀푏푎푠푒= 10000 kNm (linear)
4. Gradually improve the approach by incorporating further elements (rigid
plates) at key locations and by extending the modelling of the cantilever to
penetrate the rock, much like a pier-pile system, in the interest of examining
if proper behaviour is achieved at the vicinity of the the embedded part
and directly above (i.e. where stress concentration occurs).
5. Perform a sensitivity check by reﬁning the mesh so as to investigate con-
vergence conditions.
Figure C.1.: Deformation of cantilever model used for validation of volume pile (no
embedment)
Starting with Fig. C.2 it is shown that while the soft beam matches perfectly
the deﬂected shape of the exact solution (an indication also that solid elements
108
Chapter C
Appendix C
==PAGE:119==
capture nicely the rotation), the stress resultants are problematic in the case only
the beam is used. At top, the beam presents a singularity with the shear force
extending far beyond the boundaries of the graph, because of the application
of the force as a point load and the fact that no signiﬁcant stiﬀness is assigned
to the beam. Although this would not pose a problem in the seismic excitation,
it indicates a lack of compliance between the beam and the surrounding solid
elements. As a further evidence of this, the shear force converges to the exact
solution at elevations only far from the concentrated stresses, i.e. at top and
bottom. Additionally, the moment cannot be captured correctly at close proximity
to the ﬁxity point as well. Rigid plates monolithically connected to the beam are
incorporated to "tie" it with the solid elements and accommodate coherence. The
performance largely improves as moments now almost match with the analytical
solution. The shear force cannot be fully matched but this is anticipated due to
the nature of the ﬁnite element method.
Figure C.2.: Soft beam with and without plates in comparison to the analytical solutions
Solid elements experience the same limitation Fig. C.3, at the problematic loca-
tions and additionally, the agreement is not as good as seen in the case of the soft
beam both for the shear and the moment. Of course, using more elements would
minimize these deviations but that would be very computationally expensive.
On top of that, the limitation of the data acquisition in such case would anyhow
not render this approach a viable option for a parametric study.
109
==PAGE:120==
Figure C.3.: Solid elements with and without plates in comparison to the analytical
solutions
Since for the problem at hand the beam does not stop at the rock interface but
extends in a depth to it, an alternative modelling is tried more relevant to the
current. The rock domain is extended downwards to allow for suﬃcient space for
embedment of the cantilever. The penetration of the cantilever into the rock layer
is a total of 4 m. Even though it referred to the dynamic behaviour, Dezi et al.,
2008 showed that an embedment of over 3 times the diameter would suﬃce
for the moments to fully develop. The rest parameters of the previous analysis
remain the same. A representative ﬁgure of the model is illustrated in Fig. C.4
with a reﬁned mesh at the section of highest stress concentration.
110
Chapter C
Appendix C
==PAGE:121==
Figure C.4.: Cantilever model used for validation of volume pile (with embedment)
According to the ﬁndings above, some cases were tried and they are collectively
shown in Fig. C.5. Not including a plate at the location of the ﬁxity results to
very large shear stresses in the beam that are unrealistic. This singularity issue is
eﬀectively solved with a rigid plate at the aforementioned position. Shear forces
logically show a reversal close to the cross-section at the base, while moments are
almost matching the analytical. In fact, a sensitivity check that was performed is
also included in the ﬁgure. The green line is an outcome of a reﬁned meshing
as shown in Fig. C.4 while the purple used a mesh similar to that of Fig. C.1.
This corresponds to an element size of 0.05 m and 0.25, respectively, returning
moments of 9885 kNm and 9690 kNm at elevations of approximately the size of
the elements. For the shear, the mesh reﬁnement aﬀected the sharpness of the
reversal of the load. Also, not shown herein, the compliance of the rock positively
aﬀected the singularity shown for the shear in absence of a plate at the ground
level.
111
==PAGE:122==
Figure C.5.: Soft beam with and without plates in comparison to the analytical solutions
for the embedded cantilever model
From the current, an inclusion of a rigid plate in the pile at the rock-soil interface
makes sense, although the rock is softer than modelled herein and soil is also
present above, rather than the void of this validation, which most certainly
examined the extreme case. A reasonable meshing can provide fairly good results,
while moments are expected to present their maximum in close proximity to
the interface, but not directly on it. The development of the peak close and
not exactly at the interface of two layers was also discussed by Nikolaou et al.,
2001.
112
Chapter C
Appendix C
==PAGE:123==
List of Tables
3.1
Borehole and test data for the 3 soil types
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2
Soil proﬁles and natural frequencies of each layer in the soil deposits 25
3.3
Soil proﬁles and natural periods of each layer in the soil deposits
.
26
3.4
PGA values (in g) for the 4 diﬀerent site-speciﬁc accelerograms in
MCE and DBE conditions and their average . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.5
Case study bridge corresponding to a single pile
. . . . . . . . . .
29
4.1
Input parameters for HSs for the diﬀerent soils considered in the
parametric analyses
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2
Properties of linear soil used for validation of the numerical model
38
4.3
Validation of bridge structure numerical model assuming a SDOF
lumped mass system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.4
Plate properties for Plaxis 2D model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.5
Beam properties for Plaxis 3D model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.6
Volume pile properties for Plaxis 3D model with incorporated soft
beam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.1
Comparison of predominant periods for input, top-of-basalt and
surface motions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5.2
Maximum shear forces and moments associated with kinematic
interaction and their relative ampliﬁcation from DBE to MCE condition 70
5.3
Comparison of natural periods of bridge structure (in s) . . . . . .
79
5.4
Maximum moment comparison of FE methods with analytical ex-
pressions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
113
==PAGE:124==
List of Figures
2.1
Terminology of ground response (source: Bardet and Tobita, 2001)
6
2.2
Inﬂuence of excitation frequency and of damping on the ampliﬁca-
tion as given by the transfer function for a linear elastic soil layer
overlying a geological bedrock(source: Lang, 2004)
. . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Mode shapes of vibration (source: Kramer et al., 1996) . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Alternative concept for calculating the fundamental period of soil
based on SDOF (source: Wang et al., 2018) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Stiﬀness reduction curve based on strain levels and characteristic
exhibited strain ranges in diﬀerent engineering applications (source:
Brinkgreve et al., 2020)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1
Calculated GRM-B properties from SPT correlations and the respec-
tive derivation of the characteristic (푘) value . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
Calculated CLA-A properties from SPT correlations and the respec-
tive derivation of the characteristic (푘) value . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3
Calculated CLA-B properties from SPT correlations and the respec-
tive derivation of the characteristic (푘) value . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4
Accelerograms and spectra of the considered earthquakes for MCE
level
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.1
Stiﬀness reduction curves for GRM-B soil . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2
Stiﬀness reduction curves for CLA-A soil
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3
Stiﬀness reduction curves for CLA-B soil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.4
Damping curve for CLA-B soil (after Plaxis) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.5
Shear wave velocity proﬁle for GRM-B soil (stress dependent) . . .
35
4.6
Inﬂuence of free-ﬁeld boundaries on peak surface acceleration for
diﬀerent model widths . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.7
Bottom interface eﬀect to peak surface acceleration proﬁle (푊/퐻=
10) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.8
PGA error for the ﬁrst 3 soil eigenfrequencies (푊/퐻= 10) . . . . .
41
114
==PAGE:125==
4.9
EERA halfspace(inside motion) vs transfer function of Eq. (2.1) for
rigid bedrock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.10
Plaxis comparison with EERA (linear soil)
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.11
Plaxis comparison with EERA (non-linear soil) . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.12
Comparison of site response analysis between Plaxis 2D and 3D
(푊/퐻= 25)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.13
Comparison of site response analysis between Plaxis 2D and 3D
(푊/퐻= 10)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.14
Mesh generation for 1D site response analysis(left: SP1, right: SP2) 46
4.15
Comparison of 2D plate with Fan et al., 1991 kinematic response
factors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.16
Sensitivity analysis for the performance of plate with various slen-
derness ratios 퐿/푑and for diﬀerent lengths (푎0 = 0.20)
. . . . . .
49
4.17
Comparison of kinematic response factors between Plaxis 2D and
Anoyatis et al., 2013 for ﬁxed-tip/free-head BCs
. . . . . . . . . .
51
4.18
Sensitivity analysis for width and out-of-plane depth dimensions of
Plaxis 3D model w.r.t. Fan et al., 1991 (푎0 = 0.30)
. . . . . . . . .
53
4.19
Convergence analysis for out-of-plane depth dimensions of Plaxis
3D model w.r.t. Fan et al., 1991 (푎0 = 0.25) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.20
Comparison of kinematic response factors between Plaxis 3D and
Fan et al., 1991 for ﬁxed-tip/free-head BCs . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.21
Comparison of kinematic response factors between Plaxis 3D and
Anoyatis et al., 2013 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.22
Mesh discretization in volume pile shown at a deformed state . . .
60
4.23
Mesh discretization for beam element (direct analysis) . . . . . . .
60
5.1
Earthquake inﬂuence on maximum strains proﬁle for both PGA levels 62
5.2
Inﬂuence of the diﬀerent soil proﬁles on maximum accelerations
proﬁle for both PGA levels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.3
Ampliﬁcation and attenuation ratios w.r.t. accelerations at top of
basalt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5.4
Pseudo-acceleration spectra for both PGA levels
. . . . . . . . . .
65
5.5
Shear force envelopes due to kinematic interaction . . . . . . . . .
67
5.6
Moment envelopes due to kinematic interaction
. . . . . . . . . .
69
5.7
Internal force distribution with a soft beam (without plate at the
interface) and with solid elements for two distinct time steps
. . .
71
5.8
Kinematic 3D interaction in Plaxis 3D (SP1)
. . . . . . . . . . . .
72
5.9
Kinematic interaction in Plaxis 3D (SP2)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
List of Figures
115
==PAGE:126==
5.10
Comparison of volume pile with and without plate at rock-soil
vicinity for time of occurrence of |푀푚푎푥| (SP1) . . . . . . . . . . .
74
5.11
Shear envelopes in Plaxis 2D - Kinematic vs direct
. . . . . . . . .
75
5.12
Moment envelopes in Plaxis 2D - Kinematic vs direct . . . . . . . .
76
5.13
Phase diﬀerence of shear components of deck and pile-cap . . . . .
77
5.14
Spectra for deck and pile-cap accelerations . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
5.15
Kinematic vs direct in Plaxis 3D for SP1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
5.16
Kinematic vs direct in Plaxis 3D for SP2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
5.17
Kinematic interaction - Plaxis 2D vs 3D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
5.18
Comparison of soil and pile deformations at time of occurrence of
|푀푚푎푥| and the corresponding bending moment distribution along
the pile (SP1)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
5.19
Comparison of soil and pile deformations at time of occurrence of
|푀푚푎푥| and the corresponding bending moment distribution along
the pile (SP2)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
5.20
Direct method - Plaxis 2D Vs 3D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
B.1
Original soil stratigraphy and reported SPT values from provided data105
B.2
Spectra of input motion and motion at top of basalt
. . . . . . . . 106
C.1
Deformation of cantilever model used for validation of volume pile
(no embedment) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
C.2
Soft beam with and without plates in comparison to the analytical
solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
C.3
Solid elements with and without plates in comparison to the ana-
lytical solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
C.4
Cantilever model used for validation of volume pile (with embedment)111
C.5
Soft beam with and without plates in comparison to the analytical
solutions for the embedded cantilever model . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
116
List of Figures
