==PAGE:1==
Characterization of acoustic
material properties using the
acousto-optic eﬀect
Master thesis, August 2020
Mario Alfredo Montoya Sandoval, s182334
Supervisors:
Efren Fernandez Grande
Samuel Arturo Verburg Riezu
Salvador Barrera Figueroa
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Acoustic Technology, Department of Electrical Engineering
Ørsteds Plads, Building 352,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3949
elektro@elektro.dtu.dk
act.elektro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The goal of this thesis is to study the use the acousto-optic eﬀect for the esti-
mation of reﬂection ratio and surface impedance of acoustic materials, through
analytical simulations.
The acousto-optic eﬀect would allow to measure the
sound ﬁeld in a tube narrower than possible with conventional methods, allow-
ing to measure the reﬂection ratio and surface impedance at higher frequencies
than previously possible and without disturbing the sound ﬁeld. To perform
this study, an analytical model of the sound ﬁeld within an impedance tube is
ﬁrst developed, allowing for the surface impedance and the description of the
source at the input to be variable. After generating the sound ﬁeld, refracto-
vibrometry measurements using a scanning laser Doppler vibrometer (SLDV)
[18] across the length of a transparent tube are simulated. This process is per-
formed using 3 diﬀerent methods for calculating the reﬂection ratio or the sur-
face impedance: the standing wave ratio method, the transfer function method,
and the p/uz method estimating the velocity with a ﬁnite diﬀerence. For the
surface impedance, the simulations are done ﬁrst for a ﬁxed impedance across
frequencies, then for impedances calculated from Komatsu’s [9] model for porous
absorbers. Comparing the methods, the transfer function gives the most accu-
racy, especially in the presence of background noise, which greatly degrades the
results obtained via the p/uz method. Several parameters are varied, such as
the dimensions of the tube, position and scanning scheme of the SLDV, and
resolution of simulation parameters. The estimations are compared to the sur-
face impedance that was entered as a parameter to generate the sound ﬁeld,
calculating the relative error and analyzing the eﬀect of the varying parameters
on the resulting error. While lower background noise and more measurement
angles give straightforward advantages, other parameters like the diameter and
the laser-to-wall distance have mixed eﬀects, where modifying them to increase
the frequency range also results in higher error across all frequencies.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis, "Characterization of acoustic material properties using the acousto-
optic eﬀect", was submitted to the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) as
partial fulﬁllment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Science in En-
gineering Acoustics. The project was completed between 5-February-2020 and
14-August-2020 at the Department of Electrical Engineering and the Acoustic
Technology group, for 30 ECTS credits, under the supervision of Efren Fernan-
dez Grande (DTU), Samuel Arturo Verburg Riezu (DTU), and Salvador Barrera
Figueroa (Denmark’s National Metrology Institute).
Lyngby, 14-August-2020
Mario Alfredo Montoya Sandoval, s182334
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to thank my supervisors Efren Fernandez
Grande, Samuel Arturo Verburg Riezu, and Salvador Barrera Figueroa, for their
support and advice throughout my work in this master thesis.
Also, I would like to greatly thank DTU for awarding me the tuition fee waiver
for highly qualiﬁed non-EU/EEA students, and to the Danish government for
providing these scholarships to DTU. Without it, studying this master degree,
my most important life goal as of today, would have been out of my possibilities.
Finally, I would like to thank all the friends I have made along the way and
worked with throughout my master studies, especially Tushar, Kristinna (thanks
for the feedback on this report!), and Katarzyna, as well as my best friend and
soulmate, Saira, whose support and advice was instrumental in me taking the
leap of faith of moving to Denmark for my studies when the conditions to do so
became complicated.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Symbols
d
Tube diameter
dl
Longitudinal laser diﬀerential
dlw
Laser-to-wall distance
L
Tube length
LDV
Laser Doppler vibrometer
M
Number of m modes
m
m mode
N
Number of n modes
n
n mode
n0
Refractive index of air
p
Acoustic pressure
ˆp
Estimated pressure
ˆpz
Estimated z component of pressure for all modes
ˆpzmn
Estimated z component of pressure for current m and n mode
p0
Atmospheric pressure
R
Reﬂection ratio
SLDV
Scanning laser Doppler vibrometer
uz
z component of particle velocity
uzmn
Spatially integrated z component of particle velocity for current m and n mode
Zs
Surface impedance
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Symbols
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
Euler’s equation of motion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
One-dimensional Helmholtz equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Impedance and estimation methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.1
Deﬁnitions of impedance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.2
Komatsu model of surface impedance for porous materials
7
2.3.3
Sound reﬂection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.4
Conventional reﬂection/impedance estimation methods with
an impedance tube . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.5
Proposed reﬂection/impedance estimation methods with
an impedance tube and an SLDV . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Sound ﬁeld in a duct with circular cross-section . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4.1
Transversal modes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4.2
Sound ﬁeld in a duct with arbitrary input velocity and
arbitrary termination impedance . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.5
The acousto-optic eﬀect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.5.1
Measurement method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.5.2
Tomographical reconstruction using Radon transform
. .
24
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
3
Simulation
27
3.1
Simulation of the sound ﬁeld in an impedance tube . . . . . . . .
27
3.1.1
Validation against COMSOL model
. . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2
Simulation of SLDV measurement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2.1
Validation against COMSOL model
. . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.2.2
Calculation of apparent velocity and estimated pressure .
37
3.3
Tomographical reconstruction of a simulated sound ﬁeld at a
cross-section . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4
Results and discussion
45
4.1
Estimation of reﬂection ratio with a ﬁxed surface impedance . . .
47
4.2
Estimation of reﬂection ratio with Komatsu porous material impedance
model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.3
Eﬀect of varying parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.3.1
Tube diameter
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.3.2
Tube length . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
4.3.3
Background noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
4.3.4
Number of n and m modes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.3.5
Laser-to-wall distance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
4.3.6
Laser beam longitudinal diﬀerential
. . . . . . . . . . . .
62
4.3.7
Number of laser beam angles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
4.3.8
Maximum aperture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
4.4
Tomographical reconstruction of the sound ﬁeld at a cross-section
65
5
Conclusions and future work
67
Bibliography
69
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The measurement of materials’ absorption coeﬃcient is an essential process in
acoustics, particularly in the ﬁeld of room acoustics. Possessing accurate data of
the absorption of materials at diﬀerent frequencies, allows acoustic engineers to
more precisely tailor the acoustic response of a room, or a similar environment
like a car cabin, to a speciﬁc desired response.
However, current methods for measuring the absorption coeﬃcient all come
with considerable limitations. If using the reverberation room method, a large
sample is needed, and more important than that, the measurement is not con-
sistent across diﬀerent reverberation rooms. The impedance tube with the two-
microphone method is considerably consistent, but the ﬁxed design and setup
does not have the ﬂexibility to allow for an extensive range of frequencies [1].
Particularly, this method is limited at higher frequencies, mainly due to the
appearance of transversal modes in the tube. For this reason, sound absorber
datasheets will typically only go up to 4 kHz or 8 kHz. Absorption for higher
frequencies could be measured by designing a smaller tube, but then it becomes
more complicated to properly mount the microphones.
However, with refracto-vibrometry gradually showing more promise as an alter-
nate method for measuring sound, it is possible to circumvent the limitations
implied by the use of microphones.
Refracto-vibrometry consists on using a
laser Doppler vibrometer (LDV), where the laser goes through a sound ﬁeld.
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
The sound waves modify the refraction index of air, known as the acousto-optic
eﬀect [15] [6]. The LDV then measures an apparent velocity, caused not by a
vibrating surface but by the sound ﬁeld. This apparent velocity is only propor-
tional to an integration of the sound ﬁeld across the laser beam, so additional
techniques must be applied in order to obtain the pressure at a speciﬁc point in
3-dimensional space. Additionally, there is currently on-going research studying
the practicality of such techniques [16] [17], as they still need to be explored and
developed.
If refracto-vibrometry is deemed practical in application, it would open sev-
eral new possibilities regarding sound measurement. One of these possibilities
would be to measure the sound ﬁeld in tubes or cavities so small that micro-
phones would not even ﬁt nor could be mounted. For instance, one could use a
narrow impedance tube made of a transparent material, and measure the sound
ﬁeld inside the tube with a scanning laser Doppler vibrometer (SLDV). The
advantage of using a narrow tube is the ability to have plane waves at higher
frequencies than conventional impedance tube methods, where the tube could
be so narrow that it would be impossible to mount traditional microphones. In
the case where there are only plane waves in the small tube, the actual pressure
at diﬀerent positions can be obtained with an SLDV. Additionally, an SLDV
measurement would not disturb the sound ﬁeld as physical microphones would.
This experiment has already been carried out in [18], although using just one
method for estimation for reﬂection ratio, and one set of parameters.
The goal of this thesis is to study the use of the acousto-optic eﬀect for the
estimation of reﬂection ratio and surface impedance of acoustic materials, using
analytical simulations to explore and compare diﬀerent estimation methods, and
also studying the eﬀect of various parameters in the simulated setup. An equa-
tion for the 3-dimensional sound ﬁeld in a tube, with an arbitrary termination
impedance, is derived. Then, the procedure of measuring with an SLDV is sim-
ulated. This is performed varying several parameters, such as tube dimensions
and number of measurements at diﬀerent angles, and the simulated measure-
ments are studied and discussed. Additionally, tomographical reconstruction is
explored, applying it on sound ﬁelds obtained from the analytical model derived
in this thesis.
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Theory
This chapter presents the essential physical and mathematical framework for the
calculation and the simulated measurement of the sound ﬁeld in a tube using
refracto-vibrometry. The description of sound ﬁelds is mostly obtained from [8],
while the fundamentals of refracto-vibrometry are mostly based on [12], which
in turn references other research papers.
2.1
Euler’s equation of motion
Conservation of momentum states that a gradient in the pressure will cause a
particle to accelerate:
∇ptot + ρtot
du
dt = 0
(2.1)
where ptot is the sum of the equilibrium pressure p0 and the time varying pressure
p′, ρtot is the sum of the equilibrium density ρ0 and the time varying density ρ′,
u is the particle velocity vector, and t is time.
==PAGE:16==
4
Theory
As the equilibrium pressure is static, and the time-varying density is several or-
ders of magnitude smaller than the equilibrium density, equation 2.1 is simpliﬁed
to:
∇p′ + ρ0
∂u
∂t = 0
(2.2)
which is also known as Euler’s equation of motion.
Since the sound ﬁeld varies as ejωt, and if we consider a one-dimensional sound
ﬁeld, the equation above can also be written:
jωρˆux + ∂ˆp
∂x = 0
(2.3)
where ω is the angular frequency, ρ is density, and ˆux is the particle velocity
component in the x direction.
2.2
One-dimensional Helmholtz equation
Conservation of mass indicates that a local divergence of matter will in turn
cause a change in the local density of the medium:
∇· (ρtotu) + ∂ρtot
∂t
= 0
(2.4)
Again, taking into account that the varying density is several orders of magni-
tude smaller than the equilibrium density, plus considering adiabatic conditions:
ρ0∇· u + 1
c2
∂p′
∂t = 0
(2.5)
Combining this with equation 2.2 gives the linearised wave equation:
∇2p′ = 1
c2
∂2p′
∂t2
(2.6)
==PAGE:17==
2.2 One-dimensional Helmholtz equation
5
where c is the speed of sound.
From this equation, a one-dimensional wave
equation can be derived:
∂2p
∂x2 = 1
c2
∂2p
∂t2
(2.7)
Considering equation 2.3, the above equation can be simpliﬁed to:
∂2ˆp
∂x2 + k2ˆp = 0
(2.8)
where k is the wavenumber, equal to 2πf/c, where f is frequency. The above
equation is known as the one-dimensional Helmholtz equation, with the general
solution:
ˆp = p+ej(ωt−kx) + p−ej(ωt+kx)
(2.9)
which can be interpreted as a plane wave traveling in the positive x direction
with an amplitude p+, superimposed with another plane wave traveling in the
negative x direction with an amplitude p−.
Using Euler’s equation of motion expressed in equation 2.2, a similar expression
for the particle velocity in the x direction is derived:
ˆux = p+
ρc ej(ωt−kx) −p−
ρc ej(ωt+kx)
(2.10)
An important diﬀerence between equations 2.9 and 2.10 is that pressure is a
scalar quantity, so the two waves are added, but velocity is a vector quantity,
and as they’re traveling in opposite directions, the two quantities are subtracted.
Expanding equation 2.6 into a 3D Helmholtz equation in cartesian coordinates:
∂2ˆp
∂x2 + ∂2ˆp
∂y2 + ∂2ˆp
∂z2 + k2ˆp = 0
(2.11)
==PAGE:18==
6
Theory
2.3
Impedance and estimation methods
In this section, the concepts of impedance and sound reﬂection will be explained,
and conventional methods as well as new proposed methods will be presented.
2.3.1
Deﬁnitions of impedance
The wave impedance Z is:
Z = p
ux
(2.12)
where ux is the normal component of the particle velocity.
If the pressure is obtained at two points, then it is possible to obtain the particle
velocity component ux in the direction of the measurement positions, via a ﬁnite
diﬀerence and equation 2.2. Then, the wave impedance can be obtained using
equation 2.12.
It is worth noting that, for acoustic materials, the same ratio in equation 2.12
is used to describe their acoustic properties, but in this context this is referred
to as the surface impedance, henceforth denoted Zs.
The acoustic impedance Za, used to describe the average acoustic properties on
an actual surface, is:
Za = p
Q
(2.13)
where Q is the volume velocity.
Considering that Q is the integral of the normal component of particle velocity
across a surface S:
Q =
Z
S
u · dS,
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Impedance and estimation methods
7
and assuming the acoustic behavior is constant across the surface, then the
wave impedance and the acoustic impedance are proportional to each other by
a factor of the surface S:
Za = Z
S
The characteristic impedance of a medium is the wave impedance for a plane
wave propagating in the medium, and describes an acoustical property of the
medium itself. For dry air at 20oC, this is the multiplication of its density 1.2
kg/m3 and its speed of sound 343 m/s.
2.3.2
Komatsu model of surface impedance for porous ma-
terials
The complex speciﬁc impedance of porous absorbers can be closely estimated
using empirical models, one of which is Komatsu’s model [9].
The model states that the surface impedance Zs of the porous material is:
Zs = (R + jX)coth((α + jβ)h)
(2.14)
where h is the thickness of the material, and R, X, α, and β are deﬁned as
follows:
R = ρ0c
 
1 + 0.00027

2 −logf
σ
6.2!
X = −ρ0c
 
0.0047

2 −logf
σ
4.1!
α = 0.0069ω
c

2 −logf
σ
4.1
β = ω
c
 
1 + 0.0004

2 −logf
σ
6.2!
==PAGE:20==
8
Theory
where σ is the ﬂow resistivity of the material.
Though the symbols R and α are used here, throughout the rest of the report
they are used to refer to the reﬂection ratio |R| and the absorption coeﬃcient
α, respectively.
With this model, it is possible to estimate and enter realistic values of complex
surface impedance in the simulations.
2.3.3
Sound reﬂection
When a wave is traveling in a medium which has a certain characteristic impedance,
and it arrives at an interface with another medium with a diﬀerent characteristic
impedance, a reﬂection will occur, with a change in amplitude and phase.
If we deﬁne a ratio of p−to p+, and call it the reﬂection factor R, then equation
2.9 can be expressed:
ˆp = p+(ej(ωt−kx) + Rej(ωt+kx))
(2.15)
Then, R will describe the attenuation caused by the surface upon producing the
reﬂected wave. It is important to keep in mind that this reﬂection factor is in
function of frequency for a single material. Additionally, the reﬂection factor
can be a complex number, thereby including phase shift information.
The reﬂection factor associated to a surface and the corresponding surface
impedance are related via:
Zs = ρc1 + R
1 −R
(2.16)
Additionally, the absorption coeﬃcient (the typical quantity used to describe a
sound absorbent material) can be calculated via:
α = 1 −|R|2
(2.17)
It must be kept in mind that, here, the reﬂection ratio, surface impedance, and
absorption coeﬃcient are all being considered for normal incidence.
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Impedance and estimation methods
9
Figure 2.1: Standing wave pattern. Taken from [8], page 16
A standing wave pattern like the one shown in ﬁgure 2.1 will form in a (suf-
ﬁciently narrow) tube, due to the interaction of the incident wave and the re-
ﬂected wave. Taking advantage of this, the reﬂection ratio, and consequently the
surface impedance and absorption coeﬃcient of the material, can be estimated
using an impedance tube and diﬀerent techniques, described in the following
subsections.
2.3.4
Conventional reﬂection/impedance estimation meth-
ods with an impedance tube
Currently, there are traditional methods of calculating the reﬂection ratio and/or
surface impedance of acoustic materials, using an impedance tube and micro-
phones. The methods are presented below.
2.3.4.1
Standing wave ratio method
The standing wave method consists on measuring the maximum and minimum
pressure, and with it, obtaining the standing wave ratio s:
s = pmax
pmin
(2.18)
Consequently, the absolute value of the material’s reﬂection factor can be found:
|R| = s −1
s + 1
(2.19)
Traditionally, this would be done by inserting a probe microphone and moving
it across the length of the tube, to ﬁnd the maximum and minimum pressure of
==PAGE:22==
10
Theory
the standing wave.
This method comes with several disadvantages. One of them is that only the
magnitude of the reﬂection factor can be estimated, therefore losing the phase
information. Another disadvantage is that this is a very cumbersome procedure
to perform. And yet another one, is that the probe microphone is expected to
somewhat disturb the sound ﬁeld inside the tube.
For these reasons, one of the currently preferred methods is the transfer function
method.
2.3.4.2
Transfer function method
It is possible to determine the material’s complex reﬂection factor by measuring
the pressure at two positions, ﬁnding the transfer function between the two
measurements, and applying the following equation [1]:
R = H12 −HI
HR −H12
e2jk0x1
(2.20)
where
H12 = p2
p1
,
(2.21)
HI = e−jk(x1−x2),
(2.22)
and
HR = ejk(x1−x2)
(2.23)
In these equations, x1 and x2 are the positions of microphones 1 and 2, while
p1 and p2 are the pressures measured at microphones 1 and 2.
Like the standing wave ratio method, this method requires the sound ﬁeld to
consist only of plane waves.
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Impedance and estimation methods
11
The pressure measured at two positions can be obtained via a two-microphone
setup, or using one microphone in two successive positions.
In the two-microphone setup, the two microphones are mounted on the impedance
tube at ﬁxed positions. In order to have good enough correlation to calculate
the transfer functions, the separation distance of the two points should be be-
tween 5% and 45% of the wavelength [1]. Therefore, this ﬁxed setup results in
a working frequency range, where the 5% limit determines the low frequency
limit, and the 45% limit determines the high frequency limit. Additionally, the
low frequency limit of the working range can be further limited by the signal
processing equipment.
The one-microphone setup is more accurate, and therefore appropriate for pre-
cision measurements. However, it is a considerably more elaborate process and
requires application of more signal processing techniques.
2.3.5
Proposed reﬂection/impedance estimation methods
with an impedance tube and an SLDV
Using a transparent impedance tube and an SLDV, the methods described in
section 2.3.4 can be adapted to take advantage of the many measurements that
can be obtained. These adaptations will be presented in this section. In the
cases where it is possible to calculate the complex reﬂection ratio R, it can then
be converted into surface impedance as described in section 2.3.1. A general ad-
vantage with any of the methods is that these measurements can be performed
without disturbing the sound ﬁeld in the duct. The reﬂection factors or surface
impedances (depending on the method) are calculated from the pressures mea-
sured through the simulated LDV measurement that will be described in section
3.2.
2.3.5.1
Standing wave ratio method
An advantage of applying the acousto-optic eﬀect to the standing wave ratio
method, is that it is possible to scan the tube to get a smooth pressure curve
without causing any disturbance to the sound ﬁeld.
The standing wave ratio is calculated by taking a certain range of the estimated
pressure across the duct, ﬁnding the maximum and minimum pressure in that
range, and applying equation 2.18.
==PAGE:24==
12
Theory
The maximum and minimum pressure peaks in the interference pattern across
the duct can vary considerably, especially in the presence of evanescent modes
at the input of the duct. Thus, the range selected to calculate the standing
wave ratio is a portion containing only 2 maximum peaks and 2 minimum peaks,
around the middle of the measured aperture. This range changes with frequency,
becoming shorter at higher frequencies.
In the case of low frequencies, the
wavelength may become too large to at least form 2 maxima and 2 minima. In
that case, the standing wave ratio is calculated by ﬁnding the maximum and
minimum pressure vector in the whole vector, which is expected not to give an
accurate estimation of reﬂection ratio.
The reﬂection ratio is then calculated with equation 2.19. Because this method
works with the pressure magnitudes, and and complex reﬂection ratio is re-
quired to calculate the impedance, here it is not possible to obtain the surface
impedance.
2.3.5.2
Transfer function method
For the transfer function method, ﬁrst the pressure is measured at many points
along the tube length. As described in section 2.3.4.2, the separation distance
should be within 0.05 and 0.45 times the wavelength to be suﬃciently correlated
for this method. Then, equation 2.20 is applied for all possible combinations
where the separation distance is within this range, obtaining many values of R.
The ﬁnal estimated reﬂection factor is obtained by getting the median of all
reﬂection factors calculated from every applicable position combination.
2.3.5.3
Velocity by ﬁnite diﬀerence method
Considering that measurements can be performed at very small separation dis-
tances, not possible with microphones, it also becomes possible to estimate the
surface impedance using ﬁnite diﬀerence and equation 2.12. In fact, the wave
impedance across the whole tube length could be calculated this way.
Ad-
ditionally, the measurements can be done for very high frequencies that are
considerably scattered by microphones.
Since the wave impedance varies along the tube, to measure the material’s
surface impedance it is ideal to perform at least two measurements as close as
possible to the absorbent material sample. In the simulation, this is achieved
by restricting the aperture to a very narrow angle, since an oblique laser beam
will miss the region right in front of the sample per the setup explained later
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Sound ﬁeld in a duct with circular cross-section
13
in section 2.5.1. The code automatically shifts the narrow aperture towards the
termination with the absorbent material sample, as will be explained in section
3.2.
With two measurements, the velocity can be obtained from equation 2.2, and
the surface impedance can be obtained via 2.12.
Additionally, the complex
reﬂection factor can be obtained by solving equation 2.16 for R.
In practice, the LDV would have to placed so that the laser beam passes parallel
to the surface and right in front it, as close as possible.
A setup might be
needed where the LDV or the tube can be moved and/or rotated with very high
precision.
2.4
Sound ﬁeld in a duct with circular cross-section
The sound ﬁeld studied in this project will be in a cylindrical impedance tube,
therefore, it is important to understand the behavior of sound in a duct with
circular cross-section. The underlying theory will be presented in this section.
The sound ﬁeld in a duct, produced by a piston the same shape and size of
the duct moving uniformly, will consist only of plane waves while the sound
frequency is below the duct’s lowest cut-oﬀfrequency f10 [8]:
f10 ≈1.84c
2πa
(2.24)
where a is the radius of the tube.
In the case of a semi-inﬁnite duct, or a termination that perfectly absorbs the
incident wave, the sound ﬁeld will consist only of one plane wave traveling in
one direction. Otherwise, reﬂections will be produced, and a standing wave will
form within the duct. These scenarios are, again, considering an input frequency
below the duct’s lowest cut-oﬀfrequency.
In ducts with a very small diameter, thermoviscous losses may play a relevant
role. The thermal boundary layer δh (which is larger than the viscous boundary
layer) can be approximated via the following equation [4]:
δh ≈0.0025 1
√f
(2.25)
==PAGE:26==
14
Theory
In section 3.1 it will be shown that, for the problem and frequency range con-
sidered in this project, thermoviscous losses will be negligible.
2.4.1
Transversal modes
In this section, the equations that describe the modal behavior in a duct with
circular cross-section will be derived.
The 3D Helmholtz equation (eq. 2.11) expressed in cylindrical coordinates is:
∂2ˆp
∂r2 + 1
r
∂ˆp
∂r2 + 1
r2
∂2ˆp
∂ϕ2 + ∂2ˆp
∂z2 + k2ˆp = 0
(2.26)
The boundary condition for rigid walls is:
∂ˆp
∂r

r=a
= 0
(2.27)
And it is assumed that the pressure can be obtained through separation of
variables:
ˆp(r, ϕ, z, t) = pr(r)pϕ(ϕ)pz(z)ejωt
(2.28)
Inserting equation 2.28 into 2.26, and following from the boundary condition in
equation 2.27, it is found that:
J′
m(kra) = 0
(2.29)
where J′
m(kra) is the ﬁrst derivative of the Bessel function, m is an integer, and
kr is the radial wavenumber.
This equation is only satisﬁed with certain discrete values of kr, denoted krmn,
where n is also an integer.
==PAGE:27==
2.4 Sound ﬁeld in a duct with circular cross-section
15
Finally, the solution to equations 2.26 and 2.27 (disregarding time) is:
ˆp(r, ϕ, z) =
M
X
m=−M
N
X
n=0
Λmn
√ϵmJm(krmnr)e−jmϕ(Amne−jkzmnz + Bmnejkzmnz)
(2.30)
where Amn and Bmn are coeﬃcients, and ϵm and Λmn are regularisation factors.
In this case, ϵm = 1 for m = 0 and ϵm = 2 for m > 0. Λmn is:
Λmn = (1 −m2/(krmna)2)−1/2/Jm(krmna)
(2.31)
and the wavenumber in the z direction is:
kzmn = (k2 −k2
rmn)1/2
(2.32)
Transversal propagating modes will be generated throughout the duct when
the input frequency is above the duct’s lowest cut-oﬀfrequency, obtained from
equation 2.24. The shapes of these modes are shown in ﬁgure 2.2.
Additionally, it can be inferred from equations 2.30 and 2.32 that transversal
evanescent modes can be generated in the cases where the radial wavenumber
krmn is greater than the wavenumber k of the input frequency. Such cases would
be when the sound source is not a piston the same size and shape of the duct
cross-section moving uniformly, even when the input frequency is below the
duct’s lowest cut-oﬀfrequency. Speciﬁc examples are a point source, a piston
moving uniformly but being smaller than the duct cross-section, or a piston the
same size and shape of the duct cross-section, which is not moving uniformly.
These evanescent modes are the same as those shown in ﬁgure 2.2, however,
they would decay exponentially instead of propagating indeﬁnitely.
At each mn iteration, equation 2.30 can be thought of a multiplication of the
mode shape for a circular cross-section:
ψmn(r, ϕ) = Λmn
√ϵmJm(krmnr)e−jmϕ
(2.33)
==PAGE:28==
16
Theory
Figure 2.2: Mode shapes for a duct with a circular cross-section, showing the
nodal lines. Taken from [8], page 111
with the z component of pressure:
ˆpzmn(z) = Amne−jkzmnz + Bmnejkzmnz
(2.34)
so that
ˆpmn(r, ϕ, z) = ψmn(r, ϕ)ˆpzmn(z)
(2.35)
2.4.2
Sound ﬁeld in a duct with arbitrary input velocity
and arbitrary termination impedance
As it is of interest to simulate the sound ﬁeld in an impedance tube with an
arbitrary termination impedance, it is necessary to derive the coeﬃcients Amn
and Bmn of equation 2.30. The detailed derivation steps for Amn and Bmn are
presented in this section.
==PAGE:29==
2.4 Sound ﬁeld in a duct with circular cross-section
17
The z component of pressure ˆpz(z) will depend on the sum of the pressures
ˆpzmn(z) at all modes mn.
Given a surface velocity U(x, y)ejωt at the input of a semi-inﬁnite tube with
arbitrary cross-section, then:
U(x, y) =
∞
X
m=0
pm+
ρc
kzm
k ψm(x, y)
(2.36)
from which the following can be derived:
pm+ = ρc
S
k
kzm
Z
S
U(x, y)ψm(x, y)dS
(2.37)
where S is the surface area.
From this equation, it is understood that the pressure amplitude pm+ will be
proportional to an integration of the input surface velocity and each mode shape.
Fundamentally, this is a 2-dimensional spatial Fourier transform of the input
surface velocity U(x, y), using the mode shapes as a basis. Though the case
described in this equation applies to a semi-inﬁnite duct, it is a good starting
point toward deriving an equation for a ﬁnite tube with arbitrary termination
impedance; it will only need to be expanded by applying the boundary condition
corresponding to a termination with an arbitrary impedance.
For simplicity, let us deﬁne the integrated velocity amplitude as:
uzmn = 1
S
Z
S
U(x, y)ψmn(x, y)dS
(2.38)
Then, it is possible to derive a general solution for all pressures ˆpzmn(z) that
will depend on the respective integrated velocity uzmn.
Considering the tube shown in ﬁgure 2.3, where the input is at z = 0 and the
material sample is at z = L (where L is the tube length), and based on Euler’s
equation of motion shown in eq. 2.2, the ﬁrst boundary condition would be:
BC1 : ∂pzmn
∂z

z=0
= −jωρuzmn
(2.39)
==PAGE:30==
18
Theory
Figure 2.3: Impedance tube setup
Solving for this boundary condition:
−Amnjkzmne−jkzmnz + Bmnjkzmnejkzmnz = −jωρuzmn
−Amnjkzmn[cos(kzmn0) −j sin(kzmn0)] + Bmnjkzmn[cos(kzmn0) + j sin(kzmn0)] = −jωρuzmn
−Amnjkzmn + Bmnjkzmn = −jωρuzmn
−Amn + Bmn = −ωρuzmn
kzmn
Bmn = Amn −ωρuzmn
kzmn
pzmn = Amne−jkzmnz + Amnejkzmnz −ωρuzmn
kzmn
ejkzmnz
= Amn[cos(kzmnz) −j sin(kzmnz)] + Amn[cos(kzmnz) + j sin(kzmnz)] −ωρuzmn
kzmn
ejkzmnz
= 2Amn cos(kzmnz) −ωρuzmn
kzmn
ejkzmnz
At the other end of the tube, the arbitrary impedance can be described via a
Robin boundary condition [5]:
BC2 :

Zs
∂pzmn
∂z
+ jωρpzmn

z=L
= 0
(2.40)
Solving for this boundary condition:
==PAGE:31==
2.5 The acousto-optic eﬀect
19
−2AmnZskzmn sin(kzmnL) −jZsωρuzmnkzmn
kzmn
ejkzmnL
+jωρ2Amn cos(kzmnL) −jω2ρ2uzmn
kzmn
ejkzmnL = 0
Cancelling like terms and multiplying both sides of the equation by 1/jωρ:
−2AmnZs
kzmn
jωρ sin(kzmnL) −ZsuzmnejkzmnL + 2Amn cos(kzmnL) −
ωρ
kzmn
uzmnejkzmnL = 0
Amn[−2Zs
kzmn
jωρ sin(kzmnL) + 2 cos(kzmnL)] = ZsuzmnejkzmnL +
ωρ
kzmn
uzmnejkzmnL
Amn =
ZsuzmnejkzmnL +
ωρ
kzmn uzmnejkzmnL
2 cos(kzmnL) −2Zs kzmn
jωρ sin(kzmnL)
=
(Zs +
ωρ
kzmn )uzmnejkzmnL
2 cos(kzmnL) + 2jZs kzmn
ωρ sin(kzmnL)
(2.41)
Bmn = Amn −
ωρ
kzmn
uzmn
(2.42)
Then, each Amn and Bmn is inserted into equation 2.30, resulting in the general
expression for the sound ﬁeld inside a circular cross-section with rigid walls and
an arbitrary termination impedance.
2.5
The acousto-optic eﬀect
The acousto-optic eﬀect can be used to acquire measurements of acoustic pres-
sure, and it is a key component of the measurement methods studied in this
project.
This section lays out the deﬁnitions and equations concerning the
acousto-optic eﬀect.
==PAGE:32==
20
Theory
A sound ﬁeld is a ﬂuctuation of pressure in a medium, and consequently, there
are ﬂuctuations of density as well. Under adiabatic conditions [14]:
p + p0
p0
=
 ρ
ρ0
γ
(2.43)
where p is the acoustic pressure, p0 is the equilibrium pressure, ρ is the density
of the medium, ρ0 is the equilibrium density of the medium, and γ is the ratio
of speciﬁc heats.
The refractive index and density are related empirically via the following equa-
tion [7]:
n −1 = Kρ
(2.44)
where n is the refractive index, and K is the Gladstone-Dale constant, which
is an intrinsic property of the medium (typically a liquid, but also valid for air
[11]).
From equation 2.44 it can be observed that refractive index and density are
linearly proportional.
Together with equation 2.43, the refractive index and
acoustic pressure can be related to each other via the following equation:
n = (n0 −1)

1 + p
p0
1/γ
(2.45)
where n0 is the refractive index under standard atmospheric conditions.
When the acoustic pressure is much smaller than the equilibrium pressure, equa-
tion 2.45 can be approximated to [15]:
n ≈n0 + n0 −1
γp0
p
(2.46)
Fortunately, the condition p ≪p0 is met in typical acoustic scenarios.
==PAGE:33==
2.5 The acousto-optic eﬀect
21
Figure 2.4: Diagram of a scanning laser Doppler vibrometer, where f is the
laser frequency, BS is a beam splitter, M is a mirror, fB is a
Bragg-shifted frequency, fD is the Doppler-shifted frequency, and
L is the distance between the scanner head and the target surface.
Figure taken from [13]
2.5.1
Measurement method
An LDV is a device used to measure the vibration of a surface via a laser beam.
The beam is emitted and reﬂected from the surface with a Doppler eﬀect caused
by the vibration. The reﬂected beam is then captured back by the device and
interferes with an internal reference beam, providing the ﬁnal reading. An SLDV
is basically the same device, but additionally the head emitting the laser beam
is able to rotate, and therefore perform a scanning measurement. Nowadays,
the SLDV is the typical instrument used in refracto-vibrometry measurements.
Figure 2.4 shows the diagram of an SLDV. In order to increase the amount of
light reﬂected back to the SLDV, the reﬂecting surface will typically be treated
to be retro-reﬂective.
Recalling that a sound ﬁeld signiﬁes a ﬂuctuation of refraction index, one may
realize that a laser beam passing through a sound ﬁeld and reﬂecting back will
result in a reading by the LDV, even if the reﬂecting wall is rigid (that is, not
vibrating at all). In the case of the rigid wall, then the apparent surface displace-
ment ∆a will actually be a consequence of the sound ﬁeld. This phenomenon is
shown in ﬁgure 2.5.
==PAGE:34==
22
Theory
Figure 2.5: Measurement of a sound ﬁeld using an LDV and a laser beam,
where the gray shaded area is a rigid wall, ∆a is the apparent wall
displacement, and a is the length of the ﬂuctuating pressure area
crossed by the laser beam. Figure taken from [10].
The phase shift of light φ caused by the acousto-optic eﬀect is [15]:
φ = k0
Z
L
ndl = k0n0L0 + k0
n0 −1
γp0
Z
L
p(x, y, z, t)dl
(2.47)
where k0 is the wavenumber of light in a vacuum, L is the path traveled by the
light, and L0 is the actual distance.
In the right-hand side of equation 2.47, the ﬁrst term k0n0L0 is associated to the
vibration of the surface, while the second term is related to the acousto-optic
eﬀect. In the case of a vibrating wall, the ﬁrst of these two terms will dominate,
while in the case of a rigid wall and an airborne sound ﬁeld, the second term
will dominate. In this latter case, the phase of light will be proportional to the
line integral of sound pressure.
The velocity (either actual or apparent) measured by an LDV will be propor-
tional to the time derivative of the phase of light:
v(t) =
1
k0n0
dφ
dt
(2.48)
When applying the time derivative on equation 2.47, and again assuming a
rigid wall, the ﬁrst term is eliminated, leaving a measured vibrational velocity
==PAGE:35==
2.5 The acousto-optic eﬀect
23
Figure 2.6: Transparent impedance tube setup.
(a) glass tube, (b) loud-
speaker, (c) SLDV, (d) laser beam, (e) rigid block, (f) tested ma-
terial, (g) rigid acoustic termination, (h) retro-reﬂective tape, (D)
laser-to-wall distance, (θ) laser angle. Taken from [18] and ﬂipped
to match orientation used in this project
(here expressed in the frequency domain) exclusively related to the acousto-optic
eﬀect:
v(f) = n0 −1
γp0n0
jω
Z
L
p(x, y, z)dl

(2.49)
The ﬁrst fraction
n0−1
γp0n0 is known as the piezo-optic coeﬃcient.
The measurement can be done through a transparent impedance tube as shown
in ﬁgure 2.6, and assuming only plane waves inside the tube, the measured
apparent velocity can be used to estimate the pressure [18]:
ˆp(θ, f) =
γp0n0
jω(n0 −1)
cos(θ)
d
v(θ, f)
(2.50)
where θ is the laser angle as shown in ﬁgure 2.6, and d is the tube’s diameter.
With this procedure, it is possible to measure a sound ﬁeld consisting of plane
waves inside a transparent tube, even if the tube was too narrow to insert or
mount traditional microphones. A narrower tube would result in a higher cut-
oﬀfrequency of the duct per equation 2.24, which means it would be possible
==PAGE:36==
24
Theory
to still have plane waves at higher frequencies, and estimate the pressure at
these frequencies. Then, one may apply any of the methods explained in section
2.3.5 to estimate the absorption coeﬃcient of a sound absorbent material at
the termination of the tube at higher frequencies than possible with current
traditional methods.
2.5.2
Tomographical reconstruction using Radon trans-
form
The acousto-optic eﬀect acquires measurements of pressure integrated over a
line.
Therefore, in order to obtain the sound ﬁeld across a two-dimensional
space, additional processing techniques must be applied to the acquired data.
One such technique is using tomographic reconstruction algorithms, which make
it possible to reconstruct the acoustic pressure over space from integrated mea-
surements. This section explains the bases of tomographical reconstruction us-
ing Radon transform.
The line integral in equation 2.49 can be interpreted as a projection of the sound
ﬁeld in the direction of the LDV laser beam [15]. This is the Radon transform
Rp [3]:
Rp(x′, θ, t) =
Z ∞
−∞
p(x, y, t)dy′
(2.51)
where θ is a rotation angle, and x′, y′ are coordinates related to the coordinates
x, y via the rotation matrix:
x′
y′

=
 cos θ
sin θ
−sin θ
cosθ
 x
y

(2.52)
From equations 2.49 and 2.51, the apparent velocity measured by the LDV can
be used to obtain the Radon transform of a sound ﬁeld:
Rp(x′, θ, t) = γpon0
n0 −1
Z
v(x′, θ, t)dt
(2.53)
It then becomes possible to reconstruct the sound ﬁeld through an inverse Radon
transform, implemented trough i.e. a back-projection algorithm [3]. This can
==PAGE:37==
2.5 The acousto-optic eﬀect
25
Figure 2.7: Parallel beam scan conﬁguration for obtaining the Radon trans-
form of the sound ﬁeld at diﬀerent angles. Figure taken from [15]
be achieved by performing a parallel beam scan conﬁguration at diﬀerent angles
as shown in ﬁgure 2.7, thus obtaining projections of the arbitrary sound ﬁeld in
diﬀerent directions. Then, the ﬁltered projections Q(x′, θ, t) can be obtained:
Q(x′, θ, t) = Rp(x′, θ, t) ∗h(x′),
(2.54)
where h(x′) is a ﬁlter that accounts for the 2D spatial Fourier transform and
windowing. Then, the reconstructed sound pressure is:
˜p(x, y, t) =
Z ∞
0
Q(x′, θ, t)dθ
(2.55)
==PAGE:38==
26
Theory
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 3
Simulation
This section will present the working principles of the computer codes used to
implement the equations in chapter 2 and carry out the calculations. The simu-
lation work in this project was carried out mainly in MATLAB, only occasionally
using COMSOL models for validation of the MATLAB simulations.
3.1
Simulation of the sound ﬁeld in an impedance
tube
This section describes the code used in this project to simulate the sound ﬁeld
in a tube, as well as the parameters that can be entered for the simulation.
The ﬁrst step towards simulating the measurement of the sound ﬁeld in a duct
was being able to simulate the whole sound ﬁeld itself. The MATLAB code
used to produce this simulated sound ﬁeld consists of several blocks:
Parameters: The code allows to enter a wide range of parameters to allow the
study of diﬀerent cases. Namely:
• Tube dimensions: The user may enter the tube diameter and length
==PAGE:40==
28
Simulation
as variables. Due to the small dimensions involved in this project, these
variable are meant to be entered in centimeters, which are later converted
to standard meters within the code.
• Piston or point source: This allows to deﬁne the input source at z = 0
as either a piston or a point source. If the latter, this will not be a perfect
point, but rather a single "pixel" of the discretized surface velocity.
• Piston diameter: Only relevant if the input was deﬁned as a piston, this
parameter determines the diameter of the piston (also in centimeters).
• Source position: A two-element vector containing the x and y positions
of either the point source, or the center of the piston. The positive x axis
faces away from the wall behind the tube, and the y axis is elevation,
where the upwards is positive. The coordinate system has the x and y
origin at the center of the tube cross-section. In the case of a piston, if the
combination of diameter and position results in part of the piston being
deﬁned outside the duct cross-section, the resulting surface velocity will
simply truncate the piston to the duct diameter. This gives ﬂexibility to
experiment with input surface velocities other than circular pistons, such
as approximating a piston in the shape of half a circle, as shown in ﬁgure
3.1
• Normal velocity in the direction of z: Entered in mm/s. This is the
value that will be assigned to every pixel in the discretized surface velocity.
• Speed of sound: Entered in m/s.
• Density of air: Entered in kg/m3.
• Frequencies: Vector of frequencies desired to calculate for.
• Surface impedances: Vector of surface impedance values at each fre-
quency, in Pa·s/m. This vector will be synchronized with the frequency
vector entered in the previous parameter, i.e.: the ﬁrst impedance will be
used when processing the ﬁrst frequency, the second impedance will be
used with the second frequency, etc. Therefore, this vector must be at
least as long as the frequency vector.
• Background noise in SPL: This value will be assigned to all spatial
points outside of the duct diameter, and a diﬀerent value can be entered
for each frequency. The noise pressure values are complex, with a ﬁxed
magnitude as entered in the parameters, but random phase.
• Number of modes: Number of m and n transversal modes to process,
separately. That is, when entering a value of 3 here, 3 m modes and 3 n
modes will be processed, for a total of 9 mn modes.
==PAGE:41==
3.1 Simulation of the sound ﬁeld in an impedance tube
29
Figure 3.1: Half-circle piston approximation, deﬁned using a large diameter
and a piston center outside the duct cross-section
• Number of elements across diameter of discretized surface ve-
locity: This is mainly used for the deﬁnition of the input surface velocity,
and its integration with 2-dimensional modes. This value represents the
number of elements across a single axis, so that entering a value of 10 will
result in a matrix with 10 × 10 = 100 elements. Elements in this matrix
that fall outside of the circular shape are simply assigned a value of zero.
• x, y and z ranges: Vectors containing which x, y and z positions to
calculate for.
• x, y and z slices: x, y and z coordinates at which 2D slices of the sound
ﬁeld will be plotted. Can be deﬁned as empty vectors in order to not plot
slices on a certain dimension.
Derived parameters: The next section of the code produces a series of pa-
rameters derived from those entered by the user.
• Z, X and Y meshgrid: Calculated from the previously entered z, x and
y vectors. The dimensions are used out of order so that later plots are
shown in the desired orientation.
• Conversions of various input parameters into standard units
==PAGE:42==
30
Simulation
• Cross-section area of the duct
• Reﬂection coeﬃcient: For referencing to expected reﬂection coeﬃcient
in plots
• Vectors used for plotting purposes
• Roots of the derivative of the Bessel function: A table containing
the roots of the ﬁrst derivative of the Bessel function, used for calculations
of krmn, up to m = 10 and n = 10.
Generation of source: Discretized description of the source according to the
user’s input parameters. Also plots the source for veriﬁcation by user.
Generation of mode shapes: The mode shapes (such as those shown in ﬁgure
2.2) up to the number of modes speciﬁed by the user are generated and stored
for later use. This is done in a 2-dimensional surface discretized in the same way
as the input surface velocity, so that the multiplication of the surface velocity
and the mode shapes can be done with point-wise multiplication of matrices.
The calculation is done within 4 nested for loops: one for the x coordinate, one
for the y coordinate, one for the m mode, and another for the n mode. An
if statement in the middle of these 4 loops makes sure to skip the coordinates
outside the duct radius.
Within the innermost nested for loop, a krmn, ϵm, and Λmn for the current
iteration are calculated (the latter via equation 2.31). Then, the x and y coor-
dinates are converted to polar coordinates. Finally, the value of the mode shape
ψmn at the current x and y coordinates is calculated via equation 2.33.
At the end of this code block, the modes are plotted for veriﬁcation by user.
Sound ﬁeld calculation: This calculation is performed within 6 nested for
loops, each going through frequencies, x coordinates, y coordinates, z coordi-
nates, m modes, and n modes. Smaller calculations are performed in between
these for loops for the current iteration, namely angular frequency, wavenum-
ber, conversion of cartesian coordinates to polar coordinates, instant assignment
of background noise to points outside the tube cross-section, and calculation of
ϵm.
In the innermost loop, as with the mode shapes, a krmn and Λmn are calculated
for the current iteration. However, the following are also calculated:
• kzmn: Wavenumber in the z direction
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Simulation of SLDV measurement
31
• uzmn: Integrated surface velocity in the direction of z, according to equa-
tion 2.38
• Amn and Bmn: According to equations 2.41 and 2.42
• ˆpmn(x, y, z, f): According to equation 2.30.
After performing the calculation for all modes, these pressures are summed
together to obtain the estimated pressure at the current position and frequency.
Finally, the procedure is repeated for all positions and frequencies with the for
loops, yielding the estimated pressure ﬁeld ˆp(x, y, z, f).
Initially, it was considered to include the eﬀects of thermoviscous losses in the
tube. However, it was found through equation 2.25 that at the lowest frequency
used in this study, 250 Hz, and considering a tube diameter of 1 cm, the thermal
boundary layer would span only 3.162% of the tube radius. Already at 3 kHz,
this boundary layer would span less than 1% of the tube radius. So throughout
this project, thermoviscous losses are neglected.
3.1.1
Validation against COMSOL model
In order to validate the derived analytical model and its implementation into
MATLAB, a comparison is made against a numerical COMSOL model using
the exact same parameters.
Figures 3.2 and 3.3 show the calculated sound ﬁeld for a tube with a diameter
of 1 cm, length of 10 cm, termination surface impedance of 4500 Pa·s/m, and
frequencies 5 kHz and 50 kHz, compared against a numerical model with the
same parameters in COMSOL.
3.2
Simulation of SLDV measurement
A second version of the code was developed with the aim of simulating the
measurement as it would be performed using an SLDV. The code is mostly the
same, especially for the calculation of modes and the sound ﬁeld, with some
diﬀerences. The new considerations are presented in this section.
A few additional parameters are entered:
==PAGE:44==
32
Simulation
Figure 3.2: Comparison of analytical and COMSOL models of a sound ﬁeld
in a duct at 5 kHz
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Simulation of SLDV measurement
33
Figure 3.3: Comparison of analytical and COMSOL models of a sound ﬁeld
in a duct at 50 kHz
==PAGE:46==
34
Simulation
• Refractive index, atmospheric pressure, and ratio of speciﬁc
heats: These are used for calculating the apparent velocity from the
integrated pressure, and later to obtain an estimated pressure from the
apparent velocity.
• Laser-to-wall distance: Distance from the SLDV head to the wall, in
meters, in the x axis.
• Tube-to-wall distance: Distance from the surface of the tube to the
wall behind the tube, starting from the edge of the tube closest to the
wall. In meters, in the x axis.
• Laser beam longitudinal diﬀerential: Distance between two consec-
utive discrete points across a laser beam. Must be small enough to avoid
spatial aliasing at the highest frequency used, recommended to be 10 times
smaller than such frequency’s wavelength.
• Number of laser beam angles: Number of diﬀerent angles at which
the SLDV will perform a measurement through the tube. Can be thought
of as the resolution in the z direction.
• Maximum aperture: Maximum laser beam angle in either direction,
from the direction perpendicular to the tube length. Typically 20 degrees
since that is the limitation of the SLDV equipment, but can be modiﬁed
for other cases, for example, scanning across a narrower aperture.
As described previously, the center of the duct’s cross-section will be centered
at x = 0 and y = 0. The SLDV and wall positions will be generated based on
this and the distances deﬁned above.
Calculation of laser paths:
Using the length of the tube, and the new parameters described above, the laser
beams are generated. More precisely, the position in 3-dimensional space of the
discrete points that constitute the laser beams is calculated. The code assumes
that the scan will be horizontal, therefore all y coordinates will be equal to zero.
If the user chooses to measure at only one angle, a laser beam perpendicular to
the tube and passing through the mid-length of the tube is generated. Other-
wise, a fan of laser beams is calculated for the speciﬁed maximum aperture. If
the aperture span is longer than the tube length, then the aperture is restricted
to the tube length. All laser beams originate at the SLDV head position and
end at x coordinates along the wall , from z = 0 to z = L, where L is the length
of the tube. An example is shown in ﬁgure 3.4. The longitudinal diﬀerential
shown in the ﬁgure is larger than used in practice, for easier visualization.
==PAGE:47==
3.2 Simulation of SLDV measurement
35
Figure 3.4: Laser beam points generated for 5 laser beams, a tube length of
10 cm, and a laser-to-wall distance of 0.2 m
The angles are separated linearly, so it is important to keep in mind that the
separation distance between the laser beams in the z direction is not equidistant
(the separation distance is larger for the same angular increment at more oblique
angles).
If the positions of points along each laser beam were calculated to have equal
separation distance along the beam for all laser beams, an issue could arise
where, for certain laser beams, there could be more points within the diameter
of the tube than for other beams.
This would lead to an overestimation of
pressure for some positions along the tube length.
An example is shown in
ﬁgure 3.5. Because the velocity is being calculated from pressure using ﬁnite
diﬀerence, this would lead to even greater errors when calculating the velocity.
For this reason, the point positions were instead calculated so that the increment
in the x direction was equal for all laser beams, even if this meant that the
distance between two consecutive points along a single laser beam was longer
for the more obliquely angled beams, compared to the more centered beams.
This how it was done in ﬁgure 3.4. This would mean that the longitudinal laser
diﬀerential dl would be angle-dependent, which is something that had to be
kept in mind when discretely integrating the pressure from the simulated SLDV
measurements. Of course, this is exclusive to the simulated measurement, and
would be of no concern if the measurement was performed experimentally.
==PAGE:48==
36
Simulation
Figure 3.5: Overestimation of pressure and velocity at certain positions, due
to a diﬀering number of discrete laser elements within the tube
diameter for diﬀerent laser beams
There may be cases where the aperture is narrower than the tube length, for
example, if the aperture was deliberately conﬁgured quite narrowly, if the SLVD
is positioned too close to the tube, or if the tube is considerably long. This
restricts the aperture to a partial length of the tube. In those cases, the SLDV
is shifted in the z direction so that the laser beams are at the portion closest to
the tube termination, as shown in ﬁgure 3.6.
3.2.1
Validation against COMSOL model
Although the pressure at individual points in a laser beam will not be obtainable
during measurements, they serve as a good basis for validation. For comparison,
the sound ﬁelds from COMSOL were loaded into MATLAB, and the pressure
was taken at the same positions as the sound ﬁeld generated analytically in
MATLAB. Due to diﬀerences in the two models (discrete points across an angled
path in MATLAB vs. a mesh in COMSOL), the points taken from the COMSOL
model were simply the ones closest to each laser point position.
Comparisons between the analytical and COMSOL model with the same condi-
tions are shown in ﬁgures 3.7, 3.8, 3.9 and 3.10, for diﬀerent frequencies. This
==PAGE:49==
3.2 Simulation of SLDV measurement
37
Figure 3.6: Laser beam points generated for 5 laser beams, a tube length of
10 cm, and a laser-to-wall distance of 0.05 m
was done for an aperture with 5 laser beam angles.
In these examples the background noise was set to 0, which is why pressure
values are found only within the diameter of the tube. In ﬁgure 3.7, it can be
observed that the pressure obtained with the 2 models is practically identical.
In this simulation, 10 kHz is just below the lowest cut-oﬀfrequency of the
duct. This shows that the models are consistent while dealing with plane waves.
Figures 3.8, 3.9 and 3.10 show cases where the frequency is high enough to
generate transversal modes. This can be seen in the ﬂuctuating pressure values
across the tube width. The analytical and COMSOL models diﬀer slightly but
roughly follow the same shapes. The slight diﬀerences seen between the two
models are expected due to the diﬀerent discretization methods and equations
used, and these diﬀerences are too small to be alarming.
3.2.2
Calculation of apparent velocity and estimated pres-
sure
Having analytically calculated the pressure at many points across a laser beam,
the apparent velocity can be calculated for diﬀerent simulated laser beams using
equation 2.49, emulating the measurement.
Then, the estimated pressure is
obtained via equation 2.50.
==PAGE:50==
38
Simulation
Figure 3.7: Comparison of pressures measured across laser beam points in the
analytical and COMSOL models, for 10 kHz with an anechoic
termination
==PAGE:51==
3.2 Simulation of SLDV measurement
39
Figure 3.8: Comparison of pressures measured across laser beam points in the
analytical and COMSOL models, for 20 kHz with an anechoic
termination
==PAGE:52==
40
Simulation
Figure 3.9: Comparison of pressures measured across laser beam points in the
analytical and COMSOL models, for 50 kHz with an anechoic
termination
==PAGE:53==
3.2 Simulation of SLDV measurement
41
Figure 3.10: Comparison of pressures measured across laser beam points in
the analytical and COMSOL models, for 80 kHz with an anechoic
termination
==PAGE:54==
42
Simulation
Figure 3.11: Comparison between the estimated and analytically calculated
pressure and phase
Figure 3.11 shows a comparison of the estimated pressure and phase emulating
the LDV measurement, against the same quantities calculated directly from
equation 2.30, for 2 kHz and 8 kHz.
3.3
Tomographical reconstruction of a simulated
sound ﬁeld at a cross-section
Additional to performing pressure measurements across the tube length, the
combination of a transparent tube and the use of the acousto-optic eﬀect would
also allow to obtain the sound ﬁeld across a cross-section of the tube.
A setup can be imagined where the SLDV is scanning across a cross-section of
the tube, rather than across the length, and the tube can be rotated around the
z axis. In such a setup, it would be possible to reconstruct the sound ﬁeld in
the cross-section.
==PAGE:55==
3.3 Tomographical reconstruction of a simulated sound ﬁeld at a
cross-section
43
To simulate this setup, a cross-sectional sound ﬁeld is ﬁrst calculated using the
sound ﬁeld simulation method described in section 3.1. Then, it is entered into
the same code used in [12], to be reconstructed with tomography. However, this
code is only able to process either the real or imaginary part of the pressure
at a time. So for each cross-sectional sound ﬁeld, the code is run twice: once
for the real part, and again for the imaginary part. The reconstructed cross-
sectional complex pressure is then obtained by summing the reconstructed real
and imaginary parts, for each cross-section.
==PAGE:56==
44
Simulation
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 4
Results and discussion
The following section presents estimations of reﬂection factor, surface impedance,
and error curves for various cases and parameters, using the theory laid out in
chapter 2 and the code explained in chapter 3, and the produced ﬁgures are
discussed.
The parameters used for the calculations in this chapter are the following, the
only exceptions being when a speciﬁc parameter is being varied in section 4.3,
or otherwise speciﬁed:
• Tube diameter: 1 cm
• Tube length: 10 cm
• Velocity source: Piston with 0.5 cm diameter, centered at x = 0.1 cm
and y = 0.1 cm, moving uniformly
• Input velocity: 2.4295 mm/s
• Speed of sound: 343 m/s
• Density of air: 1.2 kg/m3
• Refractive index of air: 1.0003
==PAGE:58==
46
Results and discussion
Figure 4.1: Adapted NC20 curve
• Atmospheric pressure: 101,325 Pa
• Ratio of speciﬁc heats: 1.4
• Frequencies: 250-64,000 Hz in 1/3 octave bands
• Surface impedance: 4,500 Pa·s/m
• Background noise in SPL: Adapted NC20 curve (explained further
below)
• Number of m and n modes: 4
• Number of elements across diameter of discretized surface ve-
locity: 200
• Laser-to-wall distance: 20 cm
• Tube-to-wall distance: 0.5 cm
• Laser beam longitudinal diﬀerential: 536 µm, corresponding to λ64kHz/10
(the wavelength of sound at 64 kHz, divided by 10)
• Number of laser beam angles: 200 for standing wave ratio and transfer
function methods, 5 for p/uz method
• Maximum aperture: 20 degrees for standing wave ratio and transfer
function methods, 0.5 degrees for p/uz method
For the background noise, a noise curve based on the NC20 curve [2] was used.
The NC20 curve spans frequencies from 63 to 8000 Hz in octave bands. An
==PAGE:59==
4.1 Estimation of reﬂection ratio with a ﬁxed surface impedance
47
adapted version of the curve was generated by linearly interpolating for third
octave band center frequencies, and then simply repeating the noise value at 8
kHz for all the higher frequencies. The resulting curve is shown in ﬁgure 4.1.
The relative errors for reﬂection ratio E%,rel are calculated in this chapter as
follows:
E%,rel = |Rest −Rref|
Rref
× 100%
(4.1)
where Rest is the reﬂection ratio estimated through the simulation and Rref
is the reference reﬂection ratio what was derived from the surface impedance
entered as a parameter.
For relative errors of surface impedance, the same
equation is used, only entering the estimated and reference surface impedances
in place of the reﬂection ratios.
4.1
Estimation of reﬂection ratio with a ﬁxed sur-
face impedance
This section presents the estimation of reﬂection ratio and surface impedance,
with a surface impedance that is ﬁxed across frequencies, as a test case. The ﬁrst
three ﬁgures (4.2, 4.3 and 4.4) in this section were produced with no background
noise, in order to assess the accuracy of the code itself. The rest of the ﬁgures
in this section are then produced including background noise in the simulation.
It should be kept in mind that the noise is added only in the space outside of
the tube.
Although the reﬂection ratio was calculated with the transfer function method
only for separation distances between 5% and 45% of the wavelength as rec-
ommended by ISO 10534-2, ﬁgure 4.2 shows the reﬂection ratio magnitudes
calculated for a broader range of separation distances, at a frequency of 4 kHz.
In the ﬁgure, it can be observed that the obtained reﬂection ratios are at the
expected value for this speciﬁc example in the range up to 0.45 times the wave-
length. Shortly after this range, the deviation gradually increases, especially
producing a large peak at a normalized separation distance of 0.5.
Figure 4.3 shows the reﬂection ratios estimated for diﬀerent frequencies, as ex-
plained in section 2.3.5. While the standing wave ratio method and transfer
function method directly provide the reﬂection ratio, the p/uz method yields
==PAGE:60==
48
Results and discussion
Figure 4.2: Reﬂection ratio magnitudes calculated with the transfer function
method for a range of separation distances, without background
noise
Zs, which must be converted into R using equation 2.16. In the ﬁgure, it can
be seen that the standing wave ratio method greatly deviates from the expected
value at low frequencies. At these frequencies, the wavelength is so long that
a standing wave pattern does not form properly within the tube, therefore, ap-
propriate pressure maxima and minima are not available for the calculation. All
three methods break down after the duct’s lowest cutoﬀfrequency, as transver-
sal modes start to generate, and the LDV measurement method assumes only
plane waves. Both the transfer function method and the p/uz method (which
uses ﬁnite diﬀerence) work accurately all the way up until slightly under the
lowest cut-oﬀfrequency of the duct.
Figure 4.4 shows the error of the curves shown in ﬁgure 4.3, relative to the
expected |R| value. The curves are well below 1% error before the lowest duct
cut-oﬀfrequency, with the notable exception of the standing wave ratio method
for the same reasons as above. The green curve for the p/uz method increases
with a steady slope, which may be due to the gradually shortening wavelength
measured across the same two measurement points near the termination.
The rest of the ﬁgures in this section were produced with the noise curve shown
in ﬁgure 4.1.
Figure 4.5 shows the reﬂection ratio magnitudes calculated for separation dis-
==PAGE:61==
4.1 Estimation of reﬂection ratio with a ﬁxed surface impedance
49
Figure 4.3: Reﬂection ratio magnitudes calculated with diﬀerent methods for
a range of frequencies, without background noise
Figure 4.4: Reﬂection ratio relative errors, without background noise
==PAGE:62==
50
Results and discussion
Figure 4.5: Reﬂection ratio magnitudes calculated with the transfer function
method for a range of separation distances, adapted NC20 noise
curve used
tances, at a frequency of 4 kHz, with background noise. Compared to ﬁgure
4.2, the oscillation around the expected |R| is greater, especially considering the
broader range of the vertical axis. Additionally, there is large deviation between
0 and 0.05. It becomes apparent that this is why the standard recommends a
separation distance between 0.05 and 0.45 times the wavelength.
Figure 4.6 shows the reﬂection ratio magnitudes calculated using diﬀerent meth-
ods, with background noise, while ﬁgure 4.7 shows the relative error curves for
the same case. Here, the performance of the p/uz method drops dramatically,
becoming the most inaccurate method. In ﬁgure 4.6 it can be seen that the
reﬂection ratio is predominantly underestimated with this method.
To understand the reason for this high deviation, it is convenient to look at the
estimated particle velocity. Figure 4.8 shows the comparison of the estimated
particle velocity at 3 diﬀerent frequencies, for two diﬀerent noise conditions:
adapted NC20 curve, and no noise. It can be observed that the noise is causing
severe deviations on the estimated particle velocity. This is most likely due to
small pressure variations resulting in a much higher deviation when estimating
the velocity with ﬁnite diﬀerence.
From the shown results, it can be stated that the transfer function method is
the least sensitive to noise, while the p/uz method (using ﬁnite diﬀerence) is the
most sensitive to noise.
==PAGE:63==
4.1 Estimation of reﬂection ratio with a ﬁxed surface impedance
51
Figure 4.6: Reﬂection ratio magnitudes calculated with diﬀerent methods for
a range of frequencies, adapted NC20 noise curve used
Figure 4.7: Reﬂection ratio magnitude relative errors, adapted NC20 noise
curve used
==PAGE:64==
52
Results and discussion
Figure 4.8: Estimated particle velocity comparison at diﬀerent frequencies and
noise conditions
Converting the reﬂection ratios shown in ﬁgure 4.6 to impedance Zs (except for
the p/uz method which directly gives Zs), and calculating the relative errors,
yields ﬁgures 4.9 and 4.10. Here, the speciﬁc impedance was able to be ob-
tained with the standing wave ratio method simply because the target speciﬁc
impedance is real, otherwise this is not possible.
4.2
Estimation of reﬂection ratio with Komatsu
porous material impedance model
Real life materials will exhibit a diﬀerent surface impedance at diﬀerent frequen-
cies. Additionally, the materials will produce a phase shift, indicating that the
surface impedance is complex. To simulate a measurement closer to what would
be expected from laboratory measurements, the simulations in this section were
calculated for impedances following Komatsu’s model for the surface impedance
of porous materials, as described in section 2.3.2. Consequently, the surface
impedance used in this section is a curve in function of frequency, rather than
the ﬁxed value speciﬁed in the previous section.
Two additional parameters were entered in this calculation, as required by Ko-
matsu’s model:
==PAGE:65==
4.2 Estimation of reﬂection ratio with Komatsu porous material impedance
model
53
Figure 4.9: Surface impedance magnitudes calculated with diﬀerent methods
for a range of frequencies, adapted NC20 noise curve used
Figure 4.10: Surface impedance magnitude relative errors, adapted NC20
noise curve used
==PAGE:66==
54
Results and discussion
Figure 4.11: Reﬂection ratio magnitudes calculated with diﬀerent methods
for a range of frequencies, adapted NC20 noise curve used, using
Komatsu model
• Speciﬁc ﬂow resistivity: 10,000 Ns/m4
• Sample thickness: 10 mm
Figure 4.11 shows the magnitudes of the estimated complex reﬂection ratios,
when entering surface impedances obtained from Komatsu’s model as a param-
eter in the simulation. The noise is the adapted NC20 curve shown in ﬁgure
4.1. Figure 4.12 shows the relative errors calculated from ﬁgure 4.11. As it was
observed in section 4.1, the transfer function method is the most consistent, the
standing wave ratio method fails at low frequencies (due to the tube length),
and the p/uz method is severely aﬀected by noise throughout all the frequency
range. In ﬁgure 4.12, the standing wave ratio and transfer function methods are
under 1% error for most of the range between 1 kHz and 20 kHz.
Figures 4.13 and 4.14 show the magnitudes of the complex surface impedance
and their relative error, respectively.
While the p/uz method directly gives
the surface impedance, for the transfer function method the surface impedance
was obtained from the complex reﬂection ratio estimated with this method.
The ﬁgures only show curves for the transfer function method and the p/uz
method, as the standing wave ratio method only yields reﬂection ratio magni-
tudes, and therefore it is not possible to accurately calculate the complex surface
impedance. Again, it can be observed that the transfer function gives a close
estimation across frequencies, while the p/uz method is in general unreliable
(when there is noise).
==PAGE:67==
4.2 Estimation of reﬂection ratio with Komatsu porous material impedance
model
55
Figure 4.12: Reﬂection ratio magnitude relative errors, adapted NC20 noise
curve used, using Komatsu model
Figure 4.13: Surface impedance magnitudes calculated with diﬀerent methods
for a range of frequencies, adapted NC20 noise curve used, using
Komatsu model
==PAGE:68==
56
Results and discussion
Figure 4.14: Surface impedance magnitude relative errors, adapted NC20
noise curve used, using Komatsu model
Figures 4.15 and 4.16 show the angles of the same estimated complex surface
impedances, and their relative error. Thus, the transfer function method pro-
vides close estimation of both the magnitudes and angles, and in turn, this
allows to estimate the complex surface impedance of the sample.
4.3
Eﬀect of varying parameters
In this section, several parameters were varied individually in order to study
the eﬀect of each. The parameters are those speciﬁed at the beginning of this
chapter, except when the speciﬁc parameter is being varied for the study. The
calculations in this section were made with the transfer function method, for
the reﬂection ratio, and for impedances obtained with Komatsu’s model (section
2.3.2).
The studied parameters are:
• Tube diameter
• Tube length
• Background noise
==PAGE:69==
4.3 Eﬀect of varying parameters
57
Figure 4.15: Surface impedance phases calculated with diﬀerent methods for
a range of frequencies, adapted NC20 noise curve, using Komatsu
model
Figure 4.16: Surface impedance phase relative errors, adapted NC20 noise
curve used, using Komatsu model
==PAGE:70==
58
Results and discussion
Figure 4.17: Relative error for |R|, using the transfer function method, varying
diameter
• Number of n and m modes
• Laser-to-wall distance
• Laser beam longitudinal diﬀerential
• Number of laser beam angles
• Maximum aperture
A general trend that will be observed in the ﬁgures for all parameters is higher
error at the low and high frequency extremes. At the lower end, this is most
likely due to the unsuccessful formation of standing waves, due to wavelengths
larger than the duct. At the higher end, transversal propagating modes start to
generate, which means that the ﬁeld is not composed only of plane propagating
waves as required by the method.
Additionally, the curves are typically under 5% error at low frequencies and
under 1% error at middle frequencies, only yielding high error at high frequencies
where transversal mode propagate.
==PAGE:71==
4.3 Eﬀect of varying parameters
59
Figure 4.18: Relative error for |R|, using the transfer function method, varying
tube length
4.3.1
Tube diameter
Figure 4.17 shows the relative error for |R|, using the transfer function method,
varying diameter. Recalling equation 2.24, increasing the diameter sets the low-
est cutoﬀfrequency of the duct at a lower frequency. This can be observed in the
ﬁgure, where there is higher error in the high frequency region at larger diame-
ters, due to the earlier formation of transversal propagating waves. However, a
more interesting eﬀect is observed in the low and middle frequency region (up
to approximately 4 kHz), where smaller diameters increase the error. This is
very likely due to the changing ratio between the width of sound ﬁeld inside the
duct, and the size of the noisy space outside the duct. At smaller diameters,
the desired sound ﬁeld in the duct spans a shorter length of the laser beam,
at the same time increasing the portion of the laser beam that is incorporating
background noise into the measurement. Thus, a trade-oﬀarises: a smaller di-
ameter increases the frequency range before transversal propagating modes are
generated, allowing for measurements at higher frequencies, but also increases
the amount of error in this same range. This could be counteracted by position-
ing the LDV closer to the tube, and while this may limit the aperture, it may
still be an appropriate length span for measurements.
==PAGE:72==
60
Results and discussion
Figure 4.19: Relative error for |R|, using the transfer function method, varying
noise
4.3.2
Tube length
Figure 4.18 shows the relative error for |R|, using the transfer function method,
varying tube length.
It is also important to note that the aperture is still
limited to 20 degrees as stated at the beginning of the chapter, so at L = 20
cm and L = 40 cm, the aperture does not actually span the whole tube length.
Here, it was expected that a larger tube length would signiﬁcantly decrease the
error at low frequencies, since the tube would now allow standing waves to be
formed at lower frequencies. However, there is no clear diﬀerence or pattern
that can be observed in the ﬁgure at this range. This could be attributed to
the robustness of the transfer function method; a much higher diﬀerence would
have been observed using the standing wave method, which depends much more
on the formation of a standing wave pattern.
4.3.3
Background noise
For this parameter, adapted NC15, NC30, and NC40 curves were made in the
same manner as it was done for the adapted NC20 curve explained at the be-
ginning of this chapter and shown in ﬁgure 4.1.
Figure 4.19 shows the relative error for |R|, using the transfer function method,
varying the noise. The behavior seen in this ﬁgure is quite as expected: higher
==PAGE:73==
4.3 Eﬀect of varying parameters
61
Figure 4.20: Relative error for |R|, using the transfer function method, varying
number of modes
background noise results in higher error, throughout most of the frequency
range. The curves only converge after the duct’s lowest cutoﬀfrequency, likely
due to the transversal propagating modes playing a much larger role than the
noise levels outside the duct.
4.3.4
Number of n and m modes
Figure 4.20 shows the relative error for |R|, using the transfer function method,
varying the number of modes processed. Though not necessarily the case at
certain frequencies, generally speaking, as more modes are included in the sim-
ulation, the lower the error. Interestingly, this is mainly observed in the range
of frequencies before the duct’s lower cutoﬀ, where there are still only plane
waves. This seems to be mainly related to the accuracy of the description of the
source. Since the source is a piston smaller than the cross-section of the duct,
a certain amount of modes is necessary to describe it accurately. It should be
kept in mind that this parameter is of concern only within the simulations, but
it needs to be high enough to accurately represent the real scenario.
==PAGE:74==
62
Results and discussion
Figure 4.21: Relative error for |R|, using the transfer function method, varying
the laser-to-wall distance dlw
4.3.5
Laser-to-wall distance
Figure 4.21 shows the relative error for |R|, using the transfer function method,
varying the laser-to-wall distance. Before 8 kHz, the error tends to be larger
when the LDV is further away, compared to when it’s closer to the tube. Sim-
ilarly to the variation of diameter, when the LDV is farther from the tube, a
longer portion of the laser beam is integrating background noise into the mea-
surement. Placing the LDV closer to the tube increases the ratio of laser length
that is found within the tube. Between 8 kHz and 20 kHz, however, the shorter
distance now yields the highest error. At this frequency range, the wavelengths
are considerably short, and when too close to the tube, the laser beams are at
very oblique angles. It is likely that the laser beams are then unable to properly
sample the waves, especially at the most oblique angles.
4.3.6
Laser beam longitudinal diﬀerential
Figure 4.22 shows the relative error for |R|, using the transfer function method,
varying the laser diﬀerential, which were entered as submultiples or multiples of
the wavelength for 64 kHz, the maximum frequency used in the study. It can
be observed that, generally, the error increases as the density of the discrete
points across the laser decreases. As with the number of modes, this parameter
strictly concerns the simulation, and it needs to be high enough to approximate
the continuous integral that would describe the real measurement.
==PAGE:75==
4.3 Eﬀect of varying parameters
63
Figure 4.22: Relative error for |R|, using the transfer function method, varying
the laser diﬀerential dl
4.3.7
Number of laser beam angles
Figure 4.23 shows the relative error for |R|, using the transfer function method,
varying the number of laser beam angles. The pattern shown in the curves is as
expected: with a lower number of angles, and consequently a lower number of
spatial sampling points, a less smooth description of the pressure curve across
z is obtained, aﬀecting most calculations derived from such a measurement.
4.3.8
Maximum aperture
Figure 4.24 shows the relative error for |R|, using the transfer function method,
varying the aperture. The pattern of the curve is somewhat unclear, but with
a more restricted aperture there seems to be a general trend of higher error at
low frequencies. As it was observed in ﬁgure 4.5, a too short separation distance
between the two measurement points (normalized by wavelength) can cause de-
viations, compared to a more moderate separation distance. At low frequencies
the wavelengths are long, which makes it more likely that the aperture will span
a distance that is too short of the optimal separation distance.
==PAGE:76==
64
Results and discussion
Figure 4.23: Relative error for |R|, using the transfer function method, varying
the number of laser beam angles
Figure 4.24: Relative error for |R|, using the transfer function method, varying
the aperture
==PAGE:77==
4.4 Tomographical reconstruction of the sound ﬁeld at a cross-section
65
Figure 4.25: Tomographical reconstruction of the real part of the sound ﬁeld
on the cross-section at z = 3.61 cm, with f = 20 kHz
4.4
Tomographical reconstruction of the sound
ﬁeld at a cross-section
This section shows and discusses reconstructions of the sound ﬁeld across cross-
sections of the tube using tomography, as described in section 3.3.
Figures 4.25 and 4.26 show reconstructions of the sound ﬁeld across the cross-
section at a certain position of the tube length, for 20 kHz and 50 kHz. The
ﬁgures show the original sound ﬁeld in the ﬁrst subplot and the reconstructions
in the rest of the subplots, with varying parameters. It can be seen in both
ﬁgures that a smooth image is obtained with 300 angles per rotation and 60 tube
rotations, although there are some slight distortions in the image. Decreasing
the angles to 50 or the rotations to 10 add noticeable noise to the image.
==PAGE:78==
66
Results and discussion
Figure 4.26: Tomographical reconstruction of the real part of the sound ﬁeld
on the cross-section at z = 5.27 cm, with f = 50 kHz
==PAGE:79==
Chapter 5
Conclusions and future work
A study of the estimation of reﬂection ratio and surface impedance of materials
using the acousto-optic eﬀect, using diﬀerent estimation methods and studying
the eﬀect of diﬀerent parameters, has been achieved through the development
of an analytical model for the sound ﬁeld within a transparent tube with an
arbitrary termination impedance, as well as the implementation of a simulated
LDV measurement.
Between 3 methods to obtain the reﬂection ratio or surface impedance: stand-
ing wave ratio, transfer function, and p/uz with ﬁnite diﬀerence, the transfer
function method has proven to be the most robust, and it has been found that
the p/uz method is gravely aﬀected by background noise outside of the tube.
The transfer function method was the only method that allowed an accurate
estimation, in the presence of noise, of both the magnitude and phase of the
surface impedance, and therefore the complex surface impedance.
The study of variation of parameters was performed only with the transfer
function method. The diameter has shown to introduce a trade-oﬀ: A smaller
diameter increases the frequency range without propagating transversal modes,
but increases the portion of laser length that is measuring noise outside the tube,
which increases error across the frequency range. The background noise and the
number of laser beam angles give an expected behavior: more noise or less
angles increase the error. The laser-to-wall distance has mixed eﬀects: a shorter
==PAGE:80==
68
Conclusions and future work
distance decreases the error at low and mid frequencies, but increases the error
at high frequencies. A smaller maximum aperture, though it increases sampling
density, also increases the error due to a shorter range to calculate the reﬂection
ratio, and this is expected to have a greater eﬀect when using the standing wave
ratio. The number of n and m modes and longitudinal laser diﬀerential are
strictly simulation parameters, but must be high enough to accurately emulate
the real experiment.
It was desired to perform several other simulations that fell out of scope. One
of them would have been to calculate the particle velocity using higher order
ﬁnite diﬀerence, which could increase its reliability in face of background noise.
Another would have been to compare simulations to measurements using the
same parameters, however, the coronavirus pandemic complicated the use of
university laboratories. Also, with all the measurements that can be performed
with an LDV, it could be possible to build a single over-determined system of
equations, instead of deriving calculations from pairs of points (for any of the 3
methods). Finally, through cross-section measurements, it would be possible to
measure a more complete 3D description of the sound ﬁeld in a duct, opening up
possibilities such as ﬁltering out higher order modes and accurately estimating
the surface impedance at frequencies above the duct’s lowest cut-oﬀfrequency.
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
[1] Acoustics – determination of sound absorption coeﬃcient and impedance
in impedance tubes – part 2: Transfer-function method : Ds/en iso 10534-
2:2001. 2001.
[2] American national standard criteria for evaluating room noise : Ansi/asa
s12.2. 2008.
[3] M. Slaney A. C. Kak. Principles of Computerized Tomographic Imaging,
volume 34. 1988.
[4] Peter Risby Andersen. Modelling of acoustic viscothermal losses using the
Boundary Element Method: From method to optimization.
PhD thesis,
2018.
[5] Adam Branski, Anna Kocan-Krawczyk, and Edyta Predka. An Inﬂuence of
the Wall Acoustic Impedance on the Room Acoustics. The Exact Solution.
ARCHIVES OF ACOUSTICS, 42(4):677–687, 2017.
[6] E. Fernandez-Grande, A. Torras-Rosell, and F. Jacobsen. Holographic re-
construction of sound ﬁelds based on the acousto-optic eﬀect. volume 4,
pages 3407–3416, 2013. cited By 1.
[7] John Hall Gladstone and T. P. Dale. Ii. researches on the refraction, dis-
persion, and sensitiveness of liquids. Proceedings of the Royal Society of
London, 12:448–453, 1863.
[8] Finn Jacobsen and Peter Møller Juhl.
Fundamentals of General Linear
Acoustics. John Wiley & Sons Ltd, United States, July 2013.
==PAGE:82==
70
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[9] Takeshi Komatsu.
Improvement of the delany-bazley and miki models
for ﬁbrous sound-absorbing materials. Acoustical Science and Technology,
29(2):121–129, 2008.
[10] R. Malkin, T. Todd, and D. Robert. A simple method for quantitative
imaging of 2d acoustic ﬁelds using refracto-vibrometry. Journal of Sound
and Vibration, 333(19):4473–4482, 2014. cited By 20.
[11] W. Merzkirch.
Techniques of ﬂow visualization.
Advisory Group for
Aerospace Research & Development, Loughton, Essex, 1987.
[12] Mario A. Montoya S. Literature review on the acousto-optic eﬀect. Self-
study course in MSc Engineering Acoustics, 2020.
[13] Erik Olsson and Kourosh Tatar.
Sound ﬁeld determination and projec-
tion eﬀects using laser vibrometry. Measurement Science and Technology,
17(10):2843–2851, Oct 2006.
[14] A. D. Pierce. Acoustics: An Introduction to Its Physical Principles and
Applications, volume 34. 06 1989.
[15] Antoni Torras-Rosell, Salvador Barrera-Figueroa, and Finn Jacobsen.
Sound ﬁeld reconstruction using acousto-optic tomography. The Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America, 131(5):3786–3793, 2012.
[16] S.A. Verburg, E. Fernandez-Grande, and S. Barrera-Figueroa. Acousto-
optic sensing of the sound ﬁeld in a lightly damped room. 2019.
[17] Samuel Arturo Verburg Riezu and Efren Fernandez Grande. Acousto-optic
sensing – spatial reconstruction of the sound ﬁeld enclosed in a room. In
Proceedings of the 23rd International Congress on Acoustics, 2019.
[18] Cedric Vuye, Steve Vanlanduit, and Patrick Guillaume. Accurate estima-
tion of normal incidence absorption coeﬃcients with conﬁdence intervals
using a scanning laser Doppler vibrometer. OPTICS AND LASERS IN
ENGINEERING, 47(6):644–650, JUN 2009.
