==PAGE:1==
Photochemical Synthesis of Azetidine Derivatives:
Novel FFA2 Agonists
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
DTU Chemistry
8 August, 2020
Author
Malte Rokohl - s153231
Supervisors
Katrine Qvortrup
Anders Højgaard Hansen
==PAGE:2==
Preface/Acknowledgement
This 30 ECTS point MSc thesis has been prepared at the Department of Chemistry at the Technical Univer-
sity of Denmark under the supervision of Assistant Professor Katrine Qvortrup and Postdoc Anders Højgaard
Hansen. The project was started on 27 January and was originally scheduled to be handed in 27 June; how-
ever, due to the situation with COVID-19, the project was extended by 6 weeks and handed in 8 August.
I would like to show my appreciation to my supervisor Katrine Qvortrup for introducing me to the project
and her remarkable guidance. I would also like to thank my co-supervisor Anders Højgaard Hansen for his
support and insight regarding this project as well as his broad knowledge from his previous work.
Malte Rokohl - s153231
Signature
Date
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The free fatty acid receptor 2 (FFA2) is a G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR) that is expressed in a variety
of cells including enteroendocrine L-cells. FFA2 is activated by short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), which are
produced by colonic fermentation of dietary ﬁber and have proved to participate in signaling pathways lead-
ing to the secretion of intestinal hormones such as glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) and peptide YY (PYY).
These hormones are involved in both the regulation of insulin and appetite and thus FFA2 is considered a
potential target for the treatment of obesity and type 2 diabetes. This project aimed at performing a SAR
study of a previously disclosed pyrrolidine FFA2 agonist by exchanging the pyrrolidine ring with an azetidine
ring. The azetidine analogues were synthesised using a photochemical reaction, which made it possible to
establish a synthetic pathway that oﬀered late stage diversity. Initially, the photochemical reaction was tested
by a small library of model compounds varying in carboxylic acid protecting group to identify conditions that
would allow successful synthesis of the desired product. From these reactions, it became apparent that the
tert-butyl protecting group showed appealing results leading to what was thought to be the desired product
through a one-pot synthesis. Surprisingly, it was later on discovered that the products obtained were not
the expected azetidines; instead, the isolated products were 5-membered lactone rings (γ-butyrolactone). A
proposed mechanism was suggested and the diastereomeric ratio (dr) for the reaction was tested showing
selectivity towards the trans isomer.
==PAGE:4==
Resume
Den frie fedtsyreceptor 2 (FFA2) er en G-proteinkoblet receptor (GPCR), som er udtrykt i en række celler,
herunder enteroendokrine L-celler. FFA2 aktiveres af kortkædede fedtsyrer (SCFAs), der produceres ved
fermentering af kostﬁbre i tyktarmen og har vist sig at aktivere signalveje, der fører til sekretion af tarmhor-
moner, s˚asom: glukagonlignende peptid-1 (GLP-1) og peptid YY (PYY). Disse hormoner er involveret i
regulering af b˚ade insulin og appetit, og derfor betragtes FFA2 som et potentielt m˚al mod behandling af
fedme og type 2-diabetes. Form˚alet med dette projekt var at udføre en SAR-undersøgelse af en tidligere
beskrevet pyrrolidin FFA2-agonist ved at udveksle pyrrolidinringen med en azetidinring. Azetidinanalogerne
blev syntetiseret ved brug af en fotokemisk reaktion, der gjorde det muligt at etablere en syntesevej, der tilbød
diversitet sent i processen. Oprindeligt blev den fotokemiske reaktion testet med et lille bibliotek af modelstof-
fer, der varierede i en carboxylsyrebeskyttelsesgruppe for at identiﬁcere, hvad der ville muliggøre en vellykket
syntese af det ønskede produkt. Fra disse reaktioner blev det klart, at tert-butyl-beskyttelsesgruppen viste
tiltalende resultater, der førte til, hvad der blev antaget at være det ønskede produkt gennem en one-pot
syntese. Overraskende blev det senere opdaget, at de isolerede produkter ikke var de forventede azetidiner;
i stedet var de isolerede produkter 5-leddet lactonringe (γ-butyrolacton). En mekanisme blev foresl˚aet, og
forholdet mellem diastereoisomerene (dr) blev testet, som viste selektivitet for transisomeren.
==PAGE:5==
Abbreviations
7TM
Seven-transmembrane
AC
Adenylate cyclase
Ac
Acetyl
All
Allyl
Aq
Aqueous
Arg
Argenine
Bu
Butyl
Bz
Benzoyl
cAMP
Cyclic adenosine monophosphate
CCK
Cholecystokinin
COSY
Correlation spectroscopy
DAG
Diglycerid
DCM
Dichloromethane
DIPEA
N,N-Diisopropylethylamine
DMF
N,N-Dimethylformamide
DMSO
Dimethyl sulfoxide
dr
Diastereomeric ratio
EC50
Half maximal eﬀective concentration
eq
Equivalents
ESI
Electron spray ionization
Et
Ethyl
FFA
Free Fatty Acid
GDP
Guanyl guanosine diphosphate
GIP
Gastric inhibitory polypeptide
GLP-1
Glucagon-like peptide 1
GPCR
G protein-coupled receptor
HOBt
Hydroxybenzotriazole
HPLC
High-performance liquid chromatography
IP3
Inositol trisphosphate
IR
Infrared
LCFA
Long-chain fatty acids
m.p
Melting point
==PAGE:6==
MCFA
Medium-chain fatty acids
Me
Methyl
NMR
Nuclear magnetic resonance
NOE
Nuclear overhauser eﬀect
NOESY
Nuclear overhauser eﬀect spectroscopy
PIP2
Phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate
PKA
Protein kinase A
PKC
Protein kinase C
PLC
Phospholipase C
PyBOP
((1H-Benzo[d][1,2,3]triazol-1-yl)oxy)tri(pyrrolidin-1-yl)phosphonium hexaﬂuorophosphate(V)
PYY
Peptide YY
SAR
Structure activity relationship
SCFA
Short-chain fatty acids
T2D
Type 2 diabetes
TFA
Triﬂuoroacetic acid
THF
Tetrahydrofuran
TLC
Thin layer chromatography
TMS
Trimethylsilyl
UPLC
Ultra-performance liquid chromatography
WHO
The World Health Organization
˚
A
Angstrom
==PAGE:7==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Aim of Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Free Fatty Acid Receptors
3
2.1
FFA2 Receptor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Signal Pathways
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.2
Recognition of Agonist Versus Antagonist Ligands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.3
Previous Synthetic FFA2 Modulators
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Physical and Chemical Properties of Azetidines
10
3.1
Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2
Formation of Azetidines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Reactivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4
Spectroscopy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Results and Discussion
20
4.1
Retrosynthetic Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Synthetic Pathway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3
Photochemical Synthesis of Azetidines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.4
Synthesis of Potential FFA2 Agonists . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.4.1
Suzuki Coupling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.4.2
Hydrolysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.4.3
Amide Coupling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.4.4
Photochemical Reaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5
Conclusion
44
6
Future Perspectives
45
7
Experimentals
46
8
Appendix
60
8.1
NMR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
8.2
IR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
8.3
NOESY Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
==PAGE:8==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
1
Introduction
Overweight and obesity are deﬁned as abnormal or excessive fat accumulation that could conceivably impair
health.[1] The World Health Organization (WHO) characterize overweight and obesity as follows:
• The BMI of an overweight adult ≥25
• The BMI of an obese adult ≥30
The main cause of overweight and obesity is the diﬀerence between calories consumed and calories burned.
According to WHO, obesity has almost tripled worldwide since 1975. There are two fundamental reasons
for this: (1) An increase in intake of food containing a high content of fat and sugars. (2) A decrease in
physical activity. The health consequences of overweight and obesity are severe as it may lead to noncom-
municable diseases such as cardiovascular diseases, musculoskeletal disorders, diabetes, etc.[1] For decades, a
diet containing high levels of ﬁber has been associated with lowering body weight and hence a reduced risk
of getting noncommunicable diseases.[2] The way dietary-ﬁbers have been suggested to inhibit the excess of
energy includes:
• Displacement of energy-rich foods from the diet
• Inhibition of the absorption of macronutrients at the intestinal surface
• Altered luminal environment
• Increased gastric distension
It was later on discovered that the beneﬁcial eﬀects of a high ﬁber diet may also be a result of the presence of
short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), which are the main product of colonic fermentation of dietary ﬁber.[3] It was
shown that SCFAs were able to activate certain free fatty acid (FFA) receptors which are located in various
cells throughout the body. One important discovery was that the FFA2 receptor (also known as GPR43) was
found to be expressed in enteroendocrine L cells which are responsible for stimulating the release of peptide
YY (PYY) and glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1).[4] A study made by Psichas et al. (2015)[5] showed that
the SCFA derivative propionate was able to stimulate L cells, resulting in the release of PYY and GLP-1 via
FFA2 activation, overall leading to reduced appetite and insulin secretion in rodents.[5] This makes FFA2 a
suitable target for anti-obesity and type 2 diabetes (T2D) therapeutics.
A promising FFA2 agonist originating from Euroscreen[6] (compound I) showed to stimulate a low GLP-1
secretion and a signiﬁcant stimulation of PYY secretion in vivo. This resulted in a lower food intake and
decrease of body weight in a diet-induced obesity mouse model, making it a very promising compound as an
anti obesity-drug.
1
==PAGE:9==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 1.1: Compound I (Euroscreen)[6]
Compound I was subsequently investigated in a structure–activity relationship (SAR) study by Hansen et
al. (2018)[7] resulting in the formation of TUG-1375 (compound II), shown in ﬁgure 1.2. In this compound
the central pyrrolidine core is replaced by a thiazolidine ring and the methoxybenzene is replaced with a
dimethylisoxazole moiety, resulting in a 7-fold increase of the potency as well as 50-fold reduction of the
lipophilicity, providing a compound with more favorable pharmacokinetic parameters.[7]
Figure 1.2: Compound II (TUG-1375)[7]
1.1
Aim of Project
In this project, the aim is to make a further SAR exploration of the previously disclosed pyrrolidine FFA2
agonist (compound I). More speciﬁcally, the aim is to explore the replacement of the central pyrrolidine core
with a synthetically tractable azetidine core.
Figure 1.3: Aim of project
Furthermore, the aim is to synthesise various azetidine derivatives containing distinctive aromatic side chains,
like the dimethylisoxazole. All prepared azetidine derivatives will be tested for their biological activity as
agonists of the FFA2 receptor with potential as a possible anti-obesity drug.
2
==PAGE:10==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 1.4: The azetidine core with possible side chain substitutions
2
Free Fatty Acid Receptors
Fatty acids are hydrocarbons of diﬀerent lengths with various degrees of unsaturation, terminated with a
carboxylic acid. The properties of fatty acids depend on the length of the side chain and the degree of
saturation. In general, unsaturated fatty acids have lower melting point than the saturated fatty acids of
same length. More speciﬁcally, the presence of cis double bond disrupts the highly ordered packing, hereby
lowering the melting point. The length of the fatty acid also aﬀects melting point. The longer the fatty
acid becomes, the higher the melting point, which is a result of more van der Waals interactions. Overall, a
shorter fatty acid chain and higher cis double bond unsaturation increase the ﬂuidity of the fatty acids and
their derivatives.[8]
It has been known for decades, that fatty acids play a signiﬁcant role within the ﬁeld of biology, partic-
ularly in the esteriﬁed form (triglyceride, phosphoplipids, etc.). Certain free fatty acids (FFAs) have also
been recognised for their crucial role in regulation of both metabolism and the immune system. However the
comprehension that FFAs also could act directly as signaling molecules on certain receptors was observed in
a more recent study. It was discovered that the four G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs): GPR40, GPR43,
GPR41 and GPR120 were all activated by FFAs and for that reason the names of the receptors were changed
to FFA1, FFA2, FFA3 and FFA4, respectively.[9]
FFAs are divided into three main types according to the length of their chain: short-, medium- and longchain
fatty acids. Short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) contain fewer than 6 carbon atoms, medium-chain fatty acids
(MCFAs) contain 6-12 and long-chain fatty acids (LCFAs) contain 12 or more. LCFAs and MCFAs are
normally derived from dietary triglycerides (fat), whereas SCFAs are produced by microbial fermentation of
otherwise indigestible dietary ﬁbers.[10] It was discovered that the four FFA receptors responded to diﬀerent
ligands dependent on the length. Also, it was established that the receptors were expressed in many diﬀerent
cells and having numerous biological functions. Some of these functions, with most relevance to obesity and
T2D are summed in table 1.[11]
3
==PAGE:11==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
Table 1: Relevant functions towards treatment of obesity and T2D of the four FFA receptors[10]
Receptor
Ligand
Expressed in
Biological function
FFA1 (GPR40)
LCFA, (MCFA)
Pancreatic β-cells
Insulin ↑
Enteroendocrine I, K, and L cells
CCK, GIP, and GLP-1 ↑
FFA2 (GPR43)
SCFA
Pancreatic β-cells
Insulin ↑
Enteroendocrine L cells
PYY and GLP-1 ↑
Adipocytes
Insulin ↓
FFA3 (GPR41)
SCFA
Pancreatic β-cells
Insulin ↓
Enteroendocrine L cells
PYY and GLP-1 ↑
Enteroendocrine K cells
GIP ↓
FFA4 (GPR120)
LCFA
Enteroendocrine I and K cells
CCK, GIP, and GLP-1 ↑
Adipocytes
Glucose uptake ↑
The FFA1 receptor is mainly expressed in pancreatic β-cells and is activated by LCFAs and to a lesser
extent by MCFAs. Activation of the pancreatic β-cells FFA1 receptor has shown to result in a glucose-
stimulated insulin secretion, making this a potential target for treatment of T2D.[9] The FFA4 receptor
is also activated by LCFAs but is expressed in many diﬀerent cells and tissues like gastrointestinal tract,
lungs, pancreas, macrophages, etc. It is also expressed in enteroendocrine I and K cells, where it has shown
to regulate the secretion of several hormones, including glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1), gastric inhibitory
polypeptide (GIP) and cholecystokinin (CCK). Furthermore, the FFA4 receptors are expressed in adipose
tissue, where it can increase the insulin sensitivity and thus enhance the glucose uptake, resulting in a lower
blood sugar level, making it a relevant target for treatment of obesity and T2D.[12]. Since both FFA1 and
FFA4 are activated by LCFAs and show similar aﬃnities for a broad range of fatty acids, it can be diﬃcult
to distinguish between functional inﬂuences of each receptor for hormone secretion. However, it has been
possible to diﬀerentiate between the two receptors to some extent, for example the FFA4 show high potency
(pEC50 = 6.4) towards the fatty acid α-linolenic acid compared to FFA1 and is thus considered a “speciﬁc”
agonist of FFA4. Contrary the FFA1 receptor showed high potency for the fatty acid 5,8,11-Eicosatriynoic
acid (pEC50 = 5.7). Because of this, it has been possible to synthesise several FFA modulators that have
shown selectivity towards either of the receptors. Some of which have reached clinical trial, e.g. compound
III (TAK-875), shown in ﬁgure 2.1, a potential FFA1 agonist investigated for treatment of T2D.[13]
4
==PAGE:12==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 2.1: Compound III (TAK-875)
FFA2 and FFA3 are both activated by SCFAs, and like FFA1 and FFA4, it has been quite diﬃcult to distin-
guish between the two receptors due to their similar aﬃnity for fatty acids. However, it has been observed
that FFA3 shows slightly higher potency towards the longer SCFA (C5, C6) whereas FFA2 shows higher
potency towards the shorter SCFA (C1, C2). Nevertheless, it was identiﬁed that propionate (C3) was the
most potent SCFA for both receptors.[9] In order to investigate whether it was possible to identify selec-
tive FFA2 ligands, a targeted library of small carboxylic acids was examined by Schmidt et al. (2011).[14]
Through SAR analysis, it became clear that the selectivity for small carboxylic acids at the orthosteric binding
site containing substituted sp3-hybridised α-carbons favored the FFA3 receptor whereas ligands with sp2-
hybridised or sp-hybridised α-carbons favored the FFA2 receptor.[14] However, this is only suitable for small
carboxylic acid, and the potency of these remain quite low due to few interactions between ligands and active
site. Therefore, in order to obtain higher potency for a possible therapeutic agonist, larger ligands are needed.
The FFA3 receptor is expressed in many diﬀerent tissues, like pancreas, spleen, adipose, etc. It also ap-
pears in enteroendocrine L cells, where it has been shown to stimulate the secretion of GLP-1 and PYY,
making it a possible target for the treatment of diabetes and obesity similar to FFA1. The FFA3 receptor is
also expressed in pancreatic β-cells, like FFA1. However, activation of the pancreatic β-cells FFA3 receptor
has shown to inhibit insulin secretion.[9] This conﬂicting response makes the FFA3 receptor a diﬃcult target
and throughout literature, most of the focus within the ﬁeld of therapeutics towards obesity and T2D has
been upon FFA1, FFA2 and FFA4.
Since the aim of this project is to synthesise an agonist for the FFA2 receptor, this receptor will be dis-
cussed in more details in the next section.
2.1
FFA2 Receptor
FFA2 is a receptor that is expressed in various cells like peripheral blood mononuclear cells, polymorphonu-
clear cells and with a very high expression in immune cells.
Studies have illustrated that FFA2 has a
chemotactic eﬀect of SCFAs, directing the movement of neutrophils. This has guided the investigation of
FFA2 agonists as potential therapeutics towards diseases correlated with a defect neutrophil response, like
inﬂammatory bowel disease.[9] FFA2 is also expressed in enteroendocrine L cells and has proven to stimulate
the secretion of GLP-1 and PYY. This is of high relevance for this project, as it indicates that a FFA2 agonist
5
==PAGE:13==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
could have advantageous eﬀects on obesity and T2D. In contradiction, it was found that the loss of FFA2 and
FFA3 in mice actually showed improved glucose stimulated insulin secretion. Because of this, both agonists
and antagonists of FFA2 has been investigated in the treatment of T2D.[7] However, in a review by Milligan
et al. (2017)[15], it was suggested that the contrary results occurred because of factors that may inﬂuence
what type of signaling pathway that was predominant for the mice used in the experiments. In the review it
was implied that when the FFA2 receptor of the mouse was activated through a Gq-protein mediated signal
pathway it led to glucose stimulated insulin secretion, whereas a Gi mediated pathway led to inhibition of
glucose stimulated insulin secretion.[15] The inﬂuence of these particular signaling pathways will be described
in the next section.
2.1.1
Signal Pathways
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are seven-transmembrane (7TM) receptors, meaning that the receptor
protein is embedded within a membrane containing a protein chain winding back and forth through the
membrane seven times. The GPCR contains a binding site on the outer surface of the membrane but also a
binding site on the inner surface. When the GPCR is activated by a ligand on the outer surface, the receptor
changes structure, so that the binding site on the inner surface opens. This new binding site is activated
by a G-protein, which is a signaling protein that is located on the inner surface of the membrane. The G-
protein consists of three subunits (α, β and γ), with the α-subunit having a binding site for guanyl guanosine
diphosphate (GDP). When the G-protein binds to the receptor on the inner surface, the complex consisting
of the three subunits is degraded to one monomer and a dimer. These fragments of the G-protein interact
to continue the signal transduction. There exist several diﬀerent types of the G-proteins dependent on what
type of α-subunit is present, mainly: Gs, Gi and Gq. The signaling pathway of the GPCR is dependent on
which G-protein that is activated.[16]
There are two main signaling pathways that are predominant for the FFA2 receptor: Gq and Gi (shown
in ﬁgure 2.2). The Gq pathway is the one observed in enteroendocrine L cells whereas the Gi signaling
pathway is observed in adipocytes.[10]
Figure 2.2: Two signaling pathways of FFA2
6
==PAGE:14==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
The signal transduction pathway involving the Gq starts with the αq-subunit being released.
The αq-
subunit activates the phospholipase C β (PLC-β), which catalyses the hydrolysis of phosphatidylinositol
4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) into two secondary messengers; diglyceride (DAG) and inositol trisphosphate (IP3).
DAG activates the protein kinase C (PKC) and IP3 increases the mobilization of Ca2+.[17] The eﬀect of this
increased inﬂux of Ca2+ was investigated by Christiansen et al. (2018).[18] In this study, they discovered
that by using the Ca2+-channel blocker nifedipine, they reduced the GLP-1 and PYY responses in rats re-
markably, suggesting that the Ca2+ inﬂux is important for the SCFA-mediated hormone secretion.[18]
The signal transduction pathway involving the Gi starts with the αi-subunit being released. The αi-subunit
inhibits the enzyme adenylate cyclase (AC) resulting in a decreased production of cyclic adenosine monophos-
phate (cAMP).[17] The decrease in cAMP results in inactivation of protein kinase A (PKA) leading to sup-
pressed insulin signaling.[19] It was discovered by Kimura et al. (2013)[20] that the suppressed insulin signal
via the FFA2 receptor inhibited fat accumulation in adipose tissues and promoted the metabolism of lipids
and glucose in other tissues, thus enhancing the energy utilization in various tissues. Furthermore, it was
shown that by suppressing the insulin signal in adipose tissues, the sensitivity towards insulin increased in
other tissues, including liver and muscle.[20]
Accordingly, activation of FFA2 in both enteroendocrine L cells via the Gq-signaling pathway and in adipose
tissues via the Gi-signaling pathway leads to beneﬁcial eﬀects on obesity. For this reason, an FFA2 receptor
agonist would be of considerable value in combating obesity and obesity-related health concerns.
2.1.2
Recognition of Agonist Versus Antagonist Ligands
The detailed understanding of how the FFA2 receptor binds its ligands is not fully understood. Sergeev et
al. (2016)[21] studied how ligands bind to the FFA2 receptor and determined the diﬀerent interactions that
discriminate between an agonist and antagonist. This was done by the use of a radiolabeled ligand based on
a previously reported FFA2 antagonist GLPG 0974 (compound IV) shown in ﬁgure 2.3.[21]
Figure 2.3: Compound IV (GLPG 0974)
In the study, receptor mutation studies and molecular modelling were used to identify important interactions.
Sergeev et al. (2016)[21] discovered that particularly two arginine residues at position 180 and 255 in the
binding site of the FFA2 played an important role for the type of response obtained. It was observed that an
7
==PAGE:15==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
agonistic response requires interactions with both of the arginine residues, whereas antagonists only require
interactions with one of the two.[21] This demonstrates how important the ionic interactions of the carboxylic
acid is with the arginine residues within the binding site of FFA2 receptor.
A challenge with the FFA2 receptor is that some ligands show various aﬃnities for human FFA2 (hFFA2)
contrary to rodent orthologs. For example, the FFA2 antagonist GLPG0974 has shown to be very eﬀective
towards blocking the hFFA2 receptor, however it is unable to block the FFA2 receptor of rat and mouse
orthologs. This is by all means something that needs to be considered when testing or screening for possible
therapeutics towards the FFA2 receptor. In another study by Sergeev et al. (2017)[22], they investigated the
molecular basis for these diﬀerences. Using a combination of ligand docking to receptor homology models
and direct binding studies using the radiolabeled antagonist GLPG0974, they showed that a single lysine to
arginine variation at position 65 between the human and rodent FFA2, explained why the antagonist showed
high aﬃnity towards hFFA2 and no aﬃnity towards mouse orthologs. Furthermore, they showed that the
lysine-arginine variation has a very limited eﬀect on the signaling pathways activated by an agonist; however,
by removing the positive charge at position 65, they saw a remarkable loss in agonist potency for the signaling
via Gq.[22] This clearly demonstrates the importance of the lysine residue at position 65.
2.1.3
Previous Synthetic FFA2 Modulators
Over the past decades, numerous ligands towards the FFA2 receptor have been synthesised and tested. How-
ever, as described in previous sections, challenges still remain, including selectivity towards the FFA2 receptor
compared to FFA3, activation of the desired signaling pathway, etc. Another critical point with most of the
compounds is their lack of potency. Regardless of these challenges, a growing number of synthetic ligands have
been reported for the FFA2 receptor, including both orthosteric and allosteric agonists and antagonists.[15]
An orthosteric FFA2 antagonist is a compound that binds to the active site of the receptor, blocking the
eﬀects of SCFAs. The ﬁrst example of such a compound was CATPB (Euroscreen)[23] shown in ﬁgure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: Compound V (CATPB)
CATPB proved to be able to block the FFA2 receptor for the SCFA propionate, and was also able to inhibit
the constitutive activity of the receptor, making it an inverse agonist.[15] The compound displayed a high
potency (pIC50 = 7.70)[4] in human FFA2 and no aﬃnity towards rodent FFA2, making it very useful as a
8
==PAGE:16==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
test-molecule for the study of e.g. neutrophil response.[24] Another very important FFA2 antagonist is the
previous described GLPG0974 shown in ﬁgure 2.3. This compound proved to be able to block neutrophile
migration induced by acetate in humans. GLPG0974 entered phase II clinical trials in patients showing mild
ulcerative colitis. However, the compound was not able to show any measurable diﬀerences between patients
treated with GLPG0974 and patients treated with placebos, and thus failed to reach market.[15]
An FFA2 orthosteric agonist is a compound that binds the active site of the FFA2 receptor and activates
one or more signaling pathways. The fact that the activation of FFA2 receptor in humans has shown to
mediate beneﬁcial signaling pathways towards diseases like obesity and T2D, especially through the Gq sig-
naling pathway in enteroendocrine L cells, leading to the stimulation of GLP-1 and PYY has drawn a lot of
attention. In 2010, Euroscreen patented a series of agonists or partial agonists towards the FFA2 receptor
one of them being compound VI shown in ﬁgure 2.5.[25]
Figure 2.5: Compound VI
This compound proved to activate the FFA2 receptor with a moderate potency (pEC50 = 6.68).[7] It was
demonstrated that the compound activated the FFA2 receptor in an orthosteric manner, as experiments
showed that mutation of the FFA2 receptor in one of the arginine residues (R180 and R255) resulted in
inactivation. Furthermore, it was shown that by making an esteriﬁcation of the carboxylic acid, the activity
was lost. Together, this indicates that the compound binds to the receptor orthosterically.
Another promising agonist towards the FFA2 receptor was the previous described compound I shown in
ﬁgure 1.1. This compound also originated from Euroscreen and were patented in 2015 together with a series
of other compounds.[6] It showed very low stimulation of GLP-1 in vivo; nevertheless, it was demonstrated
that the primary eﬀect of the compound was stimulation of PYY secretion, showing a signiﬁcant PYY mu-
cosal responses. This resulted in a lower food intake and decrease of body weight in a diet-induced obesity
mouse model, making it a very promising compound as an anti obesity-drug.[19] However, this suﬀered from
lack of potency and high lipophilicity. The compound was subsequently investigated in a SAR study by
Hansen et al. (2018).[7] In this SAR study, Hansen et al. exchanged the central pyrrolidine core of the com-
pound with a more synthetically tractable thiazolidine ring. Several diﬀerent analogues containing diverse
aromatic sidechains were synthesised, where TUG-1375 shown in ﬁgure 1.2 showed the highest eﬃcacy with
a dimethylisoxazole ring. This compound showed an 7-fold increase of potency and reduced the lipophilicity
9
==PAGE:17==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
a 50-fold, giving this compound more favorable pharmacokinetic parameters.[7] However, in this SAR study,
there was no examination of how modulation in size of the central core would aﬀect biological activity of
the FFA2 receptor. Previous compounds, e.g. GLPG0974, have shown that azetidines could potentially lead
to high biological activity. Therefore, it would be of high interest to investigate whether the replacement of
the central pyrrolidine core with an azetidine would aﬀect the biological activity. The motivation behind the
azetidine analogues presented in this study, is that the carboxylic acid is maintained in a similar position to
compound I and hereby should potentially preserve the agonistic-eﬀect. However, exchanging a pyrrolidine
ring with an azetidine ring may change several physical and chemical properties, some of which described in
the next section.
3
Physical and Chemical Properties of Azetidines
Recently the interest in azetidines has increased due to the presence of such heterocycles in a variety of
biologically active molecules and their attractive properties for drug discovery. However, the basic under-
standing of reactivity patterns and general methods for the preparation of azetidines still lags behind 5-
and 6-membered N-heterocycles. One of the main reason for this is that the frequently used route for the
preparation of azetidines is cyclization via leaving-group, which presents challenges for library synthesis and
SAR studies.[26]
3.1
Structure
Azetidines are saturated four membered heterocyclic compounds consisting of three carbon atoms and one
nitrogen atom.
The conformations of azetidines are usually puckered, meaning that the geometry is a
non-planar cyclic structure similar to those of cyclobutane (shown in ﬁgure 3.1).[27] The reason for this
puckered conformation is that a planar geometry would result in an eclipsed conformation where the ﬁlled
σ-orbitals would be situated close in space and repel each other leading to a higher energy level (torsional
strain). Because of this, the azetidine distorts from a planar conformation in order to reduce the eclipsing
interactions.[28]
Figure 3.1: Conformation of azetidine
10
==PAGE:18==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
Like cyclobutane, azetidines possess considerable ring strain. This is explained by the fact that all of the
atoms in azetidine are sp3-hybridised where the ideal tetrahedral bond angle is 109.5◦, but in a four-membered
cyclic compound, the atoms are forced into a bond angle of approximately 90◦. Because of the deviation
in bond angles, the atoms are not capable of achieving optimal atomic orbital overlap. Overall, this leads
to a decrease in p-character and an increase in s-character for the sp3-hybridised orbitals of the atoms.[27][28]
Nitrogen-containing ﬂexible heterocycles like azetidines, can undergo two types of conformational changes:
ring-inversion and nitrogen-inversion (pyrimidal-inversion), leading to multiple conformation of diﬀerent en-
ergies (shown in ﬁgure 3.2).[29]
Figure 3.2: Diﬀerent types of inversion
Both types of inversion are considerably rapid.
However, the ring-inversion is slower than the nitrogen
inversion, due to a higher energy barrier (≈5.27kJ/mol for azetidines).[30] The energy barrier for a ring-
inversion is a result of the transition state having planar geometry with high torsional strain, that the azetidine
has to overcome (shown in ﬁgure 3.3).[29]
Figure 3.3: Ring-inversion with transition state of planar geometry
Nitrogen-inversion is rapid for azetidines. This inversion occurs because nitrogen is a trivalent atom where
the N-hydrogen or N-substituent can attain two equilibrating conformations. The rate of inversion is aﬀected
11
==PAGE:19==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
by several factors, one very important being the size of the ring. During nitrogen-inversion, the nitrogen has
to overcome a transition sate in which the nitrogen is in a sp2-hybridised state (shown in ﬁgure 3.4). The ideal
sp2-hybridised bond-angle is 120◦, but in azetidine the bond-angles are approximately 90◦, so the deviation
in bond-angle in this transitional state is 30◦, resulting in a higher energy state. Another important factor
controlling the rate of inversion is the substituents on nitrogen. If the nitrogen contains electron-delocalizing
substituents, the energy of the transition-state is lowered, resulting in a more rapid inversion. However, if
the nitrogen contains a substituent bearing unshared electron pairs, the energy barrier is increased due to
unfavourable lone pair-lone pair interactions in the sp2-hybridised state, resulting in a slower inversion.[29]
Figure 3.4: Nitrogen-inversion with sp2-hybridised transition state
3.2
Formation of Azetidines
The ﬁrst time the parent azetidine ring was synthesized, was in 1888 by reacting 3-bromopropylamine with
base, resulting in a ring-closing reaction, to form an azetidine in a very low yield.[30] Ring-closing reactions,
in which the heteroatom function as a nucleophile in an intramolecular substitution, are by far the most
simple way of synthesising heterocyclic compounds (shown in ﬁgure 3.5).[28]
Figure 3.5: Ring-closing reaction using bromoamines
However, ring-closing reactions to form four-membered rings are among the hardest of all to make. A rough
estimate for the relative rates of the ring-closing reaction of saturated rings is shown in equation 1, where
the numbers correspond to the size of the formed ring.[28]
(Fastest)
5 > 6 > 3 > 7 > 4 > 8 −10
(Slowest)
(1)
From equation 1 it can be seen that three-membered rings (e.g. aziridines) forms faster than four-membered
rings (e.g. azetidines) even though three-membered rings contain more strain than four-membered. This is
due to a lower Gibbs free energy (∆G). Generally, ∆G is given by equation 2 and tells us to which extent
12
==PAGE:20==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
a reaction will be spontaneous. If ∆G for a reaction is negative, the products will be favoured, whereas a
positive ∆G indicates that, the reactants will be favoured.
∆G = ∆H −T∆S
(2)
∆H is the diﬀerence in enthalpy, which essentially is a value of how much energy that is given out or taken
up in a reaction in the form of heat. ∆S is the change in entropy, which represents the diﬀerence in disorder
between the reagents and products. In an intramolecular ring-closing reaction as the one shown in ﬁgure
3.5, the ∆H is largest for the formation of three-membered ring due to the higher energy that is required
to bend the molecule into a very strained conformation. However, ∆S is smallest for the formation of a
three-membered ring, as the reactant contains very few conformations due to the few rotatable bonds, which
means that it must give up less freedom. In contrary, longer-chain reactants containing a higher number of
rotatable bonds are very disordered, and they have to give up a lot of freedom in order to form the ring. As
a result, ∆S is rather negative for the formation of larger rings, contributing to a larger ∆G. Four-membered
rings like azetidines contain both high ∆H because of ring strain and negative ∆S because it has to give up
freedom in order to form the ring. This results in a large ∆G, meaning the formation of four-membered rings
are unfavoured.[28]
Several diﬀerent ways to produce the parent azetidine have been reported throughout the years; however,
the most widespread method for obtaining azetidine is shown in ﬁgure 3.6.[30] In this reaction, the ﬁrst step
is double conjugated additions of the primary amine to the α, β-unsaturated ester, ethyl acrylate. Thionyl
chloride is used to transform the hydroxide into an alkyl chloride making it a good leaving group for the
following intramolecular SN2 reaction (4-exo-tet according to Baldwin’s rule[31]). The ester is removed using
the strong base KOH in an E1cB reaction to leave the desired azetidine.
Figure 3.6: Method for obtaining azetidine
Using the above-mentioned ring-closing reactions for the formation of azetidines, makes it challenging to
synthesise substituted products. Generally, the reaction is most eﬃcient when the halogen is primary, because
13
==PAGE:21==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
secondary and tertiary would make the intramolecular SN2 reaction less favorable.[32] Furthermore it was
shown that substitution at the C2 and C3 position decreased the rate of the reactions. This slower cyclization
is a result of a higher energy transition state that requires the substituents on C2 and C3 to be eclipsed in
the active conformation. Based on these results, it was concluded that the aminopropyl halide systems (eg.
3-chloropropan-1-amine) was most favorable for cyclisation when no substituents was present on any of the
carbons. Furthermore, it was discovered that a large substituent on nitrogen was beneﬁcial. It was shown
that N-unsubstituted compounds usually suﬀered from competing reactions, eg. fragmentation by heterolytic
cleavage (Grob fragmentation) shown in ﬁgure 3.7, whereas N-substituted compounds generally did not. The
proposed mechanism for this, was that the N-substituent favoured to place it conformationally staggered
with respect to the substituents on C3 and hereby occupying the position required of an electron pair to
participate eﬀectively in the fragmentation process.[33][34]
Figure 3.7: Grob fragmentation
Therefore, when forming substituted azetidines, another reaction is required. Throughout the years, many dif-
ferent ways of forming substituted azetidines have been reported.[35] In 2012, the Spanish National Research
Council (Spanish: Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cient´ıﬁcas, CSIC) patented a method for obtaining
azetidine derivatives. This method was based on a radical fragmentation reaction and was performed under
irradiation of light. This procedure is an eﬀective method for converting serine derivatives to 4-aryl azetidine
carboxylates as seen in ﬁgure 3.8.[36]
Figure 3.8: Method for obtaining azetidine derivatives (CSIC)[36]
This method was of high interest for this project aiming at synthesizing 2,4-disubstituteted azetidines as
possible FFA2 agonist and will be discussed more thoroughly in Section 4.3.
3.3
Reactivity
Azetidine rings are in most cases thermally stable; however, ring opening occur more frequently in azetidines
compared to larger cyclic amines (pyrrolidines, piperidines, etc) shown in ﬁgure 3.9, as a result of the increased
ring-strain in four-membered rings compared to larger rings. In three-membered cyclic amines (aziridines),
the ring strain is even higher resulting in very high reactivity. Aziridines are highly electrophilic and act
14
==PAGE:22==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
as alkylating agents, e.g. the reactive intermediate involved in DNA alkylation by nitrogen mustards is an
aziridinium ion. Azetidines are less reactive than aziridines and as a result, a variety of transformations can
be carried out on azetidine analogs without aﬀecting the azetidine ring.[30]
Figure 3.9: Cyclic amines and their respective names
Azetidine rings are rather unstable towards acids, due to protonation of the amine, making the azetidine
very susceptible towards nucleophilic attack, which leads to ring opening with a driving force favoured by
relief of strain (shown in ﬁgure 3.10). Aditionally, the energy barrier for this reaction is lowered when using
Lewis acids catalysis. In contrary, azetidines are rather stable towards basic conditions, which is proved by
the number of synthetic routes towards azetidine using base in the azetidine-forming step.[30]
Figure 3.10: Nuclephilic attack on protonated azetidine
In aqueous solution, azetidine is a relative strong base (pKa = 11.25). Azetidine is a considerably stronger
base compared to aziridine (pKa = 7.98).[37] Generally, the basicity of molecules is determined by the
accessibility of the basic electron lone pair. The more accessible, the stronger the base. Thus, lone pairs
with more p character spent more time away from the nucleus and as a result, are more accessible, leading to
higher basicity.[28] This explains why aziridine is less basic than azetidine. Aziridine suﬀers from more strain
than azetidine, where the sp3-hybridised nitrogen is forced into a bond-angle of 60◦which is a deviation of
49.5◦from the ideal tetrahedral bond angle. In comparison, the sp3-hybridised nitrogen of azetidine only
deviates by 19.5◦. Therefore, aziridine is of less sp3-hybridized character compared to azetidine, making the
lone pair on the nitrogen of more s-character, resulting in a less exposed lone pair. It is important to mention,
that the basicity also depends on several other factors such as substituents, solvation stablilisation, etc.
3.4
Spectroscopy
As mentioned previously, azetidines possess considerable ring strain and a puckered conformation, which can
be visualised using spectroscopy. This can be seen in both infrared (IR) spectroscopy and nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. In IR spectroscopy the ring strain aﬀects the stretching frequencies between
15
==PAGE:23==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
atoms. Generally, a sp3-hybridised C-H stretch in alkanes is around 3000-2850 cm−1.[38] In azetidines, the
frequencies for C-H stretches are in the higher end (2966 cm−1). This is due to the increase in s-character
in the C-H bonds, which shortens the bond length and as a result, increases the frequencies. For aziridines,
the frequencies for the C-H stretches are even higher (3047 cm−1) due to even more s-character in the C-H
bonds.[29]
The characteristics of azetidines can also be seen in NMR spectroscopy. The parent azetidine has the 1H
chemical shifts shown in ﬁgure 3.11.[39]
Figure 3.11: 1H chemical shifts of azetidine
The protons H2 and H4 are chemically equivalent and are deshielded with a chemical shift of 3.54 ppm.
However, this value varies a lot with substituents, e.g. introducing an electron donating tbutyl group at N1
enhances the shielding eﬀect, which results in more upﬁeld chemical shifts (δH2/H4 = 3.16 ppm and δH3 =
1.16 ppm). In comparison, the chemical shift of the α-CH2 in 1-benzyl-2,2,3-trimethyl azetidinium is 4.17
ppm[39], as the α-CH2 is alongside a positively charged nitrogen, decreasing the shielding eﬀect, which result
in a more downﬁeld chemical shift.
The proton-proton coupling constants (JHH) of azetidines also vary a lot depending on the substituents.
Generally, there are three main types of proton-proton coupling constants: two bond couplings (H-C-H,
geminal couplings, 2JHH), three bond couplings (H-C-C-H, vicinal couplings, 3JHH) and long-range coupling.
Geminal couplings occur when two or more nonequivalent protons are attached to the same carbon atom.
The degree of geminal coupling rely upon the H-C-H angle α.
Generally, the constant increase when α
decreases, since the orbitals move closer in space and the electron spin correlation becomes larger.[38] In
azetidine the geminal coupling constant of the protons sitting on the carbon adjacent to nitrogen (C2, C4)
is usually between 5-7.5 Hz.[40] In a study made by Akihisa et al. (2004), they isolated two enantiomeric
azetidine-type amino acids shown in ﬁgure 3.12. In these molecules the geminal coupling constants of the
diastereotopic protons sitting in position 3 where found to be 16.3 Hz.[41]
16
==PAGE:24==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 3.12: Two enantiomeric azetidine-type amino acids isolated by Akihsa et al.[41]
Three bond vicinal couplings are between a proton and a neighboring proton. According to theory, this
electronic spin interaction is due to the small parallel orbital overlap that exists between the electrons in
two adjacent C-H σ-bonds. There are several diﬀerent factors that inﬂuence the magnitude of this constant:
bond length between C-C, valence angles of the protons and electronegativity of substituents attached to C.
Another very important factor is the dihedral angle. The inﬂuence of this angle was discovered by Martin
Karplus, who showed that the magnitude of the splitting between two protons is largest when the dihedral
angle α is 0◦or 180◦and smallest when α is 90◦(shown in ﬁgure 3.13). When two adjacent C-H σ-bonds
are orthogonal to each other (α = 90◦), there is minimal orbital overlap and therefore no spin interactions.
However, when two adjacent C-H σ-bonds are parallel or anti parallel to each other (α = 0◦or 180◦) there
is most favorable orbital overlap, resulting in higher spin interactions.[38]
Figure 3.13: Variation of the vicinal coupling constant (3JHH) with the dihedral angle α
Since the structure of azetidine is puckered and not planer, the dihedral angle is not 0◦or 180◦between
vicinal protons. The dihedral angle or puckering angle of the parent azetidine was determined to be 33.1◦.[39]
However, this angle depends signiﬁcantly on substituents. For example it was discovered that the compound
1,1-dibenzyl-3,3-dimethylazetidine (shown in ﬁgure 3.14) was planar due to minimised axial repulsions.[39]
17
==PAGE:25==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 3.14: 1,1-dibenzyl-3,3-dimethylazetidine
The magnitude of vicinal coupling constants of azetidine protons are much dependent on whether it is a cis-
or trans coupling. Generally, the 3Jcis is around 6-7.5 Hz whereas 3Jtrans is lower, around 3 Hz.[40] However,
it can be diﬃcult to distinguish between diﬀerent isomers by only NMR. Therefore, it can be very useful to
establish conﬁgurational information using e.g. nuclear overhauser eﬀect spectroscopy (NOESY). NOESY
uses the nuclear overhauser eﬀect (NOE), which is the produced signal of a nearby proton when a selected
proton is irradiated.
The strength of this eﬀect is related to the distance between protons in space.[40]
Because of this, NOESY is a very useful tool for determining whether or not two protons are relatively close
in space. This was for example used in the previous described study by Akihsa et al. (2004)[41], in which
they isolated the two enantiomeric azetidine-type amino acids shown in ﬁgure 3.12. In this study, a signiﬁcant
NOE correlation was seen between one of the diastereotopic protons (Hb) and the protons on the methyl
group, but also a NOE correlation between Hb and the protons on the iso butyl group (Ha), shown in ﬁgure
3.15, was observed. This proved that the isobutyl at C2 and the methyl at C4 were oriented on the same
face of the azetidine ring.[41]
Figure 3.15: Signiﬁcant NOE correlations between the two enantiomer (ﬁgure from [41])
Long-range proton-proton couplings (4JHH - nJHH) are a lesser common type of coupling. These types of
couplings only occur under particular circumstances and are most common in allylic systems, aromatic rings
and rigid bicyclic systems. They occur when the orbitals are aligned geometrically to maximise the orbital
overlap along the H-C-C-C-H chain in which they can transmit the spin information. A type of long-range
coupling that occasionally occurs in saturated systems is the W-coupling (4JHH or 4JW).
This type of
coupling appears in a rigid arrangement of bonds, forming a ”W”, between hydrogens occupying the end
positions (shown in ﬁgure 3.16). The strength of the coupling produced by the W-coupling is usually very
small; however, in highly strained rings where the geometry is maintained in a favorable position for orbital
18
==PAGE:26==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
overlaps involved in spin transmission, higher coupling constants can be obtained.[38]
Figure 3.16: W-coupling highlighted in blue
Azetidines are, as mentioned rather strained and only slightly ﬂexible, making long-range proton-proton
couplings possible. In a study made by Fomichov et al. (1973)[42], the relationship between long-range
proton-proton coupling constants of heterocycles and puckering angle was examined. It was discovered that
the values for 4JW in azetidines were found to decrease when the puckering angle decreases. However, the
coupling constants were still relatively low: 0.25 Hz (α = 6◦) - 1.1 Hz (α = 21◦).[42]
19
==PAGE:27==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
4
Results and Discussion
As mentioned previously, this project aims at making a SAR study of the previously disclosed pyrrolidine
FFA2 agonist originating from Euroscreen (compound I). The goal is to synthesise several azetidine deriva-
tives containing distinctive aromatic sidechains and test these for biological agonist activity towards the FFA2
receptor as a potential anti-obesity drug. In section 3, the physical and chemical properties of azetidines
were described and it was established that azetidines have distinctive properties compared to pyrrolidines.
Azetidines have previously shown high activity towards the FFA2 receptor and therefore, it is of high interest
to investigate whether or not the replacement of the central pyrrolidine core with an azetidine would result
in higher biological activity. The designed target compounds will maintain a carboxylic acid in an arrange-
ment with the carbonyl located three atoms away from the carbonyl of the amide (similar to previous FFA2
agonists), thus being able to interact with the two arginine residues (R180 and R255) of the FFA2 receptor
resulting in an agonistic response.
The photochemical approach used for synthesis, made it possible to establish a synthetic pathway towards
the azetidine analogues, oﬀering late stage diversity. The objective of this study is to synthesise the target
compounds shown in ﬁgure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Target compounds of this study
Compound A is the simplest analogue of the FFA2 agonist originating from Euroscreen (compound I). The
only thing that diﬀers between compound A and compound I is the size of the central ring. Such a comparison
with the commercial Euroscreen FFA2 agonist will give a direct indication of how the azetidine ring aﬀects
biological activity. Compound B is an analogue of compound II containing the dimethylisoxazole ring, which
was previously shown by Hansen et al. (2018)[7] to introduce more favorable pharmacokinetic parameters
towards the FFA2 receptor. Compound C is an analogue in which the 2-chlorophenyl is exchanged with
a 2-ﬂuorophenyl. This analogue is interesting due to the decrease in size of the aryl group. Additionally,
ﬂuorine is often used in many pharmaceutical compounds due to important factors: it has a relatively small
size (van der Waals radius of 1.47 ˚A), comparable to H (van der Waals radius of 1.20 ˚A); it has a high electron
withdrawing properties and greater stability and lipophilicity compared to hydrogen.[43] Compound D is the
last analogue containing a pyridine in position 4. In the SAR study made by Hansen et al. (2018)[7], it was
found that the introduction of a pyridine ring in compound II, produced a relatively short intramolecular
20
==PAGE:28==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
hydrogen bond of 2.598 ˚A between the nitrogen of pyridine and the carboxylic acid in position 2. This
hydrogen bond was hypothesized to be responsible for them being able to grow a crystal of the required
quality for obtaining a crystal structure.[7] It would be of high interest in this project to get a crystal
structure of compound D, as it would show the structural eﬀects of having the azetidine compared to the
pyrrolidine core.
4.1
Retrosynthetic Analysis
A retrosynthetic analysis was made based on the target compounds, in which the central azetidine ring was
installed using the previously described photochemical reaction (CSIC), see ﬁgure 4.2. This photochemical
reaction converts serine derivatives into azetidines. Based on this, the required serine derivative IX was
designed, which is then reacted with a styrene moiety. It was noticed that the serine derivative IX could be
formed through an amide coupling between X and XI: XI consisting of the serine moiety and X consisting
of a biphenyl moiety. The serine moiety XI could be formed from serine by protection of the carboxylic
acid and the biphenyl moiety X could be formed through a Suzuki coupling. Overall this leads to the four
starting reagents marked in boxes.
Figure 4.2: Retrosynthetic analysis
21
==PAGE:29==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
4.2
Synthetic Pathway
Based on the retrosynthetic analysis, an overall synthetic route was planned to obtain compound A, C and
D, shown in ﬁgure 4.3, which requires the four commercially available starting materials: 2-methoxyphenyl
boronic acid (1.1), methyl 4-iodobenzoate (1.2), L-serine and a relevant styrene moiety depending on the
target compound. This pathway oﬀers some degree of late stage diversity that makes it possible to synthetise
several azetidine analouges containing distinctive aromatic side chains.
Figure 4.3: Synthetic pathway
The synthetic route consists of 5 simple steps: Suzuki Coupling, hydrolysis, amide coupling, photochemical
reaction and deprotection. All steps, except for the formation of the azetidine ring via the photochemical
reaction, utilize well-known chemistry.
To initially investigate the photochemical reaction, several test-
reactions were performed.
4.3
Photochemical Synthesis of Azetidines
The photochemical reaction was originally discovered in 2007 by Boto et al.[44].
In this study, it was
shown that serine derivatives used in a one-pot scission-alkylation or scission-arylation sequence allowed for
22
==PAGE:30==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
the synthesis of unnatural amino acids in excellent yields.
The mechanism for the reaction is shown in
ﬁgure 4.4. Exposing XIII to light irradiation in the presence of (diacetoxyiodo)benzene (DIB) produce an
alkoxyl radical (XIV). This intermediate, undergoes fragmentation creating XV. Generally, fragmentations
of primary alkoxyl radicals are rarely used in synthesis since other competing mechanisms such as oxidation
or hydrogen abstraction usually predominate. However, in the case of serine derivatives, the fragmentation
would be favored, because the formed C-radical (XV) is stabilised by the adjacent nitrogen. Intermediate
XV then reacts with iodine to give intermediate XVI, which is in equilibrium with the acyliminium ion
(XVII). When this intermediate is treated with various nucleophiles, compound XVIII is formed.[44]
Figure 4.4: Mechanism of photochemical reaction
In the study by Boto et al., various types of nucleophiles were investigated. One very important discovery
was that upon the use of isopropenyl acetate as a nucleophile, two products were obtained: the methyl ketone
(XXI) as the minor product and the two azetidines (XXII and XXIII) as the major products (shown in
ﬁgure 4.5). The result was explained by the two proposed mechanisms A and B in which route A would
generate a highly electrophilic [Me −CO]+ intermediate, making a nucleophilic attack by nitrogen preferred
resulting in a ring-closing reaction (route B).[44]
Figure 4.5: Mechanism of photochemical reaction with isopropenyl acetate
23
==PAGE:31==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
In 2012, CSIC patented this method for obtaining azetidines using nucleophiles containing the format: -
CH=CH-Z, in which Z may be an aryl or heteroaryl (shown in ﬁgure 4.6).[36]
Figure 4.6: Method for obtaining azetidine derivatives (CSIC)
The CSIC patent describes the method as a useful method for making 4-aryl azetidine carboxylic acids.
Unfortunately, the deprotection of the methyl ester to the corresponding carboxylic acid is not reported.
As we are interested in the free carboxylic acid products, initial eﬀorts in the current project aimed at
identifying conditions allowing for eﬃcient ester cleavage. Generally, the hydrolysis of alkyl esters can be
done under both basic and acidic conditions. In section 3.3 the reactivity of azetidines was discussed and
it was established that azetidines are rather unstable towards acidic conditions, making them susceptible
towards nucleophilic attack, leading to ring cleavage.[30] Therefore, it seemed most promising to do the
hydrolysis under basic conditions. However, it was speculated whether the compound would undergo ring-
opening and/or racemization under the strong basic conditions needed for cleavage of alkyl esters. In a study
made by Setner et al. (2018)[45], an unexpected racemization and hydrogen–deuterium exchange was shown
of the α-hydrogen of a proline derivative. It was speculated whether a similar type of racemization could
take place during ester hydrolysis of the azetidine compound (5, PG = Me) upon treatment with a strong
base. The proposed mechanism is shown in ﬁgure 4.7.
Figure 4.7: Possible racemization of compound 5 (PG = Me)
Generally, the acidity of a proton is inﬂuenced by several factors. The relative acidities of protons are con-
veniently predicted by examining the relative stabilities of the corresponding anionic conjugate bases. Com-
pound 5 contains an acidic α-hydrogen in which the anionic conjugate base is stabilized through resonance
by the carbonyl and through inductive eﬀect by the electronegative α-nitrogen. Furthermore, compound 5
possess considerable ring-strain, which lead to an increase in s-character as described in section 3.1. Because
s orbitals feel the positive charge of the nucleus more eﬀectively than p orbitals, higher s-character can better
stabilize the resulting negative charge of the conjugate base.[46] Overall this leads to a lower pKa, making the
24
==PAGE:32==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
α-hydrogen more acidic and more exposed to deprotonation under basic conditions, resulting in racemization
(shown in ﬁgure 4.7).
In this project, the isomer of interest is the (2S, 4R) with side groups in a similar arrangement to com-
pound I and II. One limitation of the photochemical reaction is that potentially four isomers of the product
can be formed (shown in ﬁgure 4.8). This is a result of the two non-stereospeciﬁc steps in the mechanism,
shown in ﬁgure 4.4 and 4.5. Since enantiomers have identical physical and chemical properties, they cannot
be separated by ﬂash chromatography. One way of separating enantiomers by chromatography is by using
a chiral stationary phase.[47] However, for the simpliﬁcation of this project, it was decided to only focus
on separating the diastereoisomers and not the enantiomers. For simpliﬁcation, the (2S, 4R) and (2R, 4S)
with side groups pointing in the same direction will further on in the thesis be referred to as the cis-isomer,
whereas the (2R, 4R) and (2S, 4S) with side groups pointing in opposite directions will be referred to as the
trans-isomer. In addition, the cis-isomer will be illustrated as the (2S, 4R), while the trans-isomer will be
illustrated as the (2S, 4S).
Figure 4.8: Diﬀerent isomers of the azetidine product
It was decided to initially synthesize a small library of simple model compounds, which vary in the carboxylic
acid protecting group to identify conditions allowing for successful removal of the protecting group as the
last step in the synthesis (PCR1, PCR2 and PCR3 shown in ﬁgure 4.9).
25
==PAGE:33==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 4.9: Three diﬀerent protecting groups tested in the photochemical reaction
The ﬁrst photochemical test reaction (PCR1) is using the methyl ester as protecting group which is hydrolysed
under basic conditions (shown in ﬁgure 4.10). This protecting group is the one used throughout the CSIC
procedure. However, as described previously the deprotection is never demonstrated.
Figure 4.10: Hydrolysis of methyl ester (9)
The second photochemical test reaction (PCR2) is using the tert-butyl ester as protecting group. Generally,
tert-butyl esters are cleaved under acidic conditions (shown in ﬁgure 4.11).
This could potentially be a
problem since azetidines are as mentioned rather unstable towards acids. However, tert-butyl esters can be
cleaved using relatively mild concentrations of acids, e.g. a tert-butyl deprotection of an azetidine-compound
using triﬂuoroacetic acid (TFA) has been reported in literature by Reshma et al. (2016).[48]
Figure 4.11: Hydrolysis of tert-butyl ester (10)
26
==PAGE:34==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
The last photochemical test reaction (PCR3) is using the allyl ester as protecting group. This is cleaved by
catalytic tetrakis(triphenylphosphine)palladium, Pd(PPh3)4 (shown in ﬁgure 4.12).
Figure 4.12: Hydrolysis of allyl ester (11)
In the CSIC patent, it is shown that increasing the size of the styrene moiety, increases the steric interactions
between the Ar and the CO2Me, which reduces the diastereoselectivity towards the cis-isomer of the formed
azetidine.[36] Based on this, it seems relevant to use a small protecting group, since larger protecting groups
could potentially increase steric interactions.
The starting reagents for PCR1 and PCR2 (compound 6 and 7) were synthesised using a nucleophilic
acyl substitution of the commercially available L-serine esters (6.1, 7.1) with benzoyl chloride (shown in
ﬁgure 4.13). Acid chlorides are among the most reactive carboxylic acid derivatives since they contain an
electronegative chlorine atom pulling electron density away from the carbonyl making it highly electrophilic
and susceptible towards nucleophilic attack.[49] The L-serine esters both contain an amine and alcohol which
potentially could react with benzoyl chloride. However, amines are better nucleophiles than alcohols and
therefore, the amine reacts chemoselectively with benzoyl chloride.
27
==PAGE:35==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 4.13: Mechanism for the formation of compound 6 and 7
The benzylation reactions were carried out using a procedure described by Fiedler, D. et al.[50] The low yield
(55% R = Me (6) and 61% R = tButyl (7)) can possible be explained by the excess of benzoyl chloride used
(1.5 eq). Within 20 min both of the reactions showed two peaks on the UPLC-MS: a large peak with mass
corresponding to the desired product (6: 224.0 [M+H+], 7: 266.0 [M+H+]) and a small peak (less polar)
with mass corresponding to the diacylated product, where both the amine and the alcohol have reacted as
nucleophiles (328.0 [M+H+], 370.0 [M+H+]), shown in ﬁgure 4.14. Therefore, in order to obtain a better
yield, it would presumably be better to use a smaller amount of benzoyl chloride. However, the reactions
resulted in isolation of enough of the desired products, so no further optimisations were made.
Figure 4.14: Possible by-product from the benzylation reaction
The starting reagent for PCR3 (compound 8) was synthesised using a SN2 reaction with the allylic halide:
3-bromoprop-1-ene and benzoyl-L-serine (8.1), shown in ﬁgure 4.15.
Figure 4.15: Mechanism for the formation of compound 8
The reaction was carried out using a procedure described by Gary Ashley and Daniel V. Santi.[51] Tri-
caprymethylammonium chloride (Aliquat 336) was used as a phase transfer catalyst in a biphasic mixture.
Generally, biphasic mixtures require a phase transfer catalyst such as an organic soluble tetralkylammonium
28
==PAGE:36==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
salt due to phase separation.[52] The overall yield of the reaction was 61% and was part due to incomplete
conversion of the starting material. However, the formation of byproducts was starting to form, so the reac-
tion was quenched and puriﬁed.
The ﬁrst photochemical test reaction (PCR1) using the benzylated methyl ester (6) was carried out uti-
lizing the procedure described by Naranjo, J. et al.[36] The mechanism for the reaction is shown in ﬁgure
4.16, which utilizes the ring-closure step that was discovered by Boto et al.[44] leading to the formation of
the two diastereoisomers of the azetidine.
Figure 4.16: Mechanism for the formation of compound 9
The reaction was followed by UPLC-MS and two peaks with a mass of 296.2 [M+H+] were seen; equivalent to
the cis and trans diasteroisomers. Isolation of the desired cis diastereoisomer 9 using ﬂash chromatography
was not easy and required several attempts. However, EtOAc:Pen (1:10) showed a successful separation and
compound 9 was isolated in 32% yield.
Figure 4.17: Photochemical reaction using 6
An easy way to diﬀerentiate between the two diastereoisomers is through coupling constants of the azetidine
protons. Figure 4.18 shows a segment of the 1H NMR of compound 9 (full spectrum shown in appendix). In
section 3.4 the stereochemical analysis of azetidines using spectroscopy was discussed and it was established
that vicinal couplings 3JHH varied depending on the dihedral angle and that the magnitude of the 3Jcis
29
==PAGE:37==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
couplings are generally higher than the 3Jtrans couplings.[40] This correlation can be seen from Ha and Hb in
ﬁgure 4.18. These protons contain a large 3Jcis coupling (Ha = 11.6 Hz, Hb = 11.5 Hz) and a small 3Jtrans
coupling (Ha = 2.8 Hz, Hb = 4.8 Hz). Diﬀerentiation between the diastereoisomers can be seen from the
diasterotopic protons Hc and Hd. These protons couples to each other through a germinal coupling (2JHH =
13.7 hz). Furthermore, Hc couples to Ha and Hb through two 3Jcis couplings (≈11.6 Hz, 11.5 Hz) and Hd
couples to Ha and Hb through two 3Jtrans couplings (≈4.8 Hz, 2.8 Hz). This indicates that the two protons
Ha and Hb must be pointing in the same direction, corresponding to the cis isomer.
Figure 4.18: Segment of 1H NMR (compound 9). Only azetidine protons shown for clariﬁcation
The deprotection of compound 9 was unsuccessful using LiOH (3 eq). Two attempts were made and both
times, the reactions were followed by UPLC-MS showing only one peak with mass equivalent to the depro-
tected carboxylic acid (281.9 [M+H+]). However, NMR sample of the isolated product showed the presence
of more compounds, probably due to a racemization as shown in ﬁgure 4.7.
Figure 4.19: Unsuccessful deprotection of compound 9
The second photochemical test reaction (PCR2) using the benzylated tert-butyl ester (7) was carried out
utilizing the same procedure as above. The reaction was followed by UPLC-MS, showing the same pattern
as for PCR1 with two peaks of similar retention time. Surprisingly, these peaks had a mass corresponding
to the deprotected carboxylic acid (281.9 [M+H+]). Using ﬂash chromatography, it was possible to isolate
30
==PAGE:38==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
the compound with a mass of 281.9 [M+H+] and it was conﬁrmed by NMR that the product was indeed the
deprotected carboxylic acid product (compound 12 and 13), shown in ﬁgure 4.20. Both the cis and trans
isomers were isolated in pure form, but the separation was diﬃcult, leading to some fractions containing both
products. Therefore the two isomers were isolated in rather low yields: cis-isomer 12 (7%) and trans-isomer
13 (14%).
Figure 4.20: Photochemical reaction using 7
Table 2 summarises the coupling constants of the azetidine protons of compound 12 and 13. The coupling
constants for the diastereotopic protons Hc and Hd for compound 12 contain two trans-couplings and two
cis-couplings whereas Hc and Hd for compound 13 both contain one trans and one cis coupling. This clearly
shows the distinction between the cis and trans isomers.
Table 2: Chemical shifts and couplings constants for azetidine protons of compound 12 and 13 (400 MHz
CD3OD)
Compound 12 (Cis)
Compound 13 (Trans)
Proton
Chemical Shift
[ppm]
Coupling Constants
[Hz]
Chemical Shift
[ppm]
Coupling Constants
[Hz]
a
5.54
(10.9, 5.8)
5.85
(8.6, 4.0)
b
5.04
(11.9, 8.7)
4.75
(9.7, 8.7)
c
2.96
(12.1, 8.7, 5.8)
2.85
(13.1, 8.7, 8.6)
d
2.52
(12.1, 11.9, 10.9)
2.65
(13.2, 9.7, 4.0)
Another way to determine the relative position of azetidine protons and diﬀerentiate between the two di-
asteroisomers, is by using NOESY. Generally, NOESY is a powerful tool for establishing conﬁgurational
information due to the NOE eﬀect that is related to the distance between protons in space. NOESY experi-
ments were made for compound 12 and 13 and diﬀerent patterns were observed, as shown in ﬁgure 4.21 and
4.22 (full spectrum shown in appendix 8.3). For compound 12 a small NOE correlation was seen between
Ha and Hb, also both of these proton had a NOE correlation to the same diastereotopic proton, indicating
they are pointing in the same direction (cis isomer). For compound 13 no NOE correlation was seen between
Ha and Hb, also each proton had a NOE correlation to a separate diastereotopic proton, indicating they are
pointing in the opposite direction (trans isomer).
31
==PAGE:39==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 4.21: NOESY of compound 12
Figure 4.22: NOESY of compound 13
A proposed mechanism for formation of the carboxylic acid product is shown in ﬁgure 4.23, with the Lewis
acid (BF3OEt2), present in the reaction mixture, catalyzing the deprotection. Previous studies have shown
that the Lewis acid (ZnBr2) can be used as a mild deprotecting agent of tert-butyl esters.[53][54]
Figure 4.23: Proposed mechanism for deprotection of compound 10
Inspired by these results, it was decided to try another photochemical reaction using the unprotected car-
boxylic acid (benzoyl-L-serine) shown in ﬁgure 4.24. However, this reaction showed no indication of the
formed azetidine product. This demonstrates the importance of the protecting group of the carboxylic acid.
This also shows that the deprotection of the tert-butyl ester must take place after the formation of azetidine.
Figure 4.24: Photochemical reaction using benzoyl-L-serine
The possibility of isolating the desired carboxylic acid directly using the tert-butyl ester was beneﬁcial. How-
ever, the diastereoselectivity of this reaction appeared to be reduced, facilitating the formation of the trans
isomer. The trans-isomer was isolated in 14% yield and the cis-isomer in 7% yield. It is however important
to mention that these values cannot be directly correlated to the diastereoselectivity of the reaction, as sev-
eral fractions contained a mixture of the two products. The reason for this reduced diastereoselectivity can
32
==PAGE:40==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
possible be explained by the unfavorable steric interactions when using a larger protecting group compared
to the methyl-ester.
Optical rotation was measured for the isolated trans-isomer (13) to determine if the product was a racemic
mixture of enantiomers: (2R, 4R) and (2S, 4S). The reason for using the trans-isomer was due to a slightly
higher purity compared to the isolated cis-isomer. The polarimeter measured no angle of rotation meaning
that the product was optically inactive. This suggests that the product is a racemate of enantiomers; as
expected.
The last photochemical test reaction (PCR3) using the allyl ester (8), was carried out utilising the procedure
previously described. The reaction was followed by UPLC-MS showing two peaks with mass equivalent to
the desired product. The cis-isomer (11) was successfully isolated in 24% yield. The deprotection was never
examined due to the appealing result of PCR2.
Figure 4.25: Photochemical reaction using 8
4.4
Synthesis of Potential FFA2 Agonists
Based on the photochemical test reactions, it was decided to use tert-butyl L-serinate in the following reac-
tions. This pathway oﬀers not only a reduced number of steps, but also increases the late stage diversity,
making it possible to synthesise several azetidine analouges with the photochemical reaction being the last
step. The overall synthetic route for the formation of compound A, C and D is shown in ﬁgure 4.26.
33
==PAGE:41==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 4.26: Optimized synthetic pathway of compound A, C and D
Another synthetic pathway was suggested for the formation compound B. This pathway consists of the same
four steps as the previous pathway with variation in the Suzuki coupling (shown in ﬁgure 4.27)
Figure 4.27: Synthetic pathway of compound B
34
==PAGE:42==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
4.4.1
Suzuki Coupling
The Suzuki reaction or the Suzuki-Miyaura cross-coupling is a powerful organometallic method, that allows
the formation of conjugated oleﬁns, styrenes and biphenyls. There are many beneﬁcial things to this method,
it uses mild reaction conditions, many boronic acids are commercial available, the reactions is unaﬀected by
the presence of water and it tolerates a broad range of functional groups.[55] In 1981, it was discovered that
the Suzuki Coupling was very useful for the coupling of phenylboronic acid with haloarenes in the presence
of bases, resulting in the formation of a biphenyl.[56] The mechanism for the formation of compound 2 is
shown in ﬁgure 4.28.
Figure 4.28: Mechanism for Suzuki cross-coupling
The Suzuki coupling is a catalytic cycle consisting of 4 steps. The cycle is initiated by the oxidative addition
in which the organic halide is ”inserted” into the active catalyst Pd(0), which results in oxidation of the
catalyst to Pd(II). The next step is the ligand exchange and transmetallation. The role of the base in these
steps is still being discussed. In the beginning, it was assumed that the base was necessary in order to
generate the boronate complex shown in ﬁgure 4.29. This boronate complex is a better nucleophile and was
therefore assumed to accelerate the transmetalation step.[28]
35
==PAGE:43==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 4.29: Formation of boronate under basic conditions
However in a study by Amatore et al. (2013)[57], the mechanism of the anionic base and its countercation
was investigated. One very important discovery was that the boronate complex was actually not the reactive
compound. Instead it was discovered that the transmetallation step was favoured when a hydroxide was
present due to the oxophilicity of the boron center that allows the precomplexation shown in ﬁgure 4.30.[57]
Figure 4.30: Transmetallation via precomplexation
The Suzuki couplings leading to the formation of compound 2 and 14 were carried out using a procedure
described by Hansen, A et al.[7] The reactions were followed by TLC and the desired product 2 was isolated
in an excellent yield of 90%. Compound 14 was obtained in a decent yield of 56%, while the literature
reports a much higher yield of 99% when using a 4th generation XPhos palladacyle.[7] This type of catalyst
is something that could be considered for optimizing the reaction.
However, suﬃcient amounts of both
compounds were isolated so no further optimization of the reaction was made.
Figure 4.31: Formation of compound 2 and 14
36
==PAGE:44==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
4.4.2
Hydrolysis
The hydrolysis of compound 2 and 14 were carried out using three equivalents of LiOH (aq). The reactions
were followed by TLC and after 24h the presence of compound 2 remained. Therefore, three additional
equivalents of LiOH was added and stirred until only the desired product 3 was observed. Compound 3 was
isolated in 76% yield, while compound 15 was obtained in a quantitative yield.
Figure 4.32: Formation of compound 3 and 15
4.4.3
Amide Coupling
Amide coupling is a very common type of reaction that has signiﬁcantly advanced throughout the years with
the development of new coupling reagents. The reaction is generally used to combine two amino acid residues
to form a peptide; however, it can be used for all sorts of reagents involving an amine and a carboxylic acid.
The coupling involves a nucleophilic attack by the amino group to the carbonyl carbon that has been activated
by introduction of an electron-withdrawing group.[58] Two of the fundamental types of coupling agents
are: benzotriazolyl phosphonium salts and benzotriazolyl uronium salts. For the synthesis of compound 9,
PyBOP (((1H-Benzo[d][1,2,3]triazol-1-yl)oxy)tri(pyrrolidin-1-yl)phosphonium hexaﬂuorophosphate(V)) was
used which is a benzotriazolyl phosphonium salt (mechanism shown in ﬁgure 4.33). The driving force for the
condensation step of the HOBt activated ester substrate and the amine is the formation of a strong P=O
bond. The amine reacts with the activated ester containing the HOBt as a good leaving group, resulting in
the formation of an amide bond.[59]
37
==PAGE:45==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 4.33: Mechanism for amide coupling
Compound 4 and 16 were synthesized using a modiﬁed version of the procedure described by Nasief et al.[60].
Compound 4 was isolated in a good yield of 78% and 16 was isolated in 80% yield. Other coupling agents
could have been tested in attempt to obtain higher yields; however, no further optimisations were made.
Figure 4.34: Formation of compound 4 and 16
4.4.4
Photochemical Reaction
The last step in the synthesis of compound A, B, C and D was the photochemical reaction. Compound A
was synthesised using 4 and 2-chlorostyrene utilizing the previously described procedure.
38
==PAGE:46==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 4.35: Photochemical reaction using compound 4 and 2-chlorostyrene
The reaction was followed by UPLC-MS and like the previous test reactions, the predominant peak ((9) in
ﬁgure 4.36) showed a mass equivalent to the deprotected carboxylic acid A (422.0 [M+H+]). However, the
separation between the two diastereoisomers (corresponding to the seperation between the two peaks (9))
was not great. Several attempts separating the isomers by ﬂash chromatography were made without any
success. Therefore, it was decided to use preparative high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) as
an attempt to isolate the two diastereoisomers. Unfortunately, the two isomers were never separated even
though various eluent systems were tried.
Figure 4.36: UPLC-MS (UV-detector) for compound A (crude)
Therefore, only a mixture containing both the cis and trans isomer was isolated, resulting in some rather
messy spectra with overlapping signals from both isomers. In the 1H NMR spectrum of compound A two
very surprising peaks were seen at δ = 9.11 ppm and 9.32 ppm, which appeared to be an exchangeable
proton of the cis and trans isomers. More interestingly, these peaks appeared to have a coupling constant
of approximately 7.5 Hz. Inspired by these results, it was decided to make another NMR experiment of the
previous isolated test-compounds 12 and 13 in DMSO (previously spectra recorded in MeOD), to see if these
compounds showed a similar exchangeable proton. It was conﬁrmed 12 and 13 also showed a proton (d) at
approximately 9.2 ppm with a coupling constant of 7.5 Hz (shown in ﬁgure 4.37).
39
==PAGE:47==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 4.37: 1H NMR of compound 13 in diﬀerent solvent (top: DMSO, bottom: CD3OD)
It was established from COSY, that the exchangeable proton coupled to the C-H proton at 4.75 ppm. It
seemed unlikely that the carboxylic acid should generate a long-range coupling of 7.5 Hz to an azetidine pro-
ton. Through further structural examinations, it was surprisingly discovered that the isolated products when
using the tert-butyl protecting group were presumably not the expected azetidines. It was instead suggested
that the isolated products were the 5-membered lactone products shown in ﬁgure 4.38. This compound diﬀers
greatly from azetidines chemically; however, they show strong similarities in NMR experiments.
Figure 4.38: Suggested product when using tert-butyl protecting group
A proposed mechanism for the formation of the 5-membered lactone ring is shown in ﬁgure 4.39. It is assumed
that the deprotection of the tert-butyl ester happens before the ring-closure, forming the carboxylate. Instead
of the lone-pair of nitrogen functioning as the nucleophile in the ring-closure reaction, the carboxylate function
as a nucleophile, resulting in the formation of a 5-membered lactone ring.
40
==PAGE:48==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 4.39: Proposed mechanism for the formation of 5-membered lactone ring
As mentioned, this 5-membered lactone ring does not show a large number of similar chemical properties
compared to the azetidine compounds of interest and for the sake of the project, this result was rather dis-
appointing. The idea behind this project was to synthesise various biologically active analogues towards the
FFA2 receptor. The purpose was to keep a carboxylic acid in an arrangement where the carbonyl of the acid
was three positions away from the carbonyl of the amide and hopefully being able to interact with the two
arginine residues resulting in an agonist response. The 5-membered lactone ring will not be able to produce
such a response without doing a ring-opening. This could perhaps take place in the blood stream, catalysed
by esterase; however, lactones are poor substrates for esterase due to their ester conﬁguration.[61]
Therefore, it became clear that the tert-butyl protecting group was probably not the most suitable for
the desired photochemical reaction. Instead, it would have been interesting to test the deprotection of the
allyl-ester. In spite, the formation of the 5-membered lactone rings and due to a limited amount of time, it
was decided to spend the last time in the laboratory investigating the diastereomeric ratio (dr) of the above
reaction. From the 1H NMR, it was possible to determine the ratio of cis/trans diastereoisomers, by looking
at relevant integrals (shown in ﬁgure 4.40). Two additional photochemical reactions using: 2-ﬂuorostyrene
(C) and styrene (E) were made and the results are summarised in table 3.
41
==PAGE:49==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 4.40: Diastereomeric ratio shown by integral diﬀerence of cis/trans-isomer
From table 3, it can be seen that all three reactions favor the formation of the trans-isomer. However, when
the size of the styrene-moiety is reduced, the diastereoselectivity towards the trans-isomer is reduced as well.
This is likely due to the reduced steric interactions between the styrene-moiety and the biaryl of the formed
product.
Table 3: Cis/trans ratio of isolated product
Compound
X
Cis
Trans
A
Cl
26%
74%
C
F
38%
62%
E
H
46%
54%
In comparison, estimated values of the diastereomeric ratio for the azetidine products of PCR1 and PCR3
is shown in table 4. These values were established from UPLC-MS of the crude reaction mixture. They
clearly show that increasing the size of the protecting group from a methyl ester to an allyl ester reduces the
diastereoselectivity towards the cis-isomer drastically. This is probably a result of the increase of unfavorable
steric interactions in the formed azetidine.
42
==PAGE:50==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
Table 4: Estimated values of diastereomeric ratio for PCR1 and PCR3
Product
Cis
Trans
PCR1
64%
36%
PCR3
28%
72%
For the synthesis of compound D, 2-vinylpyridine was used. However, this reaction showed no indication
of the formed product. A possible explanation for this could be a reaction between 2-vinylpyridine and the
iodine present in the mixture. The main diﬀerence between styrene and 2-vinylpyridine is that the latter
contain a nucleophilic nitrogen due to the lone-pair not contributing to the delocalized π-system. Pyridine is
known for reacting rather easily with halogens and inter-halogens to form crystalline compounds.[62] Some
studies have shown that the complexation reaction between iodine and pyridine forms rather stable complexes
in non-polar solvents and in polar solvents, the complex dissociates to form ionic species.[63] These complexes
can serve as electrophilic halogenating agents. This could possible explain why the desired product was never
formed.
Figure 4.41: Unsuccessful formation of compound D
43
==PAGE:51==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
5
Conclusion
In this project, an eﬀort was made to synthesize various azetidine analogs of the previously disclosed pyrro-
lidine FFA2 agonist (compound I). A photochemical reaction previously found to be useful in the formation
of azetidines was used. Initially, a small library of model compounds varying in carboxylic acid protecting
group was tested to identify conditions that would allow successful removal of the protecting group. From
these reactions, it became apparent that the tert-butyl protecting group showed appealing results leading to
what was thought to be the desired product through a one-pot synthesis. Surprisingly, it was later discovered
that the products obtained were not the expected azetidines. Through NMR experiments in DMSO-d6, the
products showed an unexpected exchangeable proton and by structural examinations, it was identiﬁed that
the isolated products were instead 5-membered lactone rings (γ-butyrolactone). A proposed mechanism for
the formation was presented, where it was assumed that the deprotection of the tert-butyl ester happened
due to the Lewis acid, hereby forming a carboxylate, which reacted as a better nucleophile forming the
5-membered lactone in a ring closure. The diastereomeric ratio for the reaction was investigated, showing
diastereoselectivity towards the trans isomer; however, when the size of the styrene-moiety was reduced, the
diastereoselectivity was reduced as well. Furthermore, the diastereomeric ratio for the formation of azetidine
using the photochemical reaction was investigated utilizing estimated values for PCR1 and PCR3. From
these results, it became apparent that PCR1 (using the methyl-ester) showed diastereoselectivity towards
the cis isomer whereas PCR3 (using the allyl-ester) showed diastereoselectivity towards the trans isomer.
44
==PAGE:52==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
6
Future Perspectives
Having demonstrated the deprotection of the ﬁrst photochemical test-reaction (PCR1) using the methyl ester
was unsuccessful and since the pathway using the tert-butyl ester (PCR2) never resulted in the desired prod-
uct, it would be of high interest to try the deprotection of the allyl ester (PCR3) using tetrakis(triphenylphosphine)-
palladium.
Figure 6.1: Conclusion of photochemical-test reactions
Another interesting approach would be the tert-butyl ester (PCR2) without lewis acid. In the original paper
of the photochemical reaction, Boto et al showed that several reactions worked in the absence of Lewis acid;
however, most of the reactions worked only (or in much greater yield) when lewis acid was present.[44] If it
is possible to obtain the azetidine with the tert-butyl ester remaining, then Lewis acid could be used as a
deprotecting agent subsequently. Also, deprotection of a similar azetidine-compound containing a tert-butyl
ester has been reported in the literature by Reshma et al. (2016)[48] using TFA, which could be used as an
alternative.
If a successful pathway is identiﬁed leading to the desired azetidine carboxylic acid, it would be of sig-
niﬁcant value to synthesise the analogues presented and test these for biological activity towards FFA2. Even
though it was considered outside the scope of this project, it would also be of high value to determine the
speciﬁc biological activity of the diﬀerent enantiomers of the azetidines: (2S, 4R) and (2R, 4S).
45
==PAGE:53==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
7
Experimentals
Starting materials, reagents and solvents were purchased from commercial suppliers and used without further
puriﬁcation. All solvents were of HPLC quality. Anhydrous THF, DCM, Et2O, MeCN, toluene, DMSO, and
DMF were obtained from a puresolvTM MD-7 Solvent Puriﬁcation System, Innovative Technology with Al2O3
as stationary phase. For Thin-layer chromatography (TLC), Merck aluminium sheets covered with silica gel
C-60 F254 were used and developed using UV-light or a suitable staining reagent [KMnO4 (3g) in water (300
mL), K2CO3 (20 g) and 5% aqueous NaOH (5 mL)]. Flash chromatography was performed using glass columns
packed with Merck Geduran 60 Angstrom silica gel (40-64 µm particles) as stationary phase[64]. The eluent
systems for ﬂash chromatography is speciﬁed under each protocol. Evaporation of solvent was performed on a
Heidolph laborota 4000 eﬃcient under reduced pressure (in vacuo) at temperatures ranging from 20 to 90◦C.
Traces of solvents were removed in vacuo by means of a membrane pump. Analytic UPLC-MS analysis was
run on a Waters AQUITY UPLC system equipped with PDA and SQD electrospray MS detector. Column:
Kinetex 1.7 µm XB-C18, 2.1 x 50mm. Column temperature: 50◦C. Flowrate: 0.5 mL/min. Solvent A: 0.1%
HCOOH in H2O, Solvent B: 0.1% HCOOH in MeCN. Gradient: 5% B to 100% B in 2.4 min, hold 0.1 min,
total run time 2.6 min. Preparative RP-HPLC was performed using REVELERIS Prep Puriﬁcation System
by GRACE equipped with a diode array detector using a C18 column (5 µM; ﬂow 20 mL/min). Eluents
A (0.1% HCOOH in H2O) and B (0.1% HCOOH in MeCN) used in a speciﬁc gradient (5% B to 100% B)
in 20-30 minutes. Alternatively Eluent C (15 mM NH4OAC in H2O) and D (15 mM NH4OAc in MeCN)
used in speciﬁc gradient (5% B to 100% B) in 20-30 minutes. NMR spectra were recorded on Bruker Ascend
spectrometer with a Prodigy cryoprobe operating at 400 and 800 MHz for 1H NMR and 101 MHz for 13C
NMR. The speciﬁc deuterated solvent is stated for each compound. Chemical shifts (δ) are reported in ppm
downﬁeld from TMS (δ = 0) using solvent resonance as the internal standard (chloroform-d, 1H: 7.26 ppm,
13C: 77.16 ppm; dimethylsulfoxide-d6, 1H: 2.50 ppm, 13C: 39.52 ppm; CD3OD, 1H: 3.31 ppm, 13C: 49.00
ppm[65]).Coupling constants (J) are reported in Hz and the ﬁeld is reported in each case. Multiplicities
are reported as singlet (s), broad singlet (br. s), doublet (d), doublet of doublets (dd), doublet of triplets
(dt), doublet of doublet of doublets (ddd), doublet of doublet of triplets (ddt), triplet (t), triplet of doublets
(td), quartet (q), pentet (p), septet (sep) and multiplets (m). IR analysis was performed on a Bruker Alpha
FT-IR spectrometer. In reporting of IR signals, (s) = strong, (m) = medium, (w) = weak and (br) = broad.
Optical rotation was measured on a Perkin Elmer Model 241 Polarimeter (cuvette 1.0 mL, 100 mm) using
a sodium source lamp (589 nm, 20◦C). Melting points were measured using a Stuart SMP30 melting point
apparatus and reported in ◦C.
46
==PAGE:54==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
(2) - Methyl 2’-methoxy-[1,1’-biphenyl]-4-carboxylate
The compound was synthesized using a procedure described by Hansen, A et al [7].
(2-methoxyphenyl)boronic acid (2.00 g, 13.16 mmol) and Methyl 4-iodobenzoate
(3.45 g, 13.16 mmol) were added to a solution of 85 mL toluene and 46 mL methanol.
The mixture was purged with argon 3 times. Tetrakis(triphenylphosphine)palladium
(152 mg, 0.131 mmol) and 11.2 mL of 4M aq NaCO3 were added to the solution. The
reaction mixture was stirred at 80◦C overnight under argon. The mixture was extracted with 3 x EtOAc and
the organic phases were dried with Na2SO4. The desired product was puriﬁed using ﬂash chromatography
(1:10 EtOAc:Pen) and obtained as a white solid (2.88 g, 11.89 mmol, 90%). ESI-MS = m/z 243.1 [M+H+],
calculated for C15H14O3: 243.09 [M+H+]. m.p: 77-79◦C. 1H NMR (400 MHz CDCl3) = δ 8.09 (d, J = 8.6
Hz, 2H), 7.62 (d, J = 8.1 Hz, 2H), 7.36 (m, 2H), 7.04 (m, 2H), 3.95 (s, 3H), 3.83 (s, 3H). 13C NMR (101
MHz CDCl3) = δ 167.1, 156.5, 143.4, 130.8, 129.6, 129.4, 129.3, 128.5, 121.0, 111.4, 55.6, 52.1. IR (cm−1):
3012(w), 2961(w), 1715(s), 1484(m) 1274(s), 1232(s).
Spectroscopic data in agreement with literature.[7]
(3) - 2’-Methoxy-[1,1’-biphenyl]-4-carboxylic acid
Methyl 2’-methoxy-[1,1’-biphenyl]-4-carboxylate (2.77 g, 11.42 mmol) was dissolved
in 10 mL THF and an aqueous solution of LiOH (820 mg, 32.4 mmol) was added and
stirred at room temperature overnight. The starting material was still present on
TLC, so 3 extra equivalents of LiOH was added and stirred for 2 hours. The mixture
was quenched with concentrated HCl to pH ≈2 and extracted with 3 x EtOAc and
washed with brine. The organic phases were dried with Na2SO4 and concentrated to leave the desired product
as a white solid (1.97 g, 76%). ESI-MS = m/z 228.9 [M+H+], calculated for C14H12O3: 229.08 [M+H+].
m.p: Decomposes at 248◦C. 1H NMR (400 MHz DMSO −d6) = δ 12.92 (br. s, 1H), 7.97 (d, J = 8.2 Hz,
2H), 7.60 (d, J = 8.2 Hz, 2H), 7.38 (m, 1H), 7.33 (dd, J = 7.5, 1.7 Hz, 1H), 7.14 (d, J = 8.2 Hz, 1H), 7.05
(td, J = 7.5, 1.0 Hz, 1H), 3.77 (s, 1H). 13C NMR (101 MHz DMSO −d6) = δ 167.7, 156.6, 143.1, 130.8,
130.1, 129.9, 129.5, 129.5, 129.2, 121.3, 112.3, 56.0. IR (cm−1): 3200-2500(br), 1673(s), 1606(m), 1320(m)
1173(m).
Spectroscopic data in agreement with literature.[7]
47
==PAGE:55==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
(4) - Tert-butyl (2’-methoxy-[1,1’-biphenyl]-4-carbonyl)-L-serinate
The compound was synthesized using a modiﬁed version of the procedure described
by Nasief et al.[60] 2’-Methoxy-[1,1’-biphenyl]-4-carboxylic acid (600 mg, 2.63 mmol)
was dissolved in 10 mL DMF. PyBOP (1.50 g, 2.89 mmol) was added to the solution
and the reaction mixture was stirred at room temperature for 30 min. Tert-butyl
(2S)-2-amino-3-hydroxypropanoate hydrochloride (572 mg, 2.89 mmol) was added
together with DIPEA (1.83 mL, 10.5 mmol) and stirred at room temperature overnight. The reaction was
quenched with water and extracted with 3 x DCM. The organic phases were combined and washed with 3 x
water, dried with Na2SO4 and the desired product was puriﬁed using ﬂash chromatography (1:5, Pen:EtOAc)
and obtained as a white solid (766 mg, 78%). ESI-MS = m/z 372.1 [M+H+], calculated for C21H25NO5:
372.17 [M+H+]. m.p: 128-131◦C. 1H NMR (400 MHz, DMSO-d6) = δ 8.43 (d, J = 7.7 Hz, 1H), 7.91 (d, J
= 8.1 Hz, 2H), 7.59 (d, J = 8.1 Hz, 2H), 7.42 – 7.32 (m, 2H), 7.14 (d, J = 8.3 Hz, 1H), 7.06 (t, J = 7.4 Hz,
1H), 4.98 (t, J = 6.1 Hz, 1H), 4.44 (dt, J = 7.6, 5.2 Hz, 1H), 3.79 (m, 2H), 3.78 (s, 3H), 1.42 (s, 9H). 13C
NMR (101 MHz, DMSO-d6) = δ 170.1, 166.8, 156.6, 141.7, 132.8, 130.8, 129.9, 129.6, 129.3, 127.6, 121.3,
112.3, 81.1, 61.8, 56.8, 56.0, 28.2. IR (cm−1): 2975(w), 1723(s), 1578(m), 1260(m), 1106(m).
General Procedure (Benzylation)
The compounds were synthesized using a procedure described by Fiedler, D. et al. [50]
The L-serine moiety (1 eq) and potassium carbonate (2.85 eq) were dissolved in water and stirred for 5 min.
Benzoyl chloride (1.5 eq) was added and stirred at room temperature for 20 min. The mixture was extracted
with ethyl acetate and the organic phases were combined and dried with Na2SO4. The desired product was
puriﬁed using ﬂash chromatography.
(6) - Methyl Benzoyl-L-Serinate
Using the general procedure (benzylation): Methyl L-serinate (500 mg, 4.20 mmol),
potassium carbonate (1.65 g, 12.0 mmol) and Benzoyl chloride (0.73 mL, 6.30 mmol)
gave the product: methyl benzoyl-L-serinate obtained by ﬂash chromatography (1:1,
Hep:EtOAc) as a white solid (564 mg, 55%). ESI-MS = m/z 224.0 [M+H+], calcu-
lated for C11H13NO4: 224.08 [M+H+]. m.p: 85-87◦C. 1H NMR (400 MHz, Chloroform-d) = δ 7.84 – 7.80
(m, 2H), 7.55 – 7.48 (m, 1H), 7.43 (m, 2H), 7.16 (d, J = 7.2 Hz, 1H), 4.86 (dt, J = 7.3, 3.6 Hz, 1H), 4.10 –
4.00 (m, 2H), 3.81 (s, 3H). 13C NMR (101 MHz, Chloroform-d) = δ 171.1, 167.7, 133.5, 132.0, 128.6, 127.2,
63.5, 55.2, 52.9. IR (cm−1): 3293(br), 2951(w), 1748(s), 1625(s), 1539(m), 1350(m), 1208 (m).
Spectroscopic data in agreement with literature.[66]
48
==PAGE:56==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
(7) - Tert-Butyl Benzoyl-L-Serinate
Using the general procedure (benzylation):
Tert-butyl L-serinate (500 mg, 3.10
mmol), potassium carbonate (1.22 g, 8.84 mmol) and Benzoyl chloride (0.54 mL, 4.65
mmol) gave the product: Tert-butyl benzoyl-L-serinate obtained by ﬂash chromatog-
raphy (1:1, Hep:EtOAc) as a green oil (551 mg, 61%). ESI-MS = m/z 266.0 [M+H+],
calculated for C14H19NO4: 266.13 [M+H+] 1H NMR (400 MHz, Chloroform-d) =
δ 7.83 – 7.79 (m, 2H), 7.52 – 7.47 (m, 1H), 7.41 (t, J = 7.4 Hz, 2H), 7.18 (d, J = 6.8 Hz, 1H), 4.72 (ddd, J
= 7.0, 4.1, 3.2 Hz, 1H), 4.07 – 3.95 (m, 2H), 1.50 (s, 9H). 13C NMR (101 MHz, Chloroform-d) = δ 170.1,
168.2, 134.1, 132.3, 129.0, 127.6, 83.5, 64.5, 56.4, 28.5. IR (cm−1): 3361(br), 2978(w), 1729(m), 1638(m),
1526(m), 1150(s).
(8) - Allyl Benzoyl-L-Serinate
The compound was synthesized using a procedure described by Gary Ashley and
Daniel V. Santi [51]
Allyl bromide (2.07 mL, 23.90 mmol) was mixed with Tricaprymethylammonium
chloride (3.86 g, 9.56 mmol) in 33 mL DCM. NaHCO3 (400 mg, 4.78 mmol) in 18
mL of water was added together with Benzoyl-L-Serine (1.00 g, 4.78 mmol) to the
solution and stirred at room temperature for 72h. The reaction mixture was diluted with 40 mL water and
extracted with 3 x DCM. The organic phases were dried with MgSO4 and the desired product was puriﬁed
using ﬂash chromatography (1:1, Hep:EtOAc) and obtained as a white solid (729 mg, 61%). ESI-MS =
m/z 250.1 [M+H+], calculated for C13H15NO4: 250.10 [M+H+] m.p: 98-100◦C. 1H NMR (400 MHz,
Chloroform-d) = δ 7.77 (dd, J = 7.2, 1.7 Hz, 2H), 7.51 – 7.42 (m, 1H), 7.39 (dd, J = 8.3, 6.7 Hz, 2H), 7.04
(d, J = 7.0 Hz, 1H), 5.87 (ddt, J = 16.3, 10.6, 5.7 Hz, 1H), 5.30 (dd, J = 17.2, 1.6 Hz, 1H), 5.22 (dd, J =
10.4, 1.4 Hz, 1H), 4.84 (dt, J = 7.0, 3.6 Hz, 1H), 4.70 – 4.62 (m, 2H), 4.10 – 3.97 (m, 2H). 13C NMR (101
MHz, Chloroform-d) = δ 170.3, 167.6, 133.5, 132.0, 131.3, 128.7, 127.2, 119.2, 66.5, 63.7, 55.3. IR (cm−1):
3337(br), 2975(w), 1737(s), 1624(s), 1540(s), 1258(m), 718(m)
49
==PAGE:57==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
General Procedure (Photochemical Reaction)
The compounds were synthesized using a procedure described by Naranjo, J. et al. [36].
The synthesis was carried out in an inert atmosphere. The benzylated L-serine moiety (1 eq) and iodine (1
eq) were dissolved in dry DCM. To the solution, (diacetoxyiodo)benzene (2.5 eq) was added and the reaction
was stirred for 3 hours under irradiation of white light. The solution was cooled to 0 ◦C and styrene (5 eq)
was added followed by dropwise addition of boron triﬂuoride diethyl etherate (3 eq). The mixture was stirred
at room temperature and under irradiation of white light for 24 h. The reaction was quenched using 1:1 10%
sodium thiosulfate and saturated sodium hydrogen carbonate and extracted with DCM. The organic phases
were combined, dried with Na2SO4 and the desired product was puriﬁed using ﬂash chromatography.
(9) - Methyl 1-benzoyl-4-phenylazetidine-2-carboxylate (Cis)
Using the general procedure (photochemical reaction): Methyl benzoyl-L-serinate
(150 mg, 0.672 mmol), iodine (170 mg, 0.672 mmol), (diacetoxyiodo)benzene (541
mg, 1.68 mmol), styrene (0.38 mL 3.36 mmol) and boron triﬂuoride diethyl etherate
(0.25 mL, 2.02 mmol) gave the desired product (2S, 4R) using ﬂash chromatography
(1:10 EtOAc:Pen) as a clear oil (64 mg, 32%).
ESI-MS = m/z 296.2 [M+H+],
calculated for C18H17NO3: 296.12 [M+H+]. 1H NMR (400 MHz, Chloroform-d) = δ 8.09 – 8.03 (m, 2H),
7.51 – 7.38 (m, 8H), 5.35 (dd, J = 11.6, 2.8 Hz, 1H), 4.62 (dd, J = 11.5, 4.8 Hz, 1H), 3.83 (s, 3H), 2.57 (ddd,
J = 13.7, 4.9, 2.8 Hz, 1H), 2.14 (ddd, J = 13.8, 11.6, 11.6 Hz, 1H). 13C NMR (101 MHz, Chloroform-d) =
δ 172.6, 157.0, 139.7, 133.1, 131.0, 128.8, 128.5, 128.1, 127.6, 125.9, 76.2, 56.5, 52.4, 32.4.
(11) - Allyl 1-benzoyl-4-phenylazetidine-2-carboxylate (Cis)
Using the general procedure (photochemical reaction): Allyl benzoyl-L-serinate (150
mg, 0.602 mmol), iodine (153 mg, 0.602 mmol), (diacetoxyiodo)benzene (485 mg,
1.50 mmol), styrene (0.34 mL 3.01 mmol) and boron triﬂuoride diethyl etherate
(0.23 mL, 1.81 mmol) gave the desired product using ﬂash chromatography (1:10
EtOAc:Pentane) as an oil (46 mg, 24%). ESI-MS = m/z 322.6 [M+H+], calculated
for C20H19NO3: 322.14 [M+H+]. 1H NMR (400 MHz CDCl3) = δ 8.08 – 8.01 (m, 2H), 7.46 – 7.31 (m, 8H),
5.96 (ddt, J = 16.3, 10.9, 5.6 Hz, 1H), 5.44 – 5.29 (m, 2H), 5.26 (dd, J = 10.4, 1.4 Hz, 1H), 4.70 (dt, J =
5.7, 1.4 Hz, 2H), 4.62 (dd, J = 11.5, 4.8 Hz, 1H), 2.55 (ddd, J = 13.8, 4.9, 2.8 Hz, 1H), 2.12 (ddd, J = 13.6,
11.7, 10.7 Hz, 1H). 13C NMR (101 MHz CDCl3) = δ 171.7, 139.6, 131.9, 131.0, 128.8, 128.6, 128.1, 127.6,
125.9, 118.6, 76.3, 65.8, 56.5, 32.5.
50
==PAGE:58==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
(12) (13) - N-(2-oxo-5-phenyltetrahydrofuran-3-yl)benzamide
Using the general procedure (photochemical reaction): Tert-butyl
benzoyl-L-serinate (500 mg, 1.88 mmol), iodine (478 mg, 1.88
mmol), (diacetoxyiodo)benzene (1.52 g, 4.71 mmol), styrene (1.08
mL 9.42 mmol) and boron triﬂuoride diethyl etherate (0.72 mL,
5.65 mmol) gave the desired product (Cis) and the diasteroisomer
(Trans) using ﬂash chromatography (1:5 EtOAc:Pen + 1% AcOH) ESI-MS = m/z 282.1 [M+H+], calculated
for C17H15NO3: 282.11 [M+H+].
Compound 12 (Cis) as an oil (35 mg, 7%)
1H NMR (400 MHz, DMSO-d6) = δ 9.09 (d, J = 8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.90 (d, J = 7.5 Hz, 2H), 7.61 – 7.55 (m,
1H), 7.52 (dd, J = 7.5, 5.7 Hz, 4H), 7.48 – 7.44 (m, 2H), 7.42 – 7.36 (m, 1H), 5.54 (dd, J = 10.8, 5.9 Hz,
1H), 5.03 (dt, J = 11.7, 8.5 Hz, 1H), 2.87 (ddd, J = 12.0, 8.5, 5.9 Hz, 1H), 2.42 (ddd, J = 12.0, 11.7, 10.8
Hz, 1H). 13C NMR (101 MHz, DMSO-d6) = δ 175.0, 166.4, 139.8, 133.9, 132.2, 129.1, 129.1, 129.0, 127.7,
126.9, 78.2, 50.7, 36.7.
Compound 13 (Trans) as an amorphous solid: (74 mg, 14%)
1H NMR (800 MHz, DMSO-d6) = δ 9.22 (d, J = 7.6 Hz, 1H), 7.91 – 7.87 (m, 2H), 7.60 – 7.56 (m, 1H),
7.53 – 7.49 (m, 2H), 7.46 – 7.41 (m, 4H), 7.40 – 7.35 (m, 1H), 5.84 (dd, J = 8.5, 4.9 Hz, 1H), 4.70 (dt, J =
10.0, 7.6 Hz, 1H), 2.72 (ddd, J = 13.2, 8.5, 7.6 Hz, 1H), 2.55 (ddd, J = 13.2, 10.0, 4.9 Hz, 1H). 13C NMR
(101 MHz, DMSO-d6) = δ 175.4, 166.6, 140.6, 133.6, 132.3, 129.2, 129.0, 128.7, 127.8, 126.3, 79.1, 48.8, 36.2.
IR (cm−1): 3333(s), 3200-2500(br), 2113(m), 1780(s), 1641(s), 1540(s).
(14) - Methyl 4-(3,5-dimethylisoxazol-4-yl)benzoate
The compound was synthesized using a procedure described by Hansen, A et al [7].
3,5-Dimethyl-4-(4,4,5,5-tetramethyl-1,3,2-dioxaborolan-2-yl)isoxazole (1.00 g, 4.48
mmol) and methyl 4-iodobenzoate (1.17 g, 4.48 mmol) were added to a solution
of 29 mL toluene and 16 mL methanol. The mixture was purged with argon 3 times.
Tetrakis(triphenylphosphine)palladium (51.8 mg, 0.0448 mmol) and 3.8 mL of 4M aq
NaCO3 were added to the solution. The reaction mixture was stirred at 80◦C overnight under argon. The
mixture was extracted with 3 x EtOAc and the organic phase was dried with Na2SO4. The desired product
was puriﬁed using ﬂash chromatography (1:5, EtOAc:Pen) and obtained as a yellow amorphous solid (581
mg, 56%). ESI-MS = m/z 231.9 [M+H+], calculated for C13H13NO3: 232.09 [M+H+].
1H NMR (400
MHz, Chloroform-d) = δ 8.10 (d, J = 8.2 Hz, 2H), 7.33 (d, J = 8.2 Hz, 2H), 3.93 (s, 3H), 2.42 (s, 3H), 2.28
(s, 3H). 13C NMR (101 MHz, Chloroform-d) = δ 166.7, 165.8, 158.4, 135.3, 130.1, 129.2, 128.9, 116.0, 52.2,
11.7, 10.9. IR (cm−1): 2950(w), 1713(s), 1621(m), 1270(m), 1108(m).
Spectroscopic data in agreement with literature.[7]
51
==PAGE:59==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
(15) 4-(3,5-Dimethylisoxazol-4-yl)benzoic acid
Methyl 4-(3,5-dimethylisoxazol-4-yl)benzoate (540 mg, 2.34 mmol) was dissolved in
15 mL THF and an aqueous solution of LiOH (167 mg, 7.01 mmol) was added and
stirred at room temperature for 2h. The mixture was quenched with 2M HCl to
pH ≈2 and extracted with 3 x EtOAc and washed with brine. The organic phases
were dried with Na2SO4 and concentrated to leave the desired product as a white
solid (503 mg, 99%). ESI-MS = m/z 218.1 [M+H+], calculated for C12H11NO3: 218.07 [M+H+]. m.p:
Decomposes at 186◦C. 1H NMR (400 MHz, DMSO-d6) = δ 13.03 (br. s, 1H), 8.02 (d, J = 8.1 Hz, 2H), 7.52
(d, J = 8.1 Hz, 2H), 2.43 (s, 3H), 2.25 (s, 3H). 13C NMR (101 MHz, DMSO-d6) = δ 167.4, 166.3, 158.5,
134.9, 130.2, 130.1, 129.4, 115.7, 11.9, 11.0. IR (cm−1): 3200-2500(br), 1680(s), 1607(m), 1422(m), 1295(m).
Spectroscopic data in agreement with literature.[7]
(16) - Tert-butyl (4-(3,5-dimethylisoxazol-4-yl)benzoyl)-L-serinate
The compound was synthesized using a modiﬁed version of the procedure described
by Nasief et al.[60] 4-(3,5-dimethylisoxazol-4-yl)benzoic acid (481 mg, 2.21 mmol) was
dissolved in 15 mL DMF. PyBOP (1.27 g, 2.44 mmol) was added to the solution and
the reaction mixture was stirred at room temperature for 30 min. Tert-butyl (2S)-2-
amino-3-hydroxypropanoate hydrochloride (482 mg, 2.44 mmol) was added together
with DIPEA (1.54 mL, 8.86 mmol) and stirred at room temperature overnight. The reaction was quenched
with water and extracted with 3 x EtOAc. The organic phases were combined and washed with 3 x water,
dried with Na2SO4 and the desired product was puriﬁed using ﬂash chromatography (1:5, Hep:EtOAc) and
obtained as a white solid (642 mg, 80%). ESI-MS = m/z 361.1 [M+H+], calculated for C19H24N2O5: 361.17
[M+H+]. 1H NMR (400 MHz, DMSO-d6) = δ 8.50 (d, J = 7.6 Hz, 1H), 7.97 (d, J = 8.2 Hz, 2H), 7.51 (d,
J = 8.0 Hz, 2H), 4.97 (t, J = 6.1 Hz, 1H), 4.44 (dt, J = 7.6, 5.2 Hz, 1H), 3.79 (t, J = 5.7 Hz, 2H), 2.43 (s,
3H), 2.26 (s, 3H), 1.42 (s, 9H). 13C NMR (101 MHz, DMSO-d6) = δ 170.0, 166.6, 166.1, 158.5, 133.4, 129.2,
128.4, 115.8, 81.1, 61.7, 56.8, 28.2, 11.9, 11.0. IR (cm−1): 3381(br), 2978(w), 1732(m), 1642(m), 1238(m),
1150(s).
52
==PAGE:60==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
(A) - N-(5-(2-chlorophenyl)-2-oxotetrahydrofuran-3-yl)-2’-methoxy-[1,1’-biphenyl]-4-carboxamide
Using the general procedure (photochemical reaction): Tert-butyl (2’-methoxy-
[1,1’-biphenyl]-4-carbonyl)-L-serinate (300 mg, 0.807 mmol), iodine (205 mg,
0.807 mmol), (diacetoxyiodo)benzene (650 mg, 2.02 mmol), 2-chlorostyrene
(0.62 mL 4.04 mmol) and boron triﬂuoride diethyl etherate (0.30 mL, 2.42
mmol) gave the desired product in an impure mixture of diastereoisomers. Iso-
lated on HPLC in qualitative amount. ESI-MS = m/z 422.0 [M+H+], calcu-
lated for C24H20ClNO4: 422.11 [M+H+].
(C) - N-(5-(2-ﬂuorophenyl)-2-oxotetrahydrofuran-3-yl)-2’-methoxy-[1,1’-biphenyl]-4-carboxamide
Using the general procedure (photochemical reaction): Tert-butyl (2’-methoxy-
[1,1’-biphenyl]-4-carbonyl)-L-serinate (300 mg, 0.807 mmol), iodine (205 mg,
0.807 mmol), (diacetoxyiodo)benzene (650 mg, 2.02 mmol), 2-ﬂuorostyrene
(0.48 mL 4.04 mmol) and boron triﬂuoride diethyl etherate (0.30 mL, 2.42
mmol) gave the desired product in an impure mixture of diastereoisomers. Iso-
lated on HPLC in qualitative amount. ESI-MS = m/z 406.1 [M+H+], calcu-
lated for C24H20FNO4: 406.14 [M+H+].
(E) - 2’-methoxy-N-(2-oxo-5-phenyltetrahydrofuran-3-yl)-[1,1’-biphenyl]-4-carboxamide
Using the general procedure (photochemical reaction): Tert-butyl (2’-methoxy-
[1,1’-biphenyl]-4-carbonyl)-L-serinate (300 mg, 0.807 mmol), iodine (205 mg,
0.807 mmol), (diacetoxyiodo)benzene (650 mg, 2.02 mmol), styrene (0.46 mL
4.04 mmol) and boron triﬂuoride diethyl etherate (0.30 mL, 2.42 mmol) gave the
desired product in an impure mixture of diastereoisomers. Isolated on HPLC in
qualitative amount. ESI-MS = m/z 388.1 [M+H+], calculated for C24H21NO4:
388.15 [M+H+].
53
==PAGE:61==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
References
[1] World Health Oranization (WHO). Fact sheets: Obesity and overweight. Available at: https://www.
who.int/en/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/obesity-and-overweight (Accessed: 16 March 2020).
[2] Theodora Psaltopoulou, Ioannis Ilias, and Maria Alevizaki. The role of diet and lifestyle in primary,
secondary, and tertiary diabetes prevention: A review of meta-analyses. Review of Diabetic Studies,
7:26–35, 2010.
[3] Michelle L. Sleeth, Emily L. Thompson, Heather E. Ford, Sagen E.K. Zac-Varghese, and Gary Frost.
Free fatty acid receptor 2 and nutrient sensing: A proposed role for ﬁbre, fermentable carbohydrates
and short-chain fatty acids in appetite regulation. Nutrition Research Reviews, 23:135–145, 2010.
[4] Laure B. Bindels, Evelyne M. Dewulf, and Nathalie M. Delzenne.
Gpr43/ﬀa2: Physiopathological
relevance and therapeutic prospects. Trends in Pharmacological Sciences, 34:226–232, 2013.
[5] A. Psichas, M. L. Sleeth, K. G. Murphy, L. Brooks, G. A. Bewick, A. C. Hanyaloglu, M. A. Ghatei,
S. R. Bloom, and G. Frost. The short chain fatty acid propionate stimulates glp-1 and pyy secretion via
free fatty acid receptor 2 in rodents. International Journal of Obesity, 39:424–429, 2015.
[6] Hamid Hoveyda, Didier Schils, Ludivine Zoute, Julien Parcq, J´erˆome Bernard, and Graeme Fraser.
Compounds, pharmaceutical composition and methods for use in treating inﬂammatory diseases.
WO2015078949A1, 2015.
[7] Anders Højgaard Hansen, Eugenia Sergeev, Daniele Bolognini, Richard R. Sprenger, Jeppe Hvidtfeldt
Ekberg, Christer S. Ejsing, Christine J. McKenzie, Elisabeth Rexen Ulven, Graeme Milligan, and Trond
Ulven. Discovery of a potent thiazolidine free fatty acid receptor 2 agonist with favorable pharmacokinetic
properties. Journal of Medicinal Chemistry, 61:9534–9550, 2018.
[8] Jeremy m. Berg, John L. Tymoczko, and Lubert Stryer.
Biochemistry, 7.ed.
W. H. Freeman and
Company, 2012.
[9] Trond Ulven. Short-chain free fatty acid receptors ﬀa2/gpr43 and ﬀa3/gpr41 as new potential therapeutic
targets. Frontiers in Endocrinology, 3:Article 111, 2012.
[10] Ikuo Kimura, Atsuhiko Ichimura, Ryuji Ohue-Kitano, and Miki Igarashi. Free fatty acid receptors in
health and disease. Physiological Reviews, 100:171–210, 2020.
[11] Van B. Lu, Fiona M. Gribble, and Frank Reimann. Free fatty acid receptors in enteroendocrine cells.
Endocrinology, 159:2826–2835, 2018.
[12] Steﬀen V.F. Hansen and Trond Ulven. Pharmacological tool compounds for the free fatty acid receptor
4 (ﬀa4/gpr120). Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology, 236:33–56, 2017.
54
==PAGE:62==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
[13] Fiona M. Gribble, Eleftheria Diakogiannaki, and Frank Reimann. Gut hormone regulation and secretion
via ﬀa1 and ﬀa4. Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology, 236:181–203, 2017.
[14] Johannes Schmidt, Nicola J. Smith, Elisabeth Christiansen, Irina G. Tikhonova, Manuel Grundmann,
Brian D. Hudson, Richard J. Ward, Christel Drewke, Graeme Milligan, Evi Kostenis, and Trond Ulven.
Selective orthosteric free fatty acid receptor 2 (ﬀa2) agonists: Identiﬁcation of the structural and chemical
requirements for selective activation of ﬀa2 versus ﬀa3. J. Biol. Chem, 286:10628–10640, 2011.
[15] Graeme Milligan, Bharat Shimpukade, Trond Ulven, and Brian D. Hudson. Complex pharmacology of
free fatty acid receptors. Chemical Reviews, 117:67–110, 2017.
[16] Graham L. Patrick. An introduction to medicinal chemistry, 5.ed. Oxford University Press, 2013.
[17] B Jassal. Signaling by gpcr. Reactome - a Curated Knowledgebase of Biological Pathways, 26:6–7, 2008.
[18] Charlotte Bayer Christiansen, Maria Buur Nordskov Gabe, Berit Svendsen, Lars Ove Dragsted,
Mette Marie Rosenkilde, and Jens Juul Holst.
The impact of short-chain fatty acids on glp-1 and
pyy secretion from the isolated perfused rat colon. American Journal of Physiology, 315:G53–G65, 2018.
[19] Qun Fang Wan, Yongming Dong, Hua Yang, Xuelin Lou, Jiuping Ding, and Tao Xu. Protein kinase
activation increases insulin secretion by sensitizing the secretory machinery to ca2+. Journal of General
Physiology, 124:653–662, 2004.
[20] Ikuo Kimura, Kentaro Ozawa, Daisuke Inoue, Takeshi Imamura, Kumi Kimura, Takeshi Maeda, Kazuya
Terasawa, Daiji Kashihara, Kanako Hirano, Taeko Tani, Tomoyuki Takahashi, Satoshi Miyauchi, Go Sh-
ioi, Hiroshi Inoue, and Gozoh Tsujimoto. The gut microbiota suppresses insulin-mediated fat accumu-
lation via the short-chain fatty acid receptor gpr43. Nature Communications, 4:1829, 2013.
[21] Eugenia Sergeev, Anders Højgaard Hansen, Sunil K. Pandey, Amanda E. MacKenzie, Brian D. Hudson,
Trond Ulven, and Graeme Milligan. Non-equivalence of key positively charged residues of the free fatty
acid 2 receptor in the recognition and function of agonist versus antagonist ligands. Journal of Biological
Chemistry, 291:303–317, 2016.
[22] Eugenia Sergeev, Anders Højgaard Hansen, Daniele Bolognini, Kouki Kawakami, Takayuki Kishi, Junken
Aoki, Trond Ulven, Asuka Inoue, Brian D. Hudson, and Graeme Milligan. A single extracellular amino
acid in free fatty acid receptor 2 deﬁnes antagonist species selectivity and g protein selection bias.
Scientiﬁc Reports, 7:13741, 2017.
[23] C. E. Brantis, F. Ooms, and J. Bernard. Novel amino acid derivatives and their use as gpr43 receptor
modulators. WO2011092284, 2011.
[24] Lena Bj¨orkman, Jonas M˚artensson, Malene Winther, Michael Gabl, Andr´e Holdfeldt, Martin Uhrbom,
Johan Bylund, Anders Højgaard Hansen, Sunil K. Pandey, Trond Ulven, Huamei1 Forsman, and Claes
55
==PAGE:63==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
Dahlgren. The neutrophil response induced by an agonist for free fatty acid receptor 2 (gpr43) is primed
by tumor necrosis factor alpha and by receptor uncoupling from the cytoskeleton but attenuated by
tissue recruitment. Molecular and Cellular Biology, 36:2583–2595, 2016.
[25] Hamid Hoveyda, Cyrille Evangelos Brantis, Guillaume Dutheuil, Ludivine Zoute, Didier Schils, and
J´erˆome Bernard. Compounds, pharmaceutical composition and methods for use in treating metabolic
disorders. WO2010066682A1, 2010.
[26] Tyler W. Reidl and Laura L. Anderson.
Divergent functionalizations of azetidines and unsaturated
azetidines. Asian Journal of Organic Chemistry, 8:931–945, 2019.
[27] Hidemi Yoda, Masaki Takahashi, and Tetsuya Sengoku.
Heterocycles in Natural Product Synthesis.
Wiley-VCH, 2011. pp. 41-61.
[28] Jonathan Clayden, Nick Greeves, and Stuart Warren. Organic Chemistry 2.ed. Oxford University Press,
2012. pp. 366-370, 1085-1087.
[29] Vandana Gupta, Radha Raman Gupta, and Mahendra Kumar. Heterocyclic Chemistry : Volume I:
Principles, Three- and Four-Membered Heterocycles. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 1998.
[30] D. E. Davies and R. C. Storr. Comprehensive Heterocyclic Chemistry (Volume 7-7). Elsevier Inc., 1984.
pp. 237-284.
[31] J. E. Baldwin.
Rules for ring-closure.
Journal of the Chemical Society-chemical Communications,
18:734–736, 1976.
[32] Norman H. Cromwell and Barry. Phillips. The azetidines. recent synthetic developments. Chemical
Reviews, 79:331–358, 1979.
[33] Wyman R. Vaughan, Robert S. Klonowski, R. Stanley Mcelhinney, and Brian B. Millward. Synthesis of
potential anticancer agents. v. azetidines. Journal of Organic Chemistry, 26:138–144, 1961.
[34] R Gleiter, WD Stohrer, and R Hoﬀmann. Orbital theory of heterolytic fragmentation and remote eﬀects
on nitrogen inversion equilibria. Helvetica Chimica Acta, 55:893–906, 1972.
[35] R. Robiette and J. Marchand-Brynaert.
Formation of four-membered heterocycles.
Comprehensive
Organic Synthesis: Second Edition, 5:85–128, 2014.
[36] Eleuterio ´Alvarez Gonz´alez, Alicia Boto Castro, and Juan Antonio Gallardo Naranjo.
Method for
obtaining azetidine derivatives. WO 2012017114A1, 2010.
[37] Raj K. Bansal. Heterocyclic Chemistry 3.ed. New Age International, 1999. pp. 95-97.
[38] Donald L. Pavia, Gary M. Lampman, George S. Kriz, and James R. Vyvyan. Introduction to Spectroscopy
5. ed. Cengage Learning, 2015. pp. 349-368.
56
==PAGE:64==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
[39] James A. Moore and Rita Seelig Ayers. Chemistry of Heterocyclic Compounds, Volume 42. John Wiley
and Sons, Ltd, 1983. pp. 1-217.
[40] Diana C. G. A. Pinto, Clementina M. M. Santos, and Artur M. S. Silva. Advanced nmr techniques
for structural characterization of heterocyclic structures. Recent Research Developments in Heterocyclic
Chemistry, pages 397–475, 2007.
[41] Toshihiro Akihisa, Shoichi Mafune, Motohiko Ukiya, Yumiko Kimura, Ken Yasukawa, Takashi
Suzuki, Harukuni Tokuda, Nobukazu Tanabe, and Tadahiko Fukuoka. (+)- and (-)-syn-2-isobutyl-4-
methylazetidine-2,4-dicarboxylic acids from the extract of monascus pilosus-fermented rice (red-mold
rice). Journal of Natural Products, 67:479–480, 2004.
[42] A. A. Fomichov, I. A. Zon, I. M. Gella, R. G. Kostyanovsky, A. N. Saprin, and V. I. Markov. Long-
range 4j coupling constants and conformation of the four-membered heterocycles. Organic Magnetic
Resonance, 5:263–264, 1973.
[43] Poonam Shah and Andrew D. Westwell. The role of ﬂuorine in medicinal chemistry : Review article.
Journal of Enzyme Inhibition and Medicinal Chemistry, 22:527–540, 2007.
[44] Alicia1 Boto, Juan A. Gallardo, D´acil Hern´andez, and Rosendo Hern´andez.
Synthesis of unnatural
amino acids from serine derivatives by β-fragmentation of primary alkoxyl radicals. Journal of Organic
Chemistry, 72:7260–7269, 2007.
[45] B. Setner, M. Wierzbicka, L. Jerzykiewicz, M. Lisowski, and Z. Szewczuk. The unexpected racemization
and hydrogen-deuterium exchange of the hydrogen at the α-carbon of proline analogs containing the
5-azoniaspiro[4.4]nonyl-group. Organic and Biomolecular Chemistry, 16:825–831, 2018.
[46] Eric V. Anslyn and Dennis A . Dougherty. Modern Physical Organic Chemistry. University Science
Books, 2006. pp. 276-285.
[47] Limei Chen, Huaqiao Ma, Xia Liu, and Sheng xiang Jiang.
Semipreparative enantiomer sepera-
tion of propranolol hydrochloride by high-performance liquid chromatography using cellulose tris(3,5-
dimethylphenylcarbamate) chiral stationary phase. Journal of Chromatographic Science, 46:767–771,
2008.
[48] Rudraraju Srilakshmi Reshma, Shalini Saxena, Karyakulam Andrews Bobesh, Variam Ullas Jeankumar,
Saritha Gunda, Perumal Yogeeswari, and Dharmarajan Sriram. Design and development of new class
of mycobacterium tuberculosis l-alanine dehydrogenase inhibitors. Bioorganic and Medicinal Chemistry,
24:4499–4508, 2016.
[49] John McMurry. Fundamentals of Organic Chemistry (7. ed). Brooks/Cole, Cengage Learning, 2011. pp.
342-344.
57
==PAGE:65==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
[50] Alan M. Marmelstein, Lisa M. Yates, John H. Conway, and Dorothea Fiedler.
Chemical pyrophos-
phorylation of functionally diverse peptides. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 136:108–111,
2014.
[51] Gary Ashley and Daniel V Santi. Controlled drug release from solid supports. WO2011140392A1, 2011.
[52] Charles M. Starks. Phase-transfer catalysis. i. heterogeneous reactions involving anion transfer by qua-
ternary ammonium and phosphonium salts. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 93:195–199,
1971.
[53] Ramesh Kaul, Yann Brouillette, Zohreh Sajjadi, Karl A. Hansford, and William D. Lubell. Selective
tert-butyl ester deprotection in the presence of acid labile protecting groups with use of znbr2. Journal
of Organic Chemistry, 69:6131–6133, 2004.
[54] YQ Wu, DC Limburg, DE Wilkinson, MJ Vaal, and GS Hamilton. A mild deprotection procedure for
tert-butyl esters and tert-butyl ethers using znbr2 in methylene chloride. Tetrahedron Letters, 41:2847–
2849, 2000.
[55] Akira Suzuki. Recent advances in the cross-coupling reactions of organoboron derivatives with organic
electrophiles, 1995-1998. Journal of Organometallic Chemistry, 576:147–168, 1999.
[56] N Miyaura, T Yanagi, and A Suzuki. The palladium-catalyzed cross-coupling reaction of phenylboronic
acid with haloarenes in the presence of bases. Synthetic Communications, 11:513–519, 1981.
[57] Christian Amatore, Ga¨etan Le Duc, and Anny Jutand.
Mechanism of palladium-catalyzed suzuki-
miyaura reactions: Multiple and antagonistic roles of anionic bases and their countercations. Chemistry
- a European Journal, 19:10082–10093, 2013.
[58] Ayman El-Faham and Fernando Albericio. Peptide coupling reagents, more than a letter soup. Chemical
Reviews, 111:6557–6602, 2011.
[59] David Van Vranken and Gregory Weiss. Introduction to Bioorganic Chemistry and Chemical Biology.
Garland Science, Taylor and Francis Group, LLC, 2013. pp. 190-193.
[60] Nader N. Nasief and David Hangauer. Additivity or cooperativity: Which model can predict the inﬂuence
of simultaneous incorporation of two or more functionalities in a ligand molecule? European Journal of
Medicinal Chemistry, 90:897–915, 2015.
[61] Patrick Barton, Andrew P. Laws, and Michael I. Page. Structure–activity relationships in the esterase-
catalysed hydrolysis and transesteriﬁcation of esters and lactones.
Journal of the Chemical Society,
Perkin Transactions 2: Physical Organic Chemistry, 9:2021–2029, 1994.
[62] J.A. Joule and K. Mills. Heterocyclic Chemistry (5. ed). Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 2010. pp. 125-131.
58
==PAGE:66==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
[63] T. Tassaing and M. Besnard.
Ionization reaction in iodine/pyridine solutions: What can we learn
from conductivity measurements, far-infrared spectroscopy, and raman scattering? Journal of Physical
Chemistry a, 101:2803–2808, 1997.
[64] W. C. Still, M. Kahn, and A. Mitra. Rapid chromatographic technique for preparative seperation with
moderate resolution. J. Org. Chem, 43:2923–2925, 1978.
[65] H. E. Gottlieb, V. Kotlyar, and A. Nudelman. Nmr chemical shifts of common laboratory solvents as
trace impurities. J. Org. Chem, 62:7512–7515, 1997.
[66] Marco Brandst¨atter, Fabian Roth, and Nathan W. Luedtke. Synthesis of 2-oxazolines by in situ desily-
lation and cyclodehydration of β-hydroxyamides. Journal of Organic Chemistry, 80:40–51, 2015.
59
==PAGE:67==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
8
Appendix
8.1
NMR
(2) - Methyl 2’-methoxy-[1,1’-biphenyl]-4-carboxylate
Figure 8.1: 1H NMR of 2
Figure 8.2: 13C NMR of 2
60
==PAGE:68==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
(3) - 2’-Methoxy-[1,1’-biphenyl]-4-carboxylic acid
Figure 8.3: 1H NMR of 3
Figure 8.4: 13C NMR of 3
61
==PAGE:69==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
(4) - Tert-butyl (2’-methoxy-[1,1’-biphenyl]-4-carbonyl)-L-serinate
Figure 8.5: 1H NMR of 4
Figure 8.6: 13C NMR of 4
62
==PAGE:70==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
(6) - Methyl Benzoyl-L-Serinate
Figure 8.7: 1H NMR of 6
Figure 8.8: 13C NMR of 6
63
==PAGE:71==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
(7) - Tert-Butyl Benzoyl-L-Serinate
Figure 8.9: 1H NMR of 7
Figure 8.10: 13C NMR of 7
64
==PAGE:72==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
(8) - Allyl Benzoyl-L-Serinate
Figure 8.11: 1H NMR of 8
Figure 8.12: 13C NMR of 8
65
==PAGE:73==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
(9) - Methyl 1-benzoyl-4-phenylazetidine-2-carboxylate (Cis)
Figure 8.13: 1H NMR of 9
Figure 8.14: 13C NMR of 9
66
==PAGE:74==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
(11) - Allyl 1-benzoyl-4-phenylazetidine-2-carboxylate (Cis)
Figure 8.15: 1H NMR of 11
Figure 8.16: 13C NMR of 11
67
==PAGE:75==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
(12) - N-(2-oxo-5-phenyltetrahydrofuran-3-yl)benzamide (Cis)
Figure 8.17: 1H NMR of 12
Figure 8.18: 13C NMR of 12
68
==PAGE:76==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
(13) - N-(2-oxo-5-phenyltetrahydrofuran-3-yl)benzamide (Trans)
Figure 8.19: 1H NMR of 13
Figure 8.20: 13C NMR of 13
69
==PAGE:77==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
(14) - Methyl 4-(3,5-dimethylisoxazol-4-yl)benzoate
Figure 8.21: 1H NMR of 14
Figure 8.22: 13C NMR of 14
70
==PAGE:78==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
(15) 4-(3,5-Dimethylisoxazol-4-yl)benzoic acid
Figure 8.23: 1H NMR of 15
Figure 8.24: 13C NMR of 15
71
==PAGE:79==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
(16) - Tert-butyl (4-(3,5-dimethylisoxazol-4-yl)benzoyl)-L-serinate
Figure 8.25: 1H NMR of 16
Figure 8.26: 13C NMR of 16
72
==PAGE:80==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
(A) - N-(5-(2-chlorophenyl)-2-oxotetrahydrofuran-3-yl)-2’-methoxy-[1,1’-biphenyl]-4-carboxamide
Figure 8.27: 1H NMR of A
(C) - N-(5-(2-ﬂuorophenyl)-2-oxotetrahydrofuran-3-yl)-2’-methoxy-[1,1’-biphenyl]-4-carboxamide
Figure 8.28: 1H NMR of C
73
==PAGE:81==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
(E) - 2’-methoxy-N-(2-oxo-5-phenyltetrahydrofuran-3-yl)-[1,1’-biphenyl]-4-carboxamide
Figure 8.29: 1H NMR of E
74
==PAGE:82==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
8.2
IR
(2) - Methyl 2’-methoxy-[1,1’-biphenyl]-4-carboxylate
(3) - 2’-Methoxy-[1,1’-biphenyl]-4-carboxylic acid
75
==PAGE:83==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
(4) - Tert-butyl (2’-methoxy-[1,1’-biphenyl]-4-carbonyl)-L-serinate
(6) - Methyl Benzoyl-L-Serinate
76
==PAGE:84==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
(7) - Tert-Butyl Benzoyl-L-Serinate
(8) - Allyl Benzoyl-L-Serinate
77
==PAGE:85==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
(14) - Methyl 4-(3,5-dimethylisoxazol-4-yl)benzoate
(15) 4-(3,5-Dimethylisoxazol-4-yl)benzoic acid
78
==PAGE:86==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
(16) - Tert-butyl (4-(3,5-dimethylisoxazol-4-yl)benzoyl)-L-serinate
79
==PAGE:87==
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
8.3
NOESY Experiments
Figure 8.30: NOESY compound 12
Figure 8.31: NOESY compound 13
80
