==PAGE:1==
Force-based control for collaborative con-
struction robots
Orri Ómarsson (s183154)
Master of Science in Engineering
2020
==PAGE:2==
Force-based control for collaborative construction robots
Report written by:
Orri Ómarsson (s183154)
Advisor(s):
Evangelos Boukas, Associate Professor at the Electrical Engineering Department of DTU
Jens Christian Andersen, Associate Professor at the Electrical Engineering Department of DTU
DTU Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
elektro@elektro.dtu.dk
Project period:
27 January- 7 August 2020
ECTS:
30
Education:
M.Sc.
Field:
Electrical Engineering
Class:
Public
Edition:
1. edition
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements for gradu-
ation in the above education at the Technical University of Denmark.
Copyrights:
©Orri Ómarsson, 2020
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The goal of this project is to create a system to allow a robot to assist humans in
carrying long beams of material. The project relates to a joint DTU and DTI project
called CoCoBot that is exploring the possibilities of creating human collaborative robots
for the construction industry.
The systems creation consisted of designing and creating a mechanical sensor-system
for a preexisting robot, to hold on to the material and to measure the movements of it
caused by the human, as well as writing software for the robot so it could perform its
task. In addition to this a simulated version of the robot and the system was created
while DTUs facilities were locked down due to Covid-19.
The system was more adaptable than was expected and tuning it turned out to be
easier that originally anticipated.
In the end the goal was achieved and the system
worked as intended.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Firstly I would like to thank the CoCoBot team for providing me with this great project,
it has been a lot of fun and I have learned a lot.
Secondly I’d like to thank my advisors Evangelos Boukas and Jens Christian Ander-
sen for their assistance, patience and good spirits.
Last but not least I want to thank my friends Daniel and Urður for their support
and endless offers to help where they can.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
CoCoBot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Force-based control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Requirements and Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
TerrainHopper
5
2.1
Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Computer and software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Sensor-system
9
3.1
Mechanics and Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Sensors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2.1
Sliding sensor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2.2
Rotation sensor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.3
Microcontroller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Physical design and creation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3.1
Electronics and programming
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3.2
Solidworks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3.3
Physical assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4
Simulation
27
4.1
Webots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Simulated Cocobot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3
Robot-operator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5
TerrainHopper software
31
5.1
ROS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2
TerrainHopper Control Node . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2.1
Odometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.3
Serial Node
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
5.4
CoCoBot Node
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6
Testing and Results
37
6.1
Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.1.1
Motor Dynamics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.1.2
Force-based Control
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.2
TerrainHopper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.2.1
Velocity controller
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.2.2
Force-based control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.3
Result analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.4
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
7
Conclusion
53
Appendices
55
A AD-converter circuit diagram
57
B Drawings of Solidworks models
59
C Codes
69
C.1 AD-converter
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
C.2 ROS TerrainHopper control Node . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
C.3 ROS Serial Node
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
C.4 ROS CoCoBot Node
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
C.5 ROS terhop sensors message file . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
C.6 ROS terhop package Cmakelists file . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
C.7 ROS terhop package package file
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
C.8 ROS CoCoBot launch file
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
C.9 Webots CoCoBot robot Proto . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
C.10 Webots Driver robot Proto . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
C.11 Webots CoCoBot robot Controller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
C.12 Webots Driver robot Controller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
Bibliography
101
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
CoCoBot
CoCoBot, short for ”Collaborative Construction site roBot for assistive logistic tasks” is
a collaborative project between DTU (Danmarks Tekniske Universitet) and DTI (Dan-
ish Technological Institute). The aim of the project is to explore the possibilities of
introducing robotic automation to the construction industry[1].
Unlike most other sectors of industry, construction hardly utilizes automated robotics,
which is in part due to environmental challenges the other sectors don’t face. The envi-
ronments of construction-sites usually have rough ground that changes during the course
of the construction as well as being open to the elements which would require the robots
to be more powerful and durable than ones that drive around a factory floor. In addi-
tion, the areas of construction-sites are often littered with tools and materials that move
around frequently which makes mapping and path-planning more challenging. Thus
instead of fully autonomous robots the aim of CoCoBot is to explore the possibilities of
collaborative robots that would assist human workers with their tasks.
Collaborative robots are robots that work closely with humans to perform a task. The
term collaborative robot most commonly refers to what is abbreviated as Cobots, robot
arms that usually work in a shared workspace with a human[2]. Until recently arms like
these used for industrial applications had to be isolated from the human workers because
the momentum of their movements and some of the tools they are equipped with can
be very dangerous. According to new safety standards from the ISO (the International
Organization for Standardization) cobots slow down or stop when humans enter their
workspace allowing the two to safely work together[3]. But human-robot collaboration
isn’t limited to just industrial robot arms, it can be anything from the exoskeletal robotic
rehabilitation systems which help stroke victims recover from their physical disability[4],
to packmule robots like BigDog which was a four legged mobile robot designed by Boston
Dynamics for the purposes of carrying equipment for soldiers over rough terrain[5]. The
applications for collaborative robot in construction are virtually endless, they could be
used to fetch tools and materials, made to paint or tile surfaces designated by a human
or fasten bolts or rivets in areas where it is dangerous for a person to reach, to name a
few.
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
The first CoCobot use-case that is being explored is a mobile robot for assisting in
carrying long beams of materials. One end of the material would be loaded onto the
robot and the human operator would carry the other end. The human then guides the
robot simply by pulling the material, the robot using the forces applied to the material as
steering references. Additionally the robot would be equipped with sensors to gauge its
environments in order to adjust its own path to avoid obstacles and terrain deformations
the human didn’t notice or ignored.
Figure 1.1: A graphic visualizing the use-case made for the projects submission to
RobotCluster[1].
1.2
Force-based control
The aim of this project is to create a functional implementation of the human-robot
interaction of the CoCoBot use-case, which can be separated into two main tasks:
• Designing and creating a mechanical sensor-system that material can be loaded on
and can measure how the human moves the material relative to the robot.
• Creating a software controller for the robot so that it can receive data from the
sensors and move appropriately.
The aforementioned robot is the TerrainHopper which was provided by the Automa-
tion and Control department for the project.
In March the scope of the project was expanded due to DTUs facilities becoming
indefinitely inaccessible when DTU along with all other schools in Denmark were closed
for Covid-19 preventive measures[6]. During the lockdown the aim of the project was
the same but implemented in a simulator instead of on a real robot. In late May the
lockdown was partially lifted and the project period was extended which allowed the
focus to be shifted back to the real robot.
==PAGE:11==
1.3 Requirements and Limitations
3
1.3
Requirements and Limitations
The main requirements of the project are:
• Designing the sensor-system to allow the material a few degrees of freedom for
movement relative to the robot to prevent the human operator from pulling on the
robot itself and vice-versa.
• Designing the sensor-system and its software to be open-ended so it can relatively
easily be attached and connected to any suitable robot.
• Creating the sensor-system has to be manageable with tools and material available
at DTU, which means that it will not be created as something extremely durable
that can handle the construction environments or capable of carrying heavy loads.
It is only intended as a proof-of-concept device to test the system.
• Creating the software for the robot with the Robot Operating System or ROS
which is a powerful tool that is being used on a lot of the robots at DTU. ROS
has not been set up on the TerrainHopper so that has to be done from scratch.
• Making the control of the system smooth and robust so that the robot follows the
operator effectively and effortlessly.
Testing this system in the real world is limited to the capabilities of the Terrain-
Hopper. The robot has an Ackermann steering model like the one you’ll find in all
commercial automobiles. This means it can only make turns in a circular motion which
is limited to how big the turning angle can be. However, creating the system in a sim-
ulator opens up the possibilities of testing the system with different steering models as
well.
==PAGE:12==
4
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
TerrainHopper
2.1
Overview
Figure 2.1: The TerrainHopper.
The TerrainHopper is a mobile robot made in the Automation and Control depart-
ment at DTU. Originally it was a mobility scooter manufactured by the British company
TerrainHopper Ltd, designed for off-road capabilities[7]. Everything except the scooters
frame, battery, wheels and motors were replaced with a computer, a new steering sys-
tem, motor encoders and sensors making it a robot capable of functioning autonomously.
The robot was created by a team competing in the Mohammed Bin Zayed International
Robotics Challenge in Abu Dhabi in 2017, where it came in second on one of the chal-
lenges[8]. The fact that it is made from mobile scooter designed for rough terrain makes
it the perfect choice for this project.
The TerrainHopper is equipped with five motors, one for each wheel and one for
steering, as well as magnetic encoders for each motor, an Inertial measurement unit
(IMU), two laser-scanners and a GPS-module[9]. When it was used for the competition
in Abu Dhabi it was also mounted with a robotic arm from Universal Robots, but that
==PAGE:14==
6
2 TerrainHopper
has since been removed. As was mentioned in chapter 1.3 the robot has an Ackermann
steering model and it can turn with an angle of 32°, though that is further limited to
28° in the software, this means it should have a minimum turn radius of 2 meters[10].
Before the robot can move the motorcontrollers need to be powered and there are
two security switches that need to be flipped to do that. The first is on the side of
the robot and is flipped with a key, a rear-light on the right side of the robot turns on
when this is done. The second is on a remote box that is wirelessly connected to the
robot, the switch itself is a toggle switch with a cover guard. This is also intended as
an emergency stop and the box should always be in someone’s hands while the robot is
moving. When the second switch is flipped a rear-light on the left side of the robot turns
on, indicating that the controllers have power. The switches have to be flipped in this
order. Once the motorcontrollers have power the robot can be moved with a Logitech
F710 wireless Gamepad[11], the pad is turned on by pressing the button in the center
of it and it should connect automatically to the robot. The robot is controlled with
the gamepads right analog-stick. If the center button is pressed again the robot can no
longer be controlled with the gamepad but can instead be controlled by software.
Figure 2.2: The wireless safety switch on the gamepad.
2.2
Computer and software
The robots computer is located in a plastic case in the center of the robot and a number
of USB, Ethernet and HDMI ports are installed on the sides and on the lid of the case.
The computer runs Ubuntu 18.04 and can be set desktop mode if a monitor is connected
to the HDMI port[9]. The computer can be accessed with the desktop mode or more
conveniently with a different computer using secure shell communications or ssh. The
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Computer and software
7
computer can be accessed with ssh either wirelessly through DTUs network where it is
designated as SMR29 or with a wired connection to one of its Ethernet ports.
The robot uses the Mobotware (Mobile Robot Software) platform, a software frame-
work developed by the Automation and Control department originally for their Small
Mobile Robots (SMRs)[12]. The framework was created so that students and research
staff wouldn’t have to repeatedly write software for the mobile robots from scratch. The
framework consists of three main modules: The Mobile Robot Controller (MRC), the
Automation Robot Server (AURS) and the Robot Hardware Daemon (RHD). RHD is a
real-time device server that can also be described as a real-time synchronized variable
database, it intended to make integrating hardware devices into the system easy and
to make all communication between the hardware and software variable oriented[12][13].
The database is defined as a symbol table where the data from each hardware device is
given a name and is categorized as either a read (”r”) variable or a write (”w”) variable.
All data is scaled to one or more 32-bit integers.
Figure 2.3: The RHD symbol table for the TerrainHopper.
Although the TerrainHopper has a separate motor for each wheel there is only one
”w” variable for them which actuates them all the same way at the same time.
==PAGE:16==
8
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 3
Sensor-system
3.1
Mechanics and Materials
As was stated in the requirements the first and most important design criteria for the
sensor-system is that the material needs a few degrees of freedom for movement relative
to the robot in order for the human to be able to pull on and/or turn it without pulling
on the robot itself and to minimize possible stresses on both the material and the sensor-
system itself. Conveniently these movements can be utilized to measure the actions of
the human operator.
The most frequent action of the human operator is likely to be pulling the material
forward, therefore the material needs to be able to move forward (and backward) to a
degree. The second most frequent action would then be turning it horizontally, there is
no need for the material to be able to move sideways but it needs to be able to rotate
around a vertical axis on the robot. The third requirement is that the human operator
can put their end of the material down without needing to detach the other from the
robot as well as being able to pitch it up or down when moving in slopes. Since this
movement of the material does not affect the robots movement and does not need to
be measured it was decided that the materials ability to pitch should be a function of
how the material is attached to the sensor-system rather than making it a mechanical
function of the system itself. Lastly there is no need for the material to be able to move
vertically nor for it to be able to roll.
To summarize: the material needs to have two degrees of freedom relative to the
robot (forwards/backwards and yaw), the movement in which is measured. The material
also needs to have one degree of freedom relative to the part of the sensor-system it is
attached to (pitch).
For the forwards and backwards motion a sliding rail was considered to be the best
solution to allow it to move freely on along a single axis. The rails design was based on
ceramic tile cutters, with two horizontal rods that the ”head” of the system could slide
along, the rods being secured on each end to a base-plate at the bottom parallel to the
rods. It was also considered that the head should stay in the center of the rail when
outside forces are acting on it and that it could be kept there by placing springs around
==PAGE:18==
10
3 Sensor-system
the rods, between the head and the ends of the rail.
The head is what the material would be attached to so it needs to allow for it to
pitch, one way of doing that is to have the top of be shaped like a horizontal cylinder
perpendicular to the rods of the rail, with its ends sticking out to the sides. That way
straps that loop around the ends could be used to secure the material while still allowing
it to rotate around the cylinder shape.
For the rotation it was decided that the simplest solution was to have the whole
system mounted on a cylindrical vertical shaft on the robot that it could rotate around
instead of attaching it to some kind of turntable or bearing.
Lastly the system needs to be mounted on the TerrainHopper somehow, this would
be challenging to do on the front of the robot due to a number of components already
attached there. The back side of the robot however has plenty of space and two horizontal
aluminum profiles are attached to it above the rear tires. The best solution that was
conceived was to have a rod sticking out of a vertical aluminum profile that is secured
to the two back profiles on the robot.
The simple pieces like the rods for the rail and the base-plate can be made out of
metal. To create all the other required parts it was decided that the most reasonable
method would be to 3D-print them.
The plastic used for 3D-printing is not a very
strong or durable material but from examining 3D-printed parts in other robots at DTU
it was concluded that it should be sufficient. An additional benefit of this is that friction
between metal and plastic is low, which would be good for the moving part of the rail.
3.2
Sensors
The system needs two sensors to measure the sliding of the rail and the rotation of
the system respectively. It also requires a microcontroller to receive the data from the
sensors, functioning as an analog-to-digital converter (AD-converter or ADC).
3.2.1
Sliding sensor
The sensor chosen to measure the sliding of the rail was a PR2S 100 5K, a 5 kΩlinear
motion potentiometer or variable resistor manufactured by Elap[14]. It has a cylindrical
body and a rod that extends out of one end, the ”100” in its name denotes that the rod
can extend up to 100mm.
On the end of the rod is an attachment with a spherical joint and a hole with a
diameter of 5mm. The same kind of attachment can be fastened to the other end of the
body.
Like most common potentiometers this one has three electrical terminals and when
==PAGE:19==
3.2 Sensors
11
Figure 3.1: The PR/PR2S series from Elap, which are available in 5 varieties; 25, 50,
75, 100 and 150[14].
two of them are connected to different magnitudes of voltage the third outputs a voltage
of a magnitude that is between the two input magnitudes and is directly proportional to
how far the rod is extended. There is a fourth terminal that is intended to be connected
to ground although the wire attachment that comes with it does not have a wire that
connects to this terminal.
3.2.2
Rotation sensor
The sensor chosen to measure the rotation of the system was an AS5047P magnetic
rotary position sensor[15]. The sensor is capable of many functions but only its primary
one, the position sensing is relevant for this application. The sensor is a Hall-effect
magnetic sensor that measures the orientation of a magnetic field from a permanent
magnet positioned perpendicular above it.
The sensor itself is a microchip but the one used for the project came pre-attached to
circuit board called an adapter board[17]. The adapter board allows for easy access to
the sensors terminals or pins and comes with a convenient method for changing whether
it operates on 5 volts or 3.3 volts. The sensor outputs its data using a serial peripheral
interface (SPI).
SPI is a type of data bus for communication between devices and it is very convenient
for having multiple ”slave” devices communicating with one ”master” device[19]. SPI
is a synchronous data bus which means that instead of wasting bits on makings sure
that communication between devices with different ”clocks” is in sync, the master sends
a clock signal on a separate line that keeps the other devices in constant sync with it.
There are two lines for data transmission called ”Master Out / Slave In” or ”MOSI” and
”Master in / Slave Out” or ”MISO” and then there is a fourth line called ”Slave select”
or ”Chip select”. The chip select line tells the slave when data transmissions take place
==PAGE:20==
12
3 Sensor-system
Figure 3.2: A representation of a magnet above the sensor. The green and red colors
represent the poles of the magnet[16].
Figure 3.3: The AS5047P adapter board and a magnet[18].
and the devices sample their incoming data according to the clock signal and since input
and output are on separate lines, data can be sent and received at the same time. When
many slaves are connected to a single master they all share the same MISO, MOSI and
clock lines and only need individual chip select lines for the master to indicate which
slave it is communicating with at the time.
3.2.3
Microcontroller
The microcontroller chosen for the AD-converter was a Teensy 3.6[20]. The Teensy are
a series of development boards made by PJRC. It has a 32 bit, 180MHz processor, a
micro-USB port and a micro SD card port. It is capable of high-resolution analog-to-
digital conversion as well as digital-to-analog conversion and has a variety of built in
serial ports, including 3 SPI ports[21].
==PAGE:21==
3.3 Physical design and creation
13
Figure 3.4: The Teensy 3.6 development board[22].
3.3
Physical design and creation
3.3.1
Electronics and programming
No additional components were required for the circuitry other than a USB-A to micro-
USB cable. Since the AS5047Ps purpose is to transmit the position of the magnet, only
5 of its 14 pins are needed, those being the supply voltage, the ground, SPI clock, SPI
chip-select and SPI MISO. When not in use the MOSI pin should be connected to the
supply. The potentiometers input pins are connected to the supply voltage and the
analog-ground pin on the Teensy and the output is connected to the analog pin A0. A
diagram of the circuit can be seen in Appendix A. The Teensy and the required wires
were soldered on to a veroboard that was cut to as wide as the Teensy but longer on
each end to make space for mounting holes.
Since the Teensy 3.6 opperates on 3.3V the AS5047P adapter board had to be slightly
altered to switch it from 5V operation to 3.3V. This was done by removing the 0Ωresistor
labeled ”R1” on the adapter board and a bit of solder placed to act as the 0Ωresistor
labeled ”R2”. The middle pin and the 3V3 pin of the ”JP1 connector” were then soldered
together on the back of the board rather that using the connector piece that came with
the board[17].
The AD-converter was programmed using the Arduino IDE and the Teensyduino
extension. The code is written in C++. Its operation can be broken down into three
steps that repeat about 100 times per second. The first is to read the analog data from
==PAGE:22==
14
3 Sensor-system
Figure 3.5: The AS5047P adapter board. R1, R2 and JP1 are clearly marked[17].
the potentiometer and register it as a 13 bit integer which means it has an accuracy of:
3.3V
213
= 3.3V
8192 = 0.00040283V
or
100mm
8192
= 0.012207mm
(3.1)
The second is to read the data from the magnetic sensor using SPI. This is done using
the Arduino IDEs SPI library which utilizes the SPI hardware on the microcontroller.
There are two SPI setting that must be initialized when the microcontroller starts up,
those being the bit-order of the input and output data and a SPI-mode which indicates
whether the data is sampled and outputted on the falling or rising edge of the clock
signal. In the case of the AS5047P the most significant bit comes first and it uses SPI-
mode 1 since data is sampled on the clocks falling edge and outputted on the rising edge.
The data is the received using a built in function as a 16-bit integer although the sensor
data itself only has a 13-bit resolution. The 16th bit is a parity bit so that one is always
set to 0 after the data is received. The accuracy of this data is:
360°
8192 = 0.04395°
(3.2)
==PAGE:23==
3.3 Physical design and creation
15
The last step is to send the data over the USB-cable, this is done using the USB-
serial port and the Arduino IDEs serial functions. The communication has a baud-rate
of 9600 and when connected to a serial terminal the output should be as follows:
4000 1622
3995 1622
3998 1621
4001 1622
4002 1623
The lines end with a carriage return character and a newline character.
Figure 3.6: The AD-converter with wires attached, the end of the grey cable fits on
the potentiometer and the headers on the end of the black cable connect
to the pins on the AS5047P adapter board.
3.3.2
Solidworks
3.3.2.1
Pieces
The 3D-printed parts were designed using Solidworks CAD program. There were seven
pieces in total:
• The front piece which holds one end of the rods in the rail and can be fastened to
the base-plate (figure 3.7).
==PAGE:24==
16
3 Sensor-system
• The back piece which holds the other end of the rods for the rail and can also hold
the potentiometer. On the back of it is a box that can house the AD-converter,
the box has a hole on one side for the cables (figures 3.8 and 3.9).
• The middle piece which can slide along the rods, the top tapers to a cylindrical
shape that can be used to secure the material to the system. Inside it is a cone-
shape protrusion with a hole through it that can be used to attach the head of the
potentiometer (figure 3.10).
• The bottom piece that can be fastened to the base-plate and can be placed around
the rod attached to the TerrainHopper to mount the system on it (figure 3.11).
• The small cap that sits on top of the rod attached to the TerrainHopper and holds
the magnet for the rotary position sensor (figure 3.12).
• The H-shaped plate that secures the rotary position sensors adapter board to the
system and positions the sensor directly above the magnet (figure 3.13).
• The lid that closes the box housing the AD-converter to give it some protection.
It’s a square plate with a protruding frame to hold it in place (figure 3.14).
Figure 3.7: The Solidworks model of the front piece of the rail.
==PAGE:25==
3.3 Physical design and creation
17
Figure 3.8: The Solidworks model of the back piece of the rail as seen from the front.
Figure 3.9: The Solidworks model of the back piece of the rail as seen from the back,
where the box that houses the AD-converter is visible.
==PAGE:26==
18
3 Sensor-system
Figure 3.10: The Solidworks model of the middle piece of the rail or the ”head” of it.
Figure 3.11: The Solidworks model of the bottom piece that holds up the system.
==PAGE:27==
3.3 Physical design and creation
19
Figure 3.12: The Solidworks model of the cap that sits on the rod the system is
mounted on and holds the magnet, as seen from both sides.
Figure 3.13: The Solidworks model of the plate that holds the rotary position sensor
above the magnet.
==PAGE:28==
20
3 Sensor-system
Figure 3.14: The Solidworks model of lid for the box that houses the AD-converter.
3.3.2.2
Assembly
To ensure that all dimensions were correct and all features in the right places, models
of the rods, the base-plate and the potentiometer were also made and the system was
assembled in Solidworks. The lengths of the rods and the base-plate were based on the
dimensions of the front, middle and back pieces and the additional required lengths: the
middle piece is 100mm long and needs to be able to slide 50mm in either direction, the
rods can go 50mm into each end piece (the pieces themselves being 70mm long) and
there are an additional 30mm to allow the springs that might be placed around the rods
room to compress. The rods are thus 360mm long and the plate 400mm. A top-view
of the model of the base-plate can be seen in figure 3.15. The plate has 16 holes where
the other pieces can be attached to it with bolts and one big hole in the middle to give
the magnet-cap enough space. The assembly can be seen from the front and the back
in figures 3.16 and 3.17.
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Physical design and creation
21
Figure 3.15: The Solidworks model of the base-plate as seen from above.
Figure 3.16: The assembly of the system in Solidworks as seen from the front.
==PAGE:30==
22
3 Sensor-system
Figure 3.17: The assembly of the system in Solidworks as seen from the back.
There are models for springs in the assembly as well, which are just there for a visual
purpose and aren’t based on any real springs.
3.3.3
Physical assembly
The mount for the system on the TerrainHopper was made by Henrik Poulsen, it consists
of a vertical aluminum profile that is supported by a horizontal and a diagonal profile.
A steel rod sticks about 10cm out of the top of the vertical one.
The plastic parts were 3D-printed by Jens Christian Andersen. Though the sizes
of the parts were accurate, all holes were slightly smaller than they should have been.
Fortunately most of this could be fixed with drills and files and only the cap for the
magnet had to be reprinted with slightly larger dimensions. The rods for the rail and
the mounting were cut from the same 12mm diameter steel rod. The base-plate was cut
from a 3mm thick aluminum plate, the holes for the bolts were drilled into it and the
middle hole was made with a milling head in a drill press and an honest attempt was
made to make it circular using hand-eye coordination.
==PAGE:31==
3.3 Physical design and creation
23
Figure 3.18: The profiles used to place the sensor-system on the robot.
Figure 3.19: All the parts of the sensor system (except the springs) laid out on a table.
==PAGE:32==
24
3 Sensor-system
The front, back and bottom pieces were fastened to the base-plate with four 6mm
bolts and nuts each. The AD-converter and the lid for its box were fastened with two
3mm bolts and nuts. The potentiometer is secured to the back piece with a 3mm bolt
that screws into one of the threaded holes on the bottom of it. The rotary sensor adapter
board is secured to the H-shaped plate with four 2.6mm bolts and nuts. The H-shaped
plate is secured to the base-plate with four 3mm bolts and there are small metal cylinders
around those bolts to elevate the sensor. The head of the potentiometer is connected to
the head of the rail with a 5mm bolt.
Once assembled the head piece was moved along the rail and the movement was
smooth enough that lubrication was deemed unnecessary. The only component missing
at that point were the springs to keep the head in the center of the rail. To figure out
the requirements for the springs a hook scale was hooked to the head of rail and pulled
until it started moving, as it moved the scale read 0.5kg. That equates to a minimum of
0.5kg ∗9.8 m
s2 ≈5Newtons of force required to move it. The requirements for the springs
were as follows:
• They should have a spring constant of around 5 N
cm summing up to 10 N
cm on each
side.
• They should be longer than the 80mm of space allocated for them on the rods so
that they are always somewhat compressed to guarantee that they’ll reliably push
the head to the center.
• They should have an inner diameter between 12mm and 15mm so that they don’t
fit too loosely around the rods.
After a search through the selection of a number of vendors the option that came
the closest to satisfying the requirements were purchased from RS Components. They
are 94mm long steel alloy compression springs with an outer diameter of 17.25mm and
a spring constant of 7.4 N
cm[23].
On the following figures the sensor-sytem can be seen in various stages of its assembly:
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Physical design and creation
25
Figure 3.20: The base-plate with the back and bottom pieces attached and placed on
the mount.
The cap holding the magnet has been placed on the rod
on the mount and the rotary sensor adapter board is laying next to it
attached to the H-shaped plate.
Figure 3.21: The AD-converter in its housing without the lid. The USB cable is miss-
ing. There is a small and inconsequential design flaw in the box and its
lid; the idea was to use the same bolts to secure the AD-converter and the
lid but while that idea was forming the fact that the USB cable covers
one of the mounting holes on the converter from the front was forgotten.
Thus the lid is only held in place on one side.
==PAGE:34==
26
3 Sensor-system
Figure 3.22: The full assembly as seen from the side.
Figure 3.23: On the bottom the rotary sensor adapter board can be seen attached to
the base-plate and above it the head of the potentiometer is connected
to the head of the rail. The bolt goes up through the bottom of the
plastic piece and goes through the ball-joint on the potentiometer, it is
not secured by a nut to make it easier to take the rail apart partially if
the adapter board or magnet need to be reached.
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 4
Simulation
4.1
Webots
Webots is an open-source robot simulator developed by Cyberbotics Ltd.
It is a 3
dimensional simulator with a physics engine and large library of assets such as robots,
sensors, actuators, objects and materials. Assets can also be created in the program or
imported from CAD models[24].
The assets in Webots are a hierarchy of nodes, an object can start as a single ”solid”
node, that solid is then defined by its subnodes, those subnodes being its shape, bounding
geometry and physics for example. Similarly a robot starts as a single robot node which
can have a joint as a subnode, and the joints parameters, the object at the other end of
the joint, the actuator that moves the joint and the sensor that measures that movement
are all subnodes of the joint[25].
Figure 4.1: A visual representation of Webots’s node hierarchy for the simplest possible
model of a rigid body[25].
==PAGE:36==
28
4 Simulation
A robot in Webots is controlled with a program called a ”controller”, which can be
written in C, C++, Python, Java, Matlab or ROS.
4.2
Simulated Cocobot
Figure 4.2: The simulated CoCoBot robot.
The simulated CoCobot robot as seen on figure 4.2 is a differential wheeled box with an
approximation to the mechanical sensor-system described in chapter 3 on top of it. The
two wheels are cylinder shapes attached by hinge-joint nodes that each have a rotary
motor and rotary position sensor connected to them. The body of the robot is supported
by two friction-less spheres that prevent it from leaning.
The sensor-system was designed to function just like the real one, with a sliding
component on a body that could rotate horizontally relative to the robot. The system’s
body (the yellow U-shaped block) is connected to the neck (the green cylinder) with a
hinge-joint node that is equipped with a rotary position sensor and the joint has a spring
constant which means that unlike the real system it returns to its starting position if
no external forces are being applied to the system. The head of the system (the purple
block) is connected to the body with a slider-joint node which allows the block to move
horizontally along a single axis. Like the hinge-joint the slider-joint has a linear position
sensor and spring constant which returns it to the center of the body if left alone. As in
the real system the head can only move 5cm in either direction. The robots controller
logs all sensor data both from the system and from the position sensors in the wheels to
a text document so that the data can be analysed with Matlab.
==PAGE:37==
4.3 Robot-operator
29
The differential steering model is common in mobile robots, and usually the model has
two wheels (or tracks), one on each side of the robot that are actuated by separate motors.
By actuating the wheels with different angular velocities the differential drive allows for
a wide variety of movement capabilities. For the CoCoBot robot the priority was to
control the the robots forwards velocity and its turning angular velocity individually.
This can be done with a model called ”the unicycle model”[26]. The forward velocity V
and angular velocity ω can be described as functions of the wheels angular velocities vr
and vl with the following equations:
V = R
2 (vr + vl)
(4.1)
ω = R
L(vr −vl)
(4.2)
Where R is the radius of the wheels and L is wheelbase (distance between the two
wheels). The required wheel angular velocities to equate to the desired forward and
angular velocity of the robot can be calculated with two functions derived from equations
4.1 and 4.2:
vr = 2V + ωL
2R
(4.3)
vl = 2V −ωL
2R
(4.4)
The force-based control was implemented as two proportional controllers with a
constant input reference of zero and the data from the sensor-system as feedback. The
two proportional gains Ks and Ka scale how fast the robot drives and how fast it turns
respectively based on the sensor data.
4.3
Robot-operator
Since simulating an actual human is quite difficult a second robot was created to take
the place of the human operator the CoCoBot is supposed to help carry material. This
robot was dubbed the Driver robot.
The Driver robot is for the most part just like the CoCoBot robot but with slightly
smaller dimensions.
It has a differential drive and is supported by two friction-less
spheres. The main difference is that its neck is a lot longer and instead of the sensor
system there is a long beam attached to it with a hinge-joint that has no actuators or
sensors. The robot is placed so that at the start of the simulation the beam rests on top
the the CoCobot robots sensor-system, the beam and the system are connected with
==PAGE:38==
30
4 Simulation
Figure 4.3: The CoCobot robot and the Driver robot.
two plate-shaped connector node that are locked together so that when the beam moves
it pulls on the system.
The Driver robots controller code also uses the unicycle model and it can be controlled
with the directional buttons on the computer running the simulation.
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 5
TerrainHopper software
5.1
ROS
The Robot Operating System (ROS) is a middleware or a software framework for creating
robot software[27]. Despite its name it is not technically an operating system, it provides
tools and libraries to create a system of processes that can function individually but can
easily be connected to operate as a whole[28].
Processes in ROS are called ”nodes” and are simply executables that can be written
in C++, Python or Lisp and while running they can communicate with each other
regardless of the language they are written in[28]. The nodes communicate through
messages exchanged over ”topics” that the nodes either publish or subscribe to. The
messages sent over a topic need to have a type defined by its publisher and a subscriber
can not receive the message unless its message type matches. There is a list of ready-
made message types in ROS but any user can create their custom ones as well.
ROS is a very practical and versatile system and has already been set up in some of
the robots in DTU that use Mobotware, notably the Small Mobile Robots (SMRs).
The idea was to make system for the TerrainHopper with three nodes, two specifically
for this project and one general one for the robots kinematics and odometry that could
be use not only for this project but all future projects that involve this robot. As for
the other two, one was to receive the sensor data from the AD-converter and publish it
and the other to be the main control for the system.
5.2
TerrainHopper Control Node
The purpose of the TerrainHopper control node is to receive encoder data and actuate
the robots motors through RHD as well as calculating the robots odometry. The node
receives commands for forward velocity and turning angle by subscribing to a topic
called ”com_vel” with the message-type ”twist” and publishes the odometry with the
message-type ”Odometry” to the topic ”odom”. The node also limits any values sent to
the RHD, higher/lower than ±4.0m
s and ±28° to those values.
==PAGE:40==
32
5 TerrainHopper software
The code for the node is a modified version of the code ”smr_control_node.cpp”
from the ROS system on the SMRs. Since both robots use the Mobotware platform and
its RHD only minor modifications were needed to use it for the TerrainHopper. Those
modifications include:
• Changing which variables from the RHD symbol table were accessed since the the
symbol table for the robots are not the same.
• Changing all steering commands and limitations since the SMRs have differential
drive steering which is completely different from the TerrainHoppers Ackermann
steering.
• Changing all odometry calculations because of the different steering systems.
• Adding a Proportional-Integral controller for the forward velocity.
5.2.1
Odometry
The odometry is a way of keeping track of the change of the robots position during
runtime using sensors, in the case of both the TerrainHopper and the SMRs those sensors
would be the wheel encoders. For a grounded mobile robot like these the odometry only
tracks the robots position in the horizontal plane (x and y) and its orientation in that
plane (θ).
Figure 5.1: The ackermann steering geometry and all its relevant variables[29].
==PAGE:41==
5.3 Serial Node
33
In the typical Ackermann steering geometry when the vehicle turns the front wheels
rotate to different angles so that lines drawn from the center of each wheel intersect
at the same point, the vehicle then moves in a circular motion around that point. To
simplify calculations there is usually only one turn angle which represents the angle of
an imaginary wheel in the center of the vehicle between the two front wheels.
The changes in x, y and θ over time are a function of the forward velocity vf, the
turn angle ϕ, the wheelbase L and the orientation θ[29]:
˙x = vf · Cos(θ)
(5.1)
˙y = vf · Sin(θ)
(5.2)
˙θ = vf
L · Tan(ϕ)
(5.3)
But this only applies for continuous time, for a discrete system with a sample time
ts like the control node the functions are:
xt+ts = xt + vf · Cos(θt) · ts
(5.4)
yt+ts = yt + vf · Sin(θt) · ts
(5.5)
θt+ts = θt + vf
L · Tan(ϕ) · ts
(5.6)
Although technically only these three variables fall under the odometry the odometry
message also contains the robots forward velocity, its angular velocity and the value from
the turning encoder.
5.3
Serial Node
The purpose of the serial node is to establish serial communications with the AD-
converter, receive the data from it and then publish it to a topic. The loop rate of
the node is 100Hz to match that of the AD-converter. The serial communications are
handled with commands from ROSs serial library. Both data points are received as a
single string that is split into two strings that are then converted to integers.
The message type that the topic ”sensor_data” uses is a custom one that was created
specifically for this purpose since non of the ready-made types seemed to fit for the job.
==PAGE:42==
34
5 TerrainHopper software
The message type is called ”sensors” and contains two 16-bit integer variables titled
”slide” and ”rotation”.
5.4
CoCoBot Node
The purpose of the CoCoBot node is to act as the main controller for the system. It
receives the sensor data from the serial node and tells the control node how to actuate
the robot as well as receiving the odometry data from the control node and logging all
relevant values to a text file for analysis.
The node subscribes to the ”sensor_data” topic and when it receives the raw data it
converts it back to its real-world values of meters and degrees. With the sensor-system
in a neutral position (facing straight forward and no force applied to the head of the rail
other than the force applied by the springs) the data from the sensors was logged for
a few seconds, a graph of the data can be seen on figure 5.2. The average value of the
data was calculated and that average was used as an offset in the nodes code so that
when the system is the neutral position the values should average at zero. That way
all potentiometer values are between -5cm and 5cm and all angle values are between
-180°and 180°.
Figure 5.2: The sensor data over time, the red lines represent the average of the data
values.
==PAGE:43==
5.4 CoCoBot Node
35
The node also subscribes to the topic ”odom” and writes the values of the current
time, the x, y and θ from the odometry, the forward velocity, the turn encoder and the
sensor data to a text file titled ”data.txt” in a format that allow for easy extraction to
Matlab.
Lastly is the actual force-based control, in which node functions as two uncoupled
proportional controllers with a constant reference of zero. The values from the poten-
tiometer and the rotation sensor are multiplied with gains Ks[s−1] and Ka respectively
and the output from that is published to the topic ”cmd_vel” as velocity and turning
commands for the TerrainHopper control node.
==PAGE:44==
36
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 6
Testing and Results
6.1
Simulation
6.1.1
Motor Dynamics
The motors can be actuated in three different ways, with a position command, a velocity
command or a torque command. The ideal method for this system was to just give it
velocity commands based on the sensor inputs but it quickly became clear that the
dynamics of the velocity was not very realistic. In a realistic system the velocity can
not go from zero to the desired speed in a single step, it reaches it gradually and the
acceleration is usually high at first and the lowers as the velocity reaches its final value.
When using the velocity command in Webots the acceleration was constant which means
the velocity reaches its final value completely linearly, a visualization of this can be seen
on figure 6.1.
Figure 6.1: The step response of the robots measured velocity using velocity com-
mands.
In an attempt to make the dynamics of the motor more realistic, a system was set
up to try to act like a real electrical motor by actuating the motors with torque instead
==PAGE:46==
38
6 Testing and Results
of velocity. A block diagram of a typical electrical motor and its parameters can be seen
on figure 6.2.
Figure 6.2: A block diagram of the dynamics of an electric motor.
The parameters seen on the system in figure 6.2 are the input voltage Vm, the electric
resistance R, the torque constant Kt, the moment of inertia J, the motor viscous friction
constant B, the electromotive force constant Ke, the wheel radius r and the gear ratio
G. The feedback voltage Vemf is the counter electromotive force or back-emf, a voltage
induced by the magnetic field that makes the motor spin.
ω
T =
1
Js + B
(6.1)
The system in equation 6.1 is what happens in the simulator between the torque
input and the wheels angular velocity. These parameters J and B are unknown and
they don’t need to be known, and it is the other part of the dynamics system that
needed to be set up to make the motors behavior more realistic.
It was considered
ideal that the parameters of the motors were the same as the ones in the motors of
the TerrainHopper, but unfortunately the parameters of those motors are unknown but
an estimation of them and some other relevant values were provided by Jens Christian
Andersen:
• The electric resistance: R = 0.16Ω
• The torque constant: Kt = 0.75Nm
A
• The electromotive force constant: Ke = 0.75
V
rad/s
• The robot’s maximum velocity: vmax = 5m
s
• The required voltage to reach vmax: Vmax = 15V
==PAGE:47==
6.1 Simulation
39
With these there is only one more coefficient required. The input is now in volts
therefore the desired angular velocity needs the be converted from rad/s to V , by use of
a coefficient Kv. The coefficient can be calculated from the values vmax and Vmax since
it should satisfy the equation:
Vmax = Kv · vmax
r
(6.2)
Where r is the wheel radius. From that equation we can derive:
Kv = Vmax · r
vmax
= 15V · 0.25m
5m
s
= 0.75
V
rad/s
(6.3)
The desired angular velocity is converted to torque which is used to actuate the
motors. The lines in the code that do this can be seen below:
// Actuating the motors:
l_torque = (Kt/R)*(Kv*left_wheelspeed - Ke*l_spd);
r_torque = (Kt/R)*(Kv*right_wheelspeed - Ke*r_spd);
wb_motor_set_torque(left_motor, l_torque);
wb_motor_set_torque(right_motor, r_torque);
Where ”left/right_wheelspeed” are the inputs and ”l/r_spd” are the angular veloc-
ities of the wheels calculated from the position sensor data.
With this implemented the dynamics of the motors became more realistic, the step
response of the system with an input of 1m
s can be seen on figure 6.3. The curve is more
like what was expected of the system originally but it is unclear where the spikes at the
start come from. There is nothing in the robots actual movement that resembles these
spikes so they are most likely just measurement artifacts.
The system reaches the desired value quite fast and the steady-state error is around
0.002m
s which is acceptable so there is no need for a closed-loop controller. This was
implemented on the Driver robot as well.
6.1.2
Force-based Control
Tuning the Force-based controllers is just a matter of finding the correct values for
Ks and Ka. When the up directional button is pressed on the computer running the
simulation the Driver robot moves forward at 1m
s , the CoCoBot robot should match that
while still have room for the sensor-system to move if the speed becomes higher or a
sharp turn is taken, but it can’t be allowed to go too fast. The simplest solution is that
==PAGE:48==
40
6 Testing and Results
Figure 6.3: Step response of the robots velocity with the new motor dynamics.
the robot matches the 1m
s speed of the operator when the rail pulled halfway forwards,
or 2.5cm. To achieve that the gain needs to be:
Ks =
1m
s
0.025m = 401
s
(6.4)
For the turning the it seemed to make the most sense to have it one-to-one or Ka = 11
s,
that way it should only take the robot a second to make up for the difference. But
when implemented the robot seemed to turn quite slowly so the value was incrementally
increased until a satisfactory rate was achieved, the final value was:
Ka = 31
s
(6.5)
6.2
TerrainHopper
6.2.1
Velocity controller
After the control node was implemented, when given a command to drive forward the
TerrainHoppers actual forward velocity did not match the input. On figure 6.4 it can
be seen that the steady-state error was quite significant.
==PAGE:49==
6.2 TerrainHopper
41
Figure 6.4: A graph of the TerrainHoppers velocity over time with a step input of 2
m/s..
To rectify this a PI-controller was designed and implemented. First a model of the
process had to be made. The system was modeled as a first-order system with a slight
delay, it was assumed that small spike that occurs at time t = 0.5s was a measurement
error since nothing in the robots actual movement implied that this spike occurred. The
transfer function of the system is therefore in the form:
vout
vin
=
k
τs + 1 · e−τds
(6.6)
Where k is the systems gain, τ is a time constant equal to the time it takes the
system to reach 62.3% of the steady-state value and τd is the output time delay.
The delay as seen on the graph in figure 6.4 is τd = 0.4s.
The systems steady-state value is approximately 0.7m
s and 62.3% of that is 0.7m
s ·
0.623 = 0.4424m
s . The sample value closest to this is at time t = 0.7s so with regards to
the delay the time constant was τ = 0.3s. With those values the transfer function is:
vout
vin
=
k
0.3s + 1 · e−0.4s = k · 3.33
s + 3.33 · e−0.4s
(6.7)
Starting with k = 1 the values of the gain and the pole were tweaked until the
systems output matched that of the actual output. A comparison of the two can be seen
==PAGE:50==
42
6 Testing and Results
on figure 6.5. The final transfer function is:
vout
vin
=
1.21
s + 3.5 · e−0.4s
(6.8)
Figure 6.5: A comparison of the output of the actual system and its mathematical
model with a step input of 2 m/s..
Next the process was set up in Simulink with a PID-controller block and a unity
feedback. The controllers proportional and integral gains KP and KI were initially set
to 1 and the derivative gain KD was set to 0.
The values of KP and KI were then incrementally increased until as satisfactory
step response was achieved. The final values were KP = 1.3 and KI = 3.8. It has a
rise time of just about 1s and a 3% overshoot. A graph of the closed-looped continuous
Figure 6.6: The system in Simulink with a continuous PID controller.
==PAGE:51==
6.2 TerrainHopper
43
time systems’s step response can be seen on figure 6.7. The transfer function for the
controller is:
KPs + KI
s
= 1.3s + 3.8
s
(6.9)
Figure 6.7: A velocity over time graph of the continuous time system.
To ensure that the system was within acceptable stability margins a bode plot of the
systems frequency response in open-loop was draw in Matlab and the gain and phase
margins were examined. The systems gain margin is 9dB which is acceptable though it
could be a little higher. The systems phase margin is 62.8° which is quite good. All in
all the system is within acceptable margins.
==PAGE:52==
44
6 Testing and Results
Figure 6.8: A bode plot of the systems frequency response, with points on the margins.
This is of course supposed to be run on a digital computer so the controller needs
to be transformed from continuous time to discrete time. That can easily be done using
the Matlab function ”c2d”, all it requires is the transfer function of the controller and
the correct sample time of the system. The control node has two threads that loop at
different rates, the thread that takes care of actuating the motors loops at a rate of 10Hz
so the sample time is ts = 0.1s. The resulting discrete time transfer function is:
b0 + b1z−1
1 + a1z−1
=
1.3 −0.92z−1
1 −z−1
(6.10)
To compare the two versions the system with the discrete controller was set up in
Simulink. The step response of the discrete system had a slightly larger overshoot at 10%
and slightly longer settling time but it was all within acceptable limits. The Simulink
model and a graph of its step response can be seen on figures 6.9 and 6.10 respectively.
==PAGE:53==
6.2 TerrainHopper
45
Figure 6.9: The system in Simulink with a discrete PID controller.
Figure 6.10: A velocity over time graph of the discrete time system.
The controller was implemented in the ROS node with a canonical realization:
==PAGE:54==
46
6 Testing and Results
Figure 6.11: A block diagram with the canonical realization of the discrete PI-
controller.
As seen in the code:
typedef struct{
//Controller parameters
double b0, b1, a1;
//Contorller variables
double dummy0, dummy1;
//Feedback
double prev_vel;
}velocityPIController;
double actuatePIControl(velocityPIController *c, double inp)
{
c->dummy0 = inp - c->a1*c->dummy1 - c->prev_vel;
double outp = c->b0*c->dummy0 + c->b1*c->dummy1;
c->dummy1 = c->dummy0;
return outp;
}
After the velocity controller was implemented a test drive was done where the Ter-
rainHopper was to drive at a velocity of 1.5m
s until the x-coordinate in the odometry
reached 10m. A graph of the velocity over time can be seen on figure 6.12 and though
the real system is a bit noisy it is quite clear that the steady-state error is eliminated
and the target velocity is reached. It reaches the target in about 2s or 2.5s which is
acceptable, the main purpose of the controller was to get rid of the steady-state error,
not to improve the rise-time.
==PAGE:55==
6.2 TerrainHopper
47
Figure 6.12: The TerrainHoppers velocity with PI-controller implemented. It was com-
manded to drive at 1.5m
s until its x-coordinate was 10m.
6.2.2
Force-based control
To test the force-based control properly a wooden beam was fastened to the sensor-
system using plastic cable ties, they were enough to secured so that when the beam was
pulled the head of the system moved along the rail and the beam did not slip out of
the ties at all. All tests were conducted in the new inflated Autonomous Systems Test
Arena (ASTA)[30].
Tuning the controllers is simply a matter of finding good values for the proportional
gains Ks and Ka. The idea was to find an equilibrium point on the rail so that the human
can walk at a comfortable pace or speed and the robot would match it. The average
human walking speed is around 1.4m
s but while carrying something it is probably a bit
lower. A comfortable pace was assumed to be about 1.0m
s and the tuning of the gains
was centered around that.
To begin with the gains were set to Ks = −1 (it is negative so that the robot reverses
since the sensor-system is attached to the back end of it) and Ka = 1. As was expected
the robot moved when the beam was pulled but very slowly so Ks was increased to -20
to get a bit more speed, but still too low. With that the robot was driven about for a
while, going both forwards and backwards and turning. The sensor data from that drive
was examined and it was clear that a certain amounts of force could be ”effortlessly”
applied to the system before it became hard to compress the springs further.
==PAGE:56==
48
6 Testing and Results
Figure 6.13: Two graphs of the sensor outputs over time as the TerrainHopper was
driven around ASTA.
The output from the sensors can be seen on figure 6.13. The position on the rail forms
flat tops and bottoms on the graph when a comfortable amount of force is used, though
the tops are not all at the same position as was expected. The values of these tops are
around the position where the robot should reach a velocity of 1.0m
s , so their average
should be a fine approximation. Their average value is 0.0136m and the corresponding
gain Ks is:
Ks =
1.0m
s
0.0136m = 73.7s−1
(6.11)
With that gain the maximum output of the controller is ±3.685m
s which is on the edge
of being too high. A few test drives were conducted and the data showed results that
were not quite what was expected. For comparison the gain was lowered to ks = 55s−1
and another drive was conducted.
==PAGE:57==
6.2 TerrainHopper
49
Figure 6.14: A graph of the robots velocity over time with the controller gain Ks =
73.7s−1. As a reminder, the negative values of the velocity correspond to
the robot going in the direction the operator considers to be forwards.
Figure 6.15: A graph of the robots velocity over time with the controller gain Ks =
55s−1.
During all these tests the robot turned quite adequately so there was never a need
to change the value of turning gain from Ka = 1.
==PAGE:58==
50
6 Testing and Results
6.3
Result analysis
In some of the tests on the simulator before the gains were scaled properly, the Driver
robot would move too fast for the CoCoBot robot to be able to keep up. When this hap-
pened the connector plates would start to slip apart, sometimes breaking the connection
entirely.
Figure 6.16: The white connector plates that link the two robots together as they start
sliding apart.
However with the gains calculated in chapter 6.1.2 the CoCoBot robot kept up with
the Driver robot perfectly and connector plates stayed in place.
The results from the real robot suggest that two of the assumptions were wrong.
The first assumption was that the comfortable pace would be at 1m
s when in both cases
the operator moved around at speeds closer to 0.7m
s . The second was that this one
equilibrium point on the rail existed that the gain should be molded to, when in reality
it was the other way around. Unless the gain is very low or very high the robot will
always match the operators speed, which is exactly what the controller should make
it do. The gain mainly affects how quickly the system responds to a change in the
sensor-system and the higher it is the further back the equilibrium point is.
Due to limited experience the capabilities of the controllers were originally quite
underestimated. There isn’t some optimal value for the gain Ks but a range of them. Of
course if the gain is too low the robot wont be able to match the desired speeds, and if
==PAGE:59==
6.4 Future work
51
it is too high the robot will respond too fast and cause the system become unstable and
might possibly hurt the operator. This optimal range might also vary between operators,
since the preferred pace is probably different from person to person. Unfortunately there
wasn’t enough time to fully evaluate this range for the gain.
The two system function almost the same way though it is a bit easier to maneuver
the one with the differential drive since it can rotate in place and the axis of its rotation
and the sensor-systems rotation are one and the same. Overall the controllers, both
simulated and real worked as intended, the material can be carried with ease and the
robots follow effectively.
6.4
Future work
Hopefully this will serve as a good baseline for the system on the actual CoCoBot project.
To further it, a suitable range for the gain ks could be found and made changeable during
runtime to fit the preference of the operator. It could be changed with a dial that along
with the emergency stop button would be affixed to the operator so that it doesn’t take
up a hand like the box for the TerrainHopper does. It could be affixed to a glove or a
wristband.
The simulation could be used to test the system with other steering models than the
two used in this project. This could reveal what model is best suited for the system.
As for the ROS system on the TerrainHopper, the control node was intended to be
usable for any future projects. Its odometry should be calculated correctly but since
it wasn’t used for this project at all it was never tested properly and calibrated. The
system will also need nodes for the laser-scanners and the other components to be fully
operational.
==PAGE:60==
52
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
The main objective of this project was to create a functioning implementation of the
CoCoBot use case described at the end of chapter 1.1 on a real robot. This was achieved
and the system functions as intended, though it could not be fine-tuned due to limited
time. All the requirements were met and the most important thing is that the system
is functional and stable. The robot follows the operator quite smoothly and reliably.
The simulation showed that the system is applicable for different types of robots and
that different steering models might be better suited for it than the Ackermann model,
although the simulated robot was never tested on rough terrain and there is a reason
the Ackermann model is used for all automobiles.
It will be exiting to see how the actual CoCoBot project develops. The project is
scheduled to finish in December and hopefully there will be a working prototype of the
whole vision at that point. With the TerrainHopper it is advised to keep an eye on
the robot while driving close to objects to ensure that it does not bump into anything,
though with the added automated environmental awareness it should avoid that by itself
and the operator can look straight ahead and won’t have to think about it.
All in all, the project was successful with mostly positive results and hopefully it will
be useful for the creation of a new and innovative robot.
==PAGE:62==
54
==PAGE:63==
Appendices
==PAGE:64==
==PAGE:65==
APPENDIX A
AD-converter circuit
diagram
==PAGE:66==
58
A AD-converter circuit diagram
==PAGE:67==
APPENDIX B
Drawings of Solidworks
models
==PAGE:68==
 200.00 
 10.00 
 29.00 
 96.00 
 22.00 
 R11.00 
 
12.00 
 R10.00 
 R10.00 
 96.00 
 50.00 
 70.00 
 11.00 
 180.00 
 R10.00 
 
6.00 
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:5
SHEET 1 OF 1
A4
WEIGHT: 
FrontPiece
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
==PAGE:69==
 200.00 
 10.00 
 29.00 
 11.00 
 22.00 
 28.00 
 40.00 
 R10.00 
 R11.00 
 
12.00 
 30.00 
 10.00 
 84.50 
 10.00 
 70.00 
 R10.00 
 110.00 
 16.00 
 50.00 
 
6.00 
 180.00 
 R13.00 
 27.00 
 10.00 
 
9.00 
 
7.00 
 
3.00 
 2.00 
 2.00 
 75.00 
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:5
SHEET 1 OF 2
A4
WEIGHT: 
BackPiece
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
==PAGE:70==
B
B
 68.00 
 2.00 
 4.00 
 3.00 
 
6.50 
SECTION B-B
SCALE 1 : 1.5
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:5
SHEET 2 OF 2
A4
WEIGHT: 
BackPiece
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
==PAGE:71==
 118.00 
 R11.00 
 
12.00 
 
17.00 
 96.00 
 14.14 
 R10.00 
 39.00 
 R10.00 
 150° 
 116.60 
 140.00 
 
40.00 
 100.00 
 
5.00 
 70.00 
 20.00 
 50.00 
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:5
SHEET 1 OF 1
A4
WEIGHT: 
MiddlePiece
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
==PAGE:72==
 180.00 
 200.00 
 200.00 
 R10.00 
 
3.00 
 R25.00 
 R15.00 
 
12.00 
 
6.00 
 40.00 
 200.00 
 100.00 
 10.00 
 46.64° 
 10.00 
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:5
SHEET 1 OF 1
A4
WEIGHT: 
BottomPiece
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
==PAGE:73==
 5.00 
 R1.00 
A
A
 
14.00 
 
6.00 
 
12.00 
 1.00 
 2.00 
 2.00 
SECTION A-A
SCALE 5 : 1
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:2:1
SHEET 1 OF 1
A4
WEIGHT: 
MagnetCap
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
==PAGE:74==
 45.00 
 18.00 
 11.00 
 R1.00 
 R1.00 
 R2.00 
 
2.60 
 
3.00 
 40.00 
 40.00 
 45.00 
 3.00 
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:1
SHEET 1 OF 1
A4
WEIGHT: 
SensorAttach
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
==PAGE:75==
 30.00 
 26.00 
 22.00 
 75.00 
 24.00 
 2.00 
 R1.00 
 R1.00 
 R1.00 
 
3.00 
 15.00 
 110.00 
 106.00 
 2.00 
 2.00 
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:1
SHEET 1 OF 1
A4
WEIGHT: 
Lid
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
==PAGE:76==
68
==PAGE:77==
APPENDIX C
Codes
C.1
AD-converter
1
2 #include "SPI.h"
3
4 unsigned int slideData = 0;
5 unsigned int rotData = 0;
6 const int chipSelect = 10;
7 const int analogPin = A0;
8
9 bool initiate = false;
10 int incoming;
11
12 void setup(){
13
14
analogReadResolution(13);
15
16
Serial.begin(9600);
17
pinMode(chipSelect , OUTPUT);
18
SPI.begin();
19
SPI.setBitOrder(MSBFIRST);
20
SPI.setDataMode (SPI_MODE1);
21
22
while(!initiate){
23
24
if(Serial.available() > 0){
25
26
incoming = Serial.read();
27
//Serial.print("Check: ");
28
//Serial.println(incoming ,DEC);
29
30
if( incoming == 49){
31
initiate = true;
32
}
33
34
}
35
}
36
37 }
38
39 void loop(){
40
==PAGE:78==
70
C Codes
41
slideData = analogRead(analogPin);
42
43
digitalWrite(chipSelect , LOW);
44
rotData = SPI.transfer16(0x0000);
45
digitalWrite(chipSelect , HIGH);
46
47
rotData &= 0b0011111111111111;
48
49
Serial.print(slideData , DEC);
50
Serial.print(" ");
51
Serial.print(rotData , DEC);
52
Serial.print("\r\n");
53
54
delay(10);
55
56 }
Listing C.1: C++ for Arduino.
C.2
ROS TerrainHopper control Node
1 #include <ros/ros.h>
2 #include <std_msgs/String.h>
3 #include <geometry_msgs/Twist.h>
4 #include <nav_msgs/Odometry.h>
5 #include <rosgraph_msgs/Clock.h>
6 #include <tf/transform_broadcaster.h>
7 #include <boost/tokenizer.hpp>
8 #include <pthread.h>
9 #include <stdio.h>
10 #include <stdlib.h>
11 #include <string.h>
12 #include <math.h>
13 #include <unistd.h>
14 #include <signal.h>
15 #include <sys/ioctl.h>
16 #include <sys/socket.h>
17 #include <sys/time.h>
18 #include <netinet/in.h>
19 #include <arpa/inet.h>
20 #include <fcntl.h>
21
22 extern "C" {
23
#include "rhd.h"
24 }
25
26 #define WHEEL_BASE 0.94
27 #define M_PER_ENC 0.000004233
28 #define VELSCALE 100
29 #define TURNSCALE 10
==PAGE:79==
C.2 ROS TerrainHopper control Node
71
30
31 #define ROBOTPORT 24902
32 #define RHD_ADDRESS "localhost"
33
34 typedef struct{ //input signals
35
int left_enc ,right_enc ,turn_enc; // encoderticks
36
// parameters
37
double cr,cl;
// meters per encodertick
38
//output signals
39
double right_pos ,left_pos;
40
double right_pos_old ,left_pos_old;
41
double dist_driven;
42
// internal variables
43
int left_enc_old , right_enc_old;
44 } odotype;
45
46 typedef struct{
47
//Controller parameters
48
double b0, b1, a1;
49
//Contorller variables
50
double dummy0 , dummy1;
51
//Feedback
52
double prev_vel;
53 }velocityPIController;
54
55
56 class SMRControlNode
57 {
58
//Ros objects
59
ros::NodeHandle nh_;
60
61
// Subscriptions
62
ros::Subscriber smrcl_cmd_subscriber_;
63
ros::Subscriber cmd_vel_subscriber_;
64
65
// Pubs
66
ros::Publisher smr_odo_pub;
67
ros::Publisher smr_clock_pub;
68
69
// Transform broadcaster
70
tf::TransformBroadcaster tf;
71
72
//ROS "watchdog" (2.0 speconds):
73
float timeout_ = 2.0;
74
ros::Timer cmdVelWathcdog_;
75
76
int watchdog_;
77
bool first;
78 private:
79
double current_linear = 0.0;
80
81
==PAGE:80==
72
C Codes
82 public:
83
double Vth;
84
85
86
void limitVelocity(double& val, double& min, double& max)
87
{
88
if (val > max)
89
val = max;
90
else if (val < min)
91
val = min;
92
}
93
94
double actuatePIControl(velocityPIController *c, double inp)
95
{
96
c->dummy0 = inp - c->a1*c->dummy1 - c->prev_vel;
97
double outp = c->b0*c->dummy0 + c->b1*c->dummy1;
98
c->dummy1 = c->dummy0;
99
100
return outp;
101
}
102
103
104
void cmdVelHandler( const geometry_msgs::Twist::ConstPtr& vel )
105
{
106
//Reset the cmd_vel watchdog timer;
107
cmdVelWathcdog_.stop();
108
cmdVelWathcdog_.start();
109
110
double dx = vel->linear.x; //Forward velocity for all wheels
111
double dth = vel->angular.z; //Steering angle
112
//PI controller to get rid of steady -state error in velocity
113
dx = actuatePIControl(&velCon,dx);
114
// Limits:
115
double dx_min = -4.0;
116
double dx_max = 4.0;
117
double dth_min = -27.0;
118
double dth_max = 27.0;
119
120
//limit the speed of the smr to +/-0.2 m/s linear and +/-1 rad/s
angular:
121
limitVelocity(dx, dx_min , dx_max);
122
limitVelocity(dth, dth_min , dth_max);
123
124
Vth = dth;
125
126
watchdog_ = 100; // Timeout = 10 seconds
127
128
//char command[64];
129
//sprintf(command , "motorcmds %4.2f %4.2f", v_left , v_right );
130
speedfwd ->data[0] = VELSCALE * dx;
131
speedfwd ->updated = 1;
132
turnangl ->data[0] = TURNSCALE * dth;
==PAGE:81==
C.2 ROS TerrainHopper control Node
73
133
turnangl ->updated = 1;
134
135
}
136
137
void cmdVelWatchdogCallback(const ros::TimerEvent& event)
138
{
139
140
speedfwd ->data[0] = 0.0;
141
speedfwd ->updated = 1;
142
turnangl ->data[0] = 0.0;
143
turnangl ->updated = 1;
144
145
//cmdVelHandler
146
cmdVelWathcdog_.stop();
147
148
}
149
150
ros::Publisher get_smr_odo_pub()
151
{
152
return(smr_odo_pub);
153
}
154
155
ros::Publisher get_smr_clock_pub()
156
{
157
return(smr_clock_pub);
158
}
159
160
tf::TransformBroadcaster get_tf()
161
{
162
return(tf);
163
}
164
165
double get_vth()
166
{
167
return(Vth);
168
}
169
170
/////////RHD CODE BELOW///////////
171
172
symTableElement * getinputref(const char *sym_name , symTableElement *
tab)
173
{
174
int i;
175
for (i=0; i< getSymbolTableSize('r'); i++){
176
if (strcmp (tab[i].name,sym_name) == 0) {
177
return &tab[i];
178
}
179
}
180
return 0;
181
}
182
==PAGE:82==
74
C Codes
183
symTableElement * getoutputref(const char *sym_name , symTableElement *
tab)
184
{
185
int i;
186
for (i=0; i< getSymbolTableSize('w'); i++){
187
if (strcmp (tab[i].name,sym_name) == 0){
188
return &tab[i];
189
}
190
}
191
return 0;
192
}
193
194
void reset_odo(odotype * p) {
195
p->right_pos = p->left_pos = 0.0;
196
p->right_enc_old = p->right_enc;
197
p->left_enc_old = p->left_enc;
198
}
199
200
void update_odo(odotype *p)
201
{
202
int delta;
203
204
delta = p->right_enc - p->right_enc_old;
205
if (delta > 0x8000) delta -= 0x10000;
206
else if (delta < -0x8000) delta += 0x10000;
207
p->right_enc_old = p->right_enc;
208
p->right_pos_old = p->right_pos;
209
p->right_pos += delta * p->cr;
210
211
delta = p->left_enc - p->left_enc_old;
212
if (delta > 0x8000) delta -= 0x10000;
213
else if (delta < -0x8000) delta += 0x10000;
214
p->left_enc_old = p->left_enc;
215
p->left_pos_old = p->left_pos;
216
p->left_pos += delta * p->cl;
217
218
p->dist_driven = ((p->right_pos - p->right_pos_old) + (p->left_pos
- p->left_pos_old))/2;
219
220
}
221
222
symTableElement *
inputtable ,*outputtable;
223
symTableElement *lenc,*renc,*steerenc , *speedfwd ,*turnangl;
224
odotype odo;
225
velocityPIController velCon;
226
227
void setupRHD(){
228
if (rhdConnect('w',RHD_ADDRESS ,ROBOTPORT)!='w'){
229
printf("Can't connect to rhd0 \n");
230
exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
231
}
232
==PAGE:83==
C.2 ROS TerrainHopper control Node
75
233
printf("connected to robot \n");
234
235
if ((inputtable=getSymbolTable('r'))== NULL){
236
printf("Can't connect to rhd1 \n");
237
exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
238
}
239
if ((outputtable=getSymbolTable('w'))== NULL){
240
printf("Can't connect to rhd2 \n");
241
exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
242
}
243
// connect to robot I/O variables
244
lenc=getinputref("encl",inputtable);
245
renc=getinputref("encr",inputtable);
246
steerenc=getinputref("steeringangle",inputtable);
247
248
speedfwd=getoutputref("speedref",outputtable);
249
turnangl=getoutputref("steeringangleref",outputtable);
250
251
}
252
253
public:
254
SMRControlNode(ros::NodeHandle& nh) :
255
nh_(nh),
256
cmd_vel_subscriber_( nh_.subscribe <geometry_msgs::Twist >("/cmd_vel
", 1, &SMRControlNode::cmdVelHandler , this) ),
257
smr_odo_pub(nh_.advertise <nav_msgs::Odometry > ("/odom", 1)),
258
smr_clock_pub(nh_.advertise <rosgraph_msgs::Clock> ("/clock", 1)),
259
first( true )
260
{
261
setupRHD();
262
rhdSync(); // Load sensor and actuators
263
odo.cr=M_PER_ENC;
264
odo.cl=M_PER_ENC;
265
odo.left_enc=lenc->data[0];
266
odo.right_enc=renc->data[0];
267
odo.turn_enc=steerenc ->data[0];
268
reset_odo(&odo);
269
270
//Setup PI-Controller parameters(Kp = 1.3, Ki = 3.8, ts = 0.1s)
271
velCon.b0=1.3;
272
velCon.b1=-0.92;
273
velCon.a1=-1;
274
velCon.dummy1=0;
275
velCon.prev_vel=0;
276
277
//Command velocity "Watchdog":
278
cmdVelWathcdog_ = nh_.createTimer(ros::Duration(timeout_), &
SMRControlNode::cmdVelWatchdogCallback , this); // starts
automaticly
279
}
280
281
void run(int argc, char** argv)
==PAGE:84==
76
C Codes
282
{
283
// Initialize ROS
284
std::string data;
285
ros::Rate r(10);
286
while (nh_.ok()) {
287
288
ros::spinOnce();
289
if( watchdog_ == 0 )
290
{
291
//TODO: Send stop command
292
watchdog_ = 100;
293
} else{
294
--watchdog_;
295
}
296
r.sleep();
297
}
298
}
299
300 };
301
302 typedef struct{ //input signals
303
double x;
304
double x_old;
305
double y;
306
double y_old;
307
double th;
308
double th_old;
309
double dth;
310
double vx;
311
double vth;
312 } odometry;
313
314 void calcOdometry(odometry * odom, odotype * raw, double dt){
315
316
// Move previous values
317
odom->x_old = odom->x;
318
odom->y_old = odom->y;
319
odom->th_old = odom->th;
320
321
odom->dth = raw->dist_driven*tan(raw->turn_enc*M_PI/1800)/WHEEL_BASE;
// the turn angle in in degrees * 10
322
odom->th += odom->dth;
323
324
odom->x += raw->dist_driven*cos(odom->th);
325
odom->y += raw->dist_driven*sin(odom->th);
326
327
while(odom->th > M_PI){
328
odom->th -= 2*M_PI;
329
}
330
while(odom->th < -M_PI){
331
odom->th += 2*M_PI;
332
}
==PAGE:85==
C.2 ROS TerrainHopper control Node
77
333
334
odom->vx = raw->dist_driven/dt;
335
odom->vth = (odom->dth)/dt;
336 }
337
338 void *odometry_thread(void *var)
339 {
340
std::string out;
341
SMRControlNode *node = (SMRControlNode *) var;
342
ros::Time ros_time;
343
double last_time = 0.0, vForward = 0.0;
344
ROS_INFO("Starting odometry thread");
345
printf("Time, x, y, th, Vx, Vth\n");
346
ros::Rate loop_rate(1/0.06);
347
odometry odom;
348
while(ros::ok())
349
{
350
rhdSync();
351
ros_time = ros::Time::now();
352
node->odo.left_enc=node->lenc->data[0];
353
node->odo.right_enc=node->renc->data[0];
354
node->odo.turn_enc=node->steerenc ->data[0];
355
node->update_odo(&(node->odo));
356
calcOdometry(&odom, &(node->odo), loop_rate.expectedCycleTime().
toSec());
357
//printf("%f, %f, %f, %f, %f, %f\n",ros_time.toSec(), odom.x, odom
.y, odom.th, odom.vx, odom.vth);
358
359
//Update PI-controller feedback
360
node->velCon.prev_vel=odom.vx;
361
362
//Send transform
363
tf::Transform txOdom( tf::createQuaternionFromYaw(odom.th), tf::
Point(odom.x, odom.y, 0.0) );
364
node->get_tf().sendTransform( tf::StampedTransform(txOdom,
ros_time , "odom", "base_footprint") );
365
366
nav_msgs::Odometry odom_message;
367
tf::poseTFToMsg(txOdom, odom_message.pose.pose);
368
369
// Set position
370
odom_message.pose.pose.position.x = odom.x;
371
odom_message.pose.pose.position.y = odom.y;
372
odom_message.pose.pose.position.z = node->odo.turn_enc; // Not the most
sensical place for this value but there isn't really a better one.
373
odom_message.pose.pose.orientation.z = odom.th;
374
//set the motor speed
375
odom_message.twist.twist.linear.x = odom.vx;
376
odom_message.twist.twist.linear.y = 0.0;
377
odom_message.twist.twist.linear.z = 0.0;
378
odom_message.twist.twist.angular.x = 0.0;
379
odom_message.twist.twist.angular.y = 0.0;
==PAGE:86==
78
C Codes
380
odom_message.twist.twist.angular.z = odom.vth;
381
// Header ID and time
382
odom_message.header.stamp = ros_time;
383
odom_message.header.frame_id = "odom";
384
odom_message.child_frame_id = "base_footprint";
385
386
// Publish odometry message
387
node->get_smr_odo_pub().publish(odom_message);
388
389
// Publish sim clock
390
rosgraph_msgs::Clock klokke;
391
klokke.clock = ros_time;
392
node->get_smr_clock_pub().publish(klokke);
393
loop_rate.sleep();
394
}
395
396
pthread_exit(NULL);
397 }
398
399 int main(int argc, char** argv)
400 {
401
ros::init(argc, argv, "smr_control_node");
402
ros::NodeHandle nh;
403
pthread_t odometry_thread_handle;
404
pthread_attr_t attr;
405
SMRControlNode control(nh);
406
407
pthread_attr_init(&attr);
408
if(pthread_create(&odometry_thread_handle , &attr, odometry_thread , &
control))
409
{
410
ROS_INFO("Failed to create odometry thread");
411
}
412
else
413
{
414
control.run(argc, argv);
415
}
416
417
return 0;
418 }
Listing C.2: C++ for ROS.
C.3
ROS Serial Node
1 #include <ros/ros.h>
2 #include <stdio.h>
3 #include <serial/serial.h>
4 #include <string.h>
5 #include <terhop/sensors.h>
==PAGE:87==
C.3 ROS Serial Node
79
6
7 serial::Serial sens;
8
9 ros::Publisher serialData;
10
11 int main(int argc, char** argv)
12 {
13
14
ros::init(argc, argv, "serial_node");
15
ros::NodeHandle nh;
16
ros::Rate r(100);
17
18
serialData = nh.advertise <terhop::sensors >("sensor_data" ,1000);
19
20
try {
21
22
sens.setPort("/dev/ttyACM2");
23
sens.setBaudrate(9600);
24
serial::Timeout to = serial::Timeout::simpleTimeout(1000);
25
sens.setTimeout(to);
26
sens.open();
27
28
}
29
catch (serial::IOException& e) {
30
31
ROS_ERROR_STREAM("Unable to open port ");
32
return -1;
33
}
34
35
if(sens.isOpen()){
36
37
ROS_INFO_STREAM("Serial Port initialized");
38
39
}else{
40
41
return -1;
42
43
}
44
45
sens.write("1");
46
47
std::string data;
48
int firstSpace , size;
49
std::string slide;
50
std::string rotation;
51
52
53
while(ros::ok())
54
{
55
56
ros::spinOnce();
57
==PAGE:88==
80
C Codes
58
if(sens.available()){
59
60
terhop::sensors mess;
61
62
data = sens.readline(sens.available());
63
64
//ROS_INFO_STREAM(data);
65
66
firstSpace = data.find(" ");
67
size = data.find("\r");
68
slide = data.substr(0,firstSpace);
69
rotation = data.substr(firstSpace+1,size-firstSpace -1);
70
71
mess.slide = stoi(slide);
72
mess.rotation = stoi(rotation);
73
74
serialData.publish(mess);
75
76
77
}
78
79
r.sleep();
80
81
}
82
83
84
return 0;
85 }
Listing C.3: C++ for ROS.
C.4
ROS CoCoBot Node
1 #include <ros/ros.h>
2 #include <stdio.h>
3 #include <string.h>
4 #include <terhop/sensors.h>
5 #include <geometry_msgs/Twist.h>
6 #include <nav_msgs/Odometry.h>
7
8 #define M_PER_POT 0.00001221
9 #define DEG_PER_ENC 0.04395
10
11
12 double x, y, theta, v, turn, slide, rot;
13 int slide_data , rot_data;
14
15 void sensorDataCallback (const terhop::sensors::ConstPtr& data){
16
17
double slide_offset = 0.0487;
==PAGE:89==
C.4 ROS CoCoBot Node
81
18
double rot_offset = 1.7;
19
20
slide_data = data->slide;
21
rot_data = data->rotation;
22
23
slide = slide_data*M_PER_POT - slide_offset;
24
rot = (rot_data - 4096)*DEG_PER_ENC - rot_offset;
25
26
if (abs(slide) < 0.001){
//Just to make sure it does not move at all
the stationary.
27
slide = 0.0;
28
}
29
30
if (rot <= -180){
31
rot += 360;
32
}
33
34
ROS_INFO("Slide value: %f, Rotation value: %f",slide,rot);
35 }
36
37 void odometryCallback (const nav_msgs::Odometry::ConstPtr& odo){
38
39
x = odo->pose.pose.position.x;
40
y = odo->pose.pose.position.y;
41
theta = odo->pose.pose.orientation.z;
42
v = odo->twist.twist.linear.x;
43
turn = (odo->pose.pose.position.z)/10;
44
45
//ROS_INFO("x: %f, y: %f, theta: %f, v: %f, turn angle: %f",x,y,theta,v,
turn);
46
47 }
48
49 ros::Subscriber sens;
50 ros::Subscriber odo;
51 ros::Publisher drive;
52
53 FILE *fp;
54
55 int main(int argc, char** argv)
56 {
57
58
ros::init(argc, argv, "cocobot_node");
59
ros::NodeHandle nh;
60
ros::Rate r(100);
61
62
sens = nh.subscribe("sensor_data", 1, sensorDataCallback);
63
odo = nh.subscribe("odom",1,odometryCallback);
64
drive = nh.advertise <geometry_msgs::Twist >("cmd_vel",1);
65
66
geometry_msgs::Twist vel_msg;
67
==PAGE:90==
82
C Codes
68
double fwd_vel = 0.0;
69
double turn_angl = 0;
70
double t=0;
71
72
// Gains
73
double kf = -55;
74
double ka = 1;
75
76
fp = fopen("/home/local/catkin_ws/src/terhop/src/data.txt","w");
77
78
while(ros::ok())
79
{
80
81
ros::spinOnce();
82
83
fwd_vel = slide * kf;
84
turn_angl = rot * ka;
85
86
vel_msg.linear.x = fwd_vel;
87
vel_msg.angular.z = turn_angl;
88
89
drive.publish(vel_msg);
90
91
t += 0.01;
92
fprintf(fp,"%f %f %f %f %f %f %f %f\n",t,x,y,theta,v,turn, slide, rot)
;
93
r.sleep();
94
95
}
96
97
98
return 0;
99 }
Listing C.4: C++ for ROS.
C.5
ROS terhop sensors message file
1
2 int16 slide
3 int16 rotation
Listing C.5: msg for ROS.
C.6
ROS terhop package Cmakelists file
1 cmake_minimum_required(VERSION 2.8.3)
2 project(terhop)
==PAGE:91==
C.6 ROS terhop package Cmakelists file
83
3
4 find_package(catkin REQUIRED COMPONENTS
5
roscpp
6
rospy
7
std_msgs
8
message_generation
9
serial
10
geometry_msgs
11
tf
12 )
13
14
add_message_files(
15
FILES
16
sensors.msg
17
)
18
19
generate_messages(
20
DEPENDENCIES
21
std_msgs
22
geometry_msgs
23
)
24
25 catkin_package(
26
27 )
28
29 include_directories(
30 # include
31
${catkin_INCLUDE_DIRS}
32 )
33
34 add_executable(th_control_node src/th_control_node.cpp)
35 add_executable(serial_node src/serial_node.cpp)
36 add_executable(cocobot_node src/cocobot_node.cpp)
37
38 target_link_libraries(th_control_node
39
${catkin_LIBRARIES}
40
-lm /home/local/mobotware/rhd/trunk/librhd/librhd.a
41 )
42 target_compile_options(th_control_node PUBLIC -O0 -I /home/local/mobotware
/rhd/trunk/include)
43 target_link_libraries(serial_node
44
${catkin_LIBRARIES}
45 )
46 target_link_libraries(cocobot_node
47
${catkin_LIBRARIES}
48 )
Listing C.6: makefile for ROS.
==PAGE:92==
84
C Codes
C.7
ROS terhop package package file
1 <?xml version="1.0"?>
2 <package format="2">
3
<name>terhop</name>
4
<version>0.0.0</version>
5
<description>The terhop package</description>
6
7
<maintainer email="local@todo.todo">local</maintainer>
8
9
<license>TODO</license>
10
11
<build_depend>message_generation</build_depend>
12
13
<exec_depend>message_runtime</exec_depend>
14
15
<buildtool_depend>catkin</buildtool_depend>
16
<build_depend>roscpp</build_depend>
17
<build_depend>rospy</build_depend>
18
<build_depend>std_msgs</build_depend>
19
<build_export_depend>roscpp</build_export_depend>
20
<build_export_depend>rospy</build_export_depend>
21
<build_export_depend>std_msgs</build_export_depend>
22
<exec_depend>roscpp</exec_depend>
23
<exec_depend>rospy</exec_depend>
24
<exec_depend>std_msgs</exec_depend>
25
<build_depend>serial</build_depend>
26
<exec_depend>serial</exec_depend>
27
28
<export>
29
30
</export>
31 </package>
Listing C.7: package for ROS.
C.8
ROS CoCoBot launch file
1 <launch>
2
3
<arg name="use_tf_static" default="false"/>
4
5
<!-- TerrainHopper Control Node -->
6
<node pkg="terhop" type="th_control_node" name="th_control_node" output=
"screen">
7
</node>
8
9
<!-- CoCobot related Nodes -->
10
<node pkg="terhop" type="cocobot_node" name="cocobot_node" output="
screen">
==PAGE:93==
C.9 Webots CoCoBot robot Proto
85
11
</node>
12
13
<node pkg="terhop" type="serial_node" name="serial_node" output="screen"
>
14
</node>
15
16
</launch>
Listing C.8: launch file for ROS.
C.9
Webots CoCoBot robot Proto
1 #VRML_OBJ R2020a utf8
2 Robot {
3
translation 6.949184868891288e-05 0.44999270369947353 0.0046068532530006
4
rotation 0.00010112262668215238 0.8552121595723469 0.5182780642606989
-0.00030348099536891746
5
children [
6
DEF BODY Shape {
7
appearance PBRAppearance {
8
baseColor 1 0 0
9
roughness 1
10
metalness 0
11
}
12
geometry Box {
13
size 0.6 0.5 1
14
}
15
}
16
HingeJoint {
17
jointParameters HingeJointParameters {
18
position
-0.03612100024066058
19
anchor 0.35 -0.2 0
20
}
21
device [
22
RotationalMotor {
23
name "wheel_left"
24
controlPID 0.01 0 0
25
maxVelocity 2
26
maxTorque 20
27
}
28
PositionSensor {
29
name "encoder_left"
30
}
31
]
32
endPoint Solid {
33
translation 0.35 -0.2 0
34
rotation
-0.018056513433466443 0.018056574231739637
0.9996739080568428 1.5711258390163072
35
children [
36
DEF WHEEL Shape {
==PAGE:94==
86
C Codes
37
appearance PBRAppearance {
38
baseColor 0 0 1
39
roughness 1
40
metalness 0
41
}
42
geometry Cylinder {
43
height 0.1
44
radius 0.25
45
}
46
}
47
]
48
boundingObject USE WHEEL
49
physics Physics {
50
density 200
51
}
52
linearVelocity 5.070304694814635e-09 3.0039219237333054e-11
-3.1817308759634024e-06
53
angularVelocity
-1.2890354589149486e-05 8.994080750770248e-06
-3.079048404726014e-09
54
}
55
}
56
HingeJoint {
57
jointParameters HingeJointParameters {
58
position
-0.022285474445478362
59
anchor -0.35 -0.2 0
60
}
61
device [
62
RotationalMotor {
63
name "wheel_right"
64
controlPID 0.01 0 0
65
maxTorque 20
66
}
67
PositionSensor {
68
name "encoder_right"
69
}
70
]
71
endPoint Solid {
72
translation
-0.35017372851886
-0.20000843503698773
-4.429311673695533e-06
73
rotation
-0.5490605329041234 0.550903318340465 0.6285205366959017
2.0159941590981547
74
children [
75
USE WHEEL
76
]
77
name "solid(1)"
78
boundingObject USE WHEEL
79
physics Physics {
80
density 200
81
}
82
linearVelocity 3.3719843758514525e-09 2.057565753923957e-11
3.111824627824723e-06
==PAGE:95==
C.9 Webots CoCoBot robot Proto
87
83
angularVelocity 1.099198291805754e-05 8.989910997073478e-06
3.1210665757175986e-09
84
}
85
}
86
Solid {
87
translation 0 -0.35 0.4
88
children [
89
DEF BALL Shape {
90
appearance PBRAppearance {
91
baseColor 0 0 1
92
roughness 1
93
metalness 0
94
}
95
geometry Sphere {
96
radius 0.1
97
}
98
}
99
]
100
name "solid(2)"
101
contactMaterial "castor_wheel"
102
boundingObject USE BALL
103
physics Physics {
104
}
105
}
106
Solid {
107
translation 0 -0.35 -0.4
108
children [
109
USE BALL
110
]
111
name "solid(3)"
112
contactMaterial "castor_wheel"
113
boundingObject USE BALL
114
physics Physics {
115
}
116
}
117
Solid {
118
translation 0 0.3 0
119
children [
120
DEF CYLINDER Shape {
121
appearance PBRAppearance {
122
baseColor 0 1 0
123
roughness 1
124
metalness 0
125
}
126
geometry Cylinder {
127
height 0.1
128
radius 0.1
129
}
130
}
131
HingeJoint {
132
jointParameters HingeJointParameters {
133
position 0.00014074124706999402
==PAGE:96==
88
C Codes
134
axis 0 1 0
135
anchor 0 0.09 0
136
minStop -3
137
maxStop 3
138
springConstant 10
139
dampingConstant 5
140
suspensionAxis 0 1 0
141
}
142
device [
143
PositionSensor {
144
name "rot_sensor"
145
}
146
]
147
endPoint Solid {
148
translation 0 0.09 0
149
rotation 0 1 0 0.0001407412458411091
150
children [
151
DEF RAILBASE Shape {
152
appearance PBRAppearance {
153
baseColor 1 1 0
154
roughness 1
155
metalness 0
156
}
157
geometry IndexedFaceSet {
158
coord Coordinate {
159
point [
160
-0.15 -0.04 0.22
161
0.15 -0.04 0.22
162
-0.15 -0.04 -0.22
163
0.15 -0.04 -0.22
164
-0.15 0.16 0.22
165
0.15 0.16 0.22
166
-0.15 0.16 0.15
167
0.15 0.16 0.15
168
-0.15 0.04 0.15
169
0.15 0.04 0.15
170
-0.15 0.04 -0.15
171
0.15 0.04 -0.15
172
-0.15 0.16 -0.15
173
0.15 0.16 -0.15
174
-0.15 0.16 -0.22
175
0.15 0.16 -0.22
176
]
177
}
178
coordIndex [
179
0, 1, 5, 4, -1, 2, 14, 15, 3, -1, 0, 2, 3, 1, -1, 0,
4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 2, -1, 1, 3, 15, 13, 11, 9, 7,
5, -1, 6, 7, 9, 8, -1, 8, 9, 11, 10, -1, 10, 11,
13, 12, -1, 4, 5, 7, 6, -1, 12, 13, 15, 14, 0
180
]
181
}
182
}
==PAGE:97==
C.9 Webots CoCoBot robot Proto
89
183
SliderJoint {
184
jointParameters JointParameters {
185
position 3.1092256622917866e-07
186
minStop -0.05
187
maxStop 0.05
188
springConstant 30
189
dampingConstant 10
190
}
191
device [
192
PositionSensor {
193
name "slide_sensor"
194
}
195
]
196
endPoint Solid {
197
translation 0 0.12 3.1092256622917866e-07
198
children [
199
DEF RAILPIECE Shape {
200
appearance PBRAppearance {
201
baseColor 1 0 1
202
roughness 1
203
metalness 0
204
}
205
geometry Box {
206
size 0.3 0.08 0.2
207
}
208
}
209
Connector {
210
translation 0 0.045 0
211
children [
212
DEF Connector Shape {
213
appearance PBRAppearance {
214
roughness 1
215
metalness 0
216
}
217
geometry Cylinder {
218
height 0.01
219
radius 0.05
220
}
221
}
222
]
223
name "SensorConnector"
224
boundingObject USE Connector
225
physics Physics {
226
}
227
isLocked TRUE
228
}
229
]
230
boundingObject USE RAILPIECE
231
physics Physics {
232
}
233
linearVelocity 3.8739378598237215e-09 -1.345914401981051
e-11 -3.580835060918425e-08
==PAGE:98==
90
C Codes
234
angularVelocity
-1.4935859892330732e-09
-6.91992919444063e-07 2.4114273766846055e-10
235
}
236
}
237
]
238
boundingObject USE RAILBASE
239
physics Physics {
240
}
241
linearVelocity 3.969849643831463e-09 -6.726996070142101e-12
-3.656694635770463e-08
242
angularVelocity
-1.5082890452116668e-09 -6.918433137490898e-07
2.522060892422996e-10
243
}
244
}
245
]
246
name "solid(4)"
247
boundingObject USE CYLINDER
248
physics Physics {
249
density 200
250
}
251
}
252
]
253
name "CoCoBot"
254
boundingObject USE BODY
255
physics Physics {
256
density 200
257
}
258
controller "test_controller"
259
linearVelocity 4.163025692797801e-09 -1.0860283624583348e-14
-3.5914222314493306e-08
260
angularVelocity
-1.079330705560422e-14 8.991535142637663e-06
2.5746910956653095e-10
261 }
Listing C.9: Robot for Webots.
C.10
Webots Driver robot Proto
1 #VRML_OBJ R2020a utf8
2 Robot {
3
translation 3.6288799175939967e-06 0.34998711329793003
2.0061253881465575
4
rotation
-0.4515738228392637 0.8549889491197881
-0.2550979800182155
4.449878587446598e-05
5
children [
6
DEF DriverBody Shape {
7
appearance PBRAppearance {
8
baseColor 1 0 0
9
roughness 1
10
metalness 0
==PAGE:99==
C.10 Webots Driver robot Proto
91
11
}
12
geometry Box {
13
size 0.5 0.5 0.5
14
}
15
}
16
HingeJoint {
17
jointParameters HingeJointParameters {
18
position 0.06460675970678208
19
anchor -0.3 -0.15 0
20
}
21
device [
22
RotationalMotor {
23
name "driverRight"
24
maxTorque 20
25
}
26
PositionSensor {
27
name "sensorRight"
28
}
29
]
30
endPoint Solid {
31
translation -0.3 -0.15 0
32
rotation 0.03228082096204905
-0.032280929655135314
0.9989574015835792 1.5718428360087726
33
children [
34
DEF DriverWheel Shape {
35
appearance PBRAppearance {
36
baseColor 0 0 1
37
roughness 1
38
metalness 0
39
}
40
geometry Cylinder {
41
height 0.1
42
radius 0.2
43
}
44
}
45
]
46
name "solid(1)"
47
boundingObject USE DriverWheel
48
physics Physics {
49
}
50
linearVelocity
-1.5051902367776076e-09 1.1082361151385731e-10
2.403909546300173e-07
51
angularVelocity 1.2002734199666192e-06 9.224957828987787e-07
-1.1486082460164953e-09
52
}
53
}
54
HingeJoint {
55
jointParameters HingeJointParameters {
56
position 0.04801872677857682
57
anchor 0.3 -0.15 0
58
}
59
device [
==PAGE:100==
92
C Codes
60
RotationalMotor {
61
name "driverLeft"
62
maxTorque 20
63
}
64
PositionSensor {
65
name "sensorLeft"
66
}
67
]
68
endPoint Solid {
69
translation 0.3 -0.15 0
70
rotation 0.02400006088386719
-0.024000141694720516
0.9994238291516787 1.5713760307656355
71
children [
72
USE DriverWheel
73
]
74
name "solid(2)"
75
boundingObject USE DriverWheel
76
physics Physics {
77
}
78
linearVelocity
-1.5262476763860998e-09 -1.1081861756016355e-10
-3.1311467702263066e-07
79
angularVelocity
-1.5633682009432584e-06 9.225270458903396e-07
-1.043513022875929e-09
80
}
81
}
82
Solid {
83
translation 0 -0.3 -0.2
84
children [
85
DEF DriverCastor Shape {
86
appearance PBRAppearance {
87
baseColor 0 0 1
88
roughness 1
89
metalness 0
90
}
91
geometry Sphere {
92
radius 0.05
93
}
94
}
95
]
96
name "solid(3)"
97
contactMaterial "castor_wheel"
98
boundingObject USE DriverCastor
99
physics Physics {
100
}
101
}
102
Solid {
103
translation 0 -0.3 0.2
104
children [
105
USE DriverCastor
106
]
107
name "solid(4)"
108
contactMaterial "castor_wheel"
==PAGE:101==
C.10 Webots Driver robot Proto
93
109
boundingObject USE DriverCastor
110
physics Physics {
111
}
112
}
113
Solid {
114
translation 0 0.46 0
115
children [
116
DEF DriverNeck Shape {
117
appearance PBRAppearance {
118
baseColor 0 1 0
119
roughness 1
120
metalness 0
121
}
122
geometry Cylinder {
123
height 0.42
124
radius 0.1
125
}
126
}
127
HingeJoint {
128
jointParameters HingeJointParameters {
129
position
-0.00013827295990889222
130
axis 0 1 0
131
anchor 0 0.26 0
132
}
133
endPoint Solid {
134
translation 0.00013827295946827593 0.26 -0.9999999904402941
135
rotation 0 -1 0 0.00013827296134509044
136
children [
137
DEF WoodBeam Shape {
138
appearance PBRAppearance {
139
baseColor 1 0.5 0.1
140
roughness 1
141
metalness 0
142
}
143
geometry Box {
144
size 0.1 0.1 2.5
145
}
146
}
147
Connector {
148
translation 0 -0.055 -1
149
children [
150
Shape {
151
appearance PBRAppearance {
152
roughness 1
153
metalness 0
154
}
155
geometry Cylinder {
156
height 0.01
157
radius 0.05
158
}
159
}
160
]
==PAGE:102==
94
C Codes
161
name "BeamConnect"
162
boundingObject DEF Connector Shape {
163
appearance PBRAppearance {
164
roughness 1
165
metalness 0
166
}
167
geometry Cylinder {
168
height 0.01
169
radius 0.05
170
}
171
}
172
physics Physics {
173
}
174
isLocked TRUE
175
}
176
]
177
boundingObject USE WoodBeam
178
physics Physics {
179
}
180
linearVelocity 8.375077055779825e-09 -2.205072813524375e-12
-3.636943849960107e-08
181
angularVelocity
-4.876427253833866e-12 -8.91166769650377e-09
-1.0800196691374276e-09
182
}
183
}
184
]
185
boundingObject USE DriverNeck
186
physics Physics {
187
}
188
}
189
]
190
name "Driver"
191
boundingObject USE DriverBody
192
physics Physics {
193
}
194
controller "DriverController"
195
linearVelocity
-1.3060393177236348e-09 9.667006032172328e-15
-3.6363722703549435e-08
196
angularVelocity 7.426884026716278e-13 9.225094326875395e-07
-1.1082089544506812e-09
197 }
Listing C.10: Robot for Webots.
C.11
Webots CoCoBot robot Controller
1
2 #include <webots/robot.h>
3 #include <webots/motor.h>
4 #include <webots/position_sensor.h>
==PAGE:103==
C.11 Webots CoCoBot robot Controller
95
5 #include <math.h>
6 #include <stdio.h>
7
8 #define TIME_STEP 10
9
10 double pose[3];
// x, y and rotation of robot
11 double right_wheelspeed , left_wheelspeed;
12 double l_spd, r_spd, v;
13 double t = 0, ts = 0.01;
14
15 // ELECTRIC MOTOR PARAMETERS
16 double R = 0.16, Kt = 0.75, Ke = 0.75, Kv = 0.75;
17
18 void odo_update(double lws, double rws){
19
20
double b = 0.8, r = 0.25; //wheel seperation , wheel radius and sample
time
21
22
pose[0] = pose[0] + 0.5*r*(rws + lws)*cos(pose[2])*ts;
23
pose[1] = pose[1] + 0.5*r*(rws + lws)*sin(pose[2])*ts;
24
pose[2] = pose[2] + (r/b)*(rws-lws)*ts;
25
26 }
27
28 void ref2velocity(double fwd, double angv){
29
30
double b = 0.8, r = 0.25;
31
32
right_wheelspeed = (2*fwd + angv*b)/(2*r);
33
left_wheelspeed = (2*fwd - angv*b)/(2*r);
34
35 }
36
37
38 int main(int argc, char **argv) {
39
40
wb_robot_init();
41
pose[0] = 0, pose[1] = 0, pose[2] = 0;
42
double l_pos, r_pos, l_pos_prev=0, r_pos_prev=0;
43
double rot_val , slide_val;
44
double forward_ref , rotation_ref , l_torque , r_torque;
45
46
WbDeviceTag left_motor = wb_robot_get_device("wheel_left");
47
WbDeviceTag right_motor = wb_robot_get_device("wheel_right");
48
WbDeviceTag left_encoder = wb_robot_get_device("encoder_left");
49
WbDeviceTag right_encoder = wb_robot_get_device("encoder_right");
50
WbDeviceTag rot_sensor = wb_robot_get_device("rot_sensor");
51
WbDeviceTag slide_sensor = wb_robot_get_device("slide_sensor");
52
53
wb_position_sensor_enable(left_encoder , TIME_STEP);
54
wb_position_sensor_enable(right_encoder , TIME_STEP);
55
wb_position_sensor_enable(rot_sensor , TIME_STEP);
==PAGE:104==
96
C Codes
56
wb_position_sensor_enable(slide_sensor , TIME_STEP);
57
58
wb_motor_set_position(left_motor , INFINITY);
59
wb_motor_set_position(right_motor , INFINITY);
60
61
FILE *fp;
62
fp = fopen("data.txt","w");
63
double Ks = 40, Ka = 3;
64
65
66
while (wb_robot_step(TIME_STEP) != -1) {
67
68
l_pos = wb_position_sensor_get_value(left_encoder);
69
r_pos = wb_position_sensor_get_value(right_encoder);
70
rot_val = wb_position_sensor_get_value(rot_sensor);
71
slide_val = wb_position_sensor_get_value(slide_sensor);
72
73
l_spd = (l_pos-l_pos_prev)/ts;
74
r_spd = (r_pos-r_pos_prev)/ts;
75
v = 0.25*(l_spd + r_spd)/2;
76
77
forward_ref = 0 + Ks*slide_val;
78
rotation_ref = 0 + Ka*rot_val;
79
80
if(rotation_ref > M_PI/4){
81
rotation_ref = M_PI/4;
82
}else if(rotation_ref < -M_PI/4){
83
rotation_ref = -M_PI/4;
84
}
85
86
//Unicycle
87
ref2velocity(forward_ref ,rotation_ref);
88
89
// Actuating the motors:
90
l_torque = (Kt/R)*(Kv*left_wheelspeed - Ke*l_spd);
91
r_torque = (Kt/R)*(Kv*right_wheelspeed - Ke*r_spd);
92
wb_motor_set_torque(left_motor , l_torque);
93
wb_motor_set_torque(right_motor , r_torque);
94
95
fprintf(fp, "%f %f %f %f %f %f %f %f\n", l_spd, r_spd, l_torque ,
r_torque , v, slide_val , rot_val , t);
96
97
l_pos_prev = l_pos;
98
r_pos_prev = r_pos;
99
t += ts;
100
101
};
102
103
wb_robot_cleanup();
104
105
return 0;
106 }
==PAGE:105==
C.12 Webots Driver robot Controller
97
Listing C.11: C for Webots.
C.12
Webots Driver robot Controller
1
2 #include <webots/robot.h>
3 #include <webots/motor.h>
4 #include <webots/keyboard.h>
5 #include <webots/position_sensor.h>
6 #include <stdio.h>
7
8 #define TIME_STEP 10
9
10 double right_angVel
= 0.0, left_angVel = 0.0;
11 double t = 0, ts = 0.01;
12 double l_pos, r_pos, l_pos_prev=0, r_pos_prev=0;
13 double l_spd, r_spd, v;
14 double l_torque , r_torque;
15 double R = 0.16, Kt = 0.75, Ke = 0.75, Kv = 0.75;
16
17 void ref2velocity(double fwd, double angv){
18
19
double b = 0.8, r = 0.2;
20
21
right_angVel = (2*fwd + angv*b)/(2*r);
22
left_angVel = (2*fwd - angv*b)/(2*r);
23
24 }
25
26 int main(int argc, char **argv) {
27
28
wb_robot_init();
29
30
wb_keyboard_enable(TIME_STEP);
31
32
WbDeviceTag left_motor = wb_robot_get_device("driverLeft");
33
WbDeviceTag right_motor = wb_robot_get_device("driverRight");
34
WbDeviceTag left_encoder = wb_robot_get_device("sensorLeft");
35
WbDeviceTag right_encoder = wb_robot_get_device("sensorRight");
36
37
wb_position_sensor_enable(left_encoder , TIME_STEP);
38
wb_position_sensor_enable(right_encoder , TIME_STEP);
39
40
wb_motor_set_position(left_motor , INFINITY);
41
wb_motor_set_position(right_motor , INFINITY);
42
43
int key = 0;
44
double fwd, rot;
45
==PAGE:106==
98
C Codes
46
FILE *fp;
47
fp = fopen("data2.txt","w");
48
49
while (wb_robot_step(TIME_STEP) != -1) {
50
51
l_pos = wb_position_sensor_get_value(left_encoder);
52
r_pos = wb_position_sensor_get_value(right_encoder);
53
54
l_spd = (l_pos-l_pos_prev)/ts;
55
r_spd = (r_pos-r_pos_prev)/ts;
56
v = 0.2*(l_spd + r_spd)/2;
57
58
key = wb_keyboard_get_key();
59
60
if( key == WB_KEYBOARD_UP ){
61
62
fwd = 1.0;
63
rot = 0;
64
65
}else if( key == WB_KEYBOARD_LEFT ){
66
67
fwd = 0.55;
68
rot = 2.0;
69
70
}else if ( key == WB_KEYBOARD_RIGHT ){
71
72
fwd = 0.55;
73
rot = -2.0;
74
75
}else if( key == WB_KEYBOARD_DOWN ){
76
77
fwd = -1.0;
78
rot = 0;
79
80
}else{
81
82
fwd = 0;
83
rot = 0;
84
}
85
86
ref2velocity(fwd,rot);
87
88
l_torque = (Kt/R)*(Kv*left_angVel - Ke*l_spd);
89
r_torque = (Kt/R)*(Kv*right_angVel - Ke*r_spd);
90
wb_motor_set_torque(left_motor , l_torque);
91
wb_motor_set_torque(right_motor , r_torque);
92
93
fprintf(fp, "%f %f %f %f\n", l_spd, r_spd, v, t);
94
95
l_pos_prev = l_pos;
96
r_pos_prev = r_pos;
97
t += ts;
==PAGE:107==
C.12 Webots Driver robot Controller
99
98
};
99
100
wb_robot_cleanup();
101
102
103
104
return 0;
105 }
Listing C.12: C for Webots.
==PAGE:108==
100
==PAGE:109==
Bibliography
[1]
Tsampikos Kounalakis and Lazaros Nalpantidis. CoCoBot: Collaborative Construc-
tion site roBot for assistive logistic tasks. 2020. url: https://robocluster.dk/
projects/cocobot/.
[2]
Mathieu Bélanger-Barrette. What Does Collaborative Robot Mean ? August 2019.
url: https://blog.robotiq.com/what-does-collaborative-robot-mean.
[3]
International Organization for Standardization. Collaborative Robots and Human
Saftey, A Reference Guide. 2017. url: https://cobotsguide.com/safety/.
[4]
Smita Deshmukh. Robotic rehabilitation and assistive technologies to revolutionize
physiotherapy. October 2019. url: https://www.therobotreport.com/robotic-
rehabilitation-assistive-tech-revolutionize-physiotherapy/.
[5]
Boston Dynamics. BigDog - The Most Advanced Rough-Terrain Robot on Earth.
2016. url: https://web.archive.org/web/20170518204101/http://www.
bostondynamics.com/robot_bigdog.html.
[6]
Emma Klinker Stephensen and Thomas Stærmose Hansen. Danmark lukker ned:
Her er regeringens nye tiltag. March 2020. url: https://nyheder.tv2.dk/
samfund / 2020 - 03 - 11 - danmark - lukker - ned - her - er - regeringens - nye -
tiltag.
[7]
TerrainHopper. TerrainHopper, created for adventure. 2018. url: https://www.
terrainhopper.com/.
[8]
Anne Kirsten Frederiksen. DTU Robot took on the world’s elite universities. March
2017. url: https://www.dtu.dk/english/News/Nyhed?id=e6456ffd-b7a9-
4f90-961c-26d76be6736c.
[9]
RSE. TerrainHopper. 2019. url: http://rsewiki.elektro.dtu.dk/index.php/
TerrainHopper.
[10]
Jens Christian Andersen. Terrain hopper steering. 2019. url: http://rsewiki.
elektro.dtu.dk/index.php/Terrain_hopper_steering.
[11]
Logitech. F710 Wireless Gamepad. 2020. url: https://www.logitechg.com/en-
us/products/gamepads/f710-wireless-gamepad.940-000117.html.
[12]
Anders B. Beck et al. “MobotWare – A Plug-in Based Framework for Mobile
Robots”. In: IFAC Procceedings Volumes 43.16 (2010), pages 127–132. doi: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1474667016350443.
==PAGE:110==
102
Bibliography
[13]
RSE. Robot Hardware Daemon (RHD). 2018. url: http://rsewiki.elektro.
dtu.dk/index.php/RHD.
[14]
Linear Motion Potentiometers. PR/PR2S. Elap.
[15]
14-bit On-Axis Magnetic Rotary Position Sensor with 12-Bit Decimal
Binary
Incremental Pulse Count for 28krpm high speed capability. AS5047P. Rev. 1.00.
ams. October 2014.
[16]
Digikey Electronics. AS5047 Magnetic Position Sensor. June 2015. url: https:
/ / www . digikey . dk / da / product - highlight / a / ams / as5047p - magnetic -
position-sensor.
[17]
AS5047P Adapter Board. AS5047P-TSEKAB. Rev. 1-0. ams. January 2015.
[18]
Digikey Electronics. AS5047P-TSEKAB. url: https://www.digikey.dk/product-
detail/da/ams/AS5047P-TS_EK_AB/AS5047P-TS_EK_AB-ND/5452344.
[19]
MIKEGRUSIN. Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI). url: https://learn.sparkfun.
com/tutorials/serial-peripheral-interface-spi/all.
[20]
PJRC. Teensy 3.6 USB Development Board. url: https://www.pjrc.com/store/
teensy36.html.
[21]
K66 Sub-Family Reference Manual. MK66FX1M0. Rev. 2. freescale. May 2015.
[22]
Sparkfun. Teensy 3.6. url: https://www.sparkfun.com/products/14057.
[23]
RS Components. Steel Compression Spring. url: https://docs.rs-online.com/
d364/0900766b8136ec22.pdf.
[24]
Webots. http://www.cyberbotics.com. Edited by Cyberbotics Ltd. Commercial Mo-
bile Robot Simulation Software. url: http://www.cyberbotics.com.
[25]
Webots. Webots User Guide, Tutorial 2: Modification of the Environment. Edited
by Cyberbotics Ltd. url: https://cyberbotics.com/doc/guide/tutorial-2-
modification-of-the-environment.
[26]
Tim Bower. 12.1.3. The Unicycle Model. url: http : / / faculty . salina . k -
state.edu/tim/robotics_sg/Control/kinematics/unicycle.html.
[27]
ROS. About ROS. url: https://www.ros.org/about-ros/.
[28]
ROS. ROS / Introduction. August 2018. url: http: // wiki. ros. org /ROS /
Introduction.
[29]
Steven M. LaValle. Planning Algorithms, 13.1.2.1 A simple car. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, April 2012. url: http://planning.cs.uiuc.edu/node658.html.
[30]
RSE. ASTA. July 2020. url: http://rsewiki.elektro.dtu.dk/index.php/
ASTA.
==PAGE:111==
Bibliography
103
==PAGE:112==
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 348
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: (+45) 45 25 38 00
www.elektro.dtu.dk
