==PAGE:1==
Master’s Thesis
Master of science in Photonics Engineering
High harmonic generation from
the narrow-gap semiconductor
indium arsenide
Author: Henrik Bødker Lassen (s144661)
==PAGE:2==
Supervisors:
Dr. Kento Uchida, Department of Physics, Kyoto University
Prof. Koichiro Tanaka, Department of Physics, Kyoto University
Prof. Peter Uhd Jepsen, Technical University of Denmark
DTU Fotonik
Department of Photonics Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 340
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
i
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
In this report we successfully measure the generation of high harmonics in the narrow-gap
semiconductor indium arsenide. The experiments take basis in two samples of InAs, one with a
(100) surface cut, and the other with a (111) surface cut. Harmonics up to the 11th order are
resolved, with both odd and even harmonics from the (111) surface cut sample.
Crystal orientation dependence measurements reveal the expected four-fold symmetry for the
(100) sample, and six-fold symmetry for the (111), with the 9th harmonic in the (111) showing
indications of 12-fold symmetry. A 30◦shift between the maxima and minima intensities of the
5th and 7th harmonic in the (111) sample is observed.
Intensity measurements of the generated harmonics dependence on the excitation laser power,
show clear indications of the process being nonperturbative. Signs of increasing intensity towards
higher laser powers are observed in the 5th harmonic for both samples, suggesting oscillating
behaviour also observed in GaAs [31].
The polarisation resolved experiments of the harmonics show the even harmonics of the (111)
sample to be perpendicularly polarised to the excitation laser polarisation. The odd harmonics
are polarised parallel to the excitation laser, with some orders showing a slight tilt likely due to
the ITO plate used in the setup.
Repeating the crystal orientation dependence measurements for the parallel and perpendicular
components of the harmonics show a similar 30◦shift in maxima and minima intensity for the
even orders but between the parallel and perpendicular component. The 12-fold symmetry of the
(111) sample is observed in the perpendicular components of the harmonics, suggesting the cause
may be related to the intensity of the excitation laser, since the perpendicular component of the
odd harmonics are related to the laser intensity [42].
ii
==PAGE:4==
Resumé
I denne rapport undersøger vi med succes genereringen af høje overtoner i det smalle båndgap
halvleder materiale indium arsenid. Eksperimenterne bygger på to prøver af indium arsenid, den
ene med en (100) overﬂadeskæring og den anden med en (111) overﬂadeskæring. Overtoner op til
11. orden observeres, med både ulige og lige overtoner fra den (111) overﬂadeskåret prøve.
Krystalorienteringsafhængighedsmålinger bekræfter den forventede ﬁre foldige symmetri for (100)
prøven og seks foldige symmetri for (111), og for den 9. overtone i (111), vises der indikationer
på 12 foldig symmetri. Der observeres et 30◦skift mellem maksima- og minimaintensiteterne for
den 5. og 7. overtone i (111) prøven.
Intensitetsmålinger af de genererede overtoners afhængighed af excitations laserens intensitet
viser klare indikationer af, at processen er ikke-perturbationbar. Stigende intensitet henover
højere laser intensiteter observeres i 5. overtone for begge prøver, hvilket antyder svingende
opførsel også observeret i GaAs [31].
De polariseringsopløste eksperimenter af overtonerne viser, at de lige overtoner af (111) prøven er
vinkelret polariseret i forhold til exciteringslaserpolarisationen. De ulige overtoner er polariserede
parallelt med exciteringslaser, og med nogle ordener, ses en svag hældning sandsynligvis på grund
af ITO-pladen, som bruges i den eksperimentelle opstilling.
Gentagelse af krystalorienteringsafhængighedsmålingerne for de parallelle og vinkelrette kom-
ponenter i overtonerne viser et tilsvarende 30◦skift i maksima og minima intensiterne for de
ulige ordener, men mellem den parallelle og vinkelrette komponent. Den 12 foldige symmetri af
(111) prøven observeres i de vinkelrette komponenter af overtonerne, hvilket antyder, at årsagen
kan være relateret til intensiteten af exciteringslaser, da den vinkelrette komponent i de ulige
overtoner er relateret til laserintensiteten [42].
iii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This project is a collaboration between the Technical University of Denmark and Kyoto Univeristy
under the supervision of Professor Peter Uhd Jepsen and Professor Koichiro Tanaka. All experiments
presented in this thesis have been perfomed at the Department of Physics at Kyoto University under
the supervision of Professor Koichiro Tanaka and co-supervision of Dr. Kento Uchida.
This thesis is the culmination of this project spanning from March 2020 to August 2020 corre-
sponding to 35 ECTS-points. Of this period, I have spend 3 months at the Department of Physics at
Kyoto Unirversity, Kyoto, Japan, performing the experiments.
Kgs. Lyngby, August 10th 2020
Henrik Bødker Lassen
iv
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Throughout the course of this project, many diﬃculties has been faced. The primary diﬃculty
being the world situation due to the COVID-19 virus. I arrived in Japan just before every airline
company stopped ﬂying all together. While I was in Japan, Kyoto University placed restrictions,
which meant we could not perform any experiments for nearly one month. But thanks to the all
the work done by Dr. Kento Uchida and Professor Koichiro Tanaka, we managed to perform all
of our original experiments.
Travelling to Kyoto, Japan, and working with the solid state spectroscopy group led by Professor
Koichiro Tanaka, has been an amazing experience. I would like to thank everyone in the group
for welcoming me wholeheartedly and for taking care of me. It was my utmost pleasure to join
and work with such a great group.
I would like to thank Professor Koichiro Tanaka for letting me join your group for 3 months.
Thank you for all the assistance you have provided in order for me to have a pleasant stay. I
would also like to thank Dr. Kento Uchida not only for all the hard work and hours spent in the
laboratory aiding me in the experiments, but also for all the assistance outside of work. It has
been an honour to learn from both of you. Additionally, I would like to thank Ms. Nakamura for
all the administrative work done in order for me to join the group.
I am thankful to William Demant Fonden for their ﬁnancial support in making the stay in
Kyoto a reality.
A special thank you to Professor Peter Uhd Jepsen for supervising the whole project and
making it a reality, when I came to you with the idea of an international collaboration on the
Master’s thesis. Without your open mind, enthusiasm, and passion for science, this would never
even have been a possibility.
Finally, thank you to my family and friends for all their love and support.
v
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
ii
Resumé
iii
Preface
iv
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
High harmonic generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
High harmonic generation in solids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Motivation behind this project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory of high harmonic generation
4
2.1
Nonlinear optics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.1
Induced polarisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.1.1
Perturbative and nonperturbative regime . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Length and velocity gauge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.1
Velocity gauge
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.2
Length gauge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Reﬂection and transmission geometry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Theoretical description of HHG in solids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4.1
Density matrix equations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4.2
Interband and intraband currents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Experimental setup
15
3.1
Optical equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.1
Solstice Ace and TOPAS Twins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.2
Variable polarisers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.3
ITO plate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
vi
==PAGE:8==
3.1.4
Cassegrain reﬂector
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.5
Dispersion compensation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Narrow-gap semiconductor - InAs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.1
Crystal structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.2
Band structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2.3
Basic properties of InAs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.4
Our samples
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3
Experimental setups and methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3.1
Background signal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3.2
Crystal orientation dependence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3.3
Polarisation dependence of the HHG light . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3.4
HHG intensity dependence on laser power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.4
Setup improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.4.1
Rotation of sample . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4
Results
36
4.1
Crystal orientation dependence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.2
HHG intensity dependence on laser power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.2.1
Location of harmonic peaks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.3
HHG polarisation dependence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.3.1
Parallel and Perpendicular components
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5
Conclusion and outlook
65
References
67
A MATLAB code
71
A.1 Intensity dependence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
A.2 Crystal orientation dependence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
A.3 HHG polarisation dependence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
vii
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
It is a well known fact that materials consists of electronic bands for which electron and holes
move within. Excitation of the electrons between the bands can occur when exposed to an
external electric ﬁeld, with suﬃcient energy to overcome the energy gap between the bands. The
excitation of electrons can lead to the generation of photons, which are harmonics of the original
excitation photon. Harmonics of laser light was ﬁrst discovered by Peter Franken, A. E. Hill,
C. W. Peters, and G. Weinreich in 1961, where they used a quartz sample and a 694 nm ruby
laser and observed 347 nm light when examining the output of the spectrometer [3]. This is a
well known nonlinear eﬀect called second harmonic generation, which has seen many application
in many diﬀerent ﬁelds of science. Six years later, New and Ward observed third harmonics in
various gasses by using a Q-switched ruby laser [4].
1.1
High harmonic generation
In 1987, Ferray et al. successfully observed harmonics up to 21st order from a Xe gas jet
illuminated by intense laser light from the Nd:YAG 1064 nm laser [5]. The intense laser and
the nonlinear interaction with the atomic medium, in this case a gas jet, lead to multiphoton
ionisation of the gas atoms leading to high harmonics emitted in the forward direction [23]. The
intensity of the harmonics decrease as we increase in harmoniuc order for low orders but reaches
a plateau where the intensity is constant over many orders, before a sharp cutoﬀis experienced.
In 1993, P. B. Corkum presented a model for understanding the process of high harmonic
generation in gasses [1]. This model is well established and widely recognised as the fundamentals
for understanding high harmonic generation. Investigations of high harmonic generation have
later expanded to solid materials where new discoveries of the mechanisms behind high harmonic
generation have been found, but the process is understood in terms of the three step model
explained by Corkum.
1
==PAGE:10==
)
Figure 1.1: Schematic representation of the three step model for an atomic medium in (a)
real space and (b) k-space, showing excitation through tunneling, acceleration of
electron, and recombination leading to emission of high harmonics. Reproduced
from [15].
The three step model is illustrated in Figure 1.1, where the excitation occurs through a tunneling
process. The electron is then accelerated by the intense laser ﬁeld, after which recombination
with the parent ion results in the emission of high harmonics.
High harmonic generation in the gas phase has led to the development of attosecond science,
including generation of attosecond pulses, and attosecond experiments in the gas phase and solid
state [15].
1.1.1
High harmonic generation in solids
In the past decade, high harmonic generation from solid state materials has been studied
[11,12,18,22]. High harmonic generation varies from the high harmonic generation in gaseous
media, since the cause of the high harmonic generation in solids can be attributed to the intraband
current and interband polarisation [11]. Crystal orientation is also another factor which is not
present for gaseous media, which for solid materials can eﬀect the eﬃciency in generating higher
harmonics [42].
High harmonic generation in solids is still a new technology, but with many interesting applications
such as electron-hole recollisions in real time [33], all-optical band structure reconstruction [21],
and creation of extreme-ultraviolet (XUV) light sources.
1.2
Motivation behind this project
This project focuses on the harmonic generation of the narrow-gap semiconductor indium arsenide
(InAs). Studies on high harmonic generation in gallium arsenide (GaAs) has been conducted [6,31],
which is a material quite similar to InAs, but with a signiﬁcantly larger bandgap. Materials
2
==PAGE:11==
such as graphene has also been studied [14], but a narrow-gap material has yet to be examined.
Thus, this project will give us a ﬁrst look at how such a material behaves, while we can compare
it to the similar material GaAs. Our goal is to generate high harmonics and examine the
crystal orientation dependence of the material and do polarisation resolved measurements of
the generated harmonics. We will also look at the intensity of the harmonics and compare it to
perturbation theory.
Because of the narrow bandgap of InAs, the excitation laser may cause direct excitation rather
than excitation through tunneling, which could alter some of the high harmonic features we see
in other semiconductor materials, and therefore may behave more like a semi-metal.
3
==PAGE:12==
2
Theory of high harmonic generation
2.1
Nonlinear optics
The phenomena of harmonic generation can be described through the induced polarisation. The
induced polarisation is one of the most important parts within nonlinear optics on which there
has been written many books [23–26].
2.1.1
Induced polarisation
In nonlinear optics we are interested in how a material interacts in the presence of an applied
electric ﬁeld. The electric ﬁeld of laser light has a suﬃciently strong intensity so that it can
modify the optical properties of a material [23]. The interaction between the applied electric
ﬁeld and the material can be described through the induced polarisation.
In a material the electron cloud of the individual atoms may be displaced due to the ap-
plied electric ﬁeld, resulting in a microscopic dipole moment with a linear proportionality to
the applied ﬁeld for weak ﬁeld intensities, described as p = αE [24]. Extending this to the
macroscopic picture, the material is made up of N dipoles per unit volume, resulting in a
macroscopic polarisation vector P = Np. In the case of linear optics, the macroscopic induced
polarisation can be described as,
P(t) = ϵ0χ(1) ˜E(t),
(1)
where χ(1) is known as the linear or ﬁrst order susceptibility and ϵ0 is the free space permittivity.
Vector notation is omitted for simplicity. In the linear regime, the displacement of the electron
cloud, is assumed to follow a harmonic atomic potential. Thus, a sinusoidal input is also a
sinusoidal output as seen in Figure 2.1(a). But, if the applied electric ﬁeld is suﬃciently strong
the potential becomes an-harmonic and the induced polarisation becomes nonlinear in the electric
ﬁeld. This nonlinear behaviour can be expressed by expanding eq. (1) in a power series in the
electric ﬁeld [23],
P(t) = ϵ0χ(1) ˜E(t) + ϵ0χ(2) ˜E2(t) + ϵ0χ(3) ˜E3(t) + ... ,
(2)
where χ(2) is known as the second-order nonlinear susceptibility and χ(3) is the third-order
nonlinear susceptibility. The response of the system has therefore become nonlinear, where the
output is modiﬁed from the input, as shown in Figure 2.1(b). Nonlinear eﬀects connected to
χ(2) are e.g. second-harmonic generation, sum- and diﬀerence frequency generation, and optical
rectiﬁcation, where eﬀects such as the optical Kerr eﬀect, four-wave mixing, and third-harmonic
4
==PAGE:13==
generation is connected to χ(3).
Figure 2.1: The induced polarisation response of a system when applied to a (a) weak
electric ﬁeld and (b) a strong electric ﬁeld. Reproduced from [26].
If we assume that the applied electric ﬁeld is given as,
˜E(t) = Ee−iωt + c.c.,
(3)
then the induced polarisation eq. (2) becomes,
P(t) = ϵ0

χ(1)Ee−iωt + 2χ(2)E2 + χ(2)E2e−i2ωt + 3χ(3)E3eiωt + χ(3)E3e−i3ωt + ... + c.c.

.
(4)
From this, it is the oscillating terms with an integer multiple of the frequency, nω which generates
the high harmonics. This integer multiple relation can be expressed as [40],
P(nω) = χ(n)En + χ(n+2)En+2 + χ(n+4)En+4 + ... .
(5)
2.1.1.1
Perturbative and nonperturbative regime
When discussing a process it is often discussed whether the process is perturbative or nonper-
turbative. This is similar to the discussing previously about linear and nonlinear optics. For
suﬃciently weak applied electric ﬁeld, i.e. E ≪1, we have,
χ(1)E ≫χ(2)E2 ≫χ(3)E3 ≫... .
(6)
This is known as the perturbative regime. In the perturbative regime, we can estimate the
induced polarisation which generates high harmonics eq. (5) as,
5
==PAGE:14==
P(nω) ≈χ(n)En.
(7)
Thus, in the perturbative regime we expect the harmonic generated ﬁeld to evolve with the
applied electric ﬁeld to the power of the harmonic. Since it is intensity we measure in the
laboratory, the intensity of e.g. the 5th harmonic should have the proportionality I5th ∝I5 in
the perturbative regime. If the ﬁeld is suﬃciently strong, then the approximation eq. (6) does
not hold any more, and another behaviour will be observed. This is denoted the nonperturbative
regime.
2.2
Length and velocity gauge
Depending on the gauge which one uses to describe the HHG phenomena, the interpretation
of the process changes. Of course, if one uses the full expressions without any approximations,
there should be gauge invariance, but previously this has been a problem and one had to be
careful in selecting the gauge [7]. The HHG process is mainly described by inter- and intraband
currents, and it was the relation between these that caused problems, but Ernotte, Hammond,
and Taucer proposed the idea of instantaneous band populations to describe the phenomena with
gauge invariance [8]. Though a proposition for gauge invariance has been proposed, one still has
to be careful with the gauges. The two main gauges used to describe the HHG is velocity gauge,
where the scalar potential Φ and the vector potential A is given as [8],
Φ(v)(x, t) = 0,
(8)
A(v)(t) = −
Z t
−∞
F(t′)dt′,
(9)
and the length gauge, where
Φ(l)(x, t) = −F(t)x,
(10)
A(l)(t) = 0.
(11)
Thus, depending on the gauge, the Hamiltonian changes, since the Hamiltonian can be written
as,
H = 1
2 [ˆp + A(t)]2 + V0(ˆx) −Φ(ˆx, t),
(12)
regardless of the chosen gauge. As a result of this is, the velocity gauge, has no movement
in k-space, i.e.
˙k = 0, but in length gauge there is movement in k-space, explained by the
acceleration, from which the relation, ¯h˙k = e0F(t) arises [7, 8]. A physical description of the
process of high harmonic generation in the two gauges will now be presented.
6
==PAGE:15==
2.2.1
Velocity gauge
In the velocity gauge the important notion is that the created electron-hole pair does not move
in k-space, but rather the bands themselves are moving.
Drawing a parallel to the three step model, the ﬁrst step is the generation of an electron-hole pair.
The generation method depends on the intensity of the electric ﬁeld applied to the material i.e.
the mid-IR light in our case. Figure 2.2 shows these diﬀerent regimes in which an electron-hole
pair is generated.
k
k
k
E
E
E
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.2: Illustration of diﬀerent excitation regimes, which depends on the intensity of
the applied electric ﬁeld, where (a) is known as the multi-photon regime, (b)
is the Zener tunneling regime, and (c) is the semi-metal regime. Adapted
from [29]
The main cause for our generation of electron-hole pairs is Zener tunneling, which is represented
in Figure 2.2(b). The electric ﬁeld from the mid-IR light causes the bands to come closer and
tunneling is possible for the electrons, resulting in an electron-hole pair.
The next step is the acceleration of the electron and hole in the three step process, but in
the velocity we have no movement in k-space, ˙k = 0, thus it is the continued movement of the
bands due to the external electric ﬁeld that causes the acceleration of the electrons and holes, as
illustrated in Figure 2.3.
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.3: Illustration of the electronic bands moving after excitation due to the applied
electric ﬁeld, thus acceleration the electron-hole pair.
The last step is the recombination. With the bands moving due to the external electric ﬁeld, at
some time recombination can occur, resulting in light generated as a harmonic of the mid-IR
light. This process is illustrated in Figure 2.4.
k
E
HHG
Figure 2.4: Illustration of high harmonics generated through interband transition in the
velocity gauge.
The emitted high harmonic generated light shown in Figure 2.4 is generated from the interband
recombination. High harmonic light can also be generated through the acceleration of the
electron-hole pair, known as intraband current. The diﬀerence between the two processes will be
elaborated upon in section 2.4.2.
8
==PAGE:17==
The explanation as to why we have constant momentum during the whole process, is because the
momentum operator only couples the states with the same momentum [8].
2.2.2
Length gauge
In the length gauge there is motion in the electrons momentum, i.e. movement in k-space. This
is one of the main diﬀerences between the velocity gauge and the length gauge. To make it
analogous to the three step model, as we did for the velocity gauge, the ﬁrst step is generation of
an electron-hole pair. When exposed to an external electric ﬁeld induced by the mid-IR laser
light, tunneling occurs because the bands themselves are tilting in real space.
r
E
r
E
(a)
(b)
E
k
Eg
Eg
Eg
(c)
Figure 2.5: Illustration of the tunneling process in the length gauge. (a) Representation of
the band structure in real space without an external electric ﬁeld and (b) with
an external electric ﬁeld. (c) Corresponding optical transition in k-space.
Figure 2.5 illustrates how the bands in real space are tilting, but when depicted in real space
we do not know the structure of the conduction and valence band. The only thing we know are
the band edges, which corresponds to the bandgap energy in k-space. Therefore, the distance
between the conduction- and valence band is the bandgap energy.
In regular optical transitions, depending on the energy of the absorbed photon, the transition
can happen at diﬀerent k-values. The same principle is applicable in this picture. In this picture,
an electron deeper inside the valence band can transition deep into the conduction and indicated
by the blue transition in Figure 2.6. The corresponding transition in k-space is illustrated in
Figure 2.6(b).
9
==PAGE:18==
Eg
Eg
(a)
(b)
r
k
E
E
Figure 2.6: (a) Visual of diﬀerent optical transitions thorugh tunneling in real space and
(b) the corresponding transition in k-space.
The tunneling in real space happens along the horizontal axis, meaning that there is no change in
energy when the transition occurs. To make a transition along the vertical axis, one would need
additional energy, and we have already accounted for the energy from the external mid-IR ﬁeld
by tilting the bands in the real space. The degree of tilting of the bands in real space depends on
the strength of the external ﬁeld.
The last step is the recombination which results in the harmonic light generated through
the interband polarisation. As previously stated, high harmonic generation can also occur from
the current caused by the acceleration of the electron-hole.
c
v
E
k
HHG
Figure 2.7: Visualisation the three-step model, with excitation, acceleration, and recombi-
nation of an electron-hole pair in the length gauge.
Thus, in k-space, the electron-hole pair generated by tunneling is accelerated due to the presence
of the external ﬁeld and later recombines emitting harmonic light in the process. A sketch of this
is shown in Figure 2.7.
10
==PAGE:19==
2.3
Reﬂection and transmission geometry
When performing experiments with high harmonic generation from solids, there are two diﬀer-
ent types of setup constructions ones works in. One is transmission geometry and the other
is reﬂection geometry. For high harmonic generation in gasses transmission geometry is the
preferred choice [5, 38, 39]. This is due to the fact that backward emission generally is much
weaker than forward emission [10]. But when transitioning from gasses to solids, forward emission
not only experiences strong absorption by the solid itself [22], but also propagation eﬀects when
propagating through the bulk of the material. To avoid these linear and nonlinear eﬀects induced
by the propagation through the material, one can use the backward emitted light, since this does
not experience any material propagation eﬀects nor absorption.
A theoretical model regarding photoemission from solid surfaces under intense laser ﬁelds was
proposed in 2005 [9], and experimental data for high harmonic generation from MgO and Si
crystal were obtained through specular reﬂection in 2018 [10]. The results showed that the
forward emission was both spectrally and spatially broader than backward emission. Thus,
using reﬂection geometry will allow for the investigation of electron dynamics not possible in
transmission geometry [6,10].
Later in 2018, a study was done on GaAs, which is similar to InAs, investigating and com-
paring the eﬀects of reﬂection geometry and transmission geometry [6]. A brief review of some of
the results will be giving to highlight the diﬀerences between the two measuring techniques.
Figure 2.8: Reﬂection and transmission setup used to measure the high harmonic signal
from GaAs. Reproduced from [6].
Figure 2.8 shows the setup used to measure both the forward emission and backward emission
of their GaAs sample. In the study, they measure the harmonic spectrum of the GaAs sample
for diﬀerent thicknesses of the sample in transmission geometry and one in reﬂection geometry
setting. The harmonic spectra for the diﬀerent measurements are shown in Figure 2.9.
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.9: High harmonic spectra obtained from backward emitted light labelled RHHG
and from forward emitted light labelled THHG from three diﬀerent thicknesses
of the sample. Reproduced from [6].
Though the intensity for the 5th harmonic in reﬂection geometry is more than one magnitude lower,
it is clearly seen that for the harmonics 7th and above the intensity is signiﬁcantly higher than for
the thicker samples in transmission geometry. In reﬂection geometry it is possible to resolve up
to the 15th order, whereas for the 650 µm thick sample, only the 5th and 7th order can be resolved.
Strong saturation eﬀects are also present when performing measurements in transmission ge-
ometry, whereas in reﬂection geometry saturation is not present, further favoring the reﬂection
based setup. The absorption of the mid-IR pulses in the material is one of the causes of the high
saturation. Therefore, to study the electron dynamics of the bulk, reﬂection geometry proves to
be superior.
2.4
Theoretical description of HHG in solids
In 2014, Vampa et al. published a theroretical analysis of high harmonic generation in solids [11],
and is regarded by many as the standard within the ﬁeld. A theoretical analysis based on
solving the three-dimensional density matrix equations for a two-band single active electron
model is presented in their paper. Similar theoretical approaches to describe high harmonic
generation has been done using both the time-dependent Schrödinger equation (TDSE) and
two-band semiconductor Bloch equations (SBE) [32]. A review of the theoretical ﬁndings done
by Vampa et al. [11] will be given.
12
==PAGE:21==
2.4.1
Density matrix equations
The model for establishing the two-band density matrix equations (DME) is based on the
two-band, three-dimensional solid coupled to a standard Gaussian laser pulse given as,
F(t) = ˆxF0f(t),
(13)
where f(t) is the ﬁeld amplitude with a temproal Gaussian envelope which has a multicycle full
width half maximum (FWHM), center frequency ω0, and peak ﬁeld F0. This is the basic laser
ﬁeld which they use to perform their simulations.
It is important to note that the pulse is multicycle, since the multicycle pulse causes interference
which in the spectrum gives rise to the harmonic peaks. If the pulse was single cycle, we would
observe a broad spectrum with no peaks.
Following the steps of the paper, the derivation takes a starting point in the Schrödinger
equation and is then expanded to the two-band density matrix equations. It is all done in the
dipole approximation. As previously discussed, the derivation can be done in either the length
gauge or the velocity gauge. Depending on which gauge is used, the Hamiltonian is changed. For
the derivation of the equations presented by Vampa et al., the length gauge has been used.
The two-level density matrix equations are then found to be,
˙π (K, t) = −π (K, t)
T2
−iΩ(K, t) w (K, t) e−iS(K,t),
(14)
˙nm (K, t) = ismΩ∗(K, t) π (K, t) eiS(K,t) + c.c.,
(15)
where the ﬁrst equation, ˙π (K, t), is related to the polarisation through,
p (K, t) = d[K + A(t)]π (K, t) eiS(K,t) + c.c..
(16)
The second equation, ˙nm (K, t), describes the population of the valance band (m = v) and the
conduction band (m = c). The population diﬀerence is given as the parameter w = nv −nc, and
the parameter sm is related to the initial conditions of the band populations being either 1 or -1.
A transformation into a moving frame for the k-vector with respects to the vector potential has
been done, i.e. K = k −A(t). S (K, t) is the classical action, Ω(K, t) is the Rabi frequency, and
d(k) is the transition dipole moment.
These are the equations describing the populations of the bands in the two-band approxi-
mation, and the transition or polarisation between the bands. By solving these equations, the
total current, which is related to the high harmonic spectrum through |F{jt}|2, can be found.
13
==PAGE:22==
2.4.2
Interband and intraband currents
As stated previously, the current is what generates the high harmonics. The total current can
be divided into two parts: the interband polarisation and the intraband current. The interband
polarisation is the recombination of an electron-hole pair, and the intraband cuurent is the
nonlinear current generated by the external electric ﬁeld accelerating the electron and hole
through the band structure.
The intraband current is found to be,
jra(t) =
X
m=c,v
Z
BZ
vm[K + A(t)]nm (K, t) d3K,
(17)
where the band velocity vm is deﬁnes as the gradient of the band structure i.e. vm(k) = ∇kEm(k).
The intraband current arises due to the anharmonic part of the band structure which generates
Bloch oscillations. This anharmonic band structure gives rise to a nonlinear band velocity, and
therefore a nonlinear current because of eq. (17).
The interband polarisation is written as,
jer(t) = d
dt
Z
BZ
p (K, t) d3K.
(18)
Thus, the interband polarisation is the time derivative of the polarisation. For the interband
polarisation, high harmonic generation only occurs when an electron-hole pair re-encounter each
other. The electron and the hole are being accelerated due to the external ﬁeld, and are therefore
being separated as shown in Figure 2.7. When they re-encounter, recombination happens and a
high harmonic signal is generated.
14
==PAGE:23==
3
Experimental setup
This section includes a schematic overview of the experimental setup, its components, and the
samples themselves. We will also see how the setup has changed during the experiments due to
the results obtained.
Figure 3.1: General sketch of setup used to perform the experiments (M = mirror, FM =
ﬂip mirror, LPF = lowpass ﬁlter, PS = periscope assembly, WGP = wire-grid
polariser, L = lens, RO = Reﬂective objective). The arrow beside the ﬁrst
WGP and the InAs sample indicates that it can be rotated electronically.
3.1
Optical equipment
In Figure 3.1 a sketch of the general setup can be seen. Periscope assemblies were used to
lower and raise the beam height for practical reasons. A laser with a wavelength of 670 nm
was used to align the mirror conﬁgurations and was coupled in and out through a ﬂip mirror.
The setup utilizes the principle of reﬂection geometry to detect the harmonic generated light.
The generated harmonics are analysed by an Andor spectrometer which has two diﬀerent CCD
cameras, one being a silicon CCD for the higher energy harmonics, and a InGaAs CCD for low
energy harmonics. The whole setup was closed oﬀby darkening curtains to minimize the amount
15
==PAGE:24==
of external light the spectrometer could detect.
A more detailed description of the more important components found in Figure 3.1 will be given
in the following.
3.1.1
Solstice Ace and TOPAS Twins
In order to achieve the mid-IR laser pulses by which we wish to generate high harmonics in our
sample we use a combination of the Solstice Ace from Spectra Physics and the TOPAS Twins
from Light Conversion.
The Solstice Ace from Spectra Physics generates 800 nm with a pulse width around 50 fs [35].
These ultra short laser pulses are then guided into the TOPAS Twins, which is an optical
parametric ampliﬁer (OPA) operating on the principle of diﬀerence frequency generation (DFG)
and can be tunable in the range of 240 nm to 20 µm [37].
The TOPAS Twins utilizes the principle of spontaneous parametric downconversion (SPDC)
which takes one input photon into a nonlinear crystal, which is then downconverted into two
photons, where conservation of energy is preserved [36], so
¯hωp = ¯hωi + ¯hωs.
(19)
These two new photon waves, the signal and the idler generated from SPDC, are then taken as
input in the OPA. Three wave mixing occur, where one of the input waves is used to amplify the
other, which then also creates a new wave, again called an idler, in the same relation as eq. (19).
3.1.2
Variable polarisers
The two wire-grid polarisers used in Figure 3.1 are made of linearly spaced wire grid patterns
deposited on AR-coated silicon substrates [45]. The wire-grid polariser is then mounted in a
stepper motor rotation mount, where we can control the rotation through a LabView program,
indicated by an arrow next to the polariser in Figure 3.1. The other polariser is mounted in a
manual rotation mount. The wire-grid polarisers have an operating range of 3-5 µm, in which
our 4.8 µm mid-IR laser is within.
The ﬁrst polariser, which can be controlled through the LabView program, acts as an at-
tenuator for the mid-IR beam, and the second maintains the polarisation state of the mid-IR
beam. The second wire-grid polariser is set to be perpendicular to the optical table, because the
pulses emitted by the TOPAS Twins are polarised horizontally, but changes polarisation due to
the periscope assembly, so the polarisation state is vertical.
A third wire-grid polariser, which can also be controlled through LabView, is inserted into
16
==PAGE:25==
the experimental setup, when the polarisation depedence of the generated high harmonic light is
examined, as shown in Figure 3.16.
3.1.3
ITO plate
To guide the 4.8 µm mid-IR laser beam onto the sample, we use an Indium Tin Oxide (ITO) plate.
When the light is reﬂected of the sample and hits the ITO once more, the mid-IR light is again
reﬂected, but the generated high harmonic light is transmitted. In Figure 3.2, the reﬂectance
and transmittance curves for the ITO used in our setup are shown.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
5000
5500
6000
6500
7000
7500
8000
0,0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1,0
R, T
W avelength (nm)
 Reflectance
 T ransmittance
Figure 3.2: Reﬂectance and transmittance curves for the ITO plate used in our setup.
As seen in Figure 3.2, the ITO plate is highly reﬂective for wavelengths above 2.5 µm and highly
transmissive for wavelength from around 250 nm to 1250 nm. This means, that the ITO plate is
highly transmissive for the 4th harmonic (1.2 µm) all the way to the 19th harmonic (253 nm).
3.1.4
Cassegrain reﬂector
After the mid-IR beam is reﬂected of the ITO plate, a reﬂective objective focuses the beam onto
the sample. The objective used to perform this focusing is a reﬂective microscope objective made
by Newport [46]. The construction of the objective follows that of a reverse cassegrain, by having
collimated light hit the primary mirror, which then direct the light to the secondary mirrors. The
light is then focused to the focal point, where the sample is placed. The design of the objective
follows a Schwarzchild design [47]. A sketch of the reﬂective objective can be seen in Figure 3.3.
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.3: Sketch of an reverse cassegrain reﬂector following a Schwarzchild design. The
red lines represent the mid-IR laser light and the green lines represent the
harmonic generated light.
In our setup, high harmonic light is generated from the sample. The light then travels back
through the reﬂective objective and is then collimated by the objective. The objective has a large
spectral band spaning from 200 nm to 20 µm, and zero chromatic aberration [46], which makes it
ideal for our experiment.
In Figure 3.3 it is illustrated how the mid-IR light, represented by the red lines, is focused
onto the sample, and the high harmonic light, represented by th green lines, travels from the
sample and is collimated by the objective.
3.1.5
Dispersion compensation
The Germanium in the lowpass ﬁlter used in the setup induce dispersion in the mid-IR laser
light. The eﬀects of dispersion is clearly seen, when we compare the harmonics obtained with
and without 4mm of CaF2 in the setup.
18
==PAGE:27==
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Photon Energy [eV]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Intensity [a.u.]
Dispersion compensation comparison at 45°
w/o CaF2
w/ CaF2
Figure 3.4: Comparison between the HHG spectra with and without dispersion compensa-
tion at an angle of 45◦of the wire grid polariser acting as attenuator.
In Figure 3.4 we can see the harmonic spectrum of two measurements. One is with 4 mm of CaF2
and one is without. We can see a signiﬁcant increase in the 5th harmonic located around 1.3 eV.
We also see a shift of the peaks, where the CaF2 shifts the peaks toward the correct position of
the harmonics, based on 4.8 µm as the excitation wavelength. This is shown for diﬀerent angles
of the wire-grid polariser, i.e. diﬀerent intensities of the mid-IR laser light, in Figure 3.5.
4
5
6
7
8
9
/
a
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Intensity [a.u]
Location of peaks w/ CaF2
(a)
4
5
6
7
8
9
/
a
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Intensity [a.u]
Location of peaks w/o CaF2
(b)
Figure 3.5: Location of the peaks in the harmonic spectra at diﬀerent attenuations for (a)
with dispersion compensating CaF2 in the setup, and (b) without CaF2. The
x-axis is relative frequency to the excitation laser wavelength, i.e. ωa = 4.8µm
19
==PAGE:28==
In Figure 3.5 it is clear that when using 4 mm of CaF2 in the setup, the expected frequency of
the harmonic generated light is achieved.
3.2
Narrow-gap semiconductor - InAs
The material we are investigating is the narrow-gap semiconductor InAs. In this section the
material characteristics of InAs, such as its crystal structure, its band structure, and material
properties are described.
3.2.1
Crystal structure
The III-V compound semiconductor indium arsenide (InAs) crystallizes in the zinc-blende struc-
ture, which belongs to the cubic space group F43m [55]. The zinc-blende (ZnS) crystal structure
is a slight modiﬁcation of the diamond crystal structure, for which group IV semiconductor
compounds, like Si or Ge, crystallizes in. The zinc-blende crystal structure is shown in Figure 3.6.
Figure 3.6: Crystal structure of zinc-blende represented with gallium and arsenide atoms.
Reproduced from [55].
As visible from Figure 3.6, GaAs which is another III-V semiconductor also crystallizes in the
zinc-blende crystal structure, therefore making the two materials exhibit similar behaviour.
Because of this fact, investigating, understanding, and comparing the diﬀerences between the
diﬀerent materials such as GaAs and InAs, could lead to new understandings of how materials
with the same crystal structure behaves.
20
==PAGE:29==
The lattice constant of InAs is 6.06 Å, making it larger than the other arsenide compounds from
the III-V group, and it also has a signiﬁcantly lower band gap than other III-V compounds.
Only InSb has a lower band gap energy [55]. Comparison of III-V semiconductors, their lattice
constants, and band gap energies can be seen en Figure 3.7.
Figure 3.7: Lattice constant dependence on the bandgap energy for diﬀerent III-V semi-
conductors at 300◦K. Reproduced from [52].
The ﬁrst Brillouin zone of the zinc-blende or diamond crystal structure is shown in Figure 3.8.
Figure 3.8: First Brillouin zone of the zinc-blende crystal structure [53].
21
==PAGE:30==
The ﬁrst Brillouin zone is the same as that of the face-centered cubic structure, because the
zinc-blende crystal structure forms two interpenetrating face-centered cubic lattices.
3.2.2
Band structure
As stated above, InAs is comparible to other III-V semiconductors, and that includes its band
structure aswell. Both InAs and InSb shares the same bandstructure only diﬀering in a slight
band gap energy diﬀerence and spin-orbit splitting of the valence band [48].
There are diﬀerent methods as how to calculate the band structure of a material, but the
basic idea is to solve the dispersion equations, which then yields the band structure. As an
example, Continenza et al. used an all-electron full-potential linear augmented-plane-wave method
(FLAPW), which uses the local density approximation (LDA) to calculate the band structure of
InAs [56]. The band structures shown below are based on pseudopotential calculations [48,54].
Figure 3.9: Band structure of InAs obtained by pseudopotential numerical calculations.
Reproduced from [54].
Figure 3.9 shows the band structure of InAs spanning from -4 eV to 7 eV and for mainly three
directions: Γ −X, Γ −K, and Γ −L. Comparing the directions to Figure 3.8, this corresponds
to [100], [110], and [111], respectively, as indicated in Figure 3.9.
Another calculation of the band structure based on a non-local pseudopotential calculation
22
==PAGE:31==
is shown in Figure 3.10.
Figure 3.10: Band structure of InAs obtained from non-local pseudopotential numerical
calculations including spin-orbit interactions of the electrons. Reproduced
from [48].
Apart from the extended energy range, another diﬀerence is the splitting of the valence bands at
the Γ-point. This splitting of the valence bands into a heavy mass band and a light mass band is
due to accounting for the spin-orbit interactions of the electrons [54].
Another way of calculating the band structure of a material is by using what is known as
the tight-binding model. All of the mentioned models are one-electron models.
3.2.3
Basic properties of InAs
To summarize some of the basic properties of InAs at room temperature (300◦K), characteristics
such as band gap energy, crystal structure etc., can be seen in Table 1.
23
==PAGE:32==
Table 1: Summarisation of material parameters of InAs at 300◦K. Values from [51,55].
Crystal structure
Zinc-blende
Eﬀective electron mass
0.023m0
Lattice constant
6.06 Å
Dielectric constant
15.15
Band gap energy
0.33 eV
Melting temperature
1238◦C
3.2.4
Our samples
For our experiments we have used in total three diﬀerent samples, where one of the samples have
previously been used for other experiments. This sample is seen in Figure 3.11.
Figure 3.11: Microscope image of our used, unknown cut InAs sample.
From Figure 3.11 it is seen that the sample surface has signiﬁcant damage, but also contain areas
which seem undamaged and can therefore be used for our experiments. The surface cut of the
sample is unknown, and therefore we will throughout this report name it Unknown sample.
24
==PAGE:33==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.12: Images of the new InAs sample, where (a) has a surface cut with (100)-direction
and (b) has a surface cut with (111)-direction.
In Figure 3.12 the two new samples of InAs can be seen, mounted on copper plates. These
sample has been ordered with a speciﬁc surface cut direction in order to investigate the diﬀerences
between the crystal directions.
3.3
Experimental setups and methodology
Diﬀerent conﬁgurations of the experimental setup have been used throughout the experiments.
Optimisations of the setup have been based on the results, especially with the Unknown sample of
InAs, where we have gained insight on how to modify the setup to measure the desired properties
more accurately. Some of the insights and altercations will be presented in section 3.4. In this
section, the methodology behind the main experiments and how the data was handled will be
presented.
3.3.1
Background signal
As previously stated, darkening curtains were used to minimize the background signal. However,
a background signal was still visible at 800 nm. This is due to the laser light exiting the Solstice
Ace being scattered oﬀdiﬀerent surfaces on the optical table. This scattering signal can be seen
in Figure 3.13.
25
==PAGE:34==
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Wavelength [nm]
800
850
900
950
1000
1050
Intensity [a.u.]
Background signal
Figure 3.13: Example of background signal detected by the spectrometer. The 4.8 µm
beam has been blocked, therefore not hitting the sample and generating higher
harmonics.
The procedure when performing the experiments was measure the background each time a new
experiment was performed. By having a measurement of the background signal we can subtract
it from the measurement of interest, leaving only the harmonic signal. This subtraction of the
background signal is shown in Figure 3.14.
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Wavelength [nm]
10-2
10-1
100
101
Intensity [a.u.]
Harmonic spectrum w/ background signal
(a)
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Wavelength [nm]
10-2
10-1
100
101
Intensity [a.u.]
Harmonic spectrum w/o background signal
(b)
Figure 3.14: Representation of subtracting background signal from the high harmonics
spectrum. (a) Spectrum with background signal present, and (b) spectrum
with background subtracted.
26
==PAGE:35==
As we can see from Figure 3.14, the background signal located at 800 nm has successfully been
removed without changing the shape of the harmonic spectrum. By subtracting the background
signal, the measured intensity has also been shifted by an amount equal to the noise ﬂoor of the
measured background, which in case of Figure 3.13 is around 830, which explains the shift in
intensity between (a) and (b) in Figure 3.14.
3.3.2
Crystal orientation dependence
The experimental setup for measuring the generated high harmonic signal’s dependence on the
crystal orientation has seen diﬀerent conﬁgurations which will be discussed later. For the ﬁnal
conﬁguration the polarisation state of the laser is kept constant and the sample is then rotated
by the rotatable mount as we can see in Figure 3.1.
In this experiment we keep the angle of the rotatable wire-grid polariser at a constant po-
sition, and only rotate the sample.The harmonic spectrum is measured at diﬀerent angle positions
of the sample and a 2D contour plot is then created, where we can see the evolution of the
harmonic peaks with the rotation degree.
Figure 3.15: Illustration of how the averaging interval of the harmonic signal was chosen.
The red lines indicate the borders of the averaging interval for each harmonic.
From the 2D contour plot we can deﬁne an averaging interval around the harmonic peaks so
that it is not the maximum intensity, but rather an average intensity of the peak we plot each
harmonic in polar plots. The reasoning behind this is that we are only interested in the evolution
27
==PAGE:36==
trend rather than speciﬁc intensity values, therefore increasing the stability, making it less crucial
selecting a speciﬁc wavelength. An example of these intervals are represented by the red lines
shown in Figure 3.15.
3.3.3
Polarisation dependence of the HHG light
When examining the polarisation dependence of the generated high harmonic light, we modify
the setup by inserting another rotatable wire-grid polariser in the harmonic lights path as shown
in Figure 3.16.
WGP
Figure 3.16: Sketch of the setup used to measure the polarisation dependence of the
harmonic generated light.
The procedure in this experiment is to keep the ﬁrst rotatable wire-grid polariser at a constant
position as in the orientation dependence measure, but also keep the sample at a chosen constant
angle. We then rotate the inserted wire-grid polariser to obtain the high harmonic spectrum at
diﬀerent angles.
The same averaging technique as we used for the crystal orientation dependence is also ap-
plied here, since we are mostly interested in the evolution trend of the intensity. An example of
the polarisation dependence of the 5th harmonic is shown in Figure 3.17.
28
==PAGE:37==
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.5
1
Polarisation dependence of 5th order
5th order
Figure 3.17: Example of polarisation dependence result for the 5th harmonic.
As we can see from Figure 3.17 only a 180◦scan has been done. The shape obtained by a full
360◦scan is the same as mirroring or continuing the shape from the 180◦scan, thus obtaining an
∞-shape.
The reason we obtain this shape is due to the fact that high harmonic generation is a co-
herent process, meaning that because we know the laser is linearly polarised, we can describe the
high harmonic emission as,
EHHG =

Ex
HHG
Ey
HHGeiφ

,
(20)
where φ is the angle between the two components of the ﬁeld. The harmonic emission then
passes through a rotatable polariser as seen in Figure 3.16, which can be described by the Jones
matrix [36],
T =


cos2(θ)
sin(θ) cos(θ)
sin(θ) cos(θ)
sin2(θ)

.
(21)
The ﬁeld after transmitting through the polariser is therefore,
E
′
HHG = TEHHG =

Ex
HHG cos2(θ) + Ey
HHG sin(θ) cos(θ)eiφ
Ex
HHG sin(θ) cos(θ) + Ey
HHG sin2(θ)eiφ

.
(22)
The intensity, which is a function of the angle of the polariser θ, can then be calculated as,
29
==PAGE:38==
I
′
HHG(θ) = |E
′
HHG|2∝|Ex′
HHG|2+|Ey′
HHG|2
= (Ex
HHG)2 cos2(θ) + (Ey
HHG)2 sin2(θ) + 2Ex
HHGEy
HHG cos(θ) sin(θ) cos(φ),
(23)
and this is what we measure in our experiment. If we plot, I
′
HHG(θ), we obtain the following.
Figure 3.18: Numerical calculation of the polarisation dependence of the harmonic light
based on eq. (23), with values Ex
HHG = 1, Ey
HHG = 0, and φ = 0.
Comparing Figure 3.18 and Figure 3.17, we clearly see the same overall shape, which in this case
corresponds to a polarisation along the x-axis.
3.3.4
HHG intensity dependence on laser power
In this experiment, taking our starting point in Figure 3.1, we rotate the ﬁrst wire-grid polariser
in order to attenuate the power of the laser. The sample is kept at a constant angle. For each
rotation of the wire-grid polariser we measure the harmonic spectrum, and from that we see how
the harmonics evolve with the laser intensity.
For estimating the power of the excitation laser, we use the relation
I ∝cos(θ)4,
(24)
where θ is the angle between the polariser and vertical to the optical table. The law which eq.
(24) stems from is called Malus’ Law, combined with the fact that the beam goes through two
30
==PAGE:39==
wire-grid polarisers. Measuring the maximum power at the sample position, denoting it Imeasured,
we can write,
Imax = Imeasured
cos(θ)4 ,
(25)
thus the power at each angle can then be estimated as,
In = Imax cos(θn)4.
(26)
3.4
Setup improvements
In this section a description of how the setup has been improved during our experiments will
be presented. We will see how our measurements on the Unknown sample were used to achieve
insights into the mechanisms of the setup. During the modiﬁcations and corrections of the setup,
the new samples arrived, which we use as a basis for testing the improved setup.
3.4.1
Rotation of sample
As visible in Figure 3.1, and stated in section 3.3.2, when doing the crystal orientation dependence
measurement, we maintain a ﬁxed polarisation state of the laser and rotate the sample. Our
previous setup was based on rotating the polarisation state of the laser beam and keeping the
sample position constant. This was done by inserting a quarter-wave plate (λ/4), which converts
the light into circularly polarised light, from where a variable polariser then converts it back to
linearly polarised light at the desired angle.
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.19: Sketch of setup utilising rotation of polarisation state, where the linearly
polarised light is converted to circularly polarised light and back to linearly
polarised at the desired angle.
The quarter-wave plate is a liquid crystal variable retarder, where the liquid crystals are placed
onto a germanium substrate. We adjusted the bias voltage on the liquid crystal retarder so that
it acts as a quarter-wave plate. By adjusting the bias voltage, it can also act as another wave
plate e.g. a half-wave plate (λ/2). Two 7 mm CaF2 plates were inserted in order to compensate
for the dispersion induced by the germanium in the liquid crystal retarder. A scheme of how the
polarisation state of the beam evolves is shown in Figure 3.20.
Figure 3.20: Illustration of the evolution of the polarisation state after passing through
the polariser, quarter-wave plate, and variable polariser.
The ﬁrst two polarisers, seen in Figure 3.19, acts attenuate and ensure that the polarisation is
vertical i.e. perpendicular to the optical table. The quarter-wave plate then converts it into
circularly polarised light. Then we have a variable polariser which can pick out linear polarised
32
==PAGE:41==
light at the desired angle.
We try to perform a crystal orientation dependence measurement with the Unknown sam-
ple, and based on the crystal planes of the material we expect to see a four-fold symmetry, or
possibly a six-fold symmetry.
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
2
4
6
8
Crystal orientation dependence - Unknown sample
5th order
7th order x10
9th order x10
Figure 3.21: Crystal orientation dependence of the used, unknown cut of InAs. The 7th
and 9th signal has been multiplied by a factor of 10 for better representation.
The orientation dependence we see in Figure 3.21 exhibits neither four-fold nor six-fold symmetry.
This could be due to the physical state of the sample, as we can see in Figure 3.11, the sample
has signiﬁcant deterioration. This could cause altercations within the crystal structure itself,
therefore changing the material properties. Another explanation could be that something goes
wrong during the polarisation selection in Figure 3.20. To examine if that is the case, we do the
same scan, rotating the polarisation state of the laser, then rotate the sample and repeat. We
expect to see the exact same shape, since rotating the sample and rotating the beam polarisation
should be equivalent. We do four measurement, where we rotate the sample 30◦between each. A
representation of this is shown in Figure 3.22.
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 3.22: Illustration of the four diﬀerent positions of the sample orientation. The red
dot indicate the interaction area of the mid-IR laser light, scaled up for better
representation.
We expect the resulting crystal orientation dependencies to be overlapping, where the combined
scans should be equivalent to doing a 270◦scan at the initial position of the sample.
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Rotation of sample - 5th order
0°
30°
60°
90°
Figure 3.23: Crystal orientation dependence of the 5th harmonic for the unknown cut
sample of InAs at four diﬀerent angles of the sample rotation.
The four diﬀerent measurements done at diﬀerent angles of the sample position we see in Figure
3.23 clearly does not overlap. We do see some symmetry in the 0◦and 90◦measurement, since
they show the same shape just rotated 90◦. This indicates that there may be some errors
occurring in the polarisation selection, since rotating the sample and rotating the polarisation
state of the laser is not equivalent. Neither the 7th nor 9th order shows four-fold symmetry.
The reason as to why they are not equivalent is, when converting the the linearly polarised light
into circularly polarised light, is not perfectly circularised, since the light is pulsed, meaning it
34
==PAGE:43==
contains a multiple of wavelength. By not having perfectly circularly polarised light after the
quarter-wave plate results in the whole polarisation selection mechanism being erroneous.
In order to free the setup from this error, we replace the setup shown in 3.19 with what
we see in Figure 3.1, consisting of two wire-grid polarisers controlling the attenuation of the
laser. In this conﬁguration we keep the polarisation of the laser constant, thus the laser is always
focused the same onto the sample, and we then rotate the sample.
In between these corrections, the two new InAs samples arrived. We therefore measure the crystal
orientation dependence for the new samples with the corrected setup. An example of the results
can be seen in Figure 3.24.
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.05
0.1
Rotation of sample [100] - 9th order
Figure 3.24: Crystal orientation depedence measurement obtained by rotation of sample
with constant polarisation state of the excitation laser for the (100)-direction
sample.
Figure 3.24 shows a clear four-fold symmetry for the 9th order, indicating that the setup works
as we would expect.
35
==PAGE:44==
4
Results
In this section the results obtained by examining the two new samples of InAs with the (100)-
direction and (111)-direction surfaces will be presented. Results from the Unknown sample other
than what have already been presented, will not be discussed since the sample has a signiﬁcant
amount of uncertainties bound with it. Discussions on how the high harmonics depend on the
crystal orientation and how the intensity of the harmonic signal depends on the excitation laser
intensity will be conducted. The polarisation state of the harmonic generated light will also be
discussed. A note to be made is that the measurements performed on the (111) sample has been
performed at eﬀectively half the power of that in the (100) sample measurements. This is because
we had an iris cutting the beam after the low-pass ﬁlter seen in Figure 3.1.
4.1
Crystal orientation dependence
We start by examining the (100) cut sample, where the crystal orientation dependence, rotating
the sample and keeping the polarisation state of the laser constant is performed, as described
previously.
36
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.1: 2D contour plot of the crystal orientation dependence for the (100) surface cut
sample, with the intensity in the z-axis being logarithm base 10 scale. The
zero position of the sample angle is arbitrary and corresponds to the starting
position the sample was placed in the setup.
In Figure 4.1, the harmonics corresponding to the 5th, 7th, 9th, and 11th order is seen, where
the 5th harmonic is much stronger in intensity than the others. Indications of four-fold symmetry
in most of the orders is clearly seen. The averaging process is utilized and plots the intensity
against the angle in a polar format for the 5th, 7th, and 9th order are done.
37
==PAGE:46==
[100] Crystal orientation dependence
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
1
2
5th order
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
7th order
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.05
0.1
9th order
Figure 4.2: Polar plots of the average harmonic intensity against the rotational angle of
the sample for three diﬀerent harmonic orders of the (100) surface cut sample.
From the polar plots it is seen that the 7th and especially the 9th order shows four-fold symmetry,
which is what we would expect from the (100) surface cut sample. As for the 5th order, we
see an almost uniform distribution of the intensity, with no signs of four-fold symmetry. The
reason to this is unknown, but could be related to the band structure and which of the inter-
and intraband contributions are dominant. If we examine the band structure of InAs, seen in
Figures 3.9 and 3.10, we can see two valleys from the excitation point Γ, which are called the
X-valley and the L-valley. These valleys can have an impact on resonance phenomena in the
high harmonic generation, which in turn could have an impact on the rotational symmetry. Since
the 5th harmonic at around 1.3 eV does not corresponds to any valley interband transition, it
could be that the 5th harmonic is primarily dominated by the nonlinear current which is related
to the curvature of the band structure cf. eq. (17). This could be some factors as to why we see
an almost uniform intensity distribution in the 5th order.
Based on this information and the crystal orientation dependence for the (100) sample, we
deﬁne two direction for which we will examine the intensity dependence and the harmonic
polarisation dependence. These two direction can be seen in Figure 4.3
38
==PAGE:47==
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.05
0.1
[100] 9th order
Figure 4.3: Illustration of the two directions of interest chosen based on the crystal ori-
entation dependence of the 9th order for the (100) sample. The blue arrow
corresponds to an angle of 165◦and the green arrow corresponds to 210◦.
The angle between the two selected directions is 45◦which, based on the crystal plane geometry,
should be along to diﬀerent crystal planes, namely the (010)-plane and (110)-plane. Because of
the symmetry of the ﬁrst Brillouin zone of the zinc-blende crystal structure, the (100), (010),
and (001) planes should be equivalent, as with the (110), (101), and (011) planes.
The procedure done for the (100) sample is now repeated for the (111) sample, though at
a lower intensity as explained earlier.
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.4: 2D contour plot of the angle of the sample against the energy. The intensity
have been plotted in a log base 10 scale for better representation of the higher
orders of harmonics.
In Figure 4.4, the crystal orientation dependence measurements of the (111) sample is seen. A
strong 5th harmonic signal compared to the 7th, 9th, and 11th order is observed. Based on
the crystal plane of the material, this plane does not have an inversion center meaning it is
non-centrosymmetric. Because it is non-centrosymmetric the plane should not only emit odd
order harmonics but also even order harmonics. From Figure 4.4, a faint signal just above 1.5 eV
and around 2.1 eV can be seen. Because of the strong signal from the 5th harmonic, the even
harmonics are diﬃcult to distinguish. Therefore, we examine the measurements without the 5th
harmonic.
40
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.5: 2D contour plot of the crystal orientation dependence for the (111) sample
where the 5th harmonic has been left out for better representation of the even
order harmonics.
Obvious signals corresponding to the 6th and 8th harmonics are seen in Figure 4.5, and parts of
the 10th harmonic can also be seen. Thus, this sample emits both odd and even order harmonics
as expected.
The average intensity of each harmonic is plotted as a function of the angle of the sample
position relative to the starting position in a polar format similarly to the (100) sample.
41
==PAGE:50==
[111] Crystal orientation dependence
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.5
1
5th order
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
7th order
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
9th order
Figure 4.6: Polar plot of the average intensity of the odd order harmonics as a function of
the sample rotation of the (111) sample.
For the (111) sample, a clear six-fold symmetry in both the 5th and the 7th order is observed.
For the 9th order, we see what resembles a 12-fold symmetry but is actually a six-fold symmetry
with dips in the middle. A similar characteristic can be seen in the 9th order for the (100) sample,
but for the (111) sample the eﬀects are signiﬁcantly more pronounced.
An interesting observation is that the maxima for the 5th order is shifted 30◦for the 7th
order. This could indicate that there is some factors in the generation method that diﬀers
between the two orders. If the 9th order is examined, a possible explanation as to why we
observe a 12-fold symmetry, could be that both eﬀects from the 5th order and 7th order takes
place in the 9th order. Thus, if the plots of the 5th and 7th order were to be combined, we
would end up with the plot of the 9th order. This does not however account for tendencies
of the same behaviour for the 9th harmonic for the (100) sample are present. Later it will be
shown how the parallel and perpendicular components of the harmonic light may induce this eﬀect.
42
==PAGE:51==
[111] Crystal orientation dependence
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.01
0.02
6th order
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
8th order
Figure 4.7: Polar plot of the average intensity of the even order harmonics as a function of
the sample rotation of the (111) sample.
In Figure 4.7, the crystal orientation dependence of the even order harmonics for the (111) sample
can be seen. By comparing Figure 4.7 and Figure 4.6, it is seen how the intensity maxima and
minima of both even orders are the same as that for the 5th harmonic. The reason behind this
30◦shift is currently unknown.
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.5
1
[111] 5th order
Figure 4.8: Illustration of the two directions chosen for further investigation, with the blue
arrow being along 280◦and the green arrow 310◦.
43
==PAGE:52==
As we did for the (100) sample, we choose two directions of interest for further investigation
based on the 5th harmonic. The two directions can be seen in Figure 4.8. The angle between
the two directions is 30◦, but it is not clear along which planes this is in contrast to the (100)
sample. The (111)-plane is at an angle compared to the other planes, so we could be exciting
electron-hole pairs along the other crystal planes but at a lower eﬃciency due to the diﬀerence in
angle between the planes.
4.2
HHG intensity dependence on laser power
We will now investigate how the intensity of the harmonic generated signal depends on the
excitation laser power. We ﬁrst examine the (100) sample for the two chosen directions shown in
Figure 4.3, and then the (111) sample for the two direction shown in Figure 4.8. We will compare
the evolution of the high harmonic intensity to the perturbative theory prediction, cf. eq. (7).
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45 0.5 0.55 0.6
Laser power [mW]
10-2
10-1
100
101
102
Intensity of harmonics [a.u.]
(100) Intensity of harmonic orders vs laser power - 165° direction
5th order
I5
I7.2
7th order
I7
I3.1
9th order
I9
I4
Figure 4.9: High harmonic generation intensity dependence on the excitation laser power
for the 5th, 7th, and 9th order for the 165◦direction. The dashed lines represent
the perturbative theory prediction, the dash-dot-dash line is a ﬁt done to a
speciﬁc region, and the solid line is the experimental data.
In Figure 4.9 it is seen that the evolution of all orders show clear non-perturbative behaviour. It
is only for weak laser power that the 7th harmonic order evolves perturbative before it starts to
44
==PAGE:53==
saturate. It is clearly seen that all orders saturate quite signiﬁcantly, but interesting is that for
low powers, the 5th harmonic evolves at a faster rate than what the perturbative theory predicts,
unlike the 7th and 9th order. This sharp increase for low laser power is also present for the 210◦
direction, shown in Figure 4.10.
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45 0.5 0.55 0.6
Laser power [mW]
10-2
10-1
100
101
102
Intensity of harmonics [a.u.]
(100) Intensity of harmonic orders vs laser power - 210° direction
5th order
I5
I4
7th order
I7
I2.5
9th order
I9
I2.8
Figure 4.10: High harmonic generation intensity dependence on the excitation laser power
for the 210◦direction. The dashed lines represent the perturbative theory
prediction, the dash-dot-dash line is a ﬁt done to a speciﬁc region, and the
solid line is the experimental data.
For the 210◦direction, this highly non-perturbative behaviour for all harmonic orders can clearly
be seen. A sharp increase in the harmonic signal intensity as we increase the power, before
it starts to saturate is observed. Comparing these results to that of GaAs conducted by Xia
et al. [6], the dependence for GaAs is also non-perturbative, but evolves linearly without the
saturation. For the 7th and 9th harmonic, it is seen in Figure 4.10 that after saturating they
seem to evovle linearly while the 5th harmonic in both the 165◦and 210◦direction starts to
increase again around 0.55 mW. Thus, it would appear that the 5th harmonic show oscillating
behaviour with the increasing laser power.
Recent results published by Xia et al.
examine GaAs beyond the pertubative regime [31].
45
==PAGE:54==
The results show oscillations of the 5th, 7th, and 9th harmonic when going beyond the perturba-
tive regime at low intensities. Because of the similarities between GaAs and InAs, one would
expect similar behaviour between the two materials. In order to conﬁrm the oscillating behaviour
seen in the 5th order, we would have to do further investigations, where we may increase the
laser power. At the moment, the maximum power at the sample position is around 0.6 mW. At
this power we did not see any damage to the sample. The ﬁrst wire-grid polariser is currently set
at an angle of 45◦compared to parallel. By changing this angle we would increase the power at
the sample position, thus extending the investigation area. But when increasing the laser power
we would have to be careful not reaching the damage threshold of the sample.
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
Laser power [mW]
10-2
10-1
100
101
Intensity of harmonics [a.u.]
(111) Intensity of harmonic orders vs laser power - 280° direction
5th order
I5
I4
7th order
I7
I2.9
9th order
I9
I4.2
Figure 4.11: High harmonic intensity dependence on the excitation laser power for the
280◦direction of the (111) surface cut sample.
Examining the intensity dependence results for the (111) sample show the same behaviour as for
the (100) sample, but due to the lower maximum power caused by the cutting of the beam by an
iris, oscillating behaviour in the 5th order is not observed. Again, a sharp increase beyond the
perturbative increase followed by saturation of the intensity is observed.
Even though we have conﬁrmed even order harmonics in the (111) sample, they are not seen for
the 280◦direction, likely due to the fact that at this angle the even orders are at a minimum in
46
==PAGE:55==
intensity as seen in Figure 4.7. Because of the low intensity of the even orders, it is not possible
to distinguish the peak from the broad emission in the spectra. But for the 310◦direction a clear
8th harmonic signal can be seen, shown in Figure 4.12.
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
Laser power [mW]
10-2
10-1
100
101
Intensity of harmonics [a.u.]
(111) Intensity of harmonic orders vs laser power - 310° direction
5th order
I5
I4
7th order
I7
I2.5
9th order
I9
I6
8th order
I8
I4.8
Figure 4.12: High harmonic intensity dependence on the excitation laser power for the
310◦direction of the (111) surface cut sample.
In Figure 4.12 it is seen that the 8th harmonic show the same behaviour as the odd harmonics,
being clearly non-perturbative and evolving linearly as the 9th harmonic. We are not able to
examine the 6th order even though it should be more previlent than the 8th, because the 6th
harmonic is located at 800 nm, which is where the scattering background from the laser is at
which we have subtracted. This subtraction may have caused large noise ﬂuctuations around the
800 nm mark in the spectrum, making it diﬃcult to distinguish a clear 6th harmonic peak from
the noise.
We previously mentioned that going to higher powers could help conﬁrm the oscillating be-
haviour of the harmonics, but one could also try to go to lower powers. The lowest powers in our
results do not appear to be in the perturbative regime in any of the harmonics except for the
7th. The problem with going to lower powers is to distinguish the harmonic peak from the broad
emission likely caused by hot carriers in the conduction band. To solve this problem, we could
47
==PAGE:56==
try to estimate the broad emission in order to subtract it from our measurements, as we did with
the background scattering from the pulsed laser at 800 nm. This would allow us to extend the
laser power in both directions increasing the opportunity to conﬁrm oscillations in the intensity.
Another idea is to increase the exposure time of the CCD camera in the spectrometer in order to
improve the signal quality. At the moment, we use a 5 second exposure time, which we, for the
lower intensities, could increase, keeping saturation of the CCD in mind.
4.2.1
Location of harmonic peaks
Another interesting aspect is to investigate is the location of the harmonic peaks at the diﬀerent
laser powers.
5
5.5
6
6.5
7
7.5
8
8.5
9
9.5
/
a
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Intensity [a.u]
(100) Location of peaks - 165° direction
5
5.5
6
6.5
7
7.5
8
8.5
9
9.5
/
a
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Intensity [a.u]
(100) Location of peaks - 210° direction
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.13: Location of the peaks found for each harmonic at diﬀerent attenuations of
the excitation laser for the (100) sample in (a) the 165◦direction and (b) the
210◦direction, normalised to each harmonic.
In Figure 4.13 we see a tendency among all orders and for both crystal orientations, which
indicates that when increasing the laser power the harmonic blue shifts. This blue shift in the
48
==PAGE:57==
harmonics has also been observed in graphene [49]. Here they discuss Dirac carriers as the
cause of the blue shift of the harmonics in graphene. The same idea may be applicable in our
material. Thus, it would be interesting to further investigate the the blue shifting perhaps by
changing the polarisation state of the excitation laser to circular polarisation or investigate the
carrier dynamics perhaps through terahertz spectroscopy, though that would require extensive
altercations to the setup.
5
5.5
6
6.5
7
7.5
8
8.5
9
9.5
/
a
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Intensity [a.u]
(111) Location of peaks - 310° direction
5
5.5
6
6.5
7
7.5
8
8.5
9
9.5
/
a
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Intensity [a.u]
(111) Location of peaks - 280° direction
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.14: Location of the peaks found for each harmonic at diﬀerent attenuations of
the excitation laser for the (111) sample in (a) the 280◦direction and (b)
the 310◦direction, normalised to each harmonic. Only one peak for the 8th
harmonic was found in the 280◦direction, and the same for the 6th harmonic
in the 310◦direction, which have been lowered for improved representation of
the location.
For the (111) sample, in contrast to the (100) sample, it is seen that the harmonic peaks are
located at the expected positions. This indicates that the blue shift depends on the direction in
the band structure where the harmonics are generated, and may be related to the movement
of the carriers in the bands, and the bands curvature. Thus, further investigation of the band
49
==PAGE:58==
structure is needed.
4.3
HHG polarisation dependence
The polarisation state of the high harmonics can be found by utilizing the method described in
sec. 3.3.3. We examine both sample in the two diﬀerent crystal orientation direction determined
by the crystal orientation dependence results. The polarisation dependence of the (100) sample
is investigated ﬁrstly.
A 180◦scan of the polarisation dependence of the harmonic light is made, for which we for the
(100) sample in the 165◦direction see the results in Figure 4.15.
Figure 4.15: 2D contour plot of polarisation dependence of the high harmonic light with a
log base 10 scale in the z-axis. The spectrum show signiﬁcant broad emission
from 2.5 eV to 3.5 eV.
From the ﬁgure above, the 5th and 7th order are clearly seen. Furthermore, signs of the 9th
order are also observed, though they are being overwhelmed by the broad background spanning
from 2.5 eV to 3.5 eV. An average over an interval of each harmonic is made and the result are
plotted in a polar format, seen in Figure 4.16.
50
==PAGE:59==
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.5
1
(100) Polarisation dependence of HHG light 165° direction
5th order
7th order x10
9th order x10
Figure 4.16: Polar plot of the average intensity of each harmonic as a function of the angle
of the wire-grid polariser. Zero degrees corresponds to parallel with the optical
table in the setup.
From this ﬁgure a clear polarisation direction for the 5th and 7th is seen, which is along the same
axis as the excitation laser, which is horizontal to the optical table in the setup. The shape of
the 5th and 7th harmonic also indicates that they are linearly polarised. By the shape of the 9th
order, it appears that the 9th order is un-polarised, having equal intensity in all directions. This
is likely due to the fact that the 9th order is being dominated by the broad emission from the
sample. In Figure 4.17 we see when changing the angle the 9th harmonic disappears in the broad
emission.
51
==PAGE:60==
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Energy [eV]
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
Intensity [a.u.]
(100) Harmonic spectra for 165° direction
0°
50°
Figure 4.17: High harmonic spectrum of the zero degree and 50 degree position of the
wire-grid polariser for the (100) 165◦direction. The broad emission is seen to
dominate the 9th harmonic as the angle increases.
Previously it was mentioned that the broad emission could be due to hot carriers in the bands.
From Figure 4.16, we see that the broad background emission appears to be un-polarised sup-
porting the idea that a non-coherent process, such as hot carriers, is the cause of the emission.
Currently, we do not have an established theory behind this broad emission.
Examining the 210◦direction, we can resolve up to the 11th harmonic, with the 11th harmonic
having the same problem as the 9th harmonic in the 165◦direction, where it is being drowned in
the broad emission.
52
==PAGE:61==
Figure 4.18: 2D contour of the high harmonic light polarisation dependence for the 210◦
direction of the (100) sample with z-axis in log base 10 scale.
From Figure 4.18 a better signal for the 9th harmonic is observed, but still being dominated by
the broad emission when approaching a 90◦angle of the wire-grid polariser.
Again the average of the harmonic signal is plotted it in polar format yielding the following ﬁgure.
53
==PAGE:62==
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.5
1
(100) Polarisation dependence of HHG light 210° direction
5th order
7th order x10
9th order x10
Figure 4.19: Polar plot of the average intensity of each harmonic as a function of the angle
of the wire-grid polariser for the 210◦direction. Zero degrees corresponds to
parallel with the optical table in the setup.
Again it is seen that the 5th and 7th harmonic is linearly polarised along the same axis as the
excitation laser, but we also see that the 9th harmonic appears to be polarised along the same
direction as the 5th and 7th harmonic. The shape of the 9th harmonic is clearly not the same as
the other harmonic due to the broad emission, thus it is not possible to conclude whether it is
linearly polarised or not, but following the tendency it would appear to be the case.
We now move on to investigate the results obtained from the (111) sample. In the previous
section we found that the 280◦direction did not yield a high enough intensity in the even orders
for us to distinguish it from the background signal. This is visible in Figure 4.20.
54
==PAGE:63==
Figure 4.20: 2D contour plot for the (111) 280◦direction of the harmonic light polarisation
dependence. The intensity in the z-axis is in log scale.
For the 280◦direction we can resolve up to the 11th harmonic, but again experiencing the broad
emission dominating at low harmonic intensities, due to it being un-polarised.
Plotting average harmonic signal in polar format yield similar results as the (100) sample as seen
in Figure 4.21.
55
==PAGE:64==
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
(111) Polarisation dependence of HHG light 280° direction
5th order
7th order x20
9th order x20
Figure 4.21: Harmonics polarisation dependence for the 280◦direction of the (111) sample.
Zero degrees corresponds to parallel with the optical table in the setup.
The exact same tendencies are seen as for the (100) 210◦direction, with linearly polarised 5th
and 7th harmonic, and 9th harmonic showing tendencies towards the same.
A note worthy comment is that the 5th harmonic in the (111) sample is signiﬁcantly stronger
than the other harmonics, compared to the (100) sample. This indicates that the cause of the
5th harmonic is much more pronounced along the directions of excitation from the (111) surface
compared to the other orders. This could be due to the diﬀerence in shape of the band structure
between the (100) surface directions and the (111) surface directions. To investigate this further,
full simulations of the band structure would have to be done.
In the 310◦direction even order harmonics are observed as we saw in the previous section.
56
==PAGE:65==
Figure 4.22: Contour plot of polarisation dependence of harmonic light. A weak even order
harmonic signal can be seen corresponding to the 6th and 8th harmonic.
In Figure 4.22 the odd harmonics are clearly observed, but hints of even order harmonics can also
be seen. Due to the large intensity diﬀerence between the 5th harmonic and the even harmonics,
we plot the results leaving out the 5th harmonic for better visualisation of the even harmonics.
This can be seen in Figure 4.23.
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure 4.23: Contour plot of the 310◦direction with the 5th harmonic left out for enhanced
representation of the even order harmonic.
In Figure 4.23 we clearly observe the even harmonics and what is more interesting is that they
appear to be polarised perpendicularly to the odd harmonics. This fact can be seen in Figure 4.24.
58
==PAGE:67==
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
(111) Polarisation dependence of HHG light 310° direction
5th order
7th order x20
9th order x30
6th order x60
8th order x60
Figure 4.24: Odd and even order harmonics’ polarisation dependence for the 310◦crystal
orientation direction. Signiﬁcant intensity diﬀerence between the 5th and
other harmonics is observed. The even harmonic signal has been smoothed
by a moving average algorithm for better visual representation.
In the 310◦direction for the (111) we see that the even harmonics appears to be linearly polarised
but evidently perpendicular to the odd harmonics and to the excitation laser. The phenomena of
perpendicularly polarised even order harmonics has been investigated in many diﬀerent materials
and is found to be related to the materials Berry curvature and the curvature of the bands in the
band structure [41–44]. The perpendicular polarisation is also related to the symmetries of the
crystal combined with the Berry curvature, interband excitation, and band curvature [41].
Another interesting aspect seen in Figure 4.24 is that the odd harmonics appears to be slightly
tilted compared to the horizontal direction. This eﬀect is visualised in Figure 4.25.
59
==PAGE:68==
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
(111) Polarisation dependence of HHG light 310° direction
5th order
7th order x20
9th order x30
Figure 4.25: Visualisation of tilt in polarisation direction of the odd harmonics for the
310◦direction of the (111) sample.
In all the polarisation results, the 5th harmonic shows signs of a slight tilt, but the signiﬁcant
tilting for the 7th and 9th harmonic is not present for the other direction or sample. The tilting
could arise from the ITO plate in the setup. When examining the ITO plate’s Jones vector, it
appears to may have a slight inﬂuence on s- and p-polarisations, which could be the cause of the
odd harmonics’ tilting.
4.3.1
Parallel and Perpendicular components
From the results above, it can be concluded that the even harmonics are polarised perpendicular
to the excitation laser, while the odd harmonics are dominantly polarised parallel to the excitation
laser. We therefore perform the crystal orientation dependence experiment for the two samples
again, but where we set the wire-grid polariser in the harmonic beam path to the parallel and
perpendicular component of the harmonics based on the excitation laser polarisation. What we
would expect is, that for the perpendicular direction we should see no harmonic signal for the
(100) sample and only even harmonics for the (111) sample. For the parallel we expect to see the
odd harmonics.
60
==PAGE:69==
(100) Perpendicular component
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.05
0.1
5th order
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
7th order
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.01
0.02
9th order
(100) Parallel component
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.5
1
1.5
5th order
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
7th order
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
9th order
(100) Full Crystal orientation dependence
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
1
2
5th order
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
7th order
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.05
0.1
9th order
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.26: Crystal orientation dependence measurements of the (100) sample for (a) all
compenents, (b) the parallel component, and (c) the perpendicular component.
The measured data (blue line) has been mirrored (orange line) for an improved
visualisation.
By examining the ﬁgures seen in Figure 4.26, it is apparent that the shape of the 5th and 7th
harmonic in the full component scan is dominated by the parallel component. But for the 9th har-
monic it appears that the full scan is a combination of the parallel and perpendicular components.
We clearly see, what appears to be, a four-fold symmetry for the perpendicular component, which
indicates that the 9th harmonic has both a parallel and perpendicular component. Kaneshima et
al. discuss how at high electric ﬁelds a perpendicular component of the odd harmonic emerges
in gallium selenide [42]. They suggest that due to the anisotropic curvature of the bands a
perpendicular component arises in the intraband current. The same shape for the perpendicular
components for the 5th and 7th order is seen, as for the 9th, suggesting that they have a perpendic-
61
==PAGE:70==
ular component as well, though primarily dominated by the parallel component. Because we see
a similar response for all harmonics in the perpendicular direction, this suggest that the cause is
not the broad emission, since the 5th harmonic does not lie within the range of the broad emission.
(111) Full Crystal orientation dependence - Odd
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.5
1
5th order
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
7th order
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
9th order
Parallel component - Odd
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
5th order
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
7th order
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.005
0.01
9th order
Perpendicular component
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.05
0.1
5th order
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
2
10-3
4
10-3
6
10-3
8
10-3
7th order
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.005
0.01
9th order
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.27: Full 360◦crystal orientation dependence measurements for the (111) sample
for (a) all components, (b) the parallel component, and (c) the perpendicular
component, for the odd harmonics.
Repeating the process for the (111) sample, the 5th and 7th harmonics are again observed to be
dominated by their parallel component, while the 9th appears to be a combination of the two.
Interestingly, from Figure 4.27(b), we see that all orders show a six-fold symmetry, while the
7th and 9th harmonic in Figure 4.27(c) show a 12-fold symmetry. This suggest that the 12-fold
symmetry in the full component scan which was previously discussed, may actually arise from the
perpendicular component of the harmonic light. The reason as to why a 12-fold symmetry is seen
62
==PAGE:71==
is still unknown. But based on Figure 4.27(b), we see the same maxima and minima for the 7th
and 9th harmonic, suggesting that the 12-fold symmetry is purely in the perpendicular component.
(111) Full Crystal orientation dependence - Even
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
6th order
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
8th order
Parallel component - Even
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
2
10-3
4
10-3
6
10-3
8
10-3
6th order
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
2
10-3
4
10-3
6
10-3
8
10-3
8th order
Perpendicular component - Even
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
2
10-3
4
10-3
6
10-3
8
10-3
6th order
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.01
8th order
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.28: 360◦crystal orientation dependence measurements for the (111) sample for
(a) all components, (b) the parallel component, and (c) the perpendicular
component, for the even harmonics.
Figure 4.28 shows an evident six-fold symmetry for both the perpendicular component and the
parallel component, indicating the 12-fold symmetry is a feature related to the odd harmonics in
the (111) sample. What is more striking is that the 30◦shift present in Figure 4.27 between the
harmonics is also present for the even harmonics, but between the parallel and perpendicular
components instead.
Figure 4.28(b) and (c) imply that depending on which direction of the crystal structure we
63
==PAGE:72==
excite the harmonics either the parallel component or the perpendicular component of the even
harmonics are dominant. As previously discussed, Liu et al. [44] and Jiang et al. [41] both suggest
that the even harmonics are polarised perpendicular to the exciation laser for their materials,
but in Figure 4.28(b) it is implied that they may also be polarised parallel to the excitation laser
for InAs.
64
==PAGE:73==
5
Conclusion and outlook
Through our experiments on the narrow-gap semiconductor indium arsenide (InAs), the gener-
ation of high harmonics have successfully demonstrated. Odd order harmonics from both the
(100) surface cut sample and the (111) surface cut sample, and even order harmonics from the
(111) sample, have been generated.
Non-perturbative behaviour has been conﬁrmed for all harmonics excited in the samples through
measurements of the intensity dependence on the laser power. The 7th, 8th, and 9th harmonics
show a high saturation eﬀect with increasing laser power, while the 5th harmonic show a slight
increase towards higher laser, indicating oscillating behaviour also found in GaAs by Xia et
al. [31].
The next step with regards to the conﬁrmation of oscillating behaviour would be to repeat the
experiments and increase the power interval for the laser. With the current maximum power at
the sample position, damage on the sample is not induced, indicating the power in the setup can
be increased, thus expanding the laser power interval. By repeating the experiment, the lack of
power in the (111) sample measurements could also be corrected, where an iris eﬀectively cut the
power in the setup by a half compared to the (100) sample.
With the increase in power it would be interesting to see how that would eﬀect the symmetries
we see in the crystal orientation dependence measurements.
The crystal orientation dependence show clear four-fold symmetry for the higher harmonics in
the (100) sample and six-fold symmetry for the (111) sample. For the (111), a 30◦shift between
the maxima and minima of the 5th and 7th harmonic is observed, while what appears to be a
12-fold symmetry in the 9th order is observed. Investigation of the parallel and perpendicular
components of the harmonics reveal that the 12-fold symmetry is related to the perpendicular
component of the odd harmonics for the (111) sample, while not being present in the even
harmonics. The cause of this 12-fold symmetry is currently unknown.
For the even harmonics of the (111) sample, we also observe a 30◦shift between the maxima
and minima of the intensity in the orientation dependence, but between the perpendicular and
parallel component of the harmonics.
Polarisation resolved measurements reveal the even harmonics to be polarised perpendicular to
the excitation laser polarisation, while the odd harmonics have the same polarisation direction as
the excitation laser. A slight tilt in the odd harmonics is observed, most likely due to distortion
in the setup caused by the ITO plate.
Future objectives for the investigation of the InAs sample are to explore the possible oscil-
65
==PAGE:74==
lations in the intensity dependence on the laser power. If oscillations are observed, the models
established by Xia et al. for GaAs [31], could possibly be applied for InAs as well.
Polarisation resolved measurements also reveal that the higher harmonics contains both a parallel
but also a perpendicular component. Thus, increasing the power in the setup would make it
possible to investigate the relation between the perpendicular component of the odd harmonics
and the electric ﬁeld intensity which Kaneshima et al. reports for gallium selenide [42].
Other future ambitions include calculations of the band structure of InAs by use of the tight
binding model. By constructing a tight binding model for InAs, it would be possible to calculate
the electronic bands in the direction of interest and therefore provide insights into how the band
structure and curvature of the bands may relate to the observations reported in this report.
66
==PAGE:75==
References
[1] Corkum, P. B. Plasma perspective on strong ﬁeld multiphoton ionization. Physical Review
Letters 71, 1994–1997 (1993).
[2] Tancogne-Dejean, N., Mücke, O. D., Kärtner, F. X., and Rubio, A. Impact of the Electronic
Band Structure in High-Harmonic Generation Spectra of Solids. Physical Review Letters 118,
(2017).
[3] Franken, P. A., Hill, A. E., Peters, C. W., & Weinreich, G. Generation of Optical Harmonics.
Physical Review Letters 7, (1961).
[4] New, G. H., & Ward, J. F. Optical Third-Harmonic Generation in Gases. Physical Review
Letters 19, (1967).
[5] Ferray, M, A L’huillier, X F Li, L A Lompre, G Mainfray, & C Manus. Multiple-Harmonic
Conversion of 1064 Nm Radiation in Rare Gases. Journal of Physics B: Atomic, Molecular
and Optical Physics 21, (1988).
[6] Xia, P. et al. Nonlinear propagation eﬀects in high harmonic generation in reﬂection and
transmission from gallium arsenide. Optics Express 26, 29393 (2018).
[7] Földi, P. Gauge invariance and interpretation of interband and intraband processes in high-
order harmonic generation from bulk solids. Physical Review B 96, (2017).
[8] Ernotte, G., Hammond, T. J. & Taucer, M. A gauge-invariant formulation of interband and
intraband currents in solids. Physical Review B 98, (2018).
[9] Faisal, F. H. M., Kamiński, J. Z. & Saczuk, E. Photoemission and high-order harmonic
generation from solid surfaces in intense laser ﬁelds. Physical Review A 72, (2005).
[10] Vampa, G., You, Y. S., Liu, H., Ghimire, S. & Reis, D. A. Observation of backward
high-harmonic emission from solids. Optics Express 26, 12210 (2018).
[11] Vampa, G. et al. Theoretical Analysis of High-Harmonic Generation in Solids. Physical
Review Letters 113, (2014).
[12] Al-Naib, I., Sipe, J. E. & Dignam, M. M. High harmonic generation in undoped graphene:
Interplay of inter- and intraband dynamics. Physical Review B 90, (2014).
[13] Yoshikawa, N. et al. Interband resonant high-harmonic generation by valley polarized
electron–hole pairs. Nature Communications 10, (2019).
[14] Yoshikawa, N., Tamaya, T. & Tanaka, K. High-harmonic generation in graphene enhanced
by elliptically polarized light excitation. Science 356, 736–738 (2017).
67
==PAGE:76==
[15] Ghimire, S. & Reis, D. A. High-harmonic generation from solids. Nature Physics 15, 10–16
(2018).
[16] Golde, D., Meier, T. & Koch, S. W. High harmonics generated in semiconductor nanostruc-
tures by the coupled dynamics of optical inter- and intraband excitations. Physical Review B
77, (2008).
[17] Han, Y.-C. & Madsen, L. B. Comparison between length and velocity gauges in quantum
simulations of high-order harmonic generation. Physical Review A 81, (2010).
[18] Kemper, A. F., Moritz, B., Freericks, J. K. & Devereaux, T. P. Theoretical description of
high-order harmonic generation in solids. New Journal of Physics 15, 023003 (2013).
[19] Liu, H. et al. High-harmonic generation from an atomically thin semiconductor. Nature
Physics 13, 262–265 (2016).
[20] Mcdonald, C. R., Vampa, G., Orlando, G., Corkum, P. B. & Brabec, T. Theory of high-
harmonic generation in solids. Journal of Physics: Conference Series 594, 012021 (2015).
[21] Vampa, G. et al. All-Optical Reconstruction of Crystal Band Structure. Physical Review
Letters 115, (2015).
[22] Ghimire, S., et al. Generation and Propagation of High-Order Harmonics in Crystals. Physical
Review A 85, (2012).
[23] Boyd, Robert W. Nonlinear Optics. Burlington: Academic Press, 2008.
[24] Rottwitt, Karsten, and Peter Tidemand-Lichtenberg. Nonlinear Optics: Principles and
Applications. CRC Press, 2015.
[25] Wegener, Martin. Extreme Nonlinear Optics. Berlin: Springer, 2005.
[26] Butcher, Paul N., and David Cotter. The Elements of Nonlinear Optics. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1990.
[27] Vampa, G., Mcdonald, C. R., Orlando, G., Corkum, P. B. & Brabec, T. Semiclassical
analysis of high harmonic generation in bulk crystals. Physical Review B 91, (2015).
[28] Mcdonald, C. R., Vampa, G., Corkum, P. B. & Brabec, T. Interband Bloch oscillation
mechanism for high-harmonic generation in semiconductor crystals. Physical Review A 92,
(2015).
[29] Tamaya, T., Ishikawa, A., Ogawa, T. & Tanaka, K. Diabatic Mechanisms of Higher-Order
Harmonic Generation in Solid-State Materials under High-Intensity Electric Fields. Physical
Review Letters 116, (2016).
68
==PAGE:77==
[30] Haug, H., & Koch, S. W. Quantum theory of the optical and electronic properties of
semiconductors. Singapore: World Scientiﬁc, 2005.
[31] Xia, P. et al. High-harmonic generation in GaAs beyond the perturbative regime. 2020
[32] Yu, C., Jiang, S. & Lu, R. High order harmonic generation in solids: a review on recent
numerical methods. Advances in Physics: X 4, 1562982 (2019).
[33] Zaks, B., Liu, R. B. & Sherwin, M. S. Experimental observation of electron–hole recollisions.
Nature 483, 580–583 (2012).
[34] Glutsch, S. Nonresonant and resonant Zener tunneling. Physical Review B 69, (2004).
[35] Accessed July 14, 2020.
https://www.spectra-physics.com/products/ultrafast-lasers/solstice-ace.
[36] Saleh, B. E., & Teich, M. C. Fundamentals of photonics. Hoboken: Wiley-Interscience, 2007.
[37] Two Independently Tunable Optical Parametric Ampliﬁers TOPAS-Twins: Light Conversion.
Accessed July 14, 2020. http://lightcon.com/Product/TOPAS-Twins.html.
[38] Hutchison, C., Ganeev, R. A., Witting, T., Frank, F., Okell, W. A., Tisch, J. W., &
Marangos, J. P. Stable generation of high-order harmonics of femtosecond laser radiation from
laser produced plasma plumes at 1 kHz pulse repetition rate. Optics Letters, 37, (2012).
[39] Soifer, H. et al. Studying the universality of ﬁeld induced tunnel ionization times via high-
order harmonic spectroscopy. Journal of Physics B: Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics,
47, (2014).
[40] Discussions with supervisor Dr. Kento Uchida.
[41] Jiang, S. et al. Crystal Symmetry and Polarization of High-order Harmonics in ZnO. Journal
of Physics B: Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics 52, (2019).
[42] Kaneshima, K. et al.. Polarization-Resolved Study of High Harmonics from Bulk Semicon-
ductors. Physical Review Letters 120, (2018).
[43] Hu, H., Li, N., Liu, P., Li, R., & Xu, Z. Pure Even Harmonic Generation from Oriented CO
in Linearly Polarized Laser Fields. Physical Review Letters, 119, (2017).
[44] Liu, H., Li, Y., You, Y. S., Ghimire, S., Heinz, T. F., & Reis, D. A. High-Harmonic
Generation from an Atomically Thin Semiconductor. Nature Physics 13, (2016)
[45] MIR Wire Grid Polarizers on Silicon Substrates. Accessed July 15, 2020. https://www.
thorlabs.com/newgrouppage9.cfm?objectgroup_id=7515.
69
==PAGE:78==
[46] Newport Reﬂective Microscope Objectives. Accessed July 17, 2020.
https://www.newport.com/f/reflective-microscope-objectives.
[47] Steel, W. H. The Design of Reﬂecting Microscope Objectives. Australian Journal of Chemistry
4, (1951).
[48] Madelung, O., Rössler, U., & Schulz, M. Semiconductors · Group IV Elements, IV-IV and
III-V Compounds. Part b - Electronic, Transport, Optical and Other Properties. Springer-Verlag
Berlin Heidelberg, 2002. ISBN: 978-3-540-42876-3.
[49] Baudisch, M., Marini, A., Cox, J. D., Zhu, T., Silva, F., Teichmann, S., Massicotte, M. et al.
Ultrafast Nonlinear Optical Response of Dirac Fermions in Graphene. Nature Communications
9, (2018).
[50] Palik, Edward D. Handbook of Optical Constants of Solids. Orlando: Academic Press, 1985.
[51] Adachi, Sadao. Optical Constants of Crystalline and Amorphous Semiconductors. Springer-
Verlag, 1999.
[52] Milnes, A. G., & Polyakov, A. Y. Indium Arsenide: a Semiconductor for High Speed and
Electro-Optical Devices. Materials Science and Engineering: B 18, (1993).
[53] Band Structure Calculations. Accessed August 09, 2020.
http://cmt.dur.ac.uk/sjc/thesis_mcg/node53.html.
[54] Phillips, J. C. Bonds and Bands in Semiconductors. New York: Academic Press, 1973.
[55] Buschow K. H. Jurgen. Encyclopedia of Materials: Science and Technology. Amsterdam:
Elsevier, 2001.
[56] Continenza, A., Massidda, S., & Freeman, A. J. Stability and Electronic Properties of
InAs/InP Strained Superlattices. Physical Review B 41, (1990).
70
==PAGE:79==
A
MATLAB code
A.1
Intensity dependence
1
c l o s e
a l l
2
c l e a r
a l l
3
%% Defining
constants
4
5
h = 4.135668 e 1 5 ;
% Planck ’ s
Constant
[ eV∗s ]
6
c = 299792458; % Light
speed
[m/ s ]
7
lambda = 4.8 e 6 ;
% Wavelength
of
mid IR
l a s e r
8
f r e q = c
. /
lambda ; % Frequency
of
mid_IR
l a s e r
9
10
%% Load
data
containing
wavelength
information
of
the
Andor
Spectromenter
11
% Path
of
f o l d e r
which
contains
the
wavelengths
a x i s
of
Andor CCD cameras
12
cd
’C: \ Users \ h_las \Dropbox\ Henrik \ hosei_20191216 ’ ;
13
% Create
s t r u c t
containing
f i l e s
14
wavelength_data = d i r ( ’ ∗. txt ’ ) ;
15
16
% Create
new
s t r u c t
containing
the
wavelength
data
17
% assuming
one
Headerline
in
the
text
f i l e
18
f o r
i = 1 : numel ( wavelength_data )
19
% Loading
the
wavelength
information
from
the
text
f i l e
20
y(0+ i ) . name = wavelength_data ( i ) . name ;
21
a_temp = fopen ( wavelength_data ( i ) . name) ;
22
b_temp = textscan (a_temp , ’%f%f%f ’ , ’ HeaderLines ’ ,1) ;
23
y(0+ i ) . wavelength = b_temp {1 ,1};
24
% Creating
a
photon
energy
a x i s
from
wavelength
a x i s
25
y(0+ i ) . energy = (h∗c ) . / ( b_temp {1 ,1}∗10^ 9) ;
26
% Creating
frequency
a x i s
from
wavelength
a x i s
27
y(0+ i ) . frequency = c . / ( b_temp {1 ,1}∗10^ 9)
28
% Creating
r e l a t i v e
frequency
a x i s
to
l a s e r
frequency
29
y(0+ i ) . r e l f r e q u e n c y = y(0+ i ) . frequency
. /
f r e q ;
30
end
31
32
% Loading
the
e f f i c i e n c y
of
Si CCD at
700 nm
33
c_temp = fopen ( wavelength_data (1) . name) ;
34
d_temp = textscan (c_temp , ’%f%f%f ’ , ’ HeaderLines ’ ,1) ;
35
y (1) . e f f i c i e n c y = d_temp {1 ,3};
36
% Loading
the
e f f i c i e n c y
of
InGaAs CCD at
1600 nm
37
e_temp = fopen ( wavelength_data (8) . name) ;
38
f_temp = textscan (e_temp , ’%f%f%f ’ , ’ HeaderLines ’ ,1) ;
39
y (8) . e f f i c i e n c y = f_temp {1 ,2};
40
% Removing
a l l
negative
values
of
the
e f f i c i e n c y
41
f o r
i = 1 : length ( y (1) . e f f i c i e n c y )
42
i f
y (1) . e f f i c i e n c y ( i ) < 0
43
y (1) . e f f i c i e n c y ( i ) = nan ;
44
end
45
end
46
% Removing
a l l
values
below
350 nm
47
f o r
i = 925: length ( y (1) . e f f i c i e n c y )
48
y (1) . e f f i c i e n c y ( i ) = nan ;
49
end
50
51
%% Load
s p e c t r a
data
71
==PAGE:80==
52
% Enter
path
of
f o l d e r
which
contains
the
data
53
cd
’C: \ Users \ h_las \Dropbox\ Henrik \20200514 _InAs_100_Intensity_dependence\
Polarisation_angle_165_degrees \5th_and_above ’ ;
54
% S e l e c t
the
data
f i l e s
55
data = d i r ( ’ ∗. txt ’ ) ;
56
% Restructures
the
data
from
a
s t r u c t
i n t o
a
t a b l e
57
data = s t r u c t 2 t a b l e ( data ) ;
58
% Sorts
the
rows
by
ascending
date
59
data = sortrows ( data ,
’ date ’ ,
’ ascend ’ ) ;
60
% Restructures
t a b l e
back
i n t o
s t r u c t
61
data = t a b l e 2 s t r u c t ( data ) ;
62
63
%Create
a
s t r u c t
containing
the
data
64
f o r
i = 1 : numel ( data )
65
x(0+ i ) . name = data ( i ) . name ;
66
x(0+ i ) . date = data ( i ) . date ;
67
x(0+ i ) . s p e c t r a = load ( data ( i ) . name) ;
68
end
69
70
% Of
the
three
s p r e c t r a
taken
at
each
measurement
point ,
we
take
the
71
% minimum
value
of
the
three
in
order
to
avoid
n o i s e
in
the
s p e c t r a
from
72
% other
p a r t i c l e s
73
f o r
i = 1 : numel ( x )
74
x(0+ i ) . spectrum = min ( x ( i ) . spectra , [ ] , 2 ) ;
75
end
76
77
%% Removing
background
78
% The
l a s t
measurement
of
the
data
set ,
has
no
high
harmonic
s i g n a l
79
% s i n c e
at
that
angle
of
the
wire
g r i d
p o l a r i z e r ,
we have
attenuated
80
% the
l a s e r
beam
so
much
that HHG cannot
be
induced .
81
% Thus by
s u b t r a c t i n g
the
l a s t
measurement
from
every
measurement
82
% we remove
the
background
n o i s e .
83
84
% S e l e c t i n g
minimum
value
of
the
three
background
s p e c t r a
85
background (1) . bk = min ( x (1) . spectra , [ ] , 2 ) ;
86
% Subtracting
background
from
every
measurement
87
f o r
i = 1 : numel ( x )
88
x ( i ) . spectrum = x ( i ) . spectrum
background (1) . bk ;
89
end
90
91
%% Implementing
the
e f f i c i e n c y
of
the CCD camera
92
% Multiplying
the
i n t e n s i t i e s
of
the
s p e c t r a
with
the
e f f i c i e n c y
of
93
% the CCD camera
94
f o r
i = 1 : numel ( x )
95
x ( i ) . spectrum = x ( i ) . spectrum
. /
y (1) . e f f i c i e n c y ;
96
end
97
98
%% Log
transforming
b e f o r e
f i n d
peaks
99
% Log
transforming
data
f o r
enhanced
peak
f i n d i n g
100
f o r
i = 1 : length ( x )
101
x ( i ) . logspectrum = x ( i ) . spectrum + abs ( min ( x ( i ) . spectrum ) ) + 0 . 0 5 ;
102
x ( i ) . logspectrum = log10 ( x ( i ) . logspectrum ) ;
103
end
104
105
%% Fingding
peaks
of
Spectra
106
% Finds
the
peaks
of
the
spectrum
in
x . spectrum
107
f o r
j = 1 : numel ( x )
72
==PAGE:81==
108
% The
’ MinPeakHeight ’
i s
an
estimate
a f t e r
lo ok i ng
at
the
spectrum
109
% and
the
same
with
the
’ MinPeakDistance ’
110
% ’ MinPeakHeight ’
and
’ MinPeakDistance ’
i s
r e l a t i v e
to
x
a x i s
111
% ’ MinPeakProminence ’
i s
r e l a t i v e
to
y
a x i s
112
[ pks_temp , locs_temp ] = findpeaks ( f l i p u d ( x ( j ) . spectrum ) , . . .
113
f l i p u d ( y (1) . wavelength ) ,
’ MinPeakHeight ’ ,
0 , . . .
114
’ MinPeakDistance ’ ,
100 ,
’ MinPeakWidth ’ ,
1 3 , . . .
115
’ MinPeakProminence ’ ,
0 . 0 2 ) ;
116
% Converting
the
a x i s
117
% I f
statements
f o r
removing
empty
arrays
118
i f (
isempty ( pks_temp )
)
119
pks_temp = nan ;
120
end
121
i f (
isempty ( locs_temp )
)
122
locs_temp = nan ;
123
end
124
pks(0+ j ) . peaks1 = pks_temp ;
125
l o c s (0+ j ) . l o c a t i o n 1 = locs_temp ;
126
l o c s (0+ j ) . l o c a t i o n 1 e n e r g y = (h∗c ) . / ( locs_temp ∗1 0 ^ 9 ) ;
127
l o c s (0+ j ) . l o c a t i o n 1 f r e q u e n c y = ( c ) . / ( locs_temp ∗1 0 ^ 9 ) ;
128
l o c s (0+ j ) . l o c a t i o n 1 r e l f r e q u e n c y = l o c s (0+ j ) . l o c a t i o n 1 f r e q u e n c y
. /
f r e q ;
129
end
130
131
%% Finding
peaks
of
log
transformed
data
132
% Finds
the
peaks
of
the
spectrum
in
x . spectrum
133
f o r
j = 1 : numel ( x )
134
% The
’ MinPeakHeight ’
i s
an
estimate
a f t e r
lo ok i ng
at
the
spectrum
135
% and
the
same
with
the
’ MinPeakDistance ’
136
% ’ MinPeakHeight ’
and
’ MinPeakDistance ’
i s
r e l a t i v e
to
x
a x i s
137
% ’ MinPeakProminence ’
i s
r e l a t i v e
to
y
a x i s
138
[ pks_temp3 , locs_temp3 ] = findpeaks ( f l i p u d ( x ( j ) . logspectrum ) , . . .
139
f l i p u d ( y (1) . wavelength ) ,
’ MinPeakHeight ’ ,
1 . 5 , . . .
140
’ MinPeakDistance ’ ,
100 ,
’ MinPeakWidth ’ ,
1 3 , . . .
141
’ MinPeakProminence ’ ,
0 . 0 2 ) ;
142
% Converting
the
a x i s
143
% I f
statements
f o r
removing
empty
arrays
144
i f (
isempty ( pks_temp3 )
)
145
pks_temp3 = nan ;
146
end
147
i f (
isempty ( locs_temp3 )
)
148
locs_temp3 = nan ;
149
end
150
pks(0+ j ) . peaks2 = pks_temp3 ;
151
l o c s (0+ j ) . l o c a t i o n 2 = locs_temp3 ;
152
l o c s (0+ j ) . l o c a t i o n 1 e n e r g y = (h∗c ) . / ( locs_temp3 ∗1 0 ^ 9 ) ;
153
l o c s (0+ j ) . l o c a t i o n 1 f r e q u e n c y = ( c ) . / ( locs_temp3 ∗1 0 ^ 9 ) ;
154
l o c s (0+ j ) . l o c a t i o n 1 r e l f r e q u e n c y = l o c s (0+ j ) . l o c a t i o n 1 f r e q u e n c y
. /
f r e q ;
155
end
156
157
%% Transforming
log
peaks
back
to
l i n e a r
158
159
f o r
i = 1 : length ( pks )
160
pks ( i ) . peaks3 = 10.^( pks ( i ) . peaks2 )
abs ( min ( x ( i ) . spectrum ) )
0 . 0 5 ;
161
end
162
163
%% Plots
of
s p e c t r a
vs
Wavelength
164
% Plot
of
multiple
s p e c t r a
at
d i f f e r e n t
a ngl es
73
==PAGE:82==
165
f i g u r e
166
hold
on
167
p l o t ( y (1) . wavelength ,
x (1) . spectrum ,
. . .
168
y (1) . wavelength ,
x (10) . spectrum ,
. . .
169
y (1) . wavelength ,
x (21) . spectrum )
170
p l o t ( l o c s (1) . location1 ,
pks (1) . peaks1 ,
’ x ’ , . . .
171
l o c s (10) . location1 ,
pks (10) . peaks1 ,
’ x ’ , . . .
172
l o c s (21) . location1 ,
pks (21) . peaks1 ,
’ x ’ , . . .
173
’ MarkerSize ’ ,
10 ,
’ LineWidth ’ ,
2)
174
hold
o f f
175
legend ( [ ’ 45 ’
char (176) ] ,
[ ’ 36 ’
char (176) ] ,
[ ’ 16 ’
char (176) ] )
176
t i t l e ( [ ’HHG Spectra
of
InAs w/o CaF_2 using
s i l i c o n CCD’ ] )
177
x l a b e l ( ’ Wavelength
[nm] ’ )
178
y l a b e l ( ’ I n t e n s i t y
[ a . u . ] ’ )
179
180
%% Plots
of
s p e c t r a
vs
photon
energy
181
f i g u r e
182
hold
on
183
p l o t ( y (1) . energy ,
x (1) . spectrum ,
. . .
184
y (1) . energy ,
x (10) . spectrum ,
. . .
185
y (1) . energy ,
x (21) . spectrum )
186
p l o t ( l o c s (1) . location1energy ,
pks (1) . peaks1 ,
’ x ’ , . . .
187
l o c s (10) . location1energy ,
pks (10) . peaks1 ,
’ x ’ , . . .
188
l o c s (21) . location1energy ,
pks (21) . peaks1 ,
’ x ’ , . . .
189
’ MarkerSize ’ ,
10 ,
’ LineWidth ’ ,
2)
190
hold
o f f
191
legend ( [ ’ 45 ’
char (176) ] ,
[ ’ 36 ’
char (176) ] ,
[ ’ 16 ’
char (176) ] )
192
t i t l e ( [ ’HHG Spectra
of
InAs w/o CaF_2 using
s i l i c o n CCD’ ] )
193
x l a b e l ( ’ Photon
Energy
[ eV ] ’ )
194
y l a b e l ( ’ I n t e n s i t y
[ a . u . ] ’ )
195
196
%% Plot
of
s p e c t r a
vs
r e l a t i v e
frequency
( Harmonic
order )
197
% Multiple
s p e c t r a
198
f i g u r e
199
hold
on
200
p l o t ( y (1) . r e l f r e q u e n c y ,
x (2) . spectrum ,
. . .
201
y (1) . r e l f r e q u e n c y ,
x (8) . spectrum ,
. . .
202
y (1) . r e l f r e q u e n c y ,
x (11) . spectrum )
203
p l o t ( l o c s (2) . l o c a t i o n 1 r e l f r e q u e n c y ,
pks (2) . peaks1 ,
’ x ’ , . . .
204
l o c s (8) . l o c a t i o n 1 r e l f r e q u e n c y ,
pks (8) . peaks1 ,
’ x ’ , . . .
205
l o c s (11) . l o c a t i o n 1 r e l f r e q u e n c y ,
pks (11) . peaks1 ,
’ x ’ , . . .
206
’ MarkerSize ’ ,
10 ,
’ LineWidth ’ ,
2)
207
hold
o f f
208
legend ( [ ’ 45 ’
char (176) ] ,
[ ’ 33 ’
char (176) ] ,
[ ’ 27 ’
char (176) ] )
209
t i t l e ( [ ’HHG Spectra
f o r
165 ’
char (176)
’
d i r e c t i o n ’ ] )
210
x l a b e l ( ’ \omega/\omega_a ’ )
211
y l a b e l ( ’ I n t e n s i t y
[ a . u . ] ’ )
212
213
%% Plot
of
d r i f t
of
high
harmonics
peaks
found
214
% Harmonic
order
s c a l e
215
f i g u r e
216
hold
on
217
f o r
i = 1 : numel ( l o c s )
218
p l o t ( l o c s ( i ) . l o c a t i o n 1 r e l f r e q u e n c y ,
pks ( i ) . peaks3 ,
’ x ’ )
219
end
220
hold
o f f
221
t i t l e ( [ ’ Location
of
peaks
found
165 ’
char (176)
’
d i r e c t i o n ’ ] )
74
==PAGE:83==
222
y l a b e l ( ’ I n t e n s i t y
[ a . u ] ’ )
223
x l a b e l ( ’ \omega/\omega_a ’ )
224
% Normalise
l o c a t i o n
p l o t s
225
pks_temp2 = pks ;
226
max_9th = pks (2) . peaks3 (1) ;
227
max_7th = pks (2) . peaks3 (2) ;
228
max_5th = pks (2) . peaks3 (3) ;
229
230
f o r
i = 1 : length ( pks_temp2 )
231
i f
length ( pks_temp2 ( i ) . peaks3 ) == 3
232
pks_temp2 ( i ) . peaks3 (3) = pks_temp2 ( i ) . peaks3 (3)
/ max_5th ;
233
pks_temp2 ( i ) . peaks3 (2) = pks_temp2 ( i ) . peaks3 (2)
/ max_7th ;
234
pks_temp2 ( i ) . peaks3 (1) = pks_temp2 ( i ) . peaks3 (1)
/ max_9th ;
235
e l s e i f
length ( pks_temp2 ( i ) . peaks3 ) == 2
236
pks_temp2 ( i ) . peaks3 (2) = pks_temp2 ( i ) . peaks3 (2)
/ max_5th ;
237
pks_temp2 ( i ) . peaks3 (1) = pks_temp2 ( i ) . peaks3 (1)
/ max_7th ;
238
e l s e
239
pks_temp2 ( i ) . peaks3 (1) = pks_temp2 ( i ) . peaks3 (1)
/ max_5th ;
240
end
241
end
242
% Plot
of
normalised
harmonic
l o c a t i o n
243
f i g u r e
244
hold
on
245
f o r
i = 1 : numel ( l o c s )
246
p l o t ( l o c s ( i ) . l o c a t i o n 1 r e l f r e q u e n c y ,
pks_temp2 ( i ) . peaks3 ,
’ x ’ ,
’ MarkerSize ’ ,
10 ,
’
LineWidth ’ ,
2)
247
end
248
hold
o f f
249
t i t l e ( [ ’ (100)
Location
of
peaks
165 ’
char (176)
’
d i r e c t i o n ’ ] )
250
y l a b e l ( ’ I n t e n s i t y
[ a . u ] ’ )
251
x l a b e l ( ’ \omega/\omega_a ’ )
252
xlim ( [ 5
9 . 5 ] )
253
s e t ( gcf ,
’ Units ’ ,
’ Normalized ’ ,
’ OuterPosition ’ ,
[ 0 ,
0 . 0 4 ,
0 . 3 5 ,
0 . 3 ] ) ;
254
255
%% I n t e n s i t y
of
peaks
vs
Laser
power
256
% Creating
an x
a x i s
f o r
l a s e r
i n t e n s i t y ,
assuming
1
degree
i t e r a t i o n
257
Power_sample = 0 . 6 1 ; % Power
at
sample
p o s i t i o n
at
f u l l
power
[mW]
258
Init_angle = 45; % I n i t i a l
angle
of
Wire
Grid
P o l a r i z e r
259
I_max = Power_sample
/
cos ( Init_angle ∗pi /180) ^4;
260
laser_power =
[ ] ;
% Empty
array
261
262
% Going
from
i n i t i a l
angle
to
f i n a l
angle
263
f o r
i = Init_angle : Init_angle + numel ( data )
2
264
laser_power = [ laser_power ,
I_max∗( cos ( i ∗pi /180) ^4) ] ;
265
end
266
267
% Creating
an
array
of
the
peak
i n t e n s i t i e s
from
spectrum
268
Peak_Intensity_5th =
[ ] ;
% Empty
array
f o r
5 th
order
269
Peak_Intensity_7th =
[ ] ;
% Empty
array
f o r
7 th
order
270
Peak_Intensity_9th =
[ ] ;
% Empty
array
f o r
9 th
order
271
272
% For
the
5 th
order
273
f o r
i = 2 : numel ( pks )
274
Peak_Intensity_5th = [ Peak_Intensity_5th ,
pks ( i ) . peaks1 ( end ) ] ;
275
end
276
% For
the
7 th
order
277
f o r
i = 2 : numel ( pks )
75
==PAGE:84==
278
i f
length ( pks ( i ) . peaks1 ) == 3
279
Peak_Intensity_7th = [ Peak_Intensity_7th ,
pks ( i ) . peaks1 (2) ] ;
280
e l s e i f
length ( pks ( i ) . peaks1 ) == 2
281
Peak_Intensity_7th = [ Peak_Intensity_7th ,
pks ( i ) . peaks1 (1) ] ;
282
e l s e
283
Peak_Intensity_7th = [ Peak_Intensity_7th ,
nan ] ;
284
end
285
end
286
% For
the
9 th
order
287
f o r
i = 2 : numel ( pks )
288
i f
length ( pks ( i ) . peaks1 ) == 3
289
Peak_Intensity_9th = [ Peak_Intensity_9th ,
pks ( i ) . peaks1 (1) ] ;
290
e l s e
291
Peak_Intensity_9th = [ Peak_Intensity_9th ,
nan ] ;
292
end
293
end
294
295
% Creating
array
of
expected
e v o l u t i o n
of HHG peak
i n t e n s i t y
296
% The
f i t
e x p o n e n t i e l
i s
determined
by
t r i a l
and
e r r o r
f i t t i n g
297
Peak_Intensity_5th_theory = laser_power . ^ 5 ;
298
Peak_Intensity_5th_fit = laser_power . ^ 5 . 8 ;
299
Peak_Intensity_7th_theory = laser_power . ^ 7 ;
300
Peak_Intensity_7th_fit = laser_power . ^ 3 . 1 ;
301
Peak_Intensity_9th_theory = laser_power . ^ 9 ;
302
Peak_Intensity_9th_fit = laser_power . ^ 4 . 2 ;
303
304
f o r
i = 1 : numel ( pks ) 1
305
i f
Peak_Intensity_5th ( i ) > 0
306
Peak_Intensity_5th_theory ( i )=Peak_Intensity_5th_theory ( i ) ;
307
Peak_Intensity_5th_fit ( i )=Peak_Intensity_5th_fit ( i ) ;
308
e l s e
309
Peak_Intensity_5th_theory ( i ) = nan ;
310
Peak_Intensity_5th_fit ( i ) = nan ;
311
end
312
end
313
f o r
i = 1 : numel ( pks ) 1
314
i f
Peak_Intensity_7th ( i ) > 0
315
Peak_Intensity_7th_theory ( i )=Peak_Intensity_7th_theory ( i ) ;
316
Peak_Intensity_7th_fit ( i )=Peak_Intensity_7th_fit ( i ) ;
317
e l s e
318
Peak_Intensity_7th_theory ( i ) = nan ;
319
Peak_Intensity_7th_fit ( i ) = nan ;
320
end
321
end
322
f o r
i = 1 : numel ( pks ) 1
323
i f
Peak_Intensity_9th ( i ) > 0
324
Peak_Intensity_9th_theory ( i )=Peak_Intensity_9th_theory ( i ) ;
325
Peak_Intensity_9th_fit ( i )=Peak_Intensity_9th_fit ( i ) ;
326
e l s e
327
Peak_Intensity_9th_theory ( i ) = nan ;
328
Peak_Intensity_9th_fit ( i ) = nan ;
329
end
330
end
331
332
% S h i f t i n g
s t a r t i n g
point
of
expected
and
f i t
e v o l u t i o n
i n t e n s i t y
333
k5 = min ( Peak_Intensity_5th )
. /
min ( Peak_Intensity_5th_theory ) ;
334
k5f = min ( Peak_Intensity_5th )
. /
min ( Peak_Intensity_5th_fit ) ;
76
==PAGE:85==
335
k7 = min ( Peak_Intensity_7th )
. /
min ( Peak_Intensity_7th_theory ) ;
336
k7f = min ( Peak_Intensity_7th )
. /
min ( Peak_Intensity_7th_fit ) ;
337
k9 = min ( Peak_Intensity_9th )
. /
min ( Peak_Intensity_9th_theory ) ;
338
k9f = min ( Peak_Intensity_9th )
. /
min ( Peak_Intensity_9th_fit ) ;
339
% The
a d d i t i o n a l
f a c t o r
i s
f o r
b e t t e r
v i s u a l i s a t i o n
340
Peak_Intensity_5th_theory = Peak_Intensity_5th_theory
. ∗
k5 ;
341
Peak_Intensity_5th_fit = Peak_Intensity_5th_fit
. ∗
k5f ;
342
Peak_Intensity_7th_theory = Peak_Intensity_7th_theory
. ∗
k7 ;
343
Peak_Intensity_7th_fit = Peak_Intensity_7th_fit
. ∗
k7f
∗
1 . 5 ;
344
Peak_Intensity_9th_theory = Peak_Intensity_9th_theory
. ∗
k9 ;
345
Peak_Intensity_9th_fit = Peak_Intensity_9th_fit
. ∗
k9f ;
346
347
% I n t e n s i t y
of HHG peaks
vs
l a s e r
power
348
f i g u r e
349
l o g l o g ( laser_power ,
Peak_Intensity_5th ,
’
bo ’ , . . .
350
laser_power ,
Peak_Intensity_5th_theory ,
’
b ’ , . . .
351
laser_power ,
Peak_Intensity_5th_fit ,
’
. b ’ , . . .
352
laser_power ,
Peak_Intensity_7th ,
’
ro ’ , . . .
353
laser_power ,
Peak_Intensity_7th_theory ,
’
r ’ , . . .
354
laser_power ,
Peak_Intensity_7th_fit ,
’
. r ’ , . . .
355
laser_power ,
Peak_Intensity_9th ,
’ mo ’ , . . .
356
laser_power ,
Peak_Intensity_9th_theory ,
’
m’ , . . .
357
laser_power ,
Peak_Intensity_9th_fit ,
’
.m’ )
358
t i t l e ( [ ’ (100)
I n t e n s i t y
of
harmonic
o rd er s
vs
l a s e r
power
165 ’
char (176)
’
d i r e c t i o n ’
] )
359
x l a b e l ( ’ Laser
power
[mW] ’ )
360
y l a b e l ( ’ I n t e n s i t y
of
harmonics
[ a . u . ] ’ )
361
ylim ( [ 1 . 5 e 2
2 e2 ] )
362
legend ( ’ 5 th
order ’ , ’ I ^5 ’ , ’ I ^{5.8} ’ , ’ 7 th
order ’ , ’ I ^7 ’ , ’ I ^{3.1} ’ , ’ 9 th
order ’ , ’ I ^9 ’ , ’ I
^{4.2} ’ )
363
364
%% I n t e n s i t y
of
peaks
vs
Laser
power
log10
transformed
data
365
% Creating
an
array
of
the
peak
i n t e n s i t i e s
from
spectrum
366
Peak_Intensity_5th_log =
[ ] ;
% Empty
array
f o r
5 th
order
367
Peak_Intensity_7th_log =
[ ] ;
% Empty
array
f o r
7 th
order
368
Peak_Intensity_9th_log =
[ ] ;
% Empty
array
f o r
9 th
order
369
370
% For
the
5 th
order
371
f o r
i = 2 : numel ( pks )
372
Peak_Intensity_5th_log = [ Peak_Intensity_5th_log ,
pks ( i ) . peaks3 ( end ) ] ;
373
end
374
% For
the
7 th
order
375
f o r
i = 2 : numel ( pks )
376
i f
length ( pks ( i ) . peaks3 ) == 3
377
Peak_Intensity_7th_log = [ Peak_Intensity_7th_log ,
pks ( i ) . peaks3 (2) ] ;
378
e l s e i f
length ( pks ( i ) . peaks3 ) == 2
379
Peak_Intensity_7th_log = [ Peak_Intensity_7th_log ,
pks ( i ) . peaks3 (1) ] ;
380
e l s e
381
Peak_Intensity_7th_log = [ Peak_Intensity_7th_log ,
nan ] ;
382
end
383
end
384
% For
the
9 th
order
385
f o r
i = 2 : numel ( pks )
386
i f
length ( pks ( i ) . peaks3 ) == 3
387
Peak_Intensity_9th_log = [ Peak_Intensity_9th_log ,
pks ( i ) . peaks3 (1) ] ;
388
e l s e
389
Peak_Intensity_9th_log = [ Peak_Intensity_9th_log ,
nan ] ;
77
==PAGE:86==
390
end
391
end
392
393
% Creating
array
of
expected
e v o l u t i o n
of HHG peak
i n t e n s i t y
394
% The
f i t
e x p o n e n t i e l
i s
determined
by
t r i a l
and
e r r o r
f i t t i n g
395
Peak_Intensity_5th_theory_log = laser_power . ^ 5 ;
396
Peak_Intensity_5th_fit_log = laser_power . ^ 7 . 7 ;
397
Peak_Intensity_7th_theory_log = laser_power . ^ 7 ;
398
Peak_Intensity_7th_fit_log = laser_power . ^ 3 . 1 ;
399
Peak_Intensity_9th_theory_log = laser_power . ^ 9 ;
400
Peak_Intensity_9th_fit_log = laser_power . ^ 3 . 7 ;
401
402
f o r
i = 1 : numel ( pks ) 1
403
i f
Peak_Intensity_5th_log ( i ) > 0
404
Peak_Intensity_5th_theory_log ( i )=Peak_Intensity_5th_theory_log ( i ) ;
405
Peak_Intensity_5th_fit_log ( i )=Peak_Intensity_5th_fit_log ( i ) ;
406
e l s e
407
Peak_Intensity_5th_theory_log ( i ) = nan ;
408
Peak_Intensity_5th_fit_log ( i ) = nan ;
409
end
410
end
411
f o r
i = 1 : numel ( pks ) 1
412
i f
Peak_Intensity_7th_log ( i ) > 0
413
Peak_Intensity_7th_theory_log ( i )=Peak_Intensity_7th_theory_log ( i ) ;
414
Peak_Intensity_7th_fit_log ( i )=Peak_Intensity_7th_fit_log ( i ) ;
415
e l s e
416
Peak_Intensity_7th_theory_log ( i ) = nan ;
417
Peak_Intensity_7th_fit_log ( i ) = nan ;
418
end
419
end
420
f o r
i = 1 : numel ( pks ) 1
421
i f
Peak_Intensity_9th_log ( i ) > 0
422
Peak_Intensity_9th_theory_log ( i )=Peak_Intensity_9th_theory_log ( i ) ;
423
Peak_Intensity_9th_fit_log ( i )=Peak_Intensity_9th_fit_log ( i ) ;
424
e l s e
425
Peak_Intensity_9th_theory_log ( i ) = nan ;
426
Peak_Intensity_9th_fit_log ( i ) = nan ;
427
end
428
end
429
430
% S h i f t i n g
s t a r t i n g
point
of
expected
and
f i t
e v o l u t i o n
i n t e n s i t y
431
k5_log = min ( Peak_Intensity_5th_log )
. /
min ( Peak_Intensity_5th_theory_log ) ;
432
k5f_log = min ( Peak_Intensity_5th_log )
. /
min ( Peak_Intensity_5th_fit_log ) ;
433
k7_log = min ( Peak_Intensity_7th_log )
. /
min ( Peak_Intensity_7th_theory_log ) ;
434
k7f_log = min ( Peak_Intensity_7th_log )
. /
min ( Peak_Intensity_7th_fit_log ) ;
435
k9_log = min ( Peak_Intensity_9th_log )
. /
min ( Peak_Intensity_9th_theory_log ) ;
436
k9f_log = min ( Peak_Intensity_9th_log )
. /
min ( Peak_Intensity_9th_fit_log ) ;
437
% The
a d d i t i o n a l
f a c t o r
i s
f o r
b e t t e r
v i s u a l i s a t i o n
438
Peak_Intensity_5th_theory_log = Peak_Intensity_5th_theory_log
. ∗
k5_log ;
439
Peak_Intensity_5th_fit_log = Peak_Intensity_5th_fit_log
. ∗
k5f_log ;
440
Peak_Intensity_7th_theory_log = Peak_Intensity_7th_theory_log
. ∗
k7_log ;
441
Peak_Intensity_7th_fit_log = Peak_Intensity_7th_fit_log
. ∗
k7f_log
∗
4 . 8 ;
442
Peak_Intensity_9th_theory_log = Peak_Intensity_9th_theory_log
. ∗
k9_log ;
443
Peak_Intensity_9th_fit_log = Peak_Intensity_9th_fit_log
. ∗
k9f_log
. ∗
2 . 8 ;
444
445
% I n t e n s i t y
of HHG peaks
vs
l a s e r
power
446
f i g u r e
78
==PAGE:87==
447
l o g l o g ( laser_power ,
Peak_Intensity_5th_log ,
’
bo ’ , . . .
448
laser_power ,
Peak_Intensity_5th_theory_log ,
’
b ’ , . . .
449
laser_power ,
Peak_Intensity_5th_fit_log ,
’
. b ’ , . . .
450
laser_power ,
Peak_Intensity_7th_log ,
’
ro ’ , . . .
451
laser_power ,
Peak_Intensity_7th_theory_log ,
’
r ’ , . . .
452
laser_power ,
Peak_Intensity_7th_fit_log ,
’
. r ’ , . . .
453
laser_power ,
Peak_Intensity_9th_log ,
’ mo ’ , . . .
454
laser_power ,
Peak_Intensity_9th_theory_log ,
’
m’ , . . .
455
laser_power ,
Peak_Intensity_9th_fit_log ,
’
.m’ )
456
t i t l e ( [ ’ (100)
I n t e n s i t y
of
harmonic
o rd er s
vs
l a s e r
power
165 ’
char (176)
’
d i r e c t i o n ’
] )
457
x l a b e l ( ’ Laser
power
[mW] ’ )
458
y l a b e l ( ’ I n t e n s i t y
of
harmonics
[ a . u . ] ’ )
459
ylim ( [ 2 e 3
1 e2 ] )
460
legend ( ’ 5 th
order ’ , ’ I ^5 ’ , ’ I ^{7.2} ’ , ’ 7 th
order ’ , ’ I ^7 ’ , . . .
461
’ I ^{3.1} ’ , ’ 9 th
order ’ , ’ I ^9 ’ , ’ I ^{4} ’ )
A.2
Crystal orientation dependence
1
c l o s e
a l l
2
c l e a r
a l l
3
%% Defining
constants
4
5
h = 4.135668 e 1 5 ;
% Planck ’ s
Constant
[ eV∗s ]
6
c = 299792458; % Light
speed
[m/ s ]
7
lambda = 4.8 e 6 ;
% Wavelength
of
mid IR
l a s e r
8
f r e q = c
. /
lambda ; % Frequency
of
mid_IR
l a s e r
9
10
%% Load
data
containing
wavelength
information
of
the
Andor
Spectromenter
11
% Path
of
f o l d e r
which
contains
the
wavelengths
a x i s
of
Andor CCD cameras
12
cd
’C: \ Users \ h_las\Dropbox\ Henrik \ hosei_20191216 ’ ; % Do not
change !
13
% Create
s t r u c t
containing
f i l e s
14
wavelength_data = d i r ( ’ ∗. txt ’ ) ;
15
16
% Create
new
s t r u c t
containing
the
wavelength
data
17
% assuming
one
Headerline
in
the
text
f i l e
18
f o r
i = 1 : numel ( wavelength_data )
19
% Loading
the
wavelength
information
from
the
text
f i l e
20
y(0+ i ) . name = wavelength_data ( i ) . name ;
21
a_temp = fopen ( wavelength_data ( i ) . name) ;
22
b_temp = textscan (a_temp , ’%f%f%f ’ , ’ HeaderLines ’ ,1) ;
23
y(0+ i ) . wavelength = b_temp {1 ,1};
24
% Creating
a
photon
energy
a x i s
from
wavelength
a x i s
25
y(0+ i ) . energy = (h∗c ) . / ( b_temp {1 ,1}∗10^ 9) ;
26
% Creating
frequency
a x i s
from
wavelength
a x i s
27
y(0+ i ) . frequency = c . / ( b_temp {1 ,1}∗10^ 9) ;
28
% Creating
r e l a t i v e
frequency
a x i s
to
l a s e r
frequency
29
y(0+ i ) . r e l f r e q u e n c y = y(0+ i ) . frequency
. /
f r e q ;
30
end
31
32
% Loading
the
e f f i c i e n c y
of
Si CCD at
700 nm
33
c_temp = fopen ( wavelength_data (1) . name) ;
34
d_temp = textscan (c_temp , ’%f%f%f ’ , ’ HeaderLines ’ ,1) ;
35
y (1) . e f f i c i e n c y = d_temp {1 ,3};
36
37
% Loading
the
e f f i c i e n c y
of
InGaAs CCD at
1600 nm
79
==PAGE:88==
38
e_temp = fopen ( wavelength_data (8) . name) ;
39
f_temp = textscan (e_temp , ’%f%f%f ’ , ’ HeaderLines ’ ,1) ;
40
y (8) . e f f i c i e n c y = f_temp {1 ,2};
41
42
% Removing
a l l
negative
values
of
the
e f f i c i e n c y
43
f o r
i = 1 : length ( y (1) . e f f i c i e n c y )
44
i f
y (1) . e f f i c i e n c y ( i ) < 0
45
y (1) . e f f i c i e n c y ( i ) = nan ;
46
end
47
end
48
% Removing
a l l
values
below
350 nm
49
f o r
i = 925: length ( y (1) . e f f i c i e n c y )
50
y (1) . e f f i c i e n c y ( i ) = nan ;
51
end
52
53
%% Load Data
f o r
e x c i t a t i o n
l i g h t
p o l a r i s a t i o n
54
% Enter
path
of
f o l d e r
which
contains
the
data
55
cd
’C: \ Users \ h_las \Dropbox\ Henrik \20200514 _InAs_100_Polarisation_dependence \
Excitation_dependence_wiregrid_angle_39p3_near_sample_center_full_scan ’ ;
56
% S e l e c t
the
data
f i l e s
57
data = d i r ( ’ ∗. txt ’ ) ;
58
% Restructures
the
data
from
a
s t r u c t
i n t o
a
t a b l e
59
data = s t r u c t 2 t a b l e ( data ) ;
60
% Sorts
the
rows
by
ascending
date
61
data = sortrows ( data ,
’ date ’ ,
’ ascend ’ ) ;
62
% Restructures
t a b l e
back
i n t o
s t r u c t
63
data = t a b l e 2 s t r u c t ( data ) ;
64
%Create
a
s t r u c t
containing
the
data
65
f o r
i = 1 : numel ( data )
66
x(0+ i ) . name = data ( i ) . name ;
67
x(0+ i ) . date = data ( i ) . date ;
68
x(0+ i ) . s p e c t r a = load ( data ( i ) . name) ;
69
end
70
71
% S e l e c t i n g
minimum
value
of
the
three
s p e c t r a
to
have
a
s i n g l e
spectrum
72
f o r
i = 1 : numel ( x )
73
x(0+ i ) . spectrum = min ( x ( i ) . spectra , [ ] , 2 ) ;
74
end
75
76
%% Removing
Background
s i g n a l
77
% S e l e c t i n g
minimum
value
of
the
three
background
s p e c t r a
78
background (1) . bk = min ( x (1) . spectra , [ ] , 2 ) ;
79
% Subtracting
background
from
every
measurement
80
f o r
i = 2 : numel ( x )
81
x ( i ) . spectrum ( : , 1 ) = x ( i ) . spectrum ( : , 1 )
background (1) . bk ;
82
end
83
84
%% Implementing
the
e f f i c i e n c y
of
the CCD camera
85
% Multiplying
the
i n t e n s i t i e s
of
the
s p e c t r a
with
the
e f f i c i e n c y
of
86
% the CCD camera
87
f o r
i = 1 : numel ( x )
88
x ( i ) . spectrum = x ( i ) . spectrum
. /
y (1) . e f f i c i e n c y ;
89
end
90
91
%% Creating
arrays
f o r
Contour
and
Polar
p l o t s
92
% Creating
empty
arrays
f o r
the
contour
data
93
conx_spectrum = {};
80
==PAGE:89==
94
% Appending
data
onto
contour
arrays
95
f o r
i = 2 : numel ( x )
96
conx_spectrum = [ conx_spectrum ,
x ( i ) . spectrum ] ;
97
end
98
99
% Transforming
the
array
100
conx_spectrum = cell2mat ( conx_spectrum ) ;
101
% Rotating
f o r
b e t t e r
r e p r e s e n t a t i o n
102
conx_spectrum = rot90 ( conx_spectrum , 1 ) ;
103
104
% Creating
y
a x i s
f o r
changing
degrees
f o r
rotated
sample
Full
scan
105
start_angle5 = 0 ; % Start
angle
in
degrees
106
steps_angle5 = 5 ; % Steps
s i z e
in
degrees
107
degrees5 = l i n s p a c e (1 , numel ( x ) 1 , numel ( x ) 1 ) ;
108
degrees5 = ( degrees5 . ∗steps_angle5 )+(start_angle5
steps_angle5 ) ;
109
radians360 = ( degrees5 . ∗pi ) . / 1 8 0 ;
110
111
%% Contour
p l o t s
112
f i g u r e
113
contourf ( f l i p u d ( y (1) . energy ) ,
degrees5 ,
conx_spectrum ,
500 ,
’ e d g e c o l o r ’ ,
’ none ’ )
114
t i t l e ( ’ Full
e x c i t a t i o n
l a s e r
dependence ’ )
115
xlim ( [ 1 . 1 5 1 5
3 . 5 2 7 5 9 ] ) ;
116
x l a b e l ( ’ Wavelength
[nm] ’ )
117
y l a b e l ( [ ’ Angle
of
p o l a r i s e r
[ ’
char (176)
’ ] ’ ] )
118
119
f i g u r e
120
contourf ( f l i p u d ( y (1) . energy ) ,
degrees5 ,
log10 ( conx_spectrum ) ,
500 ,
’ e d g e c o l o r ’ ,
’ none ’ )
121
colormap ( j e t )
122
t i t l e ( ’ [ 1 0 0 ]
Crystal
o r i e n t a i o n
dependence ’ )
123
xlim ( [ 1 . 1 5 1 5
3 . 5 2 7 5 9 ] ) ;
124
x l a b e l ( ’ Energy
[ eV ] ’ )
125
y l a b e l ( [ ’ Angle
of
sample
[ ’
char (176)
’ ] ’ ] )
126
127
%% Creating
average
arrays
of
harmonic
peaks
f o r
polar
p l o t s
128
% Plot
f o r
deciding
i n t e r v a l
in
which
to
average
peak
129
f i g u r e
130
contourf ( f l i p l r ( conx_spectrum ) ,
500 ,
’ e d g e c o l o r ’ ,
’ none ’ )
131
t i t l e ( [ ’ Contour
p l o t
of
harmonic
s i g n a l ’ ] )
132
x l a b e l ( ’ P i x e l s ’ )
133
y l a b e l ( ’ Measurement number ’ )
134
135
% S t a r t i n g
and
ending
points
f o r
peak
i n t e r v a l s
determined
v i s u a l y
136
peak5x_start = 201;
137
peak5x_end = 254;
138
peak7x_start = 533;
139
peak7x_end = 583;
140
peak9x_start = 716;
141
peak9x_end = 757;
142
143
% Create
empty
vector
f o r
containing
average
peak
i n t e r v a l
144
avg_5th_order_x = {};
145
avg_7th_order_x = {};
146
avg_9th_order_x = {};
147
148
f o r
i = 2 : numel ( x )
149
avg_5th_order_x = [ avg_5th_order_x ,
mean( x ( i ) . spectrum ( peak5x_start : peak5x_end ) ) ] ;
150
avg_7th_order_x = [ avg_7th_order_x ,
mean( x ( i ) . spectrum ( peak7x_start : peak7x_end ) ) ] ;
81
==PAGE:90==
151
avg_9th_order_x = [ avg_9th_order_x ,
mean( x ( i ) . spectrum ( peak9x_start : peak9x_end ) ) ] ;
152
end
153
154
% Transforming
arrays
155
avg_5th_order_x = cell2mat ( avg_5th_order_x ) ;
156
avg_7th_order_x = cell2mat ( avg_7th_order_x ) ;
157
avg_9th_order_x = cell2mat ( avg_9th_order_x ) ;
158
159
%% Polar
p l o t s
f o r
e x c i t a t i o n
l a s e r
dependence
160
% 360
f u l l
scan
near
sample
cen te r
161
f i g u r e
162
s g t i t l e ( ’ (100)
Full
Crystal
o r i e n t a t i o n
dependence ’ )
163
subplot ( 1 , 3 , 1 )
164
p o l a r p l o t ( radians360 ,
avg_5th_order_x )
165
t i t l e ( ’ 5 th
order ’ )
166
subplot ( 1 , 3 , 2 )
167
p o l a r p l o t ( radians360 ,
avg_7th_order_x )
168
t i t l e ( ’ 7 th
order ’ )
169
subplot ( 1 , 3 , 3 )
170
p o l a r p l o t ( radians360 ,
avg_9th_order_x )
171
t i t l e ( ’ 9 th
order ’ )
A.3
HHG polarisation dependence
1
c l e a r
a l l
2
c l o s e
a l l
3
%% Defining
constants
4
5
h = 4.135668 e 1 5 ;
% Planck ’ s
Constant
[ eV∗s ]
6
c = 299792458; % Light
speed
[m/ s ]
7
lambda = 4.8 e 6 ;
% Wavelength
of
mid IR
l a s e r
8
f r e q = c
. /
lambda ; % Frequency
of
mid_IR
l a s e r
9
10
%% Load
data
containing
wavelength
information
of
the
Andor
Spectromenter
11
% Path
of
f o l d e r
which
contains
the
wavelengths
a x i s
of
Andor CCD cameras
12
cd
’C: \ Users \ h_las \Dropbox\ Henrik \ hosei_20191216 ’ ; % Do not
change !
13
% Create
s t r u c t
containing
f i l e s
14
wavelength_data = d i r ( ’ ∗. txt ’ ) ;
15
16
% Create
new
s t r u c t
containing
the
wavelength
data
17
% assuming
one
Headerline
in
the
text
f i l e
18
f o r
i = 1 : numel ( wavelength_data )
19
% Loading
the
wavelength
information
from
the
text
f i l e
20
y(0+ i ) . name = wavelength_data ( i ) . name ;
21
a_temp = fopen ( wavelength_data ( i ) . name) ;
22
b_temp = textscan (a_temp , ’%f%f%f ’ , ’ HeaderLines ’ ,1) ;
23
y(0+ i ) . wavelength = b_temp {1 ,1};
24
% Creating
a
photon
energy
a x i s
from
wavelength
a x i s
25
y(0+ i ) . energy = (h∗c ) . / ( b_temp {1 ,1}∗10^ 9) ;
26
% Creating
frequency
a x i s
from
wavelength
a x i s
27
y(0+ i ) . frequency = c . / ( b_temp {1 ,1}∗10^ 9) ;
28
% Creating
r e l a t i v e
frequency
a x i s
to
l a s e r
frequency
29
y(0+ i ) . r e l f r e q u e n c y = y(0+ i ) . frequency
. /
f r e q ;
30
end
31
32
% Loading
the
e f f i c i e n c y
of
Si CCD at
700 nm
82
==PAGE:91==
33
c_temp = fopen ( wavelength_data (1) . name) ;
34
d_temp = textscan (c_temp , ’%f%f%f ’ , ’ HeaderLines ’ ,1) ;
35
y (1) . e f f i c i e n c y = d_temp {1 ,3};
36
37
% Loading
the
e f f i c i e n c y
of
InGaAs CCD at
1600 nm
38
e_temp = fopen ( wavelength_data (8) . name) ;
39
f_temp = textscan (e_temp , ’%f%f%f ’ , ’ HeaderLines ’ ,1) ;
40
y (8) . e f f i c i e n c y = f_temp {1 ,2};
41
42
% Removing
a l l
negative
values
of
the
e f f i c i e n c y
43
f o r
i = 1 : length ( y (1) . e f f i c i e n c y )
44
i f
y (1) . e f f i c i e n c y ( i ) < 0
45
y (1) . e f f i c i e n c y ( i ) = nan ;
46
end
47
end
48
49
% Removing
a l l
values
below
350 nm
50
f o r
i = 925: length ( y (1) . e f f i c i e n c y )
51
y (1) . e f f i c i e n c y ( i ) = nan ;
52
end
53
54
%% Load Data
f o r
harmonic
l i g h t
p o l a r i s a t i o n
55
% Enter
path
of
f o l d e r
which
contains
the
data
56
cd
’C: \ Users \ h_las \Dropbox\ Henrik \20200521 _InAs_111_Polarisation_dependence \
HHG_polarisation_dependence_angle_39p3_polarisation_280_degrees \HHG’ ;
57
% S e l e c t
the
data
f i l e s
58
data = d i r ( ’ ∗. txt ’ ) ;
59
% Restructures
the
data
from
a
s t r u c t
i n t o
a
t a b l e
60
data = s t r u c t 2 t a b l e ( data ) ;
61
% Sorts
the
rows
by
ascending
date
62
data = sortrows ( data ,
’ date ’ ,
’ ascend ’ ) ;
63
% Restructures
t a b l e
back
i n t o
s t r u c t
64
data = t a b l e 2 s t r u c t ( data ) ;
65
66
%Create
a
s t r u c t
containing
the
data
67
f o r
i = 1 : numel ( data )
68
x(0+ i ) . name = data ( i ) . name ;
69
x(0+ i ) . date = data ( i ) . date ;
70
x(0+ i ) . s p e c t r a = load ( data ( i ) . name) ;
71
end
72
73
% Correcting
f o r
anomalies
74
f o r
i = 1 : numel ( x )
75
x(0+ i ) . spectrum = min ( x ( i ) . spectra , [ ] , 2 ) ;
76
end
77
78
%% Load
background
s p e c t r a
79
% Enter
path
of
f o l d e r
which
contains
the
data
80
cd
’C: \ Users \ h_las \Dropbox\ Henrik \20200521 _InAs_111_Polarisation_dependence \
HHG_polarisation_dependence_angle_39p3_polarisation_280_degrees \Background ’ ;
81
% S e l e c t
the
data
f i l e s
82
data3 = d i r ( ’ ∗. txt ’ ) ;
83
% Restructures
the
data
from
a
s t r u c t
i n t o
a
t a b l e
84
data3 = s t r u c t 2 t a b l e ( data3 ) ;
85
% Sorts
the
rows
by
ascending
date
86
data3 = sortrows ( data3 ,
’ date ’ ,
’ ascend ’ ) ;
87
% Restructures
t a b l e
back
i n t o
s t r u c t
83
==PAGE:92==
88
data3 = t a b l e 2 s t r u c t ( data3 ) ;
89
90
%Create
a
s t r u c t
containing
the
data
91
f o r
i = 1 : numel ( data3 )
92
bground(0+ i ) . name = data3 ( i ) . name ;
93
bground(0+ i ) . date = data3 ( i ) . date ;
94
bground(0+ i ) . s p e c t r a = load ( data3 ( i ) . name) ;
95
end
96
97
% Correcting
anomalies
98
f o r
i = 1 : numel ( bground )
99
background(0+ i ) . bk = min ( bground ( i ) . spectra , [ ] , 2 ) ;
100
end
101
102
% Check
f o r
anomalies
103
f i g u r e
104
hold
on
105
f o r
i = 1 : numel ( background )
106
p l o t ( background ( i ) . bk )
107
end
108
hold
o f f
109
110
%% Removing
background
s i g n a l
111
% Subtracting
background
from
every
measurement
112
f o r
i = 1 : numel ( x )
113
x ( i ) . spectrum = x ( i ) . spectrum
background ( i ) . bk ;
114
end
115
116
%% Implementing
the
e f f i c i e n c y
of
the CCD camera
117
% Multiplying
the
i n t e n s i t i e s
of
the
s p e c t r a
with
the
e f f i c i e n c y
of
118
% the CCD camera
119
f o r
i = 1 : numel ( x )
120
x ( i ) . spectrum = x ( i ) . spectrum
. /
y (1) . e f f i c i e n c y ;
121
122
end
123
124
%% Creating
arrays
f o r
contour
p l o t s
125
% Creating
empty
arrays
f o r
the
contour
data
126
conx_spectra = {};
127
128
% Appending
data
onto
contour
arrays
129
f o r
i = 1 : numel ( x )
130
conx_spectra = [ conx_spectra ,
x ( i ) . spectrum ] ;
131
end
132
133
% Transforming
the
arrays
134
conx_spectra = cell2mat ( conx_spectra ) ;
135
% Rotating
f o r
b e t t e r
r e p r e s e n t a t i o n
136
conx_spectra = rot90 ( conx_spectra , 1 ) ;
137
138
% Creating
y
a x i s
f o r
changing
degrees
139
start_angle = 0 ; % Start
angle
in
degrees
140
steps_angle = 5 ; % Steps
s i z e
in
degrees
141
degrees = l i n s p a c e (1 , numel ( x ) , numel ( x ) ) ;
142
degrees = ( degrees . ∗steps_angle )+(start_angle
steps_angle ) ;
143
radians = ( degrees . ∗pi ) . / 1 8 0 ;
144
84
==PAGE:93==
145
%% Log
Transforming
data
146
conx_spectra_log = conx_spectra + abs ( min ( min ( conx_spectra ) ) ) + 0 . 0 5 ;
147
conx_spectra_log = log10 ( conx_spectra_log ) ;
148
149
% Removing 5 th
order
f o r
b e t t e r
r e p r e s e n t a t i o n
150
conx_spectra_log_wo5th = conx_spectra_log ;
151
f o r
i = 1:37
152
f o r
j = 732:1024
153
conx_spectra_log_wo5th ( i , j ) = nan ;
154
end
155
end
156
157
%% Contour
Plots
158
f i g u r e
159
contourf ( f l i p u d ( y (1) . energy ) ,
degrees ,
conx_spectra_log ,
500 ,
’ e d g e c o l o r ’ ,
’ none ’ )
160
colormap ( j e t )
161
t i t l e ( [ ’ (111)
Contour
p l o t
of
harmonic
s i g n a l
f o r
280 ’
char (176)
’
d i r e c t i o n ’ ] )
162
xlim ( [ 1 . 1 5 1 5
3 . 5 2 7 5 ] )
163
x l a b e l ( ’ Energy
[ eV ] ’ )
164
y l a b e l ( [ ’ Angle
of
p o l a r i s e r
[ ’
char (176)
’ ] ’ ] )
165
166
f i g u r e
167
contourf ( f l i p u d ( y (1) . energy ) ,
degrees ,
conx_spectra_log_wo5th ,
500 ,
’ e d g e c o l o r ’ ,
’ none ’
)
168
colormap ( j e t )
169
t i t l e ( [ ’ (111)
Contour
p l o t
of
harmonic
s i g n a l
f o r
310 ’
char (176)
’
d i r e c t i o n ’ ] )
170
xlim ( [ 1 . 4
3 . 5 2 7 5 ] )
171
x l a b e l ( ’ Energy
[ eV ] ’ )
172
y l a b e l ( [ ’ Angle
of
p o l a r i s e r
[ ’
char (176)
’ ] ’ ] )
173
174
%% Creating
average
arrays
of
harmonic
peaks
f o r
polar
p l o t s
175
% Plot
f o r
deciding
i n t e r v a l
in
which
to
average
peak
176
f i g u r e
177
contourf ( f l i p l r ( conx_spectra_log ) ,
500 ,
’ e d g e c o l o r ’ ,
’ none ’ )
178
colormap ( j e t )
179
t i t l e ( [ ’ Contour
p l o t
of
harmonic
s i g n a l
f o r
280 ’
char (176)
’
d i r e c t i o n ’ ] )
180
x l a b e l ( ’ P i x e l s ’ )
181
y l a b e l ( ’ Measurement number ’ )
182
183
f i g u r e
184
contourf ( f l i p l r ( conx_spectra_log_wo5th ) ,
500 ,
’ e d g e c o l o r ’ ,
’ none ’ )
185
colormap ( j e t )
186
t i t l e ( [ ’ Contour
p l o t
of
harmonic
s i g n a l
f o r
280 ’
char (176)
’
d i r e c t i o n ’ ] )
187
x l a b e l ( ’ P i x e l s ’ )
188
y l a b e l ( ’ Measurement number ’ )
189
190
% S t a r t i n g
and
ending
points
f o r
peak
i n t e r v a l s
determined
v i s u a l y
191
peak5x_start = 190;
192
peak5x_end = 247;
193
peak7x_start = 522;
194
peak7x_end = 581;
195
peak9x_start = 707;
196
peak9x_end = 744;
197
% Create
empty
vector
f o r
containing
average
peak
i n t e r v a l
198
avg_5th_order_x = {};
199
avg_7th_order_x = {};
200
avg_9th_order_x = {};
85
==PAGE:94==
201
202
f o r
i = 1 : numel ( x )
203
avg_5th_order_x = [ avg_5th_order_x ,
mean( x ( i ) . spectrum ( peak5x_start : peak5x_end ) ) ] ;
204
avg_7th_order_x = [ avg_7th_order_x ,
mean( x ( i ) . spectrum ( peak7x_start : peak7x_end ) ) ] ;
205
avg_9th_order_x = [ avg_9th_order_x ,
mean( x ( i ) . spectrum ( peak9x_start : peak9x_end ) ) ] ;
206
end
207
208
% Transforming
arrays
209
avg_5th_order_x = cell2mat ( avg_5th_order_x ) ;
210
avg_7th_order_x = cell2mat ( avg_7th_order_x ) ;
211
avg_9th_order_x = cell2mat ( avg_9th_order_x ) ;
212
213
% Smooth
even
orders
214
%avg_6th_order_x_smooth = smoothdata ( avg_6th_order_x , 2 ) ;
215
%avg_8th_order_x_smooth = smoothdata ( avg_8th_order_x , 2 ) ;
216
217
%% Polar
p l o t s
f o r
e x c i t a t i o n
l a s e r
dependence
218
219
% 5th ,
7th ,
and 9 th
order
f o r
280
d i r e c t i o n
220
f i g u r e
221
p o l a r p l o t ( radians ,
avg_5th_order_x ,
’
o ’ ,
radians ,
avg_7th_order_x . ∗20 ,
’
o ’ ,
radians ,
avg_9th_order_x . ∗20 ,
’
o ’ )
222
t i t l e ( [ ’ (111)
P o l a r i s a t i o n
dependence
of HHG l i g h t
280 ’
char (176)
’
d i r e c t i o n ’ ] )
223
legend ( ’ 5 th
order ’ ,
’ 7 th
order
x20 ’ ,
’ 9 th
order
x20 ’ )
224
s e t ( gcf ,
’ Units ’ ,
’ Normalized ’ ,
’ OuterPosition ’ ,
[ 0 ,
0 . 0 4 ,
0.265 ,
0 . 4 0 5 ] ) ;
86
