==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Reproduction of nearby sound sources in
virtual sound environments
DTU Health Technology
Master Thesis
Contributors:
Author
R´emi ARNOULT s182268
DTU supervisors
Marton Marschall
Ewen MacDonald
Widex supervisor
Jens Cubick
August 21, 2020
==PAGE:2==
Acronyms
August 21, 2020
Acronyms
ARTE Ambisonic Recordings of Typical Environment.
AVIL Audio Visual Immersion Lab.
AWW Angular Weighting Window.
DRER Direct to Reverberant Energy Ratio.
DS Direct Sound.
HA Hearing Aids.
HATS Heand and Torso Simulator.
HOA High-Order Ambisonics.
HRTF Head Related Transfer Functions.
IACC Interaural Cross Correlation.
ILD Interaural Level Diﬀerences.
ITD Interaural Time Diﬀerences.
LS loudspeakers.
MRIR Multichannel Room Impulse Responses.
NFC Near Field Coding.
NFCHOA Near-Field Coding High Order Ambisonics.
NFCREG Regularised Near-Field Coding High Order Ambisonics.
REV Reverberant part.
RIR Room Impulse Response.
SHFs Spherical Harmonic Functions.
VSE Loudspeaker-based Virtual Sound Environments.
XLS Extra loudspeaker.
i/34
==PAGE:3==
LIST OF SYMBOLS
August 21, 2020
List of Symbols
The next list describes several symbols that will be later used within the body of the
document
Greek Symbols
δ
Elevation angle
δk
Virtual source elevation angle
δl
Loudspeaker elevation angle
δs
Focused virtual source elevation angle
ρ
Radial distance
ρs
Focused virtual source radial distance
θ
Azimuth angle (right hand convention)
θk
Virtual source azimuth angle (right hand convention)
θl
Loudspeaker azimuth angle (right hand convention)
θs
Focused virtual source azimuth angle
Other Symbols
ˆsNL
Vector of nearest loudspeaker gains
ˆs
Vector of least-squares solutions for LS gains
b
Vector of HOA coeﬃcients Bσ
mn
C
Matrix of SHFs sampled at the LS array position
r
Position vector r = (r, θ, δ)
s
Vector of LS gains sl
Y
Matrix of SFHs
jm(x)
m-th order spherical Bessel function of 1st kind
Bσ
mnNFC(R) Near Field Ambisonics components for an array of radius R
Bσ
mn
HOA coeﬃcients
ii/34
==PAGE:4==
LIST OF SYMBOLS
August 21, 2020
f
Frequency
fHOA
HOA cut-oﬀfrequency
h−
m
Spherical Hankel function of the second kind
HNFC(ρs,R)
m
Near Field Coding ﬁlter for at source at ρs in an array of radius R
k
Wavenumber
L
Number of LS comprised in the reproduction array
M
HOA system order
m
Degree of the SHFs and Legendre polynomials (usually referred to as order
of the Bessel-family functions in the literature)
n
Order of the SHFs and Legendre polynomials
Os
Position of the point source in the coordinate system of origin O
p
Acoustic pressure
pR(θq, δq)
Acoustic pressure at the q-th sensor of the mic array
Pmn(x)
Associated Legendre polynomial of m-th degree, n-th order
Pm(x)
Legendre polynomial of m-th degree
r
Radial distance from origin of coordinate system
r0
Radius of reproduction area of interest (sweet spot)
S
Signal carried by the virtual source positioned at Os
whp
m
NFC ﬁlter High-pass window
wreg
m
NFC regularisation window
Y σ
mn(θ, δ)
Real-valued spherical harmonic function of m-th degree and n-th order
Physics Constants
ρ
Air Density (ρ =1.223 kg/m3 at 15 C)
c
Speed of light in a vacuum inertial frame (c = 343 m/s)
i
Imaginary Unit
rhead
Head radius for a subject sat in the sweet spot of the array, rhead = 0.1 m
throughout this work
iii/34
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Acronyms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
List of Symbols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1
Context of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Aims of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Theoretical Background
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1
Basic HOA Encoding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
HOA Decoding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Near Field Encoding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.1
The Audio Visual Immersion Lab (AVIL) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Single point pressure and HRTF recordings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.4
Reverberant scenes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4.1
Sound ﬁeld reproduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.2
Amplitude decay
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.3
Frequency response outside the origin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.4
Simulated ILDs for Anechoic signals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.5
Sweet spot size
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.5.1
Sweet spot size and amplitude matching
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.5.2
Sweet spot size and frequency response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.5.3
Sweet spot size and anechoic ILD reproduction . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.6
Measured ILDs for anechoic signals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.7
ILDs for reverberant scenes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.8
Binaural cross-correlation for reverberant scenes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.9
ITDs for reverberant scenes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.1
Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.1.1
Array processing methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.1.2
Extra loudspeaker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.3
Further research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6
Summary and conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
iv
==PAGE:6==
August 21, 2020
1
Introduction
1.1
Context of the Thesis
The management of hearing loss using Hearing Aids (HA) is an important line of research
in psycho-acoustics. The outcome of this investigation usually revolves around models
of the diverse hearing mechanisms, which later lead into enhancement strategies imple-
mented on HAs. Naturally, these solutions need to be tested in realistic experiments
before they are to be embedded into commercialised products. However, researchers such
as [Cord et al., 2004] and [Ricketts, 2000] have reported a signiﬁcant discrepancy between
these novel schemes’ beneﬁts when assessed in a laboratory as opposed to real-life scenes.
This suggests that the methods used currently in the laboratories tend to oversimplify
the simulated acoustic context, and lead to an overestimation of the performance of the
tested devices.
Loudspeaker-based Virtual Sound Environments (VSE) have been increasingly applied as
tools in hearing science, due to their potential for generating realistic, yet controllable
and reproducible acoustic scenes in a laboratory setting, e.g [Favrot and Buchholz, 2010,
Ahrens and Spors, 2009, Cubick and Dau, 2016]. In particular, [Oreinos, 2015] showed
that the use of a High-Order Ambisonics (HOA) based VSE is a valid tool for testing HAs
within a wide frequency range for reverberant simulated environments. However, in such
systems the loudspeakers (LS) are usually mounted on a sphere of ﬁxed radius, which
is often larger than the typical distance between two people conversing. Moreover, the
inherent theoretical limitations of basic HOA make it impossible to reproduce a sound
source whose placement in space is closer to the centre than the radius of the array. HOA
systems are thus incapable of simulating a close conversation. Therefore it is of interest to
accurately reproduce virtual sources that are closer to the listener than the LS distance,
that is, “nearby” sound sources. [Daniel, 2003] introduced Near-Field Coding High Order
Ambisonics (NFCHOA), and [Favrot and Buchholz, 2012] investigated its potential for
the reproduction of nearby virtual sources. Although encouraging, the results displayed a
rather limited frequency range where binaural cues were accurately reproduced, and were
only tested for 2D Ambisonics.
In order to circumvent this limitation, [Westermann and Buchholz, 2017] used additional
LSs hanged inside an Ambisonics array as nearby targets and maskers in a reverberant
scene. Despite the plausibility of their results it is not clear whether extra loudspeakers
improve the accuracy of the representation of nearby sound sources in terms of binaural
cues.
1.2
Aims of the thesis
The current project therefore implements and investigate various methods to reproduce
nearby sound sources in 3D Ambisonics: using (i) HOA (ii) NFCHOA, as well as (iii)
the placement of an Extra loudspeaker (XLS). These methods are compared using ob-
jective measures, including sound pressure errors, amplitude decay, frequency response
Interaural Level Diﬀerences (ILD), Interaural Cross Correlation (IACC) and Interaural
Time Diﬀerences (ITD), which are calculated for anechoic conditions for both simulated
and recorded sound ﬁelds. Eventually, reverberant conditions are also considered, where
1/34
==PAGE:7==
1.2
Aims of the thesis
August 21, 2020
the direct and the reverberant sound are split up and coded with diﬀerent strategies.
The results are expected to enhance the understanding of how to reproduce close sound
sources in VSEs for typical communication situations in a more ecologically valid way.
The ﬁrst section of this thesis lays out the basic theoretical concepts of HOA, and pro-
ceeds to explain the more advanced methods of NFCHOA and its regularised version. The
second section describes the thesis’ methods, namely the architecture of the simulation
frameworks, the set-up for the Head Related Transfer Functions (HRTF) recordings, and
the ARTE database of HOA recordings [Weisser et al., 2019] leading to the reproduction
of reverberant scenes with split direct sound. The third section presents the results and
provides some comments on the performance of each method with respect to the investi-
gated metrics. The last section discusses the results, the assumptions and the limitations
of the study before summarising the main ﬁndings.
2/34
==PAGE:8==
August 21, 2020
2
Theoretical Background
Ambisonics is a surround-sound technology, the goal of which is like any other: to give
stable and uncoloured acoustic images in any position, while keeping the physical means
of reproducing the sound as unobstrusive as possible [Gerzon, 1975].
The term HOA
refers to a full-sphere sound format, obtained through a mathematical decomposition of
the sound ﬁeld into a truncated sum of spherical functions covering its spatial spectrum
to a certain degree of precision. Its particularity lies in the encoding of the decomposed
sound ﬁeld into a so-called HOA-format representation which is speaker independent. The
HOA-format is then decoded to the listener’s set-up. Speciﬁcally, none of the speakers are
audible as separate sources of sound. All of the above stages are performed sequentially
and constitute the signal path of the HOA process shown in ﬁg. 1.
Fig. 1. Block diagram of the signal path in an HOA system [Gerzon, 1975]
2.1
Basic HOA Encoding
The encoding stage relies entirely on a Fourier-Bessel series expansion of the pressure ﬁeld
inside a bounded and source-free region. The acoustic waves are expressed as a weighted
sum of Spherical Harmonic Functions (SHFs). The latter form an orthogonal basis used to
transform any square integrable function on the unit sphere [Oreinos, 2015], in a spherical
coordinate system, where r is the distance to the origin, and δ and θ the elevation and
azimuth angles respectively. Under the previously mentioned assumptions, the pressure
can be expanded as,
p(kr, θ, δ) =
∞
X
m=0
imjm(kr)
m
X
n=0
X
σ=±1
Bσ
mnY σ
mn(θ, δ),
(1)
with the convention i for the imaginary unit, and jm(kr) for the spherical Bessel functions
of degree m; k is the wavenumber, Bσ
mn the HOA coeﬃcients, and Y σ
mn the SHFs of degree
m and order n [Daniel, 2001]. The SHFss are themselves expressed as,
Y σ
mn(θ, δ) =
v
u
u
t(2m + 1) (2 −δ0,n) (m −n)!
(m + n)!Pmn(sin δ)
·
(
cos nθ
if σ = +1
sin nθ
if σ = −1( ignored if n = 0)
(2)
where δ0,n is the Kronecker symbol and Pmn the associated Legendre functions, using the
same notation as as in [Daniel, 2001, Moreau, 2006, Oreinos, 2015].
The SFH are plotted up to degree 3 in ﬁg. 2, where the red and blue colours show positive
and negative values. The ﬁrst three degrees are respectively, a simple monopole (ﬁg. 2a),
a dipole (ﬁg. 2b), and a quadrupole (ﬁg. 2c), with the order representing all the possible
3/34
==PAGE:9==
2.1
Basic HOA Encoding
August 21, 2020
(a) zero degree SFH m = 0
(b) Degree one m = 1 SFH with n ∈[−m, m] increasing from L. to R.
(c) Degree two m = 2 SFH with n ∈[−m, m] increasing from L. to R.
(d) Degree two m = 3 SFH with n ∈[−m, m] increasing from L. to R.
Fig. 2. SFHs plotted as directivity balloons i.e r = (|Y σ
mn(θ, δ)| , θ, δ)
conﬁgurations.
However, more complex shapes are to be observed for higher degrees
(ﬁg. 2d).
Naturally, the pressure expansion series in eq. (1) has to be truncated to a ﬁnite degree
m = M to be computed. M is generally referred to as the order of the HOA system
and leads to a sum of (M + 1)2 SHFs terms. The truncation is the core of HOA de-
composition and is justiﬁed by the decreasing values of the radial weights jm(kr) with
increasing degree m, lower frequencies, and smaller distances from the origin of the co-
ordinate [Williams, 1999]. However, this inevitably results in a spatial error, limiting the
domain of accurate reconstruction to a small ”sweet spot”. The truncation error is given
4/34
==PAGE:10==
2.2
HOA Decoding
August 21, 2020
in [Ward and Abhayapala, 2001] by
ϵ(kr, θ, δ) = |p(kr, θ, δ) −˘p(kr, θ, δ)|2
|p(kr, θ, δ)|2
,
(3)
Where ˘p is the pressure given by the truncated series. This formula takes into account
both the amplitude and the phase mismatch for every point in the considered space. A fair
approximation can be derived for the argument kr yielding suﬃciently low error for the
majority of the practical applications of Ambisonics [Ward and Abhayapala, 2001],
M = ⌈kro⌉,
(4)
with r0 the radius of the sweet spot, and ⌈·⌉the ceiling function. This approximation
nevertheless ensures that the error within the region of interest lies below 4%, (-14dB),
given free space propagation in the array. A quick derivation of eq. (4) leads to the upper
frequency limit of the reconstruction:
fHOA ≤
c
2πr0
M.
(5)
This means that for a value of the speed of sound c = 343 m/s and r0 = 10 cm an
arbitrary radius for a human head, the upper cut-oﬀfrequency only reaches 3800 Hz
for an Ambisonics order of 7. Thus more advanced techniques are to be used in order to
compensate for the high reconstruction error in the high frequencies. Two techniques often
used as a perceptually motivated alternative to the ”basic” decoding are max rE and in-
phase decoding [Daniel, 2001, Malham, 1992]. The transition towards these ”weighted”
methods is realised above a cut-oﬀfrequency deﬁned by eq. (5), or depending on the
listener’s position. Further explanation is not given in this report, but plethora can be
found in the referenced literature.
2.2
HOA Decoding
In a few words, the decoding operation comes down to a plane-wave expansion, and con-
sidering each LS as weighted plane-wave sources (given realisable array radius distances;
commonly r ≈2m). Obviously enough, optimum gain values need to be derived in or-
der to recreate the unit-amplitude expansion realised in eq. (1) as faithfully as possible.
This starts with expanding a unit-amplitude plane wave in spherical harmonics as in
[Moreau, 2006, Daniel, 2001]:
eik·r =
∞
X
m=0
imjm(kr)
m
X
n=0
X
σ=±1
Bσ
mn (θk, δk) Y σ
mn(θ, δ)
(6)
This equation is to be compared with eq. (1), and shows that HOA coeﬃcients Bσ
mn are
only a weighted sum of the SHFs Y σ
mn(θk, δk).
Bσ
mn|pl.wave from (θk,δk) = Y σ
mn (θk, δk)
(7)
This helps generalising to an arbitrary ﬁeld.
Mathematically, this can performed by
equating the plane waves emitted by a spherical loudspeaker array of L elements placed
at angles (θl, δl), to the desired plane wave ﬁeld:
L
X
l=1
sl
M
X
m=0
m
X
n=0
X
σ=±1
Y σ
mn(θl, δl) =
M
X
m=0
m
X
n=0
X
σ=±1
Y σ
mn(θk, δk),
(8)
5/34
==PAGE:11==
2.3
Near Field Encoding
August 21, 2020
where sl is the amplitude gain, and (θk, δk) the incidence of the wave vector k. Then, a
more compact notation can be obtained by expressing eq. (8) in matrix form,
Cs = b,
(9)
with C a [(M + 1)2 × L] matrix containing the sampled SHFss Y σ
mn(θl, δl) for each LS,
which are to be summed with help of the matrix product and applied to LS dependent
gain found in the [L×1] vector s. Logically, the [(M + 1)2 × 1] vector b contains the HOA
coeﬃcients Bσ
mn, which constitute the approximate description of the sound ﬁeld to be
reconstructed. The solving of the system obtained in eq. (9) now depends on the matrices’
dimensions. Usually, L ≥(M +1)2, namely the number of loudspeakers is greater or equal
to the number of HOA coeﬃcients, meaning that the system has fewer equations than
unknowns. Nevertheless, a solution can still be derived using a pseudo-inversion,
bs = CT 
CCT−1 b = pinv(C)b = Db
(10)
with (bs) the estimate yielded by the minimisation of the 2-norm ∥bs∥2 being the loud-
speaker energy, CT the transposed matrix C, and C−1 the inverse. The operator pinv(·)
is the Moore-Penrose pseudo-inverse. The derived solution’s uniqueness is guaranteed by
the minimisation process’ properties, and the obtained matrix pinv(C) is routinely called
D, the decoding matrix [Oreinos, 2015, Williams, 1999]. The presented coding is often re-
ferred to as basic, and can be optimised in many ways [Malham, 1992, Daniel, 2001].
2.3
Near Field Encoding
Near ﬁeld reproduction, is a major challenge in loudspeaker-based auralisation. Listeners
usually rely on ILDs to detect close sound sources (≤1 m), which are induced by the
rapid variations in the wave curvature when it is emitted close at hand [Brungart, 1999].
In Ambisonics-based reproduction, this near-ﬁeld eﬀect can be taken into account by in-
troducing the NFCHOA ﬁltering method . Nevertheless, this leads to the production of
artifacts, and has a restrictive low frequency boundary, which all in all alters the percep-
tion cues despite eﬀorts for novel regularisation techniques [Favrot and Buchholz, 2012].
The near-ﬁeld coding strategy no longer assumes that sources are suﬃciently far away
to be considered as plane waves. Consequently, the coding becomes distance dependent
and now allows a radially spaced reproduction of the sources.
Let a point source be
positioned at point Os (θs, δs, ρs), using the same notation and coordinate system as in
section 2.1. Then the signal S carried by the source should be encoded up to order M
with the following near-ﬁeld Ambisonics components,
Bσ
mnNFC(R) = SHNFC(ρs,R)
m
Y σ
mn (θs, δs) ,
(11)
where R is the radius of the array, ρs the source distance, and HNFC(ρs,R)
m
the NFC ﬁlters
for a given source position and array radius [Daniel, 2003]. The latter are expressed in
the frequency domain with the wavenumber (k = 2πf/c), and up to the same order,
HNFC(ρs,R)
m
(k) = h−
m (kρs)
h−
0 (kρs)
h−
0 (kR)
h−
m(kR),
(12)
which is nothing more than a ratio of spherical Hankel functions (second kind) h−
m.
These coeﬃcients can be used to place a source inside as well as outside the reproduc-
6/34
==PAGE:12==
2.3
Near Field Encoding
August 21, 2020
(a) NFC ﬁlter
(b) Regularised NFC ﬁlter
Fig. 3. Amplitude response of the NFC and regularised NFC ﬁlters as in eq. (12) up to
order 5, for an array of radius R = 2.4 m and and a virtual source distance ρs = 1 m
tion array, because it is no longer assumed that the source should be expanded in plane
waves. The issue however, is that for sources inside the array, these ﬁlters entail large
gains at low frequencies and high degree as seen on ﬁg. 3a.
This gain is evolving as
G ∝m × 20 log10(R/ρs), which is laborious to produce with loudspeakers. Moreover, and
despite their stability, the loudspeaker signals tend to destructively interfere for ρ ≤ρs,
and give rise to inordinately high SPLs for ρ ≥ρs i.e outside the validity range of NF-
CHOA coding. The logical follow-up to this issue is to use a high-pass ﬁlter, in order to
bound the contribution of high order components to the high frequencies, and get rid of
the bass boosting eﬀect they entail. Namely three AWWs were successively introduced for
that purpose ([Daniel, 2003, Ahrens and Spors, 2009]). The most recent one called ”reg-
ularisation window” [Favrot and Buchholz, 2012], shows the most satisfying results,
wreg
m =
2
1 +
HNFC(ρ,R)
m

2.
(13)
It is applied by multiplication with the NFC ﬁlters in the frequency domain and inverse
the reconstruction process: low energy loudspeaker signals add up in the listening area
to create the required sound ﬁeld instead of large energy signals destructively interfer-
ing.
7/34
==PAGE:13==
August 21, 2020
3
Methods
The strategy of this work follows three simple steps. First, a complete simulation frame-
work was implemented to simulate the response of a single monopole, or that of a LS
array consisting of monopoles, either in free-space or at the ear positions of a spherical
head model. This allowed for a ﬂexible evaluation of diﬀerent array conﬁgurations, pro-
cessing strategies, and metrics. This helped verifying the studied theoretical concepts,
and getting a close ﬁrst estimate of the values of the chosen metrics and the validity
range of our system. The simulation allowed determining all of the above for a lot of a
diﬀerent spatial variables - which would have required an unrealistic number of recordings
in practice - and for a high Ambisonics order - whose setup comprises a number of LS
impossible to arrange on an array. The second step of the investigation was to record
HRTFs in the Audio Visual Immersion Lab (AVIL) array at DTU. Simply enough, this
was done to validate the preliminary simulation results, and to assess how the scrutinised
reconstruction techniques would perform in a real-life set-up. Moreover, no ILDs have
previously been recorded using 3D Ambisonics combined with NFC or NFCREG. Lastly,
an extra experiment was conducted in order to inspect the behaviour of the reproduced
sound ﬁelds in reverberant conditions. Indeed, reverberant environments are usually used
in practical experiments because they resemble more real-life situations and also happen
to enhance the usability range of 3D HOA systems ([Oreinos, 2015]). This has however
not been conformed for either NFC nor NFCREG.
This section quickly introduces the AVIL system at DTU, before walking the reader
through the speciﬁcs of the simulation framework, the HRTF recordings and the rever-
berant scenes.
3.1
The Audio Visual Immersion Lab (AVIL)
The Audio Visual Immersion Lab (AVIL) array is located in the acoustics laboratories
at the Danish Technical University in Lyngby. It consists of 64 LS arranged in a regular
ring layout with a 24 LS middle ring. The setup supports 5th order 3D HOA, and M = 5
was chosen throughout this work, for both the simulations and the experiments.
3.2
Simulation
The simulation results were obtained through the VSEMaker framework, implemented for
the project. This framework reproduces classical HOA processing methods seen in other
frameworks such as LoRA [Favrot, 2006]. The ﬁrst DSP chain, leading to the reproduction
of the entire sound ﬁeld on the δl = 0 plane is shown in ﬁg. 4. First, a mono signal is
coded into HOA-Format according to section 2.1. The time dependent M-Channel HOA-
Format signal - M being the order - is then decoded into a N-Channel LS signal - N being
the number of LSs in the system. This signal is played through a virtual LS array, and
Green’s function in free-ﬁeld is used to obtain the instantaneous pressure values that each
LS produces on each point of the meshed horizontal plane. In order for this to be valid,
each LS is assumed to be a monopole radiating in a perfectly anechoic room. Coherently
summing all the N instantaneous pressure values at each point logically leads to one single
pressure value for each coordinate and thus to the reconstructed sound ﬁeld.
8/34
==PAGE:14==
3.3
Single point pressure and HRTF recordings
August 21, 2020
Fig. 4. Block diagram of the DSP stages leading to the sound ﬁeld simulation in the
VSEMaker framework
The second block diagram in ﬁg. 5 presents the DSP stages yielding the binaural signals.
This chain starts from the N-Channel LS signals obtained through HOA coding and
decoding just like in ﬁg. 4. From there a spherical head model ([Duda and Martens, 1998])
is now used to obtain the instantaneous pressure values that each LS produces on each
of the two ears, which are nothing more than two points on the horizontal plane placed
at OL(−π/2, 0, rhead) and OR(π/2, 0, rhead), for the left and right ear respectively, with
rhead = 0.01 m, the head radius.
The simulated array are the AVIL array and a CONTROL array. The CONTROL array
is a virtual array of 240 LSs following a t-design layout [Hardin and Sloane, 1996], and
auralised up to order 10. When it makes sense however, a simple monopole radiating in
free ﬁeld is chosen as the reference condition for the reproduced source.
Fig. 5. Block diagram of the DSP stages leading to the binaural signal simulation in the
VSEMaker framework
3.3
Single point pressure and HRTF recordings
All of the experimental data was recorded in the 64 channel LS array AVIL. The binau-
ral recordings were made using a B&K Type 4128 Heand and Torso Simulator (HATS)
without ear canals (ﬁg. 6c), and the single channel measurement using a omnidirectional
B&K pressure microphone (ﬁg. 6b). The extra LS added in the room was a KEF LS50 -
the same model as the rest of the units on the array - and was strapped on a stand inside
the array after being adjusted to the right height (ﬁg. 6a). A set of HRTF and omnidi-
rectional transfer functions was then recorded for the HATS and the single microphone
respectively. The LSs in the array were previously equalised in level, frequency and delay.
The XLS’s response was also equalised using the average of the two nearest array LSs
9/34
==PAGE:15==
3.4
Reverberant scenes
August 21, 2020
when the extra unit was placed at 2.4 m. The response of the 41st and 42nd LSs which are
the closest to the XLS is shown in ﬁg. 7a. The dB reference is their respective frequency
response when the XLS was not inside the array. As can be seen the shadowing eﬀect is
really slight, and mainly occurs at high frequencies, i.e above the HOA cut-oﬀfrequency
of the system. Furthermore, this slender swerve is completely evened out when taking
into account the response of the entire system as shown on ﬁg. 7b. The deviation of the
system’s average frequency response is contained within 0.3 dB, and thus the presence of
the XLS has undeniably no repercussion on the original set-up’s response.
3.4
Reverberant scenes
The reverberant scenes used in this work come from the Ambisonic Recordings of Typi-
cal Environment (ARTE) database [Weisser et al., 2019], containing multichannel higher-
order ambisonic recordings of 13 realistic typical environments. The database also in-
cludes Multichannel Room Impulse Responses (MRIR) saved as 31-channel HOA signals,
in which the Direct Sound (DS) component was separated from the rest of the MRIR and
can be expressed as a single channel Room Impulse Response (RIR). Naturally it also con-
tains the complementary Reverberant part (REV), and the two of them summed together
add back up to the original MRIR. In order to compare the ILDs yielded by the diﬀer-
ent reproduction techniques in a reverberant environment, the DS MRIR was extracted
and coded in all the investigated strategies: HOA, NFCHOA, NFCREG and a monopole
source radiating in free ﬁeld - corresponding to the XLS. The signal ﬂow is shown on
ﬁg. 8. The source of the direct sound was placed where it was recorded in the scene, i.e
at a radius of ρs = 1.3 m and oriented to the two angles 52.5 and 112.5 deg recorded in
the AVIL. They were then combined with the same HOA coded REV, to constitute four
diﬀerent MRIR describing the same reverberant scene. They were ensuingly convolved
with the same broadband sweep to create 4 diﬀerent multichannel signals. Two binau-
ral signals were then obtained for each coding paradigm, by convolving the multichannel
signal with either the spherical head model, or the measured HRTFs.
10/34
==PAGE:16==
3.4
Reverberant scenes
August 21, 2020
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 6. XLS strapped on its stand and placed in between two array LSs at θsource = 52.5
and rsource = 2.4 m (a). Omnidirectional microphone in the middle of the array (b). HATS
in the middle of the array with the XLS positioned at θsource = 52.5 and rsource = 0.5
m (c). HATS in the middle of the array with the XLS positioned at θsource = 112.5 and
rsource = 2.4 m (c).
11/34
==PAGE:17==
August 21, 2020
(a)
(b)
Fig. 7.
Frequency response at the centre of the AVIL array measured with a Omni
microphone, of the LSs 41 and 42 positioned behind the XLS, as a function of the position
of the XLS, the dB reference is the frequency response of the LSs when the XLS is not
in the array (a). Frequency response at the centre of the AVIL array measured with an
Omni microphone, when the XLS is present in the set-up and placed at three diﬀerent
radial positions (b).
Fig. 8. Block diagram of the DSP stages leading to the binaural signal simulation for
the reverberant scenes
4
Results
All the results obtained throughout the project are presented in this section. Each sub-
section refers to one metric.The metrics are presented in the same sequence as in the
methods. Namely, results from sections 4.1 to 4.4 were purely obtained through simula-
tions, section 4.6 is a comparison between simulated and measured values, and sections 4.7
to 4.9 focus on the reverberant scene study.
The ﬁrst measure considered for the simulation data is the real pressure in space, across
the whole horizontal plane in the array. This metric is useful for getting a quick global
understanding of the curvature of the reconstructed sound ﬁeld and the size of the sweet
spot. The goal was also to understand the eﬀect of the diﬀerent NFC techniques and
how this ﬁltering aﬀects the pressure and the error. In order to support these broadband
analyses, the amplitude decay examined in section 4.2 displays the ability of the diﬀerent
techniques to reproduce the correct pressure levels in space; whereas the frequency re-
12/34
==PAGE:18==
4.1
Sound ﬁeld reproduction
August 21, 2020
sponse outside of the origin shown in section 4.3 indicates how far from the centre does the
system can reproduce the sound ﬁeld with an accurate frequency response. These three
metrics have been applied in [Favrot, 2006], who computed them for a 2D HOA system.
They can be considered as a sanity check and a starting point for the extension of these
former results to 3D Ambisonics. These simulation data were combined into a multi-
dimensional mapping of the sweet spot size as a function of amplitude, frequency and
source position in section 4.5. The latter is a new way of visualising and understanding
the validity range of Ambisonics system and NFCHOA coding.
The next section compares the simulated data with the measured one. ILDs were cho-
sen for this comparison due to their important role for localising close sound sources
[Brungart, 1999]. ILDs are thus a relevant psycho-acoustic cue to examine, and were also
used in [Favrot and Buchholz, 2012] for 2D Ambisonics. The frequency range and the
source positioning was dictated by the simulation results and the boundaries observed in
section 4.5.
Finally, sections 4.7 to 4.9 show the inﬂuence of reverberation on the reproduced sound
ﬁelds.
Since most of the variations introduced by reverberation cannot be solely no-
ticed through changes in ILDs, two more commonly used metrics were computed, the
Interaural Cross Correlation (IACC), which is commonly used to characterise reverberant
environments, alongside with ITDs.
4.1
Sound ﬁeld reproduction
The sound ﬁeld simulations from ﬁgs. 9 to 11, show the real pressure in the horizontal
plane yielded by a monopole radiating a 600 Hz pure tone. The source is HOA coded and
placed at rsource = 2.4 m in ﬁg. 9, NFC coded at rsource = 0.5 m in ﬁg. 10, and NFCREG
coded at rsource = 0.5 m in ﬁg. 11. Each of these ﬁgures contains three subplots. The
reference case to the left is always a monopole radiating in free-ﬁeld, the middle plot is
the simulation of the AVIL array and the right one is the CONTROL array. for the latter
two reconstructed sound ﬁelds, the truncation error was overlaid, which delimits the areas
where the error according to eq. (3) is lower than 4%. Only the contour close to the centre
is shown even though there are some areas scattered around the array where the sound
is reproduced correctly, which are of minor interest.
The encircled area in ﬁg. 9 is fairly large due to the low frequency of the monopole and
its distance from the centre, all of which combined makes it easier to reproduce in HOA.
The sweet spot radius is about twice as big for the CONTROL array, which suggests
that the increase in order actually makes a big diﬀerence in simple acoustic conditions.
However, the same diﬀerence is not found in ﬁg. 10 for a nearby NFC coded source. There,
the surrounded area is equally as big in both cases. Furthermore, the sound ﬁeld shows
extremely high pressure values for the CONTROL array. This is due to the NFC coding
and the bass boosting phenomenon that occurs at low frequency, and at high order, and
becomes more obvious when looking at the NFC ﬁlter shapes on ﬁg. 3a. This explains
why the 5th order AVIL system is not clipping as much as the 10th order CONTROL array,
because it does not reproduce high order components. As shown in ﬁg. 11 the transition
to NFCREG coding solves the clipping issues for the CONTROL array. This happens,
however, at the cost of a decreased sweet spot size. Interestingly, NFCREG yields higher
dB values for the AVIL. This might hint that using NFCREG for low order systems when
13/34
==PAGE:19==
4.2
Amplitude decay
August 21, 2020
unnecessary, ends up equalising the sound pressure in the array, and creating more high
sound level zones.
Fig. 9. Real pressure in the horizontal plane for a monopole radiating at 600 Hz and
placed at rsource = 2.4 m. The monopole was coded as: a reference monopole radiating in
free ﬁeld (L), 5th order HOA in the AVIL (M), 10th order HOA in the CONTROL array
(R). The continuous black line represents the zones where the error as in eq. (3) is less
than 4 %.
Fig. 10. Real pressure in the horizontal plane for a monopole radiating at 600 Hz and
placed at rsource = 0.5 m. The monopole was coded as: a reference monopole radiating in
free ﬁeld (L), 5th order NFC in the AVIL (M), 10th order NFC in the CONTROL array
(R). The continuous black line represents the zones where the error as in eq. (3) is less
than 4 %.
4.2
Amplitude decay
Whereas the error contours in section 4.1 combine both amplitude and phase error, this
section now only investigates amplitude matching. All ﬁgs. 12a, 12b, 13a and 13b show
14/34
==PAGE:20==
4.3
Frequency response outside the origin
August 21, 2020
Fig. 11. Real pressure in the horizontal plane for a monopole radiating at 600 Hz and
placed at rsource = 0.5 m. The monopole was coded as: a reference monopole radiating in
free ﬁeld (L), 5th order NFCREG in the AVIL (M), 10th order NFCREG in the CONTROL
array (R). The continuous black line represents the zones where the error as in eq. (3) is
less than 4 %.
the pressure on the axis connecting the auralised near ﬁeld source radiating at 600 Hz,
and the sweet spot. In order to compare the match between the slopes, their magnitude
was plotted in dB with reference to the amplitude of the monopole source at the centre
of the sweet spot. Note that this only aﬀects the standard HOA coding level, since it
is independent of the source’s radial position. This is conﬁrmed by ﬁgs. 12a and 12b,
where the HOA slope remains the same despite a changing source position. The second
observation concerns the amplitude outside of the sweet spot for the NFC coding, which
is drastically higher than the one of the regularised coding in the case of very close sources
as seen in ﬁg. 13b. This can be connected to the other clipping values seen in ﬁg. 10,
and highlights once again the relevance of the regularised coding for such cases. The two
ﬁg. 13a and ﬁg. 13b compare the NFCREG coding across two diﬀerent source radii, for the
AVIL and the CONTROL array. They mainly showcase a common observation regarding
Ambisonics technology: a substantial increase in order does not necessarily result in a
signiﬁcant gain in reproduction accuracy [Daniel, 2003, Oreinos, 2015]. Indeed, for both
positions, the amplitude match around the origin is more or less identical, despite a two-
fold increase in order.
4.3
Frequency response outside the origin
The previous amplitude decay plots were obtained with single frequency monopoles. Logi-
cally enough, this section now presents the magnitude of the spectrum over all frequencies
for ﬁxed source positions. The two ﬁgs. 14 and 15, show the simulated frequency response
for four oﬀ-centred receiver positions, whose coordinates can be seen on the mini maps
in the corner of the ﬁgures. The spectra were computed in regularised coding for both
arrays, and for two diﬀerent source radii: 1 and 0.15 m. The reference for the dB scale
is the magnitude of the spectrum at the origin, which is perfectly ﬂat due to the the-
oretically perfect reconstruction the Ambisonics technique yields. The positions of the
15/34
==PAGE:21==
4.3
Frequency response outside the origin
August 21, 2020
(a) rsource = 1m
(b) rsource = 0.15m
Fig. 12. Absolute pressure amplitude decay of a 600 Hz monopole auralised at 1 and
0.15m for 3 diﬀerent coding paradigms in the 5th order AVIL array
(a) rsource = 1m
(b) rsource = 0.15m
Fig. 13. Absolute pressure amplitude decay of a 600 Hz monopole auralised at 1 and
0.15m for the 5th order AVIL array and the 10th Order CONTROL array
receiver points were chosen such that the radius between them and the source placed at
rsource = 0.15 m is always the same, which means that the spectra do not require any
amplitude scaling. In the case of the source placed 1 m away from the origin, the radius
diﬀerence between the receiver points and the source was deemed negligible and has there-
fore not been compensated for. Outside of the origin, the system’s response is subject to
destructive interference, as can be seen in ﬁg. 14a. The further the receiver position, the
lower the starting frequency of the interference. The assessment of the CONTROL array
(ﬁg. 15a) shows similar patterns, except that the ﬁrst dips appear at higher frequency due
16/34
==PAGE:22==
4.4
Simulated ILDs for Anechoic signals
August 21, 2020
to the higher processing order. For a nearer source, the frequency accuracy seems to show
the opposite trend to that of the amplitude shown in the previous section. Figs. 14b and
15b, show signiﬁcantly ﬂatter frequency responses for the source as 0.15 m as compared
to 1 m.
(a) rsource = 1m
(b) rsource = 0.15m
Fig. 14. Frequency response observed at four diﬀerent positions for a source auralised
at 1m (L), and 0.15m (R), with regularised coding, for the 5th order AVIL array.
(a) rsource = 1m
(b) rsource = 0.15m
Fig. 15. Frequency response observed at four diﬀerent positions for a source auralised
at 1m (L), and 0.15m (R), with regularised coding, for the 10th order Control array.
4.4
Simulated ILDs for Anechoic signals
The binaural signals were obtained by convolving each loudspeaker signal with modelled
spherical head transfer functions.
The spectra of the resulting left and right channel
17/34
==PAGE:23==
4.5
Sweet spot size
August 21, 2020
signals then underwent third octave smoothing, before being subtracted to yield the ILDs.
Once again, the HOA coded signal were scaled in level in order to be compared in a fair
way to the other distance dependent coding strategies. The reference case is a monopole
radiating in free ﬁeld, and the corresponding binaural signals are also calculated with the
spherical head model.
Figs. 16 and 17 show the resulting ILDs, for two diﬀerent source radii, the four coding
paradigms and both arrays. The ILDs displayed inﬁgs. 16a and 16b all showcase a really
good match between the reference conditions and the other techniques. This encourag-
ing result suggests that all strategies might reproduce signiﬁcant ILDs for a moderate
source distance. Moreover, all the techniques seem equivalent in ﬁg. 16a, and only drift
apart in ﬁg. 16b, where the NFCREG coded source shows the most satisfying results. A
comparison between these two ﬁgures that only diﬀer in HOA processing order reveals
that besides increasing the frequency range of the system, a higher order does not help
improving the ILD match at lower frequencies. For close sources, the system is incapable
of matching the reference values as shown in ﬁg. 17. Even the most eﬃcient method
which seems to be NFCREG falls short of the mark by 2 to 3 dB in the frequency range
of interest, this being noticed independently of the order. Indeed, all the loudspeaker
have to be driven to a high level to reproduce close sources, which entails high absolute
pressure values everywhere in the array, even on the blind side of the sweet spot and thus,
makes ILDs less prominent. This is even more evident for the CONTROL array which
comprises more LSs, and shows almost constant ILDs for the NFC coded values, and a
huge drop at high frequencies for the NFCREG coded ones. Once again, increasing the
order does not bring the low-frequency ILDs nearer to the reference, but it does improve
the ILD reproduction at high frequencies.
(a) 5th Order AVIL
(b) 10th Order Control array
Fig. 16.
ILD for a source positioned at rsource = 1 m, and θsource = 52.5◦, auralised
with the three diﬀerent coding paradigms, and a reference monopole source radiating in
free-ﬁeld; for both the 5th order AVIL and the 10th order CONTROL array.
4.5
Sweet spot size
The three previously presented metrics, namely amplitude decay, frequency response, and
ILD were investigated for a speciﬁc set of parameters (e.g ﬁxed frequency and varying
18/34
==PAGE:24==
4.5
Sweet spot size
August 21, 2020
(a) 5th Order AVIL
(b) 10th Order Control array
Fig. 17. ILD for a source positioned at rsource = 0.5 m, and θsource = 52.5◦, auralised
with the three diﬀerent coding paradigms, and a reference monopole source radiating in
free-ﬁeld; for both the 5th order AVIL and the 10th order CONTROL array
source position in ﬁg. 13a or the opposite in ﬁg. 14a). The following goal was to broaden
this study and try to show the evolution of our standards as a function of several param-
eters at once. All the 2D plots previously obtained were then used to identify an area of
correct reproduction, which could be extrapolated to the size of the sweet spot. The sweet
spot was deﬁned here as the area in which the match between the three aforementioned
criteria in the case of Ambisonics reproduction, match those of a reference monopole
source radiating in free ﬁeld, auralised in the same conditions as the simulated one. The
following sections show how the diﬀerent errors evolve as a function of both frequency
and source or receiver position.
4.5.1
Sweet spot size and amplitude matching
The previous results describing the amplitude decay in section 4.2 already give a good
impression on the ability of the diﬀerent coding strategies to reproduce the correct evo-
lution of the absolute pressure in space. However, the were only computed for 2 diﬀerent
source positions, and only one frequency. The error between the reference monopole’s
amplitude decay, and the considered NFCREG reproduce wave front was then computed
for a ﬁxed frequency and an increasing source radius in ﬁg. 18a, and inversely for a ﬁxed
source radius and an increasing frequency in ﬁg. 18b. The error was then converted into
a sweet spot radius, which was deﬁned as the radius of the region where the simulated
sound ﬁeld’s amplitude decay matches the one of the reference within a 1 dB error thresh-
old. For a ﬁxed frequency, r0 rises with increasing source distance. It does so swiftly for
sources between 0,5 and 1m, and plateaus for any source above. The maximum size of
the sweet spot seems greatly dependent on the Ambisonics order for a ﬁxed frequency.
The sweet spot radius r0 decreases with increasing frequency, and crosses the 0.1 m mark
at the cut-oﬀfrequency deﬁned by eq. (4) as expected.
The two previous 2D plots were then combined into a 3D contour plot shown in ﬁgs.
19a and 19b, where the isometric lines delimit the regions of same sweet spot size in the
parametric space deﬁned by the source position and its frequency. Also in this view,
19/34
==PAGE:25==
4.5
Sweet spot size
August 21, 2020
(a) Fixed f, increasing rsource
(b) Fixed rsource, increasing f
Fig. 18. Sweet spot size as deﬁned by an Absolute Amplitude diﬀerence between a NFC
REG reproduced source and a reference monopole source radiating in free-ﬁeld within
1dB; as a function of alternatively source distance and frequency for both the 5th order
AVIL and the 10th order CONTROL array
the frequency limitation of the system appears as constant, and it shows the expected
behaviour in relation to the Ambisonics order. A somewhat more interesting observation
can be made regarding the evolution of the sweet spot size as a function of source aural-
isation distance. Its lower cut-oﬀseems independent of the frequency, and only slightly
aﬀected by the order at high frequencies. Overall, a distinct cut-oﬀis found for both
source position and frequency.
(a) 5th Order AVIL
(b) 10th Order Control array
Fig. 19. Sweet spot size as deﬁned by the area where the Absolute pressure amplitude
diﬀerence between a NFC REG reproduced source and a reference monopole source radi-
ating in free-ﬁeld is within 1dB; as a function of source distance and frequency for both
the 5th order AVIL and the 10th order CONTROL array.
20/34
==PAGE:26==
4.5
Sweet spot size
August 21, 2020
4.5.2
Sweet spot size and frequency response
The previous plots in section 4.3 were the simulated frequency response observed for a
small number of discrete receiver positions. In order to provide a more complete insight
on the ability of the system to correctly reproduce a ﬂat spectrum in the biggest possible
area, a great number of the same curves shown in ﬁgs. 14a and 14b was computed for
numerous receiver positions located on the axis linking the source and the centre of the
array. The data was then condensed into a 3D contour plot similar to the one in ﬁg. 19,
and shows the evolution of the reproduction frequency error as a function of receiver
position and frequency of the radiating monopole. The aforementioned plot is in ﬁg. 20,
where the lines delimit the error between the reference pressure at the origin and the
simulated pressure produced by a monopole auralised in NFCREG coding, for diﬀerent
receiver positions and across frequencies. Here the receiver positions are on the same
axis as the source. A meaningful sanity check is the fact that the ﬁrst signiﬁcant errors
appear at the cut-oﬀfrequency for a receiver placed at 0.1 m, which is in accordance with
eq. (4) and with the deﬁnition of the cut-oﬀfrequency. These two plots display the same
trend when considering the 3 dB error line closer to the centre. Naturally ﬁg. 20b shows
that the CONTROL array entails a larger sweet spot size for mid and high frequencies,
knowing that the HOA processing order is two-fold. Nevertheless, this increase is slight
compared to the increase in order, and concurs with the previous observations regarding
the mitigated beneﬁts of using a high order M.
(a) 5th Order AVIL
(b) 10th Order CONTROL array
Fig. 20.
Frequency response for a source auralised at 1 m as a function of receiver
position
4.5.3
Sweet spot size and anechoic ILD reproduction
The combined eﬀect of the source position and the frequency is shown on ﬁg. 21 where
the contour lines represent the absolute error in dB between the reference ILD yielded
by the monopole radiating in free-ﬁeld, and that produced by the two systems. At low
frequencies, the behaviour of the two systems is the same, and the order does not seem to
interact with the range in source position. For high frequencies however, the accuracy of
the AVIL system accuracy drops notably before the cut-oﬀ, unlike the CONTROL array.
Undeniably, the ILD appears to be less lenient of a criterion to qualify the reproduction
21/34
==PAGE:27==
4.6
Measured ILDs for anechoic signals
August 21, 2020
reliability when considering the absolute error.
(a) 5th Order AVIL
(b) 10th Order Control array
Fig. 21. Absolute ILD diﬀerence between a NFC REG reproduced source and a reference
monopole source radiating in free-ﬁeld; as a function of source distance and frequency for
both the 5th order AVIL and the 10th order CONTROL array
4.6
Measured ILDs for anechoic signals
The following ILDs were obtained with the measured binaural signals. The latter were
the product of the convolution of 64 channel signals generated in the framework with the
HRTFs recorded in the AVIL. This was done for 6 diﬀerent source positions corresponding
to 2 angles (52.5 and 112.5 degrees) and 3 radii (2.4, 1 and 0.5 m). The angles were chosen
to reproduce both medium and large ILDs respectively, and to allow the placing of the
stand directly in between two array loudspeakers for rsource = 2.4 m.
The ﬁrst series of ILDs is shown in ﬁg. 22, plotted together with the ILDs simulated in
the framework with the exact same parameters: the extra loudspeaker is compared with
a virtual monopole radiating in free ﬁeld and the ILDs obtained with the HRTFs are set
side by side with the spherical head ILDs yielded by the framework.
Generally, there is a good match between measured and simulated data for all radii, and
below the cut-oﬀfrequency. It is even more accurate for the array ILDs for which the
error only exceeds 1 dB for the shortest distance. The match between the two monopole
values is somewhat poorer starting from 1 kHz, and the error increases with decreasing
distance. This might be due to the diﬀerent transfer functions of the HATS and the
spherical model at high frequencies, and especially at resonance frequencies. The second
set of ILDs is shown in ﬁg. 23 in the same way as before, but with the additional source
placed at an angle of 112.5◦instead. Once again the match between the measured and the
simulated values is close up to the Ambisonics cut-oﬀfrequency. However, the measured
ILDs exhibit a drastic trough immediately above the limit, which the simulation failed to
predict. This could be once more related to the diﬀerence in head models.
22/34
==PAGE:28==
4.7
ILDs for reverberant scenes
August 21, 2020
Fig. 22. Measured vs Simulated ILDs for the 5th order AVIL, with an extra Loudspeaker
at 52.5◦and three diﬀerent radial positions: 2.4 m (L), 1 m (M), 0.5 m (R).
Fig. 23. Measured vs Simulated ILDs for the 5th order AVIL, with an extra Loudspeaker
at 112.5◦and three diﬀerent radial positions: 2.4 m (L), 1 m (M), 0.5 m (R).
4.7
ILDs for reverberant scenes
This section shows the reproduced ILDs in a reverberant scene. The reverberant scene is
the ”train station” scene from the ARTE database. It is the main concourse of a train
station, a large space open to the platform with a reverberation time of RT60 = 1.0 s
[Weisser et al., 2019]. The processing leading to the frequency dependent ILDs on ﬁgs. 24
and 25 was explained in section 3.4. The source was placed at rsource = 1.3 m, to match
the distance of the only available DS RIR given in the database. The scene itself however,
was rotated to the two angles of 52.5◦and 112.5◦previously investigated in this work.
All of the observations regarding the discrepancy between the HRTFs and the spherical
model, discussed in section 4.6 still apply.
Simulated values in ﬁg. 24a and ﬁg. 25a show interesting results. All of the techniques
seem to yield satisfactory results, both the NFC and NFCREG are once again completely
overlapping and fall down above the cut-oﬀfrequency. Surprisingly, the level-scaled HOA
resulted in larger ILDs at high frequencies than the dry reference. This inaccuracy high-
lights that level-scaling is not enough to reproduce the correct curvature of the sound ﬁeld
especially at high frequencies. The simulated XLS response follows very closely the dry
reference condition because of the low DRER of the reproduced reverberant scene. Con-
sidering now the ILDs based on HRTFs, the results are more mixed, as seen in ﬁgs. 24b
and 25b. The two NFC and NFCREG techniques result in lower ILDs when measured
23/34
==PAGE:29==
4.8
Binaural cross-correlation for reverberant scenes
August 21, 2020
in the real LS array, even though in the anechoic conditions the correspondence to the
reference ILDs was good (ﬁg. 22). It is also worth commenting, that the ILDs produced
by the HOA coded signals hover above the corresponding NFCREG values. This might
hint that the sound ﬁeld related to NFCREG coded DS interacts poorly with its HOA-
coded REV counterpart. This destructively interfering multi-channel signal mix results in
smaller ILDs even though the HOA strategy does not include distance coding. Conversely,
the XLS signal hardly diﬀers from the dry ILD reference even in the measured conditions.
This allows two possible interpretations. On one hand, the use of an XLS might lead to a
more predominant DS, which in turn results in the close match between the dry reference
and the reverberant ILDs observed in ﬁg. 24. On the other hand, the chosen reverberant
scene could have a too high DRER and the same investigation in a more complex envi-
ronment might show more signiﬁcant diﬀerences. It is also hard to claim only by looking
at these ILDs that reverberant conditions help extending the area of correct reproduction
for array processing techniques. It was expected that early and late reﬂections coming
from random directions curtail the ILDs, and that by doing so they limit the maximum
observable true ILD range. This brings the ecological ILDs down closer to the upper
limit of the reproducible level diﬀerences in the array, when using NFCHOA coding. The
ﬁrst reason is once again the high DRER of the investigated scene. The second however
is a bit diﬀerent: the source is already placed at 1.3 m, which revealed itself to be cor-
rectly reproduced in anechoic conditions in section 4.4. The results could have been more
conclusive had a MRIR for a closer source placed at 0.5 m been available.
(a) Simulated ILDs
(b) Measured ILDs
Fig. 24.
Simulated and Measured ILDs for a reverberant scene with split direct and
reverberant sound coded in four diﬀerent paradigms. Source placed at rsource = 1.3 m
and θsource = 52.5◦
4.8
Binaural cross-correlation for reverberant scenes
This section presents the IACC for both the simulated and measured binaural signals in
the reverberant scene for a source placed at at rsource = 1.3 m and θsource = 52.5◦. The
values disclosed on ﬁgs. 26 and 27 are actually the maximum of the correlation between
the left and right ear signals across frequency. The data was obtained by ﬁltering the
binaural signals with a 16-ﬁlter gammatone ﬁlter-bank, and computing the IACC for each
of the band-passed signals. The plotted vector then contains one IACC maximum for each
24/34
==PAGE:30==
4.8
Binaural cross-correlation for reverberant scenes
August 21, 2020
(a) Simulated ILDs
(b) Measured ILDs
Fig. 25.
Simulated and Measured ILDs for a reverberant scene with split direct and
reverberant sound coded in four diﬀerent paradigms. Source placed at rsource = 1.3 m
and θsource = 112.5◦degree
of the ﬁltered signals, and is plotted against the centre frequency of the corresponding
gammatone ﬁlters. The reference for all cases is the dry simulated monopole radiating in
free-ﬁeld. In order to deliver a fair comparison of the diﬀerent array processing methods,
the HOA coded DS was scaled to the reference because this strategy is initially distance
independent.
Comparing ﬁg. 26a and ﬁg. 26b helps understanding the diﬀerences between simulated
and measured values for anechoic scenes. The simulated values are closely following the
reference case, except for a slight drop at high frequency, which is anyway above the cut-
oﬀfrequency of the system. For the measured values however, the maximum coherence
starts to drop after 600 Hz and reaches a local minimum around 1.5 kHz before rising
again to meet the reference at the cut-oﬀfrequency. After that however, the measured
IACC curves decrease even more rapidly all the way to the upper frequency boundary.
This can be noticed for all reproduction techniques, and suggests that the HRTFs play a
major role in bringing the IACC down at these frequencies. In particular, even the XLS
lies far below the reference, which it was expected to match more closely. Lastly, all of
the array processing techniques result in the same values in anechoic conditions because
the distance coding does not aﬀect the correlation if there are no early or late reﬂections
to compete with the DS.
The IACC vs. frequency is also shown in ﬁg. 27, now for both simulated and measured
reverberant conditions. Here in ﬁg. 27a, some discrepancies between the diﬀerent tech-
niques and the reference can already be noticed. None of the curves are overlapping with
the dry reference because of the reverberant conditions, and the inﬂuence of the early
and late reﬂection can be seen in this slight gap, whose small width can be related to the
high DRER of the reverberant scene. Once again both the NFC and NFCREG methods
completely overlap over the whole frequency range due to the positioning of the source,
which is suﬃciently far away to prevent the NFC method from clipping, and thus the
NFCREG to bring added value. The observed NFC and NFCREG lines showcase a fairly
good matching range that extends marginally above the cut-oﬀfrequency, before drop-
25/34
==PAGE:31==
4.9
ITDs for reverberant scenes
August 21, 2020
ping around 3 kHz. The HOA curve however, is signiﬁcantly below the other two, even
though the DS was scaled in level to compensate for the absence of distance coding in the
method. This highlights that even though the absolute pressure levels might match, the
curvature of the sound ﬁeld and the phase do not match the one of a close source.
Finally, the XLS gives a solid match to the reference, while naturally being overall some-
what below the dry reference level.
The gathered reverberant measured data greatly
diﬀers from the simulated one. Indeed, the matching range of all the reproduction tech-
niques with the reference value is signiﬁcantly cut down in ﬁg. 27b. Namely, all of them
start to drop at around 600 Hz, just like in ﬁg. 26b. From 600 Hz to the cut-oﬀfrequency,
the HOA is the lowest, while the NFC and the NFCREG are hovering above it - and
still overlapping. After fcut however, all of the array processing techniques yield similar
irregular IACC values, that highlight both the inﬂuence of the reverberation and the use
of recorded HRTFs. Conversely, the XLS data exhibits he same behaviour as in the cor-
responding dry situation in ﬁg. 26b, only that the trough occurring at 1.5 kHz, and the
high frequency drop are deeper. This stipulates that the XLS might be a more stable way
to reproduce a close source in a reverberant environment when looking at the maximum
IACC over frequency.
(a) Simulated anechoic scene
(b) Measured anechoic scene
Fig. 26. Simulated and Measured maximum IACC values over frequency, for a source
placed at rsource = 1.3 m and θsource = 52.5◦, in an anechoic scene.
4.9
ITDs for reverberant scenes
In order to calculate the ITDs in this section, the reverberant signals were ﬁltered through
a 16-channel gammatone ﬁlter-bank. The cross-correlation between the left and right
signal of each of the 16 resulting binaural signals was then computed. The ITD is the
time lag where the maximum correlation value occurs, and the corresponding frequency
is the centre frequency of the gammatone ﬁlter. The simulated and recorded ITDs for the
anechoic scene are shown in ﬁg. 28a and ﬁg. 28b respectively. The reference case for all
the plots is the dry simulated ITD data.
It comes as no surprise that the simulated data is perfectly matching with the reference
below the cut-oﬀfrequency, and diverges above.
Since no level cues intervene when
detecting ITDs, all of the array processing techniques are equivalent. Indeed, the same
26/34
==PAGE:32==
4.9
ITDs for reverberant scenes
August 21, 2020
(a) Simulated reverberant scene
(b) Measured reverberant scene
Fig. 27. Simulated and Measured maximum IACC values over frequency, for a source
placed at rsource = 1.3 m and θsource = 52.5◦degree, in a reverberant scene.
ILDs can be induced by two diﬀerent sources with the same angle and diﬀerent radii.
That is why the HOA line is completely coinciding with the NFC and NFCREG one,
even above fcut. The measured anechoic data is visible in ﬁg. 28b. The gap between the
reference line and the others is the evidence of an angular error made when positioning
the HATS to a smaller angle than 52.5◦during the recording phase. Besides this oﬀset,
the behaviour of all the curves seems to follow the pattern of the reference. Once again,
the array processing techniques yield the same ITD values, for the same reason than in
the simulated case. What is new however, is the XLS data. If it were not for the oﬀset,
the red curve would perfectly match the reference, thus suggesting that this techniques
provides meaningful ITDs in these conditions.
Simulated reverberant conditions are shown in ﬁg. 29a. A small oﬀset is also visible on
this plot, which might be the consequence of a slight misplacement of the microphone
during the recording of the reverberant MRIR. The HOA line now ceases to coincide with
the two other NFC and NFCREG curves, although they follow the same trend. All the
array processing strategies seem to provide meaningful ITDs for low frequencies, but do
not hold these values constant, and the higher the frequency, the closer to centre is the
source localised. Above the cut-oﬀfrequency, their behaviour becomes even more erratic
which was also the case in the dry simulated scene. The diﬀerence between the HOA
and the other two array processing techniques might lay in the interaction between the
reﬂections and the placement of the source. Even though the level of the DS was also
scaled to compensate for the absence of distance coding, the phase and the curvature of
the sound ﬁeld are in no way reproduced as correctly as the other two methods. Thus,
the interference between the DS and the REV do not manifest themselves in the same
way. Even though the array processing techniques fail to reproduce acceptable values,
the XLS set-up seems to follow the exact same trend as the reference, despite the small
angular oﬀset. the absence of spikes and trough means that no early or late reﬂections
pop up in the ITD data. This is once again due to the high DRER of the reverberant
scene entailing that the reﬂections are at a too low level compared to the direct sound
and do not produce high enough peaks in the cross correlation.
27/34
==PAGE:33==
4.9
ITDs for reverberant scenes
August 21, 2020
The shift to HRTFs and recorded data in ﬁg. 29b introduces another oﬀset, which the
addition of the one seen on ﬁg. 28a and the one appearing on ﬁg. 29a, which correspond
respectively to the bias of the HRTFs and the reverberant MRIR. The three array pro-
cessing techniques yield mediocre results, and seem to cut-oﬀearlier than the expected
frequency. On the other hand the XLS once gain appears to follow the same trend as
the reference despite the signiﬁcant oﬀset. One interesting thing to notice though is the
huge dip at 1.5 kHz, that is aﬀecting all the recorded data in ﬁg. 29b. It might be related
to a head size eﬀect, considering that a negative ITD value was even observed, which is
unexpected regarding the incidence angle. All in all, as was suggested by the IACC value
seen the previous section, the XLS set-up may be the most faithful way to reproduce
correct ITDs.
(a) Simulation
(b) Recordings
Fig. 28. ITDs across frequency, for the anechoic scene, with the spherical head model
(L), and the Measured HRTFs (R) in the 5th Order AVIL array, for a source placed at
rsource = 1.3 m and θsource = 52.5◦.
(a) Simulation
(b) Recordings
Fig. 29. ITDs across frequency, for the reverberant scene, with the spherical head model
(L), and the Measured HRTFs (R) in the 5th Order AVIL array, for a source placed at
rsource = 1.3 m and θsource = 52.5◦.
28/34
==PAGE:34==
August 21, 2020
5
Discussion
An extensive series of simulation and recorded results was presented and analysed in
section 4. The upcoming discussion summarises the ﬁndings of this work regarding the
choice of either array processing techniques or the XLS set-up. Then, the limitations
are discussed, which characterise the applicability of the aforementioned solutions, and
ﬁnally, suggestions and prospects for further work will be given.
5.1
Findings
5.1.1
Array processing methods
The reproduction of nearby sound sources for a single listener placed in the centre of the
array using HOA requires the use of NFC and AWWs such as NFCREG for practical
realisations. As shown in [Daniel, 2001, Moreau, 2006, Favrot and Buchholz, 2010]. The
results of the sound ﬁeld simulations in section 4.1 conﬁrms those ﬁndings in that the
NFCREG method reproduces the correct wavefront curvature over a large area and pre-
vents the clipping caused by the simple NFC method. The NFCREG method was also
found to provide the best match to the reference monopole in terms of amplitude decay
in section 4.2 as opposed to the level scaled HOA ,which does not reproduce the correct
curvature, and the NFC method that generates extremely high pressure levels outside
the sweet spot area. The plots in ﬁg. 19 extended the results found in the literature by
displaying in an intuitive way the validity range of these reproduction techniques in terms
of amplitude matching. The results suggest that a source cannot be positioned nearer
than 0.5 m to the array centre and be faithfully reproduced in NFCREG coding under
the present simulation parameters.
The same intuitive mapping of the validity range was also performed for ILDs in sec-
tion 4.4. It showed that all of the considered techniques can yield satisfactory ILDs for
sources placed at moderate distances ( 1 m ≤rsource) below the Ambisonics cut-oﬀfre-
quency, but fail to do so for nearer sources. These array processing methods were also
evaluated in reverberant conditions, because such conditions have been previously found
to extend validity range of both the 3D HOA ([Oreinos, 2015]), and the 2D NFCREG
([Favrot and Buchholz, 2010]). Simulated and measured ILDs in the considered reverber-
ant scene could not help corroborate these ﬁndings for 3D Ambisonics in section 4.7 due
to a lack of control on the experimental conditions. Indeed, there was no access to a
potential ILD reference for that case, nor was there the possibility to modify the source
or the receiver position. It was also impossible to change the DRER or the reverberation
time of the scene, which was maybe too dry. Interestingly, in some of the cases, the
level-scaled HOA paradigm performed better than the NFC and NFCREG methods if
only considering ILDs. This suggests that a sound source auralised inside the array with
the help of an NFC coding method may be sensitive to interference caused by the early
and late reﬂections coded in HOA. Although interesting, the trends observed for IACC
in section 4.8 and the ITDs in section 4.9 could not help discriminate the diﬀerent array
processing methods in a systematic way.
Comparison of the two diﬀerent arrays of order 5 and 10 highlighted a commonly stated
fact in HOA processing : an increase in the Ambisonics order does not lead to a signiﬁcant
29/34
==PAGE:35==
5.2
Limitations
August 21, 2020
improvement in terms of correct reconstruction area, especially for frequencies below the
NFC ﬁlters’ cut-oﬀ, and for very close sources ([Daniel, 2003, Favrot and Buchholz, 2010]).
This could be observed in terms of both the amplitude decay in section 4.2 and for the
frequency response in ﬁg. 20.
Lastly, experiments involving the reproduction of a source in NFC and NFCREG for a
source radius greater or equal to 1 m such as ﬁg. 12a or ﬁg. 16 highlighted that there was
actually hardly any diﬀerence in using either NFC or NFCREG. This was even more the
case in reverberant conditions for which the result for NFC and NFCREG were typically
identical ( sections 4.7 to 4.9).
5.1.2
Extra loudspeaker
First and foremost, placing one XLS inside the LS array hardly modiﬁed the frequency
response of the system when thorough equalisation was applied. This ensures that the
method does not signiﬁcantly alter the properties of the reconstructed sound ﬁeld inside
the array, when one XLS in used. Secondly, all considered measures suggest that the use of
an XLS is more favourable to the reproduction of a close source in free-ﬁeld than NFCHOA
strategies.
Indeed, in anechoic conditions, both the simulated and recorded ILDs in
section 4.4 and section 4.6 show that the XLS undoubtedly yields values extremely close to
the reference conditions. Furthermore, the proximity of the reference and the XLS results,
supports the hypothesis that the LS behaves like a monopole for the tested frequencies
and distances, and thus allows once again the usage of this technique.
Moreover, its
range of validity extends above the cut-oﬀfrequency of the array, where all the array
processing coding strategies fail to faithfully reconstruct the sound ﬁeld and thus, cannot
of reproduce meaningful cues. The XLS also allows placing a source within 1 m, which is
not the case with the NFCREG coding as was concluded previously.
The results yielded by the investigations in reverberant conditions are more mitigated.
In reverberant conditions, the XLS was found to provide ILDs that fell extremely close
below the dry reference. The lack of an actual reverberant ILD reference for this case
made it impossible to determine whether these values were to be expected due to the
high DRER of the considered scene, or if the technique might have caused a potential
DS boosting. Although inconclusive, the maximum IACC experiments were backed up
by more signiﬁcant ITD results. Indeed, despite oﬀsets due to the angular misalignment
of the recorded MRIRs and HRTFs, the trend followed by the XLS data was once again
extremely close to the dry reference.
5.2
Limitations
The ﬁrst comment is directed towards the comparison between the simulation and the
measurements made throughout this report. Time and accessibility considerations dic-
tated the use of HRTFs over actual HATS recording for each experiment.
The term
measurement based simulation would have thus been more adequate to describe the mea-
sured values. Moreover, the discrepancy between the frequency response of the HATS
recorded in the AVIL, and the one of the spherical head model used in the simulation,
made some comparison trickier, especially at high frequencies. Of course, this does aﬀect
the relevance of the results in any way, and all of the ﬁndings remain valid. Nevertheless,
30/34
==PAGE:36==
5.3
Further research
August 21, 2020
more in-situ recordings could have allowed more thorough veriﬁcation. The second com-
ment concerns the reverberant scenes. Most of the MRIRs were taken directly from the
ARTE database, leaving only limited options for experimental parameters. Indeed most
of them were imposed and only the angle of the source could be tweaked to ﬁt that of the
HRTF recordings, whereas the source distance, the DRER, and the reverberation time
remained unchangeable.
5.3
Further research
Most of the ﬁndings of this work should be backed up by a listening experiment which
could bring some subjective insight on the objective results.
Indeed, only a listening
experiment can qualify how relevant the calculated error measures are.
Furthermore,
a localisation experiment would aid in bolstering the statement in favour of the XLS,
over the other methods. It would also help clarify if NFCREG sounds realistic and gives
natural cues, even if it does not perform as well in terms of objective measures as the XLS.
Secondly, several aspects of the XLS set-up remain to be veriﬁed. Indeed the presence of
an extra unit in the array might give extended localisation cues compared to the other
methods and even reality. This could be caused by a perceptual bias entailed by the sight
of the XLS, or even a mismatch at high frequencies between the direct sound coming out
of the XLS and the HOA-coded background which would not be faithfully reconstructed
over the cut-oﬀfrequency of the system.
Moreover, as much as only one XLS does
not disrupt the frequency response of the array, having multiple units in the array -
four in [Westermann and Buchholz, 2017] - might do so, depending on their number and
positioning.
Finally, the use of a room acoustics software like ODEON could greatly beneﬁt the study
of the reverberant conditions. Indeed, only one scene, in which few of the parameters
were chosen, was taken into account in this work.
Such a simulation software could
provide custom scenes with chosen DRER and reverberation time, on top of allowing
a free positioning of both the source and the receiver.
Most importantly, this would
help deﬁning meaningful reference conditions leading to a fair comparison of the coding
paradigms.
31/34
==PAGE:37==
August 21, 2020
6
Summary and conclusion
The aim of this thesis was to evaluate diﬀerent methods to reproduce nearby sound
sources in 3D Ambisonics. The ﬁrst group of methods under study were the array pro-
cessing methods, HOA, NFC and NFCREG. These methods have been validated in the
past, and their properties are well known in 2D Ambisonics. However, their performance
has not been tested for 3D Ambisonics. Another method investigated in this project was
the placement of an XLS inside the array to play the direct sound of a nearby source,
approximating a monopole source. This solution has been used in the past as an engi-
neering workaround, but the consequences of this set-up on the reconstructed sound ﬁeld
have not been examined.
All methods were ﬁrst compared under anechoic conditions with the help of a simulation
framework developed for this project. Objective measures were computed, including sound
pressure errors, amplitude decay, frequency response, and ILDs, these simulation data
were combined into a multi-dimensional mapping of the area with correct reproduction
(sweet spot) as a function of amplitude, frequency and source position. This mapping
oﬀers a new way of visualising and understanding the validity range of Ambisonics systems
and NFCHOA coding. The ﬁndings of the simulation were then compared to data recorded
in the AVIL loudspeaker array, within the boundaries determined by the aforementioned
mapping. Finally, the performance of the techniques was also assessed in reverberant
conditions using ILD, IACC and ITD.
Superior performance of the XLS in all the considered metrics suggests that adding an XLS
within the array is the best option for auralising nearby sound sources in HOA, if highly
realistic reproduction with correctly preserved binaural cues is the main goal. If using an
XLS is not feasible, it is recommended to use NFCREG coding for the auralisation, and
to limit the sound source location to a range beyond 1 m from the centre of the array.
These recommendations are purely based on physical measures and should be veriﬁed in
a listening experiment.
32/34
==PAGE:38==
REFERENCES
August 21, 2020
References
[Ahrens and Spors, 2009] Ahrens, J. and Spors, S. (2009). Spatial encoding and decoding
of focused virtual sound sources. In Ambisonics Symposium, pages 25–27.
[Brungart, 1999] Brungart, D. S. (1999).
Auditory localization of nearby sources. iii.
stimulus eﬀects. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 106(6):3589–3602.
[Cord et al., 2004] Cord, M. T., Surr, R. K., Walden, B. E., and Dyrlund, O. (2004).
Relationship between laboratory measures of directional advantage and everyday suc-
cess with directional microphone hearing aids. Journal of the American Academy of
Audiology, 15(5):353–364.
[Cubick and Dau, 2016] Cubick, J. and Dau, T. (2016). Validation of a virtual sound en-
vironment system for testing hearing aids. Acustica United with Acta Acustica, 102:547–
557.
[Daniel, 2001] Daniel, J. (2001). Repr´esentation de Champs Acoustiques, Application `a
la Transmission et `a la Reproduction de Sc`enes Sonores Complexes dans un Contexte
Multim´edia (Representation of acoustic ﬁelds, application in the transmission and re-
production of complex sound scenes in a multimedia context). PhD thesis, Universit´e
Paris 6.
[Daniel, 2003] Daniel, J. (2003). Spatial sound encoding including near ﬁeld eﬀect: Intro-
ducing distance coding ﬁlters and a viable, new ambisonic format. In Audio Engineering
Society Conference: 23rd International Conference: Signal Processing in Audio Record-
ing and Reproduction. Audio Engineering Society.
[Duda and Martens, 1998] Duda, R. O. and Martens, W. L. (1998). Range dependence
of the response of a spherical head model. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 104(5):3048–3058.
[Favrot, 2006] Favrot, S. (2006). A loudspeaker-based room auralization system for audi-
tory research. PhD thesis, Danmarks tekniske Universitetet.
[Favrot and Buchholz, 2010] Favrot, S. and Buchholz, J. (2010). Reproduction of nearby
sound sources using high-order ambisonics: Implementation and evaluation. Proc. of
DAGA2010.
[Favrot and Buchholz, 2012] Favrot, S. and Buchholz, J. (2012). Reproduction of nearby
sound sources using higher-order ambisonics with practical loudspeaker arrays. Acta
Acustica United with Acustica, 98(1):48–60.
[Gerzon, 1975] Gerzon, M. (1975). Ambisonics. part 1: General system description. Studio
Sound, 17:20–22.
[Hardin and Sloane, 1996] Hardin, R. H. and Sloane, N. J. (1996). Mclaren’s improved
snub cube and other new spherical designs in three dimensions. Discrete & Computa-
tional Geometry, 15(4):429–441.
[Malham, 1992] Malham, D. G. (1992). Experience with a large area 3d ambisonic sound
systems. Proceedings-Institute of Acoustics, 14:209–209.
33/34
==PAGE:39==
REFERENCES
August 21, 2020
[Moreau, 2006] Moreau, S. (2006). Study and realisation of advanced spatial encoding
tools for the spatial-sound technique of higher order ambisonics: 3D microphone and
distance control. PhD thesis, University of Maine.
[Oreinos, 2015] Oreinos, C. (2015). Virtual Acoustic Environments for the Evaluation of
Hearing Devices. PhD thesis, Macquarie University.
[Ricketts, 2000] Ricketts, T. (2000). Impact of noise source conﬁguration on directional
hearing aid beneﬁt and performance. Ear and Hearing, 21(3):194–205.
[Ward and Abhayapala, 2001] Ward, D. B. and Abhayapala, T. D. (2001). Reproduction
of a plane-wave sound ﬁeld using an array of loudspeakers. IEEE Transactions on
speech and audio processing, 9(6):697–707.
[Weisser et al., 2019] Weisser, A., Buchholz, J. M., Oreinos, C., Badajoz-Davila, J., Gal-
loway, J., Beechey, T., and Keidser, G. (2019). The ambisonic recordings of typical
environments (arte) database. Acta Acustica United With Acustica, 105(4):695–713.
[Westermann and Buchholz, 2017] Westermann, A. and Buchholz, J. M. (2017).
The
eﬀect of nearby maskers on speech intelligibility in reverberant, multi-talker environ-
ments. JASA, 141 (3)(2214):2214–2223.
[Williams, 1999] Williams, E. G. (1999).
Fourier Acoustics:
Sound Radiation and
Nearﬁeld Acoustical Holography.
34/34
