==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling materials for a new role in building
design
Rajat Kumar
s181289
August 6, 2020
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Aim: Decoupling materials for a new role in building design
Semester: Final semester Master’s Thesis
Department: Civil Engineering
Main Report: 51 Pages
Supervisor: Tim Pat McGinley
Author: Rajat Kumar
August 6, 2020
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This report represents the master thesis and is prepared at
Department of Civil Engineering at the Technical University of
Denmark for fulﬁlling the requirement of completion of M.Sc.
in Civil Engineering.
The main purpose is to propose the possibilities from Decoupling
materials from the main design process and developing the new
role for solving the purpose of optimizing material selection
process in a design project. A parametric algorithmic tool,
Grasshopper is used to develop the program for materials
systems in the model as a separate entity for optimizing the
selection of materials and taking sustainable decisions in pursuit
of material selection.
The concept for decoupling materials consists of theoretical part
about understanding basic knowledge of materials for modelling
and practical approach of implementing the concept.
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgement
I would ﬁrst like to thanks my thesis supervisor Associate
Professor Tim McGinley of DTU Civil Engineering for guiding
and assisting me throughout the project and giving me his
invaluable advice and asking me questions to drive me towards
the right direction. It was always wonderful interacting with
him as he was always present to answer my doubts despite of
this pandemic crisis.
I would also like to thanks the participants of the course Agile
Building Design who were involve in working on Grasshopper
scripts in diﬀerent systems.
Finally, I must express my deep gratitude to my parents and
family for supporting and encouraging me throughout my study
and the process of writing this thesis. This could not have been
possible without them.
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
2
2
Research methodology
3
3
Literature review
4
3.1
Traditional design v/s BIM
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.2
Building Design Process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
BIM and it’s uses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4
Agile Building Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.5
LCC/LCA at initial stages of building design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.6
Sustainability in construction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.7
Parametric Algorithmic Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.8
Interoperatibility and collaboration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.9
Product Libraries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.10 LOD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.11 Problem formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.11.1 Interest behind material decoupling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4
Methodology
38
4.1
Plan of work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.2
Decoupling materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2.1
Understanding materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2.2
Selecting materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.2.3
Steps followed in parametric modelling in materials system . . . . .
43
5
Discussion
46
6
Conclusion
49
7
Limitations and future improvements
50
Appendices
i
i
==PAGE:6==
List of Figures
1
Diagram of Eﬀort/cost related to stage of process [1]
. . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Traditional v/s Design build [2] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
The components of BIM use [3] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
The BIM use purposes [3]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5
The BIM use objectives [3] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
6
Agile workﬂow [3] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
7
Agile iterative design framework [4] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
8
List of BIM LCA tools [5]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
9
parametric design workﬂow [6] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
10
Framework of generic LOD solution [7] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
11
Phases of Building Project and decoupling material phase . . . . . . . . . .
38
12
Diﬀerent levels and kind of materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
13
Material passport proposal [8] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
14
Schematic view of functions corresponding to diﬀerent discipline for a par-
ticular layer of element . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
15
Material selection process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
16
Creating working systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
17
Material assumption and element list . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
18
Selecting material from xlsx ﬁle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
19
State of play and fetching information into material passport from other
systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
20
example of selecting one function as LCC rating from 0 to 1.0
. . . . . . .
48
21
Material decoupling beneﬁts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
22
New role in building design with competencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
ii
==PAGE:7==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
Abstract
Selection of materials in initial design stages can have great impact on life cycle
cost and performance of the construction project. As materials are main player in
projects so it is wise to consider buildings as the biggest material stockpiles avail-
able, these stockpiles can be represented as material banks. Materials also has huge
impact on the environment so it is necessary to take sustainable steps in selecting the
materials which can be recycled, reused or Eco-friendly if it has to be dumped. For
responding to this complexities of decisions, vast number of design alternatives need
to be considered and developed at initial stages. It has been tried to optimize the
material selection by creating decoupled systems for each disciplines in the designing
process which enhances an ease for selection of materials with database providing
structured information for all the materials which are used in the building.
This report focuses on optimization of materials selection process and the beneﬁts
achieved by decoupling materials from the other disciplines throughout the design
process. The zest of this approach has been scrutinized through parametric design
script writing in Grasshopper and by assigning the material task to separate author-
ity are assessed.
Moreover, as the automation in materials in context of building design is still in
progress stage, so through the research it has been tried to minimize the gap in this
ﬁeld.
Keywords: decoupling materials, material banks, parametric design
Rajat Kumar: s181289
1
==PAGE:8==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
1
Introduction
With the use of BIM, productivity and data handling has advanced to a great ex-
tent.Moreover, it has helped to perform many tasks simultaneously, which were in tra-
ditional systems of sequential in nature. Adding to this, the platform of Building in-
formation modelling has become valuable program-me to account buildings as the set of
database. These databases mainly contains information about materials used and displays
the buildings as a set of material bank.The latest interest in architecture development,as
can be demonstrated in various contemporary plays designers, the materials attracts fresh
focus and the production phase. The need for the concept phase is the residue of decades
gone by the current version of practice and teaching.The idea moves from the visual to
the conceptual the performative and actual. It is strongly related with the architectural
physicality Comprehension of construction performance and impact User actions.
Traditionally architects used to focus only on prices while selecting the material for a
particular object of the building structures, and the prices mainly included the production
and logistics cost not the costs involving environmental and social impacts. However, in
the present scenario information about material in BIM models can lead to solve various
problems which are becoming challenge for the society.Incorporating sustainable building
materials is the easiest way to solve environment issues aroused due to diﬀerent building
materials. Some of the problems related to this after the lifetime of construction projects
could be dumping of materials, reuse and recycling.If not addressed in proper way this
may lead to big problems like landﬁlls and construction waste which could be diﬃcult to
handle in coming future.
Throughout life cycle of the facility BIM has the capability to use the digital information
to do better management and construction processes. Moreover, the information created
at diﬀerent stages of the project can be stored and maintained and can be utilized for many
other diﬀerent uses. Parametric design characteristic of the BIM enables the manufac-
turing of precise and instant results with changing variables in construction geometries.
BIM is mainly considered as visualizing and coordination tool all along designing and
construction works.
The main objective of this research was to develop a system supporting the LCA, ma-
terial procurement , scheduling, construction methodology and costs incorporated in the
material based passport in initial design stage. Based on working on parametric design
BIM platform which supports the decoupling behavior in design by separating diﬀerent
disciplines and promoting collaboration for working on the same model.
The research work for this project started with conducting studies on the existing pro-
cesses in design phase of the construction. With searching out the stakeholders who have
direct inﬂuence on selecting the materials and ﬁnding the possibilities to enhance the
productivity in case of selecting the materials and the outcomes generated from material
decoupling. Initial work in this report is literature review for the case and selecting the
uses by giving main emphasis on materials in the whole life cycle of construction project.
Rajat Kumar: s181289
2
==PAGE:9==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
2
Research methodology
Research methodology was mainly inﬂuenced by Bryman and Bell’s book on Business
research strategies. They have mainly focused on primarily two main directions for re-
search, which are inductive and deductive directions. These are focused on formulating
the hypothesis, however due to the way of doing research these are diﬀerentiated. Induc-
tive theory relates to start of research from small piece of ﬁnding and observations on the
area of research a hypothesis is formed. on the other side in deductive approach research
starts from bigger area of research which already has a hypothesis. The result may be
neglected or accepted and the report is ﬁnalised.[9]
For this report the inductive approach was selected due to the constraint due to current
scenario of pandemic as it was diﬃcult to interact and time was limited for interaction
through online plat-from.
Epistemology deﬁnes how the awareness of science is used. Although there are many
epistemological approaches identiﬁed in the globe, Bryman Bell concentrate primarily on
both. Epistemology seeks to address if the natural and social sciences should be discussed
in the same manner or whether a new methodology is required. First of all, the analytical
method is positivism, and the other is interpretivism, which relies on understanding. This
report is interpretivism in nature as main motto of this project to understand the beneﬁts
of considering materials as separate entity in designing method. it has been accomplished
by doing the literature review and trying to understand the various outputs generated
from decoupling the materials. [9]
The author has selected the model of this analysis on the grounds of the epistemological
and ontological evaluation. Bryman Bell deals with minimal paradigm choices to improve
the process of paradigm collection.
The model of ﬁrst selection is the subjectivist -
objectivist search, all deﬁned by means of data collection and organizational design. The
second choice is related to the role, the intent and also the legislative or revolutionary
objective of research ﬁndings.
This report is inductive in the process of problem formulation which built around a selected
problem of looking into the trajectory of LCA in initial design stages and ended up with
suggestion for basic tool to do so and the beneﬁts captured by doing so.
Rajat Kumar: s181289
3
==PAGE:10==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
3
Literature review
The literature review was continued process through out the project to ﬁnd possibilities
with decoupling materials. And also it was done to look into what is already known in
this area of research. to broaden the scope various articles, journals, web pages and books
have referred mainly through online search engines and DTU library.
3.1
Traditional design v/s BIM
The old conventional designs relied mainly on 2D technical drawings such as plans, sections
, elevations and sketches.On the other side BIM has widened the horizons from mere
dimensional attributes to 3D parameters of space, including time information named as
4D and Cost which is 5D BIM.Moreover it can also incorporate information for asset
management and Sustainability, etc.This also includes relationship with space, geospatial
knowledge, properties and quantities of building materials (for example, the particulars
of the manufacturers), and allows for a elaborated platform of collaborative processes
related to the construction aid from initial phases of planning in construction projects till
it’s operational existence.
The engineering and construction (EC) industry assured to beneﬁt from the advancement
made through the digital technology.
This is mainly pivotal on Building information
Technology (BIM), which helps to integrate 3D modelling with project management and
visualization tools. All physical attributes of the building including their physical, tech-
nical and commercial characters can be presented through BIM. It is now easier to asses
the construction time, life cycle cost and other variables using this technology.
Construction industry is in transformation stage as it is reorganizing the value chain,
in-spite of reinforcing the traditional methods, BIM encourages the collaboration at each
stage of the project.
To arrive at the problem being analysed in this report it is important to understand the
methodologies being used in design processes in traditional as well as BIM process. As
both the system has diﬀerent stages in which the materials are assigned to the objects
being modelled.
• Traditional design system
• Design Build Method and BIM approach
The approaches and procedures commonly used for building projects have often had some
handicaps that are now being overcome with the development of the BIM technique. In
its comparison the current approach targets the initiative in a single fashion, however in
a fully disconnected path in pursuit of procedures and a particular database.
In 2 dimensional drawings methodology the planes are drawn one by one. For example
if project has three ﬂoors, then three ﬂoor plans, 8-sections and 4 elevations for a simple
housing project will be needed which is drawn one by one considering the connectivity and
clashes with other systems in mind. All these drawings may be referenced to the particular
project, which is obvious, but these may not directly linked either between them or the
project, which basically means that any changes or modiﬁcations made in the project have
to be made individually on all planes. On the other side it took high imagination and
interpretation capabilities to visualize he 2D drawings in mind which resulted in errors at
Rajat Kumar: s181289
4
==PAGE:11==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
construction execution leading to high cost because of reworks. Also it has less potential
to overlap the drawings from diﬀerent departments like MEP, electrical and civil. So the
project manager has to be well equipped with knowledge of all disciplines to execute the
project at construction level.
To visualize the project as a virtual model a 3 dimensional model is needed . While
this model helps one to imagine the project geometrically, this model, in addition to
its components, does not provide much details regarding the elements that make it up,
besides the basic geometry. The same problem appears with the 3D model as well as
in 2D planes: it is not more interconnected with the rest of the project other than by
reference lines, if their is the possibility of change in the project, despite of doing it on
each plane,it is essential to change it freely in 3D.
All this ﬂexibility between systems has meant that most of a project’s time and energy
has to be spent on output. The BIM technique has oﬀered us a fresh perspective and
a diﬀerent way to view the production of a product. Among several beneﬁts, the most
important which attracts the users to use this platform is that the availability of data in
single book from where all the information related to the project can be derived.
The archive became the basis for the BIM. In comparison to the conventional approach,
the BIM framework is focused around the construction of a core layout consisting of an
exact composite replica of the structure to be built, from which both the processing and
retrieval of the required details for the project originates.
The BIM methodology is used to automate all production. The 2D planes are extracted
directly from the model by deﬁning the required plans, sections and elevations and are
directly linked to it, so that the changes entered in the model are automatically updated
in all planes.
Another great advantage of 3D visualization is that it is also in direct relation to the
central model. Because the BIM model contains all the information about each of the
project’s elements, it will also contain all the information about the materials from which
it is constructed. Thus, if material modiﬁcations are made, 3D visualizations would also
be automated, as well as containing all the materials’ physical information, which leads to
a virtual representation closer to reality. BIM software incorporates ever better methods
of visualization, evolving from traditional static rendering to current virtual tours and
360-degree visualizations. This technology we can do the clash detection at any instance
right from the initial design stage , therefore, solving the clash problems at each iteration
of the design which was not possible in the case of 2D drawings and was only done
manually.
The calculations are focused explicitly upon the details found in each of the project compo-
nents. The algorithm derives the estimation of all of them from the model automatically,
collecting not just their spatial calculation but also their description and quantiﬁcation.
The price can be applied directly to the model itself, which also makes it easier to update
the budget. The greatest advantage that the BIM methodology gives us compared to the
traditional method, apart from greater control over the project and all its constituent
parts, is the release of a tedious work of information production and process repetition,
automating production and enabling it to be produced.[10]
Eﬃciency in respect to the diﬀerent stakeholders the design process needs to follow a
certain process. As diﬀerent participants in the project has diﬀerent need of information
at diﬀerent stages,so it shows the complexity in the process particularly on decisions and
Rajat Kumar: s181289
5
==PAGE:12==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
reviews during the life cycle of the project.
BIM technology has helped to assign materials to layers of elements with same material
in one click. Moreover, it has also eased to create and allot the materials to diﬀerent
objects at early design stages before it’s analysis.With early decisions in at predesign and
schematic design stages leads to reduction in chances for design changes and cost involved
with this.Also the major decisions which are done at inception stage aﬀects the cost to
the great extent and this can be done more eﬃciently by increasing the eﬀort in initial
stages of the project. The eﬃciency can be increase with more face to face interaction
between the stakeholders at initial stages and taking decisions for diﬀerent attributes in
the project.However in the 2D system one department has to wait for another one for the
decisions on a particular design aspect.
Figure 1: Diagram of Eﬀort/cost related to stage of process [1]
As noted in the project’s work summary, the value of early decision-making to minimize
cost and eﬀort / time pushes to build resources to promote and assist early decision-making
in design, as also noted in Figure 1.ability to impact cost and functional capabilities are
mainly associated with early decisions as can be interpreted from the ﬁgure that this
ability fades with the moving phases of the project till its end. It can also be compared
that traditional design process eﬀorts are more at the stage of construction documentation
i.e bill of quantities and tender stage.To get this, at an early phase of the project, more
information is needed. But the detail and quality of this information is also a key point,
and must be linked to the level of the design development.The information at early stages
can be enhanced only with material information incorporating various aspects like LCA,
costs, speciﬁcations and properties, geometry could be the upper edge in case of parametric
modelling.Contrary to this detailed information at early stages may have the opposite
impact on the design, coming too early, as well as lack of information.[1]
Throughout the start of each successive process, conventional paper-based methods re-
quire loss of knowledge. In account for the damages, it needs additional time in retain
Rajat Kumar: s181289
6
==PAGE:13==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
knowledge than the coordinated distribution model focused on BIM. Mostly because data
can not be replicated between stages, so each study requires new knowledge that just has
to be added to work correctly. The core paradigm is growing richer and richer in termi-
nology by participating actors in the collaboration, BIM-based distribution process.BIM
’s concept is to use a visual model consistently during a building’s whole life cycle. This
knowledge will remain in the model but instead certain semantically can be extracted
by stakeholders to insure that their applications for review runs correctly. The only mo-
ment the abundance of knowledge decreases is when a job is moved, because facilities
administrators require no details to sustain a structure.
Thanks to the constant reuse of information, repetitive re-entry of information through
BIM is limited, laborious and error-prone activity is decreased. It contributes to continu-
ous enhancement, lower maintenance expenses and increase project length. BIN models,
full of semantics, require stronger (and ongoing) interpretations than traditional paper-
based methods (relative to the provided phase). The early likelihood of carrying out such
studies is the most critical aspect of the collective solution to BIM.
The value, because it is simpler and quicker to implement improvements during design
stages, to implement crucial choices can be illustrated through Figure 1. Unfortunately,
such improvements also are not resolved when they unfold, in the conventional paper-
based method, resulting in costly adjustments and sometimes not optimal solutions. Such
slow approach to improvements leads to the signiﬁcant costs and resources taken for re-
search including expense forecasts, electricity requirements, systemic research, mitigation
study among others. At least a framework must be complete to carry out such. Such
analyzes are most always rendered as the ﬁnal, often too late, component of the design
level.
Geometry and deﬁnitions that endorse the studies described above are accessible in a
coordinated BIM framework easier as members jointly apply the information to a model.
It encourages required improvements to be detected until it is too late and a construction
plan to be modiﬁed for planned use. Such procedures contribute to higher performing
construction, shortened production time and expense – over a whole building life cycle.
It is because of early analyzes that enable the partners to aim for the optimal approach
rather than a balance between planned usage and the expense of late project adjustment.
Figure 2: Traditional v/s Design build [2]
Rajat Kumar: s181289
7
==PAGE:14==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
Current design build approach has several upper hands over traditional approach as can
be seen in Figure 2 that it allows parallel activities like cot estimates with designs, per-
mits with ﬁnal decisions on design, conﬂicting traditional system it is done step by
step.Traditionally construction projects are sequential in nature including phases such
as conceptual/planning ,design,testing, construction and closeout. Larger is the project
more phases it could involve, the main point in this is that it has sequential nature.
Typically construction projects are not the agile players as it could lead to great mess in
completing the project, moreover this could lead to higher costs.However, on the other side
the agile methods can be used in initial phases such as designing and material selection
phase to reduce the cost and increase the productivity and creating more eﬃcient design
outcome[11].
3.2
Building Design Process
Construction projects translates customers targets/speciﬁcations through a compilation
of set of project instructions directions. All projects continue to answer the same prob-
lems and adopt the same procedures, but on a smaller scope, as do most procurement
system, the exception is the complexity of the contractual matrix between the designers,
contractors and customers.[12]
Stakeholders and Team development
In the conventional system of construction projects, buildings appeared to adopt estab-
lished typical designs that could be replicated without much thought or direction, as
structures grew more sophisticated and complexity increased, need for professional plan-
ners and architects arose, and building design was gradually too diﬃcult for any person
to perform on their own, rather than simple ventures.
Often a project will start with only one designer now, but as the concept progresses and the
amount of detail grows, then the design team may continue to expand. In a typical design
and construction project would involve a core team of architects , structural engineers,
and service engineers (MEP) as needed along with other designers such as landscape
designers, interior designers, and technicians such as acoustic designers, ﬁre engineers,
etc.
Contractors and suppliers are now constantly making contributions, and professionals in
health and safety, quality, software, preparation, feasibility, usability, project management
and so on are helping the design team.[12]
Many elements of the design phase may be viewed as more innovative than others. While
the early phases of design can be deemed innovative when evaluating limitations, al-
ternatives evaluated and designs created, this can be a fairly small part of a project
accompanied by strategic strategy and rationale, quick creation and feasibility analysis,
followed by comprehensive and functional design, details on manufacturing, procurement
and construction.
Process of design is multi disciplinary and involves various stakeholders with diﬀerent
degree of authorities and responsibilities based on respective technical capabilities and
backgrounds. Also each discipline have diﬀerent types of roles some being more creative
as compared to others.
Rajat Kumar: s181289
8
==PAGE:15==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
• Architects
• Structure Engineers
• MEP engineers
• Specialist Engineers
• Quantity surveyors
• Vendors and contractors
Designers are never in full artistic charge of the course provided for building developed.
Projects may typically include several parties, each with their own, sometimes contrasting,
and often opposing design ideas, and clients may enforce restrictions such as cost, plan,
brands, etc. Groups of expert participants should be set up to insure that any opinion is
understood.
Comprehensible attempts by the customer to deﬁne what they expect from the design
team can in fact curb the innovative process.In order to increase the probability that
designers can meet their desires, it is normal for clients to seek to communicate their
expectations to a great degree of detail. This may thus bias the result before careful
consideration of the limitations and incentives, restricting imagination and preventing
progress. Deﬁning the issue would go hand and hand, and designing the answer.
Organizing Targets
The most critical issue in the construction project is whether the facility to be constructed
is needed or not, as creating new structure could be very costly and disruptive in nature.
Despite of building a facility, a diﬀerent solutions that may be less expensive and less
risky can meet the needs of the client.
It is a signiﬁcant piece of research that should not be overlooked or under-resourced
to determine if a building is required, and if so, which building type, what budget to
allocate and what site to construct. In some cases it may take longer than the processes of
design and construction, requiring a detailed analysis of business needs, staﬀrequirements,
customer relationships, etc. Even where the question of whether or not a building is
needed can be answered easily, eﬀorts will need to be made to articulate project goals
and success criteria clearly with the clients, and to agree on any client-set constraints.It
is really fruitful for the project if clients are able to set the requirements of the project
in early project meetings.
This is possible when the client is convinced to solve the
purpose what they need by considering the functions of the facility not just focusing on
constructing the facility.
Setting out targets mainly involves:
• Need of business establishment
• Setting business case
• Project strategies satisfying the project needs
The targets should concentrate on the function which the client has to perform.
As
an example, if a client demands a need for better communication then it could be solved
Rajat Kumar: s181289
9
==PAGE:16==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
through building up new open spaces in the premises of existing building where employees
can interact.Keeping the facility more ﬂexible for need of future changes like churns within
the oﬃce.
The building is not always the right solution and, even if this is the case, perhaps not
the type of building that best fulﬁlls the customer’s needs. Leaping to ﬁndings leads to
missed opportunities and hampers innovation.
Speciﬁc project partners can often have speciﬁc needs and standards (for example quick
access vs. protection at the airport). It is necessary to meet the desires of the stakeholders
of the projects, to accurately forecast their input and their eﬀects on the project to operate
a productive project.
Considering the feasibility
A feasibility analysis may include studying the physical and legal state of the land or
properties under review for construction to deﬁne limitations, risks and possibilities and
to obtain a more comprehensive view of the property’s existence and characteristics.
Typical work includes:
• Knowing existing buildings (structural surveys if needed)
• Topography mapping
• Notice for any underground structures and utilities
• Geotechnical investigations
• A study and potential eﬀect of development policy criteria on site capability
Collecting this knowledge would mean that the development department will identify
the site potential even more precisely in the possibly appropriate volume and size of a
new build and that cost and time forecasts can be much more precise than without this
analysis. After the feasibility analysis is over, project members can perform functions like
identifying options, economic assessment, scheduling, skills assessment required for the
project, risk analysis and opportunities will the client could deal with by implementing
the targets.
The result of this study will be a decision that the work should not be continued or the
business case which will justify that the project should be continued.
It should be stressed that all this will not require any construction research. Feasibility
studies and evaluations of alternatives may include charts used to determine the likelihood
of a future location or form, but not designs. The aim of this phase is to deﬁne the
expectations of the client and to decide whether the objectives of the project will move
in a particular direction.
In this method, they may use the guidance of experts, based on the scope of the project
and how professional the client is. A highly experienced customer, such as a dealer who
develops a new outlet, may have the necessary expertise at home, whilst an inexperienced
customer developing a complicated project can need independent customer consultants
from the start and may need to gradually appoint additional consultants to ensure the
project progresses.
Designers may be named to help assess planning alternatives and develop descriptions of
the proposal, but there is no actual research involved with the design.
Rajat Kumar: s181289
10
==PAGE:17==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
Conceptual design
The ﬁrst real step of designing is concept design. This is the imaginative solution with a
desired alternative to the project brief.
While project design may start with a single person’s innovative thought, it is an in-
creasingly collaborative process involving a team of designers and experts to explore the
possibilities, opportunities and constraints and to perform a more thorough assessment.
Information from others on prices, safety, construction processes, system, welfare, security
etc., and cooperation with other parties such as the local planning agency would be needed.
As a concept develops and so the design team can grow, specialist input may be required.
In most of the cases the architect leads the design work, however in some special projects
the design is led by a consultant, may be service engineers where budget is mainly aﬀected
by service works.The conceptual design cycle itself is illusory because it does not obey
set laws, while it attempts to systematize it. Another point concerning diﬀerentiation,
evaluation and then integration is a very speciﬁc deﬁnition of the design process. A single
idea produces, explores and contrasts a multitude of alternatives until they are gradually
discarded with just the best answer remaining. This means that much work is aborted
and sometimes it can appear to clients that signiﬁcant expenditure on fees has had little
eﬀect. The fact that creative design is often an internal process of thinking by designers
can exacerbate this feeling.[12]
Designing activity involves attempting to address issues that can only be partially deﬁned
at the outset, so answers are not always found by a strictly rational approach. Which
renders it challenging for buyers, in addition to matching the plans with the criteria of
the brieﬁng, to validate the planners ﬁnd acceptable problems and to determine value for
money.
To prevent surprises it is crucial for the customer to be actively engaged in the design
phase and for the project brief to change as the needs and desires both customer and the
design team better understand. For broad ventures it might be appropriate to designate
a range of company "champions" who are accountable for the brief and concept quality
control for a particular region of the project. Quality reduction activities may be needed
if the expense of the architectural design reaches the budget.
By the conclusion of the point, a consumer product analysis study should be compiled by
the consultants who document the speciﬁc ideas for the desired alternative. Any directions
needed from the customer shall be described in the design study. On acceptance of the
design and modiﬁcation control procedures introduced, the project brief should be frozen.
In the project design process a proposal for planning approval can be made. This may be
a plan application in the format if it is subjected to a completed concept design at the
beginning of the stage or a detailed plan application.
Detailed Design
The accepted model design is implemented and established in detail (sometimes referred
to as the production of design or in-depth design and technology).
The design would identify all the major building materials and how they match, but the
design was not prepared for tender (pricing provided by contractors). At the end of this
point.
For statutory approval applications, such as the approval of building regulations, a detailed
Rajat Kumar: s181289
11
==PAGE:18==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
design may be provided with suﬃcient information and, if not done, may include the
application for detailed planning approval. This will probably require a consultation and
negotiation process with the local authorities and the local authorities
The ﬁnished detailed design should provide following outputs:
• Layout plan
• layout Of surrounding roads and landscape
• Accommodation Schedules
• Circulation routes
• Identiﬁcation of standard and nonstandard space layouts
• Grid-lines and dimensions
• Architectural and structural Plans, sections and elevations with details of compo-
nents
• Components requiring specialist inputs or early procurement
• Mock-ups, testing, sampling requirements
• Schedules for all the elements including the ﬁnal ﬁnishing activities
• Strategy for safety and ﬁre
• Acoustics insulation and condition
• Materials allocation with possibility to reuse, recycle and handling of waste
• Cost plan in detail with capital ﬂow and life-cycle costs for each element
Detailed design is gradually being performed by professional designers. These might be
contractors or vendors who have been hired, originally, for planning and then carrying
out site research or for providing materials or services, or who have been designed by the
company to follow-up work on the site, or sub-consultants to a consulting team leader.
Information for construction
The construction information phase involves the preparation of the project information
that the contractor(s) need to build. They should also cover the completion of statutory
approvals for applications, such as approval of building regulations.
It is of extreme
importance that the quality of information for the construction should be precise as it
can aﬀect the whole budget to great extent. Disputes will take place on site and additional
expenses can be accrued if not planned and organized accordingly.
Construction information may include these documents:
• Drawings
• Speciﬁcations for all materials, criteria of design and calculations
• BOQ (Bill of quantities)
Rajat Kumar: s181289
12
==PAGE:19==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
• Schedule for all the activities including capital ﬂow schedule
Traditionally it was cumbersome and very sequential to bring this information for the use.
However with the use of BIM technologies this information can be produced simultane-
ously and helps to reduce errors and iterations.
After the construction information is produced it is sent for approvals from client and
the tendering process begins. But still after its completion the design work may continue
depending on the project and the phases in which it is decided. In some cases solutions
for design may be needed if certain problem arises at construction site during execution
phase. On the other side some projects with phase nature may start before ﬁnal design,
the ground works may begin before the design of upper ﬂoors has been ﬁnalised.
As discussed in this section at the conceptual phase more interaction between the stake-
holders has the possibility to reduce the cost and incorporating material information at
initial stages, however it should be based on previous projects experience and productive
discussion over decisions on materials to be used.
3.3
BIM and it’s uses
Building information modelling(BIM) in a broad sense can be described as the process of
making and managing digital information about a construction project such as building,
bridge, roads etc.
BIM has been categorised in the range of maturity levels based on the development in the
systems:
• Level 0: CAD in unmanaged way
• Level 1: 2D or 3D CAD in managed way
• Level 2: 3D system environment with attached data, modelled in separate systems
• Level 3: Central Model available on online platform including construction sequence,
cost and Life cycle analysis
BIM’s basic goal is to insure that the correct knowledge is generated in an acceptable
manner in good time in order to make informed choices about the planning, maintenance
and function of building infrastructure. It’s not about making a 3D object, so it’s not an
add-on method for your own sake. BIM is essential for designing and operating a business.
Building information that are required in the project is mainly categorized based on the
uses as:
• 2D
• 3D
• 4D Time schedules
• 5D Cost schedules
• 6D including information about facilities management
Rajat Kumar: s181289
13
==PAGE:20==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
BIM at level 2 involves a range of organized design models developed by diﬀerent con-
struction departments, such as documentation for the layout, records and organized sets
of data comprising non-geometrical details on the project, ﬂoors, rooms, structures and
components. Together they create a digital replica of the build asset that starts with a
design intention, but reﬂects what was actually built and installed by handover.
As part of this phase the development of a geometric model allows buildings to be planned
and checked in collaboration and can be tested virtually, before they are constructed and
run realistically. This in-turn helps to reduce the errors arising at time of construction
and operations.
Models are developed using the variety of parametric objects. Each object is only deﬁned
once and then placed in several places, as necessary, in the model. If the object is changed,
the modiﬁcations will be shown in the whole model. It also renders predictions compatible
and prevents errors. Moreover, a clash detection can be performed which helps to solve
various errors in the model.
The single source for the information i.e. the common data environment for project can
be used for collecting, managing and documentation for both the graphical as well as non
graphical data available for all members of project team.
To understand the purpose of this report its necessary to know what are uses which can
be cultivated by using BIM in a project.
BIM use is deﬁned as a method of applying Building Information Modelling dur-
ing a facility’s life-cycle to achieve one or more speciﬁc objectives.
Figure 3: The components of BIM use [3]
BIM uses are divided into ﬁve fundamental objectives:
1. Gathering
2. Generating
3. Analyzing
4. Communicating
5. Realizing
Rajat Kumar: s181289
14
==PAGE:21==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
Above mentioned purposes can be further subdivided into 18 sub-categories(3) for im-
plementing BIM. The question ’why’ can be communicated by using the deﬁnitions of
purposes.The BIM Use is more accurately identiﬁed after the purpose is determined by
elaborating on detailed BIM uses characteristics such as facilities element, facilities phase,
author discipline or development level.
Figure 4: The BIM use purposes [3]
This BIM usage classiﬁcation structures and procedures have a speciﬁc vocabulary and
framework for the coordination of the reasons for which BIM is being applied. Within
procurement language and BIM planning it can be used to deﬁne the exact requirements
of diﬀerent parties. It can also be used to standardize process and information-exchange
terminology.
Overall, BIM uses classiﬁcation allows for better communication of the
purposes and methods for implementing BIM throughout a facility’s life-cycle.The BIM
use purpose section includes a summary of each of the BIM use Objectives. The segment
on BIM Usage characteristic section provides a summary of the aspect of the facility,
the phase of the facility, the curriculum and the level of development . Purposes and
characteristics (3) can further be deﬁned at various other levels of speciﬁc requirements
for many applications of the uses.
The classiﬁcation system of BIM is based on purposes and objective which they need to
fulﬁll.The purposes and objectives are mainly categorized in ﬁve major categories and 18
subcategories as shown in Figure 5.
In this report, work carried out can be related to some of the purposes being mentioned in
Figure 5. Here, the work done is mainly related to several purposes which can be matched
from the list as shown above. The decoupling of materials are associated with capture,
quantify, monitor, qualify, prescribe and fabricate.
A mechanism by which BIM may be used to facilitate the development of exact quantity
start-ups and cost forecasts during the project life cycle.
This mechanism allows the
project manager, during all stages of the operation, to consider the expense consequences
of its improvements, and can help to prevent unnecessary expenditure adjustments due
to project improvements. In particular, BIM may deliver the cost eﬀect of changes and
improvements, save time and energy, which is particularly eﬀective in early project design
stages.
It creates ease to quantify materials assigned in the model accurately and moreover,
quantities supports the decision taking process at rapid rate, develop quicker forecasts of
expenses, it also cater for improved visual representation of project and design compo-
nents graphically. On the other side it also provides expense details to the owner in the
early design and life-cycle assessments, including improvements during development. Also
enabling the estimator to concentrate on further value generating practices in estimating
Rajat Kumar: s181289
15
==PAGE:22==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
Figure 5: The BIM use objectives [3]
such as: building assemblies recognition, price generation and factoring risks that are key
to good quality estimates.
Rajat Kumar: s181289
16
==PAGE:23==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
3.4
Agile Building Design
Early development has the greatest impact on the achievement of objectives of sustainabil-
ity, as eﬀective decisions tend to be taken at this stage. But numerous factors, including
construction mass, construction orientation, surface-to-volume relation, therm-isolation,
natural illumination and ventilation etc., may impact the performance of the building.
These aspects could substantially reduce energy consumption and improve the thermal
comfort of the occupants. Optimisation, for example, can decrease building heat stress
up to 80 percent by optimizing building orientation, shape, insulation and ventilation. If
the building design is to be optimized early to make use of all those potential savings,
the contribution of each factor must be evaluated before the optimum factor is selected
as the design evolves. Nonetheless, the conventional workﬂow in architecture does not
give ample possibilities to evaluate early concept alternatives. As the design evolves at
an early stage, many modiﬁcations are traditionally made to the design by virtue of prac-
tical, regulatory, aesthetic, cost or other considerations and seldom take account of other
criteria like energy performance.
In order to accurately characterize a concept to the ﬁrst step, the manufacturing com-
munity has also discovered the advantages of utilizing the iterative design method to
evaluate and test a variety of design alternatives. For starters, the IT industry faced the
same problems a couple of years ago as most of its goods struggled to work as expected,
mostly because they were only checked after design and coding phases had been done.
Agile management was developed to help and enhance the production of the goods in an
iterative design phase. IT experts have realized that such an iterative process allows for a
maximum of cooperation that results in a higher quality product than traditional methods
being delivered more quickly. This led them to develop an agile project management new
product development method.
At the other side, Building Information Modelling (BIM) has the ability to promote
iterative planning in order to achieve better construction eﬃciency as a collection of
strategies, procedures and resources.
Several works to develop agile principles inspired 12 agile concepts which cover satisfaction
of consumers, welcome improvements, frequent delivery of job apps, face-to-face interac-
tions and team-reﬂections at regular intervals. Such apps will help project team leaders
easily change their volatile and constantly evolving requirements over the duration of the
project . The ﬁve phases of the agile project management shown in Figure 6 are: "The
agile management uses this change to increase the value of the end product".
Using agile methodology could face some diﬃculties. As it is comparatively diﬃcult for the
people who are adopted to traditional methods. Because traditional waterfall systems are
easy to understand as it is sequential and linear in nature. Hence if agile methods are used
inappropriately it could bring adverse aﬀects and ineﬃciencies. Barriers like organization
resistance, improper training and apathetic management can cause its implementation to
be hard.
Rajat Kumar: s181289
17
==PAGE:24==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
Figure 6: Agile workﬂow [3]
Agile and Construction Industry
Many other initiatives can be related to IT industries, such as innovation, iterative model-
ing and research, creative creation and constant improvement. Agile methods, strategies
and tools should also be tailored to these ventures. There is a scarcity of observational
studies in the other ﬁelds of agile management although systematic work on agile man-
agement performance is being performed in the software sector.[13] A new tech consult-
ing company study found that agile is not popular in building and construction sectors
with just 10 percent of project managers employing this process. This is not a typical
approach.[14] However, in recent times, certain companies have understand and tried to
implement this methodology in their projects, such as proving ground, a data-driven con-
struction consultancy that published on its advantages and use of agile in the project [15].
The project implemented several agile concepts in a fast, economical and secure way. For
example, the project team did the component, system, subsystem and integrated test be-
fore any functional system was delivered to the customer, in place of a normal sequential
building. While agile management was not formally hired, the widespread implementa-
tion and application of agile principles became an signiﬁcant element in the progress of
the project.[11]
Many researches have been done to make construction acquainted with agile management
for optimizing collaboration process, documentation handling and life cycle data han-
dling.The traditional architecture process does not promote ample incentives to develop
alternatives at an early stage of design. Traditionally, when a building is built in the
early design stages, often improvements are incorporated in the functional, legal, artistic,
expense, or other aspects of the design due to and seldom take into account certain factors
such as energy eﬃciency. Consequently, any performance analysis is usually done at the
later stage, and only for the ﬁnal alternative.[16]
The construction process however consists of a wide range of activities For speciﬁc fea-
tures which can allow various methodologies to function best. Basic Such practices can
Rajat Kumar: s181289
18
==PAGE:25==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
be categorized in four steps according to their nature: pre-construction, construction,
building and services. The activities in these four phases are characterized by other; thus,
eﬀective management frameworks and software should be introduced for through, when
required. For example, while design phase needs to be completed in a short time (e.g., a
few months) and a lot of inspiration and creative activity, operations and management is
a long-term cycle (e.g. 50 years) of day-to-day management undertakings.[17]
Owen has analysed the potential of agile management for the pre-design, design and con-
struction phases based on criteria such as organisational attitudes and practices, planning
and execution.[18]:
• Agile management has the ability to boost pre-design as it should tackle poten-
tial possibilities and challenges which are continually evolving and the ability to
formulate creative solutions.
• The adoption of agile principles is highly appropriate in the design phase. It enables
the production of good quality and complex goods at the lowest possible cost. It is
particularly suited when solutions or requirements evolve Change from project to
project.
• Implementation of agile management in the construction phase is expected to be
more diﬃcult because the eﬀects of the changes can have a big impact on the project
goals.
• Certain considerations that should be addressed for implementing an agile manage-
ment strategy include the amount of participants in the organization, the degree of
knowledge of team leaders, the attitude of team members regarding transition and
consumer interaction. Given these variables in these four main stages, architecture
is the most compliant to agile process.[19]
Some study characterizes construction architecture by iteration (rework) and ﬁnds that
even quicker iterations require increasing the design process improved instrument coor-
dination, integration of engineering analysis and elimination of unnecessary activities;
and/or fewer variations, by decoupling of operation and better sequencing of operation.
Faster iterations (sprints) are required with the use of BIM as a method for planning, eval-
uating and organizing/collaboration, whereas sprints decouple the amount of iterations
and increase the series of events.[20]
In contrast to the agile project management traditional method, encouraging iterative
design and testing. A more agile implementation management made major changes to
the IT programs which culminated in reduced prices, increase eﬃciency and enhance
performance. As planning phase in the construction industry the software development
has the same characteristics project, agile application may apply.
Rajat Kumar: s181289
19
==PAGE:26==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
Based on Agile workﬂow framework building design phases integrated with agile has been
proposed and discussed.
Figure 7: Agile iterative design framework [4]
Brief: Project goals(Targets) will be established in this phase of the agile process, in-
cluding eﬃciency, expenditure and sustainability, when environmental standards for the
project must be met. When the project has to meet a particular timeline, it is important
for every achievement to reach consistent sustainability targets. Timeline, project scope
and feasibility objectives at this level will be the foundation to determine the iteration pe-
riod.For the starters, the ﬁrst prototype requires a month for the ﬁrst prototype and only
a week or two for the subsequent iterations. The project manager will create a basic plan
for the milestones and the sprints. The collaborative process will be established in this
step, including some framework for sharing of data, quality control and communication
mechanism.
Iteration: Three stages are involved in this phase: design, analysis and adaptation.
This includes project characteristics to be identiﬁed, solutions to be pursued, design
alternatives discussed and established in line with the brief(Targets/requirements). The
performance analysis comprises mainly 3D simulation, though physical modelling may
also be part of it, moreover, other analysis like solar, water, power, wind, electricity etc
may be done on this data review. In this phase, it is important that all team members
have a collaborative project group which can be supported by the project leader.It is the
vital nature to be a part of a collaborative project. The most signiﬁcant phase in this
process is the adaptation. The designers may know about their project adjustments and
feedback continuously, but here they will evaluate their work not just from an aesthetic
point of view but also in terms of eﬃciency and results. The input from this point may
be used in the next round to change the concept.
Close:The main goal of this process is the completion of the project and the review and
transition of important learning points to the next development team. [4]
Rajat Kumar: s181289
20
==PAGE:27==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
3.5
LCC/LCA at initial stages of building design
Life-cycle assessment(LCA) has become a trend in today’s businesses as it is important to
evaluate the environment impact of buildings and also to to achieve high grades in build-
ing certiﬁcation.Life-cycle assessment (LCA) in search of more productive construction
activities is regarded as a primary way of evaluating the possible eﬀect of materials, prod-
ucts, systems or the whole building on the environment. Presently huge data is available
for diﬀerent materials and buildings and its impact and performance by which they can
inﬂuence the environment at any stage of its life-cycle.
At the building level, LCA typically seeks to measure the possible environmental eﬀects
involved with the various phases of the life cycle of a building, i.e. the procurement of raw
materials, the manufacturing of goods, construction-installation, the usage of buildings
and end of life.[21]. LCA at early design stages has big potential in inﬂuencing the need
of energy and calculation of impact on environment. Moreover, with this approach many
beneﬁts can be achieved only with the initial eﬀorts and small changes in the design. It
is the need of the time to have a system which can evaluate the LCA in short time and
suggests the best solutions for the building structures. It can be achieved by integrating
BIM with LCA with the fusion of some tool which will calculate the LCA just by allocating
a material to the structure.Buildings engulf huge capital resources through their life at
diﬀerent stages and also leaves mark on the environment.
LCA can help for life cycle design of building products which can form the map of products
from the raw material phase till its end use, end use may be recycle, reuse or disposal.
This also provide the understanding of long term costs of the materials as these costs
are not only paid by building owners, occupants , but also by the environment.
For
determining the LCA for the materials the life cycle analyser has to consider each steps
from which the materials pass through starting from manufacturing, logistics, installing,
reuse or disposing oﬀ. The life cycle of the material can be formulated into three phases:
pre-construction; usage and post usage. Evaluating each stage is essential for calculating
the Cost analysis for lifetime as usage and post usage may involve large cost as compared
to initial cost of the material.
The pre construction phase describes the manufacturing,packaging and transportation
of the material up-to installing point but excluding the job of installation. For wisely
selecting the building material it is necessary to understand the environment impact in
pre construction phase.
The usage stage indicates the material’s useful life, starts at
the point of installing at site including maintenance and repair. At this stage the waste
collected at construction site while installing is also considerable, Hence it is critical to
use material in wisely nature so that the wastage is reduced and the waste with recycling
potential should be used for the project. Post usage phase refers to when the usefulness
of the material in a building structure has expired.Then these materials can be reused
entirely, may be used as component in other structure or it can be dumped.
Integrated design process requires high level of communication between the design team
and lots of iteration to check the authenticity of designs. However it is usually seen that
each member are busy on their respective assignments and most of the time sustainability
is put on the side tables. Conceptual phase is taken into account to be the most critical
level, because less data are available and the innovative and engineering prospects are
broader. It is hard job to calculate the LCA at accuracy, as their are chances to miss
some aspect which can inﬂuence the calculation for the same.
Rajat Kumar: s181289
21
==PAGE:28==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
However several indicators have been proposed for predicting the sustainability perfor-
mance. Indicators are selected based on environment impact, energy and life cycle cost
are shown in tables below:[22]
Indicators
Unit
Global warming potential, GWP
kg CO2 equiv
Depletion potential of the stratospheric ozone layer, ODP
kg CFC 11 equiv
Acidiﬁcation potential of land and water; AP
kg SO2 equiv
Eutrophication potential, EP
kg (PO4)3 equiv
Formation potential of tropospheric ozone photochemical oxidants, POCP
kg ethene equiv
Abiotic resource depletion potential for elements; ADP _elements
kg Sb equiv
Abiotic resource depletion potential of fossil fuels ADP _fossil fuels
MJ
Table 1: Subindicators describing environment impact indicator
Indicator
Unit
Total primary energy demands and share of renewable
kWh/m2year
and nonrenewable primary energy resources
(in operation phase)
Table 2: Indicators describing energy impact
Indicator
Unit
Construction costs
£/m2
Operation costs
£/m2
End-of-life costs
£/m2
Table 3: Indicators describing life cycle cost
LCA can be evaluated by using various available LCC tools allowing to determine the
life-cycle environment cost(LCEC) with life cycle ﬁnancial cost (LCFC). For example
to estimate the operational energy use of the building, the “dynamic equivalent heating
degree day(dEHDD)” method is used, this methods allows fast and more precise heating
energy estimates in early design phases, based on limited number of input data.[23]
To work on LCA building assessment information can be seen in ﬁgure 5 where the short
understanding of the diﬀerent system boundaries from which the material pass through are
shown, this could help to determine the LCA of the material. Moreover, this information
about each material can be stored in the database where the materials list is created
(material library).The LCA data can also be collected form various catalogues available
in diﬀerent countries like Baubook in Austria or Bauteilkatalog in Switzerland.
As determining LCA and LCC are mainly related to the knowledge about diﬀerent ma-
terials and the information required about them in context with one described in EN
15978.[24]DGNB Germany provides ceriﬁcation for the sustainability to projects. They
have assessed many buidlings on basis of life-cycle carbon emissions and awards points to
each and thee are further combined to give Life cycle performance (LCP), which ranges
from 0 to 1. These kind of data bases if integrated with the BIM can be proved very pro-
ductive and cost savers. For example may be for a particular material the initial purchase
cost be very high and the contractor decides to go for the one having comparatively lower
cost, due to lack of knowledge of contractor about its impact on whole life cycle it could
cost many folds then the expensive counterpart when calculated through LCA.[23]
Rajat Kumar: s181289
22
==PAGE:29==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
Figure 8: List of BIM LCA tools [5]
3.6
Sustainability in construction
The sustainability can be referred to as the impact of human activities on environmentally,
socially and economically without having cross eﬀects rather bringing positive outcomes in
the future.Sustainable design in fact, convenient and friendly environments are referred to
economic beneﬁts are feasible for living by productive nature although the environmental
eﬀect of buildings is decreased . So for the sustainable development a balance should be
formed among all three spheres environment, society and economics. Environmentally
Rajat Kumar: s181289
23
==PAGE:30==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
it means to create balance in protecting the physical aspect of environment and the use
resources which provides the materials in judicious manner; socially it means the progress
of the society in decent way, providing opportunities to all and increasing welfare’s among
all individuals without compromising with their basic human rights.
In Construction sustainability the life cycle of facility are evaluated in respect of cost and
eﬃciency based on stochastic human behaviour trying to reduce the negative impacts to
environment and users.The main motto of sustainability is to reuse wastage of resources
like energy, water and raw materials; prevention of environment degradation due to con-
struction activities throughout it’s life and create safe, comfortable and inhabitable built
environment.
The value of environmental architecture thought step fulﬁlls the need for long-term ap-
proaches ensure well-being and mitigate human needs air and carbon services as land use,
habitats, electricity. If a Plan is prepared properly and environmental requirements are
implemented the probability of rising negative in its early approach Impacts are low and
the deployment expense is greater. Quite much reduced Enhancing the eﬃciency of build-
ing sustainability already has to start in the concept stage as the optimization capacity for
the project in early stages are higher and the eﬀects of improvements in design. Various
options available are to follow sustainable construction technology, wisely thinking before
selection of favourable materials for construction, Through this knowledge a best option
of solution is selected and better levels of sustainability in materials for construction can
be reached. [25]
In the present time one of the aspect deciding the quality of project is the sustainability
consideration while designing and selecting materials for the construction so as to reduce
the possible impacts on environment due to the construction facility.
It is of prime
importance that the AEC industry should think wisely on materials selection at the
designing phase, it has given birth to the Integrated design approach.During designing
process each material selected and the procedure for construction should pass though the
questionnaire and awarded points so that best solution can be advised for the construction.
As during designing process all stakeholders have their respective ﬁelds of responsibility
and authority to select the materials. To make this process more eﬀective a material
expert should be appointed who takes care for preparing the questionnaire for diﬀerent
materials in the parallel way of other design activities. Moreover it is of great importance
to have correct speciﬁcations of the materials, as these are used in big amount and impact
produced by its manufacturing and installation could be very huge environmentally. For
assessment of materials several factors need to be considered like its distance from the
production, thermal and acoustic performances, cost, feasibility of operations and main-
tenance. Also it is important to consider impact caused by resource extraction, impact
due to transportation, impact due to manufacturing, impact caused during its installation
and impacts regarding its ﬁnal disposition.
Besides this it is also important to consider the standardization of materials: dimension
and weight of material to decide for the need of equipment to be used at construction site;
connection between the materials forming the product as to avoid the need of sealants ,
ﬁxtures and ﬁnishing; ease in disassembling of product favouring its reuse and reducing
losses due to disassembling, avoiding regeneration of residues and need for manufacturing
new components. For formulating the LCA diﬀerent impact due to the use of material
considering its diﬀerent stages of life cycle is necessary. LEED green building rating sytem
Rajat Kumar: s181289
24
==PAGE:31==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
is system used U.S. Green building council to evaluate and classify environment behaviour
of buildings. This system has been created to be used during the designing phases and
construction phase of the project. this encourages the integrated design process from
beginning to end resulting in low impact to environment and users and on the other side
saving cost to the owner. It will be discussed in coming paragraphs as it can become basis
for the materials guy to look into the phases and process through which the material
passes and have an idea of evaluation of materials on basis of its usage and life.[25]
LEED method on Speciﬁcation of materials
The methods used by LEED is structured in simple way and is easily understandable also
it if user friendly tool supporting designing task. The methodology used by LEED uses
credit sytem based on diﬀerent stages of design , facilitating the selection of material by
designers for taking decisions that are environmentally sustainable. Speciﬁcally ﬁve stages
can be considered in designing process: prelim study, legal design, pre executive design,
executive design and production design. Following guidelines are mainly suggested:
During prelim study when the functions and type of facility is being decided and ini-
tial solutions for the systems are considered following actions will assist in selection of
materials.
• Reusing the existing facility (credit 1): it is mainly under the control of owners and
users to decide for that the facility will be constructed newly or existing building
will be renovated to ﬁrst the purpose.
• Reuse of the materials (credit 3): The architects should consider the possibility of
rezoning the materials already used in other projects or new product to be used.
• Regional materials (credit 5): The architects should look into the locally available
material near the construction site and tries to give priority to those with easy
accessibility and that which ﬁts into the requirement box.
• Renewable materials (credit 6): it should be veriﬁed the source of material whether
it is coming form renewable source or some where else.
• Certiﬁed wood (credit 7): it should be decided whether to use it or not , but if it is
decided to use the wood then the type of wood should be researched before going
to the ﬁnal decisions
In case of legal design it must be approved from the legislative authorities of the state.
No new decisions should be made in context of selection of materials in this case where
public authority is decisive in doing so.
The pre- executive and executive
design refers to as construction documentation
stage when all the ﬁnals decisions are made for construction elements such as construction
methodology, ﬁnishing materials, installation of all elements of the buildings. Here it can
be proposed to use the materials which are composed of recycled materials as as to
minimize the impact on ecosystem. For the later one the materials should be considered
for its residual destination and treatment.
The last step of the design step refers to a production design which, in addition to the
production processes to be followed during development, would detail design solutions
according to diﬀerent material characteristics and components. The use of all established
Rajat Kumar: s181289
25
==PAGE:32==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
approaches in previous stages is often needed such that the research is carried out with
as least duplication as possible. There is no special LEED demand at this point, as all
decisions may have been taken at previous stages already.[25]
Architects led the trend for the BIM solution, however other disciplines quickly started to
be interested. The opportunity to accumulate and catch the rich information and attach it
to the model provides possibilities not historically possible in the construction industry. As
well, BIM has several parallels in terms of product life-cycle management. Such gains are
veriﬁed through the incorporation and continuing reuse of knowledge in architecture and
manufacturing processes. The parallels between BIM and project life cycle management
are so evident as to enable BIM to produce the maintenance of buildings knowledge over
the entire life cycle of a structure. BIM also relates to structure life-cycle management.
3.7
Parametric Algorithmic Design
Because of its CAD tradition, tools in BIM lacks appropriate modules for generative
design for two-directional details entirely operational and thus become captured in pe-
riphery of the architecture process. BIM has limited programming speciﬁcity and ﬁelds
of preparation that can be utilized eﬃciently in the project’s pre-design phases. The user
articulation don’t work into various design roles or levels of technical competence that
include intuitive platform. It’s often too technical for that occasionally senior program
users and regular users.Moreover, many design soft-wares have shortfall due to lack of
database for materials inventory connected to building model. It only provides comfort
for the usage and fast adoption to the tools, however it lacks to grow with the increase in
the capabilities of the authors working on the model.It may help to virtually look at the
models for the construction but it may lack the knowledge of physical attributes inform-
ing about the construct-ability or the characteristics of the materials used.These lack in
capacity of the BIM based tools demonstrates well the huge gap between conceptual and
detailed design phases.
The construction of a software blueprint on a basis of reprogram rules or algorithms known
as parameters is a parametric modeling (or parametric design). In other words, the model
or its components are dynamically generated by internal intuition rather than controlled
manually.
New industrial innovations, in combination especially with the parametric
BIM platform to provide balance opportunities conceptual thought emphasis by material
and questions of assembly at the foreground architectural communication. Architecture
is domain of constructing, in-spite of just conceptualization. Traditional design based
methods considers mainly structure behaviors of materials with complex geometries and
considers material properties partially accounts for.
In the parametric design stage, the initial state of information is the conﬁguration. In
other words, just about everything is known about the designed object except its exact
dimensions and tolerances. It may also be in some cases that the exact material choice is
also unknown, though the basic class of material will usually be included in the conﬁgu-
ration information. Their is possibility of investigating material properties as it is done
for daylight simulations or thermal behaviours of buildings.
The goal of parametric design, therefore, is to add the dimensions and any other spe-
ciﬁc information needed for functionality and manufacturability. The speciﬁc material
is also selected if it has not previously been designated. In other words, parametric de-
sign supplies all the dimensions, tolerances, and detailed materials information critical to
Rajat Kumar: s181289
26
==PAGE:33==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
the design consistent with both the marketing concept and the engineering design spec-
iﬁcation. Moreover it also supports creation of complex system of geometries including
relationship constrained parametrically.Additionally it also promotes saving production
costs, creation of new components and evaluation of new designs as it can be used to form
complex models with less diﬃculties.The reﬂection of the application and software has
improved signiﬁcantly. The algorithm enables the traceability of the operation facilitating
design and ﬂexibility for designers.
Parametric rules typically create connections between diﬀerent design elements. For in-
stance, a rule could be created to ensure the walls start at the level of the ﬂoor and reach
the base of the ceiling. The walls are immediately modiﬁed to ﬁt whether the ﬂoor is
raised to a ceiling height. The height of window cills above ﬂoor level, the ratio of walls
to a tangled roof, the connection between the ﬂoors and the size of windows or number
of luminaries and others, may also be other cases. The similar algorithm can be used in
a model to change the whole model if a speciﬁc element or rule is changed. In addition,
the model displays all the rules speciﬁed by the client.
Throughout the traditional structural architecture, structural knowledge modeling (BIM)
incorporated a considerable amount of parametric modeling. BIM is a broad word for
the development of digital content on a building or other infrastructure (such as a bridge,
lane, tunnel, and so on). In general, BIM software is based on object deﬁnition, but
parametrical attributes such as colour can be attached. Thus, for example, any entity
with this color attribute would also shift if a color scheme is modiﬁed for the house. Other
parameters can be: location details, heights, details from the supplier, shape deﬁnition
algorithms etc.
Although the interaction between objects is established and model is modiﬁed automat-
ically, BIM artifacts and their characteristics may be adjusted, the artifacts themselves
appear not to be constructed or parametrically modeled. The model is rather a compo-
sition created by logic than an assemblage of objects, and there is a suggestion that this
object-based approach is incompatible with real parametric design.
BIM helps shift away from architecture on the basis of the laborious manual handling of
"stupid" objects and is gradually able to utilize "smart" parametric approach; neverthe-
less, there is some way to go until it can address the broad variety of laws regulating the
development and designing of buildings.
In the spirit of least commitment design, parametric design need not and should not
specify information to any degree of precision that is not actually required by the Speciﬁ-
cations, but most dimensions are in fact usually determined at the parametric stage.[26]
The Figure 9 demonstrates the scheme of the design process using parametric modeling.
It lets you describe any or all parts of the model as parameters (geometry, material
properties, loads, etc.). Creating and addressing a new parametric function variance is as
easy as modifying a few parameter values and running the experiment again.[27]
There are some innovations in describing the properties of the fabrics. Many of them
look at modern building’s parametric architecture, multi-layering, facades, energy storage,
glass replacement and wide-span rooﬁng.
Performance-based product implementation, with its quantitative and qualitative dimen-
sions, the early phases of design are particularly important in sustainable design pursuit.
When we really want to, to be decided by the eﬃciency of our buildings to fulﬁll environ-
Rajat Kumar: s181289
27
==PAGE:34==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
ment standards, so zero energy architecture features and construction shape parameters
were selected in initial stages of architecture. Parametric architecture may be extended to
details by specifying such deliberately selected values and algorithms to get the ﬁnal design
automatically. In this way signiﬁcant improvements in time and precision are achieved.
Variations in initial values can be tested quickly and the template reﬁned, thereby saving
boring , repetitive activities.[28] The Grasshopper provides the facility to do parametric
modelling based on writing scripts which are just algorithms based.
Figure 9: parametric design workﬂow [6]
Grasshopper
Grasshopper provides users of Rhinoceros knowledge the platform for algorithmic mod-
eling. It is one of the newest and most common add-ins in Rhinoceros. Grasshopper
can be used without much programming knowledge. Grasshopper uses modeling tools to
produce the algorithmic modelling and the model can be created by changing individual
settings. Rhinoceros is basically used for visualize the model in-spite of using commands
from Rhinoceros. Grasshopper is a Rhinoceros simulation optimized node based algorithm
writer tool. Logical connections among multiple designs are described by algorithms pa-
rameters that describe a layout parametric. Grasshopper provides a range of generative
modelling mathematical tools like operators, binding tables, functions and trigonometric
Rajat Kumar: s181289
28
==PAGE:35==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
curves of three-dimensional objects. Logical links can be created at the same time. Those
are the methods in other terms, they may be modiﬁed or omitted independently of the
parametric model. You can create and modify the model by using your own settings us-
ing only Rhinoceros background information in Grasshopper. It permits architects build
dynamic forms without knowledge of coding or programming. For this research work
was conducted using the Grasshopper, where scripts were written and tested to see the
decoupling of materials from the main design systems.
3.8
Interoperatibility and collaboration
The existing construction implementation method relies on 2D drawings for coordina-
tion. These drawings are susceptible to mistakes which result in additional costs, delays
and sometimes legal action between diﬀerent project stakeholders. Because the bulk of
such diagrams are created by diﬀerent ﬁrms, their accuracy is challenging to monitor
or cooperate. This is primarily because numerous businesses work according to varying
requirements.The alternative is to utilize BIM ’s integrated methods. A number of back-
grounds may operate on a project at the same time. Only one conﬁguration or multiple
organized models of synchronized change may be used to cooperate. Since BIM does
not authorize more than one depiction per entity, no matter the drawing vision, accurate
drawings must still occur. Should a schedule adjustment arise, all plans are automatically
revised. Such improvements contribute to time saves and less system errors.
All the participants linked to a project beneﬁt from an identical construction pattern,
which is also rich with knowledge.
The probability of mistakes and disagreements is
smaller because several possible errors may already be detected during the design process.
Those stakeholders with exposure to the platform can see how their input is expressed in
the central model and can make changes accordingly. Such a development model often
allows the simulated pre-design of a project, which contributes to improved construction
management. While 2D models are still a prerequisite for construction permits, the model
is likely to be legally binding in the future.
Of example, in contrast to procedures employed by customers in the building industry,
the above described propositions vary signiﬁcantly. It would entail major improvements
in stakeholder ties.
The productive project needs intense knowledge sharing with its
partners over the entire length of the project. Instead of seeking individual goals, that
extend fragmentation by creating a competitive environment, this partnership should
build on a shared trust and aim.Sadly, it is very hard for the building industry to create
conﬁdence, because most stakeholder cooperation for a project is an ad-hoc collaboration
rather than a long-lasting relationship. Throughout the European Union, 93 percent of
building ﬁrms have fewer than 10 workers. Therefore, long-term relationships between
stakeholders are challenging to create since they are too fractured.
Smooth knowledge sharing is typically hindered by people not prepared to share details.
Stakeholders.
The causes may be ﬁnancial , legal or intellectual property and it is a
serious problem. Actually, the collection of procurement goods (procurement focused on
coordinated project execution, which encourages project stakeholder cooperation) or the
customer’s request and data ownership criteria may address this problem.
The integrated project delivery contract (IPD) includes risk, time and expense assign-
ments between those concerned who create a collaborative team with a shared objective.
Because they share the possible risks and advantages, it is in their favor to execute a
Rajat Kumar: s181289
29
==PAGE:36==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
project eﬀectively, as everybody proﬁts from it. If there be no IPD arrangement, then, a
complete Building execution Plan (BEP) may be used. BEP stipulates increasing stake-
holder’s (plan) level of detail for a speciﬁc process, as well as plan distribution mechanisms.
Therefore data ownership is contractually protected and disputes among stakeholders are
minimized, since each user has to comply with speciﬁcations before entering an appoint-
ment. BEP may also be assisted by the employer information requirements (EIR) manual
to help endorse the speciﬁcations. EIR helps stakeholders to consider their positions,
obligations, technological challenges, inputs and model management.
The amount of stakeholders required to create a house is a further cause for heterogeneity
of the construction industry. As stated, several of the businesses have less than 10 staﬀ
and there are thus various companies covering just one ﬁeld (architects, mechanics, HVAC,
etc.). A stakeholder specialization requires its own issues. As one instance, all businesses
are equivalent to all of the individuals participating with a construction project.
Many organizations collaborate to work on a construction project on a temporary basis,
it is vital to have compatible tools and infrastructure. It is necessary to have the platform
which is mature and widely accepted among all the participants of the project without
arresting them to use the speciﬁc tool for their respective work. With the advancement
in BIM it has forced to make changes in the use of IT in construction industry, which was
earlier conﬁned only for visual representation has now shifted to a integrated process and
product model. It has been achieved by following open BIM standard which evolved Indus-
try foundation classes. IFC has the capabilities to build the bridge between stakeholders
and diﬀerent phases in project.There is signiﬁcant potential for increased productivity:
open interoperability in the construction of information models would allow the uninter-
rupted ﬂow of information from design, cost, project, production and service, decreasing
repetition and increasing productivity allover the building’s entire lifecycle.[29]
The disintegrated nature of the construction industry and mixed use of IT tools by the
players in the industry are main potholes coming in the way of interoperatibility. BIM
data shall be legible, editable and exchanged between various applications throughout
the entire building development cycle and during the phases of the construction process.
Most of the companies in AEC industry have very limited resources and capabilities due
to which it needs a huge eﬀort to shift the industry to get more integrated with BIM.
The transition into BIM contributes to signiﬁcant improvements in the system both within
the organization and in cross-site systems as it transitions beyond conventional paper
workﬂows.
The size of the transition depends on the form of BIM sharing that the
organization requires.Closed BIM represents one vendor’s BIM services using patented
data sharing formats. Alternatively, the online BIM distribution is handled in diﬀerent
formats which enables further BIM program products to be shared. Little BIM is deﬁned
in the isolation of a system as a BIM remedy. Big BIM, though, is to utilize various
approaches collaboratively and share data across the entire project development cycle.
The approach for conventional paper-based procedures is similar to the roots of the axes.
This reduces BIM ’s advantages to the lowest degree though. In turn, one steps into
planned usage of BIM and explores further potential advantages. Farther away from the
root Sadly, these advantages pose several technical obstacles, the primary one being the
problem of interoperability.
Theoretically, there are many beneﬁts of open standard-based interoperability, be it a ﬁle-
based exchange or a cloud data exchange. Each individual application must develop and
Rajat Kumar: s181289
30
==PAGE:37==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
implement direct translators for all other software components that they are interested to
communicate with in order to convert mappings from the internal application format to
the target formats if there is no common, open standard. In order to be consistent with
the same speciﬁcation all other implementations, the mappings must be converted back
and forth only from the particular format if the universal speciﬁcation should be used.
The above mentioned problem has been solved by International framework of dictionaries
(IFD) which includes information about materials assigned to the structures or description
of properties tagged with Global unique IDs (GUID). It will create beneﬁts as uniﬁed
global libraries emerged which feeds the need of manufacturers, suppliers and other players
in material aspect of AEC industry.
The workﬂows of some disciplines vary, as speciﬁc aspects of a building are the subject
of each discipline. This contributes to various guidelines for making and representing an
otherwise similar entity. Let’s take a column to explain the diﬀerence to provide a clear
illustration. Spatial representation for an architect is signiﬁcant, but only a column is
depicted as a stick for the needs of a structural engineer. When an architect sees a jet, he
sees the deck, the walls and columns. A structural engineer sees the same ﬂoor but below
there are walls and columns. Of course, the question is simpler than this case, but it does
illustrate a point.So long as all departments work independently (in near proximity to
the BIM), there is no question. However, issues arise when any of these details have to
be shared (BIM open-ended). Semantics are abundant in BIM. This would be just a 3D
CAD if the layout was not rich and all the semanticized data were linked to it. BIM is
thus technically capable of sharing data linked to artifacts through diﬀerent BIM software
packages.
Four main approaches to information sharing in BIM exist:
• Each stakeholder will use applications of only one supplier as the ﬁrst step. This
makes a quick interchange in both directions between the disciplines. Sadly, it is
still unworkable in the context that a lot of stakeholders are not prepared to invest
money and time having tech from a speciﬁc vendor only to work with multiple
stakeholders.
• The second approach is to use vendor applications which cooperates and allows for
direct exchange via the API. Although the variety of technological technologies is
that, much of the obstacles identiﬁed with the ﬁrst solution exist.
• Software that enables data to be shared via the universal ﬁle system, such as Busi-
ness Foundation Classes (IFC) is a third solution. This reduces the need to build
direct translators across proprietary data formats of particular vendors to facilitate
the exchange through IFC. A developer then just needs to build a single interpreter
in order to cooperate with other software packages that are allowed by IFC. Nonethe-
less, this transaction at the time of writing relies strongly on the commitment of
the app provider to completely endorse IFC, otherwise data loss would occur.
• The fourth one is focused around the usage of the DBMS (Database Management
System) model server-driven data exchanges. The device is maintained on a central
or server basis. Also referred to as BIM or IFC server since it is often built on
the traditional application structure, such as IFC. This encourages all parties to
operate on the same knowledge at a building entity level rather than on a ﬁle level
Rajat Kumar: s181289
31
==PAGE:38==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
and will address interoperability challenges such as version control and overlapping
technological problems.
This is nothing like the "right solution," since it depends all on a situation and any
method has its beneﬁts and drawbacks. This is, however, predicted to be used more and
more in ﬂexible formats, including IFC (whether they are based on schema sharing or on
DBMS only). The key explanation for this is that in the most case a government is the
biggest consumer in the building business and will thus remain impartial when selecting a
technological solution. In the event that the government uses a particular ﬁle format, that
will establish unequal business practices and result in a software supplier’s dominance and
consequent legal proceedings.
The biggest impediment to collaboration is the question of interoperability that has now
been implemented. The coordination standard will be large in order to have compre-
hensive service over the whole life cycle of a building as all knowledge needed will be
inter-operable and ideally maintained in a repository over easy access. The interoper-
ability of information must also be maintained if the BIM model is to be utilized as a
life-cycle framework. It includes a large-scale, transparent BIM solution. That discipline
may relate to the main model regardless of the software vendor it requires and of where
the main model is.Nonetheless, the required amount of information they are supposed to
ﬁll in the model for each phase may be a challenge for stakeholders.
As the project proceeds the information data goes on increasing as more disciplines adds
ons the information share to the model. this facilitates the use of BIM whole life-cycle
tends to be found in logic. The gullibility of BIM is also a challenge with templates.
The structuring of the details and data handling is not often consistent with an ordinary
business. Main explanations for encounter issues of gullibility are due to the average scale
and complexity of a structure of data in model.
The whole layout and all the details in it must not all be included.
The computing
capacity is potentially possible sometime towards the future, but before that time the
issue needs to be solved. The ﬁltering out of data is one approach. The model view
deﬁnitions (MVD), produced by Building SMART, oﬀers a basic solution. The above are
collected in line with the information delivery manual (IDM), which shows the expected
usage of the pattern.
The IDM allows the concept of a model view and captures all
required details to be shared and lightens a ﬁle for smoother activity.
It is only one side of the coin, so the other is the issue of data sharing, although there are
huge sized models. Software companies try a route to solve this problem, one approach is
to upgrade only the updated sections of the code, known as the incremental change. An-
other approach to use digital tablets is databases and pattern connections. Therefore, rich
information are processed independently of the layout. Accordingly, the necessary infor-
mation is accessible through a connection. The last choice is to utilize the cloud-speciﬁed
BIM (or IFC) site.These servers provide object-based management that facilitates the
integration of querying, uploading and upgrading of model data, and facilitates multiple
players to operate concurrently on a continuously updated model.
Precise, semanticized model not just for house a house should be used. When you look
at an average construction development cycle, the planning and design stages combined
are generally much shorter than the operating process. Traditionally, both stages were
segregated, so it would be a shame if these two processes were not associated with facilities
management if BIM were implemented. As a framework for facilities operations, the built-
Rajat Kumar: s181289
32
==PAGE:39==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
up paradigm may be included. The details was intended to promote easier construction
processes rather than lose details after the handover of the house.
The ﬁnished model is a source of evidence for the software structures employed during
service to construct a structure.
Today, COBie is the most common format for data
transmission to Facilities management systems from the built-in conﬁguration. When
so many unnecessary data are stored in the when designed layout, it is ﬁrst optimized.
Processes such as simplifying a speciﬁcation, integrating interface features in one module,
inserting gaps, and so on comprise of this optimisation. Yet the as-built layout remains a
rich source of BIM FM.
3.9
Product Libraries
Manufacturing information is needed for assembling and maintenance models and also
required in design and construction processes. It is mainly available in the form of IFC
complaint format based on standards as a part of integrated BIM. Several researches have
performed on investigation of material libraries and it is lacking the extensive eﬀort to
develop real material libraries for AEC industry due to improper demand and the use of
integrated BIM in design, execution and facilities management of construction projects.
BIM users Look for where time can be saved, particularly in content.
BIM objects available in libraries are virtual representation of products and materials
in digital form. Their are usually two forms of objects available one is generic(with no
detailed information about the materials used and properties) and the other one is speciﬁc
(with detailed geometry and properties). Some of the objects may be the products with 3D
geometry, however material objects just represent the material names as in some cases the
sizes are not given. For example the insulation material it is senseless to provide the roll of
insulation material as BIM object. In most of the time designers are using generic objects
from th libraries as the ﬁnal decision for the material takes long time. usually in initial
stages the generic objects are selected and as the design evolves the speciﬁc products are
assigned to the object, during this transition from generic to speciﬁc object may loose the
lifecycle perspective of the project.Several object libraries are available online like GoBIM,
MagiCloud, NBS national BIM library UK and BIM Object. Major drawback experienced
with these repositories were that they look like more of the marketing platform adding
on value to their business. This adds on a separate responsibility who can dive into these
libraries and can select the suitable object for the project.
Here are some of the examples of online object repositories and the content they oﬀer[30]:
NBS National BIM library
NBS is UK based BIM object library controlled by Royal Institute of British Architects.
Normally it is the system for products properties also consists of free BIM toolkit sup-
porting BIM level-2 initiative. It follows their own standards, however the properties are
regulated with COBie and their in house properties. It also supports the open BIM as
most of the generic objects are available in IFC format.
BIMobject
BIM model seems from day one to have a global orientation and is not related to any
pattern or devices.
The range of manufacturers and items listed in the collection is
remarkable. But where we notice that they lack, they have certain ifc items, which are
mostly furniture and construction materials.
Rajat Kumar: s181289
33
==PAGE:40==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
MagiCloud
MagiCloud is Europe based BIM library with mainly MEP objects. It is a core techni-
cal equipment and MEP product based library with list of suppliers.Objects are mainly
available in Revit format.
It is seen that most of the libraries are just the platform for sales and marketing of the
products for suppliers and manufacturers. All these platforms supports openBIM format
and supports the property standards. But the nature of output for each of them are mixd
in nature but supports the inter-operatability.
Objects available on online portal can reduce cost engulfed by modelling and on another
side cut down the time spent.
It is basically possible when conventional objects are
used in the modelling but for new families of objects it may not work. Many companies
uses the components available on the material catalogue which helps in making decisions
especially on ﬁttings and ﬁxtures and they keep it for changes at later stages. This may
involve the object to be get forgotten and updated at the later stage when speciﬁcations
are written down. Moreover the product catalogues have possibility to be changed with
upcoming of new product.This brings the new responsibility in the team of designers who
is able to update the materials from the perspective of its availability and provide correct
information in the model. Adding to this it is also added job to track the applicability,
importance and origin of content.
In other words, components in BIM models must
be correct, consistent and meaningfully extracted to give the highest value of the BIM
process.
Mistrust for the components has resulted, as each company creates their own BIM stan-
dards and organises data on their own which enhances limitation for interoperatibility.
Certain contents are poorly modelled and these fails to interact with components used in
model, sometimes due to high detail of components it is diﬃcult to for it to get compatible
with the model. All the physical characteristics, from the visual appearance to operational
information, behavior and positioning information, this means that every product has to
be routinely deﬁned eﬀectively with accuracy..
Rajat Kumar: s181289
34
==PAGE:41==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
3.10
LOD
With the progress towards elaborating the deliverable, it is noticed the relation between
level of detail and designing stage. If we look back into the traditional design development,
the level of detail is linked with the scale of drawing, 1/50 for the technical design, 1/100
for detailed design and 1/200 for schematic design. The drawing’s scale has reduced its
importance with the implementation of computer based designs. The level of development
can be developed more to ﬁll the gap between the level of development, level of detail,
level of information and level of scale.
In the paper-based distribution cycle, through which each distribution in the system
generates sketches of a certain size, the amount of information needed by and participants
for each stage became relatively straightforward. This calculation restricts the degree of
speciﬁcity that may be included in the illustration and the information attached to it. In
fact, each discipline creates drawings independently, and there is no issue of accountability,
because each is liable for drawings created by itself.
Yet BIM has a new method of
approaching so. The breadth of research is "quantiﬁed" by the degree of detail (LOD),
which describes the geometry as well as the terminology correlated with this geometry.
We can tag the materials with the label which must describe the level of development
achieved in the progress of design, as it can address the several issues when BIM is used
as communication and collaboration tool, i.e, diﬀerent users extracting information from
the model:
• In design process, systems and components initiate from the concepts and end up
to a precise descriptive informative data. Earlier their was no way to designate an
element along the various stages of design, the creator was the only person with the
piece of cake and others often don’t know the progress.
• In a model, a component could be a generic line which if placed at the right location
can be misinterpreted as ﬁnalized component placed in the speciﬁc location, so their
is the need of something which can help to distinguish between these two.
• fetching of the information which is still in progress towards ﬁnalization. For ex-
ample an undeﬁned element can be measured with exactness, so information for an
assembly often exists before its ﬁnalization.
The LOD Framework addresses these problems by providing a standard developed by
the industry to describe the state of development of diﬀerent systems within a BIM.
This standard makes communication and execution consistent by facilitating the detailed
deﬁnition of BIM milestones and deliverable.
But LOD is often considered to be information standard. Information level is simply
how much graphical information the model feature includes. Level of development is the
degree to which the design and attached knowledge of the product are thought out –
the degree to which representatives of the project team may depend on the details while
utilizing the layout.Essentially, Level of Detail can be considered as input to the element
while Level of Development is a reliable result.[1]
Their are several existing concepts for LOD as diﬀerent disciplines, project or organiza-
tions works on their own concept a standard format is still on the way to be accepted
universally.
Rajat Kumar: s181289
35
==PAGE:42==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
Speciﬁc architecture styles, project management frameworks and project organisations
need various details at project objectives and there needs to be an input within the
LOD system. Some organisations have also adopted additional terminology, such as level
of detail (graphic-oriented) and level of information (non-graphic-oriented).DiKon 2015,
developed a solution for LOD representation based on graphical and non graphical infor-
mation for each selected model element type.[7]
The graphical requirements are deﬁned based on three criteria:
• The reliability of the elements, ranging from expected, speciﬁed to ﬁnal.
• The shape of elements related to reliability, e.g. the max. outer contours for the
expected level of reliability or contours reﬂecting the ﬁnal dimensions for the ﬁnal
level of reliability.
• The completeness of the elements, referring to the element representation (e.g.
generic, assembly or element-divided) and the scope of components to include along
with the main element.
Figure 10: Framework of generic LOD solution [7]
Above mentioned LOD system focuses mainly on delivery milestones and thus represents
the main phases of the AEC industry.This proposed framework is also desirable as it
not using the intermediate levels of LOD like 120 or 340 as they are considered unde-
sirable. Also the framework can lead to assist the authors to come up to the conclusion
of formatting the LOD system as per their own need based on the phases they want to
consider.
Their is great importance of LOD in the BIM system as it will provide the status to the
authors in diﬀerent system working on BIM. In this report the work was performed using
parametric system and option for LOD was made, so that all disciplines should be aware
of the stage of particular object in the model.
Rajat Kumar: s181289
36
==PAGE:43==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
3.11
Problem formulation
Following the initial analysis through the literature review led to formation of objective for
the scope of this report.Several issues were found in the present scenario of building design
hampering the optimization of materials selection and LCA.Some of them are shown in
Table ?? describing the causes and eﬀects related to the problem.
Causes
Eﬀects
•Big teams’ poor collaboration
•Poor selection of materials
•Less investment for life cycle
•Low motivation for life cycle
•Low sagacious thinking for decreasing waste
•Waste generation
•Less availability of life cycle data
•No future strategies for the facility
•No strict legislation for sustainable structures
•Material Knowledge
•Material ingredients
Table 4: causes and eﬀects for the current situation
The following problem is formulated based on the initial researches:
• Decoupling materials for a new role in building design?
• Exploring the trajectory of LCA/LCC investigations at early stage design
and proposing a new role in the building design and construction process?
3.11.1
Interest behind material decoupling
Beneﬁts which can be achieved by decoupling the material system from the project.
• Determining LCA/LCC at the initial stage of design.
• Decisions for the material can be done too early (inception stage)
• Embedded labeling for construction process
• Collaborate facility’s users and owners
• Helps to determine Total value of ownership (TVO) at any instance
• Smooth process of material procurement and project planning
• Creates open platform for all stakeholders to use the information they need of ma-
terials
• Allows editing at diﬀerent stages throughout life cycle of the project.
• Buildings can be represented as the material bank, and after their usage ends, the
materials can be reused or recycled
[11] [3] [31] [32] [21]
On the basis of literature review it guides to develop the picture that many beneﬁts can
be achieved from the decoupling of materials. As materials have great importance in
many aspects of the construction project and inﬂuence the cost at the great extent. So it
has been tried in the work performed in parametric system to speculate the possibilities
of achieving various gains from materials prospective. More over it has been tried to
evaluate why material decoupling needs a new role in building design.
Rajat Kumar: s181289
37
==PAGE:44==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
4
Methodology
In this report action research and evaluative methodologies has been adopted, as the
researcher has collaborated with the team working on developing model on through para-
metric system using Agile methodology. The software used in the process were Rhino 3D
and Grasshopper, the grasshopper was used to develop the model by writing scripts in
diﬀerent systems whereas Rhino was basically used to see the overview of the model.The
approach was spiral and cyclic in nature involving stages like planning action, observa-
tion and reﬂection. Moreover it also includes the literature reviews from diﬀerent articles,
journals and web-pages and is based on choices being connected with paradigm.[33]
Initially the work started with understanding the concepts of writing scripts in grasshop-
per and some initial planning of work distribution and steps to be followed in developing
scripts for material allocation.The detailed steps and process explained in the proceeding
sections which will present the full understanding of the work performed for the research.
An algorithm has been designed and analyzed with respect to the requirements and goals
of the conceptual design and parametric simulation level to address the research questions.
The program for design and creation of parametric design steps applications was selected
as Grasshopper 3D. This was because there is currently no appropriate parametric design
solution help applications such as Grasshopper. The short (program) for the architec-
tural competition was selected as the context to ensure that the assessment reﬂected a
realistic scenario regarding the site, aesthetic and other criteria. In addition, to build the
competition, a speciﬁc site setting was chosen based on the targets set by the competition
requirements.
4.1
Plan of work
Construction project has several phases which are mainly sequential in nature , as it starts
with inception. The approach for the project will be to work on RHINO 3D software using
grasshopper with a team, working on designing a project, divided into several groups like
designers, estimators, planners and material. The motto of the thesis is to decouple the
materials from the project and make it a parallel activity throughout the designing phase
and look into the possibilities of assigning material in earliest most stages of design.
This can be understand by looking into the Figure 11 showing the diﬀerent phases during
the life cycle of the project. During this project it will be tried to make the material
selection a parallel activity and increase the span of designing phase and drag it more as
marked by red line.[32]
Figure 11: Phases of Building Project and decoupling material phase
Rajat Kumar: s181289
38
==PAGE:45==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
The modelling was done for the competition which required imaginative ideas with fur-
ther exploration.Goal for the project was to design a structure which could be used for
multipurpose taking into consideration the aesthetics, adaptive, ﬂexibility, imagination
and materials.
4.2
Decoupling materials
4.2.1
Understanding materials
As discussed earlier that the buildings can be represented as material banks and the
materials used in the buildings have diﬀerent impact on the project due to cost and
environmental impact.For understands the decoupling aspect, it is necessary to develop
the knowledge about ’what the materials are’ for the use in building.
In this report
materials are named as Material passport(MP).Originally, speciﬁcations must be deﬁned
which must be fulﬁlled by the content passport. New buildings are usually ﬁxed and are
aged for around 5 decades. Furthermore, the documents will be evidence of the future
and should be understandable at that age of building. The aim is therefore to retain the
records either scanned and securely preserved or protected in a safe and accessible digital
ﬁle format. The passport details may be entered in a custom manner or in a structured
way. It is easier to standardize the input of data as it guarantees coherence and eﬃciency.
Material passport in the project is the database of each material used in the project,
which includes all the information like quantities, speciﬁcations,LCC, LOD etc. During
the research it was faced that their is very limited knowledge of the materials available for
the construction.As compared to other industries like pharmaceuticals, cosmetics or food
all the ingredients are mentioned and all information is provided with full documentation
for all of their products.
The details to be used in the content passport is next necessary to deﬁne. It must be
possible to classify every object. A supplier and a company name must also be speciﬁed.
In fact, each speciﬁc product has a unique number that allows it easy for you to link
with other apps and locate the product quickly during your lifetime. Combining multiple
materials / products creates an item that is marketed as a complete component – they
will be all joined together and registered.The diagram along with main measurements will
be used with each package, which allows diﬀerent intent in the future simpler to search
with a company. It is followed by a product’s "inventory of ingredients," enabling the
weight of the products to be measured.[34]
As the MP used could be only the material, parts or product, which needs more clariﬁca-
tion between these three. Based on diﬀerent studies throughout the research the usages of
these three kinds of tags can be explained by representing them into three diﬀerent levels
based on the assemblies. The links between the materials can be shown in the Figure 12.
In level-3 is just the single material like wood, brick, glass, stone, etc. Secondly the ma-
terial level-2 are the accessories used in the with the products or materials, thirdly the
materials in level-1 are available in the form of product example doors, windows, electrical
panel, mechanical equipment, etc which are ready to be used in construction project.
Based on above knowledge we can see the MP could only be single material or the part
or the combination of diﬀerent materials and the parts in a product. And due to com-
plex structure of the levels the authorities of these MPs may be delegated between more
stakeholders as per their role, responsibilities and ownership.
Rajat Kumar: s181289
39
==PAGE:46==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
Figure 12: Diﬀerent levels and kind of materials
As discussed above some materials falls into level 1 category which is combination of
diﬀerent materials and form a product. Others could be only materials like reinforcement
bars, I-section beam, etc which falls in category level 3, are used directly as in its basic
form. So initially in this project a list of materials based on the list of proposed number
of elements or objects were created. And all stakeholders formed their list of strategies
or functions which they select on the basis of experience and for each element/object
which included the information required from each other groups. This helped to create
a more constraint list of materials respective to individual element in the model.
If
a separate responsibility is delegated to the person who only looks into the materials
for the project which can result into better allocation and documentation of materials.
The information in the MPs can be maintained through paper documentation, locally
stored within the organization or can be stored on a server cloud. It would be Wise to
store this data separately from the model as this Will allows editing the data in the MP
without connecting to the model. In this report it is tried to make MP as locally stored
information database. The person responsible for selecting materials has an eye over the
type of material based on the category of level. As some of the material in level-3 could
be available for construction as whole product or may be it could start from level-3 in
design and construction and end up to level-1 as a ﬁnal product. Moreover, for the design
it could be available as a geometry with all the speciﬁed required information or it could
be just the material with the name and information without geometry.
Systematic approach to material passport and optimized data has the potential for inno-
vation, value creation and adoption of eﬃcient energy systems and sustainable solutions.
On the other side it promotes the circular economy where the construction companies
can identify the material reuse, disposal and maintaining, this in-turn increases the value
and life of the project. However it is important that the information in the material
passport should be useful and accessible to the users. Moreover, all stakeholders in the
design system should be able to communicate and know the level of information about the
materials and it must be able to follow the value of the project at all stages. An example
of material passport proposal in Figure 13 and it is suggested to include the information
of safety, use, sustainability, quality, demolition, reuse, history of usage and tracebalility
of material. [8]
Rajat Kumar: s181289
40
==PAGE:47==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
Figure 13: Material passport proposal [8]
The MP must be ﬂexible for adaption by the material suppliers and manufacturers and
also by the material owner in the project. In this project MP is combination of geometry
from the model, LOD, quantities and the information considered in Figure 13.
4.2.2
Selecting materials
As discussed in material passport section, all set of materials list can be created for
each element.This list could be very huge as it includes all the products available in the
market with speciﬁcations and other useful information.Initially N, numbers of materials
forms the data-set for a single element. Then based on the principles or strategies or
functions needed by diﬀerent stakeholders authorised to decide the materials create their
list of requirements named as the functions.The pictorial representation of the selection
process through selection process of materials passing from the test of functions created
by diﬀerent disciplines can be seen in Figure 14. Here in this case initially the material
having more ticks can be selected i.e the materials which gets the maximum weight-age
wins the test.
Diﬀerent materials pass through the ﬁlter of functions as per the requirement and a
set values for diﬀerent functions is created which represents a property value Pi, corre-
spondingly it predicts/selects the material which satisfy maximum number of functions
determined by the stakeholders involved.This can be explained by looking into ﬁgure 15,
which describes this process in section a,b and c. Here part b is guessed material and
part c shows the ﬁltration of diﬀerent principles required for designing from the Creator,
Rajat Kumar: s181289
41
==PAGE:48==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
Figure 14: Schematic view of functions corresponding to diﬀerent discipline for a particular
layer of element
and in-turn satisfying to maximum extent the need created in part c.
Figure 15: Material selection process
The functions stated here could be size, properties like strength, density, U-value, g- value
or other variables. By following this process of ﬁltration it could help to constraint the
list of materials determined for each element/object and the material can be allotted to
the element before ﬁnalization of element or it can be said before its design analysis only
on the basis of the prerequisites.
It will reduce the time involved at later stage of design i.e selection of materials only after
analysis process. Resulting in reducing the eﬀort at later stages of the design phase of the
project. With the progress of the project the material may satisfy all the requirements
or if not the ﬁltration process can be repeated and one with maximum weight-age can be
selected again.
The control of this process stays with the materials guy as he can track the speciﬁcations
Rajat Kumar: s181289
42
==PAGE:49==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
ordered by diﬀerent authors/systems of the elements. The material controller will fulﬁll
the criteria by ﬁltering the material which suits the condition in best possible way.The
speciﬁcation in this case are the inputs required by diﬀerent decoupled systems in the
parametric modeling.
4.2.3
Steps followed in parametric modelling in materials system
1. This part starts with formulating scripts on Grasshopper for diﬀerent systems which
a Project manager wants to decouple from the main stream. As in our case the dif-
ferent systems were generated with separate functions like facade, design, budget,
time scheduling, construction and materials. And the work started with Assump-
tions of inputs for each systems looking into the requirements from the client which
is named in this case as Target. The initial script can be seen in ﬁgure 16 which
illustrates in box named AGILE F20 two systems one is Assumption and another
is State of play. In assumption as discussed earlier only some set of information is
created based on the requirements of Target. On the other side in state of play all
the further work are carried out with improvements with iterations and discussions
within the team on the script.
Figure 16: Creating working systems
2. The next step is creating the assumption of materials for corresponding elements
being created by other systems. The initial list of objects is created from the input
derived from all other systems and the assumptions simultaneously. The snap shot
from the script displayed in Figure 17 makes it more easy to understand where
diﬀerent elements for the project are listed.
Rajat Kumar: s181289
43
==PAGE:50==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
Figure 17: Material assumption and element list
Here in the list displayed above the materials are assigned to the elements with
prelim assumptions and it also includes the input required from other team members
working on other systems, this creates the ease of communication between the team
members. As the inputs required can be asked using speckle ids. It only includes
the basic components which are commonly ﬁnd in all the projects. The assumption
list can be customized as per the need of project and the deliverable.
3. An excel sheet for each element is created including list of materials for the respec-
tive element. In the excel ﬁle the recommended materials is selected from the list
which is awarded maximum points based on the diﬀerent set of functions for the
elementFigure 18. The excel sheet is connected to the script so that the data can be
seen in Grasshopper, here the material is automatically recommended by the excel
sheet based on award set of rules. The material which is recommended by excel ﬁle
can be selected and connected to the material passport.
4. After assuming diﬀerent sets of materials and assigning them to respective elements,
its now time to work in State of play Figure 19 for the improvements in the system
by analysis. If the material does not ﬁts the suit of speciﬁcations and requirements
the next material from the selected list can be dragged to the element fulﬁlling
the criteria. this method can be repeated as many time as it doesn’t satisﬁed the
conditions required by the authors of the other systems working on design, MEP,
etc.
Rajat Kumar: s181289
44
==PAGE:51==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
Figure 18: Selecting material from xlsx ﬁle
Figure 19: State of play and fetching information into material passport from other
systems
The output was combined into one total output named Materials that branches
deeper into a collection of assumptions-related components and another focused
on state of play / current item status. The list based on assumptions calculates
quantities extracted from geometries in inferred geometries from the design teams
and adds a common material (text / name) while the list from the state of play
calculates quantities directly from the state of play outputs of the design teams.
Actually, the products in the state of play are just suggestions because they have
not been revealed by the concept departments responsible for this.
Rajat Kumar: s181289
45
==PAGE:52==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
5
Discussion
During the literature review many reasons came across for developing a new role in design
process for decoupling the materials. Foremost reason behind it is the lack of information
available in context of LCA and LCC fro the products, and the reliability over these
data if it is available.Moreover it is seen that AEC has disintegrated structure as diﬀerent
companies may work together for a single project with diﬀerent competencies, which
may cause problem in interoperatibility and better collaboration as each company may
use diﬀerent BIM platform.
Also the construction industry is mainly proﬁt oriented
so initially less preference is given to the choice of materials considering its long term
eﬀect due to less interest in life cycle.
On the other side it has been seen that the
information available in sluggish manner on diﬀerent online platforms for the materials
lacking a unique front from where all the information can be taken i.e a common platform
for all the available product.This may be due to many suppliers and vendors for the
product may not be available on those platforms and have their own respective website
for catalogues. All these factors leads to ineﬀective and ineﬃcient design choices if not
addressed at right time of the designing phase. resulting into choice of material with low
initial purchasing cost rather high life cycle cost aﬀecting the overall life cycle cost for the
facility. Moreover the immature decisions in making material choices may accounts for
unsustainable material.
In this project initial assumptions are made for diﬀerent elements in the model to be
created on preliminary basis. Here the prelim selection is based on the diﬀerent inputs
required by stakeholders working on separated systems like deign, MEP, facade, etc.
Inputs in this report named as functions may be size, properties, LCC, LCA, however
due to constraint of time and interaction it was decided by the author to create the script
based on just contemporary functions named as F1,F2... in this case. List of various choice
of materials are created in excel sheet where rating is done and the material awarded
maximum score is reﬂected in the excel sheet. The excel sheet is further connected to
the Grasshopper script where the recommended material is displayed.This sytem of excel
sheet can be created for each material and stored in standardised format.
In conceptual stage of design , layers for diﬀerent elements are created through Grasshop-
per scripts in model and are matched with the materials on the basis of experience and
material selection as per the recommendation from the excel sheet. this facilitates to
create the material inventory for the model yet to be created. This can be supported
better if the material passport already contains the geometry from the object library. In
material selection process the material expert tries to match the material which favours
most of the inputs being asked by other stakeholders working on the BIM modelling.
As this work is mainly through parametric design, the process of material selection and
assigning are manual processes, but the extraction of quantities like volume, area and
numbers is automated. So, when the high level of LOD is reached and the material is
ﬁnal stages it still welcomes any changes if required. ease of welcoming changes till the ﬁnal
project documentation is not started with least eﬀort and time involved merely just by
assigning the geometry to the material passport script. Following the Agile methodology,
which involves lots of face to face interaction and discussions can lead to less iterations
in ﬁnal stages and still welcomes any changes as the scripts are developed, because only
the material can be changed without inﬂuencing any other thing in the system.
Material passport in this work can be upgraded containing the combination of data of
Rajat Kumar: s181289
46
==PAGE:53==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
properties, geometry, life cycle data and the material type as discussed in the report (
single material, part/component or the product) and the information can be customized
as per the requirement of the project. Their are online platform available for material
passports like BAMB2020, however it is considered that those may lead to using the
material which are only available on those platforms, so may be the materials with better
capabilities could be missed oﬀ. It is essential to put one competent team member for
this task so that the best options and changes in the material information can be tracked
and actual material is selected in conceptual stages. This will help in turn providing more
realistic and reliable data for the selected materials.As the information or the products are
prone to change, because manufacturers may upgrade the material during the duration
of the project in designing phase , so when the material is selected for the material and
when it is the time for the procurement we may ﬁnd diﬀerent material availability.
Material tagging with construction process can help in planning process of the construc-
tion activities and estimating the safety conditions at site. Moreover it can help to esti-
mate and plan for the plants and machinery equipment which will be required at the time
of constructing at site.
On the other side the early procurement can be started for the products which needs to
be customized as per the requirements of the particular project or for the products which
needs more time to be assembled before erection at the site level. This can happen only
when the material selection has been ﬁnalized and is not aﬀected by other elements in
connection to it. The critical elements can be planned in such a way that decisions are
made on priority basis to start the procurement. This will in-turn help to save time and
cost to a great extent.
A pool of quantiﬁable data of cost and environmental aﬀect of each material can be
collected in an inventory and attached with material passport with the tools calculating
the Life-cycle cost and life cycle cost of environment eﬀects on the basis of standards
available. With this a semi automatic system can be generated which calculates the lCC
and the budget in instance , just by assigning the material passport details in the script,as
the system calculates the quantities automatically from the other domains. As discussed
in previous sections that their is possibility of change in the product catalogue, so it is
necessary that a separate responsibility works on tracking and gathering the information
for materials to be prevented from any mess at later stages.
Also LCC database can be integrate with algorithmic tools in the scripts from the excel
ﬁle attached to the script for calculating the Life cycle performance based on the awarding
rating system from 0 to 1 Figure 22, this will help to select the best possibility of material
for each object in the project. In turn helping to get best values in conceptual stage and
more precisely in design stage.
Decoupling materials promotes the circular economy as the information about the material
can be updated in the system for diﬀerent material levels. Furthermore reuse potential
of the materials have possibility of re-installing in the building at some other place of
use, reusing in with some another products, reusing it in other project or recycling can
be tracked easily. After the selection of best suited material it is the necessity that the
information is timely updated in the system so that it has more clarity for th stakeholders
involving in the project with passing lifespan, as this will facilitate the tracking and
usability of materials at those last stages.
The developed scripts has optimised the task of allocating materials to the model. How-
Rajat Kumar: s181289
47
==PAGE:54==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
Figure 20: example of selecting one function as LCC rating from 0 to 1.0
ever the materials were just the names but it could be developed further where data can
be driven from available object libraries or other available platforms. The scripts can
bring good results as the actual material can be used by structure designers to analyse
the deformations to the structural members directly unlike the analytical members in
the model. The success for using the Grasshopper is hidden behind the agile approach
with rigorous meetings in initial stages. Also using Grasshopper has upper edge than
other modeling platforms due to its parametric design possibilities granting calculations
at faster pace as well as facilitating collaboration between stakeholders.
As decoupling material and working exclusively with material selection and management
of it is a big task and require additional competencies with knowledge of materials,LCA,
procurement management as well as construction.The Figure 21 shows the connection
between stakeholders(designers), BIM and material passport and the beneﬁts which can
be extracted by assigning a this task to a new role in building design.
In most of the construction projects initials design stages lacks the ﬁnancial support as
designers mainly work to win the contract competition. However if companies tries to
spent more time and money at early stage the companies can get edge by using these
methods and market their structure by adding into account for LCA and sustainability
approach for materials.
Rajat Kumar: s181289
48
==PAGE:55==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
Figure 21: Material decoupling beneﬁts
6
Conclusion
Material decoupling can create many possibilities in AEC industry and improve the pro-
ductivity through many ways. Especially beneﬁcial in case of the projects with similar
kind of output or of typical geometry or nature such as production units, factories, power
plant, coal handling plants, housing projects, etc. where the designs for one project can be
used for other with the similar output. As the structures in these projects have very much
similarity on the basis of their use. For example, The model for one power plant can be
used for other one with diﬀerent capacity, where changes can be made with mere change
in dimensions and alignment of structures.The thermal power plant may be equipped with
wagon tippler in one case can be replaced directly with track hopper in an instance for
the other one. This could help to generate the tender documents in very fast pace and
with great precision. Because of the same kind of materials used in these types of projects
it will save huge and time and cost as the calculations and tenders could be ﬁled in short
span of time.
This system can be easily Connected with the LCA/LCC tools and these can be predicted
at initial stages of the project. This will help to create ease in taking environmental
solutions at ﬁnd more sustainable solutions in the AEC industry and improve the products
manufacturing process used in the industry.
It has the high possibility of improvement using this agile approach and the Grasshopper
software as it provides platform for better and faster data exchange with high accuracy.
Secondly it also facilitates collaboration among the participants.
The simulations can be done directly over the materials and the deformities can be checked
directly despite of working on symbolic lines and then allocating certain material as it is
done conventionally.
With the progress of developing the scripts for materials separately from the other at-
tributes of the model. As the script will be developed with all the elements connected to
various objects in the model through layers. A possibility of developing universal script
Rajat Kumar: s181289
49
==PAGE:56==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
can be seen where there will be need to connect only the geometries and change the
material using the common script for materials in-turn saving huge time eﬀort and cost.
Conceptual stage begins with client and designer meetings, deﬁning the objectives for
the project where system conﬁgurations are deﬁned with schematic drawings and layouts,
architectural type and functions of the facility. Though it lacks the distinct data for the
building which can be overcome by creating a list recommended materials with rating
system as done in section: selection of materials.
The incorporation of LCA at initial stages can be implemented by legislation eﬀorts. this
could enhance better utilization of the resources and it will become work culture for all
the ﬁrms of AEC industry. With this research it has been found that a new role could
Figure 22: New role in building design with competencies
be evolved in designing process. this new role can help to bridge the material selection
process in a better optimized way, as it has been seen that their is lac of knowledge about
materials with the authors and owners working on the model in diﬀerent disciplines. This
could be because they have to expertise in their own ﬁeld of work. So, if a material expert
works with the team of designers then it could solve various issues which comes across
the process of material selection optimization and LCA.
7
Limitations and future improvements
By allocating material in initial stages will lead to high level of information (LOI) and
low level of development (LOD), this may limit the building assembly to a sytem speciﬁ-
cation discouraging the exploration of intrinsic material design opportunities and also the
demand of materials could emerge from design at later stage. Early material decisions
could also lack the immaterial and sensory aspect for the facility usage
The grasshopper scripts created for decoupling materials needs too much work and it is
done manually, moreover the scripts looks sluggish and the tracking the source of data
could be hard to locate if the work needs to be repeated in the same script. Sluggishness
may also lead to committing errors if some information panel is connected to the wrong
input.On the other side it as the scope of improvement if the online libraries are able to
Rajat Kumar: s181289
50
==PAGE:57==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
upgrade and provide more speciﬁc information on LCA for each product. System can be
enhanced by connecting it to the product libraries like Prod lib manager or any other,
which has the inventory of various materials available from the diﬀerent vendors.
The script created during this project solve the purpose for only one design option.
Presently only one design option can be handled at one time. A better method could
be developed where work on multiple design systems could be performed.The scripts can
work on one project at a time. If the scripts is developed further, a universal script could
be created which may fulﬁll the material selection process for any kind of construction
project.
The knowledge about materials and available libraries have limited set of data which
can be expanded broadly and collaborated with this system. Integrating the data about
materials containing information of LCA , speciﬁcations and various other factors required
in AEC industry. However, the material data should have universally accepted standard
format and must be able to promote interoperatibility.
Their is a huge scope for material manufacturers and suppliers to jump into this work
by creating more informative material libraries by increasing more collaboration with
various architecture and designing ﬁrms working for the improvement of the parametric
algorithmic technology. The material manufacturers and suppliers can provide LCA data
with the catalogue which will make them ahead from others in the industry.A universal
online object platform can be created which compiles data from all the available online
object libraries fro all over the world and redirects the user to the availability of material
as per the nearest location where the projects demands.
One of the other future growth in the industry can be involved with this system where
the materials are already in the inventory for the designers based on the speciﬁcations,
requirements, LCA and other features. The designers just has to locate the material in
the model and assign it to the layer and geometry, as in the case of present cellphone
builders games.
Rajat Kumar: s181289
51
==PAGE:58==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
References
[1] T Juif. STREAMER D4.1 - Framework for management of information ﬂow, design
actors and collaboration in virtual design and construction. (608739):1–66, 2015.
[2] https://www.mooseridgedbc.com/blog/design-build/design-build-timeline-2/.
[3] Ralph G. Kreider and John I. Messner. The Uses of BIM: Classifying and Selecting
BIM Uses. The Pennsylvania State University, (September):0–22, 2013.
[4] Mohammad H. Sakikhales and Spyros Stravoravdis. Using agile project manage-
ment and BIM for improved building performance. Building Information Modelling,
Building Performance, Design and Smart Construction, pages 65–78, 2017.
[5] Raja Shahmir Nizam, Cheng Zhang, and Lu Tian. A BIM based tool for assessing
embodied energy for buildings. Energy and Buildings, 170:1–14, 2018.
[6] Feng Fu. Design and Analysis of Tall and Complex Structures. Design and Analysis
of Tall and Complex Structures, pages 1–304, 2018.
[7] Flemming; Karlshøj Jan Treldal, Niels; Vestergaard. ECPPM - Pragmatic Use of
LOD – a Modular Approach - 2016-09-07.
[8] M. R. Munaro, A. C. Fischer, N. C. Azevedo, and S. F. Tavares. Proposal of a build-
ing material passport and its application feasibility to the wood frame constructive
system in Brazil. IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science, 225(1),
2019.
[9] Allen Bryman and Emma Bell. Business research methods: Oxford University Press.
American journal of sociology, 2015.
[10] Varunkumar
Sagarkar.
Traditional
Approach
vs
BIM
Approachhttps://www.linkedin.com/pulse/traditional-approach-vs-bim-
varunkumar-sagarkar-igbc-ap.
[11] Glenn Stracusser. Agile Project Management Concepts Applied to Construction and
Other Non-IT Fields. PMI Global Congress, (October 2015):1–9, 2015.
[12] Design
buildings
wiki.
Building
Design
Process
https://www.designingbuildings.co.uk/wiki/Design_methodology_for_build-
ing_projects.
[13] Edivandro C. Conforto, Fabian Salum, Daniel C. Amaral, Sérgio Luis Da Silva, and
Luís Fernando Magnanini De Almeida. Can agile project management be adopted by
industries other than software development? Project Management Journal, 45(3):21–
34, 2014.
[14] J.
Leslie.
Agile
Project
Management
Software
User
Report
–
2015.
Available
at:http://www.softwareadvice.com/resources/agile-project-management-
user-trends-2015/ (Accessed: 25 Mar 2016).
[15] Nate.
What
Building
Teams
Can
Learn
from
Scrum.
Available
at:
https://provingground.io/2015/08/03/what-building-teams-can-learn-from-scrum/
(Accessed: 20 April 2016).No Title. 0.
Rajat Kumar: s181289
52
==PAGE:59==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
[16] Radan Tomek and Sergey Kalinichuk. Agile PM and BIM: A Hybrid Scheduling
Approach for a Technological Construction Project. Procedia Engineering, 123:557–
564, 2015.
[17] Şule Taşh Pektaş and Mustafa Pultar.
Modelling detailed information ﬂows in
building design with the parameter-based design structure matrix. Design Studies,
27(1):99–122, 2006.
[18] & Koskela L. Owen, R. L. . Agile Construction Project Management. In 6th Inter-
national Postgraduate Research Conference in the Built and Human Environment,
Delft, pp. 22–33., 0.
[19] Mohammad Dastbaz, Chris Gorse, and Alice Moncaster. Building information mod-
elling, building performance, design and smart construction. Building Information
Modelling, Building Performance, Design and Smart Construction, pages 1–326,
2017.
[20] S. Suresh Kumar and J. J. McArthur. Streamlining Building Information Model
creation using Agile project management. Building Information Modelling (BIM) in
Design, Construction and Operations, 1:229–240, 2015.
[21] Charles Thibodeau, Alain Bataille, and Marion Sié. Building rehabilitation life cycle
assessment methodology–state of the art. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,
103:408–422, 2019.
[22] Luís Bragança, Susana M. Vieira, and Joana B. Andrade. Early stage design deci-
sions: The way to achieve sustainable buildings at lower costs. The Scientiﬁc World
Journal, 2014, 2014.
[23] A. Miyamoto, K. Allacker, and F. De Troyer. Visual tool to integrate LCA and LCC
in the early design stage of housing. IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmen-
tal Science, 323(1), 2019.
[24] ISO. ISO 14040. Environmental management – Life cycle assessment – Principles
and framework. International Organization for Standardization, Geneva, Switzerland.
The International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment, (7):652–668, 2006.
[25] Flávia Miranda. The Building Material Selection Importance at the Building Design
Process for its Sustenability. Building, pages 2384–2396, 2007.
[26] K.L. Edwards. Design for manufacturing: a structured approach. Materials & Design,
24(2):157–158, 2003.
[27] Thompson Mary Kathryn and Thompson John M. ANSYS Mechanical APDL for
Finite Element Analysis. In ANSYS Mechanical APDL for Finite Element Analysis,
page 436. 2017.
[28] Author links open overlay PanelJ.Llorens. fabric Structures in Architecture Woodhead
Publishing Series in Textile. 2015.
[29] Mikael Laakso and Arto Kiviniemi. The IFC standard - A review of history, de-
velopment, and standardization. Electronic Journal of Information Technology in
Construction, 17:134–161, 2012.
Rajat Kumar: s181289
53
==PAGE:60==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
[30] BIM objects - in the asset lifecycle https://blog.areo.io/bim-objects/.
[31] Iva Kovacic, Meliha Honic, and Helmut Rechberger. Proof of Concept for a BIM-
Based Material Passport. Advances in Informatics and Computing in Civil and Con-
struction Engineering, pages 741–747, 2019.
[32] Agnés Audier, Jean-Francois Lahet, Romain de Laubier, Marine Guenot, and Marius
Wunder. The BIM Revolution Comes to Building Materials. Bcg.Perspectives, pages
1–19, 2017.
[33] Amir Marvasti. Research methods. In The Cambridge Handbook of Social Problems,
volume 1, pages 23–37. 2018.
[34] McDonough, W., Braungart,M.: Cradle to Cradle: Remaking the Way We Make
Things, North Point Press, 2002.
Rajat Kumar: s181289
54
==PAGE:61==
Master’s Thesis
Decoupling Materials
Appendices
1. An excel ﬁle named MATERIAL_WALL is submitted with report with work-
ing on the selection of material on the basis of discussions in Section 3.2.2 and
3.2.3 (step 3). This ﬁle has been created with tentative example of selecting func-
tions and recommended materials. And to view the excel documented data into
Grasshopper scripts.
2. A ﬁle named Material_Decoupling.gh is submitted. This ﬁle includes work on
Grasshopper scripts for Decoupling Materials.
Rajat Kumar: s181289
i
