==PAGE:1==
Prediction
of
maximum
flood
inundation
maps using Artificial Neural Networks
Master’s Thesis
DTU Environment
Department of Environmental Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
Master’s Thesis
August, 2020
By
Julian G. Böhm
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Jacob Dall, 2014
Published by:
DTU, Department of Environmental Engineering, Bygningstorvet, Build-
ing 115, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.env.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months from March to the end of August 2020
at the Section for Urban Water Systems, Department of Environmental Engineering, at
the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of
Science in Environmental Engineering from the Technical University of Munich, TUM. It is
part of the TUM - DTU 1:1 MSc programme in Environmental Engineering and equivalent
to 30 ECTS.
Julian G. Böhm - s191985
Signature
Date
ii
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Machine learning techniques have experienced increasing popularity in the urban water
sector over recent years. Concerning the generation of flood maps, these techniques of-
fer a method that requires less computation time than physically-based methods.
Objective of this thesis was the assessment of different model setups which predict max-
imum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks. The problem can be char-
acterised as a supervised regression. Therefore, a database of maximum water depth
maps was created using hydraulic numerical simulations. The corresponding rain events
were 21 synthetic events following the Chicago Design Storm concept and 56 historical
rain events.
Different networks were set up to discuss the input types, number of samples and net-
work types. The networks considered include feed-forward Neural Networks (FFNN) and
long short-term memory (LSTM) networks. As inputs, the intensity per time step and de-
scriptive statistical variables were compared. For the performance evaluation, inundation
maps, hit-miss maps and the critical-success-index (CSI) were created.
The results indicated a good performance for statistical input variables within the FFNN
and intensity per time step within the LSTM. In addition, a performance enhancement
could be noted by including historical events to the training set. Furthermore, Kfold cross-
validation has shown to be a useful validation method in the problem.
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
First, I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisors Roland Löwe, Søren Højmark
Rasmussen and Jorge Eduardo Teixeira Leandro. Without your help this thesis would not
have been possible. A special thank you to Roland Löwe for guiding me through the
project over the whole period and keeping me focused on the objective.
Many thanks to Søren Højmark Rasmussen for his helpful considerations and constant
support. I would also like to thank Jorge Eduardo Teixeira Leandro. Thank you for your
valuable input throughout the meetings.
In addition, I would like to thank David Getreuer Jensen for his recommendations con-
cerning machine learning-related question and Louise Toft Søndergaard Jensen for the
thorough introduction to the hydraulic model. Thanks also to Novafos for allowing me to
use their hydraulic model.
Thanks to the Envidan team in Kastrup and Lyngby for providing me a workplace, com-
pany and interesting insights into the Danish industry.
Lastly, I would like to thank my parents for their encouragement and trust.
Supervisors
Roland Löwe, Associate Professor (PhD), DTU Environment
Supervisor
Søren Højmark Rasmussen, PhD, Envidan A/S
Co-supervisor
Jorge Eduardo Teixeira Leandro, Dr. phil., Chair of Hydrology and River Basin Man-
agement, Technical University of Munich
Co-supervisor
David Getreuer Jensen, PhD, Envidan A/S
Co-supervisor
iv
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Theoretical background
3
2.1
Numerical hydraulic modelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
MIKE by DHI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.2
Hydrological and hydrodynamic calculations
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Artificial Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.1
The feed-forward neural network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.2
Long short-term memory - LSTM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.3
The problem of overfitting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Study area - Hellerup
11
3.1
Historical rain data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Hydraulic model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4
Methodology
15
4.1
Input data for hydraulic simulations and ANNs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.1.1
Rainfall input . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.1.2
Hydraulic numerical simulations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.1.3
Selection of test events
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.2
Artificial Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.2.1
Machine Learning Framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.2.2
Model definition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.2.3
Testing model performance - evaluation metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . 29
5
Results of the Artificial Neural Networks
31
5.1
Feed forward neural networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
5.2
Long short-term memory networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5.3
Results comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.3.1
Inclusion of additional events . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.3.2
Input type comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.3.3
Network comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.3.4
Validation schemata . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.3.5
Comparison of selected models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
6
Discussion
43
6.1
Inclusion of additional events . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6.2
Input types
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6.3
Network comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
6.4
Validation schemata . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
6.5
Performance evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6.6
Other aspects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
v
==PAGE:8==
7
Conclusion and outlook
47
Bibliography
49
A Result plots
53
vi
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Floods rank among the most disastrous and costly natural hazards in Europe. They unde-
niably have negative consequences for individuals and society. Besides intangible losses
which cannot easily be transferred into monetary values (e.g. Parker, Green, and Thomp-
son 1987), a tremendous sum of tangible economic losses have accumulated over the
last centuries. According to the natural catastrophes database of a large European rein-
surance company, the financial loss due to hydrological events sums up to US$ 189.3 bn.
in Europe from 1980 to 2018. This figure represents 30 % of all economically hazardous
natural events (Kron, Löw, and Kundzewicz 2019).
Multiple research articles predict an increased flood risk in the future, which also includes
urban pluvial flooding (e.g. Skougaard Kaspersen et al. 2017, Alfieri et al. 2015, Schrei-
der, Smith, and Jakeman 2000). Climate change may be one big driver in the increased
frequency of urban floods. Additionally, the progress of urbanisation and aging storm wa-
ter network are contributing factors to a rising flood risk (Henonin et al. 2013, Skougaard
Kaspersen et al. 2017).
To reduce the impact of flooding, forecasting systems are often used, and since the year
2007 are also part of the European Directive on Assessment and Management of Flood
Risk of the European Parliament (Parliament and Council 2007). Possible purposes of
these systems are warning of the affected population or preparation of the public sector on
taking appropriate measures. These measures can be, for instance, closing flood gates
in designated flood plains or informing technical relief organs about an increased flood
probability in certain areas. To best achieve their purposes, forecasting systems require
a fast prediction of inundated areas.
Besides their usage for flood forecasting, a short computation time of flood prediction
comes with additional advantages. For instance, the propagation of uncertainty in a Monte
Carlo context requires the evaluation of thousands of model runs, which would bene-
fit greatly from a short computation time (Bermúdez, Cea, and Puertas 2018). The be-
haviour of the catchment for different rain scenarios would also benefit from being tested
in a shorter time frame.
1.1
Problem statement
There exist several physically-based forecasting models resulting in different outputs. In
the urban water section, these models reach from rainfall-runoff models to 1D-2D models.
Depending on the temporal and spatial resolution, the models demand a relatively long
computational time which limits the use for forecasting (Henonin et al. 2013). In general,
it is often a trade-off between accuracy and calculation time.
In recent years, data-driven models have become popular in flood forecasting. This might
be attributed by the improvement of computational power and the accessibility of high-
level application programming interfaces (APIs). Some approaches have assessed a
point-wise flooding, in storage ponds (Chang et al. 2014) or manholes (Abou Rjeily et
al. 2017). Furthermore, some studies investigated promising data-driven approaches to
predict 2D flooding. Berkhahn, Fuchs, and Neuweiler 2019 used an ensemble of feed-
forward neural networks with rainfall intensities as inputs to predict urban flooding. Guo
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
1
==PAGE:10==
et al. 2020 utilised a convolutional neural network to create similar flood maps. As in-
put data they implemented multi-channel terrain images and rainfall hyetographs. Both
studies can be seen as a step towards prediction of urban flooding with Artificial Neural
Networks. However, neither of these approaches investigated the use of different inputs
nor do they compare different network structures.
Thus, the objective of this thesis was to address these shortcomings. First part is to
set up an Artificial Neural Network (ANN) which generates flood inundation maps. Then,
several ANNs are tested to show the performance depending on various input variables.
In addition, the performance of different network structures is assessed. The overall aim
is to predict maximum water depth maps with the later purpose of deriving flood hazard
maps.
Hence, following research questions evolve:
• How many input samples have to be used for training?
• What type of input should be used?
• Which Artificial Neural Network type generates the best solution?
• How can the training process be validated?
• What metric can be used to test the performance of the models?
The thesis is structured in the following order. First, the theoretical concepts of hydraulic
simulations and of ANNs are explained. The study area of Hellerup is defined in chapter 3.
Chapter 4 elaborates the construction of a flood map database on which the ANNs are
trained on and the construction of the ANNs itself. Moreover, several models are defined
which are based on addressing the research questions. Chapter 5 presents the results,
which are discussed in chapter 6. A conclusion is drawn in chapter 7.
2
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
==PAGE:11==
2
Theoretical background
2.1
Numerical hydraulic modelling
2.1.1
MIKE by DHI
The Danish Hydrological Institute (DHI) develops software which is specialised in hy-
draulic and hydrological modelling. The MIKE software package of DHI includes com-
prehensive modelling software for the water sector. The program used in this thesis to
create flood inundation maps is MIKE URBAN which is software dedicated to model all
urban water activities. In combination with MIKE FLOOD and MIKE 21, it is also capable
of modelling 2D overland flow.
2.1.2
Hydrological and hydrodynamic calculations
In the following, an overview of the flood modelling concept is presented. The concept
is based on the MIKE software but can be transferred to other commonly used water
modelling software. An essential step of the modelling process is the generation of the
physical model, namely the network system, terrain (digital elevation) and the definition
of catchments (note fig. 2.1). Furthermore, the MIKE system requires defining a certain
precipitation event. Applying this event to the model, there are specific mathematical ap-
proaches as to how the system calculates the water flow. Generally speaking, there are
two systems: The MIKE URBAN model covers the rainfall-runoff of the catchments and
the resulting network behaviour while the MIKE 21 models the overland flow. Concep-
tually, the 1D network model of MIKE URBAN is coupled with the 2D overland model of
MIKE 21 and thus results in a 1D/2D flood model. For different parts of the model, several
mathematical equations are used to calculate the water flow.
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.1: Links between the main components of the urban flood model; from ‘DHI
2015´
Urban areas are not only characterised by impervious areas like streets and buildings
but also by pervious surfaces consisting of gardens and parks. The runoff from impervi-
ous areas is the prominent one in urban flooding. However, in cases of extreme rainfall
events, the rainfall on pervious areas cannot infiltrate completely and contributes to the
overall runoff. MIKE is able to take into account both runoff types. In MIKE URBAN, the
method which is commonly used to generate the runoff is the kinematic wave method
(Surface Runoff Model B). It computes the surface runoff as flow in an open channel only
controlled by gravitational and frictional forces. Furthermore, the infiltration into pervious
areas changes over time by using the Horton’s infiltration (DHI 2015).
The hydraulic calculation in the MIKE software can be divided in pipe and channel flows.
The pipe flow can be subdivided for the case of a full flowing pipe and the case of a free
surface flow. In case of a free surface flow, the same calculation as for the channel flow is
used. These calculations are based on the Saint-Venant equations which are also called
shallow water equations (DHI 2017b).
Full flowing pipes are often calculated using the Bernoulli or Darcy-Weisbach equation.
However, MIKE URBAN uses a generalised version of the free surface flow equations
and introduces a fictitious slot on the top of the conduit (DHI 2017b).
The water exchange between the 1D network and the 2D surface is enabled by deter-
mining coupling nodes. In these nodes, the water exchange is computed via the orifice
equation (DHI 2017b). If water reaches the surface and thus the 2D overland model of
MIKE 21, the flow is approximated using 2D hydrodynamic calculations (DHI 2017a).
4
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
==PAGE:13==
2.2
Artificial Neural Networks
Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) are a concept within the increasingly popular field of
machine learning (ML). Without digging deeper into the several definitions of machine
learning, instead a basic description is presented.
ML is highly connected to the superordinated term of artificial intelligence. Although this
term only became commonplace to the general public in the 21st century, Alan Turing
discussed the subject of intelligent machines already in 1950. In his essay ”Computing
machinery and intelligence”, he redirected the objective from the rather philosophical def-
inition of ”intelligence” to the question whether it was possible to create a machine which
is taking the same decisions as a human.
To approach this question, Turing proposed constructing a machine which is able to learn
from past experience (Turing 1950).
This concept is what machine learning techniques are build around. They enable learning
from past experience using algorithms. This learned ability is generalized to solve future
problems of the same type (Herlau, Schmidt, and Mørup 2019).
ANNs are known as one branch of machine learning techniques. What distinguishes
them from other techniques is the way the information is processed within the model.
The concept of ANNs dates back to the mathematical model of information processing
by neurons presented by McCulloch and Pitts 1943. The idea relates to the information
processing of biological neurons. By combining learning algorithms, like the perceptron
learning algorithm by Rosenblatt 1958, these networks are capable of emulating non-
linear relationships within the training data and making predictions based on an adjusted
network.
Supervised & unsupervised learning
Supervised learning is a learning strategy in which input X and output y are presented
to a learning algorithm. Based on these samples the network is learning from samples
which were generated in the past. In unsupervised learning, only the input X is given and
the learning algorithm tries to detect structures such as clusters within that input. ANNs
are mostly applied within supervised learning.
Regression & classification
Regression and classification can be distinguished through their output type. In classi-
fication problems, the predicted output y is discrete, for instance a category or a label.
Regression outputs are of continuous nature. This can be a physical measurement like
temperature or a rather abstract value like a stock value.
The problem this thesis aims to solve is characterised as a supervised regression prob-
lem. Therefore, a database on which the network trains is indispensable. Since the aim
is to predict continuous water depths, the problem can be classified as regression.
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
5
==PAGE:14==
2.2.1
The feed-forward neural network
The feed-forward neural network structure is the most simple form of ANNs. All ANNs con-
sist of information processing units called neurons (same meaning as node or perceptron)
and each neuron is connected to other neurons by weighted connections. These weights
represent the strength of the outgoing signal. The neurons are structured in layers, and
each layer is connected to the following layer. Derived from this structure, information is
processed sequentially (layer-wise) in the network. Typically, an ANN structure is com-
posed of an input layer, one or several hidden layers and one output layer (Figure 2.2).
This structure is called the multi-layer perceptron (MLP).
In every neuron of the hidden layers, an activation is taking place. Each neuron com-
putes a non-linear function of the sum of its inputs. The output o of neuron j can be
written as:
oj = φ
n
∑
i=1
wijoi
(2.1)
where φ represents the non-linear activation function, wij the weights between the previ-
ous neurons i and j and oi the output of neurons i.
The output of the neural network is defined as the value of the output layer:
f(x) = [o1 o2 ... oi]T
(2.2)
Figure 2.2: Architecture of a feed forward neural network and hidden layer neuron j
The activation function determines the output of the respective neuron. Depending on
whether a neuron’s input is helpful for the prediction, the function regulates whether a
neuron should be activated (‘fired’) or not.
A network often consists of thousands of
weighted connections, and for each connection the activation functions has to be calcu-
lated. Therefore, the activation function must be computationally efficient. Some widely
used activation functions are (Herlau, Schmidt, and Mørup 2019):
• hyperbolic tangent: h(x) = tanh(x) = ex−e−e
ex+e−e
6
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
==PAGE:15==
• logistic sigmoid: h(x) = (1 + e−x)−1
• rectified linear unit (relu): h(x) =
{
x if x ≥0
0 if x ≤0
Training of neural networks
Training a neural network means calibrating all of the weights in the network by repeatedly
conducting forward-propagation and back-propagation. In forward-propagation, the net-
work is sequentially passed through by performing the non-linear activation in the hidden
layers and the output layer like explained above. For the first forward-propagation, the
set of weights is randomly initialised. Then, the error margin is measured by calculating
a loss function. This loss function compares the predicted output ˆy with the expected
output ytrue. In the backward-propagation step, the system tries to reduce the error of the
loss function by applying an optimisation algorithm. Based on this algorithm, the system
adjusts the weights.
Neural networks repeat forward and backward-propagation to minimise the loss function
and to calibrate the weights.
The above-mentioned loss function measures the difference between ˆy and ytrue. For
regression problems, commonly used loss functions are:
• Mean Absolute Error: MAE = ( 1
n) ∑n
i=1 |yi −ˆyi|
• Mean Squared Error: MSE = ( 1
n) ∑n
i=1(yi −ˆyi)2
There exist several training algorithms for neural networks. Most applications utilise ei-
ther a plain gradient descent algorithm or modifications of the gradient decent (Herlau,
Schmidt, and Mørup 2019).
Prominent optimisation algorithms in the field of ML are
(Ruder 2016):
• Adam (adaptive moment estimation) (Kingma and Ba 2015)
• Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm (Moré 1978)
• RMSprop (Root Mean Square propagation) (Hinton 2012)
2.2.2
Long short-term memory - LSTM
Another form of ANNs was introduced by Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997 with the
name long short-term memory (LSTM). LSTMs are a form of Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNN) and they are able to use time dependencies among the input sequence. In gen-
eral, RNN are built in the same multi-layer perceptron structure (MLP) as feed-forward
neural networks. Nevertheless, information processing is handled differently. Other than
in feed-forward neural networks, the flow of information in RNNs is not just forwarded in
the direction of the output but also to the neuron itself, a neuron on the same level or a
neuron on the previous level (Heaton 2020).
In general, RNN experience the loss of long-term memory and suffer from the vanishing
gradient problem. LSTM solve these problems due to their structure and are nowadays
widely used in the processing of sequential data, for instance in time-series prediction,
language translation and speech recognition.
Figure 2.3 shows an LSTM unit over three time slices: the current time slice t, the previ-
ous slice t −1 and the next slice t + 1. x represents the input and ˆy the output. Values
c are the context values. c and ˆy are always forwarded to the next time slice. Context c
enables the network to control the state between the slices.
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.3: LSTM schema (Heaton 2020)
Figure 2.4 demonstrates the internal process of a LSTM cell. The unit contains three
different regulators called gates: Forget gate ft, input gate it and output gate ot. The
gates are activated using the different activation functions hyperbolic tangent and logistic
sigmoid. The forget gate ft controls the extent to which the value remains in the cell. Input
it is activated if or when the context should remember a value. Output gate ot controls if
or when the remembered value is allowed to pass from the unit.
Figure 2.4: LSTM cell (Heaton 2020)
8
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
==PAGE:17==
2.2.3
The problem of overfitting
ANNs are in general very flexible. If one considers only a single hidden layer and the sig-
moid activation function, the network basically performs as many logistic regressions as
there are neurons in the hidden layer. Due to that, ANNs can learn very efficiently and flex-
ibly according to the training samples. Drawbacks of those characteristics are that ANNs
tend to overfit the data and the lose the ability to generalise. Because of that, one must
supervise the learning process very carefully and stop the training process as soon as the
network gets too specialised. Therefore, it is indispensable to use a validation set which
is not involved in the training. Nevertheless, keeping a separate validation set means that
there are less samples left for training. Moreover, the validation set must contain a good
representation of the data set and exclude outliers. To avoid a manual selection and the
loss of training samples, it is common practise to implement cross-validation methods,
for instance Kfold or leave-one-out. In Kfold cross-validation, K models are trained with
random train-validation split. The ratio of this split results from the number of models K
which has to be defined prior. According to Heaton 2020, there are several possibilities
to proceed with the K trained models. Some examples include choosing the model with
the highest validation score as the final model or retraining a model on all the samples
with the trainings settings as determined by the Kfold cross-validation.
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
9
==PAGE:18==
10
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
==PAGE:19==
3
Study area - Hellerup
The investigated study area lies in Hellerup, which is part of the Greater Copenhagen
Region. It is located north of Copenhagen centre and has a coast line on the Øresund,
which is a strait between Denmark and Sweden.
The district of Hellerup was flooded several times during the last couple of decades due to
cloudburst. For instance, on July 2nd, 2011, the whole Greater Copenhagen region was
exposed to an extreme rainfall event. Another severe event happened on August 31st,
2014. During this event, the cover picture was taken close to Hellerup Station. Therefore,
Hellerup has taken far reaching steps to cope with cloudbursts in the future. The utility
company responsible for the municipality of Hellerup is Novafos A/S, and it is in charge
of the urban water management.
Figure 3.1: Location of study area - Hellerup (contains data from ’Styrelsen for dataforsyn-
ing og effektivisering 2020’: Ortofoto forår 2019)
Envidan A/S - the cooperating company for this thesis - was consulted from Novafos A/S
for flood modelling and risk assessment. This assessment was carried out following the
recent engineering guidelines ”Spildevands Komiteen: Skrift 31 (Serviceniveau for vand
på terræn)”. The aim of the investigation was to find an appropriate service level sup-
ported by a thorough cost-benefit analysis.
During the assessment of the urban water management, several hydraulic models were
set up for this area. For the realisation of this thesis, one of the models was provided
and taken as a base for all further analysis. The hydraulic model which was chosen is
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
11
==PAGE:20==
not based on the current existing system but rather on the one that is planned to be con-
structed in the area. The planned system includes the implementation of a large storm
water tunnel and several feeder pipes which drain the area in case of a cloudburst. The
storm water tunnel discharges in the nearby Øresund and will avoid the release of sewage
in such (Novafos A/S 2020).The construction of the whole project has already started in
2018 and is planned to be completed by 2023. Figure 3.2 shows a digital elevation model
of the study area. The terrain characterises a natural gradient towards the east where it
meets the Øresund. Additionally, a depression is located in the south west. This is the
underpass under the railway line at Hellerupvej, which is prone to flooding (cover picture).
Figure 3.2: Digital elevation model of the study area in Hellerup (contains data from Envi-
dan A/S)
12
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
==PAGE:21==
3.1
Historical rain data
Around the study area are several rain gauge stations operated by Danmarks Meteorol-
ogiske Institut. For the investigation of the historic rain events, the station Søborg Vand-
værk was selected since it already started recording on 01-01-1979 and is therefore the
longest recording station in the area. The resulting 40-years of recorded rainfall intensities
are filtered to separate extreme events in section 4.1.1.
3.2
Hydraulic model
The hydraulic model was set up by using the software MIKE URBAN. MIKE URBAN is
a urban water modelling software that uses numerical methods to estimate the water
level in the pipe system, as well as the overland extent (see section 2.1). The model
was provided by Envidan A/S and no structural changes in the the network system were
made. However, some model parameters were adjusted to introduce the runoff Model
B (kinematic wave method). This was implemented to include runoff from the pervious
surface which was not the case in the initial Model A (time-area method). The coupling
was done with a digital elevation model in form of a regular grid with grid size 2 x 2 m.
Table 3.1 notes the properties of the MIKE URBAN model.
Table 3.1: Properties of MIKE URBAN model
Network Information
Catchment Information
Number of nodes
1064
Number of catchments
1798
Number of links
1099
Total catchment area
17.212 [ha]
Total links length
52680.9 [m]
Number of pumps
9
Number of weirs
12
Number of orifices
2
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
13
==PAGE:22==
14
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
==PAGE:23==
4
Methodology
In this section the workflow and methods used are explained. The project can be divided
into three main parts: The physically-based (hydrodynamic) model, data preparation and
the setting up and testing of different ANN models. As mentioned in the introduction, only
the simulation and prediction of maximum water depth levels are considered. Hydrody-
namic simulations result in much more information since they calculate the whole flow
dynamics to generate the maximum levels. Nevertheless, flood warning systems focus
mainly on the worst flooding case, which is represented by the maximum water depth
levels (Guo et al. 2020).
The initial step of the process is defining rain events. These rain events are used as
an input for the hydrodynamic model as well as the ANN model. One of the investigated
questions is: Which rain input has to be used (and therefore simulated) to achieve a
good modelling result and to predict a real event accurately? Therefore, synthetic and
historical rain events were considered to build a flood map database. The generation
of rainfall events is explained in section 4.1.1. The simulation results consisting of maxi-
mum water depth maps corresponding to the respective rain input series are summarised
in section 4.1.2. After building the flood map database, the data has to be processed to
fit the ANN. The ANN is setup with Python (Van Rossum and Drake 2009) using Tensor-
Flow (Martı́n Abadi et al. 2015). Description of the ANN setup and the testing approach
is elaborated in section 4.2.
Figure 4.1: Overview of the workflow and project structure
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
15
==PAGE:24==
4.1
Input data for hydraulic simulations and ANNs
In this section, the generation of rain series is explained. This rain series are then used
as an input for the 1D-2D simulations in MIKE URBAN and as input for the ANNs. Fur-
thermore, the output of the simulation is presented to the ANNs in form of maximum water
depth maps. Hence, the in- and output for a supervised learning problem emerges. The
processing of in- and output data is the objective of section 4.2.
4.1.1
Rainfall input
As input for the MIKE URBAN simulations and subsequently the ANNs, precipitation in
form of a rain event has to be defined. To create a larger database and to approximate
real rain series, synthetic and historical rainfall events are considered. In the following
section, the procedures to generate the respective ones are explained.
Chicago Design Storm
The Chicago Design Storm (CDS) is a synthetic storm developed by Keifer and Chu 1957.
The concept corresponds to a T-year rain intensity for all possible durations of uniform
rainfall events (Rosbjerg and Madsen 2019). It is commonly used for urban drainage
design in Denmark. The Waste Water Committee of the Danish Society of Engineers
(IDA) released guidelines on ’Updated climate factors and dimensioning of rain intensities’
(Gregersen et al. 2014). Accompanied by those guidelines, they provide an Excel sheet
to generate rain series according on the Chicago Design Storm concept. Based on this
Excel sheet, rain series for the geographic coordinates of Hellerup are created with 120
minutes length and three different asymmetry coefficients (0.1, 0.5, 0.9). The series are
normalised by adding up the intensities per time step and dividing the intensity at time
step t by the sum of rain series. In the next step, the normalised intensity at time step t is
multiplied with the requested accumulated rain in mm.
In fig. 4.2, the resulting 21 rain series are noted. The left plot (a), describes the rain series
in steps of one minute and the right plot (b) results by averaging every ten minutes. This
reduction of the step size was done to align it to the step size of the historical events
(section 4.1.1) and desired input resolution of the ANNs (section 4.2.1).
Table 4.1 lists the equivalent return periods of the considered accumulated rain values.
Millimetre within 120 min
return period T in years
15
1
25
5
35
20
45
59
55
146
65
314
75
613
Table 4.1: Return periods of the CDS series
16
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
==PAGE:25==
(a) Intensities in one minute steps
(b) Intensities in ten minute steps
Figure 4.2: CDS rain events with three asymmetry coefficients (0.1, 0.5, 0.9)
Historical rain events
In order to generate historical rain events, the rain series from rain gauge station Søborg
Vandværk was taken and divided into separate rain events. For this, a threshold of 0.02
mm/min was introduced. The start of a rain event was defined when no intensity was
observed 3 hours before the event. This resulted in 5614 events in the period from 01-
03-1980 to 18-03-2020. In the second step, the events were filtered depending on the 30
minute maximal rainfall intensity and the averaged rainfall sum in the catchment. Then, a
factor was applied on the intensity value. This factor was necessary to generate values
that actually end up in flooding. The study area is relatively resilient to inundation due to
the implementation of flood reduction measures (chapter 3). How the catchment reacts
to certain flood scenarios is shown in section 4.1.2.
The filtering process was done with two different setups and applied factors and two event
sets are derived:
Historical events set A: 30 minute maximal rain intensity > 1.6 mm & rainfall sum > 9
mm; factor x 1.5 applied on intensities; 24 events resulting fig. 4.3 (a).
Historical events set B: 30 minute maximal rain intensity > 1.0 mm & rainfall sum > 8
mm; factor x 3 applied; events from set A are excluded; 32 events resulting fig. 4.3 (b).
Lastly, all events were cut after 780 min to align the length for the hydraulic simulations
and ensure the same number of input neurons for the ANNs.
In table 4.2, the events are sorted in descending order depending on the maximal 30 min
rainfall intensity. It is notable that six of the ten most intense events were within the 2010s,
taking into account that the observed period spans over 40 years.
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
17
==PAGE:26==
Start date
Averaged
rainfall sum
[mm]
maximal 30min
rainfall intensity
[mm]
Duration
[min]
Event 1
02.07.2011
31.00
4.64
500
Event 2
04.09.2015
16.80
2.90
490
Event 3
14.08.2011
21.30
2.86
630
Event 4
17.09.2017
14.60
2.85
440
Event 5
14.08.2010
36.70
2.68
850
Event 6
30.06.1997
14.30
2.61
450
Event 7
01.08.2002
14.90
2.28
730
Event 8
24.08.2004
14.30
2.24
700
Event 9
12.09.2000
28.00
2.21
1860
Event 10
28.07.2019
12.00
2.21
500
Table 4.2: First ten events; descending order; without factor
(a) Historical events set A
(b) Historical events set B
Figure 4.3: Filtered historical events
18
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
==PAGE:27==
4.1.2
Hydraulic numerical simulations
The hydrodynamic simulations were conducted using MIKE URBAN for all rain series (syn-
thetic and historical) created in the previous section. The theory behind these simulations
is summarised in section 2.1. A flood map database, consisting of maximum water depth
maps, was created with the simulation results. The resulting flood extent in the study area
for CDS events with asymmetry value 0.5 is visualised in fig. 4.4.
The duration of the 73 simulations (52 historical and 21 CDS) differed quite vastly because
some rain series led to a ‘blow-up´ in the calculation, and the time step had to be reduced
down to 0.3 seconds. The mean calculation time for a CDS simulation was 39 min and
the mean duration for a historical simulation was 2 h 26 min.
Figure 4.4: Flood extent of the CDS events with asymmetry value 0.5; threshold = 5cm
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 4.5: Flood extent of the historical events; threshold = 5cm
20
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
==PAGE:29==
4.1.3
Selection of test events
Three events were chosen as independent test events to evaluate the model performance
of the ANN setups. The test events should represent real events because in a potential
forecasting implementation, the system receives weather forecasts following the fluctua-
tions of real events. To address this, historical events were considered. Other considera-
tions in the selection process were a temporal variance over the time frame and a differ-
ence in their resulting flood volumes. The three events were selected from the 24 events
of historical events set A (section 4.1.1). Hence, the sample size of historical events set
A was decreased to 21 samples. The chosen test events (fig. 4.6) are characterised by
a difference in flood volume in their hydraulic simulation and vary over the time frame of
780 minutes.
Figure 4.6: Selected test events
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
21
==PAGE:30==
4.2
Artificial Neural Networks
The third part of the model structure was defining and setting up an Artificial Neural Net-
work structure and validating different model cases (note fig. 4.1).
In general, the consideration is to use the same topology for all the networks and assess
the effect of different inputs on the model performance. The assessment includes using
the ’raw’ intensity values of synthetic rain and historical rain events. In addition, a statis-
tical pre-processed input is introduced. Furthermore, a network comparison is included
which compares a feed forward neural network (FFNN) structure to a long short-term mem-
ory (LSTM) structure. The comprehensive consideration and the derived model setups
are introduced in section 4.2.2.
To ensure the comparability of the models, a validation approach was used. This valida-
tion approach is presented in section 4.2.1. The effectiveness of that validation was also
part of the objective.
22
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
==PAGE:31==
4.2.1
Machine Learning Framework
The framework to build, train and evaluate neural networks is TensorFlow, which was de-
veloped by Google (Martı́n Abadi et al. 2015). TensorFlow is next to Theano and PyTorch
as one of the most popular open-source frameworks for creating neural network structures
(Herlau, Schmidt, and Mørup 2019). Furthermore, several Python libraries were used to
process the input and output data. Most importantly, numpy (Van Der Walt, Colbert, and
Varoquaux 2011), pandas (The pandas development team 2020) and matplotlib (Hunter
2007).
Section 2.2 explains the theoretical concept of ANNs. Following, the transmission from
the theory to the project application is explained.
In- & output
Firs, it is necessary to observe the in- and output of the problem. Input of the networks
is the same input as for the hydraulic simulations - information concerning the rainfall,
either in the form of a rainfall intensity time series or in form of pre-processed statistical
values. As an example, input in the form of a time series is shown in fig. 4.7. Output
of the network is the maximum flood depth map in a table of 569 x 635 cells. Each cell
measures 2 x 2 meters in dimension. The output is shaped to 361315 cells to create the
desired dimension of one.
Figure 4.7: Illustration of ANN in & output for one training sample
Topology of the networks
Besides in- and outputs, properties of the network topology must be defined. Network
topology describes the number of neurons, layers and how the neurons are connected.
Since a comparison of FFNN and LSTM networks was done, in the following, both network
topologies are declared. The topology for the respective network types was not changed
during the model runs and remained the same for all of the setups.
Feed forward neural network:
Two hidden layers with 78 neurons each were chosen. Between the hidden layers is a
dropout layer with a dropout rate of 20% to mitigate overfitting. The activation function of
the first hidden layer is rectified linear unit (relu) and for the second the hyperbolic tangent
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
23
==PAGE:32==
function (tanh). Relu is commonly used in hidden layer because it has fewer ’vanishing
gradient’ problems which stop the learning process too early.
Long short-term memory network:
The LSTM network consists of three hidden layers with 78 neurons each. Two of them are
LSTM layers and the third one is a fully connected dense layer with activation tanh. Be-
tween the second LSTM layer and the dense hidden layer is a dropout layer with dropout
rate of 20%.
The presented topologies were the result of several trials. The underlying basis is the
topology, which results from the study conducted by Berkhahn, Fuchs, and Neuweiler
2019. In addition, it could be determined that Relu as an activation function leads to a
more stable training process. Moreover, the number of neurons in the hidden layer was
adjusted following the suggestion of Heaton 2020 in which the number of neurons should
not be smaller than the number of input neurons. Finally, a dropout layer was introduced
since the initial setups kept overfitting relatively quickly.
Training of the networks
In both network types, the same loss function and optimisation algorithm were used. Loss
function was the mean squared error: MSE = ( 1
n) ∑n
i=1(yi −ˆyi)2. It measured the dis-
crepancy between ˆy and ytrue. For the optimisation of that loss, the Adam algorithm
was applied. The loss over the training optimisation was visualised with TensorFlow in
a so-called history plot. The history plot shows the loss over the iteration cycles of the
optimisation algorithm. The number of optimisation cycles (see back-propagation in sec-
tion 2.2) corresponds to the epoch number in TensorFlow.
Training of the networks was executed on a simple personal computer (Intel Core i7-
4500U @ 1.80GHz) using the computational power of the CPU. For faster training of the
K=10 in the Kfold validation (note next section), TensorFlow with GPU implementation
was realised by using the cloud based computing service Google Colaboratory (Colab).
Validation of the training process
Eventually, all models test on the same three excluded historical events (section 4.1.3)
using the CSI values as a evaluation metric and the hit-miss map as a qualitative assess-
ment (section 4.2.3).
In addition, a validation procedure was implemented to ensure the comparability of the
model setups and to avoid overfitting (section 2.2.3). If no validation was implemented,
the optimisation algorithm adjusts the weights as much as possible on the training data,
but a prediction for an ‘untrained´ sample would not be reasonable in most cases. The val-
idation procedure regulates that the training process is stopped before the network gets
too specialised.
However, additional validation samples are not always available. In section 4.2.2, two
models were defined which train on all generated samples. Therefore, Kfold cross-validation
was used to supervise the training and to decide on when to stop the training.
Validation schema 1
For the models which do not train on all data samples (Setup FFNN_raw1, FFNN_raw2,
FFNN_raw3, FFNN_stat1, LSTM_raw1, LSTM_raw2), the additional historical rain sam-
ples could be used for validation. By model definition, the data is already split up into
training, validation and test set. Based on that, the training can be supervised by observ-
ing the history loss plot of the validation set until a loss increase can be noticed. Then the
training stops and the weights were restored from the epoch with the lowest value of the
loss function.
24
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
==PAGE:33==
Validation schema 2
For the models which train on all data samples (FFNN_raw4, LSTM_raw3), Kfold cross-
validation was applied . The objective of the validation was to decide on an appropriate
epoch number to avoid overfitting. In the Kfold cross-validation, this is realised by training
K = 10 models with random train-validation splits and retrieving the epoch number for ev-
ery model.The resulting ten epoch numbers of the models were averaged afterwards. The
final model, which trains on all events, is then trained applying that average epoch num-
ber. To confirm this method, two model setups (FFNN_raw3, LSTM_raw2) were validated
using both validation schema 1 and validation schema 2.
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
25
==PAGE:34==
4.2.2
Model definition
As mentioned in the beginning of section 4.2, a comparison of network types and inputs
is the objective. The question concerning inputs can be divided into:
• How many input samples have to be used for training? Can the training be con-
ducted on the synthetic rain events only?
• What type of input should be used - ’raw’ intensities over time or statistical values
describing the series?
The question concerning the network type is more straightforward:
• What performs better in the problem - feed-forward neural network (FFNN) or long-
short term memory (LSTM)?
Additionally, the question as to how to validate the training process is addressed. Ta-
ble 4.3 shows an overview of the resulting model setups. The more in-depth descriptions
are in the subsections respectively. All models test on three exclusive events, which
were held back during the training process (section 4.1.3). The training process was su-
pervised through validation to avoid overfitting. The validation approach is explained in
section 4.2.1.
Table 4.3: Defined model setups
Name
Network Type
Training set
Input type
Validation of training epoch
Testing
01
FFNN_raw1
FFNN
CDS with zero padding;
21 training samples
intensities in 10 min steps
Historical events
Three test events
02
FFNN_raw2
FFNN
shifted / multiplied CDS events;
105 training samples
intensities in 10 min steps
Historical events
Three test events
03
FFNN_raw3
FFNN
shifted / multiplied CDS events
+ 21 hist. Events;
126 training samples
intensities in 10 min steps
Kfold /
Historical events
Three test events
04
FFNN_raw4
FFNN
shifted / multiplied CDS events
+ 49 hist. Events;
154 raining samples
intensities in 10 min steps
Kfold
Three test events
05
FFNN_stat1
FFNN
CDS + 21 hist. Events;
42 training samples
rainfall statistics:
max mean 30min,
max mean 60min,
max mean 90min,
accumulated rain
Historical events
Three test events
06
LSTM_raw1
LSTM
shifted / multiplied CDS events;
105 training samples
intensities in 10 min steps
Historical events
Three test events
07
LSTM_raw2
LSTM
shifted / multiplied CDS events
+ 21 hist. Events;
126 training samples
intensities in 10 min steps
Kfold /
Historical events
Three test events
08
LSTM_raw3
LSTM
shifted / multiplied CDS events
+ 49 hist. Events;
154 training samples
intensities in 10 min steps
Kfold
Three test events
Setup 01 - FFNN_raw1
The model trained on the 21 generated Chicago Design Storm (CDS) events. The vali-
dation was conducted on the 21 historical events (historical events set A; section 4.1.1)
excluding the three test cases. The sample input was the intensity in 10 minute steps.
Since the duration of the CDS rain events was 2 hours, this would have resulted in 12
input neurons. However, the prediction was made on 13 hour historical events which
equals 78 neurons. Therefore, the input of the CDS events had to be manipulated to get
to the same amount of neurons. In the setup FFNN_raw1, this was done by simply adding
zeros after the series. The aim of this setup was to see what the network does with a type
of rain series it is not trained for, in this case, a historical one.
26
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
==PAGE:35==
Setup 02 - FFNN_raw2
The training was done on CDS events in a feed forward neural network. By duplicating
and shifting the rain series, the sample size of 21 CDS events was multiplied to 105 CDS
events. The resulting rain series is plotted in fig. 4.8. Besides the goal of creating more
samples, the shifting approach ensured an equal amount of 78 input neurons of the CDS
samples and the historical samples. The evaluation of the hyper-parameters was super-
vised validating on historical events set A (section 4.1.1) excluding the three test events.
The objective was to see if the accuracy improves compared to setup FFNN_raw1.
Figure 4.8: Multiplied CDS events by shifting of the series; 105 samples resulting
Setup 03 - FFNN_raw3
In this setup, the training was conducted on CDS events and historical events set A (sec-
tion 4.1.1). The CDS events were shifted / multiplied like in model FFNN_raw2. By adding
the 21 historical events A to the training set, 126 training samples resulted.
The training epoch was validated in two ways. In the first way, the validation schema 1
using historical events set B (section 4.1.1) was applied, while in the second way, the
validation schema 2 using the Kfold cross-validation was executed. The explanation con-
cerning the schemata can be referenced in section 4.2.1. The objective of this setup was
to compare the validation approaches and whether they lead to a similar training epoch.
Moreover, it was of interest whether the performance increases by including more events
in the training set.
Setup 04 - FFNN_raw4
In setup FFNN_raw4, all historical events were added to create a larger training set (his-
torical events set A & B; section 4.1.1). Hence, training on all available samples was
conducted and the number of training samples grew to 158 events. To decide on the
training epoch, Kfold cross-validation was applied. This setup should clarify the question
of how many samples is reasonable to use.
Setup 04 - FFNN_stat1
Setup FFNN_stat1 used rainfall statistics as input variables. Therefore, the maximum
mean intensity for 30 min, 60 min and 90 min duration and the accumulated rainfall were
generated.
This values were chosen to describe the characteristics of the rainfall series.The shifting
of the CDS input was not reasonable in this approach since the statistical values remain
the same for a shifted time-series. The training was done on the 21 CDS samples and
historical events set A (section 4.1.1). Due to the different scale among the input variable,
a normalisation was conducted. Since the model did not train on all samples, a normal
validation could be executed following validation schema 1. The validation set was the
historical events set B. The results should be compared to the setup FFNN_raw3 because
it used the same training set. This comparison addressed the question of which input
types perform better within the FFNN networks.
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
27
==PAGE:36==
LSTM - setups
The following setups (LSTM_raw1, LSTM_raw2 and LSTM_raw3) used the LSTM net-
work structure. LSTM networks are commonly applied for sequential inputs because they
are able to recognise time-dependencies. Therefore, only the ’raw’ intensities depending
on time were used as inputs. The training sets were the same as setups FFNN_raw2,
FFNN_raw3, FFNN_raw4. Thus, a network comparison was executed.
Setup 06 - LSTM_raw1
Setup LSTM_raw1 used the same training set as FFNN_raw2, which consisted of the
105 shifted CDS samples. The validation of the training epoch was carried out on the
historical rain events set A (section 4.1.1). The performance was compared directly to
setup FFNN_raw2.
Setup 07 - LSTM_raw2
The training set was the same as in setup FFNN_raw3. The validation was realised via
both approaches, which were also used in FFNN_raw3.
Setup 08 - LSTM_raw3
The last setup LSTM_raw3, trained on all 158 available samples. This included the 105
CDS events and all of the 53 historical events (set A & B; section 4.1.1). The model
counterpart of the FFNN setups was FFNN_raw4 since it trained on the same set. As in
FFNN_raw4, Kfold cross-validation was applied. The results were compared to FFNN_raw4
to address the question of which model structure generates better predictions.
Data normalisation
In general, data normalisation is recommended if in- or output data is different in scale.
For instance, if input variables are in kg and temperature. This unit difference was the
case in the statistical model FFNN_stat1 (mm/10min, mm/30min etc.) and therefore a
normalisation was done. All other models in this project had the same unit for inputs and
outputs , mm/10min and m, respectively and a normalisation was not required.
28
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
==PAGE:37==
4.2.3
Testing model performance - evaluation metrics
To measure the model performance, it is necessary to compare the model output ˆy with
the true values ytrue. In this modelling approach, one assumed that the simulated results
were the virtual truth.
Flood inundation maps
For a direct visual comparison, ˆy and ytrue were plotted in maps. This gives an overview of
the specific flood extents, and by comparing these plots, a first impression of the prediction
accuracy can be gained.
Hit-miss maps and CSI
Bennett et al. 2013 gives a comprehensive summary on evaluation metrics and the critical
success index (CSI) metric was adopted from this summary. Due to the spatial nature of
the problem, it is reasonable to show graphically where the model predicts well and where
not. This is possible by creating a hit-miss map, which exposes areas of agreement and
disagreement above a specified threshold. The downside of this method is that above this
threshold the correctness of water depths is not taken into account. Nevertheless, it is
fairly easy to implement, and by generating a contingency table (fig. 4.9), one can derive
a quantitative performance measure like the threat score or critical success index (CSI):
CSI =
hits
hits + misses + false alarms
where:
1 = ideal value
Figure 4.9: Contingency table; Bennett et al. 2013
Histograms
Histograms are a method of direct value comparison (Bennett et al. 2013). They show
the frequency of a variable which is separated in classes. A 2D histogram combines a
second variable in the visualisation. Thereof, it shows the relationship between prediction
and simulation in a direct way. In an ideal case, the frequency values of prediction and
simulation would follow a straight line with a slope of one. 2D histograms give information
regarding the prediction accuracy and show in which domains the prediction is under or
over-predicting the simulation.
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
29
==PAGE:38==
30
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
==PAGE:39==
5
Results of the Artificial Neural Networks
The results of the previously defined models (section 4.2.2) are listed in this chapter. First,
a short overview of the respective model results is given. Then, a comparison of selected
models is done to highlight some of the differences.
Before that, the computational time is examined closer. Section 4.1.2 explains how the
flood database was built and what average computation time was necessary to run the
simulations. The mean calculation time for a CDS simulation was 39 min and the mean
duration for a historical simulation was 2 h 26 min. However, no measurement was taken
for the prediction of the ANNs. This is due to the fact that it takes the ANNs only up to 3
seconds to perform a prediction and no further differentiation nor documentation seemed
necessary.
Table 5.1 and table 5.2 give a summary of the achieved results. Figure 5.1 and fig. 5.2
show the inundation extents for selected models. Further investigation of this selection is
the objective of section 5.3.5.
Table 5.1: Results summary with flooded area and critical success index
Flooded area [ha]
Critical Success Index
Name
Event 1
Event 2
Event 3
Event 1
Event 2
Event 3
Mean CSI
Final epoch
number
FFNN_raw1
5.78
4.07
2.99
0.451
0.361
0.371
0.395
60
FFNN_raw2
6.26
5.04
6.05
0.480
0.453
0.582
0.505
80
FFNN_raw3
6.21
6.79
9.66
0.529
0.587
0.590
0.569
12
FFNN_raw4
2.05
9.96
7.96
0.370
0.801
0.638
0.603
17
FFNN_stat1
3.44
14.98
5.21
0.599
0.714
0.598
0.637
300
LSTM_raw1
7.52
8.76
9.75
0.505
0.714
0.582
0.600
25
LSTM_raw2
6.93
8.22
8.97
0.543
0.684
0.608
0.611
31
LSTM_raw3
3.87
15.25
9.49
0.602
0.706
0.621
0.643
80
Simulation
4.48
10.80
6.35
Table 5.2: Results summary with hits, misses and false alarms
Hits [cells]
Misses [cells]
False Alarms [cells]
Event 1
Event 2
Event 3
Event 1
Event 2
Event 3
Event 1
Event 2
Event 3
FFNN_raw1
7973
9874
6323
3227
17137
9557
6473
307
1141
FFNN_raw2
8713
12339
11402
2487
14672
4478
6949
250
3721
FFNN_raw3
9248
16263
14865
1952
10748
1015
6268
707
9294
FFNN_raw4
4403
23078
13942
6797
3933
1938
714
1815
5968
FFNN_stat1
7418
26849
10823
3782
162
5057
1189
10605
2213
LSTM_raw1
10070
20372
14809
1130
6639
1071
8734
1536
9569
LSTM_raw2
10032
19312
14482
1168
7699
1398
7291
1235
7947
LSTM_raw3
7848
26956
15178
3352
55
702
1833
11157
8554
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 5.1: Inundation of the test events for simulations and selected models; threshold
= 5 cm
32
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
==PAGE:41==
Figure 5.2: Hit-miss maps of the test events for selected models - green = Hit , red =
Miss , yellow = False Alarm ; threshold = 5 cm; threshold = 5 cm
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
33
==PAGE:42==
5.1
Feed forward neural networks
Setup 01 - FFNN_raw1
Figure 5.3: FFNN_raw1 - history loss plot
The model was trained on 21 CDS events
and validated on 21 historical events set A.
Three test events were held back for the
test evaluation (section 4.1.3). In the his-
tory plot (fig. 5.3), one can note a loss in-
crease before epoch number 100. There-
fore, the final model was trained for 60
epochs. The resulting CSI values for test
event 1, 2 and 3 were 0.451, 0.361 and
0.371, respectively. The slightly better CSI
result of test case 1 can be explained by
comparing the training input and the input
of the test cases. The network was trained
with 2 h CDS samples that have been ma-
nipulated with zero padding to fill the input
up to 78 neurons corresponding to the 78 neurons of the 13 h historical samples. Deriv-
ing from that structure, the network was just trained for cases in which intensities were
present within the first 2 hours. Since most of the rain intensities of test case 1 were in
that time period and test case 2 and 3 showed most of their rainfall after that period, the
higher CSI value of case 1 is reasonable. Overall, the CSI values were in relatively low,
which is also supported by the fact that the hit-miss maps for the three test cases showed
a lot of misses and false alarms (fig. A.2).
Setup 02 - FFNN_raw2
Figure 5.4: FFNN_raw2 - history loss plot
This model setup also trained on the CDS
events.
However, the 21 original CDS
events were multiplied to 105 events by
shifting the series within the 13 h.
Con-
ducting the same validation process as in
setup FFNN_raw1, one can note a loss in-
crease after 80 epochs. Running with this
setup, the resulting CSI values were 0.480,
0.453 and 0.582. It should be noted that
due to shifting of the 2 h CDS series, the
network showed an improvement in recog-
nising events after the 2 h frame. This re-
sulted in increased CSI values of test case
two and three. Consequently, less misses
evolved in test event 2 and 3 (fig. 5.2).
In fig. 5.5, one can note the 2D histogram of test event 2. In addition, the respective
histograms of the prediction and simulation were plotted in the same figure. Here, it is
evident that the model under-estimated the simulation. The gradient of the prediction is
decreasing steeper than the simulation and almost no values were present after 0.6 m.
This transfers to the 2D histogram where the two main relations evolved in rather straight
lines. However, both of them are beyond the ideal slope of one. Another feature can be
noted that in both histograms, prediction and simulation, a small accumulation of values
in the upper parts is shown. In the prediction around 0.45 cm and in the simulation at 0.9
m. This difference underlines the fact of under-estimation by the model.
34
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
==PAGE:43==
Figure 5.5: FFNN_raw2 - histograms of test event 2
Setup 03 - FFNN_raw3
In setup FFNN_raw3, Kfold cross-validation was introduced to generate the final epoch
number. For this, ten models were trained and the early stopping procedure stopped the
model when no further improvement was seen. Taking the average epochs of the ten
models, a final epoch number of 14 was derived.
Figure 5.6: History loss plot - loss of the train-
ing and for Kfold cross validation (K = 10);
validation loss are the dashed lines
In addition, the Kfold cross-validation was
compared to the validation schema 1,
which validated on additional historical
events. In this case, the historical events
set B. Carrying that out, the model train-
ing stopped at epoch ten.
Hence, the
difference between these validation ap-
proaches was 4 epochs.
For the final
model, the training was executed with 12
epochs since this is the average epoch
number of the two validation methods. The
resulting mean CSI was 0.569. Noticing
the visualisation of ˆy and ytrue for the three
test events, the network seemed to recog-
nise the cells which are often flooded in the
training set (fig. A.1). However, the predic-
tion was either weaker for test event 2 or
stronger for test event 1 & 3 than the simulation. This behaviour can also be noticed in
the hit-miss map (fig. A.2) resulting in a lot of misses for event 2 and false alarms for 1
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
35
==PAGE:44==
and 3. Comparing the achieved mean CSI 0.569 from the model to the previous model
FFNN_raw2 with 0.508, a slightly better performance can be seen. This may be due to
the intake of historical events in the training set.
Setup 04 - FFNN_raw4
This setup should clarify the question if it is reasonable to include more historical samples
in the training set.
The training was conducted on all available samples. Kfold cross-validation was carried
out and the resulting average epoch number is 17. The final network was trained using that
epoch number. CSI values of 0.370, 0.801 and 0.638 (mean = 0.603) for the test cases
were generated. In fig. 5.1, one can note the visualisation of ˆy and ytrue. Comparing it
to the results of FFNN_raw3, it is noticeable that the over-prediction in test case 1 and
3 was less pronounced. This can be seen comparing the hit miss maps of FFNN_raw3
(fig. A.2) and of FFNN_raw4 (fig. 5.2). In general, the agreement was better, which is also
reflected by higher CSI values. Hence, the inclusion of more samples in the training set
seems justified.
Setup 05 - FFNN_stat1
Figure 5.7: History plot
This setup included rainfall statistics as in-
put variables instead of the bare intensity
over time. The variables were maximum
mean intensity for 30 min, 60 min and 90
min duration and accumulated rain.
In-
stead of the Kfold validation approach, the
training epoch was determined validating
on the additional 28 historical events set
B. However, it could be noticed that the
validation loss did not increase from a cer-
tain point in the weight adjustment process
(fig. 5.7). But since the training loss did
not improve significantly after epoch 300,
the final training was executed with 300
epochs. The CSI values for the test cases
were: 0.643, 0.695 and 0.623 (mean CSI = 0.637). In comparison to the previous models,
these values reflected a better performance. Taking into account that the same sample
size as in FFNN_raw3 was used, the accuracy of the test cases was 7% higher. The
hit-miss map in fig. 5.2, shows the visualisation of the models result.
36
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
==PAGE:45==
5.2
Long short-term memory networks
This section summarises the results of the models which used the LSTM structure. The
detailed structure can be found in section 4.2.1 under topology.
Setup 06 - LSTM_raw1
The setup LSTM_raw1 was trained on the multiplied CDS series and the training epoch
was determined by validation on the 21 historical events set A. The loss of the validation
set was increasing after epoch 25 and the weights were restored at this epoch. The CSI
values which were determined for the test events 1, 2 and 3 were 0.505, 0.714 and 0.582,
respectively (mean 0.600). The setup FFNN_raw2 (0.480, 0.453, 0.582; mean 0.505)
used the same training samples. Overall, the performance of the LSTM network was
around 10% higher than the FFNN. In the inundation plot fig. A.1, on can note that the
predictions for the three test events are relatively similar. Hence, many false alarms in
test event 1 & 3 and misses in 2 evolved (fig. A.2).
Setup 07 - LSTM_raw2
Setup LSTM_raw2 included the historical events set A (section 4.1.1) in the training set.
Analogue to setup FFNN_raw3, the validation was carried out in two ways: Validation via
Kfold and via additional historical events set B.
In the Kfold cross-validation, a final epoch number of 13 was averaged. In the validation
via additional historical events, the early stopping mechanism stopped the training as soon
as the validation loss increased and the weights from epoch 31 were restored. The history
plots are shown in fig. 5.8. Thus, a discrepancy in the validation methods of 18 epochs
was determined. This difference was larger than the discrepancy in FFNN_raw3. In this
case, it was decided to chose epoch 31 of the validation via additional events for the final
model because it results in a more accurate number. The epochs of the 10 Kfold models,
differed in a range from 10 to 35 epochs. However, by testing different epoch numbers, it
could be observed that a difference in training epochs in the range of 10 does not result
in a large difference in the model performing results.
A Mean CSI of 0.611 was generated. Consequently, a performance increase of 4.2 % in
comparison to FFNN_raw3 (mean CSI 0.569) was detected.
(a) Kfold validation
(b) Validation via historical events set 2
Figure 5.8: Loss history for two different validations
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
37
==PAGE:46==
Setup 08 - LSTM_raw3
In the last setup, all historical events (set A & B) were included. Thus, it used the same
154 training samples as FFNN_raw4 (105 CDS & 49 historical events). Through Kfold
cross-validation, a epoch number of 80 was averaged. Running the final model with that
epoch number, the resulting respective CSI values were: 0.602, 0.706 and 0.621 (mean
0.643). Hence, the predication accuracy measured with the CSI metric was 4% better
than the model pendant using the FFNN structure.
The hit-miss map (fig. 5.2) shows an over-prediction for test event 2 and a mixed predic-
tion result for test event 1 and 2. The over-prediction of event 2 can also be noted in the
2D histogram of event 2 (fig. 5.10). Upon first glance, the plot shows a good agreement of
simulation and prediction. Nevertheless, the lowest of the diagonal lines is shifted down-
wards from the ideal line and indicates an over-prediction. A similar phenomenon, but
less pronounced, can be seen for test event 1 (fig. 5.9) and test event 3 (fig. 5.11).
Additionally, in the histogram of event 2 (fig. 5.10), one can note a peak in the histograms
of prediction and simulation slightly after 1.3 m. This was probably emerging in the depres-
sion under the railway track in the south-west of the catchment (note DEM in chapter 3).
The model seemed to predict this accurately for all three test cases (fig. 5.2).
Figure 5.9: LSTM_raw3 - histograms of test event 1
38
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.10: LSTM_raw3 - histograms of test event 2
Figure 5.11: LSTM_raw3 - histograms of test event 3
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
39
==PAGE:48==
5.3
Results comparison
This section presents aspects of the results by addressing the research questions. In
addition, some peculiarities among selected model results are addressed.
5.3.1
Inclusion of additional events
The models FFNN_raw2 & LSTM_raw1 trained only on CDS events and achieved an
mean CSI of 0.553. Models FFNN_raw3 & LSTM_raw2 included more events in the train-
ing set by adding historical events set A. The mean CSI of these models was 0.59. Further-
more, FFNN_raw4 & LSTM_raw3 included all events in the training (CDS and historical
set A + B) and the resulting mean CSI was 0.623. Comparing these numbers, an increase
of 3.7 % (21 events) and 7 % (53 events), respectively, could be observed. This could be
due to the inclusion of more events to the training set. These numbers were independent
of the network type.
5.3.2
Input type comparison
FFNN_stat1 is the only model which used statistical values as input data. Its achieved
mean CSI is 0.637. Model FFNN_raw3 trained on the same sample base utilising bare
intensity values as input and resulted in a mean CSI of 0.569. Thus, the improvement of
using the statistical values in comparison to the intensities over time, was on average 6.8
%.
5.3.3
Network comparison
In order to compare the network structures, the FFNN and LSTM models with the same in-
put samples were considered. Therefore, following models were compared: FFNN_raw2
and LSTM_raw1, FFNN_raw3 and LSTM_raw2, FFNN_raw4 and LSTM_raw3. The aver-
age CSI of the FFNN models was 0.559 and CSI of the LSTM models was 0.618. Hence,
the LSTM performed in average 5.9 % better than the FFNN in regards of their CSI values.
5.3.4
Validation schemata
In FNN_raw3 and LSTM_raw2 the validation schemata were compared directly. It shows
that both ways resulted in different epoch number. However, the difference is relatively
low with 4 epochs in FFNN_raw3 and 18 in LSTM_raw2.
5.3.5
Comparison of selected models
In fig. 5.1, the predictions for selected models and the simulations are displayed. Within
these, the best performing models were FFNN_raw4, FFNN_stat1 and LSTM_raw3. In
general, these models were able to differentiate between ’mild’ and severe events. All of
the best performing models predicted more flooded cells for the severe event 2 than for
the moderate cases 1 and 2. Nevertheless, models FFNN_stat1 and LSTM_raw3 over-
predicted test event 2. This can also be seen in fig. 5.12. The orange bars for test event
2 overshoot the simulation reference in this setups.
Another characteristic can be seen in the models of fig. 5.1. The simulation of event 2
resulted in yellow deeper flood levels in the centre and the east of the catchment. Com-
parable flood depths were only predicted by the models FFNN_stat1 and LSTM_raw3.
Neither of the other models were able to capture this deeper flood depth. This could be
due to the fact that FFNN_stat1 and LSTM_raw3 over-predicted event 2 in general.
A different reason explaining this could be that FFNN_stat1 and LSTM_raw3 were better
in identifying severe events because of the their input or network type. In FFNN_stat1,
the respective rain series was described by processing the series to maximum mean
intensity for 30 min, 60 min, 90 min duration and accumulated rainfall. Although, this pre-
processing comes with a loss of information, it seemed that the intensity of an event is
captured well by these descriptive values.
40
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
==PAGE:49==
The same ability to recognise severity among inputs accounts for setup LSTM_raw3. The
LSTM structure of this setup seemed to filter out useful information from the input by
recognising it as a sequence.
Nevertheless, for the LSTM structure it seemed necessary to utilise a larger database
since the setups LSTM_raw1 and LSTM_raw2 were not able to differentiate between
moderate and severe events (fig. A.1).
Figure 5.12: Flooded area for test events; threshold = 5 cm
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
41
==PAGE:50==
42
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
==PAGE:51==
6
Discussion
Similar to the previous section, the discussion is based on recapitulating the research
questions. Table 6.1, gives a condensed answer regarding the research questions. The
subsections explain and discuss this answers.
Table 6.1: Research questions and answers
Research question
Answer
How many input samples
have to be used for training?
Inclusion of additional historical events
results in a better model performance.
What type of input should be used?
Intensity over time for LSTM.
Statistical values for FFNN.
What performs better in the problem:
Feed-forward neural network (FFNN) or
long-short term memory (LSTM)?
FFNN for statistical inputs.
LSTM for intensity over time.
How can the training process be validated?
Kfold validation can be used as a reference
to validate the training process.
What is an appropriate metric to estimate
the model performance?
The CSI metric gives a
good indication of model performance.
6.1
Inclusion of additional events
The results indicate that the inclusion of more historical training samples was beneficial
since the CSI values increased by adding historical training data.
However, this analysis was based on the initial model which uses the multiplied and shifted
CDS series. Taking a closer look at this series (fig. 4.8), it is obvious that there are ’holes’
at around minute 150 and at the end of the series. The cells at the end of the series were
left blank on purpose because during the MIKE simulations it emerged that the time of
concentration is around one hour. In order not to conflict this period, there is no intensity
present. Nevertheless, there is no other physical reason for the placement of the series.
Because of these ’holes’, the neurons that represent these time steps were not trained
to identify rain intensities. To enhance this base model, the shifting process should be
reconsidered. Based on that, an improved model trained only on CDS events could be
established.
6.2
Input types
The model FFNN_stat1 (mean CSI 0.637) outperformed FFNN_raw3 (mean CSI 0.569)
and LSTM_raw2 (mean CSI 0.611) which used the same training base. For this, it used
just 4 input neurons instead of 78. The 4 input variables were maximum mean intensity
for 30 min, 60 min, 90 min duration and accumulated rain. In that way, the pre-processing
of the series seemed to help the network differentiate between events. However, further
investigation is needed as to which statistical values are most important to enhance this
approach. A further differentiation between descriptive statistical inputs for FFNNs was
undertaken by Dichmann and Eriksen 2019. Nevertheless, the modeller should be aware
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
43
==PAGE:52==
that the condensation of a sequence into a few descriptive statistical values always entails
a loss of information.
6.3
Network comparison
Neglecting the model performance of FFNN_stat1, the results let the reader assume that
an LSTM structure is preferable to the FFNN structure. From a conceptual point of view,
this is supported by the fact that LSTMs are well-established in processing sequential in-
puts. However, most known applications are characterised by either single output (e.g.
next value in a time-series) or sequential output (e.g. language translation). In the here
presented model it was neither of these: The output was an image that was shaped into
an one-dimensional array of 361315 cells.
Usually, for the processing of images, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are applied.
For instance, Guo et al. 2020 propose a framework to predict flood inundation maps using
CNNs. In their study, they used multi-channel terrain images and rainfall hyetographs as
inputs and maximum water depth maps as output. Through that, they achieved ’promis-
ing accuracy’ in their results. Their approach was basically a hybrid model processing
the multi-channel terrain images via a CNN and implementing the rainfall hyetographs in
form of a FFNN. Taking the findings of the here-investigated network comparison, it is to
assume that the FFNN part of the hybrid model could be replaced by an LSTM structure.
This could lead to a synergy of both model structures and further investigation could be
interesting.
6.4
Validation schemata
During the model-building process, it was noted that the training process of neural network
is unstable. Sometimes, running the same model with the same epoch number would
lead to a difference in the test performance. This occurs due to the random initialisation
of the weights in the beginning of the training. The common way to counteract this, is the
implementation of validation. This ensures that the training process is stopping at the right
time and the models are comparable independent of the random initialisation. However, it
could lead to some problems in the Kfold validation. Here, the random initialisation of the
weights in combination of the randomly assigned train-test split led to a broader training
epoch range in the K=10 models. Although the average of these 10 epoch numbers was
taken, it is co-determined by randomness. Nevertheless, it seems that this did not have a
great influence an the final epoch number. The results showed that the epoch difference
of the two validation approaches was relatively low. Based on this, a Kfold cross-validation
was a legitimate way to supervise the training process without loosing training samples
for validation. However, it seems advisable not to choose the model number K too small
to counteract the random initialisation of weights. Berkhahn, Fuchs, and Neuweiler 2019,
tried to compensate the randomness of the weight initialisation by an ensemble approach.
This was realised by running several networks for the same catchment. Afterwards, they
took the average of the resulting water levels. Overall, this seems like valid approach
assuming that the training of the respective model was supervised by a validation set.
This was not specifically stated in the article. An advanced approach to counteract the
random initialisation of weights could be the combination of both methods - training several
networks for the same catchment and validating the respective training epoch via Kfold
cross-validation.
44
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
==PAGE:53==
6.5
Performance evaluation
During the project, the question of which evaluation metrics to use came up quite early.
Other studies chose the mean squared error (MSE) or root mean squared error (RMSE) as
a evaluation metric (Berkhahn, Fuchs, and Neuweiler 2019, Lin et al. 2020). The following
considerations were made before another metric for evaluation was chosen.
Both - MSE and RMSE - are dependent on a number of cells n. Lin et al. 2020, restricted
the number of cells to the total grid cells. Based on this, cells were taken into the metric
which are not flooded in the prediction nor in the simulation. Therefore, the metric can not
be used as the only indicator for performance but rather just compared to other models
which use the same metric.
Berkhahn, Fuchs, and Neuweiler 2019 defined the number of n cells by the extent of
the ’physically based model’. They did not specify if the cells of all hydraulic simulations
or the specific test extent was chosen as a reference. In case of the former, the same
drawback as in Lin et al. 2020 would occur. In the latter case, a prediction outside of the
specific simulation extent would not be taken into account. Because of these reasons, it
was decided to take the critical success index (CSI) as a quantitative measurement.
However, the use of the CSI should also be discussed. In general, the prediction for event
2 is better than for event 1 and 3. The average CSIs over all models are 0.51, 0.627 and
0.574 for event 1, 2 and 3, respectively. This could be due to the metric characteristics of
the CSI value for events with high flood volume. In those severe cases, a high amount of
misses and false alarms do not affect the CSI that much as long as there is a relatively
high number of hits. Consequently, although the total number of misses and false alarms
may be higher than in event 1 and 3, the CSI of event 2 will be better. Conversely, the CSI
will ’punish’ a relatively low amount of misses and false alarms if there is a low amount
of total flooded cells. Derived from that behaviour, the CSI does not reward recognising
non-flooded areas which are increasingly present in event 1 and 3.
In addition, another characteristic of the CSI metric should be mentioned. The CSI is
based on the generation of hits, misses and false alarm, namely the variables of the
contingency table. Downside of these variables is that above the defined threshold no
indication of the prediction accuracy can be derived. For instance, a flooded cell with a
simulation result of 120 cm and a prediction result of 10 cm will have the same evaluation
label as a cell with a much lower discrepancy.
6.6
Other aspects
The prior section discusses the use of the MSE and RMSE as a evaluation metric. Be-
cause of the mentioned considerations, the decision was made to neglect this metrics for
evaluation. This brings up the question why the MSE was used as a loss function within
the training process. The reason for this is that, despite the number of cells n give a bias
to the evaluation, the optimisation algorithm will still try to minimise the loss function. In
other words, a high number of included cells which are not flooded in the simulation nor
in the prediction will lower the MSE but will not prevent the algorithm from searching a
minimum.
In general, the flooding in the catchment was rather mild. The maximum water depth of
a CDS event with 75 mm (accumulated value) was 1.79 m at the very prone area under
the railway track. The majority of inundations was under 1.4 m. These events correspond
to an event with a return period of 613 years and is therefore classified as extreme. In
addition, the 40 year historical rain series had to be manipulated by a factor of 1.5 and 3
to generate proper flooding. Since the used rain events are very extreme, the transfer of
the model setups to other catchments is questionable. Thereby the consideration comes
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
45
==PAGE:54==
up, if a less resilient catchment is advantageous for such modelling investigations.
In the introduction was stated that a fast prediction was requested in a flood forecasting
system. In that concern, the computational speed of ANNs is very likely not the limiting
factor for an implementation. The limiting factors are rather the accuracy and availability of
historical data. Concerning the accuracy, the needs of respective utility company have to
be investigated. If a differentiation between moderate and severe events is requested, the
best performing models seem to fulfil that. Regarding the availability of historical events,
the results indicate a benefit from adding historical events to the training set. However,
the construction of a synthetic event data base needs further investigation and is likely to
be improved.
46
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
==PAGE:55==
7
Conclusion and outlook
Several aspects can be concluded from the achieved results. First, it is important to note
that model building should be seen as procedure of understanding the data set. Several
trials preceded to the presented models to identify a useful network topology.
Overall, ANNs are a useful approach to predict flood inundation maps. Good critical-
success indexes (CSIs) could be achieved for the best performing models. The feed-
forward neural network (FFNN) with the descriptive statistical input variables and the long
short-term memory (LSTM) structure, which utilises the intensities over time and trains on
the largest data set, stand out from the other models concerning their prediction results.
Furthermore, the results indicate that a large sample database is beneficial since the
model performance consequently increased by adding more samples to the data set. Nev-
ertheless, the approach of training only on synthetic events needs further investigation
and is likely to be enhanced. In addition, the application of the project shows that a mod-
eller has to be aware of the random initialisation of weights and the risk of overfitting.
Throughout proper supervision of the training process, this risk can be contained. Kfold
cross-validation has proven to be a valid approach to realise that.
Through the improvement of computational power and high level machine learning frame-
works, the implementation of machine learning techniques is accessible to a broader au-
dience than is was just a few years ago. This comes with far reaching advantages in
automation and modelling. Machine learning (ML) methods are often connotated as an
’all-purpose weapon’. However, the same modelling rules as for other techniques apply,
and the performance has to be analysed objectively. Nevertheless, if implemented cor-
rectly, ML techniques can be a powerful tool in the urban water sector.
In matters of flood prediction, the ideas of implementing ML will not run out that quickly.
In the presented study, no spatial variability in rain input was present and the prediction is
restricted to maximum depth flood levels. However, hydraulic simulations are able to pro-
cess spatially variable rain input and can extract flood maps during the whole simulation
process. ANNs have to prove their usefulness in that concerns.
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
47
==PAGE:56==
48
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
Abou Rjeily, Yves et al. (July 2017). “Flood forecasting within urban drainage systems
using NARX neural network”. In: Water Science and Technology 76.9, pp. 2401–2412.
ISSN: 0273-1223. DOI: 10.2166/wst.2017.409. eprint: https://iwaponline.com/wst/article-
pdf/76/9/2401/208868/wst076092401.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.2166/wst.2017.409.
Alfieri, Lorenzo et al. (2015). “Ensemble flood risk assessment in Europe under high end
climate scenarios”. In: Global Environmental Change 35, pp. 199–212. ISSN: 0959-
3780. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.09.004. URL: http://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0959378015300406.
Bennett, Neil D. et al. (2013). “Characterising performance of environmental models”. In:
Environmental Modelling Software 40, pp. 1–20. ISSN: 1364-8152. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.envsoft.2012.09.011. URL: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S1364815212002435.
Berkhahn, Simon, Lothar Fuchs, and Insa Neuweiler (2019). “An ensemble neural network
model for real-time prediction of urban floods”. In: Journal of Hydrology 575, pp. 743–
754. ISSN: 0022-1694. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2019.05.066. URL:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022169419305116.
Bermúdez, María, Luis Cea, and Jerónimo Puertas (2018). “A rapid flood inundation model
for hazard mapping based on least squares support vector machine regression”. In:
Flood Risk Management. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/jfr3.12522.
Chang, Fi-John et al. (2014). “Real-time multi-step-ahead water level forecasting by re-
current neural networks for urban flood control”. In: Journal of Hydrology 517, pp. 836–
846. ISSN: 0022-1694. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2014.06.013. URL:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022169414004739.
DHI (2017a). MIKE 21 Flow Model & MIKE 21 Flood Screening Tool - Hydrodynamic
Module - Scientific Documentation. URL: https://manuals.mikepoweredbydhi.help/2017/
Coast_and_Sea/M21HDFST_Scientific_Doc.pdf.
– (2017b). MOUSE Pipe Flow - Reference Manual. URL: https://manuals.mikepoweredbydhi.
help/2017/Cities/MOUSEPipeFlowReference.pdf.
– (2015). Storm Water Runoff from Green Urban Areas - Modellers’ Guideline. URL:
https : / / watersensitivecities . org . au / wp - content / uploads / 2016 / 05 / TMR _ B4 - 1 _
StormWaterRunoffGreenUrban.pdf.
Dichmann, Lasse Ehlert Nedergaard and Jens Martin Eriksen (2019). “Varslingssystem
imod regnbetingede oversvømmelser - Realtidsmodellering af afløbssystemer”. URL:
https://projekter.aau.dk/projekter/da/studentthesis/varslingssystem-imod-regnbetingede-
oversvoemmelser(f12df574-9784-4c50-aa5d-8c7fc4a94c19).html.
Gregersen, Ida Bülow et al. (2014). Opdaterede klimafaktorer og dimensionsgivende regn-
intensiteter - Skrift nr. 30. Tech. rep. IDA. URL: https://ida.dk/om-ida/spildevandskomiteen/
skrifter-spildevandskomiteen.
Guo, Zifeng et al. (2020). “Data-driven Flood Emulation: Speeding up Urban Flood Pre-
dictions by Deep Convolutional Neural Networks”. In: arXiv: 2004.08340 [cs.CV].
Heaton, Jeff (Jan. 2020). Lecture notes: T81-558 - Applications of Deep Neural Networks.
URL: https://github.com/jeffheaton/t81_558_deep_learning.
Henonin, Justine et al. (Feb. 2013). “Real-time urban flood forecasting and modelling – a
state of the art”. In: Journal of Hydroinformatics 15.3, pp. 717–736. ISSN: 1464-7141.
DOI: 10.2166/hydro.2013.132. eprint: https://iwaponline.com/jh/article-pdf/15/3/717/
387049/717.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.2166/hydro.2013.132.
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
49
==PAGE:58==
Herlau, Tue, Mikkel N. Schmidt, and Morten Mørup (Dec. 2019). Lecture notes: Introduc-
tion to Machine Learning and Data Mining.
Hinton, Geoffrey (2012). Lecture 6.5—RmsProp: Divide the gradient by a running average
of its recent magnitude. COURSERA: Neural Networks for Machine Learning. URL:
http://www.cs.toronto.edu/%5C%7Etijmen/csc321/slides/lecture_slides_lec6.pdf.
Hochreiter, Sepp and Jürgen Schmidhuber (Dec. 1997). “Long Short-term Memory”. In:
Neural computation 9, pp. 1735–80. DOI: 10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.1735.
Hunter, J. D. (2007). “Matplotlib: A 2D graphics environment”. In: Computing in Science
& Engineering 9.3, pp. 90–95. DOI: 10.1109/MCSE.2007.55.
Keifer, Clint J. and Henry Hsien Chu (1957). “Synthetic Storm Pattern for Drainage De-
sign”. In: Journal of the Hydraulics Division 83.4, pp. 1–25. URL: https://cedb.asce.org/
CEDBsearch/record.jsp?dockey=0010917.
Kingma, Diederik P. and Jimmy Ba (2015). “Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization”.
In: 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015, San Diego,
CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015, Conference Track Proceedings. Ed. by Yoshua Bengio and
Yann LeCun. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980.
Kron, Wolfgang, Petra Löw, and Zbigniew W. Kundzewicz (2019). “Changes in risk of
extreme weather events in Europe”. In: Environmental Science Policy 100, pp. 74–83.
ISSN: 1462-9011. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2019.06.007. URL: http:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S146290111930142X.
Lin, Qing et al. (2020). “Prediction of Maximum Flood Inundation Extents With Resilient
Backpropagation Neural Network: Case Study of Kulmbach”. In: Frontiers in Earth Sci-
ence 8, p. 332. ISSN: 2296-6463. DOI: 10.3389/feart.2020.00332. URL: https://www.
frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/feart.2020.00332.
Martı́n Abadi et al. (2015). TensorFlow: Large-Scale Machine Learning on Heterogeneous
Systems. Software available from tensorflow.org. URL: https://www.tensorflow.org/.
McCulloch, Warren S. and Walter Pitts (1943). “A logical calculus of the ideas immanent
in nervous activity”. In: Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics 5, pp. 115–133. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/BF02478259.
Moré, Jorge J. (1978). “The Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm: Implementation and theory”.
In: Numerical Analysis. Ed. by G.A. Watson. Vol. 630. Lecture Notes in Mathematics.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 105–116.
Novafos A/S (2020). Accessed: 2020-07-01. URL: https://novafos.dk/regnvand/anlaegsprojekter/
regnvand-hellerup.
Parker, Dennis J., Colin Howard Green, and Paul M. Thompson (1987). Urban flood pro-
tection benefits: a project appraisal guide. URL: https://capitadiscovery.co.uk/brighton-
ac/items/152746.
Parliament, European and of the Council (2007). Directive 2007/60/EC of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2007 on the assessment and management
of flood risks. URL: http://data.europa.eu/eli/dir/2007/60/oj.
Rosbjerg, Dan and Henrik Madsen (2019). “Initial design of urban drainage systems for
extreme rainfall events using intensity–duration–area (IDA) curves and Chicago design
storms (CDS)”. English. In: Hydrological Sciences Journal 64.12, pp. 1397–1403. ISSN:
0262-6667. DOI: 10.1080/02626667.2019.1645958.
Rosenblatt, F. (1958). “The Perceptron: A Probabilistic Model for Information Storage and
Organization in the Brain”. In: Psychological Review 65 (6), pp. 386–408. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1037/h0042519.
Ruder, Sebastian (2016). An overview of gradient descent optimization algorithms. URL:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1609.04747.
50
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
==PAGE:59==
Schreider, S. Yu., D.I. Smith, and A.J. Jakeman (2000). “Climate Change Impacts on
Urban Flooding”. In: Climatic Change 47, pp. 91–115. URL: https://doi.org/10.1023/A:
1005621523177.
Skougaard Kaspersen, P. et al. (2017). “Comparison of the impacts of urban development
and climate change on exposing European cities to pluvial flooding”. In: Hydrology and
Earth System Sciences 21.8, pp. 4131–4147. DOI: 10.5194/hess-21-4131-2017. URL:
https://hess.copernicus.org/articles/21/4131/2017/.
Styrelsen for dataforsyning og effektivisering (2020). Accessed: 2020-06-22.
The pandas development team (Feb. 2020). pandas-dev/pandas: Pandas. Version 1.1.0.
DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.3509134. URL: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3509134.
Turing, A. M. (Oct. 1950). “I.—COMPUTING MACHINERY AND INTELLIGENCE”. In:
Mind LIX.236, pp. 433–460. ISSN: 0026-4423. DOI: 10.1093/mind/LIX.236.433. eprint:
https://academic.oup.com/mind/article-pdf/LIX/236/433/30123314/lix-236-433.pdf.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/mind/LIX.236.433.
Van Der Walt, Stefan, S Chris Colbert, and Gael Varoquaux (2011). “The NumPy array: a
structure for efficient numerical computation”. In: Computing in Science & Engineering
13.2, p. 22.
Van Rossum, Guido and Fred L. Drake (2009). Python 3 Reference Manual. Scotts Valley,
CA: CreateSpace. ISBN: 1441412697.
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
51
==PAGE:60==
52
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
==PAGE:61==
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
53
==PAGE:62==
A
Result plots
Figure A.1: Inundation of the test events for simulations and selected models; threshold
= 5 cm
54
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
==PAGE:63==
Figure A.2: Hit-miss maps of the test events for selected models - green = Hit , red =
Miss , yellow = False Alarm ; threshold = 5 cm; threshold = 5 cm
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure A.3: (ysim −ˆy): difference plot of the test events for model setups; depth in meter;
red indicates an over-prediction and blue an under-prediction
56
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
==PAGE:65==
Figure A.4: (ysim −ˆy): difference plot of the test events for model setups; depth in meter;
red indicates an over-prediction and blue an under-prediction
Prediction of maximum flood inundation maps using Artificial Neural Networks
57
==PAGE:66==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Bygningstorvet, Building 115
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.env.dtu.dk
