==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Master thesis by
Julius Lucas Needham (s144074)
Surface characterization and temperature
programmed desorption of small
mass-selected entities
Supervisors:
Jakob Kibsgaard, Ib Chorkendorﬀ,
Karl Toudahl & Jakob Ejler Sørensen
7th September 2020
==PAGE:2==
Preface
This thesis is submitted as the conclusion of work done from the 27th of January 2020 to 7th of
September 2020, under the supervision of Jakob Kibsgaard, Ib Chorkendorﬀ, Karl Toudahl and
Jakob Ejler Sørensen. It accounts for the ﬁnal 35 ECTS credits required to obtain a MSc degree in
Physics and Nanotechnology at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU.
Thesis structure
The thesis is divided into ﬁve main chapters. Chapter 1 motivates the project by the discussing
issue of climate change, sustainable energy and how catalysis can be a key factor in providing
energy in the future. Copper is introduced as a catalyst, and previous temperature programmed
desorption experiments are discussed.
Finally, the background for this project is presented.
In
chapter 2, the experimental setup and procedures are introduced, as well as the characterization
methods used throughout the project. In chapter 3, the results are presented and discussed, before
summarizing and concluding in chapter 4.
Chapter 5 serves as an outloook, discussing further
studies and developments. As a part of the formal requirements, a project plan and suggested link
to learning objectives can be found in the appendix, sec. 6.3.
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Jakob Kibsgaard and Ib Chorkendorﬀfor providing me with the opportunity
to work with this project and for their supervision. I owe special thanks to Karl Toudahl and Jakob
Ejler Sørensen for providing training for equipment use and for their excellent advice throughout
the project. I have thoroughly enjoyed working closely with you.
i
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
In the face of climate change, renewable energies are expected to gain wide adoption. However, an
inherent issue in renewable energies, such as wind and solar, is intermittency. Storing the electric
energy in chemical bonds allows renewable production of chemicals and fuels through CO2 reduction,
but better catalysts are required. A promising catalyst for the CO2 and CO reduction reactions is
copper, and research on improving copper as a catalyst is ongoing. In this project, studies on copper
nanoparticles were performed. The eﬀect of surface coverage and particle size were investigated
using temperature programmed desorption, a valuable tool in catalysis research. The goal of the
project was discovering desorption features at higher temperatures, as it was previously correlated
to enhanced activity for CO reduction.
Nanoparticles were deposited using a cluster source connected to a time of ﬂight mass ﬁlter. Surface
coverages of 6%, 20%, 50%, 200% and 400% monolayers were investigated, with some desorption
at higher temperatures being detected for the higher coverages. Nanoparticle sizes of 3.5 nm, 5 nm
and 8 nm were deposited, and the 5 nm nanoparticles was found to exhibit more desorption from
the higher temperature sites.
The TPD studies lead to discovery of underlying issues in the instrumentation of the employed TPD
setup, and a modiﬁcation was performed to the sample holder. This was found to amplify issues
related to the thermocouple installation in bespoke setup. These issues were found to lead to a large,
but consistent, error in the found desorption temperatures.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Resumé
I lyset af klimaændringerne forventes vedvarende energier at blive bredt implementeret. Imidlertid
er et fundamentalt problem i vedvarende energi, såsom vind og sol, omskifteligheden af disse. La-
gring af den elektriske energi i kemiske bindinger muliggører beredygtig produktion af kemikalier
og brændstoﬀer gennem CO2 reduktion, men for dette kræves bedre katalysatorer.
En lovende
katalysator for CO2- og CO-reduktionsreaktionerne er kobber, og forskning i at forbedre kobber
som katalysator er igangværende. I dette projekt blev undersøgelser af kobber-nanopartikler udført.
Eﬀekten af overﬂadedækning og partikelstørrelse blev undersøgt ved hjælp af temperaturprogram-
meret desorption, et værdifuldt værktøj til katalyseforskning. Målet med projektet var at opdage
desorption ved højere temperaturer, da dette tidligere var korreleret med forbedret aktivitet i re-
duktion af CO.
Nanopartikler blev deponeret ved hjælp af en "cluster"-kilde, der var forbundet med et "time-of-
ﬂight"-masseﬁlter. Overﬂadedækninger på 6%, 20%, 50%, 200% og 400% monolag blev undersøgt,
og der blev påvist desorption ved højere temperaturer for de høje dækninger. Nanopartikelstørrelser
på 3,5 nm, 5 nm og 8 nm blev deponeret, og 5 nm-nanopartiklerne viste sig at udvise mere desorption
ved højere temperaturer.
TPD-undersøgelserne førte til opdagelse af underliggende problemer i instrumenteringen af den an-
vendte TPD-opsætning, og en modiﬁkation blev udført til prøveholderen. Dette viste sig at forstærke
problemer relateret til termoelementets installation i TPD-opsætningen. Disse problemer viste sig
at føre til en stor, men konsekvent, fejl i de fundne desorptionstemperaturer.
iii
==PAGE:5==
List of abbreviations
• NP: Nanoparticle
• ML: Monolayer
• UHV: Ultra-high vacuum
• ToF-MF: Time-of-Flight mass ﬁltering
• ISS: (Low-energy) Ion scattering spectroscopy
• TPD: Temperature programmed desorption
• M30: Mass 30 g/mol, corresponding to CO-30
• M40: Mass 40 g/mol, corresponding to Ar
• PID: Proportional-integral-derivitive (referring to control/tuning)
• LN2: Liquid nitrogen
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The energy challenge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Electrochemistry for sustainable fuels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2.1
Copper as a catalyst . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Small entities for heterogeneous catalysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.4
Project context and goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2
Experimental setup
11
2.1
Cluster source setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.1.1
Nanobeam 2011 cluster source
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2
Concepts pertaining the synthesis of small entities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.1
DC magnetron sputtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.2
Gas aggregation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.3
Mass distribution of aggregated entities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2.4
Time of Flight Mass Filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2.5
Deposition and soft landing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.2.6
Depositing nanoparticles on the Omicron setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3
Characterization methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.3.1
Low-energy ion scattering spectroscopy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.3.2
Temperature programmed desorption
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3
Results and discussion
28
3.1
PID control tuning for TPD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2
Background signal during TPD measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2.1
ISS characterization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2.2
TPD characterization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3
Cleanliness of substrates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.4
Reproducibility of results in the TPD chamber
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.4.1
Reproducibility of subsequent TPDs on the same sample . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.4.2
Reproducibility of depositions of same coverage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.5
Coverage eﬀect of 5 nm copper nanoparticles characterized with TPD
. . . . . . . .
37
3.5.1
ISS characterization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.5.2
TPD characterization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.5.3
Heating proﬁles before the hole cutout modiﬁcation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.6
Size eﬀect of copper nanoparticles characterized with TPD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.6.1
ISS characterization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.6.2
TPD characterization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.6.3
Heating proﬁle after the hole cutout modiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4
Conclusion
52
==PAGE:7==
5
Outlook
53
Bibliography
54
6
Appendix
57
6.1
Additional TPD spectra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.2
Additional ISS spectra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.2.1
Glassy carbon substrates before deposition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.3
Learning objectives and project plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.3.1
Overall goal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.3.2
Timeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.3.3
Evaluation of timeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
==PAGE:8==
1 | Introduction
1.1
The energy challenge
One of the greatest challenges of our time is the energy challenge - providing energy for all while
avoiding climate change. Climate change due to greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions is becoming an
increasingly discussed subject. One of the most widely discussed GHGs is carbon dioxide (CO2)
since it is emitted during fossil fuel usage. According to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA), 82% of 2017 U.S. greenhouse gas emissions were CO2 [1]. This was in CO2 equivalent units,
taking each GHG’s global warming potential into account. The atmospheric CO2 concentration is
historically high, and is currently increasing rapidly. The CO2 concentration in the atmosphere
from 800,000 BCE until present can be seen in ﬁg. 1.1. There have been natural concentration
ﬂuctuations over the last few hundreds of thousands of years, but in the period since the industrial
revolution (circa 1760) until now, it has grown larger than ever.
Eﬀects of GHG emission include global warming and climate change through the Greenhouse Eﬀect
[2]. The global temperature anomaly (the yearly average deviation from the 20th century tempera-
ture average), and the global atmospheric CO2 concentration, can be seen plotted in ﬁg. 1.2. The
temperature is clearly rising, coinciding with the rising CO2 concentration. According to NASA
and The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) [3], long-term climate change eﬀects
include more frequent wildﬁres, stronger hurricanes, longer droughts, more severe tropical storms
and rising sea levels due to glacial melting. Additionally, a longer frost-free season will increase
farming yields in some regions, while decreasing them in others. In general, conditions on Earth will
be harsher due to climate change.
Page 1 of 60
==PAGE:9==
800,000 BCE
600,000 BCE
400,000 BCE
200,000 BCE
180
220
260
300
340
380
420
CO
2
 concentration (PPM)
Year
Ice cores
Mauna Loa
2020
1700
1800
1900
2000
270
320
370
420
1769
Figure 1.1: CO2 levels plotted from 800,000 BCE to present. It can be seen that natural variations
in CO2 occur, but also that present levels are historically high. Inset: zoomed-in region of 1700 to
present. The CO2 concentration seems to have been rising over the previous highest values (around
300 ppm) since 1769 - when the steam engine was patented in the beginning of the industrial
revolution. Ice core data (blue) from [4, 5] and Mauna Loa data from atmospheric measurements
(red) from [6].
1880
1900
1920
1940
1960
1980
2000
2020
280
300
320
340
360
380
400
420
-0.50
-0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
CO
2
 concentration
(Ice cores
 & Mauna Loa )
Year
CO
2
 concentration (PPM)
Temperature anomaly from
20
th
 century average
Temperature anomaly (°C)
Figure 1.2: Atmospheric CO2 concentration over time and temperature anomaly, plotted together
from 1880 to present.
It appears that the higher concentration of CO2 is linked to the higher
temperature anomaly. Ice core CO2 data (blue) from [5] and Mauna Loa data from atmospheric
measurements (red) from [6]. Temperature anomaly data (bar chart) from [7].
Presently, the world’s energy demand is largely covered by fossil fuels. The current global primary
energy consumption by source is plotted in ﬁg. 1.3. It can be readily seen that fossil fuels; coal, oil
Page 2 of 60
==PAGE:10==
and natural gas, are currently dominating. In 2018, fossil fuels accounted for approximately 70% of
the world’s primary energy consumption [8, 9]. Furthermore, the total primary energy consumption
is growing each year.
In an eﬀort to reduce the carbon dioxide emissions from energy consumption, sustainable energies
are emerging. Sustainable energy is energy conversion that builds on the principle of sustainable
development. As outlined in the report commonly known as the Brundland report by The World
Commission on Environment and Development: "Sustainable development is development that meets
the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own
needs." [10]. In other words, sustainable energy is energy that is consumed now, but will not change
the planet in such manner that future generations cannot meet their needs. Sustainable energy
technologies include hydropower, biofuels, nuclear, wind and solar. These ﬁve technologies are also
called renewable, because they do not expire or can be renewed within human lifetime [11]. Nuclear
power is also considered sustainable but not renewable, since it will expire, though it does not emit
greenhouse gasses.
The current share of primary energy consumption from sustainable energies is quite small, as can
be seen in ﬁg. 1.3. UN Sustainable Development Goal 7 is to "Ensure access to aﬀordable, reliable,
sustainable and modern energy for all" [12]. Among the targets are to "... increase substantially the
share of renewable energy in the global energy mix" and "... double the global rate of improvement
in energy eﬃciency", both by 2030. It is therefore expected that renewable energies will see an
increase their share in the global primary energy consumption.
1800
1850
1900
1950
2000
0.0
4.0x10
4
8.0x10
4
1.2x10
5
1.6x10
5
Primary energy consumption (TWh)
Year
 Carbon fuels
 Renewables
Figure 1.3: The global primary energy consumption, by source. Fossil fuels still dominate the global
energy mix. Data from [8, 9]
Page 3 of 60
==PAGE:11==
1.2
Electrochemistry for sustainable fuels
As sustainable energy sources become more ubiquitous, the issue of intermittency becomes larger.
Renewable energy sources such as wind and solar are inherently intermittent; the wind does not
blow constantly and the sun does not always shine. An example of the case for wind power can
be seen in ﬁg. 1.4. Here, it can be seen that production does not always match the demand, since
wind power relies on windy weather. A traditional coal power plant can balance its production to
the demand, whereas this is not possible with intermittent sources. Excess power must be exported,
often at a low or negative price.
One way of alleviating these issues is utilizing energy storage for load balancing. Two widely used
methods are battery storage and using pumped-storage hydroelectricity1 [13]. Batteries are made
using rare-earth materials, and therefore are not sustainable. Another method of energy storage is
converting the electrical energy to chemical energy as chemicals that can be used as fuels or in a
fuel cell. In other words, chemicals could be made using electricity. Additionally, this could push
the transportation towards sustainability, especially in larger vehicles (heavy-duty cars, aviation
etc.) where direct electriﬁcation is more challenging due to limits of battery technology. Producing
fuels for these vehicles using electrochemistry would circumvent this issue, while still providing
a sustainable alternative to fossil fuels. In 2010, the electricity sector accounted for 12% of global
energy demand, the transportation industry accounted for 19%, and the chemical industry accounted
for 8% [14].
Figure 1.4: The Danish energy demand (red), wind power production (green) and the double wind
power production (greyish blue) This data was over a two-week period in may 2015. From [15].
An energy framework for the sustainable production of important chemicals and fuels, that can
compliment or replace current energy conversion methods, by Seh et al. [16] is outlined in ﬁg. 1.5.
1Storing potential energy by pumping water up into a reservoir at higher altitude, then running the water through
a turbine
Page 4 of 60
==PAGE:12==
Using electrochemistry, commonly used chemicals and fuels can be produced sustainably. Examples
include ammonia (NH3) for e.g. agriculture, hydrocarbons for the chemical industry or fuels, and
hydrogen for e.g. fuel cells. In order to realize this framework, the eﬃciency of the electrochemical
conversion of N2, CO2 and H2O must be improved. One of the emerging conversions is the CO2
reduction reaction, the process of reducing carbon dioxide to e.g. carbon monoxide (CO), formate
(CHOO–) and hydrocarbons such as methane CH4, ethylene (C2H4), among others. These chemicals
are useful for both fuels and feedstock.
Figure 1.5: A framework for sustainable production of important chemicals and fuels, using sus-
tainable energy. Using electrochemistry, fossil fuels can be replaced while still utilizing the same
chemicals and fuels. Figure from [16].
1.2.1
Copper as a catalyst
One widely studied catalyst for CO2 reduction is copper. A catalyst is a substance that increases the
rate of a chemical reaction without itself being consumed in the process. A schematic of some of the
possible products using copper catalysts is found in ﬁg. 1.6. Having many diﬀerent intermediates,
selectivity is a challenge in CO2 reduction [16–19]. However, copper is the only metal catalyst that
produces large amounts of hydrocarbons [20]. Kuhl et. al [17] studied CO2 reduction and found 16
diﬀerent products by varying the potential. The number of electrons required for these reactions
varied from 2 (formate) to 18 (1-Propanol). The product of the chemical reaction also depends on
Page 5 of 60
==PAGE:13==
electrolyte. In work by Hori et al. [18], it was found that CH4 is favorably produced in high con-
centrations of KHCO3 electrolyte, whereas C2H4 and C2H5OH are produced in low concentrations.
In a separate paper by Hori et al. [19], they found that formation of alcohols is preferred in KCl,
K2SO4, KClO4 and dilute HCO –
3 electrolytes. Another strategy for electrochemically synthesizing
fuels is to reduce CO2 to CO, and then further reduce CO into hydrocarbons or oxygenates [21].
Figure 1.6: Some possible products of CO2 reduction. The resulting chemicals are created using
electricity, which may come from sustainable sources. The protons may come from the electrolyte
in which the electrochemical process occurs.
In CO2 reduction on copper, CO is not only a possible product, but an important intermediate as
well [17, 22]. One of the reaction pathways when synthesizing hydrocarbons on copper involves CO
binding to the surface, and then combining with H+ on the surface before desorbing. The binding
energy of CO is often used as a descriptor for CO2 reduction [20, 23], since a catalyst binding CO too
weakly primarily will produce CO and a catalyst binding CO too strongly will poison the surface.
This follows Sabaltier’s principle [24], which states that the ideal catalyst lies somewhere in the
middle in terms of binding energy.
Temperature programmed desorption experiments on copper
By adsorbing CO on a copper surface and heating it, information about how CO binds on the sur-
face can be deduced, as stronger-binding sites will desorb at higher temperatures. This is called
temperature programmed desorption (TPD). The principles of TPD will be introduced in section
2.3.2. This allows, through some calculation, to ﬁnd the CO binding energy experimentally. TPD
also yields information about active sites, which when coupled with activity experiments could be
used as a ﬁngerprint for CO reduction by ﬁnding a link between the desorption spectra and the
activity during CO reduction. If a speciﬁc sample is found to posess enhanced activity, one may
deduce the active site by comparing the desorption spectra to that of reference samples, e.g. single
crystals with well-known sites.
Several studies have been published on CO-TPD on copper (using CO as the probe molecule), fo-
cusing on copper ﬁlms. Studies by Kokalj et al., Makino et al., Vollmer et al. and Bönicke et al.
[25–29] used CO-TPD on copper surfaces and determined that CO binds stronger to surface defects
than to the ﬂat surface. These defects are common in polycrystalline copper [27]. CO was found to
Page 6 of 60
==PAGE:14==
bind considerably stronger to steps than to the ﬂat surface as well as terraces. The exact desorption
temperature varies from study to study, but the diﬀerence between stepped site and terrace site
desorption temperature is in the range of 50 K.
In Kirstein et al. [29], desorption peaks at 130 K, 145 K, 170 K were found for Cu(111), measured
at 0.7 K/s. The spectrum can be found in ﬁg. 1.7. Bönicke et al. [28] found desorptions at 145 K
(terraces), 170 K (terraces) and 224 K (steps) for Cu(332), using 1.5 K/s heating rate. The spectrum
is in ﬁg. 1.8. As such, a copper surface with many steps will bond CO stronger than one with no
steps, as evidenced by a higher desorption temperature.
Figure 1.7: TPD spectrum of pure Cu(111) at satuation coverage. Adsorption temperature was 105
K, rate was 0.7 K/s. From Kirstein et al. [29].
Page 7 of 60
==PAGE:15==
Figure 1.8: TPD spectrum of pure Cu(332) at satuation coverage. Adsorption temperature was
107K, rate was 1.5 K/s. From Bönicke et al. [28].
Enhanced activity for CO reduction was correlated to the CO-TPD spectra by Verdaguer-Casadevall
et al. [21] using oxygen-derived nanostructured copper. CO-TPD revealed that there were strong-
binding sites at considarably higher desorption temperatures than those found in polycrystalline
copper, and proposed that the enhanced activity correlated with the many grain boundaries present
in the nanostructured copper. A broad, high-temperature desorption peak was observed at 275 K,
with low temperature features between 100 K and 200 K. The spectra measured for polycrystalline
copper and an oxygen-derived copper sample can be seen in ﬁg. 1.9.
Figure 1.9: TPD spectra for (a) polycrystalline copper and (b) oxygen-derived copper at satuation
coverage. From Verdaguer-Casadevall et al. [21].
There are several studies on CO-TPD on nanoparticles that have been published, but it was not
possible to ﬁnd any publications pertaining CO-TPD on copper nanoparticles.
Page 8 of 60
==PAGE:16==
1.3
Small entities for heterogeneous catalysis
Catalysis of a chemical reaction is a surface process. Therefore, increasing the active surface area will
increase the activity of the catalyst. The surface-area-to-volume ratio describes how much available
surface area an object will have per volume, and is given as:
S
V ∝r−1
(1.1)
where S is the surface area, V is the volume and r is the shape’s characteristic length (side length
or radius).
Figure 1.10: Wulﬀconstruction of a copper nanoparticle of 4000 atoms. Figure made by Alexander
Bagger, from [30].
Thus, by decreasing the size of a nanoparticle, the amount of surface per volume will increase. This
allows for higher catalytic activity with the same amount of material. This is especially useful for
scarce and/or expensive materials, such as platinum for use in fuel cells and electrolyzers. Using
material more eﬃciently allows for scalability which could prove signiﬁcant in solving the energy
challenge. Scarcity and price of the materials for use in catalytic terawatt-scale conversion are sig-
niﬁcant factors in solving this challenge [31].
Another eﬀect of small entities is that amount of undercoordinated sites goes up. Undercoordinated
sites are sites that have few neighbors, such as steps and kinks. Fig. 1.10 displays a Wulﬀ-constructed
nanoparticle, where steps and kinks are color-coded. The Wulﬀ-construction is built on principle
that a nanoparticle always seeks the most thermodynamically stable conﬁguration, the one mini-
mizing the free energy. It assumes that the distance from the surface to the center of a crystallite is
proportional to the surface energy. The density of undercoordinated sites increases with decreasing
particle size, since the particles will contain too few atoms to form lower surface energy structures
[30]. More undercoordinated sites results in less overlap between the atomic orbitals, which in turn
results in stronger bonding [24]. This is one of the main beneﬁts for making nanoparticle catalysts.
Using TPD, it can be measured whether any of these sites have higher binding energies.
Page 9 of 60
==PAGE:17==
As the nanoparticles become smaller they approach the cluster regime, where they have countable
number of atoms. Clusters and very small nanoparticles are expected to display molecular-like be-
havior, as they will have discrete energy levels rather than bands. This is a consequence of Pauli’s
exclusion principle, where no two electrons in a molecule may have the same quantum number [32].
This leads to energy band formation by splitting molecular orbitals. Hence, fewer atoms means less
splitting occurs, resulting in molecule-like discrete energy levels [24].
Small metal entities have a strong tendency to sinter in order to minimize surface energy. Raising
the temperature, as is done in thermal catalysis, will make this tendency even stronger.
Thus,
commercial catalysts utilizing nanoparticles will use a support material. The commercial support
materials are inert, so it will not chemically interact with the catalyst, and porous to maximize
active surface area. A support material can help prevent sintering by reducing the nanoparticle
mobility. Throughout this project, a ﬂat, non-porous glassy carbon support was used. This material
is used for electrochemical testing, since it is relatively inert in the often non-neutral pH reaction
conditions, and is electrically conductive. It does not, however, signiﬁcantly reduce sintering.
1.4
Project context and goals
To facilitate the electrochemical production of widely used chemicals and fuels, better catalysts are
required. Thus, the main goal of this project is to advance catalysis research.
In this project, a ultra-high vacuum (UHV) setup for synthesis and surface characterization of model
systems for catalysis research was used. This system allows deposition and characterization of small
entities of well-deﬁned and controllable sizes without exposure to air, and thus with minimal con-
tamination. This allows a pathway to discovering the active sites that are required for improved
catalysts, since bespoke small entity sizes may be optimized. The focus of this project was to create
copper nanoparticle model systems and investigate CO desorption on them in search of stronger-
binding sites, as they were previously correlated to enhanced activity.
A characterization method of speciﬁc interest was TPD, which was used to measure CO desorption
from deposited copper nanoparticles. TPD provides a measure of adsorbate binding energy, which
can then be correlated to activity. Since the TPD implementation on this setup is still in develop-
ment, another goal of this project was testing the system, developing procedures and modifying the
instrumentation in order to improve the operation.
Page 10 of 60
==PAGE:18==
2 | Experimental setup
In this chapter, the setup used throughout the project will be described, and essential concepts per-
taining to the synthesis of clusters and nanoparticles will be introduced. Then, the characterization
methods used for the fabricated samples will be discussed.
2.1
Cluster source setup
The ultra-high vacuum (UHV) setup used throughout the duration of this project is known as the
"Omicron" cluster source setup. It consists of a cluster source system, Nanobeam 2011, Birming-
ham Instruments, a characterization system Multiscan Lab XP, Scienta Omicron GmbH. These two
systems coupled together enable synthesis and characterization of samples without atmospheric ex-
posure, ensuring cleanliness. The small entities are created and mass-selected in the Nanobeam 2011
system, and are deposited in the preperation chamber, a part of the Scienta Omicron Multiscan Lab
XP system. The samples can be transferred into the analysis chamber (Multiscan Lab XP), where
a variety of characterization methods can be performed: X-ray photoleectron spectroscopy (XPS),
auger electron spectroscopy (AES), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), low-energy ion scattering
spectroscopy (LEIS/ISS), and scanning tunneling microscopy (STM). Furthermore, attached to the
preparation chamber is a temperature programmed desorption chamber, adding to the characteri-
zation capabilities. The temperature programmed desorption chamber was designed by Jakob Ejler
Sørensen as a part of his master thesis [33]. Pictures of the setup can be seen in ﬁg. 2.1.
Page 11 of 60
==PAGE:19==
(a) The analysis chamber (Multiscan Lab XP, Scienta Omicron GmbH) (left) and the chamber for temper-
ature programmed desorption (TPD) (right).
(b) The Nanobeam 2011 cluster source and preparation chamber.
Figure 2.1: The Omicron setup consists of the analysis chamber (a), TPD chamber (a), preperation
chamber (b), the cluster source (b) and everything connecting them.
2.1.1
Nanobeam 2011 cluster source
The small mass-selected entities (clusters, nanoparticles or single atoms) are created and mass-
ﬁltered in the Nanobeam 2011 cluster source. The entities are formed in the sputter-aggregation
chamber, where they are ﬁrst sputtered from the target (sec. 2.2.1) and allowed to aggregate (sec.
2.2.2). They then exit the chamber through the exit aperture and enter the skimmer, a metal nozzle
with a potential that selects only the central part of the beam. The particle beam is accelerated and
focused in the lens system, and is then ﬁltered in the time-of-ﬂight mass ﬁlter (ToF-MF, sec. 2.2.4).
They then exit through the ToF-MF exit aperture and enter the preparation chamber, where they
are deposited on the sample.
Page 12 of 60
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.2: The Nanobeam 2011 cluster source. After the mass ﬁlter, the particles enter the prepa-
ration chamber. From [34].
2.2
Concepts pertaining the synthesis of small entities
In the following sections, some concepts concerning the formation of small entities will be discussed.
The concepts introduced are general, but the instrumentation and procedures are speciﬁc to the
Omicron setup.
2.2.1
DC magnetron sputtering
The atoms that constitute the small entities are sputtered from a target material using DC magnetron
sputtering. A ﬁgure showing a magnetron sputter head can be seen in ﬁg. 2.3. A sputter target is
placed within a magnetron sputter head. The sputter head has a backplate with strong permanent
magnets placed such that a circular magnetic ﬁeld is generated. The target is placed such that it is
located in front of the magnets. The magnetic ﬁeld serves to conﬁne the circular plasma containing
argon ions and electrons. Typically, argon is the plasma-generating gas. The argon gas is ionized by
the conﬁned electrons, and due to a DC bias applied to the target, argon ions are accelerated towards
the target surface where they collide, releasing target atoms. This process is known as sputtering.
Some of the sputtered atoms can aggregate into small entities. However, some re-deposition also
occurs on the target as well as the chamber walls. The sputtering process causes the target to erode
over time, and due to the circular plasma, a circular "race track" is formed in the target [35].
Page 13 of 60
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.3: A magnetron sputter head. Argon gas is ionized by conﬁned electrons in a circular
magnetic ﬁeld, leading to a circular plasma. The argon ions are accelerated towards the target,
where they sputter the surface. Figure from [35]
2.2.2
Gas aggregation
After being sputtered, the target atoms can agglomerate into small entities. This happens in the
sputter-aggregation chamber, the chamber the magnetron sputter head is located inside of. The
chamber walls are cooled using liquid nitrogen. A ﬁgure showing the aggregation zone can be found
in ﬁg. 2.5. A noble gas, usually helium, is added to the chamber which aids heat transfer as well
as functioning as a third body in three-body collisions. Since helium is much lighter than argon,
it does not increase sputtering rate signiﬁcantly, allowing decoupling of temperature distribution
and sputter rate [30]. First, two sputtered atoms agglomerate together, forming a dimer. Dimer
formation is only facilitated when a third body is present due to conservation of momentum and
energy [36]. The three-body growing mechanism can be described as:
M + M + No
M2 + No
(2.1)
Where M is the sputtered metal atom and No is the noble gas. The formed metal dimer can now
grow by atom-addition or cluster-cluster growth. A ﬁgure displaying this phenomenon can be found
in ﬁg. 2.4. Agglomoration occurs as a combination between atom-addition and cluster-cluster growth
[30]. There is a large pressure diﬀerence between the aggregation zone (0.01 - 1 mbar), and the lens
system (10−4 mbar), the next chamber the particles move to. This pressure diﬀerence causes a gas
ﬂow to form through an adjustable exit aperture and through the skimmer. This pressure diﬀerence
Page 14 of 60
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.4: Two metal atoms (M) collide with a third body, here a noble gas (No), to form a dimer.
The momentum is transferred to the noble gas atom, making the formation of the metal dimer
possible.
causes the particles to undergo supersonic expansion, ending the aggregation process. The small
entities with a charge can then be accelerated to 500 eV and focused through a lens system. Previous
observations show that large particles have a stronger tendency to be negatively charged, whereas
small particles tend to be positively charged [30, 37].
Figure 2.5: The aggregation zone.
Sputtered metal atoms aggregate using noble gasses helium
and argon, forming clusters and/or nanoparticles. The formed entities exit through the skimmer,
undergoing supersonic expansion. Figure courtesy of Jakob Ejler Sørensen [33].
2.2.3
Mass distribution of aggregated entities
The cluster source conditions aﬀect the mass distribution of the aggregated entities. Several param-
eters can be changed to aﬀect the distribution and current; aggregation zone length, ﬂow rate of He
and Ar, exit aperture size, sputter power, temperature and lens potentials. This is done before every
deposition, as the mass distribution should be centered around the desired mass in order to maximize
deposited current after mass-selection. There is a complex relationship between sputter-aggregation
chamber conditions that has an impact on the distribution, and no systematic study has been done
Page 15 of 60
==PAGE:23==
on the inﬂuence of these conditions so far on the Nanobeam 2011.
Furthermore, mass distribution changes over time have been observed even though no tuneable pa-
rameters were changed. The sputter-aggregation chamber is cooled using liquid nitrogen, and since
reaching thermal equilibrium and an even temperature distribution takes many hours, it is often not
achieved. This is proposed as a reason for this drift over time, which can also be observed during a
deposition. To avoid this, the sputter-aggregation chamber is kept at the minimum temperature for
at least 2 hours before deposition. Another reason proposed for the drifting distribution over time,
is the erosion of the target as it is sputtered which changes the target geometry.
Much experience has been accumulated by the many users of the system, and this experience can
be used when tuning the system parameters. A paradigm for tuning the size distribution is that the
entities grow over time, and thus longer time in the sputter-aggregation zone yields larger particles.
The reverse is also true - shorter time in the sputter-aggregation zone yields smaller particles. Below
are a few tunable parameters and how the paradigm explains how it aﬀects the entities’ mass, if all
other conditions remain unchanged.
• Decreasing aggregation zone length: Shorter time in aggregation chamber, leading to smaller
particles. Increases pressure.
• Increasing size of the exit aperture: Particles have shorter time in the aggregation zone, leading
to smaller particles. Decreases pressure.
• Increasing the magnetron power: Higher particle ﬂux.
These parameters are interlinked in a complex manner, and as such, these guidelines should be
considered rule of thumb. Higher pressure may for instance be achieved using a combination of
increased He and/or Ar ﬂow, adjusting the size of the exit aperture, or changing the aggregation
zone length. Higher pressure will decrease the time spent in the sputter-aggregation chamber, so
it usually has the eﬀect of shifting the mass distribution towards higher masses. If a shifted mass
distribution is not desired but an increased gas ﬂow results in a higher deposited current, the exit
aperture may for instance be increased to lower the pressure and avoid the mass distribution shift.
The temperature cannot easily be controlled beyond either fully cooled or room temperature. Higher
temperature causes particles to move faster and spend less time in the sputter-aggregation chamber,
making this ideal for making single atoms. For all nanoparticles however, cooling is applied. The
mass distribution can be determined before deposition by measuring the current for a given ﬁltered
mass, and thus constructing a mass spectrum. The above parameters and the lens system may be
tuned for the desired mass distribution and current.
2.2.4
Time of Flight Mass Filtering
When the generated entities leave the aggregation zone, a portion of them are electrically charged.
The charged particles may be focused and accelerated through the electronic lens system, and can
be guided into the lateral time of ﬂight mass ﬁltering (ToF-MF) system. An electric ﬁeld E can be
Page 16 of 60
==PAGE:24==
applied to the particles with charge z and mass m, which will result in an acceleration a:
a = zE
m
(2.2)
From this relation, it can be seen that the acceleration applied will depend on the mass-to-charge
ratio ( m
z ) rather than the mass only, as Nm
NZ = m
Z , where N is any integer number. In practice, only
double-mass double-charge particles are an issue since the mass distribution can be tuned such that
is relatively narrow, and higher order mass-to-charge ratios may be disregarded.
The ToF-MF consists of a series of plates that can create electric ﬁelds by having high voltage applied
to them. For a schematic representation, see ﬁg. 2.6. The particles are moving horizontally when
entering the ToF-MF. The ﬁeld is applied laterally by the bottom plate, applying an acceleration
to each particle.
After a short time delay, an identical but opposite ﬁeld is applied on the top
plate. The frequency of the pulses applied to the plates determine the selected masses. This sorts
the particles by mass-to-charge ratio, since bigger mass-to-charge ratio particles will move a smaller
lateral distance compared to smaller mass-to-charge ratio particles before being decelerated by the
pulse in the top plate. The mass-to-charge sorted particles are ﬁnally ﬁltered using an exit aperture.
This means there will be a narrow distribution of masses. The ﬁnal mass resolution is determined
by the ToF-MF exit aperture, and follows the relation:
m
∆m = [20, 50]
(2.3)
Where m is the entity mass, and ∆m is the uncertainty.
The above interval denotes the mass
resolution for the maximum to the minimum exit aperture diameter, respectively. Setting the exit
aperture to the largest diameter increase particle size uncertainty, but will yield higher particle ﬂux.
The ToF-MF is typically run at its largest diameter, making the ratio m/∆m = 20.
Figure 2.6: The time of ﬂight mass ﬁlter. The focused and accelerated particle beam is ﬁltered by
applying pulses to the bottom plate and top plate with a time delay between. This sorts the particles
according to their mass-to-charge ratio. The mass-to-charge sorted particles are then ﬁltered through
the exit aperture. Figure from [33].
Page 17 of 60
==PAGE:25==
2.2.5
Deposition and soft landing
When the small entities leave the ToF-MF, they are still accelerated to 500 V. This acceleration
originates from the lens system. After exiting the ToF-MF, the entities are deposited on a sub-
strate after travelling through a ﬁnal aperture (d = 4.5 mm). The number of deposited entities can
be measured by measuring the current on the sample using an electrometer. By applying bias to
the sample and aperture, the entities can be attracted towards sample and have their kinetic en-
ergy lowered. The sample bias can be applied by applying a potential to the stage, and the aperture
bias is achieved by applying a potential to the ﬂag (the metal plate on which the aperture is located).
At 500 V, the entities are travelling with high kinetic energy. When they impact the substrate
surface there is a possibility that the particles will fragment, become implanted in the substrate
bulk instead of being deposited on the surface, or sputter the surface [38]. By lowering the kinetic
energy to below the cohesive energy of the constituent particle atoms, the entities are said to be in
the soft-landing regime. This ensures that they are safely deposited. A rule of thumb is to keep
the kinetic energy lower than 1 eV per atom [30], meaning that smaller entities require smaller
biases on the sample and ﬂag, and bigger entities can use larger biases. The applied bias will lower
the impinging entity kinetic energy, by eﬀectively braking it. Because smaller nanoparticles and
clusters have fewer constituent particles, the bias must be smaller in order to lower the kinetic
energy suﬃciently for fragmentation not to occur. The sputtering of the surface depends on the
kinetic energy and the current, but is generally not considered when depositing. For this project,
nanoparticles of size on the order of nanometers was studied. This means the nanoparticles are built
from thousands of atoms, so a potential of 48 V will ensure soft landing. This potiential is created
by connecting four 12 V batteries in series, and since no current is drawn from them, this is an ideal
source of potential.
Figure 2.7: Left: Hard-landing nanoparticle, fragmented and partially implanted into the sample.
Right: Soft-landing nanoparticle, safely deposited on the surface. Figure adapted from [38].
2.2.6
Depositing nanoparticles on the Omicron setup
Depositing the nanoparticles on a substrate requires copious amounts of handling of the sample
inside the chamber. In this section, a rough outline of the deposition procedure is given, without
Page 18 of 60
==PAGE:26==
the many small steps involved in handling the sample.
Before depositing on a sample, the sample must be cleaned. This is done using argon sputtering,
where argon is ionized and accelerated towards the substrate surface. Argon is dosed until a prepa-
ration chamber pressure of 1.0×10−6 mbar pressure is reached. The sample is sputtered at a current
of 1-2 µA for 30 minutes.
The cluster source sputter-aggregation chamber is cooled using liquid nitrogen, and after reaching
its minimum temperature, it is kept there for two hours in order to reach approximate thermal
equilibrium. This ensures that the deposited mass distribution does not shift while depositing. The
helium and argon ﬂows are opened, the lens sysem power supply is turned on, and after ﬂows have
stabilized, the magnetron is turned on. Then, a mass scan can be performed, and tuning is per-
formed following the principles outlined in sec. 2.2.3.
When the desired mass distribution and particle current is achieved, the deposition may commence.
In the Omicron system, if required, the sample may be raster scanned by movement of the motorized
sample manipulator. The pattern is customizable such that an area of a desired size will have a
relatively uniform small entity deposition. The measured current mainly comes from single-charged
entities, which means that one nanoparticle is measured as one elementary charge. By integrating
the deposition current over time, and subtracting the leak current (the current which is measured
with no deposition), the area can be calculated using the spherical approximation. The radius of the
entity is calculated using the relation:
ρ = m
V , V = 4
3πr3
(2.4)
Where ρ is the density of the material, m is the mass of the deposited entity, and V is the volume
occupied by it. The entity is assumed to be a sphere. Finding the radius of the entity, and using
the relation
Apc = 4πr2
(2.5)
The projected area, Apc is found and coverage is calculated by dividing with the deposited area.
When the desired coverage is reached, the deposition is ﬁnished.
2.3
Characterization methods
In the following sections, the characterization methods used throughout this project and the concepts
behind them are introduced. As catalysis is a surface phenomenon, the characterization methods
employed during this project were surface-sensitive.
2.3.1
Low-energy ion scattering spectroscopy
Low-energy ion scattering spectroscopy (ISS), measures the energy of surface scattered noble gas
ions. A noble gas ion is ionized using an ion gun and is accelerated towards the surface. When
Page 19 of 60
==PAGE:27==
it impacts on the surface of the sample, it is backscattered by undergoing elastic collision, losing
energy to the surface atom. Energy and momentum are conserved, leading to the relation:
E1 = E0


q
M 2s −M 2
i sin2 θ + Mi cos θ
Ms + Mi


2
(2.6)
where E0 and E1 is the incoming and outgoing ion energy respectively, Mi and Ms are the incident
ion and surface atom masses respectively, and θ is the scattering angle.
Eq. 2.6 assumes that all scattering events are elastic. However, inelastic scattering does occur, and
this shifts the spectrum slightly to lower kinetic energies. A schematic representation of ISS can be
found in ﬁg. 2.8. The only unknown term is the surface mass, and as such, it can be calculated.
This allows determination of surface atom masses, which can then be translated into an element.
ISS is an extremely surface sensitive technique, since ions that penetrate the surface are neutralized.
Therefore, essentially only the top layer of the surface is probed.
Figure 2.8: ISS working principle. An accelerated noble gas ion of energy E0 and mass Mi scatters
oﬀthe surface atom of mass Ms. The ion at angle θ is measured in an energy analyzer.
The resolution of the measured energy depends on the incident ion mass. If eq. 2.6 is plotted using
various noble gas masses, the resolution be better understood, see ﬁg. 2.9. Looking at the heavier
surface masses, it can be seen that 5d metals yield poor resolution if probed with He, the lightest
noble gas. Here using a heavier ion such as Ar would be more appropriate, as it would yield better
resolution. It can also be seen that heavier atoms cannot probe lighter elements. This is due to
backscattering only occuring if the surface atom is heavier than the incident ion mass. If the ion
is heavier than the surface atom (Mi > Ms), forward scattering occurs (e.g. force is dispersed in
the sample) and the ion does not reach the detector. Using helium as the incident ion, the second-
lightest element after hydrogen, most elements can be detected.
ISS is a destructive technique owing to the surface being sputtered by the incident ions. Heavier
atoms carry more momentum, leading to increased sputtering [24, 39]. The choice of the noble gas
used for ISS is therefore a balance between mass resolution and sputtering. In the Omicron system,
Page 20 of 60
==PAGE:28==
Figure 2.9: The resolution of ISS using He, Ne and Ar. At higher surface masses, resolution is poor
using He, but using heavier ions increases sputter damage of the surface. From [33].
only helium is used as the ISS scattering ion. The amount of ions measured will result in an amount
of counts observed in the energy analyzer, which will be proportional to the surface concentration.
The obtained data cannot be used quantitatively, but gives qualitative indication of the elements
present and their concentration.
ISS is used to measure sample cleanliness. Most samples that have been exposed to atmospheric air
have a layer of adventitious carbon on them. For some materials, oxidation also occurs. Adventitious
carbon is a thin layer of carbon-containing material, and as such is a surface contaminant that must
be cleaned. Adventitious carbon is not detected directly using ISS, as carbon is often not detected1.
Adventitious carbon also contains hydrogen-terminated hydrocarbons, which becomes undetectable
due to the hydrogen [39]. However, a large low-energy background signal is observed in samples
before they are cleaned, so a large decrease in this signal is used as a measure of sample cleanliness.
If there is a very low signal from contaminants, and the low-energy background is low, the sample
is accepted as clean.
Performing low-energy ion scattering spectroscopy
Low-energy ion scattering spectroscopy (ISS) measurements are performed inside the analysis cham-
ber. The sample is placed onto the stage, which is tilted such that the scattering angle is 146.7°.
Using a peephole in the energy analyzer, the sample is aligned such that the area of interest, usually
where the sniﬀer will probe when performing TPD, will be measured using ISS. Helium is dosed into
1It has been observed that highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) samples only show a small carbon signal,
even though they consist of pure carbon
Page 21 of 60
==PAGE:29==
the chamber. An ion gun ionizes and accelerates the He to 1000 eV at a current of 1.0 mA (0.4 mA
for high coverage samples in order to protect the detector). The control box can redirect the beam
such that it scans over an area on the surface. For standard ISS measurements, this area is 1 mm
x 1 mm. The energy analyzer will scan over a broad range of kinetic energies, recording the counts
for a given energy. This data is used to construct the spectrum. The peak energies can then be
translated into a peak mass using eq. 2.6, and the counts will be proportional to their concentration.
2.3.2
Temperature programmed desorption
A catalytic cycle can be divided into three phases; bonding, reaction and separation. Desorption is
the separation of an adsorbed species, and is the last step in a catalytic cycle. As such, characterizing
the desorption of an adsorbate can yield information about mechanisms of catalysis. In temperature
programmed desorption (TPD), a gas is dosed on a sample at appropriate temperatures. This makes
the gas able to bind to the surface, becoming the adsorbate. Because most adsorbates require low
temperatures, liquid nitrogen is often used to cool the sample.
Then, the sample is heated linearly with respect to time. When the desorption energy is reached,
the gas will desorb from the surface. If the pumping rate is suﬃcient, it can be assumed that there
is no readsorption. Some of the desorbed gas will be collected through the sniﬀer, a hollow copper
tube with a tapered tip that allows gas collection with minimal background, and will be measured
by the mass spectrometer. Here, the current of the desorbed gas’ mass can be monitored, and the
desorption temperature can be recorded. The mass spectrometer is usually, and in this setup, a
quadropole mass spectrometer (QMS). For a schematic of the employed TPD setup, see ﬁg. 2.10.
Figure 2.10: An example of a TPD setup. The sample sits atop a LN2 cooled cooling block and is
heated using a ﬁlament. Left: The gas is dosed into the chamber through the doser, and the gas
adsorbs on the sample surface. Right: When heated, the gas desorbs, and is collected through the
sniﬀer to the mass spectrometer while temperature is also recorded.
The TPD setup used throughout this project is pictured in ﬁg. 2.11. It consists of a large copper
Page 22 of 60
==PAGE:30==
cooling block, a sniﬀer and thermocouple contacts. The ﬁlament is mounted in recess in the cooling
block, and has a potential of 2 kV. A Mo foil "cup" and "box", as can be seen from 2.11b encompass
the ﬁlament and is also at the 2 kV potential, further directing the electrons upwards through
repulsion. This serves to increase heating from electron bombardment. The sample slides into the
cooling block, and metal pins on the sample holder contact the thermocouple contacts, which enables
temperature readout from the sample surface.
(a) Inside the TPD chamber while a sample is
mounted.
(b) A top view without a mounted sample.
Figure 2.11: The TPD chamber used throughout this project. In (a) a side view of the chamber
while a sample is mounted can be seen, while in (b) a top view without the sniﬀer mounted can be
seen.
The sample holder and cooling block are made of copper due to the high thermal conductivity of
the metal. Any signal from these components can be minimized by approaching the sniﬀer, see sec.
2.3.2. The sample holder is pictured in ﬁg. 2.12. The sample sits in a recess in the copper bottom
plate, which there later was made a hole cutout modiﬁcation to, for improved electron bombardment
directly to the sample, see ﬁg. 2.12. The top plate, made of molybdenum, has a K-type thermocouple
tucked underneath the plate, which contacts the sample surface.
Page 23 of 60
==PAGE:31==
(a) A glassy carbon substrate mounted in the assembled TPD holder.
(b) Cu bottom plate.
(c) Cu bottom plate after
the hole cutout modiﬁcation.
(d) Mo top plate (bottom view)
with thermocouple marked.
Figure 2.12: The TPD sample holder. The sample is mounted and the thermocouple is contacted
with the surface. The holder slides onto the cooling block, where the thermocouple is contacted.
The relative rate of desorption, which is deﬁned as the change in adsorbate coverage over time, can
be described using the Polanyi–Wigner rate expression [24]:
r = −dθ
dt = ν(θ)θne−
Edes(θ)
RT
,
T = T0 + αt
(2.7)
where r is the desorption rate, θ is the adsorbate coverage in monolayers, t is the time, ν is a pre-
exponential factor, n is the adsorption order, Edes is the desorption energy, R is the gas constant,
T is the temperature, and α is the heating rate. Typically, the pre-exponential factor is assumed
to be ν = 1013 Hz [21, 24, 26, 27]. Due to interactions between adsorbed molecules, the desorption
will have a coverage dependence. This dependence can be estimated to the ﬁrst order, described
as Edes = a −bθ [21]. This allows equation 2.7 to be solved, enabling the determination of the
desorption energy from TPD experiments.
The desorption order n is governed by the desorption kinetics. The desorption orders are character-
ized by:
• Zeroth order: Rate does not depend on coverage. There is a shift towards higher tempera-
tures at higher adsorbate coverages.
• First order: No disassociation. No shift in temperature at higher adsorbate coverages.
• Second order: Recombinative desorption. There is a shift towards lower temperatures at
higher adsorbate coverages.
Page 24 of 60
==PAGE:32==
CO desorption on copper is ﬁrst-order desorption [21], so here, n=1.
When measuring TPD spectra, there will often be more than one peak. This is due to diﬀerences in
binding energy between the various types of sites. Having multiple peaks yields information about
the sites present on the surface of a sample, and using eq. 2.7, the energy of such sites can be found.
The peak intensity and position depends on the heating rate. Throughout this project, 0.5 K/s
was the target heating rate, which will yield lower signal and result in a peak shift towards higher
temperatures[40], compared to higher heating rates.
Proportional-integral-derivative control for linear heating
When heating the sample for temperature programmed desorption (TPD), linear heating is required.
This is achieved using proportional-integral-derivative (PID) control. PID control uses a feedback
loop, which means it continuously and dynamically corrects the output to follow a setpoint. This
setpoint is in this case the linear heating proﬁle.
The PID algorithm calculates the output, in
this case the current, using an error value, E(t). This value is the diﬀerence between the setpoint
temperature, TSP (t) and current temperature, T(t), such that E(t) = TSP (t)−T(t). Mathematically,
the PID control can be described as:
I(t) = PE(t) + I
Z t
0
E(t′)dt′ + DdE(t)
dt
(2.8)
Where I(t), is the output current, P is the proportional coeﬃcient, I is the integral coeﬃcient, D
is the diﬀerential coeﬃcient, t is the time and E(t) is the error function. The voltage can be elim-
inated as a variable if the power supply is running current-limited, which it is on the employed setup.
The proportional term will change the output proportionally in relation to the error function. Only
using the proportional term will lead to steady-state error, a constant deviation from the setpoint.
Experience has shown that this alone is not enough for the employed system to heat linearly, so the
control algorithm also allows for the integral and diﬀerential terms. The integral term will increase
in size in relation to the time that the error has persisted, which can bring the system closer to the
setpoint and eliminate steady-state deviation from the setpoint. The diﬀerential term is proportional
to the change in the error. It functions as a stabilizing term in order to decrease any ﬂuctuations
around the setpoint that might occur.
The PID parameters are tuned in order to obtain a stable temperature control that adheres to
the linear temperature change that is required for TPD, while avoiding ﬂuctuations in temperature
around the setpoint. The correction that is applied to the error by eq. 2.8 can be seen as the damping
of an harmonic oscillator, as in ﬁg. 2.13. In this ﬁgure, the target response is a constant response of
1. Oscillation of constant amplitude around the setpoint corresponds to an undamped system. An
increasing amplitude corresponds to an undamped and unstable system. An underdamped system
will overshoot slightly before adhering to the setpoint. An overdamped system will slowly or never
reach the setpoint, while a critically damped system will reach the required setpoint in shortest
time possible. Because any oscillations will result in the same temperature being measured multiple
times at diﬀerent points in time, this should always be avoided when performing TPD. Therefore, the
Page 25 of 60
==PAGE:33==
PID parameters should be tuned such that a critically damped system is achieved. If the system is
overdamped, one or more parameters should be increased. If the system is undamped, underdamped
or unstable, one or more parameters are too large. The tuning procedure and results for this system
are discussed in sec. 3.1
0
2
4
0
1
2
3
4
5
Response (A.U.)
Time
Unstable
Undamped
Underdamped
Overdamped
Critically
damped
Figure 2.13: Diﬀerent amounts of damping and stability for the PID controller response, with a
constant target of 1. The ideal response of a PID controller will be critically damped.
Performing temperature programmed desorption experiments
The procedure for performing TPD experiements is as follows. The clean sample is placed in the
TPD chamber, and the cooling is applied to the sample. The ﬁlament is set to 1.8 A in order to keep
it warm, making the heating ramp more accurate, and preventing any adsorption on the ﬁlament
that might otherwise occur. Liquid nitrogen is employed to reach a sample temperature in the range
of -170 °C to -180 °C. This low temperature is required due to the low adsorption temperature of CO
on copper. Isotope-labeled CO-30 consisting of carbon-12 and oxygen-18, with a mass of 30 g/mol
was used for TPD experiments. Here, a rare oxygen isotope is used in order to make sure only the
dosed CO is measured. The mass of 28 g/mol, the mass of non-isotope labeled CO, is also the mass
of N2, the most abundant gas in Earth’s atmosphere, so erroneously measuring this is prevented by
using isotope-labeled CO.
When the low sample temperature is reached, CO-30 is dosed until a preparation chamber pressure
of 1.0 × 10−7 mbar is reached for 5 minutes. This ensures full coverage on the sample, as the dosage
is way above what is required, the dosage being 22.6 L. Then, the CO is quenched and argon is
dosed until a preparation chamber pressure of 1.0 × 10−6 mbar is reached. The mass spectrometer
current for mass 40 (argon) is monitored while the sniﬀer is approached to the sample. As the sniﬀer
approaches the sample surface, the argon signal decreases. Monitoring the argon signal instead of
looking at the sample while approaching allows the sniﬀer to be approached beyond what is easily
Page 26 of 60
==PAGE:34==
visible, as the sniﬀer appears to touch the sample when it is properly approached. The sniﬀer is
approached until the mass 40 current reaches a value 4.75 × 10−12 A. This results in a very low
background signal when performing experiments, see sec. 3.2. After approaching, the argon signal
is quenched.
In order to desorb the CO from the surface, the sample is heated. The linear heating rate required
for TPD is ensured using PID control. While the sample is heated linearly and the temperature is
recorded, the signal from the mass spectrometer is also recorded. This allows the current of a speciﬁc
species, in this case CO-30, to be plotted as a function of temperature. The current is measured as
a function of time, and this is correlated to a temperature, also measured as a function of time.
Page 27 of 60
==PAGE:35==
3 | Results and discussion
In this chapter, the experimental work done during this project is described and the results are
discussed. Work was done on ensuring proper heating of the sample, that the background was not
signiﬁcant, and that results were reproducible. Then, the eﬀects of varying coverage for 5 nm copper
nanoparticles and the size eﬀect of copper nanoparticles were investigated using TPD.
3.1
PID control tuning for TPD
As described in section 2.3.2, temperature programmed desorption (TPD) requires linear heating,
which is achieved using proportional-integral-derivative control (PID), see section 2.3.2. When the
project was started, the TPD chamber had been operational and had achieved preliminary results,
but the PID control algorithm had since been tweaked. Thus, PID tuning was necessary.
The PID tuning was done "manually", meaning it was performed by trial and error, but according
to the following method: First, the I and D parameters are set to zero. Then, the P parameter was
optimized by starting at a low value and gradually increasing until the response was suﬃciently fast
while also being stable. Then, the I value is optimized while keeping P at the previously optimized
value. Finally, the D value is optimized while keeping P and I at the optimized values. The param-
eters are optimized within a certain temperature window. The lower temperature is dependent on
the LN2 cooling on the substrate (around 95 K to 100 K), while the higher temperature can be set
to a desired value. For CO adsorption on copper, the temperature is ramped to 273 K (0 °C) to
avoid any potential sintering.
The goal of the PID tuning was to achieve a 0.5 K/s heating rate and for the heating ramp to
adhere well to a straight line. The PID tuning has to be performed for each substrate type used
for deposition, so the tuning for glassy carbon, silicon and copper substrates will be diﬀerent. This
is due to the diﬀerent thermal properties of the substrate materials, which eﬀectively changes the
system. Throughout this project, glassy carbon sheet substrates were used. The D-term was initially
used, but it resulted in noisy temperature ramps due to derivatives being sensitive to noise. This
noise originated from the fast temperature sample rate paired with the slightly noisy temperature
measurement. In the future, this may be alleviated by averaging the temperature data over several
measurements before feeding it to the D-term. Only averaging temperature data for the D-term will
allow the rest of the algorithm and the data acquisition to operate at an unchanged sampling rate,
while it will be lower for the D-term only.
Page 28 of 60
==PAGE:36==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
260
280
300
Temperature (K)
Time (s)
0.5 K/s
PI
Before
tuning
P only
PI
after cutout
-160
-140
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
Temperature (°C)
Figure 3.1: Before (red), after optimizing P (blue), after optimizing P and I (green) and after
optimizing P and I after the hole cutout modiﬁcation of the sample holder (magenta). The black
line corresponds to a 0.5 K/s heating rate. The dotted line is the target temperature of 273.15 K (0
°C).
Looking at ﬁg. 3.1, the results of tuning the P and I parameters are seen. In general, it can be
seen that there is a region in the very beginning of all heating proﬁles that is relatively ﬂat. This
is due to the algorithm taking time to ramp up the parameters until heating occurs. This occurs to
some degree on all PID controllers. This "rise time" is reduced by tuning the PI parameters and
pre-heating the ﬁlament to 1.8 A, but avoiding it entirely was not possible1.
The "before tuning", "P only" and "PI" lines in ﬁg. 3.1 were results of PI-tuning before the hole
cutout modiﬁcation was made, pictured in ﬁg. 2.12. The "before tuning" line represents a ﬁrst guess
on the PI-values from tuning on a silicon substrate. It can be seen that while it is fairly linear, the
slope is not large enough. Calculating the slope via. a linear ﬁt, results in 0.46 K/s. Furthermore,
some small oscillations due to a slightly too high P-parameter can be observed. These oscillations
are undesirable, as they will result in multiple values at the same temperature at diﬀerent points
in time. When the TPD spectrum is plotted, this results in mass spectrometer current values for
diﬀerent points in time being plotted for the same temperature value.
By setting the I-parameter to zero and only tuning P, the "P only" line was achieved. The small
oscillations are now gone, but the slope is slightly lower than before. Tuning the I-value brings the
slope closer to 0.5 K/s, as seen from the "PI" line. However, there is now a region where the slope
is larger than 0.5 K/s. This was deemed acceptable as the goal of the PI-tuning was to achieve
the correct slope at higher temperature, and ﬁnding desorption peaks at higher temperature was
1The heating proﬁles were never discussed beyond heating rate in any of the studied literature [21, 25–29], making
a comparison of the heating proﬁle to the literature impossible.
Page 29 of 60
==PAGE:37==
the goal of this project. However, this has the consequence that the ﬁrst peak has an increase in
intensity due to higher heating rate. After the hole cutout modiﬁcation, the resulting temperature
ramp can be seen from the "PI after cutout" line. The slope is brought closer to 0.5 K/s especially
at lower temperatures, and the rise time is decreased signiﬁcantly. The slope is still higher than 0.5
K/s at very low temperatures, but there is an improvement in this regard as well. Since this cutout
modiﬁcation was done later in the project, only results in sec. 3.6 used this. The results in 3.5 used
heating ramps similar to the "PI" line.
The main limiting factor for obtaining linear temperature ramps in this setup, is the way it is
constructed. The cooling block is a large thermal mass. This was an intentional design choice,
as cooling the sample to such low temperatures was a challenge when designing the TPD setup
[33]. Therefore, it requires signiﬁcant ﬁlament power to heat the sample, as the ﬁlament needs to
overcome the cooling from the block. The hole cutout modiﬁcation in the bottom of the sample
holder aﬀects the heating positively, since it allows direct heating from the ﬁlament of the sample
rather than relying on heat conduction through the copper sample holder. This especially enhances
electron bombardment, as there is now line-of-sight directly to the bottom of the substrate.
3.2
Background signal during TPD measurements
When performing TPD, the sniﬀer is moved close to the sample. This is done to reduce background
signal from anywhere but the area immediately beneath the sniﬀer. If the background signal is too
large, the resulting spectrum will be aﬀected by it, and background subtraction would be required.
In this experiment, the background signal when performing TPD measurements was tested at various
distances. The experimental procedure for TPD is the procedure as explained in sec. 2.3.2. A
sputter-cleaned silicon surface was used as the substrate, as it does not bind CO at the tested
temperatures. Cleanliness was ensured using ISS (see sec. 2.3.1 for procedure). CO is dosed before
approaching the sample. The distance is controlled by measuring the argon signal from the mass
spectrometer through the sniﬀer, so the mass 40 current is monitored.
As the sniﬀer-substrate
distance decreases, the M40 current decreases. The tested mass 40 currents were: 24.0 pA, 20.0 pA,
10.0 pA, 8.0 pA and 5.0 pA. The 24.0 pA current was constant from a sniﬀer-substrate distance of
> 5 cm until about 1 cm. Below this distance, the current decreases as the sniﬀer-substrate distance
decreases. Argon was used as the reference gas as it is chemically inert and can be dosed from
the preparation chamber. The same argon pressure (1.0 × 10−6 mbar) was dosed on every sniﬀer
approach.
3.2.1
ISS characterization
The ISS measurement of the silicon substrate can be found in ﬁg. 3.2. Oxygen, silicon and argon
were detected during this measurement. Silicon readily binds to oxygen, which would explain the
presence of both silicon and oxygen on the surface. The argon is likely a result of the sputtering.
No signiﬁcant amount of other materials was detected, so the surface can be considered as being
Page 30 of 60
==PAGE:38==
clean. This implies that any signal detected should not originate from the sample surface, but rather
elsewhere in the chamber.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
0
5
10
15
Intensity (kcps)
Energy (eV)
Si
Ar
O
Figure 3.2: ISS measurement for the silicon substrate used for background characterization.
3.2.2
TPD characterization
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
260
280
300
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
24.0 pA
20.0 pA
10.0 pA
 8.0 pA
 5.0 pA
M30 SEM current (pA)
Temperature (K)
-160
-140
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
Temperature (°C)
(a) The full TPD spectra for various sniﬀer-substrate distances.
100
110
120
130
140
150
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
24.0 pA
20.0 pA
10.0 pA
 8.0 pA
 5.0 pA
M30 SEM current (pA)
Temperature (K)
-170
-160
-150
-140
-130
Temperature (°C)
(b) Same as (a), but over a smaller
temperature range.
Figure 3.3: The M30 background signal at various M40 (argon) currents, where lower currents
correspond to smaller sniﬀer-sample distances. The colored text indicates the M40 current during
approach.
Page 31 of 60
==PAGE:39==
The results of the TPD experiments are shown in ﬁg. 3.3. As the M40 approach signal decreases,
so does the M30 background signal, as expected. The left-most peak (around 100 K) decreases in
magnitude from 0.56 pA M30 current (@ 24.0 pA M40 current), to 0.23 pA when at its smallest
tested sniﬀer-sample distance (@ 5.0 pA M40 current). In order to more clearly see the left-most
peaks at low temperature, the same data has been plotted over a smaller temperature range, as
seen in ﬁg. 3.3b. Two results at 24 pA (marked in red) are shown; the very ﬁrst measurement
after sputtering and the second measurement. The very ﬁrst measurement, marked in a dashed
line, has its largest peak where the largest shoulder of all subsequent measurements resides, at 115
K. This indicates a change in the surface that is desorbing the CO between ﬁrst and subsequent
measurements. This was later circumvented by ramping the current of the ﬁlament to 5.5 A before
measurements, heating the cooling block and ﬁlament before dosing CO. The dashed red line will
not be discussed further in this section.
Looking at ﬁg.
3.3b, there is a displacement of the 24.0 pA (solid red) largest peak compared
to the other measurements.
The largest peak occurs at 105 K, as opposed to the 102 K of all
subsequent measurements. The shape of this peak was nearly identical to measurements at lower
approach currents, even though the TPD spectrum starts at a higher temperature (103 K for this
measurement, around 101 K for all others). It would be expected that the peak shape and position
would be aﬀected by starting temperature, as the heating rate would be diﬀerent at the very lowest
temperatures. This does not occur, which indicates that the desorption of this background signal
is not dependent on the sample temperature. The TPD spectra are always plotted as a function of
the sample temperature, measured on top of the sample. This, and owing to the Si surface being
determined as clean, indicates that the desorption does not originate from the sample.
Some components in the chamber are in direct thermal contact with the sample; the cooling block
and the sample holder - both made out of copper. They would therefore also adsorb CO at low
temperatures, which could be the source of the background signal. The temperature of the block
and sample holder was not measured. The tungsten ﬁlament also has an unknown temperature and
could therefore also be the source of the CO-30 signal.
The background signal when performing TPD is measurable even at low distance (5.0 pA M40
current when approaching). When the background signal becomes smaller, this indicates that the
sniﬀer will receive the majority of CO from the sample surface rather than the background. It also
probes a smaller area of the sample, the area directly beneath it. However, there is a ﬁnite limit
to how close the sniﬀer can approach the sample surface, as the sniﬀer will eventually touch the
surface. This is potentially catastrophic as the sample might shatter, or in the best case, the sample
will be heated by the sniﬀer, desorbing the CO non-linearly in respect to temperature. The smallest
safe distance was determined at 4.75 pA, as it allows for some margin or error when approaching in
order to avoid crashing the sniﬀer. This distance was therefore used throughout the project.
In order to determine how signiﬁcant the measured background signal is to this project, the back-
ground can be compared to a measurement. Throughout this study, the lowest signals were measured
Page 32 of 60
==PAGE:40==
by depositing 5 nm copper nanoparticles at a coverage of 6% of a monolayer. Comparing this to the
background measured at 5.0 pA M40 current, as seen in ﬁg. 3.4, the position and the size of the
background suggests that it should not interfere signiﬁcantly with any data obtained in subsequent
sections. Overall, the background signal occurs in the very beginning of the TPD spectrum. This
means that higher temperature peaks will not be signiﬁcantly aﬀected by background signal, as the
background is minute after around 140 K. Therefore, no background subtraction will be performed
on the spectra throughout this project.
1 00
1 20
1 40
1 60
1 80
200
220
240
260
280
3 00
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
M3 0 SEM current (pA)
Temperature (K)
-1 80
-1 60
-1 40
-1 20
-1 00
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
Temperature (°C)
Backg round
@ 5.0 pA
6% ML, 5 nm
Cu NPs
Figure 3.4: Comparing the measured background, measured at 5.0 pA argon approach signal, to the
lowest signal measurement in this project, 6% monolayer 5 nm nanoparticles. The position and size
of the background should not interfere with any measurements performed in the TPD setup.
3.3
Cleanliness of substrates
Throughout this project, glassy carbon substrates were used for copper nanoparticle depositions. In
order to ensure that the nanoparticles are deposited on a clean surface, an argon ion beam current
of 1-2 µA is applied to the sample surface for 30 minutes. The cleaning procedure can be found in
sec. 2.2.6. The cleanliness is then measured using ISS.
An example of a substrate before and after cleaning can be found in ﬁg. 3.5. Before cleaning, a
relatively intense low-energy background can be seen. This is mainly due to adventitious carbon,
as discussed in sec. 2.3.1. Additionally, a peak from ﬂourine can be observed. After cleaning, this
background is drastically reduced and the ﬂuorine appears to have been removed from the surface.
However, sodium, carbon and copper peaks now appear, since the surface is no longer covered in
adventitious carbon. The contaminants detected are of low intensity and thus low concentration,
and are most likely originating from the manufacture of the glassy carbon substrates 2. The argon
appears to originate from the sputter clean process, as it is not measured before sputtering. Due to
the low intensities of the contaminants, the glassy carbon substrates can be considered clean.
2All measured substrates before each deposition throughout the project display similar spectra. The spectra can
be found in the appendix, ﬁgs. 6.2 and 6.3
Page 33 of 60
==PAGE:41==
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
ISS intensity (kcps)
Energy (eV)
Ar
Na
F
Cu
Before cleaning
After cleaning
Figure 3.5: An example of ISS spectra before and after cleaning the glassy carbon substrate.
3.4
Reproducibility of results in the TPD chamber
For the results that are obtained from the TPD chamber to be valid, they must be reproducible.
That is, repeat experiments under identical conditions must produce identical results. When the
project was started, the reproducibility of the results obtained in the chamber was being questioned,
and therefore a study was required.
3.4.1
Reproducibility of subsequent TPDs on the same sample
By running subsequent experiments on the same sample, the methodology when performing TPD
can be tested. If there are large variances when measuring multiple times on the same sample,
this could possibly be due to an inaccurate sniﬀer approach procedure, or due to sintering of the
nanoparticles upon heating. The sample was only heated to 0°C in this experiment and every other
experiment performed throughout the project in order to prevent this. The glassy carbon substrate
was cleaned (sec. 2.2.6 for procedure), ISS was performed to ensure cleanliness of the surface (sec.
2.3.1 for procedure), and 5 nm, 6% monolayer nanoparticles were deposited (sec. 2.2.6 for proce-
dure). ISS was subsequently performed to ensure correct deposition. Finally, TPD was performed
(sec. 2.3.2 for procedure).
The results of the experiment can be seen in ﬁg. 3.6. It can be seen that there is a reduction in the
second peak at around 140 K after the ﬁrst measurement, but that the peak remains largely identical
for subsequent measurements. A reﬁnement to the TPD technique was added where the tungsten
ﬁlament was heated by ramping the current to 6 A. The sample is placed in a separate chamber
Page 34 of 60
==PAGE:42==
during this step to avoid contamination from the degassing. This reﬁnement reduced this eﬀect, as
can be seen in ﬁg. 3.7. Now, the spectrum is more similar between measurements, with smaller
changes in the second and third peak which now are close to identical. The ﬁrst peak at around 120
K is still slightly reduced in the ﬁrst peak, so avoiding small changes between measurements appears
unavoidable.
100
125
150
175
200
225
250
275
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
M30 SEM current (pA)
Temperature (K)
Sample:
5 nm Cu
350k AMU
6% ML
1st measurement
2nd measurement
3rd measurement
-160
-140
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
Temperature (°C)
Figure 3.6: Performing the same experiment on the same sample three times. The sample here is 5
nm 6% monolayers copper nanoparticles. The sampling rate is the same for all measurements.
100
125
150
175
200
225
250
275
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
M30 SEM current (pA)
Temperature (K)
Sample:
8 nm Cu
1.45m AMU
6% ML
1st measurement
2nd measurement
-160
-140
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
Temperature (°C)
Figure 3.7: Performing the same experiment on the same sample two times after introducing de-
gassing of the ﬁlament. The sample here is 8 nm 6% monolayers copper nanoparticles.
Page 35 of 60
==PAGE:43==
Despite minor diﬀerences between experiments, results appear consistent between runs of the same
experiment, especially after reﬁning the method. The spectra have similar intensity at the same
temperatures.
For all results obtained before introducing the degassing step, the second run is
used for analysis in subsequent sections. Overall, it would appear that the end of the temperature
ramp, set to 0 °C, and the approach method as detailed in sec. 2.3.2 yields low variability between
subsequent TPDs on the same sample. Three subsequent measurements were performed for most
samples, with similar results between them3.
3.4.2
Reproducibility of depositions of same coverage
A raster cycle takes roughly six minutes where the sample is moved in in relation to the beam.
Each cycle consists of two half-cycles, one stepping horizontally and one stepping vertically. In or-
der to obtain homogenous nanoparticle coverage, a half-cycle must be completed before deposition
can ﬁnish. This means the coverage will often deviate by around 0.5% from the target value. A
higher nanoparticle coverage will yield a higher signal in TPD, so in order to make sure that results
are reproducible across depositions of the same coverage, they must have an equal coverage deposited.
After each deposited sample is characterized using TPD, the substrate is taken out of vacuum and
a new substrate is mounted onto the sample holder. This entails re-mounting the thermocouple as
well, leading to a source of discrepancy in terms of the temperature measurement across depositions.
The coverage is a calculated value, which has some error that may or may not be signiﬁcant. Lastly,
the sputter-aggregation conditions were reproduced as well as possible, but will also have small vari-
ations between depositions.
However, two samples were made without rastering, which enables some insight into whether these
factors are signiﬁcant when characterizing samples using TPD. The sputter-aggregation parameters
such as pressure, ﬂows and power were duplicated across both of these depositions, which were
performed on separate days. The lens settings were also replicated. The target deposition coverage
was 200%. While the coverage has high uncertainty due to no rastering being performed, the total
deposited amount of nanoparticles are similar.
Results can be seen in ﬁg. 3.8. There is a slight discrepancy in peak positions, which can likely
be attributed to the thermocouple mounting. Otherwise, the intensity is quite similar, which is
expected because total amount of sites present on the surface should be similar. Therefore, it can be
assumed that results are consistent in terms of the mass spectrometer current, but it appears that
there are some variations in temperature reading across depositions. This means that some spectra
will be shifted compared to others.
3For a ﬁgure displaying all three TPD measurements on the same samples, see appendix (ﬁg. 6.1).
Page 36 of 60
==PAGE:44==
100
125
150
175
200
225
250
275
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
M30 SEM current (pA)
Temperature (K)
1st deposition
2nd deposition
Samples:
5 nm Cu
350k AMU 
200% ML
-160
-140
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
Temperature (°C)
Figure 3.8: Comparing two diﬀerent depositions of almost equal coverage. The sample was taken
out and a new substrate was mounted between depositions, which were performed on separate days.
3.5
Coverage eﬀect of 5 nm copper nanoparticles character-
ized with TPD
Since results have been shown to be reproducible, both in subsequent runs and across depositions,
studies on discovering stronger-binding sites on copper can be commenced.
By varying the deposition time, the surface coverages of nanoparticles on the substrate can be ma-
nipulated. The interaction between the nanoparticles could lead to higher-energy binding sites for
the CO, which would result in peaks at higher temperature. By increasing coverage, the distance
between nanoparticles on the surface decreases which could give rise to overlaps between them, which
could yield stronger-binding sites. At above-monolayer coverages, some more complex interactions
might occur as multiple monolayers of nanoparticles would be expected to be a porous, multi-layered
structure for the CO to interact with. By creating this porous system, the higher-energy desorption
features found in oxygen-derived copper from Verdaguer-Casadevall et al. [21] could possibly be
recreated.
This study was performed before the hole cutout modiﬁcation of the sample holder (see ﬁg. 2.12).
For this study, the size of the nanoparticles were kept at 5 nm. This diameter is achieved by al-
lowing mass 350,000 AMU to pass through the ToF-MF. The glassy carbon substrates were cleaned
and nanoparticles were deposited (sec. 2.2.6 for procedure), with ISS performed both after cleaning
and deposition (sec. 2.3.1 for procedure). Finally, TPD was performed (sec. 2.3.2 for procedure).
The only variable in this entire deposition-characterization process is the deposition coverage, as all
other factors were kept to the standard procedures. All samples except the 200% ML sample was
deposited using rastering. When the 200% sample was made, the current was too low for rastering
Page 37 of 60
==PAGE:45==
to be feasible at a reasonable deposition time. For the 400% sample, the copper target was changed,
resulting in a much higher deposition current.
Therefore, rastering could be performed for this
sample. A polycrystalline copper sample (Poly-Cu) was also measured, and was only cleaned and
characterized with ISS before measuring. The poly-Cu sample was copper sheet. This sample had
previously been annealed several times.
3.5.1
ISS characterization
ISS spectra after deposition are shown in 3.9. It can observed that the copper peak increases in
intensity as the coverage increases. This is due to more material being present on the surface, and
thus a higher surface concentration. The higher intensities for higher coverages can more clearly be
seen in the zoomed-in view in the right side of ﬁg. 3.9. However, this is only true for up to 50%
coverage. This is owing to the ionization current being set to 1.0 mA for the 6%, 20% and 50%
samples, whereas it is reduced to 0.4 mA for the higher coverages in order to protect the detector.
If the ionization currents were identical, the intensity would be higher still for the 200% and 400%
coverage samples. The slight peak displacements in terms of energy between measurements is due
to slight diﬀerences in incoming ion energy, as this value seems to drift very slightly over time.
The contaminants discussed from the measurements before deposition in sec. 3.3 have very low
intensity compared to the copper peaks. Therefore, they are not visible when the graph is scaled
after the copper peak, and this indicates that the surface concentration of contaminants is very
low compared to the deposited nanoparticle surface concentration. The exception here is the argon
signal, where peaks are clearly visible even after deposition. However argon is chemically inert, and
thus should not aﬀect results. From this, it can be argued that the desorbed CO signal will come
from the copper nanoparticles, and that the intensity of the desorption peaks will increase with
coverage.
Page 38 of 60
==PAGE:46==
Intensity (kcps)
Energy (eV)
Ar
Cu
400% ML (0.4 mA)
200% ML (0.4 mA)
50% ML (1.0 mA)
20% ML (1.0 mA)
6% ML (1.0 mA)
6% ML
20% ML 
200% ML
400% ML
50% ML
Intensity (kcps)
Energy (eV)
Figure 3.9: Left: ISS measurements of glassy carbon substrates with deposited 5 nm copper nanopar-
ticles. Coverage is indicated in a percentage of monolayers. Right: a zoomed-in view displaying
the copper peaks better
The ISS spectrum from the polycrystalline copper sample can be seen in ﬁg. 3.10. Small peaks for
oxygen and ﬂourine can be observed. A peak corresponding to argon can also be seen. A 5d metal
peak is also visible, but due to the limited resolution using He ions in ISS, the exact metal cannot be
determined. Compared to the intensity of the copper peak however, the contaminant intensities are
low. Since this sample had previously been sputtered and annealed numerous times, the impurities
here appear as though they cannot be completely removed. The sample was therefore determined
as being suﬃciently cleaned.
Page 39 of 60
==PAGE:47==
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
760
780
800
820
0
100
200
300
400
Intensity (kcps)
Energy (eV)
Ar
5d
metal
Cu
O
F
Figure 3.10: ISS measurement of the polycrystalline copper sample. Inset: zoomed-in region of the
copper peak.
3.5.2
TPD characterization
The results of the TPD measurements can be seen in ﬁg. 3.11. The amount of monolayers (ML) is
denoted as a percentage. The data is manipulated by subtracting a straight line, since the data is
oﬀset from zero by the mass spectrometer. This allows data where a zero value corresponds to no
CO-30 measured.
The 400% monolayer measurement in ﬁg. 3.11 shows a high level of noise. This was found to be
due to the heating ramp not being stable for this particular measurement. The consequence of this
was that the temperature was oscillating, creating noisy peaks. However, due to time constraints,
this measurement was not repeated. In spite of this, qualitative conclusions can still be drawn from
the sample.
In order to see the peaks for smaller coverages and their relative intensities more clearly, the data
from ﬁg. 3.11a is normalized to 1 in 3.11b. Peaks can be determined at 120-125 K, 150-155 K,
175-180 K and 180-190 K.
Page 40 of 60
==PAGE:48==
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
260
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
M30 SEM current (pA)
Temperature (K)
20% ML
50% ML
6% ML
200% ML
Poly-Cu 
400% ML
-160
-140
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
Temperature (°C)
(a) TPD spectra with oﬀset subtracted.
Figure 3.11: TPD spectra resulting from variation of coverage for 5 nm copper nanoparticles. Cov-
erage is denoted as percentage of a monolayer.
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Normalized M30 SEM current (A.U.)
Temperature (K)
400% ML
200% ML
Poly-Cu 
20% ML
6% ML
-160
-140
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
Temperature (°C)
50% ML
(b) The same data as in ﬁg. 4.8 (a), but normalized to 1 and plotted over a smaller range of 90-220 K.
Page 41 of 60
==PAGE:49==
It can be observed that the most prevalent peak throughout most measurements occurs at 120-125
K. For the 20% and 50% samples, the ﬁrst peak is found at around 130 K. The low-temperature
peak is, according to literature, due to terraces [28] which bind the CO quite weakly.
The peak that resides at 150-155 K matches terrace sites [28, 29]. This peak is the most prevalent
peak for the 50% and 200% samples.
Looking closely, a peak at at 170-180 K can be seen. It ﬁts in desorption temperature to terrace
sites as found on Cu(322) [28]. This peak was not observed for the polycrystalline sample.
A peak at around 180-190 K can be observed from coverages above 20% and the polycrystalline
copper, which does not align with any desorption peaks found in the litterature, but is under the
200-220 K range often found for stepped sites [21, 26, 28].
It would appear from this data that no stepped sites adsorb CO from the nanoparticles or the
polycrystalline foil. Despite some desorption peaks matching that of peaks found in the litterature,
the polycrystalline sample, used as a reference, does not resemble polycrystalline copper found in
Makino et.
al., Vollmer et.
al.
or Verdaguer-Casadevall et.
al.
[21, 26, 27].
For reference, a
polycrystalline spectrum was presented in ﬁg. 1.9. It can be argued that this puts into question
whether the ﬁndings here can be compared to the literature. While some desorption peaks match
those found in the literature, it would appear from the polycrystalline measurement that the TPD
system is not performing properly.
However, results will still be comparable within this study, and some qualitative conclusions can be
drawn. The desorption peaks at 180-190 K, appearing only at higher coverages, could be an eﬀect
of nanoparticles in close proximity or overlapping, giving rise to peaks at higher temperature. This
is desirable due to a possibility of it yielding stronger activity for CO or CO2 reduction. Stronger
binding sites were found to enhance activity, as discussed in sec. 1.2.1. This peak is largest for
the non-rastered 200% ML sample, which, due to the lack of rastering, is also the sample with
the largest coverage uncertainty. However, it would appear that higher coverage samples exhibit
higher-temperature features not found at lower coverages. The absence of this peak for lower cov-
erage samples could also simply be a matter of signal-to-noise ratio hiding the desorption peak for
lower coverages. In order to test this, the experiment could be done at higher heating rates. Higher
heating rates yield higher signal, and thus will give a better signal-to-noise ratio.
The broad, high-temperature desorption peak at 275 K that was observed from oxygen-derived cop-
per in Verdaguer-Casadevall et al. [21] cannot be found in these measurements. This peak was
expected to be found at signiﬁcantly higher temperatures than any of the measured desorption oc-
curs at. This indicates that the fabricated nanoparticle samples do not have the same type of site
as the oxygen-derived copper. Further investigation of this would require an oxygen-derived copper
sample being fabricated and characterized using this system.
It is evident from the data in ﬁg. 3.11 that generally, the signal increases as the coverage increases.
This is due to the amount of sites increasing as coverage increases. By integrating the area under
the respective TPD spectra, the integrated current can be related to the coverage. This is expected
Page 42 of 60
==PAGE:50==
to have a linear relation to coverage, as higher coverage results in more sites. The linear relation
is not expected to be true beyond 100% ML, as anything beyond this is more than a full layer of
nanoparticles. To see whether the relation holds true, linear ﬁtting is performed for coverages below
100%. The intercept for the ﬁtting is ﬁxed at 0, since 0% coverage should yield no desorption. The
resulting graph can be seen in ﬁg. 3.12.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
Integrated SEM current (A.U.)
Projected coverage (% ML)
y  = ax
a  =  2.8  
  0.3
R
2
 = 0.96
Figure 3.12: Integrated SEM current for M30 as a function of coverage. The polycrystalline copper
sample is marked in red.
The uncertainty in terms of coverage is estimated to 0.5% for rastered samples. For the sample with
no rastering (the 200% sample), the uncertainty is estimated as 100% due to all the nanoparticles
being deposited in an area the size of the beam, which is not homogeneous. The uncertainty for
the integrated current is assumed to be the diﬀerence between the highest and lowest calculated
integrated current values.
An R2 value of 0.96 is calculated from this 0-100% ML ﬁt, indicating a good linear correlation.
The 200% and 400% coverage samples have been omitted from ﬁtting because they are beyond one
monolayer and should not ﬁt with this line, which they can clearly be observed not to lie near.
The 400% sample shows a bigger area under the TPD spectrum compared to 200%. This indicates
that there is some porosity achieved for higher coverages of nanoparticles, resulting in more signal
observed. The polycrystalline copper sample corresponds to 25% coverage4. It is marked in red on
the graph.
4All coverages for the nanoparticles are denoted as projected coverage. The measured signal depends on the total
surface area, which is 1/4 of the projected coverage. Therefore, the polycrystalline copper, having a 100% total surface
coverage, corresponds to 25% projected coverage
Page 43 of 60
==PAGE:51==
3.5.3
Heating proﬁles before the hole cutout modiﬁcation
In the data discussed in the previous section (sec. 3.5), the samples had variations in the peak
positions on the temperature axis, and the results did not resemble the literature. Due to this, it
was argued that the system is not performing properly. By investigating the heating proﬁles for the
samples, some indication as to whether these issues were related to heating can be given.
The starting temperatures for the TPD spectra in ﬁg. 3.11 vary from 93 to 106 K. When cooling the
sample, it was left to cool until only a marginal change in temperature over time was observed. The
source of the starting temperature discrepancy between samples is likely the thermocouple contact
to the sample surface.
A similar issue was observed in sec.
3.4.2.
When cooling the polycrys-
talline sample, it was observed to consistently yield lower temperatures, which can be attributed
to copper’s excellent thermal conductivity. As the thermocouple is lodged between a molybdenum
plate and the sample surface, it will measure a temperature in the interface between the top plate
and the sample surface. This is indicated by the data being displaced on the temperature axis,
as this would be caused by the thermocouple consistently reading an erroneous value. This, and
variations in mounting, coupled together likely accounts for the displacements of the peaks seen in
the TPD spectra. Another likely consequence is that all desorption peaks actually occur at other
temperatures than what is measured by the thermocouple. However, as results appear to be repro-
ducible, the peaks can still be discussed in relative terms. Thus conclusions can still be drawn about
emergence of higher-temperature features, but the exact desorption temperature is likely not correct.
If there are small ripples in the heating proﬁle, as evidenced by the 400% sample, there will be
"ghost peaks"; peaks that are an artifact of the non-linear temperature. In order to investigate how
well the samples were heated, the temperature ramps are plotted in the range 110-200 K. This is
the region where all the peaks lie within, so it is crucial that the ramp is linear here.
Page 44 of 60
==PAGE:52==
Temperature (K)
Time (s)
185
175
170
400% ML
200% ML
50% ML
Poly-Cu
20% ML
6% ML
Figure 3.13: The heating ramps for the samples investigated for the coverage study, before the hole
cutout modiﬁcation. The lines indicate the approximate peak positions found in the study.
Page 45 of 60
==PAGE:53==
The heating proﬁles can be seen in ﬁg. 3.13. The displacements on the y-axis is due to the diﬀerent
starting temperatures, and steady-state error. The adherence to linearity is of paramount impor-
tance for TPD measurements. There are small variations in the temperature throughout, giving a
rough appearance, and they do not appear perfectly linear. By performing linear ﬁtting to each of
the heating proﬁles, the slope, residuals and R2-values can be calculated. These values can be seen
in table 3.1.
There are variations in the slope as the temperature changes, which leads to a heating rate that is
locally not equal to the target. In the region around the ﬁrst peak, the slope is higher than 0.5 K/s,
and combined with the uncertainty brought about by the thermocouple contact, the low-temperature
peak at around 120 K has large variations on the temperature axis as can be seen in ﬁg. 3.11.
The residuals in table 3.1 have large values, meaning there is signiﬁcant deviation from the straight
line. A large residual value indicates large deviations from linearity. In particular, the Poly-Cu, 20%
and 400% ramps deviate from a straight line. Since the poly-Cu sample is a diﬀerent substrate, the
heating proﬁles will diﬀer. In order to circumvent this, a copper ﬁlm could be deposited on a glassy
carbon substrate. For the 400%, the result of the suboptimal heating proﬁle is easily observed; the
rough peaks stem from this. For the other results, the eﬀects are not easily seen, but this does put
into question the correctness of the peak positions in terms of temperature. Therefore, the heating
proﬁles do seem to be a signiﬁcant factor in explaining why the results from sec. 3.5 exhibited the
issues highlighted there. This was the main motivation behind the hole cutout modiﬁcation of the
sample holder, as enhanced heating was thought to lead to more linear proﬁles.
Coverage
6%
20%
50%
200%
400%
Poly-Cu
Slope [K/s]
0.55
0.58
0.57
0.56
0.55
0.58
Residual
217
1202
467
317
1459
3083
R²
0.999
0.995
0.998
0.999
0.994
0.988
Table 3.1: Results from linear ﬁts on the heating proﬁles in the region 110-200 K.
3.6
Size eﬀect of copper nanoparticles characterized with TPD
By keeping the surface coverage constant at 6%, the nanoparticle size can be varied and the size
eﬀect when measuring copper nanoparticles with TPD can be studied. As discussed in sec. 1.3, the
nanoparticle size will determine which sites are present on the surface. Thus, by manipulating the
size, the desorption characteristics can be manipulated. Here, the goal is to ﬁnd the nanoparticle
size that yields more desorption from higher temperatures. All experiments in this study were done
after the hole cutout modiﬁcation, so the bottom plate of the sample holder is the one pictured in
ﬁg. 2.12c.
The sizes that were studied were 3.5 nm (120,000 AMU), 5 nm (350,000 AMU) and 8 nm (1,450,000
AMU). This was done by tuning the sputter-aggregation zone and lens parameters according to the
principles described in sec. 2.2.3 until the mass distribution was centered around the respective
Page 46 of 60
==PAGE:54==
masses, and then letting only the mass corresponding to the required size pass through the ToF-MF.
The cleaning, deposition and characterization procedures were the same as in sec. 3.5.
3.6.1
ISS characterization
The ISS spectra after deposition of the nanoparticles are shown in ﬁg. 3.14.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Intensity (kcps)
Energy (eV)
Ar
Cu
3.5 nm, 6% ML
5 nm, 7 % ML
8 nm, 6% ML
Figure 3.14: ISS measurements on glassy carbon substrates with deposited Cu nanoparticles of 6-7%
ML coverage. Nanoparticle size is indicated in nanometers, and coverage is indicated in a percentage
of monolayers.
The intensity of the copper peak is largest for the 3.5 nm, 6% monolayer sample. It would be expected
that the higher coverage sample, the 5 nm 7% monolayer sample, would show larger intensity.
The intensity of the copper peak decreases as the nanoparticle size increases throughout the three
measurements. One may argue that this is due to the actual nanoparticle size being diﬀerent from
the assumed size. In terms of deposited nanoparticle number, more smaller nanoparticles are needed
to reach the same coverage compared to bigger nanoparticles. This could also be an explanation.
However, more investigation would be needed to conclude the cause of the diﬀerence in intensity.
For this study however, if the diﬀerence in intensity is due to slight miscalculation of the coverage,
this is corrected when normalizing the spectra. This is only valid as long as the actual coverage
is not signiﬁcantly larger, which appears not to be the case here. Hence, after normalization the
nanoparticles may be compared.
3.6.2
TPD characterization
The results of the TPD measurements can be seen in ﬁg. 3.6.2. The same straight line subtraction
as in the coverage study, sec. 3.5, was performed.
Page 47 of 60
==PAGE:55==
Immediately, it can be seen that the spectra appear shifted towards lower temperatures, and that
they are compressed on the temperature axis compared to previous measurements. Furthermore, the
overall signal is higher. The black line from a 5 nm, 6% sample deposited pre-modiﬁcation should be
close to identical to the red line from the sample after modiﬁcation, as these samples are equivalent,
but it appears signiﬁcantly shifted. Furthermore, the desorption spectrum is compressed compared to
the pre-modiﬁcation sample, with features spanning over a smaller range in temperature. However,
the results can still be compared qualitatively, as this error appears to be consistent between samples,
and therefore the results still give an indication of the ideal nanoparticle size.
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
260
0
1
2
3
M30 SEM current (pA)
Temperature (K)
-160
-140
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
Temperature (°C)
3.5 nm, 6% ML
9  nm, 6% ML
5  nm, 7% ML
5  nm, 6% ML
(pre-modification)
Figure 3.15: TPD spectra resulting from variation of nanoparticle size. The black line is a measure-
ment from before the hole cutout modiﬁcation.
Because the displacement and compression of the temperature axis is consistent, the axes were
corrected to the pre-modiﬁcation 5 nm, 5% sample in ﬁg.
.
This was done by multiplying the
x-values to match the width of the features to the pre-modiﬁcation sample, and then displacing it
such that the starting temperatures matched. A y-axis correction was done so the 6% ML samples
roughly matched the intensity of the second peaks, the peak at around 140 K in ﬁg. 3.16. The
corrected spectrum is shown in ﬁg. 3.16. This was done for consistency, knowing that the samples
in the coverage study also had a thermocouple related error. The values were normalized in order
to compare the ratios of the desorption peaks. This can be seen in ﬁg. 3.17. When normalized, the
y-axis correction is of nulliﬁed due to the axis being multiplied by a value.
Page 48 of 60
==PAGE:56==
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
260
0
1
M30 SEM current (pA)
Temperature (K)
-160
-140
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
Temperature (°C)
3.5 nm, 6% ML
9  nm, 6% ML
5  nm, 7% ML
5  nm, 6% ML (pre-modification)
Figure 3.16: TPD spectra obtained from varying nanoparticle size, corrected to the black line. The
black line is a measurement from before the hole cutout modiﬁcation.
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
260
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Normalized M30 SEM current (A.U.)
Temperature (K)
-160
-140
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
Temperature (°C)
3.5 nm, 6% ML
  9 nm, 6% ML
  5 nm, 7% ML
Figure 3.17: Same data as in ﬁg. 3.16, normalized to 1.
After the correction, the desorption peaks can be seen at around 113 K, 140 K and 175 K. The peak
at around 113 K has higher intensity compared to the pre-modiﬁcation sample. When normalized to
distinguish the relative intensity of the peaks (ﬁg. 3.17), the 3.5 nm nanoparticle sample measures
signiﬁcantly lower intensity for the 140 K peak, and negligible signal at 175 K. The 5 nm nanoparticles
display the highest intensity at both 140 K and 175 K relative to the other sizes measured. This
indicates that the 5 nm copper nanoparticles have more sites that bind CO stronger, which could
enhance activity for CO and CO2 reduction. Therefore, the impression is that for the three sizes
measured here, 5 nm is ideal.
Page 49 of 60
==PAGE:57==
3.6.3
Heating proﬁle after the hole cutout modiﬁcation
The sample holder was modiﬁed with the hole cutout (see ﬁg. 2.12c) due to the heating rates in the
coverage study (sec. 3.5) having signiﬁcant rise time and since they did not adhere well to a straight
line. It should be considered that due to the thermocouple position and inconsistent mounting, this
temperature is not what the sample surface is subjected to, but rather the interface between the
sample holder top plate and the sample surface. Therefore, the discussion of the change relative to
pre-modiﬁcation should be seen as a discussion of the improvement due to the modiﬁcation, while
keeping in mind that the temperature measurement is erroneous.
By plotting the temperature ramps in the region 99-160 K, the eﬀect of the hole cutout modiﬁcation
can be seen, see ﬁg. 3.18. This is the region the non-corrected data desorption peaks lie within (see
ﬁg. 3.6.2).
0
25
50
75
100
125
100
120
140
160
Temperature (K)
Time (s)
3.5 nm
 8 nm
 5 nm
105
Figure 3.18: The heating ramps for each of the shown measurements in ﬁg. 3.6.2. The approximate
peak positions are marked with dotted lines.
The 3.5 nm heating ramp appears visibly rough in comparison to the other measurements. A small
reﬁnement in the PID-control between the 3.5 nm and the two other measurements caused this
improvement. The ﬁrst desorption peak for the measurements at 105 K is very close to the start of
the ramp. It is therefore greatly aﬀected by the rise time of the algorithm, as this causes the slope
to locally be higher than the 0.5 K/s target. This appears to cause asymmetry in the 105 K peak
as it appears in ﬁgs. 3.6.2, 3.16 and 3.17. The peak is slightly steeper in the region just before the
local maximum compared to the region just after.
By performing linear ﬁts on the ramps in the region of 15 sec. - 125 sec. on the time-axis of the
data in ﬁg. 3.6.3, the heating ramp improvements over the coverage study can better be quantiﬁed.
The results can be found in 3.2. The slope is close to 0.5 K/s, but the calculated slopes of 0.53 K/s
Page 50 of 60
==PAGE:58==
are aﬀected by the steeper region at 15-30 seconds on the heating ramps. The residuals are an order
of magnitude smaller than in the coverage study (table 3.1) and the R2-value is now 0.99 for every
measurement.
NP Size
3.5 nm
8 nm
5 nm
Slope [K/s]
0.53
0.53
0.53
Residual
88
51
71
R²
0.99
0.99
0.99
Table 3.2: Results from linear ﬁts on the heating ramps in the region 110-200 K.
Thus, there is a deﬁnite improvement in the linearity of heating proﬁles resulting of the hole cutout
modiﬁcation. However, new issues were observed, the displacement and compression of the temper-
ature axis, and a large increase in the measured current. It would appear that these issues were
induced by the modiﬁcation, since this was the only signiﬁcant change to the instrumentation be-
tween the coverage study and the size study.
The displacement can be explained by a shift in measured versus actual temperature. If the tem-
perature measured by the thermocouple is shifted from the actual sample temperature, there would
be a shift in the peaks when plotted as a function of temperature, which is what can be observed.
The compression can be explained by a diﬀerence in measured versus actual heating rate. It would
appear that now that the heating is more direct on the sample, the actual heating rate of the sample
is higher than target 0.5 K/s. If the actual heating rate is higher than the measured heating rate,
this would induce a compression of the desorption signal, which is also observed. A higher heating
rate also results in more signal measured, as previously established in 2.3.2, which is also observed.
The source of this error, is likely the thermocouple position.
The thermocouple is sandwiched
between the sample surface and the molybdenum top plate, which was before discovered to not
be ideal, as previously discussed in sections 3.4.2 and 3.5.3. The more eﬃcient heating is evidently
amplifying this error, leading to the results seen here. If the thermocouple contact was to be improved
such that the correct temperature was measured, the gains in linearity achieved by modifying the
sample holder could improve results obtained in the TPD setup. Due to time constraints, however,
the thermocouple issue has yet to be solved.
Page 51 of 60
==PAGE:59==
4 | Conclusion
In this project, copper nanoparticles as a catalyst for CO2 and CO reduction reactions were studied
using CO temperature programmed desorption (CO-TPD). The goal was to ﬁnd desorption features
at temperatures around 275 K, as this had previously been correlated with enhanced activity for the
CO reduction reaction.
The implementation of the TPD setup is a work in progress.
Thus, the background signal was
investigated, and the reproducibility was tested. It was found that the background signal would not
interfere with the spectra signiﬁcantly, and that results were reproducible.
Two studies were performed; one where the surface coverage of the nanoparticles was varied, and
one where the size of the nanoparticles was varied. The nanoparticles were deposited using a cluster
source connected to a time-of-ﬂight mass ﬁlter.
ISS was used throughout the project to ensure
cleanliness of substrates, and after depositions to ensure correct deposition.
By depositing surface coverages of 6%, 20%, 50%, 200% and 400% monolayers, the eﬀect of surface
coverage was investigated. It was found that coverages above 20% gave rise to desorption at higher
temperatures, and that 200% coverage displayed the largest desorption feature at this temperature.
No desorption was detected at around 275 K. The intensity of the spectra increased as a function
of coverage even beyond a full monolayer, which indicates that porosity was achieved.
By depositing nanoparticle sizes of 3.5 nm, 5 nm and 8 nm, the size eﬀect was investigated. The 5
nm copper nanoparticles displayed the largest desorption at higher temperatures, but the spectra
were compressed, displaced and had higher desorption feature intensities compared to equivalent
samples. The 5 nm nanoparticle was found to display enhanced desorption intensity at higher des-
orption temperatures compared to the other sizes.
On close investigation of the heating proﬁles in the employed TPD setup, it was concluded that there
were large deviations from linearity, a key requirement in the TPD method. It was also found that
the polycrystalline copper sample, used as a reference, did not resemble measurements of equivalent
samples found in the literature. Therefore, a modiﬁcation in the form of a hole cutout was made to
the sample holder, in an eﬀort to improve heating proﬁles. After this modiﬁcation, it was concluded
that the heating proﬁles had improved linearity and rise time. However, inappropriate thermocouple
mounting led to the compression, displacement and higher intensities found in the nanoparticle size
study. The temperature measurements were argued to have large but consistent errors. Thus, the
found desorption peak temperatures should be viewed in relative rather than absolute terms.
Page 52 of 60
==PAGE:60==
5 | Outlook
Having determined that the thermocouple contact to the sample surface was insuﬃcient and intro-
duced a large source of error, this is the improvement with the largest priority for the TPD setup.
By drilling a hole into the side of the substrate and mounting the thermocouple directly inside the
substrate, the sample temperature could be more accurately measured. This has already been at-
tempted unsuccessfully, and due to time constraints for this project, no further work has been done
to alleviate this issue. Improving the D-term implementation in the PID-algorithm is also expected
to improve the heating proﬁles in the TPD setup further.
As the heating and temperature reading issues are resolved, the results should be comparable to the
literature. A correction to the results in this project would make them comparable to the literature
as well. The next experiments of interest would be depositing polycrystalline copper on a glassy
carbon substrate, and producing an oxygen-derived copper sample. Using a glassy carbon substrate
will ensure that the heating proﬁles will be similar to deposited nanoparticle samples. Producing
the oxygen-derived copper sample would require hydrogen gas and heating. Presently, hydrogen is
not connected to the chamber, so this would need employment. Currently, a heating stage is being
tested on the Omicron system.
A study into whether TPD can be used as a ﬁngerprint for the measured catalytic activity is in order
for the longer term. This could help in discovering new catalysts, as the TPD method is already
a powerful method for determining desorption energies, and using it as a ﬁngerprint for activity
could make it an essential tool moving forward. A way this could be realized is by characterizing a
variety of samples using TPD and activity measurements, and then observing trends between the
desorption peak position and intensity and the activity measurements.
Page 53 of 60
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
[1] Overview
of
greenhouse
gasses
(2017).
URL
https://www.epa.gov/ghgemissions/
overview-greenhouse-gases. Date accessed: 06/04/2020.
[2] Climate change 2007: Working group i: The physical science basis - faq 1.3: What is the
greenhouse eﬀect? (2007). URL https://archive.ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/ar4/
wg1/en/faq-1-3.html. Date accessed: 06/04/2020.
[3] The eﬀects of climate change (2019). URL https://climate.nasa.gov/effects. Date ac-
cessed: 25/03/2020.
[4] Bereiter, B. et al. Revision of the epica dome c co2 record from 800 to 600kyr before present.
Geophysical Research Letters 42, 542–549 (2015).
[5] Etheridge, D. M. et al. Natural and anthropogenic changes in atmospheric co2 over the last
1000 years from air in antarctic ice and ﬁrn. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres
101, 4115–4128 (1996).
[6] Dr. Pieter Tans, N. & Dr. Ralph Keeling, S. I. o. O. Trends in atmospheric carbon dioxide. URL
https://www.esrl.noaa.gov/gmd/ccgg/trends/data.html. Date accessed: 24/03/2020.
[7] Dr. Pieter Tans, N. & Dr. Ralph Keeling, S. I. o. O.
Global surface temperature
anomalies.
URL https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/monitoring-references/faq/anomalies.
php#anomalies. Date accessed: 25/03/2020.
[8] Petrol, B. Statistical Review of World Energy (2019).
[9] Smil, V. Energy transitions: global and national perspectives (ABC-CLIO, 2016).
[10] Imperatives, S. Report of the world commission on environment and development: Our common
future. Accessed Feb 10 (1987).
[11] Ellabban, O., Abu-Rub, H. & Blaabjerg, F. Renewable energy resources: Current status, future
prospects and their enabling technology. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 39, 748 –
764 (2014).
[12] Goal
7:
Sustainable
development
knowledge
platform.
URL
https://
sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdg7. Date accessed: 21/03/2020.
[13] Rehman, S., Al-Hadhrami, L. M. & Alam, M. M. Pumped hydro energy storage system: A
technological review. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 44, 586 – 598 (2015).
[14] Corporation, E. M. The outlook for energy: A view to 2040 (2015).
[15] Frydendal, R. Improving performance of catalysts for water electrolysis: The MnOx case. Ph.D.
thesis, DTU Physics (2015).
[16] Seh, Z. W. et al. Combining theory and experiment in electrocatalysis: Insights into materials
design. Science 355 (2017).
Page 54 of 60
==PAGE:62==
[17] Kuhl, K. P., Cave, E. R., Abram, D. N. & Jaramillo, T. F. New insights into the electrochemical
reduction of carbon dioxide on metallic copper surfaces. Energy Environ. Sci. 5, 7050–7059
(2012).
[18] Hori, Y., Takahashi, R., Yoshinami, Y. & Murata, A. Electrochemical reduction of co at a
copper electrode. The Journal of Physical Chemistry B 101, 7075–7081 (1997).
[19] Hori, Y., Murata, A. & Takahashi, R. Formation of hydrocarbons in the electrochemical re-
duction of carbon dioxide at a copper electrode in aqueous solution. J. Chem. Soc., Faraday
Trans. 1 85, 2309–2326 (1989).
[20] Shi, C., Hansen, H. A., Lausche, A. C. & Nørskov, J. K. Trends in electrochemical co 2 reduction
activity for open and close-packed metal surfaces. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 16,
4720–4727 (2014).
[21] Verdaguer-Casadevall, A. et al. Probing the Active Surface Sites for CO Reduction on Oxide-
Derived Copper Electrocatalysts. Journal of the American Chemical Society 137, 9808–9811
(2015).
[22] Gattrell, M., Gupta, N. & Co, A. A review of the aqueous electrochemical reduction of co2 to
hydrocarbons at copper. Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry 594, 1–19 (2006).
[23] Peterson, A. A. & Nørskov, J. K. Activity descriptors for co2 electroreduction to methane on
transition-metal catalysts. The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters 3, 251–258 (2012).
[24] Chorkendorﬀ, I. & Niemantsverdriet, H. Concepts of Modern Catalysis and Kinetics, chap. 4 -
7, p. 129–166, p. 167–214, p. 215–266 & p. 267–300 (John Wiley & Sons, 2005).
[25] Kokalj, A., Makino, T. & Okada, M. DFT and TPD study of the role of steps in the adsorption
of CO on copper: Cu (410) versus Cu (100). Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 29, 194001
(2017).
[26] Makino, T. & Okada, M. CO adsorption on regularly stepped Cu(410) surface. Surface Science
628, 36 – 40 (2014).
[27] Vollmer, S., Witte, G. & Wöll, C. Determination of Site Speciﬁc Adsorption Energies of CO
on Copper. Catalysis Letters 77, 97–101 (2001).
[28] Bönicke, I., Kirstein, W., Spinzig, S. & Thieme, F. CO adsorption studies on a stepped Cu
(111) surface. Surface science 313, 231–238 (1994).
[29] Kirstein, W., Krüger, B. & Thieme, F. Co adsorption studies on pure and ni-covered cu(111)
surfaces. Surface Science 176, 505 – 529 (1986).
[30] Bodin, A. Synthesis of Nanoparticle Model Systems for Sustainable Catalysis by Gas Aggrega-
tion. Ph.D. thesis, DTU Physics (2017).
[31] Vesborg, P. C. K. & Jaramillo, T. F. Addressing the terawatt challenge: scalability in the
supply of chemical elements for renewable energy. RSC Adv. 2, 7933–7947 (2012).
Page 55 of 60
==PAGE:63==
[32] Nave, C. Pauli exclusion principle (2016). URL http://hyperphysics.phy-astr.gsu.edu/
hbase/pauli.html. Date accessed: 14/04/2020.
[33] Sørensen, J. E.
Mass-selected Copper nanoparticles for CO2 elektroreduction, Mass-selected
copper nanoparticles for CO2 electroreduction. Master’s thesis, DTU Physics (2017).
[34] Strebel, C. E. Structure and reactivity of nanoparticles: CO dissociation on Ruthenium, CO
induced surface reconstruction of Platinum, Platinum and Platinum-Yttrium alloys for electro-
chemical Oxygen Reduction Reaction. Ph.D. thesis, DTU Physics (2012).
[35] Huttel, Y. & Haberland, H. Gas-phase synthesis of nanoparticles, chap. 1, 3–21 (John Wiley &
Sons, 2017).
[36] Haberland, H., Karrais, M., Mall, M. & Thurner, Y. Thin ﬁlms from energetic cluster impact:
A feasibility study. Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology A 10, 3266–3271 (1992).
[37] Sebök, B. Creating model systems for catalysis with mass-selected nanoparticles: Characteriza-
tion and properties. Ph.D. thesis, DTU Physics (2017).
[38] Popok, V. N., Barke, I., Campbell, E. E. & Meiwes-Broer, K.-H. Cluster–surface interaction:
From soft landing to implantation. Surface Science Reports 66, 347 – 377 (2011).
[39] Cushman, C. V. et al. Low energy ion scattering (leis). a practical introduction to its theory,
instrumentation, and applications. Anal. Methods 8, 3419–3439 (2016).
[40] Harendt, C., Goschnick, J. & Hirschwald, W. The interaction of co with copper (110) studied
by tds and leed. Surface Science 152-153, 453 – 462 (1985).
Page 56 of 60
==PAGE:64==
6 | Appendix
6.1
Additional TPD spectra
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
260
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
Measurement
 1
 2
 3
M30 SEM current (pA)
Temperature (K)
20% ML
50% ML
6% ML
200% ML
400% ML
-160
-140
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
Temperature (°C)
Figure 6.1: Reproducibility of results across multiple measurements on the same sample for the
coverage study.
Page 57 of 60
==PAGE:65==
6.2
Additional ISS spectra
6.2.1
Glassy carbon substrates before deposition
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
0
2
4
6
8
Intensity (kcps)
Energy (eV)
Ar
Na
F
Cu
6% ML
400% ML
20% ML
200% ML
50% ML
Figure 6.2: ISS measurements of cleaned glassy carbon substrates for the coverage study (sec. 3.5)
after 30 min sputter cleaning at 1-2 µA beam current.
No nanoparticles are deposited in this
measurement, the naming corresponds to the substrate used for that speciﬁc deposition.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Intensity (kcps)
Energy (eV)
Ar
Na
Cu
5 nm
8 nm
3.5 nm
F
Figure 6.3: ISS measurements of cleaned glassy carbon substrates for the size study (sec. 3.6) after 30
min sputter cleaning at 1-2 µA beam current. No nanoparticles are deposited in this measurement,
the naming corresponds to the substrate used for that speciﬁc deposition.
Page 58 of 60
==PAGE:66==
6.3
Learning objectives and project plan
6.3.1
Overall goal
Use surface characterization methods with a focus on temperature programmed desorption on small
mass-selected entities to develop a fundamental understanding of prepared samples.
Suggested link to learning objectives
• Understand and formulate recent developments in temperature programmed desorption based
on peer-reviewed scientiﬁc literature.
• Apply relevant surface sensitive characterization methods to characterize prepared samples
and analyze results.
• Participate in high level academic discussions with scientiﬁc faculty in the SurCat group during
weekly meetings.
• Link the analyzed systems in relation to the energy challenge.
6.3.2
Timeline
• January-February: Gain familiarity with the system, optimize temperature control for the
temperature programmed desorption cube, initialize literary review.
• March-April: Attempt temperature programmed desorption on prepared small entity sam-
ples. If no feasible results are produced in this period, consider shifting focus of project.
• May-June: Continue developing small entity systems and characterize or focus on shifted
focus, depending on results in the March-April period.
• July: Finalize results and focus on report writing.
6.3.3
Evaluation of timeline
January-February: Most of the time here was spent gaining familiarity with the setup and the
optimization of the temperature control. Also general maintenance work needed doing, the most
signiﬁcant of which was working on issues with the x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy cooling. This is
the main reason for the absence of XPS measurements in this project, as it was not fully functional
until late in the project.
March-April: During this time, the COVID-19 outbreak reached a critical point, causing a lock-
down of DTU. This lasted until early May, where DTU was opened gradually. During this period,
litterature was reviewed and some thesis writing was commenced.
May-June: A few weeks into may, the system was operational after being shut down, and after
some upgrades, nanoparticles could be deposited from early June.
Page 59 of 60
==PAGE:67==
July-September: Due to the COVID-19 outbreak, the project had a six week extension. June to
August was spent performing the coverage and size studies in this thesis, and the last two weeks of
September was spent on writing this thesis.
Overall, the project did not go according to plan. This
was mainly due to the COVID-19 outbreak, which made impossible much of the experimental work
in this thesis. During mid-August, the thermoucouple related issues were discovered, which meant
the thesis ended being more of an investigation and development of the TPD system rather than
into copper nanoparticles.
Page 60 of 60
