==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Frequency Tuning of Nano-Photonic  
Resonators for Quantum Networks  
with Erbium Spins 
Wissenschaftliche Arbeit zur Erlangung des Grades 
M.Sc. 
an der Faklultät für Physik der Technischen Universität München. 
Betreut von 
Hon. Prof. Dr. Gerhard Rempe 
Max-Planck-Institut für Quantenoptik 
                                    Hans-Kopfermann-Str. 1 
                                    85748 Garching 
Eingereicht von 
Laura Zarraoa Sardón 
Echelsbacher Str. 3 
81373 München   
Eingereicht am 
27.07.2020 in München 
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Quantum Networks Group
Master’s thesis
Frequency Tuning of Nano-Photonic Resonators
for Quantum Networks with Erbium Spins
Laura Zarraoa Sardón
July 27, 2020
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
A system consisting of Erbium ions doped into silicon photonic crystal cavities (PCCs) has the
potential of becoming an eﬃcient light-matter interface for quantum technologies. It combines
exceptionally long coherence times and narrow optical transitions in the telecommunication
band from Erbium ions with the low mode volume and high Q-factor of PCCs. The later
results in a high Purcell enhancement to overcome Erbiums low ﬂuorescence rate. However,
the emission enhancement is maximum when the Erbium transition is located exactly at the
PCCs resonance. For this project, PCCs are designed to have resonances close to the Erbium
transition, however an exact matching of the PCC resonance and the Erbium’s optical transi-
tion would require a sensitive tuning technique. In this thesis, I explore two methods for the
frequency tuning of photonic crystal cavities. First, I study the electro-optical tuning of PCCs
fabricated on a layer of strained silicon. I observe no electro-optical tuning in the strained
sample above noise level using a lock-in measurement setup. Thus, I calculate a new upper-
bound for the electro-optical coeﬃcient due to strain to be χ(2)
eff = 0.383 ± 0.035 fm/V. Next, I
study the tuning eﬀect of condensing gas on top of the PCCs in a closed cycle cryostat. Using
this technique, I was able to shift the resonance of a 1D photonic crystal cavity up to 4.26nm
towards longer wavelengths. Whereas the electro-optic tuning needs some more detailed inves-
tigation, the gas condensation method is a reliable tool which will help us to investigate the
enhanced emission of Erbium ions in silicon based nanophotonics in the future.
I
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
4
2.1
Purcell Enhancement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Photonic Crystals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.1
Eigenvalue Problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.2
Bandstructure of Photonic Crystals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.3
2.5D Photonic Crystals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.4
Photonic Crystal Cavities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Tuning Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.1
Electro-optical Eﬀect in Strained Silicon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.2
Gas Condensation Tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Simulations
14
3.1
Electric Field Magnitude Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1.1
Back-gate geometry: Symmetrical striplines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.2
Back-gate geometry: Asymmetrical striplines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.3
Two Bondpads Geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Electric Field Gradients Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Nano-fabrication
21
4.1
Sample Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Fabrication Steps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2.1
Resist Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2.2
Electron-Beam Lithography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2.3
Resist Development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2.4
Reactive Ion Etching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2.5
Resist Removal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2.6
Gold Evaporation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2.7
Pad Bonding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5
Electro-optical Tuning Results
29
5.1
Experimental Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.1.1
Optics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.1.2
Positioning stage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.1.3
Fiber-to-chip coupling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
III
==PAGE:8==
Contents
5.2
Results and Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6
Gas Condensation Tuning Results
38
6.1
Experimental Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.2
Results and Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.2.1
Pressure Tuning with He
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7
Summary and Outlook
45
IV
==PAGE:9==
1
|
Introduction
In the last years, there has been a strong focus on the research of quantum physics, lead-
ing to a rapid on-going development of quantum technologies motivated by their promising
applications. Among these applications, special attention is given to quantum information
processing, which would allow for quantum computing [1, 2, 3, 4], and quantum communi-
cation [5, 6]. Quantum information is encoded in quantum states, usually called qubits as
counterpart of the classical bits. A qubit can take any linear combination of two basis states
|0⟩and |1⟩[7]. This allows quantum algorithms to perform a large number of operations in
parallel, leading to huge increase of computational power compared to classical computations
[7, 1].
Another main advantage of using quantum states is entanglement [8], which is the
possibility of generating and using non-classical correlations between qubits.
Numerous physical systems have been proposed as qubits and many of them have also been in-
vestigated experimentally, each being more suitable for certain applications according to their
advantages and disadvantages. Individual ions and atoms trapped in vacuum or as solid-states
impurities are a good choice for stationary qubits [9, 10, 11, 12, 13], which can be encoded
in their nuclear or electronic spin states. The main advantage of these systems is their long
coherence times [14, 15], making them good quantum memories. On the other hand, photonic
states can also carry quantum information as so-called ﬂying qubits. Photons have the ability
of travelling at the fastest possible speed and, especially at some wavelengths, they can be
eﬃciently sent through already existing low-loss glass-ﬁber infrastructure making them ideal
carriers for long distance communication. One pressing goal for the scientiﬁc community is
to combine these two types of qubits in what is known as a quantum network [5, 16]. Such
a network consists of nodes, where stationary qubits act as memories and perform quantum
operations, and channels, through which ﬂying qubits distribute the information and entan-
glement. The main drawbacks to build a quantum network of global scale are the exponential
scaling of the error probability with the length of the communication channel [10], and the
need for quantum memories to achieve longer storage times than the transmission time [15].
A key element to build a quantum network is an eﬃcient interface between stationary and
ﬂying qubits, so that the network can work with good ﬁdelity [5].
Such an interface has
already been realized using single atoms in optical resonators [10], however, the need for scal-
ability points towards solid-state emitters and nanophotonic integrated resonators as a more
promising platform. Already established solid-state emitters are NV centers [12], SiC, semi-
conductor quantum dots or semiconductor crystals doped with rare-earth ions [17]. Following
this direction, our group’s approach to developing such an interface is to use Erbium ions
implanted into silicon.
1
==PAGE:10==
1 Introduction
The choice of Eribum is motivated by two important properties. First, as a rare-earth ele-
ment it exhibits long spin state coherence times (in the order of seconds for the ground state)
[15]. This is due to the outer electronic shell 6s shielding the 4f valence electronic spin and
reducing its sensitivity to external electronic and magnetic noise [13]. Second, Er3+ is the only
known rare-earth ion emitter with an optical transition in the telecom band [13, 15, 18]. The
telecom band is the wavelength window for which optical ﬁbres have minimum losses, between
1.4µm and 1.6µm, as seen in Fig 1.1. This property makes Erbium a very attractive emitter
as it does not require an extra frequency conversion step which can reduce the communication
rate [19, 20]. Unfortunately, the dipole-forbidden nature of intra-4f optical transitions causes
long excited-state lifetimes [15, 18], which also pose a severe limitation to the communication
bandwidth.
Figure 1.1: Attenuation in silica ﬁbers. The minimal loss frequency window between 1530nm
and 1620nm is called the telecom-band. The red arrow points at the (ground state)
transition frequency of Er3+ ions.
Our group’s strategy to overcome this is building nano-photonic resonators in silicon-on-
insulator chips doped with Erbium ions.
Therefore, proﬁting from the maturity and well
established silicon nanofabrication [17, 21], and the fact that silicon is transparent around the
frequency of the Erbium’s optical transition. Some of the implanted ions are expected to be
within the afterwards fabricated nanophotonic structures. The goal is to guide the emitted
ﬂuorescence, trap it into the nanophotonic cavities and proﬁt from an enhanced light-matter
interaction with the Erbium ions [22]. Due to the implantation method each Erbium ion will
occupy diﬀerent sites in the silicon lattice, and thus each ion is expected to have a slightly
2
==PAGE:11==
1 Introduction
diﬀerent transition frequency, generating inhomogeneous broadening. To address a subset of
ions in the broadened ensemble individually, the ability of tuning the resonance frequency of
either the optical resonators or the ions is needed.
In this thesis, I study two diﬀerent frequency-tuning methods for the photonic crystal op-
tical resonators used as a light-matter interface for the Erbium ions. Unsuccessful tuning trials
by using the electro-optic eﬀect of strained silicon led to the use of cryogenic gas condensation
tuning as an alternative. First, the theory behind both tuning methods is revised, followed by
FEM simulations. Afterwards the nanofabrication process of the samples is described and the
results from the tuning eﬀorts are presented and discussed.
3
==PAGE:12==
2
|
Theory
2.1
Purcell Enhancement
The radiative transition dynamics of atoms conﬁned in resonators change dramatically com-
pared to those in free space. In the year 1946, in the context of magnetic resonances, Purcell
predicted that spontaneous emission rates depend strongly on the mode structure and density
of electromagnetic environment surrounding the atom [23]. In particular, he suggested that
placing the atom inside a cavity could enhance its spontaneous emission rate by a factor, which
is since then known as Purcell enhancement factor. In the best case scenario, when the emitter
is resonant with the cavity, oriented optimally with the electromagnetic ﬁeld and placed at an
amplitude maximum, this factor amounts to:
ηP =
3
4π2
Q
V
λ
n
3
(2.1)
Here λ/n is the wavelength in the medium, Q is the quality factor of the cavity and V is the
modal volume. In simple words, the cavity enhances the amplitude of the electromagnetic ﬁeld
trapped within, thus increasing the interaction probability of the electric ﬁeld inside the cavity
with the atom. This enhancement depends mainly on the modal volume and on the quality
factor of the resonator, which is deﬁned as:
Q = energy stored in cavity modes
losses per round trip
.
(2.2)
The key to maximize this factor is thus to have resonators with minimal modal volumes while
still achieving high quality factors.
Photonic nanostructures have been proven an eﬃcient
way to control light with extremely small mode volumes of around (λ/n)3 [24]. In particular,
photonic crystal defect cavities have been proven to achieve high quality factors of up to 107 [25]
resulting in unprecedented Purcell enhancement [26]. The theoretical background of photonic
crystals, and especially photonic crystal cavities, will be introduced in the next section.
2.2
Photonic Crystals
A photonic crystal is a medium with one-, two- or three-dimensional periodic modulation of
the dielectric function with a period of the order of the wavelength of electromagnetic waves.
The modulation of the dielectric function can result in a strong wavelength dependence of
the transmission properties of electromagnetic waves. For some wavelengths, the light can
propagate through the medium without scattering, whereas other wavelengths are completely
4
==PAGE:13==
2 Theory
reﬂected by the structure. For a ﬁxed λ, the modulation of the dielectric function can be
optimized (varying the geometry of the photonic crystal and its periodicity) to target one of
these behaviours.
A major step in the formulation of photonic crystal took place in 1987 with two publications.
On one hand, E. Yablonovitch showed the existence of photonic bandgaps (PBGs) [27] called
such in analogy with electronic bandgaps in the solid state theory. A PBG is the frequency
window in which the medium allows no propagation. On the other hand, S.John analyzed
light localization phenomena taking place in periodic and disordered media [28], which would
make it possible to control the spontaneous emission rates of emitters in 2D and 3D PhCs.
The term "photonic crystal" itself was coined by E.Yablonovitch in 1989 [29] by emphasizing
the analogy with conventional crystals in formation of Brillouin zones, Bloch’s waves, bands
and bandgaps.
2.2.1
Eigenvalue Problem
To calculate the propagation of light in a photonic crystal one can use the formulation of
classical electromagnetism given by the Maxwells Equations [30] and transform them into an
eigenvalue problem which is easily solved numerically. The so-called master equation can be
derived from Maxwell Equations by taking some assumptions. First, that the ﬁeld amplitudes
are small so only linear terms are signiﬁcant. Second, that the dielectric material is isotropic
and the dispersion in the material is negligible. And third, that the ﬁelds are monochromatic
with an e−iωt time dependence. The master equation or Helmholtz equation looks as follows:
∇×

1
ε (⃗r)∇× ⃗H (⃗r)

=
ω
c
2
⃗H (⃗r)
(2.3)
This equation has the mathematical structure of an eigenvalue problem and can be solved
by eigenvectors, ⃗H (⃗r) called modes which have corresponding eigenvalues ω/c. The electric
ﬁeld distribution can be recovered from the induction ﬁeld modes, the ansatz and the fourth
equation in 2.4:
⃗E (⃗r) =
i
ωε0ε (⃗r)∇× ⃗H (⃗r)
(2.4)
The master equation can be rewritten in analogy to the Schrödinger equation in quantum
mechanics, if the operator ˆΘ is deﬁned as:
ˆΘ ⃗H (⃗r) = ω2
c2 ⃗H (⃗r)
(2.5)
ˆΘ ≡∇×
1
ε (⃗r)∇×
(2.6)
Then, similarly to the Hamiltonian operator in Schrödingers formalism, it can be proven that
this Operator is Hermitian and positive semi-deﬁnite, therefore its eigenvalues are non-negative
and thus the eigenfrequencies w must be real.
5
==PAGE:14==
2 Theory
2.2.2
Bandstructure of Photonic Crystals
The next step to solve propagation in photonic crystal is to include the periodicity of the
medium in the master equation. This periodicity is described by the spatial dependence of
the dielectric function ε

⃗r + ⃗R

= ε (⃗r) or in refractive index n

⃗r + ⃗R

= n (⃗r), where ⃗R
designates the primitive lattice vector. In general, there can be up to three diﬀerent primitive
vectors ⃗Ri, i = 1, 2, 3 if periodicity occurs in all three dimensions.
In 1928, Felix Bloch developed the concept of Bloch states and formulated the Bloch theo-
rem to describe the conduction of electrons in crystalline solids [31]. The potential acting on
the electrons in a crystal V (⃗r) is invariant under discrete translations ⃗R matching the periodic-
ity of that crystal: V (⃗r) = V

⃗r + ⃗R

. The analogy between this potential and the periodicity
in the dielectric function is used.
If a three-dimensional, perfect and periodic medium is considered, the Bloch theorem states
that eigenmodes obey the same periodicity as the crystal lattice [30]. Therefore, in a medium
with perfect dielectric modulation the eigenstates of the master equation are also periodic and
form discrete bands in frequency space.
⃗H (⃗r) = ei⃗k⃗r⃗uk (⃗r)
(2.7)
Then the eigenvalue problem can be formulated in terms of the periodic vector ⃗uk (⃗r):
ˆΘ⃗uk (⃗r) = ω (k)2
c2
⃗uk (⃗r)
(2.8)
Typically, it is not needed to consider all possible k vectors in the dielectric function decom-
position. Periodicity manifests itself through reduction of all k-vectors in the reciprocal space
to the ﬁrst Brillouin zone only, because all points in the k-space can be restored from the
Brillouin zone by translation with reciprocal space vectors. However, such addition does not
change the eigenmodes according to Bloch’s theorem. But actually, the ﬁrst Brillouin zone is
still massively redundant in terms of wavevectors. If the symmetry of the lattice is taken into
account, actually of its unit cell (mirror symmetry, rotational symmetry, inversion, etc.), the
redundancy can be removed leaving only such k vectors which are not related by any symmetry.
Such k-space region is called the irreducible Brillouin zone (IBZ).
A graphic way to visualize the optical properties of photonic crystals is to plot their bandstruc-
ture. In analogy to bandstructures in electronic crystals, the dispersion relation of photonic
crystals can be solved ﬁnding ωi (k) for the diﬀerent modes. To do this, the eigenfrequencies
ωn (k) are calculated for discrete points in k along the IBZ. When talking about two-dimensional
photonic crystal and assuming they are periodic in the plane xy, and extending inﬁnitely in
the z direction, the bandstructure solutions can be divided into two polarization modes: the
transversal-electric mode (TE), where the electric ﬁeld is conﬁned to the xy plane; and the
transversal-magnetic mode (TM), where the magnetic ﬁeld is the one conﬁned to the xy-plane.
6
==PAGE:15==
2 Theory
Figure 2.1: Band diagrams and PBGs for hexagonal lattices of dielectric rods r = 0.2a in air
(top) and air holes r = 0.3a in dielectric (bottom) ε = 12. The irreducible Brillouin
zone is shaded in the hexagon. TE bands are in solid-red lines, TM - in dashed-blue.
Adapted from [32].
Figure 2.1 shows an example of two such 2D photonic crystal and their numerically calculated
bandstructures. The green areas represent a high index dielectric medium of eps = 12 (which
is close to the dielectric constant of Si in the telecom band), while the white areas represent
air. The hexagonal lattice has a r/a ratio of 0.2 for the top structure and 0.3 for the bottom.
These calculations show that not every frequency has a correspondent k-value, which opens
a gap in the bandstructure. This is the so-called photonic bandgap and the modes with fre-
7
==PAGE:16==
2 Theory
quencies in this window cannot propagate in the medium. For instance, the ﬁrst structure
produces a photonic bandgap in the TM mode, remaining gapless for TE polarizations. On
the other hand, the inverse structure creates a PBG in the TE modes instead. These are called
partial PBG since only one of the modes is blocked; if the periodicity of the medium blocks all
polarizations at some frequencies it is said to have a complete PBG.
2.2.3
2.5D Photonic Crystals
The solution for 2D photonic crystal assumes isotropy in the perpendicular direction. This
is of course not the case in reality, where photonic crystals are usually built on thin layers
of material resting on a substrate, for example for this project the photonic structures are
fabricated from SOI (silicon-on-insulator) chips. These structures are called photonic crystal
slabs or 2.5D photonic crystals.
To solve propagation in photonic crystal slabs the light cone needs to be taken into account, to
ﬁnd which parts modes will still be guided inside the PC slab and which will decay. The light
cone frames all possible solutions for plane waves in the medium surrounding the photonic
structure and its border is given by the special solution k⊥= 0 of the dispersion relation:
ω = c
n
q
k2
|| + k2
⊥
(2.9)
With k⊥and k|| beign the wave vectors perpendicular and parallel to the propagation axis
respectively. All slab bands sitting inside the light cone have their partners in the surrounding
medium, with whom they can be easily and eﬀectively coupled. Such modes decay very fast
due to leakage of energy, whereas the modes outside the light cone, also called guided modes,
are conﬁned inside the dielectric material due to internal reﬂection. The recipe for the analysis
of a photonic crystal slab is simple: all parts of the 2D photonic band structure, which happen
to be inside the light cone, should be eradicated as only the guided modes are of interest.
2.2.4
Photonic Crystal Cavities
Many applications of PhCs are based on incorporating diﬀerent defects in the lattice in a con-
trollable way. A defect is a change in the geometrical or optical parameters of the lattice. One
important type of defect that can be exploited is the point defect, meaning the changes are
only applied to a single or small group of lattice elements. These changes result in diﬀerent
modes being allowed in the defect region but unable to propagate outside of it, thus behaving
as cavity modes. Structures designed to achieve this conﬁnement and strongly enhance the
ﬁelds at these defects are therefore called photonic crystal cavities [33, 34].
Any cavity is characterized by two important factors, the quality Q and the mode volume
V. These factors are also dependent on how the cavity is created: one way could be to re-
move some lattice elements, another way would be to modify the geometrical parameters of
the lattice locally, which would allow to tune the frequency and shape of the cavity modes
[33]. Photonic crystal cavities can achieve very high Q-factors while having very small mode
volumes. Therefore, they can more easily achieve high Purcell factors than the conventional
optical resonators, such as Fabry-Perot cavities [35, 36].
8
==PAGE:17==
2 Theory
2.3
Tuning Methods
Photonic crystal cavities can be designed to target a certain resonance frequency, but due to
fabrication imperfections, it is not easy to have structures exactly at the desired resonance. In
addition, there are cases where this frequency might change or one wants to tune the cavity in
and out of resonance. For all of these reasons, frequency tuning of the cavities is important.
However, photonic crystal cavities are monolithic structures, meaning once built it is not easy
to change their design for tuning them. There are methods to do so, such as oxidation or FIB
processing, but they are slow processes and in most cases not reversible. Fortunately, there
are other more ﬂexible tuning methods like mechanically deforming the structure or changing
its optical properties (e.g. the refractive index).
Changing the refractive index in the cavity is usually a simple, fast and adjustable way of
tuning which is why I focus on it. There are several ways to do this, for example using mate-
rials with an electro-optical coeﬃcient which allows to tune the refractive index by applying
external ﬁelds, or coating the surface of the cavity with a diﬀerent material. In the following
subsections I go into the two methods I chose to follow these approaches.
2.3.1
Electro-optical Eﬀect in Strained Silicon
The ﬁeld of silicon optoelectronics strives to integrate electronic and optical functionalities
into monolithic components based on the widely developed silicon platform. Unfortunately,
silicon has very limited active optical properties [37]. For example, high-speed and low-power
optical modulators are typically based on the Pockels eﬀect: an electro-optic eﬀect with a very
fast temporal response (down to a femtosecond [38]). However, the inversion symmetry of the
silicon crystal structure prohibits any electro-optic eﬀect of this type.
One alternative to achieve optical modulation in silicon is to use the free-carrier plasma dis-
persion eﬀect.
The plasma dispersion eﬀect is related to the density of free carriers in a
semiconductor, which changes both the real and imaginary parts of the refractive index [37].
This is described by the Drude-Lorenz equations that relate the concentration of electrons (Ne)
and holes (Nh) to the absorption coeﬃcient α and refractive index n:
∆n =
−e2λ2
0
8π2c3ε0n
 
∆Ne
m∗ce
+ ∆Nh
m∗
ch
!
(2.10)
When an external DC ﬁeld is applied it leads to charge accumulation, which varies the carriers’
concentrations thus varying the refractive index. However, this eﬀect also varies the absorption
coeﬃcient, leading to a decreased Q factor of the resonators. This is not desirable, since the
highest Q factors are needed to achieve higher Purcell factors. Besides, this eﬀect requires
the presence of free carriers, meaning the silicon must be doped, which is not the case for the
samples used in this project.
Another way to create an electro-optic eﬀect in silicon, where only the real part of the re-
fractive index will be changed, is to locally break the inversion symmetry by applying strain
[39]. The broken symmetry will in principle allow for eﬀects like the Pockels’ eﬀect to appear.
A common way to do this is by depositing a straining overlayer (usually made of SiN), which
9
==PAGE:18==
2 Theory
applies an asymmetric strain to the crystal, thus creating a linear electro-optic eﬀect. In this
way, the bulk refractive index (n) will vary as a linear function of the external applied electric
ﬁeld (E). Following this approach, Pockels-based modulators in silicon [40, 41, 42, 43], as well
as Second Harmonic Generation [44, 45] have been demonstrated on silicon strained with a
SiN overlayer.
In these works, the electro-optic eﬀects were attributed solely to strain. However, in strained
silicon the refractive index variation when an external electrostatic ﬁeld is applied is the sum
of diﬀerent contributing electro-optics eﬀects. First, the Kerr and Pockels eﬀects, which are
only possible when the centro-symmetry is broken, but also the previously mentioned plasma-
dispersion eﬀect:
∆neff = ∆nP
eff + ∆nK
eff + ∆nc
eff
(2.11)
Silicon optical modulators usually rely on the Pockels eﬀect, because modulation requires less
power than those based on plasma dispersion or Kerr eﬀects and because charge mobility or
charge recombination times do not limit their speed [37]. Strained silicon optical modulators
using a SiN straining layer have obtained electro-optic coeﬃcients of up to r = 2.2 pm/V,
which corresponds to an eﬀective tensor element χ(2) = 336 pm/V . The tensor element is
related to the change of dielectric permittivity (and thus refractive index) as:
∆ε = 2χ(2)E
(2.12)
where E is the applied electric ﬁeld [46]. The electro-optic coeﬃcient is deﬁned as rijk = χ(2)
ijk/n4
[47]. Other semiconductors as GaAd or InP have coeﬃcients of 1.5pm/V [48], making strained
silicon a comparable option. However, it is still one order of magnitude below the most com-
mon material for electro-optic modulation, LiNbO3 which has a coeﬃcient of 33pm/V.
In the studies with higher reported electro-optic coeﬃcients the stress in the material is induced
by a depositing silicon nitride (SiNx) layer, breaking the symmetry which in principle enables
χ(2)
eff ̸= 0[49]. The electro-optic eﬀect was attributed solely to the strain eﬀect, nevertheless
having an straining overlayer can give rise to free carriers or trap states and localized charges
at the interface [45, 50, 51]. This allows a contribution from the plasma-dispersion eﬀect to
the electro-optic coeﬃcients.
One way to check if this linear refractive index variation is strain-induced is to investigate
its high frequency response. If it was a strain-induced electro-optic eﬀect the response would
be immediate up to optical frequencies, whereas the free carrier dispersion eﬀect has a slower
characteristic lifetime. In a recent study [52], the authors perform these measurements at dif-
ferent stress levels and in samples with and without a SiN stressing layer. Their results show
that the optical modulation cannot be attributed to a strain-induced χ, but rather to the eﬀect
of free carriers dispersion, and an upper limit is set on the strain contribution of χ(2)
eff=8pm/V.
10
==PAGE:19==
2 Theory
Figure 2.2: From [52]. Eﬀective χ(2)
eff as a function of the electrical modulation frequency for
three diﬀerent stress levels. The inset shows the light frequency for the electro-optic
measurement. The three lines have the same behaviour, which indicates χ(2)
eff is
highly independent on the stress.
As it can be seen in Fig 2.2, the eﬀective χ(2)
eff is independent of strain level. Besides, a cutoﬀ
frequency is observed for the optical response of 0.50 GHz, which is consistent with their free
carriers characteristic time. On the other hand, if the response was due to Pockels eﬀect, the
signal would follow voltage variations instantaneously up to optical frequencies, which they do
not observe. In addition to this, they check that samples without a SiN stressing layer exhibit
an χ(2)
eff an order of magnitude lower than those with the stressing layer. In conclusion, the
main contribution to the linear electro-optic eﬀect in strained silicon is due to free carriers
dispersion eﬀect, which also limits the modulation frequency response. The contribution from
strain is upper-bounded to their minimum detected signal which is 8pm/V for 0.5 GPa strain,
and they suggest further measurements on samples strained through other methods would be
needed to set a more accurate limit.
In this project SiN is not used to produce the strain in the samples. Instead the samples
are fabricated from chips with an alternating heterostructure of Germanium doped Silicon and
11
==PAGE:20==
2 Theory
standard Silicon layers. The lattice mismatch between alternate layers produces a strain level
comparable to that of the afore-mentioned study. The Si:Ge layers have a bigger lattice than
Si, therefore they are contracted in the parallel plane to the substrate and elongated in the
perpendicular direction; whereas the Si layers are elongated along the substrate plane and
contracted in the perpendicular direction. The samples used in this project are not expected
to have free carriers which would induce a plasma-dispersion contribution to the tuning, as
no straining overlayer is used, relaying only on the lattice mismatch for strain generation.
Therefore, my measurements of the electro-optic coeﬃcient in strained silicon will help to put
a more accurate limit to the contribution of strain to the total tuning coeﬃcient.
From Equation 2.3.1 the change of dielectric constant is known, and thus the tuning will
depend on the electric ﬁeld applied and the electro-optic tensor component. To obtain the
higher electric ﬁelds, and thus maximize the tuning simulations were made to optimize the
stripline geometry to apply ﬁelds to the strained cavities. This is detailed in Chapter 3. The
electro-optic tensor gives the tuning coeﬃcients for the diﬀerent electric-ﬁeld components. This
tensor is related to the strain tensor of the material, in particular many works suggest it is
related to the strain gradient tensor [46]. The coeﬃcients for the electro-optic tensor are not
well known, since to measure them one would need to isolate the eﬀect of strain applied from
diﬀerent directions and the respective electric ﬁeld components, which is not easy.
In this work, I just expect to measure the sum of the contributions of this coeﬃcients to
the total tuning of the cavity resonance. The expected components of the electric ﬁeld are ex-
plored in the simulations, but the strain tensor in the samples cannot be so easily calculated.
An overall strain of around 0.4 GPa is expected, which is comparable to those of previous
works (mentioned before). From their upper limit to the electro-optic eﬀect and the simulated
ﬁelds a detectable tuning is expected, although low. This eﬀect might not be useful to broadly
tune the cavities to a speciﬁc resonance, but could be used for ﬁne tuning of a resonance al-
ready very close to the desired frequency. In addition, these measurements will improve our
understanding of the electro-optic eﬀect in strained silicon, and allow to set a more accurate,
upper bound to this eﬀect.
2.3.2
Gas Condensation Tuning
Since the strain contribution to the electro-optical tuning is yet to be determined, but is in
principle not very high, and since the samples used do not proﬁt from the plasma-dispersion ef-
fect, another tuning method is explored. Cryogenic gas condensation tuning is chosen because
it is easy to implement in the current setup and has been proven to work well for photonic
crystal cavities.
Photonic crystals resonators are very sensitive to local variations in their environment due
to the close conﬁnement of the optical mode. In particular, the resonance wavelength is also
aﬀected by changes in the environment and therefore, tuning of the resonators is possible by
adsorption [53] or controlled deposition [54] of monolayers on the surface of the PCC. This
high sensitivity to the environment has been taken advantage of to develop diﬀerent kind of
sensors based on PCC, to measure for example gas pressure or relative concentrations in a gas
mixture of gases with diﬀerent refractive index. In this work I will focus on the tuning eﬀect.
12
==PAGE:21==
2 Theory
If a photonic crystal is considered, made from a dielectric with periodic holes in it and a
material is deposited on top of it, there would be a change in the eﬀective refractive index.
This change is due to the photonic bandstructure changing due to the change of index contrast
between the semiconductor and the holes. The result of this change is a shift in the resonance
wavelength. In the air-mode cavities, optical energies are concentrated in the low-index region
of the structure. If the cavity is created by missing a hole, the ﬁeld would be still appreciable
at the blank space created by this defect, thus sensing the material deposited there. However,
larger shifts are achieved by creating cavities modulating the hole diameters [55] since the ﬁeld
is concentrated in the air region, and thus more sensible to material deposition in the areas
near the holes.
Diﬀerent gases can be used for tuning.
In [56] they compare the use of xenon and nitro-
gen for this purpose. They report a 4nm scan range achievable by condensing Xe at 20K. They
also try nitrogen at the same temperature, but ﬁnd results much less reproducible. This is
solved going to lower temperatures (10K), but losing scan range to 3.4nm. In addition, much
more nitrogen is needed for condensation than Xe. However, cleaning the samples from the
condensation gas is much faster for nitrogen. In conclusion, N2 is suitable for multiple coarse
scans, whereas Xe is preferred for accurate scans.
The airmode, tapered hole cavities our group uses are optimal for this type of tuning, which
will be implemented using both nitrogen and argon, in order to compare their tuning ranges
which are expected to be in the order of a few nm, similar to those previously reported. The
samples used for this project are fabricated with many cavities with slightly diﬀerent param-
eters, and thus resonances, so that at least some of them will be close to the ions resonances.
The expected gas tuning range will be then enough to tune those cavities already close to the
targeted frequency.
13
==PAGE:22==
3
|
Simulations
In this chapter I show the results from the modelling of the samples for diﬀerent stripline ge-
ometries. These simulations were done to decide which type of striplines would be fabricated
on the samples and which electric ﬁeld magnitudes and gradients could be expected from them.
The chosen modelling tool was the COMSOL Multiphysicső software [57], in particular the
AC/DC: Electrostatics(es) module. I want to evaluate the electric ﬁeld reaching the nanos-
tructures. For this purpose, I model the samples as a SiO2 substrate on top of which lays
a central silicon waveguide with 220nm×700nm cross-section. This waveguide represents the
photonic nanostructure (for these simulations I neglect the holes making up the photonic crys-
tal cavity as they will not aﬀect signiﬁcantly the magnitude of the external electric ﬁeld). To
the sides of this waveguide diﬀerent gold stripline geometries will be modelled with a 100nm
height, sitting on top of a 220nm Si layer representing the device layer of the chips. Surround-
ing all these elements there is an air domain. An schematic of the model can be seen in Figure
3.1.
Figure 3.1: Cross-section of the model domains for the simulations. The air domain is in light
blue, the gold is yellow, the silicon dark grey and the silicon oxide is light grey.
3.1
Electric Field Magnitude Simulations
In this section I show 2D simulations of the electric ﬁeld magnitude in the center of the silicon
waveguide as a function of the distance between the striplines and the waveguide for two
14
==PAGE:23==
3 Simulations
bondpad geometries. I model the 2D cross-section of the sample to decrease computational
time, and I evaluate the electric ﬁeld magnitude in the center of the silicon waveguide as a
ﬁxed voltage is applied to the striplines.
3.1.1
Back-gate geometry: Symmetrical striplines
In the backgate geometry the striplines are in-plane and parallel to the photonic nanostructure.
They would all be connected to a bigger bondpad and the same voltage would be applied to
all of them through this bondpad. The back of the chip is used as a backgate electrode for the
voltage drop. The striplines are made from a gold layer, 100nm thick, on top of the silicon layer
(so called, device layer) which is 220nm thick. The silicon waveguide has this same height,
and a width of 700nm as said before, and is separated from the rest of the device layer by two
trenches at either side, of 2µm where there is no silicon.
The silicon, gold, air and silicon dioxide properties are taken from the COMSOL library.
The top boundary of the gold striplines is set as a terminal, where the voltage is applied. The
simulation is run looking for a stationary solution for the electric ﬁeld. I sweep over the dis-
tance separating the striplines (the closest boundary to the silicon waveguide) from where the
device layer starts after the trench. This distance is swept from 1µm to 6µm. The minimum
separation distance is chosen to be 1µm (plus 2µm trench) because it was the typical minimum
distance used in other works up to which the metal striplines will not signiﬁcantly increase the
absorption of the light on the waveguide.
An overview of the geometry can be seen in Figure 3.2, where the color map shows the voltage
distribution and the arrows mark the electric ﬁeld direction and magnitude for a ﬁxed separa-
tion distance.
Figure 3.2: Backgate geometry with symmetrical striplines separated by 2µm plus 2µm
trenches from the cavity and 5V of applied voltage.
Color map shows voltage
distribution over the sample’s cross-section. Grey arrows show the direction and
magnitude of the electric ﬁeld. The ﬁelds components shown in Figure 3.3 were
calculated for the center point of the waveguide, marked by a red circle.
15
==PAGE:24==
3 Simulations
Since the two striplines lay symmetrically to both sides of the cavity, the X components of
the electric ﬁeld generated by them cancel each other out and thus the magnitude of total X
electric ﬁeld component is very close to zero. On the other hand, the Y component is not
zero due to the voltage drop between the striplines and the backgate. The magnitude of the Y
component of the total electric ﬁeld depends on the applied voltage and the distance separating
the striplines and the cavity. This can be seen in Figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Electric ﬁeld magnitude in the center of the silicon waveguide as a function of the
separation between the striplines and the end of the trenches. In red and dark blue
are the X components of the ﬁeld, and in light blue and green the Y components,
for 5V and 10V of applied voltage respectively.
As expected, the higher the applied voltage, the higher the electric ﬁeld would be in the
waveguide. Furthermore, the closest the striplines are, the higher the electric ﬁeld is. The
expected electric ﬁeld magnitudes for the minimum separation distance and voltages between
5-10V are between 1-2×105 V/m.
3.1.2
Back-gate geometry: Asymmetrical striplines
I now compare what happens when the symmetry between the two striplines to the sides of the
cavity is broken. By this I expect to increase the X component of the electric ﬁeld. I compare
two cases, having one of the striplines being double as far as the other; and the extreme case
of having just one stripline. The voltage and electric ﬁeld distribution for these two geometries
can be seen in Figure 3.4 (a and b).
In addition, Figure 3.4 (c and d) shows the magnitude of the electric ﬁeld X and Y com-
ponents for these two geometries. As predicted, eliminating the symmetry with respect to
the waveguide axis prevents the X component of the electric ﬁeld to be almost zero in the
center of the waveguide. The X components for just one stripline are more than double those
in the asymmetrical case, since there is no electric ﬁeld from an opposite stripline to partly
cancel them. However, for the one stripline geometry the Y component of the electric ﬁeld is
reduced to around half the value of that of the asymmetrical geometry. This is because the
Y components from opposite striplines add to each other in the backgate geometry, therefore
eliminating one of them takes away its contribution. The Y component magnitude in the asym-
16
==PAGE:25==
3 Simulations
metrical case is the same as that of the symmetrical geometry, since there is no diﬀerence in
the Y direction between these two geometries. The fact that the electric ﬁelds components are
higher for higher applied voltages and decrease as the separation distance is increased remains
true for these geometries.
In conclusion, the shorter separation distance from the cavity and the higher the applied
voltages, the higher the electric ﬁelds in the waveguide. The separation could be limited by
fabrication feasibility and the change the metal stripes induce in the light absorption if too
close to the waveguide. Besides, for high Y components a symmetrical geometry is preferred,
whereas for high X components the one stripline geometry is better. For a compromise between
the two, having one stripline farther away from the cavity than the other is a good option.
I decide to fabricate these three geometries alternating them from one cavity to the next, so
that I can test which of them yields better tuning results.
3.1.3
Two Bondpads Geometry
In the two bondpad geometry half the striplines will be connected to one bondpad and the
other half to another, so that diﬀerent voltages can be applied to each side of the photonic
nanostructures. The modelling is exactly the same as before, but now each stripline is set as a
terminal (instead of both of the counting as one only terminal) and opposite sign voltages are
applied to each, as seen in Figure 3.5 (a).
In this geometry, the Y component of the electric ﬁeld is further reduced as the Y components
from each stripline partly cancel each other out. On the other hand, the X component of
the electric ﬁeld is slightly higher than the maximum X component achieved for the vertical
geometry with just one stripline. For asymmetrical striplines in this geometry the X compo-
nent is slightly reduced in favour of a slightly higher Y component. Thus, making striplines
asymmetrical while having two bondpads has no beneﬁts for high electric ﬁeld magnitudes.
In conclusion, the highest ﬁelds magnitudes are achieved with this geometry, in particular
for the X components of the ﬁeld. Thus, a sample with two bondpads will also be fabricated.
For Y components the back-gate geometry is preferred.
3.2
Electric Field Gradients Simulations
In this section I present diﬀerent simulations where the ﬁeld gradient is evaluated inside the
waveguide for diﬀerent stripline geometries. As explained in the previous section 2.3.1, the
electro-optic tensor is related to the strain gradients. In the samples the strain is induced
by a lattice mismatch from the alternating layers. From these hetero-structures, high strain
gradients are expected when going from one layer to another. however, since they alternate it
is possible that the strain gradients eﬀect cancel out under an homogeneous electric ﬁeld. For
this purpose, having an electric ﬁeld gradient over the sample could prove useful to observe
tuning.
The gradient of each electric ﬁeld component is calculated as the modulus of the vector:

dEi
dx , dEi
dy , dEi
dz

. The ﬁeld gradients of the two most promising previous geometries are evalu-
ated, namely the asymmetrical back-gate and the two-bondpads with symmetrical striplines.
17
==PAGE:26==
3 Simulations
Figure 3.4: a) and b) show the voltage drop (color map) and electric ﬁeld distribution (dark
grey arrows) for two asymmetrical striplines geometries. On a) the second stripline
is separated by twice the distance from the waveguide to the ﬁrst stripline, whereas
on b) there is just one stripline. On both the separation between the ﬁrst stripline
and the waveguide is 2µm plus 2µm trenches. c) and b) show the magnitude of the
X and Y components of the electric ﬁeld for two applied voltages (5V and 10V) for
each one of these geometries respectively, calculated at the center of the waveguide,
marked by the red circle in a) and b).
In addition, I try two more geometries which I thought could induce higher gradients of the
ﬁeld similar to the electrostatic tip eﬀect. These geometries consist of adding small perpen-
dicular features to the end of the striplines in the horizontal (two bondpads) geometry, in a
18
==PAGE:27==
3 Simulations
Figure 3.5: a) shows the voltage drop (color map) and electric ﬁeld distribution (dark grey
arrows) for two symmetrical striplines in the two bondpad geometry. The separa-
tion between the striplines and the waveguide is 2µm plus 2µm trenches and the
applied voltage is ±5V. b) and c) show the magnitude of the X and Y components
of the electric ﬁeld for two applied voltages (±2.5V and ±5V) for symmetrical and
asymmetrical striplines. The ﬁelds were calculated at the center of the waveguide,
marked by the red circle in a).
comb-like manner. I simulate this as perpendicular tips coming from both sides of the cavity.
These tips can be symmetrically opposed, called comb geometry, or alternating, called saw
geometry. Model images can be seen in 3.6 (a and b) as well as the magnitude of the gradient
of the X and Y ﬁeld components (c).
For the striplines with new features added the electric ﬁeld components magnitudes are close
to those of striplines without the features, but slightly lower (in the order of 0.5V/m lower).
However, unlike expected, the gradients of the ﬁelds are six orders of magnitude lower for these
new features.
19
==PAGE:28==
3 Simulations
Figure 3.6: 3D model of the comb geometry (a) and the saw geometry (b). Results for the
gradient modulus of Ex and Ey (c) for diﬀerent geometries: dark blue for the
vertical or backgate geometry with just one stripline, red for the horizontal or two-
bondpads geometry with symmetrical striplines, dark green for the comb geometry
and cyan for the saw geometry. The gradients were calculated at the center of the
waveguide, marked by the red circles in a) and b).
20
==PAGE:29==
4
|
Nano-fabrication
In the following section, I present the fabrication steps necessary to build our nanophotonic
devices used for investigating diﬀerent cavity tuning methods. The diﬀerent methods, including
electron-beam lithography (EBL), reactive-ion etching (RIE) and gold-evaporation will be
described in detail.
4.1
Sample Overview
As discussed in the previous sections, one of the goals of the group is to perform spectroscopy
on single Erbium ions proﬁting from the eﬀects of being coupled to a photonic crystal resonator.
In addition, the goal of this project is to tune the frequency of these resonators. Here I present
the design for the resonators; and also the bondpads and the striplines used for electro-optical
tuning.
The design of the resonators can be seen in Figure 4.1. They consist of a short waveguide,
with 2µm wide trenches. The waveguide’s end is tapered to facilitate on-chip coupling. The
photonic crystal cavities are fabricated in the centre of these waveguides, by a row of holes
with tapered radii forming a photonic defect mode.
In general, many cavities are fabricated on the same chip, varying the central hole size imply-
ing a variation of the designed resonance frequencies of the cavities. Moreover, one half of the
cavities are made asymmetric by adding holes on the opposite to the in-and outcoupling side
to increase reﬂection probability.
The samples used for electro-optical tuning undergo a second nanofabrication process to cre-
ate the bondpads and striplines used to apply external DC ﬁelds. There are two diﬀerent
geometries for the bondpads.
The ﬁrst one consists of just one bondpad, to the reﬂective
side of the cavities, and the voltage drop is applied between this bondpad and the back of
the chip which acts as a backgate. This is the one called backgate or vertical geometry in
the simulations. The second one consists of two bondpads, one to each side of the cavities,
to apply opposite voltages to them. This is the one called horizontal or two-bondpads geometry.
Several striplines connected to the bondpad carry the voltage to the cavities. These striplines
are parallel to the waveguides were the cavity is built. In the two-bondpads geometry each
stripline comes from a diﬀerent bondpad, thus from diﬀerent directions. On the back-gate
geometry both striplines come from the same bondpad, each to each side of the cavity. The
striplines end shortly after the cavity end, and they can be parallel to the cavity with straight
21
==PAGE:30==
4 Nano-fabrication
end or the can have a comb-like structure around the cavity, as described in section 3.
Figure 4.1: a) Optical image of two structures, the dark blue areas are the trenches and the
dark line in the middle is the silicon waveguide with a photonic crystal cavity. b)
Scanning electron image of the end of one of the cavities where the tapering of
the holes can be appreciated. c) SEM images of two waveguides with photonic
crystal cavities, the right cavity is asymmetric, containing extra holes to increase
the end mirror reﬂectivity.
d) Two waveguides ending with tapers to help the
on-chip coupling.
The straight striplines and comb-like striplines geometries are alternated from one cavity to
another. Plus, the distance from the cavities to the striplines is also varied. And the location of
the two striplines per cavities is also alternated between having them symmetrical to each side
of the cavity, having one of them farther from the cavity than the other, and ﬁnally having only
one stripline. These variations in location and geometry will give us diﬀerent ﬁeld strengths
and ﬁeld gradients inside the resonators, thus allowing for study of how these factors aﬀect the
tuning eﬃciency. An example of these variations can be seen in Figure 4.2.
22
==PAGE:31==
4 Nano-fabrication
Figure 4.2: a) Optical image of three cavities with striplines coming from the same bondpad
symmetrical to both sides, asymmetrical and with just one (from top to bottom)
b) Optical image of three cavities with striplines coming from two bondpads and
with comb-like structures at the end.
4.2
Fabrication Steps
The fabrication process is carried out on 10x10mm silicon-on-insulator (SOI) chips. These
chips are cut from a 12 wafer and consist on three layers (from bottom to top): a 725 µm sili-
con (Si) substrate layer for mechanical support, a 3 µm silicon oxide (SiO2) layer (also called
buried oxide layer) and a 220nm silicon layer called the device layer. Some of these chips are
directly used for fabrication testing and optimization, whereas some others are sent for Erbium
doping. The ion implantation process consists in bombarding the chips with high-energy ions,
which damages the device layer. To repair the damage, the chips go through rapid thermal
annealing (RTA) in a 133Pa nitrogen (N2) atmosphere, at 700◦C with a ramp time of 5min
and total annealing time of 10min.
The ion implantation process is carried out at the Fraunhofer Institut for Integrated Circuits,
in Erlangen. The steps of resist preparation and removal, reactive ion etching (RIE) and other
cleanroom tasks are carried out at the Centre for Nanotechnologies and Nanomaterials (ZNN),
a shared TUM nanofabrication facility operated by the Walter Schottky Institute (WSI). The
electron-beam lithography is carried out at the Walther Meiβner Institute (WMI).
An overview of the fabrication process can be seen in Figure 4.3.
4.2.1
Resist Preparation
The ﬁrst step is to apply an electron beam lithography resist ﬁlm, but before this the chips
need to be thoroughly cleaned. The cleaning removes the protective coating applied on the
chips before shipping, as well as other contaminants and dust particles. This ensures optimal
resist adhesion and homogeneity, which is very important for a successful lithography result.
23
==PAGE:32==
4 Nano-fabrication
Figure 4.3: Schematic fabrication steps. Undoped (a) and erbium doped (b) SOI chips are
covered with a thin layer of positive electron-beam resist, ZEP 520A (c). Electron-
beam lithography (d,h) is performed, changing the chemical structure of the resist
locally, so that a selective removal (e,i) of the exposed areas is possible (also called
resist development). This creates an etch mask whose pattern can be transferred
to the device layer by reactive ion etching (f). Then the resist is removed (g) and
the silicon photonic nanostructure is ready. For samples used to try electro-optical
tuning an extra nanofabrication process is needed to create the gold bondpads and
striplines. For this purpose, another layer of resist is spin-coated on the chip, which
then goes through a second e-beam lithography process and resist development step.
Gold is evaporated on the entire sample. When the resist is removed afterwards
gold remains only where the resist was previously developed during the second EBL
step (j). Then, the resist is removed (k) and the sample is ready for bonding.
24
==PAGE:33==
4 Nano-fabrication
The ﬁrst cleaning step consists in sonication at high power submerged in acetone and then
isopropanol, for three minutes each at a 30◦C temperature. Next, the chip is dried with nitro-
gen gas ﬂow and is transferred into a plasma asher to remove the remaining organic residuals
on the surface. The device creates an oxygen plasma with 300W power, oxygen ﬂux of 75
cm3/min, pressure of 75 Pa and ashing time of 4 minutes.
After checking the surface of the chip with an optical microscope to assure there are no big
imperfections, the resist is applied. The high resolution, positive electron beam resist ZEP
520A is used. A thin layer of it is spin-coated on the chip with a ﬁnal spin speed of 4000 rpm
for 2 minutes and a ramp speed of 2000 rpm/s at a resist temperature of 5◦C. After the spin-
coating the chip is heated (soft-baked) at 180◦C for 180s. This step is necessary to reduce the
solvent concentration remaining, which ensures a proper development of the written pattern
after lithography.
The thickness of the resulting resist ﬁlm is controlled with a laser ellipsometer, yielding an
average thickness of around (400 ± 20)nm in the centre of the sample.
The edges of the
sample present uneven thickness and bulges, named edge beads [58], due to tension forces.
Unfortunately, our structures need to be fabricated near the edge, for easy access with the
tapered ﬁbres. To circumvent this, once the resist is prepared the chips are cleaved (ideally) in
two halves. To do this, a small scratch is made in the silicon layer at about the middle of the
chip with a diamond scratcher-tool. It is then ﬂipped and light pressure is applied on the back
until it breaks along the scratch. This step creates two chips with one edge of homogeneous
resist where our structures can be fabricated.
4.2.2
Electron-Beam Lithography
The 80kV EBL system nB5 by Nanobeam, Ltd. (UK) was used for the electron-beam lithog-
raphy steps. This device can write patterns with features as small as 6nm. The patterns can
be uploaded as GDSII ﬁles, which I write as python macros for the program Klayout [59].
Then the electron beam has to be focused and aligned and the proper area dose (the amount
of charge deposited per area) has to be deﬁned for the Nanobeam to write these patterns
automatically.
To write the patterns the electron beam is scanned across the surface of the sample by elec-
trostatic deﬂectors. The area covered by the maximum deﬂection range, in other words, the
area that can be written without moving the stage is known as a write ﬁeld. To write pat-
terns larger than a write ﬁeld the stage has to be moved, which can cause alignment problems
between ﬁelds as the stage movement is not as precise. The patterns, which are in general
larger than one write ﬁeld, are fragmented into write ﬁelds which are then stitched together.
The Nanobeam software uses main write ﬁelds which are 500µm×500µm, which are in turn
subdivided into 20µm×20µm subﬁelds. We design our patterns so that the borders between
subﬁelds do not intersect with any cavity or stripline structure. Bondpads are very big struc-
tures occupying more than one subﬁeld, but also because of their size alignment imperfections
within them are not that signiﬁcant.
To align the pattern with the chip and to focus the beam, a focus map is used. This con-
sists in setting a coordinate system marking two consecutive corners of the chip, and then
25
==PAGE:34==
4 Nano-fabrication
focusing on four points of known position near the respective four corners of the sample. With
these focus values the software ﬁts a planar surface interpolating the focusing values in be-
tween. On the ﬁrst fabrication run small scratches are done in the corners of the chip to have
a feature in which to focus.
In this run we write alignment markers, square 10µm×10µm
features, along the edges of the chip which are then etched. These markers can be used for
automatic focusing and for alignment of structures written in diﬀerent fabrication runs. A
base dose of 2.0 c/m2 is used for writing.
4.2.3
Resist Development
Resist development consist in removing the areas of the resist exposed during the EB lithog-
raphy, creating an etching mask to transfer the pattern into the device layer. The exposed
resist is broken down chemically by the developer ZED-N50 (n-amyl acetate) by submerging
the chip in it at 5◦C for 65s. To stop the reaction and avoid removing non-exposed areas the
sample is submerge for 10s into ZMD-D (89% methyl isobutyl ketone, 11% isopropyl alcohol)
also at 5◦C. The chips are then gently dried with nitrogen gas ﬂow and checked with an optical
microscope to ensure the resist has been properly developed. If the exposed resist has not
completely gone oﬀin some parts, the chip can be again submerged in the developer for a
few seconds and again in the rinser to ﬁnish removing the exposed resist. To ﬁnish this step,
the chip is hard-baked at 140◦C for three minutes. This removes the residual solvents and
strengthens the mask.
4.2.4
Reactive Ion Etching
The pattern created after the EB-lithography is transferred to the device layer by reactive ion
etching. The hard-baked remnant resist serves as an etch-mask which leaves exposed only the
areas where we wish to remove the silicon layer. The etcher device is an Oxford Plasmalab 80
Plus system with an inductively coupled plasma (ICP) of sulfur hexauoride (SF6), argon (Ar)
and oxygen (O2). The reactive ion etching is based on the ﬂuoric gases SF6 (ﬂow: 20sccm) and
C4F8 (ﬂow:30sccm), whose molecules are ionized in the ICP and accelerated towards the chip
surface. The etching process is a combination of physical etching, due to mechanical sputtering
of silicon atoms, and chemical etchings, due to the gases forming chemical compounds with
the silicon atoms. This combination yields very high etching rates [60].
The temperature in the etching chamber is set at 25◦C with a pressure of 14 mTorr. The
forward power is 15W, the ICP power is 220W and the etching time is 70s. This recipe was
optimized by other group members to obtain steep sidewalls with small surface roughness.
4.2.5
Resist Removal
After etching (or gold evaporation), the resist mask needs to me removed. First, the chip is
submerged in ZDMAC (dimethylacetamide) for 12 min at a temperature of 100◦C. Then, the
chip is sonicated in the solver for 10min at power level 5 and 50◦C bath temperature. After
this most of the resist is dissolved and the chips just needs to cleaned. For this, it is sonicated
ﬁrst in acetone for 5min and then in isopropanol for 2 min, at power level 3 both times, still
at 50◦C bath temperature. Finally, the chips go through oxygen plasma ashing for 4min with
the same parameters as the initial cleaning to remove the remaining organic residuals.
26
==PAGE:35==
4 Nano-fabrication
4.2.6
Gold Evaporation
The gold sputtering is carried out in the shared facilities of the Experimental Physics of Func-
tional Spin Systems group at TUM.
Sputter deposition is a physical vapour deposition (PVD) method to deposit thin ﬁlms of
materials. A target material is bombarded with the sputtering gas, normally an inert gas such
as argon, which causes atoms from the target to be ejected and ﬂy through the sputtering
chamber until they impact the target (or the chamber walls). This is a very eﬃcient thin ﬁlm
deposition method which can apply coatings on a single atom layer with extreme purity. It is
a widely used method in the semiconductor industry, to deposit thin ﬁlms of various materials
in integrated circuit processing.
For our samples we want to create thin gold bondpads and striplines on the surface of the
device layer.
Therefore, the whole process of spin-coating the resist on the sample, then
writing it in the Nanobeam and then developing the resist needs to be repeated before gold
sputtering. The resist will create a mask, leaving exposed only the area where we want to
deposit the gold.
Unfortunately, gold and silicon have very weak adhesion. In general, an intermediate layer
is used between them to ensure strong binding and stable deposition. For example, positive
charger polymers such as poly-y-lysine are used when depositing colloids on top of silicon [61],
whereas thin ﬁlms of chromium and titanium are usually deposited when sputtering, before
the deposition of gold. We follow the latter trend, depositing ﬁrst a thin 7nm layer of titanium,
followed by a 100nm thick layer of gold. The sputtering takes place at a chamber pressure of
2×10−7 bar and 1.2A current.
4.2.7
Pad Bonding
Once the nanophotonic structures and the gold electrical components are fabricated, the chip
is glued using liquid silver glue (for high conductivity) to a PCB board with four copper elec-
trodes. The chip is glued on top of one of the electrodes (which will act as a back-gate), and
the three other electrodes need to be bonded to the golden bondpads on the chip to apply
external ﬁelds.
The bonding is performed with a TPT-HB16 Semi-Automatic Wire Bonder at the TUM facil-
ities from the Experimental Physics of Functional Spin Systems group. This model is based
on aluminium wedge ultrasonic wire bonding. The bonding between the aluminium wire and
the metal surface is achieved by combining bond force, ultrasonic energy, and a time long
enough to obtain metal-metal interdiﬀusion. As seen in Figure 4.4, a clamped aluminium wire
is brought in contact with the metal surface which is to be bonded. The wire is held down
against this surface while ultrasonic energy is applied for a certain amount of time. This forms
the ﬁrst wedge bond. Then the wire is guided on to the second contact, where the process
repeats forming the second bonding point. The wire is then broken oﬀby being clamped and
moved.
27
==PAGE:36==
4 Nano-fabrication
Figure 4.4: Aluminium wedge ultrasonic wire bonding process. A clamped aluminium wire
(1) is brought against the samples surface (2) and held there while applying force
and ultrasonic energy for a certain amount of time (3) to form the ﬁrst bonding
point. Then it is guided to the second bonding point (4,5) and held there while the
bonding process is repeated (6). The clamped wire is then lifted (7) and moved (8)
to break it oﬀ(9, 10).
The bonding is performed at room temperature to avoid the formation of intermetallic com-
ponents. A force of 300mN and a relative strength of the U/S signal to the tool of 200 is
applied for 200ms to ensure the bonding. Each gold bondpad is bonded twice to the corre-
spondent electrode on the PCB board in case one of the wire breaks or de-attaches (which is
not unusual).
28
==PAGE:37==
5
|
Electro-optical Tuning Results
The initial characterization measurements of the electro-optic eﬀect are performed at room tem-
perature, even though future operations with the erbium ions doped into the silicon structures
would require cryogenic temperatures to freeze out thermal phonons and enhance coherence
times. For the ﬁrst measurements of electro-optical tuning in the strained silicon photonic
crystal cavities the setup described in section 5.1 will be used. In addition, the results of these
measurements are presented in section 5.2.
5.1
Experimental Setup
The experimental setup has three main parts, which will be described in detail in the following
subsections. A schematic sketch of the setup is illustrated below in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Schematic of the measurement set-up, with all elements labeled, as described in
sections 5.1.1 and 5.1.2. Adapted from F. Burger 2020 [62].
5.1.1
Optics
The optical set-up used to measure the electro-optical tuning at room temperature is schemat-
ically depicted in Figure 5.1. As a light source a Toptica CTL 1550 laser (1) is used, which
generates infrared light continuously tunable from 1520nm to 1630nm. The light from the laser
29
==PAGE:38==
5 Electro-optical Tuning Results
is guided to the setup by a polarization-maintaining single-mode optical ﬁber (2) and it is cou-
pled out by a collimator (3). It then passes through a quarter-wave plate and a half-wave plate
for polarization control (4), after which it is split by a 50/50 non-polarizing beam-splitter (5).
The reﬂected beam is guided to an InGaAS ampliﬁed photo-detector (PD) (6) whose signal is
used for external power stabilization of the laser and signal normalization. The transmitted
beam is coupled (7) into a single-mode ﬁber whose end has been tapered (8). From the tapered
ﬁber the light is evanescently coupled into the photonic crystal cavities in the chip (9). This
process is described in detail in section 5.1.3, and requires very accurate positioning of the chip
granted by the positioning stage (11), also described in more detail in the next section (5.1.2).
Finally, the reﬂected light from the cavities on the chip is coupled back into the tapered ﬁber,
going backwards through the optical set-up until reﬂected on the beam-splitter towards a sec-
ond photo-detector (10). The signal from this photo-detector is normalized by the signal of
the ﬁrst. The normalized signal is then used to characterize the resonance frequencies of the
cavities and their shifts when a DC ﬁeld is applied.
5.1.2
Positioning stage
To couple light evanescently to a cavity, the tapered ﬁber needs to be placed on the integrated
taper at the end of the desired structure in the chip. A three-axis translation stage is used
to move the chip with submicron accuracy so that the tapered ﬁber will touch the 700nm
maximum width tapered end of the structure.
A microscopic objective (12) and a CCD camera (16) are used to get a magniﬁed real-time im-
age to align the ﬁber and the taper. The microscope is set above the chip, which is illuminated
with visible light from a LED (14) and reﬂected via a pellicle (13). The objective is moved
until the point of the tapered ﬁber is centered in the camera image, then the chip is slowly
raised towards the ﬁber, adjusting the in-plane position so that the tapered ﬁber makes contact
with the taper in the structure. An extra SWIR camera (17) is available for infrared imaging
through a second pellicle (15). This image is useful to see the IR scattered light directly from
the cavity center which heralds successful coupling to the structure
5.1.3
Fiber-to-chip coupling
The same tapered ﬁber is used to couple light into the structure and collect back the reﬂected
light. However, there is a big mode mismatch between the 10.4 µm mode-ﬁeld diameter of
the single-mode ﬁber and the 700nm wide silicon waveguides. This leads to low coupling ef-
ﬁciencies, which can be improved by adding a taper at the end of the silicon waveguides as
described in section 4.1, going from 700nm to 100nm over a length of 30 µm.
The tapered ﬁbers are fabricated from uncoated single-mode ﬁbers by dipping them on a
etch gradient formed by a layer of silicon oil over hydroﬂuoric acids in which HF etchants
diﬀuse.
High coupling eﬃciencies of up to 30% are achieved by the process described before of placing
the tapered end of the ﬁbers overlapping the taper at the end of the silicon waveguide where
the cavity is located, as seen in Figure 5.2.
30
==PAGE:39==
5 Electro-optical Tuning Results
Figure 5.2: Schematic of the a) tapered end of the silicon waveguide us to improve coupling,
b) the tapered ﬁber sitting on top of the taper for evanescent coupling.
5.2
Results and Discussion
The measurement procedure starts by looking for a nanophotonic cavity moving the chip with
the stage and then coupling to it by placing the tapered ﬁber on the structure. Once cou-
pled, a wide range scan is performed to extract the cavity resonances. For this, the laser is
continuously tuned while the light intensity coming back from the cavity is recorded. From
these measurements the resonance with higher Q is chosen, usually the ﬁrst mode, and a ﬁne
scan is performed over it to extract the exact position of the resonance and the Q with higher
accuracy. These values will be the zero reference to measure if there is any tuning.
In Figure 5.3 a wide scan (a) and a ﬁne scan (b) are shown. The resonances of the cavity
are easily identiﬁed by the dips in the light intensity, since the PD detects the reﬂected light
from the structure. If the laser is at a resonant frequency of the cavity, light gets trapped and
is not back reﬂected anymore, therefore the intensity decreases. The ﬁrst resonance frequency,
corresponding to the fundamental cavity mode, is typically the one with higher Q-factor. This
is due to the cavities’ design being optimized to trap the fundamental light mode travelling
through the waveguide. Higher modes can also be trapped, but have higher losses resulting
in lower Q-factors. High Q-factors are preferred for the measurements because the higher the
Q-factor, the steeper is the slope in the intensity dip of the cavity. The steeper the slope, the
more the signal intensity will vary if there is any tuning shifting the resonance. Therefore, for
higher Q-factors it is easier to detect the tuning eﬀects.
To extract the resonance frequency and Q-factor with higher precision ﬁne scans as the one
seen in Figure 5.3 are taken. To do this, the laser is slowly tuned around the targeted cavity
resonance. The data is then ﬁtted to extract the peak and the Q-factor, which is deﬁned as
the peak resonance divided by the linewidth of the cavity. A Lorentzian ﬁt function is used to
extract the FWHM of the dips to calculate the Q-factors. Typical Q-factors for the cavities in
31
==PAGE:40==
5 Electro-optical Tuning Results
which the electro-optical tuning was tested are around 6,500-20,000.
Figure 5.3: Normalized intensity of the reﬂected light (blue) as a function of the wavelength for
a wide scan (a) and a ﬁne scan (b) for one of the nanophotonic structures. From
the Lorentzian ﬁt (orange) the resonances and Q-factors are extracted. A ﬁne scan
(b) is performed for the ﬁrst resonance, which has the higher Q-factor (and thus
sometimes the ﬁt is not as good there in the wide scan). From the ﬁne scan the
resonance and Q-factor are extracted with higher precision, shown in the text box
in the bottom left corner.
From this point there are two types of measurements that can be done to characterize the
tuning. The ﬁrst option is to increase the voltage applied to the bondpads and re-scan the
cavity for diﬀerent voltage steps and check for any resonance shift. Another option is to tune
the laser frequency to the slope of the cavity resonance and change the voltage. If there was
any tuning, one would expect to see the intensity signal change as it slides along the slope of
the resonance due to the resonance shift. The second option is more sensible to small tuning,
as a change in the resonance causes a bigger intensity variation in the slope, compared to that
32
==PAGE:41==
5 Electro-optical Tuning Results
close to the peak.
A way to make the slope measurement more accurate is to use a lock-in detection scheme.
This consists in modulating the voltage applied to the bondpads at a certain frequency. The
light intensity is recorded and the signal is sent through a signal analyzer which takes the
Fourier transform of it. If there was any tuning above noise level, the intensity of the light
would follow the voltage and thus it would be also modulated with the same frequency as that
of the applied voltage. Therefore, one would expect the signal analyzer to show a peak at the
modulation frequency.
Figure 5.4: Cavity resonance and Q-factor as a function of the applied voltage. Measurements
taken on a structure with two striplines without a comb coming each from a diﬀerent
bondpad. The voltage was taken up from 0V to 20V, and then down again to 0V.
I ﬁrst try re-scanning the cavity resonance at diﬀerent voltage steps. Results from these mea-
surements for a cavity with two straight striplines connected each to a diﬀerent bondpad can
be seen in Figure 5.4. From my simulations, this geometry gives the highest electric ﬁeld com-
ponents and gradients. The resonance seemed to increase with increasing voltage (three points
33
==PAGE:42==
5 Electro-optical Tuning Results
for higher voltages). To check if this was due to tuning the voltage was then taken down to
0 again, expecting to see the resonance return to its original position. This did not happen,
being this last point the one of higher resonance value. In conclusion, I observe no apprecia-
ble tuning of the cavity. The resonance stays within the error bars independently from the
applied voltage and the apparent increasing trend could be caused by the laser heating the cav-
ity and possibly evaporating humidity that had condensed on the surface, which would induce
this small drift. The quality factor of the cavity also remains unaﬀected by the applied voltage.
As discussed before, the lock-in detection method is more sensible to changes on the signal
caused by small tuning eﬀect. Therefore, I tried measuring using that approach. Figure 5.5
shows the results from these measurements on three cavities, the ﬁrst with comb-like striplines
(a) and then two cavities with straight striplines (b, c). From my simulations, the straight
striplines are expected to generate the higher ﬁeld components and gradients, but still I wanted
to compare if the comb-like striplines had any eﬀect on the resonance. First, the voltage mod-
ulation is set to 10kHz (a, b), with a peak to peak voltage of 10V. The Fourier transform (in
dBm units) of the intensity signal from the PD is calculated by the signal analyzer. If there is
tuning, a peak would appear at the modulation frequency in the signal coming from the PD,
due to the intensity signal following the voltage modulation due to the tuning eﬀect. However,
I do not observe such a peak over the noise level. There is also no appreciable diﬀerence be-
tween the comb-like striplines and the straight striplines geometry, as no peak shows for any
of them.
I try to improve this measurement looking for cavities with higher Q-factors and straight
striplines, reducing the span of the signal analyzer and its resolution bandwidth and increasing
the voltage modulation to 1MHz to avoid possible high-pass eﬀects. As shown in Figure 5.5
(c) still no signal peak is found. This means that if there is any tuning, it is below the noise level.
From these measurements and simulations, I calculate an upper-bound to the electro-optical
coeﬃcient in these strained samples. The electro-optical coeﬃcient gives the expected change
of refractive index for an applied electric ﬁeld.
χ(2)
eff = ∆n
∆E
To calculate the upper bound of χ(2)
eff I calculate the maximum ∆n and ∆E from my measure-
ments. I take the case of the cavity with straight striplines and voltage modulation of 1MHz,
where the integration time was longest. From the simulations in section 3.1.3 and knowing the
striplines are 4.5 µm away from the cavity in this sample, the maximum expected ﬁeld in the
cavity is of ∆Emax = 0.5×105 V/m.
The shift of refractive index causes a change in the of resonance of the cavity given by the
relation δn/δR, which in turn causes a change in the intensity recorded by the PD given by
the relation δR/δI.
∆n = δn
δR∆R = δn
δR
δR
δI ∆I
34
==PAGE:43==
5 Electro-optical Tuning Results
Figure 5.5: Fourier transform of the intensity signal coming from the PD. The modulation of
the voltage for (a) and (b) was 10kHz. The Y axis is in dBm units. No signiﬁcant
peak at the modulation frequency is measured for comb-like cavities (a) nor for
cavities with straight striplines (b).
The Q-factor of cavities (a) and (b) were
6.5k and 7.8k. The modulation of the voltage for (c) was increased to 1MHz to
reduce possible high-pass eﬀects. The signal corresponds to a cavity with straight
striplines with 16.4k Q-factor, and still no signiﬁcant peak is observed.
35
==PAGE:44==
5 Electro-optical Tuning Results
When modulating the voltage, the maximum change of intensity (∆Imax) can be extracted
from the noise level (since there is no peak) in the signal analyzer measurements. The maxi-
mum amplitude of the modulation sidebands observed is -150dBm. This can be converted to
Volts and knowing the PD calibration, it can be converted to intensity units.
This maximum change in intensity can be used to calculate the correspondent shift in res-
onance (∆Rmax) knowing the relation δR/δI. This relation is given by the cavity slope from
the ﬁne scan. Assuming the dip of the cavity is linear to ﬁrst order, a linear ﬁt is used to ﬁnd
the slope. This linear ﬁt and value of the slope can be seen in Figure 5.6 (a), where the inset
shows the cavity ﬁne scan and the points used for the ﬁt.
Finally, to relate ∆Rmax with ∆nmax the relation δn/δR is needed. To calculate this rela-
tion, a small simulation with MEEP [63] is run where the refractive index of the photonic
crystal cavity is shifted around that of standard silicon by 10−3 (which to ﬁrst order approx-
imation, and for a cavity with 1000 Q-factor, would induce a shift of around one linewidth).
Five data points are simulated and as seen in Figure 5.6 (b) they follow a clear linear trend.
From the slope of linear ﬁt of these points and the maximum expected shift in resonance, an
upper-bound to the refractive index change (∆nmax) can be calculated. Combining it with
the upper-bound of the applied ﬁeld (∆Emax=0.5×105 V/m), the upper-bound of the electro-
optical coeﬃcient is calculated to be χ(2)
eff = 0.383 ± 0.035 fm/V.
The calculated upper-bound to the electro-optical coeﬃcient is much smaller (four orders of
magnitude) compared to the 8 pm/V reported in previous work [52]. With the reported coef-
ﬁcient and the expected ﬁelds from the simulations, an observable tuning eﬀect was expected.
A lower coeﬃcient explains why no tuning was observed. Their reported value corresponded
to their noise level as they did not observe any tuning either caused by strain. Since this ex-
periment has a higher sensitivity I can upper-bound the strain electro-optical coeﬃcient with
higher accuracy to a much lower value. However, since there is no tuning it can also possible
that the actual electric ﬁeld in the cavities is lower than the one expected from the simula-
tions, due to imperfect bonding or dirt in the bondpad or striplines. This could be further
investigated in the future.
In conclusion, no electro-optical tuning is observed and an upper-bound to the stress con-
tribution of χ(2)
eff = 0.383 ± 0.035 fm/V is calculated. Since the cavities cannot be tuned in
this way, another tuning method is tried, as described in the next section (6).
36
==PAGE:45==
5 Electro-optical Tuning Results
Figure 5.6: a) Linear ﬁt of the cavity slope (data points in blue, ﬁt in orange) used to upper-
bound the resonance shift. The inset shows the ﬁne scan of the cavity, with an
orange box enclosing the points used for the linear ﬁt. b) Simulation results for
the resonance shift with the refractive index of the cavity (blue) and their linear ﬁt
(orange) used to calculate the upper bound of the change of refractive index due
to the electro-optical eﬀect.
37
==PAGE:46==
6
|
Gas Condensation Tuning Results
The idea of the cryogenic gas condensation tuning is to change the resonance frequency of
the cavities by depositing frozen gas on their surface.
This method consist in having the
sample inside a cryostat at 1.6K and letting in small amounts of gas and measuring the shift
in resonance as it freezes over the sample. The measurement setup can be seen in Figure 6.1.
Figure 6.1: Schematic of the experimental set-up (not to scale), with all elements labeled, as
described in section 6.1. Adapted from [64].
6.1
Experimental Setup
The measurement setup is made up of three parts, the optical path getting light in and out
the cryostat, the cryostat itself and the elements to get the gas inside the cryostat.
A Toptica CTL 1550 laser, tunable from 1520nm to 1630nm, is used as a light source. The beam
goes through a beam-splitter to a tapered ﬁber inside the cryostat. The coupling principle to
the structure is the same as in the electro-optical tuning setup. Light is coupled evanescently
from the tapered ﬁber into the silicon structures, and the reﬂected light is collected back into
the ﬁber. The reﬂected light is then reﬂected by the beam-splitter into a photon detector (PD).
Due to the lack of a helium infrastructure here at the MPQ a closed cycle cryostat (Attocube
Attodry 2100) is used for measurements at 1.6K. Inside the cryostat the sample is mounted
38
==PAGE:47==
6 Gas Condensation Tuning Results
on top of a nanopositioning stage. In a similar way to the room temperature setup, an optical
objective is mounted on top of the sample to aid in the coupling process. Also, inside the
cryostat there is a heater mounted to the gas inlet, used to quickly heat the copper tube when
the gas is getting inside the cryostat, so that it does not freeze right away when entering and
it reaches the sample. The reason is that the gases used for tuning have freezing temperatures
above 1.6K (argon at 83.8K and nitrogen at 63.15K) so the gas would already freeze on the
sidewall of the sample space way above the sample. By providing a heated tube down to the
bottom of the sample space, a few centimeters away from the sample surface it is ensured that
the gas is deposited close to the sample so that it then freezes directly on top of the chip.
The heater is controlled by cryogenic temperature controller (SRS CT100) and a temperature
sensor (LakeShore DT-600).
To take the gas into the cryostat, there is an intermediate vacuum chamber equipped with
a pressure sensor to control the amount of gas in that prechamber. This chamber is connected
to the cryostat by a valve, which can be opened to let the gas ﬂow in and out the cryostat.
6.2
Results and Discussion
The measurement procedure works as follows. First, with the help of the microscope objective
a nanophotonic structure is found and coupled to. Once coupled, a continuous wave scan over
the tunable wavelength range of the laser is performed to measure the resonances of the cavity.
From this scan, a clearly visible resonance is chosen, and a ﬁne scan is done to extract its exact
position and Q-factor. This will be the zero reference for the tuning.
The next step is to let gas ﬂow inside the cryostat. To control the gas ﬂow, the pressure in
the prechamber is monitored. First, the prechamber is ﬁlled with gas up to 0.5bar. Then, the
heater mounted on the copper tube close to the sample area is switched on. The temperature is
monitored for a 10s waiting period for proper thermalization. Then, the needle valve towards
the cryostat is gently opened so that the gas ﬂows in while the pressure in the intermediate
prechamber decreases. Once the desired pressure is reached, the valve is closed and the heater
is switched oﬀ. The sample area needs a few minutes to cool down below the freezing point
of the gas. After this time, another ﬁne scan over the same resonance of the cavity is performed.
This process is called a cycle and can be repeated several times to deposit more and more
ice on the sample surface in a controllable way. For the argon tuning one cycle corresponds
to 0.2bar ﬂowing into the cryostat, whereas for nitrogen much more gas is needed to observe
tuning, thus the cycles are of 0.5bar each time (2.5 times the amount of argon per cycle). Be-
sides, when tuning with argon the heater temperature is set to 100K, since the freezing point
for argon is 83K; whereas for nitrogen the heater setpoint is 80K, since the freezing point is
63K. After each cycle there is a waiting period of a few minutes before measuring so that the
sample area thermalizes below the freezing point, at a temperature around 5K.
This procedure is repeated, and the resonance shift and the Q-factor are measured as a func-
tion of the number of cycles. The measurements stop once there is no signiﬁcant change in the
resonance after another cycle. The results of these measurements can be seen in Figure 6.2,
where one gas cycle refers to letting 0.2bar of gas inside the cryostat.
39
==PAGE:48==
6 Gas Condensation Tuning Results
The maximum tuning is achieved using argon and amounts to a (4.26 ± 0.009)nm shift in
the resonance of the cavity. As observed in Figure 6.2, the shift in resonance is not linear with
the number of cycles, but rather fast in the beginning. It then slows down until ﬁnally satu-
rating after a certain number of cycles. When using argon, the tuning saturates after around
8 cycles, whereas for nitrogen it saturates after around 12 gas cycles. The amount of nitrogen
needed for tuning the cavities is much higher than argon, and the maximum achieved tuning
is lower, (3.278 ± 0.003)nm.
Figure 6.2: Resonance shift of the cavity as a function of the gas cycle number. Each gas cycle
corresponds to 0.2bar of gas ﬂowing into the cryostat. In blue, the resonance shift
caused by argon ﬂowing inside the cryostat, whereas in red that of nitrogen. The
error bars are smaller than the points. In brackets, measurements taken while the
sample area was not yet fully thermalized below the freezing point of the gas. The
inset shows the stability of the tuned resonance using argon over 3 hours.
One possible reason for achieving higher tuning with argon compared to nitrogen is a diﬀer-
ence in the refractive index values for the two gases. At 20K argon ice has a refractive index
of 1.2897 (at 0.6234 µm) [65]; nitrogen ice has a refractive index of 1.21 at 14K [66]. One
hypothesis is that this trend is still valid at lower temperatures where the measurements are
performed and that argon ice in these conditions has a higher refractive index than nitrogen
40
==PAGE:49==
6 Gas Condensation Tuning Results
ice. A higher refractive index would induce a higher change of the eﬀective refractive index of
the photonic crystal cavity. Thus, the higher the change of eﬀective refractive index, the larger
the tuning range that can be achieved. Also, to reach a certain resonance shift less high-index
ice would be needed than lower-index ice, since for the same amount of gas the one with higher
index will induce larger resonant shifts.
A small simulation was done using the software package MEEP, to calculate the resonance
shift of the PCC when surrounded by a medium with diﬀerent refractive index than air. When
the refractive index was n=1.21 for a cavity with a quality factor similar to the ones in the
samples (19k) the resulting shift was of 15nm. For a refractive index of n=1.11, the resulting
shift was of 6 nm. These shifts are much bigger than the ones observed experimentally, but
they show that a decrease of just 0.1 in the refractive index can lower the resonance shift
by almost half. Thus, a small diﬀerence between argon and nitrogen refractive index could
explain the diﬀerent achieved tunings. Another reasons that could contribute to this diﬀerence
in tuning and could also explain why the simulations predict a much larger shift, is the quality
of the ice on the sample. On the simulations a homogeneous medium with a certain refractive
index is used, however it is possible that the ice forming on top the samples is not perfectly
crystallized. There could be dirt on the sample surface creating disturbances in the ice, which
would aﬀect the eﬀective refractive index. Besides, it is possible that the ice is depositing just
on the top surface of the sample, but not inside the holes of the photonic crystal, which would
also lower the change of eﬀective refractive index, and thus the tuning.
When tuning with argon, for some number of cycles several measurements were made, the
ones made ﬁrst are shown in brackets in Figure 6.2. The ones made after waiting for some
more time are left without brackets. The bracketed points show lower resonance shifts, in-
dicating less tuning for that number of cycles. The explanation for this is that since these
measurements were made waiting for shorter times, the area around the sample may have not
settled at a stable temperature. Therefore, not all the gas might have yet completely frozen
on the sample. After waiting for some more minutes and letting the sample stabilize at a low
temperature, another measurement is taken, showing a higher shift than before, likely from
the remaining gas freezing on the sample and increasing the refractive index change.
The inset in Figure 6.2 shows how the resonance of a tuned cavity varies over time. This
measurement was made by tuning a cavity resonance with 7 gas cycles and then waiting and
taking measurements after 30, then 60 and then 90 minutes. Once the sample area is completely
thermalized below 5K, the tuned resonance remains stable within the resonance measurement
errors for several hours.
It is also interesting how the quality factor of the structures is aﬀected by the gas deposi-
tion. Figure 6.3 shows this dependence for argon tuning on one of the cavities.
When tuning with argon, the quality factor of the structures is not clearly aﬀected by the
frozen gas on the sample. However, the ﬁt used to determine this Q-factor is very variable
from one ﬁne scan to another, thus giving not very reliable measurements of the Q-factor, as
can be seen in Figure 6.3. The errors are larger for the ﬁrst cycles because there wider scans
were performed around the resonance frequency of the cavity (not knowing how much tuning
to expect). The wider the scan, the less accurate the ﬁt can be and the higher the error in
41
==PAGE:50==
6 Gas Condensation Tuning Results
it, thus bigger error bars. At least there is no clear lowering of the Q-factor with the argon
tuning, which is promising. For nitrogen tuning, the quality factor lowers slightly after more
than 10 gas cycles.
By means of these results, argon appears to be the better tuning option since it is faster
and requires less gas compared to the nitrogen tuning. Besides, after tuning, if one wants to go
back to the original resonance to try tuning again or do any other measurements it is needed to
clean the tuning gas from the inside of the cryostat. This is done by heating, so that the frozen
layer on top of the sample melts and gasiﬁes again while pumping the cryostat. Afterwards,
the cryostat needs to be cooled down again. It is observed that after tuning with nitrogen,
doing this cleaning process and cooling down again the usual base temperature of 1.6K is not
reached, but rather the cryostat cools down to only 2.4K. However, this does not happen when
tuning with argon and then cleaning, which is an extra advantage of using this gas, but this
needs to be investigated in more detail in the future.
Figure 6.3: Quality factor of the cavity as a function of the number of cycles of argon tuning.
In blue the values for argon tuning and in red for nitrogen tuning.
42
==PAGE:51==
6 Gas Condensation Tuning Results
6.2.1
Pressure Tuning with He
One last tuning method is tried, consisting in tuning the cavities using the helium inside the
cryostat and varying the pressure. Helium is used as an exchange gas inside the cryostat to
facilitate the thermalization of the whole sample area. At room temperature the helium is
gaseous, but as the temperature drops below 4K it starts to liquify. Operations are performed
at temperatures around 1.6K, therefore a sea of liquid helium is expected to form at the bot-
tom of the cryostat. The sample is located close to the bottom of the cryostat tube and it can
be expected that the helium also liquiﬁes in the surface of the sample forming a thin (liquid)
layer, similar to that of frozen gas already used for tuning. By changing the pressure inside
the cryostat the thickness of this layer is expected to vary inducing some tuning eﬀect on the
cavities.
The initial helium pressure is 1000mbar inside the cryostat. Each cycle consists of ﬁrst evac-
uating the 1m long tube connecting the turbo pump and the cryostat to a pressure of below
10−4mbar. Afterwards to valve connecting the evacuated tube and the cryostat is opened such
that the pressure in the cryostat is reduced. This is repeated 6 times. For the seventh cycle
the sample space is directly pumped to 10mbar. The results are shown in Figure 6.4.
The liquid helium is expected to gasify with decreasing pressure, thus decreasing the thickness
in the hypothetical layer on top of the sample which would then aﬀect the resonance of the
cavity resulting in tuning. However, no signiﬁcant change of the resonance position is observed
with the pump cycles, since all values are within the error bars of each other. The same holds
for the Q-factor of the cavity, which remains unaﬀected by the decreasing pressure. This means
that if there is a liquid He ﬁlm on top of the sample in the standard operation conditions inside
the cryostat, it is not thick enough to induce any tuning which could have been reversed by
pumping the helium out of the cryostat.
In conclusion, changing the helium pressure inside the cryostat does not result in any ob-
servable tuning.
43
==PAGE:52==
6 Gas Condensation Tuning Results
Figure 6.4: Resonance frequency of the ﬁrst cavity mode (blue) and its quality factor (red) as a
function of the pump cycles for helium. These cycles consist in carefully evacuating
helium from the cryostat. This process is repeated for 6 cycles. The seventh cycle
is marked with an asterisk because it consisted on pumping directly the sample
space to 10 mbar.
44
==PAGE:53==
7
|
Summary and Outlook
In this master thesis I investigated diﬀerent frequency tuning methods for silicon photonic crys-
tal nanoresonators doped with Erbium3+ ions for quantum technologies. The group’s main
goal is to proﬁt from Erbium transitions in the telecommunication bandwidth and its long
coherence time for quantum communication. The low ﬂuorescence rate of Erbium can be en-
hanced by the Purcell eﬀect, by placing the ions inside an optical resonator. For this purpose,
photonic crystal cavities (PCCs) are fabricated to proﬁt from their small mode volumes and
high Q-factors which lead to high Purcell enhancement. The PCCs are fabricated on silicon,
doped with the Erbium ions. The main purpose of this project is to study how to tune the fre-
quency of these resonators such that they would match the Erbium transitions, thus enabling
enhanced light-matter interaction making use of the Purcell enhancement.
I explore two methods for frequency tuning, both based on changing the eﬀective refractive
index of the cavities: electro-optical tuning and cryogenic gas tuning. Varying the refractive
index for tuning has several advantages compared to other options such as mechanically modi-
fying the PCCs geometry via stress or oxidation. First, it is easier in terms of the experimental
setup and fabrication processes of the samples. Besides, it is reversible and in particular in the
case of gas tuning, it will not aﬀect the Erbium ions properties.
I start exploring the electro-optical tuning.
This method is based on the electro-optic ef-
fect on strained silicon. Strain can break the centro-symmetry of the silicon lattice, allowing
for electro-optical eﬀects. An external electric ﬁeld will be applied via striplines close to the
PCCs. These PCCs are fabricated on strained silicon consisting in a heterostructure of alter-
nating layer of silicon and silicon-germanium. This material has in principle no free charges
and thus no carrier dispersion eﬀect is expected to contribute to the tuning. Thus, only the
stress is expected to contribute to the electro-optic eﬀect in my measurements.
First, I simulated the expected electric ﬁelds for diﬀerent striplines geometries for the samples.
These simulations were performed with COMSOL Multiphysicső software. From this mod-
elling I ﬁnd that high ﬁelds and ﬁeld gradients can be obtained using straight striplines with
opposite voltages. From the ﬁeld magnitudes obtained and the upper limit found in previous
works for the electro-optic coeﬃcient in strained silicon with strain levels comparable to my
samples, a low tuning eﬀect is expected, but still detectable in my measurements.
The samples are fabricated on strained silicon chips using established silicon nanofabrication
tools such as electron-beam lithography and reactive ion etching. The bondpads and striplines
to apply the external ﬁelds are fabricated with a lithography step followed by sputter depo-
45
==PAGE:54==
7 Summary and Outlook
sition of gold and bonded by wedge ultrasonic bonding. Striplines geometries vary between
straight and comb-like striplines and the distances between the cavity and the striplines is also
alternated forming asymmetric striplines.
The ﬁrst experiment consists in measuring the resonance shift of a cavity for diﬀerent ap-
plied voltages. This coarse measurement shows no tuning in the cavity frequency, nor any
change in the quality factor. For a more accurate measurement, the lock-in detection method
is used, modulating the voltage at a certain frequency and investigating the Fourier transform
of the light reﬂected from the cavity. This is tried for diﬀerent striplines geometry and dif-
ferent quality factors of the cavities, and no tuning is observed for any of them. From these
measurements a new upper limit to the stress contribution to electro-optical tuning can be
extracted, which is χ(2)
eff = 0.383 ± 0.035 fm/V.
In the second experiment, cryogenic gas tuning is investigated.
This tuning method con-
sists in depositing a frozen gas layer on top of the PCC inside a cryostat to change the eﬀective
refractive index and thus tune the resonance as a function of the amount of gas deposited.
For this purpose, the samples are fabricated in the same way as for the previous method, but
skipping the second lithography step, gold deposition and bonding.
The samples are then
placed inside the cryostat below the freezing temperature of the tuning gas. The copper tube
close to the sample area is then brieﬂy heated while letting in gas. The heater is then switched
oﬀ, so that the area cools down again and the gas freezes on top of the sample. This process is
repeated several times while monitoring the shift of the resonance. Tuning measurements are
made with both argon and nitrogen.
Tuning is observed with both gases.
Argon achieves a tuning of 4.26 nm, whereas nitro-
gen reaches only 3.3 nm. To reach the saturation limit of the tuning much less gas is needed
when using argon. From the measurements a clear eﬀect on the quality factor when tuning
with argon is not observed. When tuning with nitrogen only a slight decrease is noticed. The
higher tuning range when using argon could be caused by this gas having a higher refractive
index compared to nitrogen on these tuning conditions. Also, this tuning range could be af-
fected by the quality of the argon/nitrogen ice on top of the samples.
A similar approach, consisting in varying the pressure of helium inside the cryostat.
The
cryostat temperature is typically below the condensation temperature of helium, thus liquid
helium is expected to condense at the bottom of the cryostat and potentially also on the surface
of the sample. By decreasing the pressure inside the cryostat, the potential liquid helium ﬁlm
on the sample would decrease in thickness thus shifting the resonance of the cavity. However,
no shift on the resonance is observed in these experiment. This means that if there is a liquid
helium ﬁlm over the sample it is not thick enough to change the resonance of it in the ﬁrst place.
From all of the measurements, I conclude the most eﬃcient way to tune the cavities is to
use gas tuning inside the cryostat.
In particular, argon seems to be the best option as it
achieves the greater tuning with the least amount of gas.
In the future, the gas tuning could be implemented when performing experiments with Er-
bium spins doped in the nanostructures to proﬁt from the Purcell enhancement for matching
46
==PAGE:55==
7 Summary and Outlook
resonances. In terms of electro-optical tuning, another possibility would be to use a straining
overlayer over the silicon to proﬁt from the plasma dispersion eﬀect, or to fabricate the cavities
from a material with higher electro-optical coeﬃcients such as LiNb3 as other groups are doing
[67].
47
==PAGE:56==
References
[1]
R P Feynman. “Simulating Physics with Computers”. In: International
Journal of Theoretical Physics 21, 467–488 (1982).
[2]
D Deutsch. “Quantum theory, the Church-Turing principle and the
universal quantum computer”. In: Proceedings of the Royal Society of
London Series A 400, 97–117 (1985).
[3]
D P Divincenzo. “The physical implementation of quantum computa-
tion”. In: Fortschritte der Physik 48, 771–783 (2000).
[4]
Lov K Grover. “Quantum Telecomputation”. In: (1997).
[5]
H J Kimble. “The Quantum Internet”. In: Nature 453, 1023–1030 (2008).
doi: 10.1038/nature07127.
[6]
S. Wehner D. Elkouss and R Hanson. “Quantum internet: a vision for
the road ahead”. In: Science 362 (2018).
[7]
M. A. Nielsen and I L Chuang. Quantum computation and quantum in-
formation: 10th anniversary edition. Cambridge University Press, 2010.
[8]
A. Einstein B. Podolsky and N Rosen. “Can quantum-mechanical de-
scription of physical reality be considered complete?” In: Phys. Rev.
47, 777–780 (1935).
[9]
T P Hartyetal. “High-Fidelity Preparation, Gates, Memory, and Read-
out of a Trapped Ion Quantum Bit”. In: Physical Review Letters 113.22
(2014). doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.113.220501.
[10]
Andreas Reiserer and Gerhard Rempe. “Cavity-Based Quantum Net-
works with Single Atoms and Optical Photons”. In: Reviews of Modern
Physics 87.4 (2015). doi: 10.1103/RevModPhys.87.1379.
[11]
et al. David D. Awschalom. “QuantumTechnologies with Optically In-
terfaced Solid-State Spins”. In: Nature Photonics 12.9 (2018). doi:
10.1038/s41566-0180232-2.
[12]
et al. Marcus W. Doherty. “The Nitrogen-Vacancy Colour Centre in
Diamond”. In: Physics Reports. The Nitrogen-Vacancy Colour Centre
in Diamond 528.1 (2013). doi: 10.1016/j.physrep.2013.02.001.
==PAGE:57==
[13]
C. W. Thiel Thomas Böttger and R L Cone. ““Rare-Earth-Doped Mate-
rials for Applications in Quantum Information Storage and Signal Pro-
cessing”. In: Journal of Luminescence. Selected Papers from DPC’10
131.3 (2011). doi: 10.1016/j.jlumin.2010.12.015.
[14]
et al. Manjin Zhong. “Optically Addressable Nuclear Spins in a Solid
with a Six-Hour Coherence Time”. In: Nature517.7533 (2015). doi:
10.1038/nature14025.
[15]
et al Miloš Rančić. “Coherence Time of over a Second in a Telecom-
Compatible Quantum Memory Storage Material”. In: Nature Physics
14.1 (2018). doi: 10.1038/nphys4254.
[16]
Wojciech Kozlowski and Stephanie Wehner. “Towards Large-Scale Quan-
tum Networks”. In: Proceedings of the Sixth Annual ACM International
Conference on Nanoscale ComputingandCommunication. 2019.
[17]
A J Kenyon. “Erbium in Silicon”. In: Semiconductor Science and Tech-
nology 20.12 (2005).
[18]
et al Thomas Böttger. “Optical decoherence and spectral diﬀusion at
1.5 min Er3+:Y2SiO5 versus magnetic ﬁeld, temperature, and Er3+
concentration”. In: Physical Review B 73.7 (2006). doi: 10 . 1103 /
PhysRevB.73.075101.
[19]
et al. Anaıs Dréau. “Quantum Frequency Conversion of Single Pho-
tons from a Nitrogen Vacancy Center in Diamond toTelecommunica-
tion Wavelengths”. In: Phys. Rev. Applied 9 (2018). doi: 10.1103/
PhysRevApplied.9.064031.
[20]
et al Sebastian Zaske. “Visible-to-Telecom Quantum Frequency Con-
version of Light from a Single Quantum Emitter”. In: Phys. Rev. Lett.
109 (2012). doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.109.147404.
[21]
L Vivien and L Pavesi. Handbook of Silicon Photonics. CRC Press,
2013.
[22]
N. Q. Vinh N. N. Ha and T Gregorkiewicz. “Photonic Properties of
Er-Doped Crystalline Silicon”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE 97.7. 2009.
doi: 10.1109/JPROC.2009.2018220.
[23]
E. M. Purcell H. C. Torrey and R V Pound. “Resonance Absorption
by Nuclear Magnetic Moments in a Solid”. In: Physical Review 69.1-2
(1946). doi: 10.1103/PhysRev.69.37.
==PAGE:58==
[24]
P. Lodahl S. Mahmoodian and S Stobbe. “Interfacing single photons
and single quantum dots with photonic nanostructures”. In: Rev. Mod.
Phys. 87, 347–400 (2015). doi: 10.1103/RevModPhys.87.347.
[25]
Takashi Asano and Susumu Noda. “Photonic Crystal Devices in Silicon
Photonics”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE ( Volume: 106 , Issue: 12 )
(2018).
[26]
et al Takashi Asano. “Photonic Crystal Nanocavity with a Q Factor
Exceeding Eleven Million”. In: Optics Express 25.3 (2017). doi: 10.
1364/OE.25.001769..
[27]
Eli Yablonovitch. “Inhibited Spontaneous Emission in Solid-State Physics
and Electronics”. In: Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 2059 (1987). doi: 10.1103/
PhysRevLett.58.2059.
[28]
S John. “Strong localization of photons in certain disordered dielec-
tric superlattices”. In: Phys. Rev. Lett, 58 (1987). doi: 10 . 1103 /
PhysRevLett.58.2486.
[29]
E Yablonovitch and T J Gmitter. “Photonic Band Structure: The Face-
Centered-Cubic Case”. In: Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 1950 (1989). doi: 10.
1103/PhysRevLett.63.1950.
[30]
Rudolf Gross and Achim Marx. Festkörperphysik. De Gruyter, 2012.
doi: 10.1524/9783486714869.
[31]
Felix Bloch. “Über die Quantenmechanik der Elektronen in Kristallgit-
tern”. In: Zeitschrift für Physik volume 52, pages555–600 (1990). doi:
10.1007/BF01339455.
[32]
ed. J. D. Joannopoulos. Photonic Crystals: Molding the Flow of Light.
2nd Edition. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2008.
[33]
et al. Yoshihiro Akahane. “High-Q Photonic Nanocavity in a Two-
Dimensional Photonic Crystal”. In: Nature 425.6961 (2003). doi: 10.
1038/nature02063.
[34]
Kartik Srinivasan and Oskar Painter. “Fourier Space Design of High-
Q Cavities in Standard and Compressed Hexagonal Lattice Photonic
Crystals”. In: Optics Express 11.6 (2003). doi: 10 . 1364 / OE . 11 .
000579.
==PAGE:59==
[35]
A J Freeman and R E Watson. “Theoretical Investigation of Some
Magnetic and Spectroscopic Properties of Rare-EarthIons”. In: Physical
Review 127.6 (1962). doi: 10.1103/PhysRev.127.2058.
[36]
et al. Michael J. Burek. “Fiber-Coupled Diamond Quantum Nanopho-
tonic Interface”. In: Physical Review Applied 8.2 (2017). doi: 10.1103/
PhysRevApplied.8.024026..
[37]
F Y Gardes D J Thomson G. T. Reed G. Mashanovich. “Silicon optical
modulators”. In: Nature Photonics volume 4, pages518–526 (2010).
[38]
Jifeng Liu Lin Zhang Jurgen Michel Juejun Hu Hongtao Lin Okechukwu
Ogbuu. “Breaking the energy-bandwidth limit of electro-optic modu-
lators: theory and a device proposal”. In: J. Lightwave Technol. 31,
4029-4036 (2013). doi: 10.1109/JLT.2013.2280820.
[39]
Peter I Borel Jacob Fage-Pedersen Lars H Frandsen Ole Hansen Martin
Kristensen Andrei V Lavrinenko Gaid Moulin Haiyan Ou Christophe
Peucheret Beáta Zsigri Anders Bjarklev Rune S. Jacobsen Karin N. An-
dersen. “Strained silicon as a new electro-optic material”. In: Nature
volume 441, pages199–202 (2006). doi: 10.1038/nature04706.
[40]
Christopher Matheisen Christian Ripperda Jens Bolten Thorsten Wahlbrink
Michael Nagel Florian Merget Bartos Chmielak Michael Waldow and
Heinrich Kurz. “Pockels eﬀect based fully integrated, strained silicon
electro-optic modulator”. In: Optics Express Vol. 19, Issue 18, (2011).
doi: 10.1364/OE.19.017212.
[41]
Christian Ripperda Jens Bolten Thorsten Wahlbrink Michael Waldow
Bartos Chmielak Christopher Matheisen and Heinrich Kurz. “Investiga-
tion of local strain distribution and linear electro-optic eﬀect in strained
silicon waveguides”. In: Optics Express Vol. 21, Issue 21, (2013). doi:
10.1364/OE.21.025324.
[42]
David Le Bourdais Eric Cassan Delphine Marris-Morini Nicolas Izard
Thomas Maroutian Philippe Lecoeur Pedro Damas Xavier Le Roux and
Laurent Vivien. “Wavelength dependence of Pockels eﬀect in strained
silicon waveguides”. In: Optics Express Vol. 22, Issue 18, pp. 22095-
22100 (2014). doi: 10.1364/OE.22.022095.
==PAGE:60==
[43]
Maxim Abashin Andrew Grieco Yeshaiahu Fainman Matthew W Puck-
ett Joseph ST Smalley. “Tensor of the second-order nonlinear suscep-
tibility in asymmetrically strained silicon waveguides: analysis and ex-
perimental validation”. In: Optics Letters, Vol. 39, No. 6 (2014). doi:
10.1364/OL.39.001693.
[44]
E Borga G Pucker M Ghulinyan E Degoli E Luppi V Véniard S Ossicini
D Modotto S Wabnitz R Pierobon L Pavesi M Cazzanelli F Bianco.
“Second-harmonic Generation in Silicon Waveguides Strained by Sil-
icon Nitride”. In: Nat Mater. 11(2):148-154 (2011). doi: 10.1038/
nmat3200.
[45]
M Cazzanelli M Ghulinyan C Eisenschmidt Johannes de Boor Alexan-
der Schmid Johannes Heitmann Lorenzo Pavesi Jörg Schilling C. Schriever
F. Bianco. “Second-Order Optical Nonlinearity in Silicon Waveguides:
Inhomogeneous Stress and Interfaces”. In: Adv. Opt. Mater. 3, 129
(2015). doi: 10.1002/adom.201400370.
[46]
Guillaume Marcaud Carlos Alonso Ramos Delphine Marris-Morini Eric
Cassan Pedro Damas Mathias Berciano and Laurent Vivien. “Com-
prehensive description of the electro-optic eﬀects in strained silicon
waveguides”. In: Journal of Applied Physics 122, 153105 (2017). doi:
10.1063/1.4985836.
[47]
W Kucharczyk M Izdebski and R E Raab. “On relationships between
electro-optic coeﬃcients for impermeability and nonlinear electric sus-
ceptibilities”. In: J. Opt. A: Pure Appl. Opt. 6, 421–424 (2004). doi:
10.1088/1464-4258/6/4/019.
[48]
G Li and P Yu. “Optical intensity modulators for digital and analog
applications”. In: J. Lightwave Technol. 21, 2010–2030 (2003). doi:
10.1109/JLT.2003.815654.
[49]
Claudio Bonati Costanza Lucia Manganelli Paolo Pintus. “Modeling
of strain-induced Pockels eﬀect in Silicon”. In: Optics Express Vol. 23,
Issue 22, pp. 28649-28666 (2015). doi: 10.1364/OE.23.028649.
[50]
M P Nezhad S. Sharif Azadeh F. Merget and J Witzens. “On the mea-
surement of the Pockels eﬀect in strained silicon”. In: Optics Letters
Vol. 40, Issue 8, pp. 1877-1880 (2015). doi: 10.1364/OL.40.001877.
==PAGE:61==
[51]
Hung-Hsi Lin Felipe Vallini Rajat Sharma Matthew W. Puckett and
Yeshaiahu Fainman. “Characterizing the eﬀects of free carriers in fully
etched, dielectric-clad silicon waveguides”. In: Appl. Phys. Lett. 106,
241104 (2015). doi: 10.1063/1.4922734.
[52]
F Merget J Witzens M Bernard M Ghulinyan G Pucker M. Borghi
M. Mancinelli and L Pavesi. “High-frequency electro-optic measure-
ment of strained silicon racetrack resonators”. In: Optics Letters Vol.
40, Issue 22, pp. 5287-5290 (2015). doi: 10.1364/OL.40.005287.
[53]
I Carmeli K Hennessy C Meier A Badolato M J A DeDood P M Petroﬀ
E L Hu E G Gwinn S. Strauf M. T. Rakher and D Bouwmeester. “Fre-
quency control of photonic crystal membrane resonators by monolayer
deposition”. In: Appl. Phys. Lett. 88, 043116 (2006). doi: 10.1063/1.
2164922.
[54]
C A Husko X. Yang C. J. Chen and C. W. Wong. “Digital resonance
tuning of high-QVm silicon photonic crystal nanocavities by atomic
layer deposition”. In: Appl. Phys. Lett. 91, 161114 (2007). doi: 10.
1063/1.2800312.
[55]
M. Loncar A. Scherer and Y Qiu. “Photonic crystal laser sources for
chemical detection”. In: Appl. Phys. Lett. 82, 4648 (2003). doi: 10.
1063/1.1586781.
[56]
B C Richards J Sweet G Khitrova S. Mosor J. Hendrickson and H M
Gibbs. “Scanning a photonic crystal slab nanocavity by condensation
of xenon”. In: Appl. Phys. Lett. 87, 141105 (2005). doi: 10.1063/1.
2076435.
[57]
Sweden www.comsol.com. COMSOL AB Stockholm. COMSOL Multiphysics R⃝.
[58]
K. Inoue and eds K. Ohtaka. “Photonic crystals, Physics, fabrication
and applications”. In: Vol.94, Springer Series in Optical Sciences (Springer-
Verlag Berlin Heidelberg) (2004). doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-40032-5.
[59]
Matthias Köﬀerlein. Klayout. 0.
[60]
Thorsten Reichert. “Photonic Crystal-Based Scalable Quantum Nanos-
tructures”. PhD thesis. Technical University of Munich (TUM).
[61]
Laura Zarraoa. “Characterization of Catalyst Nanoparticle Encapsu-
lation in Si Nanowires by Very Low Voltage Scanning Electron Mi-
croscopy”. PhD thesis. Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (UAM), 2018.
==PAGE:62==
[62]
Florian Burger. “Silicon Photonic-Crystal Waveguides for Broadband
Purcell Enhancement of Erbium Emission”. PhD thesis. Technical Uni-
versity of Munich (TUM), 2020.
[63]
Ardavan F. Oskooi et al. “Meep: A ﬂexible free-software package for
electromagnetic simulations by the FDTD method”. In: Computer Physics
Communications 181.3 (2010), pp. 687–702. issn: 00104655. doi: 10.
1016/j.cpc.2009.11.008.
[64]
Benjamin Merkel Lorenz Weiss Andreas Gritsch and Andreas Reiserer.
“Narrow ﬂuorescence lines of erbium dopants in silicon nanophotonic
waveguides”. 2020.
[65]
Mikhail Polyanskiy. RefractiveIndex.INFO website: c⃝2008-2020.
[66]
M Domingo C Millán C Santonja R. Luna M.A. Satorre. “Density and
refractive index of binary CH4,N2 and CO2 ice mixtures”. In: Icarus
Volume 221, Issue 1, September–October (2012). doi: 10.1016/j.
icarus.2012.07.016.
[67]
Risheng Cheng Yuntao Xu Mohan Shen Rufus L Cone Charles W Thiel
Hong X Tang Sihao Wang Likai Yang. “Incorporation of erbium ions
into thin-ﬁlm lithium niobate integrated photonics”. In: Appl. Phys.
Lett. 116, 151103 (2020). doi: 10.1063/1.5142631.
==PAGE:63==
Acknowledgment
I want to thank Prof. Gerhard Rempe and Andreas Reiserer for giving me the opportunity
of joining the Quantum Networks Group at the Max Planck Institute for Quantum Optics to
carry out this project. All that I have learned and all the experience I now have would not
have possible without them.
I also want to thank the everyone on the group for their companionship during these months
and their support. In particular, I want to thank Lorenz Weiss and Andreas Gritsch for their
close supervision and their inﬁnite patience. Thank you for all the tricks and advise in the lab,
cleanroom and Nanobeam, this project would not have been ﬁnished without your help!
In addition, special thanks to my oﬃce mates Daniel Repp, Florian Burger, Penghong Yu
and Stephan Rinner for all the interesting conversation and useful insights!
And ﬁnally, thanks to the former group member, Pablo Cova-Fariña for your unbreakable
optimism and the huge amount of emotional support.
==PAGE:64==
 
 
 
Anhang I 
Erklärung 
Ich versichere hiermit, dass ich die von mir eingereichte Abschlussarbeit selbstständig verfasst und keine 
anderen als die angegebenen Quellen und Hilfsmittel benutzt habe. 
 
Garching, 27.07.2020, Laura Zarraoa Sardón 
 
