==PAGE:1==
Game Based Control Program for Railway
Networks
Master Thesis
Matias Daugaard Holst-Christensen
s153198
August 2020
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
In this project a simple railway model will be explored, to examine ways to
create correct-by-construction control programs for the railway networks. This
will be done by looking at the problem as a two player game, with a Controller
in charge of signals and switch-rails, and a Conductor in charge of moving the
trains as the two players. A control program can then be found by creating a
game graph over the game, and ﬁnding a path, which ensures that the Controller
will always win, no matter how the Conductor acts. To avoid having to generate
the entire game graph, which size grows exponentially, on-the-ﬂy generating of
states will be used.
In extension to this the trains will before the game be
ordered and have their paths calculated on order to further reduce the number
of states needed to be generated. This will be solved as a single agent problem
at ﬁrst. Later we will look into merging the single agent solution into multi
agent solutions, as a way to make the solutions more eﬃcient and shorter. In
the project a graphical user interface, to create and editor railway networks and
to showcase the found solutions, has also been implemented.
1
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
Thanks to Michael R. Hansen for the project idea and as initial supervisor, and
to Jan Madsen for taking over as supervisor.
2
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1
Introduction
5
2
The Railway Domain
8
3
The Basic Setup
16
4
Single Agent Solution
20
Greedy Best-First Solver . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
Loading Railway Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
The Game . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
Observations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
Priorities and Swapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
The Game . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
Another Game
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5
Multi Agent Solution
41
Multi Agent Version 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
Multi Agent Version 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
Multi Agent Version 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
Saving The Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6
The Graphical User Interface
53
The Editor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
How To Use It
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
The Solution Viewer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
How To Use It
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
7
Results
73
8
Discussion
79
3
==PAGE:5==
9
Future Works
82
10 Conclusion
83
Bibliography
84
Appendices
85
A Railways
86
B Code
100
4
==PAGE:6==
Chapter 1
Introduction
In this project we will explore a simple railway setting, to model networks and
create correct-by-constructing control programs for the signals and switch-rail,
a similar idea also explored by [1][3]. The point of this program is to guide
the trains from one location to another in a safe manner. Meaning that even
if the trains do not move in the intended or optimal way, the control program
will ensure that the trains will arrive at their goals, and without any of them
crashing into one another. This is as long as the trains do not break any rules,
such as moving past a red signal. The way this will be done is by looking at
the problem as a two-player game. Player 1 being the Controller, which has
the ability to change the signals between red and green, and change switch-rails
between the rail options. And player 2 is a Conductor who can move the trains
on the railway, if allowed and possible by the rails, signals and switch-rails.
The way the game is played is with the Controller starting by changing
signals color or switch-rails options or by doing nothing.
When all wanted
actions have been performed the turn is given to the Conductor. This player
can move then the as many trains as wanted by one rail in this new setting with
the changes from the Controller. And the turn is then returned to the Controller.
The game then continues in this manner and if all the trains end up in their goal
location the Controller will have won the game. Which means a control program
has been found, otherwise the Conductor has won. The control program, will
then be the actions the Controller took, when trains where at certain locations,
to guide the trains to their goals.
To be a correct control program, it also
needs to ensure that even if the Conductor has acted diﬀerently at some point,
the Controller would still have won the game. Meaning that no matter how
the Conductor plays the game, the Controller will always win. The Conductor
could win by never moving the trains, and in extension therefore never have
them reach their goal. So to avoid this the Conductor has to move at least one
train if possible. By looking at the problem of creating a control program this
way as a game, it will be possible to create a game graph. Where the states or
nodes are the current game board, which includes the location of the trains, color
of the signals and selected switch-rail option, and the edges being the actions
5
==PAGE:7==
performed by the players. This means that it is possible to simulate the game
for a network and create the game graph. This can then be searched through
to ﬁnd a way that ensures the Controller will win no matter what, or in other
words ﬁnd a correct control program. However some problems arise. Because
the game graph grows exponentially in the size of the network. In fact there
exists P ∗2#Signal+#Switch−rail states, where P = Q#L
n=#L−#T rain(n), and #L is
number of locations the trains can be. Not all of these are possible, as trains
in this setting are only allowed to move in one direction, and thereby cannot
reach all locations. But this shows that the number of states quickly becomes
impossible to work with. So ﬁnding a winning strategy for the Controller would
be both time and memory consuming if even possible at all. That means that
creating the entire game graph is not really an option, if the railway have a
certain size. Instead we will look at a more dynamic approach using on-the-
ﬂy generating of the states.
In this the states will only be generated when
needed, meaning we might only need to create a fraction of the game graph, as
we only need to ﬁnd one way to get the trains to goal and not all. However
this can still result in creating a lot of states, as the Controller could generate
up to 2#Signal+#Switch−rail states each turn, and the Conductor up to 2#T rain
states. In this project some measures to reduce this number will be explored and
implemented. Which include looking at the problem as a single agent problem,
only allowing one train to move at a time, and prioritizing and path-ﬁnding of
the trains. This is all done as to try to ﬁnd a correct control program as eﬃcient
as possible, meaning generating as few states as possible, to reduce the amount
of time and memory needed.
In this project we will also try to ﬁnd an eﬃcient control program. One
thing is ﬁnding a solution eﬃciently, but the solution itself might not eﬃcient.
An eﬃcient solution, is a control program which will guide the trains to their
goals as fast as possible. Meaning that the total number of states needed to get
from the start to the goal is as low as possible. To achieve this we will look into
a multi agent solution. As mentioned one of the ideas to reduce the number of
states generated was to solve the problem single agently. Because one of the
big problems with multi agent problems, is that it grows exponentially in the
number of agents or here trains. Meaning one of the best measures taken to
reduce the state generating will be useless. To avoid this, the approach taken for
a multi agent solution will be merging a single agent solution for a network into
a multi agent solution. A similar idea explored in [4]. This means we can use
the eﬃciently found single agent control program, to create an eﬃcient multi
agent solution. So we will not have to compromise between the two, and can
create an eﬃcient control program eﬃciently. If the merging is also performed
eﬃcient.
The second part of the project is to create a graphical user interface. This
will be used to both create and modify railway networks in a simple and easy
way, and to showcase networks and the control programs found. Creating a GUI
is also to avoid typing errors, when creating networks, by having a program
automatically translate what the railway looks like into a format the solver
program can read. It can also help visualize what the control program looks
6
==PAGE:8==
like, and help ﬁnd unexpected behaviour, which would otherwise be hard to
spot.
The point of a program like this is not to create a timetable for the trains,
but get the trains safely past a problematic part of a railway, if something has
gone wrong. Lets say one of the rail has been damaged by a falling tree and
is no longer usable. How should the trains go now, since the original plan no
longer works. This is the situation a program like this could be used. The new
situation could be modelled and the solver program would automatically create
a safe plan, to get the trains past the problematic rail, and from there the normal
plan could take over again. Problems like this arise very often, due to many
diﬀerent thing, such as technical error or weather, and having an automated
way to ﬁnd a solution would be very nice, and could make the process faster
and smarter.
The focus of the project will be the implementation of the control program,
which will be done using the programming language F#, and the implementa-
tion of the graphical user interface using Java.
7
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 2
The Railway Domain
Before we start looking for a solution to the problem, we need to precise the
domain. Such that we know, what is allowed and what is not. Let us ﬁrst take a
look at the elements we need in the railway setting. First up we will need some
trains and some locations they can stay. We then need some way of connecting
these locations, which are the rails. For the control program to actually be able
to do anything we also need signals. Such that we can tell the trains if they are
allowed to move or not in some direction. And if the railways should not only
consists of single lines, there should also be some switch-rails, which is a rail
that can go to two locations but only one at a time. These are the gonna be the
basis for all of the networks we are gonna be looking at in this project. This is
a very simplistic version of a real railway, as there are numerous diﬀerent kinds
of signals and switch-rails in real railways. But to avoid being overwhelmed
and going too much into all the speciﬁcs of all of those, we will use this simple
model. So lets look at how we deﬁne each of them.
8
==PAGE:10==
Figure 2.1: Figure showing a simple railway. In circle a, we see a train at a
location (red dot) going right. The location also contains two signals, the red
for going left and the green for going right from the location. In circle b, we see a
single rail connecting two locations. In circle c we see a left directed switch-rail,
currently being able to use the lower rail. The bottom left location has a signal
for going right, and the bottom right location has a signal for going left.
The locations will each be deﬁned by a unique number. We can then deﬁne
the rails as a tuple consisting of two locations. That way we can easily create
a graph over the network with the locations as the nodes and the rails as the
edges. This will be an undirected graph as it is usually possible to go both
directions on a rail, or at least it is in this model. By creating such a graph
we can make use of graph searching algorithm for ﬁnding a way for a train to
move from one location to another, which will be very helpful, when trying to
guide them. To follow the way real railways work, we will only allow a location
to be connected by at most two rail (or one rail and a switch-rail). That way
leaving a location in one direction will always take you to the same location, if
it is connected by a normal rail. The next type is the signal. These are used for
telling if a train is allowed to move from one location in a direction at a given
time. This means that we need to deﬁne the signals as having a location and
a direction. Because it might only be leaving a location to the left that needs
a signal. Finally we have the switch-rails. These are a kind of rail that allow a
location to have two rail leaving in the same direction, but with only one being
allowed at a time. So when leaving a location which is connected to a switch-
rail, the switch-rail setting will decide which location is reached. This means
that we need to know at which location this switch-rail is, which two locations it
is connected to and the direction of the switch-rail, see ﬁgure Figure 2.1. Only
the selected rail of a switch-rail is usable even if going in the opposite direction.
These are the basic things need for a network, however one thing is missing in
order to solve a problem, there needs to be one. The problem we wish to solve
is to ﬁnd a way to guide trains from one location to another. This means that
we need some trains, and we need to know the starting location of a train and
the goal location. As a mean to simplify the problem, trains are only allowed to
move in one direction. This will reduce the number of locations a train can be
9
==PAGE:11==
and will allow for some reduction in search space and time later when looking
for a solution.
Symbol
Description
D
Set of directions. Consists of Left and Right.
L
List of locations. Each element l ∈L is a unique integer.
R
List of rails. Each element r ∈R is deﬁned a tuple (l1, l2),
where l1 ∈L and l2 ∈L.
SR
List of switch-rails. Each element sr ∈SR is deﬁned as a
quadruple (l1, l2, l3, d), where l1 ∈L, l2 ∈L, l3 ∈L
and d ∈D. l1 is connecting to l2 and l3 in direction d
S
List of signals. Each element s ∈S is deﬁned as a tuple
(l, d), where l ∈L and d ∈D. As having a signal moving
from l in direction d.
T
List of trains. Each element t ∈T is deﬁned as a quadruple
(i, l1, l2, d), where i is a unique string identifying the train,
l2 ∈L, l3 ∈L and d ∈D. l1 is the starting location,
l2 is the goal location and d is the direction of the train.
RN
The railway network. Deﬁned as the quintuple (L,R,SR,S,T).
Table 2.1: Deﬁnitions of the railway domain.
With all this information we can now deﬁne a railway network as being a
quintuple consisting of a list of locations, a list of rail, a list of switch-rails, a
list of signals and a list of trains, with their start and goal locations and their
direction see Table 2.1.
There has already been mentioned a few restrictions, which has been put on
the railway model we are gonna use. First was that a location can at most be
connected to two rails, or a rail and and a switch-rail. So a location cannot be
connected to two switch-rails. Second was that no matter the direction of the
train, only the selected rail of a switch-rail can be used. And ﬁnally that trains
are only allowed to go in one direction, which means no going in reverse. These
are all put in place to both reduce the amount of states which can exist and to
make the railways more easy to keep track of and realistic. There are however
a few more things that needs to be restricted. The ﬁrst is a consequence of
trains only being able to go in one direction, which is that there has to be a
path from the starting location to the goal location of all trains in the network.
This is fairly obvious as if this does not exists a the trains cannot arrive at
their goals. Then the game cannot be won by the Controller, which means a
control program does not exists. The next is that the starting location of a train
should always have a signal for leaving in the same direction as the direction
of the train. This is just in place to keep any trains from moving without the
consent of the Controller, which could lead to problems that are not solvable.
Because the trains can crash into each other without the Controller being able
to do anything. Following along this line the goal location of a train should also
always have signal going in the same direction as the train, or be a dead end.
10
==PAGE:12==
Meaning that no rail is leaving the location in the direction of the train. This is
to make sure that the train can be stopped at the goal location, otherwise the
Controller cannot ensure that all the trains will be in goal at the same time,
meaning a correct control program does not exists. The next restriction is also a
fairly obvious rule. A location can at most be the starting location of one train,
and the same for goal locations. Again otherwise the problem will be unsolvable
as more than one train has to occupy the same location as once, which means
the trains will have crashed, and no solution exists. Finally a switch-rail should
always have a signal on the location intersecting the two rail options in the
direction of the switch-rail.
And on the other two locations in the opposite
direction.
This rule is to make it seem realistic as there usually are signals
close to the switch-rails, as these are places things could go very wrong. For an
example of a railway see Figure 2.2. This models the railway from Østerport
Station to Copenhagen Central Station, without the S-train part1.
Figure 2.2: An example of a railway network. This has been modelled after the
railway going from the left Østerport Station to the right Copenhagen Central
Station. The red line are the rails, the L and R symbolizes a signal at a location
in direction left or right. The upper case T is the trains starting location and
lowercase t is the goal location, for a given number. Train placement is randomly
picked.
As mentioned the way we are gonna look at this problem is by considering
1The model is based on information found on OpenRailwayMap[6]. The signals have been
added to follow the domain rules, and long stretches have been shortened
11
==PAGE:13==
it as a two player game, with the Controller having the ability to control the
signals and switch-rails.
And the Conductor being able to move the trains.
That way we can create a game graph over the states these are generating, and
and see if we can ﬁnd a path, which will end up with all the trains being placed
at their goal locations. But before we can do that we need to deﬁne what a state
is, how we can get from one to another and what the game graph looks like. As
mentioned the Controller can change the signals and the switch-rails, and the
Conductor can move the train. This means that the only things that can change
between states are the signals color, switch-rails rails and trains locations. So
for each state we will only need to keep track of whether or not each signal is
green, for each switch-rail which of the two rails are currently selected and for
the trains where they are on the railway. We can therefore deﬁne a state as a
triple consisting of a map mapping each signal to a value, to indicate whether
the signal is green or red. A map mapping each switch-rail to a value, to indicate
which of the two rail options are selected, and a map mapping each train to a
location, see Table 2.2.
Symbol
Description
SM
Signal map. Key being a signal. Value whether or not it is green.
SRM
Switch-rail map. Key being a switch-rail. Value which of the
rail options are selected.
TM
Train map. Key being a train id. Value the location of the train.
S
State. Deﬁned as the triple (SM,SRM,TM).
Table 2.2: The deﬁnition of the state in the game.
Now we have deﬁned the state, we can look at how we can generate them,
move between them and create the game graph. First we will need to deﬁne the
initial state. This one is rather straightforward as this will just be the state,
where all the signals are red. The switch-rails being one of the two options
chosen, which does not matter, as the Controller always can change it before
any train can reach it. And the trains will be placed at their starting positions
given by the railway network. As stated earlier all trains have to be placed at a
location with a signal. This along with the fact that all signals are red, means
that the Conductor cannot do anything from the initial state. This is what we
wanted, to ensure that the Controller always have a chance to ﬁnd a solution if
it exists. Secondly we need to deﬁne the goal state. The goal state will be the
state in which all of the trains are located at their goal location. This means
that the value of the signals and switch-rail are not relevant, and that there
therefore are multiple states which qualify as being the goal state, and a more
accurate name would therefore be the goal states. So the goal states is the set
of states in which all trains are at their goal location.
Now how do we then get from the initial state to one of the goal states. We
will explain this by looking at a simple example, with a network containing two
trains, a switch-rail and the needed signals, see Figure 2.3.
12
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.3: The left showing the initial state, and the right showing a goal state,
of a simple railway network.
As mentioned we will not generate all game states, and just search through
them for a path, as the number of states quickly becomes impossible to work
with. Instead to get from the initial state to a goal state we need to generate
the states that are in between in the game graph.
This is what is done by
the two players. The Controller can generate new states by changing signal or
switch-rail values, and the Conductor by changing the location of the trains.
There are however a few rules for the Conductor. Trains can only be move to
a new location if the old is connected to the new one by a rail or switch-rail
in the direction of the train. And if they are connected by at switch-rail, the
rail has to be the selected option. Trains can also only move from a location
if a signal green or no signal is present for the direction. As mentioned earlier
the Conductor cannot do anything from the initial state, as the red light are
blocking all the trains from going.
This means that the only one that can
generate states at ﬁrst is the Controller. The Controller can change as many
signal and switch-rail values as it want to, meaning one way to generate states
is to ﬁnd all combination of signal and switch-rail values and create them. All
of these will be legal states, which are reachable from the initial state by a
single step, however most of them will not be relevant, as they do not allow
any of the trains to move. If we look at Figure 2.4, some of the states from
the example network initial state which has been generated by the Controller
has been illustrated. They can be seen as the three states at the end of the
arrow from the initial state at the top left. It is now the Conductors turn. He
can move any train he wants along one rail. As we can see from the ﬁgure two
of the states, will end up with trains being at the same location and therefore
means that the Controller has lost the game, as the trains have crashed. We
do however have one new state which is still good, the top right. From here
the Controller again has many options for state generation, but only one which
allows for train movement can be seen. From this new state the Conductor only
has one option which is to move the train down left, which moves it to its goal.
13
==PAGE:15==
This means all the train are now in goal and a goal state has been found. We
can then backtrack from the goal state to ﬁnd a path in the game graph which
leads to a solution, by following the arrows backwards.
Figure 2.4: Part of the game graph, for a simple railway network. Top left
showing the initial state and a goal state in the bottom right.
The arrows
indicate which player has made a move, to go from one state to the other. The
bottom left and middle states, showing states where the Conductor has won by
the two trains crashing into each other. The route from the initial state to a
goal state, showcase by following the arrows right and then down. The ﬁgure
only shows some of the states, as many of the irrelevant has been removed.
However one thing is ﬁnding a solution, another thing is ﬁnding a correct
solution. So what makes a solution a correct solution. A correct solution is a
solution where all of the states will end up in a goal state no matter what the
Conductor decides to do, of legal actions. In the shown example the solution is
a correct solution as the Conductor only has one option in each of the states,
which is to move a single train. Not moving it is also an option, but would lead
to the same state, and therefore is not counted, also as mentioned the Conductor
14
==PAGE:16==
has to move a train if possible otherwise the train will never arrive at goals. This
means all the states in the solution leads to a goal state. However if we look at
another example in Figure 2.5, we see that by following the arrow down, then
right then down and down we get to a goal state, so we have found a solution.
But the problem here is that in the state generated by the Controller ﬁrst, the
middle left, the Conductor has multiple options. The one shown by following
the arrow down, leads to the two trains being on the same location by moving
the left most train one to the right, and not moving the other. This crashes
the trains and loses the game for the Controller. This is therefore not a correct
solution as this state, which was part of the found solution, does not always
lead to a goal state. This means that we need to make sure, when we look for
a solution all of the states the Conductor can generate, from any state in the
solution has to lead to a goal state, not just one of them, for it to be a correct
solution.
Figure 2.5: Part of the game graph, for a railway network. Top left state is
initial state, and bottom right is a goal state. This is an example of a non-
correct solution, as one of the states in the solution allows for the Conductor to
crash the trains, meaning the Controller lost the game.
15
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 3
The Basic Setup
In this section the basic setup of the code and data-ﬁles will be described.
Before we start coding the solver we ﬁrst need to setup some basic types, data-
structures and design ﬁle types for the railways and solutions, such that they
can easily be stored and loaded when needed.
Lets start by looking at the ﬁles types. We will need two diﬀerent types of
ﬁles. One for storing railway networks, and one for storing the solutions. For
storing the railways we will go with a simple .txt ﬁle, that has to be setup in
a certain way. The order of the ﬁle will be the following, ﬁrst locations, then
rails, switch-rail, signals, trains and ﬁnally the dimensions of the railway, height
and width needed for the GUI. Each of these will be sectioned up separated
by a colon (:) on a line by itself. Each element of the network will be written
on its own line, and follows the description seen in Table 2.1.
For the ﬁrst
section the locations, the number representing the location will be written, the
order of locations is irrelevant. For the rail section, the two locations the rail
is connecting will be on the same line separated by a space. The order of the
locations the rail is consisting of will not be relevant, and can therefore be either
left to right or the other way. Each switch-rail will require four parts, ﬁrst the
three locations and then the direction, these has to be separated by a space.
The order of the locations is very important here. The ﬁrst location should be
the one that intersects the switch-rail. The second the one on the same row as
the intersecting one, the GUI editor always requires one of the rail options to
go along the row of the intersecting rail. And then at last the third location
for the other rail option. The direction has to be marked as either L or R, for
left or right, and is the direction of the switch-rail, an example of a left directed
switch-rail can be seen in circle c in Figure 2.1, where the intersecting location
is the bottom right location also in circle c. Next up is the signals, these will
be described by their location and their direction, separated by a space. The
direction is again either L or R. We then have the trains, these have four parts
also. The unique id of the train, the starting location, the end location and the
direction, these are as well also separated by spaces. Finally we have the width,
and the height. These are two integers each on their own line, and is used only
16
==PAGE:18==
by the GUI, to set up the correct size grid. For an example see Figure 3.1
Figure 3.1: An example of a railway network ﬁle. This is the one for the railway
network seen in Figure 2.5.
For the solution ﬁles, we will use a ﬁle type called .sol. The reason for not
using a .txt as with the railway networks, is that they can then be named to
same, making it easy to pair them together. The solution ﬁle is split up into
sections each containing a single state of the solution, in order of initial state
being the ﬁrst and the ﬁnal state being last in the ﬁle. These sections are each
surrounded by a token pair of <> and < / > to symbolize the start and end of a
state. Each state then contains three lines. The ﬁrst is started by a < trains >
token followed by a semicolon separated list of the locations of the trains, in
alphabetical order of the train ids. The second line is the signals values in the
state. This is started by the < signals > token and followed by a list of Ts and
Fs, short for true and false. The T meaning a signal is green in the state and
F meaning it is red. The order of the list is that the ﬁrst element is the signal
with the smallest location value and the last with the largest. If two signals
share a location the one with direction left is ﬁrst in the list. The last line is the
switch-rails started by a < rails > token. Following this is a also a semicolon
separated list of Ts and Fs. In this case the T is for the rail, which is on the
same row as the intersecting location being selected and the F for the other.
The list is ordered such that the ﬁrst element is the switch-rail with the smallest
location of the intersecting location part of the switch-rail, and the last element
being the one with the largest value. After all the states in the ﬁle, three more
17
==PAGE:19==
lines exists.
The ﬁrst has the token < states > followed by the number of
states in the solution. The second starts with the token < generated >. This is
followed by the number of states, that where generated when trying to ﬁnd the
solution. And ﬁnally an line started by the token < time >. This line is the
total time spent ﬁnding a solution in millisecond. The entire ﬁles is wrapped
by the tokens < solution > and < /solution >, which serves no purpose. An
example of a solution ﬁle can be seen in Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: An example of a solution ﬁle. This is the one for the solution to the
railway network seen in Figure 3.1
Next up we will look at the data types needed. The solver will be written
using F# and we will therefore make use of the easy way to create types in
F#. The types needed are the ones described in Table 2.1 and Table 2.2. Lets
look at the ones from the domain ﬁrst. These can all be seen in Figure 3.3, and
are mostly translated directly from the tables. The few things that are a bit
18
==PAGE:20==
diﬀerent is that the direction type is deﬁned as L or R. This is just to shorten
left and right. But lets go through them one by one. First up is the Train, this
is a string used to identify the trains. Next is the Direction, can be either L or
R, and is used for various element to signify which direction the element works.
Then we have the Location, which is just deﬁned as an integer. The Rail a
tuple of Locations. A SwitchRail the three Locations that is consists of and the
Direction of the switch-rail. The signal made up by the Location and Direction
types. And ﬁnally the RailwayNetwork as described in the table containing a
Location list, Rail list, SwitchRail list, Signal list and a list of the Trains and
their starting Location, goal Location and Direction.
Figure 3.3: The F# types used to describe the railway domain and game states.
Next up is the types needed for the states and game graph. These can also
be seen in Figure 3.3. Again they are mostly straight translations from Table 2.2
with a few adjustments. The SignalMap is a map with a Signal as the key and
boolean as the value. It is chosen to have a boolean as the value as a signal can
be either green or red, so we can easily represent green as being true and red as
being false. The TrainMap is the same as from the table. The key being a Train
(id) and the value its Location. As with the SignalMap the SwitchRailMap
also has a boolean as the value, but with a SwitchRail as the key. Again the
boolean is chosen as the switch-rail can be in one of two options. Either the
rail on the same row as the intersecting location is selected or the other one is.
True is here the same row rail being selected, and false as the other. Finally we
have the State type. We see that this can be one of two values either S of some
elements or N. Lets look at the S ﬁrst. The S constructor has ﬁve items, which
is more than was shown in the table from earlier. It now consists of an integer,
a SignalMap, a TrainMap, a SwitchRailMap and a State. The integer is needed
for being able to sort a list of states, used for heuristics, and will be used by the
solver. The three maps are the ones that tell the information about the state,
and match the information from the table. The State is used as a way to keep
track of the parent to the State, such that when a solution is found it is easy to
backtrack through the game graph. If looking at Figure 2.4 the State ﬁeld of a
state would be the state at the start of the arrow pointing at the state. The N
value exist as a null value for the State type, and is used as the parent of the
initial state, such that when backtracking we know when to stop.
19
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 4
Single Agent Solution
As mentioned the ﬁrst part of the problem was to create an eﬃcient control
program or solver. This will be done by looking at the problem as a single
agent problem, and not the multi agent problem it actually is. This is because
looking at it this way is a simpler problem, and ﬁnding a solution can be done
more eﬃciently. The solution itself might not be the most eﬃcient, but making
it more eﬃcient will be explored later. The basic idea for the single agent solver
is to use On-The-Fly generating of the states in the game graph. As explained
earlier this will be done by the two players of the game the Controller and
the Conductor. These can generate the states by changing signal values and
switch-rail values, or moving trains to new location if allowed. Then we will use
a Greedy Best-First [2] searching algorithm to pick the best of the generated
states, to try to ﬁnd a path to a goal state as fast and eﬃcient as possible.
The Best-First algorithm will use a simple goal heuristic, which means that the
shorter the total distance from the trains locations to their goal location is in a
state the better the state. As the goal of the problem is to get all the trains to
their goal location, using such a heuristic is a simple and good way to choose
between states. Before we start coding a few observations have been made, to
avoid generating states that are useless or irrelevant.
Lets look at the start of the game. As mentioned previously the setup of
the game only allows the Controller to act initially. However the Controller has
many options on what to do. The Controller is in charge of all the signals and
switch-rail, and is allowed to change any and as many as it wants to generate a
new state. This means that it can generate up to 2#Signal+#Switchrail new states
each turn. So in theory there are 2#Signal+#Switchrail edges from each of the
states in the game graph when it is the Controllers turn. This number grows
exceptionally fast and even for small railways it quickly becomes a problem.
However luckily for us most of these states are useless as they consists only of
changes to signals and switch-rails that in no way has any eﬀect on trains or
their ability to move. This means that we only need to consider signals and
switch-rails, which are directly connected to the locations of the trains. And
because we only look at a single agent problem at this time, there is no reason
20
==PAGE:22==
to look at more than a single train at a time. This means we can reduce the
number of generated state to O(#Train) for each Controller turn. So for each
state in which the Controller has its turn, we will only need to generate a small
number of new states, linear in the number of trains in the network. By doing
this has a great side eﬀect too. If we only make the Controller to change signals
and switch-rails which will allow a single train to move for each state, it means
that the Conductor only can generate one new state for each state generated
by the Controller. Because if only one train will be allowed to move at a time,
only one state can be generated. This results in the fact that the Conductor
therefore will never be able to branch in the game graph. Because to be able to
branch in the game graph it needs to be able to move multiple train. But since
it cannot, it means that any solution or control program found also will be a
correct. This means we wont have to backtrack through all the states generated
by the Conductor, to check if other options exists, because we know they do
not. So we just have to ﬁnd a single goal state to know that we have a correct
solution.
Greedy Best-First Solver
As mentioned before the way we are gonna ﬁnd a solution, is by using a greedy
best-ﬁrst searching algorithm to search through the generated states. The rea-
son we are going with a greedy best-ﬁrst and not a breadth-ﬁrst or depth-ﬁrst
[2] searching algorithm is because it often is the most eﬃcient way to ﬁnd a
path, and the other two each have their problems for this domain. We are not
necessarily looking for the shortest route as a breadth-ﬁrst would ﬁnd. Because
the branching value for each Controller node, is up to 2 times the number of
trains. This can quite quickly result in many states, and it not very eﬃcient.
The depth-ﬁrst algorithm also has its problems in this domain. Because not all
states lead to a goal state, it might end up picking a bad one at the beginning
and generating and exploring a lot of bad states, before ﬁnally coming back
to start and pick a better state. This again might be very ineﬃcient, and lots
of non-needed state could be generated. As mentioned we are also using state
generation on-the-ﬂy, meaning that the states are only generated when we need
them. This is necessary as creating the entire game state space, is just not
feasible. In most cases as there exists O(2|S|+|SR| ∗Q|L|
n=|L|−|T | n)1 states in the
games, which is quite impossible to keep track of and store in memory for even
smaller railways. So by only generating the states when we needed them, we
avoid having states that are not needed and will less likely run out of memory.
But before we can start implementing the state generation game and the
searching algorithm, we need to be able to load in the data from the railway
ﬁles. And we will need to process this data, such that we can easily generate
states and ﬁnd a solution.
1|X|, is the size of the list of X, where X is the symbols from Table 2.1.
21
==PAGE:23==
Loading Railway Networks
As mentioned in a previous section the railways are stored in .txt ﬁles, set up
in a speciﬁc way (Figure 3.1). This was done such that is would be easy to load
in the data to the program. The way this is done is by loading in all of the lines
from the ﬁle to a list. Such that the ﬁrst line in the ﬁle is the ﬁrst element in
the list. Then we go through the list one element at a time. Starting at the
ﬁrst element converting the string representation of the location to an integer
and adding to a list. This then continues picking the next element of the list
and doing the same until a colon is met. When this happens we know all the
locations have been loaded and the next elements are the rails. The rails are
loaded by splitting the line in two at the space, converting the two strings to
integers, and then creating a tuple of them. They are then added to a new list
which contains the rails. Again this continues until a colon is met, at which
point the rails will all have been loaded, and the switch-rails will begin. These
lines are also then split by the spaces, the three locations converted to integers
and the L or R string converted to the corresponding Direction type. The three
locations and the direction is then used to create a SwitchRail element and
added to a list. After the next colon the signals will be loaded, and then the
trains, in a similar manner. An in the end we will have a RailwayNetwork as
described in Table 2.1. The code used for this can be seen in the LoadFile.fs
ﬁle, and a snippet can be seen in Figure 4.1.
22
==PAGE:24==
Figure 4.1: Part of the code from the LoadFile.fs ﬁle. Used to load in railway
networks from a ﬁle.
Preprocessing
The next step before we can start searching for a solution is to process the data.
This is to create the initial state, and to create some data-structures that will
make searching through the game graph more eﬃcient.
We earlier described the State type, see Figure 3.3, which means that we
need to make the three maps it consists of to create the initial state. It was
also described how the maps works, so we just have to put the correct data in
23
==PAGE:25==
them. As mentioned in a previous section, the initial state is the state where all
signals are red, the switch-rails are set to one of the options and all the trains
are at their starting location. This means that to create the signal-map we need
to go through all the signals in the list from the loaded network. For each we
create a key using the signal and set the value to false, as this represents the
signal being red. For the train map we just have to go through the list of trains,
and create a key value pair for each, with the key being the train id, and the
value the starting location. For the switch-rail as mentioned, it does not matter
which of the two options is selected. So we just have to create a map, where the
switch-rail is the key and the value either true or false. For no particular reason
true is picked. This means the selected rail is the one that is in the same row
as the intersecting location of the switch-rail. The ﬁnal two items needed to
create the initial state element is an integer and another element of type State.
The integer is used for the heuristic and is not relevant for the initial state, as
it will be picked ﬁrst since it is the only state, and is therefore just set to 0.
The State type element is set to N. This was as mentioned the null value of the
State type, and as the initial state does not have a parent node setting this to
null or N makes sense. The code snippet for creating the initial state can be
seen in Figure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: Code snippet from the Preprocessing.fs ﬁle part of the InitiateState
function. Used to create the initial state.
Next up some useful data-structures are created. This includes a list of tuple
containing train ids and the direction of the train, a map to get the goal location
given a train id, a map to get a switch-rail given a rail, two RailwayGraphs and
a DistanceMap. The three ﬁrst are used to quickly look up information when
searching the game graph, whereas the last two are more interesting. The two
RailwayGraphs are graphs over the railway network, where the locations are
the nodes and the rails and switch-rails are the edges. These will be used to
ﬁnd the paths the trains can use to get from their starting location to their goal
location. The reason there are two graphs is because they are directed, since the
trains are only allowed to move in one direction. So one is for moving left and
the other is for moving right. The way they are implemented are as adjacency
lists in a map. Such that each location of the network is a key in the map, and
all the locations that it can reach by a single rail, in the direction of the map,
are put in a list as the value. The way these are made is by ﬁrst going through
all the locations adding them as keys to a map, with an empty list as values.
Then the rails are gone through one by one, where the largest number of the
two locations, the rail consists of, is picked as key and the second is added to
the value list of that key. This way we are ensuring that all of these are in the
24
==PAGE:26==
same direction for going left, as we know all rails are only connecting locations
on the same row, due to how the editor works. With the larger number of two
locations being the one further to the right. Then all the switch-rails are looked
through. Here we look at the direction of the switch-rail, and add the correct
locations to the correct lists, such that their are for going left in the railway.
We now have one of the RailwayGraphs, and can then create the other by going
through this one, and reverse what is contains. The code to do this can be seen
in Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: Code snippet from the Preprocessing.fs ﬁle from the InitiateState
function. Used to create the RailwayGraphs.
The second interesting data-structure we want to create is the DistanceMap.
As mentioned the greedy best-ﬁrst algorithm will use a goal heuristic as a mea-
surement to pick the next state to explore. So each state has to know its heuristic
value. This is done by summing up the total distance for each train from their
current position in the state to their goal location. In order to not calculate
this distance at each state generation, a distance-map is created. This contains
all distances from any location to another as long as a paths exists between the
two. That way instead of having to calculate it each time we can just look it
up, to speed up the process. The way this distance-map is created is by picking
a location, look up in the one of railway-graph what locations it can reach and
then add the tuple of the two locations as the key, with 1 as the value. Then for
each of the reachable locations look through the same railway-graph for what
they can reach, add them to the map by creating a tuple of the original location
and the new location with the value of 2. The is repeated until no more new lo-
cations are found in the railway-graph. This is then repeated for every location
to get the full distance-map. The function to do this can be seen in Figure 4.4.
Figure 4.4: Code snippet from the Preprocessing.fs ﬁle the CreateDistanceMap
function. Used to create the distance-map.
The ﬁnal thing that is done in the preprocessing is ﬁnding all locations,
which are on a path from a starting location of a train to the goal location. As
the trains are not allowed to move in reverse, it means that there are certain
locations of the railway which are unreachable. And more important there are
locations from which the goal locations are unreachable. So to guide the trains
25
==PAGE:27==
to avoid the locations from which their goal is unreachable, which would result
in states from which a goal state can not be found, all the locations which the
trains can reach, and the goal location is reachable are calculated. This is done,
by ﬁnding all the locations that are reachable going in the train’s direction from
the starting location, and intersecting it with all the locations that are reachable
going the the opposite direction from the goal location. This is the exact set of
locations, which are reachable for the train, and from which the goal location
can be reached. These locations set are found by going through the railway-
graph starting at a location and following nodes and edges until no more are
found. The code to do this can be seen in Figure 4.5.
Figure 4.5: Code snippet from the Preprocessing.fs ﬁle the FindPaths function.
Used to ﬁnd all location that each train can reach, from which their goal location
is also reachable.
We have now done all the preprocessing we need and can ﬁnally start creating
the game and solver.
The Game
So the way were are gonna ﬁnd a solution is by looking at the problem as a game
with two players. We have the Controller who can change values of signals and
switch-rails, and the Conductor who can move the trains. The way a solution is
found, is if the Controller wins the game, which is done by ﬁnding a goal state.
We are gonna implement the game as two diﬀerent functions ControllerTurn
and ConductorTurn. As mentioned numerous times, the Conductor is not able
to do anything in the initial state, so lets look at the ControllerTurn function
ﬁrst.
As a way to keep track of the best states, we will added all states generated
to a priority-queue, which will keep track of the state sorted best to worst,
based on the heuristic described earlier. The way the Controller then starts is
by popping the queue to get the best state. It will then check whether or not
this is a goal state. If it is we are done, we have found a solution. Otherwise
26
==PAGE:28==
the Controller gets its turn. First it will create a number of new states, one
for each train. Each of these states will have a single the change, which is that
the signal at the location of the train is turned green. All other signals will be
red. All the generated states are then added to the priority-queue and to a set
of states, if they pass two checks. The ﬁrst check it has to pass is done by the
function IsSafeState, the code can be seen in Figure 4.6. This function checks
it the state is safe. A safe state is a state which has three properties.
Figure 4.6: Code snippet from the BFSSolver.fs ﬁle the IsSafeState function.
Used to check if a state does not break the three properties for being a safe
state.
The ﬁrst is that no train must be able to reach the location of another train.
Being able to reach, means that the train will have a open path of available rails
and switch-rails with no red signals to the other location. If this is not kept
it means that when the Conductor gets their turn, they will be able to move
a train to another trains location, and thereby making the Controller lose the
game. So to avoid this, no train must be able to reach another trains location,
in a state generated by the Controller.
The second property is that no train, must be able to reach a location that
is also reachable by another train. The reason for this is the same as for the
ﬁrst property. If two trains can reach the same location the Conductor will be
able to crash the trains and win the game. So the Controller should also not
add states for which this property does not hold.
The ﬁnal property is that no train should be able to reach a location from
which the goal location is not reachable. If this is not the case the Conductor,
will be able to move the train to a location from which the Controller will no
longer be able to guide it to its goal. Thereby the Controller will not be able
to win the game, as a goal state will not be anywhere on this path in the game
graph.
If it passes this ﬁrst check, we know that this state will not make the Con-
troller lose, when giving the turn to the Conductor, and therefore is safe to keep.
Because if the three properties hold when the Conductor gets the state, they
27
==PAGE:29==
will also hold in the state generated by the Conductor performing an action, if
the rules of the game are followed. This is because if no signal or switch-rail
changes are made, which can only be made by the Controller, moving a train to
another legal location, will only make the number of reachable locations for the
train smaller. You remove the location it was just at from the set of reachable
locations. Because if a location was not reachable before moving the train, it
will not be reachable after moving the train, as no signals or switch-rail selec-
tions can have changed, which is the only way to add new locations to being
reachable. This means that if all states generated by the Controller have these
properties, the Conductor will never be able to make the Controller lose, and
thereby when we do ﬁnd a solution we know all the states are safe and the
solution therefore is correct.
The second check a state has to pass, before being added to the priority-
queue and state set, is a duplication check. This is done to avoid adding states
that either already are in the queue or has been in the queue. The way this
is done, is that we are keeping track of all states that have been added to the
queue at some point, by storing a hash-value for each state. Then when a new
state is to be added, we hash it and check if the hash value already exists. If
not it passes the check and can be added, otherwise we just throw it away. We
are using hash-values instead of storing all the states to reduce the amount of
memory needed and speed up the process. Because storing a single number
uses less space, and comparing two numbers takes less time than comparing
two states. There might however occur the problem, if the hashing function is
not good enough, that a state that has not been added has a the same hash-
value as another state already added. In this case we throw away a state, which
should not have been thrown away. This was actually a problem early in the
development, because the solver threw away states that were needed for ﬁnding
a solution due to hashing collisions. So instead of just using the built in hash-
function in F# it was modiﬁed it a bit, after which the problem not longer
occurred. The modiﬁed hash-function can be seen in Figure 4.7.
Figure 4.7: Code snippet from the BFSSolver.fs ﬁle the hash function. Used to
hash a state.
The states that pass the checks are then added to a state set and to the
priority-queue.
Next we ﬁnd all the switch-rails if any, which share a location with a train.
For each of these we will create a new state, where the switch-rail has been
switched, and the signal turned green. Again all other signals are changed to
red. And as before for these states to get added to the set and priority-queue,
they have to pass the same checks as before. The Controller will now have
generated all the relevant states for all trains, and the next step is to hand
over the states generated from the set and give the turn to the Conductor. The
28
==PAGE:30==
ControllerTurn code, can be seen in Figure 4.8.
Figure 4.8: Code snippet from the BFSSolver.fs ﬁle part of the ControllerTurn
function. Used to generate states as the Controller.
When the Conductor gets its turn, the ﬁrst thing it does is to check if
any states were provided by the Controller. If not the turn is return to the
Controller. If it has been given states, then for each state it will generate one
new state. In this state all movable trains, which is only a single one, due to how
the Controller generates states, have been moved one location forward. These
new states will then, if passing the duplication check, be added to the priority-
queue and a new set of states. There is no need to see, if they pass the safe
state check, because as mentioned the Conductor cannot break the properties,
if they hold in the states it is provided. Then the Conductor will get its turn
again. This is to simulate the situation, where the Controller decides not to do
anything with its turn, as this is not covered by the ControllerTurn function.
This will in fact often be the best choice for the Controller, as the trains spent a
lot of time on rail sections, where the it has no ability to manipulate where they
are moving. The code the generate the states, and the ConductorTurn function
can be seen in Figure 4.9.
29
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.9: Code snippets from the BFSSolver.fs ﬁle the ConductorTurn func-
tion and GenerateConductorStates function.
Used to generate states as the
Conductor.
When no more states are generated the turn is returned to the Controller,
and the game will go on until either a goal state is found, which means we have
a solution, or we run out of states to explore. When a solution is found, we
create a list of all the states in the solution, by going through all the parents of
the states, starting with the goal state. This list of states can then be seen as
the control program.
This solver, and all the modiﬁed versions have all been tested on 7 railway
networks, the results can be seen in the Results section of the report. This solver
is the Single Agent Version 1 (SAv1). Other networks have also been used to
test the solvers, but they have not been included in this report.
Observations
When testing the solver on the railway networks, a few things was noticed. First
is that if a network has too many trains, the solver could not ﬁnd a solution
in reasonable time. This is likely due to the branching factor of the Controller,
which generates up to two times the number of trains new states each turn,
which quickly can become a problem. Another problem the solver has, is when
the number of paths to a goal state is low. Or said in another way, when the
solution has a very speciﬁc order the trains should be moved. This is due to
the heuristic of the algorithm, it could easily chose a path of states moving a
train very close to its goal. But if another train is blocking the goal, it might
have to backtrack a lot before ﬁnding a way to get the other train away ﬁrst.
Because it would at this point prioritize picking states, where other trains are
moved, but this does not solve the issue of the blocking train. Which means all
of these states are generated and looked at in vein, as they will never lead to a
goal state. A last thing that was noticed was that for the networks the solution
often consisted of moving one train in goal at a time. This a good way to solve
the problem. So if the solution often ends up moving a single train to goal at a
30
==PAGE:32==
time, there is no need to generate |T| states each time the Controller takes its
turn. If it anyway is gonna pick the states in some order of moving the trains
one by one, maybe it would be possible to learn this order before hand, and
then only generate one state each time the Controller acts.
Priorities and Swapping
So the two biggest problem with the current solver is that it cannot solve large
networks in a fair amount of time, and if the way the trains have to move is too
speciﬁc. It was also noticed that the trains often were moved to goal one by
one, which is a good idea for solving the networks. So lets look a bit more into
this, to see if we can somehow help the solver by ﬁnding the order of the trains
beforehand, instead of during the searching. The idea is to give each train a
priority, such that the higher the priority the sooner the train should be moved
to its goal location. So lets look at how we can do this. A train initially can
be in one of two cases. Either it has a path from the starting location to the
goal that is free, meaning no other train is placed on any of the locations of the
path, or it does not. It is easy to see that if nothing is blocking the train from
reaching its goal, we could just move it to its goal, and thereby we will have
one less train to worry about. However before doing so, we need to make sure
that this train will not, if placed in goal, be blocking other trains from reaching
their goal. Otherwise placing it in goal, will not help us ﬁnd a solution, only
make it more diﬃcult or even impossible. The second case of trains is where
something is blocking them from reaching their goal, either by a train being on
their goal location or blocking all possible paths from the start location to the
goal location. It is clear here that we need to move the other train away ﬁrst,
otherwise this train cannot reach its goal. So the way we are going to prioritize
the trains, is by giving the highest priorities to the trains with free paths to
their goal. And if something is blocking a train, the blocking train will need
at higher priority than it, in order to get it to move away ﬁrst. In general this
will work for many networks, as moving free trains to goals often will open up
paths for other trains, that then freely can move to goal. However there is one
big problem, what if all the trains are blocked by other trains? Lets say train
T1 needs to go to the location of T2, but T3 is placed in the goal of T2, and
T3 cannot get to goal either because T1 is there. How should these trains be
prioritized? The solution to this is actually rather simple. Get one of the trains
to move to a location from which the others will not be blocked. Now one of
the trains will have a free path to goal, and when moved the next train has an
open path. And when the last train in this cycle has been moved to its goal,
the ﬁrst train that was moved aside can be moved to its goal. So if we always
can move trains aside, we should always be able to ﬁnd a way to prioritize the
trains. Done by picking them in order of having a free path to goal. So this is
the idea lets look at how it can be implemented.
31
==PAGE:33==
Preprocessing
As the idea was to prioritize the trains before the game graph generation and
searching, most of the work is gonna be done in preprocessing. The ﬁrst thing
that needs to be done is that instead of just having a set of all locations between
the starting location of a train and its goal, we need to ﬁnd all the distinct paths
between the two locations. This is such that we can see if a train has a free
path, or if all of them are blocked by other trains.
To do this we add the starting location of a train to a list. The we look in
the railway-graph for the direction of the train, what locations the location at
the head of the list can reach. If it can reach a single location we add this as
the new head of the list, and then do the it again. If it can reach two locations,
because of a switch-rail, will we duplicate the list, such that we have two. Where
the ﬁrst element of one of the lists is the one new location and in the other the
other new location. We then continue, now doing it for both lists. When we
reach a location which cannot reach other locations, this path is done. When
all paths are done, we have a set of location lists, with all paths leaving the
starting location of a train direction, with the elements in reverse order. As not
all of these necessarily lead to the goal location of the train, and some of them
might pass it, we need to clean them up. This is done by going through each list
one by one, and removing elements until the goal location is found. When it is
found we know that the list only contains the locations in between the start and
goal locations of the train, so we keep this list. If the goal location is not found,
we will at some point run out of elements in the list, and the list is removed.
When done with all the lists, we now have all the distinct paths between the
start and goal location of a train. This is then done for all the trains in the
network. The code can be seen in Figure 4.10.
Figure 4.10: Code snippet from the Preprocess.fs ﬁle the DistinctPaths function.
Used to ﬁnd all distinct paths between the start and goal locations of the trains.
Now that we have found all distinct paths for all trains, we can check if any
32
==PAGE:34==
of the trains, are part of these cycles of trains blocking each other. These will
be known as swap-cycles. There are two ways that a train can be part of a
swap-cycle. Either directly because it is placed on the goal location of another
train, and its own goal location has another train placed on it. Or indirectly
by blocking all paths of another train with its goal and starting locations. So
we look at these cases separately and then combine what is found. The directly
blocking trains are easy to ﬁnd, we just go through the trains and check if their
goal is the starting location of another train, and if their starting location is the
goal of another train. If so check the other trains involved, if it is also the case
for them, continue until it either is not the case or one of the trains is found
again. If found again we have a swap-cycle, if not found the cycle is broken
at some point, meaning one of the trains should not have its goal immediately
blocked, and therefore have a free path to goal. Which when moved opens up
for the next train and so on. The code to do this can be seen in Figure 4.11.
Figure 4.11: Code snippet from the Preprocess.fs ﬁle the SwapCycle function.
Used to ﬁnd all directly connected swap-cycles.
The indirect swap-cycles are a bit more complicated to ﬁnd. To do this for
each train we need to check if all of its possible paths are being blocked by a
train. Meaning that the start and goal location of a train both has to be on a
path of another train to block it. If so that path is blocked. So we go through
all of the distinct paths a train has and check if all of them are blocked. If there
is one that is not, the train has a free path, and nothing will be done. If all
the paths are blocked, we ﬁnd which trains are involved, and add them all to
a set. This does not necessarily ﬁnd the entire swap-cycle, that these train are
part of, but we ﬁx that part later. But having a train block all the paths of
another means that those two as a minimum have a swap-cycle going on, and
one needs to be moved aside for the other to get to goal. The code for ﬁnding
these swap-cycles can be seen in Figure 4.12.
33
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.12: Code snippet from the Preprocess.fs ﬁle the SpecialSwapCycle
function. Used to ﬁnd all train indirectly connected in swap-cycles.
We now might have a lot of small sets of trains in swap-cycles, that are ac-
tually connected. So the next step is to combine all of the set, which have trains
in common. This is simply done by taking two sets and checking if they have
any train in common. If so combine them, if not keep both. Then take another
set, and check against the either combined set or the two non-overlapping sets,
and combine them if any trains are overlapping. This is continued until all the
sets have been checked, and combined if needed. The resulting sets, are the the
swap-cycles of the network, Figure 4.13.
Figure 4.13: Code snippet from the Preprocess.fs ﬁle the FindSwapCycle func-
tion. Used to ﬁnd swap-cycles in a network.
Now that we have found all the swap-cycles, if any in the network, we can
move on to the next step. Here we will go through all of the swap-cycles just
found, and for each ﬁnd a train which can be move aside, while the others are
then moved to their goal. This is done by going through all the trains in a swap-
cycle, and ﬁnding all of the locations which the train can safely move to without
blocking other trains, and still reach its goal location. Each location is then
gone through, checking that the train can be blocked here by the Controller.
Meaning that there has to be a signal. This is important as the Conductor
otherwise might move the train to another location, which will not be safe.
Having a switch-rail, is also a way the Controller can block the train, but since
all switch-rails needs signals, we will ﬁnd all locations just by looking for signals.
When this is done the train, which can be moved the furthest to get to a safe
location, is picked as the train that should be moved aside for this swap-cycle.
A new goal-map is then created, setting this safe location as the goal for the
picked train, such that when we get to the game, to Controller will at ﬁrst
believe this is where the train should go. The same is done for the paths of the
train, such that it will not be guided the wrong way later. This is done for all
34
==PAGE:36==
the swap-cycles, such that we will now have two goal-maps, the ﬁrst guiding the
picked trains to their safe locations, and the other trains to their goals, and the
same is done for path-maps. Next up we need to update the paths for the rest
of the trains, such that they do not believe that they can use the paths that
will be blocked by the safe trains. Then ﬁnally we will check if in these new
conditions there still exists swap-cycles, and if so, do the same thing over again
until it is not the case. The implementation can be seen in Figure 4.14.
Figure 4.14: Code snippet from the Preprocess.fs ﬁle the SplitWork function.
Used to ﬁnd safe locations for train in swap-cycles, to move trains aside such
that the swap-cycles are dissolved.
By doing it this way, creating two goal-maps, we have split up the solving
into two rounds.
The ﬁrst pass is when the trains are moved to their safe
locations, and the rest to their goal. The second pass is then when the trains at
their safe location have to be moved to their actual goal locations. This means
that we need to be very careful not to place any trains in the ﬁrst pass in such a
way that they will block trains in the second pass. So to avoid this the next step
is to ﬁnd the distinct paths that the trains in the second pass can take. This is
done using a setup where the safe train have their starting location as being the
safe location, and the goal their original goal. We can then combine these with
the paths that were found for the trains to move to their safe location from the
start, to get all the distinct paths that these trains actually have. Now that we
force them to go to a certain location in between. That way we will know later
if we decides to move a non-safe train, if it will block one of the safe trains. Now
that we ﬁnally have found a way to avoid having swap-cycles in the network,
we can start ﬁguring out how to prioritize the trains.
The way this is done is by ﬁrst temporarily remove all paths that are not
usable in the initial setup, with all the trains at their starting location. This
is the paths where at least one of the locations in the path is the starting
35
==PAGE:37==
location of another train. When done, we know that all of the paths that are
left are entirely free. We then go through each train, and check if they have any
remaining paths. If not this train cannot currently be moved. If it does we then
check if placing the train in its current goal location, either the actual goal, or
if it was selected as a safe train before the safe location for the ﬁrst pass, will
result in blocking any other trains from being able to reach their goal. If it does
block the train should not be moved yet and we move on, otherwise we add it
to a set. When done looking through all the trains we will have a set of trains,
which in the current setup can be move to goal because it has a free path and
does not block other trains if placed in goal. For the code see Figure 4.15.
Figure 4.15: Code snippet from the Preprocess.fs ﬁle from the CalculatePrior-
ities function. Used to ﬁnd trains that have a free path, and does not block
other trains if placed at goal location.
The next step is to ﬁrst check if any trains were actually added to the set.
If not the function returns the current priority map, which is empty the ﬁrst
round, and the set of paths that the trains can take. If we did ﬁnd some trains,
we will look at these trains, to see if it is possible for some of them to move at
the same time. This is done by picking a train from the set and its shortest free
path. The shortest path is the path which contains the fewest vertical moves.
As the railways all are based on a grid with each rail having the same length,
all the paths contains the same amount of locations. So to model that using a
switch-rail to change lane is actually longer, the shortest path is the one with
the fewest of these. When the path has been selected the other trains from the
set are looked at to see if any of these have a free path, which has no overlap in
locations with the just selected path. Because if a train does, it means that the
two trains are completely independent of each other, and will be able to move
at the same time. After this the set with the most trains which has non-crossing
paths is selected, see Figure 4.16.
36
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.16: Code snippet from the Preprocess.fs ﬁle from the CalculatePriori-
ties function. Used to ﬁnd trains that have free non-crossing paths.
The path-map for all the selected trains is then updated, to only contain one
speciﬁc path for each train which is the non-crossing just found. The paths for
all other trains are updated to no longer containing paths which requires the
goal location of the selected trains, as these no longer are usable. The locations
of the trains are updated to now represent the setup where the selected trains
are in goal, and the rest at their start location. And an equal priority value is
given to all the selected trains. The function is then called recursively on this
new setup, and will in the next round give the trains that are selected a priority
of one less than just given. At some point the function does not ﬁnd any more
free trains, either because all have been placed in goal and gotten a priority. Or
because some of the train never had a free path or would always be blocking if
placed in goal. If the ﬁrst is the case nothing happens in the next step. If not
these trains are then added as belonging to the second pass, and their goal in
the ﬁrst pass is updated to being the same as their starting location to avoid the
Controller trying to moved them in the game later before they should. All the
train that received a priority also received an exact path for it to take, which is
also stored. We then create the setup for the second pass, where all trains that
did get a priority are placed in their goal location or their safe location, and the
goal is then set as the actual goal location for all the trains. We then ﬁnd the
distinct paths for the trains that are yet to be in goal, and then call the priority
function again on this setup to give priorities to the remaining trains. When
done hopefully all trains have gotten a priority, if it happens that some have
not, they will be given a priority of zero. The preprocessing is now done, and
we now have a lot more data-structures that should be sent on to the Controller
than before. Which includes two goal-maps, one for the ﬁrst pass and one for
the second. Two path-maps, again one for each pass, and the priority-map with
the priorities of the trains.
The Game
Now that we have a bit more new data from the preprocessing, we need to make
a few changes to the solver. The ﬁrst is that when checking if the networks has
37
==PAGE:39==
been solved, we need to ﬁrst use the ﬁrst pass goal-map, and when this would
return true, update the goal-map and path-map to the second pass versions.
Because when returning true, it means all the trains are at their ﬁrst pass goals,
and we then have to move on to the second pass of the game. This is fairly
simple, but needs to be done, otherwise the solver will think it is done, before
it is. Also when the ﬁrst pass has been cleared, we can remove all states still
in the priority-queue, as the second pass uses the goal state of the ﬁrst pass as
the initial state. If not done we might end up picking a ﬁrst pass state, but
try to move the train according to their second pass goals and paths, which
will give problems. This is simply done by modifying the IsSolved function, see
Figure 4.17.
Figure 4.17: Code snippet from the BFSSolver.fs ﬁle the updated IsSolved func-
tion. Used to check if the game is solved, and now update goal- and path-maps,
when ﬁrst pass is over.
The next change is in the ControllerTurn function. Instead of creating a new
state for each train, we will now ﬁnd the trains with the highest priority, that
are not in goal. We will then pick one of these and only create one new state.
The one where we turn the signal the train is waiting behind green, and possibly
change the switch-rail such that the correct rail is selected according to the path
it needs to take. When the turn is then returned to the Controller, it will pick
this train again if not in goal. When in goal another train will be picked, the
same way as the ﬁrst was selected, as the one with the highest priority not yet
in goal. This will continue until the game is solved, such that the train with the
highest priority is moved to goal ﬁrst and the one with the lowest last. For the
code see Figure 4.18.
38
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.18: Code snippet from the BFSSolver.fs ﬁle from the updated Con-
trollerTurn function. Used to pick train with highest priority not in goal, and
generate state for it to move forward.
If it so happens, that some of the trains was given the priority of zero in the
preprocessing, the Controller will use the old way to try and get these to their
goal location. This will happen after the trains that do have a priority have
been move in goal. We only look at these after the prioritized trains because
we know that if a train is given a priority it means that it will not block other
trains from being able to reach goal. And therefore if a solution does exist, we
should be able to ﬁnd it when they are in goal. This version of the solver is the
Single Agent version 2 (SAv2).
Another Game
We know that if a train has a priority, it means that it has a free path to goal,
when it is the highest priority train not yet in goal. Because it was given the
priority, when the trains with higher priority was in goal, and lower priority at
their starting locations. And it would only have been picked and given a priority
if it had a free path. We can use this knowledge to reduce the number of times
the Controller has to act. Because what if we just open up the entire path
for the train when it has been selected as having the highest priority. Meaning
that all the signals on the path will be turned green and the switch-rail changed
to match the path needed to be taken by the train. That way the Controller
would only have to act once per train, given they all have a priority, which
would reduce the number of state the Controller has to generate.
39
==PAGE:41==
This is actually very easy to do as well, because when we did give priorities
to the trains, we also picked out the exact path it should take. So when we
have selected a train, we can just go through each location in the path, check
if a signal is present in the direction of the train. If so turn it green. Then
go through all the switch-rails on the path and change them such that they
guide the train on the correct path. That way the Controller will only have
to generate this single state for each train. The code for this can be seen in
Figure 4.19. This is the Single Agent version 3 (SAv3) solver.
Figure 4.19: Code snippet from the BFSSolver.fs ﬁle, the OpenPath function
and from another updated ControllerTurn function. Used to open an entire path
for a train, such that all signals are green, and switch-rails changed correctly.
Used to make the Controller only generate one state per train.
These three single agent solvers will always ﬁnd a correct control program.
This is as mentioned due to the fact that only one train is allowed to move
in each state generated by the Controller. Meaning that the Conductor cannot
branch in the game graph, which means that a solution is also a correct solution,
as the Conductor never has an option to act diﬀerently.
40
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 5
Multi Agent Solution
We now have a seemingly very eﬃcient single agent solver, which does not seem
to generate unused states for most networks. However none of the solutions
are very eﬃcient, understood as the length of the solutions are close to worst
case. This is of cause due to the fact that they only ever allow a single train
to move at a time, so to get a more eﬃcient solution, we will need to look at
the problem as a multi agent problem. We have multiple options of how we
want to implement the multi agent solver. One way is to use the knowledge
gained when creating the single agent solver, and try to make a multi agent
solver, that works in a similar way. But instead of only allowing a single train
to move at a time, allow all or some of them, based on the priority of the trains
or other factors. Another way to do it is to use the solution found by the single
agent solver and merge the states, such that in the end it will look like a multi
agent solution, even though it was created with being a single agent solution
in mind. A similar idea is explored by Luis, Fern´andez and Borrajo [4]. Both
ideas have their pros and cons. One of the pros of the ﬁrst idea, and con of the
second, is that the solution does not depend on how it was possible to move the
trains one by one, which might allow for some smarter movement, that is not
possible when solving single agently. A con is that we might start to generate
a lot of states again, and might end up in some of the situations of the ﬁrst
single agent solver, where the branching factor becomes to big. Theoretically
we might end having the Controller generate up to 2|T| states each time, if
we want to check all possibilities, and ﬁnd the best solution. We could also
only allow a small number of trains to move at a time. This would reduce the
branching factor, but might end up giving some weird solutions, where trains
are not moving even though it technically should not be a problem if they did,
due to the selection of trains. It also has the same problem as the ﬁrst single
agent solver with networks where only one or few paths exists that leads to a
solution, moving a train to far too soon will lead to problems. The second idea
does not have these problems. Because here we already have a solution. We just
have to look through it and see if we can merge the states, such that the three
proprieties are not broken, and the edges in the game graph are still legal. One
41
==PAGE:43==
might think that a problem could be that some networks require a multi agent
solution to be solved, which would be a problem for the second idea, as it builds
on a single agent solution, and therefore these networks would not be solvable.
This is not true however. It cannot be the case that it only has a multi agent
solution. Because lets say such a correct solution does exists. This means that
one edge in the game graph requires that multiple trains are moving. But for
it to be a correct solution all edges from this state has to lead to a goal state,
also the one where just a single train moves, cause the Conductor might select
only to move a single train. So if it indeed is a correct solution following this
edge should also lead to a goal state. And the same for all other edges in the
graph. In each case the Conductor has the option to only move one train, so if a
correct multi agent solution exists, a single agent solution also exists. Another
con of the second approach is that the multi agent solution is based on a single
agent solution, which might lead to a less optimal solution, as it might have
been possible to ﬁnd a smarter path if searching for a multi agent solution from
the beginning. Another con for the ﬁrst idea is that when a solution is found
we need to back track through all the states. Because we need to check all the
places the Conductor could have done something diﬀerent, to make sure these
edges also lead to a goal state, to ensure we have a correct solution. This is
not a problem for the other idea, as we base it on a correct solution. So if the
combining of states is done correctly it should not break the correctness, as the
other paths or options the Conductor could have taken, should all in the end
be boiled down to the single agent edges, which we knows comes from a correct
solution.
The idea we are going to go with is the second. This is due to the fact that
we already have a very eﬃcient single agent solver, and that we are sure when
merging, that if done correctly, the solution will still be correct. We now also
move a bit away from the idea that the Conductor would try to sabotage the
Controller. This does not mean that the solution we try to ﬁnd will not be
correct, but we want to ﬁnd the fastest solution, which requires the two players
to play together. This also means that we wont have an exact control plan
for the solution as with the single agent version. Where it was possible to tell
exactly when the signals and switch-rails should be changed, but now will have
more of a guideline as to when this can be done. This will be explain more when
we get to it.
Multi Agent Version 1
The ﬁrst version of a multi agent solution is just a small extension of the third
single agent solver. Instead of just picking one of the trains with the highest
priority of trains not in goal, the Controller picks all of them. Then it opens
the paths for all picked trains. This works because when the trains were given a
priority, they were only given the same, if they had non-crossing free paths. This
means that opening the paths for multiple trains of the same priority, will not
violate any of the three properties as the paths are non overlapping. Therefore
42
==PAGE:44==
the trains, will not be able to reach each other or the same locations. And from
all the locations they can reach the goal location is also reachable, because the
paths that have been opened is the paths from the starting locations to the
goals of the trains. Implementing this is super simple, as the preprocessing has
already been done earlier, all that needs to be done is remove the ﬁrst line from
second code snippet in Figure 4.19, where it picks the minimum element. That
way all the trains with the same priority will be picked and have their paths
opened up. This can also be done for the second single agent solver, by doing
something similar. However this leads to solutions where trains that will wait
at signals until all other trains of the same priority is also stopped by a signal.
Which looks wrong, and weird. This is also basically just a slower version than
opening the entire path, so it has not been tested as the others.
But is the solution it ﬁnds also a correct solution? It can easily be seen that
this is the case, without having to backtrack through all states generated by
the Conductor, to check all edges. The reason is that the Controller will not do
anything new until all the trains of a priority have been placed in goal. So even
if the Conductor decides to move the trains one by one, or ﬁrst one then another
and then a third, or in other non optimal ways. All of these will always end up
leading to the same state, where all the trains of this priority is in goal. Because
they have nowhere else to go, and can only follow the path which leads them
to goal. Also none of these states, will have violated the properties. Because
as mention earlier the Conductor cannot break a property if it holds in the
last state generated by the Controller which it does. So even if the Conductor
should move the trains in a none linear way, it will always end up with the trains
in goal, and a correct solution. This will be known as the Multi Agent version
1 (MAv1). The biggest problem with this solution as a multi agent solution is
that it requires that trains have independent paths. If for example a network
only has a single rail in the middle connecting two sides, and all of the trains
have to cross, this solution would just be a single agent solution. Even though
it quite clearly could be the case that the train can move at the same time, just
not cross that one rail.
Multi Agent Version 2
Now we are going to start looking at the method described in the start of the
chapter, with using the merging single agent solutions to create a multi agent
solution. The basis for this one is the MAv1 solution. This is of cause not
a single agent solution, but using this instead of SAv3 will save a few steps.
Because the MAv1 solution is basically a merged SAv3, but only for the train
of the same priority. So there is no reason not to use this, as it will just make it
slower not to. The idea we are going to look at is that instead of waiting until
trains are in goal to open the paths for the next priority trains, we will ﬁnd the
earliest state where the path is free and then open it up. That way the trains
will in a lot of cases start moving earlier, and thereby a faster solution can be
found. The way we are going to do this is as mentioned by looking at the MAv1
43
==PAGE:45==
solution for a network, and then merge states to get a hopefully faster solution.
The ﬁrst thing that will be done is to turn the signals red when a train has
passed them. This is done simply by checking the ﬁrst state and the second
state against each other, to see if any trains have changed location. If so the
locations of the trains in the ﬁrst state are saved, and the signal map for the
second state is updated such that if a signal is present it is changed to red at
these locations. The second state is then checked against the third state the
same way. If a train is moving again the location from the second state is also
stored, and the signal map for the third state is updated to make signals from
all the stored locations red. This then goes on until there is no train movement
between states. Because at this point we know that the trains with the highest
priority have reach their goals, and the Controller has opened up the paths for
the next set of trains. Here all the saved location are trashed, as they no longer
are needed because the Controller will have turned oﬀall signals before turning
on the ones on the paths for the next trains. The same thing is then repeated
until we run out of states. The code can be seen in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Code snippet from the PostProcess.fs ﬁle the TurnOﬀSignals func-
tion. Used to turn signals to red when a train has passed them.
This technically results in illegal edges in the game graph, as we both turn
signals red and move trains at the same time. However it is done as a measure
to reduce the length of the solution, as turning signals red, behind trains, in
no way can make the solution un-correct, as it has no impact on the reachable
locations of a train. Also if seen in a real life scenario it makes sense to turn
signals red the second the train has passed.
The next step is to split the solution states into smaller lists only containing
trains of a certain priority moving. This is such that we know when each priority
of trains are starting to move, and that way know which states that makes sense
looking into merging together. To do this we used the original solution state list,
not the one which had the signals turned red, to check when the signal-map is
changing between states. Because if the signal-map has changed between states,
it means that the next priority of trains will start to move, because this is a
Controller generated state. The code snippet for this can be seen in Figure 5.2.
We can do this because the state list with the turned oﬀsignals, will contains
the same states in the same order, just where the signals are red, meaning that
44
==PAGE:46==
when we ﬁnd the split in the original state list it will be at the same spot in the
new one.
Figure 5.2: Code snippet from the PostProcess.fs ﬁle the SplitStateList function.
Used to split the state list into smaller lists, each containing a set of states where
only a single priority of trains are moving.
Next up is the merging part. This is done by picking the ﬁrst two state
lists just found. These are the ones containing the states where the highest and
second highest priority trains are moving. The ﬁrst list is the base list, and the
second is the one we want to merge into the ﬁrst. But ﬁrst we need to ﬁnd out
which locations that the trains in the second list are using. Because these are
the ones that needs to be free in the states that we want to merge into. This is
simply done by going through the states in the list and checking the train-map
for which trains are moving, and saving all the locations involved. Then we ﬁnd
which trains are moving in the ﬁrst state list. This is needed to ﬁnd the point
in the list where the merging can start. Which lead to the next step, which is
ﬁnding the exact state in the ﬁrst list, where the locations used in the second
list are free, and no longer will be used. This is done by going through the states
one by one and checking if a train is using one of the locations or a signal which
is green is on one of the locations. If this is the case the next state is checked
and so on. If not we found the state where the merging can begin. All the
states found which could not be merged are stored as the ﬁrst states in the ﬁnal
multi agent solution. To merge the states we pick the ﬁrst state that we found
as mergeable from the ﬁrst list, and the ﬁrst state of the second list that we
wanted to merge into it. We then create a new state, where the signal-map from
the two has been combined, such that the signals that are green in either of the
states are green in the new state. The train-map is the one from the ﬁrst list
state with the location of the moving trains from the second state being added.
And the switch-rail-map is also the one from the ﬁrst state, updated such that
all switch-rails on the paths for the trains moving in the second list state ﬁt
what it in this state. This new state is then added to the resulting solution list
containing the unmergable states. Then the next state is picked from each list
and the same is done again. This continues until one of the two lists are empty.
If both run out of states at the same time, everything is good, we neither have
more states that we wanted to merge into other states or states that could be
merged into. If the ﬁrst list is not empty but the other is, we duplicate the
45
==PAGE:47==
last merged state and put them into the second list such that there is an equal
amount in both lists. We then merge the ones from the ﬁrst list into these. That
way we ensure no train is suddenly teleported backwards, which would happen
if we just put the states from the ﬁrst list into the resulting solution list. Is it
the other way round, where the second list has more elements, when the ﬁrst is
empty, we just add these to the result list as this would be where they should
go. We now have a result list of the two ﬁrst lists merged together, so next is
to take the third state list and try to merge into this result list, the same way
as before. This is continued until we have no more state lists we want to merge.
The code for this can be seen in Figure 5.3.
Figure 5.3: Code snippet from the PostProcess.fs ﬁle the Merge and Merging
functions. Used to merge lists of states together.
So now we have a state list where we have merge states together such that,
whenever a trains path is free it will be opened up. But the question is, is
this a correct solution? We know that the base used for the solution is correct,
because this was discussed before that the MAv1 does indeed ﬁnd a correct
solution. And we can used the same arguments to convinced ourselves that this
solution is also a correct solution. So we know that the ﬁrst couple states in
the solution are correct, these are the un-merged states and because the base
46
==PAGE:48==
was correct these must also be correct. Since nothing have been done except
turning signals to red after a train has passed its location, which as mentioned
does not make it non-correct. Lets now look at one of the merged states. Here
the Conductor now have the option to move more trains than before, meaning
that the game graph could branch more here. However none of the states would
lead to anything other than the goal state. This is because in the merged state
the paths have only been opened up because they were free, meaning that this
train will not be able to crash into other trains, and will at some point always
end up in goal, because it has no other options. This is the case for all the
states, no matter in which order the trains are moving they only have one path,
the one that leads to goal. And they cannot reach other trains, as the path
would not have been opened if the case. So even if the Conductor should decide
not to move the trains in the most optimal way, we know that the only option
for all the trains are to at some point end in their goal location, and doing so
without crashing into other trains. Of cause if the Conductor should decide to
move the train in another way, the Controller would also have create some other
states, so this is not an exact control program. But we can just think about
the solution as a sort of guideline for the control program. Such that when all
trains of a higher priority than some train have reached or maybe passed certain
locations, the path of this train would be opened up, and the solution found
is just the most optimal way to move the trains. And as mentioned for the
multi agent solutions, we do try to ﬁnd the most eﬃcient solution, by having
the two players play together, but still having a correct solution. This is the
Multi Agent version 2 (MAv2).
The biggest problem with this solution is that, trains might wait an unnec-
essarily long time to move. Lets say that the only location on a path that a
train has in common with another train is the second to last location. Then
there should be no reason for the train to wait at its starting location for the
other train to have passed the common location. It should be able to move to
the closest stopping point before that location. Because we know none of the
locations before this one collide with other trains, as only the second to last was
a common one, and are therefore free to be used. However this is not possible
to do, when we open up the entire path for each train for it to move. Because
this would allow the Conductor to crash the trains, as it would not have to stop
at that location, so we will need to use another solution as the base to do this.
Multi Agent Version 3
As mentioned opening up the entire path for the trains makes it impossible
to move the trains closer to the shared locations before the other trains have
passed them. However we do have a single agent solver, which only opens up a
small part of the path each Controller turn. If we use the SAv2 solution as the
basis we might be able to get around this problem. Because then we no longer
needs to ensure the entire path is free but only the next rail section of the path.
Here a section should be understood as the part of the path from the current
47
==PAGE:49==
signal to the next. So the idea for this multi agent solution is almost the same
as the other, with the exception that the paths are spilt up more, which should
allow for moving train close the problematic locations, instead of having to wait
at the start.
The way to do this is also very similar, but with some small minor changes.
Again the ﬁrst step is turning the signals to red once a train has passed the
location, this is done such that the merging might be able to happen at an earlier
state than otherwise. Again we are trying to ﬁnd the most eﬃcient solution, so
combining these will help even though it is not possible in the game. Here the
same function as for MAv2 is used. The next step is also as with the MAv2, we
are going to split the solution list into smaller lists each containing the states of
a single train moving. Here we however cannot use the same function as before,
where we just needed to check if the signal-maps changed between states, as
this is done multiple time moving a single train from start to goal this time.
So instead we need to go through the states checking from one to the next if
any trains have changed locations in the train-maps. But this is not enough
cause then we would split it at each Controller turn as well, due to the train
not changing location. So we also need to check if the signal-map has changed
and if the change is at the location of the train, that was moving in the previous
state. So we go through the solution list and ﬁnd all the splitting points, and
end up with a number of state lists each containing the states of a single train
moving. The code can be seen in Figure 5.4
Figure 5.4: Code snippet from the PostProcess.fs ﬁle the GetMovingTrains,
GetMovingTrainsStates and SplitStateListSingleSignal functions. Used to split
a state list into smaller lists of single trains moving.
The next step is the merging of states. Here the process is very similar to
MAv2 as well. We pick the ﬁrst two lists, which contain the states with the
two highest priority trains moving. The second list is the one that should be
merged into the ﬁrst. But instead of trying to ﬁnd the point where the entire
path for the second list train is free, we now look only for a point were the next
48
==PAGE:50==
section of the path is free. So ﬁrst we ﬁnd the state in the second list containing
the train using the next part of its path, and store and these locations. Then
we look through the ﬁrst list to see from which state, none of those locations
are needed, and then we merge them together like with the other version. We
now have three state lists, the resulting merged state list, the rest of the ﬁrst
list, which did not have anything merge into it, and the rest of the second list,
which is not merge into the other list yet. Here depending on what remains in
each list, not the result list with the merge states, something diﬀerent happens.
If both are empty is means we have merge all the parts where the train from
the second list moves into the ﬁrst list, and that it ﬁt perfectly with the length
of the ﬁrst list. In this case we look at what train is moving in the next state
list, with the now third highest priority train moving. We then create the state
list we want to merge this list into by picking the section of the result state list
in which the train from the next state list does not move. It seems obvious that
this should be all the state in the result list, but this is for when we reach the
states from the second pass of the game, where some of the train might move
again to avoid. So picking the states from the result list where these do not
move makes sense. When we have this we call the function again, now with this
new states list as the one to be merge into and the third of the original list to
merge into it.
If it is the case that the ﬁrst list is empty but the second is not, we just add
the remaining states from the second to the result state list. And then again in
the same way create the new list we want to merge into by picking it from the
result list, and calling the function again.
If the second list if empty but the ﬁrst is not, we are going to do as we did
with MAv2, where we pick the last merged state, and merge it into each of
the remaining states in the ﬁrst list. And again before recursively calling the
function create the new list we want to merge into.
Finally if both lists still have elements, which is most often the case, as we
only tried to merge a small part of the second list, we just recursively call the
function using these two lists. This then continues until all the state lists have
been merged together. Parts of the code for this can be seen in Figure 5.5.
49
==PAGE:51==
Figure 5.5: Code snippet from the PostProcess.fs ﬁle part of the MergingSin-
gleSignal function. Used to merge state lists together.
We now have a solution where the trains no longer wait at their starting
location until the entire path is free. But are allowed to move as far as possible
as soon as possible. But we again need to convince ourselves if this is also a
correct solution. We can use the same arguments as for the MAv2 solution.
The ﬁrst couple state if any, that are un-merged must be correct. Because we
based the solution on a correct solution, so if we have done nothing but turn
some signals red behind trains, this will still be correct. For the merged states,
we can also see that these are indeed correct without having to check each and
every Conductor edge of the game graph. This is because when a state has been
merged into another we know that the train in the merging state cannot reach
any other trains or locations which will later be used by another train with
higher priority, as it would not have been merged if that was the case. And the
train will only be allowed to move on a small section of its path, as this was the
only part that was opened up. This means that even if the order of moving the
trains should be diﬀerent than the one in the solution, the trains will just be
stopped until the other trains have reach a certain location. Such that they will
never be able to reach the same location at the same time and the train will,
as with all the solutions, only ever have one way to go, meaning that it will at
some point reach the goal location. So even if the Conductor should change the
50
==PAGE:52==
order of moving the trains, they will just be blocked at certain locations until it
is safe for them to move to the next, and eventually to goal. This is the Multi
Agent version 3 (MAv3).
As with the other solution from MAv2, the way to look at it from a game
perspective is to see it as the Controller would turn the signal green for a train,
when the trains of a higher priority have reach a certain location. So whereas
the single agent solution one could see it as when the trains are in exactly
this position turn this signal green or red. The multi agent solution is more a
guideline as to when to change signals, by looking at when all the trains of a
certain minimum priority have reach or passed these locations certain signals
can be turned green, or will be turned red. And the same for the switch-rails.
As with the other multi agent solution, the found solution is only one of
the solutions and the most optimal based on the single agent solution used as a
base. The reason these are interesting to ﬁnd at look at, is that they would be
the ones that would be used in a real life scenario. Because here we would not
have the train conductors trying to move in a way such that the trains would
crash, but instead have them move in to most eﬃcient way possible. But the
reason we are looking at a case where the conductors do wish this, is just to
ensure that if something should happen, and the trains did not move optimally
to the plan made, it would not result in any catastrophe, as we have ensured
that nothing can go wrong. The turning signals red when a train has passed,
is as mentioned not a legal move in the game, as the edge would both have a
signal change and a train location change. It should actually have a separate
state where the signal change was done. This is however also done to simulate
the real life scenario, and to make it more eﬃcient, where signals can of cause
be changed while trains are going, and also when viewing the solution it seems
more ﬂuid.
Saving The Solution
Now that we have found a solution, we might also want to see it in the GUI. To
do this we need to save it to a .sol ﬁle, in the way explained earlier. The way
this is done is by creating a long sequence of strings one for each state. These
string then contains the information about the state, which includes the trains
location, signals value and switch-rails value. We only need to save the location
and not which train is belongs to, if we ensure that it will always be done in the
same order, as the order is it loaded in the GUI. To do this we just pick out the
values of the train-map and create a string of them semicolon separated. The
same of then done for the signal-map and then the switch-rail-map, where the
value of true is replaced by a T and false by a F to reduce space. These are
then all added to the same string pattern using the sprintf function, which will
ensure that new lines and other tokens needed are all placed correctly. This is
then done for all the states of a solution list, and in the end all of it is written
to a ﬁle, which can be used to show the solution in the GUI. The code can
be seen in Figure 5.6. The exact control program, mapping the locations of
51
==PAGE:53==
trains to signal and switch-rail values, will not be extracted, and only the found
solutions can be seen in the GUI. But as mentioned before the solution for the
multi agent versions can be seen as guidelines as to when the control program
would change signals and switch-rails.
Figure 5.6: Code snippet from the SaveFile.fs ﬁle solutionSequence function.
Used create a sequence of string from a state list, that can then saved to a .sol
ﬁle.
52
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 6
The Graphical User
Interface
The second part of the project is a graphical user interface to view the solutions
found by the solver programs, and to easily create and edit new and existing
railways. The reasoning for creating a GUI was at ﬁrst to be able to see what
the solutions looked like in the actual railway. Instead of having to look at lists
of numbers symbolizing the location of the trains moving from state to state.
Having a viewer also makes debugging and checking solutions easier, as seeing
a train move illegally or weird, is easier than checking if all train locations are
correct by only looking at numbers.
When creating the Copenhagen railway (Figure 2.2) at ﬁrst, a grid was
used to model it. Having normal rails on the horizontal axis, and only moving
vertical through the use of switch-rails. This was because it was simple way
to look at a railway and giving a good overview without becoming to clotted.
Therefore it was decided that this should also be the basis for the GUI. However
it quickly became apparent that something more than just loading in a solution
was needed. Because how should the networks be translated from the numbers in
the ﬁles representing the network, to something that actually also looks correct
and how the railway was intended to look. Because the numbers representing
the locations, when creating railways by hand, were just given numbers from 1
to the number of locations, with no deeper meaning. So how does should the
program know exactly how it was meant to be drawn? Here there are two main
ideas.
The ﬁrst was to translate the numbers into something that would ﬁt in a grid.
By looking at the rails and saying these should be on the same row. However
doing this might not end up with the intended view of the railway, as there
are no indications in the numbers of how tall of a vertical jump a switch-rail
was doing. There would need to be more information which the user needed
to input, making the creation of networks even more time consuming, if the
railway should look exactly as wanted. Otherwise the program could just come
53
==PAGE:55==
up with some visual representation that would ﬁt, which might not be how it
was envisioned when made.
The second idea was to make a railway editor, where the user itself would
draw the railway, by clicking in the grid where the rails and other elements
should be. Then it could save the exact grid coordinates for each location instead
of just numbering them without deeper meaning. By doing this, when loading
the railways later, it would be ensured to look exactly how it was envisioned, and
not how some algorithm thought it should be. The editor idea also had some
more beneﬁt that would not make choosing between the ideas a problem. First
it would be easier and way more convenient to create the railways. Having an
editor responsible for writing the railway ﬁles would remove the possibility for
human errors when creating a railway. Which was a problem that was hit a few
times by mistyping a number or forgetting to put in a location, rail or other. And
to empathizes the neatness of the editor when creating the Copenhagen railway,
making the ﬁle took maybe 30 or more minutes carefully entering and checking
everything was correct by hand, and some errors were still made. Where as using
the editor it took less than 10 minutes, an the ﬁle was correct. Another extra
beneﬁt from having an editor is that one can easily edit a railway. If one wants
to expand on an existing railway or change up the locations of trains or signals
this can easily be done, if you have an editor. Where as doing this manually
would require you to edit the .txt ﬁle yourself, which is very error prone. And
ﬁnally when creating railways before the editor, the networks would be drawn
anyway to keep track of how it should look. So having the editor would give the
tools needed for this and automatically create the .txt ﬁle correctly. There is
however also one huge drawback to creating an editor. It has to be made, which
would probably take a lot more time than just writing an algorithm translating
the handmade railway ﬁles. However the beneﬁts of having an editor compared
to the cost of making one were too good and therefore it was decided to make
one.
For the next part of this chapter it will be explained how to use the editor
and the solution viewer, and how they were implemented. When starting the
program the user will be met by the menu seen in Figure 6.1, and can from here
select which of the parts to go to.
54
==PAGE:56==
Figure 6.1: The main menu of the GUI.
The Editor
The editor part of the GUI is used to create new or modify existing railways.
This is all done using a simple point and click system, to add the diﬀerent
elements to the railway.
How To Use It
When clicking the button ”Edit Railway” from the main menu the user is met
with a pop-up box asking to input the desired height of the network. When
entered another box pops up and asks for the width. These numbers can later
be increased or decreased within the editor (with a value of minimum 5 and
maximum 100), so this option is just to pick a good starting point to avoid
having to click too many times later.
When done with that the user is met by the editor window, which can be
seen in Figure 6.2.
55
==PAGE:57==
Figure 6.2: The GUI Editor window when ﬁrst entered. Using a height and
width of 10.
We see that the editor consists of two sections a menu to the left, and a grey
square containing black dots on the right. The right side is know as the drawing
panel, which is where the user can draw the network, utilizing the diﬀerent menu
items on the left and clicking on the black dots, which represent the possible
locations of the network.
The user now have two options, either they can start creating a new network
from scratch, or they can load in a network already stored from the selection
menu.
Lets ﬁrst take a look at creating a new network. If we look at Figure 6.3 we
see the menu for the editor, which contains all the options needed for creating
a network.
56
==PAGE:58==
Figure 6.3: Part of the GUI Editor menu.
Lets go through the options one by one. The ﬁrst is the ”Add rail(s)” button.
This is the one that is selected by default, as it is the most important one. Since
a railway is not a railway, if it does not have any rails. When selected if the user
clicks on one of the black dots or locations on the drawing panel, this location
will be highlighted. If the next click is on one of the locations immediately to
the right or left of the highlighted one, a rail will be created, see Figure 6.4.
Figure 6.4: Figure showing how to add a rail to the network. On the left a
location has been selected and highlighted, and on the right image the location
to the immediate right has been clicked, creating a rail been the two.
If the location selected after highlighting one is not to the immediate right or
left, the program will simply just highlight the new location. It is only possible
to create rails in the horizontal plane using the ”Add rail(s)” button. This is
due to trying to keep the program simple and not add to many less important
features. If the user wants rails that also change in the vertical plane, they
have to use the ”Add switch rail(s)” button. When clicking the button four
radio buttons and a drop down menu containing numbers become visible, see
Figure 6.5.
57
==PAGE:59==
Figure 6.5: The new options added, when clicking the ”Add switch rail(s)”
button.
The four radio button are labeled Left, Right, Up and Down, and are used
for selecting the direction of the switch-rail. The drop down menu containing
numbers is used for selecting the vertical height of the switch-rail. When the
wanted combination is selected and the user clicks a location on the drawing
panel a switch-rail will be drawn, having the intersecting location where the
user clicked. For an illustration see Figure 6.6.
Figure 6.6: Examples of switch-rails. There has been clicked on the highlighted
yellow location, with the following options selected;
Top left : Left, Up, 1.
Top right : Right, Up, 1.
Bottom left : Right Down, 1.
Bottom right : Left, Down, 2.
There are a few conditions that needs to be in place before the switch-rail
58
==PAGE:60==
can be made. First of all, the locations needed to create the switch-rail all has
to exist in the grid. So clicking the top left dot on the drawing panel, with
either option Left or Up selected will do nothing, as it would place part of the
switch-rail out of the grid. Second the user cannot place a switch-rail if the
horizontal rail of the switch-rail has already been place as a normal rail. This
is due to avoid having overlapping rails in the code. And ﬁnally two or more
switch-rails cannot be immediately connected to each other, meaning all the
three locations needed to place the switch-rail cannot already contain locations
that are part of another switch-rail.
The next option is the ”Add signal(s)” button, this also makes some new
buttons visible, but this time only two, see Figure 6.7.
Figure 6.7: The new visible buttons when selecting the ”Add signal(s)” option.
These buttons are used to select if a signal should be in direction of going
to the right or going to the left. When one has been selected, the user can now
place the signals, by clicking on a location in the grid, which is in someway
connected to a rail or switch-rail, the ones that are red. When doing so a small
R or L will be drawn above the location to symbolize that a signal is here for
going respectively right or left from this location, see Figure 6.8.
Figure 6.8: An example of signals have been placed on the drawing panel. L
meaning there is a signal at the location if going to the left. R for a signal if
going to the right, and a L and R for both.
Next up is the ”Add train(s)” button, this as the name suggests is used to
add trains to the railway. The way it works is by ﬁrst selecting a location by
clicking on it, and afterwards clicking on another location. The location picked
ﬁrst, is the starting location of the train, and the second the goal of the train.
This is shown on the drawing panel, with a uppercase T followed by a number,
written below the starting location of the train and a lowercase t followed by
the same number written below the end location see Figure 6.9. As with the
signals it is only possible to add trains to locations, that are part of a rail or
switch-rail.
59
==PAGE:61==
Figure 6.9: An example of a train having been placed, starting location at
location with T0 written below, and goal location with location written t0 below.
The next four buttons do as suggested by their names remove elements from
the railway. As with the rest of the options the desired button needs to be
selected at ﬁrst. To remove a rail the user needs to select the two end points of
the rail, so as with adding rails the same has to be done to remove them. To
remove a switch-rail the intersecting location has to be clicked. Removing a rail
or switch-rail which also contains a signal or train, will also remove the signal
or train, such that the rules for trains and signals are still in order. To remove a
signal click on the location for the signal, this will remove any signal, meaning
if the user only wanted to remove one of the two, the one to be kept has to
be placed again. As for removing trains the user has to click on the starting
location of the train. The ﬁnal button in the top part of the menu as seen in
Figure 6.3, is the ”Clear” button. Clicking this will clear the drawing panel,
meaning it will remove any rails, switch-rails, signals or trains on the drawing
panel. This button should be carefully used as there is no way to undo the
action of clearing the panel.
Moving down in the menu we now get to the middle part, which can be seen
in Figure 6.10. This consists of two normal buttons and four radio buttons.
Clicking one of the buttons will either increase the size of the grid or decrease
it, depending on the button pushed. The radio buttons are used to select in
which direction this change is gonna appear.
Figure 6.10: The middle part of the editor menu. Used for increasing or de-
creasing the size of the drawing grid, in the direction selected by the radio
buttons.
Increasing the grid size will add a column or row, to the top, bottom left or
right, depending of the selected direction. Decreasing it will remove a row or
column in the same manner. It is only allowed to decrease the size if the row or
column does not contain any rails. It is also only allowed to increase or decrease
60
==PAGE:62==
the size such that the width and height are at least 5 and at most 100.
The ﬁnal part of the menu, which can be seen in Figure 6.11, contain the
buttons to load and save a railway or return to the main menu.
Figure 6.11: The bottom part of the editor menu. Here the user can load a
stored railway or save the newly made or edited railway shown on the drawing
panel. The red box marks the area at which a message will display, letting the
user know how things went trying to save or load.
To load a railway the user has to select one from the drop down menu and
click the load button. This will override whatever is currently drawn on the
drawing panel, and replace it with the railway stored behind the selected name.
To save a railway the user need to enter a name for the railway, in the text-ﬁeld
and then click the save button. Doing this will not only save the railway, but
also run the solving program and if ﬁnding a solution for the railway save that as
well. If a solution is not found the railway itself will still be saved. When given
a name to the railway it needs to be unique, meaning if another railway stored
already has the name written in the text-ﬁeld the program will not override it,
but instead notify the user that another railway already has that name. Clicking
this button will also check if the railway follows the rules speciﬁed earlier in the
report, such as signals being placed at starting locations of the trains.
The Solution Viewer
The solution viewer is used to show the solutions found by the solver programs.
This can be done automatically or by going through the states one by one. It
is used to give a good overview of how the solution works, and make it easier
to see if something is not working as intended.
How To Use It
When clicking the ”Show solution” button from the main menu the window
seen in Figure 6.12 will pop up. From here the user will be able to select any
61
==PAGE:63==
stored network, which also has a corresponding solution ﬁle from the drop down
menu. The grey box on the right with all the black dots is just a placeholder
until a railway has been loaded.
Figure 6.12: The Solution Viewer window, when ﬁrst opened.
When the user has selected a railway they can click the ”Load solution”
button. Doing so will load in the railway, and the solution to the railway, and
make some more buttons and other info visible on the left menu panel, see
Figure 6.13.
62
==PAGE:64==
Figure 6.13: The Solution Viewer window, after loading a railway and solution.
Here showcasing the Copenhagen railway, solved using MAv3.
If we start by looking at the drawing panel on the right, it will be noticed
that the representation of trains, signals and switch-rails to some degree have
been modiﬁed from the editors drawing panel. The trains are now symbolized
by a image of a train, located at the current position of the train, and moving
in the direction of the image. The signals have been replaced with small black
boxes containing either a red or a green circle, representing the signal being red
or green, just above the locations. The location of the black box represents the
direction of the signal. If the box is to the right of the location, it is a signal
that is used by trains moving to the right from the location, and vice versa for
the boxes on the left of a location. Finally a slight alteration has been made
to the switch-rails. It is now displayed which of the rails is selected, which is
the one drawn in red, whereas the the on in black is the other option, which
is not usable in the current state. For at closer look at the railway objects see
Figure 6.14.
63
==PAGE:65==
Figure 6.14: We here see the new models being drawn for the railway objects.
A train with the direction right. Located at the same location of a green light
for trains going right. A red signal on the location just to the right, also for
right moving trains, and a red signal for left moving trains to the location right
of that. And a switch-rail where the horizontal rail is currently selected.
If we now move our attention to the left panel, we can see that we now
have more options, Figure 6.15. This is showing the user information about the
solution, and will allow the user to see the solution played out, or go through it
state by state.
Figure 6.15: The menu opening up when loading a railway and solution. So-
lution length is the number of states in the solution. Generated states is the
number of states generated by the solver program when ﬁnding the solution.
Time spend is the total time spend to ﬁnd the solution by the solver program.
Start button is to start the showing of the solution, stop to stop it, and restart
to stop and return to the ﬁrst state. The next state and previous state button
are for moving one state at a time.
64
==PAGE:66==
To view the solution the user will only need to click the ”Start” button,
this will automatically then show each state in the solution in order on the
drawing panel to the right. Starting from the one currently drawn state, and
stopping when there are no more states in the solution.
To pause/stop the
automatic showing the user can press the ”Stop” button or ”Restart” button.
Both will stop it, with the ﬁrst then pausing it at the current state and the
second resetting it to the ﬁrst state in the solution. If the user want to move
more slowly through the solution, the two buttons on the bottom can be used.
By clicking the ”Next state” button the state after the one currently on the
right will be drawn, and the ”Previous state” will draw the state before the
current. These are very useful for checking that everything looks correct when
moving from one state to another, or narrow down something that looks wrong.
Both of these buttons of cause only works if there is a ”next” or ”previous”
state in the solution, otherwise nothing will happen when clicking them. If the
user so wishes, they can at anytime load another solution, by selecting another
railway and clicking the ”Load solution” button again. This will load in the
new railway and showcase the solution for that, always drawing the ﬁrst state
of the solution.
Implementation
Java is used as the programming language for the GUI, so the ﬁrst thing that
needs to be done is to create the F# types but now as Java classes. These
are pretty straight forward, where each class contains a ﬁeld for each element
needed for that type. With the exception of trains, which now also contains
the start and end locations and direction. Locations has not been made into a
class as this is just an integer. As mentioned there are two parts to the GUI the
editor and solution viewer. To ensure that the railways drawn in the editor will
look the same in the solution viewer, some general classes has been made for
the menu panel and drawing panel, which the speciﬁc panels for the editor and
solution viewer will extend. These set up the the basics of the panels such as
size and colour. The general drawing panel is also responsible for drawing all of
the railway elements for the editor. Some of these functions are overridden by
the solution drawing panel, such that we get the look that we want. The reason
that it has not been moved to the editor drawing panel class, is because some of
the elements are drawn the same for both panels, such as the rails for instance.
So it serves as a basis for drawing railways. With the exception of these classes
being used as a base for both parts, the rest are rather independent so lets look
at them individually. Starting with the editor.
To model the railway networks six data-structures are used. Two integer
matrices and four lists. One of the matrices is used for the rails and the other
for the signals. The lists are used for the rails, switch-rails, signals and trains.
The reason to have both a list and a matrix for some of the elements, it that it is
faster and easier to look up in a matrix than to run through all the elements of
a list, when checking if the user input can be done. This will be explained more
65
==PAGE:67==
later. The editor consists of two panels a menu panel on the left and a drawing
panel on the right. Everything is set to have a ﬁxed size. This is just to avoid
having to dynamically adjust everything, and avoid having things look weird,
if the user should decide to change the window size to a weird scaling. On the
menu panel a lot of buttons are placed, all the ones above the ”Clear” button
are used to set ﬂags in the code. Such that when the user clicks on the drawing
panel the desired action happens. These are not really that interesting to talk
about. The ”Clear” button, will just remove everything on the drawing panel,
which is done by clearing the data-structures used to keep track of the drawn
railway. The next set of buttons are the ”Decrease” and ”Increase” button,
which are used for changing the size of the drawing grid. The direction button
are used to set a ﬂag such that the size change happens in the correct place.
These two button are rather interesting, as changing the grid size is not just
adding or removing a row or column. Because the way the locations are stored
and created is that the location value is calculated as follows i × W + j, where
i is the row in the grid, W is the width of the grid and j is the column in the
grid. Doing it this way all grid locations will have a unique number between
0 and width times height minus one. This however means that when we want
to change the grid size, we need to go through all the elements already placed
to ensure that the locations they use get updated correctly.
Otherwise the
railway will not look at intended, as the locations then would be placed weirdly
in the grid. So for instance if we want to add a row to the top of the grid
every location needs to have the width of the grid added to their value to ﬁt
correctly into the updated grid. This is done for each direction, ensuring that
when adding a row or column, or removing a row or column everything looks
like it should afterwards. The code for adding a row on top of the grid can be
seen in Figure 6.16.
66
==PAGE:68==
Figure 6.16: Code snippet from the DrawingPanel.java ﬁle part of the increas-
eSize function. Used to add an empty row to the top of the drawing grid.
Next is the drop-down menu of the stored railways.
This is created by
looking in the ”Railways” folder for any ﬁle with the extension .txt, and the
ﬁlename will be added to this menu. When one is selected and the ”Load”
button is clicked, it will override whatever is on the drawing panel and draw the
railway from the ﬁle. The ﬁle is loaded in much the same way as done in the
F# program, where each line in gone through loading in and converting from
strings to the data-types needed. When done all of the data-structures, which
has the information of the currently drawn railway, will be replaced with the
data just loaded. As mentioned these data-structures not only contains lists of
the types, but also two matrices. These also need to be updated in the correct
manner, so lets explain how they work. The signal matrix is the simple of the
two. The matrix has the same dimensions as the grid, such that when a signal is
67
==PAGE:69==
placed in the grid a number is added to the corresponding place in the matrix.
Each grid point represents one matrix index in a direct translation, such that
top left of grid is top left of matrix. If the signal is a left directional signal a 1
is place in the matrix, if its a right directional signal a 2 is placed, and if both
are placed a 3 is added to the matrix. As mention the matrix is used such that
we do not have to loop through the signal list each time to check if a signal is
already present if the user should try to add multiple of the same.
The other matrix the rail matrix is a bit more complex. This also contains
speciﬁc values depending on what kind of rail connected to a location. Again
the matrix has the same dimensions as the grid, such that each location in the
grid has a corresponding index in the matrix. For normal rails the two locations
which it is connecting will have either a 1 or a 2 value in the grid. 1 means
that it is at an end rail, so the location is only connected to one rail, and a
2 means that the location is also connected to another rail. Swicth-rails are
also represented in the matrix using the numbers 3 through 6. 3 meaning that
the location is the intersecting location of a switch-rail, 4 is the end of the rail
on the same row as the intersecting location. Then we have 5 and 6. These
are both used for the last location that is part of the switch-rail, but the value
depend on the direction of the switch-rail. If the direction is left then 5 is used
otherwise 6. The reason for all these speciﬁc numbers is to ensure that the rules
of the railways cannot be broken, if the user tries to place elements wrong. For
instance not allowing placing a switch-rail next to another, can easily be checked
by looking in this matrix for a 4, 5 or 6, at any of the needed locations. This
matrix is also a map over where the locations of the railway are, which means
that when trying to place a signal or train, we only need to check this matrix
to check if possible. The alternative is too loop through the rail and switch-rail
lists, which could be very time consuming for large railways. These matrices
are ﬁlled by looping through the loaded data, and adding the correct values in
the correct indices. As mentioned the railways are stored in a folder, the path
for this folder is currently setup as a MacOS path, and will need to be changed
for other operating systems.
The ﬁnal elements in the menu are the text-ﬁeld and the ”Save” button. The
input in the text-ﬁeld will be the name used when saving the railway. However
saving is not the only thing the button does, because it will also try to solve
the network when saved. So lets ﬁrst look at how the saving is done, and then
the solving. The ﬁrst thing it does when the button is pressed is to see if the
railway is legal, meaning it follows the signal rules stated earlier. Such as all
starting locations of trains needing a signal in the same direction as the train.
It will then create a new .txt ﬁle using the input in the text-ﬁeld as the name.
But only if no other ﬁle has that name in the Railways folder. The reason for
not creating the ﬁle if another has the same name is to avoid risking to override
another railway. If we remember the railway ﬁle setup, we know that the ﬁrst
thing that it contains is the locations.
These are found by looping through
the rail and switch-rail lists, adding all locations from these to a set, to avoid
duplicates. The set is then converted to a list which is then sorted, and the
locations are one by one written to the ﬁle each on a separate line. When no
68
==PAGE:70==
more locations are in the list, the type separating colon is added on a separate
line. The next type in the ﬁle is the rails. Here we sort the rail list and add
them again one by one with the locations they connect being written, separated
by a space, and when done adding the colon line. The same then happens for
the switch-rails and the signals, each written such that the information in the
ﬁle is correct. Sorting the lists is technically not necessary but make the ﬁles
look less messy. When reaching the train list, we do not sort, because the order
of the list is already the order of the trains. As the train class does not have a id
ﬁeld, we just keep a counter when going through the list updating it whenever
a train has been written to the ﬁle, and using this for the id. Finally the width
and height of the grid is also written to the ﬁle. Now that the railway network
has been saved, we can try to ﬁnd a solution for it. The way this is done is
by running a command-line command, which will execute the solver program
on a speciﬁed ﬁle and storing the solution in a speciﬁed directory. To do this
we ﬁrst need to have a compiled the F# solver program, which is easily made
into an executable. As this is a F# executable to make this run on MacOS the
Mono program [7] has to be used. Doing this on other operating systems might
therefore require a slight modiﬁcation to the command used. The executable
takes in two command line arguments the ﬁlename and directory of the ﬁle, and
will then run the solver program. If the program succeeds the solution is stored
at the speciﬁed directory, if not the user will be notiﬁed via a text-ﬁeld update
in the menu.
As the solver might run for a while before ﬁnding a solution,
especially if the ﬁrst single agent version is used, the GUI will just wait until it
is done. The code to do this can be seen in Figure 6.17.
Figure 6.17: Code snippet from the SaveButtonListener.java ﬁle part of the
actionPerformed function. The command use to run the solver program from
the command-line.
The second part of the editor is the drawing panel. As mentioned the drawing
of the railway happens in the general drawing panel class. What it does is that
it loops through all of the lists and matrices and draws the elements at the
speciﬁed locations. The class however have one important role, which is to add
elements to the lists. This is done using a mouse listener, which when clicked will
check the ﬂags set by the diﬀerent menu buttons and call the correct function.
69
==PAGE:71==
If the ﬂags are set to an element which require multi clicks a highlight will be
drawn on the ﬁrst click, which also ensures that the location will be remembered
for the next click. Lets go through them one by one. Adding a rail requires two
clicks, on two locations next to each other on the same row. But a second rail
can be added using only a third click, if it is next to the second click. When
trying to add a rail it will be checked using the rail matrix whether or not it is
possible, such that the railway will not break any rules. The same is the case for
the switch-rails, this only requires one click, but will check all three locations
in the rail matrix to see if possible or not. If not possible nothing will happen
otherwise the rails will be added, and a repaint function call is performed on
the panel to make it appear on the screen. Adding signals will only require
to click on the location, at which is should be placed, and it will be placed as
long as a rail is present. Finally placing a train requires that the user clicks on
the start location ﬁrst and then the goal, both of which needs to have a rail
connection somehow. It is not checked by the editor that the starting location
and goal location of a train are connected, but when trying to ﬁnd a solution
it will quickly return saying nothing was found. Removing things except the
normal rails only requires one click on the signal, starting location of a train or
the intersecting location of a switch-rail. Doing this will update the necessary
lists and matrices. Finally removing a rail requires clicks on both ends of the
rails. So the drawing panel is basically responsible for checking if the user clicks
what ﬂags are set and perform the correct action if possible.
The solution viewer as mentioned also consists of a menu panel and a drawing
panel. Initially the menu panel only consists of a drop down menu, a ”Load”
button and a ”Back” button. The drop down menu lists all the names of ﬁles in
the Railways folder which both has a .txt and .sol ﬁle. We need both because
the .txt ﬁle knows the layout of the railway, while the .sol ﬁle knows the states in
the solution. When a railway has been selected and the ”Load” button pressed,
the railway will be loaded in the same manner as for the editor. The solution
will also be loaded but in a diﬀerent way. The way the solution is loaded is
through the use of regular expressions to ﬁnd the ﬁrst line which contains the
train locations in the ﬁrst state of the solution. We then know that the next
line in the ﬁle is the signals and the ﬁnal line is the switch-rails. Each of these
line are saved as the string from the ﬁle, before we scrape them by removing
the start token, square brackets and remove blank spaces. We then split each
string by semicolons, such that we know have a list of the elements. The string
elements are then converted to the correct data-types, and added to lists. The
train locations to integers and the F and Ts to false and true boolean values.
We now have a list of locations, a list of signal values and a list of switch-rail
values corresponding to the ﬁrst state. These are then converted to maps, and
each map added to a list. This is then done again for the next state in the ﬁle,
and continues until there are no more states. In the end we will have three lists
of maps, such that the ﬁrst element in each list contains the maps for the ﬁrst
state and the second for the second and so on. The end of the solution ﬁle also
contains some more data such as time spent solving and number of generated
states, which in a similar fashion is retrieved. The code for the state retrieval
70
==PAGE:72==
can be seen in Figure 6.18.
Figure 6.18: Code snippet from the RailwayLoader.java ﬁle part of the loadSo-
lution function. Used to load data from .sol ﬁles.
When loaded the railway will be displayed in the drawing panel, where the
location of the trains are based on the ﬁrst state, which means that ﬁrst element
in the train-map list. The signals will be based on the signal-map, being red if
false and green if true, and the switch-rails allowing the rail on the same row to
be used if true, and the other rail if false. The trains and signals are also being
drawn diﬀerently than in the editor, with the trains being a small image of a
train, and the signal being a black square with either a red or green circle. These
are being drawn such that the size ﬁts the grid and will automatically have the
best size for the drawn network. The switch-rails are also slightly changed, with
the selected rail being red as the normal rails and the non-selected rail being
drawn in black. To view the solution the start button has to be pressed. This
will start a timer, which every 100 milliseconds will update a counter used to
keep track of which element in the map lists is being drawn. That way every
100 milliseconds the state being drawn will be updated to the next state in the
list, and the solution will play out. The stop button will stop this timer and
71
==PAGE:73==
the last state drawn, when clicked will be the one shown on the drawing panel.
The restart button will reset the counter to 0, such that the ﬁrst state is drawn
again. This will also stop the timer. The last two buttons are the next and
previous state buttons, which will stop the timer, and manually can be used to
increase or decrease the counter, to move carefully move through the states.
72
==PAGE:74==
Chapter 7
Results
In this chapter the results from testing the six solvers on seven railway networks
will be shown. First the result will be stated in a table for each solver, and
afterward the results for each network will be displayed in a table of its own.
The seven networks used for the testing are the railway networks, which can
be seen in the appendix. The networks have been chosen to showcase strength
and weaknesses of the solvers. The columns in the tables for the solver has an
abbreviation for what it contains. These will now be explained. Pre. means
that time spent in preprocessing. Sol. means the time spent in the game. Post.
is time spent in post-processing, this is only relevant for the last two multi agent
solvers. Tot. is the total time spend ﬁnding a solution. So the sum of the ﬁrst
three numbers. Length is the length of the found solution, and Gen. is the
number of states that were generated during the game. All times are measured
in millisecond. If a ﬁeld is left blank in a table, it means that no solution was
found by that solver in a reasonable time, which was set at ﬁve minutes. All
the timings are taken as an average of running the program on the network ten
times. As multiple of the solutions use the same preprocessing, all but the ﬁrst,
and some of the multi agent version use solutions found by the single agent
solvers, these numbers will be equal in the tables. All of the solution ﬁles for
the networks are not included in the report, but can be found with the source
code. The experiments have been made on a MacBook Pro with a 2,3 GHz
Dual-Core Intel Core i5 processor and 8GB of RAM.
73
==PAGE:75==
Railway
Pre.
Sol.
Post.
Tot.
Length
Gen.
Lyngby
29.26
36.4
0.0
65.66
54
144
Copenhagen
121.39
100.16
0.0
221.55
317
1073
CopenhagenReal
Copenhagen10Swap
ZigZag
38.29
50.42
0.0
88.71
179
387
LineSwapping
27.38
104.61
0.0
131.99
57
939
LongLineSwapping
Table 7.1: Results for SAv1.
Railway
Pre.
Sol.
Post.
Tot.
Length
Gen.
Lyngby
73.57
27.58
0.0
101.15
54
60
Copenhagen
168.38
37.56
0.0
205.94
316
326
CopenhagenReal
164.63
36.4
0.0
201.03
281
291
Copenhagen10Swap
205.97
62.25
0.0
268.22
535
556
ZigZag
85.7
35.35
0.0
121.05
179
187
LineSwapping
73.02
27.01
0.0
100.03
57
59
LongLineSwapping
78.6
40.93
0.0
119.53
301
303
Table 7.2: Results for SAv2.
Railway
Pre.
Sol.
Post.
Tot.
Length
Gen.
Lyngby
73.57
22.33
0.0
95.9
44
44
Copenhagen
168.38
38.2
0.0
206.58
265
265
CopenhagenReal
164.63
35.57
0.0
200.2
232
232
Copenhagen10Swap
205.97
56.15
0.0
262.12
447
447
ZigZag
85.7
27.95
0.0
113.65
166
166
LineSwapping
73.02
22.15
0.0
95.17
35
35
LongLineSwapping
78.6
28.26
0.0
106.86
166
166
Table 7.3: Results for SAv3.
Railway
Pre.
Sol.
Post.
Tot.
Length
Gen.
Lyngby
73.57
22.09
0.0
95.66
29
29
Copenhagen
168.38
38.12
0.0
206.5
178
178
CopenhagenReal
164.63
34.64
0.0
199.27
205
205
Copenhagen10Swap
205.97
56.37
0.0
262.34
401
401
ZigZag
85.7
27.43
0.0
113.13
112
112
LineSwapping
73.02
22.26
0.0
95.28
35
35
LongLineSwapping
78.6
28.39
0.0
106.99
166
166
Table 7.4: Results for MAv1.
74
==PAGE:76==
Railway
Pre.
Sol.
Post.
Tot.
Length
Gen.
Lyngby
73.57
22.09
9.65
105.31
17
29
Copenhagen
168.38
38.12
20.55
227.05
150
178
CopenhagenReal
164.63
34.64
21.12
220.39
134
205
Copenhagen10Swap
205.97
56.37
34.75
297.09
283
401
ZigZag
85.7
27.43
13.28
126.41
29
112
LineSwapping
73.02
22.26
9.55
104.83
25
35
LongLineSwapping
78.6
28.39
14.66
121.65
140
166
Table 7.5: Results for MAv2.
Railway
Pre.
Sol.
Post.
Tot.
Length
Gen.
Lyngby
73.57
27.58
19.16
120.31
19
60
Copenhagen
168.38
37.56
153.54
359.48
96
326
CopenhagenReal
164.63
36.4
161.12
362.15
96
291
Copenhagen10Swap
205.97
62.25
1043.76
1311.98
206
556
ZigZag
85.7
35.35
47.13
168.18
21
187
LineSwapping
73.02
27.01
19.03
119.06
16
59
LongLineSwapping
78.6
40.93
167.61
287.14
35
303
Table 7.6: Results for MAv3.
In the result tables for each network, only the total time spent, solution
length and generated states will be shown. This is because these are the most
interesting metrics. Along with each solver another row has been added to table.
This contains the worst case solution length, meaning the longest solution, which
could exist for the network. This has been calculated as the sum of the distances
from the starting location to the goal location of all train, plus the number of
signals, on the path for each train with the most signals. If a solution exists, that
uses exactly these paths, is unsure, but we know that no other solution could
have a longer state list, and therefore this is chosen as the worst case. It has not
been possible to calculate the best case solution in a similar fashion. One could
think that it must be the longest of the shortest paths for the trains. Which is
a lower limit. However it is not that simple. Just using the path length, might
correspond to a solution where multiple train have to use the same location at
the same time, or at least being a non-correct solution, meaning that it is not
possible. So calculating the best case is not that simple and no smart way other
than brute forcing the solution exists.
The Lyngby network, is a small and compact network, where the trains are
part of two separate swap-cycles. This network is chosen for being a small and
not to simple network.
75
==PAGE:77==
Solver
Total time
Sol. length
Gen. states
WorstCase
54
SAv1
65.66
54
144
SAv2
101.15
54
60
SAv3
95.9
44
44
MAv1
95.66
29
29
MAv2
105.31
17
29
MAv3
120.31
19
60
Table 7.7: Lyngby results.
The Copenhagen railway, is a used a base for multiple of the networks. The
ﬁrst Copenhagen network has the trains placed in such a way that there are no
swap-cycles, and no train has a goal which could result in blocking other trains.
So this is a rather simple network.
Solver
Total time
Sol. length
Gen. states
WorstCase
331
SAv1
221.55
317
1073
SAv2
205.94
316
326
SAv3
206.58
265
265
MAv1
206.5
178
178
MAv2
227.05
150
178
MAv3
359.48
96
326
Table 7.8: Copenhagen results.
In the CopenhagenReal network the trains are placed, in such a way that
they represent a real life scenario on a normal day. The exact day and time was
the 23. of July 2020 around 1pm. This network has the same amount of train
as the ﬁrst Copenhagen network, but now there are some more complicated
patterns, which includes a train which if placed in goal to soon, will block the
other trains.
Solver
Total time
Sol. length
Gen. states
WorstCase
289
SAv1
SAv2
201.03
281
291
SAv3
200.2
232
232
MAv1
199.27
205
205
MAv2
220.39
134
205
MAv3
362.15
96
291
Table 7.9: CopenhagenReal results.
The Copenhagen10Swap network models a big complicated swap-cycle, which
76
==PAGE:78==
all 10 trains are part of. The combination of the swap-cycle and the number of
train, makes this network quite complicated to solve.
Solver
Total time
Sol. length
Gen. states
WorstCase
561
SAv1
SAv2
268.22
535
556
SAv3
262.12
447
447
MAv1
262.34
401
401
MAv2
297.09
283
401
MAv3
1311.98
206
556
Table 7.10: Copenhagen10Swap results.
The ZigZag network is chosen as a way to showcase a network, where a multi
agent solution should be much more eﬃcient than a single agent one. Because
the trains all should be able to move at the same time, without breaking any
rules or properties.
Solver
Total time
Sol. length
Gen. states
WorstCase
179
SAv1
88.71
179
387
SAv2
121.05
179
187
SAv3
113.65
166
166
MAv1
113.13
112
112
MAv2
126.41
29
112
MAv3
168.18
21
187
Table 7.11: ZigZag results.
The LineSwapping network is a case of a network requiring a very certain
order of moving the trains to ﬁns to a solution. Finding a solution for a human
should be fairly easy, but if not guided correctly might be diﬃcult for a program.
This also showcases the problem of the MAv1 solver.
Solver
Total time
Sol. length
Gen. states
WorstCase
57
SAv1
131.99
57
939
SAv2
100.03
57
59
SAv3
95.17
35
35
MAv1
95.28
35
35
MAv2
104.83
25
35
MAv3
119.06
16
59
Table 7.12: LineSwapping results.
77
==PAGE:79==
The LongLineSwapping network is just a bigger version of the LineSwapping
network. Selected to show the strength of the MAv3 compared to the MAv2
solutions, as it shows the biggest problem of the MAv2.
Solver
Total time
Sol. length
Gen. states
WorstCase
301
SAv1
SAv2
119.53
301
303
SAv3
106.86
166
166
MAv1
106.99
166
166
MAv2
121.65
140
166
MAv3
287.14
35
303
Table 7.13: LongLineSwapping results.
78
==PAGE:80==
Chapter 8
Discussion
In this chapter we will discuss the results from running the solver on the selected
railway networks. As we can see from the results, the SAv1 clearly has the
problems stated earlier, that when the number of trains go up or the solution
requires a very speciﬁc order of moving the trains is cannot ﬁnd a solution. This
is likely due to the high branching factor for the Controller, as it can generate
up to two times the number of trains new states each turn. The Copenhagen
and CopenhagenReal networks have the same amount of trains, but the later of
the two was not solved in time. This is due to the way the trains need to move
in order to ﬁnd a solution. If the Controller goes and places the T5 too early,
it will have to backtrack a lot, since this could end up blocking other trains. If
we look at the LineSwapping networks, we can also clearly see this pointed out
again. For the normal small one with just four trains, and very little choice,
only containing two switch-rails, and the trains are all on a row, it generates 939
states for a 57 state solution. In the more open networks it generates around 3
times the states as it has in the solution, but when the path needed to be taken
is too speciﬁc, as it is in this case, it clearly lacks some guidance. We can also see
that it is the fastest to ﬁnd a solution in the small Lyngby network and ZigZag
network, due to not having that much preprocessing time. But as soon as the
networks get a little more complicated or bigger, the other single agent solvers
make up for the extra time spent in preprocessing by ﬁnding a solution much
faster, and in some cases ﬁnding a solution, when this version could not. So it
is clearly time well spend in preprocessing as it not only allow the solutions to
be found faster, but also allows solutions to be found which could not be found
without.
If we now move the attention to the other two single agent solvers the SAv2
and SAv3, we can see that the SAv3 is a bit better as the solutions are found
faster and in less states. This is due to the fact that the Controller only has very
few states it generates, whereas it in the SAv2 generates many more, at least
one for each signal the trains have to pass. We can also see that the solution
found by the SAv2 are often very close to or actually equal to the worst case
solution. This is not necessarily a bad thing, since the worst case is often close
79
==PAGE:81==
to the best case for a single agent only solution. But as is the case for both
of these versions the number of generated states are very close to, and for the
SAv3 always equal to, the length of the solution. For the SAv3 this means that
when we simulate the game, we always only generate the states needed to get to
a solution. We see that the branching value for the graph generation is down to
one, which means that when searching we do not really search as much as we just
go the correct way. This is due to the priorities and train paths found during
the preprocessing, which allows the Controller to only generate one state, which
will be part of the solution. There might be some networks this can not solve.
Such as networks that are closer to being a puzzle than a railway, or containing
some edge cases, which are not covered in the current implementation. But
for the ones shown here and many other networks, it was always the case that
no states, except the ones part of the solution, were generated by the SAv3.
A problem this might have however, which has not been tested, is when the
networks get very large. Here the preprocessing might start taking a while to
do. But when done, the game should be solved very fast and eﬃcient, as the
branching factor in the game is one and therefore ﬁnding a solution should not
take much time.
For the ﬁrst of the multi agent solvers, MAv1, we can see it spends roughly
the same time as the SAv3, which makes sense as they are very similar. It also
as with the SAv3, only generates the states needed in the solution, and usually
fewer as it allows for multiple trains to move at the same time. However as men-
tioned this version has one big problem, which can be seen in the LineSwapping
networks. If the paths for the trains are all overlapping this is just a single agent
solver. So this means that the multi agent part is based on network it is trying
to solve, which is not optimal, as these networks clearly do have multi agent
solutions. However if a network is set up in such a way that all of the train have
non-crossing paths, this will ﬁnd the optimal solution, which is just open all of
the paths at the same time. So this version of the solver is very dependent on
the network it is solving, and will only be multi agent on some.
Something similar can be said about the MAv2. We can see that in the
networks, where the overlapping part of the trains paths are very small, like
Lyngby and ZigZag, this solution is very good.
A lot of states are merged
and the solution length reduce but a lot. But when the networks are very tight,
understood as the trains paths are overlapping a lot, such as LongLineSwapping
there is close zero multi agent movement happening. This is of cause due to
the fact that the entire path has to be free for the trains to move. So when
other trains are also needing to use a lot of the same locations, there is very
little merging to be done. Comparing this to the MAv1 we see that it is always
better, as it should be since, it is based on merging the MAv1 solution. And it
only requires a very little extra time to do so. If we look at this from a real life
perspective, this might be one of the most energy eﬃcient solutions that could
exists, due to the fact that the trains once started will not be stopped by red
signals until they reach their goal. Unless the train is the one asked to go to a
safe location, in which case it will be stopped once. But as mentioned it has its
problems when networks are very tight and crammed.
80
==PAGE:82==
This is not a problem for the ﬁnal multi agent solver. When looking through
the results, with the exception of Lyngby, it is clear that this is the one that
perform the best in terms of solution length. It does spend more time than
any of the other solver, if we do not count the ﬁrst single agent not ﬁnding
solutions to some network. But it also ﬁnds the shortest solution of them all. It
is believed that the solution it ﬁnds is very close to a best case solution, when the
solution also has to be correct. This is due to the fact that the trains are allowed
to more as soon as possible when it is safe. But as mentioned calculating the
length of a best case solution is not easy, so cannot say for sure. If we look at the
results from the LongLineSwapping, which the MAv2 has some problems with,
we can see this is not the case for this version. Here the states can be merged
together and being a tight network is not a problem. There are however some
networks where this would not work as well as the other multi agent solvers.
These are networks with close to no overlapping or non-overlapping paths for
all the trains and with many signals. Here the other solution would most likely
perform better, as the number signal changes would mean, that this solution
has to initially generate many more states. This would lead to a ﬁnal solution
being longer than for the ones, that just opens the entire paths for the trains.
So perhaps if one could combine the two solvers MAv2 and MAv3 in some
way, a smart and better solution could be found, as they each have a weakness
that the other does not. As mentioned this performs the best when looking at
solution length, but if we look at the time spent, we can see that this is the one
needing the most time. This is because the merging of states for this is a bit
more complicated that for the MAv2. Here we look at many more small state
sequences, that should be merged together, which results in using more time.
This can clearly be seen in the Copenhagen10Swap network, where it is multiple
times slower than the other. But the found solution is also much shorter.
81
==PAGE:83==
Chapter 9
Future Works
If continuing to work on the project there are a few directions that would be
interesting to take. First up it would be interesting to try to use the ideas from
merging the solutions and the single agent solvers to try to create an actual
multi agent solver, to see how it would compare to the single agent merged
solutions.
The next thing that could be interesting, is to add more elements to the
domain to make it more realistic. As mentioned this is a simpliﬁed model of a
real railway, so adding more things like diﬀerent kinds of switch-rails or signals,
allowing rails to cross or one-way rails to mention a few. This would open up
some other interesting scenarios which would require some more things to keep
track of. Following the realism idea it could also be interesting to add a time
perspective.
Meaning that the trains will also be given a time it has to be
somewhere, maybe even give them multiple locations with timestamps. Doing
this it would change it to a train scheduling problem and it could be interesting
to see if the ideas explored in this project, could also be used to eﬃciently solve
that problem.
Doing this would also require the trains to have speeds, and
distances of the rails, which have been completely ignored now, and assumed
to all be constantly the same. This could also open up for the idea of diﬀerent
kinds of trains, some which might go faster than others and some that might
occupy multiple locations.
One of the problems with the GUI is that it is limited by the size. This
means that the railways that can be made are limited. So a feature that could
be nice to add is a zoom function, such that the user could zoom in when the
railway is getting too big. That way it would no longer be limited by the size
of the window and larger railways could be constructed.
Another nice feature to add to the GUI, would be a way to play the game.
As either the Controller or Conductor to show how the game works, and how
complicated it can get.
82
==PAGE:84==
Chapter 10
Conclusion
In this project a simple railway setting was explored, implementing a program
to ﬁnd a correct-by-construction control program for the railway network. This
was done by looking at the problem as a two player game, one player control-
ling the signals and switch-rails and the other the trains. That way a graph
could be created over the game. Then by searching through this graph a path
could be found, which would ensure that the trains were always guided safely
to their goals, resulting in a correct control program. The game graph exponen-
tially grows in size with the railway network size, making larger networks close
to impossible to solve generating the entire game state space. This problem
was solved by using on-the-ﬂy generating of states. This in combination with
pre-calculation of the paths the trains should take and order that the trains
should move, allowed us to reduce the number of states generated to only be
the ones needed in the solution. Meaning that no state that was not needed was
generated, making it very eﬃcient.
These solutions however only allowed for a single train to move at a time, so
if seen in a real life scenario, the solution itself might be seen as ineﬃcient, as
only moving a single train on an entire railway is often not optimal. As there is
generally space for more to move. So to also make the solution itself eﬃcient,
the states of single agent solutions were merged into multi agent solutions, which
would allow more trains to move at a time, without loosing the correctness of
the control program. Doing this reduces some of the solution length by quite a
lot, making the solutions themselves also eﬃcient.
To create the networks, and see the solutions found by the program, a graph-
ical user interface was also implemented.
This allowed for easy creation of
networks, through a simple interface, reducing the error prone method of hand-
writing the networks. While also ensuring that the requirements of the railway
domain were not broken.
The other part of the GUI allow for showing the
control program found, by playing through the solutions one state at a time.
This helped get a visual idea of how the railways where solved, at made ﬁnding
problems in a solution easier, than looking through the text based states given
by the control program.
83
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
[1] Patrick Kasting, Michael R. Hansen, and Steen Vester. 2016. Synthesis of
Railway-Signaling Plans using Reachability Games. In Proceedings of IFL
2016, Leuven, Belgium, August 31-September 02, 2016, 13 pages. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3064899.3064908
[2] Stuart J. Russell and Peter Norvig. 2009. Artiﬁcial Intelligence: A Modern
Approach - Third Edition pages 81-102.
[3] Mathias Kok. 2019. Game-Based Solutions for Railway Networks. Master
Thesis.
[4] Luis,
N.,
Fern´andez,
S.
and
Borrajo,
D.
2020.
Plan
merging
by
reuse
for
multi-agent
planning.
Appl
Intell
50,
365–396
(2020).
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10489-019-01429-0
[5] Rejseplanen.dk.
https://www.rejseplanen.dk/. [Online; accessed 23-07-2020].
[6] OpenRailwayMap.
https://www.openrailwaymap.org. [Online; accessed 19-03-2020].
[7] The Mono Project.
https://www.mono-project.com.
84
==PAGE:86==
Appendices
85
==PAGE:87==
Appendix A
Railways
In this appendix the railway networks which were used to the testing will be
listed, as a visual representation. The textual representation can be seen in with
the source code.
Lyngby
This railway is a modiﬁed version of the Lyngby Station railway [1]. It has
been modiﬁed to ﬁt the domain used in this project. This is an example of a
small railway network, which includes problems such as limited space and trains
needing to swap locations.
|L| = 30, |SR| = 6, |S| = 23, |T| = 5
86
==PAGE:88==
Figure A.1: Lyngby railway network, as seen in the editor.
Figure A.2: Lyngby railway network, as seen in the solution viewer.
87
==PAGE:89==
Copenhagen
This railway is based on the railway going from Østerport Station on the left,
to Copenhagen Central Station on the right. This is based on the information
found at [6]. The train placements are random. The purpose of the network is
to be a basis, to show that train placement means a lot, when trying to solve.
|L| = 204, |SR| = 25, |S| = 88, |T| = 6
Figure A.3: Copenhagen railway network, as seen in the editor.
88
==PAGE:90==
Figure A.4: Copenhagen railway network, as seen in the solution viewer.
89
==PAGE:91==
CopenhagenReal
Network also based on the Copenhagen Railway. The train locations here are
selected to be based on Wednesday 23/7-2020 around 1PM. Used to model a
real scenario. Information about trains found at [5]. The translate from real
train to modelled train is as follows RE1354 = T0, IC851 = T1, RE24149 =
T2, RE1355 = T3, RE3128 = T4, RE2055 = T5.
|L| = 204, |SR| = 25, |S| = 92, |T| = 6
Figure A.5: CopenhagenReal railway network, as seen in the editor.
90
==PAGE:92==
Figure A.6: CopenhagenReal railway network, as seen in the solution viewer.
91
==PAGE:93==
Copenhagen10Swap
Another network based on the Copenhagen railway. The placement of the trains
here are created in such a way that it is one big swap cycle.
|L| = 204, |SR| = 25, |S| = 88, |T| = 10
Figure A.7: Copenhagen10Swap railway network, as seen in the editor.
92
==PAGE:94==
Figure A.8: Copenhagen10Swap railway network, as seen in the solution viewer.
93
==PAGE:95==
ZigZag
This network is a simple railway, where we almost have a swap cycle, except
one train has a free goal location. Good example to show how much multi agent
solutions can improve solution length.
|L| = 146, |SR| = 8, |S| = 45, |T| = 9
Figure A.9: ZigZag railway network, as seen in the editor.
94
==PAGE:96==
Figure A.10: ZigZag railway network, as seen in the solution viewer.
95
==PAGE:97==
LineSwapping
A very simple railway network, but solution has a very speciﬁc order to solve,
making it diﬃcult for a simple solver.
|L| = 12, |SR| = 2, |S| = 24, |T| = 4
Figure A.11: LineSwapping railway network, as seen in the editor.
96
==PAGE:98==
Figure A.12: LineSwapping railway network, as seen in the solution viewer.
97
==PAGE:99==
LongLineSwapping
Bigger version of LineSwapping, to showcase the advantage of the ﬁnal multi
agent version.
|L| = 28, |SR| = 8, |S| = 56, |T| = 10
Figure A.13: LongLineSwapping railway network, as seen in the editor.
98
==PAGE:100==
Figure A.14: LongLineSwapping railway network, as seen in the solution viewer.
99
==PAGE:101==
Appendix B
Code
All the source will be displayed in this appendix. First the F# source code for
the solvers. Then the Java code for the GUI.
F#
Types.fs
1 namespace
Railways
2
3 module
Types =
4
5
type
Train = string
6
type
Direction = L | R
7
type
Location = int
8
type
Rail = Location * Location
9
type
SwitchRail = Location * Location * Location * Direction
10
type
Signal = Location * Direction
11
type
RailwayNetwork = Location
list * Rail
list * SwitchRail
list * Signal
list * (Train*Location*Location*Direction) list
12
13
14
type
SignalMap = Map <Signal , bool >
15
type
TrainMap = Map <Train ,Location >
16
type
SwitchRailMap = Map <SwitchRail ,bool >
17
type
State = S of int * SignalMap * TrainMap * SwitchRailMap *
State | N
18
19
type
RailwayGraph = Map <Location , Location
list >
20
type
DistanceMap = Map <Location*Location ,int >
21
type
Turn = Controller | Conductor
22
type
StateID = int
100
==PAGE:102==
Preprocessing.fs
1 namespace
Railways
2
3 open
Railways.Types
4
5 // Module
used
for the
preprocessing
of the
network
data , to make
the
solving
more
efficient
6
7 module
Preprocess =
8
9
//
Function
to get the
value
set of a map
10
let
valueSet m =
11
Map.fold (fun s _ v -> Set.add v s) Set.empty m
12
13
//
Function
to get the key set of a map
14
let
keySet m =
15
Map.fold (fun s k _ -> Set.add k s) Set.empty m
16
17
// Used
for
creating
the
railway
graph
18
let
addVertex
((l1 ,l2):Rail) (m: RailwayGraph ) =
19
let ll = Map.find l1 m
20
Map.add l1 (l2::ll) m
21
22
23
//
Calculates
the
distance
from
Location l in
direction d to
all
other
reachable
locations
24
// TODO : Make
smart by use of
already
calculated
distances
25
// Find
all end
points
left or right
26
//
Calculate
their
distances
to all
reachable
locations
27
// Then
for
each
next
location
use the
distance
already
calculated
28
let rec
CreateDistanceMapLoc (loc:Location) ( currentLocations :
Set <Location >) (explored:Set <Location >) c m rwg =
29
match
Set.isEmpty
currentLocations
with
30
| true
-> m
31
| _ -> let
nexts = Set.difference (Set.fold (fun s v -> Set
.ofList (Map.find v rwg) + s) Set.empty
currentLocations )
explored
32
let nm = Set.fold (fun s v -> Map.add (loc ,v) c (Map
.add (v,loc) c s)) m nexts
33
CreateDistanceMapLoc
loc
nexts (Set.union
nexts
explored) (c+1) nm rwg
34
35
//
Creates
the
DistanceMap
by going
through
all
location
and
calculating
their
distances
to all
other
reachable
loactions
36
let
CreateDistanceMap
ll rwg = List.fold (fun m v ->
CreateDistanceMapLoc v (set [v]) (set [v]) 1 (Map.add (v,v) 0 m
) rwg) Map.empty ll
37
38
39
// Find
all
paths by taking
intersection
of
reachable
locations
from
starting
location
in train
direction
and the
opposite
direction
from
the
goal
location
40
// Only
used
for non
priority
version
41
let
FindPaths
tm trains
left
right
goal =
42
let rec
Path d s =
101
==PAGE:103==
43
let rwg = match d with
44
| L -> left
45
| _ -> right
46
let x = Set.fold (fun st v -> Set.union (Set.ofList (
Map.find v rwg)) st) s s
47
match x = s with
48
| true
-> x
49
| _ -> Path d x
50
51
List.fold (fun s (t,d) -> let sl = Map.find t tm
52
let gl = Map.find t goal
53
let
paths1 = Path d (set [sl])
54
let a = if d = L then R else L
55
let
paths2 = Path a (set [gl])
56
let
paths = Set.intersect
paths1
paths2
57
Map.add t paths s) Map.empty
trains
58
59
60
// Finds
all
distinct
paths
for the trains , and
saves
them
individually
61
let
FindDistinctPaths
tm gm tdl
rwgl
rwgr =
62
let rec
DistinctPath (rwg: RailwayGraph ) (sll:Set <Location
list >) =
63
match
Set.forall (fun v -> List.isEmpty (Map.find (List
.head v) rwg)) sll
with
64
| true
-> sll
65
| false
-> let
nsll = Set.fold (fun s v -> let ll = Map
.find (List.head v) rwg
66
match ll
with
67
| []
-> Set
.add v s
68
| [x] -> Set
.add (x::v) s
69
| [x;y] ->
Set.add (x::v) (Set.add (y::v) s)
70
| _ ->
failwith "Location
has
more
than
two options , should
not be
possible ") Set.empty
sll
71
72
73
DistinctPath
rwg
nsll
74
let rec
RemovePath l ll =
75
match ll with
76
| [] -> Set.empty
77
| x::xs when x = l -> Set.ofList ll
78
| x::xs -> RemovePath l xs
79
List.fold (fun s (t,d) -> let rwg = if d = R then
rwgr
else
rwgl
80
let l = Map.find t tm
81
let g = Map.find t gm
82
let sll = set [[l]]
83
let sll = DistinctPath
rwg sll
84
let
nSll = Set.fold (fun sx vx ->
let p = RemovePath g vx
102
==PAGE:104==
85
if Set.isEmpty p then sx else
Set.add p sx) Set.empty
sll
86
Map.add t nSll s) Map.empty
tdl
87
88
89
// Find
the
trains
that
needs to swap
locations
90
//
Outdated
function , no longer
needed
91
(*
92
let
Swappers (tm:TrainMap) gm paths =
93
Map.fold (fun s k v -> let
glocs = (valueSet
gm)
94
let sx = match
Set.contains v glocs
with
95
| true
-> let ot = Map.
findKey (fun ot gl -> gl = v) gm
96
Set.add k (Set.
add ot s)
97
| false
-> s
98
99
let ps = Map.find k paths
100
let ts = Set.remove k (keySet tm)
101
let
locP = Set.fold (fun ls t -> Set
.add (t,Map.find t tm , Map.find t gm) ls) Set.empty ts
102
let b = Set.forall (fun p -> Set.
exists (fun (_,l1 ,l2) -> not (Set.contains
l1 p && Set.contains
l2 p)) locP) ps
103
104
match b with
105
| true
-> let ot = Set.fold (fun s (
t,_,_) -> Set.add t s) Set.empty (Set.filter (fun (t,l1 ,l2) ->
Set.forall (fun p -> Set.contains
l1 p || Set.contains
l2 p) ps
) locP)
106
Set.add k (Set.union ot s)
107
| false
-> sx) Set.empty tm
108
*)
109
110
//
Calculates
if a given
train is part of a swap cycle , and if
so
returns
the
swap
cycle
111
let rec
SwapCycle (tm:TrainMap) gm t s
=
112
let l = Map.find t tm
113
match (Map.tryFindKey (fun k v -> v = l) gm) with
114
| Some(tr) -> match
Set.contains
tr s with
115
| true
-> Set.add t s
116
| false
-> SwapCycle
tm gm tr (Set.add
t s)
117
| None
-> Set.empty
118
119
//
Calculates
if any
train is part of a special
swap cycle , not
chaging
places
but
train
would
block if placed or not moved ,
and
returns
swap
cycle
120
let
SpecialSwapCycle (tm:TrainMap) gm t paths =
121
let ps = Map.find t paths
122
let ts = Set.remove t (keySet tm)
123
let
locP = Set.fold (fun ls t -> Set.add (t,Map.find t tm ,
Map.find t gm) ls) Set.empty ts
124
let b = Set.forall (fun p -> Set.exists (fun (_,l1 ,l2) ->
not (Set.contains
l1 p && Set.contains
l2 p)) locP) ps
125
match b with
103
==PAGE:105==
126
// true = No free path , therefore
part of swapcycle , find
other
trains , also
part of cycle
127
| true
-> let ot = Set.fold (fun s (t,_,_) -> Set.add t s)
Set.empty (Set.filter (fun (t,l1 ,l2) -> Set.forall (fun p ->
Set.contains
l1 p || Set.contains
l2 p) ps) locP)
128
Set.add t ot
129
// false = Has
free path , therefore
not
part of swap
cycle
130
| false
-> Set.empty
131
132
//
Combines
sets of
trains if they
have
any
trains in common
133
let rec
CombineSwapSets
ss rs =
134
match
Set.isEmpty
ss with
135
| true
-> rs
136
| false
when
Set.isEmpty
rs -> let s = Set.minElement
ss
137
CombineSwapSets (Set.remove
s ss) (Set.add s rs)
138
| false
-> let x = Set.maxElement
ss
139
let
rest = (Set.remove x ss)
140
let rs = match
Set.exists (fun v -> not (Set.
isEmpty (Set.intersect v x))) rs with
141
| true
-> Set.fold (fun s v -> if not (
Set.isEmpty (Set.intersect v x)) then
Set.add (v+x) s else
Set.
add v s) Set.empty rs
142
| false
-> Set.add x rs
143
CombineSwapSets
rest rs
144
145
// Finds
swap
cycles
in the
network
146
let rec
FindSwapCycles (tm:TrainMap) gm paths =
147
let nsc = Map.fold (fun s t l -> let
cycle = (SwapCycle
tm
gm t Set.empty)
148
if Set.isEmpty
cycle
then
s else
Set.add
cycle s) Set.empty tm
149
let scs = Map.fold (fun s t l -> let
cycle =
SpecialSwapCycle
tm gm t paths
150
match
Set.isEmpty
cycle
with
151
| true
-> s
152
| false
-> Set.add
cycle s
) nsc tm
153
Set.fold (fun s v -> if Set.count v < 2 then s else
Set.add
v s) Set.empty ( CombineSwapSets
scs Set.empty)
154
155
//
Function
returning
shortest
path
based on length
and
fewest
vertical
switches
156
let
shortestPath
ps locs =
157
158
// Find
the
shortest
of two
paths
159
let
shortest
p1 p2 =
160
match
Set.isEmpty p1 , Set.isEmpty
p2 with
161
| true ,_ -> p2
162
| _,true
-> p1
163
| _ -> let rec
jumpCount l c =
164
match l with
165
| [] -> c
166
| [x] -> c
167
| x::(y:: rest) -> if abs (x-y) = 1 then
jumpCount (y:: rest) c else
jumpCount (y:: rest) (c+1)
104
==PAGE:106==
168
let sp1 = List.sort (Set.toList p1)
169
let l1 = Set.count p1 + jumpCount
sp1 0
170
let sp2 = List.sort (Set.toList p2)
171
let l2 = Set.count p2 + jumpCount
sp2 0
172
if l1
<= l2 then p1 else p2
173
174
let rec
bestPath
ps bp =
175
match ps with
176
| [] -> bp
177
| x::xs when
Set.isEmpty (Set.intersect
locs x) ->
bestPath
xs (shortest
bp x)
178
| _::xs -> bestPath
xs bp
179
180
bestPath (Set.toList ps) Set.empty
181
182
183
//
Function
returning
if given
location
is safe , meaning
all
other
trains
have a path if
something
would
block
the
location
184
let
LocationIsSafe l (ts:Set <Train >) (paths:Map <Train ,Set <Set <
Location >>>) =
185
Set.forall (fun v -> let ps = Map.find v paths
186
Set.exists (fun ls -> not (Set.
contains l ls)) ps) ts
187
188
//
Function
to give
priority
to trains
that
have a free
path to
goal , and
give
trains
that
have
non
crossing
path
same
priority
recursively
189
let rec
CalculatePriorities (curLoc:Map <Train ,Location >) (ts:
Set <Train >) (gs:Map <Train ,Location >) (fPaths:Map <Train ,Set <Set <
Location >>>) (comPaths:Map <Train ,Set <Set <Location >>>) (pm:Map <
Train ,int >) (c:int) =
190
match
Set.isEmpty
ts with
191
| true
-> pm ,fPaths
192
| false
-> //
Temporarily
remove
paths
that
cannot be used
due to
locations
of train
193
let
tempPaths = Map.fold (fun s t v -> let
locs
= (Set.remove (Map.find t curLoc) (valueSet
curLoc))
194
let ls =
Set.fold (fun s v -> if Set.isEmpty (Set.intersect
locs v) then
Set.add v s else s ) Set.empty v
195
Map.add t
ls s) Map.empty
fPaths
196
// Find
all
trains
the
have an open
path
from
start to goal , in
current
setup , and
does
not
block
trains by
being in goal
location
197
let
freeTrain = Set.fold (fun s t -> let
pathSet
= Map.find t tempPaths
198
// Location
of the
other
trains
199
let
locs =
(Set.remove (Map.find t curLoc) (valueSet
curLoc))
200
// Checks if
given
train
has a path
that
does
not
intersect
with
location
of other
trains
201
match
Set.
exists (fun
path
-> Set.isEmpty (Set.intersect
locs
path))
pathSet
with
105
==PAGE:107==
202
| true
->
// Checks if
putting
train in goal
blocks
other
from
being
able
to get to goal
203
let g = Map.find t gs
204
match
LocationIsSafe g (Set.remove t ts) comPaths
with
205
|
true
-> Set.add t s
206
|
_ -> s
207
| _ -> s)
Set.empty ts
208
match
Set.isEmpty
freeTrain
with
209
| true
-> pm ,fPaths
210
| false
-> // Finds
lists of trains
with
open
path , that
have
non
crossing
paths
211
let t = Set.fold (fun s v -> let
pathSet = Map.find v tempPaths
212
//
Location
of other
trains
213
let
locs
= (Set.remove (Map.find v curLoc) (valueSet
curLoc))
214
// Find
shortest
paths
that
does
not
cross
any
other
trains
current
position
215
let p =
shortestPath
pathSet
locs
216
// Finds
free
trains
that
have
non
crossing
paths
with
train
217
let (x,_
) = Set.fold (fun (sx ,xx) vx -> let px = Map.find vx
tempPaths
218
let gls = List.fold (fun s v ->
Set.add (Map.find v gs) s) Set.empty (vx::sx)
219
let py = Set.fold (fun sz vz ->
let b1 = Set.isEmpty (Set.intersect
vz xx)
220
let b2 = (Set.count vz < Set.count sz || Set.isEmpty
sz)
221
if b1 && b2 then vz else sz
222
) Set.empty
px
223
let b = Map.exists (fun mk mv
-> let pss = Set.filter (fun ls -> Set.isEmpty (Set.intersect
ls gls)) mv
224
not (List.contains
mk sx || mk = vx) && Set.isEmpty
pss
225
) comPaths
226
106
==PAGE:108==
if Set.isEmpty
py || b
227
then (if b && List.contains
vx
sx then ([],xx) else (sx ,xx))
228
else vx::sx ,xx+py
229
) ([v],p) freeTrain
230
Set.add
x s
231
) Set.empty
freeTrain
232
// Pick
the
list
with
the
most
trains
233
let bts = Set.fold (fun s v -> if
List.length v > List.length s then v else s) [] t
234
// If bts is empty
return
235
if List.isEmpty
bts
236
then pm ,fPaths
237
else
238
let gls = List.fold (fun s v -> Set.
add (Map.find v gs) s) Set.empty
bts
239
// Update
the
path of the
trains to
the
ones
not
crossing
240
let fPaths ,_ = List.fold (fun (s,sp)
v -> let
locs = (Set.remove (Map.find v curLoc) (valueSet
curLoc)) + sp
241
let
pathSet = Map.find v tempPaths
242
let p = shortestPath
pathSet
locs
243
(Map.add v (set [p]) s),sp+p) (fPaths ,Set.empty) (List.rev
bts)
244
// Remove
these
paths
from
the
comPaths
245
let
comPaths = List.fold (fun s v ->
let pss = Map.find v s
246
let l = Map.find v curLoc
247
let
npss = Set.fold (fun sa va -> let ns = Set.difference
va (
Set.unionMany (Map.find v fPaths))
248
Set.add ns sa) Set.empty
pss
249
Map.add v npss s
250
) comPaths
bts
251
// Remove
the
trains
from
the set of
trains
not in goal
252
let ts = List.fold (fun s v -> Set.
remove v s) ts bts
253
// Remove
all
paths
for
other
trains
containing
location
of trains
put in goal
254
let
fPaths = Map.fold (fun s k v ->
let pss = Set.filter (fun ls -> Set.isEmpty (Set.intersect
ls
gls)) v
107
==PAGE:109==
255
if Set.contains k ts then
Map.add k pss s else s
256
) fPaths
fPaths
257
let
comPaths = Map.fold (fun s k v ->
let gls = Set.fold (fun s v -> Set.add (Map.find v gs) s) Set.
empty (Set.remove k (Set.ofList
bts))
258
let pss = Set.filter (fun ls -> Set.isEmpty (Set.intersect
ls
gls)) v
259
Map.add k pss s
260
) comPaths
comPaths
261
// Update
location
of trains , as if
the
just
picked
trains
have
been
moved to their
goal
locations
262
let
curLoc = List.fold (fun s v ->
Map.add v (Map.find v gs) s) curLoc
bts
263
264
// Give
the
trains a priority
265
let pm = List.fold (fun s v -> Map.
add v c s) pm bts
266
let c = c - 1
267
268
CalculatePriorities
curLoc ts gs
fPaths
comPaths
pm c
269
270
271
272
// Finds
all
currently
reachable
locations
from a train
273
let
PreReachableLocations (t:Train) tm (d:Direction) (paths:Map
<Train ,Set <Set <Location >>>) rwgL
rwgR bl =
274
let l = Map.find t tm
275
let
path = Set.unionMany (Map.find t paths)
276
let rwg = match d with
277
| R -> rwgR
278
| L -> rwgL
279
let rec
Locations (ls:Set <Location >) =
280
let nls = Set.fold (fun s p -> let y = Map.find p rwg
281
let y = List.fold (fun s
v -> if Set.contains v bl || not (Set.contains v path) then s
else v::s) [] y
282
let x = (List.fold (fun
st va -> Set.add va st) Set.empty y)
283
Set.union x s) ls ls
284
match ls = nls
with
285
| true
-> ls
286
| _ -> Locations
nls
287
Locations (Set.ofList [l])
288
289
290
// Find a train
which
can be move to the "side" safely
291
let
FindSafeTrain (ts:Set <Train >) (paths:Map <Train ,Set <Set <
Location >>>) dm tm sm td bl rwgL
rwgR =
292
//For
each
train
find
their "safe" locations
293
let
safeZone = Set.fold (fun s v -> // Find
all
locations
the
train
can
reach
108
==PAGE:110==
294
let bl = Set.union bl (
Set.remove (Map.find v tm) (valueSet
tm))
295
let
locs =
PreReachableLocations v tm (Map.find v td) paths
rwgL
rwgR bl
296
// For
each
location
check if is safe , meaning
does
not
block
other
train
from
reaching
goal
297
let sls = Set.fold (fun
ss l ->
298
match
LocationIsSafe l (Set.remove v ts) paths
with
299
| true
-> Set.add (v,l) ss
300
| _ -> ss) Set.empty
locs
301
Set.union s sls
302
) Set.empty ts
303
//The the
train
with
the
longest
distance
to a safe
location
304
Set.fold (fun (d,tr ,loc) (t,l) -> let dis = Map.find (l,Map
.find t tm) dm
305
let dir = Map.find t td
306
let rwg = match
dir
with
307
| R -> rwgR
308
| L -> rwgL
309
// Safe
location
needs a
signal , such
that
the
train
does
not
move
away
from it
310
match
dis > d && (( Map.
containsKey (l,dir) sm) || List.isEmpty (Map.find l rwg)) &&
dis > 0 with
311
| true
-> (dis ,t,l)
312
| _ -> (d,tr ,loc)
313
) (0 ,"" ,0)
safeZone
314
315
// Creates
the
extra
goal
map and
paths
map
allowing
trains to
move to safe
location
to break swap -cycles
316
let rec
SplitWork
swappers
paths dm tm sm ds gml
rwgL
rwgR bl =
317
let gm = List.head
gml
318
let ngm , dp , stl = Set.fold (fun (ngm ,dp ,ts) sc -> // Find
train to park in safe
location
319
let (_,t
,l) = FindSafeTrain
sc paths dm tm sm ds bl rwgL
rwgR
320
//
Creating
new
temp
goal
for
train
321
let ngm
= Map.add t l ngm
322
// Find
and
update
the
distinct
paths
using
the
updated
goal
map for
the
safe
train
323
let sdp
= FindDistinctPaths
tm ngm [(t,Map.find t ds)] rwgL
rwgR
324
let dp =
Map.fold (fun s k v -> Map.add k v s) dp sdp
325
(ngm ,dp
,(t,l)::ts)
326
) (gm ,paths ,[])
swappers
327
//The
trains
just
moved to safe
locations
109
==PAGE:111==
328
let st = List.fold (fun s v -> fst v::s) [] stl
329
let
safeTs = Set.ofList st
330
// Update
paths
for
other
train , to no longer
being
able to
use
ones
where
safe
trains
have
been
placed , and
blocked
location
331
let bl ,dp = List.fold (fun (ls ,ps) (t,l) -> let d = Map.
find t ds
332
let ts = Set.
fold (fun s v -> if Map.find v ds <> d then
Set.add v s else s)
Set.empty (keySet
tm)
333
let ndp = Set.
fold (fun s v -> Map.add v (Map.find v dp) s) Map.empty ts
334
let nps = Map.
fold (fun s k v -> let nv = Set.fold (fun s v -> match (Set.
contains l v) with
335
| false
->
Set
.add v s
336
| true
-> s)
Set.empty v
337
Map.add k nv s) dp ndp
338
Set.add (l) ls ,
nps) (Set.empty ,dp) stl
339
// Remove
the
trains
from
the
train
map
340
let tm = Set.fold (fun s v -> Map.remove v s) tm safeTs
341
342
// Find if any
more
trains
still
need
swapping
343
let
swappers = FindSwapCycles (tm:TrainMap) ngm dp
344
match (Set.isEmpty
swappers) with
345
| true
-> (ngm ::gml ,dp ,st)
346
| false
-> SplitWork
swappers
dp dm tm sm ds (ngm :: gml)
rwgL
rwgR bl
347
348
349
//
InitiateState
creates
the
initial
state
and
static
global
variables , given a railway
network
350
let
InitiateState (ll ,rl ,srl ,sl ,tl) =
351
352
353
// Create
the
initial
signal , train
and
switchrail
maps ,
for the
initial
state
354
let sm = List.fold (fun s v -> Map.add v false s) Map.empty
sl
355
let tm = List.fold (fun s (t,l,_,_) -> Map.add t l s) Map.
empty tl
356
let rm = List.fold (fun s (l1 ,l2 ,l3 ,d) -> (Map.add (l1 ,l2 ,
l3 ,d) true) s) Map.empty
srl
357
let
initialState = S(0,sm ,tm ,rm ,N)
358
359
// List of Train * Direction
and map of train
and the
goal
location
360
let trains ,goal = (List.fold (fun (st ,sg) (t,_,l,d) -> (t,d
)::st ,Map.add t l sg) ([], Map.empty) tl)
361
362
110
==PAGE:112==
363
// Create a map to get the
switch
rail
from a rail
364
let
addAllSwitchrail (x: SwitchRail) m =
365
let (l1 ,l2 ,l3 ,d) = x
366
Map.add (l1 ,l2) x (Map.add (l2 ,l1) x (Map.add (l1 ,l3) x
(Map.add (l3 ,l1) x m)))
367
368
let sr = List.fold (fun s v -> addAllSwitchrail v s) Map.
empty
srl
369
370
371
// Create
the
railway
graph
going
left
and
right
372
let rwg = List.fold (fun s l -> Map.add l [] s) Map.empty
ll
373
let
rwgL = List.fold (fun s (l1 ,l2) -> addVertex (max l1 l2
,min l1 l2) s) rwg rl
374
let
rwgLeft = List.fold (fun s (l1 ,l2 ,l3 ,d) -> if d = L
then
addVertex (l1 ,l2) (addVertex (l1 ,l3) s) else
addVertex (l2
,l1) (addVertex (l3 ,l1) s)) rwgL
srl
375
let
rwgRight = Map.fold (fun s l ll -> List.fold (fun ss
loc
-> Map.add loc (l:: Map.find
loc ss) ss) s ll) rwg
rwgLeft
376
377
// Create
the
distance
map
378
let
distanceMap = CreateDistanceMap
ll
rwgLeft
379
380
381
// The
block
below
should be
uncommented
if the
priority
preprocess
should
be used
382
//
#################################
383
// START OF
PRIORITY
PREPROCESS
CODE
384
//(*
385
// Find
all
distinct
paths
from
start to end
location
for
all
trains
386
let
distinctPaths = FindDistinctPaths
tm goal
trains
rwgLeft
rwgRight
387
388
// Map of trains
and
their
direction
389
let ds = List.fold (fun s (t,_,_,d) -> Map.add t d s) Map.
empty tl
390
391
// Set of trains in swap
cycles
392
let
swapCycles = FindSwapCycles
tm goal
distinctPaths
393
394
// Find
the
trains
which
has to be move to safe
locations
first
round
395
let goals ,dPaths ,sts = SplitWork
swapCycles
distinctPaths
distanceMap
tm sm ds [goal] rwgLeft
rwgRight
Set.empty
396
397
let
goalFirst = List.head
goals
398
let
goalLast = List.last
goals
399
400
// Find
paths
for
second
part of trains
routes , needed to
avoid
placing
blocking
trains in first
pass
401
let
sptm = Map.fold (fun s k v -> if List.contains k sts
then
Map.add k (Map.find k goalFirst) s else s) Map.empty tm
402
let
spTrains = List.fold (fun s (t,d) -> if List.contains t
sts
then (t,d)::s else s ) [] trains
403
let
spPaths = FindDistinctPaths
sptm
goalLast
spTrains
111
==PAGE:113==
rwgLeft
rwgRight
404
405
let
disPaths = Map.fold (fun s k v -> let fps = Map.find k
s
406
let sps = v
407
let nps = Set.fold (
fun sa va -> let x = Set.fold (fun sb vb -> Set.add (va+vb) sb
408
) Set.empty
sps
409
Set.union x sa
410
)
Set.empty
fps
411
Map.add k nps s
412
) dPaths
spPaths
413
let ts = (keySet tm)
414
415
416
//
Finding
priority
and
exact
path
for
trains
417
let
priorities ,p = CalculatePriorities
tm ts
goalFirst
dPaths
disPaths
Map.empty (Set.count ts)
418
// Find
train
that
block
paths if places
first
pass
419
let
blockers = Map.fold (fun s k v -> if Map. containsKey k
priorities
then s else
Set.add k s) Set.empty p
420
// Set the
paths
for the
train to the
paths
taken
first
pass
421
let
firstPaths = Map.fold (fun s k v -> if Set.contains k
blockers
then
Map.add k (set[Map.find k tm]) s else
Map.add k (
Set.unionMany (v)) s) Map.empty p
422
// Update
the
goal
for
blockers
first
path
423
let
firstGoal = Set.fold (fun s v -> Map.add v (Map.find v
tm) s) goalFirst
blockers
424
let
goals = [firstGoal;goalLast]
425
// For
second
pass
find
the
paths
for the
trains at safe
locations
or
trains
that
was
blocking
first
round to their
goals
426
let
sptm = Map.fold (fun s k v -> Map.add k (Map.find k
goalFirst) s) tm
priorities
427
let
spgm = goalLast
428
let
spdp = FindDistinctPaths
sptm
spgm
trains
rwgLeft
rwgRight
429
430
431
let x,np = CalculatePriorities
sptm ts spgm
spdp
spdp
Map.
empty (Set.count ts)
432
let nps = Map.fold (fun s k v -> Map.add k (Set.unionMany (
v)) s) Map.empty np
433
let
Paths = firstPaths ::[ nps]
434
let
priorities = Map.fold (fun s k v -> if Map. containsKey
k s then s else
Map.add k v s) priorities x
435
// TODO : No train
should
not
have
been
given a priority , so
if used
some
case
not
covered
436
let
finalPriorities = Map.fold (fun m k v -> if not (Map.
containsKey k m) then (Map.add k 0 m) else m) priorities
tm
437
// END OF
PRIORITY
PREPROCESS
CODE
438
//
###############################
439
//*)
112
==PAGE:114==
440
441
442
//The
block
below
should be
uncommented
if the
version
of
no
priorities
should be used
443
(*
444
//
####################################
445
// START OF NO
PRIORITY
PREPROCESS
CODE
446
let
goals = [goal]
447
let
paths = FindPaths
tm trains
rwgLeft
rwgRight
goal
448
let
Paths = [paths]
449
let
finalPriorities = Map.fold (fun m k v -> Map.add k 0 m)
Map.empty tm
450
// END OF NO
PRIORITY
PREPROCESS
CODE
451
//
##################################
452
*)
453
454
trains , rwgLeft , rwgRight , goals , distanceMap , Paths , sr ,
finalPriorities , 0, sm ,
initialState
113
==PAGE:115==
LoadFile.fs
1 namespace
Railways
2
3 open
System.IO
4 open
Railways.Types
5
6 // Module
used to load a railway
netork
from a file
7
8 module
LoadFiles =
9
10
//
Function
to
translate
string
rail
representation
to rail
11
let
toRail (s:string) =
12
let x = List.ofArray (s.Split ’ ’)
13
(int(List.head x), int(List.item 1 x))
14
15
//
Function
to
translate
string
switchrail
representation
to
switchrail
16
let
toSwitchRail (s:string) =
17
let x = List.ofArray (s.Split ’ ’)
18
let d = match
List.item 3 x with
19
| "L" -> L
20
| "R" -> R
21
| x -> failwith
(" Direction
illegal
cannot
translate " + x + " to a direction ")
22
(int(List.head x), int(List.item 1 x),int(List.item 2 x),d)
23
24
//
Function
to
translate
string
signal
representation
to signal
25
let
toSignal (s:string) =
26
let x = List.ofArray (s.Split ’ ’)
27
let d = match
List.item 1 x with
28
| "L" -> L
29
| "R" -> R
30
| x -> failwith
(" Direction
illegal
cannot
translate " + x + " to a direction ")
31
(int(List.head x),d)
32
33
//
Function
to
translate
string
train
representation
to train
34
let
toTrain (s:string) =
35
let x = List.ofArray (s.Split ’ ’)
36
let d = match
List.item 3 x with
37
| "L" -> L
38
| "R" -> R
39
| x -> failwith
(" Direction
illegal
cannot
translate " + x + " to a direction ")
40
(( List.head x), int(List.item 1 x),int(List.item 2 x),d)
41
42
43
//
Function
used to load
railway
network
from
file in a given
directory
44
let
LoadRailway f directoryPath : RailwayNetwork =
45
let
path = Path.Combine(directoryPath ,f)
46
let
lines = List.ofArray (File. ReadAllLines (path))
47
// Load
the
locations
48
let rec
ExtractLocations l r =
49
match l with
50
| [] -> failwith "Ran out of lines
when
trying to read
114
==PAGE:116==
locations"
51
| ":":: rest
-> r,rest
52
| s:: rest
->
ExtractLocations
rest (( int (s))::r)
53
54
let
locations ,rest = ExtractLocations
lines []
55
56
// Load
the
rails
57
let rec
ExtractRails l r =
58
match l with
59
| [] -> failwith "Ran out of lines
when
trying to read
rails"
60
| ":":: rest
-> r,rest
61
| s:: rest
->
ExtractRails
rest (( toRail (s))::r)
62
63
let rails ,rest = ExtractRails
rest []
64
65
// Load
the
switchrails
66
let rec
ExtractSwitchRails l r =
67
match l with
68
| [] -> failwith "Ran out of lines
when
trying to read
switch -rails"
69
| ":":: rest
-> r,rest
70
| s:: rest
->
ExtractSwitchRails
rest (( toSwitchRail
(s))::r)
71
72
let srails ,rest = ExtractSwitchRails
rest []
73
74
// Load
the
signals
75
let rec
ExtractSignals l r =
76
match l with
77
| [] -> failwith "Ran out of lines
when
trying to read
signals"
78
| ":":: rest
-> r,rest
79
| s:: rest
->
ExtractSignals
rest (( toSignal (s))::r)
80
81
let sigs ,rest = ExtractSignals
rest []
82
83
// Load
the
trains
84
let rec
ExtractTrains l r =
85
match l with
86
| [] -> r,[]
87
| ":":: rest
-> r,rest
88
| s:: rest
->
ExtractTrains
rest (( toTrain (s))::r)
89
90
let trains ,rest = ExtractTrains
rest []
91
92
locations ,rails ,srails ,sigs ,trains
115
==PAGE:117==
SaveFile.fs
1 namespace
Railways
2
3 open
System.IO
4 open
System
5 open
Railways.Types
6
7 // Module
used to save a solution
to a file
8
9 module
SaveFiles =
10
11
let
saveSolution
sol t gs fn
directoryPath =
12
13
let
mapValues m =
14
let l = Map.fold (fun s k v -> v::s) [] m
15
seq{
16
for x in List.rev l do
17
yield x
18
}
19
20
21
22
let
solutionSequence (sol:State
list) =
23
24
let
locs m =
25
let s = seq{
26
for x in
mapValues m do
27
yield (string x)
28
}
29
String.concat
";" (s)
30
let
bLocs m =
31
let s = seq{
32
for x in
mapValues m do
33
yield if x then "T" else "F"
34
}
35
String.concat
";" ( s)
36
37
let
stateSeq (s) =
38
match s with
39
| S(_,sm ,tm ,rm ,_) -> sprintf "<>\n<trains >[%s]\
n<signals >[%s]\n<rails >[%s]\n</>"
(locs tm) (bLocs sm) (bLocs
rm)
40
| _ -> failwith "N state in
solution"
41
42
seq {
43
yield "<solution >"
44
for x in sol
do
45
yield
stateSeq x
46
yield (sprintf "<states > %A" (List.length
sol))
47
yield (sprintf "<generated > %A" gs)
48
yield (sprintf "<time > %A" (t))
49
yield "</solution >"
50
}
51
52
53
let
path = Path.Combine(directoryPath ,(fn + ". sol "))
116
==PAGE:118==
54
55
File. WriteAllLines (path , solutionSequence (List.rev sol))
|> ignore
117
==PAGE:119==
PriorityQueue.fs
1 namespace
Railways
2
3 open
Types
4
5 //
Implementation
of
priority
queue
6
7 module
PriorityQueue =
8
9
type
PriorityQueue =
10
| Q of (State
list)
11
12
//
Function
to check if queue is empty
13
let
isEmpty q =
14
match q with
15
| Q([])
-> true
16
| _ -> false
17
18
//
Function
to remove
first
element
in queue
19
let pop q =
20
match q with
21
| Q([])
-> failwith "queue is empty"
22
| Q(x::xs) -> (x,Q(xs))
23
24
// Helper
function
to insert
new
element
to
correct
place in
queue
25
let rec
insertInList s h sl =
26
match sl with
27
| [] -> [s]
28
| x::xs -> match x with
29
| S(hx ,_,_,_,_) when hx < h -> x:: insertInList s
h xs
30
| S(hx ,_,_,_,_) -> s::(x::xs)
31
| _ -> failwith "F"
32
33
//
Function
to insert
element
in queue
34
let
insert s q =
35
match s,q with
36
| (S(h,_,_,_,_),Q(l)) -> Q( insertInList s h l)
37
| _ -> failwith "Cannot
insert N is queue"
118
==PAGE:120==
PostProcess.fs
1 namespace
Railways
2
3 open
Railways.Types
4 open
Railways.Preprocess
5
6 module
Postprocess =
7
8
//
####################################
9
// HELPER
FUNCTIONS
FOR POST -PROCESSING
10
//
####################################
11
12
// Gets
the
location
of a given
train in a given
state
13
let
GetTrainLocation s t =
14
match s with
15
| S(_,sm ,tm ,rm ,p) -> Map.find t tm
16
| N -> failwith "N state in
solution"
17
18
// Gets
the
direction
of a train
19
let
GetTrainDirection t tdl =
20
snd (List.find (fun (tr ,d) -> tr = t) tdl)
21
22
// Gets
the
TrainMap
from a state
23
let
GetTrainMap s =
24
match s with
25
| S(_,sm ,tm ,rm ,p) -> tm
26
| N -> failwith "N state in
solution"
27
28
// Gets
the
SignalMap
from a state
29
let
GetSignalMap s =
30
match s with
31
| S(_,sm ,_,_,_) -> sm
32
| N -> failwith "N state in
solution"
33
34
// Gets
the
SwitchRailMap
from a state
35
let
GetSwitchRailMap s =
36
match s with
37
| S(_,_,_,rm ,_) -> rm
38
| N -> failwith "N state in
solution"
39
40
//
Returns a signal
map
with
the
signal a given
location
turned
of , if signal
is there
41
let
TurnOffSignal l sm =
42
let nsm = match
Map.tryFind (l,R) sm with
43
| Some(_) -> Map.add (l,R) false sm
44
| None
-> sm
45
match
Map.tryFind (l,L) nsm
with
46
| Some(_) -> Map.add (l,L) false
nsm
47
| None
-> nsm
48
49
//
Changes
the
signal
map of a state
50
let
ChangeSignalMap s sm =
51
match s with
52
| S(h,_,tm ,rm ,p) -> S(h,sm ,tm ,rm ,p)
53
| _ -> failwith "N in
ChangeSignalMap "
54
119
==PAGE:121==
55
56
//
Function
to turn of
signals
when
train
has
passed
signal
57
let rec
TurnOffSignals
sl nsl als =
58
match sl with
59
| [] -> nsl
60
| x::xs when
List.isEmpty
nsl
-> TurnOffSignals
xs (x:: nsl)
als
61
| x::xs -> let
curTM = GetTrainMap x
62
let
lastTM = GetTrainMap (List.head
nsl )
63
let ls = Map.fold (fun s k v -> if v <> Map.find
k lastTM
then
Set.add (Map.find k lastTM) s else s) Set.empty
curTM
64
match
Set.isEmpty
ls with
65
| true
-> TurnOffSignals
xs (x:: nsl) Set.empty
66
| false
-> let cls = Set.union
als ls
67
let sm = GetSignalMap x
68
let nsm = Set.fold (fun s v ->
TurnOffSignal v s) sm cls
69
let ns = ChangeSignalMap x nsm
70
TurnOffSignals
xs (ns:: nsl) cls
71
72
//
Updates a state by
changing
the
signal map , train
map and
switchrail
map
73
let
UpdateState s sm tm rm =
74
match s with
75
| S(h,_,_,_,p) -> S(h,sm ,tm ,rm ,p)
76
| N -> N
77
78
79
//
####################################
80
// POST -PROCESS
FOR
ENTIRE
PATH
VERSION
81
//
####################################
82
83
// Splits
the
state
list
into
list of order of trains
moving
84
let rec
SplitStateList
sl nsl ssl rsl =
85
match sl with
86
| [] -> List.rev rsl
87
| x::xs -> let sm = GetSignalMap x
88
let nsm = GetSignalMap (List.head
nsl)
89
match sm = nsm
with
90
| true
-> let rl = List.head
rsl
91
let nrl = (List.head
ssl)::rl
92
SplitStateList
xs (x:: nsl) (List.tail
ssl) (nrl ::( List.tail
rsl))
93
| false
-> SplitStateList
xs (x:: nsl) (List.tail
ssl) ([ List.head
ssl ]:: rsl)
94
95
//
Function
to find
which
locations
are in use in a state
list
96
let rec
GetImportantLocations
sl locs =
97
match sl with
98
| [] -> locs
99
| x::[]
-> locs
100
| x::(y:: rest) -> let tm1 = GetTrainMap x
101
let tm2 = GetTrainMap y
102
let
locs = Map.fold (fun s k v -> if Map.
find k tm2
<> v then
Set.add v (Set.add (Map.find k tm2) s)
else s) locs
tm1
120
==PAGE:122==
103
GetImportantLocations (y:: rest) locs
104
105
// Find
the
train
that
are
moving in the
state
list
106
let rec
GetTrains
sl ts =
107
match sl with
108
| [] -> ts
109
| x::[]
-> ts
110
| x::(y:: rest) -> let tm1 = GetTrainMap x
111
let tm2 = GetTrainMap y
112
let
locs = Map.fold (fun s k v -> if Map.
find k tm2
<> v then
Set.add k s else s) ts tm1
113
GetTrains (y:: rest) locs
114
115
// Find
splitpoint
in list
where
the
states
can
merge
116
let rec
FindSplitState
sl locs ts rsl =
117
match sl with
118
| [] -> sl ,rsl
119
| x::xs -> let sm = GetSignalMap x
120
let tm = GetTrainMap x
121
let
tlocs = Set.fold (fun s v -> Set.add (Map.
find v tm) s) Set.empty ts
122
let b = Map.exists (fun (l,d) v -> (Set.contains
l locs && v)) sm
123
match b || not (Set.isEmpty (Set.intersect
locs
tlocs)) with
124
| true
-> FindSplitState
xs locs ts (x:: rsl)
125
| false
-> sl ,rsl
126
127
// Merges
two
state
list
together
by
merging
the signal , train
and
switchrail
maps at given
locations
128
let rec
Merge sl msl rsl
locs =
129
match sl with
130
| [] -> List.fold (fun s v -> v::s) rsl msl
131
| _ when
List.isEmpty
msl
-> match
List.isEmpty
sl with
132
| true
-> rsl
133
| false
-> let nsl = List.init
(List.length
sl) (fun v -> List.head
rsl)
134
let
nmsl = sl
135
let
nrsl = rsl
136
let ts = GetTrains
nmsl
Set.empty
137
let
tlocs = Set.
fold (fun s v -> Set.add ( GetTrainLocation (List.head
rsl) v) s
) Set.empty ts
138
let
nlocs = (tlocs)
+ ( GetImportantLocations
nmsl
Set.empty)
139
Merge
nsl
nmsl
nrsl
nlocs
140
| x::xs -> let sm = GetSignalMap x
141
let tm = GetTrainMap x
142
let rm = GetSwitchRailMap x
143
144
let ms = List.head
msl
145
146
let nsm = Map.fold (fun s k v -> if Set.contains
(fst k) locs
then
Map.add k v s else s) sm ( GetSignalMap
ms)
147
let ntm = Map.fold (fun s k v -> if Set.contains
121
==PAGE:123==
v locs
then
Map.add k v s else s) tm ( GetTrainMap
ms)
148
let nrm = Map.fold (fun s (l1 ,l2 ,l3 ,d) v -> let
b = Set.contains
l1 locs || Set.contains
l2 locs || Set.
contains
l3 locs
149
if b
then
Map.add (l1 ,l2 ,l3 ,d) v s else s) rm ( GetSwitchRailMap
ms)
150
151
let ns = UpdateState x nsm ntm nrm
152
Merge xs (List.tail
msl) (ns:: rsl) locs
153
154
// Merges
the
second
element (list) of the
list
into
the first ,
updates
the
second
element
and
recurse
over
the
tial of the
list
155
let rec
Merging l r =
156
match l with
157
| [] -> r
158
| x::[]
-> x@r
159
| x::y:: rest
-> // Get the
state
list
that
should
have
something
merged
into it
160
let sl = List.rev x
161
// Get the
state
list
that
should be merged
into sl
162
let msl = List.rev y
163
// Find
the
location
which
trains
are
using
in msl
164
let
locs = GetImportantLocations
msl Set.
empty
165
// Find
the
trains
that
are
moving in sl
166
let n = min (List.length sl) (List.length
msl)
167
let ts = GetTrains (List.rev(List.take n (
List.rev sl))) Set.empty
168
// Find
the
place to merge
into sl
169
let sl1 , rsl = FindSplitState
sl locs ts []
170
// Put the non -mergeable
states in the
result
list
171
let r = rsl@r
172
// Merge
msl
into
the
place in sl
173
let
rsl1 = Merge
sl1 msl r locs
174
let ny = (List.take (List.length y) rsl1)
175
let
nrsl = List.rev (List.take (List.length
rsl1 - List.length y) (List.rev
rsl1))
176
Merging (ny:: rest) nrsl
177
178
// Find
the
point at which
the
solution
can be split
then
merges
the
lists
together
179
let
MergeStates
sl ssl =
180
let x = SplitStateList (List.tail sl) ([ List.head sl]) (
List.tail
ssl) [[ List.head
ssl ]]
181
// First
element
always
initial
state , which
should be kept
unmerged
182
let r = List.head x
183
Merging (List.tail x) r
184
185
186
187
//
Postprocess
function
for
solution
found
using
the
opening
of
122
==PAGE:124==
entire
paths
function
188
let
CombineSolutionEntirePath
sl =
189
let slr = List.rev sl
190
let r = TurnOffSignals
slr [] Set.empty
191
let rr = (List.rev r)
192
MergeStates
slr rr
193
194
195
//
######################################
196
// POST -PROCESS
FOR
SINGLE
SIGNAL
VERSION
197
//
######################################
198
199
200
201
// Check if any
signal is on is a signalmap
202
let
SignalIsOn
sm =
203
Set.exists (fun v -> v) (valueSet
sm)
204
205
// Checks
if any new
signals
has
been
turned
green
between
two
signal
maps
206
let
NewSignalOn
smx smy =
207
Map.fold (fun s k v -> let b = Map.find k smy
208
if b && b<>v then
true
else s) false
smx
209
210
211
// Finds
trains
that
have
moved/changed
position
in a list of
states
212
let rec
GetMovingTrains
sl rts =
213
match sl with
214
| [] -> rts
215
| [_] -> rts
216
| x::y:: rest
-> let tmx = GetTrainMap x
217
let tmy = GetTrainMap y
218
let smx = GetSignalMap x
219
let smy = GetSignalMap y
220
let
locs = Map.fold (fun s k v -> if v ||
Map.find k smy
then
Set.add (fst k) s else s) Set.empty
smx
221
let ts = (Map.fold (fun s k v -> if v <>
Map.find k tmx || Set.contains v locs || Set.contains (Map.find
k tmx) locs
then
Set.add k s else s) rts tmy)
222
GetMovingTrains (y:: rest) ts
223
224
225
// Find
the
consequetive
set of states
for
which a set of
trains
are
moving
226
let rec
GetMovingTrainsStates
ts sl rsl tdl =
227
match sl with
228
| [] -> [],rsl
229
| [x] -> [],x:: rsl
230
| x::y::xs -> let mts = GetMovingTrains (x::[y]) Set.empty
231
match
mts = ts with
232
| true
-> GetMovingTrainsStates
ts (y::xs) (x
::rsl) tdl
233
| false
-> sl ,x:: rsl
234
235
123
==PAGE:125==
236
// Splits a state
list
into
states
list
containing
set of
trains
moving
237
let rec
SplitStateListSingleSignal
sl asl tdl =
238
match sl with
239
| [] -> List.rev asl
240
| x::y::xs -> let ts = GetMovingTrains (x::[y]) Set.empty
241
let nsl ,rsl = GetMovingTrainsStates
ts (y::xs
) [x] tdl
242
SplitStateListSingleSignal
nsl (( List.rev rsl
)::asl) tdl
243
| _ -> failwith "Failed in
SplitStateListSingleSignal
input
list
length
wrong"
244
245
// Find
the
locations
being
used in state
list
246
let rec
GetNextLocations
sl ts tdl
locs
rsl =
247
match sl with
248
| [] -> locs ,List.rev rsl
249
| x::xs -> let tm = GetTrainMap x
250
let sm = GetSignalMap x
251
let ls = Set.fold (fun s t -> Set.add (Map.find
t tm) s) Set.empty ts
252
let b = Set.exists (fun t -> let l = Map.find t
tm
253
let d =
GetTrainDirection t tdl
254
match
Map.tryFind (
l,d) sm with
255
| Some(x) when x ->
true
256
| Some(_) -> false
257
| None
-> true) ts
258
match b with
259
| true
-> GetNextLocations
xs ts tdl (locs+ls) (
x::rsl)
260
| false
-> locs + ls ,List.rev (x:: rsl)
261
262
// Find
splitpoint
in list
where
the
states
can
merge
263
let rec
FindSplitStateSingleSignal
sl locs ts rsl =
264
match sl with
265
| [] -> sl ,rsl
266
| x::xs -> let tm = GetTrainMap x
267
let ls = Set.fold (fun s v -> Set.add (Map.find
v tm) s) Set.empty ts + (Map.fold (fun s (k,_) v -> if v then
Set.add k s else s) Set.empty ( GetSignalMap x))
268
match
Set.isEmpty (Set.intersect
ls locs) with
269
| false
-> let ntm = match
rsl
with
270
| [] -> tm
271
| y::ys -> Set.fold (fun s
v -> Map.add v (Map.find v tm) s) ( GetTrainMap y) ts
272
let sm = GetSignalMap x
273
let rm = GetSwitchRailMap x
274
let ns = UpdateState x sm ntm rm
275
FindSplitStateSingleSignal
xs locs ts
(ns:: rsl)
276
| true
-> let b = List.forall (fun v -> let tm =
GetTrainMap v
277
let ls =
124
==PAGE:126==
Set.fold (fun s v -> Set.add (Map.find v tm) s) Set.empty ts
278
Set.
isEmpty (Set.intersect
ls locs)) xs
279
match b with
280
| false
-> let ntm = match
rsl
with
281
| [] -> tm
282
| y::ys -> Set.
fold (fun s v -> Map.add v (Map.find v tm) s) ( GetTrainMap y)
ts
283
let sm = GetSignalMap x
284
let rm = GetSwitchRailMap x
285
let ns = UpdateState x sm
ntm rm
286
FindSplitStateSingleSignal
xs locs ts (ns::rsl)
287
| true
-> sl , rsl
288
289
// Merges
two
state
list
together
by
merging
the signal , train
and
switchrail
maps at given
locations
290
let rec
MergeSingleSignal
sl msl rsl ts =
291
match sl with
292
| [] -> [],List.fold (fun s v -> v::s) rsl msl
293
| x::xs -> match
msl
with
294
| [] -> sl ,rsl
295
| y::ys -> let smx = GetSignalMap x
296
let tmx = GetTrainMap x
297
let rmx = GetSwitchRailMap x
298
299
let smy = GetSignalMap y
300
let tmy = GetTrainMap y
301
let rmy = GetSwitchRailMap y
302
303
let
locs = Set.fold (fun s v -> Set.
add (Map.find v tmy) s) Set.empty ts
304
let nsm = Map.fold (fun s k v -> if
Set.contains (fst k) locs
then
Map.add k v s else s) smx smy
305
let ntm = Map.fold (fun s k v -> if
Set.contains v locs
then
Map.add k v s else s) tmx tmy
306
let nrm = Map.fold (fun s (l1 ,l2 ,l3 ,d
) v -> if (Set.contains
l1 locs || Set.contains
l2 locs || Set.
contains
l3 locs) then
Map.add (l1 ,l2 ,l3 ,d) v s else s) rmx rmy
307
308
let ns = UpdateState x nsm ntm nrm
309
MergeSingleSignal
xs (List.tail
msl)
(ns:: rsl) ts
310
311
// Finds
where in state
list
given
trains
are not
moving
312
let rec
StatesWithoutTrains
sl ts =
313
match sl with
314
| [] -> []
315
| x::xs -> let mts = GetMovingTrains (sl) Set.empty
316
match
Set.isEmpty (Set.intersect
ts mts) with
317
| true
-> sl
318
| false
-> StatesWithoutTrains
xs ts
319
320
// Merges
the
second
element (list) of the
list
into
the first ,
updates
the
second
element
and
recurse
over
the
tail of the
125
==PAGE:127==
list
321
let rec
MergingSingleSignal l r tdl =
322
match l with
323
| [] -> r
324
| x::[]
-> x@r
325
| x::y:: rest
-> // Get the
state
list
that
should
have
something
merged
into it
326
let sl = x
327
// Get the
state
list
that
should be merged
into sl
328
let msl = y
329
330
// Get the
trains
moving in sl
331
let s = if List.isEmpty r then
List.head sl
else
List.head r
332
let ts = GetMovingTrains (sl) Set.empty
333
let
allTs = List.fold (fun s (v,_) -> Set.
add v s) Set.empty
tdl
334
match ts = allTs
with
335
| true
-> let nx = List.tail sl
336
let nr = (List.head sl::r)
337
MergingSingleSignal (nx::y:: rest)
nr tdl
338
| false
->
// Get the
trains
moving in msl
339
let mts = GetMovingTrains
msl
Set.empty
340
341
// Get the
locations
that
are
used
for the
next
train
ride in msl , and the
states it is
moving
in
342
let locs ,ms = GetNextLocations
msl mts tdl Set.empty []
343
344
let ats = List.fold (fun s (v,_
) -> if Set.contains v mts
then s else
Set.add v s) Set.empty
tdl
345
// Find
the
place to merge
into
sl
346
let sl1 , rsl =
FindSplitStateSingleSignal
sl locs (ats) r
347
// Put the non -mergeable
states
in the
result
list
348
let r = rsl
349
// Merge ms into sl , nsl = part
of sl that
has not yet
been
merged
into
350
let nsl ,rsl1 =
MergeSingleSignal
sl1 ms r mts
351
// Get the
part of the
list
msl
that is not yet
merged
352
let
nmsl = List.rev (List.take
(List.length y - List.length ms) (List.rev y))
353
match nsl ,nmsl
with
354
| [] ,[] -> match
rest
with
355
| [] -> rsl1
356
| z::zs -> let ny =
StatesWithoutTrains (List.rev
rsl1) ( GetMovingTrains z Set.
empty)
126
==PAGE:128==
357
let
nrsl
= List.rev (List.take (List.length
rsl1 - List.length ny) (List
.rev
rsl1))
358
MergingSingleSignal (ny::z::zs) nrsl
tdl
359
360
| [],_ -> let
nrsl = List.fold
(fun s v -> v::s) rsl1
nmsl
361
match
rest
with
362
| [] -> nrsl
363
| z::zs -> let ny =
StatesWithoutTrains (List.rev
nrsl) ( GetMovingTrains z Set.
empty)
364
let
nrsl =
List.rev (List.take (List.length
nrsl - List.length ny) (List.
rev
nrsl))
365
MergingSingleSignal (ny::z::zs) nrsl
tdl
366
| _ ,[]
-> let
nmsl1 = List.init
(List.length
nsl) (fun v -> List.head
rsl1)
367
let
nsl1 = nsl
368
let _,nrsl =
MergeSingleSignal
nsl1
nmsl1
rsl1
mts
369
match
rest
with
370
| [] -> nrsl
371
| z::zs -> let ny =
StatesWithoutTrains (List.rev
nrsl) ( GetMovingTrains z Set.
empty)
372
let
nrsl =
List.rev (List.take (List.length
nrsl - List.length ny) (List.
rev
nrsl))
373
MergingSingleSignal (ny::z::zs) nrsl
tdl
374
| _,_ -> MergingSingleSignal (
nsl :: nmsl :: rest) rsl1
tdl
375
376
377
// Find
the
point at which
the
solution
can be split
then
merges
the
lists
together
378
let
MergeStatesSingleSignal
sl tdl =
379
let x = SplitStateListSingleSignal
sl [] tdl
380
let y = MergingSingleSignal x [] tdl
381
y
382
383
//
Postprocess
function
for
solution
found
using
the
single
signal
turn on
function
384
let
CombineSolutionSingleSignal
sl tdl =
385
let slr = List.rev sl
386
let r = TurnOffSignals
slr [] Set.empty
387
let rr = List.rev r
388
let r = MergeStatesSingleSignal
rr tdl
389
r
127
==PAGE:129==
BFSSolver.fs
1 namespace
Railways
2
3 open
System
4 open
Railways.Types
5 open
Railways.Preprocess
6 open
Railways. PriorityQueue
7 open
Railways. Postprocess
8
9 module
BestFirst =
10
11
12
13
let
Solve rn =
14
15
// Used to time
preprocess
16
let
stopWatchPre = System. Diagnostics .Stopwatch.StartNew ()
17
18
//
Getting
global
variable
from
preprocessing
19
let Trains , RWGLeft , RWGRight , Goals , DistanceMap , Pathss ,
SwitchRails , Priorities , MaxPrio , SM , s = InitiateState
rn
20
21
//
Datastructures
used to keep
track of
current
goals
and
paths
22
let
mutable
Goal = List.head
Goals
23
let
mutable
Paths = List.head
Pathss
24
//
Datastructure
used to keep
track of
visited
and non
visited
states
25
let
mutable
unexploredStatesController : PriorityQueue = Q
([])
26
// Datastructure
used to keep
track of
already
seen
states
27
let
mutable
generatedStates :Set <StateID > = Set.empty
28
29
stopWatchPre .Stop ()
30
let
pretime = stopWatchPre .Elapsed. TotalMilliseconds
31
32
//
Function
for
hashing a state
33
let
hash s =
34
match s with
35
| S(_,sm ,tm ,rm ,_) -> Map.fold (fun s (a,b,c,d) v ->
hash(s,a,b,c,d,v)) (Map.fold (fun s t l -> hash(s,t,l)) (Map.
fold (fun s (l,d) b -> hash(s,l,d,b)) 0 sm) tm) rm
36
| _ -> failwith "Cannot
hash N"
37
38
//
Function
used to update
the
goal
map
39
let rec
NextGoal g gl =
40
match gl with
41
| [] -> failwith "F"
42
| x::xs when x = g -> List.head xs
43
| _::xs -> NextGoal g xs
44
45
// Checks
if all
trains
are in their
goal
positions
if so
checks
if final
goal if so
returns
true
otherwise
updates
goals
46
let
IsSolved (s:State) =
47
match s with
48
| S(_,_,tm ,_,_) -> match
Map.forall (fun t l -> Map.
128
==PAGE:130==
find t tm = l) Goal
with
49
| true
-> if List.last
Goals = Goal
50
then
51
true
52
else
53
Goal
<- NextGoal
Goal
Goals
54
Paths
<- NextGoal
Paths
Pathss
55
unexploredStatesController
<- Q([s])
56
false
57
| false
-> false
58
| _ -> failwith "IsSolved N"
59
60
// Checks
if it is
posible
to move
from l1 to l2 in
current
state
61
let
CanMove
((l1 ,l2):Rail) (d:Direction) (sm:SignalMap) (rm
: SwitchRailMap ) =
62
let l = l1
63
let r = (l1 ,l2)
64
let b1 = match
Map.tryFind (l,d) sm with
65
| None
-> true
66
| Some(x) -> x
67
let b2 = match
Map.tryFind (r) SwitchRails
with
68
| None
-> true
69
| Some(x) -> let (_,lx ,_,_) = x
70
let b = Map.find x rm
71
if lx = l1 || lx = l2 then b else
not b
72
73
b1 && b2
74
75
// Finds
all
next
possible
locations
from a given
location
and
going in a given
direction
in the
current
state
76
let
NextPosition (p:Location) (d:Direction) sm rm =
77
let x = match d with
78
| L -> Map.find p RWGLeft
79
| R -> Map.find p RWGRight
80
List.fold (fun s v -> if
CanMove (p,v) d sm rm then v::
s else s) [] x
81
82
//
Changes a switchrail
from up to down
and
reversed
83
let
ChangeSwitchRail (sr: SwitchRail ) (rm: SwitchRailMap ) =
84
let b = Map.find sr rm
85
Map.add sr (not b) rm
86
87
// Get the
locations
assosiated
for a given
switchrail
status
88
let
getSwitchRailLocation
((l1 ,l2 ,l3 ,d): SwitchRail ) rm = if
Map.find (l1 ,l2 ,l3 ,d) rm then
set [l1;l2] else
set [l1;l3]
89
90
// Finds
all
currently
reachable
locations
from a train
91
let
ReachableLocations (t:Train) (d:Direction) (sm:
SignalMap) (tm:TrainMap) (rm: SwitchRailMap ) =
92
let l = Map.find t tm
93
let rec
Locations (ls:Set <Location >) =
129
==PAGE:131==
94
let nls = Set.fold (fun s p -> let y = (
NextPosition p d sm rm)
95
let x = (List.fold (
fun st va -> Set.add va st) Set.empty y)
96
Set.union x s) ls ls
97
match ls = nls
with
98
| true
-> ls
99
| _ -> Locations
nls
100
Locations (Set.ofList ( NextPosition l d sm rm))
101
102
// Checks
if trains
can
reach
other
trains , can go off
path
or reach
location
reachable
by other
train , if true
state is
not
safe
103
let
IsSafeState (s:State) =
104
match s with
105
| S(_,sm ,tm ,rm ,_) -> let arl = List.fold (fun s (t,d)
-> Map.add t ( ReachableLocations t d sm tm rm) s) Map.empty
Trains
106
List.forall (fun (t,d) -> //
Locations
currently
picked
train
can
reach
107
let rl =
Map.find t arl
108
109
//
Locations
which
other
trains
can
reach
110
let rls
= Map.fold (fun s k v -> if k = t
111
then
112
s
113
else
114
Set.union s v) Set.empty
arl
115
116
let
tloc
= Set.remove (Map.find t tm) (Preprocess .valueSet
tm)
117
let
locs
= Set.union
rls
tloc
118
119
//
Should
not be able to reach
another
train , or same
location
as
other
train
120
let b1 =
Set.intersect
rl locs = Set.empty
121
122
//
Should
not be able to reach
location
not on path
123
let b2 =
Set.difference
rl (Map.find t Paths) = Set.empty
124
125
b1 && b2
) Trains
126
| _ -> failwith " IsSafeState N"
127
128
130
==PAGE:132==
129
// Calculates
total
distance
for the
trains
current
position
to their
goal
times
the
priority
of the
train
130
let
CalculateHeuristic (tm:TrainMap) =
131
List.fold (fun s (t,d) -> let l = Map.find t tm
132
let g = Map.find t Goal
133
if l = g then s else
134
135
s + (Map.find (l,g)
DistanceMap)
136
) 0 Trains
137
138
139
// Add
state to the
queues if it has not
been
added
before
140
let
AddState s h =
141
if not (Set.contains h generatedStates )
142
then
unexploredStatesController
<- PriorityQueue .insert
s unexploredStatesController
143
generatedStates
<- Set.add h generatedStates
144
true
145
else
false
146
147
// Checks
if state is smart
and
safe
before
adding to queue
148
let
AddNewState (s:State) t =
149
let h = hash s
150
match t with
151
| Conductor
-> AddState s h
152
| Controller
when ( IsSafeState s)
-> AddState s h
153
| _ -> false
154
155
156
//
Creates
the
control
program
from a state by
backtracking
the
states
157
let rec
ToControlProgram s =
158
match s with
159
|S(_,sm ,tm ,rm ,x) when x <> N -> s:: ToControlProgram x
160
| _ -> [s]
161
162
163
// Function
for
finding
all new
states by moving
trains in a
given
state
164
let
GenerateConductorStates s =
165
match s with
166
| S(_,sm ,tm ,rm ,_) -> let nTm = List.fold (fun st (t,d)
-> let l = Map.find t st
167
let ps = NextPosition l d sm rm
168
let p = if List.isEmpty
ps then l else
List.head ps
169
Map.add t p st) tm Trains
170
171
172
let h = CalculateHeuristic
nTm
173
let nS = S(h,sm ,nTm ,rm ,s)
174
if
AddNewState
nS
Conductor
then
set [nS] else
Set.empty
175
| _ -> failwith "Cannot
generate
new
states
from N"
131
==PAGE:133==
176
177
178
// Finds
all
switchrails
connected
to given
location
and
direction
179
let
TrainToSwitchRail (l,d) =
180
let lns = match d with
181
| L -> Map.find l RWGLeft
182
| R -> Map.find l RWGRight
183
let rs = List.fold (fun s v -> (l,v)::s) [] lns
184
List.fold (fun s v -> match
Map.tryFind v SwitchRails
with
185
| Some(sr) -> Set.add sr s
186
| _ -> s) Set.empty rs
187
188
// Function
to open
entire
path
for a train , turn on all
signals
and
switch
switchrails
correctly
189
let
OpenPath t d (sm:SignalMap) (rm: SwitchRailMap ) =
190
let ps = Map.find t Paths
191
let nSm = Set.fold (fun s v -> let
sign = (v,d)
192
match
Map.tryFindKey (
fun k _ -> k=sign) sm with
193
| Some(x) when
fst x <>
Map.find t Goal
->
Map.add x true s
194
| _ -> s) sm ps
195
let nRm = Set.fold (fun s v -> let rwg = match d with
196
| R ->
RWGRight
197
| L -> RWGLeft
198
let nps = Set.intersect
(Set.ofList (Map.find v rwg)) ps
199
match
Set.isEmpty
nps
with
200
| true
-> s
201
| false
-> let np = Set.
minElement
nps
202
match
CanMove
(v,np) d nSm rm with
203
| true
-> s
204
| false
->
let sr = Map.find (v,np) SwitchRails
205
ChangeSwitchRail
sr s) rm ps
206
nSm ,nRm
207
208
// Helper
function
to find
all
switch
rail
combinations
209
let rec
AllCom r sr =
210
match sr with
211
| []
-> r
212
| x::y::xs -> let r = Set.fold (fun s v -> Set.add (Set
.add y v) (Set.add (Set.add x v) s)) Set.empty r
213
AllCom r xs
214
| _ -> failwith "AllCom
failed"
215
216
// The
game
217
let rec
ControllerTurn _ =
218
match
PriorityQueue .isEmpty
unexploredStatesController
with
132
==PAGE:134==
219
| true
-> failwith "No more
states to
explore"
220
| _ -> let (s,p) = PriorityQueue .pop
unexploredStatesController
221
unexploredStatesController
<- p
222
match
IsSolved s with
223
| true
->
( ToControlProgram s)
224
| _ ->
match s with
225
| S(x,_,tm ,rm ,_) ->
// Find
the
highest
priority
of train
not yet in goal
226
let
curPrio =
Map.fold (fun s k v -> if Map.find k tm <> Map.find k Goal
then
max s v else s) 0 Priorities
227
// Pick
train
with
just
found
priority , or if lower
than non -priority
value
pick
all
remaining
trains
228
let
prioTs =
if
MaxPrio
>= curPrio
229
then
List.fold (fun s (t,_) -> if Map.find t tm <> Map.find t
Goal
then
Set.add t s else s) Set.empty
Trains
230
else
Map.fold (fun s k v -> if v = curPrio
&& Map.find k tm <>
Map.find k Goal
then
Set.add k s else s) Set.empty
Priorities
231
// Find
signals
near
all
picked
trains
232
let
tSigs =
List.fold (fun s (t,d) -> if (( Set.contains t prioTs) && (Map.
containsKey (Map.find t tm ,d) SM)) then (Map.find t tm ,d)::s
else s) [] Trains
233
// Find
location
and
direction
of picked
trains
234
let td = Set.
fold (fun s t -> match
List.tryFind (fun (t1 ,d1) -> t1 = t)
Trains
with
235
| Some(_,d) -> (Map.find t tm ,d)::s
236
| _ -> s ) [] prioTs
237
let tls = List
.fold (fun s (l,_) -> Set.add l s) Set.empty td
238
match
Set.
count
prioTs
with
239
| x when
MaxPrio
>= curPrio
->
240
241
//
Create
new
states. One for
each
signal
near
train
being
turned
on
242
let s1
= List.fold (fun sx v -> let nSm = (Map.add (v) true SM)
243
let h = CalculateHeuristic
tm
244
let nS = S(h,nSm ,tm ,rm ,s)
245
if
AddNewState
nS
Controller
then
Set.
add nS sx else sx) Set.empty
tSigs
133
==PAGE:135==
246
247
248
// Find
switchrails
near
trains
249
let tSR
= List.fold (fun s v -> Set.fold (fun sx vx -> Set.add (vx ,v)
sx) Set.empty ( TrainToSwitchRail v) + s) Set.empty td
250
251
//
Create
new
states
one for
each
switchrail
change
252
let s2
= Set.fold (fun sx (sr ,sg) -> let nRm = ChangeSwitchRail
sr rm
253
let
locs = ( getSwitchRailLocation
sr nRm)
254
let b = not (Set.isEmpty (Set.
intersect
locs
tls))
255
256
let h = CalculateHeuristic
tm
257
let nSm = Map.add sg true SM
258
let nS = S(h,nSm ,tm ,nRm ,s)
259
if b &&
AddNewState
nS
Controller
then
Set.add nS sx else sx) Set.empty
tSR
260
261
ConductorTurn (s1+s2)
262
// The
block
below
should
be
uncommented
if the
version
opening
all
signals
on paths
for
trains
should be used
263
//
####################################
264
// START OF
OPENING
ENTIRE
PATHS
SOLVER
265
(*
266
| _ -> //
Uncomment
line
below
for
single
agent
entire
paths
solver
267
// let
prioTs = set [Set.minElement
prioTs]
268
let nSm
,nRm = Set.fold (fun (ssm ,srm) t ->
let t = t
269
let _,d = List.find (fun (
l,d) -> l = Map.find t tm) td
270
OpenPath t d ssm srm) (SM ,
rm) prioTs
271
let h =
CalculateHeuristic
tm
272
let nS
= S(h,nSm ,tm ,nRm ,s)
273
let s1
= if
AddNewState
nS
Controller
then
set [nS] else
Set.empty
134
==PAGE:136==
274
ConductorTurn
s1
275
*)
276
// END OF
OPENING
ENTIRE
PATHS
SOLVER
277
//
##################################
278
279
// The
block
below
should
be
uncommented
if the
version
opening
only
signals
at same
location
as trains
should be used
280
//
#####################################
281
// START OF
SINGLE
SIGNAL
OPENING
SOLVER
282
//(*
283
| _ ->
284
285
let
tSigs =
[List.head
tSigs]
286
// Create
one new
states
for all
relevant
signals
being
turned on
287
let nSm =
List.fold (fun s v -> Map.add v true s) SM tSigs
288
let h =
CalculateHeuristic
tm
289
let nS = S(
h,nSm ,tm ,rm ,s)
290
let s1 = if
AddNewState
nS
Controller
then
set [nS] else
Set.empty
291
// Find
switchrails
near
picked
trains
292
let tSR =
List.fold (fun s v -> Set.fold (fun sx vx -> Set.add (vx ,v) sx)
Set.empty ( TrainToSwitchRail v) + s) Set.empty
tSigs
293
// Create
new
states
one for
each
relevant
switchrail
combination
change
294
let srs =
Set.fold (fun s (sr ,_) -> (sr ,true)::(sr ,false)::s) [] tSR
295
if List.
length
srs > 0
296
then
297
let x =
set [List.item 0 srs]
298
let y =
set [List.item 1 srs]
299
let srs
= List.tail (List.tail
srs)
300
let
srcom = AllCom (Set.add x (Set.add y Set.empty)) srs
301
302
let s2
= Set.fold (fun ss v -> let nRm = Set.fold (fun sx (sr ,b) ->
Map.add sr b sx) rm v
303
let
locs = Set.fold (fun sx (sr ,_) ->
sx + ( getSwitchRailLocation
sr nRm)) Set.empty v
135
==PAGE:137==
304
let h = CalculateHeuristic
tm
305
let nS = S(h,nSm ,tm ,nRm ,s)
306
let b = not (Set.isEmpty (Set.intersect
locs
tls))
307
if b &&
AddNewState
nS
Controller
then
Set.add nS ss else ss) Set.empty
srcom
308
ConductorTurn (s1+s2)
309
else
310
ConductorTurn
s1
311
//*)
312
// END OF
SINGLE
SIGNAL
OPENING
SOLVER
313
//
###################################
314
315
| _ -> failwith " ControllerTurn "
316
317
and
ConductorTurn (states:Set <State >) =
318
match
Set.isEmpty
states
with
319
| true
-> ControllerTurn 0
320
| _ -> let
nStates = Set.fold (fun (s) v -> s +
GenerateConductorStates v) (Set.empty) states
321
ConductorTurn
nStates
322
323
324
325
// Used to time
the
solving
326
let
stopWatchSolve = System. Diagnostics .Stopwatch.StartNew
()
327
328
unexploredStatesController
<- PriorityQueue .insert s
unexploredStatesController
329
AddNewState s Conductor |> ignore
330
let r = ControllerTurn 0
331
let x = Set.count
generatedStates
332
333
stopWatchSolve .Stop ()
334
let
solvetime = stopWatchSolve .Elapsed. TotalMilliseconds
335
336
let
postresult = r
337
// Used to time
the
postprocessing
338
let
stopWatchPost = System. Diagnostics .Stopwatch.StartNew ()
339
// Line
below
used
multiagent
postprocess
for
opening
entire
paths
solver
340
//let
postresult = if Set.contains 0 (valueSet
Priorities )
then r else
CombineSolutionEntirePath r
341
342
// Line
below
used
multiagent
postprocess
for
opening
single
signal
solver
343
let
postresult = if Set.contains 0 (valueSet
Priorities)
then r else
CombineSolutionSingleSignal r Trains
136
==PAGE:138==
344
345
stopWatchPost .Stop ()
346
let
posttime = stopWatchPost .Elapsed. TotalMilliseconds
347
348
let rec
CheckSafeness l =
349
match l with
350
| [] -> ()
351
| x::xs -> match
IsSafeState x with
352
| false
-> Console.WriteLine(sprintf "
Something
went
wrong ")
353
CheckSafeness
xs
354
| true
-> CheckSafeness
xs
355
356
357
Paths
<- Map.fold (fun s k v -> Map.add k (v+Map.find k s)
s) Paths (List.head
Pathss)
358
CheckSafeness
postresult
359
(postresult ,x,pretime ,solvetime ,posttime)
137
==PAGE:139==
Program.fs
1 open
System
2 open
Railways.Types
3 open
Railways.BestFirst
4 open
Railways.LoadFiles
5 open
Railways.SaveFiles
6 open
Railways.Preprocess
7 open
System.IO
8
9
10 [<EntryPoint >]
11 let
main
args =
12
printfn "Arguments
passed to
function : %A" args
13
14
let
filename = match
Array.tryHead
args
with
15
| Some(n) -> n
16
| None
-> Console.WriteLine (sprintf "No
filename
entered ")
17
"Lyngby"
18
19
let
path = match
Array.tryItem 1 args
with
20
| Some(n) -> n
21
| None
-> Console.WriteLine (sprintf "No
directory
entered ")
22
__SOURCE_DIRECTORY__
23
24
let
GameOver s =
25
match s with
26
| S(_,_,tm ,_,_) -> let
locs1 = valueSet
tm
27
let
locs2 = Set.ofSeq
locs1
28
Seq.length
locs1
<> Set.count
locs2
29
| _ -> failwith "GAMEOVER"
30
31
let rn = try
32
LoadRailway (filename + ". txt ") path
33
with
34
| _ -> ([] ,[] ,[] ,[] ,[])
35
36
37
let result ,gs ,pretime ,solvetime ,posttime = try
38
Solve rn
39
with
40
| _ ->
([] ,0 ,0.0 ,0. ,0.0)
41
42
43
44
saveSolution
result (pretime+solvetime+posttime) gs
filename
path
45
46
List.iter (fun s -> if (GameOver s) then
Console.WriteLine(
sprintf "Something
went
wrong
GameOver ") else ()) (List.rev
result)
47
48
Console.WriteLine (sprintf "Time
spend in
preprocess : %A (ms)"
(pretime))
138
==PAGE:140==
49
Console.WriteLine (sprintf "Time
spend in
solving : %A (ms)" (
solvetime))
50
Console.WriteLine (sprintf "Time
spend in
postprocess : %A (ms)
" (posttime))
51
Console.WriteLine(sprintf "Length of
solution : %A" (List.
length
result))
52
Console.WriteLine(sprintf "Generated
states : %A" (gs))
53
54
if gs = 0 then 1 else 0
139
==PAGE:141==
Java
Direction.java
1 package
utils;
2
3 public
enum
Direction {
4
5
Left ,Right ,Up ,Down;
6
7
@Override
8
public
String
toString () {
9
switch(this) {
10
case
Left: return "L";
11
case
Right: return "R";
12
case Up: return "U";
13
case
Down: return "D";
14
default: return "NULL ";
15
16
}
17
}
18
19 }
140
==PAGE:142==
Train.java
1 package
utils;
2 // Class
used to model
trains
3 public
class
Train {
4
5
private
int
startLocation ;
6
private
int
endLocation ;
7
private
Direction
direction;
8
9
public
Train(int start , int end , Direction
direction) {
10
setStartLocation (start);
11
setEndLocation (end);
12
this. setDirection (direction);
13
}
14
15
public
int
getStartLocation () {
16
return
startLocation ;
17
}
18
19
public
void
setStartLocation (int
startLocation ) {
20
this. startLocation = startLocation ;
21
}
22
23
public
int
getEndLocation () {
24
return
endLocation;
25
}
26
27
public
void
setEndLocation (int
endLocation ) {
28
this. endLocation = endLocation ;
29
}
30
31
public
Direction
getDirection () {
32
return
direction;
33
}
34
35
public
void
setDirection (Direction
direction) {
36
this.direction = direction;
37
}
38
39 }
141
==PAGE:143==
Rail.java
1 package
utils;
2 // Class
used to model a rail
3 public
class
Rail
implements
Comparable <Rail >{
4
5
private
int
start;
6
private
int end;
7
8
public
Rail(int start , int end) {
9
this.setStart(start);
10
this.setEnd(end);
11
}
12
13
public
int
getStart () {
14
return
start;
15
}
16
17
public
void
setStart(int
start) {
18
this.start = start;
19
}
20
21
public
int
getEnd () {
22
return
end;
23
}
24
25
public
void
setEnd(int end) {
26
this.end = end;
27
}
28
29
@Override
30
public
boolean
equals(Object o) {
31
if (!(o instanceof
Rail)) {
32
return
false;
33
}
34
Rail r = (Rail) o;
35
36
return (start == r.getStart () && end == r.getEnd ())|| (
start == r.getEnd () && end == r.getStart ());
37
}
38
39
40
@Override
41
public
int
compareTo(Rail r) {
42
int r1s = Math.min(start , end);
43
int r1e = Math.max(start , end);
44
int r2s = Math.min(r.start , r.end);
45
int r2e = Math.max(r.start , r.end);
46
if(r1s == r2s) {
47
return r1e -r2e;
48
}
49
return r1s -r2s;
50
}
51
52 }
142
==PAGE:144==
Signal.java
1 package
utils;
2 // Class
used to model
signals
3 public
class
Signal
implements
Comparable <Signal >{
4
5
private
int
location;
6
private
Direction
direction;
7
8
public
Signal(int
location , Direction
direction) {
9
setLocation(location);
10
setDirection (direction);
11
}
12
13
public
int
getLocation () {
14
return
location;
15
}
16
public
void
setLocation (int
location) {
17
this.location = location;
18
}
19
public
Direction
getDirection () {
20
return
direction;
21
}
22
public
void
setDirection (Direction
direction) {
23
this.direction = direction;
24
}
25
26
@Override
27
public
boolean
equals(Object o) {
28
if (!(o instanceof
Signal)) {
29
return
false;
30
}
31
Signal s = (Signal) o;
32
33
//
Compare
the
data
members
and
return
accordingly
34
return (location
== s. getLocation () &&
direction
== s.
getDirection ());
35
}
36
37
@Override
38
public
int
compareTo(Signal o) {
39
int l = o. getLocation ();
40
Direction d = o. getDirection ();
41
if(l ==
location) {
42
return d ==
Direction.Left ? 1 :
-1;
43
}
44
return
location -l;
45
}
46
47 }
143
==PAGE:145==
SwitchRail.java
1 package
utils;
2 // Class
used to model a switch -rail
3 public
class
SwitchRail
implements
Comparable <SwitchRail >{
4
5
private
int
start;
6
private
int
end1;
7
private
int
end2;
8
private
Direction d;
9
10
public
SwitchRail(int start , int end1 , int end2 , Direction d) {
11
this.setStart(start);
12
this.setEnd1(end1);
13
this.setEnd2(end2);
14
this. setDirection (d);
15
}
16
17
public
int
getStart () {
18
return
start;
19
}
20
21
public
void
setStart(int
start) {
22
this.start = start;
23
}
24
25
public
int
getEnd1 () {
26
return
end1;
27
}
28
29
public
void
setEnd1(int
end1) {
30
this.end1 = end1;
31
}
32
33
public
int
getEnd2 () {
34
return
end2;
35
}
36
37
public
void
setEnd2(int
end2) {
38
this.end2 = end2;
39
}
40
41
public
Direction
getDirection () {
42
return d;
43
}
44
45
public
void
setDirection (Direction d) {
46
this.d = d;
47
}
48
49
@Override
50
public
int
compareTo(SwitchRail r) {
51
52
return
start -r.start;
53
}
54
55
144
==PAGE:146==
56
57 }
145
==PAGE:147==
ButtonType.java
1 package
utils;
2 // Enum
used to keep
track of
selected
button in editor
3 public
enum
ButtonType {
4
5
Rail ,
6
Signal ,
7
Train ,
8
SwitchRail ,
9
RemoveRail ,
10
RemoveSignal ,
11
RemoveTrain ,
12
RemoveSwitchRail ;
13 }
146
==PAGE:148==
BackButtonListener.java
1 package
utils;
2
3 import
java.awt.event.ActionEvent ;
4 import
java.awt.event. ActionListener ;
5
6 import
javax.swing.JFrame;
7
8 import
main.MainFrame;
9
10 public
class
BackButtonListener
implements
ActionListener {
11
12
private
JFrame
frame;
13
14
public
BackButtonListener (JFrame
frame) {
15
this.frame = frame;
16
}
17
18
//
Function
to return to main menu , by remove
current
frame
and
creating
new
main
menu
frame
19
@Override
20
public
void
actionPerformed ( ActionEvent e) {
21
new
MainFrame ();
22
frame.dispose ();
23
24
}
25
26 }
147
==PAGE:149==
DrawingPanel.java
1 package
utils;
2
3 import
java.awt.Color;
4 import
java.awt.Graphics;
5 import
java.util.ArrayList;
6 import
java.util.List;
7
8 import
javax.swing.JPanel;
9 // Class
used as basis
for the
drawing
panel in the
editor
and
solution
shower
10 //
Responsable
to
drawing
the
right
panel , with
the
rail
way
11 public
class
DrawingPanel
extends
JPanel{
12
13
protected
int
WIDTH = 100;
14
protected
int
HEIGHT = 100;
15
16
protected
int [][]
rails = new int[HEIGHT ][ WIDTH ];
17
protected
int [][]
signals = new int[HEIGHT ][ WIDTH ];
18
protected
List <Train > trainList;
19
protected
List <Rail > railList;
20
protected
List <Signal > signalList ;
21
protected
List <SwitchRail > switchRailList ;
22
23
public
static
double
xOffset = 0;
24
public
static
double
yOffset = 0;
25
26
27
28
protected
int
highlightI =
-1;
29
protected
int
highlightJ =
-1;
30
31
public
DrawingPanel () {
32
for(int i = 0; i < HEIGHT; i++) {
33
for(int j = 0; j < WIDTH; j++) {
34
rails[i][j] = 0;
35
signals[i][j] = 0;
36
37
}
38
}
39
40
this. setBackground (Color. LIGHT_GRAY );
41
trainList = new
ArrayList <Train >();
42
signalList = new
ArrayList <Signal >();
43
railList = new
ArrayList <Rail >();
44
switchRailList = new
ArrayList <SwitchRail >();
45
repaint ();
46
}
47
48
@Override
49
protected
void
paintComponent (Graphics g) {
50
51
super. paintComponent (g);
52
53
xOffset = (this.getSize ().width -20) /(WIDTH -1);
54
yOffset = (this.getSize ().height -20) /( HEIGHT -1);
148
==PAGE:150==
55
56
// Draw
the
black
dots
57
g.setColor(Color.black);
58
for(int i = 0; i < HEIGHT; i++) {
59
for(int j = 0; j < WIDTH; j++) {
60
int x = (int)(5+j*xOffset);
61
int y = (int)(5+i*yOffset);
62
if(rails[i][j] != 0) {
63
g.setColor(Color.red);
64
65
}else {
66
g.setColor(Color.black);
67
}
68
g.fillOval(x, y, 6, 6);
69
}
70
}
71
72
73
74
drawRails(g);
75
drawSwitchRails (g);
76
drawSignals(g);
77
drawTrains(g);
78
drawHighlight (g);
79
80
81
}
82
83
84
private
void
drawRails(Graphics g) {
85
g.setColor(Color.red);
86
for(Rail
rail : railList) {
87
int
startI = Math.floorDiv(rail.getStart (), WIDTH);
88
int
startJ = rail.getStart ()%WIDTH;
89
int
endI = Math.floorDiv(rail.getEnd (), WIDTH);
90
int
endJ = rail.getEnd ()%WIDTH;
91
92
int
startX = (int)(5+ startJ*xOffset)+3;
93
int
startY = (int)(5+ startI*yOffset)+3;
94
int
endX = (int)(5+ endJ*xOffset)+3;
95
int
endY = (int)(5+ endI*yOffset)+3;
96
97
g.drawLine(startX , startY , endX , endY);
98
}
99
}
100
101
protected
void
drawSwitchRails (Graphics g) {
102
for(SwitchRail
rail : switchRailList ) {
103
int
startI = Math.floorDiv(rail.getStart (), WIDTH);
104
int
startJ = rail.getStart ()%WIDTH;
105
int
end1I = Math.floorDiv(rail.getEnd1 (), WIDTH);
106
int
end1J = rail.getEnd1 ()%WIDTH;
107
int
end2I = Math.floorDiv(rail.getEnd2 (), WIDTH);
108
int
end2J = rail.getEnd2 ()%WIDTH;
109
110
int
startX = (int)(5+ startJ*xOffset)+3;
111
int
startY = (int)(5+ startI*yOffset)+3;
149
==PAGE:151==
112
int
end1X = (int)(5+ end1J*xOffset)+3;
113
int
end1Y = (int)(5+ end1I*yOffset)+3;
114
int
end2X = (int)(5+ end2J*xOffset)+3;
115
int
end2Y = (int)(5+ end2I*yOffset)+3;
116
117
g.drawLine(startX , startY , end1X , end1Y);
118
g.drawLine(startX , startY , end2X , end2Y);
119
}
120
}
121
122
protected
void
drawSignals (Graphics g) {
123
g.setColor(Color.black);
124
for(int i = 0; i < HEIGHT; i++) {
125
for(int j = 0; j < WIDTH; j++) {
126
if(signals[i][j] == 1) {
127
int x = (int)(5+j*xOffset) -5;
128
int y = (int)(5+i*yOffset) -5;
129
g.drawString ("L", x, y);
130
}else if(signals[i][j] == 2) {
131
int x = (int)(5+j*xOffset)+5;
132
int y = (int)(5+i*yOffset) -5;
133
g.drawString ("R", x, y);
134
}else if(signals[i][j] == 3) {
135
int x = (int)(5+j*xOffset)+5;
136
int y = (int)(5+i*yOffset) -5;
137
g.drawString ("R", x, y);
138
x = (int)(5+j*xOffset) -5;
139
g.drawString ("L", x, y);
140
}
141
}
142
}
143
}
144
145
protected
void
drawTrains(Graphics g) {
146
int c = 0;
147
for(Train
train : trainList) {
148
int
startI = Math.floorDiv(train. getStartLocation (), WIDTH)
;
149
int
startJ = train. getStartLocation ()%WIDTH;
150
int
endI = Math.floorDiv(train. getEndLocation (), WIDTH);
151
int
endJ = train. getEndLocation ()%WIDTH;
152
153
int
startX = (int)(5+ startJ*xOffset) -10;
154
int
startY = (int)(5+ startI*yOffset)+15;
155
int
endX = (int)(5+ endJ*xOffset)+10;
156
int
endY = (int)(5+ endI*yOffset)+15;
157
g.setColor(Color.blue);
158
g.drawString ("T" + c, startX , startY);
159
g.drawString ("t" + c, endX , endY);
160
c++;
161
}
162
}
163
164
private
void
drawHighlight (Graphics g) {
165
g.setColor(Color.yellow);
166
if(highlightI
>= 0) {
167
int x = (int)(5+ highlightJ *xOffset);
150
==PAGE:152==
168
int y = (int)(5+ highlightI *yOffset);
169
g.fillOval(x, y, 6, 6);
170
}
171
}
172
173
public
void
reset () {
174
for(int i = 0; i < HEIGHT; i++) {
175
for(int j = 0; j < WIDTH; j++) {
176
rails[i][j] = 0;
177
signals[i][j] = 0;
178
}
179
}
180
xOffset = (this.getSize ().width -10) /(WIDTH -1);
181
yOffset = (this.getSize ().height -10) /( HEIGHT -1);
182
trainList = new
ArrayList <Train >();
183
railList = new
ArrayList <Rail >();
184
switchRailList = new
ArrayList <SwitchRail >();
185
repaint ();
186
}
187
188
public
int
getWIDTH () {
189
return
WIDTH;
190
}
191
public
int
getHEIGHT () {
192
return
HEIGHT;
193
}
194
195
public
int [][]
getRails (){
196
return
rails;
197
}
198
public
int [][]
getSignals (){
199
return
signals;
200
}
201
public
List <Train > getTrainList (){
202
return
trainList;
203
}
204
public
List <Rail > getRailList () {
205
return
railList;
206
207
}
208
public
List <SwitchRail > getSwitchRailList (){
209
return
switchRailList ;
210
}
211
public
List <Signal > getSignalList () {
212
return
signalList;
213
}
214
215
public
void
setWIDTH(int
width) {
216
WIDTH = width;
217
}
218
public
void
setHEIGHT(int
height) {
219
HEIGHT = height;
220
}
221
222
public
void
setRails(int [][]
rails){
223
this.rails = rails;
224
}
151
==PAGE:153==
225
public
void
setSignals(int [][]
signals){
226
this.signals = signals;
227
}
228
public
void
setTrainList (List <Train > trainList){
229
this.trainList = trainList;
230
}
231
public
void
setRailList (List <Rail > railList) {
232
this.railList = railList;
233
234
}
235
public
void
setSwitchRailList (List <SwitchRail > switchRailList ){
236
this. switchRailList = switchRailList ;
237
}
238
239
public
void
setSignalList (List <Signal > signalList ) {
240
this.signalList = signalList ;
241
242
}
243
//
Function
used to
increase
grid
size of
drawing
panel
244
public
void
increaseSize (Direction d) {
245
int [][]
newRails;
246
int [][]
newSignals;
247
switch (d) {
248
case
Left:
249
newRails = new int[HEIGHT ][ WIDTH +1];
250
newSignals = new int[HEIGHT ][ WIDTH +1];
251
for(int i = 0 ; i < HEIGHT ; i++) {
252
for(int j = 0 ; j < WIDTH ; j++) {
253
newRails[i][j+1]=
rails[i][j];
254
newSignals[i][j+1] = signals[i][j];
255
}
256
newRails[i][0] = 0;
257
newSignals[i][0] = 0;
258
}
259
this.setRails(newRails);
260
this.setSignals(newSignals );
261
262
for(Train t : trainList) {
263
int i = Math.floorDiv(t. getStartLocation (), WIDTH);
264
t. setStartLocation (t. getStartLocation ()+i+1);
265
int m = Math.floorDiv(t. getEndLocation (), WIDTH);
266
t. setEndLocation (t. getEndLocation ()+m+1);
267
}
268
269
for(Rail r : railList) {
270
int i = Math.floorDiv(r.getStart (), WIDTH);
271
r.setStart(r.getStart ()+i+1);
272
int m = Math.floorDiv(r.getEnd (), WIDTH);
273
r.setEnd(r.getEnd ()+m+1);
274
}
275
276
for(Signal s : signalList ) {
277
int i = Math.floorDiv(s. getLocation (), WIDTH);
278
s. setLocation (s. getLocation ()+i+1);
279
}
280
for(SwitchRail
sr : switchRailList ) {
281
int i = Math.floorDiv(sr.getStart (), WIDTH);
152
==PAGE:154==
282
sr.setStart(sr.getStart ()+i+1);
283
int m = Math.floorDiv(sr.getEnd1 (), WIDTH);
284
sr.setEnd1(sr.getEnd1 ()+m+1);
285
int o = Math.floorDiv(sr.getEnd2 (), WIDTH);
286
sr.setEnd2(sr.getEnd2 ()+o+1);
287
}
288
289
290
WIDTH ++;
291
repaint ();
292
break;
293
case
Right :
294
295
newRails = new int[HEIGHT ][ WIDTH +1];
296
newSignals = new int[HEIGHT ][ WIDTH +1];
297
for(int i = 0 ; i < HEIGHT ; i++) {
298
for(int j = 0 ; j < WIDTH ; j++) {
299
newRails[i][j]= rails[i][j];
300
newSignals[i][j] = signals[i][j];
301
}
302
newRails[i][ WIDTH] = 0;
303
newSignals[i][ WIDTH] = 0;
304
}
305
this.setRails(newRails);
306
this.setSignals(newSignals );
307
308
for(Train t : trainList) {
309
int i = Math.floorDiv(t. getStartLocation (), WIDTH);
310
t. setStartLocation (t. getStartLocation ()+i);
311
int m = Math.floorDiv(t. getEndLocation (), WIDTH);
312
t. setEndLocation (t. getEndLocation ()+m);
313
}
314
315
for(Rail r : railList) {
316
int i = Math.floorDiv(r.getStart (), WIDTH);
317
r.setStart(r.getStart ()+i);
318
int m = Math.floorDiv(r.getEnd (), WIDTH);
319
r.setEnd(r.getEnd ()+m);
320
}
321
322
for(Signal s : signalList ) {
323
int i = Math.floorDiv(s. getLocation (), WIDTH);
324
s. setLocation (s. getLocation ()+i);
325
}
326
for(SwitchRail
sr : switchRailList ) {
327
int i = Math.floorDiv(sr.getStart (), WIDTH);
328
sr.setStart(sr.getStart ()+i);
329
int m = Math.floorDiv(sr.getEnd1 (), WIDTH);
330
sr.setEnd1(sr.getEnd1 ()+m);
331
int o = Math.floorDiv(sr.getEnd2 (), WIDTH);
332
sr.setEnd2(sr.getEnd2 ()+o);
333
}
334
335
WIDTH ++;
336
repaint ();
337
break;
338
case Up:
153
==PAGE:155==
339
newRails = new int[HEIGHT +1][ WIDTH ];
340
newSignals = new int[HEIGHT +1][ WIDTH ];
341
for(int i = 0 ; i < HEIGHT ; i++) {
342
for(int j = 0 ; j < WIDTH ; j++) {
343
newRails[i+1][j]= rails[i][j];
344
newSignals[i+1][j] = signals[i][j];
345
newRails [0][j] = 0;
346
newSignals [0][j] = 0;
347
}
348
349
}
350
this.setRails(newRails);
351
this.setSignals( newSignals );
352
353
for(Train t : trainList) {
354
t. setStartLocation (t. getStartLocation ()+WIDTH);
355
t. setEndLocation (t. getEndLocation ()+WIDTH);
356
}
357
358
for(Rail r : railList) {
359
r.setStart(r.getStart ()+WIDTH);
360
r.setEnd(r.getEnd ()+WIDTH);
361
}
362
363
for(Signal s : signalList ) {
364
s. setLocation (s. getLocation ()+WIDTH);
365
}
366
for(SwitchRail
sr : switchRailList ) {
367
sr.setStart(sr.getStart ()+WIDTH);
368
sr.setEnd1(sr.getEnd1 ()+WIDTH);
369
sr.setEnd2(sr.getEnd2 ()+WIDTH);
370
}
371
372
HEIGHT ++;
373
repaint ();
374
break;
375
case
Down:
376
newRails = new int[HEIGHT +1][ WIDTH ];
377
newSignals = new int[HEIGHT +1][ WIDTH ];
378
for(int i = 0 ; i < HEIGHT ; i++) {
379
for(int j = 0 ; j < WIDTH ; j++) {
380
newRails[i][j]= rails[i][j];
381
newSignals[i][j] = signals[i][j];
382
newRails[HEIGHT ][j] = 0;
383
newSignals[HEIGHT ][j] = 0;
384
}
385
386
}
387
this.setRails(newRails);
388
this.setSignals(newSignals );
389
390
HEIGHT ++;
391
repaint ();
392
break;
393
default:
394
break;
395
}
154
==PAGE:156==
396
397
}
398
//
Function
used to
decrease
grid
size of
drawing
panel
399
public
void
decreaseSize (Direction d) {
400
int [][]
newRails;
401
int [][]
newSignals;
402
switch (d) {
403
case
Left:
404
if(WIDTH == 5) {
405
return;
406
}
407
for(int i = 0; i < HEIGHT; i++) {
408
if(rails[i][0] != 0) {
409
return;
410
}
411
}
412
newRails = new int[HEIGHT ][WIDTH -1];
413
newSignals = new int[HEIGHT ][WIDTH -1];
414
for(int i = 0 ; i < HEIGHT ; i++) {
415
for(int j = 0 ; j < WIDTH -1 ; j++) {
416
newRails[i][j]= rails[i][j+1];
417
newSignals[i][j] = signals[i][j+1];
418
}
419
}
420
this.setRails(newRails);
421
this.setSignals(newSignals );
422
423
for(Train t : trainList) {
424
int i = Math.floorDiv(t. getStartLocation (), WIDTH);
425
t. setStartLocation (t. getStartLocation ()-i -1);
426
int m = Math.floorDiv(t. getEndLocation (), WIDTH);
427
t. setEndLocation (t. getEndLocation ()-m -1);
428
}
429
430
for(Rail r : railList) {
431
int i = Math.floorDiv(r.getStart (), WIDTH);
432
r.setStart(r.getStart ()-i -1);
433
int m = Math.floorDiv(r.getEnd (), WIDTH);
434
r.setEnd(r.getEnd ()-m -1);
435
}
436
437
for(Signal s : signalList ) {
438
int i = Math.floorDiv(s. getLocation (), WIDTH);
439
s. setLocation (s. getLocation ()-i -1);
440
}
441
for(SwitchRail
sr : switchRailList ) {
442
int i = Math.floorDiv(sr.getStart (), WIDTH);
443
sr.setStart(sr.getStart ()-i -1);
444
int m = Math.floorDiv(sr.getEnd1 (), WIDTH);
445
sr.setEnd1(sr.getEnd1 ()-m -1);
446
int o = Math.floorDiv(sr.getEnd2 (), WIDTH);
447
sr.setEnd2(sr.getEnd2 ()-o -1);
448
}
449
450
451
WIDTH --;
452
repaint ();
155
==PAGE:157==
453
break;
454
case
Right :
455
if(WIDTH == 5) {
456
return;
457
}
458
for(int i = 0; i < HEIGHT; i++) {
459
if(rails[i][WIDTH -1] != 0) {
460
return;
461
}
462
}
463
newRails = new int[HEIGHT ][WIDTH -1];
464
newSignals = new int[HEIGHT ][WIDTH -1];
465
for(int i = 0 ; i < HEIGHT ; i++) {
466
for(int j = 0 ; j < WIDTH -1 ; j++) {
467
newRails[i][j]= rails[i][j];
468
newSignals[i][j] = signals[i][j];
469
}
470
}
471
this.setRails(newRails);
472
this.setSignals( newSignals );
473
474
for(Train t : trainList) {
475
int i = Math.floorDiv(t. getStartLocation (), WIDTH);
476
t. setStartLocation (t. getStartLocation ()-i);
477
int m = Math.floorDiv(t. getEndLocation (), WIDTH);
478
t. setEndLocation (t. getEndLocation ()-m);
479
}
480
481
for(Rail r : railList) {
482
int i = Math.floorDiv(r.getStart (), WIDTH);
483
r.setStart(r.getStart ()-i);
484
int m = Math.floorDiv(r.getEnd (), WIDTH);
485
r.setEnd(r.getEnd ()-m);
486
}
487
488
for(Signal s : signalList ) {
489
int i = Math.floorDiv(s. getLocation (), WIDTH);
490
s. setLocation (s. getLocation ()-i);
491
}
492
for(SwitchRail
sr : switchRailList ) {
493
int i = Math.floorDiv(sr.getStart (), WIDTH);
494
sr.setStart(sr.getStart ()-i);
495
int m = Math.floorDiv(sr.getEnd1 (), WIDTH);
496
sr.setEnd1(sr.getEnd1 ()-m);
497
int o = Math.floorDiv(sr.getEnd2 (), WIDTH);
498
sr.setEnd2(sr.getEnd2 ()-o);
499
}
500
501
WIDTH --;
502
repaint ();
503
break;
504
case Up:
505
if(HEIGHT
==5) {
506
return;
507
}
508
for(int i = 0; i < WIDTH; i++) {
509
if(rails [0][i] != 0) {
156
==PAGE:158==
510
return;
511
}
512
}
513
newRails = new int[HEIGHT -1][ WIDTH ];
514
newSignals = new int[HEIGHT -1][ WIDTH ];
515
for(int i = 0 ; i < HEIGHT -1 ; i++) {
516
for(int j = 0 ; j < WIDTH ; j++) {
517
newRails[i][j]= rails[i+1][j];
518
newSignals[i][j] = signals[i+1][j];
519
}
520
521
}
522
this.setRails(newRails);
523
this.setSignals( newSignals );
524
525
for(Train t : trainList) {
526
t. setStartLocation (t. getStartLocation ()-WIDTH);
527
t. setEndLocation (t. getEndLocation ()-WIDTH);
528
}
529
530
for(Rail r : railList) {
531
r.setStart(r.getStart ()-WIDTH);
532
r.setEnd(r.getEnd ()-WIDTH);
533
}
534
535
for(Signal s : signalList ) {
536
s. setLocation (s. getLocation ()-WIDTH);
537
}
538
for(SwitchRail
sr : switchRailList ) {
539
sr.setStart(sr.getStart ()-WIDTH);
540
sr.setEnd1(sr.getEnd1 ()-WIDTH);
541
sr.setEnd2(sr.getEnd2 ()-WIDTH);
542
}
543
544
HEIGHT --;
545
repaint ();
546
break;
547
case
Down:
548
if(HEIGHT
==5) {
549
return;
550
}
551
for(int i = 0; i < WIDTH; i++) {
552
if(rails[HEIGHT -1][i] != 0) {
553
return;
554
}
555
}
556
newRails = new int[HEIGHT -1][ WIDTH ];
557
newSignals = new int[HEIGHT -1][ WIDTH ];
558
for(int i = 0 ; i < HEIGHT -1 ; i++) {
559
for(int j = 0 ; j < WIDTH ; j++) {
560
newRails[i][j]= rails[i][j];
561
newSignals[i][j] = signals[i][j];
562
}
563
564
}
565
this.setRails(newRails);
566
this.setSignals(newSignals );
157
==PAGE:159==
567
568
HEIGHT --;
569
repaint ();
570
break;
571
default:
572
break;
573
}
574
575
}
576
577 }
158
==PAGE:160==
MenuPanel.java
1 package
utils;
2
3 import
java.awt.Font;
4
5 import
javax.swing.JLabel;
6 import
javax.swing.JPanel;
7 // Class
used as basis
for
left
menu
panel
for
editor
and
solution
viewer
8 public
class
MenuPanel
extends
JPanel{
9
10
11
public
static
String
fontName = "Lucida
Grande ";
12
public
static
int
fontSize = 16;
13
public
static
Font
normalFont = new
Font(fontName ,Font.PLAIN ,
fontSize);
14
public
static
Font
boldFont = new
Font(fontName ,Font.BOLD ,
fontSize);
15
public
static
Font
bigFont = new
Font(fontName ,Font.PLAIN ,22);
16
17
protected
JLabel
loadLabel = new
JLabel ();
18
protected
String
filename = "";
19
protected
boolean
loaded = false;
20
21
public
void
setLabelMessage (String s) {
22
loadLabel.setText(s);
23
loadLabel. setHorizontalAlignment (JLabel.CENTER);
24
}
25
26
public
String
getFilename () {
27
return
filename;
28
}
29
30
public
void
setFilename (String
filename) {
31
this.filename = filename;
32
}
33
34
public
void
loaded () {}
35
36
public
void
loaded(int length , int
generated , double
time) {}
37
38
public
String
getFilenameLoad () {
39
return
"";
40
}
41
42 }
159
==PAGE:161==
RailwayLoader.java
1 package
utils;
2
3 import
java.io. BufferedReader ;
4
5 import
java.io.File;
6 import
java.io.FileReader ;
7 import
java.nio.file.Path;
8 import
java.nio.file.Paths;
9 import
java.util.ArrayList;
10 import
java.util.List;
11 import
java.util.regex.Matcher;
12 import
java.util.regex.Pattern;
13
14 import
solution. SolutionDrawingPanel ;
15 // Class
used to load in a railway
from a file
and
load in a
solution
16 public
class
RailwayLoader {
17
18
19
public
RailwayLoader () {}
20
//
Function
used to load in a railway
21
public
boolean
loadRailway ( DrawingPanel
drawingPanel , String
title , MenuPanel
menuPanel) {
22
Path
currentRelativePath = Paths.get ("");
23
String p = currentRelativePath . toAbsolutePath ().toString () +"/
Railways /";
24
File
file = new
File(p+title + ". txt ");
25
BufferedReader
reader = null;
26
try {
27
reader = new
BufferedReader (new
FileReader(file));
28
String
line = reader.readLine ();
29
// Load in
locations
30
while (! line.equals (":")) {
31
line = reader.readLine ();
32
33
}
34
// Load in rails
35
List <Rail > railList = new
ArrayList <>();
36
line = reader.readLine ();
37
while (! line.equals (":")) {
38
String [] s = line.split (" ");
39
int
start = Integer.parseInt(s[0]);
40
int end = Integer.parseInt(s[1]);
41
Rail r = new
Rail(start ,end);
42
railList.add(r);
43
line = reader.readLine ();
44
}
45
// Load in switch
rails
46
List <SwitchRail > switchRailList = new
ArrayList <>();
47
line = reader.readLine ();
48
while (! line.equals (":")) {
49
String [] s = line.split (" ");
50
int
start = Integer.parseInt(s[0]);
51
int
end1 = Integer.parseInt(s[1]);
52
int
end2 = Integer.parseInt(s[2]);
160
==PAGE:162==
53
Direction d = s[3]. equals ("L") ? Direction.Left :
Direction.Right;
54
SwitchRail r = new
SwitchRail (start ,end1 , end2 , d);
55
switchRailList .add(r);
56
line = reader.readLine ();
57
}
58
// Load in
signals
59
List <Integer > signalLoc = new
ArrayList <>();
60
List <Direction > signalDir = new
ArrayList <>();
61
line = reader.readLine ();
62
while (! line.equals (":")) {
63
String [] s = line.split (" ");
64
int loc = Integer.parseInt(s[0]);
65
Direction d = s[1]. equals ("L") ? Direction.Left :
Direction.Right;
66
signalLoc.add(loc);
67
signalDir.add(d);
68
line = reader.readLine ();
69
}
70
// Load in trains
71
List <Train > trainList = new
ArrayList <>();
72
line = reader.readLine ();
73
while (! line.equals (":")) {
74
String [] s = line.split (" ");
75
int
start = Integer.parseInt(s[1]);
76
int end = Integer.parseInt(s[2]);
77
Direction d = s[3]. equals ("L") ? Direction.Left :
Direction.Right;
78
Train t = new
Train(start ,end ,d);
79
trainList.add(t);
80
line = reader.readLine ();
81
}
82
line = reader.readLine ();
83
int
width = Integer.parseInt(line);
84
line = reader.readLine ();
85
int
height = Integer.parseInt(line);
86
87
88
int [][]
signals = new int[height ][ width ];
89
List <Signal > signalList = new
ArrayList <>();
90
for(int a = 0; a < signalLoc.size (); a++) {
91
int x = signalLoc.get(a);
92
int i = Math.floorDiv(x, width);
93
int j = x%width;
94
if(signals[i][j] != 0) {
95
signals[i][j] = 3;
96
}else {
97
if(signalDir.get(a) ==
Direction.Left) {
98
signals[i][j] = 1;
99
}else {
100
signals[i][j] = 2;
101
}
102
}
103
signalList.add(new
Signal(signalLoc.get(a),signalDir.get(
a)));
104
105
161
==PAGE:163==
106
}
107
int [][]
rails = new int[height ][ width ];
108
for(Rail r : railList) {
109
int i = Math.floorDiv(r.getStart (), width);
110
int j = r.getStart ()%width;
111
rails[i][j]++;
112
i = Math.floorDiv(r.getEnd (), width);
113
j = r.getEnd ()%width;
114
rails[i][j]++;
115
}
116
117
for(SwitchRail r : switchRailList ) {
118
int i = Math.floorDiv(r.getStart (), width);
119
int j = r.getStart ()%width;
120
rails[i][j] = 3;
121
i = Math.floorDiv(r.getEnd1 (), width);
122
j = r.getEnd1 ()%width;
123
rails[i][j] = 4;
124
i = Math.floorDiv(r.getEnd2 (), width);
125
j = r.getEnd2 ()%width;
126
if(r. getDirection () ==
Direction.Left) {
127
rails[i][j] = 5;
128
}else {
129
rails[i][j] = 6;
130
}
131
}
132
//Set the
loaded
data in the
drawing
panel
133
drawingPanel .reset ();
134
drawingPanel .setWIDTH(width);
135
drawingPanel .setHEIGHT(height);
136
drawingPanel .setRails(rails);
137
drawingPanel .setSignals (signals);
138
drawingPanel . setTrainList (trainList);
139
drawingPanel . setSignalList (signalList );
140
drawingPanel .setRailList (railList);
141
drawingPanel . setSwitchRailList ( switchRailList );
142
143
drawingPanel .repaint ();
144
reader.close ();
145
menuPanel.loaded ();
146
return
true;
147
} catch (Exception
ex) {
148
System.err.print(ex);
149
return
false;
150
}
151
152
}
153
//
Function
used to load in a solution
file
154
public
void
loadSolution (String
title , SolutionDrawingPanel
drawingPanel , MenuPanel
menuPanel) {
155
156
Path
currentRelativePath = Paths.get ("");
157
String p = currentRelativePath . toAbsolutePath ().toString () +"/
Railways /";
158
File
file = new
File(p+title + ". sol ");
159
BufferedReader
reader = null;
160
162
==PAGE:164==
161
int
length = 1;
162
int
generated = 1;
163
double
time = 1.0;
164
165
Pattern
trainPattern = Pattern.compile ("<trains >(.*) ");
166
Pattern
statsPattern = Pattern.compile ("<states >(.*) ");
167
drawingPanel . resetSolution ();
168
try {
169
reader = new
BufferedReader (new
FileReader(file));
170
String
line = reader.readLine ();
171
while(line != null) {
172
Matcher
tMatcher = trainPattern .matcher(line);
173
if(tMatcher.find ()) {
174
String
trains = line;
175
line = reader.readLine ();
176
String
signals = line;
177
line = reader.readLine ();
178
String
rails = line;
179
line = reader.readLine ();
180
181
trains = trains.substring (9, trains.length () -1).
replaceAll ("\\s" ,"");
182
signals = signals.substring (10, signals.length () -1).
replaceAll ("\\s" ,"");
183
rails = rails.substring (8, rails.length () -1). replaceAll
("\\s" ,"");
184
185
String []
trainArray = trains.split (";");
186
List <Integer > trainList = new
ArrayList <>();
187
String []
signalArray = signals.split (";");
188
List <Boolean > signalList = new
ArrayList <>();
189
String []
railArray = rails.split (";");
190
List <Boolean > railList = new
ArrayList <>();
191
192
for(String s : trainArray ) {
193
trainList.add (( Integer.parseInt(s)));
194
}
195
196
for(String s : signalArray ) {
197
if(s.equals ("F")) {
198
signalList .add(false);
199
}else {
200
signalList .add(true);
201
}
202
}
203
for(String s : railArray) {
204
if(s.equals ("F")) {
205
railList.add(false);
206
}else {
207
railList.add(true);
208
}
209
}
210
211
drawingPanel .addState(signalList , trainList , railList);
212
213
}else {
214
Matcher
statsMatcher = statsPattern .matcher(line);
163
==PAGE:165==
215
if( statsMatcher .find ()) {
216
String
states = line;
217
line = reader.readLine ();
218
String
genStates = line;
219
line = reader.readLine ();
220
String
solTime = line;
221
line = reader.readLine ();
222
223
states = states.substring (9).replaceAll ("\\s" ,"");
224
genStates = genStates.substring (12).replaceAll ("\\s
" ,"");
225
solTime = solTime.substring (7). replaceAll ("\\s" ,"");
226
227
length = Integer.parseInt(states);
228
generated = Integer.parseInt(genStates);
229
time = Double. parseDouble (solTime);
230
}else {
231
line = reader.readLine ();
232
}
233
234
}
235
236
}
237
menuPanel.loaded(length , generated , time);
238
239
reader.close ();
240
} catch (Exception
ex) {
241
System.err.println(ex);
242
}
243
244
}
245 }
164
==PAGE:166==
Runner.java
1 package
main;
2
3 //The
main
function
to start
the GUI
4 public
class
Runner {
5
6
7
8
public
static
void
main(String
args []) {
9
10
11
new
MainFrame ();
12
13
14
15
16
17
}
18
19 }
165
==PAGE:167==
MainFrame.java
1 package
main;
2 import
java.awt.Container;
3 import
java.awt.Font;
4 import
java.awt.event.ActionEvent ;
5 import
java.awt.event. ActionListener ;
6
7 import
javax.swing.JButton;
8 import
javax.swing.JFrame;
9 import
javax.swing.JLabel;
10 import
javax.swing. SpringLayout ;
11 // The
frame
for the
main
menu
12 public
class
MainFrame
extends
JFrame {
13
14
public
MainFrame () {
15
16
super (" Railway
Network
GUI ");
17
Container
contentPane = this. getContentPane ();
18
SpringLayout
layout = new
SpringLayout ();
19
contentPane.setLayout(layout);
20
21
22
Font
font = new
Font (" Lucida
Grande",Font.PLAIN ,40);
23
24
JLabel
label = new
JLabel (" Select
one of the
following ");
25
label.setFont(font);
26
label. setHorizontalAlignment (JLabel.CENTER);
27
contentPane.add(label);
28
29
JButton
editorButton = new
JButton ();
30
editorButton .setText (" Edit
railway ");
31
editorButton .setFont(font);
32
editorButton . setHorizontalAlignment (JLabel.CENTER);
33
editorButton . addActionListener (new
EditorButtonListener (
this));
34
contentPane.add( editorButton );
35
36
JButton
solutionButton = new
JButton ();
37
solutionButton .setText (" Show
solution ");
38
solutionButton .setFont(font);
39
solutionButton . setHorizontalAlignment (JLabel.CENTER);
40
solutionButton . addActionListener (new
SolutionButtonListener
(this));
41
contentPane.add( solutionButton );
42
43
44
45
46
47
layout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST , label ,200 ,
SpringLayout .WEST , contentPane );
48
layout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST , label ,-200,
SpringLayout .EAST , contentPane );
49
layout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH , label ,50,
SpringLayout .NORTH , contentPane );
50
166
==PAGE:168==
51
layout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST , editorButton ,200 ,
SpringLayout .WEST , contentPane );
52
layout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST , editorButton ,-200,
SpringLayout .EAST , contentPane );
53
layout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH , editorButton ,50,
SpringLayout .SOUTH , label);
54
55
layout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST , solutionButton ,200 ,
SpringLayout .WEST , contentPane );
56
layout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST , solutionButton
,-200, SpringLayout .EAST , contentPane );
57
layout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH , solutionButton ,50,
SpringLayout .SOUTH , editorButton );
58
59
60
this.pack ();
61
this.setSize (1400 ,
850);
62
this. setLocationRelativeTo (null);
63
64
this. setResizable (false);
65
this. setDefaultCloseOperation (JFrame. EXIT_ON_CLOSE );
66
this.setVisible(true);
67
68
69
}
70
71 }
167
==PAGE:169==
EditorButtonListener.java
1 package
main;
2 import
java.awt.event.ActionEvent ;
3 import
java.awt.event. ActionListener ;
4
5 import
javax.swing. JOptionPane ;
6
7 import
editor. EditorFrame ;
8 //
Listener
for
button to go to editor
window
9 public
class
EditorButtonListener
implements
ActionListener {
10
11
private
MainFrame
frame;
12
13
public
EditorButtonListener (MainFrame
frame) {
14
this.frame = frame;
15
}
16
17
@Override
18
public
void
actionPerformed ( ActionEvent e) {
19
int
height = 0;
20
int
width = 0;
21
22
while(height
<= 4) {
23
try {
24
height = Integer.parseInt( JOptionPane . showInputDialog ("
Height
of
railway (minimum
5): "));
25
}catch(Exception
ex){
26
JOptionPane. showMessageDialog (frame ," Please
enter
valid
number ");
27
}
28
}
29
30
while(width
<= 4) {
31
try {
32
width = Integer.parseInt( JOptionPane . showInputDialog (" Width
of
railway (minimum
5): "));
33
}catch(Exception
ex){
34
JOptionPane. showMessageDialog (frame ," Please
enter
valid
number ");
35
}
36
}
37
38
new
EditorFrame (height ,width);
39
frame.dispose ();
40
41
}
42
43 }
168
==PAGE:170==
SolutionButtonListener.java
1 package
main;
2
3 import
java.awt.event.ActionEvent ;
4 import
java.awt.event. ActionListener ;
5 import
solution. SolutionFrame ;
6 // Lister
for
button to go to
solution
viewer
7 public
class
SolutionButtonListener
implements
ActionListener {
8
9
private
MainFrame
frame;
10
11
12
public
SolutionButtonListener (MainFrame
frame) {
13
this.frame = frame;
14
}
15
16
@Override
17
public
void
actionPerformed ( ActionEvent e) {
18
new
SolutionFrame ();
19
frame.dispose ();
20
21
}
22
23 }
169
==PAGE:171==
ButtonListener.java
1 package
editor;
2 import
java.awt.event.ActionEvent ;
3 import
java.awt.event. ActionListener ;
4
5 import
javax.swing.JButton;
6 import
javax.swing.JComboBox;
7 import
javax.swing. JRadioButton ;
8
9 import
utils.ButtonType;
10 import
utils.Direction;
11
12 // Listener
for
buttons
in editor
menu
panel
13 public
class
ButtonListener
implements
ActionListener {
14
15
private
JButton []
buttons;
16
private
JRadioButton []
radioButtons ;
17
private
JComboBox <String > heightBox;
18
private
EditorDrawingPanel
panel;
19
20
public
ButtonListener (JButton [] buttons , JRadioButton []
radioButtons , JComboBox <String > heightBox , EditorDrawingPanel
panel) {
21
this.buttons = buttons;
22
this. radioButtons = radioButtons ;
23
this.heightBox = heightBox;
24
this.panel = panel;
25
}
26
27
28
29
30
public
void
actionPerformed ( ActionEvent e) {
31
if (e.getSource ()
instanceof
JButton) {
32
JButton
source = (JButton) e.getSource ();
33
for(int i = 0; i < buttons.length; i++) {
34
if(source ==
buttons[i]) {
35
buttons[i]. setFont( EditorMenuPanel .boldFont);
36
for( JRadioButton
rb : radioButtons ) {
37
rb.setVisible (false);
38
}
39
heightBox.setVisible (false);
40
panel. setButtonType (i);
41
if(i == 1) {
42
radioButtons [0]. setSelected (true);
43
radioButtons [1]. setSelected (false);
44
radioButtons [2]. setSelected (true);
45
radioButtons [3]. setSelected (false);
46
radioButtons [0]. setVisible (true);
47
radioButtons [1]. setVisible (true);
48
radioButtons [2]. setVisible (true);
49
radioButtons [3]. setVisible (true);
50
heightBox.setVisible (true);
51
panel. setDirectionLR (Direction.Left);
52
panel. setDirectionUD (Direction.Up);
53
}else if(i == 2) {
170
==PAGE:172==
54
radioButtons [4]. setSelected (true);
55
radioButtons [5]. setSelected (false);
56
radioButtons [4]. setVisible (true);
57
radioButtons [5]. setVisible (true);
58
panel. setDirectionLR (Direction.Left);
59
}
60
}else {
61
buttons[i]. setFont( EditorMenuPanel . normalFont );
62
}
63
}
64
DrawingListener .lastI =
-1;
65
DrawingListener .lastJ =
-1;
66
}else if (e.getSource ()
instanceof
JRadioButton ) {
67
JRadioButton
source = ( JRadioButton ) e.getSource ();
68
if (source ==
radioButtons [0]){
69
radioButtons [0]. setSelected (true);
70
radioButtons [1]. setSelected (false);
71
panel. setDirectionLR (Direction.Left);
72
}else if (source ==
radioButtons [1]){
73
radioButtons [0]. setSelected (false);
74
radioButtons [1]. setSelected (true);
75
panel. setDirectionLR (Direction.Right);
76
}else if (source ==
radioButtons [2]){
77
radioButtons [2]. setSelected (true);
78
radioButtons [3]. setSelected (false);
79
panel. setDirectionUD (Direction.Up);
80
}else if (source ==
radioButtons [3]){
81
radioButtons [2]. setSelected (false);
82
radioButtons [3]. setSelected (true);
83
panel. setDirectionUD (Direction.Down);
84
}else if (source ==
radioButtons [4]) {
85
radioButtons [4]. setSelected (true);
86
radioButtons [5]. setSelected (false);
87
panel. setDirectionLR (Direction.Left);
88
}else if (source ==
radioButtons [5]){
89
radioButtons [4]. setSelected (false);
90
radioButtons [5]. setSelected (true);
91
panel. setDirectionLR (Direction.Right);
92
}
93
}
94
95
}
96
97 }
171
==PAGE:173==
ClearButtonListener.java
1 package
editor;
2 import
java.awt.event.ActionEvent ;
3 import
java.awt.event. ActionListener ;
4 // Listener
for
clear
railway
button
5 public
class
ClearButtonListener
implements
ActionListener {
6
7
private
EditorDrawingPanel
panel;
8
9
public
ClearButtonListener ( EditorDrawingPanel
panel) {
10
this.panel = panel;
11
}
12
13
14
@Override
15
public
void
actionPerformed ( ActionEvent e) {
16
panel.reset ();
17
18
}
19
20 }
172
==PAGE:174==
DecreaseButtonListener.java
1 package
editor;
2
3 import
java.awt.event.ActionEvent ;
4 import
java.awt.event. ActionListener ;
5
6 import
utils.Direction;
7 // Listener
for
decrease
grid
size
button
8 public
class
DecreaseButtonListener
implements
ActionListener {
9
10
private
EditorMenuPanel
menuPanel;
11
private
EditorDrawingPanel
drawingPanel ;
12
13
public
DecreaseButtonListener ( EditorMenuPanel
menuPanel ,
EditorDrawingPanel
drawingPanel ) {
14
this.menuPanel = menuPanel;
15
this. drawingPanel = drawingPanel ;
16
}
17
@Override
18
public
void
actionPerformed ( ActionEvent e) {
19
Direction d = menuPanel. getSizeDirection ();
20
drawingPanel . decreaseSize (d);
21
22
}
23
24 }
173
==PAGE:175==
DrawingListener.java
1 package
editor;
2 import
java.awt.event.MouseEvent;
3 import
java.awt.event. MouseListener ;
4
5 import
utils.ButtonType;
6 // Listener
used
for mouse -event
for
drawing
on the
drawing
panel
7 public
class
DrawingListener
implements
MouseListener {
8
9
private
EditorDrawingPanel
panel;
10
public
static
int
lastI =
-1;
11
public
static
int
lastJ =
-1;
12
13
public
DrawingListener ( EditorDrawingPanel
panel) {
14
this.panel = panel;
15
16
}
17
18
@Override
19
public
void
mouseClicked ( MouseEvent e) {
20
panel.grabFocus ();
21
int x = e.getX ();
22
int y = e.getY ();
23
24
int j = (int) ((x-5 + EditorDrawingPanel .xOffset /2)/
EditorDrawingPanel .xOffset);
25
int i = (int) ((y-5 + EditorDrawingPanel .yOffset /2)/
EditorDrawingPanel .yOffset);
26
if(lastI ==
-1) {
27
if (panel. getButtonType () ==
ButtonType.Signal) {
28
panel.addSignal(i, j);
29
panel. setHighlight (i,j);
30
}else if (panel. getButtonType () ==
ButtonType . RemoveSignal )
{
31
panel. removeSignal (i,j);
32
panel. setHighlight (-1,
-1);
33
}else if (panel. getButtonType () ==
ButtonType . RemoveTrain )
{
34
panel.removeTrain (i, j);
35
panel. setHighlight (-1,
-1);
36
}else if (panel. getButtonType () ==
ButtonType . SwitchRail) {
37
panel. addSwitchRail (i,j);
38
panel. setHighlight (i,j);
39
}else if(panel. getButtonType () ==
ButtonType.
RemoveSwitchRail ) {
40
panel. removeSwitchRail (i,j);
41
panel. setHighlight (i,j);
42
}else{
43
lastI = i;
44
lastJ = j;
45
panel. setHighlight (lastI ,lastJ);
46
}
47
}else {
48
if (panel. getButtonType () ==
ButtonType .Rail) {
49
if( (j == lastJ + 1 || j == lastJ - 1) && (i == lastI) )
{
174
==PAGE:176==
50
panel.addRail(lastI , lastJ , i, j);
51
}
52
}else if (panel. getButtonType () ==
ButtonType .Train) {
53
panel.addTrain(lastI , lastJ , i, j);
54
lastI =
-1;
55
lastJ =
-1;
56
panel. setHighlight (lastI , lastJ);
57
return;
58
}else if(panel. getButtonType () ==
ButtonType. RemoveRail )
{
59
if( (j == lastJ + 1 || j == lastJ - 1) && (i == lastI
|| i == lastI +1 || i == lastI -1 ) ) {
60
panel.removeRail (lastI , lastJ , i, j);
61
}
62
}
63
lastI = i;
64
lastJ = j;
65
panel. setHighlight (lastI ,lastJ);
66
}
67
68
69
70
71
}
72
73
@Override
74
public
void
mousePressed (MouseEvent e) {}
75
76
@Override
77
public
void
mouseReleased ( MouseEvent e) {}
78
79
@Override
80
public
void
mouseEntered (MouseEvent e) {}
81
82
@Override
83
public
void
mouseExited (MouseEvent e) {}
84
85
86
public
void
reset () {
87
panel. setHighlight (-1,
-1);
88
lastI =
-1;
89
lastJ =
-1;
90
91
}
92
93 }
175
==PAGE:177==
EditorComboBoxListener.java
1 package
editor;
2
3 import
java.awt.event.ActionEvent ;
4 import
java.awt.event. ActionListener ;
5
6 import
javax.swing.JComboBox;
7
8 import
utils.MenuPanel;
9 // Listener
for
dropdown
menu
with
switch -rail
height
options
10 public
class
EditorComboBoxListener
implements
ActionListener {
11
12
private
JComboBox <String > list;
13
private
EditorDrawingPanel
panel;
14
15
public
EditorComboBoxListener (JComboBox <String > list ,
EditorDrawingPanel
panel) {
16
this.list = list;
17
this.panel = panel;
18
}
19
20
@Override
21
public
void
actionPerformed ( ActionEvent e) {
22
panel. setSwitchHeight (Integer.parseInt (( String) list.
getSelectedItem ()));
23
24
}
25
26 }
176
==PAGE:178==
EditorDrawingPanel.java
1 package
editor;
2 import
java.awt.Color;
3
4 import
java.awt.Graphics;
5 import
java.awt.event.KeyEvent;
6 import
java.util.ArrayList;
7 import
java.util.List;
8
9 import
javax.swing.JPanel;
10
11 import
utils.ButtonType;
12 import
utils.Direction;
13 import
utils. DrawingPanel ;
14 import
utils.Rail;
15 import
utils.Signal;
16 import
utils.SwitchRail;
17 import
utils.Train;
18
19 // Class
for the
drawingpanel
of the
editor
window
20 public
class
EditorDrawingPanel
extends
DrawingPanel {
21
22
private
DrawingListener
drawingListener ;
23
private
int
switchHeight ;
24
25
private
ButtonType
buttonType = ButtonType.Rail;
26
private
Direction d = Direction.Left;
27
private
Direction p = Direction.Up;
28
29
public
EditorDrawingPanel (int h, int w) {
30
HEIGHT = h;
31
WIDTH = w;
32
drawingListener = new
DrawingListener (this);
33
switchHeight = 1;
34
this. addMouseListener ( drawingListener );
35
36
37
38
}
39
// Function
used to change
selected
button
type
40
public
void
setButtonType (int i) {
41
switch (i) {
42
case 0 :
43
buttonType = ButtonType .Rail;
44
break;
45
case 1 :
46
buttonType = ButtonType . SwitchRail;
47
break;
48
case 2 :
49
buttonType = ButtonType .Signal;
50
break;
51
case 3 :
52
buttonType = ButtonType .Train;
53
break;
54
case 4 :
55
buttonType = ButtonType . RemoveRail;
177
==PAGE:179==
56
break;
57
case 5 :
58
buttonType = ButtonType . RemoveSwitchRail ;
59
break;
60
case 6 :
61
buttonType = ButtonType . RemoveSignal ;
62
break;
63
case 7 :
64
buttonType = ButtonType . RemoveTrain ;
65
break;
66
}
67
68
}
69
// Function
to add
train to
railway
70
public
void
addTrain(int i, int j, int m, int n) {
71
if(rails[i][j] != 0 && rails[m][n] != 0) {
72
int
start = i*WIDTH+j;
73
int end = m*WIDTH+n;
74
Direction d;
75
if(j < n) {
76
d = Direction.Right;
77
}else {
78
d = Direction.Left;
79
}
80
for(Train
train : trainList) {
81
if(train. getStartLocation () == start || train.
getEndLocation () == end) {
82
return;
83
}
84
}
85
Train t = new
Train(start ,end ,d);
86
trainList.add(t);
87
repaint ();
88
}
89
90
}
91
// Function
to
remove
train
from
railway
92
public
void
removeTrain (int i, int j) {
93
int
start = i*WIDTH+j;
94
trainList.removeIf(t -> t. getStartLocation () == start);
95
repaint ();
96
}
97
// Function
to add
signal to
railway
98
public
void
addSignal(int i, int j) {
99
if(rails[i][j] != 0) {
100
if (d ==
Direction.Left) {
101
if(signals[i][j] == 0) {
102
signals[i][j] = 1;
103
}else if(signals[i][j] == 2) {
104
signals[i][j] = 3;
105
}
106
107
}else {
108
if(signals[i][j] == 0) {
109
signals[i][j] = 2;
110
}else if(signals[i][j] == 1) {
111
signals[i][j] = 3;
178
==PAGE:180==
112
}
113
}
114
int loc = i*WIDTH+j;
115
signalList.add(new
Signal(loc , d));
116
repaint ();
117
}
118
119
}
120
// Function
to
remove
signal
from
railway
121
public
void
removeSignal (int i, int j) {
122
signals[i][j] = 0;
123
int loc = i*WIDTH+j;
124
signalList.removeIf(s->s. getLocation () == loc);
125
setHighlight (-1,-1);
126
repaint ();
127
}
128
129
130
// Function
to add
rail to
railway
131
public
void
addRail(int i, int j, int m, int n) {
132
int
start = i*WIDTH+j;
133
int end = m*WIDTH+n;
134
Rail r = new
Rail(start ,end);
135
if(! railList.contains(r)) {
136
if(rails[i][j] == 4 && rails[m][n] == 3) {
137
return;
138
}
139
if(rails[i][j] == 3 && rails[m][n] == 4) {
140
return;
141
}
142
if(rails[i][j] == 5 && n > j) {
143
return;
144
}
145
if(rails[m][n] == 5 && j > n) {
146
return;
147
}
148
if(rails[i][j] == 6 && n < j) {
149
return;
150
}
151
if(rails[m][n] == 6 && j < n) {
152
return;
153
}
154
155
if(( rails[i][j] == 2 && rails[m][n] == 2)) {
156
return;
157
}else {
158
if(rails[i][j] <= 1) {
159
rails[i][j]++;
160
}if(rails[m][n] <= 1) {
161
rails[m][n]++;
162
}
163
railList.add(r);
164
this.repaint ();
165
}
166
167
168
}
179
==PAGE:181==
169
}
170
// Function
to
remove
rail
from
railway
171
public
void
removeRail(int i, int j, int m, int n) {
172
int
start = i*WIDTH+j;
173
int end = m*WIDTH+n;
174
Rail r = new
Rail(start ,end);
175
if(railList.contains(r)) {
176
if(rails[i][j] <= 2) {
177
rails[i][j]--;
178
}
179
if(rails[m][n] <= 2) {
180
rails[m][n]--;
181
}
182
railList.remove(r);
183
signals[i][j] = 0;
184
signals[m][n] = 0;
185
trainList.removeIf(t -> (t. getStartLocation () == start || t.
getEndLocation () == start || t. getStartLocation () == end || t.
getEndLocation () == end));
186
this.repaint ();
187
}
188
189
}
190
// Function
to add switch -rail to
railway
191
public
void
addSwitchRail (int i, int j) {
192
193
if(d ==
Direction.Left && p ==
Direction.Up) {
194
if(j==0 || i-switchHeight <0) {
195
return;
196
}
197
if(rails[i][j] <= 1 && rails[i][j -1]
<= 1 && rails[i-
switchHeight ][j -1]
<= 1) {
198
int
start = i*WIDTH+j;
199
int
end1 = i*WIDTH +(j -1);
200
int
end2 = (i- switchHeight )*WIDTH +(j -1);
201
int loc = (i- switchHeight )*WIDTH +(j);
202
if(railList.contains(new
Rail(start ,end1)) ||
railList.
contains(new
Rail(end2 ,loc))) {
203
return;
204
}
205
rails[i][j] = 3;
206
rails[i][j-1] = 4;
207
rails[i- switchHeight ][j -1] = 5;
208
209
SwitchRail r = new
SwitchRail (start , end1 , end2 , d);
210
switchRailList .add(r);
211
}
212
}else if(d ==
Direction.Left && p ==
Direction.Down) {
213
if(j==0 || i+switchHeight >= HEIGHT) {
214
return;
215
}
216
if(rails[i][j] <= 1 && rails[i][j -1]
<= 1 && rails[i+
switchHeight ][j -1]
<= 1) {
217
int
start = i*WIDTH+j;
218
int
end1 = i*WIDTH +(j -1);
219
int
end2 = (i+ switchHeight )*WIDTH +(j -1);
220
int loc = (i+ switchHeight )*WIDTH +(j);
180
==PAGE:182==
221
if(railList.contains(new
Rail(start ,end1)) ||
railList.
contains(new
Rail(end2 ,loc))) {
222
return;
223
}
224
rails[i][j] = 3;
225
rails[i][j-1] = 4;
226
rails[i+ switchHeight ][j -1] = 5;
227
228
SwitchRail r = new
SwitchRail (start , end1 , end2 , d);
229
switchRailList .add(r);
230
}
231
}else if(d ==
Direction.Right && p ==
Direction.Up) {
232
if(j==WIDTH -1 || i-switchHeight <0) {
233
return;
234
}
235
if(rails[i][j] <= 1 && rails[i][j+1]
<= 1 && rails[i-
switchHeight ][j+1]
<= 1) {
236
int
start = i*WIDTH +(j);
237
int
end1 = i*WIDTH +(j+1);
238
int
end2 = (i- switchHeight )*WIDTH +(j+1);
239
int loc = (i- switchHeight )*WIDTH+j;
240
if(railList.contains(new
Rail(start ,end1)) ||
railList.
contains(new
Rail(end2 ,loc))) {
241
return;
242
}
243
rails[i][j] = 3;
244
rails[i][j+1] = 4;
245
rails[i- switchHeight ][j+1] = 6;
246
247
SwitchRail r = new
SwitchRail (start , end1 , end2 , d);
248
switchRailList .add(r);
249
}
250
}else if(d ==
Direction.Right && p ==
Direction.Down) {
251
if(j==WIDTH -1 || i+switchHeight >= HEIGHT) {
252
return;
253
}
254
if(rails[i][j] <= 1 && rails[i][j+1]
<= 1 && rails[i+
switchHeight ][j+1]
<= 1) {
255
int
start = i*WIDTH +(j);
256
int
end1 = i*WIDTH +(j+1);
257
int
end2 = (i+ switchHeight )*WIDTH +(j+1);
258
int loc = (i+ switchHeight )*WIDTH+j;
259
if(railList.contains(new
Rail(start ,end1)) ||
railList.
contains(new
Rail(end2 ,loc))) {
260
return;
261
}
262
rails[i][j] = 3;
263
rails[i][j+1] = 4;
264
rails[i+ switchHeight ][j+1] = 6;
265
266
SwitchRail r = new
SwitchRail (start , end1 , end2 , d);
267
switchRailList .add(r);
268
}
269
}
270
repaint ();
271
}
272
// Function
to
remove
switch -rail
from
railway
181
==PAGE:183==
273
public
void
removeSwitchRail (int i, int j) {
274
int
start = i*WIDTH +(j);
275
for(SwitchRail r : switchRailList ) {
276
if(r.getStart () == start) {
277
int
iEnd1 = Math.floorDiv(r.getEnd1 (), WIDTH);
278
int
jEnd1 = r.getEnd1 ()%WIDTH;
279
if(jEnd1 < j) {
280
if(jEnd1 > 0 && rails[i][j -2] > 0) {
281
rails[iEnd1 ][ jEnd1] = 1;
282
}else {
283
rails[iEnd1 ][ jEnd1] = 0;
284
}
285
if(j < WIDTH - 1 && rails[i][j+1] > 0) {
286
rails[i][j] = 1;
287
}else {
288
rails[i][j] = 0;
289
}
290
}else if(jEnd1 > j) {
291
if(j > 0 && rails[i][j -1] > 0) {
292
rails[i][j] = 1;
293
}else {
294
rails[i][j] = 0;
295
}
296
if(jEnd1 < WIDTH - 1 && rails[iEnd1 ][ jEnd1 +1] > 0) {
297
rails[iEnd1 ][ jEnd1] = 1;
298
}else {
299
rails[iEnd1 ][ jEnd1] = 0;
300
}
301
}
302
303
304
305
int
iEnd2 = Math.floorDiv(r.getEnd2 (), WIDTH);
306
int
jEnd2 = r.getEnd2 ()%WIDTH;
307
308
if(jEnd2 < j) {
309
if(iEnd2 < i) {
310
if(jEnd2 > 0 && rails[i -1][j -2] > 0) {
311
rails[iEnd2 ][ jEnd2] = 1;
312
}else {
313
rails[iEnd2 ][ jEnd2] = 0;
314
}
315
}else {
316
if(jEnd2 > 0 && rails[i+1][j -2] > 0) {
317
rails[iEnd2 ][ jEnd2] = 1;
318
}else {
319
rails[iEnd2 ][ jEnd2] = 0;
320
}
321
}
322
323
}else if(jEnd2 > j) {
324
if(iEnd2 < i) {
325
if(jEnd2 < WIDTH
-1 && rails[i -1][j+2] > 0) {
326
rails[iEnd2 ][ jEnd2] = 1;
327
}else {
328
rails[iEnd2 ][ jEnd2] = 0;
329
}
182
==PAGE:184==
330
}else {
331
if(jEnd2 < WIDTH
-1 && rails[i+1][j+2] > 0) {
332
rails[iEnd2 ][ jEnd2] = 1;
333
}else {
334
rails[iEnd2 ][ jEnd2] = 0;
335
}
336
}
337
}
338
339
signals[i][j] = 0;
340
signals[iEnd1 ][ jEnd1] = 0;
341
signals[iEnd2 ][ jEnd2] = 0;
342
trainList.removeIf(t -> t. getStartLocation () == r.getStart
() || t. getStartLocation () == r.getEnd1 () || t. getStartLocation
() == r.getEnd2 () || t. getEndLocation () == r.getStart () || t.
getEndLocation () == r.getEnd1 () || t. getEndLocation () == r.
getEnd2 ());
343
switchRailList .remove(r);
344
break;
345
346
}
347
}
348
repaint ();
349
}
350
// Function
used to set
highlight
on
selected
dot in grid
351
public
void
setHighlight (int i, int j) {
352
highlightI = i;
353
highlightJ = j;
354
repaint ();
355
}
356
357
// Function
used to remove
everything
from
grid
358
public
void
reset () {
359
super.reset ();
360
drawingListener .reset ();
361
repaint ();
362
363
}
364
365
public
void
setSwitchHeight (int h) {
366
switchHeight = h;
367
368
}
369
370
public
void
setDirectionLR (Direction d) {
371
this.d = d;
372
373
}
374
375
public
void
setDirectionUD (Direction d) {
376
this.p = d;
377
378
}
379
380
public
ButtonType
getButtonType () {
381
return
buttonType;
382
}
183
==PAGE:185==
383
384
385
386 }
184
==PAGE:186==
EditorFileComboBoxListener.java
1 package
editor;
2
3 import
java.awt.event.ActionEvent ;
4 import
java.awt.event. ActionListener ;
5
6 import
javax.swing.JComboBox;
7 // Listener
for the
dropdown
menu of
railways
8 public
class
EditorFileComboBoxListener
implements
ActionListener {
9
10
private
JComboBox <String > list;
11
private
EditorMenuPanel
panel;
12
13
public
EditorFileComboBoxListener (JComboBox <String > list ,
EditorMenuPanel
panel) {
14
this.list = list;
15
this.panel = panel;
16
}
17
18
@Override
19
public
void
actionPerformed ( ActionEvent e) {
20
panel. setFilenameLoad (list. getSelectedItem ().toString ());
21
22
}
23
24 }
185
==PAGE:187==
EditorFrame.java
1 package
editor;
2
3 import
java.awt.Container;
4 import
javax.swing.JFrame;
5 import
javax.swing. SpringLayout ;
6 // The
frame
for the
editor
window
7 public
class
EditorFrame
extends
JFrame{
8
9
public
EditorDrawingPanel
drawingPanel ;
10
11
public
EditorFrame(int h, int w) {
12
13
super (" Railway
Network
GUI ");
14
Container
contentPane = this. getContentPane ();
15
SpringLayout
layout = new
SpringLayout ();
16
contentPane.setLayout(layout);
17
18
drawingPanel = new
EditorDrawingPanel (h,w);
19
EditorMenuPanel
menuPanel = new
EditorMenuPanel (this);
20
21
contentPane.add(menuPanel);
22
contentPane.add( drawingPanel );
23
24
25
26
27
// Make
the
layout
look
nice
28
layout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST , menuPanel ,
29
5,
30
SpringLayout .WEST , contentPane );
31
32
layout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH , menuPanel ,
33
5,
34
SpringLayout .NORTH , contentPane );
35
36
layout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .SOUTH , menuPanel ,
37
-5,
38
SpringLayout .SOUTH , contentPane );
39
40
layout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST , menuPanel ,
41
240,
42
SpringLayout .WEST , contentPane );
43
44
layout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST , drawingPanel ,
45
5,
46
SpringLayout .EAST , menuPanel);
47
48
layout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH , drawingPanel ,
49
5,
50
SpringLayout .NORTH , contentPane );
51
52
layout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST , contentPane ,
53
5,
54
SpringLayout .EAST , drawingPanel );
55
186
==PAGE:188==
56
layout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .SOUTH , contentPane ,
57
5,
58
SpringLayout .SOUTH , drawingPanel );
59
60
61
62
63
// Fix
frame
stuff
64
this.pack ();
65
this.setSize (1400 ,
850);
66
this. setLocationRelativeTo (null);
67
68
this. setResizable (false);
69
this. setDefaultCloseOperation (JFrame. EXIT_ON_CLOSE );
70
this.setVisible(true);
71
72
73
}
74
75 }
187
==PAGE:189==
EditorMenuPanel.java
1 package
editor;
2 import
java.awt.Color;
3 import
java.awt.Font;
4 import
java.awt.event.ActionEvent ;
5 import
java.awt.event. ActionListener ;
6 import
java.io.File;
7 import
java.io. FilenameFilter ;
8 import
java.nio.file.Path;
9 import
java.nio.file.Paths;
10
11 import
javax.swing.JButton;
12 import
javax.swing.JComboBox;
13 import
javax.swing.JLabel;
14 import
javax.swing.JPanel;
15 import
javax.swing. JRadioButton ;
16 import
javax.swing.JTextField ;
17 import
javax.swing. SpringLayout ;
18
19 import
solution. SolutionListListener ;
20 import
utils. BackButtonListener ;
21 import
utils.Direction;
22 import
utils.MenuPanel;
23 // The
menu
panel
for the
editor
window
24 public
class
EditorMenuPanel
extends
MenuPanel{
25
26
27
private
String
filenameLoad ;
28
private
Direction
sizeDirection = Direction.Right;
29
30
public
EditorMenuPanel ( EditorFrame
frame) {
31
32
this. setBackground (Color. LIGHT_GRAY .brighter ());
33
SpringLayout
menuLayout = new
SpringLayout ();
34
this.setLayout(menuLayout );
35
36
37
JLabel
menuLabel = new
JLabel (" Create or edit
railway ");
38
menuLabel.setFont(bigFont);
39
this.add(menuLabel);
40
41
//For
editing
railway
42
43
JButton
railButton = new
JButton ();
44
railButton.setText (" Add
rail(s)");
45
railButton.setFont(boldFont);
46
this.add(railButton);
47
48
JButton
switchRailButton = new
JButton ();
49
switchRailButton .setText (" Add
switch
rail(s)");
50
switchRailButton .setFont( normalFont );
51
this.add( switchRailButton );
52
53
JRadioButton
leftSwitchButton = new
JRadioButton ();
54
leftSwitchButton .setText (" Left ");
55
leftSwitchButton .setFont( normalFont );
188
==PAGE:190==
56
this.add( leftSwitchButton );
57
58
JRadioButton
rightSwitchButton = new
JRadioButton ();
59
rightSwitchButton .setText (" Right ");
60
rightSwitchButton .setFont( normalFont);
61
this.add( rightSwitchButton );
62
63
JRadioButton
upSwitchButton = new
JRadioButton ();
64
upSwitchButton .setText ("Up");
65
upSwitchButton .setFont(normalFont );
66
this.add( upSwitchButton );
67
68
JRadioButton
downSwitchButton = new
JRadioButton ();
69
downSwitchButton .setText (" Down ");
70
downSwitchButton .setFont( normalFont );
71
this.add( downSwitchButton );
72
73
String []
heightOptions = {"1" ,"2" ,"3" ,"4" ,"5"};
74
75
JComboBox <String > heightBox = new
JComboBox <String >(
heightOptions );
76
heightBox. setSelectedIndex (0);
77
frame. drawingPanel . setSwitchHeight (1);
78
79
heightBox.setFont( normalFont );
80
heightBox. addActionListener (new
EditorComboBoxListener (
heightBox , frame. drawingPanel ));
81
this.add(heightBox);
82
heightBox.setVisible (false);
83
84
JButton
signalButton = new
JButton ();
85
signalButton .setText (" Add
signal(s)");
86
signalButton .setFont( normalFont );
87
this.add( signalButton );
88
89
JRadioButton
leftButton = new
JRadioButton ();
90
leftButton.setText (" Left ");
91
leftButton.setFont( normalFont );
92
this.add(leftButton );
93
94
JRadioButton
rightButton = new
JRadioButton ();
95
rightButton.setText (" Right ");
96
rightButton.setFont( normalFont);
97
this.add(rightButton );
98
99
JButton
trainButton = new
JButton ();
100
trainButton.setText (" Add
train(s)");
101
trainButton.setFont( normalFont);
102
this.add(trainButton );
103
104
JButton
removeRailButton = new
JButton ();
105
removeRailButton .setText (" Remove
rail ");
106
removeRailButton .setFont( normalFont );
107
this.add( removeRailButton );
108
109
JButton
removeSwitchRailButton = new
JButton ();
110
removeSwitchRailButton .setText (" Remove
switch
rail ");
189
==PAGE:191==
111
removeSwitchRailButton .setFont( normalFont);
112
this.add( removeSwitchRailButton );
113
114
JButton
removeSignalButton = new
JButton ();
115
removeSignalButton .setText (" Remove
signal ");
116
removeSignalButton .setFont( normalFont);
117
this.add( removeSignalButton );
118
119
JButton
removeTrainButton = new
JButton ();
120
removeTrainButton .setText (" Remove
train ");
121
removeTrainButton .setFont( normalFont);
122
this.add( removeTrainButton );
123
124
JButton
clearButton = new
JButton ();
125
clearButton.setText (" Clear ");
126
clearButton.setFont( normalFont);
127
this.add(clearButton );
128
129
JLabel
borderLabel1 = new
JLabel ("
___________________________ ");
130
borderLabel1 . setHorizontalAlignment (JLabel.CENTER);
131
borderLabel1 .setFont( normalFont );
132
this.add( borderLabel1 );
133
134
JButton []
buttons = {railButton ,switchRailButton ,
signalButton ,trainButton ,removeRailButton ,
removeSwitchRailButton ,removeSignalButton , removeTrainButton };
135
JRadioButton []
radioButtons = {leftSwitchButton ,
rightSwitchButton ,upSwitchButton ,downSwitchButton ,leftButton ,
rightButton };
136
ButtonListener
buttonListener = new
ButtonListener (buttons ,
radioButtons ,heightBox ,frame. drawingPanel );
137
for( JRadioButton b : radioButtons ) {
138
b. addActionListener ( buttonListener );
139
b.setVisible(false);
140
}
141
for(JButton b : buttons) {
142
b. addActionListener ( buttonListener );
143
}
144
ClearButtonListener
clearListener = new
ClearButtonListener
(frame. drawingPanel );
145
clearButton. addActionListener ( clearListener );
146
147
148
149
//For
changing
grid
size
150
151
JButton
increaseButton = new
JButton ();
152
increaseButton .setText (" Increase ");
153
increaseButton .setFont(normalFont );
154
increaseButton . addActionListener (new
IncreaseButtonListener
(this , frame. drawingPanel ));
155
this.add( increaseButton );
156
157
JButton
decreaseButton = new
JButton ();
158
decreaseButton .setText (" Decrease ");
159
decreaseButton .setFont(normalFont );
190
==PAGE:192==
160
decreaseButton . addActionListener (new
DecreaseButtonListener
(this , frame. drawingPanel ));
161
this.add( decreaseButton );
162
163
164
165
JRadioButton
leftSizeButton = new
JRadioButton ();
166
leftSizeButton .setText (" Left ");
167
leftSizeButton .setFont(normalFont );
168
this.add( leftSizeButton );
169
170
JRadioButton
rightSizeButton = new
JRadioButton ();
171
rightSizeButton .setText (" Right ");
172
rightSizeButton .setFont( normalFont );
173
rightSizeButton . setSelected (true);
174
this.add( rightSizeButton );
175
176
JRadioButton
upSizeButton = new
JRadioButton ();
177
upSizeButton .setText ("Up");
178
upSizeButton .setFont( normalFont );
179
this.add( upSizeButton );
180
181
JRadioButton
downSizeButton = new
JRadioButton ();
182
downSizeButton .setText (" Down ");
183
downSizeButton .setFont(normalFont );
184
this.add( downSizeButton );
185
186
JRadioButton []
sizeButtons = {leftSizeButton ,
rightSizeButton ,upSizeButton , downSizeButton };
187
188
GridSizeButtonListener
gridSizeListener = new
GridSizeButtonListener (this , sizeButtons );
189
for( JRadioButton
rb : sizeButtons ) {
190
rb. addActionListener ( gridSizeListener );
191
}
192
193
JLabel
borderLabel2 = new
JLabel ("
___________________________ ");
194
borderLabel2 . setHorizontalAlignment (JLabel.CENTER);
195
borderLabel2 .setFont( normalFont );
196
this.add( borderLabel2 );
197
198
199
//For
loading
and
saving
railways
200
201
loadLabel = new
JLabel ();
202
loadLabel.setFont( normalFont );
203
this.add(loadLabel);
204
205
206
Path
currentRelativePath = Paths.get ("");
207
String s = currentRelativePath . toAbsolutePath ().toString () +"/
Railways /";
208
File f = new
File(s);
209
File []
railwayFiles = f.listFiles(new
FilenameFilter () {
210
public
boolean
accept(File dir , String
name) {
211
return
name.endsWith (". txt ");
191
==PAGE:193==
212
}
213
});
214
215
String []
fileOptions = new
String[ railwayFiles .length ];
216
for(int i = 0; i < railwayFiles .length; i++) {
217
String
file = railwayFiles [i]. getName ();
218
fileOptions[i] = file.substring (0, file.length () -4);
219
}
220
221
JComboBox <String > fileBox = new
JComboBox <String >(
fileOptions);
222
fileBox. setSelectedIndex (0);
223
filenameLoad = fileBox. getSelectedItem ().toString ();
224
225
226
fileBox.setFont(normalFont );
227
fileBox. addActionListener (new
EditorFileComboBoxListener (
fileBox , this));
228
this.add(fileBox);
229
230
JButton
loadButton = new
JButton ();
231
loadButton.setText (" Load
railway ");
232
loadButton.setFont( normalFont );
233
this.add(loadButton);
234
235
JTextField
filenameField = new
JTextField (" Railway
name ");
236
filenameField .setFont( normalFont);
237
TextFieldListener
tfListener = new
TextFieldListener (this ,
filenameField );
238
filenameField . getDocument (). addDocumentListener (tfListener )
;
239
this.add( filenameField );
240
241
JButton
saveButton = new
JButton ();
242
saveButton.setText (" Save
railway ");
243
saveButton.setFont( normalFont );
244
this.add(saveButton );
245
246
JButton
backButton = new
JButton ();
247
backButton.setText (" Return to menu ");
248
backButton.setFont( normalFont );
249
backButton. addActionListener (new
BackButtonListener (frame))
;
250
this.add(backButton );
251
252
253
254
255
SaveButtonListener
saveListener = new
SaveButtonListener (
this , frame. drawingPanel );
256
saveButton. addActionListener ( saveListener );
257
LoadButtonListener
loadListener = new
LoadButtonListener (
this , frame. drawingPanel );
258
loadButton. addActionListener ( loadListener );
259
260
261
192
==PAGE:194==
262
// Make
menu
layout
look
nice
263
// Layout
of label
264
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH , menuLabel , 6,
SpringLayout .NORTH , this);
265
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST ,
menuLabel ,-5,
SpringLayout .EAST ,
this);
266
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST ,
menuLabel , 5,
SpringLayout .WEST ,
this);
267
268
// Layout of rail
button
269
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH , railButton , 6,
SpringLayout .SOUTH , menuLabel);
270
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST ,
railButton ,-5,
SpringLayout .EAST ,
this);
271
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST ,
railButton , 5,
SpringLayout .WEST , this);
272
273
// Layout of
switchrail
button
274
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH ,
switchRailButton , 6, SpringLayout .SOUTH , railButton );
275
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST ,
switchRailButton ,-5, SpringLayout .EAST ,
this);
276
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST ,
switchRailButton , 5, SpringLayout .WEST , this);
277
278
// Layout of left
and
right
switch
button
279
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH ,
leftSwitchButton , 6, SpringLayout .SOUTH , switchRailButton );
280
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH ,
rightSwitchButton , 6, SpringLayout .SOUTH , switchRailButton );
281
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST ,
rightSwitchButton ,-50, SpringLayout .EAST ,
this);
282
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST ,
leftSwitchButton , 50, SpringLayout .WEST ,
this);
283
284
// Layout of up and
down
switch
button
285
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH , upSwitchButton
, 6, SpringLayout .SOUTH , leftSwitchButton );
286
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH ,
downSwitchButton , 6, SpringLayout .SOUTH , rightSwitchButton );
287
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST ,
downSwitchButton ,-50, SpringLayout .EAST ,
this);
288
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST ,
upSwitchButton
, 50, SpringLayout .WEST ,
this);
289
290
// Layout of
heightBox
291
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH , heightBox , 6,
SpringLayout .SOUTH , upSwitchButton );
292
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST ,
heightBox ,-5,
SpringLayout .EAST ,
this);
293
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST ,
heightBox , 5,
SpringLayout .WEST , this);
294
295
// Layout of signal
button
296
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH , signalButton ,
6, SpringLayout .SOUTH , heightBox);
297
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST ,
signalButton
193
==PAGE:195==
,-5, SpringLayout .EAST ,
this);
298
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST ,
signalButton ,
5, SpringLayout .WEST ,
this);
299
300
// Layout of signal
left
and
right
301
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH , leftButton , 6,
SpringLayout .SOUTH , signalButton );
302
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH , rightButton ,
6, SpringLayout .SOUTH , signalButton );
303
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST ,
rightButton
,-50, SpringLayout .EAST ,
this);
304
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST ,
leftButton ,
50, SpringLayout .WEST ,
this);
305
306
// Layout of train
button
307
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH , trainButton ,
6, SpringLayout .SOUTH , leftButton);
308
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST ,
trainButton
,-5, SpringLayout .EAST ,
this);
309
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST ,
trainButton ,
5, SpringLayout .WEST ,
this);
310
311
// Layout of remove
rail
button
312
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH ,
removeRailButton , 6, SpringLayout .SOUTH , trainButton );
313
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST ,
removeRailButton ,-5, SpringLayout .EAST ,
this);
314
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST ,
removeRailButton , 5, SpringLayout .WEST , this);
315
316
// Layout of remove
rail
button
317
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH ,
removeSwitchRailButton , 6, SpringLayout .SOUTH , removeRailButton )
;
318
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST ,
removeSwitchRailButton ,-5, SpringLayout .EAST ,
this);
319
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST ,
removeSwitchRailButton , 5, SpringLayout .WEST , this);
320
321
// Layout of remove
signal
button
322
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH ,
removeSignalButton , 6, SpringLayout .SOUTH ,
removeSwitchRailButton );
323
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST ,
removeSignalButton ,-5, SpringLayout .EAST ,
this);
324
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST ,
removeSignalButton , 5, SpringLayout .WEST ,
this);
325
326
// Layout of remove
train
button
327
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH ,
removeTrainButton , 6, SpringLayout .SOUTH , removeSignalButton );
328
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST ,
removeTrainButton ,-5, SpringLayout .EAST ,
this);
329
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST ,
removeTrainButton , 5, SpringLayout .WEST ,
this);
330
331
// Layout of clear
button
194
==PAGE:196==
332
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH , clearButton ,
6, SpringLayout .SOUTH , removeTrainButton );
333
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST ,
clearButton
,-5, SpringLayout .EAST ,
this);
334
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST ,
clearButton ,
5, SpringLayout .WEST ,
this);
335
336
// Layout of border
label 1
337
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH , borderLabel1 ,
18, SpringLayout .SOUTH , removeTrainButton );
338
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST ,
borderLabel1
,-5, SpringLayout .EAST ,
this);
339
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST ,
borderLabel1 ,
5, SpringLayout .WEST ,
this);
340
341
// Layout of
increase
and
decrease
buttons
342
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH , increaseButton
, 6, SpringLayout .SOUTH , borderLabel1 );
343
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST ,
increaseButton
,-5, SpringLayout .EAST ,
this);
344
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH , decreaseButton
, 6, SpringLayout .SOUTH , borderLabel1 );
345
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST ,
decreaseButton
, 5, SpringLayout .WEST ,
this);
346
347
// Layout of left
and
right
size
button
348
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH , leftSizeButton
, 6, SpringLayout .SOUTH , increaseButton );
349
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH ,
rightSizeButton , 6, SpringLayout .SOUTH , increaseButton );
350
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST ,
rightSizeButton ,-50, SpringLayout .EAST ,
this);
351
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST ,
leftSizeButton
, 50, SpringLayout .WEST ,
this);
352
353
// Layout of up and
down
size
button
354
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH , upSizeButton ,
6, SpringLayout .SOUTH , leftSizeButton );
355
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH , downSizeButton
, 6, SpringLayout .SOUTH , rightSizeButton );
356
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST ,
downSizeButton
,-50, SpringLayout .EAST ,
this);
357
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST ,
upSizeButton ,
50, SpringLayout .WEST ,
this);
358
359
// Layout of border
label 2
360
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH , borderLabel2 ,
18, SpringLayout .SOUTH , leftSizeButton );
361
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST ,
borderLabel2
,-5, SpringLayout .EAST ,
this);
362
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST ,
borderLabel2 ,
5, SpringLayout .WEST ,
this);
363
364
// Layout of save
load
label
365
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .SOUTH , loadLabel , -6,
SpringLayout .NORTH , fileBox);
366
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST ,
loadLabel ,-5,
195
==PAGE:197==
SpringLayout .EAST ,
this);
367
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST ,
loadLabel , 5,
SpringLayout .WEST ,
this);
368
369
// Layout of save
load
label
370
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .SOUTH , fileBox , -6,
SpringLayout .NORTH , loadButton );
371
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST ,
fileBox ,-5,
SpringLayout .EAST ,
this);
372
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST ,
fileBox , 5,
SpringLayout .WEST ,
this);
373
374
// Layout of load
button
375
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .SOUTH , loadButton ,
-6, SpringLayout .NORTH , filenameField );
376
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST ,
loadButton ,-5,
SpringLayout .EAST ,
this);
377
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST ,
loadButton , 5,
SpringLayout .WEST ,
this);
378
379
// Layout of
textfield
380
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .SOUTH , filenameField ,
-6, SpringLayout .NORTH , saveButton);
381
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST ,
filenameField
,-5, SpringLayout .EAST ,
this);
382
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST ,
filenameField ,
5, SpringLayout .WEST ,
this);
383
384
// Layout of save
button
385
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .SOUTH , saveButton ,
-6, SpringLayout .NORTH , backButton);
386
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST ,
saveButton ,-5,
SpringLayout .EAST ,
this);
387
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST ,
saveButton , 5,
SpringLayout .WEST ,
this);
388
389
// Layout of back
button
390
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .SOUTH , backButton ,
-6, SpringLayout .SOUTH , this);
391
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST ,
backButton ,-5,
SpringLayout .EAST ,
this);
392
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST ,
backButton , 5,
SpringLayout .WEST ,
this);
393
394
}
395
396
@Override
397
public
String
getFilenameLoad () {
398
return
filenameLoad ;
399
}
400
401
public
void
setFilenameLoad (String
filename) {
402
filenameLoad = filename;
403
404
}
405
406
public
void
setSizeDirection (Direction d) {
196
==PAGE:198==
407
sizeDirection = d;
408
}
409
410
411
412
public
Direction
getSizeDirection () {
413
return
sizeDirection ;
414
}
415
416
417
418
419 }
197
==PAGE:199==
GridSizeButtonListener.java
1 package
editor;
2
3 import
java.awt.event.ActionEvent ;
4 import
java.awt.event. ActionListener ;
5
6 import
javax.swing. JRadioButton ;
7
8 import
utils.Direction;
9 // Listener
for the
directional
button
for
increasing
or
decreasing
grid
sizes
10 public
class
GridSizeButtonListener
implements
ActionListener {
11
12
private
EditorMenuPanel
panel;
13
private
JRadioButton []
buttons;
14
15
public
GridSizeButtonListener ( EditorMenuPanel
panel , JRadioButton
[]
buttons) {
16
this.panel = panel;
17
this.buttons = buttons;
18
}
19
20
@Override
21
public
void
actionPerformed ( ActionEvent e) {
22
if(e.getSource ().equals(buttons [0])) {
23
panel. setSizeDirection (Direction.Left);
24
buttons [0]. setSelected (true);
25
buttons [1]. setSelected (false);
26
buttons [2]. setSelected (false);
27
buttons [3]. setSelected (false);
28
}else if(e.getSource ().equals(buttons [1])) {
29
panel. setSizeDirection (Direction.Right);
30
buttons [0]. setSelected (false);
31
buttons [1]. setSelected (true);
32
buttons [2]. setSelected (false);
33
buttons [3]. setSelected (false);
34
}else if(e.getSource ().equals(buttons [2])) {
35
panel. setSizeDirection (Direction.Up);
36
buttons [0]. setSelected (false);
37
buttons [1]. setSelected (false);
38
buttons [2]. setSelected (true);
39
buttons [3]. setSelected (false);
40
}else if(e.getSource ().equals(buttons [3])) {
41
panel. setSizeDirection (Direction.Down);
42
buttons [0]. setSelected (false);
43
buttons [1]. setSelected (false);
44
buttons [2]. setSelected (false);
45
buttons [3]. setSelected (true);
46
}
47
48
}
49
50
51
52 }
198
==PAGE:200==
IncreaseButtonListener.java
1 package
editor;
2
3 import
java.awt.event.ActionEvent ;
4 import
java.awt.event. ActionListener ;
5
6 import
utils.Direction;
7 // Listener
for
increase
grid
size
button
8 public
class
IncreaseButtonListener
implements
ActionListener {
9
10
private
EditorMenuPanel
menuPanel;
11
private
EditorDrawingPanel
drawingPanel ;
12
13
public
IncreaseButtonListener ( EditorMenuPanel
menuPanel ,
EditorDrawingPanel
drawingPanel ) {
14
this.menuPanel = menuPanel;
15
this. drawingPanel = drawingPanel ;
16
}
17
18
@Override
19
public
void
actionPerformed ( ActionEvent e) {
20
Direction d = menuPanel. getSizeDirection ();
21
drawingPanel . increaseSize (d);
22
23
24
}
25
26 }
199
==PAGE:201==
LoadButtonListener.java
1 package
editor;
2 import
java.awt.event.ActionEvent ;
3
4 import
java.awt.event. ActionListener ;
5
6 import
solution. SolutionDrawingPanel ;
7 import
utils. DrawingPanel ;
8 import
utils.MenuPanel;
9 import
utils. RailwayLoader ;
10
11
12
13 // Listener
for
load
railway
button
14 public
class
LoadButtonListener
implements
ActionListener {
15
16
private
MenuPanel
menuPanel;
17
private
DrawingPanel
drawingPanel ;
18
19
public
LoadButtonListener (MenuPanel
menuPanel , DrawingPanel
drawingPanel ) {
20
this.menuPanel = menuPanel;
21
this. drawingPanel = drawingPanel ;
22
}
23
24
25
@Override
26
public
void
actionPerformed ( ActionEvent e) {
27
28
String
title = menuPanel. getFilename ();
29
if(menuPanel
instanceof
EditorMenuPanel ) {
30
title = menuPanel. getFilenameLoad ();
31
}
32
33
RailwayLoader
loader = new
RailwayLoader ();
34
if(loader. loadRailway (drawingPanel , title , menuPanel)) {
35
if( drawingPanel
instanceof
SolutionDrawingPanel ) {
36
37
loader. loadSolution (title , ( SolutionDrawingPanel )
drawingPanel , menuPanel);
38
39
}
40
menuPanel. setLabelMessage (" Success ");
41
}else {
42
menuPanel. setLabelMessage (" Failed to load
railway ");
43
}
44
45
46
47
48
49
}
50
51 }
200
==PAGE:202==
SaveButtonListener.java
1 package
editor;
2 import
java.util.ArrayList;
3 import
java.util.HashSet;
4 import
java.util.List;
5 import
java.util.Set;
6
7 import
utils.Direction;
8 import
utils.Rail;
9 import
utils.Signal;
10 import
utils.SwitchRail;
11 import
utils.Train;
12
13 import
java.awt.event.ActionEvent ;
14 import
java.awt.event. ActionListener ;
15 import
java.io.File;
16 import
java.io.FileWriter ;
17 import
java.io. IOException ;
18 import
java.nio.file.Path;
19 import
java.nio.file.Paths;
20
21 public
class
SaveButtonListener
implements
ActionListener {
22
23
private
EditorDrawingPanel
drawingPanel ;
24
private
EditorMenuPanel
menuPanel;
25
26
public
SaveButtonListener ( EditorMenuPanel
menuPanel ,
EditorDrawingPanel
drawingPanel ) {
27
this. drawingPanel = drawingPanel ;
28
this.menuPanel = menuPanel;
29
}
30
31
//
Function
to save
railway , and
find
solution
32
@Override
33
public
void
actionPerformed ( ActionEvent e) {
34
String
title = menuPanel. getFilename ();
35
36
try {
37
// Before
trying
to save
check if
railway
is legal
38
railwayIsLegal ( drawingPanel . getTrainList (), drawingPanel .
getSwitchRailList (), drawingPanel . getSignalList (),drawingPanel .
getRailList ());
39
40
// Create
the
save
file
41
Path
currentRelativePath = Paths.get ("");
42
String s = currentRelativePath . toAbsolutePath ().toString () +
"/ Railways /";
43
File
myObj = new
File(s + title + ". txt ");
44
if (myObj. createNewFile ()) {
45
FileWriter
writer = new
FileWriter (s + title + ". txt ");
46
Set <Integer > locations = new HashSet <Integer >();
47
List <Rail > railList = drawingPanel . getRailList ();
48
List <SwitchRail > switchRailList = drawingPanel .
getSwitchRailList ();
49
50
// Get all the
locations
from
the
rails
and switch -rails
201
==PAGE:203==
51
for (Rail r : railList) {
52
locations.add(r.getStart ());
53
locations.add(r.getEnd ());
54
}
55
for (SwitchRail r : switchRailList ) {
56
locations.add(r.getStart ());
57
locations.add(r.getEnd1 ());
58
locations.add(r.getEnd2 ());
59
}
60
61
// Sort
the
locations
in order
smallest
to largest , and
write
them to the
file
62
List <Integer > locationList = new
ArrayList <>();
63
for (Integer i : locations) {
64
locationList .add(i);
65
}
66
locationList .sort(null);
67
for (Integer i : locationList ) {
68
writer.write(i + "\n");
69
}
70
writer.write (":\n");
71
72
// Sort
the
rails in order
smallest
to largest , and
write
them to file
73
railList.sort(null);
74
for (Rail
rail : railList) {
75
writer.write(rail.getStart () + " " + rail.getEnd () + "\n
");
76
}
77
writer.write (":\n");
78
79
// Sort
the switch -rails in order
smallest
to largest , and
write
them to file
80
switchRailList .sort(null);
81
for (SwitchRail
rail : switchRailList ) {
82
writer.write(rail.getStart () + " " + rail.getEnd1 () + " "
+ rail.getEnd2 () + " " + rail. getDirection ().toString () + "\n
");
83
}
84
writer.write (":\n");
85
86
// Sort
the
signals
in order
smallest
to largest , if same
left to right , and
write
them to file
87
List <Signal > signalList = drawingPanel . getSignalList ();
88
signalList.sort(null);
89
for (Signal
sig : signalList ) {
90
writer.write(sig. getLocation () + " " + sig. getDirection ()
.toString () + "\n");
91
}
92
writer.write (":\n");
93
94
// Write
the
trains to the
file
95
List <Train > trainList = drawingPanel . getTrainList ();
96
int c = 0;
97
for (Train t : trainList) {
98
writer.write ("T" + c + " " + t. getStartLocation () + " " +
t. getEndLocation () + " " + t. getDirection () + "\n");
202
==PAGE:204==
99
c++;
100
}
101
102
// Write
the
height
and
width to file
103
writer.write (":\n");
104
writer.write( drawingPanel .getWIDTH () + "\n");
105
writer.write( drawingPanel .getHEIGHT () + "\n");
106
writer.close ();
107
108
109
// Try to find a solution
to the
railway
110
String p = currentRelativePath . toAbsolutePath ().toString ()
+ "/ Solver /";
111
try {
112
ProcessBuilder
pb = new
ProcessBuilder ("/ Library/
Frameworks/Mono.framework/Versions/Current/Commands/mono",
113
p + "/ Program.exe",title , s);
114
115
Process
process = pb.start ();
116
int
exitValue = process.waitFor ();
117
if (exitValue
!= 0) {
118
menuPanel. setLabelMessage (" File
saved - No
solution
found ");
119
} else {
120
menuPanel. setLabelMessage (" File
saved - Solution
found
");
121
}
122
} catch ( IOException | InterruptedException
ex) {
123
ex. printStackTrace ();
124
}
125
126
} else {
127
menuPanel. setLabelMessage (" File
already
exists ");
128
}
129
} catch ( IOException
ex) {
130
menuPanel. setLabelMessage ("An error
occurred ");
131
} catch (Exception
ex) {
132
menuPanel. setLabelMessage (" Railway
not
constructed
correctly
");
133
ex. printStackTrace ();
134
}
135
136
}
137
//
Function
to check if a railway
is legal. Signals
are
placed at
needed
locations.
138
private
void
railwayIsLegal (List <Train > trains , List <SwitchRail >
switchrails , List <Signal > signals , List <Rail > rails) throws
Exception {
139
// Check if a signal is
present
at the
starting
location
for
each train , and if signal is
present
or is end of rail at end
location
140
for(Train t : trains) {
141
int s = t. getStartLocation ();
142
int e = t. getEndLocation ();
143
Direction d = t. getDirection ();
144
if (!( signals.contains(new
Signal(s,d)))) {
145
throw
new
Exception ();
203
==PAGE:205==
146
}
147
int lx = d ==
Direction.Left ? e-1 : e+1;
148
Rail r = new
Rail(e,lx);
149
if (! signals.contains(new
Signal(e,d))) {
150
if (rails.contains(r)) {
151
throw
new
Exception ();
152
}else {
153
boolean b = false;
154
for(SwitchRail
sr : switchrails ) {
155
int l1 = sr.getStart ();
156
int l2 = sr.getEnd1 ();
157
int l3 = sr.getEnd2 ();
158
Direction
dx = sr. getDirection ();
159
if (l1 == e && dx == d) {
160
b = true;
161
break;
162
}else if ((l2 == e || l3 == e) && d != dx) {
163
b = true;
164
break;
165
}
166
}
167
if (b) {
168
throw
new
Exception ();
169
}
170
}
171
172
}
173
174
}
175
// Checks
if
signals
are
present
at switch -rails
176
for(SwitchRail
sr : switchrails ) {
177
int l1 = sr.getStart ();
178
int l2 = sr.getEnd1 ();
179
int l3 = sr.getEnd2 ();
180
Direction d = sr. getDirection ();
181
Direction
opd = d ==
Direction.Left ? Direction.Right :
Direction.Left;
182
183
if (!( signals.contains(new
Signal(l1 ,d)) &&
signals.contains(
new
Signal(l2 ,opd))&&
signals.contains(new
Signal(l3 ,opd)))) {
184
throw
new
Exception ();
185
}
186
}
187
188
189
}
190 }
204
==PAGE:206==
TextFieldListener.java
1 package
editor;
2
3
4 import
javax.swing.JTextField ;
5 import
javax.swing.event. DocumentEvent ;
6 import
javax.swing.event. DocumentListener ;
7
8 import
utils.MenuPanel;
9 // Lister
for
textfield
to enter
railway
name
10 public
class
TextFieldListener
implements
DocumentListener {
11
12
private
MenuPanel
menuPanel;
13
private
JTextField
tf;
14
15
public
TextFieldListener (MenuPanel
menuPanel , JTextField
tf) {
16
this.menuPanel = menuPanel;
17
this.tf = tf;
18
}
19
20
@Override
21
public
void
insertUpdate ( DocumentEvent e) {
22
menuPanel. setFilename (tf.getText ());
23
}
24
25
@Override
26
public
void
removeUpdate ( DocumentEvent e) {
27
menuPanel. setFilename (tf.getText ());
28
}
29
30
@Override
31
public
void
changedUpdate ( DocumentEvent e) {
32
menuPanel. setFilename (tf.getText ());
33
34
}
35
36 }
205
==PAGE:207==
NextButtonListener.java
1 package
solution;
2
3 import
java.awt.event.ActionEvent ;
4 import
java.awt.event. ActionListener ;
5 //
Listener
for
next
step
button in
solution
viewer
6 public
class
NextButtonListener
implements
ActionListener {
7
8
private
SolutionDrawingPanel
panel;
9
10
public
NextButtonListener ( SolutionDrawingPanel
panel) {
11
this.panel = panel;
12
}
13
14
@Override
15
public
void
actionPerformed ( ActionEvent e) {
16
17
panel.next ();
18
19
20
}
21
22 }
206
==PAGE:208==
PrevButtonListener.java
1 package
solution;
2
3 import
java.awt.event.ActionEvent ;
4 import
java.awt.event. ActionListener ;
5 // Listener
for
previuos
step
button in
solution
viewer
6 public
class
PrevButtonListener
implements
ActionListener {
7
8
private
SolutionDrawingPanel
panel;
9
10
public
PrevButtonListener ( SolutionDrawingPanel
panel) {
11
this.panel = panel;
12
}
13
14
@Override
15
public
void
actionPerformed ( ActionEvent e) {
16
17
panel.prev ();
18
19
20
}
21
22 }
207
==PAGE:209==
RestartButtonListener.java
1 package
solution;
2
3 import
java.awt.event.ActionEvent ;
4 import
java.awt.event. ActionListener ;
5 // Listener
for
restart
button in
solution
viewer
6 public
class
RestartButtonListener
implements
ActionListener {
7
8
private
SolutionDrawingPanel
panel;
9
10
public
RestartButtonListener ( SolutionDrawingPanel
panel) {
11
this.panel = panel;
12
}
13
14
@Override
15
public
void
actionPerformed ( ActionEvent e) {
16
panel.restart ();
17
18
}
19
20 }
208
==PAGE:210==
SolutionDrawingPanel.java
1 package
solution;
2
3 import
java.awt.Color;
4 import
java.awt.Graphics;
5 import
java.awt.event.ActionEvent ;
6 import
java.awt.event. ActionListener ;
7 import
java.awt.image. BufferedImage ;
8 import
java.io.File;
9 import
java.io. IOException ;
10 import
java.nio.file.Path;
11 import
java.nio.file.Paths;
12 import
java.util.List;
13 import
java.util.Map;
14
15 import
javax.imageio.ImageIO;
16 import
javax.swing.Timer;
17
18 import
java.util.ArrayList;
19 import
java.util.HashMap;
20
21 import
utils.Direction;
22 import
utils. DrawingPanel ;
23 import
utils.Signal;
24 import
utils.SwitchRail;
25 import
utils.Train;
26 // Class
for the
solution
viewer
drawing
panel
27 public
class
SolutionDrawingPanel
extends
DrawingPanel {
28
29
private
List <Map <Signal ,Boolean >> signalsSolution ;
30
private
List <Map <Train ,Integer >> trainsSolution ;
31
private
List <Map <SwitchRail ,Boolean >> switchRailsSolution ;
32
33
private
int
counter;
34
private
Timer
timer;
35
36
private
BufferedImage
imageRight ;
37
private
BufferedImage
imageLeft;
38
39
public
SolutionDrawingPanel () {
40
super ();
41
signalsSolution = new
ArrayList <>();
42
trainsSolution = new
ArrayList <>();
43
switchRailsSolution = new
ArrayList <>();
44
timer = new
Timer (100 , new
TrainListener (this));
45
counter = 0;
46
// Load
images of trains
47
Path
currentRelativePath = Paths.get ("");
48
String s = currentRelativePath . toAbsolutePath ().toString () +"/
Images /";
49
try {
50
imageRight = ImageIO.read(new
File(s+" TrainRight .png "));
51
imageLeft = ImageIO.read(new
File(s+" TrainLeft.png "));
52
} catch ( IOException e) {
53
e. printStackTrace ();
54
}
209
==PAGE:211==
55
56
57
58
}
59
60
@Override
61
protected
void
paintComponent (Graphics g) {
62
63
super. paintComponent (g);
64
65
}
66
67
@Override
68
protected
void
drawSignals (Graphics g) {
69
// Draw
the
signal
boxes
70
int
width = (int) (xOffset /4);
71
int
height = (int) (yOffset /2);
72
if (width
<= height /2) {
73
height = width *2;
74
}else if(height
<= width *2) {
75
width = height /2;
76
}
77
double h = height + (xOffset /2.5);
78
g.setColor(Color.black);
79
for(int i = 0; i < HEIGHT; i++) {
80
for(int j = 0; j < WIDTH; j++) {
81
if(signals[i][j] == 1) {
82
int x = (int)(5+j*xOffset) -(width);
83
int y = (int) (( int)(5+i*yOffset) -(h));
84
g.fillRect(x, y, width , height);
85
}else if(signals[i][j] == 2) {
86
int x = (int)(5+j*xOffset)+6;
87
int y = (int) (( int)(5+i*yOffset) -(h));
88
g.fillRect(x, y, width , height);
89
}else if(signals[i][j] == 3) {
90
int x = (int)(5+j*xOffset)+6;
91
int y = (int) (( int)(5+i*yOffset) -(h));
92
g.fillRect(x, y, width , height);
93
x = (int)(5+j*xOffset)-width;
94
g.fillRect(x, y, width , height);
95
}
96
}
97
}
98
if( signalsSolution .size () == 0) {
99
return;
100
}
101
// Draw
the
signal
values in the
current
state
102
Map <Signal ,Boolean > signalMap = signalsSolution .get(counter);
103
for (Map.Entry <Signal , Boolean > entry : signalMap.entrySet ())
{
104
Signal
sig = entry.getKey ();
105
int i = sig.getLocation ()/WIDTH;
106
int j = sig.getLocation ()%WIDTH;
107
int x;
108
int y = (int) (( int)(5+i*yOffset) -(h));
109
if(entry.getValue ()) {
110
g.setColor(Color.green);
210
==PAGE:212==
111
y +=
height /10;
112
}else {
113
g.setColor(Color.red);
114
y += (height /2) +( height /10);
115
}
116
if(sig. getDirection () ==
Direction.Right) {
117
x = (int)(5+j*xOffset)+6 + width /5;
118
}else {
119
x = (int)(5+j*xOffset) -(width) + width /5;
120
}
121
int
lightSize = width *3/5;
122
g.fillArc(x, y, lightSize , lightSize , 0, 360);
123
124
}
125
}
126
127
@Override
128
protected
void
drawSwitchRails (Graphics g) {
129
if( switchRailsSolution .size () == 0) {
130
super. drawSwitchRails (g);
131
return;
132
}
133
// Draw
the
current
switch -rail
setup
for the
current
state
134
Map <SwitchRail ,Boolean > switchRailMap = switchRailsSolution .get
(counter);
135
for(Map.Entry <SwitchRail , Boolean > entry : switchRailMap .
entrySet ()) {
136
SwitchRail
switchRail = entry.getKey ();
137
int
startI = Math.floorDiv( switchRail.getStart (), WIDTH);
138
int
startJ = switchRail.getStart ()%WIDTH;
139
int
end1I = Math.floorDiv(switchRail .getEnd1 (), WIDTH);
140
int
end1J = switchRail .getEnd1 ()%WIDTH;
141
int
end2I = Math.floorDiv(switchRail .getEnd2 (), WIDTH);
142
int
end2J = switchRail .getEnd2 ()%WIDTH;
143
144
int
startX = (int)(5+ startJ*xOffset)+3;
145
int
startY = (int)(5+ startI*yOffset)+3;
146
int
end1X = (int)(5+ end1J*xOffset)+3;
147
int
end1Y = (int)(5+ end1I*yOffset)+3;
148
int
end2X = (int)(5+ end2J*xOffset)+3;
149
int
end2Y = (int)(5+ end2I*yOffset)+3;
150
g.setColor(Color.red);
151
if(entry.getValue ()) {
152
g.drawLine(startX , startY , end1X , end1Y);
153
g.setColor(Color.black);
154
g.drawLine(startX , startY , end2X , end2Y);
155
}else {
156
g.drawLine(startX , startY , end2X , end2Y);
157
g.setColor(Color.black);
158
g.drawLine(startX , startY , end1X , end1Y);
159
}
160
161
162
163
}
164
165
}
211
==PAGE:213==
166
167
@Override
168
protected
void
drawTrains(Graphics g) {
169
if( trainsSolution .size () == 0) {
170
return;
171
}
172
// Draw
the
trains
at their
locations
for the
current
state
173
int h = (int) (xOffset /2.5);
174
int w = (int) xOffset;
175
if(h > yOffset /2) {
176
h = (int) (yOffset /2);
177
w = (int) (h*2.5);
178
}
179
Map <Train ,Integer > trainMap = trainsSolution .get(counter);
180
for(Map.Entry <Train , Integer > entry : trainMap.entrySet ()) {
181
Train
train = entry.getKey ();
182
int loc = entry.getValue ();
183
int i =
loc/WIDTH;
184
int j = loc%WIDTH;
185
int x = (int) (( int)(5+j*xOffset)-w);
186
int y = (int) (( int)(5+i*yOffset)-h);
187
if(train. getDirection () ==
Direction.Right) {
188
x += w/4 + w/9;
189
g.drawImage(imageRight , x, y, w ,h, null);
190
}else {
191
x += (3*w/4);
192
g.drawImage(imageLeft , x, y, w ,h, null);
193
}
194
195
}
196
197
198
199
}
200
// Function
used
start
the
automatic
solution
viewer
201
public
void
start () {
202
timer.start ();
203
204
205
206
}
207
// Function
used
stop
the
automatic
solution
viewer
208
public
void
stop () {
209
timer.stop ();
210
211
}
212
213
214
// Function
used to go back to first
state in
solution
215
public
void
restart () {
216
stop ();
217
counter = 0;
218
repaint ();
219
220
}
221
// Function
used to add a state to the
solution
state
list
222
public
void
addState(List <Boolean > signals , List <Integer > trains ,
212
==PAGE:214==
List <Boolean > rails) {
223
224
int c = 0;
225
Map <Train ,Integer > trainMap = new HashMap <>();
226
for(Train t : this.trainList) {
227
trainMap.put(t, trains.get(c));
228
c++;
229
}
230
trainsSolution .add(trainMap);
231
232
233
Map <Signal ,Boolean > signalMap = new HashMap <>();
234
c = 0;
235
for(Signal s : this. signalList ) {
236
signalMap.put(s, signals.get(c));
237
c++;
238
}
239
signalsSolution .add(signalMap);
240
241
242
243
Map <SwitchRail ,Boolean > switchrailMap = new HashMap <>();
244
c = 0;
245
for(SwitchRail s : this. switchRailList ) {
246
switchrailMap .put(s, rails.get(c));
247
c++;
248
}
249
switchRailsSolution .add( switchrailMap );
250
}
251
// Function
used to clear
solution
252
public
void
resetSolution () {
253
trainsSolution = new
ArrayList <>();
254
signalsSolution = new
ArrayList <>();
255
switchRailsSolution = new
ArrayList <>();
256
counter = 0;
257
repaint ();
258
259
}
260
// Function
used to move to next
state in
solution
261
public
void
next () {
262
stop ();
263
if(counter
< trainsSolution .size ()
-1) {
264
counter ++;
265
repaint ();
266
}
267
268
269
}
270
// Function
used to move to
previuos
state in
solution
271
public
void
prev () {
272
stop ();
273
if(counter
> 0) {
274
counter --;
275
repaint ();
276
}
277
278
}
213
==PAGE:215==
279
280
// Class
used to
automatically
go
through
solution
281
private
class
TrainListener
implements
ActionListener {
282
283
private
SolutionDrawingPanel
panel;
284
285
public
TrainListener ( SolutionDrawingPanel
panel) {
286
this.panel = panel;
287
}
288
@Override
289
public
void
actionPerformed ( ActionEvent e) {
290
if(counter
< trainsSolution .size ()
-1) {
291
panel.counter ++;
292
panel.repaint ();
293
}else {
294
stop ();
295
}
296
297
}
298
299
}
300
301
302 }
214
==PAGE:216==
SolutionFrame.java
1 package
solution;
2
3 import
java.awt.Container;
4
5 import
javax.swing.JFrame;
6 import
javax.swing. SpringLayout ;
7
8 import
utils. DrawingPanel ;
9
10 // Class
for the
frame
for the
solution
viewer
11 public
class
SolutionFrame
extends
JFrame{
12
13
14
public
DrawingPanel
drawingPanel ;
15
16
public
SolutionFrame () {
17
18
super (" Railway
Network
GUI ");
19
Container
contentPane = this. getContentPane ();
20
SpringLayout
layout = new
SpringLayout ();
21
contentPane.setLayout(layout);
22
23
24
drawingPanel = new
SolutionDrawingPanel ();
25
SolutionMenuPanel
menuPanel = new
SolutionMenuPanel (this);
26
27
contentPane.add(menuPanel);
28
contentPane.add( drawingPanel );
29
30
31
32
33
// Make
the
layout
look
nice
34
layout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST , menuPanel ,
35
5,
36
SpringLayout .WEST , contentPane );
37
38
layout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH , menuPanel ,
39
5,
40
SpringLayout .NORTH , contentPane );
41
42
layout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .SOUTH , menuPanel ,
43
-5,
44
SpringLayout .SOUTH , contentPane );
45
46
layout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST , menuPanel ,
47
240,
48
SpringLayout .WEST , contentPane );
49
50
layout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST , drawingPanel ,
51
5,
52
SpringLayout .EAST , menuPanel);
53
54
layout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH , drawingPanel ,
55
5,
215
==PAGE:217==
56
SpringLayout .NORTH , contentPane );
57
58
layout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST , contentPane ,
59
5,
60
SpringLayout .EAST , drawingPanel );
61
62
layout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .SOUTH , contentPane ,
63
5,
64
SpringLayout .SOUTH , drawingPanel );
65
66
67
68
69
this.pack ();
70
this.setSize (1400 ,
850);
71
this. setLocationRelativeTo (null);
72
73
this. setResizable (false);
74
this. setDefaultCloseOperation (JFrame. EXIT_ON_CLOSE );
75
this.setVisible(true);
76
}
77
78 }
216
==PAGE:218==
SolutionListListener.java
1 package
solution;
2
3 import
java.awt.event.ActionEvent ;
4 import
java.awt.event. ActionListener ;
5
6 import
javax.swing.JComboBox;
7
8 import
utils.MenuPanel;
9 // Listener
for the
dropdown
menu to select
solution
10 public
class
SolutionListListener
implements
ActionListener {
11
12
private
JComboBox
list;
13
private
MenuPanel
panel;
14
15
public
SolutionListListener (JComboBox
list , MenuPanel
panel) {
16
this.list = list;
17
this.panel = panel;
18
}
19
20
@Override
21
public
void
actionPerformed ( ActionEvent e) {
22
panel.setFilename(list. getSelectedItem ().toString ());
23
24
}
25
26 }
217
==PAGE:219==
SolutionMenuPanel.java
1 package
solution;
2
3 import
java.awt.Color;
4 import
java.io.File;
5 import
java.io. FilenameFilter ;
6 import
java.nio.file.Path;
7 import
java.nio.file.Paths;
8 import
java.util.HashSet;
9 import
java.util.Set;
10
11 import
javax.swing.JButton;
12 import
javax.swing.JComboBox;
13 import
javax.swing.JLabel;
14 import
javax.swing. SpringLayout ;
15
16 import
editor. LoadButtonListener ;
17 import
utils. BackButtonListener ;
18 import
utils.MenuPanel;
19
20
21 public
class
SolutionMenuPanel
extends
MenuPanel{
22
23
private
JButton
startButton ;
24
private
JButton
stopButton;
25
private
JButton
restartButton ;
26
private
JButton
nextButton;
27
private
JButton
prevButton;
28
29
private
JLabel
solutionLength ;
30
private
JLabel
generatedStates ;
31
private
JLabel
solutionTime ;
32
33
public
SolutionMenuPanel ( SolutionFrame
frame) {
34
35
this. setBackground (Color. LIGHT_GRAY .brighter ());
36
SpringLayout
menuLayout = new
SpringLayout ();
37
this.setLayout(menuLayout );
38
39
40
JLabel
menuLabel = new
JLabel (" Select
railway ");
41
menuLabel.setFont(bigFont);
42
this.add(menuLabel);
43
44
// Find
all
railways
in
current
directory
45
Path
currentRelativePath = Paths.get ("");
46
String p = currentRelativePath . toAbsolutePath ().toString () +"/
Railways /";
47
File f = new
File(p);
48
File []
railwayFiles = f.listFiles(new
FilenameFilter () {
49
public
boolean
accept(File dir , String
name) {
50
return
name.endsWith (". txt ");
51
}
52
});
53
54
File []
solutionFiles = f.listFiles(new
FilenameFilter () {
218
==PAGE:220==
55
public
boolean
accept(File dir , String
name) {
56
return
name.endsWith (". sol ");
57
}
58
});
59
60
Set <String > railwayFileSet = new HashSet <>();
61
for(File fl : railwayFiles ) {
62
String
file = fl.getName ();
63
railwayFileSet .add(file.substring (0, file.length () -4));
64
}
65
66
Set <String > solutionFileSet = new HashSet <>();
67
for(File fl : solutionFiles ) {
68
String
file = fl.getName ();
69
solutionFileSet .add(file.substring (0, file.length () -4));
70
}
71
72
solutionFileSet .removeIf(s -> ! railwayFileSet .contains(s));
73
String [] files = new
String[ solutionFileSet .size ()];
74
int i = 0;
75
for(String s : solutionFileSet ) {
76
files[i] = s;
77
i++;
78
}
79
80
81
82
83
84
JComboBox <String > solutionList = new
JComboBox <String >(
files);
85
if(files.length > 0) {
86
solutionList . setSelectedIndex (0);
87
filename = solutionList .getItemAt (0);
88
}
89
90
solutionList .setFont( normalFont );
91
solutionList . addActionListener (new
SolutionListListener (
solutionList , this));
92
this.add( solutionList );
93
94
JButton
loadButton = new
JButton (" Load
solution ");
95
loadButton.setFont( normalFont );
96
LoadButtonListener
loadListener = new
LoadButtonListener (
this , frame. drawingPanel );
97
loadButton. addActionListener ( loadListener );
98
this.add(loadButton );
99
100
solutionLength = new
JLabel ();
101
solutionLength .setFont(normalFont );
102
solutionLength .setVisible(false);
103
this.add( solutionLength );
104
105
generatedStates = new
JLabel ();
106
generatedStates .setFont( normalFont );
107
generatedStates .setVisible (false);
108
this.add( generatedStates );
219
==PAGE:221==
109
110
solutionTime = new
JLabel ();
111
solutionTime .setFont( normalFont );
112
solutionTime .setVisible (false);
113
this.add( solutionTime );
114
115
startButton = new
JButton (" Start ");
116
startButton.setFont( normalFont);
117
startButton.setVisible(false);
118
startButton. addActionListener (new
StartButtonListener ((
SolutionDrawingPanel )frame. drawingPanel ));
119
this.add(startButton );
120
121
stopButton = new
JButton (" Stop ");
122
stopButton.setFont( normalFont );
123
stopButton.setVisible (false);
124
stopButton. addActionListener (new
StopButtonListener ((
SolutionDrawingPanel )frame. drawingPanel ));
125
this.add(stopButton);
126
127
restartButton = new
JButton (" Restart ");
128
restartButton .setFont( normalFont);
129
restartButton .setVisible (false);
130
restartButton . addActionListener (new
RestartButtonListener ((
SolutionDrawingPanel )frame. drawingPanel ));
131
this.add( restartButton );
132
133
JLabel
borderLabel = new
JLabel ("
___________________________ ");
134
borderLabel. setHorizontalAlignment (JLabel.CENTER);
135
borderLabel.setFont( normalFont);
136
this.add(borderLabel );
137
138
nextButton = new
JButton (" Next
state ");
139
nextButton.setFont( normalFont );
140
nextButton.setVisible (false);
141
nextButton. addActionListener (new
NextButtonListener ((
SolutionDrawingPanel )frame. drawingPanel ));
142
this.add(nextButton);
143
144
prevButton = new
JButton (" Previous
state ");
145
prevButton.setFont( normalFont );
146
prevButton.setVisible (false);
147
prevButton. addActionListener (new
PrevButtonListener ((
SolutionDrawingPanel )frame. drawingPanel ));
148
this.add(prevButton);
149
150
151
152
153
154
JButton
backButton = new
JButton (" Return to menu ");
155
backButton.setFont( normalFont );
156
backButton. addActionListener (new
BackButtonListener (frame))
;
157
this.add(backButton );
158
220
==PAGE:222==
159
160
161
162
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH , menuLabel , 10,
SpringLayout .NORTH , this);
163
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST ,
menuLabel ,-5,
SpringLayout .EAST ,
this);
164
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST ,
menuLabel , 5,
SpringLayout .WEST ,
this);
165
166
167
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH , solutionList ,
20, SpringLayout .SOUTH , menuLabel);
168
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST ,
solutionList
,-5, SpringLayout .EAST ,
this);
169
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST ,
solutionList ,
5, SpringLayout .WEST ,
this);
170
171
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH , loadButton ,
20, SpringLayout .SOUTH , solutionList );
172
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST ,
loadButton ,-5,
SpringLayout .EAST ,
this);
173
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST ,
loadButton , 5,
SpringLayout .WEST ,
this);
174
175
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH , solutionLength
, 50, SpringLayout .SOUTH , loadButton );
176
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST ,
solutionLength
,-5, SpringLayout .EAST ,
this);
177
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST ,
solutionLength
, 5, SpringLayout .WEST ,
this);
178
179
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH ,
generatedStates , 50, SpringLayout .SOUTH , solutionLength );
180
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST ,
generatedStates ,-5, SpringLayout .EAST ,
this);
181
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST ,
generatedStates , 5, SpringLayout .WEST ,
this);
182
183
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH , solutionTime ,
50, SpringLayout .SOUTH , generatedStates );
184
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST ,
solutionTime
,-5, SpringLayout .EAST ,
this);
185
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST ,
solutionTime ,
5, SpringLayout .WEST ,
this);
186
187
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH , startButton ,
50, SpringLayout .SOUTH , solutionTime );
188
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST ,
startButton
,-5, SpringLayout .EAST ,
this);
189
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST ,
startButton ,
5, SpringLayout .WEST ,
this);
190
191
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH , stopButton ,
20, SpringLayout .SOUTH , startButton );
192
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST ,
stopButton ,-5,
SpringLayout .EAST ,
this);
221
==PAGE:223==
193
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST ,
stopButton , 5,
SpringLayout .WEST ,
this);
194
195
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH , restartButton ,
20, SpringLayout .SOUTH , stopButton );
196
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST ,
restartButton
,-5, SpringLayout .EAST ,
this);
197
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST ,
restartButton ,
5, SpringLayout .WEST ,
this);
198
199
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH , borderLabel ,
20, SpringLayout .SOUTH , restartButton );
200
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST ,
borderLabel
,-5, SpringLayout .EAST ,
this);
201
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST ,
borderLabel ,
5, SpringLayout .WEST ,
this);
202
203
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH , nextButton ,
20, SpringLayout .SOUTH , borderLabel );
204
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST ,
nextButton ,-5,
SpringLayout .EAST ,
this);
205
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST ,
nextButton , 5,
SpringLayout .WEST ,
this);
206
207
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .NORTH , prevButton ,
20, SpringLayout .SOUTH , nextButton );
208
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST ,
prevButton ,-5,
SpringLayout .EAST ,
this);
209
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST ,
prevButton , 5,
SpringLayout .WEST ,
this);
210
211
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .SOUTH , backButton ,
-10, SpringLayout .SOUTH , this);
212
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .EAST ,
backButton ,-5,
SpringLayout .EAST ,
this);
213
menuLayout. putConstraint ( SpringLayout .WEST ,
backButton , 5,
SpringLayout .WEST ,
this);
214
215
216
}
217
218
public
void
loaded(int length , int
generated , double
time) {
219
startButton.setVisible(true);
220
stopButton.setVisible (true);
221
restartButton .setVisible (true);
222
nextButton.setVisible (true);
223
prevButton.setVisible (true);
224
225
solutionLength .setVisible(true);
226
solutionLength .setText (" Solution
length : " + Integer.toString(
length));
227
generatedStates .setVisible (true);
228
generatedStates .setText (" Generated
states : " + Integer.
toString(generated));
229
solutionTime .setVisible (true);
230
solutionTime .setText (" Time
spend : " + Double.toString(time) +
"ms");
222
==PAGE:224==
231
}
232 }
223
==PAGE:225==
StartButtonListener.java
1 package
solution;
2
3 import
java.awt.event.ActionEvent ;
4 import
java.awt.event. ActionListener ;
5 import
java.util.concurrent .TimeUnit;
6 // Listener
for
start
button in
solution
viewer
7 public
class
StartButtonListener
implements
ActionListener {
8
9
private
SolutionDrawingPanel
panel;
10
11
public
StartButtonListener ( SolutionDrawingPanel
panel) {
12
this.panel = panel;
13
}
14
15
@Override
16
public
void
actionPerformed ( ActionEvent e) {
17
18
panel.start ();
19
20
21
}
22
23 }
224
==PAGE:226==
StopButtonListener.java
1 package
solution;
2
3 import
java.awt.event.ActionEvent ;
4 import
java.awt.event. ActionListener ;
5 // Listener
for
stop
button in
solution
viewer
6 public
class
StopButtonListener
implements
ActionListener {
7
8
private
SolutionDrawingPanel
panel;
9
10
public
StopButtonListener ( SolutionDrawingPanel
panel) {
11
this.panel = panel;
12
}
13
14
@Override
15
public
void
actionPerformed ( ActionEvent e) {
16
panel.stop ();
17
18
}
19
20 }
225
