==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
E-scooter: Increasing mobility at the
expense of safety?
E-scooter user behaviour and perceptions
in different mobility cultures and adapta-
tions as a consequence of the COVID-19
pandemic
Cléo Deroo (s181273)
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
DTU Transport
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
Technical University of Denmark
Bygningstorvet
Building 116
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Influenced by the COVID-19 pandemic, many cities in the world adopted restriction
measures. The lockdown policies deeply affected transportation. E-scooters were also
affected by the pandemic. Thus, this master thesis aims to shed light on the conse-
quences of the COVID-19 pandemic and its implications on e-scooter mobility, focusing
on the behaviours and perceptions of both users and non-users.
Two European capitals have been chosen as study cases: Paris and Copenhagen. A
survey was distributed in June 2020 to inhabitants of the two cities, in order to gather
relevant information regarding their e-scooter habits before the pandemic; their use in-
tentions after the lockdown; their motivations for change, when relevant, and their per-
ception of the micromobility. The impact of COVID-19 on other transport modes use
intentions was also assessed on a higher-level. Answers from the 393 participants that
filled the questionnaire was analysed using descriptive statistics and logistic regressions
to model e-scooter use determinants. An integrated framework was used to look over
relevant factors underlying e-scooter use in the two cities, before and after the lockdown.
It appeared that before the pandemic, user demographics and use patterns were sim-
ilar in Paris and Copenhagen. Most users relied on e-scooters for occasional leisure-
related trips. Both in Paris and Copenhagen, e-scooters were largely replacing walking
and public transport. In Copenhagen, e-scooter also replaced biking. In both cities,
intermodality was found to mainly occur along with walking or public transport. Deter-
minants underlying e-scooter use appeared vary depending on the city. Positive affects
and descriptive social norms were the main factors influencing e-scooter use in Paris
before COVID-19. In Copenhagen, perceived behavioural control turned out to be the
main determinant for e-scooter use. The influence of the three factors on e-scooter use
was positive. They were all significant when considering the full sample of participants.
The feeling of safety was also found to influence e-scooter use positively. However, the
significance of the factor did not hold everywhere after the pandemic. A general mistrust
regarding e-scooters’ safety is observed in both cities. The lack of safety of e-scooter
users was especially pronounced in Paris. Non-user participants from both cities stated
feeling less safe around e-scooter riders than users did.
Perceived infection risk in regards to COVID-19 was considered as part of the e-scooter
safety issues. E-scooters were not perceived as holding a major infectious risk, neither in
Paris nor in Copenhagen. Despite that, in Copenhagen, the infectious risk became part
of the significant determinants for e-scooter use post-lockdown, along with perceived
==PAGE:4==
ii
Summary
behavioural control. Some changes in determinants in Paris were also observed after
the lockdown: the positive affects remained significant, whereas perceived behavioural
control became significant, and descriptive social norms lost its significancy.
A substantial share of participants expected their e-scooter use and habits to change as
an outcome of the pandemic, especially in Paris. Very few variations in use intentions
were observed within e-scooter use patterns and habits after the lockdown. A majority
of users expected to use e-scooter for leisure-related purpose, occasionally. Nevertheless,
the number of participants expressing intentions to use e-scooters post-lockdown was
lower than users before the pandemic.
The COVID-19 pandemic also affected other transport modes’ use intentions. In both
cities, participants expressed a clear wish to reduce their use of public transportation.
This goes hand in hand with the high perceived infection risks and discomfort level in
puclic transport expressed by Parisians and Copenhageners. On the other hand, partic-
ipants expected to walk and cycle more.
Overall, the number of e-scooter users is expected to decrease as a consequence of the
pandemic, unlike walking or cycling. Despite the decrease of riders, the use of e-scooter
is not expected to change significantly. Finally, determinants of e-scooter use were found
to be different depending on the mobility culture of a city.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Technology, Management and
Economics at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for
acquiring a master degree in Transport and Logistics.
Kongens Lyngby, September 10, 2020
Cléo Deroo (s181273)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
Throughout the writing of this dissertation I have received a great deal of support and
assistance.
I would first like to thank both my supervisors, Professor Sonja Haustein and Professor
Anders Fjendbo Jensen, whose expertise was invaluable in formulating the research ques-
tions and methodology. They were extremely available, attentive and helpful throughout
this master thesis. I want to thank them for their patient support and for all of the op-
portunities I was given to further my research. Their insightful feedbacks pushed me to
sharpen my thinking and brought my work to a higher level.
I would like to thank Pernille Ehlers, Camille Krier and Adrien Lelièvre for sharing
their expertise with me, and helping me to better understand the ins and outs of e-
scooter issues, whether in Paris or Copenhagen.
In addition, I would like to thank the people who spent the lockdown with me, Inken
Ohlsen, Jannik Bergmann and Rasmus Arnt Pedersen, for their moral support and sym-
pathetic ear during the lockdown. They also provided stimulating discussions as well as
happy distractions (understand coffe & cake) to rest my mind outside of my research.
Finally, I could not have completed this dissertation without the support of my par-
ents. Merci d’avoir gentiment et patiemment supporté votre fille qui va enfin pouvoir se
trouver un vrai travail!
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
List of Figures
ix
List of Tables
x
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Mobility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Safety
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
The COVID-19 pandemic
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Research questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Background
9
2.1
Comparing Paris and Copenhagen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Understanding modal choice and determinants in e-scooter use . . . . . .
13
3
Methodology
19
3.1
Sampling procedure/ Questionnaire distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Questionnaire and measurement instruments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3
Statistical procedure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.4
Sample description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Results
29
4.1
Why do people not use e-scooters?
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
What were the users’ habits before the pandemic? . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3
Did the COVID-19 and the lockdown trigger any change in people’s habits? 33
4.4
Were there other repercussions of the COVID-19 pandemic on transporta-
tion habits? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.5
How do people feel about e-scooters? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
4.6
What are the factors at stake determining e-scooter use in Paris and
Copenhagen?
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5
Discussion
57
5.1
Mobility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.2
Safety
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.3
Differences in mobility culture in Paris and Copenhagen
. . . . . . . . .
63
5.4
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6
Conclusion
69
7
Perspectives
71
A Backward regression models
73
A.1 Results of backward variables selection for the use before the pandemic .
73
A.2 Results of backward variables selection for the use after the pandemic
.
74
B Survey
75
Bibliography
77
==PAGE:11==
List of Figures
2.1
Integrated framework developed to study the determinants of e-scooter use,
inspired by the framework used by Fallah Zavareh et al., 2020. . . . . . . . .
16
3.1
Categories proposed to participants in the questions related to demographic
characteristics. Categories framed in red were merged for the data analysis .
21
3.2
Distribution of items between several hypothetical factors that are to be used
in the integrated framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3
Origin of respondents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4
Proportion of users in the surveyed locations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.5
Age distribution of respondents in Copenhagen and Paris . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.6
Employment status of respondents in the surveyed locations . . . . . . . . .
28
4.1
Incentives for the use free-floating e-scooter services given by non-users and
people only using private-owned e-scooter in Paris (N=96) and Copenhagen
(N=72). Significant differences between the two cities (p<.05) are marked
with a (*) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2
Distribution of all the transport modes replaced by e-scooters cited by the
users in Paris (N=76) and Copenhagen (N=49). Significant differences be-
tween the two cities (p<.05) are marked with a (*)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.3
Risk behaviours adopted by respondents in Paris and Copenhagen . . . . . .
32
4.4
E-scooter trip purposes distribution in Paris and Copenhagen, before and
after the lockdown. Significant differences between before and after the lock-
down (p<.05) are marked with a (*)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.5
Transport modes used in combination with e-scooters in Paris and Copen-
hagen, before and after the lockdown. Significant differences between before
and after the lockdown (p<.05) are marked with a (*)
. . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.6
Mean scores of level of agreements of users with several items tackling their
opinion of e-scooters in Copenhagen and Paris. Significant differences be-
tween Copenhagen and Paris (p<.05) are marked with a (*). (Likert scale
from from -2: Completely disagrees to 2: Completely agrees) . . . . . . . . .
42
4.7
Mean scores of level of agreements of users with several items tackling their
opinion of e-scooters in Copenhagen and Paris. Significant differences be-
tween Copenhagen and Paris (p<.05) are marked with a (*). (Likert scale
from from -2: Completely disagrees to 2: Completely agrees) . . . . . . . . .
43
4.8
Percentage of variance explained by the dimensions resulting from performing
a PCA on the items relative to attitudes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
==PAGE:12==
x
List of Tables
List of Tables
2.1
Demography, topography and transport infrastructure in Paris and Copenhagen 11
4.1
Comparison if the frequency of e-scooter use between Parisians, Copenhagen-
ers and other respondents
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2
Proportion of respondents stating using each transport modes in intermodal
trips including e-scooters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3
Distribution of people’s beliefs on whether their e-scooter habits will change
after the lockdown in Paris and Copenhagen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.4
Responses given by participants when asked about the reasons for a possible
change of e-scooter habits
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.5
Proportion of respondents that would change their user status after the lock-
down in Copenhagen and Paris
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.6
Expected changes in transportation habits in the overall sample, Paris and
Copenhagen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.7
Level of comfort taking different transport modes following the lockdown in
Paris and Copenhagen. (Likert scale from -2=Very uncomfortable to 2 =
Very comfortable) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.8
Perceived infection risk when using different transport modes following the
lockdown in Paris and Copenhagen.
(Likert scale from -2=Very low to
2=Very high) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.9
Level of agreement given by users in Paris and Copenhagen when asked about
the perceived level of safety when riding e-scooters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.10 Factors relative to comfort level when using different transportation modes -
PCA results (Note: the items are derived from the Likert-scale questions on
comfort level in the survey)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.11 Factors relative to attitudes and comfort - PCA results . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.12 Factors relative to risk perception - PCA results (Note: the items are derived
from the Likert-scale questions on perceived infection risk in the survey)
. .
47
4.13 Logistic regressions of the use of e-scooter after the lockdown based on de-
mographic variables. Significant factors are highlighted in bold . . . . . . . .
49
4.14 Logistic regressions for the use of e-scooter after the lockdown based on vari-
ables relative to attitudes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.15 Logistic regressions of the use of e-scooter after the lockdown based on vari-
ables relative to risks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.16 Logistic regressions of the use of e-scooter after the lockdown based on vari-
ables relative to self-identity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
==PAGE:13==
List of Tables
xi
4.17 Use of e-scooters after the lockdown in Paris and Copenhagen - Final model
53
4.18 Results of logistic regression modelling e-scooter use before the pandemic in
Paris and Copenhagen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
A.1 Results of backward variable selection relevant to model e-scooter use before
the pandemic in Paris and Copenhagen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
A.2 Logistic regression of the use after the lockdown, obtained after stepwise
variable selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
==PAGE:14==
xii
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In September 2017, Santa Monica’s streets filled with free-floating e-scooters almost
overnight (Laker, 2019). The phenomenon quickly spread out. Other American cities
faced the same situation, having to deal with a new type of shared vehicle, provided
by private firms. E-scooters rapidly gained in popularity over the United States. The
scooter-sharing systems established themselves as a fast and convenient transport mode
for last-mile mobility in urban areas (Ajao, 2019). The e-scooter market expanded to
Europe in 2018, starting with Lime’s first big-scale e-scooter deployment in Paris, in
June 2018 (De Clercq, 2018). Other cities rapidly followed. As of January 2019, Lime’s
e-scooters were present in over 13 European cities (Lime, 2019) and Bird’s e-scooters
were operating in 7 cities (Bird, 2019).
Because of the quick installation process of operators within new areas, a lot of cities
had to react and regulate the use of e-scooters in hindsight. To cope with this new form
of micromobility, several cities have chosen to set up pilot projects to study the impact
of shared e-scooters on the mobility and safety of users. Ultimately, such studies allow
the cities to make informed decisions regarding appropriate response and regulations
concerning the use of e-scooters. The intention and expectations of cities are variable
and can affect the approach used in the studies. Some cities welcome e-scooter operators
with enthusiasm, hoping that they will improve the sustainability of the city’s transport
systems. This is the case in Portland where e-scooters were expected not only to help
reduce the number of road fatalities by replacing part of the car trips (Portland Bureau
of Transportation, 2018). Other cities like Baltimore expect e-scooters to serve areas
with little or no public transport service (Baltimore City Department of Transportation,
2019). On the other hand, some cities are more cautious about the introduction of these
new shared vehicles, like in San Francisco where the e-scooters were temporarily banned
before being reintroduced for a 1-year pilot period (Bendix, 2018).
When it comes to the European Union, e-scooters are considered to be a possible an-
swer to the first and last-mile problem (Mercier-Handisyde, 2020). Thus, e-scooters are
considered “a next big topic in the area of multimodal integrated mobility solutions”,
according to European Commissioner Bulc.
While shared e-scooters are an effortless and flexible way to get around, especially for
last-mile transport, the question of their impact on safety was quickly raised (Valdivia,
2018). One of the concerns raised by the authorities was to determine where e-scooters
should be allowed, as the riders are vulnerable road users but dangerous sidewalk users
due to the vehicle’s speed that can reach above 20km/h. Cities wanted to look at the
==PAGE:16==
2
1 Introduction
number of e-scooter accidents, their context, as well as the severity of injuries suffered by
those involved in the accidents. A better knowledge of the users’ risk behaviours causing
accidents can enable cities to act and regulate the use of e-scooters in an appropriate
way, in particular by tackling the management of spaces used by riders, both for driving
and parking.
1.1
Mobility
To understand the ins and outs of the mobility aspect of e-scooters, it is first important
to understand what uses are made of e-scooters, and the specifities of e-scooter trips.
It is also necessary to consider how e-scooters fit into existing mobility solutions, either
through the scope of intermodality or through what transport modes e-scooters replace.
Finally, the underlying motivations for e-scooter use prove to be useful in understanding
what users expect from this micromobility.
1.1.1
E-scooter trip characteristics
E-scooters are mainly used for short trips. E-scooter services are only available within
the same city, so the distances that can be covered are relatively short. In Germany,
for example, the average distance of an e-scooter journey is between 1.75km (Lime)
and 1.96km (Tier). This ranks e-scooters between walking and tram in terms of trip
length (Civity, 2019).
More generally, in European cities, the typical trip distance,
in km, is included in the range [0.5;5] (Zagorskas & Burinskienė, 2020). However, a
significant share of the trips exceeds 5km, suggesting that e-scooter is not only a “last-
mile” transport mode (Gössling, 2020).
1.1.2
Inter- or monomodality
Indeed, thanks to their flexibility, e-scooters prove to be perfectly adapted to replace
a journey by car, Uber, or even on foot from someone’s house to their local transit or
subway station, or from a station to the workplace (6-t Research Office, 2019b). This
applies to the US, where the review of mobility reports leads to the conclusion that 45%
of car trips are individual short trips (less than 3miles) (Riggs & Kawashima, 2020).
A report about the use of e-scooter in New-Zealand showed that half of the surveyed
people that had used an e-scooter, used it along one or more other transport modes,
whether it was walking (77%), public transport (28%) or car (27%) (Curl & Fitt, 2019).
In France, 23% of the trips involving e-scooters are intermodal (6-t Research Office,
2019a, 2019b). Thus, intermodality applies to a minority of the trips. According to a
user survey conducted among Lime users in Paris, in 44% of the cases, e-scooters are
used for the complete trip only for the outward journey, with the return journey taking
place in another mode (or vice versa) (6-t Research Office, 2019b).
==PAGE:17==
1.1 Mobility
3
Because e-scooters are used for short trips mostly, they tend to replace vehicles usu-
ally used to cover similar distances (Lee et al., 2019). This, of course varies in each
considered geographical region. In the case of France, for example, user surveys show
that 30% of local users would have made their last journey by public transport rather
than by e-scooter. That number climbs to 44% for walking. On the other hand, only
3.2% of journeys replace car use (6-t Research Office, 2019a, 2019b). The number of car
trips replaced is higher in New-Zealand (23%) and Brussels (26.7%) (Curl & Fitt, 2019;
Moreau et al., 2020), where the car usually accounts for a larger share of the modes of
transport used.
Surprisingly, although e-scooters are regularly compared to shared bikes (McKenzie,
2019), it seems that in many cities and regions, bikes lag far behind walking, public
transport and the car when it comes to being replaced. E-scooters have replaced bicy-
cles in 6% of cases in French and New Zealand cities, and 14.2% of cases in Brussels
(6-t Research Office, 2019b; Curl & Fitt, 2019; Moreau et al., 2020). A study exploring
origins and destinations, as well as time of use of e-scooters and confronting it to similar
data regarding bike sharing systems in Washington DC suggested that e-scooters are
not likely to compete with cycling (McKenzie, 2019).
However, this observation is hardly applicable to cities and regions with a strong bik-
ing culture. In Danish cities, for example, bike trips account for strongest share of the
replaced transport modes with 29% of the trips, closely followed by walking trips with
28% of the trips. According to a user survey conducted for Færdselsstyrelsen, car and
public transports are replaced in only 9 and 13% of the cases (Færdselsstyrelsen, 2020).
There are also reports of journeys that would not have been made in the absence of
e-scooters. It can be assumed that some of these are due to test rides and recreational
trips (Portland Bureau of Transportation, 2018).
1.1.3
Motivations for using an e-scooter
E-scooters can be very handy when it comes to commuting. As developed above, the flex-
ibility of e-scooters offers a new mobility option opening the possibility of intermodality.
Many users use e-scooters for daily journeys to work or university, for example. But a
large proportion of users also use them for their fun aspect. Recreational use is common,
whether by locals or tourists who see e-scooters as a pleasant way to travel around a
city.
As the pattern of use is similar from one city to another, the proportions of each type of
user varies greatly. This variation seems to correlate with the mobility culture of each
city, and the transport mode replaced. Taking the example of Denmark, it appears that
51% of the e-scooter trips are made in a leisure or sightseeing context (Færdselsstyrelsen,
2020). A significant part of the users are tourists or visitors. In Baltimore, socializing
and recreation purposes cover 49.3% of the trips made in the city (Baltimore City De-
partment of Transportation, 2019).
However, in Paris, e-scooters are used more often for practical reasons than for leisure
(6-t Research Office, 2019a). In Portland, after the pilot programme was conducted to
==PAGE:18==
4
1 Introduction
assess the impact of introducing e-scooters in the city, 71% of users reported that they
most frequently used e-scooters to get to a destination, while only 28.6% said they most
frequently used e-scooters for recreation or exercise (Portland Bureau of Transportation,
2018). Thus, it is very difficult to define a specific mode of mobility for e-scooters. Their
use seems to vary significantly from one city to another. This phenomenon can be due
to the existence of different mobility cultures.
1.2
Safety
Safety issues were quickly raised with the rapid emergence of e-scooter fleets and an
increase in the number of injuries involving e-scooters (Valdivia, 2018).
Many also
expressed some concern regarding fleet management, considered to be ”anarchic”, as
well as the apparent lack of respect for traffic rules by some users (Tapper, 2019). Pilot
programmes were set up in several cities such as Portland, Baltimore and Copenhagen
to try to better assess the safety issues posed by e-scooters (Baltimore City Department
of Transportation, 2019; Færdselsstyrelsen, 2020; Portland Bureau of Transportation,
2018).
1.2.1
Risk-prone behaviours
An observational study highlighted risk-prone behaviours of e-scooters at intersections,
compared to e-bikes and bikes.
E-scooter riders tend to cross more quickly and be
engaged in more traffic conflicts (Guo et al., 2014).
When surveyed, the users also
report engaging in several risk-prone behaviours such as riding on sidewalks or being
two users on a single vehicle (6-t Research Office, 2019b). Studies based on the use of
video footage of several cities report a lack of helmet use (Blomberg et al., 2019a; Trivedi
et al., 2019).
Regarding the context of the accidents, some significant factors can be identified as
aggravating factors, the main ones being high speed, alcohol level of the protagonists
and lack of helmet use (Haworth & Schramm, 2019). It should be noted that the latter
is found in a large majority of cases. It appears that many of those injured are the riders
themselves, often because they have fallen out of their vehicles, or because there were
involved in a collision with another vehicle (Trivedi et al., 2019).
1.2.2
Injuries suffered
A majority of the injuries suffered after an e-scooter accident concerns the upper part of
the body, including many facial (Blomberg et al., 2019a) and head (Trivedi et al., 2019)
injuries. Injured people often have lacerations and fractures. In a large proportion of
cases, patients present multiple injuries (City of Austin, 2019b). Retrospective studies
can hardly give absolute proportions of injuries suffered.
The source of the data in
most of the studies sets a narrow frame of injured persons. It is almost certain that
==PAGE:19==
1.3 The COVID-19 pandemic
5
many users did not need or did not resort to medical intervention after an e-scooter
accident. For example, in 2019, among the 34 accidents reported to the Zuckerberg
San Francisco General Hospital and Trauma Centre by the e-scooter operators, 16 were
declared without injury (Bendix, 2018).
1.2.3
Pedestrians as main victims
Other users are sometimes injured, and first in line are the pedestrians that are quite
vulnerable to e-scooters (Haworth & Schramm, 2019). Encounters between pedestrians
and e-scooters can lead to significant pedestrian injuries. Pedestrians appear to most
frequently suffer from extremities, face, head and neck injuries, with higher rates than
e-scooter riders (Blomberg et al., 2019a; Sikka et al., 2019). Vulnerable pedestrians such
as the very young and the very old seem to be particularly affected (Sikka et al., 2019).
1.2.4
Parking issue
Encounters between riders and pedestrians can either occur because of sidewalk rid-
ing or poor parking. During an observational study of the e-scooter parking situation
conducted in Arlington, 16% of parked e-scooters appeared to be poorly parked. In
total, 6% of the 606 observed vehicles were found to be blocking the pedestrian right-
of-way (James et al., 2019). The study also surveyed users and non-users to gather
their opinions on e-scooters safety and parking management. The survey highlighted
that non-users feel less safe than users when around e-scooter riders. Furthermore, they
tend to picture e-scooter parking issues to be worse than it actually is (based on the
observational study).
1.3
The COVID-19 pandemic
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) published a declaration
officially characterising COVID-19 as a pandemic (World Health Organisation, 2020).
While only a few countries like China, South Korea, Iran and Italy were going through
outbreaks at that time, other countries rapidly went through their own outbreaks in the
weeks following (Fouad, 2020). With the rise in the number of cases, many countries de-
cided to shut their borders and issue orders for their citizens to stay at home. In Europe,
containment measures were in place between mid-March to mid-May, 2020 (with some
variations between cities and countries) (BBC News, 2020). This containment period is
referred to as the ”lockdown”.
With the mobility restrictions in place, and the remaining infection risks once the lock-
down was lifted, transportation habits have been changed for many European citizens.
The quarantine measures in place drastically limited the mobility of individuals, to the
extent that some e-scooter systems, such as Lime and Bird, have suspended their service
in some regions (Dickey, 2020). However, some like Travis VanderZanden, CEO of Bird,
==PAGE:20==
6
1 Introduction
assumed that “micromobility, especially scooters, will very likely have an important role
to play as communities begin to get moving again in the wake of the COVID-19 pan-
demic”.
It is difficult to predict with certainty how the pandemic will impact micro-mobility on
the long-run. Nonetheless, one can look back at similar events that occurred during the
century to build hypothesis regarding COVID-19 effects on e-scooters mobility. The
example of the SARS outbreak can be used to understand how people’s health concerns
can affect their mobility. The financial crisis that followed the restriction measures due
to the pandemic also has to be considered, examples of former financial crisis have proven
to have affected mobility patterns (Jones et al., 2020).
1.3.1
How epidemics can affect transports systems
In 2003, the SARS epidemic in Asia pushed people towards individual modes of transport.
People tended to avoid any contact with other users during the epidemic. A drop in
public transport ridership during and right after the epidemic was observed in China
and in Taiwan (Beutels et al., 2009; Wang, 2014). However, in the weeks following the
outbreak, the inhabitants resumed their initial habits. In China, sales of personal bikes
increased during the epidemic (Buckley, 2003). Although it has to be kept in mind that
the extent of SARS turned out to be smaller than what was predicted, the behaviours
adopted depict the population’s health concerns (Wang, 2014).
As of March 2020, the bike-sharing systems were facing a growth in demand in China
(Shen, 2020). Similarly, bike use increased significantly in Paris after the lockdown (Cazi,
2020). The fear of public transport is likely to push people towards individual transport
modes. Sun Naiyue, an analyst at research firm Analysys evokes the possibility of people
choosing cycling, taxi or ride-hailing over public transport in the months to come (Celik,
2020). It is conceivable that some people will choose to switch to shared-mobilities over
public transport.
1.3.2
How financial crisis can affect transports systems
.
On the other hand, in 2008, the economic crisis led to a shift in users to cheaper modes of
transport than the car, mainly public transport, but also cycling. The Greek crisis led to
similar observations (Efthymiou & Antoniou, 2017). In France, shared-bikes and shared-
cars use increased by 40% and 39% respectively (UTP, 2014). Ultimately, households
aim for a reduction of their expenses. Therefore, in addition to the switch to cheaper
transport modes, they tend to reduce trip frequency, notably for optional trip purposes
like shopping and entertainment (Papagiannakis et al., 2018). This phenomenon affects
the lowest income groups all the more. However, it appears that there is no preservation
of these mobility behaviours when the financial situation of the household changes.
Even in countries less affected by the 2008 financial crisis like Denmark, changes in the
transport habits were visible. After the crisis, trips were more likely to be done for work
==PAGE:21==
1.4 Research questions
7
or studies. However, students and people that were unemployed before the crisis did not
appear to change their behaviour (Nielsen, 2015). As a result, it can be expected that
part of the population will also switch to cheaper transport modes in the coming months,
or even that some will no longer make trips that are considered to be unnecessary.
1.4
Research questions
Assuming that micromobility, including e-scooters, will play a pivotal role in people’s
transport habits in the weeks following the lockdown, the aim of this master thesis will
be to investigate the impact of the pandemic on the usage made of e-scooters. To this
end, an attempt will be made to understand the short- and medium-term impact of the
COVID-19 pandemic on the use of e-scooters (frequency of trips, multimodality, means
of transport replaced, etc.)
and the profile of users.
For this purpose, the cities of
Copenhagen and Paris are chosen as study cases. Part of the study will therefore be
devoted to comparing these two cities and their cultural mobility, based on the assump-
tion that they are different. Through a questionnaire, we seek to understand the habits
and profile of users before the COVID-19 pandemic, but also how they imagine their
habits in the weeks following the lockdown.
In a first chapter, the reader will be given some background information about the
two cities studied, and about the theoretical tools and relevant concepts forming the
basis of this master’s thesis. The methodology for data gathering and statistical tools
used during the analysis are developed in a second chapter. Then, the results will be
presented, structured so that the following topics are tackled:
• The profile of the respondents (age, gender, occupation, city they live in);
• Their e-scooter habits before the pandemic (use/no use, frequency of use, reason
for travelling, adopted risk behaviour, accidents;
• Their expected e-scooter habits in the weeks following the spring peak of the
pandemic (frequency of use, reason for travel, reason for change if applicable);
• Their expected changes regarding other transport modes use;
• Their perception of e-scooters (practicality, safety, price, amusement, etc.).
The results extracted from the surveys will be used in an attempt to discuss the
impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on e-scooter use, confront the changes that will occur
in Paris and Copenhagen and make some recommendations from it. Hypotheses on the
role of e-scooters as micromobility in a post-pandemic context shall also be formulated.
==PAGE:22==
8
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2
Background
The aim of this master’s thesis is to assess and compare the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic on the use of e-scooters in Copenhagen and Paris, while also tackling the
differences in mobility culture between the two cities. In order to do so, it is important
to understand the specificities of each city, by considering the context of their state of
mobilities in each of the cities before the pandemic. This will help have a better un-
derstanding of the findings later on. In this chapter, the theoretical tools and relevant
concepts forming the basis of this master’s thesis will also be detailed, followed by the
theoretical framework developed for the study, as well as the hypotheses that are to be
tested.
2.1
Comparing Paris and Copenhagen
Along this study, Paris and Copenhagen are compared as they both are capital cities
with drastically different mobility cultures. Paris serves as a reference for how a megacity
works: as it has a high density and large variety of transport modes. Copenhagen on
the other hand, despite being an important European capital city, is considered to be
a ”regional cutting-edge city”, as it has a population lower than 1 million with forward-
looking transport policies (Goletz et al., 2020). In this sense, the focus on these two
distinct cities makes it possible to consider a broader spectrum of mobility cultures.
Even though the plans and infrastructures of both cities are not alike, they share a
similar long-term vision for urban transport, seeking to reduce the share of cars within
the municipality in favour of public transport and micromobilities, in particular cycling
(European Green Capital, 2012).
2.1.1
Cities characteristics
Paris and Copenhagen are both European capital cities, respectively in France and Den-
mark. While the two cities share a few characteristics, like the fact that their topography
is similar, they also differ in many regards. Paris and Copenhagen are both relatively
flat, even though Paris counts a few hills. In terms of climate, Paris has a mild and
moderately wet climate. Light rainfall is distributed along the year with episodic abrupt
heavy showers. Copenhagen is subject to unstable weather conditions throughout the
==PAGE:24==
10
2 Background
year. Usually, precipitation is moderate, with a slightly higher rainfall from July to
September. Paris is a megacity and Copenhagen a region cutting-edge city. Both cities
cover areas of similar surfaces, however the population within Paris is almost three times
as high as the population in Copenhagen. This results in drastically different population
densities as presented in Table 2.1.
The cities present very different transportation infrastructures. Paris has more public
transportation infrastructure than Copenhagen. On the other hand, the latter disposes
of more infrastructures dedicated to soft mobilities (e.g.
higher share of roads with
dedicated bike lanes), as shown in Table 2.1. In Paris, biking infrastructures are often
combined with bus and taxi lanes, which can be very off-putting for cyclists or other
micromobilities users1.
Nevertheless, both cities are currently going through deep infrastructural changes, mostly
regarding public transportation in Copenhagen and road infrastructure in Paris.
In
Copenhagen, two new metro lines have been opened in 2019 and 2020. These lines will
keep on growing within the next few years, with extensions are expected in Nordhavn
(2020) and Sydhavn (2024). Furthermore, the S-trains and existing metro will undergo
important construction work to increase public transportation capacity (DSB, 2020;
Metro Service, 2020). In Paris, efforts are made to improve the cycling infrastructure,
with the construction of more dedicated bike lanes and ”Express bike lanes” (Plan Vélo,
2020). In a further future, four new metro lines are also expected to open as they are
currently under construction (Société du Grand Paris, 2017).
2.1.2
Mobility cultures and policy plans
Existing infrastructures alone do not fully explain the differences in mobility habits there
can be between two areas. Deffner et al., 2006, present a concept for mobility culture
which includes more factors on top of the existing infrastructure and official planning
and policy work. The authors argue that the mobility culture of an area rely on: the
vision of the city, deriving from its history; the communication of the city and the image
of the area produced through it; the existing environment and infrastructure and finally,
the socio-economic situation of the city, as well as the lifestyle of the inhabitants. All
these aspects impact travel behaviours and mobility orientation.
Overall, the concept of mobility culture is built on the existing environment (the
tanglible elements that surround the individual and the means made available to them
to evolve in it) on the one hand, and on the social norms and attitudes of citizens towards
the different available modes of transport on the other hand (K et al., 2016). These two
factors combined affect users and forge their awareness of their mobility and travelling
patterns. In addition to the built environment and available infrastructure, mobility
1Paris municipality declares 901km of cycling infrastructure within the city. However, these also
account for areas made officially accessible for bikes, such as some bus lanes open to cyclists and one-way
streets that can be taken in the opposite direction by bicycles (Institut Paris Région, 2019). In Table
2.1, only bike lanes specifically made accessible for cyclists and micromobilities are considered.
==PAGE:25==
2.1 Comparing Paris and Copenhagen
11
Table 2.1: Demography, topography and transport infrastructure in Paris and Copen-
hagen.
Paris
Copenhagen
Inner city population
2 148 271
632 340
City area (km²)
105.4
97
Population density (ppl/km²)
20 755
4 400
Topography (highest pt/avg slope)
131m/2.5%
37m/1.9%
Total roads (km)
1625
780
Total bike lanes (km)
325
382
Nb of bus lines
316
66
Nb of light rail and metro lines
24
4
Nb of rail lines
5
7
Proportion of households with car
69.9%
62.1%
Note: Road infrastructure from Paris and Copenhagen’s statements (resp. 2014, 2007);
Cycling infrastructure from Copenhagen municipality (2019) and Grand Paris
Metropole (2020); Proportion of households owning a car obtained from Euromonitor
International (2014)
policies and communication campaigns can affect mobility by playing on social norms
and impacting on people’s perception of their mobility (Klinger & Lanzendorf, 2016).
When it comes to Paris and Copenhagen, despite having similar objectives and plan-
ning goals, the differences in population density and historical planning of the two cities
are significant. Consequently, the transport market shares, and more generally the mo-
bility cultures themselves, are different. Copenhagen is well-known for being a cycling
city. In 2016, biking represented 35% of the modal split, behind cars accounting for 43%
of mobilities (Københavns Kommune, 2018). The strong biking culture in Copenhagen
has been the object of many studies, and can be both explained by Copenhageners’ at-
titude towards cycling and the appropriate biking infrastructures made available in the
city (Freudendal Pedersen, 2015; Buehler & Pucher 2012). In Copenhagen, most bike
lanes and roads are separated which allows riders to have their own space. The gentle
topography is also a good asset of the city. In addition, the place of public transport
is less important there than in Paris, even though the metro system in Copenhagen
goes through on-going development with an important rise of the demand (Københavns
Kommune, 2018).
On the other hand, mobility in Paris mostly relies on walking and public transport
(UTP, 2019). As presented in Table 2.1, the public transportation network is extremely
developed. The number of public transport users keeps on growing, contrary to the num-
ber of car users that tends to decrease (Observatoire des déplacements à Paris, 2019).
==PAGE:26==
12
2 Background
Unlike Copenhagen, biking is not a strong asset of the city’s modal split. However, the
number of cyclists seems to be on the rise, with the recorded use of cycle paths in Paris
between 2018 and 2019 having increased by 53.77% (Breteau, 2020). This increase is
attributed to the development of infrastructures by Paris municipality, but also to the
overhaul of the Parisian shared bicycle system, Vélib’, until July 2019 (Breteau, 2020).
Despite clear differences in mobility culture and infrastructures, both Paris and Copen-
hagen share common goals in terms of transport planning: reduce the importance of
cars to benefit greener and softer transport modes such as biking and public transports.
For example, in Paris, an on-going effort has been made to make Paris 100% accessible
to bikes, in order to raise biking modal split up to 15% in the city by 2020 (Najdovski,
2017). In Copenhagen, as the city aims for carbon neutrality by 2025, there has also
been an attempt to raise bicycle market shares. However, the goals set by the municipal-
ity are much higher than in Paris: 50% of bike trips by 2015 (European Green Capital,
2012).
2.1.3
E-scooters market & regulations
Being a new actor in the mobility market, with very few market shares compared to
traditional transport modes, e-scooters are not yet taken into account in the mobility
reports of Paris and Copenhagen. E-scooters were introduced in Paris in summer 2018.
The city was the first entry point in the European market for some of the biggest oper-
ators, such as Lime or Bird (De Clercq, 2018). It hosted up to 16 operators at the same
time (Landais-Barrau, 2019). However, in order to limit the mess due to the numerous
operators and lack of regulations when e-scooters were introduced, Paris municipality
defined stricter regulations for e-scooters on October 25th, 2019 and limited the num-
ber of operators in the city to three, through a tender in July 2020 (France 3 Paris
Ile-de-France, 2020). In terms of regulations, no new category has been introduced for
e-scooter in the French traffic regulations, as the vehicles are considered to fall under the
”personal travel device” category (Legifrance, 2019). Some of the following behaviours
are for example forbidden when riding e-scooters: riding over the 25km/h speed limit;
riding or parking the vehicle on sidewalks; not having the mandatory lamps and light
reflection devices; riding when under 12 years old; wearing headphones while riding and
be more than one rider on the e-scooter.
Until July 2020, the total number of vehicles in the city was capped at 20 000. With
the reduction of the number of operators, this number has been set to 15 000 (France 3
Paris Ile-de-France, 2020).
In Copenhagen, e-scooters were introduced on January 17th, 2019.
Preceeding the
deployment of the first fleets, a list of regulations concerning e-scooters was released on
January 14th, 2019 (Retsinformation, 2020). On top of defining what can be labelled as
an e-scooter, the regulations specify some usage rules, e.g. the age required to drive an e-
scooter alone (15 years old); the number of riders allowed on one vehicle (limited to one);
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Understanding modal choice and determinants in e-scooter use
13
the lamps and reflective devices required to ride. This set of rules is completed with the
ones provided by Rådet for Sikker Traffik on their website: the alcohol limit is set to 0.5
(and a zero limit for illegal substances); e-scooter riders are subject to the same rules as
cyclists; e-scooters cannot be used on sidewalks, footpaths or pedestrian lanes; e-scooter
riders need to give signs of turns and stops. Fines can be given to riders not complying
with these rules (Rådet for Sikker Trafik, 2020). The number of authorized e-scooters in
the city was set to 200 vehicles in the city centre, and 3000 in the rest of Copenhagen.
The numbers were supposed to be revised after the publishing of the report delivered by
Færdselsstyrelsen in 2020 (Københavns Kommune, 2019b). Concerns about the safety
of e-scooters were quickly expressed through various articles (Tapper, 2019), especially
given that Færdselsstyrelsen’s found, through retrospective studies, that the accident
rate is 7 times higher for e-scooters than bicycles in Copenhagen (Færdselsstyrelsen,
2020).
2.1.4
The COVID-19 pandemic impact
On top of their existing differences in terms of characteristics and mobility cultures,
Paris and Copenhagen differ by how they have been struck by the COVID-19 pandemic.
In Paris, the population went through a complete lockdown, with impossibility to go out
for 8 weeks, except for essential trips. Essential trips covered commuting for essential
workers, grocery shopping and a few other exceptions (such as running or walking around
less than 1km away from the place of habitation). In Copenhagen, on the other hand, the
population was encouraged to stay at home, but did not have further restrictions (BBC
News, 2020). Many people worked or studied remotely, drastically reducing the amount
of people commuting. In both cities non-essential shops were closed for the time of the
lock-down and the public transportation services were limited. E-scooter services were
stopped in Paris during the lockdown, which was not the case in Copenhagen (Hawkins,
2020). The differences in restrictions and length of the lockdown in the two cities most
likely affected the populations in different ways. Thus, consequences of the lockdown on
behaviours may differ in Paris and Copenhagen.
2.2
Understanding modal choice and
determinants in e-scooter use
Determinants in the use of a specific transport mode have been traditionally conceived
as linked to the level of convenience of the said mode. The convenience of the transport
mode is assessed through different factors such as cost, speed, and flexibility, which are
grouped under the heading ”Instrumental motives” (Steg & Tertoolen, 1999). These
aspects are quite easy to grasp, measure and understand. However, other factors have
been shown to impact travel mode choice. A mode of transport also has affective and
symbolic functions that influence the decision to use or not to use it (Steg & Tertoolen,
==PAGE:28==
14
2 Background
1999).
The affective functions cover the emotional factors that are associated with
the transport mode. The choice of a particular transport mode can be motivated by
the level of joy, excitement or pride felt by the user.
On the other hand, symbolic
motives for using a transport mode are related to the social aspect of the said transport
mode. Users can express themselves and compare themselves to others through their
choice of travel mode (Steg et al., 2001). Social status of a travel mode, or the will to
express and show some sort of achievements can influence the choice (Gatersleben, 2014).
The instrumental, symbolic, and affective functions underlying several transport modes
use, car use for example, have been the subject of previous studies. It appears that
depending on the transport mode, some motives are more significant than others. For
example, underlying symbolic and affective motives were found to be more significant
than instrumental motives in car use (Steg, 2005).
Thus, an integrated framework, taking into account all these functions, can be used to get
a comprehensive understanding of determinants underlying a travel mode use. Similar
integrated frameworks have been used in previous studies. For instance, Fallah Zavareh
et al., 2020, used a framework similar to the one that is developed in this master’s thesis
to get a comprehensive understanding of the mechanisms underlying active mode use. In
the following, we present the concepts on which the integrated hypothetical framework
used in this master’s thesis is based. The goal is to investigate e-scooter use in Paris
and Copenhagen using psychological variables gathered in the integrated framework.
2.2.1
Theoretical approaches
2.2.1.1
Theory of planned behaviour
The Theory of Planned Behaviour is the most widely used framework when studying the
underlying of transport behaviour. The Theory of Planned Behaviour (TPB), developed
by Ajzen in 1991, is an extension of the Theory of Reasons Action (Fishbein & Ajzen,
1975). The two theories postulate that the choice of transport mode is a reasoned deci-
sion aiming at maximizing the user’s personal benefits. The authors assume that people
engage in specific behaviours based on behavioural intentions. Stronger intentions are
more likely to result in the behaviour. The personal intention leading to the behaviour
is an outcome of:
• Attitudes towards the behaviour: The individual’s positive or negative evaluations
of the final outcome, facilitated by the individual assumptions that an action might
lead to certain outcomes
• Subjective norms: The individual’s subjective perception of social pressure to per-
form and comply with a specific behaviour, based on their evaluation of the expec-
tations from relatives and significant others to act in a certain way
• Perceived behavioural control: The individual’s perceived level of difficulty in per-
forming a specific behaviour
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Understanding modal choice and determinants in e-scooter use
15
To our knowledge, only Eccarius and Lu, 2020, have studied the intentions of using
e-scooters. In order to do so, they used an extended version of the TPB to understand
the underlying of e-scooter use by students in Taiwan. The scope of study and context
differ from what will be developed in this master’s thesis. A more extensive framework
will be used to identify which are the motives involved in the use of e-scooters in Paris
and Copenhagen. On top of the factors related to the TPB framework, it includes the
safety and self-identity aspects. Furthermore, the framework has the specificity to be
using items directly related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
2.2.1.2
Motives and self-identity
In the TPB, attitudes are considered important determinants of behaviour. Many studies
mainly focus on the role of instrumental motives on outcomes, such as travel mode
choice (Steg, 2005).
But other motives, such as symbolic motives may be relevant
when studying mode use. These include self-image and identity factors Hafner et al.,
2017. Thus, the individuals’ desire to express their social status and identity may be
important to consider in the study of e-scooter use. According to Gatersleben, 2007,
a person may use possession to present themselves to others and try to manipulate
the way others perceive them. The existence of various communities of e-scooter users
existing on the internet suggests that there is a possibility that e-scooter riders consider
using e-scooter as being part of their identity and status. Furthermore, the feeling of
shame is mentioned by some Dott users when asked about the disadvantages of using
e-scooters (6-t Research Office, 2019a), which could points towards the existence of a
status associated with e-scooters.
2.2.1.3
Risk perception
A wide range of behaviour can be partly explained by the way people perceive risk.
For instance, risk perception and perceived exemption from harm were found to be
significant in the decision to wear a helmet (Fallah Zavareh et al., 2018). This is very
relevant in this study, as it so happens that e-scooters seem to be perceived by some
as a rather unsafe transport mode, as mentioned in the Introduction. Risk perception
has been included in previous studies focusing on reasons for individuals to choose a
transport mode. Moen and Rundmo, 2006, and Gröndahl-Backer et al., 2009, found
that risk perception in transport may be divided into collective and private transport
modes. However, the role of risk perception in micro-mobility use is not discussed. In
the case of the use of e-scooters in a post-pandemic context, two types of risks can be
identified:
• The risks linked to e-scooters mobility itself
• The infection risks linked to COVID-19
The differences in infrastructures and pandemic handling between the cities we aim
to compare could result in a different risk perception by the two populations, which
==PAGE:30==
16
2 Background
would be interesting to assess.
2.2.2
Integrated framework
In order to study the use of e-scooters in Paris and Copenhagen, the following integrated
framework, using the approaches listed above, is developed (see Figure 2.1).
Figure 2.1: Integrated framework developed to study the determinants of e-scooter use,
inspired by the framework used by Fallah Zavareh et al., 2020..
Within this framework, the intention of using e-scooters after the COVID-19 lock-
down is to be modelled. As “Intention is assumed to be an immediate antecedent of
behaviour” (Ajzen, 2002), we consider that such a model can give an overview of be-
haviours to expect in the weeks following the peak of the COVID-19 that occurred in
spring 2020 in Europe. In the framework, two variables are specific to the COVID-19
pandemic context, thus most of the variables can also be used to model use before the
lockdown. Based on the context elements provided in the previous sections, the following
hypotheses are proposed:
• More Parisians will express a willingness to change their e-scooter use than Copen-
hageners (H1)
• People will express intentions to shift to transport modes with less direct or indirect
contact with other users after the pandemic:
– In both cities, people are expected to want to reduce their use of public
transport. (H2a)
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Understanding modal choice and determinants in e-scooter use
17
– In both cities, people are expected to want to walk more. (H2b)
– In both cities, people are expected to want to cycle more. (H2c)
• In Copenhagen, the proportion of leisure trips is expected to decrease. (H3)
• In both cities, the number of multimodal trips including Public transport is ex-
pected to decrease. (H4)
• In both cities, the proportion of intermodal trips including walking is expected to
increase. (H5)
• In both cities, the COVID-19 pandemic is expected to trigger discomfort when
using public transportation. (H6)
• In both cities, the perceived infection risk when using e-scooters influences e-scooter
use negatively. (H7)
• In both cities, the perceived feeling of safety influences e-scooter use positively.
(H8)
• In both cities, positive attitudes towards e-scooter use positively influence use
intentions. (H9)
• In both cities, perceived behavioural control over use of e-scooters positively influ-
ences use intentions. (H10) 2
These hypothesis will be tested using the results of a survey distributed in Paris and
Copenhagen to both users and non-users.
2Hypothesis H9 and H10 are the same as the ones submitted by Eccarius & Lu (2020) to allow
comparisons of their results with the findings presented in this master’s thesis.
==PAGE:32==
18
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 3
Methodology
In the literature tackling the use of e-scooters and attitudes of people towards them,
different methodologies have been applied depending on the goal of the study. Studies
aiming to assess the safety of e-scooters mainly rely on retrospective studies, user surveys
and field observations. Retrospective studies are used to determine the circumstances
and consequences of accidents leading to a medical consultations (Blomberg et al., 2019b;
City of Austin, 2019b; Trivedi et al., 2019). Surveys, on the other hand, are used to find
out how people perceive e-scooters and the users risky behaviours (6-t Research Office,
2019b; Baltimore City Department of Transportation, 2019; Færdselsstyrelsen, 2020).
Finally, field observations allow to observe the actual behaviour of users and to better
understand the parking situation (Færdselsstyrelsen, 2020; Haworth & Schramm, 2019;
James et al., 2019).
On the other hand, studies and articles focusing on users habits and reasons for using
e-scooters rely on user surveys to collect users’ habits and attitudes on the service and
data analysis in order to observe patterns of use and habits on trips made in a city. This
is what is done by6-t Research Office, 2019b, the City of Austin, 2019b, Baltimore City
Department of Transportation, 2019 or Portland Bureau of Transportation, 2018.
The final purpose of this thesis is to identify factors that influence e-scooter use
before and after the COVID-19 pandemic, and compare these elements in Paris and
Copenhagen. The study includes a statistical analysis of surveys carried out in Paris
and Copenhagen in order to establish the impact of the pandemic on transport usage
and compare determinants for e-scooter use in the two cities. A study of the perception
of e-scooters is conducted in the two cities in order to ultimately propose a choice model
to understand e-scooter use after the lockdown. As actual data are not available at the
time of the study, the full analysis will only rely on an anomnymous, cross-sectional,
self-administered survey distributed to both Paris and Copenhagen inhabitants in June
2020.
3.1
Sampling procedure/ Questionnaire
distribution
The survey was distributed using similar channels in both cities. Both e-scooter users
and non-users were invited to take the survey. The main distribution channels were
social media (Facebook and LinkedIn), personal and professional circles, as well as flyers
==PAGE:34==
20
3 Methodology
randomly distributed in an attempt to broaden the diversity of profiles covered by this
study.
3.2
Questionnaire and measurement
instruments
Several aspects of e-scooter use were assessed in the survey. First, the respondents were
asked about their use (or non-use) of e-scooters before the lockdown due to COVID-
19. They were then questioned about expected changes (or not) in their transportation
habits following the lockdown. In a third section, the respondents’ infection risks and
comfort level perception when using different transport modes was assessed. Finally,
respondents had to state their level of agreement with several declarations concerning
instrumental, symbolic and affective motives for using e-scooters.
The questions respondents had to take regarding their transport habits were different
for users and non-users. However questions regarding the perception of infection risks
and opinions about e-scooters were common.
To avoid open answers, it was decided that the respondents would only be given multiple
choice questions, with a possibility to add their own answer when relevant (e.g. when
none of the proposition is applicable to the respondent).
3.2.1
Demographics
The demographics questions covered the place of residence of the participants, as well
as their year of birth, gender and employment status. The place of residence, gender
and employment were treated as categorical variables in the analysis (see Figure 3.1).
For the employment status, the number of categories has been reduced from 8 to 6
items initially proposed in the survey, for simplicity purpose in the modeling phase of
the study. In the initial survey, two categories of students (working and not working)
and two categories of unemployed (looking or not for a job) were proposed. However, it
was not considered to add value to the study once the final answers were studied.
The year of birth was used to compute the age of the respondents in 2020. Based on
this, the participants were then assigned to age groups: under 18 years old; between 19
and 30 years old; between 31 and 45 years old; between 46 and 60 years old and over
60 years old. To ensure the gathering of as many answers relative to e-scooter habits as
possible, the demographic questions were put at the very end of the survey.
3.2.2
Habits before the COVID-19 pandemic
The first questions in the survey focused on participants’ habits regarding e-scooters
prior to the pandemic. Respondents had to state if they had ever used e-scooters before
the pandemic and the type of e-scooters they had used: free-floating e-scooter, privately
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Questionnaire and measurement instruments
21
Figure 3.1: Categories proposed to participants in the questions related to demo-
graphic characteristics. Categories framed in red were merged for the data
analysis.
owned e-scooter or both. From this questions, users and non-users were separated. Users
had to describe their typical e-scooter trips, answering questions regarding:
• Frequency of their e-scooter trips
• Purpose for their trips
• Transport modes replaced by e-scooters
• Other transport modes used in combination with e-scooters (intermodality)
Because users were asked about their average trip, they were given the possibility
to give several answers for the questions tackling the travel purpose, intermodality and
replaced modes.
Two questions were dedicated to users’ risk behaviours. The first one proposed four
risk behaviours and asked respondents to specify in which of them they had already
engaged in. The four behaviours, listed in Figure 4.3, were chosen based on the reports
studying e-scooter use in Copenhagen and Paris (6-t Research Office, 2019a, 2019b;
Færdselsstyrelsen, 2020). The second one asked respondents if they had ever been in-
volved in an e-scooter accident, and if the accident required any emergency intervention.
On the other hand, instead of being asked about their habits, non-users were ques-
tioned on the incentives that could make them consider using e-scooters services. This
question aims to understand the reasons they have to not use e-scooters services. Sev-
eral incentives for e-scooter use were presented to the participants, who had to check
==PAGE:36==
22
3 Methodology
the ones relevant to them. People having exclusively used e-scooters also had to answer
this question, in addition to the habits questions.
3.2.3
Expectations after pandemic
All participants were then asked if they believed their use of e-scooters would change
after the lockdown. Repondents stating their e-scooter habits would change after the
lockdown were asked more in depth about what changes they were expecting: changes
in use frequency, trip purpose or intermodality. For example, a participant stating that
their use frequency would change after the lockdown then had to indicate what use
frequency they expected to hold after the lockdown. This also applied to trip purpose
and intermodality. The respondents were also asked why they thought their habits would
change (change in transport needs, wish to try e-scooters, wish to avoid public transport,
etc.).
More generally, all participants were asked to indicate their expected transport habits
post-lockdown, by stating for each transport mode if they were going to use them more,
less or as much. One category was also proposed for people to state that they were not
using a transport mode before the pandemic and that they would remain non-users. The
main goal of this question was to make a high-level comparison of use frequency before
and after the lockdown of several transport modes. It covered the following modes:
• Public transport (metro, bus, train);
• Private transport modes (personal car, personal bike, personal e-scooter);
• Shared individual modes (shared cars, shared bikes, free-floating e-scooters).
During the analysis of e-scooter use post-lockdown, the habits of each respondent
prior to the pandemic were kept and amended only with the expected changes stated by
the said repondent. Thus, the post-lockdown habits of people not expecting any changes
in their use patterns were considered to be the same as before the pandemic. Whereas the
answers of respondents expecting a change of habits were adapted according to their use
expectations. This allows for a more accurate overview of e-scooter use post-lockdown.
3.2.4
Attitude toward e-scooter and other transport
modes
Comfort level using different transport modes
Respondents were asked to assess their comfort level and the perceived infection risk
when taking different transport modes using a 5-points Likert scale (-2 = Very uncom-
fortable to 2 = Very comfortable for the comfort level, -2 = Very low to 2 = Very high
for the perceived infection risk).
==PAGE:37==
3.3 Statistical procedure
23
Affective and instrumental motives for using e-scooters
The opinions and attitudes of respondents regarding e-scooters in general were also
gathered to assess the relationship participants have with the micromobility.
Items
were created, inspired from previous studies involving frameworks based on the TPB
(Anable & Gatersleben, 2005; Fallah Zavareh et al., 2020; Steg et al., 2001).
They
tackled aspects such as amusement, convenience, perceived behavioural control, feeling
of safety or self-identity. Each item corresponded to an assertion, which was assessed
through 5-point Likert scales showing the level of agreement of the respondent with each
assertion (from -2= completely disagree to 2 = completely agree). The assertions aim
to evaluate instrumental, symbolic and affective motives for using e-scooters. All the
items are displayed in Figure 3.2. To ensure that no bias would occur due to the layout
of the questionnaire, the questions were ordered randomly for each participant.
3.3
Statistical procedure
3.3.1
Descriptive statistics
Description of e-scooter habits
Because of the categorical nature of most variables, the e-scooter habits in Paris and
Copenhagen, both before and after the lockdown are mostly described using charts,
figures and distributions. χ2 tests are used when determining if there are some significant
differences between the frequency distributions either between the two cities, or between
before and after the lockdown. For p-values over 0.1, the distributions are not considered
to be significantly different. A p-value of 0.05 is be used as significance level. P-values
between 0.05 and 0.1 are described as being light differences.
Level of agreement with an assertion
Several questions use Likert scales-based answers. Variables based on Likert scales are
to be described using medians and means. Distributions of two Likert variables are
compared using Mann-Whitney U-tests. The significance threshold when performing
the test is set to be the same as the one used when performing the χ2 test. T-tests are
also used when comparing the means of the opinion and attitudes items between Paris
and Copenhagen.
==PAGE:38==
24
3 Methodology
3.3.2
E-scooter use modelling
Principal component analysis
To measure the participants’ motives for using e-scooters, 33 items were defined and used
to create factors that would then be injected in the integrated framework presented in
Figure 2.1. 13 items are dedicated to the comfort level using several transport modes.
4 items are used to assess the perceived infection risks. 16 items are covering the partic-
ipants’ attitudes toward e-scooters. The different items and how they are expected to
be integrated in the framework is further detailed in 3.2.
Principal component analysis (PCA) with Varimax rotation is used to group the
items in relevant factors.
First, a PCA is run using the comfort items only.
Once
these items are grouped in coherent factors, three PCAs are performed on the respective
items of each block of the framework (Attitudes, Risk perception, Self-identity). For each
factor identified, the Cronbach alpha is computed to ensure the inner level of consistency
of the factor. A Cronbach alpha above 0.7 is considered acceptable. The final factors
are to be used in the logistic regressions.
Logistic regression
Binary logistics regressions are run in order to model the dependent variable describing
the theoretical status (user/non-user) of the participants after the lockdown, based to
their use intentions and expectations. These logistic regressions aim to understand the
motives underlying the use of e-scooter in the light of the COVID-19 pandemic. They
rely on a set of independent variables that includes the factors identified through the
PCAs.
The influence of the independent variables is explained in terms of odds, i.e. the prob-
ability of an event occurring over the probability of an event not occurring, which the
logistic regression calculates. With logistic regression the mean of dependent variable
p in terms of dependent variable x is given by the equation p = α + βx Because the
dependent variable is expected to be binary, the odds are transformed using a natural
logarithm. The natural log odds are modelled as a linear function of the independent
variable:
logit(y) = ln(odds) = ln
(
p
1 −p
)
= α + βx
(3.1)
where p is the probability of the considered outcome and x is the independent variable.
With multiple predictors, which is the case here, a general logistic model would be
presented as:
logit(y) = ln(odds) = ln
(
p
1 −p
)
= α + β1x1 + ... + βnxn
(3.2)
Thus, from equation (3.2) the prediction of probability becomes:
p =
eα+β1x1+...+βnxn
1 + eα+β1x1+...+βnxn =
1
1 + e−(α+β1x1+...+βnxn)
(3.3)
==PAGE:39==
3.3 Statistical procedure
25
Figure 3.2: Distribution of items between several hypothetical factors that are to be
used in the integrated framework.
First, logistic regressions are performed on the dataset covering all the responses
received, i.e.
the responses of the inhabitants of Copenhagen, Paris and elsewhere.
Initially, the regressions are done block by block to get an overview of the role and impact
of each factor. Then, a general model, based on the full dataset and including all factors,
is built. In order to get a better view of the main factors at stake in the description of
==PAGE:40==
26
3 Methodology
the dependent variable, variables are selected using stepwise selection, more specifically
backward selection. The stepwise selection is done by comparing models between them
using the AIC criterion, which is an estimator indicating the relative quality of statistical
models for a given set of data. This model building methodology is based on the stepwise
variable selection method described by Zhang, 2016.
A similar methodology is applied to the Copenhagen and Paris datasets alone. This
makes it possible to identify factors that may be specific to each of the cities. A final
model is to be run using only the factors found relevant for each city in order to compare
the determinants for e-scooter use in each of them.
3.4
Sample description
A total of 434 answers were collected from June 1st to June 21st, 2020.
All but 9
answers were collected through the anonymous link.
Out of the 434 responses, 391
answers were used. Answers were used if the respondent had taken more than 50% of
the questionnaire. Only one full response was excluded as it was likely to not be a
serious response. 153 respondents stated living in Paris and its surrounding and 118
stated living in Copenhagen and its surrounding. The rest of the respondents either
lived in another area, did not wish to state their place of living or did not reach the
Demographics section of the questionnaire. The distribution of respondents based on
their place of living is displayed in Figure 3.3
Figure 3.3: Origin of respondents.
Regarding e-scooter use, the majority of respondents had never used an e-scooter
before taking the survey (57%). 29% of the respondents have used free-floating e-scooters
at least once in their life, 8% have used a privately owned e-scooter (also referred to as
==PAGE:41==
3.4 Sample description
27
personal e-scooter in this report) and 6% have used both free-floating and privately
owned e-scooters.
The distribution of users (and types of users) varies significantly
between the different surveyed areas, specifically between Paris and Copenhagen (p<.05).
The proportions of free-floating and personal e-scooters are the same in both cities,
however the proportion of people having used personal e-scooters is higher in Paris than
in Copenhagen. Paris also counts less non-users than Copenhagen (see Figure 3.4).
Figure 3.4: Proportion of users in the surveyed locations.
In terms of demographics, the distributions of genders and age groups do not differ
significantly between the Copenhagen, Paris and Others samples (p>.1). However, a
light difference (p=.06) is observed in the age of respondents in Paris compared to
Copenhagen, due to older respondents having taken the survey in Paris (see Figure 3.5).
The employment status of respondents from the Paris, Copenhagen and Others sam-
ples does not differ significantly when tested (p>.1).
However, when tested against
each other only, employment status differs significantly between Paris and Copenhagen
(p<.05).
More students took the survey in Copenhagen than in Paris, where more
full-time employees answered (see Figure 3.6). Overall, the demographic profile of the
users does not vary significantly between Paris and Copenhagen. The user sample is
mostly composed of full-time employees and students, aged between 19 and 45. The
users sample counts more men (N=80) than women (N=59).
==PAGE:42==
28
3 Methodology
Figure 3.5: Age distribution of respondents in Copenhagen and Paris.
Figure 3.6: Employment status of respondents in the surveyed locations.
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4
Results
In this chapter, the results are presented in a comprehensive manner, in order to address
the research questions and tackle the hypothesis formulated in the Background chapter.
The sections of the chapter are organised in such a way that it starts with the descriptive
statistics, following the sequence of the questionnaire, and then presents models built,
in an attempt to better understand the underlying of e-scooter use before and after the
pandemic.
4.1
Why do people not use e-scooters?
Motives for not using e-scooters were explored through the scope of the incentives to
make non-users consider using an e-scooter (see Figure 4.1). According to the answers
given by the non-users (N=254) and people using exclusively personal e-scooters (N=31),
it appears that the main incentive for not using e-scooter services are better road in-
frastructure first (23% of all given answers) and cheaper services (15% of the given
answers), closely followed by an improvement in the vehicles’ safety and the manage-
ment of e-scooter parking (14% each). Upon closer look at Paris and Copenhagen, the
reasons for not using e-scooter services differ significantly (p<.01, see Figure 4.1). In
Copenhagen, the main reasons for people not using e-scooter services appears to be the
price, followed by the e-scooter parking management. The vehicles’ safety and the road
infrastructure only come after these two reasons. In Paris, on the other hand, the main
reason to not use e-scooter services is the road infrastructure. The reasons following are
the safety of vehicles and the organisation of the parking. The price issue only comes
after the possibility to borrow a helmet as an incentive to use free-floating e-scooters.
4.2
What were the users’ habits before the
pandemic?
Frequency of use
The surveyed users had similar frequency patterns in all the areas prior to the pandemic
(p>.1, see Table 4.1). Most of them were occasional users, using e-scooters either once
or less than once a month.
==PAGE:44==
30
4 Results
Figure 4.1: Incentives for the use free-floating e-scooter services given by non-users
and people only using private-owned e-scooter in Paris (N=96) and Copen-
hagen (N=72). Significant differences between the two cities (p<.05) are
marked with a (*).
Table 4.1: Comparison if the frequency of e-scooter use between Parisians, Copen-
hageners and other respondents.
Never
Only once
Less than
once a month
1-3 times
a month
1-4 times
a week
More than 5
times per week
Paris
56%
15%
16%
7%
1%
5%
Copenhagen
62%
15%
14%
4%
3%
2%
Others
69%
15%
7%
1%
4%
4%
Purpose of e-scooter trips
The main reason for using e-scooter before the pandemic among all respondents appears
to be leisure: “Fun / trying the vehicle out” is stated by 27% of the respondents, ”Meet-
ing with friends” is given by 15% of the respondents, commuting for leisure activities is
cited by 10% of the sample and sightseeing, 7%. Out of all the answers given by the
participants, 68% are leisure-related purposes. On the other hand, more practical rea-
sons for using e-scooters account for 27% of the answers. The 5% remaining correspond
to shopping. The purpose of e-scooter trips in Paris and Copenhagen does not differ
significantly (p>.1, see Figure 4.4).
==PAGE:45==
4.2 What were the users’ habits before the pandemic?
31
Transport modes replaced by e-scooters
In both cities, the main transport mode replaced by e-scooters is walking. In Copen-
hagen, 76% of users cite walking as one of the modes of transport replaced by e-scooters
when travelling. In Paris, this figure goes up to 83% of the surveyed users.
Walking is followed by the different types of public transports. The situation in Paris
and Copenhagen differs slightly (p<.1, see Figure 4.2). Privately owned bikes are more
often replaced by e-scooters in Copenhagen than in Paris. Driving cars and taking the
train is also significantly more replaced by e-scooters in Copenhagen, compared to Paris.
Figure 4.2: Distribution of all the transport modes replaced by e-scooters cited by the
users in Paris (N=76) and Copenhagen (N=49). Significant differences
between the two cities (p<.05) are marked with a (*).
Intermodality
In both cities, intermodality does not appear to be a prevalent aspect of e-scooter mo-
bility at first. Respondents were asked about the proportion of intermodal trips among
their e-scooter trips. The median of the share of intermodal trips is only 1% and the
mean of 15%. Out of 168 users taking this question, 86 state that intermodality rep-
resented 0% or 1% of their trips. However, after removing users that had only used
e-scooters once, intermodality appears a characteristic of a quarter of the trips made
with e-scooters (Copenhagen: Mdn: 15, M: 28.52; Paris: Mdn: 10, M: 23.47). The
difference between the cities is not significant (p>.1). The main transport modes used
==PAGE:46==
32
4 Results
in combination with e-scooters are the same in both cities: metro, walking, train and
bus (p>.1). Walking and metro are the main transport modes involved in intermodal
e-scooter trips (see Table 4.2).
Table 4.2: Proportion of respondents stating using each transport modes in intermodal
trips including e-scooters.
Transport modes
used in combination
with e-scooters
Walking
Own
bike
Shared
bike
Car as a
passenger
Car as a
driver
Bus
Metro
Train
Proportion of
respondents
45%
5%
4%
10%
17%
27%
54%
36%
Risky behaviours
Regarding risky behaviours, 67.7% of the users sample declare having adopted a risky
behaviour at least once. Among them, 15% adopted more than one of the behaviours
listed in Figure 4.3. The overall frequency distribution of behaviours differs slightly
between Paris and Copenhagen (p<.1).
The main infringement, both in Paris and
Copenhagen is riding on sidewalks. Riding with two persons comes second in Paris. In
Copenhagen, being two riders on the same e-scooter and using e-scooter while intoxicated
are mentioned at the same frequency. The difference in the proportion of users stating
they had used e-scooters under the influence of alcohol is slightly higher in Copenhagen
than in Paris (p<.1).
Figure 4.3: Risk behaviours adopted by respondents in Paris and Copenhagen.
8 participants, out of the 171 surveyed users state that they have been involved in
an e-scooter accident (4.7% of the user sample). 5 of them live in Paris, the 3 remaining
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Did the COVID-19 and the lockdown trigger any change in people’s habits?
33
ones do not live neither in Paris nor in Copenhagen. Only one person declares that the
accident required emergency intervention.
4.3
Did the COVID-19 and the lockdown
trigger any change in people’s habits?
Contemplating change
Overall, 17.9% of the respondents expected their e-scooter habits to change in the weeks
following the lockdown (referred to as ”sure respondents” from here on). 15.8% are
unsure whether a change would occur in their e-scooter habits (referred to as ”unsure re-
spondents”). The contemplation of change differs significantly between Paris and Copen-
hagen (p<.01) and between the three samples (Paris, Copenhagen, Others) (p<.05). In
Copenhagen, the proportion of people considering a possible change of habits is substan-
tially lower than in Paris (see Table 4.3). Thus, the hypothesis (H1), relative to the
higher willingness of Parisians to change their e-scooter habits, is verified.
In all the samples considered, sure respondents are mainly e-scooter users. On the
other hand, there are more unsure non-users than unsure users. Motivations for changing
of e-scooter habits are different among sure and unsure respondents. The main reason
for sure respondents to state that their e-scooter habits would change in a post-lockdown
context is that their needs in transportation have changed, and that they do not wish
to use public transportation anymore (see Table 4.4).
The main motivation that makes unsure respondents contemplate a change of habits
is the wish to try scooters out. This reason is of course given almost exclusively by
non-users, but also by users that have used e-scooters only once before. Other reasons
are given in smaller proportions, such as the desire to stop using public transport or the
change of transportation needs.
The motivations of unsure respondents are the same in Paris and Copenhagen (p>.1).
However, the reasons stated by sure respondents are significantly different in the two
cities (p<.01). The first difference resides in what the top reason for changing habits
is. In Paris, the desire to avoid public transportation comes first far before the second
Table 4.3: Distribution of people’s beliefs on whether their e-scooter habits will change
after the lockdown in Paris and Copenhagen.
No change
of e-scooter
habits
Unsure
Change
of e-scooter
habits
Copenhagen
77%
11%
12%
Paris
59%
20%
22%
==PAGE:48==
34
4 Results
Table 4.4: Responses given by participants when asked about the reasons for a possible
change of e-scooter habits.
Will e-scooter
habits
change?
My needs for
transportation
have changed
I do not want
to use public
transport
anymore
I want to
try it out
Other
Hygiene
concerns
Overall
Yes
31%
43%
13%
7%
6%
Unsure
25%
31%
41%
3%
0%
Paris
Yes
23%
48%
19%
8%
2%
Unsure
25%
34%
38%
3%
0%
Copenhagen
Yes
41%
29%
6%
6%
18%
Unsure
25%
25%
50%
0%
0%
reason, being the change in transportation needs. On the other hand, in Copenhagen,
the main reason stated is the change in transportation needs.
The second significant difference between the two cities is the extent to which the hy-
giene factor influences the desire to change one’s habits. In Copenhagen, 21% of sure
respondents express some concern about the level of hygiene of e-scooters, given that
much people touch the vehicles without systematic disinfection. In Paris however, only
3% of them express similar concerns. 1
A new binary variable is created to indicate the user/non-user status of each partic-
ipant after the lockdown, according to their statement and intentions. The variable’s
definition is based on whether people intended to change their e-scooter habits, the ex-
pected frequency they would use e-scooters at post-lockdown, and their user/non-user
status before the pandemic. For example, someone that was a user before the pandemic
but stated that their use frequency would drop to ”Never” after the lockdown would
be attributed a ”non-user” status after the lockdown. With this assumption, it appears
that the overall number of users would decrease after the lockdown. The number of
users in Copenhagen would drop from 49 to 42 users (a decrease of 14.29%). In Paris,
76 respondents were users, however only 57 respondents would be expected users after
in the weeks following the lockdown, representing a decrease of 25%.
Within the studied sample, a small proportion of the respondents would consider
changing their behaviour and habits to the point of changing their status (user to non-
user or vice-versa), as presented in Table 4.5. However, two things can be noted. First,
the proportion of people that could potentially change status is significantly different in
Paris and Copenhagen (p<.01) with a higher tendency to consider changing status in
Paris. Furthermore, most changes of status are users that would stop using e-scooters,
which aligns with the decrease of the overall number of users. When checking the demo-
graphics of users before and after the lockdown, no significant differences and change of
profile was highlighted (p>.1 before and after the lockdown, on the employment status,
1The ”Hygiene concern” answer was not proposed in the original questionnaire. A significant amount
of people brought it up using the field available for the ”Other:” answer, as shown in Table 4.4
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Did the COVID-19 and the lockdown trigger any change in people’s habits?
35
gender and age variables, for all three datasets).
Table 4.5: Proportion of respondents that would change their user status after the
lockdown in Copenhagen and Paris.
Would become
a user
Would become
a non-user
Would keep their
user/non-user status
Overall
2%
11%
87%
Paris
2%
14%
84%
Copenhagen
1%
7%
92%
Changes in e-scooter use after the lockdown
In Paris and Copenhagen, the way participants view their possible changes of habits
differs (p<.01).
In Paris, changes in frequency, trips purpose and intermodality are
given in the same proportions (about one-third of respondents for each type of change).
15% of the Parisians, sure that their habits will change, also state their habits would
change in other ways than frequency, trip purpose or intermodality. In Copenhagen, sure
and unsure respondents do not see this change in the same way. Change in frequency
is cited by 71% of sure respondents. Changes of intermodality and trips purpose are
both mentioned by 43% of sure Copenhageners.
Whereas, motives given by unsure
Copenhageners are significantly different (p<.01). The main type of change is also the
frequency but with only 38% of the group picking that answer. It is followed by changes
in intermodality (31%) and changes trips purpose (23%). However, despite respondents
giving the change of frequency as the top type of change that would occur, there is no
drastic impact of the lockdown on the distribution of the frequency of use neither in
Paris nor in Copenhagen (p>.1). The distribution of frequency is similar to the one
presented in Table 4.1.
The overall distribution of trip purposes does not differ significantly before and after
the lockdown (p>.1 both in Paris and Copenhagen, figures summed-up in Figure 4.4).
Therefore, the hypothesis (H3), assuming that the proportion of leisure trips would
decrease in Copenhagen is rejected.
==PAGE:50==
36
4 Results
Figure 4.4: E-scooter trip purposes distribution in Paris and Copenhagen, before and
after the lockdown. Significant differences between before and after the
lockdown (p<.05) are marked with a (*).
The only remarkable difference after the lockdown is the decrease of Copenhageners
expecting to use e-scooters to access public transportation/complete the last mile of a
trip (p<.05). This figure drops from 33% to 6%. In Paris, the number of participants
mentioning this reason for travelling also decreased, but not significantly (p>.1). This
would suggest that intermodality could change after the lockdown, with less people using
e-scooters in combination with public transport. Indeed, a small change in intermodality
can be observed in the full sample: the distribution of the transport modes used in
combination with e-scooters before and after the lockdown varies slightly (p<.1). In
Copenhagen, the appearing decrease in people stating they would use the metro in
==PAGE:51==
4.3 Did the COVID-19 and the lockdown trigger any change in people’s habits?
37
combination with e-scooters is not found to be significant (p>.1). The only significant
difference is the higher proportion of Parisians that expect to use walking in combination
with e-scooters (see Figure 4.5). (H4), assuming that the proportion of intermodal trips
involving public transportation would decrease, is rejected for both cities. Hypothesis
(H5) about the raise of intermodal trips involving walking is verified in Paris, but not
in Copenhagen.
Figure 4.5: Transport modes used in combination with e-scooters in Paris and Copen-
hagen, before and after the lockdown. Significant differences between be-
fore and after the lockdown (p<.05) are marked with a (*).
==PAGE:52==
38
4 Results
4.4
Were there other repercussions of the
COVID-19 pandemic on transportation
habits?
Aside from their e-scooter habits, respondents were asked to indicate their future use of
other transport modes, as well as their perception of safety of each transport mode in
after the lockdown, in regards to COVID-19.
Use of other transport modes
In Table 4.6 below, the changes that can be expected in transportation habits are
summed-up, based on the participants’ beliefs of their own future habits.2 For all trans-
port modes, a significant share of users intend to change their use frequency.A tendency
to walk more and take more personal bikes and cars can be observed everywhere, con-
firming hypothesis (H2b). The assumption that people from both cities would bike more
(H2c) needs to be nuanced. Intentions to use more personal bikes is indeed present in
both cities. There would also be a tendency to use more shared bikes in Paris. This con-
trasts with Copenhagen where shared modes, including shared bikes, seem to be avoided.
Public transport appear to be more avoided post-lockdown, verifying hypothesis (H2a).
This tendency is stronger in Copenhagen than in Paris. Metros and S-trains are subjects
of the same tendency in Copenhagen. However, in Paris, metros and RERs (trains) do
not share the same fate: RERs are not as avoided as metros. When combining all the
public transport modes under one ”public transport” category, the difference between
Copenhagen and Paris remains: a larger proportion of Copenhageners indicate they will
use public transport less (53% of Copenhageners, for 36% of Parisians).
Level of comfort and fear of infection
Respondents were asked to rate directly their comfort level and perceived infection risk
for different transport modes, using 5-point Likert scales. Overall, as well as in both
cities, people feel very comfortable using personal transport modes and uncomfortable
using public transport and shared cars. Thus, COVID-19 did seem to have triggered a
feeling of discomfort when using public transportation in both cities, as formulated in
hypothesis (H6). As for shared bikes and e-scooters, the level of comfort appears to be
neutral.
The distributions of answers in the two cities are significantly different for walking,
personal bike, metro and train (see Table 4.7). When looking at the distributions of
2The given p-values correspond to χ2 performed on Paris and Copenhagen distribution for each
transport mode, including the proportion of non-users. The tests have also been performed without
including the non-users, it does not change the observation, apart for walking where no significant
difference is noted when non-users are excluded.
==PAGE:53==
4.4 Were there other repercussions of the COVID-19 pandemic on transportation habits?
39
Table 4.6: Expected changes in transportation habits in the overall sample, Paris and
Copenhagen.
Will use
it less
Will use it
as much
Will use
it more
Not a
user
Different
in Paris and
Copenhagen?
Overall
2%
49%
45%
4%
Yes
Walking
Paris
1%
43%
49%
7%
(p=0.04)
Copenhagen
4%
54%
41%
1%
Own
Overall
3%
31%
35%
30%
Yes
Bike
Paris
16%
20%
48%
16%
(p<.001)
Copenhagen
7%
44%
44%
4%
Shared
Overall
5%
14%
10%
71%
Yes
Bike
Paris
1%
12%
18%
69%
(p<.001)
Copenhagen
10%
13%
4%
73%
Own
Overall
7%
28%
18%
48%
No
Car
Paris
7%
29%
22%
43%
(p=0.11)
Copenhagen
7%
21%
13%
59%
Shared
Overall
8%
17%
5%
71%
No
Car
Paris
5%
13%
6%
77%
(p=0.27)
Copenhagen
10%
18%
3%
69%
Overall
48%
34%
5%
13%
No
Metro
Paris
49%
34%
5%
12%
(p=0.67)
Copenhagen
53%
34%
6%
7%
Overall
41%
33%
8%
17%
Yes
Bus
Paris
32%
36%
11%
22%
(p<.002)
Copenhagen
58%
26%
4%
12%
Overall
34%
47%
6%
13%
Yes
Train
Paris
26%
53%
3%
18%
(p<.001)
Copenhagen
49%
39%
8%
4%
the level of comfort for each transport modes, it appears that Parisians feel more com-
fortable than Copenhageners when walking. However, they feel less comfortable taking
the metro, train or personal bike. No significant difference is observed between the two
cities regarding the comfort level when using e-scooters. Parisians and Copenhageners
do not feel comfortable nor uncomfortable when using e-scooters (p>.1).
A lower level of comfort using public transport and shared cars appears to go in pair
with a higher perceived infection risk in public transportation and shared cars. The
perceived infection risk is overall neutral for shared biked and e-scooters (see Table 4.8).
A very small proportion of the respondents answered that they perceived infection risk
when using e-scooters as high (4.0% of the respondents in Paris, 7.1% in Copenhagen).
In both cities, a majority of respondents evaluated the infection risk when using free-
==PAGE:54==
40
4 Results
Table 4.7: Level of comfort taking different transport modes following the lockdown in
Paris and Copenhagen. (Likert scale from -2=Very uncomfortable to 2 =
Very comfortable).
Transport modes
Paris
Mdn
Copenhagen
Mdn
U-test
(p-value)
Walking
2
2
(0.004)
Personal car
2
2
(0.980)
Shared car
-1
-1
(0.625)
Personal bike
2
2
(<.001)
Shared bike
0
0
(0.167)
Personal e-scooter
1
1
(0.447)
Free-floating e-scooter
0
0
(0.753)
Metro
-1
-1
(0.015)
Bus
-1
-1
(0.559)
Train
-1
0
(0.025)
floating e-scooters as ”Low” or neutral (55.4% in Paris, 60.1% in Copenhagen). Despite
perceiving e-scooter infection risks the same way (p>.1), the perceived level of infection
when using public transportation varies between Paris and Copenhagen. The risk of
getting infected when using public transportation is perceived to be higher by Parisians
than Copenhageners (p<.05). In Copenhagen, 50.4% of the respondents declare the in-
fection risk in public transportation to be high, and 20.3% very high. 45.3% of Parisian
respondents state that this risk is high, and 32.4% say that it is very high.
However, the fact that people think they will change their transportation habits or
not is not highly correlated with their comfort level and/or perceived infection rate for
any of the transport modes. Thus, we fail to clearly link the change to the perceived
infection risk despite what is seen in the median tables using correlation rates. Nev-
ertheless, comfort level and perceived infection risk are negatively correlated (-0,4 to
-0,5 correlation rates). It is also interesting to note that the perceived infection risks
for all public transport modes are significantly correlated with each other (0,48 to 0,6
correlation rates). Perceived infection risks are highly correlated for shared bikes and
Table 4.8: Perceived infection risk when using different transport modes following the
lockdown in Paris and Copenhagen.
(Likert scale from -2=Very low to
2=Very high).
Transport modes
Paris
Mdn
Copenhagen
Mdn
U-test
(p-value)
Public transport
1
1
(0.047)
Free-floating e-scooter
0
0
(0.436)
Shared bike
0
0
(0.810)
Shared car
0
1
(0.618)
==PAGE:55==
4.5 How do people feel about e-scooters?
41
free-floating e-scooters (0,9 correlation rate). Accordingly, the comfort level is positively
correlated between shared bikes and free-floating e-scooters (0,61 correlation rate) and
between all public transport modes (0,70 to 0,79 correlation rates). These correlations
suggest that some factors could be created from gathering the correlated items. This
will be tackled later in this chapter.
4.5
How do people feel about e-scooters?
It appears that overall opinions people have of e-scooters vary between the two cities,
and between users and non-users. Users from both cities seem to agree on the enjoyable
aspect of e-scooters (both with friends and in itself), the flexibility they offer and ease of
use (see Figure 4.6). Nevertheless, Parisians agree significantly more with the assertion
that e-scooters can bring one wherever they want to.
Another important difference
in Parisian and Copenhagener users’ opinions is the feeling of safety when riding e-
scooters. Parisian users do not feel as safe as Copenhageners. Parisian users also state
having many other user friends, and would rather disagree with the fact that e-scooter
riders look ridiculous. Both opinions differ significantly with what can be observed in
Copenhagen. Finally, Parisian users agree significantly more with the statement that it
is difficult to find operational e-scooters than their Copenhagener peers.
As for non-users, unlike users, their opinions do not diverge as much (agreeing vs.
disagreeing), but the extent to which they (dis)agree with some of the assertions marks
significant differences between the two cities (see Figure 4.7). The two item for which
Copenhagener and Parisian non-users’ opinions diverge are whether e-scooter riders look
ridiculous and whether e-scooters can bring the users wherever they want. Similarly to
what was observed with users, non-users in Copenhagen agree more with the assertion
than e-scooter riders look ridiculous than Parisians. As for the second item, Parisian
non-users appear to agree with the fact that e-scooter can bring one wherever they
want, which is not the case of Copenhagener non-users. As for the other items, Parisian
non-users seem to agree more with the the fact that e-scooter are easy to use, offer
flexibility and allow to save time. Parisians also agree more with e-scooters being fun
that Copenhageners. In both cities, and even more in Copenhagen, non-users state that
they do not have many user friends. Finally, non-users all agree that they would feel
unsafe when riding e-scooters. The feeling of unsafety appears to be even greater in
Paris.
Regarding safety perception, the significant difference between Paris and Copenhagen
concerns both users an non-users. Indeed, the proportion of respondents stating that
they would feel unsafe using e-scooters is significantly higher in Paris than in Copen-
hagen, as 56.1% of Parisian respondents answer that they would unsafe or very unsafe,
against 39.8% in Copenhagen.
In both cities, the proportion of people stating they
would feel very safe is very low (2.7% in Paris, 4.4% in Copenhagen). A Mann-whitney
test confirms that distributions in both cities significantly vary (p<.01). However, these
figures cover both users and non-users, so it is important to go further and see how
==PAGE:56==
42
4 Results
Figure 4.6: Mean scores of level of agreements of users with several items tackling
their opinion of e-scooters in Copenhagen and Paris. Significant differences
between Copenhagen and Paris (p<.05) are marked with a (*). (Likert
scale from from -2: Completely disagrees to 2: Completely agrees).
people that have experienced riding e-scooter actually feel. When considering the users
only, one can see that the perceived safety level are drastically different in both cities
(see Table 4.9). Apparently, the majority of users living in Copenhagen feel safe or
very safe, unlike Parisian users who tend to feel unsafe when riding e-scooters. In both
cities, people tend to feel unsafe around e-scooter riders, with no significant differences
between Paris and Copenhagen (p>.1). The only difference in that regards is that in
Copenhagen, both users and non-users feel the same way about other e-scooter riders
(p>.1). Whereas in Paris, non-users tend to feel more unsafe than users (p<.01).
==PAGE:57==
4.6 What are the factors at stake determining e-scooter use in Paris and Copenhagen?
43
Figure 4.7: Mean scores of level of agreements of users with several items tackling
their opinion of e-scooters in Copenhagen and Paris. Significant differences
between Copenhagen and Paris (p<.05) are marked with a (*). (Likert
scale from from -2: Completely disagrees to 2: Completely agrees).
Table 4.9: Level of agreement given by users in Paris and Copenhagen when asked
about the perceived level of safety when riding e-scooters.
I (would) feel safe riding e-scooters
Strongly
disagree
Disagree
Neither agree
nor disagree
Agree
Strongly
agree
Paris
8.1%
31.0%
36.5%
18.9%
5.5%
Copenhagen
4.1%
12.2%
36.7%
40.8%
10.2%
(U)
(0.0013)
4.6
What are the factors at stake determining
e-scooter use in Paris and Copenhagen?
To better understand the underlying of e-scooter in Paris and Copenhagen, relevant
factors are defined using PCA with Varimax rotation. The factors are then used in
==PAGE:58==
44
4 Results
logistic regressions on the different datasets available, aiming to model e-scooter use
before and after the lockdown.
4.6.1
Output of the principal component analysis
Attitudes and comfort level
First of all, a principal component analysis with Varimax rotation is performed using the
13 items relative to comfort while using different transport modes. 3 dimensions with
eigenvalues above 1 came out of the analysis. Together, the 3 dimensions explain 64,4%
of the variance. They are consistent and seem to correspond to the comfort level when
using: individual shared transport modes (car, bike, e-scooter); private transport modes
(walking, car, bike, e-scooter); public transport modes (metro, bus, train). However,
only the comfort level using shared and private individual transport modes are kept as
usable factors, the Cronbach alpha being considered too low for public transportation
(see Table 4.10).
Once the comfort factors are identified, the PCA is run using items relative to the
attitudes, subjective norms and perceived behavioural control of respondents toward e-
scooters. The comfort items are not directly merged in factors, however only the items
considered relevant for e-scooter use (comfort level in individual shared transport modes)
are kept in this PCA. 6 dimensions have eigenvalues above 1, and the graph showing
the percentage of variance explained by the dimensions points towards a 5 dimensions
solution (see Figure 4.8).
Table 4.10: Factors relative to comfort level when using different transportation modes
- PCA results (Note: the items are derived from the Likert-scale questions
on comfort level in the survey).
Transport modes
for which comfort
level is assessed
Public transport
modes
Shared individual
transport modes
Private transport
modes
Walking
0.29
-0.12
0.58
Personal Car
-0.18
-0.02
0.72
Shared Car
0.35
0.65
-0.14
Personal Bike
-0.01
0.11
0.69
Shared Bike
0.09
0.84
0.07
Personal Escooter
-0.14
0.32
0.65
Free-floating Escooter
0.07
0.82
0.25
Metro
0.89
0.17
0.00
Bus
0.86
0.12
-0.05
Train
0.89
0.13
-0.03
Cronbach alpha
0.60
0.73
0.89
==PAGE:59==
4.6 What are the factors at stake determining e-scooter use in Paris and Copenhagen?
45
Figure 4.8: Percentage of variance explained by the dimensions resulting from perform-
ing a PCA on the items relative to attitudes.
Only 3 factors actually come out of the 5 dimensions, as two of the dimensions
are actually constituted of one item only (see Table 4.11). The item relative to the
respondents’ friends being users does not fit in any category. Running the PCA again
without this item does not change the overall results. The 3 factors obtained as an
output for the PCA (perceived behavioural control; positive affect towards e-scooters,
that includes symbolic and affective attitudes; comfort level using shared modes) appear
to all be consistent (Cronbach alpha higher than 0.7).
Another PCA was run with only 4 dimensions. Two consistent factors came out of
it: perceived behavioural control and comfort level using individual shared transport
modes. It was considered less satisfying than the 5-dimensions solutions, that was used
during the rest of the analysis.
Risk perception
In a second step, a PCA is performed using the items relative to risk perception. 2
factors come out.
The two dimensions account for 73.1% of the explained variance,
and correspond to the expected factors: perceived e-scooter safety and infection risk
perception when using transport modes (see Table 4.12).
It turns out that the perceived infection risk factor is improved when the perceived
infection risk in public transportation is not included (the Cronbach alpha is 0.87 with-
out the public transportation item). Thus, this item is not included in the following
steps. The Cronbach alpha of the perceived e-scooter safety factor does not reach the
consistency level set in the Methodology (0.67). However, the factor will be kept as is
==PAGE:60==
46
4 Results
Table 4.11: Factors relative to attitudes and comfort - PCA results.
Items relative to Attitudes
PBC
use
Positive
affect
Comfort level
using shared
modes
Cost
Perceived
availability
E-scooter services are expensive
0.03
-0.07
0.00
0.88
0.06
Riding e-scooters saves time
0.75
0.20
-0.01
-0.02
0.04
Riding e-scooters is fun
0.44
0.53
0.06
0.35
-0.04
Riding e-scooters with friends is
an enjoyable activity
0.37
0.58
0.06
0.31
-0.04
Using e-scooters to commute is
stressful
-0.08
-0.52
-0.17
-0.22
0.51
E-scooters can ring me wherever
I want to
0.75
0.10
0.06
-0.08
0.14
E-scooters offer flexibility
0.80
0.01
0.06
0.10
-0.11
Many of my friends use
e-scooters
0.33
0.23
0.13
0.24
0.24
E-scooters are a nuisance
-0.11
-0.76
-0.09
0.22
0.07
E-scooter riders look ridiculous
-0.10
-0.71
0.00
0.05
-0.27
Finding an operational e-scooter
is difficult
0.01
0.09
-0.05
0.11
0.81
E-scooters are easy to use
0.50
0.31
0.01
0.27
-0.19
Comfortable using free-floating
e-scooters
0.18
0.24
0.78
0.02
0.00
Comfortable using shared bike
0.06
0.00
0.86
0.02
0.06
Comfortable using shared car
-0.07
-0.03
0.75
0.00
-0.16
Cronbach alpha
0.71
0.71
0.73
–
–
because of its importance and relevance in this study. The fact that the factor is not
as good as expected will be taken into consideration. The factor can be improved if
the item ”Using e-scooters to commute is stressful” was added in the PCA. However,
removing this item from the attitudes impacts the other attitude-related factors in such
a way that it is preferable to keep it with the other attitudes related items for the rest
of the analysis.
==PAGE:61==
4.6 What are the factors at stake determining e-scooter use in Paris and Copenhagen?
47
Table 4.12: Factors relative to risk perception - PCA results (Note: the items are
derived from the Likert-scale questions on perceived infection risk in the
survey).
Items relative to risk perception
Perceived infection
risk using
shared modes
Perceived
e-scooter
safety
Perceived infection risk using free-floating e-scooters
0.90
-0.02
Perceived infection risk using public transport
0.63
0.16
Perceived infection risk using shared bikes
0.92
-0.01
Perceived infection risk using shared cars
0.81
0.03
I would feel safe using when using e-scooters
0.02
-0.87
I feel unsafe around e-scooter riders
0.09
0.86
Cronbach alpha
0.84
0.67
Self-Identity
Finally, the Cronbach alpha relative to the two self-identity items is calculated. It ends
up being too low (0.16) to be able consider a self-identity factor.
Overall, the successive PCAs that were performed in this section led to the identifi-
cation of the following factors:
• Perceived behavioural control (instrumental motives and PBC)
• Positive affect (affective and symbolic motives)
• Comfort level using shared modes (PBC, specific to the post-lockdown context)
• Many of my friends use e-scooters (Descriptive social norm, item not included in
any factor)
• E-scooter services are expensive (Instrumental motive, item not included in any
factor)
• Finding an operational e-scooter is difficult (PBC, item not included in any factor)
• Perceived infection risk when using individual shared modes (specific to the post-
lockdown context)
• E-scooters positive safety outcome
• E-scooters show who I am (item not included in any factor)
• Riding e-scooters suit me (item not included in any factor)
==PAGE:62==
48
4 Results
In the final factors, perceived behavioural control and instrumental attitude items
are combined under the same factor. The same applies to affective and symbolic items.
Regarding the items that were not ultimately included in any factors, some are interest-
ing to keep as is in the modelling section. Even though their impact will be considered
in a first step, the self-identity items, as well as the ”Finding an operational e-scooter
is difficult” should not be included in the final model. The reason for this is that not
only the three items were not included in any factor, but also they would be difficult to
interpret if kept as part of the final model, as they aim to assess a subjective impression.
Furthermore, the three items are much more relevant to users than non-users, which
could affect the model. On the other hand, the expensiveness of e-scooter services, as
well as the number of the participants’ relatives using e-scooter can be considered more
objective and tangible. Thus, it can be interesting to include them in the models.
4.6.2
Underlying motives for e-scooter use in Paris and
Copenhagen
Now that the factors have been identified, it is possible to evaluate how they relate to
the intention of using e-scooters after the lockdown, which will be used as the main
dependent variable throughout this section. A general assessment of how the different
factors impact e-scooter use will be performed in a first subsection. Then, the differences
in factors influencing use after the lockdown in Paris and Copenhagen will be further
detailed in the second subsection. Finally, e-scooter use before the lockdown will be
modelled in the last subsection, to compare motives for using e-scooters before and after
the lockdown.
Relation of each factor with the use after the lockdown
A first logistic regression is run using only the demographic factors to model the use of
e-scooters after the lockdown, the results are presented in Table 4.13. It is interesting to
see what demographic characteristics can define users and if these vary between Paris
in Copenhagen. First of all, there is no direct impact of living in Paris or Copenhagen
appearing in that regression. Only a few factors appear to be significant for now: the age
everywhere, being self-employed in Paris, being a man in Paris. When considering the
estimates, it seems that being between 19 and 45 years old positively influences e-scooter
use (the reference group is 46-60 y.o.). The difference between men and women only is
significant in Paris, where being a man positively influences e-scooter use. Finally, the
impact of the employment situation depends on the city. In Paris, for example, self-
employed workers are less likely to be users after the lockdown than full-time employees
(used as reference). On the other hand, in Copenhagen, being unemployed makes one
less likely to be a user. Everywhere, students are less likely to be users after the lockdown
than full-time employees.
==PAGE:63==
4.6 What are the factors at stake determining e-scooter use in Paris and Copenhagen?
49
Table 4.13: Logistic regressions of the use of e-scooter after the lockdown based on
demographic variables. Significant factors are highlighted in bold.
Overall
Copenhagen
Paris
Variable
Estimate
p-value
Estimate
p-value
Estimate
p-value
Intercept
-1.4187
0.0039
-1.87
0.0815
\textbf{-1.495}
\textbf{0.0254}
Living in Paris
0.4635
0.1686
–
–
–
–
Living in Copenhagen
0.2722
0.4339
–
–
–
–
Male
(REF)
(REF
(REF)
(REF)
(REF)
(REF)
Female
-0.7084
0.0052
-0.5251
0.2267
{-0.9256}
{0.0174}
Other
-16.245
0.9946
-16.2529
0.9945
–
–
Full-time
(REF)
(REF)
(REF)
(REF)
(REF)
(REF)
Student
-0.3981
0.2136
-0.1215
0.8831
-0.669
0.1590
Part-time
0.170
0.8318
0.33
0.8222
-16.69
0.9935
Self-employed
-0.55
0.3892
18.42
0.9940
{-1.99}
{0.0857}
Unemployed
0.134
0.8102
-0.1404
0.8853
0.4035
0.6500
Retired
-14.47
0.9916
–
–
15.757
0.9923
Other
-15.9
0.9925
–
–
-16.82
0.995
Less than 18 y.o.
-14.76
0.9913
–
–
-14.88
0.995
19-30 y.o.
{1.22}
{0.0103}
1.688
0.1538
{2.14}
{0.0032}
31-45 y.o.
{1.246}
{0.0103}
{1.934}
{0.0949}
{2.11}
{0.0072}
More than 60 y.o.
-0.516
0.6532
-14.71
0.9931
-14.42
0.9930
AIC
414.47
152.16
183.67
Following the demographics, it is interesting to have a look at the attitudes. The
perceived behavioural control over e-scooters is significant for all datasets. This factor is
found to positively influence e-scooter use, verifying (H10). Expensiveness of e-scooter
services, as well as affective and symbolic attitudes are also significant in the regressions
performed on the overall and Paris datasets (see Table 4.14). The descriptive social
norms and level of comfort when using e-scooters on the other hand are only significant
in Copenhagen. As expected, it seems in this regression that having positive attitudes
towards e-scooters, positively impacts whether one is a user or not post-lockdown, con-
firming (H9).
This covers the perceived behavioural control, affective and symbolic
attitudes, and level of comfort factors. On the other hand, agreeing with the fact that
finding operational e-scooters is difficult has a negative influence over e-scooter use.
The factor assessing if respondents think e-scooter services are expensive does not have
a negative estimate. To clarify this point, especially because of the significance of that
factor, two PCA were ran using the items relevant to attitudes, one on the users dataset,
and another on the non-users dataset.
In the users dataset, similarly to the results
presented in Table 4.11, the cost item ended up forming a factor on its own. In the
non-users dataset, on the other hand, the expensiveness of e-scooter services formed a
factor together with the number of friend users. Despite the low Cronbach alpha (0.16),
the fact that these two items were gathered under the same factor could suggest that the
cost factor is actually an indication of the familiarity of the respondents with e-scooter
services: people that are users or have users in their surrounding are more likely to know
what the actual price of e-scooter services is.
==PAGE:64==
50
4 Results
Table 4.14: Logistic regressions for the use of e-scooter after the lockdown based on
variables relative to attitudes.
Overall
Copenhagen
Paris
Variable
Estimate
p-value
Estimate
p-value
Estimate
p-value
Intercept
-1.5567
9.66e-10
-1.032
0.0223
-2.14
3.4e-06
Perceived behavioural
control
0.654
0.0059
1.132
0.0217
0.757
0.0557
Positive affects
0.937
3.97e-05
0.6193
0.1856
1.311
0.0004
Cost
0.497
0.0016
0.3964
0.1764
0.787
0.0017
Many of my friends
use e-scooters
0.0181
0.8827
0.5564
0.0373
-0.168
0.375657
Feeling comfortable using
individual shared modes
0.222
0.1179
0.4626
0.0937
0.141
0.5265
Finding an operational
e-scooter is difficult
-0.286
0.0933
-0.2928
0.3096
-0.045
0.8766
AIC
382.19
126.78
173.39
As mentioned in the previous chapters, the risk perception of using e-scooters is
assessed through the scope of the vehicle and mobility safety, and through the scope of
infection risk due to the on-going pandemic. The safety of e-scooter is a very significant
factor in all three regressions (Table 4.15). A higher perceived safety influences positively
e-scooter use, as assumed in hypothesis (H8). On the other hand, the impact of the
infection risk is almost null in the Overall and Paris regressions. Only in Copenhagen
does it seem to have a small impact, its influence being that a higher perceived risk
would make one less likely to be a user after the lockdown. Thus, hypothesis (H7) is
verified in Copenhagen.
Table 4.15: Logistic regressions of the use of e-scooter after the lockdown based on
variables relative to risks.
Overall
Copenhagen
Paris
Variable
Estimate
p-value
Estimate
p-value
Estimate
p-value
Intercept
-0.356
0.0052
-0.3799
0.0829
-0.1492
0.457
Perceived e-scooter
safety level
0.769
1.92e-08
0.9265
0.0003
0.8080
9.32e-05
Perceived infection risk using
individual shared modes
-0.0812
0.5094
-0.3209
0.1163
0.0154
0.936
AIC
408.44
135.78
183.83
Finally, despite the self-identity items not being gathered in one factor, making them
harder to interpret on their own, it appears that feeling that e-scooter are suiting oneself
is significant when determining if that person is a user or not, the relation between the
two variable being positive. However, the ”E-scooter show who I am” item is not as
convincing: it is not significant in any of the regressions (see Table 4.16) and its impact
is either almost null or negative (in the case of Paris). It can be difficult for non-users to
==PAGE:65==
4.6 What are the factors at stake determining e-scooter use in Paris and Copenhagen?
51
relate to this item. Furthermore, both users and non-users from the two cities disagreed
with this assertion to a similar extent (p>.1), as presented in Tables 4.6 and 4.7.
Table 4.16: Logistic regressions of the use of e-scooter after the lockdown based on
variables relative to self-identity.
Overall
Copenhagen
Paris
Variable
Estimate
p-value
Estimate
p-value
Estimate
p-value
Intercept
-0.4889
0.0023
-0.245
0.3267
-0.5323
0.0187
Riding e-scooters
suits me
0.5472
6.58e-07
0.750
0.0005
0.6908
6.89e-05
Riding e-scooters
shows who I am
-0.03058
0.7831
0.039
0.8394
-0.2129
0.2257
AIC
417.52
141.56
182.23
General model and comparison between Paris and Copenhagen
Following this first investigation, logistic regressions combining all the relevant variables
were run on the Overall, Copenhagen and Paris datasets.
Use after lockdown = β0 + β1 PBC
+ β2 Positive affects
+ β3 Cost
+ β4 Many user friends
+ β5 Comfortable using shared modes
+ β6 Perceived safety
+ β7 Perceived infection risk
+ β8 Place of living
+ β9 Employement status
+ β10 Age
+ β11 Gender
Regressions using the same variables as the regression above, but removing the cost
variable were also run to measure the impact of the factor. The presence or absence of
this variable does not have a significant impact on the other variables’ significancy or
estimates. However, taking the cost variable into account improves the models (based on
the AIC criterion). Thus, we choose to keep the variable, as an indicator of familiarity
with e-scooters serivces and opinion on their expensiveness.
==PAGE:66==
52
4 Results
Once the full regression is performed, relevant variables are selected using a backward
selection, based on the AIC criterion. The final models ended up being different for
each dataset. In the overall dataset, the remaining variables were the ones related to
attitudes, safety and age (see appendix A.2).
Overall use after lockdown = β0 + β1 PBC
+ β2 Positive affects
+ β3 Cost
+ β6 Perceived safety
+ β10 Age
In Copenhagen, the final model, after backward selection did not include any demo-
graphic variables, but some attitudes-related variables, as well as both the risk-related
variables (see appendix A.2).
Copenhagen use after lockdown = β0 + β1 PBC
+ β3 Cost
+ β4 Many user friends
+ β6 Perceived safety
+ β7 Perceived infection risk
Finally, in Paris, no risk-related variables were significant, only attitudes and age
(see appendix A.2).
Paris use after lockdown = β0 + β1 PBC
+ β2 Positive affects
+ β3 Cost
+ β10 Age
The only variables that are consistently included in all models are the perceived be-
havioural control and the expensiveness of e-scooters. The level of comfort, employment
status and gender never appear in the models. The only difference that can be noted
when removing the cost factor from the regression (because of its ambiguity) it that
gender becomes part of the significant variable for the Paris dataset. The cost variable
is kept moving forward.
Using these relevant variables only, a final regression model is run to model the de-
pendent variable describing e-scooter use after the lockdown. This last regression is
==PAGE:67==
4.6 What are the factors at stake determining e-scooter use in Paris and Copenhagen?
53
used to compare the main underlying of e-scooter use in Paris and Copenhagen. All
the results are presented in Table 4.17. All the estimates have kept the same signs and
show the same tendencies as described in the previous subsection. No direct impact of
the city of origin of the respondent can be found when performing a regression on the
full dataset. The only significant factors appear to be the positive affects, perceived be-
havioural control, expensiveness of the e-scooter services. On top of this, the age group
also appears to be a determinant of e-scooter use: being 19 to 45 years old influences
e-scooter use positively. Finally, the safety factor appears to be significant too. How-
ever, this influence of the safety factor is not prevalent neither in Copenhagen nor in
Paris. Factors relevant in Paris are similar to the Overall model, with the significance
of the following factors: perceived behavioural control, positive affects, expensiveness of
e-scooter services and being between 19 and 45 years old. In Copenhagen, on the other
hand, only the perceived behavioural control is significant (p<.05). Perceived infection
risk and descriptive social norms slightly influence e-scooter use (p<.1). In an attempt
to create global model that would include interactions between relevant factors and the
fact that one lives in Paris and Copenhagen, interactions have been added to the logistic
regression. However, after proceeding with a stepwise selection, no interaction seemed
relevant enough to be kept in a final model.
Overall, the only factor that is found in both cities is the perceived behavioural
control, which has a positive influence over e-scooter use post-lockdown. In Copenhagen,
Table 4.17: Use of e-scooters after the lockdown in Paris and Copenhagen - Final
model .
Overall
Copenhagen
Paris
Variable
Estimate
p-value
Estimate
p-value
Estimate
p-value
Intercept
-2.32112
2.25e-05
-1.6741
0.1060
-3.20700
0.000335
PBC
0.70351
0.00528
1.2510
0.0218
0.92816
0.032110
Positive affects
0.68704
0.00942
0.2851
0.6194
0.85275
0.046888
E-scooter services
are expensive
0.50177
0.00218
0.4674
0.1268
0.70484
0.007444
Many of my friends
use e-scooters
0.05035
0.69378
0.4851
0.0859
-0.10226
0.614409
Perceived e-scooter
safety
0.33273
0.05890
0.3157
0.3856
0.38681
0.165494
Perceived infection
risk
-0.17794
0.20698
-0.3997
0.0836
-0.06301
0.795212
Less than
18 y.o.
-14.06902
0.98460
–
–
-15.44828
0.993645
19-30 y.o.
0.97867
0.04611
0.4245
0.6601
1.60688
0.040793
31-45 y.o.
1.09453
0.04494
0.9475
0.3760
1.69685
0.049520
46-60 y.o.
(REF)
(REF)
(REF)
(REF)
(REF)
(REF)
More than
60 y.o.
-0.54830
0.64937
-13.3753
0.9936
-15.47975
0.990793
AIC
351.67
124.31
155.86
==PAGE:68==
54
4 Results
no demographic attributes seem to ever be significant. Because, in the final regression
the infection risk seem to matter, it would be interesting to also investigate what the
determinants for e-scooter use were before the lockdown, in order to compare the two
cities before, as well as changes that may have occurred with the pandemic. Being a
user before the pandemic significantly impacts the use after the pandemic (p<2e-16 for
each dataset), thus it is relevant to see if any changes of determinants actually occurred.
Use before the lockdown and evaluation of changes in Paris and
Copenhagen
The same methodology is applied to understand the factors determining the use of e-
scooters before the COVID-19 pandemic. After proceeding with the stepwise variables
selection, we obtain the logistic regression models presented in Table A.1, in the Appen-
dice. In Copenhagen, again no specific demographic variables appear to be significant
when explaining the use of e-scooters. Significant factors appear to be the perceived be-
havioural control, expensiveness of e-scooter services and perceived safety of e-scooters.
The only factor appearing to be common to Paris and Copenhagen is the cost of e-
scooter services (and familiarity level with them, the estimates are still positive). The
other prevalent factors are positive affects, descriptive social norms and being aged from
19 to 30. People in that age group appear to be more likely users than the others.
Differences before and after the lockdown can be observed when running a regression
with all the identified variables (Table 4.18). In Copenhagen, descriptive social norms
gained significancy from before the after the lockdown. Cost, on the other hans used to
be significant before the pandemic, but is not anymore afterwards. Thus, even before
the pandemic, in our sample, the main factors underlying e-scooter use in Copenhagen
are factors relative to instrumental attitudes and perceived behavioural control. In Paris
on the other hand, before the pandemic, the perceived behavioural control factor was
not significant. It only becomes relevant after the pandemic. The second difference is
that, in Paris, before the pandemic, the perceived safety level was significant. The same
applies to descriptive social norm that significantly impacted e-scooter use before the
pandemic. None of these factors are significant after the lockdown.
Once again, the attempt to include interactions between relevant factors and each city
was not conclusive. No interaction seemed relevant enough to be kept after proceeding
with the stepwise selection.
==PAGE:69==
4.6 What are the factors at stake determining e-scooter use in Paris and Copenhagen?
55
Table 4.18: Results of logistic regression modelling e-scooter use before the pandemic
in Paris and Copenhagen .
Overall
Copenhagen
Paris
Variable
Estimate
p-value
Estimate
p-value
Estimate
p-value
Intercept
-1.4839
0.003886
-1.8049
0.0925
-1.3292
0.0515
PBC
0.6967
0.008094
1.2971
0.0174
0.6247
0.1363
Positive affects
0.7961
0.004313
0.3204
0.5807
0.8351
0.0420
E-scooter services
are expensive
0.5892
0.000693
0.6428
0.0386
0.3987
0.1394
Many of my friends
use e-scooters
0.4285
0.001825
0.3557
0.2020
0.4683
0.0231
Perceived e-scooter
safety
0.5527
0.003020
0.5638
0.1176
0.5638
0.0461
Less than
18 y.o.
-0.1008
0.947380
–
–
-0.1163
0.9417
19-30 y.o.
0.8044
0.086078
0.7466
0.4539
1.1200
0.0716
31-45 y.o.
1.0671
0.045071
1.3317
0.2263
0.9977
0.1671
46-60 y.o.
(REF)
(REF)
(REF)
(REF)
(REF)
(REF)
More than
60 y.o.
-16.5407
0.986107
-13.6552
0.9935
-17.0716
0.9886
AIC
328.40
121.60
154.56
==PAGE:70==
56
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
In this chapter, all the findings are discussed. The results obtained in this master’s
thesis are compared to previous studies and implications of the findings are presented and
developed. In a first section, the mobility aspect of e-scooters in Paris and Copenhagen is
tackled, followed by the safety issues that were raised during the study. Then conclusions
regarding mobility culture in Paris and Copenhagen are drawn. Finally, limitations of
the study are addressed, with inputs on what improvement could be applied in the
future.
5.1
Mobility
Electric scooter mobilities before the COVID-19 pandemic
In this master’s thesis, because the participants were asked to describe their general
habits before the lockdown, it can be difficult to depict a precise portrait of the typical
use made of e-scooters in Paris and Copenhagen. However, it is possible to understand
part of the underlying of e-scooter use and confront it to previous studies, in Paris and
Copenhagen.
Overall, the user demographics both in Copenhagen and Paris are similar: full-time
employees and students aged between 19 and 45 years old, with slightly more males
than females. This does not quite correspond to the typical profile defined by user sur-
veys that have been run in Copenhagen and Paris. In fact, the studies we have available
show that a large majority of users are men in Paris and Copenhagen (6-t Research Of-
fice, 2019a; Færdselsstyrelsen, 2020). Nevertheless, the study sample displayed e-scooter
habits before the pandemic corresponding to previous findings of user studies conducted
in 2019 in Paris and Copenhagen.
In both cities, the typical user is an occasional user who mainly relies on e-scooters for
leisure. However, determinants of e-scooter use differ depending on the city. In Paris,
the models run in the present study show that affective and symbolic factors were sig-
nificant determinants of e-scooter use before the pandemic, along with descriptive social
norms and feeling of safety. Indeed, findings from 6-t Research Office, 2019b, indicate
that Lime users’ main motivation for using e-scooters was the fun aspect of micromo-
bility. Being between 19 and 45 years old also appeared to influence e-scooter use. In
Copenhagen on the other hand, the most prominent and significant factors shaping e-
==PAGE:72==
58
5 Discussion
scooter use before the pandemic seem to be the perceived cost of e-scooter services, the
perceived safety of e-scooters and the perceived behavioural control that using e-scooter
to commute allows for. The perceived cost does not actually stand as an instrumental
factor, affecting e-scooter use negatively as one could expect. Those who find e-scooter
services expensive are more likely to be users. Upon closer look on this specific factor,
it was concluded that that the cost factor can be read and interpreted as a factor of
people’s familiarity with e-scooter services: a person familiar enough with the services
to know that they are expensive is more likely to use e-scooters. The strength of the
control factor and the lack of significance of the positive affects in Copenhagen is sur-
prising given the mainly leisure-related use of e-scooters in the city. The model obtained
for the full dataset includes a combination of the factors relevant in each city.
Relevant factors influencing e-scooter use are different depending on the city and the
mobility culture. In Copenhagen, perceived behavioural control and safety appeared as
important factors before the lockdown, unlike in Paris where social norms, demographics
and positive affects prevail, in addition to perceived safety. Nevertheless, further inves-
tigation would be necessary to verify the findings, as the introduction of interactions
between the city and attitudes factors in the overall model was not conclusive.
Both in Paris and Copenhagen, e-scooters are largely replacing walking and public trans-
port. In Copenhagen, 60% of users also stated that e-scooters have replaced trips that
would otherwise have been made using personal bicycle. In Paris, these findings also
align with modal split in the city (Observatoire des déplacements à Paris, 2019). The
same applies in Copenhagen, where bikes acount for a significant share of the modal
split (Københavns Kommune, 2018). On the other hand, it may seem surprising that
shared bicycles account for such a small proportion of our results. Indeed, free-floating
e-scooters are often compared to shared bicycles (McKenzie, 2019). However, user stud-
ies observed the same phenomenon in cities with no strong biking cultures (6-t Research
Office, 2019b; Curl & Fitt, 2019; Moreau et al., 2020). It seems that the target de-
mographics for both transport modes are quite different, and that despite both modes
being commonly presented as alternatives for walking and public transportation, most
e-scooter users are non-bikers, which would explain the low bicycles shares captured by
e-scooters.
Intermodality appears to concern about 25% of regular users. The phenomenon affects
Copenhagen and Paris in the same extent. In both cities, e-scooters are mainly used
in combination with walking and/or public transport.
While it is possible to assess
how much of the user sample engages in intermodality, determining the actual share of
e-scooter trips involving intermodality just from this study is not possible, since partici-
pants had to describe their general habits, not about their most recent trip. Overall, the
findings on e-scooters use before the pandemic in Paris and Copenhagen are consistent
with the studies conducted in 2019 in the two cities.
==PAGE:73==
5.1 Mobility
59
Effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on mobilities
This study’s subject was based on the assumption that the COVID-19 pandemic would
have a significant impact on mobility, especially on the short- and medium-term. This
postulate was based on the knowledge of examples of epidemics that have occurred in
the past, notably linked to SARS-CoV-1 in the early 2000s, but also on the observation
that mobility in general was limited at the time of this master’s thesis. As e-scooters are
still a relatively new transport mode in cities, one could think that e-scooters may not
have been completely assimilated into people’s habits, which could therefore be easily
changed.
Based on the intentions displayed by participants in the survey, it seems that changes in
e-scooter habits are to be expected. The main change in e-scooter use intention observed
after the lockdown concerns the frequency of use. Indeed, a significant portion of users
would stop using e-scooters after deconfinement. The proportion of people who intend
to change their habits is higher in Paris than in Copenhagen. The greater extent of the
pandemic in Paris could partially explain this. In both cities, the number of people that
would stop using e-scooters after the lockdown is greater than the number of people
intending to become users. However, this result has to be nuanced, as it is possible
that some occasional users already planned on not using e-scooters anymore before the
pandemic occurred. The issue was mitigated through asking respondents about their
expected changes of e-scooter habits specifically in regards to the COVID-19 pandemic.
A majority of Parisians, previously users, justify their wish to change their habits by
the fact that they want to avoid public transport. Copenhagener users, on the other
hand, consider their needs for transportation has changed. Wanting to try e-scooter out
is the motivation brought up by non-users from both cities. Despite the lower number
of users, the overall distribution of use frequencies is not really affected and remains
similar before and after the pandemic’s first peak. These findings have to be taken with
a grain of salt, as a report delivered by Lime in July 2020 states that users will keep the
same frequency pattern. In some cases, frequency of use is even expected to increase
after the pandemic, particularly in cities where mobility restrictions were light, which is
the case of Copenhagen (Lime, 2020a).
Few changes in travelling pattern intentions are observed. Regarding trip purpose, the
motive of getting to a train / public transport station appear to be affected by the
pandemic. This is consistent with the participants’ intentions to avoid public transport
after the pandemic. This effect is more pronounced in Copenhagen, which is in line
with the fact that Copenhageners show a more consistent desire to reduce their trips
by public transport. One would therefore expect intermodal journeys to include less
public transport. However, no significant change of habits were found in that regard.
This can be due to the sample size, as the number of respondents being concerned by
intermodality and wanting to change their habits is very low. However, there is a greater
propensity to use walking in combination with e-scooters after the lockdown in Paris.
This result is consistent with the high share of Parisians stating that they intended more.
Changes are also likely to affect most transport modes.
Modes involving privately-
==PAGE:74==
60
5 Discussion
owned vehicles seem to benefit from the pandemic: people declare that they want to
use walking or their own vehicles (car or bicycle) more or as much. On the other hand,
there is an intention to use public transport less, especially in Copenhagen. This trend
is less marked in Paris. A closer look at how each transport mode is to be used more
or less after the pandemic gives interesting inputs on the relationship of Copenhageners
and Parisians with each of them. In Copenhagen, S-trains and metros are subject to the
same use change trends, with a majority of the sample wanting to use them less. An even
higher proportion of Copenhageners wants to use buses less. It is possible that infection
risk is perceived to be higher in buses, as there is less space for people to observe social
distances. The trends observed in Paris are quite different. Like in Copenhagen, the
majority of people plan on using less the metro. However, buses and trains are much
less avoided. In Paris, public transport account for a very large share of people’s jour-
neys. Buses and RERs (trains) are less widely used than the metro, but this alone does
not fully explain the phenomenon. RER is the public transport mode least affected by
avoidance intentions. Because the train is usually used for longer trips than the metro,
it may be more difficult to find appropriate transport alternatives. In Copenhagen, on
the other hand, S-train can be easily replaced with bus, metro or bicycle. Moreover, it
would seem that Parisians are seeking to create and find an alternative by buying bikes:
bike sellers claim to have sold 2.5 to 3.5 times more bikes in May-June 2020 than in 2019
around the same period (Breteau, 2020). This goes along with the high proportion of
respondents stating they want to use personal bikes more in Paris, phenomenon that can
also be observed in Copenhagen. Nevertheless, (Lime, 2020a) finds that public transit
shall go back to a normal state after the pandemic, based on a survey Lime distributed
to their users, so these results are to be taken with a grain of salt.
Ambiguity remains with regard to shared transport modes, particularly shared bicycles.
The avoidance of shared modes is justified by the infection risk for some participants
who consider these modes to pose a health problem, due to the indirect contact with pre-
vious users if vehicles are not disinfected. However, where Copenhageners consistently
express the desire to avoid both free-floating e-scooters and shared bikes, a significant
proportion of Parisians declare intending to use more shared bikes after the lockdown.
It is not unthinkable that this is due to the fact that more Copenhageners own personal
bicycles than Parisians, and therefore do not need to use the ones provided by the city
or private shared bikes companies. Furthermore, the massive communication from Paris
municipality to promote cycling and the use of the new cycle paths, inaugurated when
the lockdown was lifted, may have pushed Parisians to turn to both private and shared
bikes, despite the risk of infection. The importance of this bike-oriented communication
plan is further supported by the the enthusiasm of Parisians for shared bicycles that
does not seem to apply in the same way to electric scooters. Indeed, according to the
answers given by the respondents, there is a greater proportion of people wishing to use
fewer e-scooters, or not use them at all, in both Paris and Copenhagen. Nevertheless,
people express intentions to use individual transport modes more, at the expense of
public transport and shared cars, which aligns with expectations (Shen, 2020).
==PAGE:75==
5.2 Safety
61
5.2
Safety
The safety of e-scooters has been considered from two perspectives. On the one hand,
the feeling of users and other people interacting with them in the public space was as-
sessed in order to understand how the sample perceive this transport mode in terms of
overall road safety. On the other hand, the perception of safety with regard to the risk
of infection by the SARS-Cov-2 was assessed by comparing e-scooters with other modes
of transport.
When considering both users and non-users, the proportion of people that would feel
safe or very safe riding e-scooters is lower than that of people that would feel unsafe or
very unsafe. This indicates a feeling of insecurity towards e-scooter use. This effect is
accentuated by non-users who perceive e-scooters as a rather unsafe mode. Focusing on
users shows that the safety perception depends very much on the city. In Paris, more
users feel unsafe using e-scooters than in Copenhagen. This corroborates with figures
from 6-t Research Office, 2019b, according to which, 40% of users stated the lack of
safety as the major disadvantage of e-scooters. However, in Copenhagen, the results
issued by Færdselsstyrelsen, 2020 show a higher proportion of users feeling unsafe when
riding e-scooters than the figures found here. Several elements could help explain the
differences with the findings of this study. First, the sample size is lower in this study
than in Færdselsstyrelsen, 2020. Second, the report gave figures covering more cities
in Denmark than just Copenhagen.
Finally, it is possible that in the time between
the first study and this survey, people got used to the idea of using e-scooters and got
educated on the safety matters associated to them. Nevertheless, the clear difference
between Paris and Copenhagen remains. It may be related to the existing infrastructure
for e-scooters in each of the cities. Indeed, as developed in the Background chapter, it
is not uncommon for micromobility in Paris to share the road with other cars, taxis or
buses. On the other hand, in Copenhagen, e-scooters can use bike lanes isolated from
the traffic most of the time.
What is common to both cities is the feeling of unsafety of people interacting with e-
scooter riders. There is a pronounced perceived lack of safety in both cities towards
e-scooter riders. In Copenhagen, both users and non-users state feeling unsafe around
e-scooter riders. In Paris, non-users tend to feel more unsafe around e-scooter riders
than users. This echoes the findings of James et al., 2019, who highlighted the fact
that the feeling of unsafety was more compelling among non-users in Rosslyn, Virginia.
Consequently, the perceived level of e-scooter safety is part of the determinants for e-
scooter use in both cities before the pandemic. In both cities, perceived safety influences
e-scooter use positively.
In conclusion, there is a general mistrust of e-scooters, which seems to be decreasing with
time and with further familiarity with this still relatively new transport mode. From
==PAGE:76==
62
5 Discussion
the user’s point of view, it would appear that the Parisian environment is less conducive
to the development of a sense of safety, which could be linked to the lack of safe and
suitable infrastructure at the time of the study. Before the lockdown, safety feeling is
part of the factors influencing e-scooter use.
In both cities, a large majority of the users seem to have adopted risky behaviours at
least once. In Paris, the two most frequent offences were riding on the sidewalk, and
riding with more than one person. The first one can be linked to the lack of safe in-
frastructure or the convenience some people find in riding on sidewalks. Riding with
more than one person on an e-scooter could be a matter of convenience, because of
the lack of available vehicles (6-t Research Office, 2019a), or a matter of excitment. In
Copenhagen, the main infrigement was also found to be riding on sidewalks. According
to Færdselsstyrelsen, 2020, the risky behaviours reported by the police often involved
intoxicated riders, which corroborates with the fact that 17% of Copenhagener users
admitted having used e-scooters under the influence of alcohol in the survey, making
intoxicated riding the second most common offence in Copenhagen.
It is difficult to determine whether or not the feeling of unsafetyness expressed by respon-
dents is justified, just from the results presented here. Some Parisians stated having ever
been involved in e-scooter accidents, and none did in Copenhagen. However, the sample
is too small to deduce anything from these figures. Furthermore, studies tackling the
safety of e-scooters do not always point in the same direction. In Copenhagen, e-scooters
accident rate was found to be seven times as high as bicycles (Færdselsstyrelsen, 2020).
On the other hand, the International Transport Forum did not seem to find elements
pointing to e-scooters’ accident rates being much different from bicycles on the same
time period, on a more global scale (Internation Transport Forum, 2020b). It is likely
that more time will be needed to determine the dangerousness or not of this micromo-
bility, as the population gets used to e-scooters. Nonetheless, the share of the injuries
sustained from e-scooters can most likely be avoided, as a restrospective study led in
Copenhagen showed that several injuries occurred as a result of reckless driving and
discarded e-scooters (Blomberg et al., 2019b).
Regarding the COVID-19 pandemic, e-scooters do not appear to be considered a big
source of infection. Indeed, the perceived level of infection risk for e-scooters, as for
other shared modes of transport (bicycles and cars), is neutral in both Paris and Copen-
hagen. This can be contrasted with observations made regarding public transport where
the infection risk is perceived to be high. An even higher proportion of people perceive
the risk of infection when using public transport to be very high in Paris, compared to
Copenhagen. The great promiscuity of users in Parisian transport, and the perception
of public transport as being generally unhygienic, particularly metros and trains can
easily explain this difference between the two cities.
The perceived infection risk also resonates with observations made in this study regard-
ing the level of comfort in the different modes of transport with regards to the pandemic.
A greater proportion of Parisians is not comfortable in the metro compared to Copen-
hagen. The level of comfort associated with using an e-scooter is neutral in both cities.
Despite e-scooters not being perceived as holding a major infectious risk, whether in
==PAGE:77==
5.3 Differences in mobility culture in Paris and Copenhagen
63
Paris or Copenhagen, it appears that the infectious risk associated with the micromobil-
ity slightly influences the decision whether or not to use an e-scooter in a post-lockdown
context in Copenhagen, whereas it is not a significant factor in Paris, despite the COVID-
19 crisis hitting the inhabitants severely. The main explanation put forward are that in
Copenhagen, emphasis was put on hand disinfection in the communication for mitiga-
tion of the virus spread compared to other cities focusing on mask wearing for example.
Furthermore, the strict measures in place in Paris at the time of the survey may have
impacted the will of Parisians to make more efforts than those imposed by the author-
ities (wearing masks, confining oneself, and so on). It could also be that the Parisians
were under the impression that they did not need to mind their behaviours outside the
scope of the restrictions.
5.3
Differences in mobility culture in Paris and
Copenhagen
Whereas the use made of e-scooters seems similar in Paris and Copenhagen, the way
in which e-scooters are appreciated in each of the cities, and how they fit into the ex-
isting mobility offer is different. The coronavirus crisis and its impact on the habits of
Parisians and Copenhageners may have further accentuated the pre-existing differences
exposed in section 5.1. Although usage patterns is similar, the determinants of e-scooter
use vary between Paris and Copenhagen. This sheds light on how this micromobility
is perceived differently by the two samples. First, it is interesting to understand what
turns off non-users and what reasons they choose not to adopt this transport mode.
What inhabitants from the two cities have in common in that regard is how the poor
organisation of parking is perceived as a big issue, especially by the non-users. This is
supported by several comments left by the survey participants, complaining about the
management of free-floating e-scooters parking.
Apart from that common trait, it appears that non-users from the two cities have a
different approach and relation to e-scooter use. In Paris, the safety issue appears to
be a major obstacle for e-scooter use, where in Copenhagen, the price and management
of e-scooter fleets seem to be the biggest issue, which is explained by the difference in
infrastructure of both cities. Apart from the existing environment, other factors like
the communication from Paris municipality have also been mentioned as most likely
affecting the image of micromobility and the intentions of Parisians after the lockdown.
However, as developed by Deffner et al., 2006 one also needs to consider other factors,
such as affective motives, social norms and risk perception. These are a strong factors
playing in the decision of whether to use or not e-scooters after the pandemic.
The models built independently for each city showed that use or non-use of e-scooters
could be explained through very different factors in Paris and Copenhagen. After the
lockdown, in Paris, the factors at stake when trying to determine whether a person is
likely to be a user are: their positive attitudes toward the micromobility, as well as the
==PAGE:78==
64
5 Discussion
perceived behavioural control over e-scooters. Their familiarity with the service and
their age are also significant factors. In Copenhagen on the other hand, the factors that
emerge relate to the feeling of perceived behavioural control, descriptive social norms
and familiarity with the service. In addition, the impression of safety, both in terms of
mobility and the risk of infection seems important, which does not appear at all in Paris.
When comparing the two cities in a same model, based on the factors relevant in each of
the city, the differences persist. In Paris, positive attitudes, perceived behavioural con-
trol and familiarity with the services all influence positively the use of e-scooter. Being
aged between 19 and 45 is also a significant factor. In Copenhagen only the perceived
behavioural control is significant. Perceived infection risk and descriptive social norm
are found to influence e-scooter use slightly. While perceived behavioural control and
descriptive social norms positively influences the use of e-scooter, a high perceived infec-
tion risk would tend to deter people from using e-scooters, as it would be expected.
Several comments are to be made on these results, first on the evolution before and
after the pandemic of the motives for e-scooter use in Paris and Copenhagen, then on
the differences between the two cities and the hints it gives out on the cultural differ-
ences between them. First of all, in Copenhagen, the outcome of being a user or not
after the lockdown is slightly affected by a factor relative to the pandemic, which is
particularly interesting given that Copenhageners did not have to comply with as strict
sanitary measures as other cities, especially for transportation. The perceived control is
the only consistent factors before and after the lockdown. This result is surprising since
e-scooters are more used for leisure than practical matters. One could have expected
positive affects to be more significant. These results could be due to the affective motives
toward e-scooters being less relevant to Copenhageners, or it is a sign of the limitations
of our study and models (or both!). The cost factor (interpreted as being familiar with
e-scooter services) loses its significancy after the lockdown. It can be due to the increase
of people not familiar with e-scooters wanting to try them out, but also to people more
willing to put money in these services, out of convenience.
On the other hand, in Paris, the perceived behavioural control factor was not significant
before the pandemic and only gained importance after the start of the pandemic. De-
scriptive social norms as well as safety perception disappear from the significant factors.
It can be that, due to the pandemic, and the restrictive measures that came with it,
people had to think their mobilities using a more ”practical scope”. In such a context,
social perception may matter less, one tries to reach their destination in the most con-
venient way. The higher number of bike lanes available after the lockdown could have
improved Parisians’ feeling of safety when using micromobility. Practical advantages in
using e-scooters become more relevant in the post-lockdown context. However, this is
not fully backed up by the stated trip purpose post-pandemic that do not show a surge
in practical reasons for using e-scooters, so these assumptions are to be taken with a
grain of salt. It appears that consistently, whether before or after the pandemic, positive
attitudes keep having a positive influence on e-scooter use, along with the familiarity of
people with e-scooters.
==PAGE:79==
5.4 Limitations
65
Together, the elements summed-up above suggest that the pandemic impacted the sam-
ples intentions regarding their mobility patterns. In both studied cities, people express
the desire to avoid transport modes perceived as presenting high infection risks. Fur-
thermore, factors relative to control keep or obtains significance and importance as
e-scooter use determinants. Differences in how each transport mode is perceived in the
two cities point towards the existence of differences in mobility culture. These differ-
ences in Paris and Copenhagen’s mobility cultures regarding e-scooters can be related to
the differences in infrastructures, the communication of the cities and the social norms
and population’s attitudes toward e-scooters, despite similarities in official planning and
policy work. Copenhageners seem to have more considerations to the risks (including
infectious risks) related to e-scooter use after the pandemic, and are more sensible to
control behavioural factors. On the other hand, social norms, familiarity and positive at-
titudes prevailed among Parisians when considering e-scooter use. Despite safety being
significant before the pandemic, safety and infection risks are apparently more disre-
garded than in Copenhagen after the lockdown. When significant, the positive affect
and perceived behavioural control both influence positively e-scooter use, which is aligns
with the findings of Eccarius and Lu, 2020. More generally, the results point towards
the relevance of studying affective and symbolic motives, perceived behavioural control
and perceived risk when investigating e-scooter use. In all the models, these factors were
significant, and their level of significancy was dependent on both the context (pandemic)
and the mobility culture.
5.4
Limitations
The results and interpretations presented in this master’s thesis have to be mitigated, as
several biases have been identified as possibly affecting the outcome of the study. Some
of these biases are linked to the context of the study, while others come out of flaws in
the applied methodology.
This master thesis was started at the beginning of the lockdown, a period when the
course of the pandemic and its consequences were still very uncertain. This affected the
writing of the survey on the one hand, but also the state of mind of the respondents,
all the more so as in Paris and Copenhagen, people were subject to very specific condi-
tions. Concerning the writing of the survey, the uncertainty about the consequences of
the pandemic meant that multiple choice questions were sometimes oriented, especially
questions related to changes in habits. In general, the use of multiple choice introduces
a bias in the sense that participants may not find an adequate proposal for their situa-
tion. Furthermore, the participants had to assess their use of e-scooters in the future,
without a specific time range being clearly defined.
The survey only mentioned the
”weeks following the lockdown”. Therefore, everyone was free to imagine the range of
the future they wanted, without any control over this element by the student. Moreover,
the answers given by the participants are only representative of their intentions at the
time of the questionnaire (June 2020). Over the months during when this master the-
==PAGE:80==
66
5 Discussion
sis was written, the elements reaching the population on a daily basis were triggering
rapid changes in people’s states of mind. Therefore, it is crucial to keep the context
in which the questionnaire was distributed in mind when reading and interpreting the
results. Because of this fast change of perception, it is quite probable that many of the
respondents’ intentions have changed drastically over the weeks following the survey.
Indeed, mobility studies conducted on the SARS-CoV-1 epidemic showed that people
had resumed their habits once the shock had passed (Wang, 2014). It is likely that the
same thing will happen in this case, but only time will help confirming or infirming this.
Finally, the lockdown occurred during spring, thus the change of seasons before and
after the lockdown can have impacted the results, as weather is a probable determinant
of e-scooter use, as suggested by the findings of (6-t Research Office, 2019a).
In terms of method, several elements may have introduced biases in the results. Firstly,
as mentioned above, the format of the questionnaire itself, i.e.
with multiple-choice
questions, was restrictive for the participants (with the advantage of greater ease in
data processing). Respondents were only asked about the city they currently live in.
Some may actually come from other cities, and therefore may not be fully representa-
tive of the mobility culture of the city they live in. Furthermore, participants were asked
to tell about their ”typical trip”, because of the circumstances of the survey distribu-
tion (no trips in a long time). The results could have been improved if respondents
had been asked about their last trip, but then there would be a risk of respondents not
being able to remember how it exactly occurred. Secondly, the size of the sample limits
the conclusions that can be drawn from the data. Indeed, in some procedures, notably
modelling and principal component analysis, the number of people from each city has
proved to be limitant, making it more difficult to obtain robust and consistent results.
Moreover, the size of the sample did not allow certain questions to be explored further,
such as the reliable comparison of occasional and regular users, or users of free-floating
and privately owned e-scooters, among others. The distribution of the survey was done
through social media platforms (i.e. personal network). This impacted the demographic
characteristics of the final sample, which was largely made up of students, particularly
in Denmark. A collaboration with e-scooter companies could have provided more data,
allowing for better results.
The survey was pre-tested on relatives, but no pilot test was performed. Thus, as the
PCA factors have not been properly pre-tested, not all the factors that were obtained
as an outcome were fully satisfactory. A general remark is that more items should have
been used to measure each of the factors. A minimum of three items per factor would
have been more suitable. Some factors in particular should have been tackled differ-
ently. Items relative to e-scooter safety did not have a Cronbach alpha high enough
to be considered a reliable factor, which may have distorted the final results and could
explain the absence of the safety factor in the decision models of each city (or perhaps
not, but the doubt remains). More pre-tested items, relevant for users and non-users,
would have been more appropriate. Other factors, such as emotional and symbolic mo-
tives might have come out as two distinct factors if the items had been selected more
appropriately. This would have made it easier to determine the actual weight of each
==PAGE:81==
5.4 Limitations
67
aspect in the final decision. The impact of e-scooter services prices (instrumental fac-
tor) could not be properly assessed, as the item appeared to account for more aspects
than cost alone. More items relative to the financial aspect of e-scooters should have
been used in order to measure the impact of instrumental motives on e-scooter use, all
the more important that instrumental motives are commonly very significant in mode
choice. The self-identity factors were not conclusive at all. First, a better self-identity
factor could have been defined using pre-tested and more numerous items. Second, it is
important that items are made relevant for both users and non-users. In this case, the
item ”Riding e-scooters shows who I am” was not appropriate, as non-users are not able
to easily state a coherent level of agreement with the assertions. Finally, the environ-
mental consciousness was not assessed in this study. It could have been an interesting
element to assess, as communication actions to engage Copenhageners in environmental
friendly transport behaviours is said to be efficient (European Green Capital, 2014), and
that the sustainability of e-scooters is sometimes challenged (Hollingsworth et al., 2019).
==PAGE:82==
68
==PAGE:83==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
This master thesis aimed to investigate e-scooter use in Paris ad Copenhagen, and as-
sess the consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic on the micromobility. A survey was
distributed to both users and non-users in Paris and Copenhagen. It allowed to gather
their behaviours and perceptions in regards to e-scooters. Participants were asked to in-
dicate their e-scooter habits before the pandemic, expectations after the lockdown, and
overall perception of the micromobility. An integrated framework was developed to look
over relevant determinants underlying e-scooter use in the two cities, before and after
the lockdown. Overall, the results presented in this master’s thesis stand as a snapshot
of e-scooter use intentions in a very specific context.
Before the pandemic, user demographics and use patterns were similar in Paris and
Copenhagen. The typical user was a full-time worker or student, aged between 19 and
45 with slightly higher chances of being a man. They mainly relied on e-scooters for
occasional leisure-related trips. Both in Paris and Copenhagen, e-scooters were largely
replacing walking and public transport. In Copenhagen, e-scooters have been replacing
bikes for 60% of users. In both cities, about 25% of regular users used e-scooters during
intermodal trips, along with walking or public transport. Even though e-scooter use
patterns were similar in the two cities, determinants underlying e-scooter use appeared
to be different. In terms of attitudes, positive affects and descriptive social norms were
the main factors influencing e-scooter use in Paris. In Copenhagen, despite e-scooters
being mostly used in leisure contexts, perceived behavioural control turned out to be the
main determinant for e-scooter use. These three factors appeared to influence positively
e-scooter use, and were all significant determinants when considering the full sample of
participants.
In addition to the attitude-related factors, the feeling of safety appeared to influence
e-scooter use positively before the pandemic. However, the significancy of this factor
did not hold everywhere after the pandemic. A general mistrust regarding e-scooters’
safety is observed in both cities. From a rider’s perspective, Paris seems to be especially
not conducive to the development of a sense of safety. Furthermore, the lack of safety
is particularly present among non-users. Non-user participants from both cities state
feeling less safe around e-scooter riders than users do.
In the COVID-19 pandemic context, safety issues regarding e-scooters also cover in-
fection risks. The infection risk when using e-scooters is perceived to be neutral both
in Paris and Copenhagen, therefore e-scooters are not seen as holding a major infec-
tious risk. Despite that, the infectious risk associated with micromobility appears to
negatively influence e-scooter use in Copenhagen. Thus, in Copenhagen, infectious risk
==PAGE:84==
70
6 Conclusion
becomes part of the significant determinants for e-scooter use post-lockdown, along with
perceived behavioural control. Some changes in determinants in Paris are also observed
after the lockdown. While the positive affects remain significant, descriptive social norms
and safety feeling lose their significancy, and perceived behavioural control becomes sig-
nificant instead.
A substantial share of participants stated expecting their e-scooter use and habits to
change. This is especially true in Paris where 22% of the participants stated they would
change their habits, for 12% of Copenhageners. A majority of Parisians users justify
this with the wish of avoiding public transport. Copenhagener users, on the other hand,
consider their needs for transportation has changed. Despite the expressed wishes, very
few variations are expected to occur within e-scooter use patterns and habits after the
lockdown. A majority of users expect to use e-scooter for leisure-related purpose, occa-
sionally. Nevertheless, the number of participants expressing intentions to use e-scooters
post-lockdown is lower than users before the pandemic.
The other changes observed in e-scooter use intentions are related to other transport
modes. In Copenhagen, less participants expect to use e-scooters to ride to or from a
public transport station. In Paris, more participants expect to use e-scooters in combi-
nation with walking. Indeed, the COVID-19 pandemic affected other transport modes’
use intentions. In both cities, participants expressed a clear wish to reduce their use of
public transportation. This goes hand in hand with the high perceived infection risks
and discomfort level expressed by both Parisians and Copenhageners. On the other
hand, participants expect to walk and cycle more. Overall, the respective determinants
for e-scooter use in Paris and Copenhagen changed due to the COVID-19 pandemic,
although use patterns remained the same.
==PAGE:85==
CHAPTER 7
Perspectives
When the lockdown policies were put up in several countries, questions were raised
regarding mobility and transport systems in the post-pandemic context. Then, micro-
mobility was presented as an alternative for public transportation, that could help cities
offer resilient transport systems (Heineke et al., 2020; Naka, 2020). This master thesis
stands as an attempt to understand the role of e-scooters in the post-pandemic con-
text, and assess the impact of COVID-19 on the micromobility. It tackles the problem
through the scope of users’ behavioural intentions and perceptions regarding e-scooters,
whereas other studies conducted on the same topic performed quantitative assessments
of the trips made during the pandemic (Li et al., 2020). Considering the results of the
latter, in addition to the findings presented in this master thesis would point towards
e-scooters playing a lesser role in the post-pandemic recovery, especially compare to
other micromobility such as cycling.
This master thesis reveals how factors can influence e-scooter use differently depend-
ing on the mobility culture of a city as well as the on-going context (i.e. the pandemic
in this case). It provides insights on how people’s modal choice intentions are affected
by an epidemic, depending on mobility culture and extent of the said epidemic. The
methodology presented could be applied to measure the impact of future crisis on other
transport modes, helping cities cope and recover faster from a crisis by understanding
users better.
==PAGE:86==
72
==PAGE:87==
APPENDIX A
Backward regression
models
A.1
Results of backward variables selection
for the use before the pandemic
Table A.1: Results of backward variable selection relevant to model e-scooter use before
the pandemic in Paris and Copenhagen.
Overall
Copenhagen
Paris
Variable
Estimate
p-value
Estimate
p-value
Estimate
p-value
Intercept
-1.4839
0.0039
-1.3485
0.0026
-0.8192
0.1805
PBC
0.6967
0.0081
1.4824
0.0014
–
–
Positive affects
0.7961
0.0043
–
–
1.3176
0.0025
E-scooter services
are expensive
0.5892
0.0007
0.6774
0.0264
0.5906
0.0351
Many of my friends
use e-scooters
0.4285
0.0018
–
–
0.4176
0.0517
Perceived e-scooter
safety
0.5527
0.0030
0.7230
0.0177
0.4575
0.1209
Less than
18 y.o.
-0.1008
0.9474
–
–
1.1250
0.4881
19-30 y.o.
0.8044
0.0861
–
–
1.4444
0.0394
31-45 y.o.
1.0671
0.0451
–
–
1.2200
0.1044
46-60 y.o.
(REF)
(REF)
–
–
(REF)
(REF)
More than
60 y.o.
-16.5407
0.9861
–
–
-16.8748
0.9899
AIC
328.40
115.77
159.23
==PAGE:88==
74
A Backward regression models
A.2
Results of backward variables selection
for the use after the pandemic
Table A.2: Logistic regression of the use after the lockdown, obtained after stepwise
variable selection.
Overall
Copenhagen
Paris
Variable
Estimate
p-value
Estimate
p-value
Estimate
p-value
Intercept
-2.2424
1.48e-05
-1.2594
0.01038
-3.3855
4.7e-05
PBC
0.7053
0.00416
1.4132
0.00223
0.8726
0.03712
Positive affects
0.7104
0.00665
–
–
1.1133
0.00281
Cost
0.4928
0.00252
0.5257
0.08062
0.6651
0.01051
Many user friends
–
–
0.4678
0.09231
–
–
Comfortable using
shared modes
–
–
–
–
–
–
Perceived
e-scooter safety
0.3478
0.04551
0.4526
0.13151
–
–
Perceived infection
risk using
individual shared modes
–
–
-0.3840
0.09413
–
–
Less than 18 y.o.
-14.0887
0.98472
–
–
-15.4771
0.99376
19 to 30 y.o.
0.8816
0.06547
–
–
1.5963
0.03278
31 to 45 y.o.
0.9855
0.06497
–
–
1.6606
0.04630
46 to 60 y.o.
(REF)
(REF)
–
–
(REF)
(REF)
More than 60 y.o.
-0.5827
0.62706
–
–
-15.6480
0.99046
AIC
349.39
117.89
152.10
==PAGE:89==
APPENDIX B
Survey
This survey was distributed in June 2020 to participants in Paris and Copenhagen,
through personal and professional circles, as well as social media. It aims to gather
information relative to e-scooter perceptions and expected behaviour after the lockdown,
from inhabitants of each city.
==PAGE:90==
 
 
E-scooter: Increasing mobility at the expense of 
safety? 
Welcome!    
    
This survey is part of a master thesis at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) and Ecole Centrale de Nantes.    
    
It focuses on the perceptions and behaviour of electric scooter (e-scooter) users before and after the containment 
due to the Covid-19 pandemic, comparing Paris and Copenhagen. You can respond to the survey whether you are 
an e-scooter user or not. Whatever your status, your answer will enable us to understand the role of electric 
scooters in current available mobility solutions.   
    
Your participation in this questionnaire is on a voluntary basis. Your data will only be used in the context of our 
research, and will remain completely anonymous. Completing this questionnaire should take between 5 and 10 
minutes.    
    
    
Thank you for your participation, which is valuable for our research!   
    
If you have any questions, or wish to contact us, you can do so at: s181273@student.dtu.dk 
 
Previous experience with e-scooters (everyone) 
Have you ever used an e-scooter? 
o Yes, free-floating e-scooter  
o Yes, personal e-scooter  
o Yes, both personal and free-floating e-scooters  
o No  
 
Have you ever used an e-scooter in these cities? 
 
Yes 
No 
Paris  
o  
o  
Copenhagen  
o  
o  
Other:  
o  
o  
 
==PAGE:91==
 
 
 
Incentives to e-scooter use (non-users + privately owned e-scooters users) 
What would make you consider using e-scooter services?  
▢ 
Cheaper services  
▢ 
Safer vehicles  
▢ 
Possibility to borrow a helmet  
▢ 
Better road infrastructure (e.g. dedicated lanes)  
▢ 
Better organisation of e-scooter parking  
▢ 
More environmentally-friendly vehicles  
▢ 
Better privacy regarding personal data  
▢ 
Other: ________________________________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
E-scooter use before the lockdown (users) 
Try to remember your travelling habits before the Covid-19 lockdown.  
How often did you use e-scooters?  
 
Never 
Only once 
Less than 
once a 
month 
1-3 times a 
month 
1-4 times a 
week 
5 times per 
week or 
more 
Travelling 
frequency  
o  
o  
o  
o  
o  
o  
 
==PAGE:92==
 
 
What were the most frequent purposes for your e-scooter trips?  
▢ 
Commute for work  
▢ 
Commute for school/university  
▢ 
Shopping  
▢ 
Meeting with friends  
▢ 
Commuting for leisure activities (sport, association...)  
▢ 
Sightseeing  
▢ 
For fun / just to try it out  
▢ 
Access train station or public transport station / last mile of a trip  
▢ 
Other: ________________________________________________ 
 
 
How often do you use e-scooter in combination with other transport modes in the course of a trip?  
 
Rarely 
25% of the 
times 
50% of the 
times 
75% of the 
times 
Almost 
every time 
 
 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
 
Frequency 
 
==PAGE:93==
 
 
Which other transport mode(s) do you combine e-scooter with?  
▢ 
Walking  
▢ 
Own bike  
▢ 
Shared-bike  
▢ 
Car as passenger  
▢ 
Car as driver  
▢ 
Bus  
▢ 
Metro  
▢ 
Train  
 
==PAGE:94==
 
 
If e-scooters did not exist, what transport mode(s) would you use instead?  
▢ 
Walking  
▢ 
Own bike  
▢ 
Shared bike  
▢ 
Car as passenger  
▢ 
Car as driver  
▢ 
Bus  
▢ 
Metro  
▢ 
Train  
▢ 
I would not do these trip(s)  
 
 
Have you ever engaged in risky behaviour(s)? If yes, which one(s)?  
 (Do not check any box if you never had any of these behaviours) 
▢ 
Used an E-scooter under the influence of alcohol  
▢ 
Used an E-scooter with two persons  
▢ 
Used the E-scooter on the sidewalk  
▢ 
Violated a traffic light  
 
 
Have you ever been involved in an e-scooter accident?  
o Yes  
o No  
 
==PAGE:95==
 
 
Did the accident require any intervention from an emergency vehicle? 
o Yes  
o No  
 
 
Use of e-scooters after the lockdown (everyone) 
Do you think your use (or non-use) of e-scooters will change in the coming weeks as compared to the time before 
the Covid-19 lockdown? 
 (e.g. frequency of use, purpose for travel, other transport modes used with e-scooters...) 
o Yes  
o No  
o I am not sure  
 
Why do you think your e-scooter use could change in the coming weeks? 
▢ 
My needs for transportation have changed  
▢ 
I do not want to use public transport anymore  
▢ 
I want to try it out  
▢ 
Other: ________________________________________________ 
 
 
How do you think your e-scooter use could change in the coming weeks? 
▢ 
The frequency of my trips will be different  
▢ 
The purpose of my trips will be different  
▢ 
The transport modes I will combine with e-scooter will be different  
▢ 
Other: ________________________________________________ 
 
==PAGE:96==
 
 
 
How often do you expect to use e-scooters?  
 
Never 
Only once 
Less than 
once a 
month 
1-3 times per 
month 
1-4 times per 
week 
5 times per 
week or 
more 
Expected 
travelling 
frequency  
o  
o  
o  
o  
o  
o  
 
 
What do you think you will mostly use e-scooters for?  
▢ 
Commute for work  
▢ 
Commute for school/university  
▢ 
Shopping  
▢ 
Meeting with friends  
▢ 
Commuting for leisure activities (sport, association...)  
▢ 
Sightseeing  
▢ 
For fun / just to try it out  
▢ 
Access train station or public transport  
▢ 
Other: ________________________________________________ 
 
==PAGE:97==
 
 
Which other transport mode(s) do you think you will combine e-scooter with? 
▢ 
Walking  
▢ 
Own bike  
▢ 
Shared-bike  
▢ 
Car as passenger  
▢ 
Car as driver  
▢ 
Bus  
▢ 
Metro  
▢ 
Train  
▢ 
None  
 
==PAGE:98==
 
 
Use of other transport modes after the lockdown (everyone) 
Do you think your use (or non-use) of the following transport modes will change in the coming weeks as compared 
to the time before the Covid-19 lockdown? 
 
I will use it less 
I will use it as much 
I will use it more 
I do not use this 
transport mode 
Walking  
o  
o  
o  
o  
Own bike  
o  
o  
o  
o  
Shared-bike  
o  
o  
o  
o  
Own car  
o  
o  
o  
o  
Shared car  
o  
o  
o  
o  
Bus  
o  
o  
o  
o  
Metro  
o  
o  
o  
o  
Train  
o  
o  
o  
o  
 
 
==PAGE:99==
 
 
Assessment of perceived infection risk and comfort level (everyone) 
How would you feel using the following transport modes in the Covid-19 context? 
 
Very 
uncomfortable 
Uncomfortable 
Neither nor 
Comfortable 
Very 
comfortable 
Walk  
o  
o  
o  
o  
o  
Private car  
o  
o  
o  
o  
o  
Shared car  
o  
o  
o  
o  
o  
Private bike  
o  
o  
o  
o  
o  
Shared bike  
o  
o  
o  
o  
o  
Private e-
scooter  
o  
o  
o  
o  
o  
Free-floating e-
scooters  
o  
o  
o  
o  
o  
Metro  
o  
o  
o  
o  
o  
Bus  
o  
o  
o  
o  
o  
Train (S-tog, 
RER...)  
o  
o  
o  
o  
o  
 
 
==PAGE:100==
 
 
How do you perceive the risk of getting infected using the following transport modes? 
 
Very low 
Low 
Neither nor 
High 
Very high 
Public transport  
o  
o  
o  
o  
o  
Free-floating e-
scooters  
o  
o  
o  
o  
o  
Shared bikes  
o  
o  
o  
o  
o  
Shared cars  
o  
o  
o  
o  
o  
 
 
E-scooter perceptions (everyone) 
How much do you agree with the following statements?   
==PAGE:101==
 
 
 
Strongly 
disagree 
Disagree 
Neither nor 
Agree 
Strongly agree 
Riding e-
scooters is fun  
o  
o  
o  
o  
o  
Using e-scooters 
to commute is 
stressful  
o  
o  
o  
o  
o  
Riding e-
scooters with 
friends is an 
enjoyable 
activity  
o  
o  
o  
o  
o  
E-scooter 
services are 
expensive  
o  
o  
o  
o  
o  
The pay-per-
minute system 
encourages fast 
driving  
o  
o  
o  
o  
o  
Finding an 
operational e-
scooter is 
difficult  
o  
o  
o  
o  
o  
Using e-scooters 
saves time  
o  
o  
o  
o  
o  
I would feel safe 
when riding an 
e-scooter  
o  
o  
o  
o  
o  
I feel unsafe 
when e-scooter 
users ride near 
me  
o  
o  
o  
o  
o  
E-scooters offer 
flexibility  
o  
o  
o  
o  
o  
E-scooters are 
easy to use  
o  
o  
o  
o  
o  
E-scooters can 
bring me 
wherever I want 
to  
o  
o  
o  
o  
o  
==PAGE:102==
 
 
E-scooter riders 
look ridiculous  
o  
o  
o  
o  
o  
Riding e-
scooters shows 
who I am  
o  
o  
o  
o  
o  
Riding e-
scooters suits 
me  
o  
o  
o  
o  
o  
Many of my 
friends use e-
scooters  
o  
o  
o  
o  
o  
E-scooters are a 
nuisance  
o  
o  
o  
o  
o  
 
 
Demographics (everyone) 
What is your year of birth? (YYYY format) 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
What gender do you identify to? 
o Male  
o Female  
o Other: ________________________________________________ 
o Do not wish to disclose  
 
 
Where do you live? 
o Paris and its surrounding  
o Copenhagen and its surrounding  
o Other: ________________________________________________ 
o Do not wish to disclose  
 
 
==PAGE:103==
 
 
 
What category describes best your current employment status? 
o Full-time employee  
o Part-time employee  
o Self-employed  
o Unemployed, looking for a job  
o Unemployed, not looking for a job  
o Student, working part-time  
o Student, not working  
o Retired  
o Other: ________________________________________________ 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
Thank you for your participation!    
    
If you would like to add something, please feel free to leave a comment.    
    
Furthermore, if you are interested in the results of this study or have further questions about the survey, feel free to 
contact us at the following e-mail adress: s181273@student.dtu.dk . 
________________________________________________________________ 
==PAGE:104==
76
==PAGE:105==
Bibliography
6-t Research Office. (3 December 2019a). Enquête auprès des utilisateurs de trottinettes
en free-floating Dott à Paris (technical report) [Dott] [Library Catalog: 6-t.co].
Library Catalog: 6-t.co. Retrieved 18 May 2020, from https://6-t.co/utilisateurs-
trottinettes-dott/
6-t Research Office. (June 2019b). Usages et usagers des trottinettes électriques en free-
floating en France (technical report) [ADEME] [Library Catalog: www.ademe.fr].
Library Catalog: www.ademe.fr. Retrieved 18 May 2020, from https://www.
ademe.fr/usages-usagers-trottinettes-electriques-free-floating-france
Ajao, A. (1 February 2019). Electric scooters and micro-mobility: Here’s everything you
need to know [Https://www.forbes.com/]. Retrieved 20 May 2020, from https:
//www.forbes.com/sites/adeyemiajao/2019/02/01/everything-you-want-to-
know-about-scooters-and-micro-mobility/#531ea5aa5de6
Ajzen, I. (1991). The theory of planned behavior. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 50(2), 179–211. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/
0749-5978(91)90020-T
Ajzen, I. (2020). Theory of planned behavior - website. Retrieved 18 May 2020, from
https://people.umass.edu/aizen/tpb.html
Anable, J., & Gatersleben, B. (1 February 2005). All work and no play? the role of
instrumental and affective factors in work and leisure journeys by different travel
modes. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 39(2), 163–181.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2004.09.008
Baltimore City Department of Transportation. (2019). Baltimore city dockless vehicle
pilot program evaluation report - Urbanism Next (technical report) [Library Cata-
log: www.urbanismnext.org]. Library Catalog: www.urbanismnext.org. Retrieved
18 May 2020, from https://www.urbanismnext.org/resources/baltimore-city-
dockless-vehicle-pilot-program-evaluation-report
BBC News. (2 July 2020). Coronavirus: How lockdown is being lifted across europe
[Https://www.bbc.com/]. Retrieved 5 September 2020, from https://www.bbc.
com/news/explainers-52575313
Bendix, A. (16 October 2018). Toppled scooters, sidewalk riding, and illegal parking:
Electric scooters have returned to San Francisco after being banned [Business in-
sider] [Library Catalog: www.businessinsider.com]. Retrieved 18 May 2020, from
https://www.businessinsider.com/electric-scooters-return-to-san-francisco-after-
a-citywide-ban-2018-10
==PAGE:106==
78
Bibliography
Beutels, P., Jia, N., Zhou, Q.-Y., Smith, R., Cao, W.-C., & Vlas, S. J. D. (2009). The eco-
nomic impact of SARS in Beijing, China [_eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/
3156.2008.02210.x]. Tropical Medicine & International Health, 14, 85–91. https:
//doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-3156.2008.02210.x
Bird. (2 January 2019). Bird webarchive: Map - Bird. Retrieved 18 May 2020, from
https://web.archive.org/web/20190102152938/https:/www.bird.co/map/
Blomberg, S. N. F., Rosenkrantz, O. C. M., Lippert, F., & Christensen, H. C. (1 Decem-
ber 2019a). Injury from electric scooters in copenhagen: A retrospective cohort
study [Publisher: British Medical Journal Publishing Group Section: Emergency
medicine]. BMJ Open, 9(12), e033988. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2019-
033988
Blomberg, S. N. F., Rosenkrantz, O. C. M., Lippert, F., & Christensen, H. C. (22 Decem-
ber 2019b). Injury from electric scooters in Copenhagen: A retrospective cohort
study | BMJ open. Retrieved 25 March 2020, from https://bmjopen.bmj.com/
content/9/12/e033988
Breteau, P. (4 December 2019). La hausse du nombre de trajets à vélo à Paris en carte
et en 30 graphiques. Le Monde.fr. Retrieved 31 August 2020, from https://www.
lemonde.fr/les-decodeurs/article/2019/12/04/la-hausse-du-nombre-de-trajets-a-
velo-a-paris-en-carte-et-en-30-graphiques_6021688_4355770.html
Breteau, P. (28 May 2020). Plus de vélos dans les rues de Paris après le déconfinement
que lors des grèves dans les transports cet hiver. Le Monde.fr. Retrieved 17 Au-
gust 2020, from https://www.lemonde.fr/les-decodeurs/article/2020/05/28/
deconfinement- la- forte- hausse- du- trafic- cyclable- a- paris- en- 2020- en- trois-
graphiques_6041056_4355770.html
Buckley, C. (18 May 2003). The SARS epidemic: Economic impact of new disease, from
near outbreak to far away. The New York Times. Retrieved 18 May 2020, from
https://www.nytimes.com/2003/05/18/us/the-sars-epidemic-economic-impact-
of-new-disease-from-near-outbreak-to-far-away-733474.html
Buehler, R., & Pucher, J. (January 2021a). Big city cycling in Europe, North America,
and Australia. Retrieved 31 August 2020, from https://www.researchgate.net/
publication/285153540_Big_city_cycling_in_Europe_North_America_and_
Australia
Buehler, R., & Pucher, J. (January 2021b). International overview: Cycling trends
in Westerns Europe, North America and Australia. Retrieved 31 August 2020,
from https://www.researchgate.net/publication/304495464_International_
overview _ cycling _ trends _ in _ Westerns _ Europe _ North _ America _ and _
Australia
Cazi, E. (9 June 2020). Les ventes de vélos explosent avec la crise sanitaire. Le Monde.fr.
Retrieved 29 August 2020, from https://www.lemonde.fr/planete/article/2020/
06/09/l-industrie-du-velo-renforcee-par-la-crise-due-au-coronavirus_6042294_
3244.html
Celik, G. (15 February 2020). How will coronavirus affect the mobility industry? implica-
tions from SARS [Library Catalog: equalocean.com]. Retrieved 18 May 2020, from
==PAGE:107==
Bibliography
79
https://equalocean.com/mobility-transport/20200215-how-will-coronavirus-
affect-the-mobility-industry-implications-from-sars
Chiambaretta, P. (8 May 2020). « Il faut combattre le lobbying aberrant pour un report
des mesures en faveur de la transition écologique ». Le Monde.fr. Retrieved 18 May
2020, from https://www.lemonde.fr/smart-cities/article/2020/05/08/il-faut-
combattre-le-lobbying-aberrant-pour-un-report-des-mesures-en-faveur-de-la-
transition-ecologique_6039039_4811534.html
City of Austin. (April 2019a). Dockless electric scooter-related injuries study — Austin,
Texas, september–november 2018 (technical report). Retrieved 25 March 2020,
from https://trid.trb.org/view/1607200
City of Austin. (2 May 2019b). Scooter injury study report released | AustinTexas.gov.
Retrieved 18 May 2020, from https://austintexas.gov/news/scooter- injury-
study-report-released
Civity. (30 September 2019). E-scooter in Deutschland. Retrieved 18 May 2020, from
http://scooters.civity.de/
Curl, A., & Fitt, H. (6 June 2019). Attitudes to and use of electric scooters in new
zealand cities [Artwork Size: 2545528 Bytes Pages: 2545528 Bytes type: dataset].
https://doi.org/10.6084/M9.FIGSHARE.8056109
Daclon, N. (2020). Paris cycling policies, 23.
De Clercq, G. (22 June 2018). Lime launches electric scooters in Paris, targets Europe.
Reuters. Retrieved 18 May 2020, from https://www.reuters.com/article/us-lime-
paris-bike-share-idUSKBN1JH0PK
Deffner, J., Götz, K., Schubert, S., Potting, C., Gisela, S., Tschann, A., & Loose, W. (Oc-
tober 2006). Entwicklung eines integrierten konzepts der planung, kommunika-
tionund implementierung einer nachhaltigen, multioptionalen mobilitätskultur.
Retrieved 21 August 2020, from https://docplayer.org/10408239-Schlussbericht-
zu-dem-projekt-nachhaltige-mobilitaetskultur.html
Delahaye, O. (14 August 2020). 7 chiffres sur le vélo en Île-de-France [Paris bike lanes
figures]. Retrieved 14 May 2020, from http://www.gpmetropole- infos.fr/7-
chiffres-sur-le-velo-en-ile-de-france/
Dickey, M. R. (27 March 2020). Bird lays off about 30% of workforce amid COVID-
19 pandemic [TechCrunch] [Library Catalog: techcrunch.com]. Retrieved 18 May
2020, from https://social.techcrunch.com/2020/03/27/bird-lays-off-about-30-of-
workforce-amid-covid-19-pandemic/
DSB. (2020). Future rail network. Retrieved 4 September 2020, from https://www.dsb.
dk/en/future-rail-network/
Eccarius, T., & Lu, C.-C. (1 July 2020). Adoption intentions for micro-mobility – insights
from electric scooter sharing in Taiwan. Transportation Research Part D: Trans-
port and Environment, 84, 102327. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trd.2020.102327
Efthymiou, D., & Antoniou, C. (1 January 2017). Understanding the effects of economic
crisis on public transport users’ satisfaction and demand. Transport Policy, 53,
89–97. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tranpol.2016.09.007
Euromonitor International. (15 August 2015). Top developed world cities with low re-
liance on car-based mobility [Car ownership figures]. Retrieved 14 August 2020,
==PAGE:108==
80
Bibliography
from https://blog.euromonitor.com/top- developed- world- cities- with- low-
reliance-on-car-based-mobility/
European Green Capital. (2012). Section 2: Local transport - plans and visions for the
city of copenhagen [Partial document, other sections of the report were not found.
Extract available on the European Commission website.]. Retrieved 14 July 2020,
from https://ec.europa.eu/environment/europeangreencapital/wp- content/
uploads/2012/07/Section-2-Local-transport_Copenhagen.pdf
European Green Capital. (2014). 2014 - Copenhagen: Green cities fit for life. Retrieved
5 September 2020, from https://ec.europa.eu/environment/europeangreencapital/
winning-cities/2014-copenhagen/
Færdselsstyrelsen. (27 February 2020). Evalueringen af de små motoriserede køretøjer er
nu offentliggjort (technical report) [Library Catalog: www.trm.dk]. Library Cat-
alog: www.trm.dk. Retrieved 18 May 2020, from https://www.trm.dk/nyheder/
2020/evalueringen-af-de-smaa-motoriserede-koeretoejer-er-nu-offentliggjort/
Fallah Zavareh, M., Mehdizadeh, M., & Nordfjærn, T. (1 July 2020). Active travel as a
pro-environmental behaviour: An integrated framework. Transportation Research
Part D: Transport and Environment, 84, 102356. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trd.
2020.102356
Fallah Zavareh, M., Mohamadi Hezaveh, A., & Trond, N. (February 2018). Intention to
use bicycle helmet as explained by the health belief model, comparative optimism
and risk perception in an iranian sample. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.trf.2018.02.003
Fouad, N. A. (8 May 2020). Editor in chief’s introduction to essays on the impact of covid-
19 on work and workers. Journal of vocational behavior. https://doi.org/https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.jvb.2020.103441
France 3 Paris Ile-de-France. (21 December 2020). L’appel d’offres pour réduire les trot-
tinettes électriques lancé par la mairie de Paris. Retrieved 31 August 2020, from
https://france3-regions.francetvinfo.fr/paris-ile-de-france/paris/appel-offre-
reduire-trottinettes-electriques-lance-mairie-paris-1765755.html
Freudendal‐Pedersen, M. (2015). Cyclists as part of the city’s organism: Structural sto-
ries on cycling in copenhagen [_eprint: https://anthrosource.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.11
City & Society, 27(1), 30–50. https://doi.org/10.1111/ciso.12051
Gatersleben, B. (2014). Psychological motives for car use [In: Gärling T., Ettema D.,
Friman M. (eds) Handbook of Sustainable Travel]. https://doi.org/https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-94-007-7034-8_6
Gatersleben, B. (2007). Affective and symbolic aspects of car use [In Threats from Car
Traffic to the Quality of Urban Life. Emerald Group Publishing Limited, pp.
219–233]. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1108/9780080481449-012
Goletz, M., Haustein, S., Wolking, C., & l’Hostis, A. (18 April 2020). Intermodality in
european metropolises: The current state of the art, and the results of an expert
survey covering Berlin, Copenhagen, Hamburg and Paris. Transport Policy. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.tranpol.2020.04.011
Gössling, S. (1 February 2020). Integrating e-scooters in urban transportation: Problems,
policies, and the prospect of system change. Transportation Research Part D:
==PAGE:109==
Bibliography
81
Transport and Environment, 79, 102230. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trd.2020.
102230
Gröndahl-Backer, A., Fyrhi, A., Ulleberg, P., & A.H., A. (2009). Accidents and unpleas-
ant incidents: Worry in transport and prediction of travel behaviour [In: Risk
Analysis, 29 (2009), pp. 1217-1226].
Guo, Y., Liu, P., Bai, L., Xu, C., & Chen, J. (1 January 2014). Red light running
behavior of electric bicycles at signalized intersections in china [Publisher: SAGE
Publications Inc]. Transportation Research Record, 2468(1), 28–37. https://doi.
org/10.3141/2468-04
Hafner, R. J., Walker, I., & Verplanken, B. (March 2017). Image, not environmentalism:
A qualitative exploration of factors influencing vehicle purchasing decisions [In:
Transport. Res. Part A: Policy Pract. 97 (March), 89–105]. https://doi.org/https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2017.01.012
Haustein, S., Koglin, T., Nielsen, T. A. S., & Svensson, Å. (1 March 2019). A comparison
of cycling cultures in Stockholm and Copenhagen [Publisher: CRC Press/Balkema].
International Journal of Sustainable Transportation, 14(4), 280–293. https://doi.
org/10.1080/15568318.2018.1547463
Haustein, S., & Nielsen, T. A. S. (1 June 2016). European mobility cultures: A survey-
based cluster analysis across 28 European countries. Journal of Transport Geog-
raphy, 54, 173–180. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2016.05.014
Hawkins, A. J. (20 March 2020). Electric scooter-sharing grinds to a halt in response
to the COVID-19 pandemic. Retrieved 5 September 2020, from https://www.
theverge.com/2020/3/20/21188119/electric-scooter-coronavirus-bird-lime-spin-
suspend-bikes
Haworth, N. L., & Schramm, A. (10 July 2019). Illegal and risky riding of electric
scooters in Brisbane. The Medical Journal of Australia, 211(9), 412–413. https:
//doi.org/10.5694/mja2.50275
Heineke, K., Benedikt, K., & Darius, S. (6 July 2020). The future of micromobility:
Ridership and revenue after a crisis. Retrieved 8 September 2020, from https:
//www.mckinsey.com/industries/automotive-and-assembly/our-insights/the-
future-of-micromobility-ridership-and-revenue-after-a-crisis
Hollingsworth, J., Copeland, B., & Johnson, J. X. (August 2019). Are e-scooters pol-
luters? the environmental impacts of shared dockless electric scooters. Environ-
mental Research Letters, 14(8), 084031. https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/
ab2da8
Hunecke, M., Haustein, S., Böhler, S., & Grischkat, S. (1 January 2010). Attitude-based
target groups to reduce the ecological impact of daily mobility behavior [Pub-
lisher: SAGE Publications Inc]. Environment and Behavior, 42(1), 3–43. https:
//doi.org/10.1177/0013916508319587
Institut Paris Région. (10 October 2019). Territoires cyclables. Retrieved 6 September
2020, from https://urlz.fr/dKuW
Internation Transport Forum. (2 June 2020a). Inequities & Innovation in mobility dur-
ing the COVID-19 pandemic. Retrieved 6 September 2020, from https://www.
centreforpublicimpact.org/inequities-innovation-micromobility-covid-19-pandemic/
==PAGE:110==
82
Bibliography
Internation Transport Forum. (2020b). Safe Micromobility: Corporate Partnership Board
Report (technical report). Retrieved 31 August 2020, from https://www.itf-
oecd.org/sites/default/files/docs/safe-micromobility_1.pdf
James, O., Swiderski, J. I., Hicks, J., Teoman, D., & Buehler, R. (January 2019). Pedes-
trians and e-scooters: An initial look at e-scooter parking and perceptions by
riders and non-riders [Number: 20 Publisher: Multidisciplinary Digital Publish-
ing Institute]. Sustainability, 11(20), 5591. https://doi.org/10.3390/su11205591
Jones, L., Palumbo, D., & Brown, D. (30 June 2020). Coronavirus: A visual guide to the
economic impact [Https://www.bbc.com/]. Retrieved 5 September 2020, from
https://www.bbc.com/news/business-51706225
K, G., J, D., & T, K. (2016). Mobilitätsstile und mobilitätskulturen–erklärungspotentiale,
rezeption und kritik [In: O. Schöller, W. Canzler, A. Knie (Eds.): Handbuch
Verkehrspolitik. Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften].
Klinger, T. (1 October 2017). Moving from monomodality to multimodality? changes
in mode choice of new residents. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and
Practice, 104, 221–237. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2017.01.008
Klinger, T., Kenworthy, J. R., & Lanzendorf, M. (1 July 2013). Dimensions of urban
mobility cultures – a comparison of german cities. Journal of Transport Geography,
31, 18–29. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2013.05.002
Klinger, T., & Lanzendorf, M. (1 March 2016). Moving between mobility cultures: What
affects the travel behavior of new residents? Transportation, 43(2), 243–271. https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s11116-014-9574-x
Københavns Kommune. (May 2007). Vedligeholdelse af veje, bygværker, belysning og
signalanlæg i københavn [Copenhagen road network figures]. Retrieved 14 August
2020, from https://urlz.fr/dKFc
Københavns Kommune. (1 January 2018). Status på københavn 2018: Nøgletal for køben-
havn. Retrieved 3 June 2020, from https://www.kk.dk/sites/default/files/
nogletalsrapport_2018_endelig_version_printervenlig.pdf
Københavns Kommune. (2019a). Cykelredegørelse 2019 - bilag 2 [Copenhagen bike lanes
figures]. Retrieved 14 August 2020, from https://www.kk.dk/sites/default/files/
edoc/Attachments/23020624-32266360-1.pdf
Københavns Kommune. (4 June 2019b). Loft over elløbehjul i københavn. Retrieved
31 August 2020, from https://www.kk.dk/nyheder/loft- over- elloebehjul- i-
koebenhavn
Laker, L. (18 June 2019). Welcome, watch or ban: How should cities deal with electric
scooters? The Guardian. Retrieved 18 May 2020, from https://www.theguardian.
com/cities/2019/jun/18/welcome-watch-or-ban-how-should-cities-deal-with-
electric-scooters
Landais-Barrau. (7 September 2019). Paris : quels sont les 12 opérateurs de trottinettes
électriques en libre-service de la capitale ? [www.cnews.fr] [Library Catalog: www.cnews.fr].
Retrieved 18 May 2020, from https://www.cnews.fr/france/2019-09-07/paris-
quels-sont-les-12-operateurs-de-trottinettes-electriques-en-libre-service-de
Lee, M., Chow, J. Y. J., Yoon, G., & He, B. Y. (21 August 2019). Forecasting e-scooter
competition with direct and access trips by mode and distance in New York City.
==PAGE:111==
Bibliography
83
arXiv:1908.08127 [econ, q-fin, stat], arxiv 1908.08127. Retrieved 18 May 2020,
from http://arxiv.org/abs/1908.08127
Legifrance. (23 October 2019). Décret n° 2019-1082 du 23 octobre 2019 relatif à la
réglementation des engins de déplacement personnel.
Li, A., Zhao, P., He, H., & Axhausen, K. W. (August 2020). Understanding the variations
of micro-mobility behavior before and during covid-19 pandemic period. https:
//doi.org/https://doi.org/10.3929/ethz-b-000430395
Lime. (13 January 2019). Lime webarchive: Lime locations. Retrieved 18 May 2020, from
https://web.archive.org/web/20190113063947/https:/www.li.me/fr/locations
Lime. (1 June 2020a). Rethinking travel in the era of COVID-19: Survey findings and im-
plications for urban transportation (technical report). Retrieved 31 August 2020,
from https://drive.google.com/file/d/1cxgMXbMDIg6ijky1fp2QEt-2jEBishMZ/
view
Lime. (June 2020b). Rethinking travel in the era of covid-19: Survey findings and im-
plications for urban transportation (technical report). Retrieved 29 August 2020,
from https://drive.google.com/file/d/1cxgMXbMDIg6ijky1fp2QEt-2jEBishMZ/
view?usp=embed_facebook
Mairie de Paris. (2020a). Trottinettes électriques : de nouvelles règles de circulation.
Retrieved 31 August 2020, from https : / / www . paris . fr / pages / trottinettes -
electriques-de-nouvelles-regles-de-circulation-7249
Mairie de Paris. (14 August 2020b). Voirie: Chiffres clefs [Paris road network figures].
Retrieved 11 April 2015, from https://web.archive.org/web/20150411081505/
http://www.paris.fr/pratique/equipements-urbains/voirie-en-chiffres/voirie-
chiffres-cles/rub_19_stand_4913_port_652
McKenzie, G. (1 June 2019). Spatiotemporal comparative analysis of scooter-share and
bike-share usage patterns in Washington, D.C. Journal of Transport Geography,
78, 19–28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2019.05.007
Mercier-Handisyde, P. (2020). Next-generation electrified vehicles for urban and sub-
urban use [European Union - Horizon 2020 Work Programme for Research and
Innovation]. https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/portal/
screen/opportunities/topic- details/lc- gv- 08- 2020;freeTextSearchKeyword=
;typeCodes=1;statusCodes=31094501,31094502;programCode=H2020;programDivisionCode
null;focusAreaCode=null;crossCuttingPriorityCode=null;callCode=H2020-LC-
GV-2018-2019-2020;sortQuery=openingDate;orderBy=asc;onlyTenders=false;
topicListKey=callTopicSearchTableState
Metro Service. (2020). We are constructing new lines - the copenhagen metro. Retrieved
4 September 2020, from https://intl.m.dk/we-are-constructing-new-lines/
Moen, B.-E., & Rundmo, T. (2006). Perception of transport risk in the norwegian public.
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1057/palgrave.rm.8250003
Moreau, H., de Jamblinne de Meux, L., Zeller, V., D’Ans, P., Ruwet, C., & Achten,
W. M. J. (28 February 2020). Dockless e-scooter: A green solution for mobility?
Comparative case study between dockless e-scooters, displaced transport, and
personal e-scooters [Number: 5 Publisher: Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing
Institute]. Sustainability, 12(5), 1803. https://doi.org/10.3390/su12051803
==PAGE:112==
84
Bibliography
Najdovski, C. (June 2017). Paris cycling policies: Towards a 15% modal share by 2020
[Presentation given by the Deputy mayor of Paris in charge of transports and
public space on Paris cycling policies]. Retrieved 27 August 2020, from https:
//ecf.com/system/files/ChristopheNajdovski_ParisCyclingPolicies.pdf
Naka, M. (6 April 2020). Covid-19 reveals how micromobility can build resilient cities.
Retrieved 8 September 2020, from https://nextcity.org/daily/entry/covid-19-
reveals-how-micromobility-can-build-resilient-cities
Nielsen, T. A. S. (1 September 2015). Changes in transport behavior during the financial
crisis. an analysis of urban form, location and transport behavior in the greater
Copenhagen area 2006–2011. Research in Transportation Economics, 51, 10–19.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.retrec.2015.07.003
Observatoire des déplacements à Paris. (2019). Le bilan des déplacements en 2018 à
paris (technical report). Retrieved 8 May 2020, from http://temis.documentation.
developpement-durable.gouv.fr/document.html?id=Temis-0033289
Papagiannakis, A., Baraklianos, I., & Spyridonidou, A. (1 July 2018). Urban travel
behaviour and household income in times of economic crisis: Challenges and per-
spectives for sustainable mobility. Transport Policy, 65, 51–60. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.tranpol.2016.12.006
Plan Vélo. (2020). Observatoire du Plan Vélo de Paris [Observatoire du Plan Vélo de
Paris]. Retrieved 4 September 2020, from https://planvelo.paris/
Portland Bureau of Transportation. (2018). 2018 e-scooter findings report | the city of
portland, oregon (technical report). Retrieved 18 May 2020, from https://www.
portlandoregon.gov/transportation/78431
Rådet for Sikker Trafik. (2020). Elektriske løbehjul - regler og bøder | SikkerTrafik.dk.
Retrieved 31 August 2020, from https://www.sikkertrafik.dk/raad-og-viden/
smaa-motoriserede-koeretoejer/elektriske-loebehjul
Retsinformation. (2020). Bekendtgørelse om forsøgsordning for motoriseret løbehjul. Re-
trieved 31 August 2020, from https://www.retsinformation.dk/eli/lta/2019/40
Riggs, W., & Kawashima, M. (12 January 2020). Exploring best practice for municipal e-
scooter policy in the United States (SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3512725). Rochester,
NY. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3512725
Schlussbericht zu dem projekt nachhaltige mobilitätskultur - PDF kostenfreier download.
(No date). Retrieved 31 August 2020, from https://docplayer.org/10408239-
Schlussbericht-zu-dem-projekt-nachhaltige-mobilitaetskultur.html
Shen, X. (4 March 2020). The coronavirus is bringing bike sharing back in china [Abacus]
[Library Catalog: www.abacusnews.com]. Retrieved 18 May 2020, from https:
//www.abacusnews.com/tech/coronavirus-bringing-bike-sharing-back-china/
article/3064941
Sikka, N., Vila, C., Stratton, M., Ghassemi, M., & Pourmand, A. (1 September 2019).
Sharing the sidewalk: A case of e-scooter related pedestrian injury [Publisher:
Elsevier]. The American Journal of Emergency Medicine, 37(9), 1807.e5–1807.e7.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajem.2019.06.017
Société du Grand Paris. (3 May 2017). Carte interactive [Société du Grand Paris]. Re-
trieved 4 September 2020, from https://www.societedugrandparis.fr/gpe/carte
==PAGE:113==
Bibliography
85
Steg, L. (March 2005). Car use: Lust and must. instrumental, symbolic and affective
motives for car use. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2004.07.001
Steg, L., & Tertoolen, G. (1999). Affective motives for car use. Retrieved 10 September
2020, from https://aetransport.org/public/downloads/28h28/2513-514ec4a0ede29.
pdf
Steg, L., Vlek, C., & Slotegraaf, G. (1 September 2001). Instrumental-reasoned and
symbolic-affective motives for using a motor car. Transportation Research Part F:
Traffic Psychology and Behaviour, 4(3), 151–169. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1369-
8478(01)00020-1
Tapper, J. (15 July 2019). Invasion of the electric scooter: Can our cities cope? | cities
| the guardian. The Guardian. Retrieved 31 August 2020, from https://www.
theguardian.com/cities/2019/jul/15/invasion-electric-scooter-backlash
Théry, B. (20 April 2020). Face au coronavirus, Lime met ses trottinettes électriques à
disposition de l’AP-HP [Clubic.com] [Library Catalog: www.clubic.com Section:
mobilie-urbaine-electrique]. Retrieved 18 May 2020, from https://www.clubic.
com/mobilie-urbaine-electrique/actualite-892161-face-coronavirus-lime-offre-
trajets-gratuits-trottinettes-electriques.html
Trivedi, T. K., Liu, C., Antonio, A. L. M., Wheaton, N., Kreger, V., Yap, A., Schriger,
D., & Elmore, J. G. (25 January 2019). Injuries associated with standing electric
scooter use. JAMA Network Open, 2(1), e187381. https://doi.org/10.1001/
jamanetworkopen.2018.7381
UTP. (28 October 2014). Habitudes, impacts de la crise et attentes des voyageurs: ré-
sultats de l’Observatoire de la mobilité 2014 (technical report). https://www.
lagazettedescommunes.com/telechargements/Dossier-de-presse-UTP.pdf
UTP. (2019). Observatoire de la mobilité 2019: Offre territoriale, usages, économie (tech-
nical report). Retrieved 8 May 2020, from https://www.ifop.com/publication/
lobservatoire-de-la-mobilite-2019/
Valdivia, A. G. (6 December 2018). The phenomenon of electric scooters that has bro-
ken into European cities by surprise [Forbes] [Library Catalog: www.forbes.com
Section: Industry]. Retrieved 18 May 2020, from https://www.forbes.com/sites/
anagarciavaldivia/2018/12/06/the-phenomenon-of-electric-scooters-that-has-
broken-into-european-cities-by-surprise/
Wang, K.-Y. (19 March 2014). How change of public transportation usage reveals fear
of the SARS virus in a city. PloS One, 9(3), e89405. https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0089405
World Health Organisation. (11 March 2020). Who director-general’s opening remarks
at the media briefing on covid-19 - 11 march 2020. Retrieved 5 September 2020,
from https://www.who.int/dg/speeches/detail/who-director-general-s-opening-
remarks-at-the-media-briefing-on-covid-19---11-march-2020
Zagorskas, J., & Burinskienė, M. (January 2020). Challenges caused by increased use
of e-powered personal mobility vehicles in European cities [Number: 1 Publisher:
Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute]. Sustainability, 12(1), 273. https:
//doi.org/10.3390/su12010273
==PAGE:114==
86
Bibliography
Zhang, Z. (April 2016). Variable selection with stepwise and best subset approaches.
Annals of Translational Medicine, 4(7). https://doi.org/10.21037/atm.2016.03.35
