==PAGE:1==
Master thesis
Master thesis in Electrical Engineering
Title: Control and integration of a mobile
robot platform for wind turbine inspection
Author: Qixi Zhao
Student number: s181384
==PAGE:2==
Supervisor: Jens Christian Andersen (DTU)
Supervisor: Rune Yding Brogaard (Force Technology)
DTU
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Building 326
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
There is an increasing demand for renewable energy, where especially wind turbines
have seen a growing interest throughout the world. The blades of the wind turbine
are considered a critical component and a good and reliable production is crucial.
Thus, there is a need for inspecting the quality of each blade during the production
steps. This project is based on the AMS-46, a manually controlled robotic platform
by FORCE Technology, used explicitly for wind turbine blade inspections. To provide
reliable and repeatable inspection results, an automated system is added to locate
and track the main beam of the wind turbine blade, while collecting the inspection
data in the form of Ultra Sonic depth data of the blade.
The actual ultrasound
inspection method is provided by Force Technology and will not be part of this
project. A mathematical model of the robotic system, is created and PID controllers
are designed to keep the robot on track with the beam.
A laser sensor and an
inertial measurement unit are used as the feedback sensors for the control system. To
provide position feedback, a specialized locating method for the blade is developed.
In addition, functional software such as blade map generation and a user interface
are also included. The entire developed software is tested on an experimental blade
with the size 1 m×5 m, where the robot platform proves to be able to run along the
main beam. At the same time, the trajectory of the AMS-46 shows good control
performance.
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Abstract
i
Contents
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Project analysis
4
2.1
Robot platform description and discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.1
Main frame . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.2
Driving system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.3
Steering system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.4
Steering angle limitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.5
Alternative moving system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
ROS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Central Processing Unit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Motor and motor driver . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4.1
Motor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4.2
Motor driver
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4.2.1
Motor driver protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4.2.2
Built-in controller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Sensors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5.1
Laser sensor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5.2
IMU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.6
Control system overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.7
Steering system protection and steering angle initialisation . . . . . . .
16
2.8
User interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Motor adjustment
19
3.1
Motion Manager 6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
ROS programming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
==PAGE:5==
Contents
iii
4
Localisation and mapping
22
4.1
Main beam positioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.1.1
Data collecting & calibrating function . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.1.1
Unnecessary data discarding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.1.2
Coordinate conversion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.1.1.3
Tilt angle Calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.1.2
Peak point searching function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.1.2.1
polynomial filter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2
Mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5
Modelling and control system design
29
5.1
Steering system modelling and controller design . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.1.1
Steering system modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.1.1.1
CST mode control system modelling . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.1.1.2
Angular velocity control system modelling
. . . . . .
30
5.1.2
Steering angle Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2
Robot structure modelling and trajectory control . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.2.1
Platform modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2.2
Position control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.3
Dual-loop control system analyse . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.4
Robot platform running experiment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6
ROS integration
44
6.1
Driving system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.2
Steering system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.3
initialisation system and steering system protection node . . . . . . . .
46
6.4
mapping system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.5
whole system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7
Conclusion and future work
48
7.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
Bibliography
50
==PAGE:6==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In Denmark, the percentage of the electricity produced by wind power is increasing
every year. In 2019, 47% of Denmark total electricity consumption came from wind
power[1], increased from 42.1% in 2015[2], 39.1% in 2014, and 32.7% in 2013[3]. And
by 2020, the Danish government plans to increase the wind energy production to 50%,
and 100% by 2050, of daily electricity consumption[4].
In countries with sufficient wind flow speed, wind power provides stable energy
supply, without directly contributing to local air and water pollution.
Like most
renewable energy sources, wind power is also inexhaustible. Thus, the promotion
of wind power can make a positive contribution to emission reduction. Besides, in
the development of various new energy sources, wind power generation is a method
with relatively mature technology and conditions for large-scale development with
commercial benefits.
In many countries, wind power can lead to a lower energy
cost compared to other renewable energy sources. Therefore, in the context of the
increasingly serious global energy and environmental crisis, wind energy has received
widespread attention.
1.1
Background
The blade is a critical mechanical component of the Wind Turbine (WT). However,
in the manufacturing process, typical defects may occur inside the blades, such as
adhesive debonding, splitting, adhesive joint failure, missing glue and delamination.
Meanwhile, the WT blades will also experience varying degrees of damage during
operation, such as cracks, fractures, and matrix aging. These defects can have severe
consequences for the structural integrity of the WT blades. Therefore, in order to
avoid the serious consequences caused by the defects, significant investments are com-
mitted in wind turbine maintenance every year, and various WT blade inspection
techniques are continuously developed.
Force Technology, an independent technical service company located in Denmark,
has developed the robot platform ”AMS-46” for the WT blades inspection. It can
provide an ultrasound inspection of fibre-reinforced-rotor blades for the WT. The
inspection is performed with a manoeuvrable crawler scanner while the rotor blade
is placed horizontally. The crawler scanner and a frame with auxiliary equipment
==PAGE:7==
1.2 Thesis outline
2
can be moved along the blade during scanning. The moving system is a four-wheel
remotely operated unit, which is manoeuvred manually during the inspection[5].
In order to save labour costs and improve the efficiency of the robot, the goal
of this project is to design a self-navigation system for the robot to scan the blade
automatically following a specific route. A laser sensor is added on the robot to scan
the profile of the blade and provide the position feedback to the designed control
system. Meanwhile, an inertial measurement unit (IMU) is mounted on the top of
the laser sensor to calibrate the robot tilt angle when running on the curved blade
surface. The thesis will focus on the blade main beam tracking, and similar techniques
can also be applied to track the blade edges or other specific routes. Moreover, the
high-level control system of the robot platform will be using ROS (Robot Operating
System).
Figure 1.1. AMS-46[5]
1.2
Thesis outline
Chapter 1
This chapter introduces the advantages of wind energy and the fact
of extensive construction of wind turbines, leading to the WT blade defect-detection
robot platform. Then briefly introduces the robot platform used in this project and
proposes the project objective.
Chapter 2
This chapter describes the whole robot platform, including the robot
frame, hardware choices and the overview designed control system. The last part
is about three functions of the robot, the steering system protection, steering angle
initialisation and the operating user interface.
Chapter 3
This chapter firstly tells the approach to adjust the coefficient of the
==PAGE:8==
1.2 Thesis outline
3
motor driver.
Then control the motor by ROS programming and test the motor
performance.
Chapter 4
This chapter explains how the combination of the laser sensor and
IMU locates the WT blade main beam and builds the robot scanning map.
Chapter 5
This chapter detailly describes the mathematical modelling and con-
troller design of the robot platform.
Chapter 6
This chapter shows the developed robot software in the form of ROS
framework. Meanwhile, communication and cooperation between the different ROS
nodes are described.
Chapter 7
This chapter concludes the thesis and discusses the possibility of
technique developing in the future.
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 2
Project analysis
The first part of this chapter is the robot platform description; meanwhile, the hard-
ware and software selections are discussed. The second part is about the overview of
the whole control system. Then the robot functions of the steering system protection
and the steering angle initialisation is described. The last part briefly illustrates the
user interface designed for the robot operation.
2.1
Robot platform description and discussion
2.1.1
Main frame
Figure 2.1. Real AMS-46 robot platform
The total length and width of AMS-46 are 1300 mm and 1410 mm, figure 2.1. The
explosion diagram of the platform is in figure 2.2.
==PAGE:10==
2.1 Robot platform description and discussion
5
Figure 2.2. Explosion diagram of the AMS-46[5]
1. Main frame, 2. Front cover, 3. Rear cover, 4. Electronic components, 5. Rear
wheels, 6. Y-modules, 7. Frame for line scan probes, 8. Front wheels, 9. Video
camera
In the project, the video camera is not installed; instead, the combination of a
laser sensor and an IMU is mounted on the main frame in front of the robot, figure
2.1.
2.1.2
Driving system
The structure of the rear wheels (driving wheels) is shown in figure 2.3. The wheels
are driven by a single motor with a gearbox. The highest driving speed is 0.1 m s−1
due to the limitation of the motor system.
Figure 2.3. Driving system of AMS-46[5]. 1.Frame bracket, 2.Motor, 3.Tyre, 4.Rim, 5.Hub,
6.Feather, 7.Axle part, 8.Axle part, 9.Gear, 10.Support frame.
==PAGE:11==
2.1 Robot platform description and discussion
6
2.1.3
Steering system
In the steering system, the axle is mounted with a tilt unit to ensure proper wheel
contact if the surface below the guide wheels is tilted relative to the surface below
the drive wheels.
Figure 2.4. Steering system of AMS-46[5]. 1.Frame bracket, 2.Gear, 3.Motor, 4.Axle, 5.Turn
angle limiter, 6.Tilt unit, 7.Hub, 8.Tyre, 9.Rim, 10.Lock washer.
2.1.4
Steering angle limitation
Figure 2.5. Two limit switches
Due to the mechanical structure’s limitation, the steering angle is limited within
−5° to +5°[5]. When the steering angle exceeds ±5°, the axle will hit the steering
gearbox. That will lead to serious consequences, because the steering system does
not have a mechanical buffer device to protect the gearbox from the impact of the
axle. Therefore, behind the axle, two switches are mounted to provide an alert signal
when the steering angle is beyond the limit, figure 2.5.
==PAGE:12==
2.2 ROS
7
2.1.5
Alternative moving system
On the robot platform, an alternative moving system can also be considered, the
Mecanum Wheel system[6], figure 2.6.
The Mecanum Wheel (MW) system is designed as an omnidirectional wheel sys-
tem, controlled by four motors. With the MW system, the inspection platform will
be able to move on the WT blade in any direction, so it will be easier to control the
platform tracking the required route. However, compared with the AMS-46 moving
system, the MW system also has disadvantages. The first one is in the MW sys-
tem, more motors are needed compared with the AMS-46, and with more electrical
components, the robustness of the platform will decrease. The other disadvantage
is that the MW system would cause vibration while running because the wheels are
surrounded by a series of rubberised external rollers. The vibration may produce
disturbance to the blade inspection. Therefore, although the AMS-46 platform only
provides the small steering range, the movement system is still a good option, con-
sidering the robustness and inspection accuracy. Also, as the thesis is focused on
the system software design, this project did not put much effort into the mechanical
system modification.
Figure 2.6. Mecanum wheel system
2.2
ROS
The reason why the high-level control system runs on ROS is explained in this sec-
tion. Firstly, ROS has plenty of open-source packages, which makes it easy to com-
municate with the sensors and to process the data.
Secondly, ROS provides the
multi-processing and multi-threading operating methods and various communication
==PAGE:13==
2.3 Central Processing Unit
8
methods between different nodes. Thirdly, ROS supports multi-language program-
ming. In this project, C++ is the primary programming language, while due to the
data processing advantage, Python is selected as the secondary language and used
in a subsystem (polynomial fitting). Therefore, with the help of ROS, the level of
complexity in software development involved in this project is reduced drastically.
A few open-source ROS packages have been applied for communication and data
collection, including the urg_node and the xsens_driver. The urg_node gathers the
distance data from the laser sensor. The xsens_driver collects the quaternion data
from the IMU, detecting the robot tilt angle. Meanwhile, the package TF is used to
convert the quaternion data into an Euler angle. Besides, the serial package is used
for data transmission between USB and RS232.
2.3
Central Processing Unit
The two choices for the central processing unit are ”Raspberry Pi 4” and ”LattePanda
Alpha 864s”.
Raspberry Pi 4:
• $35
• Broadcom BCM2711, Quad core Cortex-A72 (ARM v8) 64-bit SoC @ 1.5GHz
• 8GB LPDDR4-3200 SDRAM
• SD card
LattePanda Alpha 864s:
• $409
• Intel Core m3 processor
• 8GB RAM
• 64GB eMMC and M.2 interface with SSD support
Based on the hardware information shown above, the LattePanda Alpha 864s is
more powerful than Raspberry Pi 4. When operating the robot, multi-threading and
multi-processing operations are required, since the high-level control system runs on
ROS. Besides, dealing with several types of feedback data, a more powerful processor
is necessary. Therefore, even though LattePanda Alpha 864s brings more cost, it is
still a reasonable choice because of the decent processing performance.
==PAGE:14==
2.4 Motor and motor driver
9
Figure 2.7. LattePanda Alpha 864s
2.4
Motor and motor driver
The motor and motor driver are chosen by Force Technology as a prototype for future
research, so the alternative choices are not considered in this project.
2.4.1
Motor
Both the steering and the driving systems use the same motor, the RE-max 29 with
an incremental digital encoder from the company Maxon. The power level is 22 W,
with nominal voltage and current at 24 V and 1.08 A.
However, the nominal torque of this type of motor is only 27 mN m.
Thus, a
proper gearbox for both the driving and steering systems is needed to reduce the
load and consequently decrease the excessive current and heat production. Besides,
the gearbox allows to slow down the driving speed and prevent miss scanning during
the inspection. Therefore, the motor is mounted on the gearbox designed by Force
Technology with the ratio 86:1, figure 2.9.
Figure 2.8. 2D drawing of RE-max 29 motor from Maxon[7]
==PAGE:15==
2.4 Motor and motor driver
10
Figure 2.9. Motor gearbox
2.4.2
Motor driver
The motor driver used in this project is MC5010 from FAULHABER. The supply
voltage is between 12 V and 50 V, and the maximum continuous output current is
10 A.
Figure 2.10. MC5010 motor driver from FAULHABER
.
2.4.2.1
Motor driver protocol
MC5010 is designed with three communication protocols, namely RS232, CANopen,
and EtherCAT. The RS232 protocol was chosen because with the ROS open-source
package serial, RS232 is relatively convenient for communication.
Actually, the
services defined for the RS232 and USB interfaces are based on the CANopen, but
tailored to the characteristics of the RS232 interface, with transmission rate 115200
bits/s. According to the driver manual, a binary protocol with variable length mes-
sages is used for communication via the USB and RS232 interfaces, figure 2.11 and
2.12[8].
==PAGE:16==
2.4 Motor and motor driver
11
Figure 2.11. Schematic structure of a USB/RS232 telegram
Figure 2.12. Functions of the command codes
2.4.2.2
Built-in controller
Instead of simply outputting PWM signal, MC5010 is integrated with a built-in motor
controller, including five control modes: PV (Profile Velocity), PP (Profile Position),
CST (Cyclic Synchronous Torque), CSV (Cyclic Synchronous Velocity) and CSP
(Cyclic Synchronous Position).
According the the driver manual, the controller cascade is shown in figure 2.13
However, the PP and CSP modes are dangerous and will not be used on the AMS-
46 platform, because before reaching the desired angle, the motor driver would not
accept any other commands, which means that the motor cannot be stopped when
exceeding the angle limit. As CSV’s control mode is similar to PV’s, for the sake of
simplicity, only PV mode is chosen. So in this project, the PV and CST modes are
applied.
==PAGE:17==
2.5 Sensors
12
Based on the manual, the PV control mode is a dual-loop control system. The
inner loop is regulated by the built-in torque controller and the outer loop by the built-
in velocity controller. The control performance of the PV mode will be analysed in
detail in chapter 5.
Figure 2.13. Motor driver built-in Controller cascade[9]
2.5
Sensors
2.5.1
Laser sensor
Figure 2.14. 2D cross-section of the WT blade
==PAGE:18==
2.5 Sensors
13
As mentioned in chapter 1, the robot platform is focused on the main beam
inspection. In the 2D cross-section profile of the blade, figure 2.14, the main beam is
installed under the peak point of the blade. In order to find the peak point, a laser
sensor is applied. The selected laser sensor is ”Hokuyo URG-04LX-UG01” which is
mounted in front of the robot, figure 2.16.
Figure 2.15. Hokuyo URG-04LX-UG01
The measuring distance of the sensor is from 20 mm to 5600 mm with 240◦scan-
ning range. The accuracy from 60 mm to 1000 mm is ±30 mm, and from 1000 mm
to 4095 mm is ±3%. The angular resolution is approximately 0.36°(360°/1,024 steps)
and the scanning time is 100 ms/scan.[10]
Figure 2.16. Laser sensor and IMU
==PAGE:19==
2.5 Sensors
14
2.5.2
IMU
An IMU is used to calibrate the tilt angle of the robot. In figure 2.17, the bold axis
is the world frame and the thin axis is the robot frame. When the robot runs on a
curved surface, there is a tilt angle θt between the robot frame and the world frame.
In figure 2.18, since the angle will influence the peak point searching, the tilt angle is
calibrated by the IMU.
Figure 2.17. World frame and robot frame
Figure 2.18. Laser sensor scanning point cloud shown in ROS RVIZ
==PAGE:20==
2.6 Control system overview
15
The IMU used in this project is ”Xsens MTI-10”, shown in figure 2.19.
For
calibrating the robot tilt angle as well as the angle derived from an inexact installation
of the laser sensor, the IMU is mounted on the top of the laser sensor, figure 2.16.
Figure 2.19. Xsens MTI 10
The localisation algorithm based on the laser sensor and the IMU will be described
in detail in chapter 4.
2.6
Control system overview
The control system designed for the AMS-46 robot platform is a dual-loop system.
For the steering system, as mentioned in section 2.4.2.2, the motor driver built-in
control mode PP and CSP are not applicable, so a steering angle controller should be
developed. Meanwhile, for tracking the main beam of the WT blade, with the laser
sensor feedback, a position controller should be designed to calculate the required
steering angle. Thus, the inner-loop controller is the steering angle controller, and the
outer-loop controller is the position controller. The overview control block diagram
is shown in figure 2.20.
The motor driver dynamic and the robot platform dynamic is analysed by mathe-
matical modelling. Both the modelling and the controller design will be described in
chapter 5.
==PAGE:21==
2.7 Steering system protection and steering angle initialisation
16
Figure 2.20. Overview control system
2.7
Steering system protection and steering angle
initialisation
With the two limit switches mounted behind the steering axle, figure 2.5, a protection
function is designed to stop the whole robot system when receiving the alert signal.
Besides, in the steering system, the only component that provides steering angle
feedback is the encoder of the steering motor.
So whenever restarting the robot
system, an initialisation function is needed to reset the steering feedback to the zero-
degree-steering angle with the help of the two switches. Meanwhile, the feedback
values of the angle limit (±5°) are recorded.
A single-chip microcomputer, Arduino Leonardo, is integrated on LattePanda.
With the ROS package rosserial_arduino, ROS nodes are able to run on the Ar-
duino and communicate with the LattePanda via the serial port.
Both protection and initialisation functions are combined in one ROS node. The
functional flow chart is shown in figure 2.21.
==PAGE:22==
2.7 Steering system protection and steering angle initialisation
17
Figure 2.21. Flow chart for steering system protection and steering angle initialisation function
==PAGE:23==
2.8 User interface
18
2.8
User interface
In order to reduce the difficulty for technicians to operate the robot, a user interface
(UI) is designed based on QT.
Figure 2.22. User interface for the robot operation
On the left side, the useful information is displayed, including the distance from
the main beam, the distance from the start point, the steering initialisation state, and
the real-time steering angle requirement. On the right side, some useful buttons are
designed for the ROS Master states and control functions. With the UI, the techni-
cians who will operate the robot platform do not need to learn the operating process
based on the ROS nodes, which also reduces the risk of the improper operation.
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 3
Motor adjustment
This chapter consists of two parts, motor driver coefficients adjustment and motor
test. The first one shows how to use the manufacturer’s software ”Motion Manager
6”. It is possible to adjust the coefficients of the motor driver’s built-in controller.
The latter part details the development of a ROS node to test the motor’s dynamic
performance. Another purpose of this section is to verify the reliability of the motor
operation performance in ROS.
3.1
Motion Manager 6
Motion Manager 6 (MM6) is a software developed by Faulhaber for the configuration
and adjustment of the driver system[11]. In MM6, a user interface is designed for
tuning the controller parameter, and also provides a tool to analyse the angular-
velocity step response. So the built-in controller’s dynamic response can be quickly
and clearly evaluated. After tuning the velocity control gain (the only adjustable
parameter), the reference tracking performance is satisfactory, figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1. Diagram of the PV mode control.
The vertical axis represents the steps per
minute.
==PAGE:25==
3.2 ROS programming
20
Since there is an incremental encoder mounted on the motor, the motor driver
returns the speed with the y axis label ”1/min”, which means how many steps the mo-
tor crossed in every minute. The plot shows an overshoot at 10%, which is considered
acceptable and a short settling time within around 40 ms.
3.2
ROS programming
According to the driver’s manual, before controlling the angular velocity, a set of
initialisation is needed, and the flow chart in figure 3.3 shows the motor initialisation
and operation process. Since the motor driver provides angular velocity information,
the dynamic response of the angular velocity controller can also be easily obtained,
see figure 3.2. It can be seen that the dynamic response of the motor is equally good
when used through the ROS interface, compared to the previous results with the
software MM6.
Figure 3.2. Motor angular velocity feedback from the motor driver
==PAGE:26==
3.2 ROS programming
21
Figure 3.3. Flow chart of the motor driving program
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 4
Localisation and
mapping
This chapter will introduce how AMS-46 uses the laser sensor and IMU to obtain the
distance between the robot and the main beam. Meanwhile, a map of the scanning
area is generated to show the defect areas.
Figure 4.1. 2D cross-section of the WT blade
4.1
Main beam positioning
Main beam positioning is the process that calculates the distance between the robot
platform and the main beam. Then, the distance is considered as the tracking er-
ror feedback for the position controller (see chapter 5) when regulating the robot
trajectory. For locating the mean beam position, the laser sensor is responsible for
collecting the 2D profile data of the WT blade, and the IMU calibrates the robot tilt
angle. Based on the calibrated data, the peak point (main beam) is located and the
distance from the main beam to the robot platform is derived.
The ROS package developed for the main beam positioning has two functions:
data collecting & calibrating function and peak point searching function.
==PAGE:28==
4.1 Main beam positioning
23
4.1.1
Data collecting & calibrating function
The laser sensor detects objects by emitting and receiving the reflected infrared beams.
When the laser sensor is working, a launch tube rotates counterclockwise and emits
laser beams. Then, the distance is calculated based on the time of the reflected light
returning to the laser. Using the ROS package urg_node, the polar coordinate of the
surrounding area can be derived.
4.1.1.1
Unnecessary data discarding
The scanning range of the Hokuyo URG-04LX-UG01 is 240◦, but with the launch file
of the package urg_node , only the scanning data from 0◦to 180◦is kept.
Figure 4.2. Scanning range of the laser sensor
However, only the data related to the blade area is useful. It is then necessary
to discard part of the data to reduce the computational burden for the central pro-
cessing unit and limit the system delay. Therefore, two methods of data filtering are
developed and described in this section.
Typically, the wind turbine blade is placed on a large workbench, and there is
a certain distance step between the surrounding area (ground) and the blade. This
distance step allows to detect the blade edges by comparing the measurement at two
consecutive angles in the scanning process.
The first method is detecting the blade edge. Figure 4.3 shows the laser sensor and
the WT blade, where the distances [d1, d2] and [d3, d4] are two pairs of consecutive
angle measurements. For each pair, one of the measurements is on the blade and
the other one is on the ground. The sharp variation in distance between the two
consecutive angles can be easily identified; hence the blade edges are detected. Then,
the scanning data outside of the range [d2, d3] is discarded.
==PAGE:29==
4.1 Main beam positioning
24
Figure 4.3. Edge detection
However, during the actual test in Force Technology, the experimental blade was
placed on the ground without the workbench, so the method above was not available,
unfortunately.
Instead, a fixed-range scanning method was applied. Due to the narrow width
of the experimental blade, the peak point can also be caught with a relatively small
scanning range. So, a 60-degree scanning range is used, and the data outside the
range will be discarded, figure 4.4.
Figure 4.4. 60-degree scanning range
==PAGE:30==
4.1 Main beam positioning
25
4.1.1.2
Coordinate conversion
Figure 4.5. Coordinate conversion
The 2D profile derived from the laser sensor is described in the Polar coordinate, but
it is more convenient to search the peak point in the Cartesian coordinate. So the
coordinate conversion is needed. With the distance d and scanning angle θ, the profile
in the Cartesian coordinate is easily described by equation 4.1
{
x = d · cos θ
y = d · sin θ
(4.1)
The Cartesian coordinate derived above is in the robot frame. Since the peak
point should be found in the world frame, when there is a tilt angle between the
robot frame and the world frame, the angle needs to be calibrated.
4.1.1.3
Tilt angle Calibration
Figure 4.6. the IMU with the laser sensor
==PAGE:31==
4.1 Main beam positioning
26
The IMU is mounted on the laser sensor by tape.
This way is not a reasonable
mechanical assembly method. However, since the robot works on the massive wind
turbine blade, the error caused by the unreasonable assembly is too small to be noticed.
Moreover, as the project is developing a prototype and mainly focused on the software
design, the hardware assembly method should not be concerned too much.
When the robot is tilted, the IMU will return a calibration angle θt.
Figure 4.7. Robot tilt angle
With the calibration angle θt, the equation 4.1 will change to the 4.2
{
x = d · cos(θ + θt)
y = d · sin(θ + θt)
(4.2)
After the laser sensor finishing one scanning cycle, a set of coordinates is packed
and transmitted in the ROS topic to the peak point searching function.
4.1.2
Peak point searching function
4.1.2.1
polynomial filter
The data collecting function derives noisy profiles of the WT blade, because the laser
sensor is influenced by the ±30 mm white noise, as shown in section 2.5.1. The noise
would create challenges to the peak point searching, so a white noise filter should be
designed.
==PAGE:32==
4.1 Main beam positioning
27
Figure 4.8. The blade cross-section profile with noise
There are several potential methods to filter the white noise, such as the Kalman
filter, low-pass filter, and mean-value filter.
Since the Kalman filter is relatively
complicated and needs iteration, and the other two filters would cause a system delay,
the methods above are not applied in this project.
Instead, a polynomial fitting method is used to filter the white noise. The first
reason is that the cross-section of the WT blade is always a smooth curve that can be
perfectly fitted by a polynomial equation. Secondly, it is easy to calculate the slope
of every pair of adjacent points from the polynomial curve. Then, the pair with the
smallest slope will be considered as the peak point.
After a group of coordinates are derived from the laser sensor, a third-order poly-
nomial equation is selected, because the lower order equation would cause underfitting
and the higher-order equation would increase the computational burden and cause a
significant delay. The fitting method used is LLS(linear least squares[12]).
This node is based on rospy instead of the more used roscpp, because with the
function leastsq in Python library scipy.optimize[13], the fitted equation can be
calculated automatically.
The filtered plot is shown in figure 4.9. The peak point highlighted in the figure
is accurate enough for an enormous wind turbine blade.
Figure 4.9. Comparison between the original and the filtered curve
==PAGE:33==
4.2 Mapping
28
4.2
Mapping
When the robot is running, the encoder of the driving motor continuously records the
driving distance from the start point.
The 3D map is built with the point cloud generated from the Cartesian coordinate
of the blade profile. Two of the dimensions come from the 2D profile, and the third
dimension is the driving distance. While the robot is running on the wind turbine
blade, a 3D point cloud map is accumulated continuously. If a defect occurs during
the detection, the area would be recorded and highlighted on the map.
The example of the final map is shown in figure 4.10
Figure 4.10. The generated WT blade map
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 5
Modelling and control
system design
This chapter is about the description of the robot platform modelling and controller
design. As mentioned in chapter 2, the platform control system is a dual-loop system,
the inner loop is the steering control system and the outer-loop is the position control
system. The two loops will be analysed separately below.
5.1
Steering system modelling and controller design
5.1.1
Steering system modelling
The mechanical structure for the steering system, as shown in chapter 2, is composed
of a motor, two gearboxes, an axle and two wheels. The motor and motor driver dy-
namic analysis is the most important part for the steering system modelling. Usually,
mechanics and electrical analysis are used to build the system’s mathematical model.
However, the load of the motor can not be estimated, due to the lack of information
for the wheel tires’ friction force and the system inertial force. The real load is essen-
tial for establishing the mathematical model, because the assumption of an inexact
value would cause a significant deviation between the model and the actual system.
Thus, the steering system needs to be built in another approach.
The reasonable method to build the model is to firstly estimate the system as a
classic Linear model, such as the first-order system or second-order system. Secondly,
based on the experiment data, the coefficients of the classic Linear model are calcu-
lated to fit the model to the data. Afterward, the model will be considered as a good
estimation of the real steering system model.
The modelling uses the second-order system identification method.
It can be
divided into three parts. The first part is to collect the feedback data from a step
response of the steering system. The second part is to fit a classical second-order
system model to the collected data. The last part is to verify the robustness of the
model by checking its accuracy in reproducing the real step response at different
intensities.
==PAGE:35==
5.1 Steering system modelling and controller design
30
For steering angle control, both the motor driver’s PV mode (angular velocity
controller) and the CST mode (torque controller) can be used. The feasibility analysis
of the two methods is discussed below.
5.1.1.1
CST mode control system modelling
The relationship between the torque input and the steering angle, according to the
motor driver manual, is shown in figure 5.1[9]
Figure 5.1. The Relationship between torque and steering angle
Since the motor driver cannot return the torque feedback data, the regulated
torque value of the control system is not available. As the modelling method relies
on these torque values, it is not feasible to model the CST mode control system.
5.1.1.2
Angular velocity control system modelling
The relationship between the angular velocity and steering angle is shown in figure
5.2, according to the manual[9].
Figure 5.2. The relationship between angular velocity and steering angle
The steering system angular velocity (AV) can be read by LattePanda from the
motor driver, so with the given AV step reference, the step response can be derived.
Therefore, it is feasible to model the PV mode control system.
For deriving the relationship between the AV input and the steering angle, the
transfer function Gω between the ωref (AV reference) and ωout (AV output) is needed,
==PAGE:36==
5.1 Steering system modelling and controller design
31
then the steering angle θ can be calculated as: θ = ωref · Gω · 1
s, as shown in figure
5.2.
In the experiment step response, ωref steps from 0 ° s−1 to 7 ° s−1. The sampling
time Ts is set to 0.01 s, which is the shortest time allowed by the hardware. In order
to increase the precision of the measurement, the experiment takes the average value
over twenty independent samples.
Figure 5.3. 7 ° s−1 step response in real steering system
The experiment data shows that the step response is already stable after 0.2s, as
shown in figure 5.3. Since ωout experiences an overshoot, a second-order underdamped
system could be a more suitable model, as equation 5.1.
ωout(t) = Kωref(t)(1 −β−1e−ζωnt sin(βωnt + ψ))
(5.1)
where
ψ = cos−1 ζ,
β ≡
√
1 −ζ2,
0 < ζ < 1
In the equation 5.1, K is the static gain, ωn is the undamped natural frequency, and
ζ is the damping ratio. When the system is transferred into Laplace domain:
Gω = ωout
ωref
=
K · ω2
n
s2 + 2ζωns + ω2n
(5.2)
The essential response parameters for the second-order underdamped system iden-
tification is shown as:
• y∞:
The final value of the output (if system is stable).
• ymax:
The first overshoot value of the output.
==PAGE:37==
5.1 Steering system modelling and controller design
32
• p:
Oscillation period.
• tp:
Time to reach the first peak.
With the parameters, relationship between the maximum overshoot and the damp-
ing ratio is:
ymax −y∞
y∞
= e
−πζ
√
1−ζ2
(5.3)
The relationship between oscillation period and undamped natural frequency is:
tp = p
2 =
π
√
1 −ζ2 · ωn
(5.4)
The relationship between static gain and the final value of the output is:
K = y∞
ustep
(5.5)
From the figure 5.3, it can be roughly read that ymax is around 1.067, y∞is 1,
and tp is around 0.02. So the damping ratio ζ, natural frequency ωn and static gain
K can be calculated from equation 5.3, 5.4 and 5.5. The equations yield:
K = 1
(5.6)
ζ ≈0.65
(5.7)
ωn ≈207
(5.8)
So the transfer function Gω is derived as:
Gω =
42849
s2 + 269.1s + 42849
(5.9)
Figure 5.4. 7 ° s−1 step response comparison
==PAGE:38==
5.1 Steering system modelling and controller design
33
Figure 5.4 shows the comparison between the approximated transfer function sim-
ulation and the real system performance. There is a good agreement between the two
plots, so the approximated transfer function is considered to be able to well represent
the real system while the angular velocity reference steps from 0 ° s−1 to 7 ° s−1.
Furthermore, to prove the robustness of the transfer function, another experiment
with a different AV step reference is needed. The new experimental ωref is 8.2 ° s−1,
slightly slower than the maximum AV the steering axle can reach.
Figure 5.5. 8.2 ° s−1 step response comparison
According to figure 5.5, the simulation step response and the experimental data
nearly coincide. Thus it is reasonable to consider that the approximated transfer
function is able to describe the steering system’s dynamic response.
Then the transfer function between motor rotation angle and velocity Gωθ in the
figure 5.2 is shown in equation 5.10, and it is noted as ”steering transfer function” in
the following sections.
Gωθ =
42849
s3 + 269.1s2 + 42849s
(5.10)
5.1.2
Steering angle Control
The steering angle controller should be designed in the discrete-time domain since
the robotic system runs on a digital central processing unit. The sampling time is
set as 0.1s to avoid the communication conflict between the LattePanda and motor
drivers. The steering transfer function can be discretized as equation 5.11
Gd,ωθ =
0.09372z2 + 0.00628z + 9.036 × 10−9
z3 −z2 −(2.867 × 10−6)z −2.057 × 10−12
(5.11)
==PAGE:39==
5.1 Steering system modelling and controller design
34
Figure 5.6. Bode plot of the discrete time steering transfer function
The bode plot of the discrete steering transfer function, figure 5.6, shows that the
open-loop phase margin is 86.8 deg, which means the system would be stable simply
with a unit feedback controller.
However, the cross-over frequency ωc at 1 rad/s
means the control system has a very slow dynamic performance at higher frequencies.
As from equation 5.12, the step response settling time is calculated to be around 6.8 s,
figure 5.7.
Ts = 2π
ωc
(5.12)
Figure 5.7. Step response with unit feedback controller
==PAGE:40==
5.1 Steering system modelling and controller design
35
In order to improve the system dynamic response, a PI controller is designed for
steering angle regulation.
u(t) = Kpe(t) + Ki
∫t
0
e(t) dt
(5.13)
In the general equation 5.13 for PI controller, u(t) is the system input, and e(t) is the
feedback error. Kp and Ki are the proportional part and the integral part constants,
respectively.
For discrete time, PI controller is defined as equation 5.14
u(k) = Kpe(k) + Ki
k
∑
0
e(k)∆t
(5.14)
where e(k) illustrates the feedback error in each step.
Based on the requirements of the real system, also considering the balance between
the control performance and the system stability, the settling time should better be
less than 1 s , so the cross-over frequency of the open-loop transfer function with PI
controller should be larger than 6.28 rad/s, based on equation 5.12. Meanwhile, the
open-loop phase margin needs to be positive to guarantee the system stability.
When Kp = 10.43, Ki = 0.1738, the controller fulfils the requirement.
The
discrete time open-loop transfer function Gd,o is shown in equation 5.15.
Gd,o = 0.978z3 −0.9107z2 −0.06548z −9.421 × 10−8
z4 −2z3 + z2 + 2.867 × 10−6z + 2.057 × 10−12
(5.15)
Figure 5.8. Bode plot of the open-loop system with PI controller
In the bode plot of the open-loop transfer function with PI controller, figure
5.8, the cross-over frequency ωc is 10.6 rad/s with the phase margin at 56.3 degree.
==PAGE:41==
5.2 Robot structure modelling and trajectory control
36
That means the closed-loop system’s step response is stable, and the response time,
according to the equation 5.12, is around 0.59 s. The simulate plot is shown as the
red line in figure 5.9.
Figure 5.9. Real control performance and simulated control performance
When applying the PI controller on the real steering system, it returns the step
response as the blue line in figure 5.9. Compared with the simulated result, the real
response shows a small difference with the 10% of overshoot and longer adjusting
time.
The real system’s high-frequency response is slightly slower than the simulation
because the steering velocity has a saturation value, ±8.2°/s. The overshoot is due
to the sampling delay in the communication process between the motor driver and
LattePanda, and the longer adjusting time is caused by the dead zone of the motor
dynamic when the motor voltage is fairly low.
The real control performance shows a good balance between the performance and
stability. Since the overshoot is caused by the communication delay, the overshoot will
still exist even though turning down the control gain. Besides, 10 % of the overshoot
is acceptable because the steering angle will be controlled within ±4° to reserve a
buffer zone for structure protection.
5.2
Robot structure modelling and trajectory control
In the previous section, the steering angle controller has been designed. In this section,
the mathematical model for the platform movement is established, which describes
the relationship between the steering angle, the driving speed and the robot position.
Based on the model, it is possible to design a position controller, i.e., the outer-loop
==PAGE:42==
5.2 Robot structure modelling and trajectory control
37
controller in the dual-loop control system. The role of the controller is to calculate
the required steering angle when tracking the main beam of the WT blade.
5.2.1
Platform modelling
The robot platform can be assumed moving in a 2D plane, because when the robot
is tracking the main beam, the height gradient of the curved blade surface in Z axis
is not important.
In the robot movement schematic, figure 5.10, xR and yR are the coordinates in
the robot frame, which has the origin oR located at the middle of the robot’s driving
axle. l is the distance between the steering axle and the driving axle. Based on the
producer’s assumption, when the robot steers, the movement can be regarded as a
combination of translation and rotation, and the centre of rotation is located in the
middle of the driving axle. Then, the robot kinematic can be described as equation
5.16, where v is the speed of the driving wheels, β is the steering angle and α is the
robot travelling angle.
˙PR =


˙xR
˙yR
˙α

=


v · cos α
v · sin α
v
l · tan β


(5.16)
Figure 5.10. Schematic of robot movement
==PAGE:43==
5.2 Robot structure modelling and trajectory control
38
Since the steering angle β is limited within ±5°, the travelling angle α is always
close to zero. So that the equation 5.16 can be simplified as equation 5.17 with Taylor
approximation[14].
˙PR =


˙xR
˙yR
˙α

=


v
v · α
v
l · β


(5.17)
Then, put the robot frame into the world frame, shown in figure 5.11. The position
(xI, yI) locates the robot in the world frame. The origin of the world frame oI should
always be placed at the robot start point and the xI axis coincides with the main
beam.
The pose of the robot in the world frame can be described by the equation 5.18:
PI =


xI
yI
θ


(5.18)
Figure 5.11. World frame and robot frame
To explain the robot movement in both the robot frame and the world frame, an
orthogonal rotation matrix is implemented as equation 5.19
R(θ) =


cos θ
sin θ
0
−sin θ
cos θ
0
0
0
1


(5.19)
==PAGE:44==
5.2 Robot structure modelling and trajectory control
39
With the rotation matrix, the relationship between the robot coordinates in the
world and in the robot frame is illustrated as equation 5.20 and 5.21.
PR = R(θ)PI
(5.20)
PI = R(θ)−1PR
(5.21)
Thus, the robot velocity in the world frame can be calculated from the robot frame
as equation 5.22
˙PI = R(θ)−1 ˙PR
(5.22)
Substituting the equation 5.19 into equation 5.22:


˙xI
˙yI
˙θ

=


cos θ
−sin θ
0
sin θ
cos θ
0
0
0
1




v
v · α
v
l · β


(5.23)
Where α =
∫t
0( v
l · β) dt (derived from equation 5.17).
In the platform, only the driving speed and the steering angle is controllable. So,
for controlling the trajectory, it is important to derive the transfer function between
the robot position, steering angle and the driving speed.
With Laplace transformation, the position of the robot in the world frame can be
calculated from’ equation 5.23 as equation 5.24.


xI
yI
θ

=


cos θ
−sin θ
0
sin θ
cos θ
0
0
0
1




1
s · v
1
s2 · v2β
l
1
s · vβ
l


(5.24)
For the position control, only the distance yI (between the robot platform and
the main beam) matters, so from the equation 5.24, yI is calculated as equation 5.25.
yI = sin θ · 1
s · v + cos θ · 1
s2 · v2β
l
(5.25)
with:
θ = 1
s · vβ
l
When the robot platform is running on the blade, the driving velocity v should be
constant at 0.1m/s, which is the maximum driving speed the robot can reach. The
distance l is 0.75 m. The heading angle θ is considered to be small during the whole
robot running time. So with Taylor approximation, sin(θ) ≈θ and cos(θ) ≈1, the
equation 5.25 can be simplified as equation 5.26.
yI = 2β
75s2
(5.26)
Then the outer-loop transfer function Gouter, between yI and β, is derived as
equation 5.27.
Gouter = yI
β =
2
75s2
(5.27)
==PAGE:45==
5.2 Robot structure modelling and trajectory control
40
5.2.2
Position control
With the mathematical relationship between yI and β, a discrete controller is designed
in order to regulate the trajectory for the main beam tracking.
After discretization, the transfer function Gouter, equation 5.27, becomes equation
5.28
Gd,outer = 0.00013333z −0.0001333
z2 −2z + 1
(5.28)
Figure 5.12. Bode plot of the open-loop transfer function Gd,outer
The negative phase margin in the open-loop bode plot of Gd_outer, figure 5.12,
shows that the system cannot follow a step signal only with a unit feedback controller.
For this reason, a discrete PD controller is chosen to regulate the robot running
position. Because, Gouter includes two pure integral parts (see equation 5.27), which
means that the integral control part (I) in PID controller is redundant.
β(k) = Kpe(k) + Kd
∆e(k)
∆t
(5.29)
The equation 5.29, shows the general equation for the PD controller, where Kp is
the proportional control constant and Kd is the derivative control constant. e(k) and
β(k) are the feedback error and required steering angle in every step.
When tuning the coefficients of the PD controller, there is a constraint that needs
to be satisfied: the bandwidth of the position control loop (outer) has to be smaller
than the bandwidth of the steering angle control loop (inner)[15]. As the inner control
loop’s bandwidth is 10.6 rad/s, the open-loop cross-over frequency of the route control
loop should be lower than 10.6 rad/s. Meanwhile, to guarantee the stability, the open-
loop phase margin needs to be positive.
==PAGE:46==
5.2 Robot structure modelling and trajectory control
41
The controller with coefficients Kp = 20, Kd = 30 fulfils the requirement. As
the bode plot (figure 5.13) shows the open-loop cross-over frequency (closed-loop
bandwidth) is 0.848 rad/s, which is more than 10 times lower than 10.6 rad/s (inner-
loop bandwidth), and the 30.8 degrees phase margin is enough to guarantee the
stability.
Figure 5.13. Bode plot of PD control system
The simulation of the outer control loop is shown in figure 5.14. Although there
is an oscillation, compared with the size of the WT blade, the control performance is
still acceptable.
Figure 5.14. Simulation of the outer-loop control system
==PAGE:47==
5.3 Dual-loop control system analyse
42
5.3
Dual-loop control system analyse
After designing both the outer and inner control loop separately, it is important to
combine the two loops and analyse the dynamic performance. The block diagram
of the dual-loop control system is redrawn in figure 5.15, where GP D, GP I are the
PD (outer), PI (inner) controller, Gd,ωθ,Gd,outer are the inner and outer loop transfer
function illustrated in equation 5.11 and equation 5.28, v is the robot driving speed:
0.1 m s−1.
Figure 5.16 shows the open-loop bode plot of the dual-loop system, and the phase
margin at 26.2 rad/s guarantees the closed-loop system’s stability. From the simula-
tion in figure 5.17, it can be seen that the oscillation can be ignored even compared
with the small size of the experiment blade.
Figure 5.15. Block diagram of the dual-loop system
Figure 5.16. Bode plot of the whole system
==PAGE:48==
5.4 Robot platform running experiment
43
Figure 5.17. Simulation of the whole robot control system
5.4
Robot platform running experiment
The robot platform with the control system is tested on an experiment blade. The
width and length of the blade are 1m and 5m, so the WT blade is not big enough to
observe a longer regulation performance, but the trajectory still can show the robot
running route is following to the main beam, figure 5.18.
Figure 5.18. Robot trajectory in real experiment
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 6
ROS integration
In the previous chapters, the mathematical principle of the robot functions has been
described. Then, the communication and cooperation between different ROS nodes
also desire to be explained. So in this chapter, the ROS framework of the overview
robot software will be shown in the flow charts.
6.1
Driving system
The robot driving system consists of two ROS nodes and a ROS server. The vel_request
node publishes the topic of velocity requirement, and the driving_node is responsi-
ble for the motor control. Meanwhile, the position_feedback server returns the
driving distance when receives the request from the driving_node, then the topic of
driving position will be published by driving_node to the main system.
Figure 6.1. ROS flow chart of driving system
Besides, the driving_node subscribes another three topics, steering angle initial-
isation state, emergency stop signal and system normal shut-down signal.
==PAGE:50==
6.2 Steering system
45
6.2
Steering system
The steering system consists of three parts, the sensor application, steering angle
calculation and steering angle control. The flow before steering_controller_node
collects the laser data and calculates the distance from the main beam. Then the
steering_controller_node calculates the steering angle requirement with the PD
controller and publishes the request steering angle topic to steering_node. At the
same time, the PI controller in the steering_node regulates the steering motor based
on the feedback steering angle derived from the steering_angle_feedback server,
see figure 6.2. Meanwhile, the start and stop of the system are determined by the
three start and shut-down topics as same as the driving system mentioned in the
previous section.
Figure 6.2. ROS flow chart of steering system
==PAGE:51==
6.3 initialisation system and steering system protection node
46
6.3
initialisation system and steering system protection
node
This node includes both steering angle initialisation and robot components protection
functions. After the angle initialisation, every touch of the limit switch will publish
the emergency stop topic to shut-down the whole robot system. Besides, there is
also a system_switch_node playing a role as a manual ”shut-down “ function of the
whole system, which provides the user a button to stop the robot’s moving when an
unexpected situation happens.
Figure 6.3. ROS flow chart of initialisation & component protection system
6.4
mapping system
The map is built based on driving distance and 2D profiles scanned by the laser sensor.
The two types of data are from the Driving_position_topic and 2D_profile_coordinate_topic
ROS topic. The mapping_node subscribes the Peak_point_coordinate_topic to cal-
ibrate the map’s original point. That is because in every 2D profile scanned from the
laser sensor, the original point is in the middle of the sensor, but in the map, the
original point should be located on the main beam.
==PAGE:52==
6.5 whole system
47
Figure 6.4. ROS flow chart of mapping system
When a stop or emergency stop information goes to mapping_node, the node will
save the map to a PCD file.
6.5
whole system
The whole system flow chart is shown in figure 6.5:
Figure 6.5. ROS flow chart of the whole system software
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion and future
work
7.1
Conclusion
An automated system was successfully designed for the AMS46 robotic platform,
which made it possible to follow the trajectory of the main beam of the wind tur-
bine blade. The sensors were sufficiently fused and filtered and provided acceptable
results for estimating the position of the beam. With the polynomial fitting method,
the white noise on the laser sensor feedback is well filtered.
Compared with the
popular filters, such as mean-value filter, low-passed filter, the polynomial fitting
method causes less system delay. With the function leastsq in the Python library
scipy.optimize, the method brings a fast and effective filter performance. For the
motor driver, it is essential to understand the dynamics of the built-in control system,
but the modelling process with electrical and mechanics analysis is not doable due to
the lack of load data. However, with the second-order system identification method,
the approximated second-order undamped system fits the experimental data well and
with good robustness. Thus, it can prove that for a linear system, the method is
a good way to model the system when the system parameters are not available. In
the platform dynamic modelling process, the developed model is able to capture the
dynamic performance of the robot platform to a large extent. However, if a more
accurate control system is desired, the modelling process needs to be more detailed.
The designed dual-loop control system works well, but there is a small trajectory-
oscillation closed to the reference route.
The oscillation is mainly caused by the
inefficient actuator (the angle-limited steering system). Besides, some sections of the
WT blade are relatively flat, so the 2D profile’s slope of the main beam area may
have a small changing gradient. The small gradient will create a challenge for the
laser sensor to calculate the very precise position of the main beam and cause the
feedback error. From the testing result, it can be seen that the trajectory oscillations
are limited in ±8 cm, and compared with the massive WT blade, the tracking error
can be reasonably ignored. The user interface and the generated scanning map reduce
the workload for the technicians. With the user interface, the technicians do not need
to learn the robot operating process based on ROS nodes and the platform has less
==PAGE:54==
7.2 Future work
49
possibility to be damaged by the improper operation. And the map can provide an
easy way to allocate the defects.
7.2
Future work
The laser sensor and IMU used in this project are chosen by Force Technology. Al-
though the feedback quality is decently good, the high price of the sensors still brings
a high financial cost. So in future work, more brands of the sensors should be tried
and it is needed to find a good balance between the sensor price and the data quality.
Apart from the laser sensor, a camera is also able to detect the main beam of the
WT blade with the image analysis method. However, the image analysis work needs
more computational resources, especially when the central processing unit is not very
powerful. But the method is still possible to be tried.
For the robot platform movement system, it is discussed in chapter 2 that the
Mecanum Wheel system is an alternative choice. Albeit with the disadvantage of
more motor required and vibration disturbance caused, the advantage of the moving
flexibility still cannot be ignored. So, in future work, it is worthy of putting effort
into the Mecanum Wheel system experiment and developing a damping structure for
vibration cancellation.
The AMS-46 platform can only inspect the WT blade placed in the factory. How-
ever, disassembly and transportation of wind turbine blades will cost plenty of money.
Thus, an inspection platform that is able to scan the installed blade on the WT is
deserving to be developed, such as a drone system with the small inspection devices.
With the new system, the wind turbines will be maintained more economically and
more frequently.
==PAGE:55==
Bibliography
[1]
”Denmark sources record 47% of power from wind in 2019”. Reuters. 2020-01-02.
[2]
”New record-breaking year for Danish wind power”. Energinet.dk. 15 January
2016.
[3]
”Wind turbines broke a record in 2014”. Energinet.dk, 15-01-2014.
[4]
”Denmark aims to get 50% of all electricity from wind power”. The Guardian,
26-03-2012.
[5]
”AMS-46 User Manual v.10 (UK)”. FORCE Technology, Edition 10. 19.10.2017
[6]
Olaf Diegel, Aparna Badve, Glen Bright, Johan Potgieter, Sylvester TlaleMecha-
tronics and Robotics Research Group, ”Improved Mecanum Wheel Design for
Omni-directional Robots”. Institute of technology and Engineering, Massey Uni-
versity. November 2002.
[7]
”RE-max 29ϕ29 mm, Graphite Brushes, 22 Watt”. Maxon, 04-2016.
[8]
Dr. Fritz Faulhaber GmbH. ”Communications Manual”. Co. KG. Faulhaber, Edi-
tion 4. 11-2018
[9]
Dr. Fritz Faulhaber GmbH. ”Drive functions”. Co. KG. Faulhaber, Edition 10.
03-2019
[10] ”URG-04LX-UG01 Specification”. Hokuyo Automatic, Edition 3, 08-2009.
[11] Dr. Fritz Faulhaber GmbH. ”Software Manual”. Co. KG. Faulhaber, Edition 4.
11-2018
[12] Golub, G. ”Numerical methods for solving linear least squares problems”. Numer.
Math. 7, 206–216, 1965.
[13] Pauli
Virtanen,
Ralf
Gommers,
Travis
E.
Oliphant,
Matt
Haberland,
TylerReddy, David Cournapeau, Evgeni Burovski, Pearu Peterson, Warren
Weckesser,Jonathan Bright, Stéfan J. van der Walt, Matthew Brett, Joshua Wil-
son, K. Jar-rod Millman, Nikolay Mayorov, Andrew R. J. Nelson, Eric Jones,
==PAGE:56==
Bibliography
51
Robert Kern,Eric Larson, CJ Carey, İlhan Polat, Yu Feng, Eric W. Moore, Jake
Vand erPlas,Denis Laxalde, Josef Perktold, Robert Cimrman, Ian Henriksen, E.
A. Quintero,Charles R Harris, Anne M. Archibald, Antônio H. Ribeiro, Fabian
Pedregosa,Paul van Mulbregt, and SciPy 1.0 Contributors. ”SciPy 1.0: Funda-
mental Algorithms for Scientific Computing in Python”, 17:261–272, 2020.
[14] Brook Taylor, ”Methodus incrementorum directa et inversa [direct and re-
versemethods of incrementation] (in latin)”. A Source Book in Mathematics 1200–
1800.Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. 329–332, 1715
[15] ”Designing Cascade Control System with PI Controllers”. Matlab.
==PAGE:57==
==PAGE:58==
