==PAGE:1==
Smart charging
through trip demand modelling
Master Thesis
Yuchu Liu
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:2==
DTU Management
Department of Transport Modelling
Technical University of Denmark
Bygningstorvet
Building 116B
2800 Kongens Lyngby
Denmark
Phone +45 4525 1516
transport@transport.dtu.dk
www.transport.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at Volvo Cars and Department of Transport in
Technical University of Denmark, in fulfilment of the requirements for acquiring a
Master degree in Sustainable Transport.
”Om jag får 300 idéer på ett år och en är användbar, då är jag nöjd.”
Alfred Nobel
Gothenburg, Sweden, September 28, 2020
Yuchu Liu
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to extend my gratitude to the industry supervisor Linus von Sydow, for
his support in the project. I would like to express my appreciation to my academic
supervisor Francisco Camara Pereira, for his advice and guidance during the project.
Special thanks to company Tomorrow, for sharing the high quality electrical grid
data. Special thanks to the Volvo On Call team for enabling access to the trip data.
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The popularity of passenger electrified vehicle (EV) is growing and so is the elec-
tricity demand. As renewable energy availability varies from hour to hour, the cost
and carbon footprint of an EV is dependent on when the vehicle is charged. Many
applications of vehicle-to-grid (V2G) were made to address this issue. However, the
characteristics of vehicle trip demands determine if a V2G application can achieve
its full potential. Previous V2G researches have been based on either survey or ana-
lytical trip demand models. This project utilised empirical trip data from Germany
and Sweden, presented a smart charging solution that is based on departure time
prediction of individual users.
A modulated smart charging solution was proposed, with departure time pre-
diction and charging optimisation as two separate components. For the departure
time modelling, Cox proportional hazards model was fitted to the trip data. It is con-
cluded that an individual based prediction model can yield a high prediction accuracy
in comparison to a population based one. An optimisation strategy was formulated
as a linear programming problem, and using departure time as a constraint.
In
comparison to uncontrolled charging, we found CO2 saving potential of as high as 10
gCO2/km when a car is charged and driven in Germany. We found little to none CO2
saving potential for cars in Sweden, however monetary cost saving can be achieved.
Furthermore, because of the strong connection of electricity cost to carbon intensity,
the charging cost can be reduced without compromising CO2. The analysis done in
the project is believed to be relevant, and applicable towards the current electric car
fleet of Volvo Cars.
Key words: Electrified vehicles, Vehicle-to-grid optimisation, Smart charging, Time-
to-event modelling, Usage patterns
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface
i
Acknowledgements
ii
Abstract
iii
Contents
iv
List of Symbols
vi
List of Figures
vii
List of Tables
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Methodology
10
2.1
Data description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
An Agile approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
System architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Theory
16
3.1
Clustering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Time-to-event prediction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
Optimisation problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4
Results and Discussion
27
4.1
Work flow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Descriptive statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3
Time-to-event prediction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.4
Charging and optimisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.5
Discussion and future work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
==PAGE:7==
Contents
v
5
Conclusion
47
A Figure and table outputs
49
B Example code
55
Bibliography
63
==PAGE:8==
List of Symbols
AC
Alternating current
ALAP
As late as possible
API
Application programming interface
ASAP
As soon as possible
BECM
Battery energy control module
BEV
Battery electric vehicle
BS
Brier score
CO2
Carbon dioxide
CPH
Cox proportional hazards
DC
Direct current
DE
Germany
EEA
European Economic Are
ECU
Electronic control modules
EU
European Union
EV
Electric vehicle
GDPR
General Data Protection Regulation
OBC
On-board charger
OEM
Original equipment manufacturer
SOC
State of charge
SE
Sweden
SQL
Structured Query Language
UBE
Usable battery energy
V1G
Vehicle to grid (unidirectional)
V2G
Vehicle to grid/grid to vehicle
VCM
Vehicle communication module
WLTP
World harmonized light-duty vehicles test procedure
==PAGE:9==
List of Figures
1.1
An overview of Type-Approval electric range and consumption of the most
common electric vehicle models in Europe. Data collected through EV
database [11] and summarised by author . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Vehicle to grid services on difference space [22] and time [24] scale, sum-
marised by author
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1
Grid carbon intensity data imputations visualised . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2
A system diagram of smart charging implementation in Volvo On Call . .
14
3.1
K-means model inertia as function of number of clusters k, to demonstrate
elbow method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
A map overview of all survival functions and their relationships [53]
. . .
19
3.3
A visual explanation of expanding window cross validation method . . . .
22
3.4
Charging time (tc) vs total parked time (tp) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1
Work flow for training and evaluating a prediction model
. . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Vehicle up-time on the daily and hourly heat map
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3
Origin destination hot spots on map with randomly selected six users from
data set SE II . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.4
Origin destination hot spots on map with randomly selected six users from
data set SE II . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.5
Bidding price and carbon intensity in Germany and Sweden . . . . . . . .
32
4.6
CPH model, SE I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.7
CPH model, DE I
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.8
Baseline survival curve and effect of varying a covariate at the time, for SE I 34
4.9
Brier score of the timeline, for training and testing sets in SE I . . . . . .
35
4.10 Visits at each cluster of location, at different quarters of the day for user
Henrik . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.11 Mean parked time when trip ends at different hour of the day, and each
destination cluster for car Henrik . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.12 Kaplan-Meier survival function S(t) at each quarter of the day, for the six
selected users . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.13 Brier score of the timeline, for training and testing sets for car Tom
. . .
39
==PAGE:10==
List of Figures
viii
4.14 Brier score of the timeline, for training and testing sets for car Tom and
Jack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.15 Difference in number of start charging events (bar) when charging as soon
as possible (ASAP) and as late as possible (ALAP) at each hour, and the
corresponding average CO2 (line) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.16 Carbon intensity and price, and an indication on the optimal charging
window
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.17 Difference in number of start charging events (bar) when charging as soon
as possible (ASAP) and Optimiser I (Opt I) at each hour, and the corre-
sponding average CO2 (line) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.18 Carbon intensity and price, and an indication on the optimal charging
window
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.19 Average carbon intensity (blue) and price per kilometre (orange) in Ger-
many, when charging with different strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
A.1 First trip departure time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
A.2 Average parking time when trip ends at each hour of the day . . . . . . .
50
A.3 Bidding price distribution for Sweden and Germany, in Euro per MWh . .
50
A.4 Visits at each cluster of location, at different quarters of the day for user
Erik . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
A.5 Hourly arrival rate, weekdays vs weekends . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
A.6 Share of charging starts at each hour, when charging as soon as possible
(ASAP) and as late as possible (ALAP) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
A.7 Average carbon intensity (blue) and price (orange) per kilometre in Swe-
den, when charging with different strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
A.8 Time plan for the project listed in two week sprints . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
==PAGE:11==
List of Tables
2.1
An example of data structure extracted from Volvo On Call trip log (time:
start and end time, dis: distance, dur: duration.) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.1
A cost matrix of unbalanced assignment problem, with n number of ma-
chines and m number of jobs, whereas n > m . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.1
A summary of the trip data set used . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2
Six randomly selected users and their daily trip demands
. . . . . . . . .
30
4.3
K-fold expanding window cross validation, k = 5, C-index . . . . . . . . .
35
4.4
CO2 and price per kilowatt charged in Germany, for both charging as soon
as possible and as late as possible . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
A.1 CO2 and price per kilowatt hour charged in Sweden, for all charging scenarios 54
A.2 CO2 and price per kilowatt hour charged in Germany, for all charging
scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
With the development of electrified vehicles (EV) and their growing electricity de-
mands, EV and the electric grid will become more entwined in many different ways.
This thesis aim to analyse one aspect of such connection, smarting charging. This
chapter is arranged as following, Section 1.1 gives an overview of the background and
motivation to the thesis. Problem definition and project objective is described in
Section 1.2. In the end, Section 1.3 summarises a literature review.
1.1
Background
To meet the Paris Agreement, decarbonising transport sector is critical [1]. In year
2015, transportation accounted for 29% of the global energy consumption and 24%
of the CO2 emission [2]. Electrifying road vehicles is considered an effective mean of
reducing direct CO2 emission in the transport sector. Although, an electrified vehicle
has higher energy efficiency comparing to a vehicle powered with combustion engine,
the net electricity demand will only increase as the fleet size of electrified vehicles
has grown substantially over the past decade. To date, over 1.9 million passenger
electrified vehicles are registered in the European Economic Area (EEA) [3], with
Germany leading in new electrified vehicles registration with 105,802 cars in 2019. In
Norway, over 60% of the new registered cars are electrified in the same year.
Needless to say that such growth in electrified vehicles will be reflected in electricity
demand. These additional electrical consumption can be problematic in many aspects.
EVs achieve tailpipe emission free by transferring their emissions upstream. Many
research suggested the CO2 impact of EVs is largely dependent on the electricity
generation mix [4–7]. For example, in countries with higher renewable electricity share
such as Norway and Sweden, the CO2 emission from EVs are significantly lower than
the equivalent conventional vehicle models. On an European average, an EV emits 50
to 100 gCO2/km depending on the model types [8]. Furthermore, the transport energy
and power demand of the electrified vehicles fleet introduces pressures in electricity
generation and dispatching in real time. Especially when charging is uncontrolled or
uncoordinated [9].
This project is conducted jointly with Swedish car manufacture Volvo Cars. Volvo
Cars have committed to make all-electric cars 50 per cent of their global sales by
2025, with the rest hybrids. The thesis will utilise large data sets of vehicle trips
and electricity grid.
Electricity data were provided from electricityMap made by
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Background
2
company Tomorrow [10]. The trip and vehicle data were provided by Volvo Cars. A
smart charging solution is be presented, aiming to minimise charging cost and carbon
intensity in real time. The project looks at vehicle usage patterns in Sweden and
Germany during the period of early 2020, then uses such data for a demand prediction
model. Based on the predicted trip demand, an optimisation model is then introduced.
This optimisation model takes input from the trip demand prediction and real-time
electricity information, decides a charging schedule which can reduce CO2 emission
and monetary cost.
1.1.1
Electrified vehicles and charging
Electrified vehicle, EV, is a type of vehicle which is powered with electrical energy.
There are many types of EVs, such as battery electric vehicles (BEVs), and fuel cell
electric vehicles (FCEVs). In contrast to a conventional vehicle, EVs do not have
tailpipe emissions during usage thus considered an important factor in the decarbon-
isation of personal transport. A BEV stores electrical energy in the batteries and
propels the car with electric motors by depleting the battery State-of-Charge (SOC).
In this thesis, EVs reference to passenger BEVs only.
There are two important attributes of an EV, energy efficiency, and electric range.
These two attributes discussed in this thesis are based on European Type-Approval
values, i.e. a standardised test governed by Commission Regulation (EU) 2017/1151.
This test is called Worldwide Harmonised Light Vehicles Test Procedure, WLTP for
short. Energy efficiency, reported in wh/km measures the average energy consump-
tion over a driving cycle. This value taken into account the charging efficiency, as it is
recorded as amount of energy from the charging outlet over the tested electric range.
Therefore, the product of energy efficiency and all electric range is the total usable
electrical energy (UBE) with a fixed charging efficiency. The term usable emphasises
on the difference from installed battery energy capacity, as to avoid battery rapid
ageing, a small fraction of installed capacity is never used.
Figure 1.1 illustrates a summary of energy consumption and range for the most
common BEV models in Europe. Note that letter A - F denotes vehicle segments,
and size of each dot is proportional to the UBE. Comparing to real world energy
consumption, Type-Approval values often fall short [12–15]. In practice, the electric
consumption and UBE are observable variables. However, due to the lack of data, this
thesis will assign a constant value in wh/km for each car model based on estimated
WLTP energy consumption. UBE for each car will also be an assigned value.
BEVs are charged through electric mains. Such charging can be done through a
standard electric outlet at home privately, or through designated charging stations
in public [16]. An uncontrolled charging usually starts immediately after user had
plugged in the car.
Charging speed is determined with the rated power.
Users’
charger preference can be considered as an observable variable as the vehicle instru-
ments can measure the input current and voltage. Slower charging use single phase
alternating current (AC), which is typically found at households. In Europe, these
==PAGE:14==
1.1 Background
3
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
WLTP range (km)
140
160
180
200
220
240
WLTP efficiency (Wh/km)
Audi e-tron 50 quattro
Audi e-tron Sportback 55 quattro
BMW i3 - 120 Ah
DS 3 Crossback E-Tense
Hyundai IONIQ Electric
Hyundai Kona Electric - 39 kWh
Hyundai Kona Electric - 64 kWh
Jaguar I-Pace
Kia e-Niro - 39 kWh
Kia e-Niro - 64 kWh
Mercedes EQC 400 4MATIC
Mini Cooper SE
Nissan Leaf
Nissan Leaf e+
Opel Corsa-e
Porsche Taycan 4S
Porsche Taycan 4S Plus
Porsche Taycan Turbo S
Renault Zoe ZE40 R110
Renault Zoe ZE50 R110
Tesla Model 3 Long Range Dual Motor
Tesla Model 3 Performance
Tesla Model 3 Standard Range Plus
Tesla Model S Long Range
Tesla Model S Performance
Tesla Model X Long Range
Tesla Model X Performance
Volkswagen e-Golf
Volkswagen e-Up!
Polestar 2 - H
Polestar 2 - L
A
B
C
D
E
F
Figure 1.1: An overview of Type-Approval electric range and consumption of the
most common electric vehicle models in Europe. Data collected through
EV database [11] and summarised by author.
slow chargers can charge the cars on 230 volts and at most 32 amperes [17]. Three-
phase AC, commonly found at specially installed home chargers or shared chargers.
They charge the cars on 11 to 43 kilowatts. When a three-phase AC charger can
output 43 kilowatts, the charging can be considered as fast charging. High voltage
DC charging is the fastest option, and usually capable of delivering power from 50 to
125 kilowatts. Azadfar et al. shows that the user charging preferences can be grouped
in two dimensions, slow and fast charging [18]. Users prefer slow charging when the
they are parked at places where they plan to stay for a while, such as home and work;
visiting a fast charging is similar to going to a petrol station and/or it often occurs
during a long distance trip. In this thesis, we focused on slow charging with power
output less than 11 kilowatts.
1.1.2
Electrical grid and V2G integration
Vehicle-to-Grid, or V2G, referring to when EVs interact with the electricity grid
through planned charging and discharging. The concept of V2G was first introduced
in early 90s, Ford argued there is a value of using EVs for electric grid valley filling
[19]. In 1997, Kempton and Letendre suggested that EV is not just a load to the
grid, they can also generate economical values by secluding the charging hence selling
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Objective
4
electricity on/off peak [20]. Since then many aspects and applications of V2G have
been widely discussed and explored.
V2G usually means the integration is bidirectional. In the power balancing use
case, the vehicle charges from the grid when there is excess energy in the grid and
discharge when the grid requires so. Effectively, such integration can also be unidi-
rectional without vehicle discharging to the grid, V1G. This type of integration often
called smart charging or predictive charging, manages charging to the EVs by vary-
ing schedule and/or rate of the charging [21]. With the highest commercial interests
from Japanese car manufacturers, more often than not, the implementation of V2G
requires a type of charger that is not a commonly adopted standard outside Japan.
For example, in the V2G experimental validation project Parker in Copenhagen, DC
ChAdeMo chargers were used enabling V2G in cross brand vehicles [22]. Although
a charger solution can provide higher value in V2G integration, due to its hardware
dependency, it will have lesser coverage. V1G on another hand, can be implemented
more widely and cheaply as it does not require modifications to the charger or vehicle
hardware [23].
Vehicle to grid integration can be applied on many scales, Andersen et al. listed
services in categories based on geographic [22]. The service listed covers applications
on region, neighbourhood and building (or transmission, distribution and consump-
tion) levels. On the regional level, vehicle to grid integration can provide power and
energy balancing; services such as bilateral trading and self consumption maximisa-
tion can be provided on the neighbourhood level. Taljegård emphasised the challenges
for electric grid on a time-scale, and their corresponding V2G solutions ranging from
seconds to days [24]. From hour to hour and day to day, renewable energy such as
wind and solar have fluctuated outputs. This fluctuation results a variation in carbon
intensity and price in the grid through out the day. These variation can be balanced
with EVs through smart charging. Smart charging can therefore offer financial in-
terests to EV users and grid operators. However, how to balance energy availability
for the grid on both the time and location scale, while satisfy users’ trip demands
remains a challenge.
1.2
Objective
As mentioned in Section 1.1, the objective of this project is to explore a possible im-
plementation of smart charging. Instead of charging right after the user had plugged
in the vehicle, smart charging will optimise charging cost and carbon intensity by
varying the charging schedule. When applying smart charging, it is important to
understand when the vehicle needs to be ready, i.e. time to the next driving event.
Therefore, this thesis project will make use of available data to make trip demand
predictions and model the optimal charging schedule accordingly. This comprehensive
approach to V1G will be taken by utilising the project’s unique advantage of industry
recourse access.
Instead of making assumption of EV trip demands, they will be
derived empirically from real customer data. It is believed this approach will reflect a
==PAGE:16==
1.2 Objective
5
more realistic evaluation of smart charging potential in terms of carbon reduction and
cost saving. Due to the time limitation of the thesis, an Agile development method
will be taken.
The model development will be consider the concept of minimum
viable product while modulates all the potential improvements. More discussion and
presentation of the method and modules can be seen in Section 2.2. The prospective
production implementation will be discussed on the architecture level.
We consider a fleet of EVs and all of their trips are continuously measured. At
the end of each trip, a number of observed variables such as distance, duration, origin
and destination and the current SOC level, are sent from the vehicle and stored in
a database in the cloud. Thus, they can be accessed remotely in an instant. Fur-
thermore, historical data of the entire fleet can also be acquired through the same
database, we call this the trip data. From the trip data, we will model and predict
the time to the next departure upon every arrival. Beside the trip data from the EV
fleet, we aim to establish a live connection to a grid database through an application
programming interface (API). From which we will gain insights on carbon intensity
and pricing of the electric grid on the hourly basis to build an optimisation model.
Then depending on the outcome of the optimisation, charging events will be initiated
accordingly.
An user friendly approach is to let the EV users decide if they want to priori-
tise lowering charging cost or carbon intensity or both; alternatively they could also
provide their estimated departure schedule. The schedule users provide can be con-
sidered as a validation to our departure time prediction, thus increases confidence in
the prediction model. Moreover, in the production version, a notification will also
be sent to the users after a prediction is produced. In this project, we simulate the
information flow with a few stationary data sets of limited numbers of EVs. Through
analysing and modelling of the trip and grid data, this project aims to answer the
following research questions,
• Can smart charging be implemented without compromising on the trip demands
of electric vehicles? How?
• How can the proposed implementation integrate into the current Volvo vehicles?
• What are the benefits and pitfalls of the proposed implementation?
• How much environmental and economical potential does the proposed imple-
mentation have?
The trip data available to the project are collected from a mix fleet of vehicles,
thus some of the EV unique observable variables such as SOC level are not present
in the data set. At the moment, EVs made up a small part of Volvo car fleet, and we
assume EV travel demand won’t be significantly different. Thus, arbitrary values will
be assigned to all observable features that are missing from the data sets, knowing
they will be available in the real production environment. The imputation logic will
be discussed in Section 2.1. We also assumed users plug in their EV to the mains
==PAGE:17==
1.3 Related work
6
Time
Space
millisecond
second
hour
day
Building
Neighbourhood
Region
Country
Grid
contingency
- voltage control
Energy availability
- regulation
- marginal emission 
Energy autonomy
- micro grid
- off grid storage
Frequency 
control
Figure 1.2: Vehicle to grid services on difference space [22] and time [24] scale, sum-
marised by author.
after every trip disregarding the current state of charge level. This assumption will
over-estimate the frequency of charging.
Figure 1.2 shows V2G service examples
across time and space scale. In this project, the energy availability aspect will be
visited, as it provides the greatest service coverage. Energy availability balancing is
also consider a V2G application which the achieve highest potential through charging
comparing to discharging. This project will work with one hour time resolution.
Last but not least, in the trip data, each trip is a record of engine on to engine
off cycle, called a drive cycle. This means in real life, a true trip can comprise of
multiple drive cycles. Since a true trip cannot be observed, it is considered the same
as a drive cycle. The terms trip and drive cycle will be used interchangeably. Effects
from multi-cycle or multi-day trips will not be explicitly discussed.
1.3
Related work
In this section a systematic literature review will be presented.
From the cross-
disciplinary nature of this project, literature review has been grouped in two main cat-
egories, there are firstly works related to vehicle to grid integration and optimisation
(Section 1.3.1), then works which focused on time-to-event modelling (Section 1.3.2).
==PAGE:18==
1.3 Related work
7
1.3.1
Vehicle to grid optimisations
Since Kempton and Letendre first suggested V2G as a concept [20], many researches
have been published on the subject.
During this project, a fair number of V2G
literature was reviewed and most of which lack empirical evidence supporting their
travel demand assumptions. It is believed that, there is a gap in literature on studies
using real trip data for analysing and modelling V2G optimisation [24]. Thus this
section will focus on the implementation of V2G and their corespondent optimisation
models.
One of the most discussed application for V2G is grid frequency control and load
balancing. Andersson et al. studied the possibility of using plug-in hybrid vehicles
for frequency control in Sweden and Germany using a simulation model in Matlab
[25]. They assumed 80 % of the vehicle fleet is connected to the mains at any given
time, and only driven 2 times 35 minuets trips per day.
From their model, they
conclude that V2G for frequency control is significantly more profitable in Germany
comparing to Sweden. Arias et al. and Andersen et al. performed V2G frequency
regulation experimentally by connecting a number of EVs to V2G enabled charging
stations [22, 26]. In both experiments the vehicles are constantly connected to the
grid. Arias et al. concluded that the availability of EVs plays an important role in
V2G success. Liu et al. demonstrated V2G potential for power distribution through
linear programming models and concluded a substantial impact to regional grid if
charging is uncontrolled [9].
Zhu et al.
presented an optimised charging scheme
based on a stochastic mean field game theory, to prevent unexpected peak load for
the grid [27]. They considered cost as a function of charging speed, then modelled a
large EV fleet of 500 cars as a single battery with a predetermined charging schedule.
Crozier et al. performed analysis of potential of smart charging in mitigating load on
transmission and distribution systems in Great Britain [28]. Their model is based on
travel survey and trip data from a panel of 200 or so EVs. Zhang et al. used travel
survey and a linear optimisation model to analyse how V1G and V2G can balance the
load in the grid [29]. They estimated V2G has as much as three times the potential
for peak shaving comparing to V1G.
Another often discussed application for V2G is energy balancing, balancing the
availability of renewable in the current context.
Lund and Kempton used an in-
put/output model to analyse the energy supply and demand in the Danish grid [30].
They modelled the EV fleet as a large battery with hourly availability to the grid,
and always connected. They suggested with high charging power at 10kW and UBE
at 30 kWh, a fleet of 1.9 million EVs can form a coherent solution for decentralising
wind energy storage. Another study on the Danish grid was done by Göransson et al.
who analysed the regional wind-thermal system integration to plug-in hybrids [31].
In their linear programming model aimed to minimise CO2 emission from charging,
they assumed a fixed commuting pattern for the entire EV fleet. At a 20% of the
fleet’s energy consumption, 4.7 % emission can be reduced. Hedegaard et al. dis-
cussed effects of EV on Nordic countries power systems using a deterministic model,
while assuming same driving patterns for all countries [32]. Disregarding the charg-
==PAGE:19==
1.3 Related work
8
ing strategy, it is believed that EV will decrease the total transport CO2 emission in
Nordic countries with high renewable shares. Jochem et al. looked at control and
uncontrolled charging scenarios in Germany through linear programming [33]. As-
suming fix parking period and charging pattern for all fleet, concluded a controlled
charging strategy can reduce EV indirect CO2 emission by 50 %.
Power price, which is strongly correlated to renewable share in the European grid,
is another V2G optimisation objective. Kristoffersen et al. put EV optimal charging
in a market setting, formulating the cost as a quadratic programming problem [34].
The trip demands are constructed per vehicle (which are considered the same as user),
then clustered based on time of departure and average trip distance. By comparing
four scenarios, it was concluded that EVs provide price flexibility almost exclusively
through charging. Halvgaard et al. presented a control model where the consumption
is planned based on forecast price [35].
They observed a cost saving up-to 50 %
comparing to a non-optimised charging. Noel et al. through a deterministic model
compared cost gain of V1G to V2G, and concluded the cost saving for V2G is marginal
comparing to V1G towards 2020 [36].
Last but not least, V2G optimisation can also be extended to electricity dispatch-
ing, i.e. optimising on the grid level. Schill and Gerbaulet built a mixed integer linear
program model for minimising dispatch costs for power plants [37]. They believe on
the grid level, cost-driven charging will increase renewable share and the low-cost
carbon heavy plants. This risk shall be mitigated through policy changes. Sohnen
et al. studied charging plug-in hybrids as a function of time and location, with a
multi-stage linear program model [38]. The model is used to evaluate current and
future impact of EV charging on the grid in terms of carbon emission. Schlachtberger
et al. modelled a dispatch model which uses EVs as renewable backup [39]. Arias et
al. summaries possible electric distribution service provided by EVs [40].
1.3.2
Time-to-event modelling
Some different schools of time-to-event modelling have been mentioned in literature.
Survival analysis, is one of the frequently applied method for such modelling. Wonng
and Tsai used a Cox proportional hazards model for airline flight delay [41]. Their
model comprised of a time function expressing the departure delay, and a regression
term accounting for the covariates that influence the departure delay. Austin offered
a tutorial on methods and models of multi-level survival analysis [42]. In which the
method of nesting subjects into clusters and a random intercept was assigned for each
cluster.
Walters presented an application which also used Cox regression model to estimate
time-to-event outcome [43]. Using clinical trials as example, they could analyse if
certain features are statistically significant in a medical treatment.
Furthermore,
Kvamme et al. suggested a Cox regression model incorporating a neural network [44].
Their model removes the proportionality constraint of the Cox model, and a Python
package is provided under CC-BY 4.0 license. This model is compared with classical
==PAGE:20==
1.3 Related work
9
Cox model and appear to perform very well. Alexander et al. presented a Bayesian
method approach for Cox survival analysis and such can fit censored data [45].
Besides survival modelling, there are a few other models introduced in literature
for time-to-event prediction. Linden and Yarnold proposed a machine learning classi-
fication model replacing survival analysis [46]. Ghaemia et al. predicted train delay
time by modelling disruption in a Bayesian network and passenger assignment with
multinomial logit choice model [47]. Cao et al. performed a time-to-event model by
transferring time from feature space to time vector space [48].
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2
Methodology
This chapter presents the methodology for the development. Section 2.1 summarises
the data collection methods and structure. The Agile approach taken for the time
limited development is presented in Section 2.2. Description of a proposed system
architecture can be found in Section 2.3, which represents modular design of an Agile
development project.
2.1
Data description
Trip data used in this project is collected through a connected function Volvo On
Call.
This is a function Volvo Cars offer to their customers for almost a decade,
with an array of services. One of those services is the driving journal that presents
information of every trip. These data are sent from the vehicles to a cloud storage after
each engine on-off cycle. For the project, the data were accessed in an anonymous
manner so that individual vehicles cannot be identified. The collection and usage of
the trip data is covered with Volvo Cars’ data policy and General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR).
Table 2.1: An example of data structure extracted from Volvo On Call trip log (time:
start and end time, dis: distance, dur: duration.).
car ID
trip ID
time
model
country
dis
dur
location
472007
1010159855
datetime
S90
DE
float
float
[lat, lon]
472007
1010228296
datetime
S90
DE
float
float
[lat, lon]
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
603164
2147228714
datetime
XC40
CH
float
float
[lat, lon]
The first trip data set are collected from Germany and Sweden where Volvo Cars
have a higher market penetration, from a number of individual vehicles in each coun-
try; from the period of 1st to 31st of January 2020. The data is aggravated on the
trip level. Meaning that for every trip, the observed variables include time stamp,
vehicle ID, trip ID, vehicle registration country, trip duration and distance and car
==PAGE:22==
2.1 Data description
11
model type. The second trip data set was collected from 10.000 cars from Sweden
alone, in the time period of 1st of December 2019 to 30th of March 2020. Besides the
same features as the first data set, this second data set also contains trip origins and
destinations in longitude and latitude, and energy consumption of each trip. There
are over 3.5 million trips in the second data set.
Since Volvo On Call data is stored in a cloud environment, the data was accessed
through a Kubeflow pipeline to Volvo On Call SQL databases. Some bad observations
were removed in the prepossessing of the data. For example, when a vehicle loose
connection to the cloud, the cloud will register null values for speed and distance.
This can result record trips with short duration however long distance, or multiple
trips records with same starting time and trip ID but different distance. These bad
data points were identified with a simple sanity check, by query on average velocity;
for records with same trip IDs and starting time, only one record with the longest trip
distance is kept. Less than 1% of the observations were discarded after this general
cleaning process.
Grid and electricity data used in this project are provided by company Tomorrow.
The information is provided on the country level for Sweden and Germany. Data from
Tomorrow has 101 variables includes power production, consumption with respect to
each generation method, bidding price, and carbon intensity. Swedish bidding price
was not available in the set thus this price data was obtained separately from Nord
Pool Group [49] and joint by timestamp. All data is presented as time series with
one hour time step.
2.1.1
Missing value assignment logic
As briefly discussed in Section 1.1.1 and Section 1.2, some values of the trip and
vehicle are not available in the particular data sets. The following logic was applied
to assign values to these missing data.
• Vehicle metadata: for metadata of the vehicles such as UBE, rated energy
consumption and electric range, constant values are assigned. That is because
during development stages, these values have yet to be finalised. Once in pro-
duction, they can be easily obtained. The on board instrument can measure
the the charging power, but since it is missing from these data sets, a constant
value is assigned. Furthermore, the dummy values assigned in no way reflect or
imply Volvo Cars future vehicle development plans.
1. UBE: 70 kWh.
2. Charging: 3 phase AC at 10 kW.
3. Rated energy consumption: model dependent and follows general trend in
the car market.
4. Electric range: calculated from UBE and rated energy consumption.
5. Charger plugged: a dummy variable and always true in this project.
==PAGE:23==
2.2 An Agile approach
12
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
2000
2250
2500
30
40
50
60
70
Carbon intensity [gCO2eq/kWh]
Sweden
observed data
imputed data
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
2000
100
200
300
400
500
Germany
Index
Figure 2.1: Grid carbon intensity data imputations visualised.
• SOC level: for electric cars, the state of charge level at the end of each trip
is sent to Volvo On Call.
Since a mix pool of vehicles are included in the
data sets, SOC levels for some trips are missing. These values are assigned by
assuming daily first trip for each car starts with 100% SOC, then SOC level
reduces linearly by total energy consumption of each trip.
• Parked time: in Volvo On Call production environment, parked time since
last trip can be simply calculated as delta time from the last key-off to this
key-on cycle. In this data set, this feature was calculated in the same manner
and associated with trip on the previous index. It is addressed as time to the
next driving event, or simply time-to-event.
• Carbon intensity: the data provider strictly uses real-time carbon information
and at times such data can be missing from their pipeline. In this particular
project, there are around 80 and 130 samples missing from the Germany and
Sweden data respectively.
Leerbeck et al.
proposed novel machine learning
models for imputation of such data which can achieve high accuracy [50]. For
the purpose of this project, a naive model will be used for imputation. This
model assumes data is missing at random. It linearly interpolate in between the
indexes, and assign noise randomly sampled from a normal distribution fitted
from the previous observed samples of the same time window as the missing
periods. A visualisation of such imputation practice can be found in Figure 2.1.
2.2
An Agile approach
Agile is a software development practice which promotes deliver-fast and fail-fast
mindsets [51]. From the time limited nature of this thesis work and complexity of the
==PAGE:24==
2.3 System architecture
13
functionality to be developed, an Agile incremental approach is taken. A minimum
viable product is determined, and all potential improvements are modulated. The
project was planned on two-week cycles, a sprint. The final time plan comprises of
six sprints and an innovation sprint of one week in the end, a detailed time plan is
described in Figure A.8.
The complete smart charging implementation includes two separate modules, a
predictor, and an optimiser. A predictor takes travel history as features, and produce
time-to-event prediction for the optimisation model to use as a constraint.
This
separation enables a flexible development as the thesis project aim to produce a few
proposals on predictors and optimisers. Upstream of the predictors is the trip data
pre-processor, which should be made compatible with all versions of the predictors.
Same logic applies to the optimisation models. All versions of the optimisers can
be used when a time-to-event prediction is produced. This configuration also allows
different permutations of prediction and optimisation models.
The first loop of development is based on the trip data sets without location, it is
called the temporal module. In these two sprints, a prediction model (called predictor
I for the lack of imagination) will be made based on survival analysis on the total
population. Meanwhile a linear optimisation model will be built (optimiser I). These
two modules combined can be considered as the minimum viable product for the
thesis. The project will then move on to the second loop of development expanding
to spatial module, by utilising the trip data set with origin and destination locations
and using such information in the predictor II as input features.
An user based
model will be developed for predictor II. In the same sprints, a new optimiser II as
an improvement to the optimiser I will be designed however without changing the
assumptions and concepts.
2.3
System architecture
The system architecture reflects the Agile development approach. The constraints of
current vehicle software and Volvo On Call architecture should also be respected, as
the project should serve as a smart charging demo for Volvo Cars. To avoid changes to
the current in vehicle software, all computation shall be done in a cloud environment,
using the signals that already exist in the vehicle communication protocol. In doing
so, dependency on the hardware and embedded software in the cars can be avoided;
and reducing needs of interpreters for different programming languages used in the
cars and in the cloud.
The system works as following. At the end of each drive cycle, all vehicles send a
package of trip data to the Volvo On Call cloud. Trip data is collected through signals
from varies electronic control modules (ECU) in the car, such as battery energy control
module (BECM) and on board charger (OBC). These signals are sent through the
vehicle communication module (VCM). Trip data informs about the time, location,
duration, distance, SOC level and if a charger is plugged. Trip data is collected for
all cars, conventional cars included. Hosted in the cloud, is the prediction model and
==PAGE:25==
2.3 System architecture
14
VCM
OBC
BECM
Volvo
On Call
TripData
Time
Duration
Distance
OD-matrix
Charger plugged = 1
SOC level...
Prediction model
VCM
TripData
Optimisation
model
Time-to-
departure
Grid
database
GridData
Time
Bidding price
CO2
Schedule
Departure time
Distance
Schedule
Start
charging
Start
charging
Charging
start
notiﬁcation
TripData
Time
Duration
Distance
OD-matrix
Start
charging
OR
Figure 2.2: A system diagram of smart charging implementation in Volvo On Call.
optimisation model in two separate components. Based on the trip data, time to next
departure is predicated and sent to the optimisation model. Alternatively, users can
set their own schedules through the Volvo On Call application on their mobile devices.
This user-defined schedule will always be prioritised over the predicted one.
The
optimisation model should have a connection to an external grid database through
an API. Such API should provide forecast electricity price and CO2 information.
The optimisation model computes when to start charging, under the constraints of
estimated departure time.
After a conclusion is made, optimisation model sends
the charging time to Volvo On Call, which will inform the users through mobile
application notification, and send the start charging command to the vehicles. An
illustration can be seen in Figure 2.2.
This approach can be applied when implementing smart charging in production.
By firstly introducing a standalone optimisation model that relies on user-defined
departure schedule, then gradually extend to a prediction capable complete solution.
==PAGE:26==
2.3 System architecture
15
2.3.1
Libraries and code
All the data analysis and modelling work in the thesis is done in Python.
Some
Python libraries such as Pandas, NumPy, Matplotlib and Folium were used for the
processing, analysis and visualisation of the data.
For the machine learning and
survival models, scikit-learn [52] and Lifelines [53] libraries were utilised.
A data pipeline was developed to process raw data so that they can be directly used
for the predictors. In this pipeline, data cleaning, feature engineering and charting
were included. Feature engineering and charting were separated into two directories,
for data sets exclude or include location features.
The optimisation classes read
one output from the prediction classes; and a great effort was put into reducing
other dependencies in between these classes, i.e.
they can be used separately.
A
configuration script is also included. The config sets up a Python virtual environment
and installs all dependencies in the virtual environment. As a result, the code can
be shared and used in a plug-and-play manner. All classes and functions are written
in style pep8, and documented with docstrings. The library works across operative
systems.
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3
Theory
This chapter presents the theory behind the models used in the project. The data
analytical and time-to-event modelling are presented in Section 3.1 and Section 3.2,
and the optimisation strategies in Section 3.3.
3.1
Clustering
Clustering is a technique used to divide a large data set into groups of data, so that
within each group, the data are more similar to each other comparing to in between
groups. K-means clustering is a type of clustering algorithm, which can group data
points into k clusters.
With k-means clustering, the data points with the nearest means are grouped into
the same k clusters. This is also called cluster centroids. Mathematically, k-means
clustering is formulated as follows. A set of observations {x1, x2, ..., xn} where each
observation is a d-dimensional vector, these n-observations will be partitioned into k
(k ≤n) sets S = {S1, S2, .., Sk}. The objective is to minimise the within-cluster sum
of squares ((3.1)). µi is the mean of observations in Si.
argmin
S
k
∑
i=1
∑
x∈Si
∥X −µi∥2 = argmin
S
k
∑
i=1
|Si|VarSi
(3.1)
Equation (3.1) is equivalent to minimising the pairwise squared deviations of
points within the same cluster:
argmin
S
k
∑
i=1
1
2|Si|
∑
x,y∈Si
∥x −y∥2
(3.2)
By law of variance, this is equivalent to maximising the sum of squared deviations
between points in different clusters (because total variance is constant).
Solving a k-means clustering problem is computational complex (NP problem).
Thus many algorithms have been developed. For this project, we deploy an algorithm
Elkan from scikit-learn, that is based on work from Hamerly and Elkan [54]. It works
as follows. Firstly determine k number of clusters, second k centroids will be randomly
selected without replacement and keep iterating until no changes can be made to the
centroids.
==PAGE:28==
3.2 Time-to-event prediction
17
3.1.1
Metrics and evaluation
Since the numbers of clusters k are arbitrarily chosen, there is no definitive correct way
of clustering. Depending on the application, assumptions on the cluster numbers can
be made. One common way of checking such assumption is through Elbow method.
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
No. of clusters
1
2
3
4
5
Model inertia
1e14
optimal no. of clusters
Figure 3.1: K-means model inertia as function of number of clusters k, to demon-
strate elbow method.
Elbow method is done by training the model with different numbers of clusters
k, then compare each k with the sum of squared distance from each data to their
corresponding cluster centroids.
This measure is also called model inertia.
The
shorter the distance, the more similarity there is from the cluster of data to its
centroid. Elbow method supports the decision making on choosing which k to use
as input, by illustrating an elbow point when the model no longer improves or the
improvement appears to be minimum.
In the example in Figure 3.1, the model
inertia rapidly reduces as the number of clusters increase. However, the improvement
is minimal after the model reaches k = 6, which we decided to be an optimal number
of clusters.
3.2
Time-to-event prediction
Time-to-event modelling is a branch of statistics which studies the expected duration
until some events occur [55]. Survival analysis can model death or hospital readmis-
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Time-to-event prediction
18
sion in medical care, machine failure in engineering applications and departure time
in mobility services. The commonly used terms in survival analysis are:
• Event: action of interest, such as departure.
• Time: time from beginning of an observation, to the event of interest. In this
case, is the time delta from this trip to the next in relation to the time of day.
• Censored: when there are observation of the data, but have no experienced the
event when observation ended. In this data set, all observations are uncensored.
A probably density function (PDF) is constructed to estimate probability density
at time t.
f(t) = lim
∆t→0
P(t < T ≤t + ∆t)
∆t
(3.3)
The cumulative distribution function (CDF) computes the probability of an event
occurring up-to time t. F(t) is a non-decreasing function of time, and bounds within
0 to 1.
F(t) = P(T ≤t) =
∫t
−∞
f(z)dz
(3.4)
The survival function S(t) is simply: S(t) = 1−F(t), which is also a non-increasing
function of t and bounds within 0 to 1.
When time approaches infinity, survival
probability is 1.
S(t) = P(T > t) =
∫∞
t
f(z)dz
(3.5)
A hazard function h(t) describes the instantaneous hazard rate of event occurs at
time t, if said event has not happened before. It has a direct correlation to survival
function.
h(t) = lim
∆t→0
P(t < T ≤t + ∆t|T > t)
∆t
= f(t)
S(t) = −d
dtlog(S(t))
(3.6)
Finally the cumulative hazard function H(t). It can be interpreted as the proba-
bility of failure at time t given survival until time t. It is expressed as following.
H(t) =
∫t
0
h(z)dz = −log(S(t))
(3.7)
In the departure prediction model, survival probability can be understood as like-
lihood of remaining parked. The survival function S(t) is correlated to cumulative
hazard function H(t), as S(t) = exp(−H(t)). As the survival function, hazard func-
tion and cumulative hazard function are all correlated, they can be easily converted
==PAGE:30==
3.2 Time-to-event prediction
19
Figure 3.2: A map overview of all survival functions and their relationships [53].
back and forth. Lifelines have presented a summary map on survival function rela-
tions [53]. The map can be seen in Figure 3.2. When estimating survival function,
both parametric and non-parametric methods can be used. Examples of parametric
and non-parametric methods are Weibull distribution and Kaplan-Meier estimator
respectively.
3.2.1
Cox proportional hazards model
In a survival analysis problem, often there are features (or covariates) other than the
event time line. These covariates contribute to the survival probability differently, and
would be informative to include in the model. Therefore, technique survival regression
can be applied. In this section, a survival regression model Cox proportional hazards
(CPH) model will be introduced.
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Time-to-event prediction
20
In a CPH model, the effect of a feature changes is multiplicative to the baseline
hazard, and such effects are linear. Meaning, firstly the hazard at time t given features
x changes linearly with features, and all features contribute to hazardous rate equally.
There is a population level baseline hazard. Let x = {xi1, xi2, ...xij} be a set of values
for i features with j observations, CPH model can be expressed mathematically,
h(t|x) = h0(t)exp(βT x)
(3.8)
where h0(t) is the baseline hazard that is time-dependent, xi are the time constant
features observed and β are the regression coefficients. The likelihood of the event to
be observed occurring for subject i at time ti can be written as:
L(βi) =
∏
i:Ei=1
h(ti|xi)
∑
j:tj≥ti h(t|xj)
(3.9)
=
∏
i:Ei=1
h0(ti)exp(βT xi)
∑
j:tj≥ti h0(ti)exp(βT xj)
(3.10)
=
∏
i:Ei=1
exp(βT xi)
∑
j:tj≥ti exp(βT xj)
(3.11)
This is a partial likelihood: the effect of the features can be estimated without
modelling the change of the hazard over time. Finally, all subjects are treated as
independent. Therefore, the joint probability of all event occurring is the following
partial likelihood,
L(β) =
∏
i:Ei=1
Li(β)
(3.12)
and the corresponding log partial likelihood is,
l(β) = −logL(β) =
∑
i:Ei=1
(βT xi −log
∑
j:tj≥ti
(βT xj))
(3.13)
In this project, each individual subject is considered to be a trip. CPH model will
be fitted both on the population level, i.e. one model for all cars, or on the user level,
i.e. one model for each car.
3.2.2
Metrics and evaluation
To assess CPH model performance, there are a few metrics can be used. The trips
data will be split into training and testing set at random, then these performance
metrics will be computed on both the training and testing sets. By doing so, we can
also visualise model under or over fitting by comparing the metrics in both sets.
==PAGE:32==
3.2 Time-to-event prediction
21
The first evaluation metric is Concordance index (C-index). C-index evaluates
the predictions made by the CPH model globally. It essentially measures the ability
of model in providing a reliable ranking of survival time correctly, based on the
individual subject’s risk scores. C-index is calculated as,
C = 1
|ϵ|
∑
i:Ei=1
∑
j:Tj≥Ti
1f(xi)<f(xj)
(3.14)
ϵ is the number of observations. As equation (3.14) indicates, when C-index is 1,
the model has perfect discriminatory power; And at level 0.5, the model in question
is as good as a random model.
The second evaluation metric is Brier score. At a given time, Brier score measures
the average difference between the status and the estimated probabilities.
When
accessing a time dependent output, integrated Brier score is used so that the score is
assess across time. The Brier score at time t is formulated as,
BS(t) = 1
N
N
∑
i=1
(
1Ti>t −ˆS (t, xi)
)2
(3.15)
and the integrated Brier score is then expressed as,
IBS(Tmax) =
1
Tmax
Tmax
∑
i=0
BS(t)
(3.16)
Brier score can be interpreted as following. If the prediction suggests the likelihood
for departure is 100%, and the vehicle had departed, then Brier score is 0 which is
the best score. If the prediction suggests the likelihood for departure is 70 %, and the
vehicle in fact departed. Then the Brier score is (0.7 −1)2 = 0.49. The worst score
is 1 when the predicted likelihood is completely wrong.
3.2.2.1
Cross validation
Cross validation is a model validation technique, which splits the data in subsets
of training and testing sets and evaluate model performance with all of the subsets.
The goal of cross validation is to identify problems like overfitting or selection bias.
A properly performed cross validation can be beneficial in demonstrating the model
can be generalised beyond the empirical data sets it was trained on.
An usual way of performing cross validation is to split data in k-folds, then use a
rolling scheme of kth fold for testing and the rest for training. This method assumes
each observation is independent from another and do not carry information of each
other.
In this project, the trip data sets contain trips from a time window of 3
month. Such time dependent data could have underlying correlation from the past
to the future. Therefore, a so-called expanding window cross validation method will
be used.
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Optimisation problem
22
Time index
1
2
3
4
5
6
Split 1
Train
Test
Split 2
Test
Split 3
Test
Split 4
Test
Split 5
Test
Train
Train
Train
Train
Figure 3.3: A visual explanation of expanding window cross validation method.
Expanding window cross validation firstly split the data into k folds by time index
in the increasing order, time index ∈{1, 2, 3, ..., k}. Then in each split, the model
will use the first index to current index for training, then the current plus one index
as testing. The k −1-th split uses the complete data set for training and testing.
This is a computationally inexpensive way of doing cross validation, and ensures no
information leaks from the past to the future.
3.3
Optimisation problem
In engineering and mathematics, an optimisation problem is a problem of finding the
best solution from all possible solutions. An optimisation problem usually starts with
a real function which describes the objective of the problem, then the inputs to such
problem will be systematically chosen from a set of allowed domains. These domains
are also called constraints.
There are many ways of formulating and solving an optimisation problem. Gener-
ally, an optimisation problem for minimisation can be expressed in the following way.
Given a function f : A →R from some set A to real numbers, sought an element
x0 ∈A, so that f(x0) < f(x) for all x ∈A. In this section, two methods will be in-
troduced. There are linear programming and linear combination. First, we introduce
linear search for a single objective and constraint optimisation problem.
3.3.1
Linear search
Linear search is a method for identifying an element within a vector.
It checks
every element in the list in sequence until a match is found.
Linear search has
poor computational performance, for a list with j elements, the average numbers of
comparison need to be made is j+1
2 . The worst case performance for linear search is
O(j). In practice, this computational expense must always be balanced with model
complexity.
==PAGE:34==
3.3 Optimisation problem
23
0 th
i th
0 th
j th
t_p
(total parking time [h])
t_c 
(total charging time [h])
Figure 3.4: Charging time (tc) vs total parked time (tp).
The approach for searching combines a linear search with a hash map. Let us
consider an example presented in Figure 3.4. Total charging time tc, is a subsets
of {0, 1, 2, .., i}-th hours. Total parking time tp, is a subset of {0, 1, 2, .., j}-th hours,
to have any optimisation effects, we limit 1 < i ≤j.
We aim to determine the
hour k ∈{0, 1, ..., klatest} when to start charging, so that the total cost is minimum.
When working with the limitation that once charging starts, it will not be stopped,
i.e.
tc is continuous.
The latest hour charging must start is defined as klatest =
j −i-th hour. Furthermore, since the electricity grid data is presented on a hourly
dynamic bases.
Let the cost of electricity and CO2 during the parked period be
Cel ∈{Cel,0, Cel,1, ..., Cel,j} and CCO2 ∈{CCO2,0, CCO2,1, ..., CCO2,j} respectively.
So the total charging cost is calculated as,
t=j
∑
t=k
Cel,tPcharging + α
t=j
∑
t=k
CCO2,tPcharging
(3.17)
where, Pcharging is the average rated charging power, and α is a coefficient which
weights gCO2 into a real currency. For each parking event, algorithm below will be
followed:
1. Compute the latest hour when charging needs to start klatest.
a) For each hour prior to klatest, k ∈{0, 1, ..., klatest}, apply equation (3.17),
compute the total cost for j hour of charging.
2. Obtain a cost matrix of klatest length, with time index k and the corresponding
cost in each column.
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Optimisation problem
24
3. Sort the cost matrix in the ascending manner by cost column. Extract corre-
sponding time index.
An implementation of this approach in Python can be found in Appendix B.
3.3.2
Linear programming
Linear programming, also called linear optimisation. Linear programming is an op-
timisation model which the objectives are expressed by linear relationships, and sub-
jected to linear equality and inequality constraints. A linear programming formulation
was first given by Leonid Kantorovich in 1939 [56]. The standard linear minimum
problem is formulated as following: find an m-vector, b = (b1, b2, .., bm), to minimise:
bT x
(3.18)
subjected to constraints,
AT x ≥c and x ≥0
(3.19)
where x = (x1, ..., xm)T , c = (c1, ..., cn)T and,
A =


a11
a12
· · ·
a1m
a21
a22
. . .
a2m
...
...
...
...
an1
an2
. . .
anm


(3.20)
The inequality AT x ≥c and x ≥0 specify a convex polytope over which the
objective function is minimised. These two vectors are comparable because they have
the same dimensions.
To minimise the total charging cost C in terms of CO2 and price, the charging
time x will be allowed to be discontinuous within the predicted parking period Aeq.
The dot product of x and total charging time beq must be less than or equal to
the parking time. At each time step, the minimum charging time l cannot be less
than 0 and the maximum charging time u cannot be greater than 1. The problem is
expressed as follow,
min CT x
(3.21)
such that,
Aeq · x = beq
(3.22)
l ≤x ≤u
(3.23)
A formulation of this linear programming in Python can be found in Appendix B.
==PAGE:36==
3.3 Optimisation problem
25
3.3.3
Combinatorial optimisation
Combinatorial optimisation is a subject within optimisation problem. Alike linear
programming, combinatorial optimisation aim to find the most optimal combination
from a finite sets of objects. At times the ideal outcome is dependent on the combina-
tion or permutation of objects. Combinatorial optimisation problem is often discrete.
This type of problems are complex, a polynomial-time algorithms Hungarian algo-
rithm will be introduced here.
The Hungarian algorithm solves assignment problems. It was published by Harold
Kuhn in 1955, based on work of two Hungarian mathematicians [57]. The algorithm
can find linear combination of jobs and costs, so that the global cost is minimal in
O(n3) running time. Hungarian algorithm is used for computing the fleet level optimal
charging schedule, i.e. dispatching. This algorithm can solve balanced assignment
problem, that is when number of charging schedules equal to number of vehicles.
However, multiple vehicle should be allowed to start charging simultaneously. Thus,
this project will use a modified Hungarian algorithm for an unbalanced assignment
problem. An method developed by Rabbani et al. will be used [58].
Table 3.1: A cost matrix of unbalanced assignment problem, with n number of
machines and m number of jobs, whereas n > m.
V1
V2
. . .
Vn
h0
c11
c12
. . .
c1n
h1
c21
c22
. . .
c2n
...
...
...
...
...
hm
cm1
cm2
. . .
cmn
Consider a cost matrix of charging and vehicles n × m, n > m being constructed
every 24 hours. Let V ∈{1, 2, ..., n} be a fleet of vehicles, and h ∈{0, 1, ..., m}, m ≤
23 be the m-th hour of the day the charging will start. The goal is to coordinate
charging start accordingly for all n vehicles, so that the total charging cost is minimum
for the entire fleet. An indicator variable Xij is made such that,
Xij =
{
1, if at i −th hour charging is assigned for jth car.
0, if at i −th hour no charging is assigned for jth car.
The objective function for this unbalanced assignment problem can be written as,
Minimise:
Z =
m
∑
i=1
n
∑
j=1
CijXij
(3.24)
subjected to constraints,
n
∑
j=1
Xij ≥1, i = 1, 2, ..., m
(3.25)
==PAGE:37==
3.3 Optimisation problem
26
m
∑
i=1
Xij = 1, i = 1, 2, ..., n
(3.26)
Xij = 0, or Xij = 1
(3.27)
Equation (3.25) states that more than one car can be charged at the same time,
and equation (3.26) restricts a vehicle from getting more than one charging time to
follow.
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 4
Results and Discussion
This chapter presents the results of the analysis. Section 4.2 summaries the descriptive
statistics of the few data sets. The prediction models are presented in Section 4.3.
Prediction models build on both population level and user level will be compared.
Some different charging scenarios including different optimisation strategies are dis-
cussed in Section 4.4. Their cost saving potentials are summarised. Finally, we list a
number of improvements in Section 4.5.
4.1
Work flow
Flow chart below describe the general work flow, from raw data to an user based
prediction model. As an example on the overall work flow with data analysis and
modelling in this project. Each module (represented as squares in Figure 4.1) is coded
to be a Python class or function, so that the raw data can be processed multiple times
without the need of rewriting any code.
Trip
data
Sanity
checker
&
data cleaning
General
features
Visualisation
User 2
User 1
User n
KMeans
cluster
User speciﬁc 
features
KMeans
cluster
User speciﬁc 
features
KMeans
cluster
User speciﬁc 
features
Cox
model 1
Cox
model 2
Cox
model n
Evaluate 
model
Evaluate 
model
Evaluate 
model
Compare
models
Combine
similar
features
Split users
Figure 4.1: Work flow for training and evaluating a prediction model.
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Descriptive statistics
28
4.2
Descriptive statistics
The trip and grid data were collected in accordance to method presented in Section 2.1,
then analysed in the descriptive manner. Their results are presented in this section.
In Table 4.1, a summary of the trip data sets can be found.
Table 4.1: A summary of the trip data set used.
Data
Total
trips
Cars
Period
(days)
Features
Mean trip
distance
(km)
Mean trip
duration
(min)
DE I
603,165
5,000
30
7
19.2
20
SE I
622,854
4,994
30
7
14.9
17
SE II
3,583,632
10,000
100
9
14.5
17
4.2.1
Trips
In the DE I and SE I data, a distinction of if the vehicle is registered locally can
be made. In total, around half of the trips recorded in Germany were made with
cars registered outside of the country. The non-local cars are mostly registered in the
border countries such as the Netherlands and Switzerland (19% and 5%). The trip
share made by non-local cars is at 8% in Sweden. It is believed that this difference
comes from the amount of cross border commuters in Germany and its bordering
countries [59].
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
Hour of day
2020-01-01
2020-01-03
2020-01-05
2020-01-07
2020-01-09
2020-01-11
2020-01-13
2020-01-15
2020-01-17
2020-01-19
2020-01-21
2020-01-23
2020-01-25
2020-01-27
2020-01-29
2020-01-31
Date
Sweden
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
Hour of day
Germany
0.000
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
0.125
0.000
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
0.125
Figure 4.2: Vehicle up-time on the daily and hourly heat map.
On the population level, average trip distance in Germany is longer than in Sweden.
On a weekday, the average trip distance is at 15 and 14 kilometres for local cars in
==PAGE:40==
4.2 Descriptive statistics
29
Germany and Sweden respectively. The non-local vehicles travel slightly longer at
22 kilometres and 16 kilometres.
During the weekend, the average distance is 15
kilometres and 17 kilometres for local and non-local cars in Sweden, 18 kilometres
and 24 kilometres in Germany. Average trip duration is relatively higher in Germany
however not significantly, at 20 minutes for both weekdays and weekends. Swedish
trips have an average duration of 17 minutes.
The daily first trip occurs around
6:40 o’clock on weekdays and 9:00 o’clock (Central European Time) on weekends. A
distribution can be seen in Figure A.1. The daily average distance per car is 77 and
62 kilometres for Germany and Sweden data sets respectively. An average car makes
four trips per day in both countries.
Figure 4.3: Origin destination hot spots on map with randomly selected six users
from data set SE II.
Figure 4.2 presents a heat map of vehicle up and down time, with the 0 repre-
senting the vehicle being parked. And when every car is being used all the time,
they achieve maximum value 1. From this heat map, three things can be clearly
observed. One, the weekday and weekend patterns. On weekends, such as the 4th
to 5th of January, the trip demands shifts into later hours in the days, and the last
trips finish later than weekdays. Secondly, during the night hours, the fleet driving
activity is very low to none. Lastly, during the peaks which occurs in the morning
and afternoon, the fleet up-time is at around 13%. This indicates the cars are parked
during majority of the time, thus the V2G potential in this particular fleet can be
considered high. Since we assume the observations are continuous, the parking time,
or time to the next trip was calculated simply as the time difference from arrival time
to the next departure time for the same vehicle. For trips arriving in between 19:00
to 21:00 o’clock, the associated parking time averages at in between 9 to 10 hours.
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Descriptive statistics
30
A distribution of hourly arrival in relation to the mean parking time can be seen in
Figure A.2.
Table 4.2: Six randomly selected users and their daily trip demands.
Car
Sample
No. trips per
weekday
(weekend)
km per
weekday
(weekend)
Up-time per
weekday
(weekend)
First trip
departs at
on weekdays
(std)
Erik
373
4 (3)
34 (51)
2.4% (3.4%)
6:40 (3.3h)
Patrick
386
5 (2)
61 (18)
4.8% (1.5%)
6:30 (2.7h)
Anders
987
12 (6)
118 (75)
11.5% (7.1%)
5:20 (1.7h)
Jack
1081
12 (8)
319 (147)
36.9% (24.9%)
7:10 (4.1h)
Tom
1083
15 (3)
139 (33)
12.4% (2.6%)
7:05 (2.8h)
Henrik
1126
14 (7)
405 (207)
57.4% (24.8%)
12:40 (5.0h)
The variation from vehicle to vehicle is analysed and described using data set SE
II, as it brings a spatial dimension to the analysis. First, six vehicles were randomly
selected, their most visited locations are visualised in Figure 4.3. Note that the car
names are generated at random to mask the vehicle IDs. The average trip distance
in this randomly selected subset is similar to the population level, at 17 and 18
kilometres for weekdays and weekends. However, the variation is large from user to
user. The daily trip demand variations are presented for each vehicle in Table 4.2.
Some cars travelling much greater distance per day in less trips some vice versa. The
difference in travel demand will naturally result variation in vehicle down time, i.e.
time available for smart charging.
The difference in trip demands can also be observed in mean and variance of trip
distance. On a weekday, the maximum distance made by vehicle Erik and Patrick is
less than 90 kilometre. Patrick consistently travelled short distances per trip, while
Erik mainly performed long distance trips during the weekends. Car Anders and Tom
have similar trip distance distribution, however in trip duration in car Anders is longer
than Tom. Judging by the origin destination locations of both cars, the difference
might come from trip made with Anders was mostly in the cities where congestion
is a larger issue than in the country side (Tom’s locations). Absolute location based
analysis will not be informative, as a point in space can signify difference meaning
for different user. Therefore, a clustering method will be applied to each individual
users to group designations, then these designations will be weighted with frequency
of visits each day. This method will be further discussed in Section 4.3.2.
Last but not least, parked time was analysed. The longest period the vehicle was
inactive is 92 hours which took place during the week for car Patrick. Car Erik was
parked the longest during weekdays, at 61 hours. Both cars have average parking
time around 6 hours on weekdays, 6 and 7 hours for Erik and Patrick respectively.
Vehicles with high up-time have low average parked time about 1 hour. Trip share
at different hour of the day is illustrated for each vehicle in Figure 4.4. There are
two travel peaks in the morning and afternoon for weekdays, and for the weekend
==PAGE:42==
4.2 Descriptive statistics
31
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23
hour
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Trip share
Weekdays
Name
Anders
Erik
Henrik
Jack
Patrick
Tom
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23
hour
Weekends
Name
Anders
Erik
Henrik
Jack
Patrick
Tom
Figure 4.4: Origin destination hot spots on map with randomly selected six users
from data set SE II.
the trip demands are more evenly distributed. As can be seen, car Patrick is never
used from 22:00 to 6:00 o’clock during the weekends and from 21:00 to 3:00 o’clock
on weekdays. Even the car with the highest number of trips made during the period,
Henrik, is never active from 0:00 to 3:00 o’clock on weekdays. On another hand, car
Jack has trip starting on every hour in this period, which making it a difficult subject
for a departure time prediction. In terms of activity radius, i.e. the distance on the
map trip cover, car Erik and Anders visits a greater radius of destinations during
weekends comparing to weekdays. Car Jack and Henrik is the opposite, they visits
much more places during the week than weekends. The rest two have similar activity
radius for weekend and weekdays.
4.2.2
Electric grid
The gird data was provided in two subsets for Germany and Sweden, matching the
observation period of DE I, SE I and II. There are 104 features in each data sets,
describing the details of electric generation share in the grid. The points of interest
in this thesis is the average carbon intensity expressed as gCO2/kWh and electricity
bidding price in Euro/kWh.
The power generation methods in the two countries are significantly different.
Both countries have a high share in renewable production, 49% in Germany and 60%
in Sweden, and in Germany fossil fuel power plants are still dominating the electric-
ity market. In January, fossil fuel made up 37% of the total electricity production
in Germany while only at 8% with the rest hydro and nuclear power in Sweden. As
a result, the carbon intensity of power produced in Germany and Sweden is 310
gCO2/kWh and 40 gCO2/kWh respectively. Carbon intensity from imported elec-
tricity is similar in the two countries, averages at 100 gCO2/kWh. The difference in
carbon intensity can be seen on the hourly average. While the carbon intensity dif-
fers within 1 gCO2/kWh from hour to hour in Sweden. In the German grid, average
carbon intensity on and off peak can differ by 47 gCO2/kWh. This also implies that
==PAGE:43==
4.3 Time-to-event prediction
32
smart charging solutions optimising for carbon intensity will have more potential in
countries with similar grid composition as Germany.
40
50
60
70
80
60
40
20
0
20
40
60
80
Power price [Euro/MWh]
Sweden
100
200
300
400
500
Germany
Carbon intensity [gCO2eq/kWh]
Figure 4.5: Bidding price and carbon intensity in Germany and Sweden.
A histogram of the bidding prices is presented in Figure A.3. In Sweden, the
bidding is done in four zones and at times the price can vary, for this analysis we took
an average price in between the four zones. During the same period, the average price
is at 26 and 23 Euro/kWh with standard deviation of 15 and 13 Euro/kWh in Germany
and Sweden. When there is excess renewable energy in the grid, bidding price can
be negative, which was the case during a short period in late March in Germany.
Figure 4.5 shows a scattered plot of bidding prices at corresponding average carbon
intensity in the grid. The price to CO2 correlation is strong in Germany, at around
0.75 and slightly weaker in Sweden at 0.48.
On the hourly average, the bidding
price and carbon intensity follows the same trend, low during the nights from 22:00
to 8:00, and mid-day from 10:00 to 13:00. This price to CO2 correlation was used
when constructing the total charging cost function, a parameter α is introduced in
the models to weight carbon and price.
Bidding price can be considered to reflect supply and demand in an electricity
market [60]. The retail electricity price for the end consumers is often not as elastic
as the bidding prices, however the general trend should agree. Bidding price is used
in all cost analysis in this thesis as we interpret charging cost as a system cost of
energy balancing and carbon intensity.
4.3
Time-to-event prediction
In this section, prediction models will be presented.
Predictor I, that is a popu-
lation based prediction model is summarised in Section 4.3.1. We will present an
==PAGE:44==
4.3 Time-to-event prediction
33
origin-destination clustering for each individual users in Section 4.3.2 and the fea-
tures generated from such clustering. Finally, an user based prediction model will be
discussed in Section 4.3.3.
4.3.1
Predictor I: population based prediction
The first prediction model was built based on the trip records for the entire population,
on data sets SE I and DE I. There are a mix of continuous and categorical variables
included in the features. The data sets are fitted with CPH model, then each data
sets were split into k-folds for cross validation.
In the models, each trip is an individual observation, whereas duration to next
departure is the target variable of interest. The covariates which will fit in the regres-
sion term in the CPH model are, trip start and end time, trip distance, trip duration.
And the categorical covariates are, trip end time in each time quarter of the day, if
the vehicle is registered in the country and if the trip was made on a weekday, one-
hot encoded. These continuous variables were treated with minimum and maximum
scaling. Trips with duration shorter than 5 minutes or distance shorter than 1 kilo-
metre are excluded from the models. Furthermore, as a single user can make multiple
trips, we allow the model to group the observations based on vehicle IDs. The point
estimates of the model will not change from this grouping, but the standard errors
will increase. As on the population level, multiple trips made by the same vehicle is
less informative than multiple trips made by different vehicles.
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
log(HR) (95% CI)
distance
trip_duration
am_pm
is_Weekday
is_Local
Start_hour
End_hour
Figure 4.6: CPH model, SE I.
4
2
0
2
4
log(HR) (95% CI)
trip_duration
am_pm
is_Local
is_Weekday
Start_hour
End_hour
distance
Figure 4.7: CPH model, DE I.
The models were fitted to SE I and DE I separately, both model converged after
30 iterations. There are no censored observations in either data sets. Figure 4.3.1
shows the regression coefficient for SE I (left) and DE I (right) at 95% confidence
interval. CPH model assumes these covariates are independent of time. As can be
seen, the same covariates influence departure likelihood differently in the two data
sets. The exponential value of the coefficient is the hazard ratio which assumed to be
constant over time. For example, the covariate ”is Weekday” is a boolean indicating
if the trip is made on a weekday. In models, the coefficient indicated that at a given
==PAGE:45==
4.3 Time-to-event prediction
34
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
trip_duration=0.5
trip_duration=1.0
trip_duration=2.0
trip_duration=5.0
baseline
Start_hour=0.0
Start_hour=0.1
Start_hour=0.5
Start_hour=1.0
baseline
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
End_hour=0.0
End_hour=0.1
End_hour=0.5
End_hour=1.0
baseline
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
distance=0.1
distance=0.5
distance=1.0
distance=2.0
baseline
Time [t]
Probability of remaining parked, S(t)
Figure 4.8: Baseline survival curve and effect of varying a covariate at the time, for
SE I.
point in time, a vehicle is much more likely to depart on a weekday in comparison to
a weekend. These affects to the baseline survival function are visualised in Figure 4.8
for SE I data set. In comparison to arrival time, departure time has little to no effect
on the up-coming parking period. Trip distance and duration positively correlates to
the parking period, meaning that the after a longer trip, it is more likely for a car to
be parked for a longer period of time.
4.3.1.1
Evaluation of Predictor I
The models were evaluated in two ways. Firstly, the observations were split into a
80-20 training and testing subsets at random. The two evaluation metrics, C-index
and Brier score was computed for the training and testing subsets. C-index measures
the model performance globally over time and it ranges in between 0.5 and 1. In the
SE I model, a C-index of the training and testing set was computed at 0.604 and
0.601 respectively. C-index is 0.632 and 0.634 for training and testing subset in DE
I. Overall, the model accuracy is not ideal.
Secondly, the Brier score was computed for the complete timeline. A figure is
presented in Figure 4.9 for SE I. Brier score measures the deviation from predicted
likelihood to the actual observed occurrence, thus the best value for Brier score is 0.
This score is computed for the timeline, and the worst acceptable Brier score is set
==PAGE:46==
4.3 Time-to-event prediction
35
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
Time, t
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Brier score, BS(t)
Brier score for the timeline - training data
Brier scores
0.25 criterion
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
Time, t
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Brier score, BS(t)
Brier score for the timeline - test data
Brier scores
0.25 criterion
Figure 4.9: Brier score of the timeline, for training and testing sets in SE I.
at 0.25. That can be interpreted as, in the worst case, the predicted likelihood of
departure is at 50%, but the car had in fact departed. It is shown that for shorter
or longer parking period, the prediction is fair. The model is very poor at handling
prediction for parking period over 1 day and less than 2 days.
In practice, long
inactive period type of prediction is not of interests as charging event is unlikely to
occur. The integrated Brier score for DE I data set is 0.163 for the training set and
0.164 for the testing set. SE I scored similarly at 0.172 and 0.174 for training and
testing sets respectively.
Table 4.3: K-fold expanding window cross validation, k = 5, C-index.
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
SE I
Train
0.618
0.614
0.618
0.615
0.609
Test
0.609
0.616
0.607
0.600
0.594
DE I
Train
0.635
0.634
0.632
0.633
0.631
Test
0.632
0.631
0.634
0.633
0.632
A k-fold expanding window cross validation was done to ensure that the model is
not over nor under-fitting. Due to the limitation on computing power, only C-index
was computed for this cross validation. The results are presented in Table 4.3. Same
model performs slightly better with the German data set, and shows no sign of under
or over fitting from the cross validation. This CPH model is judged to be acceptable,
but not applicable for smart charging due to its limited prediction accuracy. Some
small prediction accuracy can be gained through further adjustment of parameters
such as L1 and L2 penalty, however no dramatic improvement is to be expected
given the nature of the problem. As the input data is noisy and individual. It is
also suspected some features which can be informative for parking duration are not
included in the data, such as location. Furthermore, by building a population based
model, the variability of travel demands in between individuals are largely overlooked.
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Time-to-event prediction
36
4.3.2
Origin destination clustering
In Section 4.3.2 and Section 4.3.3, an user based time-to-event prediction model will
be attempted with origin destination information. An origin destination clustering
of six users in data set SE II is presented in this section, together with some analysis
on the correlation of parking time to different destination clusters.
Time of the day: 0.00 to 6.00
Cluster 0
Cluster 1
Cluster 2
Cluster 3
Time of the day: 6.00 to 12.00
Cluster 0
Cluster 1
Cluster 2
Cluster 3
Time of the day: 12.00 to 18.00
Cluster 0
Cluster 1
Cluster 2
Cluster 3
Time of the day: 18.00 to 24.00
Cluster 0
Cluster 1
Cluster 2
Cluster 3
Latitude
Longitude
Figure 4.10: Visits at each cluster of location, at different quarters of the day for
user Henrik.
The K-means clustering was done for each individual cars. Since a geographical
location signifies differently for individuals, relative location should be compared in-
stead of absolute location. Therefore, the longitudes and latitudes are scaled before
clustering. Each cars’ location were fitted into four clusters. The model inertia does
not directly correlate to the number of observations but the activity radius of users.
Although some users travel in a larger radius than other, the model inertia is similar
for all users at n=4.
It can be observed that visits to each cluster changes over the day (Figure 4.10),
thus one of the cluster can be interpreted as home for the users. It is reasonable to
assume that origin destination clusters correlate to parking time, as can be seen in
Figure 4.11. The average parking time is in average high when user arrives at cluster
0 and at 5 o’clock in the morning. Similar spikes in parking period can be observed
==PAGE:48==
4.3 Time-to-event prediction
37
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
Time of day
0
2
4
6
8
10
Mean Parked time [h]
Cluster 0
Cluster 1
Cluster 2
Figure 4.11: Mean parked time when trip ends at different hour of the day, and
each destination cluster for car Henrik.
in other users trips, however at different times. For other users, the longest inactive
period took place after arrival at their home cluster, and during the period from 16:00
to 19:00. Therefore, origin and destination can indeed be considered informative of
parking time, and will be included in the features for Predictor II.
4.3.3
Predictor II: user based prediction
The second prediction model, Predictor II is CPH model fitted to individual users
from data set SE II. Similar to Predictor I, each trip is an observation made by the
same vehicle. Similar features are included in the features, in addition, the origin
destination cluster labels and the number of times each cluster was visited on the
given day. The continuous variables including trip duration, distance, start and end
time were scaled.
Firstly, to demonstrate the difference in departure behaviour for each individual
users, a Kaplan–Meier estimator is used. Kaplan-Meier is a non-parametric method
for estimating survival function of lifetime data. The probably of remaining parked
after certain hours for each quarter of the day is plotted in Figure 4.12. This naive
estimator is to demonstrate effects of trip occurrence time to the likelihood of remain-
ing parked. Trips ended in between 18:00 to 24:00 have the highest predictability in
terms of parking time, and trips during the day have the least. Moreover, the travel
demand differs from user to user. For example user Erik and Patrick displayed high
likelihood of parking for a long time during the nights, and user Jack’s likelihood of
long parking period does not differ from hour to hour.
Ideally, an user based model should be built for a cluster of users with similar
travel demands instead of a single user. In this project, the clustering process is done
manually. We first looked a single, randomly selected user, then added trips from
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Time-to-event prediction
38
0
5
10
15
20
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Kaplan-Meier survival function, user: Patrick
Time: 00:00 - 06:00
Time: 06:00 - 12:00
Time: 12:00 - 18:00
Time: 18:00 - 24:00
0
5
10
15
20
Kaplan-Meier survival function, user: Erik
Time: 00:00 - 06:00
Time: 06:00 - 12:00
Time: 12:00 - 18:00
Time: 18:00 - 24:00
0
5
10
15
20
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Kaplan-Meier survival function, user: Anders
Time: 00:00 - 06:00
Time: 06:00 - 12:00
Time: 12:00 - 18:00
Time: 18:00 - 24:00
0
5
10
15
20
Kaplan-Meier survival function, user: Tom
Time: 00:00 - 06:00
Time: 06:00 - 12:00
Time: 12:00 - 18:00
Time: 18:00 - 24:00
0
5
10
15
20
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Kaplan-Meier survival function, user: Jack
Time: 00:00 - 06:00
Time: 06:00 - 12:00
Time: 12:00 - 18:00
Time: 18:00 - 24:00
0
5
10
15
20
Kaplan-Meier survival function, user: Henrik
Time: 00:00 - 06:00
Time: 06:00 - 12:00
Time: 12:00 - 18:00
Time: 18:00 - 24:00
Time [t]
Probability of remaining parked, S(t)
Figure 4.12: Kaplan-Meier survival function S(t) at each quarter of the day, for the
six selected users.
another user that is judged to have similar travel patterns. The randomly selected
user is Tom, that has 1083 valid observations in the data set, and been split into 80-20
training and testing set. A CPH model is fitted to these trips. A penaliser of 0.0002
is set with L-1 ratio at 0.7. The model converged after 19 iterations; this user based
model yield a C-index of 0.908 and 0.907 on the training and testing set respectively.
The model suggests features such as trip distance, origin and destination and if the
trip is made on a weekday have strong influence on the possible parking period.
Brier score was computed for the model, a figure is presented in Figure 4.13.
Comparing to the global model, the maximum accepted score is lowered to 0.15 as
one would expect lower margin of error on the individual user level. Brier score is
plotter over time, as visualised, the performance is consistently fare over time. The
score stays under the maximum acceptance, and do not exhibit trends or inability of
prediction at given time. The integrated Brier score was computed for the training
and testing set, at 0.057 for both sets. A k-fold cross validation was not performed
for the user model as the training testing subsets yield highly similar results, and the
==PAGE:50==
4.3 Time-to-event prediction
39
0
200
400
600
800
Time, t
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Brier score, BS(t)
Brier score for the timeline - training data
Brier scores
0.15 criterion
0
200
400
600
800
Time, t
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Brier score, BS(t)
Brier score for the timeline - test data
Brier scores
0.15 criterion
Figure 4.13: Brier score of the timeline, for training and testing sets for car Tom.
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
Time, t
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Brier score, BS(t)
Brier score for the timeline - training data
Brier scores
0.15 criterion
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
Time, t
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Brier score, BS(t)
Brier score for the timeline - test data
Brier scores
0.15 criterion
Figure 4.14: Brier score of the timeline, for training and testing sets for car Tom
and Jack.
numbers of observations are insufficient for applying expanding window method.
User Jack was identified to have similar travel patterns to user Tom. Since both
of them have similar number of total observations, thus average numbers of trips
per day. User Jack drives longer distances in average and have shorter inactive time.
However, their inactive periods during the nights are similar. Therefore, observations
from Jack were included in the model with the exact same parameters.
The new model was trained on 1731 observations and tested on 433 observations.
It converged after 22 iterations. Theis model returned C-index of 0.885 and 0.883
for training and testing set respectively. The performance is slightly worse than the
model fitted to an individual, however still fair. It is observed that the covariates
with strong effect is the arrival time of a give trip. Brier scores behave similar to the
individually fitted model, as can be seen in Figure 4.14. Integrated Brier score was
calculated to be 0.072 for both training and testing sets.
==PAGE:51==
4.4 Charging and optimisation
40
4.4
Charging and optimisation
In this section, the two optimisation methods will be discussed along with different
charging scenarios. A number of charging scenarios were suggested, analysed and
compared. We computed all charging scenarios based on the observed parking period
as a representation of highest potentials. In the model, charging power is set constant
at 10 kilowatt.
The benchmark case considered is called charging as soon as possible (ASAP).
Namely, when a vehicle finishes it’s trip, it is connected to the mains and start charg-
ing right away. This is the most common practice if no charging schedule is available,
i.e. no information about the next departure time is available. The second bench-
mark case is to charge as late as possible (ALAP). When charging ALAP, the charging
model must have information on the next departure time, then delays the charging so
the car will just have sufficient time to charge before the estimated departure time.
4.4.1
Benchmark: ASAP and ALAP
Both benchmark cases were calculated for DE I and SE I trips taken place in January
2020. During this period, the average carbon intensity is 309 and 47 gCO2/kWh in
Germany and Sweden respectively. The benchmark cases followed heuristics without
information about the grid.
When charging ASAP, the majority of the charging events starts in between 15:00
to 18:00 o’clock which corresponds to the hourly arrival rate (Figure A.5). During
this time period, the average carbon intensity and price in the grid is higher. As a
result, charging ASAP have an average carbon intensity of 313 and 32 gCO2/kWh
in Germany and Sweden. Charging in Germany yield a higher carbon intensity than
the grid average as the German grid has a high carbon fluctuation. This charging
method will cost at average 0.039 and 0.024 Euro/kWh in Germany and Sweden.
Comparing to ASAP case, a fare share of charging starts were shifted to later
in the nights Figure A.6. For Sweden, no CO2 changes were observed with ALAP
strategy, however a clear improvement is observed in Germany at 294 gCO2/kWh.
The electricity cost improved for both countries, saving as much as 0.5 Euro Cents
per kilowatt hour. Detailed results for Germany with these two benchmark cases are
presented in Table 4.4.
When charging ALAP, most charging events started in between 02:00 to 05:00
o’clock. In average, carbon intensity and price in this period is lower. Figure 4.15
visualised the difference in number of start charging events when charging ASAP
and ALAP (as bars) and the hourly carbon intensity in the grid in Germany (as
line). Positive values indicates more charging events than the ASAP case and vice
versa.
As can be seen, delaying charging did help shifting charging activity from
the morning and afternoon peak. But the strategy failed during 4:00 to 6:00, as less
charging was done during this period comparing to the baseline. This will directly
increase the charging carbon intensity. The ALAP method is also suboptimal when
the availability of renewable changes rapidly from hour to hour.
==PAGE:52==
4.4 Charging and optimisation
41
Table 4.4: CO2 and price per kilowatt charged in Germany, for both charging as
soon as possible and as late as possible.
Germany
CO2
(g/kWh)
Price
(cent/kWh)
mean
(std)
75%
max
mean
(std)
75%
max
ASAP
313 (92.2)
364
528
3.9 (0.96)
4.5
6.9
ALAP
294 (96.7)
358
527
3.3 (1.22)
4.1
6.8
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
Hour of day
7500
5000
2500
0
2500
5000
7500
Delta number of charging starts, ALAP - ASAP
290
300
310
320
330
Grid carbon intensity [gCO2/kWh]
Figure 4.15: Difference in number of start charging events (bar) when charging as
soon as possible (ASAP) and as late as possible (ALAP) at each hour,
and the corresponding average CO2 (line).
The rationality of charging as late as possible is that for arrivals during the
evenings, the cars are usually parked for the entire night. In general, both the car-
bon intensity and price are low during nights. Thus if no information of the gird
is available, delaying all the charging could be the most uncomplicated optimisation
strategy.
==PAGE:53==
4.4 Charging and optimisation
42
4.4.2
Optimiser I: fixed time window
Two optimisation methods are investigated, they are Optimiser I fix and Optimiser II
flex charging time window. In the first case, the charging is constraint to be finished
in one event, that is once it starts, it shall not be interrupted. In the second case,
that constraint is relaxed as the charging is allowed to be discontinues.
0
4
8
12
16
n
th hour
180
200
220
240
260
280
Carbon intensity [gCO2/kWh]
25
30
35
40
45
Bidding price [Euro/MWh]
Charging starts
Charging ends
Figure 4.16: Carbon intensity and price, and an indication on the optimal charging
window.
When the charging must be finished without interference, the optimisation prob-
lem can be solved by conducting a simple linear search. When the cost do not vary
dramatically from one time step to another, this method can in general reach a global
minima at a cost of computation time. The implementation can compute a solution
for each charging decision at an average of 20 milliseconds. Figure 4.16 shows a exam-
ple of finding the optimal charging window of 6.5 hours within the search prerequisites
of 19 hours of parking time. The model concluded that if charging starts on the 12-th
hour, the total cost of charging will be minimum. In Germany on the fleet level,
this simple optimisation can save 7% of CO2 and 9% of charging cost in comparison
to uncontrolled charging. It costs in average 3.0 Euro cents per kilowatt hour, as
comparing to 3.9 when charging ASAP. As expected, the CO2 saving potential is
minimum in Sweden. Furthermore when applying the Optimiser I on electricity price
only, we saw a cost saving from 2.4 Euro cents per kilowatt hour to 1.8 cents without
compromising the carbon intensity.
When applied the Optimiser I, we observed that the majority of charging events
started in between 22:00 to 02:00. And there is almost no charging started at 17:00.
Figure 4.17 illustrates that the Optimiser I was able to shift almost all charging events
==PAGE:54==
4.4 Charging and optimisation
43
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
Hour of day
10000
0
10000
20000
30000
Delta number of charging starts, Opt I - ASAP
290
300
310
320
330
Grid carbon intensity [gCO2/kWh]
Figure 4.17: Difference in number of start charging events (bar) when charging as
soon as possible (ASAP) and Optimiser I (Opt I) at each hour, and
the corresponding average CO2 (line).
to off peak hours, and identified the cheapest hours to start charging. It was also able
to capture the noon off-peak that the heuristic ALAP did not identify. The potential
pitfall of this method is when the fluctuation of cost and carbon is high from hour
to hour, for example, on the 8-th hour in Figure 4.16, the weighted total cost is less
than the 12-th hour. In which case allowing the charging to be discontinuous will be
more ideal.
4.4.3
Optimiser II: flex time window
The Optimiser II, flex time window, relaxed the constraint of a charging must be
continuous. This constraint was set as a precaution of dynamic schedule might ac-
celerate battery ageing. However, experiments conducted by Wikner suggested that
dynamic current charging could potentially improve the cell ageing [61]. Therefore,
Optimiser II will allow the vehicle to charge as little or as much as it is optimal for
the weighted cost at each time step.
==PAGE:55==
4.4 Charging and optimisation
44
0
4
8
12
16
n
th hour
180
200
220
240
260
280
Carbon intensity [gCO2/kWh]
25
30
35
40
45
Bidding price [Euro/MWh]
Charging
Figure 4.18: Carbon intensity and price, and an indication on the optimal charging
window.
Optimiser II was programmed and solved using Python scipy linear programming
package. The model can be solved for all of the charging events at around 15 millisec-
onds each. Applying the Optimiser II to the data sets, it it discovered that for 70 %
of the charging events, two optimisation models yield the same results. Figure 4.18
shows the same example charging event as Figure 4.16, however charging with Opti-
miser II. A cost saving was observed in this particular example. In Germany On the
fleet level, Using Optimiser II resulted average carbon intensity of 270 gCO2/kWh
as compared to 274 gCO2/kWh when charging with Optimiser I. There is a cost
reduction to 2.9 Euro cents per kilowatt hour.
Optimiser II was applied on the Germany data sets to find charging schedules that
optimises for CO2 only. In this case, we found a slightly reduced carbon intensity at
the cost of electricity price. This optimisation can further reduce the charging CO2
by 2 grams per kilowatt hour, however the average electricity price stood at 3.1 cents.
The optimisation model can optimise CO2 without a dramatic increase in price is
because of the strong correlation of carbon and price in the current electricity market.
For the Swedish market, Optimiser II was applied on the weighted cost of CO2 and
price. We can see an improvement of electricity price, the new average price is at
1.7 Euro cents per kilowatt hour with the flex time window charging. But the new
optimisation returned no differences on the carbon intensity aggregated level. It is
safe to assume that in a grid of similar structure as Sweden, potential of saving CO2
from charging is minimum.
The physical limitation of charging, such as real time efficiency, and start up time
==PAGE:56==
4.4 Charging and optimisation
45
was not included in neither of optimisation models. This means that the optimisation
model will send command which the vehicles might not be able to execute. To combat
this potential pitfall, the constraints need to be reformulated so that any physical limit
of charging should be included and well represented.
4.4.4
Carbon and cost of transport
The equivalent CO2 per kilometre and cost of operation is summarised in Figure 4.19
for vehicles used and charged in Germany. It was calculated as the carbon intensity
or price per kilowatt hour charged, and the vehicle’s corresponding rated energy
consumption.
Benchmark (ASAP)
ALAP
Fixed
Flex
Flex (CO2 Only)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
Average CO2 [gCO2/km]
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Average price [ /100km]
Price
Figure 4.19: Average carbon intensity (blue) and price per kilometre (orange) in
Germany, when charging with different strategies.
As presented in Figure 4.19, the average CO2 saving can be has high as 10
gCO2/km when charging is optimised. At the same time, price of charging reduced
by 9% if the optimisation is done for only the carbon intensity and 15 % when the
charging optimises for both carbon and cost. The strong correlation of power price
and carbon intensity enabled such saving. By tuning the correlation parameter in the
optimisation model, we can ensure no cost saving should be done at the expense of
extra carbon emission. This analysis was done for January 2020 only. However, it is
believed the saving potential could be higher during seasons when renewable energy
availability fluctuates more.
==PAGE:57==
4.5 Discussion and future work
46
4.5
Discussion and future work
4.5.1
Prediction and optimisation
In this project, the optimisation for charging was computed based on observed parking
period instead of predicted values.
Ideally, the cost saving potential should be a
function of prediction accuracy. However, on the aggregated level, the cost saving
possibility of smart charging should not be effected since the optimisation model
have much higher potential when parking period is longer. And the prediction models
suggested have fair performance for such trips. Furthermore, instead of using exact
parking time, the optimisation model tighten the constraint by always rounding down
to dead hours of the parking time.
In practice, there are many fallback actions can be done for predictions with low
confidence. As suggested by Su et al. one can allow the vehicle to be charged to a
certain level as soon as possible, then use the last percentage of SOC for optimisa-
tion [62]. After a time-to-event prediction is made, a notification should be sent to
the users as confirmation. Furthermore, besides the estimated departure time, the
prediction model shall also produce a confidence to such departure time. So that any
uncertainty can be modelled into the final cost function of the optimisation.
4.5.2
Future work
The time-to-event prediction model on the population level failed to meet expectation
of the project, as being able to produce a highly accurate prediction is critical for
customers. Thus it is important to build user based models, for cluster of users with
similar trip demands. We recommend a further look into possible user based model
candidates, and restructure the analysis towards understanding of similarities from
user to user.
In the model, travel patterns are observed from real trips but charging patterns
are generated. It is believe that charging pattern, such as an indicator if a charger
is plugged or charger input power, can contribute positively to a prediction model.
Furthermore, travel pattern from both conventional and EVs are included in the
modelling. However, the deviation of conventional car users’ and EV users’ travel
pattern are not explicitly analysed. Thus re-visiting the models with EV trip and
charging data is strictly necessary before a business decision can be made.
This work demonstrated a possible implementation of charging carbon intensity
and price optimisation model for individual vehicles. However, should the fleet size
become significant, a fleet level optimisation should also be considered. Since the
power price and carbon intensity is largely dependent on the expected load in the
grid. Connecting a large fleet will eventually alter the demand thus change the price
and carbon intensity. A dispatch model was theorised in this project, however due to
time limitations not further discussed. Such dispatch model should be made so that
fleet level optimal charging can be ensured.
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
Electrified vehicles and the electricity grid have became more connected in different
ways. This thesis analysed one aspect of such connection and demonstrate a possible
implementation of smart charging. The implementation is aimed to reduce carbon
intensity and price from charging the vehicle, by optimising charging schedules.
If such optimisation is to be done, understanding of trip demands is critical. In
this project, we consider expected parking time a constraint to the optimisation prob-
lem. Different from most vehicle to grid research work, the expected parking duration
is individual and derived from empirical data from trips made in Germany and Swe-
den. A modulated prediction and optimisation system was suggested, with prediction
producing estimated departure time to the next trip, for the optimisation model to
use as constraint when computing a charging schedule. This solution offers flexibility
in inputs, as the end users can determine their own departure time instead of predic-
tion. Comparing to other V2G approaches, this solution considers the individuality
in vehicle trip demands.
A cloud based system architecture is introduced in the project. The system design
aim to utilise the existing architecture, thus all current hardware and software in
the vehicles are kept. Instead all computations and optimisations will be done off-
board from the vehicles, and the final charging schedule is sent back to the cars as a
parameter. It is believed that the set up will make minimum changes to the system,
and therefore have the fastest deployment time.
A Cox proportional hazards model was used to fit a time-to-event prediction model,
on both the population level and individual user level. The population based model
does not perform up to expectations, with a C-index at around 0.63 and integrated
Brier score of 0.16. The trip demands discrepancy from user to user generated a large
however noisy model. On the user level, the model performs rather well. A C-index
of 0.9 and integrated Brier score of 0.057 was achieved. Should a prediction model
to be introduced in the production environment, further work is required to fit user
based models for clusters of similar users.
Two optimisation models were analysed, one allows the charging to be discontin-
uous and one does not, flex and fix. We constructed the cost function to take both
carbon intensity and price into consideration. Comparing to the baseline case when
the cars charge as soon as possible, flex optimisation can save as much as 10 gCO2/km
when the vehicle is charged and driven in Germany. In a grid similar to Sweden, CO2
saving potential is minimum due to its carbon neutral nature. From the strong asso-
==PAGE:59==
5 Conclusion
48
ciation of price and CO2, the optimisation models can reduce charging costs at the
same time as the carbon intensity. Comparing to the baseline case, simply delaying
charging as late as possible can reduce cost and CO2. The principle of this simple
heuristic is to avoid charging during rush hours when the arrival rates are high; which
highlights the importance of knowledge in the next departure time.
This project demonstrated potentials of CO2 and cost saving through smart charg-
ing, and exhibited a concept of departure time prediction. If connection to a reliable
grid database is in place, we believe an optimisation model which rely on user input
schedules can be introduced in the near future. Furthermore, we have shown a possi-
ble system design for implementation of smart charging to the current Volvo fleet. We
recommend coordinated and optimised charging as the electrified vehicle fleet grows,
and hope to inspire similar development work within and outside of Volvo Cars.
==PAGE:60==
APPENDIX A
Figure and table
outputs
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23
Daily first trip departure time [hour of day]
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
weekday
weekend
Figure A.1: First trip departure time.
==PAGE:61==
A Figure and table outputs
50
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
Trip end hour
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Parked time [h]
SE: mean
DE: mean
Figure A.2: Average parking time when trip ends at each hour of the day.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
Density
Sweden
60
40
20
0
20
40
60
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0.025
0.030
0.035
Germany
Power price [ /MWh]
Figure A.3: Bidding price distribution for Sweden and Germany, in Euro per MWh.
==PAGE:62==
A Figure and table outputs
51
Time of the day: 0.00 to 6.00
Cluster 0
Cluster 1
Cluster 2
Cluster 3
Time of the day: 6.00 to 12.00
Cluster 0
Cluster 1
Cluster 2
Cluster 3
Time of the day: 12.00 to 18.00
Cluster 0
Cluster 1
Cluster 2
Cluster 3
Time of the day: 18.00 to 24.00
Cluster 0
Cluster 1
Cluster 2
Cluster 3
Latitude
Longitude
Figure A.4: Visits at each cluster of location, at different quarters of the day for
user Erik.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
Hourly arrival rate,  [%]
Weekday
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
Weekend
Hour of day
Figure A.5: Hourly arrival rate, weekdays vs weekends.
==PAGE:63==
A Figure and table outputs
52
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
Charging start share
Sweden
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23
Germany
ALAP
ASAP
Hour of day
Figure A.6: Share of charging starts at each hour, when charging as soon as possible
(ASAP) and as late as possible (ALAP).
Benchmark (ASAP)
ALAP
Fixed
Fixed (price only)
Flex
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Average CO2 [gCO2/km]
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Average price [ /100km]
Price
Figure A.7: Average carbon intensity (blue) and price (orange) per kilometre in
Sweden, when charging with different strategies.
==PAGE:64==
A Figure and table outputs
53
Time plan
w28-29
Feature
engineering
Post-processor
Temporal module
Descriptive
statistics
Post-processor
Grid data module
w30-31
Time-to-event
predictor
Pyplot function
Descriptive
statistics
Cluster function
w32-33
It's never
good enough
Optimiser I
Evaluate 
solution 1
Good
enough?
w34-35
Post-processor
Spatial module
Folium GIS
function
w36-37
PGM
Optimiser I-1
Bayesian time-to-
event predictor
w38-39
Since it's 
never 
good enough
Optimiser II
Evaluate
solution 2
w40
Evaluate 
solution 3
Evaluate
combinations of
predictor &
optimiser
Conclude
Figure A.8: Time plan for the project listed in two week sprints.
==PAGE:65==
A Figure and table outputs
54
Table A.1: CO2 and price per kilowatt hour charged in Sweden, for all charging
scenarios.
Sweden
CO2
(g/kWh)
Price
(cent/kWh)
mean
(std)
75%
max
mean
(std)
75%
max
ASAP
40 (2.5)
41
62
2.4 (0.77)
3.1
3.6
ALAP
41 (3.4)
42
61
2.2 (0.76)
2.6
3.6
Fixed
41 (2.9)
43
62
1.9 (0.79)
2.5
3.6
Fixed
(price only)
41 (3.0)
43
63
1.8 (0.78)
2.4
3.5
Flex
41 (2.8)
42
56
1.7 (0.79)
2.5
3.5
Table A.2: CO2 and price per kilowatt hour charged in Germany, for all charging
scenarios.
Germany
CO2
(g/kWh)
Price
(cent/kWh)
mean
(std)
75%
max
mean
(std)
75%
max
ASAP
313 (92.2)
364
528
3.9 (0.96)
4.5
6.9
ALAP
294 (96.7)
358
527
3.3 (1.22)
4.1
6.8
Fixed
274 (94.5)
328
527
3.1 (1.04)
3.7
6.6
Flex
270 (94.3)
321
527
2.9 (1.04)
3.5
6.5
Flex
(CO2 only)
268 (93.0)
320
526
3.1 (1.11)
3.8
6.9
==PAGE:66==
APPENDIX B
Example code
1 #encoding utf-8
2 #code stype pep8
3
4 import pandas as pd
5 import numpy as np
6 from sklearn.preprocessing import MinMaxScaler
7 from lifelines import CoxPHFitter
8
9
10 def cross_val_expand(data=None, k_folds=5,
11
target_var=None,
12
features=None,
13
censor=None):
14
'''
15
data (DataFrame):
data in a pandas dataframe.
16
k_folds (int):
number of folds to cross validate.
17
target_var (str):
column name of target variable.
18
features (list):
list of columns names for features.
19
censor (str):
column name of censor column.
20
'''
21
22
c_train = []
23
c_test = []
24
ind_0 = int(len(data) / (k_folds + 1))
25
26
for i in range(1, k_folds + 1):
27
28
df_train = data.iloc[0: ind_0 * i].sample(
29
frac=1).reset_index(
30
drop=True)
31
df_test = data.iloc[ind_0 * i: ind_0 * (i + 1)].sample(
32
frac=1).reset_index(
33
drop=True)
34
scaler = MinMaxScaler()
35
36
df_train[features] = scaler.fit_transform(df_train[features])
37
df_test[features] = scaler.fit_transform(df_test[features])
38
39
print('Training set size {}-fold:'.format(i), len(df_train))
40
print('Testing set size {}-fold:'.format(i), len(df_test))
41
42
cph = CoxPHFitter(penalizer=0.01, l1_ratio=0.19)
43
cph.fit(df_train[features + [target_var] + [censor]],
==PAGE:67==
B Example code
56
44
duration_col=target_var,
45
event_col='departure',
46
cluster_col='vehicle_id_hashed',
47
show_progress=False)
48
49
print('Train score (C-index), {}-fold:'.format(i),
50
cph.score(df_train[features + [target_var] + [censor]],
51
scoring_method='concordance_index'))
52
c_train.append(cph.score(df_train[features
53
+ [target_var] + [censor]]))
54
55
print('Test score (C-index), {}-fold:'.format(i),
56
cph.score(df_test[features + [target_var] + [censor]],
57
scoring_method='concordance_index'))
58
c_test.append(cph.score(df_test[features
59
+ [target_var] + [censor]]))
60
61
return c_train, c_test
Listing B.1: K-fold expanding window cross validation.
==PAGE:68==
B Example code
57
1 #encoding utf-8
2 #code stype pep8
3
4 import pandas as pd
5 import numpy as np
6
7 def optimal_fixed_window(trip_ends_at=None,
8
estimated_dep_time=None,
9
current_soc_level=None,
10
UBE=70, c_power=10,
11
df_grid=None,
12
co2_col='carbon_intensity_avg',
13
price_col='latest_forecasted_price_avg',
14
co2_alpha=0.00025):
15
16
'''
17
trip_ends_at (datetime object): end time of this trip.
18
estimated_dep_time (float):
predicted or scheduled parking period in
minutes.
19
current_soc_level (float):
current state of charge level.
20
UBE (float):
usable battery energy in kWh.
21
c_power (float):
charging power in kW.
22
df_grid (pandas dataframe):
dataframe which contains grid
information.
23
co2_col (string):
column name for CO2 info.
24
price_col (string):
column name for price info.
25
co2_alpha (float):
weights CO2 as currency, default 25e-3.
26
'''
27
28
charging_time = round(((100 - current_soc_level)/100 * UBE) / c_power,
29
2)
30
con_2 = estimated_dep_time - charging_time
31
32
if (charging_time < estimated_dep_time) or (con_2 > 1):
33
date = trip_ends_at.date()
34
hour = trip_ends_at.hour
35
minute = trip_ends_at.minute
36
37
grid_info = df_grid.loc[(df_grid['datetime'].dt.date >= date) &
38
(df_grid['datetime'].dt.hour >= hour)]
39
[['datetime', co2_col, price_col]]
40
41
first = ((60 - minute) / 60)
42
if charging_time <= first:
43
final = np.array(charging_time)
44
time_step = 1
45
else:
46
dead_hours , last = divmod(charging_time , 1)
47
middle = np.ones(int(dead_hours))
48
final = np.append(middle, last)
49
time_step = final.shape[0]
50
51
mid, last = divmod((con_2), 1)
52
serach_options = int(mid)
==PAGE:69==
B Example code
58
53
54
cost_temp = []
# cost of both co2 and money
55
co2_temp = [] # just co2
56
price_temp = [] # just money
57
58
for j in range(0, serach_options):
59
co2_ = np.array(grid_info.iloc[j: time_step+j][co2_col])
60
price_ = np.array(grid_info.iloc[j: time_step+j][price_col])
61
# convert MWh to kWh
62
cost_ = np.add(price_ / 1e3, co2_ * co2_alpha)
63
64
try:
65
co2_tot = np.dot(final, co2_).item() * c_power
66
price_tot = np.dot(final, price_ / 1e3).item() * c_power
67
costs_ = np.dot(final, cost_).item() * c_power
68
except ValueError:
69
# ValueError occurs when the df_grid dataset is not
available
70
co2_tot, price_tot, costs_ = np.nan, np.nan, np.nan
71
72
cost_temp.append(costs_)
73
co2_temp.append(co2_tot)
74
price_temp.append(price_tot)
75
76
index_min = np.argmin(cost_temp)
# at which hour to start
77
co2_min = co2_temp[index_min]
# at which the total charging co2
78
price_min = price_temp[index_min]
# at which the total price
79
80
charge_starts_at = (trip_ends_at + pd.Timedelta(first, unit='H') +
81
pd.Timedelta(index_min, unit='H'))
82
else:
83
co2_min, price_min, charge_starts_at = np.nan
84
85
86
return co2_min, price_min, charge_starts_at
Listing B.2: Linear search example code in Python.
==PAGE:70==
B Example code
59
1 import pandas as pd
2 import numpy as np
3 from scipy.optimize import linprog
4
5 def optimal_flexwindow(trip_ends_at=None,
6
estimated_dep_time=None,
7
current_soc_level=None,
8
UBE=70,
9
df_grid=None,
10
c_power=10,
11
co2_col='carbon_intensity_avg',
12
price_col='latest_forecasted_price_avg',
13
co2_alpha=0.00025):
14
15
'''
16
trip_ends_at (datetime object): end time of this trip.
17
estimated_dep_time (float):
predicted or scheduled parking period in
minutes.
18
current_soc_level (float):
current state of charge level.
19
UBE (float):
usable battery energy in kWh.
20
c_power (float):
charging power in kW.
21
df_grid (pandas dataframe):
dataframe which contains grid
information.
22
co2_col (string):
column name for CO2 info.
23
price_col (string):
column name for price info.
24
co2_alpha (float):
weights CO2 as currency, default 25e-3.
25
'''
26
27
charging_time = round(((100 - current_soc_level) / 100 * UBE) / c_power,
28
2)
29
estimated_dep_time = round(estimated_dep_time , 2)
30
31
if (charging_time < estimated_dep_time) and (estimated_dep_time > 1):
32
date = trip_ends_at.date()
33
hour = trip_ends_at.hour
34
35
grid_info = df_grid.loc[(df_grid['datetime'].dt.date >= date) &
36
(df_grid['datetime'].dt.hour >= hour)]
37
[['datetime', co2_col, price_col]]
38
39
# only consider the dead hours
40
# as a precocious of unhappy customers
41
# if estimated departs at 12:30
42
# this will make sure charging is done latest at 12:00
43
44
search_options , last = divmod(estimated_dep_time , 1)
45
46
co2_ = np.array(grid_info.iloc[0: int(search_options)][co2_col])
47
price_ = np.array(grid_info.iloc[0: int(search_options)][price_col])
48
C = np.add(price_ / 1e3, co2_ * co2_alpha)
# cost matrix
49
50
A_eq = np.ones((1, int(search_options)))
# parked time vector
51
b_eq = charging_time # total charging time
52
lb = 0 # minimum charging time per time step
==PAGE:71==
B Example code
60
53
ub = 1 # maximum charging time per
54
55
lin_ = linprog(c=C, A_eq=A_eq, b_eq=b_eq, bounds=(lb, ub))
56
57
if lin_.success is True:
58
# round to eliminate floating point errors
59
schedule = np.round(lin_.x, 2)
60
total_co2 = np.dot(schedule, co2_) * c_power
61
total_price = np.dot(schedule, price_) * c_power
62
else:
63
schedule, total_co2, total_price = 'opt failed', 'opt failed', '
opt failed'
64
else:
65
schedule, total_co2, total_price = np.nan, np.nan, np.nan
66
67
return total_co2, total_price , schedule
Listing B.3: Linear programming for flex time window method example code in
Python.
==PAGE:72==
B Example code
61
1 import pandas as pd
2 import numpy as np
3 import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
4 from pathlib import Path
5 from sklearn.cluster import KMeans
6 plt.style.use(str(Path('visualisation', 'vcc.mplstyle')))
7
8
9 def kmeans_trainer(X, ks=10):
10
11
'''
12
X
(n-d array): data for clustering.
13
ks (int): up to how many clusters.
14
'''
15
data = np.array(X)
16
k_s = np.arange(1, ks, step=1)
17
distortion = []
18
19
for k in k_s:
20
model = KMeans(k)
21
model.fit(data)
22
distortion.append(model.inertia_)
23
24
return distortion
25
26
27 def kmeans_eval_plot(ks, distortion, cluster_you_like ,
28
save=False, filename=None,
29
size=(10, 7)):
30
'''
31
ks
(int): up to how many clusters.
32
distortion
(array): model inertia at each number of cluster.
33
cluster_you_like (int): point out the ideal number of cluster.
34
save
(boolean): True if you want the figure saved.
35
filename
(str): where to put the figure.
36
size
(tuple): size of figure.
37
'''
38
fig, ax = plt.subplots(figsize=size)
39
40
k = np.arange(1, ks, step=1)
41
line, = plt.plot(k, distortion, marker='*')
42
43
ax.annotate('optimal no. of cluster',
44
xy=(cluster_you_like ,
45
distortion[cluster_you_like - 1]),
46
xytext=(cluster_you_like + 2,
47
distortion[cluster_you_like - 2]),
48
arrowprops=dict(facecolor='black',
49
shrink=0.03))
50
51
plt.xlabel('No. of clusters')
52
plt.ylabel('Model inertia')
53
54
if save is True:
==PAGE:73==
B Example code
62
55
plt.savefig(filename, bbox='tight')
56
plt.show()
57
else:
58
plt.show()
Listing B.4: K-means training code example.
==PAGE:74==
Bibliography
[1]
United Nations Environment Programme. The emissions gap report 2019. Nairobi,
Kenya: United Nations Environment Programme, 2019. isbn: 9789280737660.
[2]
International Energy Agency: Data and statistics. July 2020. url: https://
www.iea.org/data-and-statistics.
[3]
EAFO: Passenger cars. July 2020. url: https://www.eafo.eu/vehicles-
and-fleet/m1.
[4]
William J. Smith. “Can EV (electric vehicles) address Ireland’s CO2 emissions
from transport?” In: Energy 35.12 (Dec. 2010), pp. 4514–4521. doi: 10.1016/
j.energy.2010.07.029.
[5]
Wonjae Choi and Han Ho Song. “Well-to-wheel greenhouse gas emissions of
battery electric vehicles in countries dependent on the import of fuels through
maritime transportation: A South Korean case study”. In: Applied Energy 230
(Nov. 2018), pp. 135–147. doi: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2018.08.092.
[6]
Yu Wang and Ming-Hsun Cheng. “Greenhouse gas emissions embedded in US-
China fuel ethanol trade: A comparative well-to-wheel estimate”. In: Journal of
Cleaner Production 183 (May 2018), pp. 653–661. doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.
2018.02.080.
[7]
Qun Wang et al. “Well-to-wheel analysis of energy consumption, greenhouse gas
and air pollutants emissions of hydrogen fuel cell vehicle in China”. In: Journal
of Cleaner Production 275 (Dec. 2020), p. 123061. doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.
2020.123061.
[8]
L. Athanasopoulou, H. Bikas, and P. Stavropoulos. “Comparative Well-to-Wheel
Emissions Assessment of Internal Combustion Engine and Battery Electric Ve-
hicles”. In: Procedia CIRP 78 (2018), pp. 25–30. doi: 10.1016/j.procir.2018.
08.169.
[9]
Chunhua Liu et al. “Opportunities and Challenges of Vehicle-to-Home, Vehicle-
to-Vehicle, and Vehicle-to-Grid Technologies”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE 101.11
(Nov. 2013), pp. 2409–2427. doi: 10.1109/jproc.2013.2271951.
[10]
Tomorrow. electricityMap API. July 2020. url: https://api.electricitymap.
org/.
[11]
Electric Vehicles Database. July 2020. url: https://ev-database.org/.
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
64
[12]
Tom Sims. Mind the Gap! Why official car fuel economy figures don’t match up
to reality. Ed. by Jos Dings. Transport and Environment (T&E), 2013.
[13]
Georgios Fontaras et al. “The difference between reported and real-world CO2
emissions: How much improvement can be expected by WLTP introduction?”
In: Transportation Research Procedia 25 (2017), pp. 3933–3943. doi: 10.1016/
j.trpro.2017.05.333.
[14]
J. Pavlovic et al. “How much difference in type-approval CO2 emissions from
passenger cars in Europe can be expected from changing to the new test pro-
cedure (NEDC vs. WLTP)?” In: Transportation Research Part A: Policy and
Practice 111 (May 2018), pp. 136–147. doi: 10.1016/j.tra.2018.02.002.
[15]
Stefanos Tsiakmakis et al. “From lab-to-road & vice-versa: Using a simulation-
based approach for predicting real-world CO2 emissions”. In: Energy 169 (Feb.
2019), pp. 1153–1165. doi: 10.1016/j.energy.2018.12.063.
[16]
Peyman Ashkrof, Gonçalo Homem de Almeida Correia, and Bart van Arem.
“Analysis of the effect of charging needs on battery electric vehicle drivers’ route
choice behaviour: A case study in the Netherlands”. In: Transportation Research
Part D: Transport and Environment 78 (Jan. 2020), p. 102206. doi: 10.1016/
j.trd.2019.102206.
[17]
Spöttle et al. Research for TRAN Committee: charging infrastructure for electric
road vehicles. European Parliament, 2018.
[18]
Elham Azadfar, Victor Sreeram, and David Harries. “The investigation of the
major factors influencing plug-in electric vehicle driving patterns and charg-
ing behaviour”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 42 (Feb. 2015),
pp. 1065–1076. doi: 10.1016/j.rser.2014.10.058.
[19]
Andrew Ford. “Electric vehicles and the electric utility company”. In: Energy
Policy 22.7 (July 1994), pp. 555–570. doi: 10.1016/0301-4215(94)90075-2.
[20]
Willett Kempton and Steven E. Letendre. “Electric vehicles as a new power
source for electric utilities”. In: Transportation Research Part D: Transport and
Environment 2.3 (Sept. 1997), pp. 157–175. doi: 10.1016/s1361-9209(97)
00001-1.
[21]
California ISO. Vehicle-Grid Integration (VGI) Roadmap: Enabling vehicle-
based grid services. Feb. 2014.
[22]
Peter Bach Andersen et al. “Cross-brand validation of grid services using V2G-
enabled vehicles in the Parker project”. English. In: Proceedings of 31st In-
ternational Electric Vehicles Symposium & Exhibition & International Elec-
tric Vehicle Technology Conference 2018. 31st International Electric Vehicles
Symposium &amp; Exhibition &amp; International Electric Vehicle Technol-
ogy Conference 2018, EVS31 and EVTeC2018 ; Conference date: 30-09-2018
Through 03-10-2018. United States: IEEE, 2018.
==PAGE:76==
Bibliography
65
[23]
Joy Chandra Mukherjee and Arobinda Gupta. “A Review of Charge Scheduling
of Electric Vehicles in Smart Grid”. In: IEEE Systems Journal 9.4 (Dec. 2015),
pp. 1541–1553. doi: 10.1109/jsyst.2014.2356559.
[24]
Maria Taljegård. “Electrification of Road Transportation - Implications for the
Electricity System”. PhD thesis. Chalmers University of Technology, 2019.
[25]
S.-L. Andersson et al. “Plug-in hybrid electric vehicles as regulating power
providers: Case studies of Sweden and Germany”. In: Energy Policy 38.6 (June
2010), pp. 2751–2762. doi: 10.1016/j.enpol.2010.01.006.
[26]
Nataly Banol Arias et al. “V2G enabled EVs providing frequency containment
reserves: Field results”. In: 2018 IEEE International Conference on Industrial
Technology (ICIT). IEEE, Feb. 2018. doi: 10.1109/icit.2018.8352459.
[27]
Ziming Zhu et al. “A Mean Field Game Theoretic Approach to Electric Vehicles
Charging”. In: IEEE Access 4 (2016), pp. 3501–3510. doi: 10.1109/access.
2016.2581989.
[28]
Constance Crozier, Thomas Morstyn, and Malcolm McCulloch. “The opportu-
nity for smart charging to mitigate the impact of electric vehicles on transmis-
sion and distribution systems”. In: Applied Energy 268 (June 2020), p. 114973.
doi: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.114973.
[29]
Cong Zhang et al. “Quantifying the benefits of electric vehicles on the future
electricity grid in the midwestern United States”. In: Applied Energy 270 (July
2020), p. 115174. doi: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.115174.
[30]
Henrik Lund and Willett Kempton. “Integration of renewable energy into the
transport and electricity sectors through V2G”. In: Energy Policy 36.9 (Sept.
2008), pp. 3578–3587. doi: 10.1016/j.enpol.2008.06.007.
[31]
Lisa Göransson, Sten Karlsson, and Filip Johnsson. “Integration of plug-in hy-
brid electric vehicles in a regional wind-thermal power system”. In: Energy Pol-
icy 38.10 (Oct. 2010), pp. 5482–5492. doi: 10.1016/j.enpol.2010.04.001.
[32]
Karsten Hedegaard et al. “Effects of electric vehicles on power systems in North-
ern Europe”. In: Energy 48.1 (Dec. 2012), pp. 356–368. doi: 10.1016/j.energy.
2012.06.012.
[33]
Patrick Jochem, Sonja Babrowski, and Wolf Fichtner. “Assessing CO2 emissions
of electric vehicles in Germany in 2030”. In: Transportation Research Part A:
Policy and Practice 78 (Aug. 2015), pp. 68–83. doi: 10.1016/j.tra.2015.05.
007.
[34]
Trine Krogh Kristoffersen, Karsten Capion, and Peter Meibom. “Optimal charg-
ing of electric drive vehicles in a market environment”. In: Applied Energy 88.5
(May 2011), pp. 1940–1948. doi: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2010.12.015.
[35]
Rasmus Halvgaard et al. “Electric vehicle charge planning using Economic
Model Predictive Control”. In: 2012 IEEE International Electric Vehicle Con-
ference. IEEE, Mar. 2012. doi: 10.1109/ievc.2012.6183173.
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
66
[36]
Lance Noel, Gerardo Zarazua de Rubens, and Benjamin K. Sovacool. “Opti-
mizing innovation, carbon and health in transport: Assessing socially optimal
electric mobility and vehicle-to-grid pathways in Denmark”. In: Energy 153
(June 2018), pp. 628–637. doi: 10.1016/j.energy.2018.04.076.
[37]
Wolf-Peter Schill and Clemens Gerbaulet. “Power system impacts of electric
vehicles in Germany: Charging with coal or renewables?” In: Applied Energy
156 (Oct. 2015), pp. 185–196. doi: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2015.07.012.
[38]
7ia Sohnen et al. “A network-based dispatch model for evaluating the spatial
and temporal effects of plug-in electric vehicle charging on GHG emissions”. In:
Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment 38 (July 2015),
pp. 80–93. doi: 10.1016/j.trd.2015.04.014.
[39]
D.P. Schlachtberger et al. “Backup flexibility classes in emerging large-scale
renewable electricity systems”. In: Energy Conversion and Management 125
(Oct. 2016), pp. 336–346. doi: 10.1016/j.enconman.2016.04.020.
[40]
Nataly Banol Arias et al. “Distribution System Services Provided by Electric
Vehicles: Recent Status, Challenges, and Future Prospects”. In: IEEE Transac-
tions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 20.12 (Dec. 2019), pp. 4277–4296.
doi: 10.1109/tits.2018.2889439.
[41]
Jinn-Tsai Wong and Shy-Chang Tsai. “A survival model for flight delay prop-
agation”. In: Journal of Air Transport Management 23 (Aug. 2012), pp. 5–11.
doi: 10.1016/j.jairtraman.2012.01.016.
[42]
Peter C. Austin. “A Tutorial on Multilevel Survival Analysis: Methods, Mod-
els and Applications”. In: International Statistical Review 85.2 (Mar. 2017),
pp. 185–203. doi: 10.1111/insr.12214.
[43]
Stephen J. Walters. “Analyzing time to event outcomes with a Cox regression
model”. In: Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Computational Statistics 4.3 (Feb.
2012), pp. 310–315. doi: 10.1002/wics.1197.
[44]
Håvard Kvamme, Ørnulf Borgan, and Ida Scheel. “Time-to-Event Prediction
with Neural Networks and Cox Regression”. In: Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 20(129):1-30, 2019 (July 1, 2019). arXiv: 1907.00825v2 [stat.ML].
[45]
Leo Alexander T et al. “Bayesian Frailty Model for Time to Event Breast Cancer
Data”. In: Indian Journal of Applied Research 4.2 (Oct. 2011), pp. 8–12. doi:
10.15373/2249555x/feb2014/184.
[46]
Ariel Linden and Paul R. Yarnold. “Modeling time-to-event (survival) data
using classification tree analysis”. In: Journal of Evaluation in Clinical Practice
23.6 (July 2017), pp. 1299–1308. doi: 10.1111/jep.12779.
[47]
Nadjla Ghaemi et al. “Impact of railway disruption predictions and rescheduling
on passenger delays”. In: Journal of Rail Transport Planning & Management
8.2 (Sept. 2018), pp. 103–122. doi: 10.1016/j.jrtpm.2018.02.002.
==PAGE:78==
Bibliography
67
[48]
Xi Hang Cao et al. “Time-to-event estimation by re-defining time”. In: Journal
of Biomedical Informatics 100 (Dec. 2019), p. 103326. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.
2019.103326.
[49]
NordPool Group. Historical Market Data. July 2020. url: https : / / www .
nordpoolgroup.com/historical-market-data/.
[50]
Kenneth Leerbeck et al. “Short-term forecasting of CO2 emission intensity in
power grids by machine learning”. In: Applied Energy 277 (Nov. 2020), p. 115527.
doi: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.115527.
[51]
Beck et al. Manifesto for Agile Software Development. July 2020. url: https:
//agilemanifesto.org/.
[52]
F et al. Pedregosa. “Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python”. In: Journal of
Machine Learning Research 12 (2011), pp. 2825–2830.
[53]
Cameron Davidson-Pilon and Kalderstam. CamDavidsonPilon/lifelines: v0.25.4.
2020. doi: 10.5281/ZENODO.4002777.
[54]
Greg Hamerly and Charles Elkan. “Alternatives to the k-means algorithm that
find better clusterings”. In: Proceedings of the eleventh international conference
on Information and knowledge management - CIKM ’02. ACM Press, 2002. doi:
10.1145/584792.584890.
[55]
Mitchel Klein David G. Kleinbaum. Survival Analysis. Springer-Verlag GmbH,
Oct. 17, 2011. isbn: 9781441966469. url: https : / / www . ebook . de / de /
product/19950519/david_g_kleinbaum_mitchel_klein_survival_analysis.
html.
[56]
A Schrijver. Theory of linear and integer programming. Chichester New York:
Wiley, 1998. isbn: 9780471982326.
[57]
H. W. Kuhn and Bryn Yaw. “The Hungarian method for the assignment prob-
lem”. In: Naval Res. Logist. Quart (1955), pp. 83–97.
[58]
Quazzafi Rabbani, Aamir Khan, and Abdul Quddoos. “Modified Hungarian
method for unbalanced assignment problem with multiple jobs”. In: Applied
Mathematics and Computation 361 (Nov. 2019), pp. 493–498. doi: 10.1016/j.
amc.2019.05.041.
[59]
eurostat. People on the move: STATISTICS ON MOBILITY IN EUROPE,
2020 edition. 2020. url: ec.europa.eu/eurostat/cache/digpub/eumove/
index.html?lang=en.
[60]
Runar Brrnnlund and Mattias Vesterberg. “Peak and Off-Peak Demand for Elec-
tricity: Subsistence Levels and Price Elasticities”. In: SSRN Electronic Journal
(2018). doi: 10.2139/ssrn.3194465.
[61]
Evelina Wikner. “Ageing in commercial li-ion batteries : lifetime testing and
modelling for electrified vehicle applications”. PhD thesis. Göteburg, Sweden,
2019. isbn: 9789179051662.
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
68
[62]
Wencong Su and Mo-Yuen Chow. “Performance Evaluation of an EDA-Based
Large-Scale Plug-In Hybrid Electric Vehicle Charging Algorithm”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Smart Grid 3.1 (Mar. 2012), pp. 308–315. doi: 10.1109/tsg.
2011.2151888.
==PAGE:80==
