==PAGE:1==
TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK
M.Sc. Thesis
CFD Simulation of Deep-Water
Wave Instabilities
September 30, 2020
Julie Langberg
s153546
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
CFD Simulation of Deep-Water
Wave Instabilities
Author:
Julie Langberg, s153546
Supervisor:
David R. Fuhrman, Associate Professor, PhD
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Co-supervisor:
Yuzhu Li, Postdoc
DTU Mechanical Engineering
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Section of Fluid Mechanics, Coastal and Maritime Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Nils Koppels Alle, Building 403
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: +45 4525 1360
Project period:
ECTS:
Education:
Fields:
Remarks:
January 2020 - September 2020
30
Master of Science, M.Sc.
Civil Engineering
This report is submitted as partial fulﬁllment of the requirements
for graduation in the above education at the Technical University
of Denmark.
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This project serves the purpose of ﬁnalizing the master’s program in Civil Engineering
at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU. This thesis is credited 30 ECTS
points in total and has been prepared at the Department of Mechanical Engineering,
Section of Fluid Mechanics, Coastal and Marine Engineering, under supervision of
Associate Professor David F. Fuhrman and Postdoc Yuzhu Li.
I would like to extend my gratitude to my supervisors David F. Fuhrman and Yuzhu
Li for their guidance and patience throughout this project. Further I would like to
thank them for their great support and incredibly fast response time during these
peculiar times with a national lock down due to the world pandemic of 2020.
I would also like to show my gratefulness to close friends and family for always
picking up the phone and being ready with support and motivation whenever needed,
without them 2020, which has already been a though year on everyone, would have
been even harder.
Kgs. Lyngby, September 30, 2020
i
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
The phenomena of both two- and three-dimensional deep-water wave train instabilities
has been studied through CFD simulations using the open source CFD software
OpenFOAM version v1912 including the waves2FOAM toolbox by Jacobsen et al. (2012).
The ﬁrst case studied is the classical two-dimensional Benjamin-Feir instability.
Through comparison with previous experiments it was found that the model rather
accurately models the phenomena of the Benjamin-Feir instability.
The physical process of the this instability was indeed through spatial Fourier analyses
found to be the quartet resonant interaction with a carrier wave and two side bands
and the initial growth rate of the side bands was found to match the one predicted by
McLean (1982). Further it was possible to ﬁnd the point of breaking where previous
numerical studies only speculate as to where breaking might occur.
The second case studied is that of crescent water wave patterns arising from modula-
tions of a steep deep-water wave train. Here it was found through qualitative and
quantitative comparisons with experiments and previous numerical studies that the
CFD model is rather capable of accurately describing this phenomena.
In this case the physical process was conﬁrmed to be the quintet resonant interactions
of a carrier wave and a pair of symmetric satellites. The amplitude evolution of these
satellites was likewise found to match the prediction by McLean (1982). Further it it
showed that the crescent waves develop into spilling breakers before the wave train
quickly returns back to a two-dimensional form.
Since the CFD model is able to continue past the modulational peak and breaking
point it is suggested that this model is able to model the long time evolution of deep-
water wave instabilities at which previous numerical has not without compromising
some level of detail.
For both cases the the turbulence beneath the breaking waves was studied both
with the standard k −ω SST turbulence model by Menter (1994) and a stabilized
version of this model by Larsen and Fuhrman (2018). Here it was found for the
Benjamin-Feir case that the standard model overestimates the turbulence levels a
great deal resulting in a decay of the wave train which is so strong that the instability
hardly even develops. The stabilized turbulence model on the other hand seems to
give a good idea of the turbulence levels underneath the breaking waves.
iii
==PAGE:8==
For the crescent waves it was found that even though the standard model estimates
a higher amount of turbulence than the stabilized model the results are fairly similar.
This is considered to be due to the very rapid evolution of the crescent wave instability
meaning that the exponential growth of kinematic turbulent energy and eddy viscosity,
often seen in two-equation turbulence models, does not have time to develop.
iv
==PAGE:9==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Model Description
5
2.1
Wave instabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
The Benjamin-Feir instability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.2
The Class II instability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Governing equations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Turbulence Closure Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.1
The Standard k −ω SST model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.2
The Stabilized k −ω SST model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4
General setup of OpenFOAM models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4.1
The interFoam Solver . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4.2
Boundary Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4.3
Initial conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4.4
Turbulence Properties
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4.5
Time Schemes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4.6
Wave Types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Benjamin-Feir Instability
21
3.1
Model set-up
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.1.1
Simple progressive wavetrain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.1.2
Instability wave . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
Laminar Model Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2.1
Wave train evolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2.2
Fourier amplitudes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.3
Side-band evolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2.4
Wave breaking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3
Turbulence Model Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.3.1
Wave train evolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.3.2
Side band evolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.3.3
Turbulence levels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4
Crescent waves
43
4.1
Model setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
v
==PAGE:10==
CONTENTS
4.2
Results of the Laminar Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.2.1
Surface characteristics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.2.2
Wave proﬁle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.2.3
Fourier amplitudes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.3
Turbulence Model Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.3.1
Surface characteristics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.3.2
Wave proﬁle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.3.3
Amplitude evolution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.3.4
Turbulence levels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5
Conclusions
65
vi
==PAGE:11==
Nomenclature
δij
Kronecker delta function
η
surface elevation
µ
dynamic viscosity
ν
kinematic viscosity
ω
speciﬁc rate of dissipation
ω0
angular frequency
φ
velocity potential
φ1,2
initial phase of side bands
Ψ
Streamfunction
ρ
density
σij
The stress on the ﬂuid
c
celerity
g
Gravity force
gi
gravity force vector
H
wave height
h
water depth
k
turbulent kinetic energy
k0
wave number of carrier wave
kx
wave number in the x-direction
kz
wave number in the z-direction
L
Wavelength
p
pressure
vii
==PAGE:12==
NOMENCLATURE
t
time
u
particle velocity in the x direction
ui
velocity vector
UL
Lagrangian uniform current
w
particle velocity in the y direction
xi
spatial coordinates
viii
==PAGE:13==
Abbreviations
CFD
Computational ﬂuid dynamics.
DNS
Direct Numerical Simulation.
RANS
Reynolds-Averaged Navier-Stokes.
SST
shear stress transport.
VOF
Volume of Fluid.
ix
==PAGE:14==
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The phenomena of remarkably large waves which appear unexpectedly at the sea
surface is known as extreme waves (also known as freak or rogue waves). This
phenomena is of great interest within the ﬁeld of coastal and marine engineering as
these extreme waves can have severe consequences for ships and coastal structures.
One of the most plausible mechanisms for the formation of extreme waves is the
modulational instability of a plane wave train to side band perturbations, as ﬁrst
described by Benjamin and Feir (1967). This instability is known as the Benjamin-Feir
instability.
Lake et al. (1977) studied the long-time evolution of nonlinear wave trains both
numerically and experimentally in a ground breaking study, and discovered that
evolution occurs in a recurrent fashion, where the modulation periodically increases
and decreases. In one of their experiments with a small steepness they found, that
past peak modulation the original near three-waves system almost recovered but
with one important exception, namely that the spectral peak downshifted, despite
the absence of wave breaking.
Following this study by Lake et al. (1977), Melville (1982) conducted a series of side
band evolution experiments which all had breaking events. He suggested that the
end state of the evolution is a breaking event followed by partial recurrence tending
to a lower frequency.
Later on Tulin and Waseda (1999) conducted a massive study of seeded experiments of
the wave train evolution of long waves, where the modulational frequencies had been
decided upon in contrast to previous experiments, where the modulation naturally
evolved from background noise. Here they found near recurrence in the absence of
wave breaking, as previously described by Lake et al. (1977). In experiments with
local wave breaking they found an overall decrease of the carrier wave as well as the
upper side band where as the lower side band experienced an increase.
One of the experiments by Tulin and Waseda (1999) was modeled by Madsen et al.
(2002) using a Boussinesq formulation. Here they managed so reasonably reproduce
1
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
the results from Tulin and Waseda (1999) from numerical simulation despite the
shallow-water limitations of the Boussiniq formulation. Previous numerical studies
of the phenomenon of modulational instability have typically been conducted on the
basis of various forms of the nonlinear Schr¨odinger equations, the Zakharov equations
or fully nonlinear boundary integral methods.
McLean et al. (1981) and McLean (1982) showed that there is two main types of
wave instabilities which they named the Class I and Class II instability. Type one is
the just addressed two-dimensional Benjamin-Feir instability whereas type two is a
much faster growing three dimensional instability ﬁrst discovered by Longuet-Higgins
in 1978.
while the two-dimensional Benjamin-Fier (Class I) instability is well understood,
quantitative investigations into the three-dimensional instability are limited, which is
most likely due to the high computational costs associated with the three-dimensional
nature of the crescent patterns which occur in the class II instability in combinations
with the high nonlinearity, at which they occur.
The Class II instability is also known as crescent waves as this is the shape formed
by the wave crests. They are also known as L2 pattern as it is repeated every two
wavelengths. This instability is also of great interest to the engineering world as it is
a part of the natural evolution of steep deep-water wavetrains, which are commonly
used as design waves for ships and oﬀshore structures.
The phenomenon of crescent waves was studied by Su (1982) and Su et al. (1982)
through experiments in wave tanks in the absense of wind. Here they found that an
initially two-dimensional wavetrain of great steepness would evolve into a series of
crescent shaped spilling breakers followed by a transition back to a two-dimensional
modulated wavetrain.
Past numerical simulations of crescent waves has been conducted by Xue et al. (2001),
who did numerical simulations with a boundary-element model and demonstrated
quantitatively accurate crescent forms, naturally arising from the nonlinear evolution
of a perturbed plane incident wave. Greatly inspired by the work of Xue et al. (2001),
Fuhrman et al. (2004) did an extensive fully nonlinear numerical study of the class II
instability using a numerical model based on the fully nonlinear and highly disperisve
Boussinesq formulation of Madsen, Bingham & Liu (2002) and Madsen, Bingham &
Sch¨aﬀer (2003).
On the basis of the work from Tulin and Waseda (1999) and Madsen et al. (2002)
concerning the Benjamin-Feir instability and Fuhrman et al. (2004) concerning the
simulation of crescent waves, this thesis contains simulations of these two phenomena
through Computational ﬂuid dynamics (CFD) based on the Reynolds-Averaged
Navier-Stokes (RANS) equations.
The spectacular thing about CFD, compared with previous numerical simulations of
each phenomena, is that where all the previous models break down at some point,
assumingly around the point of wave breaking, the CFD model does not have this
2
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
problem and an actual point of breaking can be established whereas it in previous
works only has been possible to speculate in where the breaking begins.
As breaking is involved, turbulence is arising and therefor a turbulence model is
introduced. Over the last few decades there has been a problem with a tendency of
severely overestimating turbulence levels both before and after breaking of the waves.
According to Larsen and Fuhrman (2018) this tendency is most likely due to the
conditional instability of the widely used turbulence closure models when used to
close the RANS equations, resulting in exponential growth of the turbulent kinetic
energy and eddy viscosity. Larsen and Fuhrman (2018) developed new formulations
of the commonly used two-equation closure models to formally stabilize them and
eliminate the much unphysical generation of pre-breaking turbulence.
In this work the stabilized version of the k −ω SST model along with the standard
version by Menter (1994) are used to close the RANS equations and the results of
each of the models are compared to asses the performance of them.
The structure of this thesis is organized as follows: Chapter 2 gives an theoretical
background into the wave instabilities and the governing equations used to model
them including those of the turbulence models. Further, an introduction into the
settings of the CFD software OpenFOAM used to model the instabilities is given.
Chapter 3 describes the Benjamin-Feir instability starting by introducing the case
speciﬁc settings in OpenFOAM and the waves which are modeled. Further the model
results are presented both for the laminar model and the model including the two
diﬀerent turbulence models. In Chapter 4 the crescent waves are simulated again
starting by describing the case speciﬁc setup in OpenFOAM and the characteristics of
the waves, before presenting the results. Chapter 5 includes the ﬁnal conclusions of
this thesis.
3
==PAGE:18==
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2
Model Description
In this chapter a description of wave instabilities will be presented and the two main
types of instabilities, Class I and Class II bee clariﬁed and afterwards be referred to
as the Benjamin-Feir instability and crescent waves respectively.
The Phenomenon of wave instability has been studied through Computational ﬂuid
dynamics (CFD) simulations utilizing the Reynolds-Averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS)
equations and the gonerning equations within RANS modelling will be preseented.
It is possible to solve the Navier-Stokes equations directly through Direct Numerical
Simulation (DNS), however this requires a resolutions down to the Kolmogoroﬀ
scale which is computationally very expensive, therefor a more feasible way to
simulate turbulent ﬂows is to modify the Navier-Stokes equations through Reynolds
decomposition and then arrive at the RANS equations.
As wave instabilities lead to wave breaking two diﬀerent turbulence models has been
used in this study, the standard k −ω SST model (Menter et al. (2003)) and a rather
new stabilized version of this model by Larsen and Fuhrman (2018). The equations
of these models will also be presented in this chapter.
To simulate the wave instabilities the open source CFD software OpenFOAM version
v1912 has been used and waves has been generated by utilizing the waves2FOAM
toolbox by Jacobsen et al. (2012). In all simulations the interFoam solver is used
and the characteristics of this solver as well as the general setup of the OpenFOAM
models will be described at the end of this chapter.
2.1
Wave instabilities
Benjamin and Feir (1967), Su (1982) and McLean (1982) all found that nonlinear
waves may develop instabilities whenever the resonance conditions are satisﬁed which
leads to disintegration of the original wave form.
The instability of a plane wave with respect to small perturbations was described
5
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 2. MODEL DESCRIPTION
by McLean (1982). A plane wave with wave vector ka is unstable with respect to
perturbations having wave vectors kb and kc which approximately obey the resonant
condition:
nka = kb + kc,
nωa = ωb + ωc,
(2.1)
Where the integer n = 2, 3, 4 corresponds to quartet, quintet and sextet resonant
interactions. This is the basic and strongest interaction but there will be more
interactions among the harmonics generated or enhanced by the instability.
The two instabilities which are to be analyzed through CFD modelling in this project
is the quartet and the quintet resonant interactions.
2.1.1
The Benjamin-Feir instability
The quartet resonant interactions is the lowest order instability of a plane deep-
water wave due to four-wave interactions and is better known as the Benjamin-Feir
instability, or the class I instability by McLean (1982). It has the resonant condition
described by:
k1 + k2 = 2k0,
ω1 + ω2 = 2ω0,
(2.2)
McLean (1982) found that the strongest class I instabilities are in fact two-dimensional
and hence describe the case of side-band instabilities ﬁrst discussed by Benjamin
and Feir (1967), therefor commonly known as the Benjamin-Feir instability.
Figure 2.1: Sketch of a wavenumber spectrum describing the Benjamin-Feir instability
Figure 2.1 shows a sketch of a wave number spectrum showing the Benjamin-Feir
instability with a carrier wave given by the wave number and corresponding frequency
(k0, ω0) and the amplitude a0. Along side this carrier wave are two small perturbations,
given by (k1,2, ω1,2), which will grow by an exponential growth rate due to harmonic
resonance.
6
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2. MODEL DESCRIPTION
Before the stability analysis done by McLean (1982), Benjamin and Feir (1967) showed
both theoretically and experimentally that weakly nonlinear deep water waves can be
unstable to modulational perturbations under certain conditions. As described they
considered a carrier wave and two small-amplitude waves with frequencies ω(1 −δ)
and ω(1 + δ) resulting in the following expression as described by Madsen et al.
(2002):
η = a cos(ωt −k0x) + βa cos Θ1 + βa cos Θ2
(2.3)
where,
Θ1 = ω(1 + δt) −k1x + φ1
(2.4)
Θ2 = ω(1 −δt) −k2x + φ2
(2.5)
Where φ1,2 is the initial phases of the side bands. From this description there is a
slight diﬀerence from what was described previously, namely that they found the
condition for the wave numbers to be:
2k0 = k1 + k2 + ∆k
(2.6)
where ∆k is a slight mismatch of the wavenumber, which will de-tune the resonance.
However the presence of amplitude dispersion was found to cancel out this de-tunig,
and again create resonance, which will make the side bands grow exponentally. The
perturbation wave numbers are from linear deep-water theory given as reported by
Madsen et al. (2002) to:
k1 = k0(1 + δ)2
k2 = k0(1 −δ)2
(2.7)
According to the Benjamin and Feir (1967) theory the most unstable case is given
where δ = k0a0 and φ1 = φ2 = π
4.
2.1.2
The Class II instability
The quintet resonant interaction is the lowest order of three-dimensional instability
and is also known as class II instability by McLean (1982) or crescent waves due to
the wave shape generated by the instability. It can be described by the resonant
condition:
k1 + k2 = 3k0,
ω1 + ω2 = 3ω0,
(2.8)
where k0 is the central harmonic or the carrier wave and k1 and k2 are two symmetric
oblique satellites.
7
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 2. MODEL DESCRIPTION
The wave number vectors for this case can be deﬁned as follows to satisfy the resonant
condition
k1 = (1 + p, q)κ0,
k2 = (2 −p, −q)κ0,
k0 = (1, 0)κ0
(2.9)
where p and q are arbitrary real numbers and κ0 in this case represents the wave
number of the carrier wave. In his stability analysis McLean (1982) found the
instability areas in the (p, q) plane for diﬀerent wave steepnesses. The instability
area for a wave steepness of H/L = 0.095 and H/L = 0.111 can be seen in the ﬁgures
from McLean (1982) shown in ﬁgure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Figures from McLean (1982) showing the Class I and Class II instability areas, where
the dot labels the point of maximum instability and the dashed lines are points of neutral stability.
(a) for steepness H/L = 0.095 and (b) for steepness H/L = 0.111-
As can be seen from ﬁgure 2.2 the strongest class II instability is found to occur where
p = 0.5 and q ̸= 0, conﬁrming that the class II instability is indeed three-dimensional.
A sketch of the wave number vectors can be seen in ﬁgure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: Sketch of the wave number vectors for the most dominant Class II patter, the L2
pattern.
Further he found that whenever p = 0 the two perturbations become phase locked to
the carrier wave meaning that they move with the same celerity as the basic wave
while having a standing wave structure in the transverse direction. This feature is
what ensures the possibility of the quasi-stationary character of the resulting patterns
of crescent shaped waves Shrira et al. (1996).
8
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2. MODEL DESCRIPTION
The most dominant Class II pattern is called the L2-pattern, since it repeats itself
every second wavelength of the carrier wave. This pattern creates crescent shaped
wave crests which is why it is better known as crescent waves or horse shoe waves.
Whether the Class I or the Class II instability is the most dominant depends on the
wave steepness. McLean (1982) found that for a wave steepness H/L < 0.1 the Class
1 instability would be dominant whereas for a wave steepness H/L > 0.1 the Class
II instability would be the dominant one.
2.2
Governing equations
the governing equations for RANS modeling is the continuity equation, which
describes the conservation of mass and the Navier-Stokes equations which describes
the motion of viscous ﬂuids, and expresses conservation of momentum.
For an incompressible ﬂuid such as water the continuity equation is given as:
∂ui
∂xi
= 0
(2.10)
Where the index i represents Einstein’s summation convention, in which case ui is
the i-component of the velocity vector and xi is the spatial coordinates.
The Navier-Stokes equations for a newtonian ﬂuid such as water is given by:
ρ
∂ui
∂t + uj
∂ui
∂xj

= ρgi + σij
∂xj
(2.11)
Where t is the time, gi is the gravity force, ρ is the density (which is assumed constant
for a newtonian ﬂuid) and σij is the stress on the ﬂuid deﬁned as:
σij = −pδij + µ
∂ui
∂xj
+ ∂uj
∂xi

(2.12)
Where p is the pressure, µ is the dynamic viscosity related to the kinematic viscosity
by µ = ρ ν and δij is the Kronecker delta function given by:
δij =
1
for
i = j
0
for
i ̸= j
(2.13)
The Navier-Stokes equations are valid for laminar ﬂows. It is possible to model
turbulent ﬂows from the Navier-Stokes equations, however it requires a very ﬁne
mesh resolution down to the Kolmogoroﬀscale which are very time consuming
computational vise. Therefor the Reynolds equations is usually used to compute
turbulent ﬂow.
9
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 2. MODEL DESCRIPTION
The Reynolds equations are the Navier-Stokes equations which have been averaged
and modiﬁed through Reynolds decomposition, which is a principle of separating the
expected term, φi, into a mean value, φi, and a time varying ﬂuctuating component,
φ′
i, as:
φi = φi + φ′
i
(2.14)
The Reynolds Averaged Navier-Stokes equations then become:
ρ
∂ui
∂t + uj
∂ui
∂xj

= ρgi + ∂
∂xj
(σij −ρu′
iu′
j)
(2.15)
where the overbar referes to averaged components and the prime to ﬂuctuating
components.
As seen the equation for the laminar ﬂow (eq. 2.11) and the turbulent ﬂow (eq. 2.15)
are quite similar with just one additional term in in the latter namely ρu′
iu′
j which is
an additional stress called the Reynolds stress. With full notation there is nine such
stresses which can be written in an symmetrical second order tensor:
−ρu′
iu′
j =


−ρu′
1u′
1
−ρu′
1u′
2
−ρu′
1u′
3
−ρu′
2u′
1
−ρu′
2u′
2
−ρu′
2u′
3
−ρu′
3u′
1
−ρu′
3u′
2
−ρu′
3u′
3


(2.16)
Since the tensor is symmetrical it only contains 6 unknowns.
So far it is seen that when looking at the turbulent ﬂow there are four equations,
namely the continuity equation (eq. 2.10) and three equations of motion (eq. 2.15).
However when in turbulent ﬂow there are 10 unknowns consisting of three components
of velocity ui, the pressure p and six components of the Reynolds Stress −ρu′
iu′
j.
Since there are 10 unknowns but only four equations the system is not closed and can
therefor not be solved. This problem is known as the closure problem of turbulence.
To solve this problem a turbulence model is needed. There are several diﬀerent
turbulence closure models. Some of the more popular ones are the two-equation
turbulence models such as the k −ω model and the k −ϵ model
2.3
Turbulence Closure Models
As described above, there is a closure problem when working with the RANS equations,
hence a separate closure model i needed to describe the eﬀects of turbulence on the
mean ﬂow. Throughout this thesis two diﬀerent versions of the k −ω SST turbulence
model has been utilized. The standard one by Menter (1994) and a stabilized version
of this model by Larsen and Fuhrman (2018).
10
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 2. MODEL DESCRIPTION
The reason for working with two diﬀerent turbulence models is that there in CFD
studies of breaking waves has been a tendency to severely overestimate the turbulence
levels both before and after breaking. According to Larsen and Fuhrman (2018)
this problem is most likely related to the conditional instability of the widely used
turbulence models, used to close Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS) equations,
in regions near potential ﬂow, such as the k −ω SST model. The result of this
problem is an exponential growth of the turbulent kinetic energy and eddy viscosity.
In the works of Larsen and Fuhrman (2018) they demonstrated that virtually all
commonly used two-equation turbulence closure models are unconditionally, rather
than conditionally stable in regions of potential ﬂow, and on the basis of that
developed a new formulation of the k −ω SST closure model, which stabilizes the
model in nearly potential ﬂow regions was formulated and it is this new formulations
which will be used as the stabilized k −ω SST model throughout this thesis along
with the standard formulation.
2.3.1
The Standard k −ω SST model
The shear stress transport (SST) model is based on the combination of the Wilcox
k −ω model and the standard high-Reynolds-number version of the k −ϵ model.
This is done by transforming the k −ϵ model into a k −ω formulation which will
then be multiplied by a blending function. This means that the SST model will be
based on the k −ω formulation with the original Wilcox model activated in the near
wall region and the standard k −ϵ model activated in the outer wake region and
in free shear layers (Menter (1994)). The second part of the new model is that the
eddy viscosity is modiﬁed to account for the transport of the principle turbulent
shear stress and it is this modiﬁcation which is seen to be a major improvement and
why this turbulence model is considered superior to other two-equation turbulence
models.
The idea behind this formulation of the k−ω model is to retain a robust and accurate
formulation of the Wilcox k −ω model in the near wall region and take advantage of
the free stream independence of the k −ϵ model.
The 2003 version of the k −ω SST model by Menter et al. (2003) is described below.
The turbulence kinetic energy equation is given by:
∂(ρk)
∂t
+ ρuik
∂xi
= ˜Pk −β∗ρkω + ∂
∂xi

(µ + σkµt) ∂k
∂xi

(2.17)
The turbulence speciﬁc dissipation rate equation is given by: (note that there was a
typo in the original paper where the production term was incorrectly given as αρS2).
∂(ρk)
∂t
+ ρuik
∂xi
= α ˜Pk
νt
−βρω2+ ∂
∂xi
"
(µ+σkµt) ∂k
∂xi
#
+2(1−F1)ρσw2
1
ω
∂k
∂xi
∂ω
∂xi
(2.18)
11
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 2. MODEL DESCRIPTION
Where the turbulence viscosity is deﬁned as:
νt =
a1k
max(a1ω, SF2)
(2.19)
and ˜Pk is a production limiter to prevent build-up of turbulence given by:
Pk = µt
∂ui
∂xj
∂ui
∂xj
∂uj
∂xi

→
˜Pk = min
 Pk, 10β∗ρkω

(2.20)
As the SST version of the k −ω model is a combination of the original k −ω model
and the k −ϵ model there are two blending functions to make this combination. The
ﬁrst blending function is given as:
F1 = tanh
(
min

max
 √
k
β∗ωy, 500ν
y2ω

, 4ρσω2k
CDkωy2
4)
(2.21)
where y is the distance to the nearest wall and:
CDkω = max

2ρσw2
1
ω
∂k
∂xi
∂ω
∂xi
, 10−10

(2.22)
The second blending function is given by.
F2 = tanh
"
max
 2
√
k
β∗ωy, 500ν
y2ω
2#
(2.23)
All of the model coeﬃcients (given in table 2.1) are computed by a blend from the
corresponding coeﬃcients of the k −ω model and the k −ϵ model via the following
relation:
α = α1F + α2(1 −F)
(2.24)
Where α could be any of the coeﬃcients and F either of the blending functions.
Table 2.1: Default model coeﬃcients in the OpenFOAM k −ω SST model
σk1
σk2
σω1
σω2
β1
β2
β∗
α1
α2
a1
0.85
1.0
0.5
0.856
0.075
0.0828
0.09
5/9
0.44
0.31
12
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 2. MODEL DESCRIPTION
2.3.2
The Stabilized k −ω SST model
The Standard model can be stabilized with a slight modiﬁcation to the stress-limiting
feature as shown by Larsen and Fuhrman (2018), in this case by adding an additional
parameter to the eddy viscosity term:
νt =
a1k
max

a1ω, SF2, a1λ2
β
β∗α
p0
pΩω

(2.25)
where p0 = S2 and pΩcorresponds to a region considering nearly potential ﬂow and
is deﬁned by:
pΩ= 2ΩijΩij ≪p0
(2.26)
where:
Ωij = 1
2
∂ui
∂xj
−∂uj
∂xi

(2.27)
The third argument within the maximum function has been added to this model and
is designed to be active only in a region of nearly potential ﬂow i.e. where pΩ≪p0.
The way the model works when applying it in OpenFOAM is to add a λ2 value. Larsen
and Fuhrman (2018) found that when having λ2 = 0.05 the model stabilizes, in
comparrison to the original model which can be tested by applying λ2 = 0
2.4
General setup of OpenFOAM models
In this section the general settings in the OpenFOAM models will be descibed, starting
with the governing equations of the interFOAM solver and then the general boundary
conditions utilized, the initial conditions, the implementations of the turbulence
models, the time schemes and temporal resolution.
2.4.1
The interFoam Solver
The interFoam solver, solves the incompressible RANS equations in a two-phase ﬂow
(air and water) utilizing the Volume of Fluid (VOF) method. The RANS equations
and the continuity equation are as given in equations 2.15 and 2.10 respectively.
Additionally two equations are needed when applying the interFoam solver.
Since there are two ﬂuid phases a scaler ﬁeld, γ, (also called the indicator ﬁeld) is
used to keep track of the two ﬂuids, where γ = 1 represents pure water and γ = 0
represents pure air. All intermediate values of γ represents a mixture of water and air.
The distribution of γ is governed by an advection equation as described in Larsen
et al. (2019) given by:
13
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 2. MODEL DESCRIPTION
∂γ
∂t + ∂ujγ
∂xj
+ ∂ur
i γ (1 −γ)
∂xj
= 0
(2.28)
where ur
j is a relative velocity used to compress the interface, as documented by
Berberovi´c et al. (2009).
Additionally any ﬂuid property φ in the ﬂow is assumed to be expressed as:
Φ = γ Φwater + (1 −γ) Φair
(2.29)
The interFoam solver is the solver behind the waves2FOAM toolbox by Jacobsen et al.
(2012)
2.4.2
Boundary Conditions
The boundaries in the following cases are named as sketched in ﬁgure 2.4 and their
settings will be described in the following.
Figure 2.4: Sketch of domain layout and names used for the diﬀerent patches
Inlet and Outlet
The inlet and the outlet boundary conditions are designed to be periodic or cyclic
as they are called in OpenFOAM. This means that the boundaries are treated as if
they were physically connected such that the inlet and the outlet boundary have the
same values. This makes it possible to analyze a wavetrain over a long period of
time while maintaining a small computational domain.
The periodic boundaries are given for all inlet and outlets, both considering the mesh
and the input values.
14
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 2. MODEL DESCRIPTION
Bottom
The bottom is in the mesh input boundary type set to be of the type; wall. Further
the boundary condition at the bottom is set to be a slip boundary condition for all
inputs. Since deep water is considered the viscous eﬀects at the wall are negligible
and a slip condition is therefor chosen for simplicity i all cases instead of considering
wall functions.
Atmosphere
The atmosphere boundary is set to be a patch and is given slightly diﬀerent for the
diﬀerent inputs. For the alpha.water input and the pressure it is modeled to be of
a uniform value equal to zero and for the velocity and the turbulence constants (k,
nut and omega) it is modeled to to have zeroGradient conditions.
Front and Back
The front and the back is set to be empty for the 2D case as a third dimension is
simply not considered. For the 3D case however the boundary is set to be a patch
and the slip boundary condition is again applied on both the front and back patch
as these are seen to be symmetry planes such that the computational domain can be
mirrored.
2.4.3
Initial conditions
In OpenFOAM the initial values for diﬀerent parameters are set in the 0 folder anlong
with the boundary conditions for these parameters. These parameters are the surface
elevation identiﬁcation parameter alpha.water, the pressure p rgh and the velocity
U for the laminar case and additionally the turbulent kinetic energy k, the eddy
viscosity nut and the angular frequency omega for the turbulence cases.
For all cases the initial internal ﬁeld of alpha.water and p rgh has been set to
uniform 0 while the velocity U has been set to uniform (0 0 0) as this parameter
is given as vectors.
For the turbulence parameters omega corresponds to the frequency calculated by the
wave properties for the speciﬁc case and nut is the eddy viscosity. As two diﬀerent
turbulence models are to be utilized a restraint is set on the νT/ν ratio to equal one
in order to have an initial low turbulence starting at the same point for both models
for better comparison. This means that the initial internal ﬁeld for nut is set to be
uniform 1e-06.
From these two the last parameter is set to initially correspond to νT times ω0.
An error in the initial conditions was found in the Benjamin-Feir case where it, quite
late in the process of ﬁnishing this project was found that the initial conditions of
the turbulence parameters had not been changed from the values of the tutorial
model which it was build on. A new simulation was done but was not able to ﬁnish
15
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 2. MODEL DESCRIPTION
completely before the deadline. However on the basis on the new results which
did ﬁnish in time it has been assessed that the diﬀerence is not that great and
that the results found with the incorrect initial conditions still reasonably describes
the phenomena in question. The diﬀerences involving the initial conditions will be
discussed as they appear.
2.4.4
Turbulence Properties
The cases considered in this thesis are using three diﬀerent turbulence settings. One
which is simply laminar ﬂow which is given in the turbulenceProperties simulation
type as laminar. The other two are both variations of the k −ω SST turbulnce
closure model which has been descibed previously. Here the simulation type is RAS
(Reynolds Averaged Simulation) where the RASModel in both cases is deﬁned as
kOmegaSSTStab from the Larsen and Fuhrman (2018) paper.
The diﬀerence in the two turbulence models is that the λ2 coeﬃcient for the standard
case is set to λ2 = 0 and for the stabilized case λ2 = 0.05.
2.4.5
Time Schemes
The time schemes in OpenFOAM is used to integrate ﬁelds with respect to time.
Trough out this project two diﬀerent time schemes has been used the Euler time
scheme and the crankNicolson time scheme.
Euler
The Euler time scheme is based on the Backward Euler method which is one of
the most basic numerical methods for solving ordinary diﬀerential equations. It is a
ﬁrst-order method meaning that the error pr. time step is proportional to the square
of the step size and that the error at a given time is proportional to the step size. It
is an implicit method which means that it ﬁnds a solution based on both the current
state of the system and a later one.
∂
∂t(φ) = φ −φ0
∆t
(2.30)
Crank-Nicolson
The crankNicolson time scheme is based on the theory of Crank and Nicolson
(1946) and is a second order method to evaluate numerical solutions. When using
uniform time steps the scheme equates to:
∂
∂t(φ) = φ −φ00
2∆t
(2.31)
16
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 2. MODEL DESCRIPTION
when using the Crank-Nicolson scheme in OpenFOAM a coeﬃcient is added, in this case
0.7. The coeﬃcient provides a blending between the Euler and the Crank-Nicolson
schemes such that Euler is 0 and Crank-Nicolson is 1. When adding this blending
scalar the method is basically still of ﬁrst order and the closer the scalar gets to one
the closer it is to being a second order method. the reason for blending the two is to
add numerical dissipation in order to sacriﬁce some accuracy for robustness.
In the cases the diﬀerent time schemes has been used to stabilize a simple progressive
wave train in order to have the better starting point to add perturbations to.
Temporal Resolution
The Courant number tells something about how the ﬂuid moves trough the compu-
tational cells, if the Courant number is less than 1 ﬂuid particles will move from one
cell to another within one time step. To achieve temporal accuracy and numerical
stability, a Courant number of less than 1 is required. The Courant number is given
by:
Co = ∂t|U|
∂x
(2.32)
where ∂t is the time step, |U| is the magnitude of the velocity through that cell and
∂x is the cell size in the direction of the velocity.
Instead of calculationg the timestep such that the Courant number do not exceed 1
it can be set to automatic adjusment when using the interFoam solver. This is done
by specifying adjustTimeStep to be on and then deﬁne the maxAlphaCo and maxCo
in the controlDict to be 1 or less. This ensures that the Courant number in the
phase ﬁelds as well as all other ﬁelds stay below the value deﬁned. As the time steps
are now saved as determined by the maximum value of the Courant number these
intervals are not necessarily convenient and therefor a writeInterval is deﬁned.
This interval is speciﬁed by the user and will be case speciﬁc.
Through out this thesis a max Courant number of 0.05 has been implemented. This
Courant number is considered very low but was chosen based on the performance
test on the interFoam solver done by Larsen et al. (2019) where they found that
signiﬁcantly reducing the Courant number lead to a strong improvement on the
problem of increasing wave height, a wiggled interface, spurious air velocities and
severely overestimated velocities near the crest. A low Courant number is especially
important to look into when having convergence problems so in order to accurately
simulate gravity waves in a steady propagating wave train this low Courant number
was utilized.
2.4.6
Wave Types
Two diﬀerent wave types has been used trough out this study, where one is the ﬁrst
order stokes wave and the other is the streamfunction solution. The two wave types
17
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 2. MODEL DESCRIPTION
will be described in the following in the way that they have been implementet in the
waves2FOAM toolbox by Jacobsen et al. (2012).
Stokes First Order
The ﬁrst order Stokes wave can be described by linear theory and the implementation
in waves2FOAM is the one given by Svendsen and Jonsson (1982) as follows:
η = H
2 cos(ω0 t −k0 x)
(2.33)
φ = H
2
ω0
ko
cosh k0(y + h)
sinh k0h
sin(ω0 t −k0 x)
(2.34)
u = Hω0
2
cosh k0(y + h)
sinh k0h
cos(ω0 t −k0 x)
(2.35)
w = −Hω0
2
sinh k0(y + h)
sinh k0h
sin(ω0 t −k0 x)
(2.36)
Where η is the surface elevation, φ is the velocity potential and u and w are the
particle velocities. Further H is the wave height, ω0 is the angular frequency, y is
the coordinate in the direction of the depth (which in the usual description is given
by z, but kept as y here due to the used coordinate system through out this thesis),
h is the water depth and k0 is the wave number.
The wave type is called stokesFirst in waves2FOAM and the input needed is the
depth, h, the wave period, T, the direction of propagation, the angle, the wave height,
H and the warm up period, Tsoft. As periodic boundaries are used no warm up is
needed and this values is set to zero.
Streamfunction
The stream function wave theory is a nonlinear solution to the steady wave problem
implemented in the version by Fenton (1988). The stream function will here be
described in a Lagrangian formulation by Madsen (2017) where:
ηL =
N
X
j=1
Aj cos[jk0X]
(2.37)
ΨL = (y + h)UL +
N
X
j=1
Bj
jk0
sinh[jk0(y + h)] cos[jk0X]
(2.38)
18
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 2. MODEL DESCRIPTION
uL = UL +
N
X
j=1
Bj cosh[jk0(y + h)] cos[jk0X]
(2.39)
wL =
N
X
j=1
Bj sinh[jk0(y + h)] sin[jk0X]
(2.40)
Where Ψ is the streamfunction, N is the order of nonlinearity and UL is the Lagrangian
uniform current and X is the connection between the Lagrangian and Eulerian
coordinatesystem given by X = x −ct, where c is the celerity.
The wave type is called streamFunction in waves2FOAM and needs the inputs of
wave height, depth, angle, direction and warm up period as before. Further it needs
an input called N which is the number of Fourrier modes and Niter which is the
number of iterations. Additionally is has two either/or inputs, the ﬁrst where the
input must be either period or wavelength and the second where the input must be
either Euler velocity or stokes velocity. In all of the uses of the streamFunction
the input has been waveLength and stokesVelocity. The Stokes velocity is for all
cases equal to zero.
19
==PAGE:34==
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 3
Benjamin-Feir Instability
In this chapter the CFD simulation of the Benjamin-Feir instability will be presented.
Firstly the case speciﬁc model setup and settings in OpenFOAM will be explained
followed by a presentation of the results. The results include those of the laminar
model which will be discussed and compared with previous experiments conducted
by Lake et al. (1977), Melville (1982) and Tulin and Waseda (1999) as well as the
numerical study by Madsen et al. (2002). Following this the results of the simulations
including the two diﬀerent turbulence models will be presented and the diﬀerence
between them will be investigated.
3.1
Model set-up
In the following section the model set-up for the Benjamin-Feir instability in OpenFOAM
will be presented. There is two versions of the setup. Firstly an initial simple wave
train to test the stability of the simulation setup and secondly the model to simulate
the actual Benjamin-Feir instability.
3.1.1
Simple progressive wavetrain
As an initial setup a simple progressive wavetrain is computed to test the settings
and see if it is propagating steadily. This step is important as it can otherwise disturb
later results of more complicated cases. The simple wavetrain has the computational
domain as sketched in ﬁgure 3.1
The computational domain is deﬁned in the blockMeshDict ﬁle in OpenFOAM and
spans one wavelength and a little more that the depth in heigth to allow room for the
waves. The domain is discretized into regular cells with a size of ∆x = ∆y = H/15
meaning that there is 15 cells per wave height and corresponding to an aspect ratio
of ∆x/∆y = 1.
The parameters of the wave used to simulate the Benjamin-Feir instability are
speciﬁed based on a wave used by Tulin and Waseda (1999) in their experiments.
21
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 3. BENJAMIN-FEIR INSTABILITY
Figure 3.1: Sketch of the mesh dimensions for the simple wavetrain case
Further this wave was also used in a numerical study by Madsen et al. (2002). The
parameters of the wave can be seen in table 3.1.
Table 3.1: Wave parameters used as input to OpenFOAM for a streamfunction wave solution based
on the Tulin and Waseda (1999) experiments as described in Madsen et al. (2002)
L [m]
H [m]
h [m]
T [s]
1.2
0.0508
1.2
0.87
The wave parameters are implemented as a streamFunction in the waveProperties.input
ﬁle, which is part of the Waves2Foam toolbox by Jacobsen et al. (2012). Besides from
the parameters in table 3.1 and the general values given in Chapter 2 the function
also need the direction of propagation which for this wave is direction (1.0 0.0
0.0).
The most stable wave train was for this case found to be the one utilizing the Euler
time scheme. A time series of the wave train can be seen in ﬁgure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Time series of the surface elevation of a periodic wave train. The dashed lines represent
the initial levels of the wave height and trough.
In ﬁgure 3.2 it can be seen that the wave train stays very steady for the ﬁrst 40
periods after which it starts to move a little, however since it does not directly decay
or decrease, the settings for the initial wave train are acceptable and this is the wave
train which is going to be the basis for the more complicated instability case.
22
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 3. BENJAMIN-FEIR INSTABILITY
3.1.2
Instability wave
The simulations of the Benjamin-Feir instability is based in an experiment conducted
by Tulin and Waseda (1999) where the carrier wave was described in the previous
section. The perturbations are designed on the basis of δ = 0.785k0a0 and k0a0 =
0.133. To make sure that the perturbations would ﬁt exactly within the computational
domain they have been modiﬁed slightly such that they are deﬁned from their
wavelengths as Llower = 1.5 m and Lupper = 1.0 m. This approximation comes very
close to the exact solution provided by the conditions in the experiments by Tulin
and Waseda (1999).
The perturbations are modeled by linear theory as stokesFirst waves with a
perturbation strength of 5% of the carrier wave height (in comparison Madsen
et al. (2002) used a perturbations strength of 3%). The input parameters of the
perturbations can be seen in table 3.2.
Table 3.2: Perturbation input for OpenFOAM
L [m]
T [s]
H [m]
h [m]
Upper side band
1.0
0.800
0.00254
1.2
Lower side band
1.5
0.980
0.00254
1.2
The instability is modeled by utilizing the combinedWaves option in Waves2foam.
This option makes is possible to add multiple waves and combine them. The carrier
wave is, as for the simple wave train case modeled as a streamFunction solution
and the perturbation are based on linear theory with the wave type stokesFirst in
OpenFOAM as described above.
Additional parameters set in the waveProperties.input ﬁle for the perturbation
waves are the direction of the wave which is propagating in the x-direction given the
input direction (1.0 0.0 0.0) and the initial phase phi = π/4.
The computational domain of this case is changed to be longer than that of the
simple wave train such that it is now 5L of the carrier wave hence 6 times Lupper
and 4 times Llower as sketched in ﬁgure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Sketch of the mesh dimensions for the Benjamin-Feir instability case
The discretization of the domain is kept in the order of that of the simple wave train
with an aspect ratio of 1. A visualization of the combined waves input can be seen
23
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 3. BENJAMIN-FEIR INSTABILITY
in ﬁgure 3.4 where the wave height has been sketched with a factor 10 compared to
the wavelengths for better visualization.
Figure 3.4: Visualization of the carrier wave (black) with the two perturbation waves (lower
sideband: blue, upper sideband: red) The wave heights are visualized with a facter 10 comparetd
to the wavelength.
The simulation was run over 110 seconds corresponding to 126 periods with a write
interval of 0.05 s for the laminar case, whereas the cases including the standard and
the stabilized k −ω SST turbulence models had a write interval of 0.10 s as this was
found to be suﬃcient.
3.2
Laminar Model Results
In this section the results from the CFD simulation concerning the laminar turbulence
model will be presented by a time series analysis, a spectral analysis, an analysis of
the temporal amplitude evolution and a comparison of the breaking wave form to
the ones described by Tulin and Waseda (1999). All will be discussed in comparison
with literature.
3.2.1
Wave train evolution
The time series from the perturbed wave simulation can be seen in ﬁgure 3.5.
Figure 3.5: Time series of the perturbed wave train where the dashed lines are the surface elevation
of the original carrier wave for reference.
From this time series it can be seen that the wave train goes unstable between the
ﬁrst 40 to 50 periods and that it has peaks after about 58 and 67 periods which are
more than twice the height of the original surface elevation of the wave. To get a
24
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 3. BENJAMIN-FEIR INSTABILITY
more detailed view of the temporal evolution of the wave train a zoomed in series is
shown in ﬁgure 3.6.
Figure 3.6: Time series of the perturbed wave train separated into smaller sections where the
dashed lines are the surface elevation of the original carrier wave for reference.
Lake et al. (1977) did an experiment of the evolution of an initially unmodulated
wave train where it was seen it started to develop an amplitude modulation as
described by Benjamin and Feir (1967). This correspond to what can be seen in
25
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 3. BENJAMIN-FEIR INSTABILITY
ﬁgure 3.6(a)-(c) where it starts out as a somewhat stable wave train which get more
and more modulated. As the wave train evolves further the modulation continues to
become larger, ﬁgure 3.6(d) until the modulation eventually becomes so large that
the individual wave crests approach zero, as can be seen in ﬁgure 3.6(e). This also
correspond with the observations done by Lake et al. (1977). According to Lake
et al. (1977) it is at this stage the wave train can take on a ’pulse train’ appearance
which to some extend can be seen in ﬁgure 3.6(e) however this only happens for a
very short amount of time.
Further in the evolution Lake et al. (1977) found that the wave train demodulated
and returned to a somewhat uniform state. This return to uniformity is not seen
in the simulation done here. The phenomena of recurrence was also challenged by
Tulin and Waseda (1999), who did ﬁnd the tendency toward recurrence to be quite
strong for a wave train suﬃciently weak for wave breaking to be absent, however
they emphasize the word ’tendency’.
Another important fact is that Lake et al. (1977) used a small wave steepness and
hence did not encounter wave breaking, which might be the main reason that a
tendency towards recurrence is not seen for this time series. Another reason might
be that the simulations has not run for long enough.
The experimental results of Lake et al. (1977) concluded that the nonlinear instability
of an initially unmodulated wave train does not lead to wave train disintegration,
as ﬁrst thought of Benjamin and Feir (1967) and that ’pulse trains’, if they occur,
are simply special strongly modulated stages in a continuing process of wave train
evolution. (However this can again be due to the fact that they did not consider
wave breaking).
Based on ﬁgure 3.6 and the comparison with the Lake et al. (1977) experiments as
well as the ones done by Tulin and Waseda (1999) it can be concluded that the model
simulation seems to represent the Benjamin-Feir instability quite well considering
the evolution of the surface elevation over time.
3.2.2
Fourier amplitudes
The computed Fourier amplitudes at ﬁve diﬀerent times during the evolution of
the wave train can be seen in ﬁgure 3.7 along with the corresponding form of the
surface. The ﬁrst spectrum, ﬁgure 3.7(a), at t/T = 0 show the initial carrier wave, its
harmonics and the two initial side bands. Additionally it is seen than the surface is
uniform. The values of these amplitudes corresponds to the input into the simulated
model. Otherwise from these four signals the spectrum is empty, which conﬁrm that
the initial conditions of the waves has been implemented correctly.
In the second spectrum, ﬁgure 3.7(b), it is seen that the side band amplitudes has
started to grow and the carrier wave started to loose some energy, further it is seen
that the surface is at a stage where it is starting to undergo modulations.
In the third stage, ﬁgure 3.7(c), it is seen that the surface is undergoing strong
26
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 3. BENJAMIN-FEIR INSTABILITY
Figure 3.7: Fourier amplitudes at diﬀerent times which their corresponding surface at the time, (a)
t/T = 0.0, (a) t/T = 42, (a) t/T = 57, (a) t/T = 73 and (a) t/T = 95.
modulations and seem to be in the process of loosing its coherence, further it can be
seen from the amplitudes that these are starting to spread over many wave number
components. It is also seen that the carrier wave and the lower side band in this
stage is approximately of the same strength.
In the fourth state, ﬁgure 3.7(d) it is seen that the amplitudes are spread over most
of the wave number components. At a ﬁrst glance it might look as if the carrier wave
with side bands is back to its somewhat initial state, however this large amplitude is
the lower side band indicating a frequency downshift as will be discussed in further
detail later.
In the ﬁnal state, ﬁgure 3.7(e) it is seen that the amplitudes are more collected at
fewer wave number components however still with a frequency downshift, this could
27
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 3. BENJAMIN-FEIR INSTABILITY
suggest some sort of recurrence as this state is similar to the one in ﬁgure 3.7(b).
Further when looking at the surface this seem to be in a more steady state which
also points toward recurrence as suggested by Lake et al. (1977).
Another thing which can be seen from the Fourier plots is that the dominant physical
process for this instability is indeed the quartet resonant interaction consisting of a
carrier wave and two side bands.
Up until ﬁgure 3.7(c) the results are quite similar to the ones found by Lake et al.
(1977), however they did not take breaking into account and therefor came to the
conclusion that the end state of the evolution of a nonlinear wave train on deep
water is neither random or steady but a series of periodically recurring states. This
is not what was found here.
Melville (1982) found similar results especially describing the marked asymmetry
between the lower and upper side band which is also very clearly seen in ﬁgure
3.7. Further he reports that observations show that the onset of the asymmetry
corresponds to the onset of wave breaking. This will be looked into later on.
The experiments by Melville (1982) are based on natural modulations form back-
ground noise whereas the study by Tulin and Waseda (1999) is based on ’seeded’
experiments, meaning that the modulation has been imposed at the wave generator
making it possible to decide upon the initial side band amplitudes and perturbation
strength. This is a lot like what is done in the CFD model where the values has
been decided and given as input to the model.
3.2.3
Side-band evolution
The temporal evolution of the wave train amplitudes has been plotted in ﬁgure
3.8 along with the experimental data of Tulin and Waseda (1999), a theoretical
prediction of the exponential growth rate from Benjamin-Feir theory and a growth
rate prediction following McLean (1982).
The theoretical expression for the spatial growth rate by Benjamin and Feir (1967)
is given by:
ϵ exp
n
δ
 2 k2
0 a2
0 −δ21/2 k0 x
o
(3.1)
The prediction of the growth rate from McLean (1982) is found from interpolation
of the values in Table 2 in his paper which shows the maximum growth rate as a
function of wave steepness for diﬀerent steepness and classes of instability. The
expression computed is:
ϵ exp

0.007083
p
g k0 t

(3.2)
28
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 3. BENJAMIN-FEIR INSTABILITY
As the data by Tulin and Waseda (1999) and the theoretical expression by Benjamin
and Feir (1967) are in the spatial domain and it was of interest to show the ﬁgure
in the temporal domain in connection with the rest of the ﬁgures of this thesis a
conversion was made. The conversion between the spatial and temporal domain has
been made on the basis of the group velocity using the transformation from Madsen
et al. (2002):
x
L = cgt
cT ≈1
2
t
T
(3.3)
The initial exponential growth of the side band amplitudes as ﬁrst predicted by
Benjamin and Feir (1967) and later conﬁrmed by Lake et al. (1977), Melville (1982),
Tulin and Waseda (1999) and Madsen et al. (2002) and McLean (1982) (just as a
few) is also seen in ﬁgure 3.8 from the data of the simulation. This phenomenon is
well documented and was to be expected.
Figure 3.8: Temporal evolution of the amplitudes of the carrier wave and the two side bands (lines),
alongside the experimental results of Tulin and Waseda (1999) (marks), the theoretical prediction
of the exponential growth rate by Benjamin-Feir theory and the growth rate prediction following
McLean (1982).
As can be seen in ﬁgure 3.8 the simulation results ﬁt very well with the data from
Tulin and Waseda (1999) concerning the initial growth of the side bands. (the data
from Tulin and Waseda (1999) has been shifted slightly in the x-direction in the plot
to ﬁt with the computed data). As for the predictions of the exponential growth
also shown in ﬁgure 3.8 it is seen that the prediction from the Benjamin and Feir
theory tends to overestimate the temporal growth rate when compared to the data
from the simulation as well as the experimental data of Tulin and Waseda (1999).
However the estimate made from McLean (1982) ﬁts very well. The diﬀerence in
these is that the theory of Benjamin and Feir (1967) is based on weakly nonlinear
analysis whereas the McLean (1982) results analyzes actual perturbations made from
29
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 3. BENJAMIN-FEIR INSTABILITY
an exact streamfunction type solution and it is therefor expected that this prediction
would ﬁt the results better, as can be conﬁrmed by ﬁgure 3.8.
What happens after the initial growth of the perturbations is however not as well
understood. Lake et al. (1977) as previously mentioned came to the conclusion
that the wave train would be a continuous series of modulation and demodulation
recurrence cycles in the absence of dissipative eﬀects. This conclusion has however
been challenged later by Melville (1982) who showed that the modulation instability
would lead to some breaking and therefor dissipative eﬀects could not be ignored.
When looking at ﬁgure 3.8 is also seems highly unlikely that the amplitudes of the
three waves would restore themselves to their original level judging from their current
evolution, hence it can be assumed that some breaking is happening in this model.
This will be conﬁrmed later on. Melville (1982) suggested that the end state of the
evolution is inevitably a breaking event, followed by partial recurrence tending to
lower frequency.
Tulin and Waseda (1999) found an overall decrease of the carrier wave as well as of
the higher side band, while the lower side band was increased in the case of breaking.
This ﬁts quite well with the data found from the model where the lower side band
stays high after its exponential growth and the upper side band decreases slightly
after its local maximum. Further the carrier wave also seem too have the behavior
described by Tulin and Waseda (1999) with an initial decrease to a local minimum
and there after a rise, which will however not increase back to original strength.
Comparing the results of this simulation to the ones obtained by Madsen et al.
(2002) based on their Boussinesq method for fully nonlinear waves, some diﬀerence
can be seen. In their ﬁgure 15(b) the initial growth of the side bands is seen to
be quite similar to the result from this simulation. The diﬀerence is starting to be
noticeable after about 60 periods. The amplitude of their lower side band increases
up until about 0.7 and then decreases to about 0.5 before increasing back up to 0.7.
Compared to ﬁgure 3.8 it can be seen that the lower side band initially increases
until around 0.85 and stays at this level whereas for the Tulin and Waseda (1999)
measurements the lower side band seems to be between 0.7 and 0.85.
For the upper side band Madsen et al. (2002) found that it initially increases up
until 0.4 before decreasing to 0.2 and afterwards back up to 0.5, whereas for the
current simulation the upper side band likewise initially increases to 0.4, however it
decreases to around 0.25 and stay more or less at this level as can be seen in ﬁgure
3.8.
The most signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the simulated results of the CFD model
considered here and the Boussinesq model by Madsen et al. (2002) is the behavior of
the carrier wave amplitudes. As for the other amplitudes, the initial behavior is more
or less the same with a decrease in amplitude down to around 0.15. The diﬀerence is
in the following increase which for the Madsen et al. (2002) model increases to 0.8,
almost regaining its full strength and for the CFD model only increases until 0.35.
This diﬀerence could be due to the fact that the models by Madsen et al. (2002) was
30
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 3. BENJAMIN-FEIR INSTABILITY
not able to account for breaking. As described by Madsen et al. (2002) they did
two simulation, one with a coarse grid, 0.05 m and one with a ﬁne grid, 0.025 m,
but only the one with the coarse grid survived past the modulation peak, indicating
the necessity of a breaking model. This would also explain the diﬀerence between
the carrier wave amplitudes since a breaking event would generate dissipative eﬀects
which is a suggested cause for the permanent downshifting.
To compare the two numerical models to the measurements from Tulin and Waseda
(1999) they both compare reasonably. However where the CFD model seems to have
height amplitudes compared to the measurements, the Boussinesq model has low
and the other way around which means that when comparing the two models to
each other, away from the measurements, their results look quite diﬀerent from one
another after peak modulation.
The general characteristics here and from previous studies are the initial exponential
growth, the asymmetry of the upper and lower side band near the modulation
peak and the permanent frequency downshift after the modulation peak. As this
simulation agrees very well with other studies of the initial evolution of the Benjamin-
Feir instability it gives good conﬁdence in the model.
3.2.4
Wave breaking
Since several observations so far has indicated the occurrence of breaking for this
particular three wave instability the surface over time has been analyzed and it was
found that breaking indeed does occur for this model.
Melville (1982) reported that in each case studied the divergence of the amplitudes
happen in the neighborhood of the onset of wave breaking, with the lower side band
reaching the larger amplitude and a little after the upper side band reaches its local
minimum. This corresponds very well with the model simulation where the ﬁrst sign
of wave breaking is seen around t/T = 59 which in ﬁgure 3.8 can be seen to be at
the local maximum of the upper side band. Likewise it is indeed where the lower
and upper side band starts to diverge.
Further Melville (1982) reported that breaking has been accompanied by a reduction
in the amplitude of the upper side band relative to the lower side band and additionally
that after breaking the lower side band has grown to an amplitude greater than that
of the initial carrier wave amplitude. These observations also corresponds well with
what is seen to happen in ﬁgure 3.8.
Additionally to validate the results of the simulation the shape of the wave breaking
has been analyzed more closely and been compared qualitatively to the observations
reported by Tulin and Waseda (1999), who described the shape of the breaking waves
in their experiments as having the eight phases depicted in ﬁgure 3.9, (ﬁgure 11 in
original paper). An eﬀort was made to ﬁnd these same phases of a breaking wave in
the simulation results and the snapshots of the breaking wave evolution can be seen
in ﬁgure 3.10.
31
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 3. BENJAMIN-FEIR INSTABILITY
Figure 3.9: Schematics of the breaking waves in the experiments done by Tulin and Waseda
(1999).Depicting diﬀerent phases: steepening-crest phase (a), plunging-jet phase (b)-(d), splashing-
ploughimg phase (e)-(g), and decaying scar phase (f).
When comparing the phases of wave breaking described by Tulin and Waseda (1999)
and depicted in ﬁgure 3.9 to the shape of the waves from the simulation in ﬁgure 3.10
it can be seen that phase (a) which is the steepening of the wave looks quite similar,
likewise in phase (b) where the wave is becoming nearly vertical near the crest the
simulation looks fairly much like the description from Tulin and Waseda (1999).
Moving on to phase (c) and (d) the ﬁrst part of the formation of a jet is clearly
seen in ﬁgure 3.10(c), however the next phase where the jet curls over and touches
the curving front is not seen clearly from the simulation. This could be due to
the relatively short wave length meaning that the wave breaking is relatively week.
Tulin and Waseda (1999) reported that some waves are noticeably week and as the
wavelength increases so does the strength of the visibility of the splashing and foaming
process. The wave considered is in the short end of the wavelengths considered in
the experiments.
The next phases (e) to (g) are not very clear visually from the simulations, however
there is a tendency towards the phases described by Tulin and Waseda (1999) who
describes these phases as the splashing-ploughing phase, where the plunging jet
enters the water moving forward and downward due to a strong ploughing action (f).
Then the now submerged jet creates a new front ahead of it, followed by a turbulent
region between this new front and the old wave crest (g). The last phase of the
breaking wave is where the surface starts to quiet down with only a thin foaming
layer until the next breaking cycle occurs, as described by Tulin and Waseda (1999).
This last phase (h) can also be seen from the simulation in ﬁgure 3.10(h)
From all of the above it is evident that the CFD simulation of the Benjamin-Feir
instability is quite accurate in most parameters when compared to experimental
32
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 3. BENJAMIN-FEIR INSTABILITY
Figure 3.10: Phases of breaking in the simulation at 67th period, where the phases have the names
(a)-(h) for comparison with the schematic of Tulin and Waseda (1999) in ﬁgure 3.9.
results.
Since it was found that breaking does occur, it is of interest to try and add a
turbulence model in order to describe the turbulence beneath the breaking wave
which is what will be done in the following section.
3.3
Turbulence Model Results
In this section The CFD simulation of the Benjamin-Feir instability will be presented
and analyzed with the use of the standard and the stabilized k −ω SST turbulence
models. In the process of making these results an error was found in the initial
conditions when adding the turbulence models. The inﬂuence of this error on the
results was however found to little. The diﬀerences will be discussed throughout the
section based on new simulations with the proper initial conditions.
33
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 3. BENJAMIN-FEIR INSTABILITY
3.3.1
Wave train evolution
It is a well known problem that turbulence closure models tend to overestimate the
turbulence resulting in a decrease of the wave train, therefor the ﬁrst investigation
of these models are a comparison of the time series of the three diﬀerent models as
seen in ﬁgure 3.11.
Figure 3.11: Comparison of the wave train time series using diﬀerent turbulence models
Here it can be seen that the case with the standard k −ω model is strongly decaying.
From the laminar model it was found that breaking occurred around t/T = 59 and
judging from the time series of the case with the k −ω model this is where it starts to
change signiﬁcantly from the laminar case and the decay becomes evident. According
to Larsen and Fuhrman (2018) this wave decay is commonly seen for the standard
closure model as an inevitably eﬀect of the exponential growth of the eddy viscosity.
This will be discussed later. Considering the wave train with the restraint on the
initial condition it was found that this has a higher initial eddy viscosity, resulting
in such a strong wave decay that the instability seemingly does not even develop, for
the stabilized model however no such change was seen.
Looking at the time series for the stabilized k −ω model in ﬁgure 3.11 it is seen
that this time series looks very similar to the one obtained by the laminar case. The
good thing is that the model clearly is stabilized since the waves are not decaying,
however it gives rise to the question whether or not the turbulence model is even on.
34
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 3. BENJAMIN-FEIR INSTABILITY
To investigate this a close comparison of the two time series is made as can be seen
in ﬁgure 3.12.
Figure 3.12: close ups from the time series of the laminar and stabilized turbulence cases.
Here it can be seen that initially the two series are identical, however as time progresses
there starts to be a slight diﬀerence between them which as a ﬁrst investigation
suggests that the turbulence model indeed does turn on in the simulation. However
turbulence seem to have a very small eﬀect.
3.3.2
Side band evolution
The temporal evolution of the amplitudes for both turbulence models can be seen
in ﬁgure 3.13. Here it can again be seen that the results of the stabilized k −ω
SST model compares almost identically to the results from the laminar model ﬁgure
35
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 3. BENJAMIN-FEIR INSTABILITY
3.13(b) and 3.8 respectively.
Figure 3.13: (a) Evolution of the amplitude of the carrier wave and the two sidebands computed
with the standard k-omega SST model, including measurements by Tulin and Waseda (1999)
(T&W), the theoretical predictions from Benjamin and Feir (B&F) theory as well as a prediction
based on interpolation of the McLean (1981) tables given as ϵ exp (0.007083√g k0 t). (b) Same as
(a) but computed with the stabalized k-omega SST model by Larsen et al. (2018)
As for the standard k −ω SST model the results look quite diﬀerent. The initial
evolution does look similar but already after about 45 periods the side band ampli-
tudes start to loose their strength. The upper side band has its maximum at 0.35
after 55 periods and the lower side band 0.46 after 60 periods. The upper side band
has its maximum after the same number of periods as for the other cases and it is
only slightly lower whereas the lower side band has its maximum about 12 periods
earlier than before and almost only half the strength.
Though all three waves have a very strong decrease, the tendency of a permanent
36
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 3. BENJAMIN-FEIR INSTABILITY
frequency downshift is still seen as the low side band amplitude continues to stay
stronger than that from the carrier wave. In comparison the standard model with the
initial constraint on the eddy viscosity show even less development of the side band
amplitudes and the upper and lower side band has their maximum at approximately
the same time around 50 periods and no frequency downshift is seen, this is likely
due to the increased turbulence in this model.
Another thing that can be seen from ﬁgure 3.13(a) is that the lines are a lot smoother
which gives rise to the question whether wave breaking is even happening in this
model.
Both the results from the time series and the evolution of the amplitudes indicate
a strong decay in the standard model. As previously mentioned this is a result of
a well known problem for the two-equation turbulence models with an exponential
growth of the eddy viscosity.
3.3.3
Turbulence levels
The eddy viscosity in the two diﬀerent models were studied in order to see the
development. In ﬁgure 3.14 the temporal evolution of the depth and period averaged
eddy viscosity for the standard and stabilized k −ω SST model is shown.
Figure 3.14: temporal development of the depth- and period-averaged eddy viscosity beneath a
wavetrain using the standard k-omega SST model (blue) and the stabilized k-omega SST model by
Larsen and Fuhrman (2018) (black).
Here is can be seen that the standard k −ω SST model does indeed have an
exponential growth of the eddy viscosity which only levels after about 60 periods.
When comparing this observation with the time series, ﬁgure 3.11(b) it is seen that
it is also after about 60 periods that the wave height starts to decay signiﬁcantly.
Larsen and Fuhrman (2018) reported that the leveling of the eddy viscosity can be
explained as due to the declining wave heights, which again is a direct consequence
of the unphysical growth of the turbulent kinetic energy and eddy viscosity. This is
indeed what is seen for the standard model where the leveling appear as the wave
heights decrease and eventually almost disappear.
37
==PAGE:52==
CHAPTER 3. BENJAMIN-FEIR INSTABILITY
In contrast to this it can be seen that the stabilized k −ω SST model is leveled after
the ﬁrst ten periods until it reaches the onset of breaking where after it becomes
leveled again, now at a higher level. This indicates that the model is indeed more
stable as a level of no signiﬁcant turbulence is obtained prior to breaking and a new
stable level is found after the breaking process begins, this also indicated that the
waves continue to break and not only ones at the modulation peak.
Considering the model with the constrained on the initial eddy viscosity would
mean that in ﬁgure 3.14 both the standard and the stabilized model would start at
νT/nu = 1. This would cause the standard model to start at a higher level and grow
from there whereas it for the stabilized model would mean that it would start at a
higher point from where it would drop to the ﬁrst described level before breaking
and otherwise continue as in ﬁgure 3.14.
Another noteworthy thing seen in ﬁgure 3.14 is that the eddy viscosity in the standard
k −ω SST model generally is more than a factor 100 greater than the eddy viscosity
in the stabilized k −ω SST model.
In order to describe the turbulence beneath the waves for each model the following
ﬁgures show snapshots of the surface and the non-dimensional eddy viscosity at
diﬀerent times of the propagation of the wave train. The ﬁrst, ﬁgure 3.15, shows the
surface and the non-dimensional eddy viscosity at t/T = 56.3 which is at the ﬁrst
sign of breaking for the stabilized k −ω SST model.
Figure 3.15: Normalized eddy viscosity underneath the surface at t/T = 56.3 for (a) the standard
model and (b) the stabilized model.
As seen in ﬁgure 3.15(b), the only sign of eddy viscosity is in the very top of the
wave which is about to break, on the other hand in ﬁgure 3.15(a) it can be seen that
there already is a great amount of uniformly spread non-dimensional eddy viscosity,
38
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 3. BENJAMIN-FEIR INSTABILITY
(with a ratio up to 1200 which is several orders of magnitude larger than ν) even
though the surface does not look as if it has even broken yet. These high values
are as explained by Larsen and Fuhrman (2018) not physical and for real waves
signiﬁcant turbulence should not be expected prior to breaking.
Figure 3.16: Normalized eddy viscosity underneath the surface at t/T = 46 for (a) the standard
model and (b) the stabilized model.
Another look at the surface and non-dimensional eddy viscosity has been taken at
t/T = 46 which is in the region prior to breaking, the results can be seen in ﬁgure
3.16, where it is seen that there for the stabilized model, ﬁgure 3.16(b), is no eddy
viscosity, but for the standard model, ﬁgure 3.16(a), there is already a quite strong
uniform spread of turbulence. When looking at the surface of the two diﬀerent models
it is seen that they are identical which means that there should be no diﬀerence in
the turbulence underneath them. Again it is seen that there is an over-production
of turbulence in the standard model with a quite signiﬁcant amount prior to wave
breaking.
As a third look a snapshot of the surface and non-dimensional eddy viscosity for the
two diﬀerent models can be seen at t/T = 67 in ﬁgure 3.17. Here it is noticed that
for the stabilized model some turbulence is happening under the surface, however
still very little compared to the standard model. This conﬁrms that there is some
turbulence happening and that the turbulence model therefor has turned on, which
was questioned earlier due to the very similar time series and amplitude evolution
when compared to the laminar case.
The behavior of the turbulence during wave breaking for the stabilized model has
been studied closer and a series of snapshots from the breaking cycle can be seen in
ﬁgure 3.18.
39
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 3. BENJAMIN-FEIR INSTABILITY
Figure 3.17: Normalized eddy viscosity underneath the surface at t/T = 67 for (a) the standard
model and (b) the stabilized model.
As no turbulence levels were measured by Tulin and Waseda (1999) it is not possible
to compare these results with experiments. It can however be determined that the
stabilized turbulence model by Larsen and Fuhrman (2018) performs much better
than the standard one as this has a signiﬁcant over-production of turbulence. Further
it is seen that the prediction of the turbulence beneath the breaking waves in the
Benjamin-Feir instability by the stabilized model seems to be reasonably good and
eliminates the problem of severely polluted results prior to breaking. This would be
the preferred model in further studies.
40
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 3. BENJAMIN-FEIR INSTABILITY
Figure 3.18: Snapshots of the evolution of non-dimensional eddy viscosity during the ﬁrst breaking
event starting at t = 56.1T computed with the stabilized k-omega model. Note that the color bar
is diﬀerently scaled than the precious ﬁgures.
41
==PAGE:56==
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 4
Crescent waves
In this chapter the CFD simulation of the crescent waves will be presented. This
will be done by describing the characteristics of the waves simulated and their
implementation into OpenFOAM along the the case settings. Then results from the
laminar model will be presented through a description of the computed surface,
the time series of the surface elevation and the Fourier amplitudes. Lastly the
results including the two diﬀerent turbulence models will be presented and the
results compared to those of the laminar model followed by and investigation of the
turbulence beneath the breaking waves.
4.1
Model setup
In this section the case speciﬁc settings for the Class II instability simulation of
crescent waves in OpenFOAM will be presented with the wave characteristics, the
inputs into OpenFOAM and a convergence study which was done in order to optimize
the spacial discretization relative to the computational expense.
The carrier wave
For this case the simulated waves are based on a wave studied by Fuhrman et al.
(2004) using a high-order Boussinesq model with a carrier wave (base incident wave)
corresponding to a stream function solution with a wave number of k0 = 1 m−1
resulting in a wavelength of L = 2π/k0 = 2π m and with steepness H/L = 0.105.
The parameters of the carrier wave is presented in table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Parameters of the carrier wave used in the simulation
H [m]
H/L
T [s]
ω0 [s−1]
h [m]
L [m]
0.66
0.105
1.914
3.283
2 π
2 π
43
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 4. CRESCENT WAVES
The carrier wave has been implemented as a streamFunction with the parameter seen
in table 4.1 as well as phi = 0.0, direction (1.0 0.0 0.0) and stokesVelocity
= 0.0.
Perturbations
The Crescent wave pattern is generated by superimposing two three dimensional
perturbations to the carrier wave such that they are traveling with equal kx and
opposite kz, resulting in a stationary standing wave structure in the z-direction with
⟨kx, kz⟩being the wave numbers. The three-dimensional perturbations are designed
to correspond to the most unstable Class II instability as described by McLean (1982)
with p = 0.5 corresponding to kx = 1.5k0 and q ̸= 0.
When implementing the perturbations in OpenFOAM the full wavelength of the per-
turbation waves is needed. This wavelength can be found based on the total wave
numbers which is found as:
ktotal =
p
k2
x + k2
z
(4.1)
Further the generated perturbations are assumed to be bound to the unperturbed
wave having an angular frequency:
ω′ = kx
k0
ω0
(4.2)
where the prime denotes that it is a perturbation. Knowing ktotal the wavelength
of the perturbations can be found as Ltotal = 2π/ktotal. The parameters of the
perturbations can be seen in table 4.2:
Table 4.2: Parameters for implementing the perturbations in OpenFOAM.
kz [m−1]
Lz [m−1]
kx [m−1]
Lx [m−1]
ktotal [m−1]
Ltotal [m−1]
1.23
5.11
1.5
4.19
1.94
3.24
The wave height of the perturbations are determined from the perturbations strength
ϵ, however for this case compared to the previous, ϵ corresponds to the combined
perturbation strength meaning that the wave height is found by ϵ/2 times the
carrier wave height. For this study a perturbation strength of 0.05 has been used in
correspondence with one of the simulations done by Fuhrman et al. (2004), resulting
in a perturbation wave height of H = 0.0165 m.
The perturbations are in this case implemented as streamFunctions in order to be
able to deﬁne them on the basis of their wave length. The inputs to the stream-
function are height = 0.0165, depth = 2 π, phi = 0.0, waveLength = 3.24 and
44
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 4. CRESCENT WAVES
stokesVelocity = 0.0. The direction of the perturbations are deﬁned from the
wave numbers as direction (1.5 0.0 1.23) and direction (1.5 0.0 -1.23).
In the implementation of these waves there was a bit of trouble ﬁnding the right
number of modes and iterations. The ﬁnal result for which the case could run ended
up being N = 28 and Niter = 10.
The perturbation waves has been implemented by the use of the combinedWaves
function in the waves2FOAM toolbox as in the Benjamin-Feir case in combination
with the carrier wave as described in the beginning of this section.
Convergence study
To determine the discretizations a simple 2D wave train case was tested starting at
H/15 as in the Benjamin-Feir case to see how small a spacing would be suﬃcient.
The goal is to have as large a spacing as possible without compromising the stability
of the wave train. To reach this goal a convergence study was conducted where
diﬀerent discretizations were tested. In ﬁgure 4.1 the simple 2D wave train is seen
with three diﬀerent discretizations with an aspect ratio of 1. The computational
domain of this test was set to contain 1 wavelength of the carrier wave and be a
little higher than the depth.
Figure 4.1: Convergence study for the crescent wave train with discretizations corresponding to
H/20, H/25 and H/30 with ∆x = ∆x
From ﬁgure 4.1 above it can be seen that the progressive wave train becomes stable
45
==PAGE:60==
CHAPTER 4. CRESCENT WAVES
when the discretization is H/30. As the 3D simulation had a hard time running
with this discretization it was further investigated whether the aspect ratio could
be compromised in order to make the case less expensive computationally. It was
investigated whether the discretization in the x-direction could be greater by testing
cases where ∆y = H/30 and ∆x = 1.5∆y as well as ∆x = 2∆y. The results from
these can be seen in ﬁgure 4.2.
As the wave train did not become steady in the case of ∆x = 1.5∆y nor ∆x = 2∆y
a diﬀerent temporal scheme was tried, as these can have a great inﬂuence on a
progressive wave train as described by Larsen et al. (2019). Up until now The Euler
scheme has been used, however since the wave train did not converge with this time
scheme the Crank-Nicolson time scheme was tested and the results can be seen in
ﬁgure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: Convergence study for the crescent wave train with discretizations corresponding to
H/30 and ∆x = 1.5∆y and ∆y = 2∆x for two diﬀerent temporal schemes, Euler and Crank-Nicolson
As seen in ﬁgure 4.2 the wave train with ∆x = 1.5∆y and the Crank-Nicolson scheme
is the only one which is still stable within 30 periods and therefor these are the
settings used moving forward.
46
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 4. CRESCENT WAVES
Based on the convergence study the optimized mesh has been created such that
∆x = ∆z = 1.5 H
30. The discretization in the y-direction is split into two where the
top part has ∆y = H
30 and the deep water part is graded such that the cells gets
larger an larger towards the bottom, where the bottom cell is 20 times longer than
the top one.
A sketch of the computational domain for the crescent wave instability case is shown
in ﬁgure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: Sketch of the computational domain for the crescent waves case.
The length of the domain in the z-direction is based on the perturbation wavelength
in the z-direction and is corresponding to 1
2Lz.
With this computational domain and all the settings described above the crescent
wave instability has been simulated both as a laminar case as well as with the
standard and stabilized k −ω SST turbulence models.
4.2
Results of the Laminar Model
In this section the results for the laminar case of the crescent waves CFD simula-
tion will be presented. This will be done by a qualitative analysis of the surface
observations from the model, followed by a look at the time series and a quantitative
analysis of the surface elevation and form compared to the measurements found by
Su (1982) and Fuhrman et al. (2004). Further an analysis of the Fourier amplitudes
will be discussed and the initial evolution of the perturbation amplitudes will be
compared with the theory found by McLean (1982).
4.2.1
Surface characteristics
The evolution of the computed surface of the perturbed incident waves can be seen
in ﬁgure 4.4 and 4.5. Here it is seen that the incident wave quite quickly evolve into
a pattern of crescent-shaped waves, ﬁgure 4.4(a)-(c).
47
==PAGE:62==
CHAPTER 4. CRESCENT WAVES
Figure 4.4: Computed free surface of the crescent waves (a) t = 1.5T, (b) t = 3.5T, (c) t = 5.5T
and (d) t = 6.5T
As can be seen in ﬁgure 4.4 the pattern of the crescent waves is very regular with
one row of two full crescent-shaped waves and the next with one full and two halves
as described by Su et al. (1982). This pattern is what is called the L2 pattern as
it repeats every two waves lengths. It must however be kept in mind that these
picture were made by reﬂecting the results over the z-axis as only half a wavelength
in this direction was computed and therefor the regularity in this direction must be
48
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 4. CRESCENT WAVES
Figure 4.5: Computed free surface of the crescent waves (e) t = 7.5T, (f) t = 9.5T and (g) t = 11.5T
expected.
For the next picture, ﬁgure 4.4(d) it is seen that the waves start to break. Su et al.
(1982) described this stage as that the central part of the crescent-shaped wave
accelerates and spills over the front face, which is also what can be seen here. Further
Su et al. (1982) continues to refer to the crescent waves as spilling breakers which is
indeed also what can be seen from the model.
Su et al. (1982) describes this three-dimensional pattern to be stage two of the
evolution and reports that it lasts for about 10 wavelengths, this is however not the
case in the CFD model as the evolution of the patterns happens much quicker and
only lasts for about two periods.
Further Su et al. (1982) reports that the second stage is followed by a stage where
49
==PAGE:64==
CHAPTER 4. CRESCENT WAVES
the crescent-shapes quickly disappear and the wave train returns to a more or less
two-dimensional form. This stage is what can be seen from ﬁgure 4.5 where ﬁrst the
crescent shapes are still very clear though breaking, ﬁgure 4.5(e), and next, ﬁgure
4.5(f) there is still seen some severe surface disturbances, however the crescent shapes
are more or less gone and ﬁnally in ﬁgure 4.5(g) a two-dimensional form is seen.
When comparing the free surface of the CFD simulation to the ones found by
Fuhrman et al. (2004) it can bee seen that the basic evolution is more or less the
same starting with a two-dimensional wave which develops into a crescent pattern.
However a big diﬀerence is that judging from the ﬁgures presented in Fuhrman et al.
(2004) the front face of their crescent waves seem to be much steeper then what they
appear to be in the CFD model. This will be investigated in more detail later.
In the high-order Boussinesq model used by Fuhrman et al. (2004) the simulations
break down when the waves become very steep, which they concluded would be
almost certainly due to wave breaking. This can be conﬁrmed by the CFD model
which can handle the breaking and it is clearly seen from ﬁgures 4.4 and 4.5 that the
waves do indeed break.
In the above it has been established that the model results of the surface evolution
are qualitatively similar to those observed in physical experiments and described by
Su et al. (1982). Additionally strong similarities are seen when comparing to the
computations done by Fuhrman et al. (2004).
4.2.2
Wave proﬁle
The wave proﬁles was also studied by Su et al. (1982) and a time series of the surface
elevation computed at the crescent centerline can be seen in ﬁgure 4.6.
Figure 4.6: computed time series of the crescent waves at the centerline
Su et al. (1982) describes some notable features of the wave proﬁles of the crescent
waves. One is that the height of the wave crest increases in alternate waves. This
feature can also be seen in ﬁgure 4.6 up until t/T = 8 which is where the breaking
crescent waves start to transform back to a two-dimensional form as was seen in
ﬁgure 4.5(f).
50
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 4. CRESCENT WAVES
The second feature is that the wave trough deepens in front of the following higher
wave. This feature is also seen in ﬁgure 4.6 especially from t/T = 2 to t/T = 8.
The third feature described by Su et al. (1982) is that the wavelength, which is
measured between two consecutive wave troughs, is shorter for the higher wave than
for the lower wave. This feature is however not very clear from this ﬁgure but can be
seen more clearly in ﬁgure 4.7(a) which shows the free surface elevation at t = 6.5T
for the crescent centerline.
Figure 4.7(b) shows the free surface elevation for one fourth of the perturbation
wavelength and it can be seen to ﬁt the form of a plane Stokes wave and further
compares quite well to the one found by Fuhrman et al. (2004). However it should be
noted that the ﬁgure of the wave in the Fuhrman et al. (2004) paper is at t/T = 10
whereas it here is at t/T = 6.5. The reason for this is that the CFD simulation is
seen to progress faster than the simulations by Fuhrman et al. (2004) and therefor
the waves has already broken at t/T = 10.
Figure 4.7 can be used to give a quantitative comparison of the characteristic ratios
of the crescent-shaped waves in this model to the ones computed by Fuhrman et al.
(2004) and the ones found experimentally by Su (1982). The characteristic ratios are
found from the measures seen on ﬁgure 4.7(a) and the values can be found in table
4.3.
Figure 4.7: Relative free surface elevation at t=6.5T along (a) the centerline of the crescent-shape
corresponding to z = Lz/2 and (b) at z = Lz/4. Please note that the measures h21 and h22 has
accidentally been swapped on the ﬁgure.
The ratios seen in table 4.3 gives a quantitative comparison of the characteristic
ratios as depicted in ﬁgure 4.7(a) to measurements found both from the Su (1982)
experiments and the ones found by Fuhrman et al. (2004). The characteristic ratios
51
==PAGE:66==
CHAPTER 4. CRESCENT WAVES
Table 4.3: Characteristic ratios for crescent wave patters, from both the CFD model simulation at
t/T = 6.5 and for the simulation by Fuhrman et al. (2004) for t/T = 8 as well as the experimental
results from Su (1982).
Su (1982)
Fuhrman et al. (2004)
CFD model
t/T = 8
t/T = 5.5
t/T = 6.5
t/T = 7.5
λ2/λ1
1.28
1.16
1.10
1.11
1.09
h11/h12
1.10
1.11
1.05
1.09
1.16
h21/h22
0.88
0.89
0.94
0.91
0.84
h11/h21
1.66
1.36
1.22
1.26
1.37
are given for three diﬀerent times, T/T = 5.5, t/T = 6.5 and t/T = 7.5 where the
wave at t/T = 7.5 is undergoing severe surface disturbances as can be seen in ﬁgure
4.5(e).
When comparing the characteristic ratios of this simulations to the ones found by
Fuhrman et al. (2004) they are seen to ﬁt fairly well with their t/T = 8. The
simulation done by Fuhrman et al. (2004) is assumed to be breaking at a later period
but also when comparing to these values they ﬁt quite well. One measure which
is standing out and which is consequently lower than the other results found by
simulation of experiments is the one for h11/h21. This measure describes the crest to
trough height diﬀerence of the lower and the higher wave. When this ratio i small
it seems that the CFD model fails to model the asymmetry strongly enough, even
though when qualitatively comparing ﬁgure 4.7(a) to the similar ﬁgure by Fuhrman
et al. (2004) the shape of the waves are very similar.
Another measure which is rather low when comparing with the experiments by
Su (1982) and the simulation by Fuhrman et al. (2004) is the ratio between the
wavelengths λ2/λ1. However when comparing this with the simulation done by Xue
et al. (2001) they also obtain results which are slightly low for this measure but very
similar to the ones found here. According to Xue et al. (2001) the diﬀerence in their
results for the wavelength ratio compared to the experimental results of Su (1982)
could possibly be due to lower accuracy in the measuring of the wavelengths in the
experiments. Another possible explanation for this diﬀerence described by Fuhrman
et al. (2004) is the use of periodic boundaries in the x-direction which do not allow
for free adjustment of the lengths in this direction. If this is the case this could also
explain the lower ratios in this model as it too uses periodic boundaries.
A thing that both the Xue et al. (2001) results and the results of this model has in
common is that the crescent patterns evolve very quickly and disappears again ealier
than the results found by Fuhrman et al. (2004). This could indicate the possibility
that the full asymmetry does not fully develop. When comparing with the results by
Fuhrman et al. (2004) it is seen that the λ2/λ1 ratio increases some from t/T = 8 to
t/T = 11 which helps the possibility that this asymmetry need longer to develop.
The quantitative comparison shows rather good results when compared with experi-
52
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 4. CRESCENT WAVES
mental data and results from previous simulations, however what distinguish this
model from previous models is its capability of simulating the wave breaking, hence
with the CFD model it is possible to know when the breaking occurs whereas for the
Boussinesq model by Fuhrman et al. (2004) a precise indications of the wave breaking
could not be made but speculations were made that it would roughly correspond to
the point of computational breakdown. Another interesting point about the CFD
model is that since it does not break down it might also be possible to compute
the long-term results of the instability. Though this simulation was not run for
that many periods is does show the evolution back to a two-dimensional wave train
as described by Su et al. (1982) indicating the accuracy of the model beyond the
crescent patterns to promising.
Generally the computed results seems acceptable, which gives conﬁdence in the
CFD model to accurately be able to reproduce this highly nonlinear deep water
phenomenon.
4.2.3
Fourier amplitudes
To better understand the physical process happening in the generation of crescent
waves the Fourier amplitudes at diﬀerent times has been computed as can be seen in
ﬁgure 4.8
Figure 4.8(a), shows the initial state of the Fourier amplitudes at t/T = 0. Here
the carrier wave along with its higher bound harmonics (k/k0 = 1, 2, 3) are clearly
seen. Additionally a component at k/k0 = 1.5 is seen which corresponds to the
perturbations. As no other components, besides the ones just described, are seen
at the initial state t/T = 0, this conﬁrms that the initial conditions of the model
regarding the waves are set up correctly.
Moving on to ﬁgure 4.8(b) is it seen that additional signals at k/k0 = 0.5, 2.5, 3.5
are starting to develop, and as seen in ﬁgure 4.8(c) the signal at k/k0 = 1.5 develops
to be very strong. This provides very strong evidence that the dominant physical
process at this state is indeed the established quintet resonant condition. Comparing
this result to the one found by Fuhrman et al. (2004) they are seen to be the same.
Another noteworthy thing as described by Fuhrman et al. (2004) is the relative
insigniﬁcance if the k/k0 = 0.5 subharmonic, which is consistent with triad inter-
actions in deep water, for which the subharmonic energy transfer is less than the
superharmonic.
Further when looking at ﬁgure 4.8(d) is is seen that the spikes at k/k0 = 0.5, 1.5, 2.5, 3.5
has signiﬁcantly decreased starting to look more like the initial state. Also a signiﬁ-
cant decrease in the carrier wave amplitude is seen and when comparing with ﬁgure
4.5(g) it is seen that the waves at this time are two-dimensional.
The temporal evolution of the carrier wave amplitude as well as for the perturbation
can be seen in ﬁgure 4.9.
53
==PAGE:68==
CHAPTER 4. CRESCENT WAVES
Figure 4.8: Fourrier amplitudes at diﬀerent times including the form of the surface at this time, (a)
t/T = 0, (b) t/T = 5.5, (c) t/T = 7.5 and (d) t/T = 11.5
Figure 4.9: Temporal evolution of the carrier wave amplitude (black) as well as the perturbation
amplitude (blue) along with the theoretical prediction of the growth rate by McLean (1982)
The theoretical growth rate for the class II instability from the linear stability analysis
of McLean (1982) is for the wave in question given by the following expression:
54
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 4. CRESCENT WAVES
ϵ exp

0.0316
p
g k0 t

(4.3)
In ﬁgure 4.9 it can be seen that the initial growth of the perturbations amplitudes
ﬁts rather perfectly with the theoretical prediction by McLean (1982) up until the
point where the crescent shapes start to disappear at t/T = 7.5. This ﬁt gives at
good indication that the CDF model is capable of simulating the quintet resonant
interaction of inﬁnitesimal perturbations of a plane progressive wave train.
Based on all of the results found above there is conﬁdence in the CFD model to be
able to rather accurately simulate the phenomenon of crescent waves, however as
the simulation evolve quite fast it is hard to say if a quasi-permanent state of the
crescent shapes develop, since all of the diﬀerent states in the simulation only last
a few periods. It could therefor be of interest to simulate the crescent waves with
smaller perturbations to slow down the evolution and see how the diﬀerent states of
the Class II instability then evolves.
As for the Benjamin-Feir case this instability involves wave breaking which introduces
the need of a turbulence model in order to predict the turbulence underneath the
breaking wave. As in the previous case both the standard and the stabilized k −ω
SST turbulence models has been applied to the simulations and the results of these
will be presented below.
4.3
Turbulence Model Results
In this section the result for the simulation of crescent waves using both the standard
and the stabilized k −ω SST models will be presented by a qualitative description
of the surface elevation and quantitative measurements of the characteristic ratios
and a description of the Fourier amplitudes. These results will be compared with
the results from the laminar case as well as with literature. Further a comparison on
the performance on the two diﬀerent turbulence models will be given.
4.3.1
Surface characteristics
As for the laminar case a ﬁrst study of the simulation results is a qualitative
investigations of the surface.
The evolution of the computed surface with the
standard and the stabilized k −ω SST model can be seen in ﬁgure 4.10 and 4.11
respectively.
The ﬁrst thing that can be noticed from ﬁgure 4.10 and 4.11 is that they are very
similar indicating that the two models perform the same. This will be studied in
more detail later when looking at the turbulence in the two models.
Though the two are almost identical when compared to each other some diﬀerence can
be seen when comparing to the laminar model. For the following comparison there
will be referred to the stabilized turbulence model, however the same conclusions
55
==PAGE:70==
CHAPTER 4. CRESCENT WAVES
Figure 4.10: Computed surface elevations with the standard k −ω SST model at (a) t/T = 5.5, (b)
t/T = 6.5, (c) t/T = 7.5, (d) t/T = 8.5, (e) t/T = 10.5 and (f) t/T = 12.5.
Figure 4.11: Computed surface elevations with the stabilized k −ω SST model at (a) t/T = 5.5,
(b) t/T = 6.5, (c) t/T = 7.5, (d) t/T = 8.5, (e) t/T = 10.5 and (f) t/T = 12.5.
could be drawn towards the standard model. Up until t/T = 6.5 the surface in the
laminar model and the stabilized turbulence is almost the same as seen in ﬁgure
4.4(d) and 4.11(b) respectively.
56
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 4. CRESCENT WAVES
From here a lot of disturbances are seen on the surface at t/T = 7.5 in the laminar
model, ﬁgure 4.5(e) where as the surface in the simulations with the turbulence
models, ﬁgure 4.11(c) stay more smooth. This could be due to the laminar model
developing smaller scale features which seemingly are smoothed out by the turbulence
model. Moving further it can be seen that the simulations with the turbulence models
seem to hold on to the crescent shape for about a period longer than the laminar
model.
The fact the the crescent shapes last for a little longer indicates that the tubulence
models might slow down the evolution a little making a quasi-permanent state
described by Su et al. (1982) more clear. The turbulence levels will be looked into in
more detail later on.
4.3.2
Wave proﬁle
Figure 4.12 compares the time series of the three diﬀerent models.
Figure 4.12: Computed surface elevation for the three diﬀerent turbulence models at the domain
inlet.
As can be seen in ﬁgure 4.12 the time series of the surface elevation for the two diﬀerent
turbulence models look almost identical as observed from the surface elevation picture
57
==PAGE:72==
CHAPTER 4. CRESCENT WAVES
described before. when comparing with the time series of the laminar model it can
be seen that these too are almost identical up until about t/T = 8 where the wave
height for the laminar model looks to decrease more than the ones for the turbulence
models.
Another detail which can be seen in ﬁgure 4.12 is that where the laminar model
seems to have somewhat evenly deep wave troughs after t/T = 11 they seem to still
alternate in height in the turbulence models.
Further it can be seen that the turbulence models has the same features as described
by Su et al. (1982) with alternate high and low wave height, a deepening of the
trough before the high wave crest and possibly a shorter and a longer wavelength
which will be investigated deeper in the following.
In table 4.4 the characteristic rations for all three diﬀerent cases can be seen for
t/T = 5.5, t/T = 6.5, t/T = 7.5.
Table 4.4: Characteristic ratios for crescent wave patters for the three diﬀerent models at t/T = 5.5,
t/T = 8.5 and t/T = 7.5.
Laminar
Standard
Stabilized
t/T = 5.5
t/T = 6.5
t/T = 7.5
t/T = 5.5
t/T = 6.5
t/T = 7.5
t/T = 5.5
t/T = 6.5
t/T = 7.5
λ2/λ1
1.10
1.11
1.09
1.10
1.12
1.09
1.07
1.16
1.11
h11/h12
1.05
1.09
1.16
1.05
1.09
1.18
1.05
1.09
1.17
h21/h22
0.94
0.91
0.84
0.94
0.91
0.83
0.94
0.91
0.84
h11/h21
1.22
1.26
1.37
1.22
12.6
1.34
1.22
1.26
1.32
Here it is seen that the characteristic ratios are next to identical for the three
diﬀerent models, indicating that both turbulence models can be used to accurately
describing the initial development of the crescent wave instability based in quantitative
comparisons to the experiments by Su (1982) and numerical models by Xue et al.
(2001) and Fuhrman et al. (2004). However it should be noted that the greatest
diﬀerence seen between the laminar model and the turbulence model happen after
t/T = 7.5.
4.3.3
Amplitude evolution
Figure 4.13(a)-(c) shows the amplitude evolution of the carrier wave and the pertur-
bations for all of the three models, where the theoretical line by McLean (1982) is
given in 4.3.
Here it is like for the laminar case seen that the initial growth of the perturbations
ﬁt rather perfectly for all three models. One diﬀerence which can be noticed is that
the initial growth for both the turbulence models look to grown a little higher and
for a little longer compared to the laminar case meaning that the crescent pattern
seems to develop a little further than in the laminar case.
When comparing this with the computed surface elevations seen in ﬁgure 4.4 and
4.5 for the laminar model and ﬁgure 4.10 and 4.11 for the turbulence models it
is noticed, as previously discussed, that the surface in the cases using turbulence
58
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 4. CRESCENT WAVES
Figure 4.13: Temporal evolution of the Fourier amplitudes of the carrier wave and the perturbations
along with the theoretical expression of the initial exponential growth eq. 4.3 for (a) the laminar
model, (b) the standard k −ω SST turbulence model and (c) the stabilized k −ω SST turbulence
model.
models is more smooth than in the case of the laminar model, which could possibly
cause the crescent pattern to stay a little longer before collapsing and evolving back
to a two-dimensional modulated wave train.
Another thing concerning this, which can be noticed in ﬁgure 4.13 is that even the
amplitude evolution results seem to be more smooth for the turbulence models than
for the laminar model especially considering the carrier wave.
4.3.4
Turbulence levels
As for the Benjamin-Feir case the performance of the two diﬀerent turbulence models
has been tested in order to be able to study the turbulence underneath the waves.
Figure 4.14 shows the depth and period averaged eddy viscosity for both the standard
59
==PAGE:74==
CHAPTER 4. CRESCENT WAVES
and the stabilized model. The way these results has been obtained is by averaging
a full domain at a given time t consisting of the full depth and two wave lengths.
Since number of periods are fairly small the domain has been averaged for every half
period.
Figure 4.14: Temporal evolution of the depth and period averaged eddy viscosity νT normalized by
the viscosity ν for the standard and the stabilized turbulence models.
As seen in ﬁgure 4.14 the evolution of the normalized eddy viscosity starts at the
same point for the two diﬀerent models. This is due to the initial restraint given in
the initial conditions that νT/ν should be equal to one. From here the normalized
eddy viscosity for the stabilized model drops signiﬁcantly to an insigniﬁcant level of
turbulence whereas the standard starts to slowly increase. At the point of breaking
it can be seen that the stabilized model makes a jump up to about the standard
model and that they after breaking has the same evolution though the standard
model keeps slightly higher than the stabilized one. The reason for the standard
model to have a higher level of turbulence than the stabilized model is most likely
due to the initial growth of eddy viscosity as was seen for the Benjamin-Feir case and
described by Larsen and Fuhrman (2018). An interesting thing here is however that
the turbulence levels after breaking in these models are quite close to each other,
especially compared to the Benjamin-Feir case. This is probably due to the very
rapid evolution of the instability meaning that the initial exponential growth of the
standard model does not have time to develop and hence the results from the two
models will be closer to one another.
The following ﬁgures show snapshots of the turbulence underneath the waves and
are used to compare how the standard and the stabilized models performs in terms
of handling the turbulence.
The ﬁrst ﬁgure, ﬁgure 4.15 shows the normalized eddy viscosity under the crescent
centerline at t/T = 7.5 where the ﬁrst wave breaks.
In ﬁgure 4.15 it can be seen that the standard model does have a slight level of
turbulence all the way beneath the waves whereas the the stabilized model only
has turbulence right beneath the crest breaking. However the additional level of
60
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 4. CRESCENT WAVES
Figure 4.15: Turbulence levels beneath the surface at the crescent centerline given in terms of
normalized eddy viscosity at t/T = 7.5.
turbulence in the standard model is quite low compared to what was seen in the
Benjamin-Fier case.
As this case is in three-dimensions it is also of interest to see what the turbulence
looks like beneath the Lz/4 point of the waves. This can be seen for the same time
(t/T = 7.5) in ﬁgure 4.16
Here the same tendency as for the centerline is seen with the standard model having
a higher turbulence level all the way beneath the waves whereas the stabilized model
only has turbulence right beneath the wave crest.
A big dilemma of turbulence models is the overestimation of pre-breaking turbulence,
which is highly unphysical and was seen to be a great problem in the Benjamin-Feir
case. This has also been investigated in this case. Figure 4.17 shows the turbulence
beneath the surface for the crescent centerline just before breaking at t/T = 6.5.
Here is can be seen that the standard models does indeed have some pre-breaking
turbulence whereas the stabilized has none. This is however very little especially
when comparing to the levels of pre-breaking turbulence seen in the Benjamin-Feir
case. The reason for the amount of pre-breaking turbulence to be so low is as
previously mentioned due to the very rapid evolution of the instability not allowing
the pre-breaking turbulence to develop. It should also be noted that prior to ﬁgure
4.17 in time no signiﬁcant turbulence is seen in either of the models.
As spilling breakers are known to develop quite a lot of turbulence, the turbulence
below the surface at the crescent centerline at t/T = 11.5 is shown in ﬁgure 4.18 to
61
==PAGE:76==
CHAPTER 4. CRESCENT WAVES
Figure 4.16: Turbulence levels beneath the surface at Lz/4 given in terms of normalized eddy
viscosity at t/T = 7.5.
Figure 4.17: Turbulence levels beneath the surface at the crescent centerline given in terms of
normalized eddy viscosity at t/T = 6.5.
see how the turbulence develops later on in the model.
62
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 4. CRESCENT WAVES
Figure 4.18: Turbulence levels beneath the surface at the crescent centerline given in terms of
normalized eddy viscosity at t/T = 11.5.
Here it is seen that at this point both models has develop a very high amount of
turbulence beneath the surface but that a tendency of overestimating the turbulence
still is seen for the standard model.
Overall is is seen that as for the Benjamin-Fier case the results indicate that the
stabilized model does perform better in estimating the turbulence beneath the
breaking waves though the diﬀerence between the models are rather small in this
case most likely due to the rapid development of the instability.
63
==PAGE:78==
==PAGE:79==
Chapter 5
Conclusions
This thesis presents the numerical study of two- and three-dimensional instabilities
of deep-water wave trains through CFD simulations. The software used for the
simulations is open source CFD software OpenFOAM version v1912, including the
waves2FOAM toolbox by Jacobsen et al. (2012).
It is shown that the models results of the Benjamin-Feir instability compare qualitative
well with experiments regarding the evolution of the wave train from more or less
uniform, to start undergoing modulations and eventually take on a ’pulse train’
appearance where individual wave crests approach zero in amplitude.
The initial growth rate of the side bands is shown to compare very closely with that
predicted by McLean (1982) as well as ﬁtting the experimental data obtained by
Tulin and Waseda (1999). This includes that the side bands evolution ends in a
strong asymmetry of the lower and the upper side band with the amplitude of the
lower side band increasing to a value greater than that of the carrier wave resulting
permanent downshifting.
From Fourier analysis of the space series it was found that quartet resonant inter-
actions in the form of a carrier wave with two side bands are indeed the dominant
physical process of the Benjamin-Feir instability and this analysis also conﬁrm the
permanent downshift.
The model shows that the wave train when undergoing the Benjamin-Feir instability
ultimately leads to wave breaking around the modulation peak. Qualitative analysis
of the surface elevation suggests small plunging type breakers however the results
are not all clear and should be studied further.
The standard and the stabilized k −ω SST turbulence models has been used to
analyse the turbulence underneath the breaking wave. Here it was found the the
standard model overestimates extremely large amounts of turbulence already prior
to wave breaking and can therefor not give an reliable picture of what is happening
beneath the wave. The stabilized model on the other hand showed some but little
turbulence underneath the wave at breaking and only at breaking which suggests
65
==PAGE:80==
CHAPTER 5. CONCLUSIONS
that this model is more likely in being reliable when analyzing turbulence underneath
breaking waves. Additionally the fact that only little turbulence was generated
underneath the waves suggest breakers of the plunging type as these do not generate
as much turbulence as spilling breakers.
Further it is shown that the model results of the crescent waves simulations compare
both qualitatively and quantitatively well with experimental results and previous
simulations giving conﬁdence in the model.
The initial growth rate of the crescent wave instability is seen to closely match the
one predicted by McLean (1982) through linear analysis up until the point where
the breaking becomes so strong that the crescent shapes start to disappear and the
wave train returns to a two-dimensional form.
Through Fourier analyses of the space series it was found that the quintet resonant
interaction is indeed the dominant physical process for the crescent wave instability
formed by the carrier wave and a pair of symmetric satellites.
If was found that for this case the standard and stabilized k −ω SST turbulence
model has a rather similar performance in predicting the turbulence levels underneath
the breaking waves for such a rapid evolution of the instability as seen for the crescent
waves, however the standard model still overestimates the turbulence slightly when
compared to the stabilized model which make the stabilized k −ω SST turbulence
model the preferred choice.
All in all it can be concluded that the CFD model performs well in simulating wave
instabilities both of the initial growth and both for the Benjamin-Feir instability
and the crescent waves, but it also shows qualitatively good results past the initial
instability suggesting that it might also be possible to model the long time evolution
of wave instabilities through CFD.
The simulations presented in this thesis is (to the authors knowledge) the ﬁrst
CFD simulations of deep-water wave instabilities and is shown to be applicable in
simulating these rather facinating phenomena.
66
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
Benjamin, T. B. and Feir, J. E. (1967). The disintegration of wave trains on deep
water part 1. theory. Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 27(3):417–430.
Berberovi´c, E., van Hinsberg, N. P., Jakirli´c, S., Roisman, I. V., and Tropea, C.
(2009). Drop impact onto a liquid layer of ﬁnite thickness: Dynamics of the cavity
evolution. Phys. Rev. E, 79:036306.
Fenton, J. (1988). The numerical solution of steady water wave problems. Computers
& Geosciences, 14(3):357–368.
Fuhrman, D. R., Madseb, P. A., and Bingham, H. B. (2004). A numerical study of
crescent waves. Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 513:309–341.
Jacobsen, N. G., Fuhrman, D. R., and Fredsøe, J. (2012). A Wave Generation
Toolbox for the Open-Source CFD Library: OpenFoam®. International Journal
for Numerical Methods in Fluids, 70(9):1073–1088.
Lake, B. M., Yuen, H. C., Rungaldier, H., and Ferguson, W. E. (1977). Nonlinear
deep-water waves: theory and experiment. part 2. evolution of a continuous wave
train. Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 83(1):49–74.
Larsen, B. E. and Fuhrman, D. R. (2018). On the over-production of turbulence
beneath surface waves in reynolds-averaged navier–stokes models. Journal of Fluid
Mechanics, 853:419–460.
Larsen, B. E., Furhman, D. R., and Roenby, J. (2019). Performance of interfoam on
the simulation of progressive waves. Coastal Engineering Journal, 61:3:380–400.
Madsen, P. (2017). Streamfunction solutions for waves and currents. A lecture note.
DTU, Lyngby.
Madsen, P. A., Bingham, H. B., and Liu, H. (2002). A new boussinesq method for
fully nonlinear waves from shallow to deep water. Journal of Fluid Mechanics,
462:1–30.
McLean, J. W. (1982). Instabilities of ﬁnite-amplitude water waves. Journal of Fluid
Mechanics, 114:315–330.
McLean, J. W., Ma, Y. C., Martin, D. U., Saﬀman, P. G., and Yuen, H. C. (1981).
67
==PAGE:82==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Three-dimensional instability of ﬁnite-amplitude water waves. Physical Review
Letters, 46(13):817–820.
Melville, W. K. (1982). The instability and breaking of deep-water waves. Journal
of Fluid Mechanics, 115:165–185.
Menter, F., Kuntz, M., and Langtry, R. (2003). Ten years of industrial experience
with the sst turbulence model. Proceedings of the fourth international symposium
on turbulence, heat and mass transfer, page 625–632.
Menter, F. R. (1994). Two-equation eddy-viscosity turbulence models for engineering
applications. Aiaa Journal, 32(3):1598–605.
Shrira, V. I., Badulin, S. I., and Kharif, C. (1996). A model of water wave ‘horse-shoe’
patterns. Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 318:375–405.
Su, M.-Y. (1982). Three-dimensional deep-water waves. part 1. experimental mea-
surement of skew and symmetric wave patterns. Journal of Fluid Mechanics,
124:73–108.
Su, M.-Y., Bergin, M., Marler, P., and Myrick, R. (1982). Experiments on nonlinear
instabilities and evolution of steep gravity-wave trains. Journal of Fluid Mechanics,
124:45–72.
Svendsen, I. A. and Jonsson, I. G. (1982). Hydrodynamics of coastal regions. Den
Private Ingeniørfond Technical Univ. Denmark, 1st edition.
Tulin, M. P. and Waseda, T. (1999). Laboratory observations of wave group evolution,
including breaking eﬀects. Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 378:197–232.
Xue, M., Xu, H., Liu, Y., and Yue, D. K. P. (2001). Computations of fully nonlinear
three-dimensional wave–wave and wave–body interactions. part 1. dynamics of
steep three-dimensional waves. Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 438:11–39.
68
