==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
Lucija Barišić
Kongens Lyngby
September, 2020
==PAGE:2==
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
Master Thesis
September, 2020
By
Lucija Barišić
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil Engineering, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This work represents the partial fulfilment of the requirements for obtaining the Master of
Science in Civil Engineering degree. The Master’s thesis is a product of eight months
research and it is worth 35 ECTS credits. The work has been conducted with the Depart-
ment of Civil Engineering at Technical University of Denmark.
The work has been supervised by:
Main Supervisor
Eyal Levenberg
Associate Professor
Technical University of Denmark
Secondary supervisor
Asmus Skar
Assistant Professor
Technical University of Denmark
Lucija Barišić - s182579
Signature
Date
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
ii
30.9.2020.
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Even though the civil infrastructure (especially pavement systems) is of great importance
for the society, it has not yet undergone a considerable digital transformation. Amongst
many concepts emerging from the ongoing digital revolution, the Digital Twin (DT) has a
great potential for its application within the civil infrastructure. Its application could possi-
bly offer: (i) real time structural monitoring; (ii) support maintenance-related decisions and
activities; and (iii) ability to examine the structural responses under different operational
scenarios.
This study aims to adapt and apply the DT concept to an asphalt road - with focus on
the thermal state of the system. Specifically, the work deals with developing a suitable
method for near-real time parameter updating. The DT formulation developed in this work
integrates a one-dimensional thermal model and a parameter updating method based on
control theory. The necessary data for establishing the DT was acquired from a sensed
road. The input environmental data of the thermal model was measured by a weather
station in close proximity of the road, while the in-pavement temperature measurements
needed for the updating process were obtained from sensors installed at different loca-
tions.
The work shows that the developed DT formulation is capable of generating the DT of
an asphalt road. Furthermore, the parameter updating method based on control theory
proved to be computationally efficient and feasible technique for near real-time parameter
updating. It was also determined that the accuracy of the results (twiness level) strongly
depends on the relevancy of the available weather data.
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
This work was carried out as part of the Snowless project. Snowless has received funding
form the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under grant
agreement No 831120.
The work presented in this Master’s thesis was achieved under the supervision of As-
sociate Professor Eyal Levenberg, and Assistant Professor Asmus Skar from the Civil
Engineering Department at Technical University of Denmark. I would like to express my
gratitude for your great guidance and support. Throughout the work you have advised,
inspired and challenged me to approach the problem in a creative and innovative way.
I would also like to thank all the important people who helped me and kept me going
through these strange times.
Lucija Barišić
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Digital transformation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Digital twin concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Transportation infrastructure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Thesis structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Literature review
5
2.1
Digital twin
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Origins
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
Updating methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.3
Applications within civil infrastructure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Thermal modelling of asphalt pavements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Objectives and methodology
16
4
Formulation of a thermal digital twin
17
4.1
Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Parameter sensitivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3
Parameter updating based on control theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3.1
PI controller tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.4
Computational implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5
Application of a thermal digital twin
27
5.1
Input weather conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2
Synthetic case
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2.1
Data generation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2.2
Analysis and results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.3
Asphalt road
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.3.1
Experimental setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.3.2
Field measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.3.3
Analysis and results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6
Conclusion
66
6.1
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
6.2
Findings and discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
6.3
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
6.4
Recommendations for future work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
References
69
A Appendix A: Developed code
74
B Appendix B: Sensor Measurements
94
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
v
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
In 2018 more than half (55%) of the world’s population lived in urban areas, and this
number is expected to reach 68% by 2050 [1]. These statistics highlight the fact that
man-made civil infrastructure is crucially important for economic prosperity and for the
well-being of society, providing essential surroundings that support all human activities [2].
1.1
Digital transformation
Digital transformation is a part of the ongoing fourth industrial revolution (Industry 4.0)
which is characterized by integration of physical systems and technology to create so-
called cyber-physical systems [3]. Within the civil engineering profession, the term used
for describing this digital revolution is Construction 4.0 [4]. This transformation is en-
abled by rapid development in technologies such as: sensors, Internet of Things (IoT),
augmented reality, additive manufacturing, high-performance computing, and smart ma-
terials [4]. Some of these technologies are emerging, e.g. equipping new buildings with
sensors to monitor indoor climate; these have already proven to reduce operating costs
and energy consumption [5]. Another example of the digitalization progress within civil in-
frastructure is the sensing of mechanical responses of bridges as a means of performing
condition monitoring of structural integrity (i.e., structural health monitoring (SHM)) [6].
Even though a modern and well maintained civil infrastructure is a cornerstone of any
economy, the construction industry has not yet undergone a major digital transformation
compared to other industrial sectors. In effect, the built infrastructure itself lags behind in
terms of digitalization compared to other products (e.g., airplanes, cars, ships). This state
of affairs directly translates into lower construction efficiency as well as to sub-optimal per-
formance of the built products. In this context, digitalization of construction industry could
bring substantial cost savings in design, construction, and operation phases [7]. Never-
theless, investments in research and development (R&D) related to industry’s economic
impact are ranked as one of the lowest with only around 1% of net sales being invested
back in R&D [8]. There are several possible reasons for this lag in implementation of
technology within the construction industry; these include [8]: (i) the high complexity of
projects; (ii) unpredictable environmental events; (iii) fragmented supply chain and need
to cooperate between a large number of different participants; (iv) emphasizing the con-
struction phase of the structure rather than the operational phase; and (v) strong industry
resistance to changes - deeply rooted conservatism.
1.2
Digital twin concept
Wireless sensor networks are a fundamental level in the cyber-physical system architec-
ture [9]. This technological advancement allows for wide-area instrumentation of large
and often remote civil infrastructures because of the ability to deploy a great number of
sensors without the necessity for physical cables. Nonetheless, it is not possible to sense
the entire structure and therefore sensing can only be realized at a few pre-selected loca-
tions. In general, interpretation of sensor data takes two different paths: (i) observing the
data time-history and evaluating changes that indicate an emerging issue by means of
signal processing techniques (e.g. SHM); and (ii) integrating the sensor data with math-
ematical modeling of the infrastructure to complete the structural understanding - with
specific attention to the phenomenon being sensed. The latter path is closely related to
the concept of a digital twin (DT), which has emerged from the Industry 4.0 approach.
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
1
==PAGE:8==
The DT concept is graphically illustrated in Figure 1.1. The upper part represents the
real environment hosting a physical structure (e.g., bridge, road, tunnel, building) as it
ages through time. To facilitate the illustration only two time instances (out of an infinite
number) are included. The structure boundaries, configuration, and connectivity are all
depicted with an octagon shape bounded by a solid line; the inner shading portrays the
physical properties of the different structural parts. This shading changes as time passes
to indicate evolution in properties. The outer shading represents environmental conditions
to which the structure is exposed and affected by; as indicated graphically, these also
change in-between the two time instances.
The three circular markers superposed over each of the octagons represent a finite num-
ber of sensors that are embedded in the structure; these sensors continually read the
physical state at their location, e.g., vibration, humidity, temperature.
The change in
colour of the sensor markers, in-between the two time instances, graphically indicates
change in sensor readings. The rectangular shaped markers superposed over the outer
shading denote an array of sensors monitoring the prevailing environmental conditions;
the readings of these sensors also change with time.
Figure 1.1: Digital twin concept
The lower part of the figure represents a virtual environment corresponding to the real
environment. It hosts a digital representation of the structure - a digital twin model (DTM)
- as well as a digital representation of the environmental conditions. The model’s mathe-
matical formulation (e.g., differential equations) and its boundary conditions are depicted
as an octagon shape to correspond to the real structure (bounded by a dashed line).
Additionally there are three sensor icons superposed over the DTM. These are virtual
sensors, they produce model-calculated readings corresponding to the readings from the
real sensors embedded within the physical structure. The pattern fill within the octagon
itself illustrates the completion of structural information in-between the sensors by solv-
ing the model. The colour of this fill represents the numerical values of the governing
model parameters - which can change over time. In general terms, the DTM is expected
to continually, and with little time delay, mimic the state of the real structure.
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
2
==PAGE:9==
The real environment and the structure are continually evolving; the changes in condition
are captured by the sensors and transmitted to the virtual sensors via wired or wireless
data streams (represented by dotted lines). For the DTM to be able to mimic the behaviour
of the real structure the governing model parameters, and possibly the model formulation
itself, need to be properly updated. What drives this update is the discrepancy between
measured and calculated sensor readings. Updating activities aim at minimizing the dif-
ference between measured and calculated sensor readings. By continously monitoring
this discrepancy and updating the DTM as needed, it becomes a virtual duplicate of the
sensed structure under the prevailing environmental conditions.
In the context of civil infrastructure digitalization (Construction 4.0 revolution) the DT con-
cept deals with the creation of a virtual duplicate of a sensed structure. So doing can
offer remote real-time structural monitoring, support for maintenance-related decisions
and activities, and ability to examine responses under different (even imagined) opera-
tional scenarios.
1.3
Transportation infrastructure
This work deals with the transportation infrastructure (e.g. bridges and roads) which is
a core component of the civil infrastructure, facilitating the safe and efficient mobility of
both people and goods within and between urban areas [10]. This infrastructure stretches
across large geographical areas, and is expected to provide uninterrupted service under
ever changing environmental conditions; it is considered the most expensive public in-
frastructure (per capita). For example, in the EU there are 5.5 million kilometers of roads,
accommodating the transport of 81% of total passengers and 73% of all goods. The
total value of this road network is estimated at more than eight trillion euros [11]. The
most widespread pavement type within the transportation infrastructure are asphalt pave-
ments, wherein the upper layer(s) are made of asphalt concrete – a three-phase material
composed of aggregates (range of sizes), asphalt binder (bitumen), and air-voids [12].
This material is also the preferred choice for surfacing bridge decks, tunnels, and parking
houses [13].
Considering the large scale of asphalt roads it is important that the digital transformation
Industry 4.0 does not bypass it. According to EAPA1 the digitalization within the pavement
industry is titled Asphalt 4.0, and it includes the use of technology to advance aspects such
as efficiency, sustainability, and reliability [14]. Monitoring of asphalt pavement structural
condition is a fundamental part of asphalt pavement maintenance. It focuses on preserv-
ing the pavement’s condition in order to minimize the need for maintenance and costly
reconstruction and repair. Compared to traditional monitoring techniques (e.g., core sam-
pling and visual surveys), new sensing technologies could provide more precise informa-
tion about the system’s condition without lane closures, material sampling, or reliance on
distress appearing on the surface [15].
The mechanical condition of asphalt roads is governed by the prevailing temperature level
within the structure. This is because the layers – and specifically the asphalt concrete –
are highly thermosensitive [16]. Given the exposure to environmental impacts, pavement
temperature conditions exhibit constant change under service [16]. Thus, the overall aim
herein is to apply the DT twin concept to the thermal state of an asphalt road potentially
offering: (i) real time monitoring; (ii) support for maintenance-related decisions and ac-
tivities (especially for the ride surface); and (iii) possibility to evaluate the influence of
extreme climatic events.
1European Asphalt Pavement Association
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
3
==PAGE:10==
1.4
Thesis structure
The text commences with a literature review (Chapter 2) that covers two main topics: (i)
digital twin - origins, updating methods, and application within civil infrastructure; and (ii)
thermal modeling of asphalt roads. In Chapter 3, the specific objectives and methodology
of the work are stated. This if followed by developed formulation of the thermal DT in
Chapter 4. Then, the formulation is demonstrated via application to synthetic data and
to real field-measured data (Chapter 5). Lastly, Chapter 6 offers a short summary of the
work, as well as conclusions and recommendations for future work. The thesis terminates
with two appendices in which the developed code and the sensor measurements are
presented in great detail.
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
4
==PAGE:11==
2
Literature review
In this chapter the findings of the literature study will be presented. The study covers two
main topics: the DT concept and thermal modelling of asphalt pavements. In the first part,
origins of the DT and state of the art are reviewed, with an emphasis on the model updating
methods. In the second part, different approaches for establishing a thermal model of an
asphalt road are examined. Relevant findings are summarized and presented at the end
of the chapter.
2.1
Digital twin
The DT concept has emerged from the current industrial revolution - Industry 4.0, and
it has been named as one of the top ten strategic technology trends in 2017 [17]. It is
predicted that by 2021 more than half of the large industrial companies will use the DT
technology, which could increase their efficiency by approximately 10% [18].
While the concept has many definitions, the basic idea behind it is that a real (physical)
system is represented by a virtual (digital) construct which has embedded all the infor-
mation about the real system, as well as a link between the two throughout the life cycle
of the system [19]. This link between the two spaces (real and virtual) is the innovative
part of the DT concept [20]. The physical space of the DT consists of the real system,
embedded sensors as well as external sensors which monitor the environment, commu-
nication interfaces and other devices. The measured data read by the sensors is fed to
the virtual space where the digital model exists. The digital model is updated so that the
DT becomes an accurate and live representation of the physical system. Additionally, the
DT has the ability to represent the context (environment) in which the physical system is
operating [21]. The model can be called a DT as long as it represents the object and its
context in a sufficiently accurate manner [18].
2.1.1
Origins
The term DT was first coined by Michael Grieves in 2002 at a presentation about the
creation of a Product Lifecyle Management (PLM) center at University of Michigan. In
that presentation Grieves showed a slide (Figure 2.1) representing a ”Conceptual Ideal for
Product Lifecycle Management”. The basis for the idea was that a system is consisted of
two systems; a physical one that always exists and a virtual one containing the information
gathered from the physical one. This implies that there is a link between the two, i.e. that
there is mirroring or twinning of the two. In other words, what exists in the real space also
exists in the virtual one. This principle served as basis for defining the DT concept [19].
Figure 2.1: Conceptual idea for Product Lifecycle Management [19].
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
5
==PAGE:12==
NASA was one of the first institutions that started using the DT concept in their engineering
practice. In a NASA technology road-map from 2012, a long-term concept called the
Virtual Digital Fleet Leader was introduced. The idea behind it is to integrate the high-
fidelity models and simulation to a real time virtual representation of a flying vehicle, as
well as continuously forecast its health to determine the remaining life of the vehicle and
the probability of a mission to succeed [22].
Today, more industries are starting to implement the DT concept in their engineering prac-
tice. For example, in manufacturing, the application of the DT concept was done on the
production system with human-robot collaboration. There, the DT concept is capable of
simulating the assembly workstation and analyzing the process ergonomics [23]. In the
offshore industry, the DT concept is used in monitoring of remote structures during their
operational life, more precisely the assessment prediction models are based on the DT
concept [24]. The DT is also finding its application in wind and solar farms, maritime
sector and risk analysis [20].
As described by Erikstad [25] the main characteristics of a DT are:
• Identity - DT and the physical asset are connected one-to-one
• Representation - DT needs to capture all the essential physical characteristics of
the physical asset in a digital format (e.g., CAD/CAE/FEM models)
• State - DT is capable of interpreting measured data and describing state of the asset
in real time
• Behaviour - DT is capable of capturing response of the asset towards environmen-
tal influences (e.g., temperature, force)
• Context - DT is capable of describing the environment (context) in which the asset
is operating
Furthermore, there are several advantages of the DT found in the literature. One is that
the concept gives an opportunity for real-time monitoring of assets as well as data analysis
which could potentially notify problems before they happen, i.e., the DT could be used for
preventive maintenance [21]. Additionally, the concept could be used as a base for further
developments and upgrades of the asset [21].
Another benefit of the concept is that it can be used for simulation of virtual experiments,
instead of performing them in real life since they are often dangerous, detrimental and
extremely expensive [20]. Since the DT is a virtual representation, it is easier to have
controlled test conditions to study and exploit the model compared to its real counterpart.
Data coming from these tests can than be used for future design improvements, develop-
ment of new design codes, prediction of system’s responses to different excitation coming
from the environment, optimization of the maintenance, etc. [21].
Besides providing the connection between the real and virtual space, as well as compre-
hensive understanding of the asset, DT is capable of storing the data base and visually
representing it. All this enables for better asset management since the engineers have
very accessible information which could help them bring decisions in a faster manner
[26]. Likewise, the concept could substantially improve the collaboration between the
designers and users by offering a more transparent channel for communication [27].
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
6
==PAGE:13==
2.1.2
Updating methods
The essence of the DT concept is its ability to mimic the real structure in an accurate
manner. Although highly sophisticated mathematical models are available, their practi-
cal application often results in substantial disparity between the analytical prediction and
measured experimental data observed by sensors. This discrepancy can be decreased
by changing model parameters and assumptions on which the model is built, until a sat-
isfactory result is achieved [28]. Traditionally this update of model was done using a trial
and error approach, but in recent times with development in computational power many
intelligent techniques were developed known as model updating methods [29].
Model updating is a process of minimizing the discrepancy between the model parame-
ters of the digital representation and real structure by adjusting the parameters, and it is
commonly seen as an optimization problem [24]. The aim of these methods is to develop
a better numerical model which can later be used for value predictions under alternative
load application or changes in structural configuration [29]. The model updating methods
can also be identified as model calibration, parameter identification or estimation [30]. Us-
ing model updating, the accuracy of the mathematical model is improved in order to get a
closer match to the observed behaviour of the real structure [31]. In civil engineering the
term model updating is usually associated with updating of a finite element (FE) model,
but same principles can be applied for other kinds of parametric models [30].
Figure 2.2: A typical finite element model updating procedure [32].
A key issue in model updating is the choice of design parameters to be updated. The un-
certainty of model parameters in some cases is clear, while in others it is difficult to identify
the physical parameters which cause the discrepancy between the model and real struc-
ture [33]. The discrepancy between the model and physical structure rises from different
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
7
==PAGE:14==
material and geometrical properties, boundary and load conditions, and different simplifi-
cations based on which the real structure is modelled [30]. Mottershead and Friswell [29]
recognized the three most common forms of model uncertainty which influences the error
in model predictions as: (i) model structure errors which often occur when there is a great
uncertainty related to the governing equations which describe the physical structure (e.g.
modelling of highly non-linear behaviours) ; (ii) model parameter errors which include
wrong assumptions and simplifications, as well as incorrect modelling of boundary condi-
tions; and (iii) model order errors which emerge from discretization of complex physical
systems. Therefore, the physical structure needs to be investigated to a great extent and
a mathematical model which best represents the structure should be chosen. This choice
and the selection of both the mathematical model representing the structure and param-
eters for the updating process still depends on the engineering judgment of the user [34].
A typical FE model update procedure as illustrated in [32] is shown in Figure 2.2.
Within the FE model updating the methods are often categorized in two categories: direct
and iterative. Direct methods include earliest methods for FE model updating which have
the ability to reproduce the experimental data without iterations, thus they are computa-
tionally more efficient. Direct methods include methods such as: matrix update, Lagrange
multiplier, optimal matrix and eigenstructure assignment methods [32]. These methods
are considered obsolete since the accuracy of the results depends highly on measured
data quantity and quality [31], and the physical parameters subjected to update are not
taken into account [34].
Iterative methods fall into the second category, and they are based on changing the values
of model parameters in an iterative manner until satisfactory result is obtained. This way,
they are more flexible than the direct methods and also physically more realistic [31]. An
example of an iterative method is FE model updating based on sensitivity analysis [28].
In this method, it is assumed that the measured (experimental) data is the perturbation of
calculated data of the mathematical model. Thus, for these methods to be effective the
predicted values of the model need to be close to the experimental data [34]. Often, the
optimization problem in this method, is based on minimizing the change of the parameter
(residual norm) using linear least squares method which gives an updated parameter
value [35].
The matrix-update in which the structural model matrices are being subjected to changes
is also an example of an iterative FE model update method [34]. Additionally, another
iterative technique is the probabilistic model updating method (uncertainty quantification
method) based on the Bayes theorem. Since this method is based on using the obser-
vations to update the hypothesis’ probability of being true, the uncertainties associated
with parameter estimation in traditional optimization based updating methods, could be
avoided [32]. Mares, Mottershead and Friswell [36] propose yet another updating method
(stochastic model) in which the predefined parameters are reproduced using the Monte-
Carlo analysis in order to produce multiple predicted results.
Moreover, with development in the computational capabilities, and considering that up-
dating methods are essentially optimization problems, new model updating methods are
emerging based on artificial intelligence techniques. These include: the Nelder-Mead
simplex method, sequential quadratic programming technique, particle-swarm optimiza-
tion, Bayesian approach trained using Monte Carlo method, genetic algorithms, simulated
annealing and artificial neural networks [34].
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
8
==PAGE:15==
Control theory deals with signals and systems; the control systems are constructed in a
way that a certain measured signal (e.g. error tracking, actuator inputs) does not exceed
a predefined level. These systems are usually based on feedback, i.e. the signal which
is being controlled is continuously compared to a certain desired reference signal, while
the discrepancy between the two is used for corrective control that is achieved by means
of a controller [37]. In other words, the main objective of control system engineering is
to force the system output to behave in a certain way by manipulating the system input
[38]. In feedback control (closed feedback control loops), the system is controlled by a
controller. This controller is error based; the input to the controller is a continuous signal
of the difference between the measured (experimental or desired) and actual behaviour,
while the output of the controller is a function of the error [39]. A graphical representation
of this concept is given in Figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: Block diagram of a feedback control loop [39].
Amongst the available, the Proportional-Integral-Derivative (PID) controller is considered
the most commonly used in engineering practice [40]. It is widely accepted because of
its simplicity since it is based on derivation/differentiation and integration, i.e., there is no
need for profound knowledge about the control theory. Even though it is considered a
relatively simple concept, in the same time PID controller is a sophisticated tool capable
of capturing the system’s history (integral part) and predict future behaviour of the system
(derivative part) [41]. The controller’s output is mathematically expressed as,
output(t) = Kpe(t) −Ki
Z t
0
e
 t′
dt′ + Kd
de(t)
dt
(2.1)
where e(t) represents the error signal (input of the controller), while KP , KI and KD rep-
resent the proportional, integral and derivative term respectively [42]. The feedback loop
with a PID controller is illustrated as a block diagram in Figure 2.4. As it can be seen from
the figure the PID controller is situated in a feedback control closed loop system. The vari-
able e(t) represents the error signal, i.e. the discrepancy between the desired state and
feedback signal. Furthermore, the error signal is the input of the PID controller in which
it computes the derivative and integral of the error signal in respect to time. The output
signal (control signal) of the controller is a sum of the proportional gain (KP ) multiplied by
the magnitude of the error, the integral gain (KI) multiplied with the integral of the error
and the derivative term (KP ) multiplied with the derivation of the signal. This control signal
is then fed to the plant which represents the system which is controlled. This produces a
new output signal, which is fed back (feedback signal) to the beginning and compared to
the desired value to compute a new error signal, and the loop starts again [41].
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
9
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.4: Block diagram of a feedback control loop with PID controller [42].
The three terms of the PID controller have different influences on the control signal. The
proportional term, as the name suggests, proportionally increases the control signal for
the same error values. This action causes the system to ”act” in a faster manner, but
also it can cause overshooting of the output signal. This term also tends to reduce the
steady-state error of the output signal [41]. The integral gain is added to the controller for
long term precision. If only integral term is used it will cause considerable decrease in
stability of the signal (making it more oscillatory) [43]. In combination with the proportional,
integral term aids the reduction of the steady-state error [41]. The derivative term, when
added to the controller, helps with stabilizing the output signal by ”anticipating” the error.
It tends to add damping within the system which directly decreases the the overshoot [41].
In the same time, it is the mos problematic of the three terms since it highly depends on
the sampling irregularities, noise and high frequency oscillations [43]. These effects of
the three terms on the controller output signal are summarized in Table 2.1.
Table 2.1: PID controller terms effect on controller output signal [41]
Controller gain
Rise time
Overshoot
Settling time
Steady-state error
KP
Decrease
Increase
Small change
Decrease
KI
Decrease
Increase
Increase
Decrease
KD
Small change
Decrease
Decrease
No change
The controller does not have to be strictly a PID controller, depending on the problem
only parts of the controller can be utilized, i.e. the controller becomes: P controller, PD
controller or a PI controller. In order to get an accurate response and to improve the
performance of the controller the three gains need to be properly tuned (adjusted). This
process can be done manually or by utilizing different developed tuning methods (e.g.
Ziegler–Nichols rule or the Cohen–Coon method) [44].
The control theory is not extensively used in model updating. In their paper Sarma et
al. [45] propose a closed feedback control loop in which the control and model updating
algorithms are combined for real-time optimization of reservoir management. In [46] the
idea of using the eigenstructure assignment concept from control theory for solving the
problem of model updating is discussed.
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
10
==PAGE:17==
2.1.3
Applications within civil infrastructure
A comprehensive literature research on the application of DT in civil infrastructure was
conducted in [47]. The work proposes a framework for classification, since in most of the
literature the DT concept is not precisely mentioned, even though a similar technology is
used. The proposed classification consist of three concepts: the digital model that is not
linked with the real space, i.e., only exists in the virtual space; the digital shadow in which
the digital model is linked to the real space with a one directional link, i.e., data is fed to
the model, but the model does not have the capability to change the real space; and the
DT in which the real and virtual space are fully integrated. As examined in the research
paper, civil engineering industry is moving beyond the use of digital model (e.g., BIM,
CAD, FEM) to use of digital shadows, but the use of DT concept is not yet fully accepted
in the industry [47].
One of the first applications of the DT within the civil infrastructure, was the so called
Smart city1 concept, which is enabled due to rapid development of IoT technology. The
data coming from IoT and DTs could help with planning and development of the cities,
as well as bringing valuable insights for building new smart cities and saving the city’s
energy consumption [49]. An example of a smart city which utilizes DT technologies is
Hong Kong with its digital counterpart Neuron City that is able to monitor, predict and
control different parts of the physical city. Virtual Singapore is a first city-scale DT, with
map and terrain data, live traffic, demographic and climate information [48].
The DT concept could potentially be utilized in all the phases of the structure’s life cycle.
For example, in the construction phase it gives the opportunity to visualize the structure
before and during the construction. This leads to better communication between different
participants in the project, as well as easier exchange of various solutions and design
alternatives [27]. During its operational life, by sensing the structure it could give valu-
able insights about the structure’s health [48]. Such use of the DT concept is proposed
in [50], where a DT of a prestressed precast concrete bridge was built for bridge main-
tenance (damage on the surface). The idea is to base the DT on high accuracy BIM
model, where the real state of the bridge is input to the model as scanned-surface which
was acquired using high quality mobile devices, unmanned aerial vehicles or other 3D
scanning technologies. This DT is being continuously updated with a scanned model of
the reality during the whole life-cycle of a bridge, providing rich source of information for
the bridge maintenance [50].
An exploratory study for creating a DT for cable-supported bridges was proposed in [51].
The study introduces a concept for creating a DT for health monitoring of a bridge based
on mobile mapping (GIS), building information modelling (BIM), 3D point clouds and ma-
chine learning. Shim, Kang and Dang [52] also proposed the use of DT concept for
maintenance of cable supported bridges, by utilizing point cloud data and image based
inspection. In [53] the paper deals with reviewing the challenges of sensing during oper-
ational life of a structure which could prove a base for developing DTs. A demonstration
is given based on applying sensing technology on a wind turbine, developing a suitable
FEM model which is updated based on the measured data. Qiuchen Lu et al. showed in
their work [54] a case study of a dynamic DT for a building. They proposed a dynamic
five layer DT architecture capable of integrating data with its application which could pos-
sibly support asset management, operational and maintenance management, and help
reducing the gap between the users (humans) and buildings. The proposed system was
demonstrated on a Cambridge University campus building.
1Smart city is a city where data and technology are used in such manner to help with urban challenges [48].
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
11
==PAGE:18==
2.2
Thermal modelling of asphalt pavements
The environment in which the pavement system is usually placed is exposed to fluc-
tuations of ambient temperature, solar radiation, precipitation, etc., which all influence
pavement’s temperature field. Thus, the properties of asphalt materials are subjected
to considerable variations caused by temperature changes during its service life. These
variations have significant impact on the aging of asphalt materials [55]. Considering
that the environmental impacts can lead to reduced stability of the pavement, the infor-
mation about the temperature distribution aids pavement engineers with modulus back-
calculations, pavement deflection, frost penetration estimation, etc. [56].
Effects of the frost action, which is a directly induced by temperature changes, are con-
sidered to strongly influence the deterioration process of asphalt pavements [57]. The
temperature variations could also cause premature cracks in the asphalt concrete over-
lay, where the thermal stress is induced by daily and seasonal temperature fluctuations.
These temperature changes greatly affect the binder properties of the asphalt pavement
(aging, stiffness, penetration) [58]. Furthermore, rooting of roads which can be formed
due to increase in pavement temperature is another example of deteriorating temperature
influence on the asphalt pavement.[59].
These negative impacts directly lead to higher maintenance costs. Thus, there is a need
for establishing reliable thermal (heat-transfer) models capable of assessing the temper-
ature field within the whole structure. These models could help with preventive measures
that can be incorporated in the design, construction and maintenance of the pavement and
possibly reduce the overall costs [57]. There are different methods for establishing the
temperature distribution field within the pavements structure. Most methods are based on
the basic principles of the heat transfer. Some of these methods include: simple direct for-
mulations for estimating the maximum pavement temperature based on the heat transfer
theory and accepting the maximum air temperature, hourly solar radiation and latitude as
input [60]; temperature field simulation based on the one-dimensional finite difference ap-
proximation of the heat transfer equation [55], [57], [61], [62]; two-dimensional numerical
solutions based on heat conduction problem and basic heat transfer principles [63]; esti-
mation of the temperature field using three-dimensional finite element model with hourly
solar radiation, temperature measurements, and mean daily wind speed measurements
as input [58]; and temperature estimation based on a regression model founded on the
partial least squares method which is based on measurements of pavement temperature
and environmental data [59].
As the literature indicates, the most common method for determining the temperature field
is based on establishing a one-dimensional finite difference thermal (heat-transfer) model
based on the Fourier’s heat equation. This numerical method is flexible, simple, compu-
tationally efficient, and accurate. The model takes into account the main mechanics of
heat transfer: conduction, convection and radiation [57].
The finite difference approximation of the pavement system illustrated by Dempsey [57]
is shown in Figure 2.5. As it can be seen, the system is discretized with a finite number
of nodes in the vertical direction, where each node has a predefined cross sectional area
and thickness. This is selected in a way that the model’s numerical stability is ensured.
The nodes 2 to 37 are referred to as normal nodes; they represent the thermal properties
of different pavement system layers. The nodes 38 to 40 in the figure are the so called
termination nodes; they increase computational efficiency since they are replacing the
smaller nodes - reducing the number of nodes. Since the temperature variations decrease
with depth and there is no need for many nodes. At the bottom of the system it is assumed
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
12
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.5: Finite difference approximation of the pavement system [57].
that the temperature is constant (constant temperature node). The total depth and the
value of the constant temperature at the last node, are variable inputs of the model, and
they depend on the problem to which the model is applied. The weather (meteorological)
effects are introduced at the surface, i.e. at node 1. Essentially, the model determines
the future temperature at a node as a function of time, the present temperature value in
the node and the present temperature in the adjacent nodes [57].
The length and the width are larger than the thickness of the pavement. Thus, its tem-
perature is primarily influenced by the heat flux on the top surface of the pavement [62].
A diagram of main factors affecting the surface heat flux, as illustrated in [57] is shown
in Figure 2.6. The main means of heat flux on the pavement surface are the convection
and radiation [57].
The most influential radiation is the short-wave solar radiation on the pavement surface,
and its intensity varies in a day. Part of this short-wave radiation is absorbed in the atmo-
sphere, lost as diffuse scattering2, or reflected from the clouds and pavement’s surface.
The long-wave solar radiation which affects the pavement surface is made of two parts:
the radiation emitted by the pavement, and radiation emitted from the atmosphere. The
rate of heat transfer by convection between the air and pavement strongly depends on
the convection coefficient, which is difficult to estimate due to many variables inputs [57].
2”Solar radiation reaching the earth’s surface after having been scattered from the direct solar beam by
molecules or suspensoids in the atmosphere [64]”
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
13
==PAGE:20==
Both the quantities of the heat transfer convection, and the radiation are determined using
different empirical formulations based on the field and laboratory testing [57], [62]. These
quantities are input to the thermal model at the surface node using the meteorological
energy balance [57].
Figure 2.6: Illustration of the heat transfer between the surface of the pavement and its
surrounding environment [57].
Some of the meteorological effects are not included in the model due to the uncertainty of
the calculated heat quantities. These effects include: transpiration (neglected since it is
related to vegetation growth); condensation (neglected since the heat flux is lost after the
condensate evaporates); evaporation (neglected by assuming that the rainfall is quickly
drained from the pavement surface); sublimation (neglected since the snow is almost
immediately removed from the roads); precipitation (there is no accurate formulation for
calculating the heath quantities); and surface moisture infiltration (strongly depends on
the condition and type of pavement) [57].
The governing thermal properties of the pavement materials include: heat capacity, ther-
mal conductivity and latent heat of fusion. These parameters are usually determined by
scientific research and their values can be found in literature [57]. Other input parameters
to the model are the ones concerning the estimation of heat quantities from the radiation
and convection such as: extraterrestrial radiation (depends on the geographical location
of the pavement), pavement surface emissivity coefficient, Stefan-Boltzmann constant,
percentage of cloud cover, and convection coefficient [57], [62].
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
14
==PAGE:21==
2.3
Summary
The relevant findings of the literature review are:
(i) The DT is a fairly new concept, with promising advantages and possibilities of ap-
plication, but it has yet to be researched to its full potential. The terminology related
to the DT concept appears conflicting and vague.
(ii) Model/parameter updating is a crucial point of the DT concept which assures that
the DT is a real representation of the physical asset by minimizing the discrepancy
between the two. Traditional updating methods are usually associated with updating
model parameters, and they are mostly applied to FE models. Limited literature was
found of updating methods preformed in continuous time, or of updating methods
based on control theory.
(iii) Even though there are not many applications of the DT concept within the civil in-
frastructure yet, there is a great potential for its application throughout the life cycle
of the structure (design, construction and operation).
(iv) Replication of the thermal field in the pavement system is crucial for better under-
standing of temperature effects on the asphalt pavement. The widely accepted
thermal model for pavements is based on one-dimensional finite difference approx-
imation of the heat transfer between the pavement and its environment.
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
15
==PAGE:22==
3
Objectives and methodology
The objective of this work is to adapt and apply the DT concept to an asphalt road - with
focus on the thermal state of the system. Thus, with reference to the DT definition in
Figure 1.1, an asphalt road takes the role of a physical structure. A common layered
system is assumed, composed of an asphalt concrete layer resting on a compacted un-
bound granular layer(s), all founded on a subgrade soil. The road is exposed to changing
environmental conditions such as: ambient air temperature, solar radiation, wind, and pre-
cipitation. It is instrumented with several temperature sensors that provide a partial image
of its thermal state. Additionally, a weather station in close proximity to the road captures,
records and transmits the changing environmental conditions. The corresponding virtual
environment hosts a digital representation (DTM) of the asphalt road, capable of produc-
ing the full thermal state based on input weather data. The numerical values of the model
parameters are adjusted over time to produce a close match between the calculated and
measured temperatures at the sensor locations. Assuming that the overall model formu-
lation remains unchanged, the crux of this work is developing a suitable method for near
real-time parameter updating - thus realizing the DT concept for an asphalt road.
Chosen for the DTM is a one-dimensional numerical thermal model based on the heat
equation. This model takes as input measured environmental data, and produces a tem-
perature field throughout the pavement system for any time instance. The model is solved
using the finite difference approximation. In the interest of limiting complexity, the layered
system is modelled as a half-space, i.e., assuming the all layers share the same thermal
properties. This simplification is justified given that asphalt concrete and unbound gran-
ular materials are essentially soil-like. Also, the half-space simplifies the geometrical
boundaries since it does not include edge effects (analysis based on the half-space is
relevant away from edges).
The chosen framework for developing a method for near real-time parameter updating is
based on the control theory. More precisely, the method is formulated as a closed-control
feedback-loop with a PI controller type that continually tracks the error between mea-
sured and model-calculated temperature values, and applies parameter updating when-
ever deemed necessary.
The development is sought in two interlinked steps. The first is based on a purely syn-
thetic analysis, in which sensor readings, based on measured weather data, are artificially
generated in a road model. This is done in order to establish a fully controlled environ-
ment that allows for assessment and calibration of the of the updating method. The sec-
ond step is based on a field experiment involving an instrumented asphalt road. This
road was constructed with embedded temperature sensors and hosts a weather station
(in close proximity). The updating method developed in the first step is to be adjusted
in the second part and subsequently utilized for establishing a DT of the instrumented
asphalt road.
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
16
==PAGE:23==
4
Formulation of a thermal digital twin
In this chapter the developed formulation for the thermal DT of an asphalt road is pre-
sented. It commences with a detailed description of the thermal model (DTM) that re-
produces the temperature field of the road. Additionally, the sensitivity of the thermal
model is evaluated and commented. Following, the proposed parameter updating method
based on control theory is formulated. The chapter finishes with the computational imple-
mentation of the DT concept by integration of the thermal model and parameter updat-
ing method.
4.1
Modelling
The formulation of the thermal DT for an asphalt road begins with establishment of a
DTM capable of reproducing temperature field of the pavement structure. In this work,
the DTM is based on a one-dimensional thermal model which is capable of accurately
determining the temperature field based on the weather conditions and material properties
of the pavement system. The thermal model is governed by Fourier’s one-dimensional
differential heat equation
∂2T
∂z2 + ˙q
k = 1
α
∂T
∂t
(4.1)
where T = T(z, t) is temperature (°C) at depth z (m) during a time instant t (s), ˙q = ˙q(z, t)
is the heat generation, k is thermal conductivity (W· m−1· K−1); thermal diffusivity with
units (m2·s−1) is defined as α = k · ρ−1 · c−1, where ρ is the medium density (kg·m−3) and
c is specific heat capacity (J· kg−1·K−1). If there is no internal heat source inside medium,
the heat generation term ˙q is considered to be 0.
The solution to the heat equation is found numerically, using the finite difference scheme.
With this method the solution to the continuous partial differential equation is replaced
with a discrete approximation, thus the numerical solution is found only at a finite num-
ber of points. These points are selected in way that the result is accurate and detailed;
with larger number of points the numerical solution resolution and accuracy increase [65].
Discrete approximation used to solve the Equation 4.1, can be represented with a mesh
of points (nodes) as seen in Figure 4.1. In the figure the black solid squares represent
the boundary conditions while the grey solid squares represent the initial condition, which
are both known entities. The nodes at which the solution (temperature) is calculated are
indicated with squares without a fill. The mesh has two governing parameters, ∆t (s)
representing the distance between two adjacent points in time, and ∆z (m) representing
the thickness of the layer (size of the spatial increment). The points can be uniformly
distributed along the mesh, or concentrated at areas which require higher accuracy.
Furthermore, the numerical solution is sought using finite difference FTCS (Forward-Time
Centered-Space) method. In it, the time and space derivatives of the heat equation are
replaced with finite difference approximations [65]. The time derivative is approximated
by a forward difference as
∂T
∂t ≈T(z, t + ∆t) −T(z, t)
∆t
(4.2)
The spatial derivative is approximated by a central difference as
∂2T
∂z2 ≈T(z + ∆z, t) −2T(z, t) + T(z −∆z, t)
∆z2
(4.3)
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
17
==PAGE:24==
Figure 4.1: Discrete approximation of the system for solving the heat equation.
With ˙q set to 0, inserting the finite approximations of the derivatives in the heat equation
and rearranging, the discrete form of the heat equation becomes
T(z, t + ∆t) =

1 −2α∆t
∆z2

T(z, t) + α∆t
∆z2 (T(z + ∆z, t) + T(z −∆z, t))
(4.4)
To find the solution of Equation 4.1, it is required to specify boundary and initial condi-
tions. Two boundary conditions are imposed, one at the boundary (equilibrium) depth
(z = ze), and one at the surface of the medium (z = 0 m). The first boundary condition
(Equation 4.5) states that at a at a predefined boundary depth (ze), the temperature of the
medium is considered to be at a constant level Te at all times.
T (ze, t) = Te
(4.5)
Based on the heat transfer principles, the second boundary condition is set at the surface
of the medium (z = 0m), where the weather effects are introduced by imposing the heat
flux as
−k∂T(z, t)
∂z

z=0
= fS(t)
| {z }
Solar
+ hc(t)
 Tair(t) −T(0, t)

|
{z
}
Convection
+
 fD(t) −σεs(T(0, t) + 273.15)4
|
{z
}
Long-wave radiation
(4.6)
where fs (W·m−2) is the shortwave solar radiation, hc (W−2·K−1) is the average convection
heat transfer coefficient, Tair (°C) is the instantaneous air temperature just above the
surface, fD (W·m−2) is the downwelling long wave radiation from the atmosphere, σ is
the Stefan-Boltzmann constant (5.670·10−8 W· m−1· K−4), and ε is the surface emittance
(non dimensional).
The near surface flux is approximated with a finite difference scheme as
−k∂T(z, t)
∂z

z=0
≈−kT(∆z, t) −T(−∆z, t)
2∆z
(4.7)
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
18
==PAGE:25==
After the approximation, Equation 4.6 can be rewritten as,
T(−∆z, t) = T(∆z, t) + 2∆z
k
 fS + hc (Tair −T(0, t)) +
 fD −σε(T(0, t) + 273.15)4
(4.8)
To get the final form of the surface layer boundary condition Equation 4.4 needs to be
evaluated at surface as shown in Equation 4.9.
T(0, t + ∆t) =

1 −2α∆t
∆z2

T(0, t) + α∆t
∆z2 (T(∆z, t) + T(−∆z, t))
(4.9)
Inserting Equation 4.8 into Equation 4.9 and rearranging gives the surface boundary con-
dition as shown in Equation 4.10.
T(0, t+∆t) =

1 −2α∆t
∆z2

T(0, t)+2α∆tT(∆z, t)
∆z2
+2α∆t
k∆z
 fS + hc (Tar −T(0, t))
+fD −σε(T(0, t) + 273.15)4

(4.10)
A graphical illustration of all the model components and the heat transfer mechanism
between the pavement system and the environment is illustrated in Figure 4.2. The in-
coming shortwave solar radiation is partly absorbed by the road surface where energy is
transformed into heat, while the rest of the energy is reflected back in the atmosphere
in form of radiation emmitance. The atmosphere itself is reflecting part of the solar ra-
diation as downwelling long-wave radiation. Some of the absorbed heat is lost through
convection on top of the pavement surface. The heat which is absorbed on the surface is
transferred through the pavement system by means of conduction, from the region with
higher temperatures, to lower ones [63].
Figure 4.2: Illustration of the heat transfer mechanism, and the different thermal model
components [66].
In addition to the two boundary, an initial condition is needed for solving the heat equation
using the FTCS approximation method. The initial condition is applied at time t = 0 s, and
for the sake of simplicity it is formulated as
T(z, 0) = T(0, 0) + (Te −T(0, 0)) z
ze
(0 ≤z ≤ze)
(4.11)
where T(0, 0) is a chosen value of the initial surface temperature.
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
19
==PAGE:26==
Furthermore, the heat transfer coefficient hc follows a power relationship in Equation 4.12,
where a0 (W·m−2·K−1), a1 (W·m−2·K−1), a2 (dimension less) are positive fitting constants,
Vair (km·h−1) is the wind speed, and Vref = 1km·h−1 (introduced for unit simplification).
hc = a0 + a1(Vair/Vref)a2
(4.12)
The physical meaning of the constant a0 is the convective heat transfer in case of no wind
(free convection), while the multiplier a1 and power a2 represent the effect of wind (forced
convection).
For the solution to be conditionally stable, the condition in Equation 4.13 needs to be
satisfied (r denotes the stability parameter). Time step ∆t influences greatly the stability
of the solution, if it is too large, the solution becomes unstable, moreover it starts to
oscillate and grow.
r = α∆t
∆z < 1
2
(4.13)
4.2
Parameter sensitivity
To determine how the different input parameters disturb the result of the thermal model, a
sensitivity analysis was performed. The analyzed parameters include the different mate-
rial (ρ, ε) and thermal properties (k, c) of the asphalt pavement, and the three coefficients
defining the heat transfer coefficient.
The study starts by defining the so-called base case, which is used as a reference in the
sensitivity analysis. This case is the temperature time series at 1 cm depth, calculated
using input parameters shown in Table 4.1 and weather data of one week (i.e., the time
series has about 10,080 data points). The analysis itself is done by changing, one-by-one,
the values of the base case input parameters, calculating new temperature time series
(at 1cm depth), and correlating them with the base case. The correlation was done by
estimating the error between the base case and the time series calculated with alternated
input parameter values.
Table 4.1: Thermal model sensitivity analysis: base case parameter values.
Input parameter
Base value
Thermal conductivity k
1 [W· m−1· K−1]
Density ρ
2200 [kg·m−3]
Specific heat capacity c
1000 [· kg−1·K−1]
Surface emittance ε
0.9 [-]
Convection coefficient a0
1.02 [W·m−2·K−1]
Convection coefficient a1
2.26 [W·m−2·K−1]
Convection coefficient a2
0.58 [-]
For each parameter four alternative values were tested - the 90%, 95%, 105%, 110% of
the base parameter value. Therefore, a new temperature time series was estimated for
each tested parameter value (i.e., 28 new time series were calculated). The values of the
parameters used for the analysis are summarized in Table 4.2.
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
20
==PAGE:27==
Table 4.2: Thermal model sensitivity analysis: alternative parameter values.
k
[W· m−1· K−1]
ρ
[kg·m−3]
c
[J· kg−1·K−1]
ε
[-]
a0
[W·m−2·K−1]
a1
[W·m−2·K−1]
a2
[-]
0.9
1980
900
0.81
0.92
2.03
0.52
0.95
2090
950
0.855
0.97
2.15
0.55
1.05
2310
1050
0.945
1.07
2.37
0.61
1.1
2420
1100
0.99
1.12
2.49
0.64
Furthermore, the error between the base case and the new temperature time series (calcu-
lated for every changed parameter) is estimated. The sensitivity analysis was performed
based on two criteria: the standard deviation and the mean absolute error of the calcu-
lated error. First in Figure 4.3, the sensitivity analysis based on the calculated values of
the standard deviation for different cases is shown. On the horizontal axis, the alternative
input parameter is expressed as a percentage of the base case parameter values, while
the standard deviation of the error is shown on the vertical axis of the plot. Second in
Figure 4.4, the sensitivity analysis based on the calculated values of the mean absolute
error is presented. On the horizontal axis the parameter values are represented as the
percentage of the base case parameter values, while the mean absolute of the error is
shown on the vertical axis.
90
92
94
96
98
100
102
104
106
108
110
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Figure 4.3: Sensitivity analysis based on the error’s standard deviation.
As seen in Figure 4.3 and Figure 4.4 a small change in the value of k results in the
large increase of the error’s standard deviation and its mean absolute value. This directly
implies that the thermal model is the most sensitive to a small change of the k parameter.
Following, as it can be seen from the plots, the model is quite sensitive to small changes
of parameters ε and a1. As for the rest of the parameters both deviation and mean error
results are close to 0. Thus it can be stated that the thermal model is not very sensitive
to a small change in these parameters. Based on this analysis, it can be concluded that
thermal model is the most sensitive to a small change in k, followed by ε and a1, while
the model is not as sensitive to changes in other input parameters.
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
21
==PAGE:28==
90
92
94
96
98
100
102
104
106
108
110
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
Figure 4.4: Sensitivity analysis based on the mean absolute error value.
4.3
Parameter updating based on control theory
Parameter update is done to reduce the discrepancy between the analytically calculated
values from the thermal model, and the sensor measurements coming from the sensed
road. This is done by modifying certain parameters of the finite difference thermal model.
In this work a novel approach is proposed for parameter update in real time, using the
feedback control loop with a PI controller. This method was chosen due to its simplicity
and computational efficiency, which is important since the update needs to be performed
continually.
The closed feedback control loop used for continuous thermal model parameter update
is graphically illustrated in Figure 4.5. As it can be seen, the loop takes as the input the
temperature data coming from the sensors embedded in the pavement structure. The
measured temperature is compared with a temperature calculated by the thermal model
for the same location and time as the sensor. An error between the two values is esti-
mated, and taken as the input for the PI controller, which corrects (updates) the parameter
values of the thermal model for a specific time instance. These parameters are then in-
put to the thermal model which produces the pavement temperature field for the same
time instance. The loop is performed continually in time, with update taking place when
needed (e.g., if the error is greater than a control predefined value or the update is per-
formed periodically).
Figure 4.5: Schema for parameter updating using control theory’s closed feedback loop.
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
22
==PAGE:29==
The PI controller is a variant of the PID controller, which does not include the derivative
term, and it is used in this work since the controller only needs to adjust parameters in
order for the model to accurately represent the current state of the road, i.e. there is
no need for the derivative term’s ”predictive” nature. Also, the noise coming from the
measured data could seriously destabilize the updating process if a derivative term is
included in the controller. The mathematical formulation of a PI controller is derived from
Equation 2.1 as
x(ti) = KP · e(ti) + KI · eI(ti)
(4.14)
where x(ti) (dimension less) is the controller variable at time instance ti (s), and KP (°C−1),
KI (°C−1·s−1) are the proportional and integral gains of the controller. The first error term
e(ti) (°C) is defined as the difference between the sensor measured temperature TS(ti)
(°C), and thermal model calculated temperature TC(ti) (°C) at ti.
e(ti) = TS(ti) −TC(ti)
(4.15)
The second error term eI(ti) (°C·s) represents the integral of the first error term (e(ti)),
and it is defined in Equation 4.16 as a sum of adjacent error (e(ti) and e(ti−1)) values,
multiplied by the half of the time step ∆t.
eI(ti) = ∆t
2
i
X
k=1
(e(ti) + e(ti−1))
(4.16)
Once the controller variable x is known, the controller can update the value of the model
parameter P. There are two possibilities for the updated parameter values - P1 and P2
(Equation 4.17) - from which the controller chooses a better fit. These options are for-
mulated as power relation for two reasons: (i) to take into account the possible negative
values of the controller variable x; and (ii) if the controller variable is close to zero the
parameter value would not update but stay the same value.
P1 = P(ti−1) · 10x(ti)
P2 = P(ti−1) · 10−x(ti)
(4.17)
Furthermore, inside of the controller, the two new parameter values are input to the ther-
mal model (with the rest of the inputs remaining the same) and new temperatures at the
observed time and location T P1
C1 and T P2
C2 are calculated. These temperatures are used
to find errors e1 and e2 in Equation 4.15.
e1 = TS(ti) −T P1
C1
e2 = TS(ti) −T P2
C2
(4.18)
Finally, the controller evaluates which option of the adjusted parameter values(P1 or P2)
fits better. For this, three conditions are set for the controller to check:
(i) the controller checks if the newly estimated errors e1 and e2 are lower than the
original error value e;
(ii) if both errors from the previous condition are lower than the original one, the con-
troller checks which of the two is lower; and
(iii) the controller performs a check to determine if the value of the adjusted parameter
fits within certain predefined limits.
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
23
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.6: Thermal model parameter updating using closed feedback control loop with
PI controller.
The limits in the last controller check should be set considering the parameter physical
properties. For example, if the e1 is smaller than both e, and e1,then it means that the
updated parameter value P1 fits better the reality. If this parameter also satisfies the last
condition, the controller will then save the P1 value as the updated parameter value. The
complete parameter update process is graphically illustrated in Figure 4.6. If one or more
of the conditions are not met, the controller will not perform the update, and the parameter
values will stay the same until the next updating step.
4.3.1
PI controller tuning
The essential part of parameter updating using the control feedback loop is the PI con-
troller which adjusts the values of the thermal model parameters. For the controller to
correct the parameters in an accurate manner the gains, proportional and integral, need
to be carefully chosen. The process of determining the optimal values of the gains is
called tuning. The literature suggests different tuning methods such as: empirical formu-
lations and trial end error.
In this work, the trial and error method was tested first, but because of thermal model’s
sensitivity and the amount of parameters being updated, the method did not prove to be
accurate. Thus, the gains were tuned by running an optimization problem based on the
update algorithm, in which the discrepancy between the measured and calculated data
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
24
==PAGE:31==
was minimized by changing the PI controller gains. For each parameter that is subjected
to the update a unique set of PI controller gains has to be defined.
4.4
Computational implementation
The DT of an asphalt road is implemented as a computer program written in Matlab. The
program is based on a loop algorithm which integrates the developed formulations of the
thermal model and control theory parameter update method. It is important to note that
the program operates ”off-line”, meaning that the data (e.g., sensor measurements) is not
fed in real time but rather input as a time series of data values. This means that there is
no live link between the physical and virtual space which is characteristic for a DT (usually
established using the IoT, and cloud technologies).
The program is, as already mentioned, based on a closed loop. Meaning that the algo-
rithm inside of the loop is executed a certain number of times in succession. For the
developed DT program this number of repetitions is defined by the length of the observed
data, i.e., the loop will be executed as many times as there are data points in the input
data (weather and sensor). If the program was based on a live link, each time a new input
data is received from the sensed road the program would be run. Thus, by basing the
program on a loop, it is in a certain way imitating the live link between the sensed road
and the DTM.
Figure 4.7: A single time step flow chart of the developed DT program.
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
25
==PAGE:32==
Before starting the program, the model parameters which will be subjected to update need
to be decided. This can be done based on the sensitivity analysis of the thermal model
by noticing which parameters have a great influence on the results when subjected to a
small change, and the ones which do not affect the results greatly and that can be kept at
a constant value during the calculation. Additionally, initial values for these parameters
need to be set. The values are chosen based on the physical meaning of the parameters,
so that they resemble reality as close as possible, and the stability of the algorithm is not
violated.
The methodology of the developed computational program is graphically illustrated in
Figure 4.7 as a flow chart for a single time instance of the loop. The full Matlab script is
presented in Appendix A.
As it can be seen in Figure 4.7, the algorithm within the loop starts by defining the input
for the unique time step. This input includes following variables:
• Measured sensor temperature for that time instance
• Weather data - short- and long-wave solar radiation, air temperature and wind speed
for that time instance
• Assumptions for the thermal model parameters subjected to change - equal to val-
ues from a previous time instance
• Other thermal model parameters - constant
• Finite difference approximation parameters - constant
• PI controller gains - constant
After the input data enters the loop it is stored in a data set, i.e., the input data between
the two updates is internalized. This is done since the update is based on all the data
between the two updates. Furthermore, each time step the thermal model calculates
the temperature field with input parameters which are relevant for that instance. If the
stability criteria of the thermal model (Equation 4.13) the program returns an error and
asks the user to readjust the input parameters. Furthermore, the error between the sensor
measurement and the calculated temperature at the same location and time is evaluated.
The error data is stored in a time series since it is needed for the parameter update (the
integral error term in the PI controller).
Next, a decision is made if the update is needed. Two different options (together or sep-
arate) can be used for the decision: (i) preform the update if the error has exceeded a
predefined limit; (ii) preform the update if a certain amount of time steps has past since
the last update. In this work, only the second method was utilized. If the condition is not
met, the loop goes straight to the next time instance, and if the condition is met the update
is performed based on the formulation explained in Section 4.3. The update is governed
by the mean absolute value of the errors between the two update steps, the integral of
the error, and the PI controller gains which are defined in the beginning. Every time the
update is performed another parameter is updated, and the program shuffles through
them. The new updated value is stored as the parameter value for the whole period after
the last update step. Furthermore, the data set is cleared, and the algorithm continues
looping through the rest of the data. When all the data has been used, the algorithm stops
and gives following outputs: the calculated temperature field of the pavement time series,
time series of the parameter updating process, and the error time series with its integral.
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
26
==PAGE:33==
5
Application of a thermal digital twin
This chapter deals with the application of the developed DT program on two cases. First,
a synthetic case based study was performed where the developed DT program was ap-
plied to a synthetically generated temperature time series imitating the sensor measure-
ment. Second, the DT program is applied to the real sensor measured temperature time
series. In addition, the methods of measuring the weather station, the generation of syn-
thetic temperature data, the experimental setup, and the field measured temperature data
are explained.
5.1
Input weather conditions
The weather data required for the thermal DT formulation was acquired from two differ-
ent weather station: (i) DTU weather station on top building 119 at DTU campus; and (ii)
GMX551 weather station placed on a container next to the sensed road. The data was
collected from both station because the small weather station (GMX551) does not have
the option to measure downwelling long-wave radiation which is one of the input parame-
ters of the thermal model used in the DT formulation. Based on the closeness of the DTU
weather station to the sensed road, the measured data is reliable for filling in the missing
downwelling long-wave radiation data which is not recorded by the GMX551 station.
The DTU climate station is located at Department of Civil Engineering on the roof top of
building 119. The latitude and the longitude of the stations are 55.8 N and 12.5 E [67].
The climate station was installed to study the weather and to develop solar radiation pro-
cessing models which are needed in different engineering fields. This climate station was
installed in 1989, and upgraded in 2014, when the hardware and software were renewed.
The station is unique because it has been in operation for many years (measurement pe-
riod of 30 years), and because of the particularly detailed measurements of solar radiation
[68]. It measures global irradiance, diffuse horizontal irradiance, direct normal iradiance,
downwelling horizontal irradiance, wind direction, wind speed, air temperature, relative
humidity, air pressure, rain and hail fall, duration and intensity.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.1: Photographs of: (a) GILL GMX551 weather station, and (b) the weather sta-
tion itself.
The weather station placed next to the road is design by Gill Instruments (GILL GMX551
Compact Weather Station) and it is shown in Figure 5.1b.
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
27
==PAGE:34==
It measures temperature, humidity, air pressure, short-wave solar radiation, wind speed
and direction and precipitation [69]. This weather station was placed on top of a container
right next to the road as shown on a photograph in Figure 5.1a.
The input weather conditions used in the DT formulation were collected over a period of al-
most four months, between March and July, 2020. The data was recorded approximately
every minute, resulting in a time series for each measured entity with about 170,000 points.
The time series of shortwave solar radiation, downwelling longwave radiation, wind speed
and air temperature are presented in Figure 5.2, Figure 5.3, Figure 5.4 and Figure 5.5,
respectively.
The time axis of all time series starts with zero time (t = 0 s) representing the first data
point which was recorded on March 13 at 07:32; and ends with the last data point (t =
9, 856, 560 s) recorded on July 15 at 10:30. The downwelling longwave radiation is from
the DTU weather station, while the rest of the data is gathered from the road’s weather
station.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Figure 5.2: Measured time series of shortwave solar radiation (GMX551 weather station,
March-July 2020).
The short-wave solar radiation shown in Figure 5.2 follows an expected trend where the
values are increasing during the day, and decreasing to zero at night. There is an overall
trend of growing towards the last data point, which corresponds to the approaching sum-
mer time. Another notable trend are the peaks of intensity on some days which indicates
the measurement’s sensitivity towards clear or cloud covered sky.
The values of the downwelling long-wave radiation are not fluctuating considerably as the
short-wave ones. As it can be seen in Figure 5.3, the measured radiation values are not
deviating greatly from a mean value of about 315 W·s−2. The same growth trend towards
the end of the time series is noticed, as in the short-wave solar radiation data.
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
28
==PAGE:35==
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
200
250
300
350
400
450
Figure 5.3: Measured time series of downwelling longwave radiation (DTU weather sta-
tion, March-July 2020).
As it can be seen from the Figure 5.4, the wind speed is a rather unpredictable entity,
without a noticeable trend in measured values. They are fluctuating randomly between 0
and around 45 km/h, with an average speed of about 7 km/h.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Figure 5.4: Measured time series of wind speed (GMX551 weather station, March-
July 2020).
The air temperature shown in Figure 5.5 shows daily fluctuations corresponding to heating
of the air during the day, and cooling off during the night. Additionally, the air tempera-
ture follows the same increase trend as the solar radiation entities, which indicates the
approaching higher summer temperatures.
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
29
==PAGE:36==
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Figure 5.5: Measured time series of air temperature (GMX551 weather station, March-
July 2020).
5.2
Synthetic case
The sensor readings in the synthetic case were generated artificially based on the ther-
mal model and measured weather data presented in the preceding section. This way a
controlled environment was established for calibrating the updating method, specifically
the gains of the PI controller. In following two sections the synthetic sensor readings data
generation is explained, and its application to the DT concept is analyzed.
5.2.1
Data generation
Herein, the synthetically generated sensor temperature readings will be referred as the
synthetic sensor data. The generation of the synthetic sensor data starts by calculating
the in-pavement thermal field time history. The data shown in preceding section was
taken as the weather data input, while the rest of the input data of the thermal model is
summarized in Table 5.1. The time increment ∆t corresponds to the measured weather
data time step, while the spatial increment ∆z (thickness) is chosen for computational
efficiency. The equilibrium temperature Te was based on the yearly average of the mea-
sured air temperatures, and it is assumed that this temperature is constant at ze. The
governing thermal properties (k, ρ, c, ε) are chosen based on values found in literature.
Table 5.1: Thermal model input parameters for generating synthetic sensor data.
Parameter
Value
Parameter
Value
Parameter
Value
∆t
60 s
k
1 W·m−1·K−1
ε
0.9
∆z
0.01 m
ρ
2200 kg·m−3
a0
0.020 W·m−2·K−1
ze
10 m
c
1000 J·kg−1·K−1
a1
1.413 W·m−2·K−1
Te
10 °C
α
4.546·10−7 m2s−1
a2
0.802
The three governing constants (a0, a1, a2) of the power relation that describes the heat
transfer coefficient hc (Equation 4.12) were found by data fitting. First, the values of the
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
30
==PAGE:37==
heat transfer coefficient were found using empirical formula in Equation 5.1 where the
coefficient is expressed as a function of both measured air temperature and wind speed
(L = 10 m is assumed). The empirically determined hc values are plotted in Figure 5.6a
Second, the coefficient values were then calculated using the power relation. Third, the
governing constants of the power relation were founded by best fitting the empirical data
to the calculated ones by changing the values of the constants. The linear fitting was
performed using Excel plug-in Solver, based on a data set of about 170,000 data points.
hc =
 0.02437 + 7.905 · 10−5Tair

V 0.8
air
84.76L0.2 (1.3342 · 10−5 + 8.1271 · 10−8Tair )0.8
(5.1)
In Figure 5.6b the comparison between the best fit and empirically calculated data is
shown, and as it can be seen the data follows an almost perfect 1:1 correlation (red
diagonal dashed line).
0
2
4
6
8
10
106
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.6: Convection heat transfer coefficient: (a) time series of empirically calculated
hc values, and (b) correlation between the empirical and power relation calculated values
(dashed red line indicates perfect correlation).
Furthermore, the thermal model, as explained in Section 4.1. was established to calculate
the full in-pavement temperature field, based on the explained input data. In Figure 5.7
the calculated temperature time series at four different depths are plotted.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Figure 5.7: Thermal model calculated temperature at four different depths for the ob-
served time period.
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
31
==PAGE:38==
As expected, the overall temperature fluctuations are the highest closer to the surface,
and decrease towards the equilibrium depth at which the temperature is constant. Thus,
this closely agrees with the basic postulations of the thermal model.
For producing the synthetic sensor data, the temperature time series at depth of 1 cm
was extracted from the thermal field history in Figure 5.7, and a certain amount of noise
was added to it. The noise data was generated using triangular probability distribution
where the lower and the upper limit coincide with the temperature tolerance values of
the real PT100 temperature sensors - ±0.15 ◦C. With triangular distribution (Figure 5.8a)
more than 200,000 points were generated that are later randomly chosen as noise that
is added to the calculated temperature. In Figure 5.8b the histogram of randomly chosen
noise values from the probability distribution is shown.
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
(a)
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
104
(b)
Figure 5.8: Generated noise that is added to generate the synthetic data: (a) the triangular
probability distribution of the noise, and (b) the histogram of the randomly chosen values
from the triangular distribution.
Subsequently, the generated random values are added to the calculated temperature
time series (at 1 cm dept), and the synthetic sensor data is generated. In Figure 5.9 the
original calculated values from the thermal model are plotted against the synthetic data,
and as it can be seen the synthetic data follows the perfect correlation line (dashed red).
Figure 5.9: Correlation between the synthetic and original temperature data at 1 cm depth
(dashed line indicating perfect correlation)
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
32
==PAGE:39==
5.2.2
Analysis and results
The synthetic case based analysis starts with a test to verify the quality of the developed
DT computational program that integrates thermal model and the parameter update for-
mulation (see Section 4.4). The goal of this test is to observe if the developed script is
capable of producing expected results. This is tested by setting the input parameters
to the same values as the ones used for generating the synthetic data, and applying
the synthetic sensor temperature for the parameter update. In the test the update is not
performed, i.e., the gains of the PI controller are kept at zero. Thus, the input parame-
ter values stay constant throughout the calculation process. In order for the test to be
validated, the output error should equal the noise that was applied when generating the
synthetic data.
The result of the test is shown in Figure 5.10. On the left side of the figure the error
time series is represented, and as it can be seen the error values are in the ±0.15°C,
which corresponds to the limits of the triangular probability distribution used to generate
noise values (Figure 5.8a). On the right side of the figure the histogram of the error
is represented, and it coincides with the histogram of randomly chosen noise data that
was added to generate the synthetic temperatures (Figure 5.8b). These results strongly
confirm the accuracy of the script, and the validity of the test.
0
2
4
6
8
10
106
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
(a)
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
104
(b)
Figure 5.10: Initial script test validation result: (a) the error time series, and (b) histogram
of the calculated error values.
In following text the original thermal model input parameters will refer to the values shown
in Table 5.1, while the original temperature time series will refer to the temperature at 1
cm depth (Figure 5.7). In all the calculations same weather data is used (Section 5.1).
The main part of the parameter updating method is finding the right values for the pro-
portional (KP ) and integral (KI) gains of the PI controller, since they are governing the
update itself. The values of the gains are different for each parameter being updated (i.e.,
for one parameter a unique pair of gains needs to be defined). To demonstrate the influ-
ence of the gains, a study was conducted where only one input parameter was updated.
For this study, the k parameter was chosen. Its initial value was decreased by 5% of its
original one, while the rest of the input parameters are kept the same. The input param-
eters used in this study are summarized and shown in Table 5.2. Additionally, the same
weather data as for the synthetic data generation was used. For the parameter update
the synthetic sensor data was used as a reference for estimating the error input of the
controller.
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
33
==PAGE:40==
Table 5.2: Input parameters for a single parameter update case study.
Parameter
Original value
Assumed value
k [W·m−1·K−1]
1
0.9
c [J·kg−1K−1]
1000
950
ε [-]
0.9
0.855
a0 [W·m−2·K−1]
0.020
0.019
a1 [W·m−2·K−1]
1.413
1.342
a2 [-]
0.802
0.762
The update is first calculated with both gains set to zero (KP = 0 °C−1, KI = 0 °C−1·s−1),
and the error and its integral were calculated. As expected, when the gains are zero,
there is no update. Thus, the value of the k parameter is constant during the updating
process, as shown in Figure 5.11.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
0.9
0.95
1
1.05
1.1
Figure 5.11: Single parameter updated time series (KP = 0 °C−1 and KI = 0 °C−1·s−1).
In Figure 5.12, the error (top plot) and its integral (bottom plot) time series are shown. As
it can be seen, if there is no updating, the error between the original temperature time
series, and the newly calculated is substantial. To reduce this error the parameter update
needs to be done, by determining the values of the controller gains.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
-0.5
0
0.5
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
-4
-2
0
104
Figure 5.12: Single parameter update output (KP = 0 °C−1 and KI = 0 °C−1·s−1): error
time series (top plot), integral of the error (bottom plot).
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
34
==PAGE:41==
Furthermore, a study on how the proportional gain is influencing the parameter update
is performed. Four different values of KP were tested; in all the tests the integral gain
(KI) is set to zero. In Figure 5.13 and Figure 5.14 the behaviour of the parameter update,
and the output error is observed when KP = 1 °C−1. As it can be seen, this value of the
proportional gain gives a rather unstable and inaccurate results.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Figure 5.13: Single parameter updated time series (KP = 1 °C−1 and KI = 0 °C−1·s−1).
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
-20
0
20
40
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
0
2
4
6
107
Figure 5.14: Single parameter update output (KP = 1 °C−1 and KI = 0 °C−1·s−1): error
time series (top plot), integral of the error (bottom plot).
Following, a ten times smaller value KP = 0.1 °C−1 is chosen, and the result is shown in
Figure 5.15 and Figure 5.16. As it can be seen, a noticeable improvement in the results
is made by using a smaller value. The updated values of the k parameter are oscillating
in the range of ±2% of the original value, and the overall result is much more stable. If
a closer look is taken on the error time series shown in top plot of Figure 5.16, it can
be seen that the error values coincide with the range of the noise added in synthetic
sensor generation.
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
35
==PAGE:42==
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
0.96
0.98
1
1.02
Figure 5.15: Single parameter updated time series (KP = 0.1 and KI = 0 °C−1·s−1).
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
-2000
-1000
0
Figure 5.16: Single parameter update output (KP = 0.1 °C−1 and KI = 0 °C−1·s−1): error
time series (top plot), integral of the error (bottom plot).
The KP value was decreased ten more times, and the result of the parameter update is
shown in Figure 5.17. As it can be seen the stability of the result is improved, but the
updated parameter values are converging slower to the original value.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
0.94
0.96
0.98
1
Figure 5.17: Single parameter updated time series (KP
= 0.01 °C−1 and KI = 0
°C−1·s−1).
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
36
==PAGE:43==
In Figure 5.18 the output error results of the update are shown. The error plot (top) is
again very accurate since it corresponds to the noise applied in generation of the synthetic
sensor data.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
-5000
0
5000
10000
Figure 5.18: Single parameter updated output (KP = 0.01 °C−1 and KI = 0 °C−1·s−1):
error time series (top plot), integral of the error (bottom plot).
Subsequently, a study on how the integral gain (KI) influences the results is performed.
Three different values of the integral gain KI were observed, while the proportional gain
is kept at 0. The study started by setting the integral gain to 0.001. The results of the
update using only this gain value can be observed in Figure 5.19, and as it can be seen,
it causes serious instability and inaccuracy of the results. This is confirmed by plotting
the output error and its integral (Figure 5.20) which show that the update is not performed
correctly since both the error and its integral are increasing continuously in time.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
Figure 5.19: Single parameter updated time series (KP = 0 °C−1 and KI = 0.0001
°C−1·s−1).
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
37
==PAGE:44==
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
0
20
40
60
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
0
1
2
108
Figure 5.20: Single parameter update output (KP
= 0.001 °C−1 and KI = 0.0001
°C−1·s−1): error time series (top plot), integral of the error (bottom plot).
The value of the integral is decreased ten times and KI = 0.00001 °C−1·s−1, and the
update is performed. The result of the parameter update is seen in Figure 5.21. The
results are more accurate than in the previous case, but still quite unstable. A large
oscillation is observed around the middle of the time series.
Furthermore, the same behaviour is observed in the error and its integral (Figure 5.22)
time series. The error is steady oscillating around the synthetic sensor added noise limits
(±15°C) until the middle of the time series where a rise in amplitude is observed, after
which the signal returns to a steady state. The integral of the error shows the same
behaviour; it oscillates around the mean value close to zero before and after the middle
of the time series, where the peak happens.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
Figure 5.21: Single parameter updated time series (KP = 0.0 °C−1 and KI = 0.00001
°C−1·s−1).
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
38
==PAGE:45==
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
-1
0
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
-5000
0
5000
10000
Figure 5.22: Single parameter update output (KP = 0 °C−1 and KI = 0.00001 °C−1·s−1):
error time series (top plot), integral of the error (bottom plot).
In Figure 5.23 the updated parameter time series is shown when the KI is set to 0.000001
°C−1·s−1, and as it can be observed the result is best of the three cases. The updated
parameter is converging fast to the original value and oscillating within 2% of the original
value limits. The correctness of the results can also be seen in Figure 5.23 where the
output error and its integral are shown. The error reaches the steady state fast, and there
are no significant changes throughout the time series. As for the integral, it suggests that
the error is evenly distributed between the negative and positive values.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
0.94
0.96
0.98
1
1.02
Figure 5.23: Single parameter updated time series (KP = 0 °C−1 and KI = 0.000001
°C−1·s−1).
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
39
==PAGE:46==
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
-4000
-2000
0
2000
Figure 5.24: Single parameter update output (KP = 0 °C−1 and KI = 0.000001 °C−1·s−1):
error time series (top plot), integral of the error (bottom plot).
Finally, from this case study it was observed that the proportional gain controls the con-
vergence speed and the stability of the result. While the integral part has the influence
on the stability of the result. Thus, the values of both gains should be carefully chosen.
The process of determining the gains which will produce reliable and accurate results is
called tuning. In this work, first a simple trial and error method of changing the gains was
tested but did not seem to prove good results. The updating method is very sensitive to
small changes in values of KP and KI, and there is a great number of combinations that
need to be tested in order to find the best fit. Thus, the controlled environment using the
synthetic data was utilized. The tuning process was set up as an optimization problem
where the goal was to minimize the overall error from the updating process, by changing
the controller gains. The optimization was based on two different criteria: (i) on the stan-
dard deviation of the error; and (ii) the mean absolute of the error. Additionally, values
of the gains were set up as power values of the minimizing variables in order to avoid
having negative results for controller gain values. The optimization was performed using
Matlab function fminsearch, which is a derivative free optimization method, based on the
Nelder-Mead simplex algorithm.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
0.9
0.95
1
1.05
1.1
Figure 5.25: Single parameter updated time series with KP = 0.05 °C−1 and KI = 3.25 ·
10−7 °C−1·s−1.
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
40
==PAGE:47==
The optimization was performed to find the optimal gains for updating of the parameter k.
The optimal values of the gains are KP = 0.05 °C−1 and KI = 3.25 · 10−7. The results
of the parameter update with optimized gains is shown in Figure 5.25, and as it can be
seen the value of the updated parameter is oscillating within 1% the original value, with a
mean value of 1.002 W·m−1·K−1. If the error and its integral are examined (Figure 5.26) it
can be seen that the temperature error between the original and calculated values is the
same as the noise applied in the synthetic case, and that its integral is oscillating around
a mean value (121.02 s·°C) close to 0 proving that the results are very good.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
-0.2
0
0.2
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
-2000
0
2000
Figure 5.26: Single parameter update output (KP = 0.05 °C−1 and KI = 3.25 · 10−7
°C−1·s−1): error time series (top), and error integral time series (bottom)
After the one parameter update case study was done, the updating of multiple thermal
model parameters, more precisely k, c, ε, a0, a1 and a2, is performed. These parameters
were chosen for the update based on the stability analysis of the thermal model, physical
meaning and possible variability of parameters. The script was set so that the update
is performed every 30 minutes (i.e. every 30 data points). The input to the controller is
based on the mean absolute value of the error for that period and the error integral. Each
time the update is performed only one parameter is adjusted while the others are equal
to the value of the previous time step. The chosen parameters, and their initial values
(decreased by 5% from the original value) are shown in Table 5.3.
Table 5.3: Input parameters for the multiple parameter updating case study.
Parameter
Value
Parameter
Value
k [W·m−1·K−1]
0.95
a0 [W·m−2·K−1]
0.019
c [J·kg−1K−1]
950
a1 [W·m−2·K−1]
1.342
ε [-]
0.855
a2 [-]
0.762
The DT algorithm was first run as if there was no updating process (KP and KI are set
to zero), to see how the assumed parameter values affect the calculated temperature
time series comparing to the original. The result is shown in Figure 5.27, where the error
between the calculated and the original temperatures is the plot on the left (Figure 5.27a),
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
41
==PAGE:48==
while the integral of the error is shown in the plot on the right (Figure 5.27b). As it can
be seen from the plots, the newly calculated temperatures diverge significantly from the
original. More precisely, since both graphs are increasing negatively, the calculated tem-
peratures are overestimated (larger) compared to the original ones (Equation 4.15).
0
2
4
6
8
10
106
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
(a)
0
2
4
6
8
10
106
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
107
(b)
Figure 5.27: Multiple parameter update (KP = 0 °C−1 and KI = 0 °C−1·s−1): (a) the error
time series, and (b) the integral of the error.
To get a better understanding of the error in Figure 5.27a, the calculated temperature time
series is plotted with the original one; for the complete observed time period (top), and
one week period (bottom). The original (”measured”) temperature series is represented
as a blue line and the calculated (”updated”) is the orange line. The difference between
the two temperatures is clearly observed in the one week period plot (bottom).
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
0
20
40
60
80
8.7
8.8
8.9
9
9.1
9.2
106
20
30
40
50
60
Figure 5.28: Calculated temperature time series at 1cm dept: complete observed time
period (up), and zoomed one week period (bottom) depicted with a circle on the top plot.
The parameter update method is applied in order to minimize the above shown error. For
the method to update the parameter values accurately, the gains of the PI controller need
to be carefully chosen. Here, the same optimization problem was set up as in the one
parameter update case based study using Matlab’s built-in function fminsearch. The goal
of the optimization is to minimize the standard deviation of the error, by changing the gains
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
42
==PAGE:49==
of the PI controller. The optimization was based on the four month time series for weather
data and synthetic sensor temperature data. A pair of the controller gains (KP and KI)
is unique to each parameter being updated (i.e. in this case six pairs of gains need to
be found). The optimized values of the gains for each updating parameter is shown in
Table 5.4.
Table 5.4: Controller gains for the multiple parameter update.
Parameter
KP [°C−1]
KI [°C−1·s−1]
k
5.49 · 10−3
1.28 · 10−6
c
9.74 · 10−4
1.38 · 10−7
ε
1.27 · 10−2
9.03 · 10−8
a0
1.49 · 10−5
1.75 · 10−4
a1
1.77 · 10−2
1.33 · 10−7
a2
5.05 · 10−3
6.50 · 10−8
The overall result of the parameter update is presented in Figure 5.29; the error between
the original and updated values is shown in Figure 5.29a, and the integral of the error
is show in Figure 5.29b. As it can be seen the error converges fast to a steady state
oscillating between ±0.15°C, which closely corresponds to the noise added to generate
the synthetic sensor data. This means, that the temperature values calculated using the
updated parameters coincide with the original temperature time series. The integral of
the error confirms the accuracy of the results, since it oscillates around the mean value
which is close to zero, proving that there is almost the same amount of positive error as
there is the negative.
0
2
4
6
8
10
106
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
(a)
0
2
4
6
8
10
106
-15000
-10000
-5000
0
5000
(b)
Figure 5.29: Result of the multiple parameter update: (a) the error time series, and (b)
the integral of the error.
The updating time series of each parameter is represented in Figure 5.30. As it can be
seen from the figure, three thermal properties of the asphalt pavement (ε, k, c) converge
fast to the original value, and continue to oscillate within the 1% around it. As for the three
factors governing the heat transfer coefficient, the a2 parameter reaches the updated
value (1% of the original) and stays relatively constant throughout the update. The other
two governing factors do not reach completely their original value; a0 is closer to 0, while
a2 is around 10% higher than its original value. Considering that the output error of the
update is highly accurate it can be presumed that the two factors compensate each other.
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
43
==PAGE:50==
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
0.86
0.88
0.9
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
0.95
1
1.05
1.1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
950
1000
1050
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
1.3
1.4
1.5
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Figure 5.30: Result of the multiple parameter update process for (top to bottom): ε, k, c,
a0, a1, and a2.
Since the gains are unique for different problems, and they cannot be applied to more
systems that need to be updated, a convergence study was done in order to see if the
gains can be optimized based on smaller data sets. The study was based on optimizing
the synthetic case multiple parameter update with one week (10,080 data points), one
month (43,200 data points), two months (86,400 data points) and the total time series (4
months, 173,000 data points). After the gains were optimized, the parameter update was
conducted using these optimized values for the gains. The convergence analysis was
based on the standard deviation and mean absolute value of the updating process output
error. The results are shown in Figure 5.31 and Figure 5.32. As it can be seen, both
convergence analysis follow the same trend. Although there is one outlier (optimization
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
44
==PAGE:51==
based on one month data), the results converge in both cases. The outlier value could
indicate that a local minimum of the optimization problem was founded. Based on this
study it can be stated that smaller data sets used for parameter optimization could produce
results with a sufficient level of accuracy.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
104
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
Figure 5.31: Convergence analysis of the optimized gains based on the mean absolute
error.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
104
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
Figure 5.32: Convergence analysis of the optimized gains based on the standard devia-
tion of the errror.
5.3
Asphalt road
The calibrated and verified DT implementation from the synthetic case, is applied to the
field data measurements in order to establish a DT of an asphalt road. First, the exper-
imental setup and the measured data are presented. Second, the DT calculated results
are shown.
5.3.1
Experimental setup
For this project, the data time series was obtained from a road equipped with temperature
sensors located at the Lyngby campus of the Technical University of Denmark, behind
the building 119. This road was constructed for the purpose of the EU-funded research
project - Snowless which investigates the possibility of eliminating snow accumulation and
ice formation on the ride surface of the heavy duty asphalt pavements, by using electrical
heat ribbons embedded in the structure and their intelligent operation [70].
The aerial photograph of the road’s location is shown in Figure 5.33, where the road is
marked with red lines. It is around 70 m long and 5.8 m wide and oriented along the north-
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
45
==PAGE:52==
south direction. The road is predominantly straight with turning fillets at the intersection
with the neighbouring road. In its surroundings, there are smaller buildings and different
experimental installations [70]. Therefore, there is no frequent traffic on the road.
Figure 5.33: Aerial photograph of the road (Google earth)
The construction works on the road were commenced in the end of 2019 by milling off
the existing asphalt pavement, reconstructing the granular base of the structure, and
paving three new asphalt concrete layers. The first pavement lift was made of Stone
Mastic Asphalt (SMA) with maximum aggregate size of 11 mm (SMA 11), with an uneven
thickness raging from 1.5 to 4 cm. While the other two lifts are 4 cm thick and made of the
same asphalt concrete but with a smaller maximum aggregate size of 9 cm (SMA 9). The
road’s electrical heating system was installed between the paved layers. Cross section
of the road is graphically illustrated in Figure 5.34 where the different layers and locations
of the heating ribbons are noted [70].
Figure 5.34: Cross section of DTU Heated Test Road (as-constructed) [70].
In order to accurately measure the thermal state, sensors need to be placed in close con-
tact with the body to adopt the same temperature [71]. Thus, to monitor the thermal state
of the road, several temperature sensors were embedded in the pavement, at different
locations. Three sensors are placed at deeper depths: one at 10 cm, and two more at 5
cm below the road ride-surface. Another ten sensors were installed near the ride-surface
post-construction, by placing them in saw cut grooves at depth of about 1 cm. The names,
and the depths at which the sensors were placed are summarized in Table 5.5. The in-
stallation of the near surface sensors is shown with photographs in Figure 5.35 [70].
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
46
==PAGE:53==
Table 5.5: Installed sensor names and locations (depth below the ride-surface) [70].
Name
Location [cm]
Name
Location [cm]
Name
Location [cm]
A1-1
1
B1-1
1
PTR20
5
A1-2
1
B1-2
1
PTR52
5
A1-3
1
B2-1
1
PTR8
10
A1-4
1
B2-2
1
A1-5
1
A1-6
1
Figure 5.35: Photographs of installation of the temperature sensors 1 cm below the ride-
surface [70].
The sensors installed in the road are the PT100 thermometers. These sensors measure
temperature based on the change in electrical resistance. The sensor is made from a
material (usually platinum) of which the temperature-resistance relationship is well known
[71]. For evaluating the temperature special empirical relations were developed to trans-
form the measured change in resistance to temperature [72]. The PT100 thermometers
are one of the most commonly used sensors; the name indicates that the sensor has the
resistance of 100Ωat 0°C [71].
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.36: Measuring resistors alternatives: (a) thin-film resistor, and (b) wire wound
(glass) resistor.
There are two types of PT100 sensors based on their design, the wire wound and the thin
film resistors (Figure 5.36). The sensors installed in the road are the wire wound sensors
constructed which are usually constructed from a rounded protective casing with a thin
platinum wire inside [71]. The temperature tolerance values of the Pt100 sensors are
standardized and they are shown in Table 5.6, for both thermometer types [72].
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
47
==PAGE:54==
Tolerance class
Temperature range of validity [°C]
Tolerance values1 [°C]
Wire wound resistors
Film resistors
AA
-50 to +250
0 to +150
± (0.1 + 0.0018 |t|)
A
-100 to +450
-30 to +300
± (0.15 + 0.002 |t|)
B
-196 to +600
-50 to +500
± (0.3 + 0.005 |t|)
C
-196 to +600
-50 to +600
± (0.6 + 0.01 |t|)
1 |t| is modulus of temperature in °C without regard to sign.
Table 5.6: Tolerance classes for thermometers according to DS/EN 60751:2008 [72]
5.3.2
Field measurements
Field measurements that are used in parameter update for establishing the DT of an
asphalt road were collected from the sensed road for the same period as the weather
data - March to July 2020. A different temperature time history was obtained for all 13
sensors embedded in the road, and it is presented in Appendix B separately.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
8.7
8.8
8.9
9
9.1
9.2
106
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Figure 5.37: Zone A: complete temperature time series (top), and zoomed one week
temperature time series (bottom) depicted with a circle on the top plot.
The temperature time series recorded at 1 cm depth was analyzed first. The ten sensors
embedded at this depth were divided in two zones, thus the visual analysis of each zone
is done separately. In Figure 5.37 a complete time series for all the sensors at 1 cm depth
in zone A is shown in the top plot, while a close up of a week (marked with a circle in the
top plot) is shown in the bottom plot. As it can be seen temperatures of sensors A1-5 and
A1-6 are deviating from the rest of the data, showing lower measurements through the
time series.
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
48
==PAGE:55==
Following, in Figure 5.38 the complete time series of the 4 sensors embedded in the zone
B is shown. In the top plot the complete temperature time series is plotted, while in the
lower plot a close up (one week) of the data is shown. As it can be seen only one sensor
- B1-2 - is deviating from the rest.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
0
20
40
60
8.7
8.8
8.9
9
9.1
9.2
106
10
20
30
40
50
Figure 5.38: Zone B: complete temperature time series (top), and zoomed one week
temperature time series (bottom) depicted with a circle on the top plot.
These temperature deviations between the measurements from the sensors in the same
zones could be the effect of inaccurate installation or of the sensor location. Since these
near surface sensors were installed after construction by sawing the grooves in which
they were placed, it could be that they were not installed at exactly the same depths.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
0
20
40
60
8.7
8.8
8.9
9
9.1
9.2
106
10
20
30
40
Figure 5.39: Average temperature time series at 1cm depth for zones A and B: complete
time series (top), and zoomed one week time series (bottom) depicted with a circle on the
top plot..
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
49
==PAGE:56==
Sensor location could be another possible cause of these deviations, it could be that
the sensors that exhibit lower temperatures are shadowed by an object, or not directly
exposed to solar radiation as the others.
Because of these deviations, an average value of the measured temperatures without the
deviating sensor measurements was determined, and this data is used for establishing
the DT of an asphalt road. The average temperature time series for both zones can be
observed in Figure 5.39 where in the top graph the complete temperature time series is
plotted, and on the bottom graph a one week close up is plotted. Sensors in both zones
show the same behaviour, while the zone A sensors measure overall higher temperatures
than the ones in zone B.
In Figure 5.40, the temperature time series at different depths are plotted for a period
of one week. For the surface sensor measurements the average temperatures for both
zones are plotted. As it can be seen from the figure, range of temperature values de-
creases with increase in depth. Therefore, the sensors near surface have a larger range
in temperature values, while the one at the depth of 10 cm (PTR-8) has a much lower tem-
perature range. This closely correlates with the behaviour of the thermal model shown in
Figure 5.7.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
0
20
40
60
8.7
8.8
8.9
9
9.1
9.2
106
10
20
30
40
Figure 5.40: Measured temperature at all depths: complete time series (top), and zoomed
one week time series (bottom) depicted with a circle on the top plot..
5.3.3
Analysis and results
For establishing the DT of the asphalt road the near surface sensor data was used as a
reference in the parameter update. The analysis started by assuming the initial values
of the thermal model parameters. These initial values were taken from the Snowless
research in which a relatively accurate thermal model of the sensed road was established
[66]. The input parameters and data for establishing the DT of the asphalt road are:
• Weather data recorded by the road (GMX551) and DTU weather stations (Section
5.1);
• Near surface sensor temperature measurements (Zone A averaged);
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
50
==PAGE:57==
• The spatial and time increment: ∆z = 0.1m, ∆t = 60s (time step size the same as
of the measured data);
• Equilibrium depth and temperature: ze = 10m, Te = 10°C;
• Initial surface temperature (based on measurements): T(0, 0) = 7.3°C;
• Heat conduction parameters for the asphalt concrete: k = 1W·m−1·K−1, ρ = 2200kg·m−3,
c = 800J·kg−1·K−1;
• Surface emittance coefficient ε = 0.9; and
• Three constants governing the convection heat transfer coefficient hc (found by best
matching sensor measured with corresponding model-calculated temperatures for a
short time period (approx. 11 days)): a0 = 16.62 W·m−2·K−1, a1 = 0.034 W·m−2·K−1,
a2 = 1.98.
In Figure 5.41, the measured temperature at 1 cm depth and the corresponding thermal
model (before parameter update) calculated temperatures are compared for the complete
observed time period (top plot) and for a period of one week (bottom plot).
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
0
20
40
60
8.7
8.8
8.9
9
9.1
9.2
106
10
20
30
40
Figure 5.41: Measured and corresponding DT calculated temperature time series at 1 cm
depth (before the update) : complete time series (top), and zoomed one week time series
(bottom) depicted with a circle on the top plot.
As it can be seen, the assumed initial values for the thermal model parameters give a
relatively close result; calculated temperature shape follows the measured ones, while
the values of the calculated are slightly larger. The difference between the measured
and calculated temperatures is shown in Figure 5.42. The plotted error is in a range
between -15 and 5°C, which directly implies that the thermal model is overestimating the
temperatures comparing to the measured values (Equation 4.15), especially for a period
towards the end of the observed time.
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
51
==PAGE:58==
This trend can be observed on the graph of the error integral (bottom plot in Figure 5.42),
where it can be seen that the value of the integral grows towards the end of the time
series, confirming that the thermal model is overestimating the temperature values. The
standard deviation of the error is σ = 3.25°C2 while the mean absolute error (MAE) is
MAE = 1.53°C. Ideally, if there was slight error between the two, both values would be
close to 0.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
-20
-10
0
10
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
-15
-10
-5
0
106
Figure 5.42: The difference between the measured and corresponding DT calculated
temperatures at 1 cm depth (before the update): error time series (top), and integral of
the error (bottom).
Herein, for better understanding, two additional statistical tools are introduced and are
used for comparing the calculated and measured data sets. First, is the Pearson product-
moment correlation coefficient r, which is defined as
r =
PN
n=1
 Xn −¯X
  Yn −¯Y

NσXσY
(5.2)
where Xn and Yn represent the two data sets of size N, while the ¯X, ¯Y the means, and σX,
σY the standard deviations of the two. The Pearson product-moment correlation factor (r)
measures the strength of the linear correlation between the two data sets being analyzed.
It is a dimensionless metric, and its values range between -1 and 1, where 0 indicates no
correlation, ±1 indicates total positive or negative linear correlation. Thus, the coefficient
describes the strength of the linear correlation as well as the relationship direction [73].
Second, the modern agreement metric λ is introduced since it integrates both the corre-
lation and bias. It offers a single similarity metric index that outlines the closeness of the
tow analyzed data sets. For positive values of the Pearson correlation coefficient, the
modern agreement metric is expressed as
λ =
2r
σX
σY + σY
σX + ( ¯
X−¯Y )2
σXσY
(r ≥0)
(5.3)
In this expression the denominator is meant to reduce the negative effects of r that in-
creases additive or multiplicative bias between the two data sets. If the data sets are
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
52
==PAGE:59==
closely correlated, their means and standard deviations are identical, then the λ metric in-
dex is the same as the Pearson correlation coefficient. If the data sets are not closely cor-
related (means and standard deviations are different), then the λ metric index is smaller
than the Pearson correlation coefficient. Thus, the index values are raging between zero
and unity [73].
Furthermore, the cross plot of calculated and measured data for the case without param-
eter update is shown in Figure 5.43. On the plot the Pearson correlation and λ metric
coefficients can be seen. Since their values are close to unity, it can be stated that the
correlation between the two data sets is significant, but not complete. As it can be seen
from the plot, the data does not absolutely follow the perfect linear correlation line (de-
picted with a red dashed line), but rather noticeable accumulation of data below the line
is observed. This indicates that for this case, the calculated temperatures are overesti-
mated, which closely relates to findings observed in Figure 5.42. For the data to be more
correlated, i.e., to minimize the error between the DT calculated and sensor measured
temperatures, the parameter updating process is performed.
Figure 5.43: Correlation between the measured and corresponding DT calculated tem-
peratures at 1 cm depth (before the update).
For establishing the DT of the asphalt road, this error is minimized using the developed
control theory parameter update method. In this case, the study was based on updating
six thermal model parameters (a0, a1, a2, k, c, ε) every 30 minutes. Furthermore, for the
update process, the parameter limits have to be set.
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
53
==PAGE:60==
These limits are included in the controller’s decision for estimating the better fit parameter
value as explained in Section 4.3., and they are:
• For parameters a0, a1 and a2 that govern the power relationship for determining the
hc, the upper limit is set as double of the initial parameter value, while the lower
limited as half of the initial parameter value.
• From the physical meaning of the surface emmitance coefficient ε ,its upper limit is
set to 1, while the lower limit is half of the initial parameter value.
• For parameter k the lower limit was set as half of the initial value, while the upper
limit was based on the stability criteria of the thermal model (Equation 4.13) as
k < ∆z2 · ρ · c(t−1)
2 · ∆t
(5.4)
where the c(ti−1 indicates the parameter value from a previous time instance.
• The upper limit of c parameter was set as double of its initial value, while the lower
limit was based on the stability criteria of the thermal model (Equation 4.13) as
c > 2 · k(ti−1) · ∆t
ρ · ∆z2
(5.5)
The establishment of the DT started by using the same controller gains (for parameter
update) that were calibrated for the synthetic multiple parameters update case. And as
expected these gains did not yield a suitable result, confirming the need for finding the
problem specific gains. Thus, the same optimization problem for finding the gain values
was set up as in the synthetic case study.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
104
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
104
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
Figure 5.44: Asphalt road DT convergence analysis of the PI controller gains optimization.
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
54
==PAGE:61==
A convergence analysis is performed to confirm the possibility of using gains which were
found by setting the optimization problem on a certain amount of data points. This conver-
gence of the optimized gains study was based on 4 different data sets: 1 week, 1 month,
2 months and full data (i.e., 4 month) set. The optimization was based on minimizing the
standard deviation of the parameter update output error by changing the controller gains.
The convergence analysis based on the mean absolute error and the standard deviation
of the parameter update output error is presented in Figure 5.44. As it can be seen the
gains optimized on the full data set produce the best results in both convergence analy-
ses which was expected. Since the differences in the standard deviation and the mean
absolute value are rather small between different tested cases, it can be stated that even
less data points yield a good result.
The optimized values for the gains are summarized in Table 5.7, and graphically illus-
trated in Figure 5.45, where the top figure represents the proportional and the bottom one
integral gains. The naming on the horizontal axis corresponds to the order of the table
(i.e., KP1, KI1 are controller gains controlling the update of parameter a1). The highest
change in the gains can be observed for proportional gain KP of parameters a0, c and
k, while the values of the integral gains (KI) are similar for all the updated parameters
except the ε.
KP1
KP2
KP3
KP4
KP5
KP6
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
KI1
KI2
KI3
KI4
KI5
KI6
0
2
4
6
10-9
Figure 5.45: Comparison of the optimized PI controller gains for the DT of an asphalt
road.
For establishing the DT of the asphalt road, the thermal DTM was updated using the best
fit controller gains from the convergence analysis performed before. Following, the result
of the parameter update is analyzed through statistical comparison of DT calculated and
sensor measured data. In Figure 5.46 both data sets are plotted for whole observed time
period (top plot), and for a period of one week (bottom plot). Just by a simple visual
observation of these plots it can be seen that the DT calculated temperatures closely
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
55
==PAGE:62==
Table 5.7: Values of the controller gains optimized on different data sets.
Parameter
One week data set
One month data set
KP [°C−1]
KI [°C−1·s−1]
KP [°C−1]
KI [°C−1·s−1]
a0
3.85E-02
5.14E-13
3.17E-02
1.41E-12
a1
2.50E-04
5.63E-12
1.65E-04
1.27E-12
a2
9.49E-04
1.03E-12
2.06E-04
4.95E-14
c
1.09E-03
1.43E-13
3.22E-02
2.75E-14
k
1.09E-02
2.11E-11
9.69E-03
1.15E-10
ε
2.04E-03
4.84E-10
2.02E-03
2.12E-10
Parameter
Two months data set
Four months data set
KP [°C−1]
KI [°C−1·s−1]
KP [°C−1]
KI [°C−1·s−1]
a0
1.89E-02
1.81E-13
5.10E-02
1.39E-13
a1
2.22E-04
1.00E-12
6.41E-05
8.82E-14
a2
7.31E-04
3.01E-14
4.38E-04
1.55E-13
c
1.32E-02
2.56E-12
1.35E-02
3.65E-12
k
2.14E-02
1.30E-12
1.17E-02
2.38E-11
ε
8.17E-04
5.77E-09
9.17E-04
3.24E-09
resemble realty. In the first half of the time period the calculated values are only slightly
underestimated, while in the second half there is a more significant difference between the
measured and calculated temperature values. This is confirmed with the bottom graph in
Figure 5.46, where a one week data set towards the end of the time period was extracted.
The difference between the two can clearly be seen, as well as the behaviour of the DT
in the higher temperature regions where it does not reach the peak temperature values
measured by the embedded sensors.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
0
20
40
60
8.7
8.8
8.9
9
9.1
9.2
106
10
20
30
40
Figure 5.46: Comparison of the DT calculated and the original measured temperature
at 1cm (after the update): complete observed time period (up), and zoomed one week
period (bottom) depicted with a circle on the top plot.
This behaviour is confirmed by plotting the error between the two data sets for the full time
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
56
==PAGE:63==
period (top plot), as well as the error integral time series (bottom plot) in Figure 5.47. As it
can be seen the higher error oscillations are recorded in the second half of the time series,
which corresponds to the already made statements. The integral of the error follows the
same trend; in the first half of the observed period it is closer to 0 suggesting less error
between the two data sets, while in the second half it steadily grows indicating the already
observed increase in error. The error values in the first half oscillate in a range of ±5°C,
while in the second one that range increases to ±15°C. The standard deviation of the error
is 2.44°C2, while the mean absolute error is 1.54°C, confirming the existence of errors.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
-10
-5
0
5
10
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
-10
-5
0
105
Figure 5.47: The difference between the measured and DT calculated temperatures at 1
cm depth (after the update): error time series (top), and integral of the error (bottom).
Furthermore, from the bottom plot in Figure 5.46, a trend was noticed in which the cal-
culated temperatures are slightly offset from the measured ones. To investigate deeper
this phenomena, the full time series was analyzed and it was noticed that this trend is
periodically repeating for the complete time series. Because the trend is more apparent
for the second half of the time series it was assumed that the air temperature and solar
radiation could cause the model to deviate.
For a better understanding of this drift in temperatures, single day plots were made in
which DT calculated, measured, and air temperatures, as well as solar radiation are plot-
ted against each other. Following, two plots were made for July 3, and July 4, 2020,
which correspond to the third and the fourth peak in bottom plot of Figure 5.46, and one
plot from the first half of the time series (April 11, 2020) is made to show the same trend
happening in the colder period. From Figure 5.48 it can be seen that the DT calculated
temperatures (blue continuous line) start to increase before and in a more steep man-
ner, than the measured ones (dashed blue line). The red dashed line indicates midday,
meaning that this deviation between the two temperatures is happening in the morning.
As it can be seen with increase in solar radiation (orange line) and air temperature (dot-
ted line), the DT calculated temperatures start to increase almost immediately, while the
measured ones start to increase later in time. Towards midday, the two data meets, and
in the second part of the day there is almost no error between the two.
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
57
==PAGE:64==
1.62
1.63
1.64
1.65
1.66
1.67
1.68
1.69
1.7
106
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Figure 5.48: Time series of DT calculated (at 1 cm depth), measured (at 1 cm depth) and
air temperature, and shortwave solar radiation on April 11, 2020.
8.79
8.8
8.81
8.82
8.83
8.84
8.85
8.86
106
10
15
20
25
30
35
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Figure 5.49: Time series of DT calculated (at 1 cm depth), measured (at 1 cm depth) and
air temperature, and shortwave solar radiation on July 3, 2020.
In Figure 5.49 same trend is observed before as in the previous figure. The DT calculated
temperatures rise with the increase in solar radiation, while the measured temperatures
do not follow the same trend (the values start to increase later). Even though the calcu-
lated temperature follows the shape of the measured ones, a noticeable error (about 5°C)
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
58
==PAGE:65==
between the peak temperatures is observed. In addition, it was observed that this error
is prominent in the summer time (higher air temperatures and solar radiation).
To confirm that the influence of the solar radiation directly influences these temperature
drifts between the DT calculated and measured values, the plot in Figure 5.50 is made.
As it can be see the solar radiation is much lower than in two previously analyzed figures;
this suggests a cloudy day where the solar radiation was partial blocked. As it can be seen
the two data closely follow the same shape, while the error between the two is around 5°C.
There is no increase in the calculated temperatures that was observed in two previous
figures in the morning period.
8.87
8.88
8.89
8.9
8.91
8.92
8.93
8.94
8.95
106
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Figure 5.50: Time series of DT calculated (at 1 cm depth), measured (at 1 cm depth) and
air temperature, and shortwave solar radiation on July 4, 2020.
The findings of this study indicate that the weather station and the embedded sensors,
in the experimental setup, were not exposed to the same amounts of shortwave solar
radiation during the same periods of the day.
Additionally, a cross plot of the DT calculate and sensor measured temperatures is pre-
sented in Figure 5.51. As it can be seen the values are closely aggregated around the
perfect correlation line, proving that the parameter update of the DT provides closer re-
sults compared to Figure 5.43 where the update was not performed. Furthermore, the
Pearsons correlation coefficient and λ metric are presented on the plot. Since the val-
ues of these two statistical metrics are close to unity it can be said that the two data
sets are closely correlated. Compared to the values of these factors when there is no
update (r = 0.948,λ = 0.939), the updated data set has larger values and thus it is better
correlated than the non updated data.
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
59
==PAGE:66==
Figure 5.51: Correlation between the measured and corresponding DT calculated tem-
peratures at 1 cm depth (after the update).
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
Figure 5.52: Comparison between the non updated and updated error time series at 1
cm depth.
Moreover, to analyze how the updating of the parameters influenced the overall results,
a comparison between the temperature time series before the update and after it is pre-
sented in Figure 5.52. As it can be seen, the updating of the thermal model parameters
reduced the overall error, especially in the higher temperature region where the error is
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
60
==PAGE:67==
more concentrated around the mean. The standard deviation of the error after update is
2.44 °C2 which is a 15% reduction from the standard deviation of the error before param-
eter update. Additionally, the mean absolute error is 1.54°C which is half of the mean
absolute error of the not updated time series, suggesting an overall better result.
Following, the stability of the thermal model is analyzed and the result is plotted in Fig-
ure 5.53 where the stability parameter is plotted over time. It can be observed that the
stability parameter is below the limited value as defined in Equation 4.13. This result
implies that the limits for the parameter update choice within the PI controller were set
properly.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Figure 5.53: Stability time series of the thermal DTM.
Additionally, the updated values of the thermal model are presented in Figure 5.54, and as
it can be see all the updated values of the parameters are within the predefined limits. This
is another confirmation that the controller is properly adjusting the values in the updating
process.
First, surface emmitance parameter shows a relatively steady change throughout the
updating process with a slight deviation in the value around half of the time series. Second,
the thermal conductivity parameter k has a relatively uniform update for the first half of the
updating process, after which it doubles in the value and remains oscillating around higher
value until the end of the updating process. Third, the specific heat capacity parameter
c is steadily rising for the first one million data points after which it continues to oscillate
closely to the predefined upper limit equal to double of its initial value.
The second three plots represent the three coefficients governing the power relation of
the convection heat transfer coefficient hc. First, the parameter a0 shows a rather ecstatic
updating process; in the beginning of the updating process the values stay in the range
between 10 and 20 W·m−2K−1, while they start to oscillate significantly (between 10 and
30 W·m−2K−1) just before the half of the updating process. The second coefficient of
the hc power relation a1 is very stable throughout the whole updating process; its value
changes less than 1 % overall. Third, the a2 parameter also shows a relatively stable
behaviour with a slight increase towards the end of the time series.
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
61
==PAGE:68==
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
0.9
0.95
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
1
2
3
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
800
1000
1200
1400
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
10
20
30
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
0.0339
0.034
0.0341
0.0342
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
1.9
2
2.1
Figure 5.54: Result of the parameter update process for (top to bottom): ε, k, c, a0, a1,
and a2.
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
62
==PAGE:69==
Finally, to verify the accuracy of the DT, the calculated and measured temperatures for
depths of 5 and 10 cm are compared. In Figure 5.55, the measured temperatures from
the two sensors at 5 cm depth (PTR-20 and PTR-52) are compared with the calculated
ones. The upper plot represents the complete time series, while the bottom plot shows
the focused one week data series. As it can be seen the calculated temperatures follow
the shape, but are overall smaller in value than the measured temperatures.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
0
20
40
60
8.7
8.8
8.9
9
9.1
9.2
106
10
20
30
40
Figure 5.55: Comparison of the DT calculated and the original measured temperature
at 5cm (after the update): complete observed time period (up), and zoomed one week
period (bottom) depicted with a circle on the top plot.
Figure 5.56: Correlation between the measured and corresponding DT calculated tem-
peratures at 5 cm depth (after the update).
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
63
==PAGE:70==
A statistical analysis is conducted where the two data sets are compared. The result can
be observed in Figure 5.56 where a cross plot of the measured and DT calculated data
is plotted. As it can be seen the values do not follow closely the perfect correlation line.
More data is gathered above this line indicating that the DT calculated temperatures are
indeed underestimated through the calculation period. The Pierson correlation coefficient
r and λ metric, indicated in the top left corner are close to unity which indicates sufficient
linear correlation both in shape and values between the two.
Moreover, in Figure 5.57 the measured (sensor PTR-8) and the DT calculated tempera-
tures at 10 cm depth are plotted. The upper plot represents the complete temperature
time series, while the bottom one represents a close up of the indicated one week of
data. It can be observed that the calculated data follows the same trend in shape, but the
temperature values are slightly lower, especially at regions with high temperature peaks.
The same behaviour of the calculated temperature values was observed for the depth of
5 cm.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
0
10
20
30
40
8.7
8.8
8.9
9
9.1
9.2
106
15
20
25
30
35
Figure 5.57: Comparison of the DT calculated and the original measured temperature at
10 cm (after the update): complete observed time period (up), and zoomed one week
period (bottom) depicted with a circle on the top plot.
The same statistical analysis was conducted as for the 5 cm depth data sets. The cross
plot of measured and DT calculated temperature values was plotted, and it is shown in
Figure 5.58. The plotted data follows the correlation line, with a slight deviation in the
higher temperatures region. This suggests that for that data the DTM underestimates the
temperature values. The deviation in the beginning where the measured temperatures
are much higher than the calculated ones corresponds to the sensor data deviation no-
ticed in the beginning of the measured temperature time series (top plot in Figure 5.57).
Furthermore, the statistical indices in the top left corner of the plot are close to unity sug-
gesting a good correlation between the two compared data.
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
64
==PAGE:71==
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Figure 5.58: Correlation between the measured and corresponding DT calculated tem-
peratures at 10 cm depth (after the update).
The overall accuracy is expressed by summarizing the statistical indices for the three
cases (1, 5 and 10 cm depth) in Table 5.8. As it can be seen the best correlation (highest
r and λ) with the measured data has the calculated time series at 1 cm depth, followed
by the 10 cm depth, while the worst correlation has the calculated time series at 5 cm
depth. It was expected that the near surface case has the best correlation since the
parameter update was based on that data. Additionally, because of the nature of the
finite difference approximation of the thermal model in which the temperatures at larger
depths are calculated based on adjacent temperatures, and the temperature deviations
for higher temperature ranges between the measured and DT calculated for 1 cm depth,
it can be stated that the same differences at deeper layers are expected.
Table 5.8: Statistical analysis summarized for all the evaluated cases.
Depth
r
λ
1 cm
0.971
0.967
5 cm
0.955
0.903
10 cm
0.972
0.948
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
65
==PAGE:72==
6
Conclusion
6.1
Summary
A DT concept, applicable to civil engineering structures, was defined for subsequent imple-
mentation (see Chapter 1). At its core resides a digital representation (DTM) of a sensed
structure. Through continuous parameter updating based on sensor measurements, the
DTM should mimic the structure and complete any missing information in-between sensor
locations.
Overall, the DT concept is expected to deliver remote real-time structural monitoring, sup-
port for maintenance-related decision and activities, and ability to examine responses
under different (even imagined) operational scenarios.
After a review of literature (see Chapter 2) a two-fold objective was defined for the work
(see Chapter 3): (i) adapting and applying the DT concept to an asphalt road with focus
on the thermal state of the system; and (ii) developing a suitable method for near real-time
parameter updating.
The DT formulation (see Chapter 4), integrated a one-dimensional thermal model (i.e.,
the DTM) with a parameter updating method based on application of a PI controller. With
respect to the thermal modelling, the asphalt road was represented as a homogeneous
half-space. As for method updating, the discrepancy between temperature readings and
model-calculated temperatures (at the same locations) were continually followed and uti-
lized as a guide to adjust the DTM parameters.
The formulation and parameter updating method were first applied to a synthetic study
(see Chapter 5, Section 5.2) in which the sensor readings were artificially generated to
offer a known and regulated environment for in depth investigation of the proposed DT
formulation. Second (see Chapter 5, Section 5.3), the formulation and parameter updat-
ing method were applied to a real asphalt road, instrumented with temperature sensors
as well as a nearby weather station.
6.2
Findings and discussion
Based on the literature review it was found that the DT is a fairly new concept, with promis-
ing advantages and possibilities of application, but limited actual applications within the
civil engineering profession. DT-related terminology appears conflicting and vague.
Model/parameter updating was identified as a crucial point of the DT concept to ensure
representation of the physical structure. Nonetheless, the technical literature main men-
tions updating via optimization that is performed once, or at sparse time intervals, and
not continually as needed by the DT. One possible reason for the current state of affairs
is the utilization of computationally demanding models that require long time for updating
under an optimization scheme.
Control theory was found to be useful in situations that involve sensor readings and the
need to achieve some target that is a function of the readings. It has been successfully
applied for industrial or manufacturing processes. No applications were identified in the
context of using the control theory in order to update a mathematical model.
In addition, it was found that knowledge of the thermal field within pavement systems,
and within asphalt pavements in particular, is crucial for understanding deterioration – as
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
66
==PAGE:73==
temperature levels control aging and mechanical behavior. Knowledge of the thermal field
is also needed for taking decisions related to winter maintenance. In this context, the most
commonly accepted thermal model for pavements is the one-dimensional heat equation,
with the finite difference approximation as the preferred numerical solution technique.
An investigation of the common thermal model was carried out for the case of a half-
space exposed to heat fluxes at the surface representing weather effects (Section 4.2).
This investigation revealed that the thermal field is most sensitive to the thermal conduc-
tivity parameter, followed by surface emittance coefficient, and the dependency of the
convective coefficient on wind speed.
From the synthetic study (Section 5.2) it was found that the accuracy of the update greatly
depends on choice of the PI controller gains. Thus, a careful calibration (tuning) process
needs to be performed for optimal results. A tuning process based optimization proved
most effective in this connection. This process required some data buffer the sensors,
and was seen to yield satisfactory results even with one week of data.
From analysis of the field study it was found necessary to apply limitations on the range of
model parameters to ensure physically meaningful values cannot be exceeded during the
updating process. Also, it was noticed that the controller gains obtained in the synthetic
case study were not applicable for the field case study. Therefore, the gains were obtained
by the utilizing the same optimization method as in the synthetic case.
Lastly, from the results of the DT calculations for the surface (where matching was done),
an error pattern was identified, in which the DTM-calculated temperatures in the morning
periods were overestimated compared to the measured ones. When compared to other
temperature measurements, taken at deeper layers (not matched), the DTM was found
capable of reproducing all measured trends. However, the peaks matched well only for
days with little solar radiation intensity and exhibited undershooting for days with high
solar radiation intensity. These findings are the result of differences in shortwave solar
radiation intensity between the weather station and the asphalt surface of the road.
6.3
Conclusions
The primary conclusion from this work is that the chosen thermal formulation, combined
with a PI controller for parameter updating, is capable of generating a thermal DT for an
asphalt road.
The utilization of control theory offers a computationally efficient and workable technique
to achieve near real-time parameter updating. Obtaining a correct set of controller gains
is crucial for ensuring high level of twinness; it must be pursued on a case-by-case basis
that reflect the specifics of the structure and sensing array being utilized. An optimization
scheme should be employed to find the gains, which means that some data must be
collected prior to establishment of DT.
The thermal state of an asphalt road is highly dependent on the input environmental condi-
tions prevailing at the surface (e.g., wind speed, intensity of solar radiation). This means
that the achievable level of twinness is fundamentally limited by the relevancy of the avail-
able weather data.
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
67
==PAGE:74==
6.4
Recommendations for future work
Based on the finding and conclusions obtained in this work, following recommendations
for future work are placed: (i) develop a quantified measure of twiness level to guide any
future improvements in the DT concept and its application; (ii) build a DT based on more
sensors, both in-structure and environmental; (iii) find a balance between the amount
of sensors and the achieved twiness level; (iv) investigate the results of the updated
parameters, i.e., asses independently what is the physical meaning behind the observed
changes in their values; (v) consider re-tuning of the PI controller gains during operation
of the DT (not just initiation); (vi) balance the DTM complexity against the computation
effort in establishing of the DT; and (vi) compensate the imperfect data input by utilizing
more sensors, and by smarter placement of the sensors.
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
68
==PAGE:75==
References
[1]
United Nations, World Urbanization Prospects. 2018, vol. 12, pp. 197–236, ISBN:
9789211483192. DOI: 10 . 4054 / demres . 2005 . 12 . 9. [Online]. Available: https : / /
population.un.org/wup/Publications/Files/WUP2018-Report.pdf.
[2]
D. M. Frangopol and M. Liu, “Maintenance and management of civil infrastructure
based on condition, safety, optimization, and life-cycle cost”, Structure and Infras-
tructure Engineering, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 29–41, 2007, ISSN: 15732479. DOI: 10.1080/
15732470500253164.
[3]
L. S. Dalenogare, G. B. Benitez, N. F. Ayala, and A. G. Frank, “The expected contri-
bution of Industry 4.0 technologies for industrial performance”, International Journal
of Production Economics, vol. 204, no. July, pp. 383–394, 2018, ISSN: 09255273.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpe.2018.08.019. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.
2018.08.019.
[4]
F. Craveiro, J. P. Duarte, H. Bartolo, and P. J. Bartolo, “Additive manufacturing
as an enabling technology for digital construction: A perspective on Construction
4.0”, Automation in Construction, vol. 103, no. March, pp. 251–267, 2019, ISSN:
09265805. DOI: 10.1016/j.autcon.2019.03.011. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.autcon.2019.03.011.
[5]
D. Snoonian, “Can building automation systems overcome interoperability prob-
lems to assert control over our offices, hotels, and airports? By Deborah Snoonian”,
IEEE Spectrum, vol. August, pp. 18–23, 2003.
[6]
K. Chintalapudi, T. Fu, J. Paek, N. Kothari, S. Rangwala, J. Caffrey, R. Govindan, E.
Johnson, and S. Masri, “Monitoring civil structures with a wireless sensor network”,
IEEE Internet Computing, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 26–34, 2006, ISSN: 10897801. DOI:
10.1109/MIC.2006.38.
[7]
P. Gerbert, S. Castagnino, C. Rothballer, A. Renz, and R. Filitz, “Digital in Engi-
neering and Construction”, The Boston Consulting Group, pp. 1–22, 2016. [Online].
Available: https://www.bcgperspectives.com/Images/BCG-Digital-in-Engineering-
and-Construction-Mar-2016_tcm80-206107.pdf%5Cnpapers3://publication/uuid/
06E4B809-B169-49E7-BDB4-02E8939071A9.
[8]
T. D. Oesterreich and F. Teuteberg, “Understanding the implications of digitisation
and automation in the context of Industry 4.0: A triangulation approach and ele-
ments of a research agenda for the construction industry”, Computers in Industry,
vol. 83, pp. 121–139, 2016, ISSN: 01663615. DOI: 10.1016/j.compind.2016.09.006.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2016.09.006.
[9]
J. Lee, B. Bagheri, and H. A. Kao, “A Cyber-Physical Systems architecture for In-
dustry 4.0-based manufacturing systems”, Manufacturing Letters, vol. 3, pp. 18–
23, 2015, ISSN: 22138463. DOI: 10.1016/j.mfglet.2014.12.001. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.mfglet.2014.12.001.
[10]
G. Goger and T. Bisenberger, “Digitalization in infrastructure construction – Devel-
opments in construction operations”, Geomechanik und Tunnelbau, vol. 13, no. 2,
pp. 165–177, 2020, ISSN: 18657389. DOI: 10.1002/geot.201900077.
[11]
EAPA, “A European Green Deal. The asphalt industry’s contributions to climate-
neutrality and preservation of Europe’s natural environment”, pp. 1–4, 2019.
[12]
EAPA and Eurobitume, “FIT FOR TOMORROW: Asphalt Paving”, 2011.
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
69
==PAGE:76==
[13]
European Asphalt Pavement Association and National Asphalt Pavement Associa-
tion, The Asphalt Paving Industry A Global Perspective - 2nd edition. 2011, p. 36,
ISBN: 0-914313-06-1. [Online]. Available: http://www.asphaltpavement.org/images/
stories/GL_101_Edition_3.pdf.
[14]
EAPA, What is Asphalt 4.0. [Online]. Available: https://eapa.org/asphalt-40/.
[15]
H. Wang, P. Xiang, and L. Jiang, “Optical Fiber Sensor Based In-Field Structural
Performance Monitoring of Multilayered Asphalt Pavement”, Journal of Lightwave
Technology, vol. 36, no. 17, pp. 3624–3632, 2018, ISSN: 15582213. DOI: 10.1109/
JLT.2018.2838122.
[16]
B. F. Kallas and C. Park, “Asphalt Pavement Temperatures”, 1965.
[17]
Gartner, “Gartner’s Top 10 Strategic Technology Trends for 2017”, Smarter With
Gartner, pp. 1–12, 2016. [Online]. Available: https://www.gartner.com/smarterwithgartner/
gartners-top-10-technology-trends-2017/.
[18]
V. V. Makarov, Y. B. Frolov, I. S. Parshina, and M. V. Ushakova, “The design concept
of digital twin”, Proceedings of 2019 12th International Conference, pp. 1–4, 2019.
DOI: 10.1109/MLSD.2019.8911091.
[19]
S. Flumerfelt, F.-J. Kahlen, and A. Alves, Transdisciplinary Perspectives on Com-
plex Systems: New Findings and Approaches. 2017, ISBN: 9783319387543.
[20]
A. Hafver and F. B. Pedersen, “PROBABILISTIC DIGITAL TWINS - Extending dig-
ital twins for risk management”, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://ai- and- safety.
dnvgl.com/probabilistic-twin/.
[21]
A. Madni, C. Madni, and S. Lucero, “Leveraging Digital Twin Technology in Model-
Based Systems Engineering”, Systems, vol. 7, no. 1, p. 7, 2019, ISSN: 2079-8954.
DOI: 10.3390/systems7010007.
[22]
B. Piascik, J. Vickers, D. Lowry, S. Scotti, J. Stewart, and A. Calomino, “Materials,
Structures, Mechanical systems, and Manufacturing Roadmap: Technology Area
12”, NASA Space Technology Roadmaps, 2012. DOI: 11/13/2013.
[23]
J. F. Uhlenkamp, K. Hribernik, S. Wellsandt, and K. D. Thoben, “Digital Twin Appli-
cations : A first systemization of their dimensions”, Proceedings - 2019 IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Engineering, Technology and Innovation, ICE/ITMC 2019,
no. June, 2019. DOI: 10.1109/ICE.2019.8792579.
[24]
U. T. Tygesen, M. S. Jepsen, J. Vestermark, N. Dollerup, and A. Pedersen, “The true
digital twin concept for fatigue re-assessment of marine structures”, Proceedings
of the International Conference on Offshore Mechanics and Arctic Engineering -
OMAE, vol. 1, no. September 2019, 2018. DOI: 10.1115/OMAE2018-77915.
[25]
S. O. Erikstad, “Merging Physics , Big Data Analytics and Simulation for the Next-
Generation Merging Physics , Big Data Analytics and Simulation for the Next-Generation
Digital Twins”, no. September, 2017.
[26]
E. J. Tuegel, A. R. Ingraffea, T. G. Eason, and S. M. Spottswood, “Reengineering air-
craft structural life prediction using a digital twin”, International Journal of Aerospace
Engineering, vol. 2011, 2011, ISSN: 16875966. DOI: 10.1155/2011/154798.
[27]
Y. Tchana and S. Remy, “ScienceDirect ScienceDirect ScienceDirect Designing Dig-
ital Twin linear infrastructures lifecycle Designing a a unique unique Digital Twin for
for linear lifecycle management management A new methodology to analyze the
functional and physical architecture”, Procedia CIRP, vol. 84, pp. 545–549, 2019,
ISSN: 2212-8271. DOI: 10.1016/j.procir.2019.04.176. [Online]. Available: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2019.04.176.
[28]
J. E. Mottershead, M. Link, and M. I. Friswell, “The sensitivity method in finite el-
ement model updating: A tutorial”, Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing,
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
70
==PAGE:77==
vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 2275–2296, 2011, ISSN: 10961216. DOI: 10.1016/j.ymssp.2010.
10.012. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ymssp.2010.10.012.
[29]
J. E. Mottershead and M. I. Friswell, “Model Updating in Structural Dynamics: A
survey”, 1993.
[30]
M. Aghagholizadeh and F. Catbas, “A Review of Model Updating Methods for Civil
Infrastructure Systems”, Computational Techniques for Civil and Structural Engi-
neering, no. September, pp. 83–99, 2015. DOI: 10.4203/csets.38.4.
[31]
H. Grafe, “Model Updating of Large Structural Dynamics Models Using Measured
Response Functions”, Vibration University Technology Centre, no. October, p. 184,
1998. [Online]. Available: http://vibration.ex.ac.uk/doc/1183.pdf%5Cnhttp://www3.
imperial.ac.uk/pls/portallive/docs/1/40375700.PDF.
[32]
T. Marwala, I. Boulkaibet, and S. Adhikari, Probabilistic Finite Element Model Up-
dating Using Bayesian Statistics. 2017, ISBN: 5856420187.
[33]
M. Dorosti, R. Fey, M. Heertjes, M. Van De Wal, and H. Nijmeijer, Finite element
model reduction and model updating of structures for control, 3. IFAC, 2014, vol. 19,
pp. 4517–4522, ISBN: 9783902823625. DOI: 10.3182/20140824-6-za-1003.01644.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.3182/20140824-6-ZA-1003.01644.
[34]
T. Marwala, Finite-elemnt-model Updating Using Computational Intelligence Tech-
niques. 2018, ISBN: 978-1-84996-322-0. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-84996-323-7.
[35]
H.-P. Chen, “Finite Element Model Updating”, in Structural health monitoring of large
civil engineering structures, John Wiley & Sons, 2018, ch. 6.
[36]
C. Mares, J. E. Mottershead, and M. I. Friswell, “Stochastic model updating: Part 1-
theory and simulated example”, Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing, vol. 20,
no. 7, pp. 1674–1695, 2006, ISSN: 08883270. DOI: 10.1016/j.ymssp.2005.06.006.
[37]
J. Doyle, B. Francis, and A. Tannenbaum, “Feedback Control Theory”, Tech. Rep.
[38]
S. Skogestad and I. Postlethwaite, “Multivariable Feedback Control—Analysis and
Design”, IEEE Control Systems, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 80–81, 2007, ISSN: 1066033X.
DOI: 10.1109/MCS.2007.284514.
[39]
J. Leigh, “Synthesis of automatic feedback control loops: a more quantitative view”,
in Control Theory: A guided tour, 2013, ch. 3, pp. 19–28. DOI: 10.1049/pbce072e{\_
}ch3.
[40]
A. O’dwyer, “Handbook of PI and PID controller tuning rules”, IEEE Control Systems,
vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 92–93, 2006, ISSN: 1066033X. DOI: 10.1109/MCS.2006.1580157.
[41]
U. o. Michigan, Introduction : PID Controller Design, 2020.
[42]
L. K. Agrawal, B. K. Chauhan, and G. K. Benerjee, “A Review on Hybrid Controller
Using Soft Computing Algorithms”, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 49–61, 2016. DOI: 10.12691/
ajeee-4-2-2.
[43]
T. Wescott, “PID without a PhD”, no. October, 2000. [Online]. Available: file:///C:
/Users/rxc821/Desktop/23_10_2012_[Guide]_PID_Without_A_PhD.pdf.
[44]
Q. G. Wang, T. H. Lee, H. W. Fung, Q. Bi, and Y. Zhang, “PID tuning for improved
performance”, IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology, vol. 7, no. 4,
pp. 457–465, 1999, ISSN: 10636536. DOI: 10.1109/87.772161.
[45]
P. Sarma, L. J. Durlofsky, K. Aziz, and W. H. Chen, “Efficient real-time reservoir man-
agement using adjoint-based optimal control and model updating”, Computational
Geosciences, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 3–36, 2006, ISSN: 14200597. DOI: 10.1007/s10596-
005-9009-z.
[46]
B. N. Datta, “Finite-element model updating, eigenstructure assignment and eigen-
value embedding techniques for vibrating systems”, Mechanical Systems and Sig-
nal Processing, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 83–96, 2002, ISSN: 08883270. DOI: 10.1006/
mssp.2001.1443.
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
71
==PAGE:78==
[47]
M. El Jazzar and H. Nassereddine, “Digital Twin in construction : An Empirical Anal-
ysis”, no. May, pp. 0–10, 2020.
[48]
Arup, “Digital twin”, Mondo Digitale, vol. 18, no. 80, 2019, ISSN: 1720898X. DOI:
10.1007/978-3-642-35950-7{\_}16870-1.
[49]
A. Fuller, Z. Fan, and C. Day, “Digital Twin: Enabling Technology, Challenges and
Open Research”, 2019. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1911.01276.
[50]
C. S. Shim, N. S. Dang, S. Lon, and C. H. Jeon, “Development of a bridge mainte-
nance system for prestressed concrete bridges using 3D digital twin model”, Struc-
ture and Infrastructure Engineering, vol. 15, no. 10, pp. 1319–1332, 2019, ISSN:
17448980. DOI: 10.1080/15732479.2019.1620789.
[51]
H. Sofia, E. Anas, and O. Faiz, “Mobile mapping, machine learning and digital twin
for road infrastructure monitoring and maintenance: Case study of mohammed VI
bridge in Morocco”, Proceedings - 2020 IEEE International Conference of Moroccan
Geomatics, MORGEO 2020, 2020. DOI: 10.1109/Morgeo49228.2020.9121882.
[52]
C. Shim, H. Kang, and N. Dang, “Digital Twin Models for Maintenance of Cable-
Supported Bridges”, vol. 2019, no. 2017, pp. 737–742, 2019. DOI: 10.1680/icsic.
64669.737.
[53]
C. U. Grosse, “Monitoring and inspection techniques supporting a digital twin con-
cept in civil engineering”, Sustainable Construction Materials and Technologies,
vol. 2, 2019, ISSN: 25153056.
[54]
V. Qiuchen Lu, A. K. Parlikad, P. Woodall, G. D. Ranasinghe, and J. Heaton, “De-
veloping a Dynamic Digital Twin at a Building Level: using Cambridge Campus as
Case Study”, vol. 2019, pp. 67–75, 2019. DOI: 10.1680/icsic.64669.067.
[55]
W. Herb, R. Velasquez, H. Stefan, M. O. Marasteanu, and T. Clyne, “Simulation and
characterization of asphalt pavement temperatures”, Road Materials and Pavement
Design, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 233–247, 2009, ISSN: 14680629. DOI: 10.3166/rmpd.10.
233-247.
[56]
C. Yavuzturk and K. Ksaibati, “in Asphalt Pavements Due To Thermal Environmen-
tal Conditions Using a Two-Dimensional ”, no. October, 2002.
[57]
B. J. Dempsey and M. R. Thompson, “A heat- transfer model for evaluating frost
action and temperaturerelated effects in multilayered pavement systems”, Highw
Res Rec, no. 34, pp. 39–56, 1970.
[58]
M. J. C. Minhoto, J. C. Pais, P. A. A. Pereira, and L. G. Picado-santos, “Predicting
Asphalt Pavement Temperature with a Three-Dimensional Finite Element Method”,
Transportation Research Record, vol. 1919, no. 1919, pp. 96–110, 2005. [Online].
Available: http://trb.metapress.com/content/060716883r685171/.
[59]
J. Chao and Z. Jinxi, “Prediction Model for Asphalt Pavement Temperature in High-
Temperature Season in Beijing”, Advances in Civil Engineering, vol. 2018, 2018,
ISSN: 16878094. DOI: 10.1155/2018/1837952.
[60]
Transportation Research Board, Asphalt Concrete Mixtures, 1417. 1993, vol. 1,
pp. 1–12, ISBN: 0309055652.
[61]
Å. Hermansson, “Mathematical Model for Calculation of Pavement Temperatures”,
Transportation Research Record, vol. 1764, no. Paper No. 01-3543, pp. 180–188,
2001.
[62]
Y. Qin and J. E. Hiller, “Modeling temperature distribution in rigid pavement slabs:
Impact of air temperature”, Construction and Building Materials, vol. 25, no. 9, pp. 3753–
3761, 2011, ISSN: 09500618. DOI: 10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2011.04.015. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2011.04.015.
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
72
==PAGE:79==
[63]
N. Zhang, G. Wu, B. Chen, and C. Cao, “Numerical model for calculating the unsta-
ble state temperature in asphalt pavement structure”, Coatings, vol. 9, no. 4, 2019,
ISSN: 20796412. DOI: 10.3390/COATINGS9040271.
[64]
S. P. Parker, McGraw-Hill Dictionary of Scientific & Technical Terms. McGraw-Hill
Education, 2003, p. 2380.
[65]
G. W. Recktenwald, “Finite-Difference Approximations to the Heat Equation”, Me-
chanical Engineering, vol. 0, no. 2, pp. 1–27, 2004. [Online]. Available: http : / /
math5022spring2010.weebly.com/uploads/3/6/3/0/3630523/fdheat.pdf.
[66]
E. Lavenberg, “Snowless: Data Collection and Analysis Report”, Tech. Rep., 2020.
[67]
Department of Civil Engineering and Technical university of Denmark, DTU Climate
Station, 2020. [Online]. Available: climatestationdata.byg.dtu.dk.
[68]
E. Andersen, J. Dragsted, T. V. Kristensen, and L. K. Andersen, “Upgrade and Ex-
tension of the Climate station at DTU Byg”, vol. 01, no. July, p. 14, 2014.
[69]
Gill Instruments, “MaxiMet GMX551 Compact Weather Station”, Gill Instruments,
Tech. Rep., 2020.
[70]
E. Lavenberg and Q. Adam, “Construction of an Electrically Heated Asphalt Road
based on Ribbon Technology”, Not published, 2020.
[71]
WIKA, “Operating limits and tolerances of platinum resistance thermometers per
EN 60751 : 2008”, pp. 1–8, 2016. [Online]. Available: https://de-de.wika.de/upload/
DS_IN0017_en_co_20804.pdf.
[72]
Dansk Standard, “DS/EN 60751 Industrielle platinmodstandstermo- metre og platin-
termofølere (Industrial platinum resistance thermometers and platinum temperature
sensors)”, p. 60 751, 2008.
[73]
E. Levenberg, M. Pettinari, S. Baltzer, and B. M. L. Christensen, “Comparing Traffic
Speed Deflectometer and Falling Weight Deflectometer Data”, Transportation Re-
search Record, vol. 2672, no. 40, pp. 22–31, 2018, ISSN: 21694052. DOI: 10.1177/
0361198118768524.
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
73
==PAGE:80==
A
Appendix A: Developed code
This page was left blank intentionally.
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
74
==PAGE:81==
Table of Contents
 ........................................................................................................................................  1
Synthetic Sensor Generator ...................................................................................................  1
Information ........................................................................................................................  1
Input data ..........................................................................................................................  1
Domain discretization ..........................................................................................................  2
Other input parameters ......................................................................................................... 2
Thermal model ...................................................................................................................  2
Thermal model result ........................................................................................................... 3
Synthetic Sensor Data ..........................................................................................................  3
Random number generator .................................................................................................... 3
Save the data ...................................................................................................................... 4
clear; close all; clc;
Synthetic Sensor Generator
%Lucija Barisic, s182579
%Technical University of Denmark
Information
This script is used to generate synthetic sensor data used in model updating. The data is generated using
the finite difference thermal model and weather station data as input.
Input data
Specify file from which data is read - the name of the file should be written as stated below (extension
needs to be included).
data = readtable('ALLDATA.csv');
With following lines the data is read from the table and sorted in vectors - a vector per weather parameter.
• f_S - shortwave solar radiation 
• f_D - down-dwelling longwave radiation 
• T_air - air temperature 
• U - wind speed 
f_S = data(:,'GHI');
f_S = table2array(f_S);
f_D = data(:,'LWD');
f_D = table2array(f_D);
T_air = data(:,'air_temperature');
T_air = table2array(T_air);
1
==PAGE:82==
U = data(:,'wind_speed_avg');
U = table2array(U);
% U = U*3.6;
Domain discretization
The time and space domain need to be discretized in order to determine the mesh of nodes at which thermal
model will calculate temperatures.
Time domain The time step dt is set at 60 seconds since the weather station time step is 1 minute.
time = length(f_S);       % Total number of time steps
dt = 60;                        % Time step increment [s]
totalTime = time*dt;            % Total time
M = time;
timePlot = 0:dt:totalTime-1;    % Grid points for plot
timePlot = timePlot';
% *Spatial domain*
% The depth increment *dz *is set to 0.01 m. *z_e* is the equilibrium
 depth
% - boundary.
z_e = 10;                       % Equilibrium depth [m]
dz = 0.01;                      % Spatial step increment [m]
N = round((z_e+dz)/dz);          % Total number of spatial steps
zPlot = 0:dz:z_e;                % Grid points for plot
Other input parameters
• T_e - Equilibrium temperature - value of the constant temperature at boundary depth 
• *k *- thermal conductivity 
• rho - asphalt density 
• c - specific heat capacity 
• sigma - Stephen-B oltzmann constant
• *e *- surface emittance
T_e = 10;
k = 1;
rho = 2200;
c = 1000*4;
sigma = 5.670*10^(-8);
e = 0.9;
Thermal model
Here the thermal model is run with all the input parameters mentioned before. The result T is a matrix
(mesh) with calculated temperatures.
2
==PAGE:83==
FTCS is a function for the finite difference thermal model based on *F*orward-*T*ime *C*enter-*S*pace
finite difference method.
T = FTCS(M,N,z_e,dz,dt,T_e,T_air,k,rho,c,sigma,e,f_S,f_D,U);
Thermal model result
The plot below shows the thermal model result - temperature distribution over time at different depths.
% figure
% plot(timePlot,T(1,:))
% hold on
% plot(timePlot,T(11,:))
% hold on
% plot(timePlot,T(51,:))
% hold on
% plot(timePlot,T(1000,:))
% xlabel('Time [s]','Interpreter','latex','FontSize',12)
% ylabel('Temperature [$^\circ
$C]','Interpreter','latex','FontSize',12)
% grid minor
% legend('z = 0 m','z = 0.1 m','z = 5 m','z = 10
 m','Interpreter','latex','FontSize',12)
Synthetic Sensor Data
%The synthetic sesnor data is generated using the above calculated
 temperatures
%to which noise is added. The noise is defined as a triangular
 distribution with
%edges of +- 0.15 degrees, since that is the real sensor noise
 badwidth.
% *Triangular distribution*
% The below code creates the triangular distribution, using the lower
 limit
% a = -0.15, peak location b = 0 and upper limit c = 0.5.
pd = makedist('Triangular','a',-0.15,'b',0,'c',0.15);
x = -1:0.00001:1;
y = pdf(pd,x);
% figure
% plot(x,y)
% grid on
% xlabel('Temperature
 [$^{\circ}$C]','Interpreter','latex','FontSize',12)
Random number generator
Random numbers are generated in order to randomly choose noise from the triangular distribution.
• r - noise
3
==PAGE:84==
rng default
r = random(pd,M,1);
% figure
% hist(r)
% grid on
% xlabel('Temperature
 [$^{\circ}$C]','Interpreter','latex','FontSize',12)
% ylabel('Count','Interpreter','latex','FontSize',12)
% Finally, the noise is added to the original data.
%
% Here *T(2,i)* means that for every time step *i *a temperature at
 depth
% of 1 cm is taken (spatial increment 2 means dz = 0.01 m). This was
 done since
% it was chosed that the synthetic sensor is placed at depth of 1 cm.
noiseData = zeros(1,length(f_S));
for i = 1:length(noiseData)
    noiseData(i) = T(2,i)+r(i);
end
% Below the noised data is plotted against the original data, to see
 the
% distribution.
noiseData = noiseData';
tempOriginal = T(2,:)';
% figure
% plot(tempOriginal,noiseData)
% ylabel('Original data
 [$^{\circ}$C]','Interpreter','latex','FontSize',12)
% xlabel('Noised data
 [$^{\circ}$C]','Interpreter','latex','FontSize',12)
% grid on
Save the data
The calculated data is saved and used in model updating as a sensor reading input.
save('SynthSensor.mat','noiseData');
save('OriginalData.mat','tempOriginal');
Published with MATLAB® R2018b
4
==PAGE:85==
Table of Contents
 ........................................................................................................................................  1
Function for solving differential equation of the thermal model based on ....................................... 1
INPUT: .............................................................................................................................  1
Check for stability ............................................................................................................... 1
Finite difference .................................................................................................................. 2
Fill the rest of the matrix .....................................................................................................  2
function [T] = FTCS(M,N,z_e,dz,dt,T_e,T_air,k,rho,c,sigma,e,f_S,f_D,U)
Function for solving differential equation of the
thermal model based on
%finite difference method - FTCS(Forward time centered space)
%Lucija Barisic, s182579
%Technical University of Denmark
INPUT:
    %M - the number of data points - measurements
    %z_e - predefined equilibrium depth [m]
    %dz - spatial increment [m]
    %dt - time increment [s]
    %T_e - boundary condition - average anual temp [Celsius].
    %T_air - temperature of air [Celsius]
    %k - thermal conductivity [W m^-1 K^-1]
    %rho - medium's density [kg/m3]
    %c - specific heat capacity [J kg^-1 K^-1]
    %sigma - Stefan - Boltzmann constant [W m^-2 K^-4]
    %e - surface emittance (0.9 for asphalt)
    %f_S - shortwave radiation [W/m2]
    %f_D - longwave radiation [W/m2]
    %U - wind speed [m/s]
Check for stability
alpha = k/(rho*c);
r = alpha*dt/dz^2;    % unitless
t = 0.5*dz^2/alpha;
if r > 0.5
   error('ERROR: r must be less then 0.5')
end
1
==PAGE:86==
if t < dt
    error('ERROR: dt must be <0.5*dz^2/alpha')
end
Not enough input arguments.
Error in FTCS (line 27)
alpha = k/(rho*c); 
Finite difference
T = zeros(N,M+1);     %initialazing the matrix
% Initial condition - first column of the matrix T
Tinit = zeros(1,N);
Ta = 7;
%Ta = T_air(1);
for p = 1:1:N
     z = (p-1)*dz;
     Tinit(p) = Ta+(T_e-Ta)*(z/z_e);
end
Fill the rest of the matrix
Defining the h_c
h_c = zeros(1,M);
for i = 1:M
     h_c(i) = 0.020047+1.41328*U(i)^0.801929;
% Empiriacal formula for finding h_c
%      h_c(i) =1*(((0.02437+7.905*10^(-5)*T_air(i))*U(i)^0.8)...
%       /(84.76*10^0.2*(1.3342*10^(-5)+8.1271*10^(-8)*T_air(i))^0.8));
end
save('hc.mat','h_c');
T(:,1) = Tinit;     %initial condition
T(N,:) = T_e;       %boundary condition
for m = 2:M+1
    for n = 1:N-1
        z = (n-1)*dz;
        if z == 0
             T(n,m) = (1-(2*r))*T(n,m-1)+2*r*T(n+1,m-1)+...
                ((2*alpha*dt)/(k*dz))*(f_S(m-1)+h_c(m-1)*(T_air(m-1)-
T(n,m-1))...
                +f_D(m-1)-sigma*e*((T(n,m-1)+273.15)^4));
        else
            T(n,m) = (1-(2*r))*T(n,m-1)+r*(T(n-1,m-1)+T(n+1,m-1));
        end
2
==PAGE:87==
    end
end
T(:,1) = [];
end
Published with MATLAB® R2018b
3
==PAGE:88==
Table of Contents
 ........................................................................................................................................  1
DIGITAL TWIN ................................................................................................................. 1
Input data ..........................................................................................................................  1
Input parameters (not subjected to update) ............................................................................... 2
Domain discretization ..........................................................................................................  2
Matrix initialization .............................................................................................................  2
Initial value of parameters subjected to update .........................................................................  3
Initial condition of the thermal model ..................................................................................... 3
Model updating ................................................................................................................... 3
PI controller gains ...............................................................................................................  3
FINAL OPTIMIZED PI GAINS ............................................................................................  3
DIGITAL TWIN - PARAMETER UPDATE ...........................................................................  4
clear; close all; clc
DIGITAL TWIN
Lucija Barisic, s182579
%Technical University of Denmark
% This script preforms the updating of all parameters by updating a
 single
% parameter every 30 minutes and shuffeling between them. It is
 optimized
% for Te=10 and Ze=10m.
Input data
Specify file from which data is read - the name of the file should be written as stated below (extension
needs to be included).
% Weather station data
data = readtable('ALLDATA.csv');
fS = data(:,'GHI');
fS = table2array(fS);
fD = data(:,'LWD');
fD = table2array(fD);
Tair = data(:,'air_temperature');
Tair = table2array(Tair);
U = data(:,'wind_speed_avg');
U = table2array(U);
% U = U*3.6;
% Sensor measurement data
data1 = readtable('SensorMeasurementsAll.csv');
Aavg = data1(:,'AverageA');
1
==PAGE:89==
Aavg = table2array(Aavg);
Tsensor = Aavg;
Input parameters (not subjected to update)
Te = 10;
rho = 2200;
sigma = 5.670*10^(-8);
Domain discretization
The time and space domain need to be discretized in order to determine the mesh of nodes at which thermal
model will calculate temperatures.
Time domain The time step dt is set at 60 seconds since the weather station time step is 1 minute.
time = length(fS);       % Total number of time steps
dt = 60;                        % Time step increment [s]
totalTime = time*dt;            % Total time
M = time;
timePlot = 0:dt:totalTime-1;    % Grid points for plot
timePlot = timePlot';
% *Spatial domain*
% The depth increment *dz *is set to 0.01 m. *z_e* is the equilibrium
 depth
% - boundary.
zE = 10;                       % Equilibrium depth [m]
dz = 0.01;                      % Spatial step increment [m]
N = round((zE+dz)/dz);          % Total number of spatial steps
zPlot = 0:dz:zE;                % Grid points for plot
Matrix initialization
hc = zeros(M,1);
a0 = zeros(M,1);
a1 = zeros(M,1);
a2 = zeros(M,1);
epsilon = zeros(M,1);
k = zeros(M,1);
c = zeros(M,1);
alpha = zeros(M,1);
rr = zeros(M,1);
Tinit = zeros(1,N);
err = zeros(M,1);
errInt = zeros(M,1);
errPlot = zeros(M,1);
x = zeros(M,1);
T = zeros(N,M+1);
errInt1 = zeros(M,1);
s = errInt1;
intY = s;
2
==PAGE:90==
counter = 0;
a0_10 = zeros(10,1);
a1_10 = zeros(10,1);
a2_10 = zeros(10,1);
e_10 = zeros(10,1);
k_10 = zeros(10,1);
c_10 = zeros(10,1);
fD_10 = zeros(10,1);
fS_10 = zeros(10,1);
U_10 = zeros(10,1);
Tair_10 = zeros(10,1);
Tsensor_10 = zeros(10,1);
err_10 = zeros(10,1);
hc_10 = zeros(10,1);
Initial value of parameters subjected to update
a0(1,1) = 16.62;
a1(1,1) = 0.034;
a2(1,1) = 1.98;
c(1,1) = 800;
k(1,1) = 1;
epsilon(1,1) = 0.9;
a0_act = true;
a1_act = false;
a2_act = false;
c_act = false;
e_act = false;
k_act = false;
Initial condition of the thermal model
Ta = 7;
for p = 1:1:N
    z = (p-1)*dz;
    Tinit(p) = Ta+(Te-Ta)*(z/zE);
end
T(:,1) = Tinit;
Model updating
PI controller gains
input = [1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1];
FINAL OPTIMIZED PI GAINS
input = [-1.29241086930476 -12.8565381934858 -4.19289265460632
 -13.0543952963658 -3.35868048783947 -12.8086638122263
3
==PAGE:91==
 -1.86998960252132 -11.4382990472810 -1.93113163611671
 -10.6237184805438 -3.03780221649736 -8.48976073315674];
Kp1 = 10^(input(1));
Ki1 = 10^(input(2));
Kp2 = 10^(input(3));
Ki2 = 10^(input(4));
Kp3 = 10^(input(5));
Ki3 = 10^(input(6));
Kp4 = 10^(input(7));
Ki4 = 10^(input(8));
Kp5 = 10^(input(9));
Ki5 = 10^(input(10));
Kp6 = 10^(input(11));
Ki6 = 10^(input(12));
DIGITAL TWIN - PARAMETER UPDATE
for m = 2:M+1
        counter = counter+1;
        fD_10(counter) = fD(m-1);
        fS_10(counter) = fS(m-1);
        U_10(counter) = U(m-1);
        Tair_10(counter) = Tair(m-1);
        Tsensor_10(counter) = Tsensor(m-1);
        a0(m) = a0(m-1);
        a0_10(counter) = a0(m);
        a1(m) = a1(m-1);
        a1_10(counter) = a1(m);
        a2(m) = a2(m-1);
        a2_10(counter) = a2(m);
        hc(m)= a0(m)+a1(m)*U(m-1)^(a2(m));
        hc_10(counter) = hc(m);
        c(m) = c(m-1);
        c_10(counter) = c(m);
        k(m) = k(m-1);
        k_10(counter) = k(m);
        epsilon(m) = epsilon(m-1);
        e_10(counter) = epsilon(m);
        Tin = T(:,m-1);
        T(:,m) =
 ThermalModel(N,Te,k(m),rho,c(m),Tin,dt,dz,fS(m-1),hc(m),Tair(m-1),fD(m-1),sigma,e
        err(m-1) = Tsensor(m-1)-T(2,m);
        errInt1(m) = Tsensor(m-1)-T(2,m);
        intY(m) = ((errInt1(m)+errInt1(m-1))/2)*dt;
        s(m) = s(m-1)+intY(m);
        errInt(m-1) = s(m);
        err_10(counter) = err(m-1);
        alpha(m-1) = k(m)/(rho*c(m));
4
==PAGE:92==
        rr(m-1) = alpha(m-1)*dt/dz^2;
        if counter == 30
            abs_err = sum(abs(err_10));
            avg_err = mean(err_10);
              if a0_act
                x = avg_err*Kp1+errInt(m-1)*Ki1;
                a0_1 = a0(m)*10^x;
                a0_2 = a0(m)*10^(-x);
                a0_1_10 = zeros(counter,1);
                a0_1_10(:,1) = a0_1;
                a0_2_10 = zeros(counter,1);
                a0_2_10(:,1) = a0_2;
                T1 = zeros(N,counter+1);
                T1(:,1) = T(:,m-counter);
                err1 = zeros(counter+1,1);
                hc1 = zeros(counter,1);
                for i = 2:counter+1
                    hc1(i-1) =
 a0_1_10(i-1)+a1_10(i-1)*U_10(i-1)^a2_10(i-1);
                    T1(:,i) =
 ThermalModel(N,Te,k_10(i-1),rho,c_10(i-1),T1(:,i-1),dt,dz,fS_10(i-1),hc1(i-1),Tai
                    err1(i) = Tsensor_10(i-1)-T1(2,i);
                end
                err1(1,:) = [];
                abs_err1 =  sum(abs(err1));
                T1(:,1) = [];
                T2 = zeros(N,counter+1);
                T2(:,1) = T(:,m-counter);
                err2 = zeros(counter+1,1);
                hc2 = zeros(counter,1);
                for i = 2:counter+1
                    hc2(i-1) =
 a0_2_10(i-1)+a1_10(i-1)*U_10(i-1)^a2_10(i-1);
                    T2(:,i) =
 ThermalModel(N,Te,k_10(i-1),rho,c_10(i-1),T2(:,i-1),dt,dz,fS_10(i-1),hc2(i-1),Tai
                    err2(i) = Tsensor_10(i-1)-T2(2,i);
                end
                err2(1,:) = [];
                abs_err2 =  sum(abs(err2));
                T2(:,1) = [];
                if abs_err1 < abs_err && abs_err1 < abs_err2 && a0_1 <
 2*a0(1,1) && a0_1 > 0.5*a0(1,1)
                    aa = counter-1;
                    T(:,m-aa:m) = T1;
                    a0(m-aa:m) = a0_1;
                    hc(m-aa:m) = hc1;
5
==PAGE:93==
                elseif abs_err2 < abs_err && abs_err2 < abs_err1 &&
 a0_2 < 2*a0(1,1) && a0_2 > 0.5*a0(1,1)
                    aa = counter-1;
                    T(:,m-aa:m) = T2;
                    a0(m-aa:m) = a0_2;
                    hc(m-aa:m) = hc2;
                end
                    counter = 0;
                    a0_act = false;
                    a1_act = true;
                    a2_act = false;
                    c_act = false;
                    k_act = false;
                    e_act = false;
                    %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
            elseif a1_act
                x = avg_err*Kp2+errInt(m-1)*Ki2;
                a1_1 = a1(m)*10^x;
                a1_2 = a1(m)*10^(-x);
                a1_1_10 = zeros(counter,1);
                a1_1_10(:,1) = a1_1;
                a1_2_10 = zeros(counter,1);
                a1_2_10(:,1) = a1_2;
                T1 = zeros(N,counter+1);
                T1(:,1) = T(:,m-counter);
                err1 = zeros(counter+1,1);
                hc1 = zeros(counter,1);
                for i = 2:counter+1
                    hc1(i-1) =
 a0_10(i-1)+a1_1_10(i-1)*U_10(i-1)^a2_10(i-1);
                    T1(:,i) =
 ThermalModel(N,Te,k_10(i-1),rho,c_10(i-1),T1(:,i-1),dt,dz,fS_10(i-1),hc1(i-1),Tai
                    err1(i) = Tsensor_10(i-1)-T1(2,i);
                end
                err1(1,:) = [];
                abs_err1 =  sum(abs(err1));
                T1(:,1) = [];
                T2 = zeros(N,counter+1);
                T2(:,1) = T(:,m-counter);
                err2 = zeros(counter+1,1);
                hc2 = zeros(counter,1);
                for i = 2:counter+1
                    hc2(i-1) =
 a0_10(i-1)+a1_2_10(i-1)*U_10(i-1)^a2_10(i-1);
                    T2(:,i) =
 ThermalModel(N,Te,k_10(i-1),rho,c_10(i-1),T2(:,i-1),dt,dz,fS_10(i-1),hc2(i-1),Tai
                    err1(i) = Tsensor_10(i-1)-T2(2,i);
                end
                err2(1,:) = [];
6
==PAGE:94==
                abs_err2 =  sum(abs(err2));
                T2(:,1) = [];
                if abs_err1 < abs_err && abs_err1 < abs_err2 && a1_1 <
 2*a1(1,1) && a1_1 > 0.5*a1(1,1)
                    aa = counter-1;
                    T(:,m-aa:m) = T1;
                    a1(m-aa:m) = a1_1;
                    hc(m-aa:m) = hc1;
                elseif abs_err2 < abs_err && abs_err2 < abs_err1 &&
 a1_2 < 2*a1(1,1) && a1_2 > 0.5*a1(1,1)
                    aa = counter-1;
                    T(:,m-aa:m) = T2;
                    a1(m-aa:m) = a1_2;
                    hc(m-aa:m) = hc2;
                end
                    counter = 0;
                    a0_act = false;
                    a1_act = false;
                    a2_act = true;
                    c_act = false;
                    k_act = false;
                    e_act = false;
                %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
          elseif a2_act
                x = avg_err*Kp3+errInt(m-1)*Ki3;
                a2_1 = a2(m)*10^x;
                a2_2 = a2(m)*10^(-x);
                a2_1_10 = zeros(counter,1);
                a2_1_10(:,1) = a2_1;
                a2_2_10 = zeros(counter,1);
                a2_2_10(:,1) = a2_2;
                T1 = zeros(N,counter+1);
                T1(:,1) = T(:,m-counter);
                err1 = zeros(counter+1,1);
                hc1 = zeros(counter,1);
                for i = 2:counter+1
                    hc1(i-1) =
 a0_10(i-1)+a1_10(i-1)*U_10(i-1)^a2_1_10(i-1);
                    T1(:,i) =
 ThermalModel(N,Te,k_10(i-1),rho,c_10(i-1),T1(:,i-1),dt,dz,fS_10(i-1),hc1(i-1),Tai
                    err1(i) = Tsensor_10(i-1)-T1(2,i);
                end
                err1(1,:) = [];
                abs_err1 =  sum(abs(err1));
                T1(:,1) = [];
                T2 = zeros(N,counter+1);
                T2(:,1) = T(:,m-counter);
                err2 = zeros(counter+1,1);
                hc2 = zeros(counter,1);
7
==PAGE:95==
                for i = 2:counter+1
                    hc2(i-1) =
 a0_10(i-1)+a1_10(i-1)*U_10(i-1)^a2_2_10(i-1);
                    T2(:,i) =
 ThermalModel(N,Te,k_10(i-1),rho,c_10(i-1),T2(:,i-1),dt,dz,fS_10(i-1),hc2(i-1),Tai
                    err1(i) = Tsensor_10(i-1)-T2(2,i);
                end
                err2(1,:) = [];
                abs_err2 =  sum(abs(err2));
                T2(:,1) = [];
                if abs_err1 < abs_err && abs_err1 < abs_err2 && a2_1 <
 2*a2(1,1) && a2_1 > 0.5*a2(1,1)
                    aa = counter-1;
                    T(:,m-aa:m) = T1;
                    a2(m-aa:m) = a2_1;
                    hc(m-aa:m) = hc1;
                elseif abs_err2 < abs_err && abs_err2 < abs_err1 &&
 a2_2 < 2*a2(1,1) && a2_2 > 0.5*a2(1,1)
                    aa = counter-1;
                    T(:,m-aa:m) = T2;
                    a2(m-aa:m) = a2_2;
                    hc(m-aa:m) = hc2;
                end
                    counter = 0;
                    a0_act = false;
                    a1_act = false;
                    a2_act = false;
                    c_act = true;
                    k_act = false;
                    e_act = false;
                    %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
              elseif c_act
                x = avg_err*Kp4+errInt(m-1)*Ki4;
                c_1 = c(m)*10^x;
                c_2 = c(m)*10^(-x);
                c_1_10 = zeros(counter,1);
                c_1_10(:,1) = c_1;
                c_2_10 = zeros(counter,1);
                c_2_10(:,1) = c_2;
                T1 = zeros(N,counter+1);
                T1(:,1) = T(:,m-counter);
                err1 = zeros(counter+1,1);
                for i = 2:counter+1
                    T1(:,i) =
 ThermalModel(N,Te,k_10(i-1),rho,c_1_10(i-1),T1(:,i-1),dt,dz,fS_10(i-1),hc_10(i-1)
                    err1(i) = Tsensor_10(i-1)-T1(2,i);
                end
                err1(1,:) = [];
                abs_err1 =  sum(abs(err1));
                T1(:,1) = [];
8
==PAGE:96==
                T2 = zeros(N,counter+1);
                T2(:,1) = T(:,m-counter);
                err2 = zeros(counter,1);
                for i = 2:counter+1
                    T2(:,i) =
 ThermalModel(N,Te,k_10(i-1),rho,c_2_10(i-1),T2(:,i-1),dt,dz,fS_10(i-1),hc_10(i-1)
                    err2(i) = Tsensor_10(i-1)-T2(2,i);
                end
                err2(1,:) = [];
                abs_err2 =  sum(abs(err2));
                T2(:,1) = [];
                if abs_err1 < abs_err && abs_err1 < abs_err2 && c_1 <
 2*c(1,1) && c_1 > (2*60*(k(m-1)))/(0.01^2*rho)
                    aa = counter-1;
                    T(:,m-aa:m) = T1;
                    c(m-aa:m) = c_1;
                elseif abs_err2 < abs_err && abs_err2 < abs_err1 &&
 c_2 < 2*c(1,1) && c_2 > (2*60*(k(m-1)))/(0.01^2*rho)
                    aa = counter-1;
                    T(:,m-aa:m) = T2;
                    c(m-aa:m) = c_2;
                end
                    counter = 0;
                    a0_act = false;
                    a1_act = false;
                    a2_act = false;
                    c_act = false;
                    k_act = true;
                    e_act = false;
                    %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
              elseif k_act
                x = avg_err*Kp5+errInt(m-1)*Ki5;
                k_1 = k(m)*10^x;
                k_2 = k(m)*10^(-x);
                k_1_10 = zeros(counter,1);
                k_1_10(:,1) = k_1;
                k_2_10 = zeros(counter,1);
                k_2_10(:,1) = k_2;
                T1 = zeros(N,counter+1);
                T1(:,1) = T(:,m-counter);
                err1 = zeros(counter+1,1);
                for i = 2:counter+1
                    T1(:,i) =
 ThermalModel(N,Te,k_1_10(i-1),rho,c_10(i-1),T1(:,i-1),dt,dz,fS_10(i-1),hc_10(i-1)
                    err1(i) = Tsensor_10(i-1)-T1(2,i);
                end
                err1(1,:) = [];
                abs_err1 =  sum(abs(err1));
                T1(:,1) = [];
9
==PAGE:97==
                T2 = zeros(N,counter+1);
                T2(:,1) = T(:,m-counter);
                err2 = zeros(counter+1,1);
                for i = 2:counter+1
                    T2(:,i) =
 ThermalModel(N,Te,k_2_10(i-1),rho,c_10(i-1),T2(:,i-1),dt,dz,fS_10(i-1),hc_10(i-1)
                    err2(i) = Tsensor_10(i-1)-T2(2,i);
                end
                err2(1,:) = [];
                abs_err2 =  sum(abs(err2));
                T2(:,1) = [];
                if abs_err1 < abs_err && abs_err1 < abs_err2 && k_1 <
 (0.5*0.01^2*rho*c(m-1))/60 && k_1 > 0.5*k(1,1) %
                    aa = counter-1;
                    T(:,m-aa:m) = T1;
                    k(m-aa:m) = k_1;
                elseif abs_err2 < abs_err && abs_err2 < abs_err1 &&
 k_2 < (0.5*0.01^2*rho*c(m-1))/60 && k_2 > 0.5*k(1,1)
                    aa = counter-1;
                    T(:,m-aa:m) = T2;
                    k(m-aa:m) = k_2;
                end
                    counter = 0;
                    a0_act = false;
                    a1_act = false;
                    a2_act = false;
                    c_act = false;
                    k_act = false;
                    e_act = true;
                    %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
              elseif e_act
                x = avg_err*Kp6+errInt(m-1)*Ki6;
                e_1 = epsilon(m)*10^x;
                e_2 = epsilon(m)*10^(-x);
                e_1_10 = zeros(counter,1);
                e_1_10(:,1) = e_1;
                e_2_10 = zeros(counter,1);
                e_2_10(:,1) = e_2;
                T1 = zeros(N,counter+1);
                T1(:,1) = T(:,m-counter);
                err1 = zeros(counter+1,1);
                for i = 2:counter+1
                    T1(:,i) =
 ThermalModel(N,Te,k_10(i-1),rho,c_10(i-1),T1(:,i-1),dt,dz,fS_10(i-1),hc_10(i-1),T
                    err1(i) = Tsensor_10(i-1)-T1(2,i);
                end
                err1(1,:) = [];
                abs_err1 =  sum(abs(err1));
                T1(:,1) = [];
10
==PAGE:98==
                T2 = zeros(N,counter+1);
                T2(:,1) = T(:,m-counter);
                err2 = zeros(counter+1,1);
                for i = 2:counter+1
                    T2(:,i) =
 ThermalModel(N,Te,k_10(i-1),rho,c_10(i-1),T2(:,i-1),dt,dz,fS_10(i-1),hc_10(i-1),T
                    err2(i) = Tsensor_10(i-1)-T2(2,i);
                end
                err2(1,:) = [];
                abs_err2 =  sum(abs(err2));
                T2(:,1) = [];
                if abs_err1 < abs_err && abs_err1 < abs_err2 && e_1 <
 1 && e_1 > 0.5*epsilon(1,1)
                    aa = counter-1;
                    T(:,m-aa:m) = T1;
                    epsilon(m-aa:m) = e_1;
                elseif abs_err2 < abs_err && abs_err2 < abs_err1 &&
 e_2 < 1 && e_2 > 0.5*epsilon(1,1)
                    aa = counter-1;
                    T(:,m-aa:m) = T2;
                    epsilon(m-aa:m) = e_2;
                end
                    counter = 0;
                    a0_act = true;
                    a1_act = false;
                    a2_act = false;
                    c_act = false;
                    k_act = false;
                    e_act = false;
             end
        end
end
T(:,1) = [];
hc(1,:)=[];
a0(1,:)=[];
a1(1,:)=[];
a2(1,:)=[];
c(1,:)=[];
k(1,:)=[];
epsilon(1,:)=[];
Published with MATLAB® R2018b
11
==PAGE:99==
function [T,r] =
 ThermalModel(N,Te,k,rho,c,Tin,dt,dz,fS,hc,Tair,fD,sigma,e)
%Thermal model function
%Lucija Barisic, s182579
%Technical University of Denmark
% This function calculates the temperature profile, for a certain time
% step.
Tout = zeros(N,1);
Tout(N,:) = Te;
% Checking the stability
    alpha = k/(rho*c);
    r = alpha*dt/dz^2;
    for n = 1:N-1
        z = (n-1)*dz;
        if z == 0
             Tout(n) = (1-(2*r))*Tin(n)+2*r*Tin(n+1)+...
                ((2*alpha*dt)/(k*dz))*(fS+hc*(Tair-Tin(n))...
                +fD-sigma*e*((Tin(n)+273.15)^4));
        else
            Tout(n) = (1-(2*r))*Tin(n)+r*(Tin(n-1)+Tin(n+1));
        end
    end
T = Tout;
end
Not enough input arguments.
Error in ThermalModel (line 11)
Tout = zeros(N,1);
Published with MATLAB® R2018b
1
==PAGE:100==
B
Appendix B: Sensor Measurements
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
0
10
20
30
40
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
0
20
40
60
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
0
20
40
60
Figure B.1: Temperature time series for sensor at deeper depths: PTR-20 (5 cm), PTR-52
(5 cm), PTR-8 (10cm)
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
94
==PAGE:101==
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
0
20
40
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
0
20
40
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
0
20
40
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
0
20
40
Figure B.2: Temperature time series for sensors at 1 cm depth in Zone B
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
95
==PAGE:102==
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
0
20
40
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
0
20
40
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
0
20
40
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
0
20
40
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
0
20
40
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
0
20
40
Figure B.3: Temperature time series for sensors at 1 cm depth in Zone A
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
96
==PAGE:103==
A Digital Twin of an Asphalt Road
97
==PAGE:104==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
