==PAGE:1==
Master’s Programme in Computer Science and Engineering
Mitigating IoT-Based DDoS Attacks
Using SDN and NGS
by
Mohamad Suhel Dalati (s170364)
Technical University of Denmark
Supervisor: Associate Professor Dr. Weizhi Meng
32.5 ECTS
October 2020
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
This thesis provides a thorough study of IoT-Based DDoS attacks. The following
chapters will illustrate the core of DDoS cybercrimes and why IoT devices are con-
sidered the best environment for DDoS to grow and thrive. An IoT risk assessment
based on OCTAVE methodology is provided to spot the light on the most critical
vulnerabilities of IoT devices that are related to DDoS attacks and propose the
appropriate countermeasures to mitigate the IoT-Based DDoS attacks.
In the last part, we explain a suggested approach to mitigate IoT-Based DDoS
attacks. Network Gate Shield (NGS) is a program that works on SDN technology
and utilizes the RYU controller. NGS aims to provide organizations with online
services (servers, website) with the appropriate security protection against IoT-
Based DDoS attacks. In addition to test-lab setup and creating an SDN topology
using the Mininet network simulator, we provided an experimental test of the NGS
to prove that SDN technology is an optimum solution to mitigate the DDoS attacks.
1
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Introduction
8
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.2
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.3
Organization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2
Background
12
2.1
DDoS Attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.1.1
DDoS Network Architectures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.1.2
How are DDoS Attacks Performed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.2
Internet of Things - IoT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3
IoT systems Risk Assessment
25
3.1
Operationally Critical Threat, Asset, and Vulnerability Evaluation
(OCTAVE)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.1.1
Assets-Threats Proﬁle for IoT system . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.1.2
Identify Infrastructure Vulnerabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.1.3
Develop Security Strategy and Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4
Network Gate Shield (NGS)
46
4.1
Software-Deﬁned Networking (SDN)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.2
OpenFlow Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.3
Network Gate Shield (NGS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.3.1
Standard OpenFlow Switching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.3.2
IoT-Based DDoS Detection Algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5
NGS Workshop, Testing Lab Setup
68
2
==PAGE:4==
5.1
SDN Test Lab Installation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
5.2
Test The Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
5.3
NGS Testing and Results Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
5.3.1
NGS Start Up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
5.3.2
Launching DoS/DDoS Attack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
5.3.3
Random Source, A Case-Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
6
Conclusion and Future Work
82
3
==PAGE:5==
List of Figures
2.1
DDoS Attack, Agent-Handler Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2
DDoS IRC-Based Attack Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3
DDoS P2P Architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.4
Central Source Propagation Mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.5
Back-Chain Propagation Mechanism
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.6
Autonomous Propagation Mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.1
(OCTAVE) Risk Assessment Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2
(OCTAVE) Pahse One . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3
Internet of Things Architecture Layers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.4
IoT. Arch. L1 – Perception Layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.5
IoT. Arch. L2 – Network Layer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.6
IoT. Arch. L3 – Support Layer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.7
IoT. Arch. L4 – Application Layer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.8
Threat Actor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.9
KrebsOnSecurity, OVH, DYN, Scenario [4, 26, 28] . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.10 Deutsche Telekom [4, 26] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.11 Phase Two . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.12 Assets / Components Mapping
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.13 Assets / Evaluating IoT Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.1
Software-Deﬁned Networking Layers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.2
OpenFlow messages between the controller and the network nodes . .
51
4.3
Mirai Attack, Pivot Table illustrating the Dst-Ip: 71.61.66.148, Time
Per-Sec, the blue bar indicates the packet count per second, the or-
ange shows the average packet length during the attack . . . . . . . .
53
4
==PAGE:6==
4.4
TCP Flooding, Pivot Table
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.5
Network Gate Shield, Two Wings and Functions . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.6
Network Gate Shield, Standard OpenFlow Switching Activity Diagram 58
4.7
Network Gate Shield, Detection Algorithm Statistic Requests Activ-
ity Diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
4.8
Network Gate Shield, Handling The Aggregated Statistic Reply and
Calculating The Average Packets Per-Seconds. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
4.9
Network Gate Shield, Handling The ﬂow Statistic Reply, Calculating
The Average Packets Per-Seconds for Each Flow . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
5.1
Ubuntu Version . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
5.2
OpenVSwitch Version . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
5.3
RYU Controller Version
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
5.4
Python3 Version
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
5.5
Mininet and Ryu Controller Test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
5.6
Pingall Command Between Hosts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
5.7
OpenFlow13 Dump Flows of Switch1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
5.8
Network Gate Shield, Test-Bed Topology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
5.9
Network Gate Shield and Topology Start-Up . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
5.10 NGS, Set-up h1 As Server, and Start Wireshark . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
5.11 NGS, Shwoing a Normall Switching Process in The Network. . . . . .
76
5.12 NGS, Showing a Normal Switching Process in The Network. . . . . .
76
5.13 NGS, Under Attack System Behaviour. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
5.14 NGS, Under Attack System Behaviour. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
5.15 NGS, Random Source Attack, System Behaviour. . . . . . . . . . . .
79
5.16 NGS, Random Source Attack, Wireshark Packet Capturing.
. . . . .
80
5.17 Network Gate Shield, Modiﬁed Packet-In-Handler Function . . . . . .
81
5
==PAGE:7==
Acronyms
IoT
Internet of Things
IT
Information Technology
DoS
Denial of Service
DDoS
Distributed Denial of Service
OCTAVE
Operationally Critical Threat, Asset, and
Vulnerability Evaluation
IP
Internet Protocol
DNS
Domain Name System
IRC
Internet Relay Chat
P2P
Peer to Peer
CNC
Command and Control [C&C]
RFID
Radio-Frequency Identiﬁcation
DVR
Digital Video Recorder
CCTV
Closed-Circuit Television
GPRS
General Packet Radio Service
WiFi
Is a family of wireless network protocols
WSN
Wireless Sensor Network
SSH
Secure Shell: is a cryptographic network
protocol
TCP
Transmission Control Protocol
UDP
User Datagram Protocol
ICMP
Internet Control Message Protocol
HTTP
Hypertext Transfer Protocol
DHT
Distributed Hash Tables
GRE
Generic Routing Encapsulation
NGS
Network Gate Shield
SDN
Software Deﬁned Networking
RYU
Ryu Controller is (SDN) Controller
API
Application Programming Interface
6
==PAGE:8==
OFP
OpenFlow Protocol
APS
Average Packet Size
TSF
Total Summation of all ﬂows
APC
Average Packet Count Per-Flow
PS
Packet Size
PC
Packet Count
7
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
There is no doubt that a multitude of tasks which are related to private, public,
business institutions such as banks, police, hospitals, and many other life sectors,
especially the smart technologies and IoTs, nowadays are performed online, and thus
have become essentials in ourselves and fundamental for regular activity. Neverthe-
less, being online exposes an individual to an assembly of cyber risks, such as viruses,
Trojan horses, and worms, furthermore data sniﬃng and IoT hacking and manip-
ulating. The number of online users is enormously increasing, which creates the
necessity to develop and provide a safe and secure information system environment.
And thus, the management of IT systems is crucial for private and commercial em-
ployment of computers, to ensure appropriate internet security measures to be taken
using the system conﬁdently refrained from any possible cyber-criminal attacks.
Hacking and hacking motivations is a disputed topic; in her research Renushka
Madarie [1], she quantiﬁed the hacking motivations based on other ﬁve studies and
were able to shade the light over the relationship between motivations such as (fun,
curiosity, intellectual challenge, thrill, and excitement, economic and ﬁnancial ac-
counts, information and data-stealing, human purposes) and the hacking activities
such as (website hacking, personal and public data thief, software and viruses, de-
nial of service), she found that the motivations change by changing the values of the
society, in other words [The more importance is given to openness to change
values over conservation values, the more likely it is that people (attempt
to) circumvent computer security systems] [1].
8
==PAGE:10==
The fast-paced recent development of the internet has contributed to a more in-
terconnected world, as well the great openness (new technologies, channels of com-
munication, and information exchange) contributing to a potential space for cyber-
criminal activity. While this critical matter to all individuals, it also poses threats
to governments, private institutions, and public organizations all over the world.
Consequently, agile and superior applications are indispensable to mitigate cyber-
attacks, they are essential not only for individuals but also for public and private
institutions, yet foremost governments in a global context. Means of securing net-
works and data systems protect internet clients from being a casualty of harmful
spyware and cyber attacks.
The Internet implements a tremendous environment for extensive data streams,
whereby any suspicious actions, disruptive activities should be detected by the mode
of continuous traﬃc monitoring to guaranty systems reliability and availability.
In this thesis, we will be exploring one of the most critical cyber-attacks, IoT- based
DDoS attacks and the possible approaches to mitigate the attacks over the network,
in addition to suggested mitigation approach based on the collaboration between
packets analyzer and SDN controller. Internet is a gigantic environment for massive
data traﬃc; any suspicious actions, disruption activities, and downtimes should be
detected by means of continuous traﬃc monitoring to guarantee system reliability
and availability.
A Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attack is an attack to prevent legitimate
users from accessing a service (website, server) on the internet, by rendering a net-
work incapable of providing the assumed services. In this thesis, we will explore
one of the most critical cyber-attacks, the IoT- based DDoS attacks, and why the
Internet of Things environment is considered one of the most preferred spaces for
the DDoS attacks to grow and dominates.
9
==PAGE:11==
1.1
Motivation
IoT devices are made out of broad number of various infrastructures and vast hetero-
geneous end frameworks with limited security means, associated with the internet,
in which makes them vulnerable to be hacked and utilized as botnets, to overwhelm
the targeted service, network, server or the surrounding infrastructure, for the pur-
pose of disrupting the legitimate users of accessing the targeted victims. All of that,
highlights on the undeniable needs to seriously face the security problems that arose
from compromising the IoT services.
The research points to be investigated are:
• Present an overview of DDoS, IoT and SDN
• Why IoT?
• Possibility of SDN to mitigate DDoS attacks
• Suggest an algorithm to detect and mitigate DDoS attacks
1.2
Objective
This work aims to suggest a practical approach that allows the network infrastruc-
ture of detecting and mitigating potential DDoS attacks through the use of Software
Deﬁned Network (SDN) architecture.
1.3
Organization
The remaining parts of this thises are organized into four chapters.
• Chapter 2: The Background - Introduces DDoS attacks (a detailed explana-
tion, key characteristics, architectures, and operational phases), in addition to
a brief introduction about IoT.
• Chapter 3: IoT systems Risk Assessment - Introduces an insight risk assess-
ment of IoT devices (in general) based on OCTAVE (the Operationally Critical
Threat, Asset, and Vulnerability Evaluation)
10
==PAGE:12==
• Chapter 4: Network Gate Shield (NGS) - The suggested approach
• Chapter 5: NGS Workshop, Testing Lab Setup
• Chapter 6: Conclusion and Future work
11
==PAGE:13==
2
Background
This chapter provides a detailed explanation of the Distributed Denial of Service
(DDoS) attacks. What is DDoS, what are the main components, network architec-
tures, and how DDoS operates (phases) and developed? This section highlights the
importance of understanding DDoS attacks and presents a broad overview of DDoS.
2.1
DDoS Attacks
The signiﬁcant advancement of the Internet during the last decade seemed to have
facilitated the development of advanced cyber-attacks. One of the most ferocious
and detrimental attacks is the Denial of Service attack (DoS). DoS attacks intended
to denial the legitimate access of the provided services. Denial of service attack
is posing a signiﬁcant threat to the internet users, servers, and infrastructure, im-
mensely if a very advanced hackers intended to evolve the attack to be able to take
advantage of exploiting other low-level security internet devices and transforms the
devices into an army of botnets to paralyze eﬀectively the ability of the internet
devices and services of serving genuine users. [2].
One method that is frequently practiced to carry out a DDoS attack is for the at-
tacker to manage to send a stream of packets to the victim; this streaming consumes
most of the targets’ signiﬁcant resources, making them unavailable for the regular
clients. The other common approach is attempting to send, by the attacker zombies,
malformed packets to confuse the protocols and applications on the target machine,
12
==PAGE:14==
leading them to crash or reboot [3].
The DDoS domain is quickly spreading and becoming more and more complex and
has reached the point where it cannot see the wood for the trees. Consequently,
the threats and risks of DDoS are tremendous, since the internet inherently was
designed to take into consideration functionality rather than security and how to
transport the packets eﬃciently from source to destination [4].
Why are DDoS attacks possible?
The Internet is a vulnerable environment carries plenty of security issues that en-
courage hackers to commit DDoS attacks [4, 5], such as:
• Limited resources: any device or object (servers, hosts, network infrastructure
and services) on the internet, have limited resources that can be used by a
speciﬁc number of users at one time.
• Internet security is dependently interconnected: security countermeasures of
any object on the internet do not guarantee the safety of that object, wherein
the case of DDoS attacks, it depends on the security countermeasures of every
internet devices and entities.
• Many resources overcome few: if the resources of a distributed attack are more
signiﬁcant than the target, then the attack will be more eﬀective.
• No centralized control management: due to the fact that each network is man-
aged and protected by its own policies and security system; it is not applicable
to apply a security mechanism that able to control and investigate the global
traﬃc behavior.
• Easy to hide identity: it is possible to change the source IP address to hide
the identity and avoid the responsibility of perpetrating an attack such as an
IP spooﬁng attack.
• The possibility of utilizing internet intermediate entities: attackers managed
to compromise some internet devices and utilize them in attacks, such as DNS.
13
==PAGE:15==
2.1.1
DDoS Network Architectures
The network architecture of the Distributed Denial of Service is deﬁned as the phys-
ical and logical design of the hardware (Clients, Servers, Bots) and the software
(Handlers). Evidently and based on how the entities are organized and how tasks
are allocated to those entities, we can break down the DDoS infrastructure archi-
tecture into two main categories, as follow [2, 4, 6, 7]:
(A) Client/Server Architecture
(i) Agent-Handler Model
The network architecture of this DDoS attack model consists of three
main parts.
Client/Real Attacker:
Is where the attacker communicates with the other hardware/software
of DDoS attack infrastructure, e.g., the attacker can communicate with
the handlers to check the availability status of the bots or to schedule an
attack (victims, date, and timing) or even to upgrade the bots.
Handlers/Masters:
Are a unique software located in more than one compromised host, some-
where on the internet, to control many other compromised bots.
Daemon Agents/Bots/Zombies:
The Agents are malware that runs on infected and compromised hosts
such as IoT devices (as many as better) responsible for responding to the
attackers’ orders and perpetrate an attack (e.g., overwhelming the target
by sending a stream of packets) towards the targeted victims.
Reﬂectors:
In some attacks such as Smurf and Fraggle attacks, the attacker utilizes
intermediary entities within a broadcast network as agents to reﬂect and
amplify the attack without the need to hack into those devices or in-
stalling any agent software. This type of attacks could occur by ordering
the infected bots to send a stream of packets to regular hosts after spoof-
14
==PAGE:16==
ing the victim’s IP address as the Src-IP of the packet [3].
Figure 2.1: DDoS Attack, Agent-Handler Model
(ii) IRC-Based Model
Internet Relay Chat channels/Agent-IRC: an architecture which is
similar to Agent-Handler, but instead of using Handler software installed
in some nodes, the hacker tends to establish the connection between the
client and the bots using IRC. Since IRC channels allow their users of cre-
ating public or private chatting channels, this makes the attacker highly
invisible and low traceable due to the fact that the attacker is using a le-
gitimate connection to send his/her commands to the agents; in addition,
the IRC server keeps track of all online bots so no need for the attacker
to maintain a list of bots, whenever the bot is online, the agent software
informs the attacker by communicating with the established IRC channel.
15
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.2: DDoS IRC-Based Attack Model
(iii) Web-based Model
In this model, the attackers aim to replace the IRC channels with web-
based commands and reporting channels. The bots in this model are
divided into two categories: one is reporting statistics, and the other one
is controlled through encrypted communications using HTTP/HTTPS
protocol and over port 80/443, and conﬁgured through PHP complex
scripts [2].
(B) Peer-To-Peer Architecture:
There are two approaches to create a P2P DDoS infrastructure:
First approach: is such as Hajime malware which is: a sophisticated newly
developed P2P architectural model malware, which is designed to use a Bit-
Torrent’s DHT network. This malware is managed to deploy wide range of
exploits across an even wider range of architecture types, the propagation
16
==PAGE:18==
started with initially scanning port 23 Telnet with brute force using a dictio-
nary of most used usernames and passwords, and during the time it expanded
the method to cover more ports such as Alternative Telnet on port 5358, TR-
064 service on port 7547, HTTP on port 81, MCTP services on port 9000.
This type of attack was distinguished in some key points like; First, rather
using a Centralized Command-and-Control (C&C) approach, it uses a Peer-
to-Peer distributed hash table. Second, it uses special protocol to spread ﬁles
which includes exchanging a public key. In this approach the attackers intend
to exploit internet devices for the purpose of making a Botnet [9].
Another approach: the Peer-to-Peer system architecture mainly, rely on the
bandwidth and the computing strength of the participated nods in the net-
work to share ﬁles and messages even without any form of authentication.
Based on this fact, it is possible for attackers to compromise a selected P2P
network in order to establish a DDoS attacks. There are two main methods
to achieve this. First: by poisoning the distributed ﬁle index, and makes the
peers believe that some popular and much requested ﬁles are present at the
victim machine, which leads to TCP connection-based DDoS attacks. Sec-
ond: by poisoning the routing table of the peers, the attacker aims to make
the peers to add the victim as their neighbour, so in case the peers want to
send a search query, then the victim will be ﬂooded with forwarded messages
form many nodes. Furthermore, the victim is not participated in the P2P sys-
tem, so it normally will responds with “port unreachable” ICMP message [8].
17
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.3: DDoS P2P Architecture
2.1.2
How are DDoS Attacks Performed
DDoS attacks are accomplished through several steps and phases as follow:
1. Agent Selection and Recruitment phase
In the ﬁrst step, the attacker uses automated scanning tools to search for as
many agent machines with security vulnerabilities for recruitment purposes.
Those machines (Agents, Bots) should have some suﬃcient resources to be
able to perpetrate powerful DDoS attacks against some selected victims. Some
diﬀerent techniques are used to set up this army of Zombies, such as:
Random Scanning:
The previously infected agents scan with random IP Addresses from the IP
address range to recruit other vulnerable agents. In this scenario, many com-
promised hosts could scan the same IP address, which potentially leads to high
volume traﬃc. [4, 5].
18
==PAGE:20==
Hitlist Scanning:
In this technique, the attacker attempts to reduce the initial infection time
by creating the main list of machines that are considered as potential targets,
then as soon as it infects a machine, it propagates half of the list to the infected
agent. This scanning technique prevents the scanning collisions of the same
target host and increases the scanning propagation speed [4, 5].
Permutation scanning:
This scanning technique is a smart technique, where it introduces a self-
coordination to prevent multiple scanning for the same target agent by im-
plementing a list of Pseudo-random permutation of IP address range, each IP
is mapped to an index. This index is computed from its IP address and used
by the infected machine during the initial phase as a starting point[3, 4, 5].
Local Subnet Scanning:
This technique is considered as an assistive scanning method that can be added
to other scanning techniques to scan for potential targets on the same subnet
of the infected bots and compromise other vulnerable hosts even behind a
ﬁrewall [3, 4].
Vertical Scanning This technique aims to scan multiple ports at a single
target host [5].
Horizontal Scanning
In this technique, the scanning is directed towards a speciﬁc vulnerability on
all target hosts such as destination port 23 [5].
Coordinated Scanning
This technique is coordination between the local subnet and horizontal scan-
ning, aims to scan the same destination port for all hosts on the same local
subnet of the infected host [5].
Stealthy/Slowly Scanning
To avoid detection by intrusion detection system, any of the aforementioned
techniques could be performed slowly [5].
19
==PAGE:21==
2. Exploitation and Propagation Phase
After selecting the agent machines the next step is to break into the selected
machines and injects them with attacking and malicious codes. Typically, the
users and owners of the infected machines, they have no knowledge or ideas
that their devices have been compromised. In this phase the attacker might
use various mechanisms [4], such as:
Central Source:
In this mechanism, the attacker bot executes an instruction to transfer the
malicious codes from the central source to the newly compromised bots. As
in this method all the agents are communicating and downloading the mali-
cious codes from one or more central source, this leads to high traﬃc in the
network, which eventually may lead to attack discovery. Given that all hosts
are downloading from central source, this make the source as a single point of
failure [10].
Figure 2.4: Central Source Propagation Mechanism
Back-Chaining:
In this propagation mechanism, the attacker bot executes an instruction to
transfer the malicious codes from the attacking host to the newly compromised
host. In order this mechanism to work, the attacking codes in the attacking
host should include codes to open ports in the destination and transfer proto-
20
==PAGE:22==
col such as TFTP to send the malicious codes [10].
Figure 2.5: Back-Chain Propagation Mechanism
Autonomous Propagation:
In this propagation mechnism, the propagation is performed directly, the mali-
cious codes are transferred automatically, without the ﬁle fetching (no further
communication with the infected agents or any other systems), during the ex-
ploitation step [4].
Figure 2.6: Autonomous Propagation Mechanism
3. Communication Phase
The attacker in DDoS uses a control channels to pass the attack commands
to an array of bots. As mentioned in the DDoS Network Architectures
section, the attacker uses Command and Control infrastructure, to commu-
nicate with the handler, the communication channels between the client and
the handler are one way communication as such that, the handler would wait
and listen for connections from the client and executes the commands. On
the other side of the architecture, the communication channels between the
handler and the agents involve two ways communication, Agent - Handler: to
register the details (IP, Credentials) of the agent in the handler, and to tell
that the agent is available, and Handler - Agent: to send commands to the
array of available agents, schedule an attack, and determine or update the tar-
get victim. This technique of communication is relatively easy to identify and
21
==PAGE:23==
disrupt, due to the fact the the handler IP address is saved in the agents, and
the communications between the agents and the handler could be intercepted,
which leads to identifying the handler and eventually the discovery and disrup-
tion of the entire DDoS network. Incorporating an encryption techniques to
the communication channels, improves the eﬃciency of concealing the DDoS
attack communication network [10].
Other communication channels make it diﬃcult to identify the DDoS net-
work, such as Internet Relay Chat (IRC). Using the IRC essentially means to
replace the handler with the IRC protocols and network as a communication
backbone for the DDoS network. The IRC service, plays the role of mediator
between client and the agents, by allowing the attacker to establish outbound
connection to the IRC server using legitimate communication network, in or-
der to control and pass commands to an array of DDoS agents. On the other
side, IRC provides the agent with the ability to communicate with the client
through standard service ports used by also legitimate communication net-
work, without the need for the agents to enable a listening ports that can be
detected easily with security tools. In addition, IRC servers have the ability
of tracking the IP addresses of the connected agents, which means no need for
the attacker to maintain a track and trace tool of the available agents[10]
4. Attack phase
Is where the attacker, from the main client device, directs the bots to lunch
the attack against the target victim. The agents in this phase and after estab-
lishing the connection with the handler, they keep alive, listening and waiting
for further commands to start executing the attack [4].
22
==PAGE:24==
2.2
Internet of Things - IoT
Following is a briefe introduction and deﬁnition of IoT systems.
Kevin Ashton,
the then executive director of Auto-ID, in 1999 and in a presentation for Procter
& Gamble, he was the ﬁrst who introduced the term “Internet of Things” in the
context of RFID supply chain [K. Ashton, ”That ‘internet of things’ thing.” RFID
Journal 22, no. 7(2009): 97-114.].
The deﬁnition of Internet of Things is very wide, in some references or web sites the
idea even started long time before 1999, and expanded due to the convergence of
multiple technologies such as: machine learning, distributed systems, wireless sensor
networks and embedded systems.
In general, IoT devices are representing any system with interrelated and intercon-
nected electrical, electronical and/or mechanical objects (things) with computing
abilities, assigned with unique internet identiﬁers IP addresses, that are connected
to share data with other objects without manual intervention, using the internet.
These devices or objects are including:
• Smart homes appliances
• Smart home security systems
• Smart factory equipment
• Industrial IP CCTV and intrusion systems
• Smart cars and vehicles
• Wireless sensor systems and networks
• Autonomous farming equipment
• Shipping and logistics tracking
• Fitness, health, watches, etc. and any wearable smart device with internet
access
IoT Advantages:
• Economic dimensions: the number of IoT devices will escalate to very enor-
mous level, give the opportunities for new business models to support the
23
==PAGE:25==
economic growth in cities [11].
• Societal dimension: quality of life, saving time and money, improving moni-
toring and sensorization functions [11].
• Industrial dimension: machine to machine interaction, increasing the eﬃciency
by automation and control, bypassing the manual tasks, and improving the
monitoring performance [12].
IoT Disadvantages:
The most important disadvantage that we are focusing in our research is that IoT
devices do not have any international compatibility standards, making them vul-
nerable to security breaches, besides to violating users data and utilizing the IoT in
cyber-crimes such as DDoS attacks.
24
==PAGE:26==
3
IoT systems Risk Assessment
In this chapter, a comprehensive risk assessment and evaluation is applied over
universal (not speciﬁed) IoT systems, with a view to identify, evaluate and manage
system security risks. We attempted to adapt and use the OCTAVE (Operationally
Critical Threat, Asset, and Vulnerability Evaluation) risk assessment framework to
perform an overall evaluation of the IoT systems.
25
==PAGE:27==
3.1
Operationally Critical Threat, Asset, and Vul-
nerability Evaluation (OCTAVE)
OCTAVE (in general) is a set of phases “processes and activities”, used by small-
/medium organizations to identify, manage, and evaluate their system security risks.
It is a framework that used to improve the process of decision making regarding the
security protection of the organization’s assets. All information related to OCTAVE
methodology in this section is based on the following resources [13, 14, 15, 16, 17]
Next is a brief preface about the methodology explaining the main phases and pro-
cess, followed by an implementation of the methodology over IoT, Fig(3.1) illustrates
phases and process of OCTAVE.
• Phase one: Create Asset-Threat proﬁle In this phase, knowledge elicitation
and security strategy evaluation are performed, for the purpose of determining
the most critical resources “assets” that demand special protection, and the
security requirements for those types of asset. It involves four process:
1. Identify senior management knowledge
2. Identify operational area management knowledge
3. Identify staﬀknowledge
4. Create threat proﬁles
• Phase two: Identify Infrastructure (Components) Vulnerabilities This phase
mainly built on the knowledge elicitation from phase one, to evaluate the
information security and the key vulnerabilities of the system components. In
this phase we locate the components where the critical assets are located and
determine the main issues and vulnerabilities of those components. It involves
two processes:
1. Identify key components
2. Evaluate the selected components
• Phase three: Develop Security Strategy and Plans In this phase, risk analysis
and assessment are performed from the elicited information from phase one
26
==PAGE:28==
and two. Security strategies and plans are set up to minimize the risk of system
attacking. Goals achieved during this phase, an identiﬁcation and evaluating
of the threats impact over the critical assets and creating a risk evaluation.
This phase consists of two processes:
1. Perform risk analysis
2. Develop Protection Strategies
Figure 3.1: (OCTAVE) Risk Assessment Framework
Operationally Critical Threat, Asset, and Vulnerability Evaluation
Since we are evaluating IoT systems (not an organization) we adjusted the method-
ology to ﬁt our assessment, for e.g. the preparation steps (such as, getting man-
agement sponsorship, selecting analysis team and participants of the staﬀmembers)
and processes 1 to 3 (Identifying Senior Management Knowledge, Identifying Oper-
ational Area Management Knowledge, Identifying StaﬀKnowledge) of the Octave
methodology are neglected, instead we conducted the required series of processes
and activities on our own.
27
==PAGE:29==
Phase One:
3.1.1
Assets-Threats Proﬁle for IoT system
At this phase and particularly process number 4 is consisted for the following ac-
tivities: merging information collected from processes 1 to 3, deﬁning the critical
assets, reﬁning the security requirements, and creating threats proﬁle based critical
assets. Fig (3.2) shows Phase-One diﬀerent processes.
Figure 3.2: (OCTAVE) Pahse One
Operationally Critical Threat, Asset, and Vulnerability Evaluation
In the following subsections, we will conduct a survey over the IoT architecture to
identify the critical assets, discover the main architectural security issues, determine
the security requirements, and create the assets-based threat proﬁle.
This survey is performed instead of the processes 1-3 for the purpose of knowledge
identiﬁcation of senior management, operations management, and staﬀ.
28
==PAGE:30==
• IoT Architecture
A typical IoT architecture mainly consists of four layers, with the related proto-
cols that are used for applications, processing, authentication, and messaging.
Explained as follow:
1. Perception / Recognition Layer:
The major task of this layer is to comprehensively collect external data,
by employing some physical devices such as: sensors, RFID, GPS, and
cameras [18, 23].
2. Network Layer:
It functions as the transport layer; this layer is responsible of transmit-
ting the collected information from the previous layer (perception) to the
internet. It includes the network infrastructure such as WIFI, LAN, mo-
bile communication in addition to the communication protocols that are
required for data transmission between devices [19, 20, 21].
3. Support Layer:
This layer provides the support for both the application layer and network
layer; it processes and analyses the collected data from the perception
layer to take decisions. It employs diﬀerent technologies such as cloud
computing, databases, and data processing modules [18, 23].
4. Application Layer:
Is responsible of presenting and implementing the results of the processing
and analysis (of the processing layer), to accomplish diﬀerent services to
the users. It determines the diﬀerent applications in which the Internet of
Things can be deployed, which include smart cities, smart transportation,
smart homes, personal care, healthcare, etc [19, 22].
29
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.3: Internet of Things Architecture Layers
• Security Issues of IoT Systems
There are many papers and researches that have classiﬁed various security
issues based on each IoT architecture layer. This classiﬁcation includes security
of information gathering (sensing), data transmission, and maintaining the
security of applications. Some of the following (security) issues are not related
directly to the topic of this paper.
1. Perception Layer Security Issues
As previously mentioned, certain physical devices are functioning in per-
ception layer to collect information, such as sensors. The main charac-
teristic of these devices is that the computational capabilities are very
low, and due to the wireless mode communication in some IoT terminals
it is diﬃcult to apply a security system to protect authentication and
integrity [20]. Some of the security problems over Perception Layer, as
follow:
Nodes Manipulating: taking into consideration that many of that IoT
30
==PAGE:32==
systems nodes are installed in open areas; this can privilege the attacker
a direct access to the nodes, which leads to manipulating the nodes and
gaining some sensitive data [21].
Nodes destruction: the physical damage to the nodes is also possible, in
order to hinder the service [21].
Node Spooﬁng: adding a malware node as an authentic IoT system device
[20].
Injection of malicious codes: illegal access to the system could be granted
by injecting malicious codes to the nodes [20].
Adding a deceptive node: attacker can add non original or fake node to
the system for the purpose of injecting malicious data through it.
2. Network Layer Security Issues
Essentially, network layer includes the network infrastructure (IR, Blue-
tooth, GPRS, WIFI) so, the attacks on this layer is derived from the
traditional attacks on the network and data transmission security issues
such as, Spooﬁng and Man-in-the Middle [22]. Some of the security prob-
lems over Network Layer, as follow:
Denial of service: Which include WSN-Node Jamming, RFID (Radio Fre-
quency Identiﬁcation) interference and overwhelming the network with
traﬃc [22].
Traﬃc sniﬃng and device spooﬁng: the wireless nature of the IoT sys-
tems gives the attacker the ability to perform packet sniﬃng over RFIDs,
Bluetooth, WSN components and the capability of spooﬁng for e.g. RFID
to send false data with original ID [23].
Brute forcing: since IoT systems are connected to the internet and they
have telnet activated; this gives the attacker the ability to launch brute
force attacks to gain access to the IoT system.
3. Support Layer Security Issues
This layer is responsible for supporting the processing, storing, and analysing
31
==PAGE:33==
of large data. Malicious behaviour, cloud and data security are considered
as critical issues [23].
4. Application Layer security Issues The structures of the IoT applications
are varies, there are diﬀerent security requirements for diﬀerent IoT appli-
cations. However, one of the IoT features is data sharing. Authentication,
access control and privacy protection are common issues of the IoT ap-
plication layer [18].
• IoT Malwares with DDoS Capabilities
For the purpose of exposing security vulnerabilities that are related to our
topic, and in order to identify threats to the critical assets, this section provides
a superﬁcial explanation of the most famous IoT malwares (created the past
few years) that are the capable of performing DDoS attacks, expressing the
current situation. Noteworthy, that the mentioned IoT malwares below have
been modiﬁed and improved through the times by cyber criminals, to exploit
new vulnerabilities, infect, and utilize various types of new IoT to launch new
attacks.
Linux.Hydra:
Linux/Hydra, is an open source botnet framework released in 2008, it is con-
sidered as the predecessor of all IoT botnet malwares.
It was designed to
expand and has the merits of both the spreading and DDoS mechanisms, it
relies in exploitation on dictionary attack, it targets the MIPS architecture-
based routing devices. Linux/Hydra is an IRC based network architecture
that performs a simple SYN Floods attacks[4, 26].
Psyb0t:
It was discovered in 2009 the source code has not been revealed but based
on the network architecture and exploitation mechanism, we can say that it
was considered as the Linux/Hydra successor. Psyb0t aimed towards MIPS
architecture components, operated on IRC network architecture, managed to
infect around 100,000 IoT devices with the malware using SSH and Telnet,
by applying a brute force attack with predeﬁned list of 6000 usernames and
32
==PAGE:34==
13000 passwords. Once the IoT device has been infected it become a source
of performing UDP and ICMP Flood attacks [4, 26].
Chuck Noris:
Is an IoT malware was released on 2010, very similar to Psyb0t, operated
by IRC, spreading by brute force attack with predeﬁned list of usernames
and passwords, targeting routers and DSL modems, it managed to exploit
authentication vulnerabilities in D-Link routers, able to perform ACK Flood
attack [4, 26].
Tsunami:
Is an IRC based command and control, able to carry out SYN, UDP, and ACK
Flooding, and HTTP ﬂood [4].
LightAidra/Aidra:
It is an open source IoT malware project was discovered around 2012, operated
on IRC network architecture, it was designed to scan for open telnet ports
with known default credentials. What makes this malware distinguishable of
the previously mentioned malwares, is its ability and complexity of exploiting
several architectures such as, MIPS, ARM, MIPSEL, x86-64 and Power PC
(PPC) [4, 26].
Linux.Darlloz:
In 2013 Symantec reported that an IoT worm infected 31,000 devices. Linux.Darlloz
was spreading and targeting IoT devices such as routers and CCTV systems,
by utilizing (CVE-2012-1823) PHP vulnerability to exploit and infect IoT de-
vices. Linux.Darlloz managed to infect various system architectures (ARM,
MIPS, MIPSEL, PPC, x68) through default list of credentials [26].
BASHLITE /Lizkebab/Torlus/Gafgyt:
“The Predecessor of Mirai”, is one of the popular malwares which infected
Linux based IoT devices in order to commence distributed denial-of-services
attacks (DDoS). BASHLITE, managed to enslave over one million IoT device
via Brute forcing, using a list of most common or default credentials. It was
capable to launch attacks (hold open TCP connections, TCP and UDP ﬂoods,
HTTP attacks) of up to 400 Gbps, for command and control it operated over
33
==PAGE:35==
Client-Server network architecture (Agent-Handler) [4, 26].
Linux.Wifatch:
“The Vaccination”, is an open source malware has been active since Novem-
ber 2014. This malware was attempted to infect IoT devices using default,
common or weak telnet credentials. The main purpose of this malware after
infecting the device is to remove any other malwares, disable telnet access and
replace it with the message: “Telnet has been closed to avoid further infection
of this device. Please disable telnet, change telnet passwords, and/or update
the ﬁrmware.”. Wifatch is updating the malware deﬁnitions and interacting
using Peer-to-Peer networks architecture [4, 26].
Hajime:
Likewise Wifatch, Hajime is a white worm attempted to secure IoT devices in
much the similar approach of Wifatch, there are no Distributed Denial of Ser-
vice functionalities, just the propagation module, it consists of two executable
Linux ELF: core implant (performs P2P tasks) and scanning and propagation
module. In October 2016 the warm exploited unsecured IoT devices via open
Telnet ports using weak, default or common credentials (similar to Mirai),
Hajime operated overpeer-to-Peer network architecture there is no command
and control servers, instead it uses a distributed hash table (DHT), and the
controller disseminate command modules and updates to the peer network and
it will propagate to the other peers overtime. Hajime managed to infect over
100,000 IoT devices and targeted various versions of ARM and MIPS CPU
architectures [4, 26].
Mirai:
Is an open source code, one of the most sophisticated and dangerous IoT
malwares. Mirai was discovered in 2016, attempted to build a huge IoT bot-
nets army of “over” 600,000 IoT device mainly IP CCTV, DVRs and home
routers. Mirai was capable to launch a Distributed Denial of Service attack
reached 620 Gbit/s against the web site of Krebs on Security and 1.2 Tbit/s
attack on French web host OVH, in Oct 2016 multiple DNS Water Torture
attacks resulted in the inaccessibility of several high-proﬁle websites such as
34
==PAGE:36==
Twitter, GitHub, Airbnb and Netﬂix. Mirai aimed to send “asynchronously”
TCP SYN probes targeting a list of random IPv4 addresses to the ports 23
and 2323 (to establish a Telnet connection) and (in case the targeted IoT re-
sponded) it applies a Brute forcing, using a list of predeﬁned most common
or default credentials. For the command and control it operated over Client-
Server network architecture (Agent-Handler) and designed to run on various
CPU architectures (ARM, MIPS, x86, PowerPC and ARC) and able to per-
form diﬀerent kinds of DDoS attacks shuch as: GRE IP, GRE ETH, SYN,
ACK, UDP and HTTP ﬂooding [4, 26].
• Security Requirements
The core underpinning of information security is the CIA triad [26], this triad
consists of three main components considered as the basics of information
security, we list them as follow:
– Conﬁdentiality:
(keeping secrets secret), is the process of preventing
unauthorized access and monitoring of data, and / or even protecting
knowledge about the existence of information and resources, by using the
means of protection such as: encryption and access control mechanisms.
– Integrity: it is the process of preventing and detecting any unauthorized
modiﬁcation of the data or the origin of the data that it is coming from.
– Availability: (the core of the paper) is the process of ensuring that the
systems information and resources are available (without any malicious
denial of service) for legitimated and authorized users.
– Authenticity: is the process of verifying that the received data are sent
form a device that is electronically tag authenticated or not.
35
==PAGE:37==
• Build the Threat Proﬁle
This section uses the information provided by the previous sections, since in
the previous sections, an idea was given about the security issues in the ar-
chitecture of IoT systems and how they are used to implement and launch
the DDoS attacks. The threat proﬁle includes a selection of the critical as-
sets, threat actors and the threat scenario (threat scenarios will be extracted
from the section: IoT malwares with DDoS Capabilities and from references
[4, 26, 28] where ). In order to create the threat proﬁle, the ﬁrst step is per-
forming assets categorization, then identify the threat actors ﬁnally the threat
scenarios.
1. Assets Categorisation
Figure 3.4: IoT. Arch. L1 – Perception Layer
36
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.5: IoT. Arch. L2 – Network Layer
Figure 3.6: IoT. Arch. L3 – Support Layer
37
==PAGE:39==
Figure 3.7: IoT. Arch. L4 – Application Layer
2. Threat Actor
Figure 3.8: Threat Actor
38
==PAGE:40==
3. Threat Scenario
Figure 3.9: KrebsOnSecurity, OVH, DYN, Scenario [4, 26, 28]
39
==PAGE:41==
Figure 3.10: Deutsche Telekom [4, 26]
40
==PAGE:42==
Phase Two:
3.1.2
Identify Infrastructure Vulnerabilities
Phase two of the assessment includes the following two processes Fig(3.11).
Figure 3.11: Phase Two
• Identify key components
In the previous phase we collected the important information about the IoT
systems to create a threat proﬁle that is concerned only about the utilization
of IoT systems in launching DDoS attacks. In this process we are identifying
the infrastructure components to be evaluated for technological vulnerabilities
and weaknesses. Fig(3.12) shows a mapping between the IoT critical assets
and the aﬀecting components of the system. The stars (*) show the impact
level of each component on the assets, in regards to DDoS matter .
Figure 3.12: Assets / Components Mapping
41
==PAGE:43==
• Evaluate the selected components
The basic criterion for the impact of a compromised component is how it af-
fects the entire system and the losses that can result from compromising the
component ﬁg(3.13).
Figure 3.13: Assets / Evaluating IoT Components
42
==PAGE:44==
Phase Three:
3.1.3
Develop Security Strategy and Plan
This part is the last phase of our assessment, where the security strategy is
developed based on the analysis of the collected information. Our countermea-
sures are divided into three categories; each category is related to one segment
of individuals.
1. IoT Producers
This part is related to the producers of IoT devices where the following
countermeasures can be taken into consideration to support in defending
against DDoS attacks.
(i) Enhance Hardware Security
Adopting a root of trust hardware that can provide a Trusted Exe-
cution Environment (TEE), increase memory and hard drive size so
it can support protection and anti-malware.
(ii) Enhance Default Security Settings
Activate the security features by default, and ensure that all insecure
features which may risk the system are deactivated also by default.
(iii) Enhance the OS and Firmware Security
Oﬀer an auto update mechanism, through trusted server and secure
connections, ensure that the end-users are able to obtain the latest
updates in regards to security and system safety.
(iv) Enhance Authentication
Ensure a strong default system password, oﬀer changing the pass-
word during the initial setup, storing the passwords and credential
encrypted and hashed.
(v) Enhance Network and Internet Access
Ensure the unnecessary ports are closed and only the trusted and
needed ports are activated, insure ports (23/2323), remote manage-
43
==PAGE:45==
ment, or any other ports that can be accessed from the internet are
closed or protected by strong password.
(vi) Enhance Security Policies
Ensure conﬁdentiality and data integrity, provide an access control
mechanism to prevents unauthorized users from accessing the system
and permit the authorized users to access what they are privileged
to access.
(vii) Enhance Web Application and User Interface Security
Ensure connection through secure layers with data transfer encryp-
tion.
Some other factors the IoT vendors can work on such that, the IoT de-
vices are constantly and unobtrusively operating and easily can be in-
fected and properly not being recognized, IoT devices are produced to be
user-friendly and easy-use rather than secure [29].
2. IoT Users
Many of IoT users are not IT specialists and they Don’t know how to
protect their own devices either against attack nor not to be utilized as
bots. Some suggestions and advises that the IoT users can consider to
avoid being victims of cyber-crimes.
(i) Change the factory default password.
(ii) Strong passwords that include capital and small letters, numbers and
samples like (?, #, @) are highly recommended.
(iii) Disable unneeded open ports, remote access
(iv) Auto updates should be Enabled, Frequently search for Firmware
and security updates.
(v) Insure strong WiFi connection protocols and password
(vi) In case of buying second hand device, factory reset is highly recom-
mended.
44
==PAGE:46==
Those were some countermeasures any user can perform that can some-
how grantee a reasonable level of protection.
3. Companies, Websites and Server Owners
In general, the defense mechanisms against botnets can be organized
into three categorizes prevention, monitoring, and response. Preventing
infections and the creation of IoT botnet is the most eﬀective defense
mechanism. This can be achieved through antivirus, ﬁrewalls, network
monitoring, intrusion detection and prevention systems, and many other
countermeasures.
User responsibility and awareness of this problem’s criticality are also
important, as malware are often spreading because of user mistakes, such
as clicking on email attachments or accessing malicious websites or for
example enabling some unneeded ports and remote access services.
However, and despite the use of the security mechanisms and tools it is
still possible that IoT devices to become infected. Therefore it is very
important for online event owners (website or servers) to monitor their
networks and employ the appropriate techniques to check for any suspi-
cious traﬃc that might indicate the presence of an attack and take the
appropriate actions to prevent and mitigate the attack.
In the next chapter a DDoS attack mitigation approach is suggested to
help the internet event owners of protecting their online resources, the
approach is based on SDN technology and RYU controller
45
==PAGE:47==
4
Network Gate Shield (NGS)
NGS Abstract:(In this chapter, a mitigation approach is suggested based on SDN
technology, OpenFlow, and RYU controller. First we will go through a brief intro-
duction about the SDN how it works and what are the three planes of SDN, next a
detaild explanation of NGS ”the suggested approach”, how it works and what are
the main characteristics that NGS applies to mitigate DDoS attacks).
46
==PAGE:48==
4.1
Software-Deﬁned Networking (SDN)
In today’s world, especially in the massive spreading of the IoT devices, there is no
organization, be those governmental agencies, national or international institutions,
big or small companies that work online, except it was vulnerable to cyber-attacks.
As mentioned before, and despite all the protection measures, IoT devices can still
be a tempting target to be infected and utilized as bots in performing DDoS attacks.
Therefore, when IoT devices infection seems to be inevitable, and the DDoS attack is
a matter of time, the most eﬀective way for preparedness is in the form of monitoring
the network traﬃc and check for unwanted behaviors.
The contribution of this section is to propose an algorithm solution for mitigating
IoT-based DDoS attacks against the network resources by applying a real-time net-
work monitoring with a predeﬁned time interval. NGS employs a Software-Deﬁned
Networking (SDN) technology that enables dynamic and automatic action of bring-
ing the defense mechanism into practical action. The development of an optimum
attack mitigation mechanism requires an automated, programmable, and dynamic
response to the attack. In addition to that, the network’s ability to handle the DDoS
attack situations that threaten the access of legitimated users should be an aspect
during the network design process.
All the background information, explanations, and details about; SDN, RYU con-
troller, and OpenFlow protocol are based on the following resources [31, 32, 33, 34,
35]
• What is SDN
There are many diﬀerent deﬁnitions of SDN, and mainly it depends on the
viewpoints, for example Cisco would deﬁne the SDN as ”is an architecture de-
signed to make a network more ﬂexible and easier to manage”. While OPEN
NETWORKING FOUNDATION, has another way of deﬁning SDN: ”The
physical separation of the network control plane from the forwarding plane,
and where a control plane controls several devices”. SDN is the new revolution
47
==PAGE:49==
of the networking, it is the process of adding programmability, automation
and dynamic to the network, shifting the network architecture from decen-
tralized to centralized structure, by centralizing the network intelligence into
one component and separating the network into three diﬀerent planes (layers).
SDN adds new vision of how to manage and control the network infrastructure.
• SDN Key Principles
1. SDN separate the control plane data plane, the communication between
the control plan and network plane (southbound) accomplished via Ap-
plication Programming Interface (API)
2. SDN enables an interaction between the programs (software) and the net-
work infrastructure. This programmatic interaction includes monitoring,
managing, conﬁguring, and controlling the network infrastructure.
3. The function of controlling the network is centralized and separated from
the controlled network infrastructure. The SDN controller is responsi-
ble for the functions of monitoring, managing, and taking routing and
switching decisions.
4. The SDN controller is responsible for deﬁning the logical topology of the
network, creating the ﬂow tables, and the forwarding behaviour.
5. One SDN infrastructure could contain multiple controller and each con-
troller can manage multiple network nodes
• SDN Architecture
The tight coupling between the control layer and the data layer in traditional
network architectures has inﬂexibility disadvantages. The infrastructure com-
ponents in the traditional networks (Routers, Switches) are embedded systems,
which means that the vendors are implementing their vision of the control logic
which leads to limitations with the controlling speciﬁcations.
In SDN, the infrastructure components are separated; the functions are dis-
48
==PAGE:50==
tributed over three diﬀerent planes (layers); each is responsible for speciﬁc
functions and jobs. This distribution enabled the programmability, ﬂexibil-
ity, and the dynamic response of the new network generation. Open Network
Foundation has given the following SDN architecture Fig().
Figure 4.1: Software-Deﬁned Networking Layers
1. Data Plane:
Is the physical layer or the data forwarding, it includes the infrastructure
components of the network such as routers and switches. This plane com-
municate with controller through the South-bound by sending a message-
in with inquiries and receiving message-out with instructions in order to
get the switching and forwarding details.
2. Control Plane:
The SDN controller is considered as the logical entity and the SDN net-
49
==PAGE:51==
work brain. It is located in the middle of the network architecture. that
receives instructions or requirements from the SDN application plane and
relays them to the data plane.
3. Application Plane:
This layer contains the applications which are written by the vendor or
third party, these program are communicating with the SDN controller
through the North-bound, to send requirements or to collect information
form the network for the purposes of network monitoring, protection,
analysis, auto response to a threats, and decision making,
4.2
OpenFlow Protocol
OpenFlow is not SDN, OpenFlow is a protocol that is used in the Southbond of the
SDN architecture.
OpenFlow: is the ﬁrst standard communication interface deﬁned between the con-
trol and forwarding layers of an SDN architecture. OpenFlow allows direct access
to manipulation of the forwarding plane of network devices such as switches and
routers, both physical and virtual (hypervisor-based) [Open Network Foundation].
In other words, It is an open interface used for sending event messages between the
controller and the network infrastructure components (switches and routers). There
are diﬀerent types of message requests and replies, e.g., First, switch status request
and reply, these event messages are sent from the data plane devices to the controller
to inform it about ports or link changes. Second, sending the ﬂow statistics from
the network nodes (switch, router) to the controller (ﬂow statistics request-reply ).
Third, Message-in and Message-out, the incoming messages that the network nodes
they don’t know what to do with them, are sent by message-in to the controller and
the controller will send a copy of them by message-out to the destination port then
install the new ﬂow entry to the ﬂow entry table in the network nodes. Fig(4.2)
Shows the main OpenFlow messages between the controller and the network nodes.
50
==PAGE:52==
Figure 4.2: OpenFlow messages between the controller and the network nodes
51
==PAGE:53==
4.3
Network Gate Shield (NGS)
NGS: Is a program that works on SDN, the main purpose of NGS is to monitor the
network frequently and respond to any suspicious behaviors. NGS depends on its de-
cision on whether the traﬃc is normal or abnormal on some criteria and IoT packet
speciﬁcation, such as the average packet size during a time interval and the packet
per-sec threshold. NGS is designed to detect the IoT-based DDoS attacks, for this
reason we had to make some statistical analysis on what are the main characteristics
that IoT data packets have. In this part, a collection of data packets of IoT devices
that are launching DDoS attacks (of diﬀerent kinds) are extracted in Excel ﬁle.
The IoT packet data sets [30] are very large ﬁles collected using Wireshark (.pcap
ﬁles), the ﬁrst step is to split the big ﬁles into smaller size, so it can be handled,
the next step is to ﬁnd TCP-streams, UDP-streams that indicates an attacks. the
Data-Sets are also provided (from the Originato[30]) with some explanations such as
the: infected devices, target IP, what type of attacks [30]. Following an illustration
of Pivot Tables added as ﬁgures to the paper bellow, that visualize the IoT-Based
DDOS attack behaviour. Fig(4.3) and Fig(4.4) are showing some examples of the
Pivot Tables dashboards available for more research on the following private link ().
52
==PAGE:54==
Destination
716166148
Row Labels
Count of Time Average of Length
11
40568
60
.50
40568
60
.06
53
60
.07
1865
60
.08
1867
60
.09
1838
60
.10
1884
60
.11
1819
60
.12
1862
60
.13
1894
60
.14
1842
60
.15
1781
60
.16
1837
60
.17
1873
60
.18
1818
60
.19
1872
60
.20
1685
60
.21
1865
60
.22
1838
60
.23
1843
60
.24
1841
60
.25
1877
60
.26
1845
60
.27
1878
60
.28
1791
60
Grand Total
40568
60
Mirai Attack, Pivot Table illustrating the Dst-Ip: 71.61.66.148, Time Per-
Sec, the blue bar indicates the packet count per second, the orange shows the 
averagepacket length during the attack
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
.06 .07 .08 .09 .10 .11 .12 .13 .14 .15 .16 .17 .18 .19 .20 .21 .22 .23 .24 .25 .26 .27 .28
.50
11
Count of Time
Average of Length
Values
Hours
Minutes
Time
Count of TimeAverage of Length
Destination
Figure 4.3: Mirai Attack, Pivot Table illustrating the Dst-Ip: 71.61.66.148, Time Per-
Sec, the blue bar indicates the packet count per second, the orange shows the average
packet length during the attack
53
==PAGE:55==
Time
.01
Destination
192.99.142.246
Row Labels
Average of Length
Count of Field1
192.168.1.196
82
350562
00
81
47015
01
82
51606
02
81
59125
03
83
48436
04
82
58773
05
81
12963
22
80
9675
23
81
62969
Grand Total
82
350562
25
TCP Flooding, Pivot Table illustrating the Dst-Ip: 192.99.142.246, Src-
Ip: 192.168.1.169, Time Per-Mint "could be per sec"  the orange line 
indicates the packet count per minute, the blue bars show the average 
packet length during the attack
79
79
80
80
81
81
82
82
83
83
84
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
00
01
02
03
04
05
22
23
192.168.1.196
Average of Length
Count of Field1
Values
Source
Hours
Minutes
Average of LengthCount of Field1
Time
Destination
Figure 4.4: TCP Flooding, Pivot Table
54
==PAGE:56==
All excel sheets, data collections, and pivot tables show that the IoT-Based traﬃc is
of the type of small size, and the packet size is ﬁxed and constant during the attack,
it is not changing and hardly ﬂuctuating, in addition to the sudden increase in the
packet traﬃc volume per-sec.
NGS depends on its decision on whether the IoT-based packet are normal of abnor-
mal on the characteristics of small packet size (on average) and the sudden increasing
in the volume traﬃc.
NGS approach, theoretically is divided, into two parts (standard OpenFlow switch-
ing and the detection algorithm), that performing the tasks of monitoring, manag-
ing, and protecting the network against IoT-based DDoS attacks Fig(4.5) shows the
main fumctions of NGS program. Following an explanation of the solution:
Figure 4.5: Network Gate Shield, Two Wings and Functions
55
==PAGE:57==
4.3.1
Standard OpenFlow Switching
This part is responsible for the normal OpenFlow Protocol switching. There are
three main functions operating in this part Fig(4.4) Shows the tree functions, and
the main activities of each function.
• New Switches Event Handling:
This is an OpenFlow framework function, that is used at any time a new
switch is added to the network. After the new switch Handshake with the
controller, the controller sends a Switch-Feature request message, and wait
for the response from the switch, then the switch responds back, then the
controller sets the traﬃc Match as ”All” and the Action as ”Send the traﬃc to
controller”, install the ﬂow-miss-table and give instructions to the new switch
to direct all new ﬂows (that the switch doesn’t know what to do with) to the
controller.
FUNCTION:
@set ev cls(ofp event.EventOFPSwitchFeatures, CONFIG DISPATCHER)
switch features handler(event):
1: networknode ←event.message.datapath
2: match ←match.all.flows
3: actions : forward.all.new.flows.to.controller
4: add flow(networknode, priority, match, actions)
• Packet-In Handler:
This function is called whenever (any) switch on the network send a ”Packet-
In” message to the controller.
Packet-In; occurs if there is no ﬂow entry
rule available (in the ﬂow table) and the node does not know where to send
the packet, then the switch sends it to the controller to take the appropriate
decision.
FUNCTION:
@set ev cls(ofp event.EventOFPPacketIn, MAIN DISPATCHER)
packet in handler(event):
1: Pars information from the event (packet-in)
56
==PAGE:58==
pkt: (data) / length: / ethernet type: / destination mac: / source mac:
/ in port: / switch id
2: Learn the MAC addresses and associated port
dpid = network node.id
mac of eth port.setdefault(dpid, )
mac of eth port[dpid][src mac] = in port
3: if dst mac IN mac of eth port[dpid]: then
4:
actions ←send.packet.through.the.port.associated.to.MAC
5: else
6:
actions ←OFPP FLOOD
7: end if
8: Install a ﬂow table in the switch
match = ethernet-type, SrcIp, DstIP
actions = associated port or action = FLOOD
add ﬂow(networknode, priority, match, actions)
9: Message-out, forward the packet received by controller
network node.send msg(network node, in port, action, data)
• Add Flow:
This function adds ﬂow entries with predeﬁned options.
FUNCTION:
add ﬂow( network node, priority, match, action, idle=0, buﬀer id)
create the instructions(actions list-applicable in OpenFlow v1.3 and
above)
inst = OFPInstructionActions(ofproto.OFPIT APPLY ACTIONS, action)
network node.send msg(network node, priority, match, inst, idle timeout)
57
==PAGE:59==
Figure 4.6: Network Gate Shield, Standard OpenFlow Switching Activity Diagram
4.3.2
IoT-Based DDoS Detection Algorithm
The main idea behind our algorithm is to collect statistics (of diﬀerent types) of the
ﬂow entry from the network nodes and extract the metrics, to be used in distin-
guishing between normal and abnormal traﬃc.
The logic of the algorithm is built on two diﬀerent types of statistical data, one: the
general ﬂow entry of the nodes, second: a more detailed data of each ﬂow separately.
The general steps of the algorithm are as follow:
• Start the program.
58
==PAGE:60==
• Setup the connection between the network nodes and the SDN controller
(RYU).
• Controller sends a Switch-Features-Request to the network nodes.
• Controller adds the Initial Flow Miss Entry table to the network nodes
• Start the ﬂow monitoring thread every interval of time (which is pre-deﬁned
in a conﬁguration ﬁle) for aggregate ﬂow statistics and ﬂow statistics.
• Send ﬂow statistic requests to the network-nodes.
• Receive and handle an auto replay (ﬂow statistics replay) from nodes.
• Send aggregate statistic requests to the network-nodes.
• Receive and handle auto replies (aggregate statistics replay) from nodes.
• Based on the statistical replies from the network nodes, decisions made, and
ﬂow rules are added to the ﬂow entry table.
• One routine (EventOFPPacketIn), used to handle Packet-In Messages form
the switch to the controller. Due to mitigation requirements, we had to add
some steps to the routine, for the purpose of controlling traﬃc with speciﬁc
size, more details will be represented in subsection (5.3.3) Random Source, A
Case-Study.
This algorithm mainly consists of three phases functioning simultaneously which are
the ﬂow entry statistic requests, metrics and characteristics extraction, and decision
maker.
Phase One: Flow Statistic Request and Reply Handling
During this phase, the security system starts a thread in the RYU controller and
enters into an inﬁnite While-Loop, during this loop the system is making two types
of statistical data requests as follow:
FUNCTION: ﬂow monitoring()
1: while True do
2:
for every-nodes In network-nodes-list do
3:
Call: aggre-statstcs-rqust(network-node)
59
==PAGE:61==
4:
Call: ﬂow-statstcs-rqust(network-node)
5:
end for
6:
hub.sleep(INTERVAL)
7: end while
The main goal of this phase is to keep requesting the statistical data of the ﬂows
from every switch on the network in order to get to the next phase and process
the data. It is very important to mention that RYU is a framework and whenever
we make a request of any data, we expect an auto reply from the network node to
handle it. As mentioned above, the algorithm is using two diﬀerent types of statis-
tical requests, one for the total statistical data which is used to determine the load
on the network, and the other is individual statistical data for each ﬂow individually.
• The ﬁrst function Call: aggre statstcs rqust(network node): is responsible for
requesting general ﬂow statistics as follow:
FUNCTION 1: aggre statstcs rqust(network node):
1: match = OFPMatch() “to match any ﬂow”
2: request = OFPAggregateStatsRequest(insert requested arguments such as:
network node ID, ﬂow table number, match, OFP ports-groups and others)
3: network-node.send.msg(request) ”send a request massage to switches”
• The replay for aggre statstc request is handled as follow:
@set ev cls([ofp event.EventOFPAggregateStatsReply, ], MAIN DISPATCHER)
FUNCTION 2: aggre stats reply handler(event):
1: is attack = Bolean ”as global variable”
2: statistics-result = event.msg.body “get just the statistical values”
3: is attack = calc avrg pkt ps(result) “to process the data”
• The second functionCall: ﬂow statstcs rqust(network node): is responsible for
requesting a detailed ﬂow statistic for each ﬂow separately as follow:
FUNCTION 3: ﬂow statstcs rqust(network node):
1: request = OFPFlowStatsRequest(network node)
2: network node.send.msg(request)
60
==PAGE:62==
• The reply is handled as follow:
@set ev cls([ofp event.EventOFPFlowStatsReply, ], MAIN DISPATCHER)
FUNCTION 4: statstcs reply handler(event):
1: ﬂows = “create a list of ﬂows”
2: for statistics-info in event.msg.body do
3:
ﬂows.append(insert to the list, values such as: match(srcIP, dstIP, IPv4),
packet-count, byte-count)
4:
for each-ﬂow in ﬂows list do
5:
results = Call: populate ﬂow metrics data(network node, ﬂow)
“to process the statistical data, and return the results”
6:
if results then
7:
print (”DDos Attack Detected)
8:
mstch = ﬂow (srcIP, dstIP, ethType)
9:
action = “drop”
10:
Call: add ﬂow(network node, match, priority, action, idle timeout)
11:
end if
12:
end for
13: end for
Fig(4.5) shows the activity diagram of the statistic requests from the controller and
the reply from the switches, where all the replies are sent to another functions to be
processed and check if the traﬃc is normal or abnormal.
61
==PAGE:63==
Figure 4.7: Network Gate Shield, Detection Algorithm Statistic Requests Activity Diagram
Phase Two-Three: Characteristics Extraction and Decision Making
The following characteristics have been extracted and used in detecting IoT-based
DDoS traﬃc:
1. Average Packet Size:
This feature is calculated for each ﬂow during the pre-deﬁned interval, it helps
to determine if the ﬂow (in general) is normal or abnormal, deﬁned as follow:
APS = Total Bytes Count / Total Packets Count – per interval
2. Total Summation of all ﬂows:
This number is considered as the general threshold of the system capacity and
calculated per-interval and in seconds, deﬁned as follow:
TSF = sum of Total Packet Count / Interval Value – per interval
62
==PAGE:64==
3. Average Packet Count Per-Flow:
This is the threshold limit (pre-deﬁned) value for each ﬂow separately, this
limit is used to determine if one Src-IP is sending high volume traﬃc to the
system, deﬁned as follow:
APC = sum of Packet Count (per-ﬂow, per-interval) / Interval Value
In this phase, the ﬂow metrics are calculated in functions in a way that takes into con-
sideration the old-values, new-values, the diﬀerences, and the averages per-seconds
during every time interval. Following an explanation of the functions used in NGS
to calculate: average packets per second, extract the ﬂow metrics, calculate and
store the current value of a each Src-IP, and decide wither the ﬂow is normal or up
normal.
• FUNCTION: calc avrg pkt ps(statistics-result)
This function is used to calculate the average packet count per second for all the
incoming traﬃc, it was called by the function: ”aggre stats reply handler(event)”.
In this function if the traﬃc volume exceded the threshold then it returnes
Ture.
calc avrg pkt ps(statistics-result):
1: packet-count-new-value = result.packet-count
2: if new-value > old-value then
3:
value-per-interval = new-value – old-value “extract the current ﬂow
value”
4:
old-value = new-value
5:
avrg-value-per-sec = value-per-interval / INTERVAL
6: else
7:
old-value = new-value
8: end if
9: if avrg-value-per-sec > 3 times previous avrg OR a pre-deﬁned value then
10:
DDoS Attack Detected
11:
return True
12: end if ”Note: in NGS we use only a predeﬁned threshold”
63
==PAGE:65==
Fig(4.6) shows the activity diagram of handling the aggregated statistic reply, calcu-
lating the average packet count per second, and deciding whether the traﬃc exceeded
the threshold limit.
Figure 4.8: Network Gate Shield, Handling The Aggregated Statistic Reply and Calculating
The Average Packets Per-Seconds.
64
==PAGE:66==
In ﬁrst method ﬁg(4.6), (aggre stats reply handler(event)), we receive the statistic
reply from the switch to handle it, we parse the data from the event then we send
the packe count to (calc acrg pkt ps(reslt)), whis is responsible for calculating the
current value of the aggregated ﬂow (during the current time interval) because the
retrieved statistics are indicating the total period from the beginning and not for
the time interval, so it maintains the aggregated packet count old-value, new-value
and calculate the current average packet count per-second, then it checks whether if
current-value exceeded the threshold. If the APC exceeded the threshold then the
function return True to indicate a DDoS attack. is attack ←True.
FUNCTION: populate ﬂow metrics data(network-node, ﬂow)
1: create a key form the ﬂow attributes as primary key
2: Key = nodeID + SrcIP + DstIP
3: calculate current packet count
4: pkts count = calculate value(key, int(ﬂow[”packet count”]))
5: packet-size = ﬂow[byte coutn] / ﬂow[packer count]
6: if packet-size < packet-size-threshold then
7:
if pkts count > packet-count-threshold then
8:
DDoS ATTACK DETECTED
9:
return FLOW
10:
end if
11: end if
12: if is attack and packet-size < packet-size-threshold then
13:
DDoS ATTACK DETECTED
14:
Call: Write-ﬂow (ﬂow, nodeID) “to write the follow in an external ﬁle”
15:
return FLOW
16: end if
FUNCTION: calculate value(self, key, packet count)
1: key = str(key)
2: if key IN keystor then
3:
oldval = keystorekey
65
==PAGE:67==
4:
if oldval > packet count then
5:
keystorekey = packet count
6:
return 0
7:
else
8:
current value = (packet count – oldval ) / INTERVAL
9:
keystorekey = packet count
10:
return current value
11:
else
12:
keystorekey = packet count RETURN 0
13:
end if
14: end if
Diagram (4.7) consists of three functions, the ﬁrst function is: statscs reply hadler(event):
in this function we create a match key for each ﬂow as ”primary key”, append the
pkt-count and byte-count of the ﬂow to the ﬂow-lis, then send each ﬂow from the
ﬂow-list to second function:(check ﬂow metrics data(dpid, ﬂow)) be checked for the
ﬂow packet count and ﬂow packet size, in this method; the decision is taken whether
if the ﬂow is exceeded the threshold or not there are three indicators taken into con-
sideration to determine is the ﬂow is normal or not: Packet size, Packet count, and
is attack.
The third function calculate value(ﬂow, packet count), is responsible for calculating
the current value of the ﬂow (during the current time interval) because the retrieved
statistics are indicating the total period from the beginning and not for the time in-
terval, so it maintain the PC old-value, new-value and calculating the current-value
and per-seconds, then retrieve it to the requesting function for comparison.
66
==PAGE:68==
Figure 4.9: Network Gate Shield, Handling The ﬂow Statistic Reply, Calculating The
Average Packets Per-Seconds for Each Flow
67
==PAGE:69==
5
NGS Workshop, Testing Lab
Setup
Abstract: (This chapter explains how to set up the test lab for NGS, what are the
lab components, the simulation platform, how to create the topology, the controller
framework, and the testing tools for topology and the SDN application performance.)
68
==PAGE:70==
5.1
SDN Test Lab Installation
This chapter aims to create a test-bed for SDN applications, with the purpose of
testing our program NGS. To create the SDN test-bed environment we need the
following tools:
1. Operating System: Ubuntu 18.04+ Desktop.
The installation requirements for the OS are as follow:
• OS: Ubuntu version 18.04 Desktop
It is possible to ues the VirtualBox tool, to install Ubuntu version 18.04
Desktop operating system as a virtual Machine
Figure 5.1: Ubuntu Version
• RAM: 4+ GB
• CPU: 3+ Cores
• Drive: 25 GB of free hard drive space
The ﬁrst step is to update and upgrade to the updated version of packages or
their dependencies as follow:
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get upgrade
2. Switsh: Openvswitch.
sudo apt-get install openvswitch-switch
Verify: ovs-vsctl −−version
69
==PAGE:71==
Figure 5.2: OpenVSwitch Version
3. Network Simulator: Mininet.
sudo apt-get install mininet. Verify: mn −−version
4. Controller: RYU.
sudo pip install ryu. Verify: ryu-manager −−version
Figure 5.3: RYU Controller Version
5. Python3.
Install Python 3: sudo apt-get install python3.**
Check the version: python3 −−version
Figure 5.4: Python3 Version
6. Traﬃc Generator Tools: Iperf and HPING3.
sudo apt-get install iperf. Verify: iperf −−version.sudo apt-get install hping3
7. Packets Capture Tool: Wireshark.
sudo apt-get install wireshark
Verify: wireshark −−version
70
==PAGE:72==
5.2
Test The Environment
First, start two terminal windows, in the ﬁrst terminal type:
(ryu-manager ryu.app.simple switch 13), to start the RYU controller manager.
In second window type:
(sudo mn –controller=remote,ip=127.0.0.1 –mac –switch=ovsk,protocols=OpenFlow13
–topo=single,5), to create a single switch network topology of 5 hosts and connected
to remote controller with ip=127.0.0.1 and southbound protocol is OpenFlow13,
Fig(5.5).
Figure 5.5: Mininet and Ryu Controller Test
In Mininet terminal window type: pingall to make an ICMP echo request and the
ICMP echo reply messages, to check the topology and connectivity between the
hosts, Fig(5.6).
71
==PAGE:73==
Figure 5.6: Pingall Command Between Hosts
Start new terminal and type: sudo ovs-ofctl -O OpenFlow13 dump-ﬂows s1 to get
some statistical information about ﬂows in the SDN topology such as: dl src=00:00:00:00:00:02,
dl dst=00:00:00:00:00:01, actions=output:”s1-eth1”, n packets=6, n bytes=532. Fig(5.7)
Figure 5.7: OpenFlow13 Dump Flows of Switch1
72
==PAGE:74==
If managed to get the same results as in the ﬁgures listed above then we are ready
to go to next step, run NGS and apply some DDoS attacks and network testing.
5.3
NGS Testing and Results Discussion
This section presents a network testing by simulating Volumetric DDoS attacks, and
the results’ observation of the approach. Fig(5.8) illustrates the network topology
used in the testing procedure. This topology is a custom topology created using a
mininet built in program called Miniedit.
The topology consists of the following network nodes:
• Hosts: from Host-1 to Host-15 are considered as normal PCs in which the
attacks are launched from.
• Server: Host-16 is the target victim. Iperf -s command is executed to launch
a server and open a connection port.
• Switches: an OpenVSwitchs are used in the SDN topology from S1 to S6.
• The Controller: C0 is the central controller of the SDN, it communicates
with the OpenVSwitches using OpenFlow protocol, for the purpose of moni-
toring the workﬂow in the network, by requesting the statistical information
from the switches in an iterative manner.
5.3.1
NGS Start Up
Now we need to start the program, RYU controller, the Mininet topology, and launch
a DDoS attacks against the target victim to check the eﬀecience of the program.
1. Start NGS and the RYU controller: ﬁrst of all we need to have two separate
terminal started in the same location of the ﬁles (use Open in Terminal).
2. In the ﬁrst terminal window, type: ryu-manager –conﬁg-ﬁle params.conf NGS.py,
to start NGS and the RYU controller.
3. In the second terminal type: sudo python ./NGS Topology.py, to start the
topology Fig(5.9).
73
==PAGE:75==
Figure 5.8: Network Gate Shield, Test-Bed Topology
Figure 5.9: Network Gate Shield and Topology Start-Up
74
==PAGE:76==
4. In Mininet, type: xterm h1, to start a local terminal in host1 for monitor-
ing purposes, then type: wireshark &, to start Wireshark program for traﬃc
inspection. In the same Xterm terminal type: iperf -s &, to set Host1 as
TCP server, ”the target”. The ”&” symbol used to run the program in the
background Fig(5.10).
Figure 5.10: NGS, Set-up h1 As Server, and Start Wireshark
5. In Mininet, we start a normal TCP or UDP connection from diﬀerent hosts
to the server ”h1”, to check the connection, bandwidth and throughput.
Type: h4 iperf -c h1 -b 1m -t 300 >dataﬁleh4 &
h8 iperf -c h1 -b 2m -t 300 >dataﬁleh8 &
h11 iperf -c h1 -b 1m -t 300 >dataﬁleh11 &
h16 iperf -u -c h1 -b 3m -t 300 >dataﬁlehh16UDP &.
New ﬁles (dataﬁleh4, dataﬁleh8... ) will be generated in the same folder with
some traﬃc details of each command, note: this is not the NGS statistics they
are provided by Iperf command. In the RYU/NGS terminal we can check the
ﬂow statistics, that show the details of the traﬃc in an iterative manner, such
as: the current ﬂows, aggregated packet count, ﬂow average packet count, ﬂow
average packet size, same information can be listed in Wireshark, when captur-
ing the traﬃc details of Host1, Fig(5.11) shows the details of normal network
forwarding. Fig(5.12) shows the results of the previous Iperf commands, we
can notice that the network is functioning perfectly, the Bandwidth is up to
75
==PAGE:77==
10.0 Mbits/sec.
Figure 5.11: NGS, Shwoing a Normall Switching Process in The Network.
Figure 5.12: NGS, Showing a Normal Switching Process in The Network.
76
==PAGE:78==
5.3.2
Launching DoS/DDoS Attack
Flowing we will start launching a DDoS attack, the idea here is to start a normal
TCP/UDP streaming between Host16 as client (we can add more than one) and
Host1 as server, this connection is 5.0 Mbits/sec, and long for 300 seconds as follow:
in Mininet Type: h16 iperf -c h1 -b 5m -t 300 >dataﬁleh16 &.
The next step (after one minute) is to launch DDoS attacks from the Xterm terminals
of Hosts 2-15, to start the xterm terminals, in Mininet type: xterm h2 h3 h4 h5 h6
....h15. Hping3 is used to send a huge number of packets and ﬂood the network
and the server with traﬃc, in each Xterm terminal type the following command:
hping3 -i u1000 -S -p30 -c50000 10.1.1.1, it is more convenient to start typing the
commands in all the xterm terminals, and then execute them all as fast as possible
so we can simulate an actual DDoS. There is a possibility of using a python code to
generate mutiple Hping sessions from mutiple hosts at the same time.
Next, check the RYU/NGS program how will react to the traﬃc ﬂooding by Hping3
from other hosts. Fig(5.13) shows some examples of the mitigation process and the
statistical information, such as the average packet rate per/sec, packet size, byte
count, and pacet count.
Figure 5.13: NGS, Under Attack System Behaviour.
We notice for example, that the ﬂow from Src-IP 10.1.1.9 (h9), toward h1 is exceeded
the threshold in the conﬁguration ﬁle which is 250 pkt/sec and reachede the 611
pkt/sec.
77
==PAGE:79==
Fig(5.14) Shows the statistical results for the attack from 10.1.1.9 (Host9) Shows
that 76% of the packet did not reach the destination which means that NGS is apple
to monitor, detect, and stop DDoS attacks.
Figure 5.14: NGS, Under Attack System Behaviour.
This mean, that the Src-IP 10.1.1.9 will not be able to communicate with Dst-IP
10.1.1.1. for some period of time (called Idle Time Out) which is deﬁned in the
program as 120 sec, under some conditions. These procedures will be applied in an
automated manner in case NGS detected any threshold violation in the network.
following we will go through an interesting case study where the program might lose
some of its eﬃciency.
5.3.3
Random Source, A Case-Study
NGS is a real time traﬃc monitoring, that works on SDN technology and RYU
controller. It is designed to monitor the each ﬂow (Src ===>Dst) individually and
check in an iterative manner the ﬂow behaviour, and react in case there is a violation
of the Average Packet Count/sec threshold.
There is really an interesting case where the system resources could be exhausted
due to DDoS ﬂooding, but it is still not notable by NGS. In Hping3 tool, there is
an argument ”–rand-source”, this argument is used in the command to generate a
ﬂood of traﬃc with random source IP addresses, What striking is that, this tool is
able to generate any number of packets with a unique IP address for each packet,
which means that NGS will not be able to detect the DDoS attack due to the fact
that no individual Src-IP is violating the Average Packet Count/sec (cause each IP
is used once, one source - multiple IPs).
In subsection (4.3 - NGS), we have analyzed the IoT packets and concluded with
the result that the main characteristics of the packets of IoT-based DDoS attacks
are huge in quantity and small on the average size (and they are all equal). The ﬁrst
characteristic ”quantity” is used eﬃciently in determining the threshold violation of
78
==PAGE:80==
an individual ﬂow and proved that NGS is able to stop the volumetric attacks. For
this case study, we had to change the program (what you see is the newest version)
to be able to detect if there is a total (all ﬂows) threshold violation and that was
the purpose of the function (aggregat-stats-request).
The idea is to monitor the overall traﬃc in the network in real-time, and check if
there is an exceeding of the limits, in case a violation accrued where, e.g., one device
is spooﬁng a 100 IP address, from each IP it sends 10 packets only per second, then
the system will be ﬂooded with traﬃc and there will be no suspicious IP address.
Here comes the role of using the second packet characteristic, Average Packet Size.
NGS and whenever it detects an overall threshold violation, it starts comparing the
the average packet size for each ﬂow, if is attack and the APS is smaller than the
PS-threshold then, DDoS attack detected and ﬂow dropped.
We launched a random source attack from h4 using Hping3 as follow: h4 hping3 -i
u1000 -S -p 80 -c 100000 –rand-source h1
and the results shown in Fig(5.15).
Figure 5.15: NGS, Random Source Attack, System Behaviour.
As per the hping statistics: 100000 packets were transmitted from Host4, and 0
packet received by Host1, 100% of the packets were lost, This is completely not
the truth. During the attack, the Wireshark program was capturing all the traﬃc
coming to the interface h1-eth0 (Host1 interface) and the number of captured packets
(from external random IP addresses) were exceeded the 45000 packets during the
attack, which means that this attack is managed to deliver 45% of the traﬃc to
the destination, but 0% replay from the server Host1. Fig(5.16) shows a Wireshark
packets capture.
If we compare the results of both attacks, we notice that there is a signiﬁcant
diﬀerence in the eﬃciency of NGS in the two cases, ﬁrst normal DDoS attack and
the second, with -rand-source attack. To understand this matter, we need ﬁrst to
know some concepts about NGS.
79
==PAGE:81==
Figure 5.16: NGS, Random Source Attack, Wireshark Packet Capturing.
NGS is a mitigation program that works on the RYU controller, and the RYU
controller is a Python program with its libraries, classes, functions, and arguments.
The diﬃculty we faced with RYU is, when setting the matching of a ﬂow and sending
it by message-out from the controller to the switch.
To install a policy into the ﬂow entry table, we must set the match and actions.
RYU controller does not support the size or length of packets as a match, You can
deﬁne the ﬂow match by a list of keyword arguments, and packet size is not in
the list [35]. So to deal with this issue we had to change the algorithm and use
the packet-in-handler function, to drop all small size packets, incase; if is-attack
== True:, beacause it is not possible to send a message-out from the controller
with matching of a speciﬁc ﬂow length. Fig(5.17) shows the activity diagram of the
new modiﬁcation in packet-in-handler(self, event) function. The modiﬁed packet-in-
handler function works as follow: Incase the TSF ”Total Summation of all Flows”
exceeded the total packet threshold, per an interval of time and per sec, then; the
function calc-avrg-pkt-ps() will return True to set the value of is-attack to True and
indicate that there is a threshold violation and check for possible DDoS attacks.
if is-attack == True: then check if the ﬂow size is less than the PS-Size-threshold
(Packet-Size threshold) if yes then, match == the Flow, and actions == to Drop
80
==PAGE:82==
Figure 5.17: Network Gate Shield, Modiﬁed Packet-In-Handler Function
81
==PAGE:83==
6
Conclusion and Future Work
Here we reach the ﬁnal drops at the end of our adventure in this thesis; it has been
an exciting stage in my educational journey with a blend of passion, complication,
and hard work. The topic of DDoS attacks has been a particular interest to me as
a student specializing in computer security.
We have been keen through this thesis to provide all the information related directly
to the ﬁelds of the research. This topic, ”IoT-Based DDoS Attack is a ranking topic
of cyber-security. The hazards behind DDoS attacks are related directly to the mas-
sive expansion of non-secure IoT devices. In chapter 3, IoT Risk Assessment, the
OCTAVE methodology has indicated the glitches of IoT systems and how they are
vulnerable to be infected and utilized in launching DDoS attacks. As shown in the
Assets-Threats proﬁle, in most famous DDoS incidents, the attackers managed to
infect and recruit a vast number of IoT bots through the IoT architecture network
layer’s penetration. The low processing capabilities, small RAM, and weak security
procedures are all factors that have helped in the permanence infection of IoT de-
vices. In addition to the diﬃculties of discovering the DDoS capable IoT malware
in the infected IoT devices. DDoS attacks is a matter of time, more non-secure IoT
leads to more potential DDoS attacks. This thesis provided an integrated solution
of three directions, IoT-Producer countermeasures, IoT-Users countermeasures, and
NGS (Network Gate Shield), which is intended to ﬁll the security gaps left by the
IoT users and producers.
82
==PAGE:84==
NGS is a Python language program; NGS’s primary goal is to monitor the network
traﬃc and reveal any IoT-Based DDoS attacks. At this stage, NGS is created to
mitigate the volumetric DDoS attacks. To understand the DDoS attacks that are
originated by IoT devices, we had to go through an analysis of packets collected
from infected IoT devices that are launching a DDoS attack of diﬀerent types. The
analysis shows that the main characteristics that the IoT packets have are; small
size and they hit in a large quantity.
The NGS algorithm is a real-time data monitoring approach that requests the sta-
tistical information of the ﬂows from all switches on the SDN iteratively.
After
collecting the statistics, NGS performs an in-depth inspection of two types, one for
the total ﬂows coming to the switch and the other one is a mare speciﬁc check-up
for each ﬂow individually (e.g., form src 192.168.1.45 to dst 99.150.03.18).
It has been experimentally proven that NGS can mitigate the volumetric IoT-Based
DDoS attacks. We managed to create an SDN topology using Mininet and simulate
DDoS traﬃc using Hping3 against one host as our target. Between 75%, up to 95%
of the attacking traﬃc is dropped and did not reach the destination. In a particular
case, random source, we can notice that NGS’s eﬃciency is dropped to 55% due
to the RYU controller does not support dropping traﬃc based on size/length. For
more realistic results, we are intended to test the program on real traﬃc to get
better observations from the test.
83
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
[1] Renushka Madarie1. In Hackers’ Motivations: Testing Schwartz’sTheory of Mo-
tivational Types of Values in a Sample of Hackers.
[2] Esraa Alomari, Selvakumar Manickam. In Botnet-based Distributed Denial of
Service (DDoS) Attacks on Web Servers: Classiﬁcation and Art.
[3] ABBASS ASOSHEH, NAGHMEH RAMEZANI. In A Comprehensive Taxon-
omy of DDoS Attacks and Defense Mechanism Applying in a Smart Classiﬁca-
tion.
[4] Michele De Donno, Nicola Dragoni, Alberto Giaretta, and Angelo Spognardi. In
DDoS-Capable IoT Malwares: Comparative Analysis and Mirai Investigation.
[5] Jelena Mirkovic, Peter Reiher. In A Taxonomy of DDoS Attack and DDoS
Defense Mechanisms.
[6] Stephen M. Specht, Ruby B. Lee. In Distributed Denial of Service: Taxonomies
of Attacks, Tools and Countermeasures.
[7] Christos Douligeris, Aikaterini Mitrokotsa. In DDoS attacks and defense mech-
anisms: classiﬁcation and state-of-the-art.
[8] Pankaj Kohli and Umadevi Ganugula. In DDoS Attacks using P2P Networks
April 25, 2007.
[9] Stephen Herwig, Katura Harvey, George Hughey, Richard Roberts. In Measure-
ment and Analysis of Hajime, a Peer-to-peer IoT Botnet.
[10] Kevin J. Houle, George M. Weaver. In Trends in Denial of Service Attack
Technology.
84
==PAGE:86==
[11] Ciro Formisano, Daniele Pavia, Levent Gurgen, Takuro Yonezawa, Jos`e Antonio
Galache, Keiko Doguchi, Isabel Matranga.
In The advantages of IoT and Cloud applied to Smart Cities.
[12] Michael
Mendoza,
Hitachi
Solutions.
In
”https://global.hitachi-
solutions.com/blog/industrial-iot-beneﬁts”.
[13] Christopher J. Alberts, Audrey J. Dorofee, Julia H. Allen. In OCTAVESM
Catalog of Practices, Version 2.0, October 2001.
[14] Christopher J. Alberts, Sandra G. Behrens, Richard D.Pethia, William R. Wil-
son. In Operationally Critical Threat, Asset, and Vulnerability Evaluation (OC-
TAVE) Framework Version 1.0.
[15] Author: Stephen Irwin, Advisor: Stephen Northcutt - SANS Institute, Infor-
mation Security Reading Room). In Creating a Threat Proﬁle for Your Orga-
nization, September 8th 2014.
[16] Christopher Alberts and Audrey Dorofee. In OCTAVESM* Threat Proﬁles,
Carnegie Mellon University.
[17] Marek Pyka and Scibor Sobieski. In Implementation of the OCTAVE Method-
ology in Security Risk Management Process for Business Resources, Chapter
21.
[18] J.YASHASWINI. In A Review on IoT Security Issues and Countermeasures,
ORIENTAL JOURNAL OF COMPUTER SCIENCE and TECHNOLOGY
[19] Amit Kumar Sikder, Giuseppe Petracca, Hidayet Aksu, Trent Jaeger, A. Selcuk
Uluagac1. In A Survey on Sensor-based Threats to Internet-of-Things (IoT)
Devices and Applications.
[20] Siham Al Hinai1, Ajay Vikram Singh2, In Internet of Things: Architecture,
Security challenges and Solutions.
[21] Mayuri A. Bhabad, Sudhir T. Bagade. In Internet of Things: Architecture,
Security Issues and Countermeasures
[22] Ioannis Andrea, Chrysostomos Chrysostomou, George Hadjichristoﬁ. In Inter-
net of Things: Security Vulnerabilities and Challenges
85
==PAGE:87==
[23] Inayat Ali1, Sonia Sabir, Zahid Ullah. In Internet of Things Security, Device
Authentication and Access Control: A Review
[24] Minhaj Ahmad Khan a, Khaled Salah. In IoT security: Review, blockchain
solutions, and open challenges
[25] Jian Zhang, Huanran Jin, Liangyi Gong, Jing Cao, Zhaojun Gu. In Overview
of IoT Security Architecture
[26] Kishore Angrishi. In Turning Internet of Things(IoT) into Internet of Vulner-
abilities (IoV) : IoT Botnets
[27] Christian Jensen. In Course: 02239 Data Security - DTU
[28] Brian
Krebs.
In
KrebsOnSecurity
Hit
With
Record
DDoS,
”https://krebsonsecurity.com/2016/09/krebsonsecurity-hit-with-record-ddos/”
[29] C. Kolias, G. Kambourakis, A. Stavrou and J. Voas. In ”DDoS in the IoT:
Mirai and Other Botnets,” in Computer, vol. 50, no. 7, pp. 80-84, 2017, doi:
10.1109/MC.2017.201.
[30] ”Stratosphere Laboratory. A labeled dataset with malicious and benign IoT net-
work traﬃc. January 22th. Agustin Parmisano, Sebastian Garcia, Maria Jose
Erquiaga.” https://www.stratosphereips.org/datasets-iot23.
[31] Jin Ye, Xiangyang Cheng, Jian Zhu, Luting Feng, and Ling Song. In ”A DDoS
Attack Detection Method Based on SVM in Software Deﬁned Network” Hindawi
Security and Communication Networks Volume 2018, Article ID 9804061, 8
pages https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/9804061.
[32] Udemy.com ”SDN Crash Course (Openﬂow, Mininet, RYU) Practical/Hand-
son” https://www.udemy.com/share/101IjiBUodc19aTHQ=/.
[33] Udemy.com. In ”Complete, practical SDN and OpenFlow Fundamentals: over
8hrs” https://www.udemy.com/share/1020m2BUodc19aTHQ=/.
[34] Open Networking Foundation. In ”OpenFlow Switch Speciﬁcation Version 1.3.0
(Wire Protocol 0x04) June 25, 2012”
86
==PAGE:88==
[35] ryu
development
team.
In
”ryu
Documentation,
Release
4.34
”,
https://ryu.readthedocs.io/en/latest/developing.html.
87
