==PAGE:1==
Assessment of new transport links
across the Øresund Strait
Fabrizio Moscatelli
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Transportation and Logistics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Transportation and Logistics
Assessment of new transport links across
the Øresund Strait
Fabrizio Moscatelli (s182594)
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:4==
Report written by:
Fabrizio Moscatelli (s182594)
Project Supervisors:
Michael Bruhn Barfod and Henrik Sylvan
External Supervisor:
Lars Wittrup Jensen
Project period: 14. April 2020 - 8. October 2020
ECTS: 30
Education: M.Sc.
Field: MAN
Class: Public
Edition: 1. edition
Remarks: This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements for graduation in the above edu-
cation at the Technical University of Denmark.
Copyrights: © Me Myself, 2020
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
Technical University of Denmark
Building 358
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 4800
www.man.dtu.dk/english
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
There is a growing focus on the development of new links in the Øresund strait in
order to solve the bottleneck issues across the area, increase passenger and freight
capacity, and reduce travel times. However, the selection and prioritization of major
investment projects for transport infrastructure clashes with the qualitative nature of
the judgments and the different urgencies between stakeholders. That makes it diffi-
cult to provide a fact-based approach with clear results for delivery to decision-makers.
Therefore, the objective of this thesis is to implement a customized and comprehensive
approach for the prioritization of the alternatives, combining elements of different de-
cision support systems. This methodology is applied to the Øresund case study, with
the aim to assess all three major transport infrastructures planned: the HH fixed link,
the Øresund Metro and the Europaspåret. First, the method consists in the appli-
cation of the Cost-Benefit Analysis characterized by the Feasibility Risk Assessment
to conduct the socio-economic appraisal. The risk analysis is performed to evaluate
uncertainties in demand forecasts and construction costs through the Monte-Carlo
simulation. Then, a set of criteria are developed based on the literature and the data
available, and a survey is proposed to 7 key stakeholders with the purpose to assign
a weight to each criterion. The results of the weighting process help in performing
the Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis, and in parallel the Composite Assessment. Fi-
nally, the thesis framework combines all the previous analysis performed providing
meaningful insights with recommendations and policy implications.
Kongens Lyngby, October 8, 2020
Fabrizio Moscatelli (s182594)
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
”The most important thing I’ve accomplished, other than building the compiler, is
training young people. They come to me, you know, and say, ’Do you think we can
do this?’ I say, ‘Try it.’ And I back ’em up.” Grace Hopper (Lynn and Moore, 2012)
The completion of this thesis would not have been possible without the support and
help I got throughout the past six months. In this respect, I want to thank all three
of my supervisors, who guided and assisted me during this time. To my university
professor, Michael Bruhn Barfod, I would like to express my deepest gratitude for
his constant support and advice in all steps of the thesis. His extensive knowledge
in the field of decision support systems has guided me throughout all the challenges
faced in this work. To my project supervisor, Henrik Sylvan, I would like to express
my profound gratitude for offering me the topic of this thesis and for his support,
availability and constructive feedback. I greatly benefited from his help in translating
Swedish literature and from our long conversations.
To my company supervisor,
Lars Wittrup Jensen, I would like to express my deepest gratitude for his invaluable
feedback, encouragement and for being such an understanding mentor.
An extra special thanks goes to the 7 stakeholders who took the time to fill my survey
and showed strong interest in this research. Furthermore, many thanks go to Alex
Landex, who participated in the MCDA discussion. This project would not have been
possible without their interest in the topic.
I would also like to thank all my family that always encouraged me and sustained
since I started this journey.
Last but not least, I would like to thank all the friends I have met along the ”Scandi-
navian - Mediterranean corridor”, from Bari to Copenhagen, passing through Munich,
who have inspired me with their stories and ideas.
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgements
ii
Contents
iii
List of Figures
v
List of Tables
vii
List of abbreviations
viii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The Scandinavian-Mediterranean Corridor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The Fehmarn Belt Fixed Link . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Current infrastructure in the Greater Copenhagen
. . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Future Scenario in the Øresund . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Objectives and Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.6
Thesis Framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2
Literature review
14
2.1
Socio-Economic Appraisal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2
Risk Assessment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3
Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.4
Composite Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3
Socio-economic appraisal
27
3.1
Cost-Benefit Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2
Risk Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
==PAGE:8==
Contents
iv
4
Methodological Framework
42
4.1
The Methodological Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.2
Description of Criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.3
Survey Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.4
Exploratory criteria analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.5
Analysis of Outcomes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5
Composite Assessment
63
5.1
Combining CBA and MCDA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6
Discussion
68
6.1
Discussion of Main Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
6.2
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
6.3
Further insights on Survey findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
6.4
Political implications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
7
Conclusions
74
7.1
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
7.2
Recommendations and Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
A
76
B
84
Bibliography
86
==PAGE:9==
List of Figures
1.1
Greenhouse gas emissions by main sector in the EU, 1990-2017 [7]
. . . .
2
1.2
Scandinavian-Mediterranean Corridor for passengers [8]
. . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Scandinavian-Mediterranean Corridor for freight [8]
. . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Current railway infrastructure in the Greater Copenhagen [6] . . . . . . .
4
1.5
The HH fixed link
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.6
The Øresund Metro (red) [20] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.7
Thesis Framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.1
Estimation of the increase in users’ surplus with the Rule of Half [23] . . .
15
2.2
The development of costs (red) and benefits (blue) over time [24] . . . . .
16
2.3
The Risk Assessment framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.4
The SASI model [31] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.1
Overview of costs and benefits in the HH fixed link scenario . . . . . . . .
30
3.2
Overview of costs and benefits in the Øresund Metro scenario . . . . . . .
32
3.3
Overview of costs and benefits in the Europaspåret scenario . . . . . . . .
34
3.4
Comparison of two alternatives by use the NPV and IRR indicators
. . .
35
3.5
Normal distribution for the traffic growth of the HH fixed link
. . . . . .
37
3.6
Erlang distribution for the investment costs in the Europaspåret
. . . . .
39
3.7
PERT distribution for the time savings of the Øresund Metro . . . . . . .
39
3.8
Certainty graph for the transport link alternatives across the Øresund . .
40
4.1
Proposed methodological process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.2
Ranking list request
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.3
Accessibility from/to Copenhagen without and with the HH link [46] . . .
50
4.4
Accessibility in the GCA with the implementation of the Metro [47]
. . .
52
4.5
”Natura 2000” area in the Øresund strait [49] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.6
Artificial island and nature protection in Landskrona [13]
. . . . . . . . .
54
==PAGE:10==
List of Figures
vi
5.1
TRR values for the three alternatives as a function of the MCDA% . . . .
66
6.1
Proposed decision support tool for transport policy-making . . . . . . . .
73
B.1
Schematic picture of today’s train traffic in Skåne [54] . . . . . . . . . . .
84
B.2
New connectivity plan proposed by the Region Skåne for 2040 [54] . . . .
85
==PAGE:11==
List of Tables
1.1
The alternatives for the HH fixed link [17] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.1
Input factors recommended by the Danish Ministry of Finance [37] . . . .
27
3.2
CBA of the HH Fixed Link . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3
CBA of the Øresund Metro . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.4
CBA of the Europaspåret . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.5
Probability distributions in railway infrastructure projects [28]
. . . . . .
38
3.6
Profitability indicators and certainty values (CV) for the alternatives . . .
41
4.1
The criteria list . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.2
REMBRANDT scale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.3
Output of the survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.4
Comparison matrix for the ’socio-economic robustness’ criterion . . . . . .
60
4.5
Comparison matrix for the ’contribution to EU green corridors’ criterion .
60
4.6
Comparison matrix for the ’accessibility’ criterion . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
4.7
Comparison matrix for the ’impact on land-use’ criterion
. . . . . . . . .
61
4.8
Comparison matrix for the ’increased capacity’ criterion . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.9
Final result of the MCDA methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.1
B/C-rate and the sum of benefits (Vi(Xik)) for the tree alternatives
. . .
63
5.2
ROD weights assigned to the new criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5.3
Value function scores of the alternatives within each criterion . . . . . . .
64
5.4
Results of the COSIMA analysis with the MCDA% set to 50
. . . . . . .
65
6.1
An overview of the main rankings based on the assessments conducted . .
68
==PAGE:12==
List of abbreviations
ADG
Accumulated Descending Graph
AHP
Analytic Hierarchy Process
CBA
Cost-Benefit Analysis
CEF
Connecting Europe Facility
CI
Confidence Interval
CS
Consumers’ Surplus
CV
Certainty Values
DSS
Decision Support System
ERDF
European Regional Development Fund
FRA
Feasibility Risk Assessment
GC
Generalised Cost
GCA
Greater Copenhagen Area
IRR
Internal Rate of Return
LoK
Level of Knowledge
MCDA
Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis
MCS
Monte Carlo Simulation
NPV
Net Present Value
PDF
Probability Distribution Function
QRA
Quantitative Risk Analysis
RoH
Rule of a Half
ROD
Rank Order Distribution
SMART
Simple Multi Attribute Rating Technique
SMARTER
Simple Multi Attribute Rating Technique Exploiting Ranks
TEN-T
Trans-European Transport Network
TRR
Total Rate of Return
WTP
Willingness To Pay
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The first chapter introduces the scenario where the thesis will focus. It starts pointing
the current infrastructure in the TEN-T network and in the Greater Copenhagen
Area. Then, the need to develop a new link that aims to increase the passengers and
freight capacity across the Øresund strait. Finally, objectives, research questions,
expected contributions of the thesis and its framework are summarized.
1.1
The Scandinavian-Mediterranean Corridor
In 2015, during the COP21 which was held in Paris, 195 countries signed a legally
binding agreement on climate [1]. The action plan imposed by the agreement was
aimed at mitigating the effect of climate change, with the purpose to keep the tem-
perature rise within 2 degrees compared to pre-industrial levels. In 2019, with the
introduction of the von der Leyen Commission, the targets set aim to be supported by
a series of policy initiatives, entitled ”European Green Deal” [2]. As shown in Figure
1.1, the data collected between 1990 and 2017 demonstrate that the transport sector
is the second main responsible in terms of greenhouse gas emissions, thus, sustainable
transport is high on the European political agenda [3]. As a result, the European
Union has directed the majority of the Connecting Europe Facility (CEF) fund on
the railway system rather than on other transport facilities [4].
With more than 94’000 km of railways, the Trans-European Transport Network (TEN-
T) is the biggest integrated rail network in Europe [5].
The TEN-T is a set of
integrated transport infrastructures designed to support the internal market, ensuring
free movement of goods and people and strengthening the growth, employment and
competitiveness of the European Union.
The TEN-T has the purpose to achieve
specific objectives dictated by the European Commission (e.g.: decarbonise transport,
cohesion of countries, secure mobility, etc.). Therefore, the target established by the
==PAGE:14==
1.1 The Scandinavian-Mediterranean Corridor
2
”European Green Deal” is to shift the majority of passenger and freight transport on
efficient and environmentally friendly corridors within 2050 [6].
Figure 1.1: Greenhouse gas emissions by main sector in the EU, 1990-2017 [7].
Figure 1.2: Scandinavian-Mediterranean Corridor for passengers [8].
The TEN-T is composed in its entirety by 10 strategic corridors. The ”Scandinavian-
Mediterranean Corridor” is the number 5 of these ten priority axes, it represents a
crucial north-south axis for the European economy, crossing seven different countries
for a total of 9,121 km [8]. As illustrated in Figure 1.2 and Figure 1.3, the corridor
==PAGE:15==
1.2 The Fehmarn Belt Fixed Link
3
Figure 1.3: Scandinavian-Mediterranean Corridor for freight [8].
stretches from Finland and Sweden in the North of Europe, to Valletta (Malta),
passing through Denmark, Germany, the core of the industrial districts in North of
Italy and the southern Italian ports.
1.2
The Fehmarn Belt Fixed Link
As said by the European Coordinator of the Scandinavian-Mediterranean Corridor,
Mr. Pat Cox, the Fehmarn Belt Fixed Link is one of the most important infrastructure
project along the European north-south axis [5]. The Fehmarn Belt Fixed Link is an
immersed tunnel that plans to link the Danish island of Lolland with the German
island of Fehmarn. The main aim of this project is to provide a direct connection
from Central Europe to Scandinavia for both passenger and freight transport. The
inauguration of the tunnel is scheduled for 2028 [9].
Once it is established, the
infrastructure will decrease significantly the travel time between the cities of Hamburg
and Copenhagen (journey time will be cut by two hours). Therefore, the Fehmarn Belt
Fixed Link will lead to unlock the potential of the Greater Copenhagen, increasing
the passenger volume of the 111% and the freight volume of 2.2% per year until 2035,
==PAGE:16==
1.3 Current infrastructure in the Greater Copenhagen
4
compared to the current situation [10]. The tunnel and the upgrading of the railway
on both sides of the link will lead a strengthening of the Scandinavian region, thus
reporting an improvement in terms of connectivity.
1.3
Current infrastructure in the Greater Copenhagen
The Greater Copenhagen incorporates Eastern Denmark and Southern Sweden for a
total of 4.3 million inhabitants. The purpose of the area is to support the connectivity
across the region which has more than 85 municipalities and is the home of many
highly-skilled employees [11]. The EU identifies the area of the Greater Copenhagen
as a relevant transport network for the Scandinavian-Mediterranean Corridor.
Figure 1.4: Current railway infrastructure in the Greater Copenhagen [6].
==PAGE:17==
1.4 Future Scenario in the Øresund
5
The railway network consists of four main lines based on Copenhagen and Malmö
respectively (see Figure 1.4). The Vestbanen mainline goes from Copenhagen to Fyn,
the Sydbanen stretches from the the Danish Capital towards the Fehmarn Belt, the
Södra mainline goes from Malmö in direction of Stockholm and the Västkustbanan
towards Gothenburg. In between, the Øresund Bridge connects the two national rail-
ways. To improve the existent infrastructure, the Danish and the Swedish Transport
Administration have planned a strategy with the aim to focus on the high-speed rail-
way. In this respect, the Trafikverket has launched an ambitious project to expand
the high-speed railway network, with the purpose to complete the first phase within
2029, which includes the East Link and the Hässleholm–Lund projects [12]. From
the Eastern Denmark side, the Fehmarn Belt fixed link combined with the upgrad-
ing of other railway lines, such as the Ringsted railway, seek to improve the travel
time across the Northern Europe. Therefore, the travel time of the routes Stockholm-
Copenhagen and Copenhagen-Hamburg will decrease respectively of 50 minutes and
2.5 hours [13].
1.4
Future Scenario in the Øresund
In the next decades, ambitious projects will directly involve the Greater Copenhagen
Area: the construction of the Fehmarn Belt fixed link, the implementation of the high
speed-trains in Sweden and the expansion of the Copenhagen Airport. The combina-
tion of all these events will increase the rail traffic across the Øresund, causing capacity
problems on the Øresund bridge. In the Scandinavian-Mediterranean Corridor, the
bridge is already considered a bottleneck. Recently, 11 million of train journeys were
recorded and over 64,300 freight trains crossed the bridge [14]. Nowadays, around 40%
of the travellers crossing the Øresund are commuters [14]. In addition, according to a
survey that was performed in 2015, 85% of the total trips affect directly the Øresund
bridge, and the remaining concern the ferries between Helsingør and Helsingborg [6].
The Swedish Transport Administration and the Danish Ministry of Transport have
predicted an increasing between the 49,000 and 61,000 daily trips across the Øresund
bridge in 2030 and a raise between 60,000 and 100,000 daily trips in 2050 [15]. In
==PAGE:18==
1.4 Future Scenario in the Øresund
6
this respect, it is essential to implement a new infrastructure across the area that
allows to loosen the pressure on the Øresund bridge. Therefore, in response to these
capacity and bottleneck problems, new solutions have been elaborated.
1.4.1
The HH Link
The idea of a fixed connection between Helsingør (Denmark) and Helsingborg (Swe-
den) dates from the beginning of the 20th century. In the last decades, several studies
have been conducted to evaluate a set of alternatives for a new fixed link between the
two cities. In this respect, it was instituted the ”Infrastructure and Urban Develop-
ment” in Øresund (IBU-Øresund), a collaboration between various regional entities
on both sides of the Øresund, which aimed to make the region more competitive and
attractive [16]. The IBU-Øresund cooperation focused its attention in a northern
fixed link that aims to reduce the travel time between Zealand and the Skåne region.
The four main solutions analyzed for the HH fixed link were proposed in 2010 by
the IBU-Øresund. As Table 1.1 shows, the purpose of this study was to include the
most feasible options in the infrastructure development plan of the area, through the
elaboration of socio-economic calculations.
Solution
Description
Alternative 1
HH 0.2
Rail tunnel (2 tracks), passenger trains only
Alternative 2
HH 4.2
Rail tunnel (2 tracks), passenger trains only +
motorway tunnel (2 x 2 lanes + 1 hard shoulder)
Alternative 3
HH 4.2.1
Rail tunnel (2 tracks), passenger trains only +
motorway tunnel (2 x 2 lanes + 1 hard shoulder)
+ rail tunnel (single track), freight trains
Alternative 4
HH 2.2.1
Rail tunnel (2 tracks), passenger trains only +
motorway tunnel (2 lanes + 1 hard shoulder) +
rail tunnel (single track), freight trains
Table 1.1: The alternatives for the HH fixed link [17].
==PAGE:19==
1.4 Future Scenario in the Øresund
7
Based on the results of the socio-economic analysis, all the four alternatives appear
particularly profitable. According to the profitability indicators, the most suitable
solution is represented by the ”alternative 4” (HH 2.2.1) with a B/C rate of 2.76
[18]. Instead, the passenger train solution (alternative 1) produces a smaller but still
positive socio-economic result (B/C rate value is 1.23) [18].
Currently, the most likely scenario is represented by a rail tunnel and a road tun-
nel, geographically divided, with the aim of replacing the existing ferries between
Helsingborg and Helsingør, as it is shown in the Figure 1.5.
Figure 1.5: The HH fixed link.
The most appropriate route for the road connection is a drilled tunnel that will go
from the Helsingør motorway E47/E55, passing through Snekkersten, to E4/E6 south
of Helsingborg. The tunnel under consideration will extend for 8 kilometres, while
the whole infrastructure will measure approximately 14 km. Differently, the railway
infrastructure would stretch from the coastal railway in Helsingør to the city of Hels-
ingborg. The rail link is designed exclusively for passenger trains and it covers a dis-
tance of 6 km. Another restriction involves the timetable of the Danish local rail line,
that will not be able to support additional trains through the HH link. Therefore, the
==PAGE:20==
1.4 Future Scenario in the Øresund
8
most reasonable choice is to extend the regional railway line Copenhagen-Helsingør
to include Helsingborg station, and then turning back to Copenhagen [19]. In this
regards, the rail infrastructure would be an extension of the current ’Kystbanen’,
creating the conditions to ensure the practicability of the link for the regional trains
that run along the coastal railway.
1.4.2
The Øresund Metro
Based on the outcome of a survey about the Øresund railway, around 10% of all
passengers cross the bridge to cover exactly the distance between Malmö C and
Copenhagen H [6]. At the same time is assumed as a finding that another 10% of
commuters make a transfer from/to Malmö C [6]. In this respect, the Øresund metro
is one of the most innovative project in response to the increasing of the capacity
problems across the strait. The infrastructure is planned to be a high-speed metro and
it is expected to connect Malmö C - Copenhagen H in 23 minutes, with 5 intermediate
station stops in the middle [6]. Therefore, a prerequisite for the implementation of
the Øresund metro in the Copenhagen Metro system is the development of the M6
and M7 lines, that share one stop at the Copenhagen Central Station [9].
The metro is designed as a driverless, fast (120 km/h) and high frequency (each
departure is planned every 1.5 minutes) transportation system. Moreover, the in-
frastructure is designed as a drilled tunnel that covers 22 km crossing the island of
Saltholm [21]. The Øresund Metro aims at shifting transport demand from the Øre-
sund bridge, creating better condition for commuters and tourists and supporting the
growth of the labour market in the Greater Copenhagen. Additionally, the railway
will play a strategic role also for long-distance transportation; in effect the travel time
of the journey from Copenhagen H with the Øresund metro and high-speed train to
Stockholm is estimated approximately 2 hours and 50 minutes [21]. The construction
of the infrastructure could begin in 2028 and is expected to be completed in 2035.
==PAGE:21==
1.4 Future Scenario in the Øresund
9
Figure 1.6: The Øresund Metro (red) [20].
1.4.3
The Europaspåret
The Europaspåret is a new fixed link that aims at connecting Copenhagen with the
Swedish municipality of Landskrona. The proposed project consists in a long tunnel
of 19 kilometers for long distance, regional and freight trains. Between the proposed
infrastructures, the Europaspåret is the only one that can be integrated in the ”Core
Network” of TEN-T. Concretely the Europaspåret is expected to create new opportu-
nities for long distance trains from Copenhagen towards Gothenburg and Stockholm.
In this respect, the Europaspåret needs to be linked to the high-speed railway Lund
- Hässleholm. Within this scenario, it would cut the travel time from Stockholm to
Copenhagen, Hamburg and Berlin by 30 minutes, and it would reduce the journey
time from Gothenburg to Copenhagen, Hamburg and Berlin by 55 minutes. Further-
more, the fixed link between Copenhagen and Landskrona provides new opportunities
==PAGE:22==
1.5 Objectives and Research Questions
10
for the regional traffic, building a ring that creates the conditions for redundancy.
Thus, if the Europaspåret or the Øresund bridge need to be closed for maintenance,
one link can replace the other with travel times that do not exceed one hour. For
freight, the fixed link aims at managing the 90% increase due to the opening of the
Fehmarn Belt fixed link, giving continuity to the Scandinavian-Mediterranean Cor-
ridor. In this scenario, the railway tunnel, that will have to reach the Swedish cost,
will depart from Nordhavn with the aim to use the danish station as a train depot
and relieve pressure from Copenhagen central station [13].
1.5
Objectives and Research Questions
This study is motivated to contribute to the continued development of the Greater
Copenhagen. In this respect, there is always a quest of new and innovative transport
infrastructures in order to improve environmental impacts, reduce traffic congestion
and encourage regional connectivity. Therefore, the main objective of this thesis is to
identify the most suitable modelling framework for the prioritization of new transport
links across the Øresund in order to ensure the comparability of analyses.
The identified state-of-the-art DSS could help local government authorities to better
address research and designing of alternative mobility solutions in the Greater Copen-
hagen Area. Other stakeholders, such as municipalities or private companies, would
also benefit from the analysis conducted.
In working towards the objective, the following research questions have to be an-
swered:
• Which is the most suitable scenario that has to be prioritized in the Øresund
region?
• Can the theory of decision analysis be appropriate to assess major investment
projects?
• What is the analysis that should have the biggest influence?
==PAGE:23==
1.6 Thesis Framework
11
• What are the core criteria that should be included in a wider impact assessment?
Therefore, in line with the main objectives and research questions, the thesis is ex-
pected to contribute in the following:
• Theoretical contributions:
– Summary of the main DSSs and criteria/impacts affecting the assessment
of specific infrastructure projects.
– Potential future research.
• Methodological contributions:
– Proposing an approach developed in several steps to assess the main im-
pacts, including core criteria, and consistent literature review.
In this
methodology, the results of each assessment are mostly used as input for
the next one.
– Further model development.
• Practical contributions:
– Development of useful suggestions to create a state-of-the-art DSS.
– Discussion of criteria affecting the multi-criteria decision analysis, followed
by recommendations based on the thesis findings.
– Providing useful suggestions on survey design and methodology.
– A final ranking of the major infrastructure projects.
1.6
Thesis Framework
In working towards the objective, the thesis framework is summarized in Figure 1.7.
The literature review will first be presented, including an overview of the decision sup-
port tools: the traditional cost-benefit analysis, analysis methods in risk assessment,
==PAGE:24==
1.6 Thesis Framework
12
introduction of the main techniques offered by the multi-criteria decision analysis and
the composite assessment. Then, the methodology for the thesis is detailed, comprises
both the socio-economic appraisal and the analysis methods. After that, the results
of the analysis previously performed converge in the multi-criteria decision analysis.
With the help of a survey that involves the key stakeholders, the MCDA identifies and
estimates the criteria that are not addressed by the CBA and FRA modules, includ-
ing interesting insights. In parallel, the composite assessment reveals the outcomes of
the trade-off between CBA and MCDA. Subsequently, the discussion is dedicated to
summarize and at the same time debate the results. Finally, a conclusion including
recommendations and insights for future work is given.
==PAGE:25==
1.6 Thesis Framework
13
Figure 1.7: Thesis Framework.
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 2
Literature review
The literature review was split into four sections. First, the Cost-Benefit Analysis
was introduced to appraise new infrastructure investments, using welfare economic
analysis to evaluate the several impacts in terms of monetary unit.
Second, the
Risk Assessment framework is explained to deal with the uncertainties that affect
investment projects. Then, the Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis that incorporates
the full range of criteria.
Finally, the Composite Assessment is presented as a
decision support system that combines CBA with MCDA.
2.1
Socio-Economic Appraisal
The Cost-Benefit Analysis (CBA) is an important tool for the assessment of economic
impacts within major infrastructure projects. The purpose of the CBA is to facilitate
a more efficient allocation of funds, in order to provide a neutral point of view to the
society in terms of benefits and costs generated by a transport project. Therefore, the
CBA is considered necessary for the decision-making processes by the EU, concerning
the fund allocation procedures in operational programmes (OPs) of the European
Regional Development Fund (ERDF) and the Cohesion Fund [22].
2.1.1
Benefit determination – Rule of a Half
The Rule of a Half bases its principles on the consideration that, without the infras-
tructure project, non-travelling users Willingness To Pay (WTP) is lower than the
(prior) generalised cost of transport. After the opening of the project, the new gener-
alised cost is lower, thus new users decide to use the transport infrastructure to travel
[22].
As an example, consider the users’ demand Q, for travel on a given origin-destination
(O-D) relation. The demand depends by some factors (e.g.: ticket price, travel time,
==PAGE:27==
2.1 Socio-Economic Appraisal
15
etc.) that are combined in a generalised cost GC. As illustrated in Figure 2.1, the
society demand is represented with the red demand curve. In the initial situation, the
generalised cost is equal to GC1 with of Q1 existing users. In the case of a renewal
of the infrastructure, with significantly decreasing of travel time, the generalised cost
will decrease to GC2, resulting in an increase of users’ demand of Q2. In this regard,
the initial users will experience an improvement in supply condition, through a cost
reduction of GC1-GC2. Therefore, each of the existing users will acquire a benefit of
this size, with a total benefit described by the blue area in Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Estimation of the increase in users’ surplus with the Rule of Half [23].
Furthermore, the improvement in supply condition will generate new travelling-users,
that will benefit from half the reduction in generalised costs (GC1-GC2). As a result,
the green area in Figure 2.1 represents the increase in surplus for the new users. Then,
the change in consumers’ surplus (CS) can be expressed by the equation 2.1, where
the demand curve is indicated with D:
∆CS =
∫GC1
GC2
D(GC)dGC
(2.1)
When the cost changes are not ‘extremely big’ it can be assumed that the demand
==PAGE:28==
2.1 Socio-Economic Appraisal
16
curve is linear between GC1 and GC2. Therefore, the ”Rule of a Half” can be defined
by the equation 2.2:
RoH = 1
2 · (GC1 −GC2) · (Q2 + Q1)
(2.2)
2.1.2
Profitability Indicators
Transport infrastructure projects evolve over the years including benefits and costs.
Normally, the years that precede the opening of the infrastructure are characterized
by net cost, on the other hand, after the inauguration of the project, due to an
increase of traffic, the benefits are multiple. This is illustrated in Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: The development of costs (red) and benefits (blue) over time [24].
Therefore, the development of costs and benefits over the year can be summarized by
economic index values. The profitability indicators are the following:
• Net Present Value (NPV);
• Internal Rate of Return (IRR);
• Benefit-Cost Ratio (B/C-Rate).
==PAGE:29==
2.1 Socio-Economic Appraisal
17
The Net Present Value is the sum of the present value of all the benefits Bt minus
the costs Ct in the time horizon T. As shown in the equation 2.3, the present value is
calculated by dividing the results of benefits and costs in the year t by the discount
factor (1+r)t, where r is the discount rate, with r > 0.
The discount rates are
determined by the Ministry of Finance. In Denmark, since May 2013 it has been 4%
for a time horizon of 35 years, 3% for year 36-70, and 2% after 70 years of assessment
[24].
NPV =
T
∑
t=0
Bt −Ct
(1 + r)t
(2.3)
The purpose of the NPV index is to indicate the actual size of a project in terms of
profitability, with a minimum acceptable value equal to NPV > 0.
The Internal Rate of Return (equation 2.4) is defined as that discount rate which
equates a NPV of 0.
T
∑
t=0
(Bt −Ct) · (1 + IRR)−t = 0
(2.4)
Higher is the value of IRR, better is the examined project. But on the other hand, it
is difficult to utilize it in ranking alternatives. Frequently, the rankings established by
the IRR indicator are considered inconsistent with those of the NPV and B/C-Rate
criteria [25].
The last profitability indicator is the Benefit-Cost Ratio. As shown in the equation
2.5, the index measures the sum of the present value of all the benefits and costs
generated in the time horizon T.
B/C −rate =
∑T
t=0
Bt
(1+r)t
∑T
t=0
Ct
(1+r)t
(2.5)
==PAGE:30==
2.2 Risk Assessment
18
If the value of the index is bigger than 1, it means that the project is feasible in terms
of profitability. The purpose of the indicator is to perform a raking of the alternatives
when they are independent between them [24]. Alternatively, when a selection must
be done between competing projects that are mutually dependent the B/C rate fails
[26]. In these cases, a combination of both NPV and B/C-rate criteria can be applied.
2.1.3
Pros and Cons of the CBA
The main advantage of the CBA is to summarize all the aggregate impacts into
an absolute monetary measure through profitability indicators. In this respect, the
methodology provides the investment criteria that make comparable the variety of
alternatives. In effect, the CBA requires a detailed collection of data that express the
socio-economic costs and benefits of each item, in order to assess the welfare change
attributable to them. On the other hand, the socio-economic approach has certain
limitations. The main problem is determined by ‘false’ transparency due to a wrong
estimate of prices for non-marketed impacts (e.g.: travel time savings, environmental
benefits, safety) [24]. Subsequently, another weakness is constituted by the difficulty
to convert intangible impacts, that are almost impossible to estimate, into monetary
values. These are effects focused more on long-term or strategic nature, as for example
water pollution or loss of biodiversity in terms of environmental impacts [27]. Finally,
another limitation is represented by the ’moral problem’ in the assessment of long
term impacts. In effect, the evaluations are made by the current generations, which
could not live the standard 50 years of assessment performed after that a transport
infrastructure opens for traffic [24].
2.2
Risk Assessment
The results provided by the CBA, are influenced by several assumptions, which might
have different degrees of uncertainty. In this respect, the risk analysis is used as a
tool to evaluate how often specified events may occur and the magnitude of their con-
sequences. As illustrated in Figure 2.3, the risk assessment incorporates the CBA and
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Risk Assessment
19
the Quantitative Risk Analysis (QRA), that are directly linked with the Feasibility
Risk Assessment (FRA).
Figure 2.3: The Risk Assessment framework.
In transport infrastructure investments, the QRA aims at modifying the determinis-
tic nature of the assessment by replacing the uncertain inputs with the probability
distribution function (PDF) of the most significant input values [26]. Therefore, it is
possible to estimate the probability distribution of the profitability indicators through
the statistical indicators. The most widely used analysis is the Monte Carlo Simula-
tion (MCS), which involves a random sampling method based on different probability
distributions selected for the model set-up [26].
As a consequence, the Feasibility Risk Assessment aims at merging the CBA and
the QRA, making the risk analysis transparent and practical in use for the decision
maker. The main task of the FRA is to produce a set of ’certainty graphs’ which
establish the probability of achieving a profitable project [28].
2.2.1
Monte Carlo Simulation
The Monte Carlo Simulation is a computerized mathematical technique for analyzing
complex decision making problems. The risk analysis performed by the MCS aims
==PAGE:32==
2.2 Risk Assessment
20
to build models of possible outcomes, by replacing a range of values (PDF) for any
uncertain input. Then, the simulation is performed, by computing several iterations,
each time using a different set of random values from the input distributions [29]. As
a result, the MCS produces distributions of possible outcome values. Moreover, in
the context of transport projects, the Monte Carlo Simulation is considered stochastic
[26].
Probability distributions are the most realistic way of describing uncertain inputs.
Therefore, it is crucial to use the most suitable probability distributions based on the
input features. As an example, interpreting the level of knowledge (LoK) of the un-
certain variable. The most common probability distributions in transport investment
appraisal are the following:
• Normal distribution: it is one of the most used distribution. The mean (µ) and
the standard deviation (σ) are the parameters that describe the distribution.
The normal distribution can be applied on the travel time savings (TTS) effect
[26].
• PERT distribution: it is based on the definition of the minimum, maximum
and most likely values. However, the values located between the most likely
and extremes are more likely to occur than in the triangular distribution. The
LoK of the data inputs has to be medium or high, because the expected resulting
value will be close to the most likely estimate. The distribution can be applied
to the maintenance costs and travel time savings [26].
• Erlang distribution: it is a generalization of the exponential and gamma dis-
tributions. The parameters of the distributions are the shape k, which is an
integer, and a scale θ parameter, which is a real. The distribution can be imple-
mented in the Quantitative Risk Analysis of the construction cost, due to the
goodness of fit arising from the use of Chi-squared statistics [29]. Generally, the
distribution function towards railway projects is fitted with a k shape parameter
of 23 [26].
==PAGE:33==
2.3 Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis
21
2.3
Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis
As illustrated in the subsection 2.1.3, one of the weakness of the CBA consists in
converting some impacts in monetary measure, thus the need to perform a separate
analysis more focused on the assessment of these impacts. In this respect, the de-
ficiency of the CBA in the transport appraisal was compensated by integrating the
Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis (MCDA). The MCDA includes a list of techniques
used to choose alternatives according to a set of different criteria and their relative
‘weights’. In this regard, the MCDA is appropriate to pursue a comprehensive assess-
ment of several projects, rather than for the appraisal of a single investment [30].
2.3.1
The SASI model
The EUNET report has identified the SASI model as a pragmatic approach, because
it does not require a large collection of data on socio-economic distributions or on
travel patterns. The SASI methodology is used to conduct analysis on large trans-
port investments in Europe, especially concerning future scenarios of the TEN-T
network [31]. The particularity of this approach is the incorporation of the CBA as
an additional criterion in the model [28]. Moreover, as illustrated in Figure 2.4, the
other sub-models included in the SASI framework are: European Developments, Re-
gional Accessibility, Regional GDP, Regional Employment, Regional Population and
Regional Labour Force.
The advantages of this model consist in a comprehensive geographical coverage of the
EU area, that makes it suitable for the appraisal of the railway network effects.
2.3.2
Main Techniques
The most common techniques in the MCDA are the following:
• SMART (Simple Multi Attribute Rating Technique): it relies on a linear ad-
ditive model. Therefore, the overall value of a certain alternative is the result
of the total sum of the assigned direct scores for each alternatives multiplied
==PAGE:34==
2.3 Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis
22
Figure 2.4: The SASI model [31].
by the direct weight of each criteria [32]. In this respect, the SMART method
adopt a similar approach to that previously introduced by the CBA [30]. On
the other hand, this methodology requires a high level of knowledge for all the
criteria/alternatives taken into account.
• SMARTER (Simple Multi Attribute Rating Technique Exploiting Ranks): it
is a further development of the SMART technique.
This approach consists
in ranking the criteria in order of priority and assign pre-determined weights
based on the importance covered by that criterion [33]. Based on the probability
theory, the rank order distribution (ROD) weights are ordinarily applied [28].
The only precaution is represented by the number of criteria, that should not
exceed 10 [30].
==PAGE:35==
2.3 Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis
23
• AHP (Analytic Hierarchy Process): this method compares the alternatives in
a pair-wise way and assign the weights according to the AHP scale (from 1
to 9) [30]. Firstly, the decision-makers develop a pair-wise comparisons of the
assessment criteria. Secondly, the values obtained for each criterion by the pair-
wise methodology are placed in so-called comparison matrix and through the
geometric method all the values are standardized [30]. The comparison matrix
A, where w1, w2,..,wn are the weights used in the comparisons, is shown below:
A =


w1
w1
w1
w2
· · ·
w1
wn
w2
w1
w2
w2
· · ·
w2
wn
...
...
...
...
wn
w1
wn
w2
· · ·
wn
wn


(2.6)
Thirdly, the same approach is applied for the alternatives scenarios examined.
Then, calculations are performed for each project by summing the product of the
criteria weight and the project contribution [30]. Finally, the MCDA method-
ology defines the final scores and the ranking of the alternatives. Based on its
structure, the AHP technique has wide applications both in transport planning
and economics [30]. In addition, a further development of this methodology
is represented by the multiplicative AHP, called REMBRANDT. The REM-
BRANDT technique differs for three main reasons from the standard AHP.
The direct rating is performed on a geometric scale, the weights are calculated
with the geometric mean method and the aggregation of scores is the result of
the product of alternative relative scores weighted by the power of weights ob-
tained from analysis of hierarchical elements above the alternatives [30]. This
approach is highly recommended where the alternatives are poorly described
[34].
Furthermore, the REMBRANDT methodology adopt a different inten-
sive scale, that goes from 0 (when it is stated no preference) to 8 (very strong
preference) [30].
==PAGE:36==
2.4 Composite Assessment
24
2.3.3
Pros and Cons of the MCDA
The main strength represented by the MCDA is the overcoming of the majority of the
measurement problems. In this respect, the methodology provides the quantification
of all criteria into monetary units.
Furthermore, another advantage concerns the
direct involvement of the stakeholders with the purpose to determine the criteria
and criteria weights. On the other hand, the MCDA methodology is characterized by
some limitations. Firstly, the approach is a tool for comparative assessment, it cannot
measure the ”goodness” of the project similarly to what occurs in the CBA through
the profitability indicators [30]. In addition, there could be issues with the scoring of
criteria weights. In effect, the decision makers need to be guided to understand the
importance of their stated weights in the examination process for setting the ranking
criteria.
2.4
Composite Assessment
Different decision support tools are adopted by countries and organizations. However,
they can be classified as CBA-based or MCDA-based frameworks. The composite
assessment with the ”COSIMA DSS” aims to formulate a total value (TV) expressed
both on CBA and MCDA. This methodology is applicable when the decision makers
are unsure if the necessary conditions are fulfilled, and consequently the MCDA is
used as a supplement to the CBA [30].
In this respect, a project alternative Ak
is better depicted by a TV(Ak), which provides a more complete picture for the
decision making, rather than a profitability indicator from the CBA [35]. Therefore,
the methodology emphasizes the MCDA approach as complementary to the CBA,
and it can be expressed by the following equation [36]:
TV (Ak) = CBA(Ak) + MCDA(Ak)
(2.7)
The formulation of COSIMA, introduced by the equation 2.7, is characterized by the
novelty to evaluate a project non looking exclusively at the socio-economic point of
==PAGE:37==
2.4 Composite Assessment
25
view. In effect, if in the CBA, the investment in Ak is equal or smaller than the
investment cost (Ck), the project is not considered feasible in socio-economic terms.
Alternatively, if the total value of Ak is bigger than the investment cost (TV(Ak)>Ck),
the project can be considered practicable from a wider perspective [35]. Another way
to express the same concept is the total rate of return (TRR), where the total value
is divided by the investment cost incurred by the project, as shown in the equation
2.8.
TRR(Ak) = TV (Ak)
Ck
= 1
Ck
= 1 ·


I
∑
i=1
Vi(Xik) + α ·


J
∑
j=1
wj · V Fj(Yjk)




(2.8)
where Vi(Xik) is the value in monetary units for the CBA impact i for alternative k,
alpha (α) is a parameter that expresses the calibration between CBA and MCDA in
the model, wj is the weight that expresses the level of priority of the MCDA criterion
j and VFj(Yjk) is a value function of the MCDA criterion j for alternative k [30].
Hence, if the value of the TRR(Ak) is bigger than 1, the alternative Ak is considered
attractive in its entirety.
As highlighted by the equation 2.7 and 2.8, one of the main difficulties of COSIMA is
the conversion of both CBA and MCDA in the same unit of measure. If the determi-
nation of the Vi(Xik) for the CBA can be performed according to the socio-economic
analysis, the impacts of the MCDA are hard to quantify for the value function. There-
fore, the objective of the COSIMA is to ensure a clear and exhaustive approach that
leads to the determination of pertinent values for alpha, wj and VFj(Yjk) [30].
2.4.1
Calibration of COSIMA
As introduced in this section, the COSIMA approach aims to merge two different
methodologies as the CBA and the MCDA. The balance between CBA and MCDA is
expressed by the alpha (α) parameter. This coefficient aims to change the influence
of the MCDA, in terms of percentage, on the TRR [30]. Therefore, the value of alpha
==PAGE:38==
2.4 Composite Assessment
26
is set to determine the MCDA% according to the following equation 2.9:
MCDA% = 100 ·
∑
j Bj
∑
i Bi + ∑
j Bj
(2.9)
where Bi= ∑
k∈K bik and Bj= ∑
k∈K bjk are respectively the value elements for each
CBA effect i and MCDA criterion j summed over the k alternatives [35]. In this
respect, a parameter for the calibration is required, known as UPj, which operates as
a shadow price in order to obtain bjk [30], as shown in the equation 2.10:
bjk = V Fj(Yjk) · UPj
(2.10)
Consequently, the shadow price represents a function of the criteria weights, the alpha
parameter and the sum of the value function scores used for the alternatives in the
MCDA [35].
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 3
Socio-economic appraisal
This section includes the preliminary assessment to analyze the major transport
infrastructures across the Øresund. First, the Cost-Benefit Analysis is performed
for each alternative. Then, the Feasibility Risk Assessment is needed to evaluate
uncertainties in demand forecasts and estimations of construction costs. The overall
goal of the chapter is to identify the socio-economically alternative most sound.
3.1
Cost-Benefit Analysis
The CBA is traditionally included in any transport project appraisal.
Therefore,
this analytical tool was used with the aim to take investment decisions by assessing
costs and benefits for each new transport links from Denmark to Sweden.
Since
establishing a fixed link across the Øresund is a joint Danish/Swedish project, it is
necessary to adopt a common approach in terms of unit prices values and factors. For
simplicity, the calculations are performed with Danish unit prices values and input
factors.
In this regard, a set of fixed parameters (see Table 3.1) cover the socio-
economic evaluations in order to assess the welfare change attributable to them.
Input Factor
Coefficient (%)
Price growth (GDP/cap)
0.9%
Net taxation factor
28%
Tax distortion rate
10%
Table 3.1: Input factors recommended by the Danish Ministry of Finance [37].
Following the trend in the Danish GDP/cap, the price growth is forecasted to grow
by 0.9% per year from 2020 onwards [38]. All the social implications are measured
in monetary impacts converted in 2020-prices through the trend in ”Net Price In-
dex” [39]. Furthermore, the factor prices are transformed into market prices by using
==PAGE:40==
3.1 Cost-Benefit Analysis
28
the net taxation factor. According to the Danish Ministry of Finance, this factor is
set to 28% [37]. Additionally, because generally taxation applied to the infrastruc-
ture projects lead to distortion of economic activities, in accordance to the Danish
standards, the tax distortion rate is included in the CBA with a value of 10% [37].
Moreover, it is important to emphasize that in the case of the HH fixed link, the
regional railway line (alternative 1) was chosen between the different scenarios listed
in Table 1.1, in order to ensure comparability with the other major infrastructure
projects taken into account. In this respect, the three new transport links are respec-
tively the rail tunnel between Helsingør and Helsingborg, the Metro from Copenhagen
to Malmö C and the rail tunnel that links Copenhagen with Landskrona. Finally, it
is assumed that each project will open in 2035.
3.1.1
HH Fixed Link Scenario
The socio-economic analysis of the HH connection performed over the years, are
the focal point of professional and political debate. Based on previous studies, the
passenger train constitutes the alternative with the lowest socio-economic profitability
[18]. The amount of the construction costs is estimated at DKK 18 billion, as a result
of two sub-costs.
First, the DKK 15 billion mentioned in the latest IBU update
report (in 2020 prices) [40], they are the sum of the tunnel, ramp and bridges, railway
technology, mechanical and electrical installations, expansion of the Helsingør station
and design costs [17]. Second, the addition of a further cost from the Swedish side:
the hinterland infrastructure Maria - Helsingborg C [41]. The construction period of
the permanent link, located in the northern Øresund, is assumed to be approximately
6 years. For operation and maintenance costs are assumed 1.2% of the total capital
per year [18]. The traffic is expected to grow with a trend of 1.7% per year [18].
The time horizon for the calculation is 50 years from the opening year (2035) with a
discount rate of 3% according to the Danish Ministry of Finance.
==PAGE:41==
3.1 Cost-Benefit Analysis
29
Principal items
Billions of DKK, 2020 prices
Construction costs
-19.99
Scrap value
4.23
Maintenance costs
-9.87
Operation (incl. ticket revenue), train
21.06
Operation (incl. ticket revenue), road
-0.48
Tax revenue, state
-5.90
User Benefits
7.90
Environmental benefits
11.64
Distortion loss
-0.09
NPV
8.51
B/C rate
1.43
IRR
4%
Table 3.2: CBA of the HH Fixed Link.
As shown in Table 3.2, the project will mostly be user-financed through ”ticket rev-
enue”. Furthermore, in terms of user benefits, the ”travel time savings” show the
benefits of this strategic railway line that aims to link two cities that have been al-
ways interconnected for economic and cultural reasons. It is equally important to
highlight the large ”environmental benefits” of the infrastructure, mainly due to a
decrease of ferry rides across the strait. On the other hand, the construction cost
totalled approximately DKK 20 billion and it is assumed that the cost of construc-
tion is distributed equally over the construction period (2029-2035). Moreover, the
estimated Øresund bridge loss is equal to DKK 484 million; in the absence of data,
the assumption was based on the 10% of travellers that should shift from the Øresund
bridge to the HH link according to the data collected by the ”Øresundbro Konsor-
tiet” [6]. Some externalities, identified with the distortion loss, cause a loss of DKK
91.7 million in the CBA. Other external effects, such as accidents and noise, are not
included in this analysis, due to a lack of data concerning these items.
The results of the cost-benefit analysis underline the suitability of the link across the
northern Øresund. In effect, the NPV has a positive impact of DKK 8.51 billion
(EUR 1.14 billion) and the B/C rate is bigger than 1, indicating that the benefits are
greater than the costs.
==PAGE:42==
3.1 Cost-Benefit Analysis
30
Figure 3.1: Overview of costs and benefits in the HH fixed link scenario.
3.1.2
Øresund Metro Scenario
Based on preliminary studies performed by ”Incentive Partners”, the Øresund Metro
has been assessed through a cost-benefit analysis. ”Incentive Partners” has evaluated
the infrastructure in three different scenarios, assuming the traffic growth as a vari-
able factor that can make changes. The ’original scenario’, ’scenario 1’ and ’scenario
2’ were characterized respectively by a traffic growth equal to 2%, 1% and a vari-
able percentage, that goes from 3% in the opening year to 0 in the last year of the
assessment [42]. The original scenario is considered the most realistic analysis due
to the large increase of commuters that will choose the Metro mode choice. In this
respect, the socio-economic analysis was conducted on a standard evaluation period
of 50 years, with a discount rate equal to 3% according to the Danish Ministry of
Finance and traffic growth that amounts to 2% in the period from 2035 to 2084.
==PAGE:43==
3.1 Cost-Benefit Analysis
31
Principal items
Billions of DKK, 2020 prices
Construction costs
-22.89
Scrap value
4.77
Maintenance costs
-14.68
Operation (incl. ticket revenue), train
24.95
Operation (incl. ticket revenue), road
-2.38
Tax revenue, state
-5.66
User Benefits
12.63
Environmental benefits
0.06
Accidents
0.14
Distortion loss
-0.92
NPV
-3.97
B/C rate
0.83
IRR
2.5%
Table 3.3: CBA of the Øresund Metro.
As shown in Table 3.3, the construction costs are valued at approximately DKK 23
billion [21]. The increase in maintenance costs (compared to the present situation)
are set to 300 million DKK per year according to ”Incentive Partners” [42]. Another
important cost consists in the loss of ticket revenue (DKK 2.38 billion) as a result of
users transfer from the Øresund bridge [42]. However, except for the great expense
allocated to the construction and maintenance costs, the benefits are multiple. The
cost-benefit analysis estimates a large impact in terms of ”user benefits” through sig-
nificant travel time savings, along with a significant expansion of the labour market
from the city centres of Copenhagen/Malmö. An additional income is represented by
the ”operation” item, the ticket revenue is estimated approximately DKK 20 billion
in the time horizon of the first 50 years [21], and the operation costs enable annual
savings equal to DKK 4.75 billion, for a total value of nearly DKK 25 billion. How-
ever, the saving costs attributable to the operations have been subject to alterations
compared to the analysis provided by ”Incentive Partners”. The ”Incentive Partners”
analysis proposed an average running distance of 140 km covered by one EMU (Elec-
tric Multiple Unit) on the Øresund bridge railway line [43]. In contrast with that,
the savings of 2 EMUs (compared with the present 3 EMUs) would lead to significant
==PAGE:44==
3.1 Cost-Benefit Analysis
32
problems in terms of train capacity. In effect, it would be unfeasible to transport
all the commuters that journey from/to Copenhagen H with the Øresund Metro, by
considering a maximum capacity of 250 passengers per EMU. Therefore, in the analy-
sis was performed an interpolation, considering a realistic covered distance of 40 km,
instead of 140 km.
Figure 3.2: Overview of costs and benefits in the Øresund Metro scenario.
According to the profitability indicators, the Øresund Metro has a socio-economic
impact of DKK -3.97 billions (EUR -533 million) in net present value of DKK in
2020-prices. In this scenario, the NPV presents a negative value, which indicates
that the costs are larger than the benefits of the project. In addition, the B/C rate
underlines how the benefits do not support the high cost rate of the infrastructure,
thus the Øresund Metro is considered infeasible from an economic perspective.
3.1.3
Europaspåret Scenario
The Europaspåret project is deemed the most expensive infrastructure in terms of
construction costs. Overall, the investment costs are estimated at approximately 35
==PAGE:45==
3.1 Cost-Benefit Analysis
33
billions of DKK [13] to realize the tunnel infrastructure across the strait. In addition,
it is assumed a construction period of 6 years, thus the constructions could begin in
2029 and the Europaspåret could open in 2035. The operation and maintenance costs
are estimated 1.2% of the investment capital per year, similar to what already done
in the cost-benefit analysis of the HH link. Moreover, the socio-economic appraisal
assume a traffic growth of 1.5% [44] over a 50-year period of calculation with a discount
rate of 3%.
Principal items
Billions of DKK, 2020 prices
Construction costs
-38.89
Scrap value
8.23
Maintenance costs
-18.33
Operation (incl. ticket revenue), train
54.14
Operation (incl. ticket revenue), road
-1.36
Tax revenue, state
-15.16
User Benefits
23.35
Environmental benefits
2.71
Distortion loss
1.16
NPV
15.84
B/C rate
1.41
IRR
4.1%
Table 3.4: CBA of the Europaspåret.
As shown in the Table 3.4, the construction costs make the Europaspåret the most ex-
pensive project in terms of investment. Approximately DKK 39 billion are estimated
to cover the 19 kilometers that stretches from the new station of Copenhagen C to the
municipality of Landskrona [13]. The loss of income generate by the ticket revenue of
the Øresund bridge is around DKK 1.36 billion; in the absence of data, the assumption
was based on the calculation performed for the Øresund metro in the scenario of 1%
traffic growth. It was agreed a shift of 70% users on the Copenhagen-Landskrona con-
nection. On the other hand, in terms of benefits, the infrastructure is distinguished
for the high incomes due to the ticket revenue (DKK 54.14 billion), user benefits
(DKK 23.35 billion) and environmental benefits (DKK 2.71 billion). The last two
items are characterized by the strategic location of the railway in the Scandinavian-
==PAGE:46==
3.1 Cost-Benefit Analysis
34
Mediterranean corridor. In effect, it is estimated that the Europaspåret is the only
one alternative that shows significant travel time improvements in the whole region of
the the Greater Copenhagen. In addition, large investment projects commissioned by
the EU through the CEF fund have the aim to reduce air traffic across the continent,
promoting a more sustainable mobility represented by the TEN-T networks.
Figure 3.3: Overview of costs and benefits in the Europaspåret scenario.
In accordance with the investment criteria, the NPV amounts to DKK 15.84 billions
(EUR 2.13 billions), in large part influenced by benefits such as ”ticket revenue” and
”consumer surplus”. Furthermore, the B/C rate support a value above 1, highlighting
the high profitability of the transport link between the cities of Copenhagen and
Landskrona.
3.1.4
Socio-Economic Results
The results of the CBA clearly show that the Europaspåret and the HH fixed link
are the only feasible alternatives if the decision would be based exclusively on mon-
etary impacts. In effect, the Øresund Metro requires financial support due to the
==PAGE:47==
3.1 Cost-Benefit Analysis
35
negative value of the NPV and the BC-rate below 1. The most profitable projects are
represented by the Europaspåret according to the NPV indicator, and on the other
side, the HH fixed link according to the BC-rate index. In addition, another perfor-
mance indicator that needs attention is the IRR. As illustrated in Figure 3.4, the
internal rate of the HH fixed link and the Europaspåret differs for a small percentage
value. Therefore, based on the IRR index, both investments are equally convenient
in financial terms, despite differing net-present values.
Figure 3.4: Comparison of two alternatives by use the NPV and IRR indicators.
To further explore the socio-economic assessment, it is important to highlight some
simplifications that have been made. Firstly, it is significant to underline that the
potential EU grants allocated for each alternatives are not included in the assessment.
The choice was based on the difficulties in the calculations of the CEF fund distri-
bution. Between the various scenarios, the Europaspåret would be definitively the
alternative with the highest allocation of the EU funds. Being the only infrastructure
that fits into the ”Core Network” of the TEN-T, the Europaspåret aims at receiving
almost 40% of the EU grant allowed to support the costs of railway construction fa-
==PAGE:48==
3.2 Risk Analysis
36
cilities [13]. In this respect, the EU grant would be estimated greater than 10 billions
of DKK, an investment powered by the European Commission comparable only with
other major strategic infrastructure placed along the Scandinavian-Mediterranean cor-
ridor, like the Øresund bridge or the Fehmarn Belt. As regards the other alternatives,
the EU grant estimated for the Øresund Metro would be approximately 10% of the
total construction costs [43], while it remains uncertain the allocation of funds for the
HH fixed link [17]. Secondly, another major limitation is the non-implementation of
the TERESA model that is considered mandatory for each CBA in Denmark. The
TERESA model was not used due to the high complexity and the language of the
model (danish); on the other hand, it would constitute an advantage in accuracy
terms due to the highest fidelity of the taxation module. Thirdly, the analysis that
originated the data inputs used in each scenario are partially obsolete. Therefore,
it would be relevant to consider new cost-benefit analysis, performed more recently.
Finally, there is the risk that some socio-economic appraisals used in the CBA section
might be ”politicized”, because commissioned by stakeholders like municipalities.
3.2
Risk Analysis
The feasibility risk assessment of infrastructure investments is considered a necessary
step to estimate the certainty values (CV) of the profitability indicators obtained in
the CBA. This analysis is conducted post evaluation studies on the different scenar-
ios, focusing in particular on the overestimating transport-demand benefits and on
the underestimating construction costs. In order to perform the FRA, the software
”@RISK” has to be downloaded.
In effect, the software enables to set the differ-
ent probability distribution functions for the uncertain inputs, with the purpose to
perform a Monte Carlo Simulation. The only input factors that can be considered
accurate are the discount rate, the net taxation factor and the tax distortion rate.
All of them are parameters set by the Danish Ministry of Finance and are therefore
not subject to change. Furthermore, the construction period can be equally assumed
as an accurate input factor, mainly because is an integer value and does not affect
directly the socio-economic evaluation.
==PAGE:49==
3.2 Risk Analysis
37
3.2.1
Quantitative Risk Analysis
The simulation software used in this analysis, ”@RISK”, presents a total of 31 con-
tinuous and 8 discrete probability distribution functions (PDF). As mentioned above,
for each uncertain input is assigned a probability distribution function. The PDFs
are assigned based on the recommendations provided in the literature review (see
subsection 2.2.1) and on the level of knowledge (LoK) of each item.
The price growth is represented with a normal distribution due to the high LoK of
the item. In the same way, the normal distribution is set for the traffic growth (see
Figure 3.5), especially since this distribution is considered suitable in interpreting
uncertainties in the traffic models [26]. The value presented in the CBA is considered
the mean (µ) and the standard deviation (σ) of the price growth and traffic growth is
set respectively 3% and 1%. The σ of the price growth was calculated based on the
values in the period 2010-2030 [38]. Differently, the σ of the traffic growth was derived
considering 0 as lower boundary (the traffic is expected to grow) of 90% confidence
interval (CI).
Figure 3.5: Normal distribution for the traffic growth of the HH fixed link.
==PAGE:50==
3.2 Risk Analysis
38
Mode
Impact
Distribution
Min.
Max.
Railway
Construction costs
Erlang (k=23)
≈-40%
≈120%
Railway
Demand forecast
PERT
≈-90%
≈140%
Table 3.5: Probability distributions in railway infrastructure projects [28].
According to the literature, the Erlang distribution is applied to the construction
costs, as shown in Figure 3.6. Furthermore, the high LoK of the impact makes this
distribution more suitable. The distribution function towards railway project is fitted
with k = 23 [26] and µ is determined by the equation 3.1, where the most likely value
is the price used in the CBA, and the minimum and the maximum are calculated
according to the Table 3.5. Moreover, the relationship to the scale θ parameter is
found by the equation 3.2.
µ = (min. + 2.9 · ML + max.)
4.9
(3.1)
θ = µ
k
(3.2)
In this respect, it is noted that the applicability of the Erlang distribution in ”@RISK”
is subject to the variation of the scale (θ) and shape parameter (k).
Based on a medium-high LoK due to the proximity to the most likely value, and
according to the literature, the PERT distribution type is applied to all the other
inputs of the CBA (e.g.: time savings, maintenance costs, ticket revenue, etc.). As
shown in Table 3.5, the approximated range of the probability distribution function is
set between -90% and 140%, which results in a relatively high standard deviation of
about 52%. Therefore, as illustrated in Figure 3.7, each uncertain input with PERT
distribution has data points fitted as:
RiskPERT(−90%; −37%; 140%)
(3.3)
==PAGE:51==
3.2 Risk Analysis
39
Figure 3.6: Erlang distribution for the investment costs in the Europaspåret.
where the most likely of -37% [28] reveals an overestimation of the static values used
in the cost-benefit analysis for the items concerned.
Figure 3.7: PERT distribution for the time savings of the Øresund Metro.
==PAGE:52==
3.2 Risk Analysis
40
3.2.2
Feasibility Risk Assessment
Merging the cost-benefit with the quantitative risk analysis enables a more compre-
hensive type of assessment. In this respect, the feasibility risk assessment has the task
to generate a set of ’certainty graphs’ which establish the probability of achieving a
feasible project in economic terms. Based on the probability distribution functions
previously set in the QRA, the B/C-rate was used as uncertain output parameter
subjected to the Monte Carlo Simulation. The choice of the B/C-rate as profitability
indicator took place because the projects are independent between them and are not
subject to budget constraints [24].
Figure 3.8: Certainty graph for the transport link alternatives across the Øresund.
The outcome of the MCS performed with ”@RISK” is illustrated in Figure 3.8, where
all the three different scenarios are depicted.
The accumulated descending graph
(ADG) shows the likelihood of achieving a B/C-rate above 1. In effect, the intersec-
tion between the vertical line passing through the x-value of 1 and the ADG of each
scenario detects the cut-off limit in terms of “feasibility”, in which lower values imply
an infeasible alternative in terms of socio-economic robustness. However, none of the
==PAGE:53==
3.2 Risk Analysis
41
three alternatives examined is 100% certain of being socio-economically feasible. As
shown in the Table 3.8, the certainty graph of the HH fixed link indicates 47% cer-
tainty that the investment is feasible, the Øresund Metro ADG exhibits the minimum
value nearly 28% and the Europaspåret estimates approximately a certainty value of
43%. Therefore, according to the simulation outputs, the infrastructure project that
shows the best socio-economic robustness is the HH fixed link. With a similar score,
the European track also is considered a valuable alternative. Finally, with the lowest
CV the metro is dismissed by the FRA.
Alternative
BCR
CV (%)
HH Fixed Link
1.43
47%
Øresund Metro
0.83
28%
Europaspåret
1.41
43%
Table 3.6: Profitability indicators and certainty values (CV) for the alternatives.
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 4
Methodological Framework
This section details the process to build the MCDA model.
The methodology is
described, consisting of the survey design, and the analysis methods, including the
weighting of the assessment criteria and the pair-wise comparisons between the
alternatives. After that, a new prioritization for the transport links is proposed.
4.1
The Methodological Process
The proposed and applied methodological framework is presented. In order to reach
the objectives of the research, the methodological process is divided into 5 steps
that are required to perform adequately the multi-criteria decision analysis.
The
methodological process is shown in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Proposed methodological process.
Firstly, it is important to introduce the concepts and the methodology used to perform
the analysis in simple terms in Step 1. Therefore, the literature review is the ideal
tool to help to familiarize with the MCDA techniques and their adaptation that will
be shown in next steps. Secondly, in Step 2 the assessment criteria are identified and
included in the examination process. In this respect, the SASI model can be used to
implement the most consistent impacts based on the evaluation scenario. Once all
relevant criteria are defined, the Step 3 can take place. At this point in the process,
==PAGE:55==
4.2 Description of Criteria
43
the survey is introduced with the purpose to reach and involve the key stakeholders
in the decision process, asking them to rank the criteria in order of importance. The
outcome of the survey will be elaborated to obtain the weighting of the assessment
criteria. This step is considered the most subjective part of the appraisal. The Step 4
comprises the scoring of the alternatives according to the criteria. In this part of the
process, the pair wise comparisons are performed in order to determine the respective
scores. After determining the weights of the criteria and deriving separate scores for
the alternatives, the Step 5 with the validation of results represents the last stage of
the process. In the last step, the ranking, as a result of the previous evaluations, is
introduced and discussed.
4.2
Description of Criteria
This case study, circumscribes a transnational scenario, in effect the new transport
link involves the Greater Copenhagen area and partially affect the TEN-T. Therefore,
the findings of the literature review indicate the need to identify a list of criteria with
the aim of pursuing simultaneously different policy objectives within the MCDA. In
this respect, the criteria implemented are mainly identified in the SASI model [31].
Criterion
C1
Socio-economic robustness
C2
Contribution to EU green corridors
C3
Accessibility
C4
Impact on land-use
C5
Increased capacity
Table 4.1: The criteria list.
==PAGE:56==
4.2 Description of Criteria
44
Particular attention was given in this case to avoid double counting between the
selected criteria and the items previously assessed in the socio-economic appraisal, in
order not to measure the same impacts multiple times. As illustrated in Table 4.1,
five relevant criteria were selected.
4.2.1
Socio-Economic Robustness
According to the EUNET report [31], the ”socio-economic robustness” is considered
a core impact, because it is a quantifiable criterion of great relevance that should be
always included in any appraisal. The criterion covers the overall economic perfor-
mance in terms of profitability indicator (Benefit-Cost rate) of each alternative. The
main indicator is represented by the certainty values as a result of the feasibility risk
assessment and cost-benefit analysis.
4.2.2
Contribution to EU Green Corridors
The criterion covers the impact on interconnection and interoperability between the
transport networks of the European Member Countries with the purpose to remove
bottlenecks limiting the system. Furthermore, the criterion considers the potential of
the alternatives for contributing to the development of the green transport corridors
which support the “European Green Deal”.
A new connection can help towards
decarbonising transport and improve the efficiency of the Trans-European Transport
Network.
4.2.3
Accessibility
The criterion covers the impact in transnational connectivity in the “Greater Copen-
hagen” and supports alternatives that contribute to improve spatial and social co-
hesion.
Additionally, the criterion is considered a strategic territorial implication
according to EUNET [31], because the impact induced by the indicator is linked to
tangible phenomena.
==PAGE:57==
4.3 Survey Design
45
4.2.4
Impact on Land-use
The criterion emphasises the strategic territorial impacts in order to ensure an en-
vironmentally sound mobility. Especially, focusing on special sites (e.g.: indication
of slight, moderate, severe impact on national parks) and land use conformity with
the existing land use plan. In addition, the functional use of real estate within the
involved municipalities will be analyzed.
4.2.5
Increased Capacity
Currently, the railway line of the Øresund bridge is facing capacity problems and it is
expected that the existing infrastructure will be close to its maximum capacity by 2035
[9]. Therefore, the criterion emphasizes the capacity and performance improvement
of the railway network across the Øresund strait with the purpose to increase the
capacity utilisation rate in line with demand expectations. This is also represented
by the commuters’ gaining in terms of increase mobility potential.
4.3
Survey Design
With the aim of better understanding the priority requests recommended by the rel-
evant stakeholders, it was agreed to involve representatives of key stakeholders in
the decision process. In this respect, a survey focused on the ”weighting of crite-
ria” was developed and subsequently attended by 7 main stakeholders. The decision
group consisted of stakeholders with different backgrounds, that range from project
managers to senior advisors in the involved municipalities. Therefore, the proposed
survey represents the starting point of the MCDA approach and the main source for
the criteria ranking. The full survey was realized with ”Qualtrics” and it is available
in Appendix A.
==PAGE:58==
4.3 Survey Design
46
4.3.1
Survey structure
The survey was structured using the main points of the literature such as the SASI
model [31] and the stakeholders’ involvement for the weighting of criteria [28]. Ac-
cordingly, a maximum number of 12 questions were formulated and grouped in 4
main parts (personal information, weighting of criteria, final ranking and recommen-
dations). The estimated time for completion was around 4 minutes. Additionally,
all the questions in the survey were mandatory with only one answer option. The
reasoning behind the grouping of parts is described in the following bullet points:
• Introduction: The author and the project supervisors of this research are
introduced; guidelines and instructions are furnished regarding the content of
the survey. Moreover, data use statements are also provided.
• Part 1: personal information. In this part, the personal information of the
respondent are collected. The main purpose was to collect relevant info about
the stakeholders and their involvement in the transport link projects across the
Øresund.
• Part 2: weighting of criteria. For this section, it was essential to introduce
the criteria definitions to familiarize the respondents with the topic. The answer
options were categorical and numerical with the purpose to establish the order
of importance for each criterion. In this respect, it was used a five-point Likert
scale with answer options ranging from unimportant (1) to very important (5).
Due to the fact that all the respondents are respectively stakeholders of different
infrastructure projects, the definitions of the criteria were built around realistic
scenarios within the region where the new transport links would be located.
• Part 3: final ranking. This part contained two requests. In the first one,
it was asked to perform a final ranking with all the criteria introduced in the
previous section according to their importance, as shown in Figure 4.2. The
main purpose was to ensure that the stakeholders could define preferences also
between those criteria that were rated equally according to the five-point Lik-
==PAGE:59==
4.3 Survey Design
47
ert scale. In the following request, the respondents were asked if they would
recommend other relevant criteria to take into consideration for the analysis.
Figure 4.2: Ranking list request.
• Part 4: recommendations. The survey ends with the ”recommendations”
section. However, this section was subjected to conditionally, based on the last
request of part 3. In effect, it was set the feature ’display logic’ in ”Qualtrics”,
that allowed the respondents to take part at this section only in case of positive
answer to the last question of the section ”final ranking”. This last part aims
at collecting other relevant assessment criteria that could be useful for further
development studies of new transport link across the Øresund strait.
4.3.2
Survey methodology
The aim of the survey was to assess the criteria according to the SMARTER tech-
nique. Due to limitations in terms of time and difficulties in bringing together the
concerned stakeholders, the survey was conducted online. In this respect, a group of 7
stakeholders attended the survey. The 7 stakeholders were the sum of 2 stakeholders
==PAGE:60==
4.4 Exploratory criteria analysis
48
for each of the three transport links and one decision making strategist involved in
several mega-infrastructure projects. Furthermore, it is important to note that every
group of 2 stakeholders per link was composed by one stakeholder for each side of
the Øresund strait: one Danish and one Swedish respondent. This choice was made
in order to provide a fuller picture of the MCDA, based on the different needs that
characterize the different shores of the strait.
As a result, the ranking requested
was first performed individually by each respondent that completed the survey, and
afterwards the final results were aggregated and weighted to reflect one average.
4.4
Exploratory criteria analysis
Once the criteria to be included in the MCDA were decided upon, the performance
of the alternatives against the relevant criteria must be determined. The evaluation
of the alternatives for each criterion play a role of primary importance in the MCDA
methodology. In this respect, the exploratory criteria analysis has the aim of merging
personal considerations and findings from previous studies concerning all three trans-
port infrastructures. Due to the impossibility of setting up a workshop attributable to
time constraints, it was agreed to conduct the assessment individually. Furthermore,
this approach was also preferred because it is susceptible to an objective assessment,
without external influences from the key stakeholders. As a result, this section under-
lines how each alternative perform under the different impacts, highlighting strengths
and weaknesses in order to make the analysis more manageable and efficient.
4.4.1
Criterion 1: Socio-Economic Robustness
Due to the high uncertainty of the results obtained in the CBA, the criterion ”socio-
economic robustness” focuses its attention on the risk analysis performed in the sec-
tion 3.2. In this respect, the certainty graphs introduced in the subsection 3.2.2 are
considered as specific indicators for evaluation purposes.
After assessing risks and uncertainties, the HH fixed link is represented by the higher
value in terms of economic profitability (47%).
==PAGE:61==
4.4 Exploratory criteria analysis
49
Differently, the metro that connects Malmö with Copenhagen shows a negative B/C-
rate value, highlighting the need of extra financial support. Therefore, the CV of
the Øresund metro is estimated at 28%, stating the lower probability of obtaining a
profitable project.
Similarly to the HH fixed link, the European track shows a positive B/C-rate, higher
than one. Moreover, the output of MCS ranks the Europaspåret as the second best
infrastructure, with a certainty value of 43%.
4.4.2
Criterion 2: Contribution to EU Green Corridors
The Scandinavian-Mediterranean corridor is a key element for the European economy.
All the countries incorporated in this corridor of the TEN-T generate about 20% of
the EU’s GDP [45]. In order to reach the targets imposed by the ”European Green
Deal”, the CEF for Transport pays particular attention to the environmental aspects.
In effect, CEF Transport aims at removing bottlenecks in the sections of the core
network, shifting passenger and freight traffic from road to rail and improving the
further greening of the corridor.
The HH link would be included in the rail portfolio in terms of ”operational imple-
mentation”. In the fixed railway link between Helsingør and Helsingborg, the rail
actions face urban nodes affected by capacity constraints [45]. Therefore, the HH
link is considered as a part of the ”nodes of the Core Network”.
Similarly, the Øresund metro would be also included in the rail portfolio. The link
is mainly designed as a support for the Øresund bridge, with the purpose to relieve
passenger volume from the strait. Therefore, the infrastructure aims at enhancing
the capacity of the strait, considering it as a node of the TEN-T.
Alternatively, the Europaspåret would be considered as an integral part of the ”Core
Network Corridor”. In effect, this immersed rail tunnel would be fully incorporated
in the Scandinavian-Mediterranean corridor, with the purpose of filling one of the
major strategic gaps, comparable only with few other major infrastructures placed
==PAGE:62==
4.4 Exploratory criteria analysis
50
along the corridor, like the Brenner Tunnel or the Fehmarn Belt. Also the European
track would be included in the rail portfolio.
4.4.3
Criterion 3: Accessibility
The ”accessibility” criterion is of fundamental importance because it enhances spatial
and social cohesion of the Greater Copenhagen Area.
Figure 4.3: Accessibility from/to Copenhagen without and with the HH link [46].
The HH link estimates an increase of the labour market by 110,000 people, for all the
commuters within a travel time under 60 minutes [13]. The infrastructure, placed in
north of the strait, would enable a more efficient commuting alternative compared
to the ferry. As shown in Figure 4.3, it would incorporate new areas in the Skåne
County like Helsingborg, Ängelholm and Åstorp, improving the connectivity in the
region. Additionally, it partially provides redundancy in the system around Øresund,
==PAGE:63==
4.4 Exploratory criteria analysis
51
but exclusively for passengers and only for long travel time. In this respect, the travel
time from Helsingborg to Copenhagen H is estimated approximately 1 hour.
The metro generates a positive impact by placing an infrastructure capable of con-
necting Copenhagen Central Station to Malmö Central Station within 23 minutes,
instead of the 35 minutes that are required with the Øresund bridge. As illustrated
in Figure 4.4, the area within a travel time under 60 minutes from both central sta-
tions will be extended, covering a larger portion of population, in particular in terms
of labour market. In this respect, the extension of the catchment area will involve
the municipalities of Roskilde, Glostrup and Lyngby-Taarbæk in Denmark and the
cities of Lund and Svedala in Sweden. Consequently, it is estimated a growth of 1
million more people capable of travelling across the Øresund within 60 minutes of
travel time [9]. Furthermore, as a consequence of the collaboration between research
and education institutions of the region, the integration of the labour market aims
to reach 500,000 more workplaces [9]. Despite this, there are always persistent limi-
tations in terms of redundancy. In effect, the infrastructure can ensure redundancy
only for the passenger traffic, not allowing redundancy for freight.
In contrast with the other two alternatives, the Europaspåret aims at improving the
accessibility in the Nordic countries of the EU. In effect, with the construction of the
infrastructure is estimated a decrease of 30 minutes in travel time from Stockholm to
Copenhagen and a saving of 55 minutes for the route Gothenburg-Copenhagen [13].
Furthermore, the travel time needed to connect Stockholm with Hamburg and Berlin
will be decreased significantly via the Fehmarn Belt fixed link. However, the fixed
railway link between Landskrona and Copenhagen affects directly also the regional
market.
In this respect, it is assumed an increase of 325,000 inhabitants able to
travel from one country to the other (220,000 Swedish people and 105,000 Danish
people) [13]. The areas most affected are the Halland County and the north-western
part of Skåne, that incorporates Helsingborg, Ängelholm and Båstad. Moreover, the
European track provides a full redundancy, because it would be able to cover both
passenger and freight transport across the strait, with the same functionality of the
Øresund bridge.
==PAGE:64==
4.4 Exploratory criteria analysis
52
Figure 4.4: Accessibility in the GCA with the implementation of the Metro [47].
4.4.4
Criterion 4: Impact on Land-use
The impact on land-use aims to assess the real-estate implications and the strategic
territorial impacts in order to promote green mobility. For the purposes of criterion
assessment, it is significant to focus on the special sites impact, and thus introduce
the concept of ”Natura 2000”. ”Natura 2000” is the largest coordinated network of
protected areas worldwide, and as such it offers a refuge to Europe’s most precious
and threatened species and habitats [48].
The HH link with its 6 km across the Øresund is the shortest link in terms of distance
that aims to cover the strait.
Therefore, the infrastructure is considered the less
intrusive, and thus it would not affect the Øresund waterflow and the ecosystem of
protected areas across the strait [17]. Furthermore, the implementation of the link
would relieve the major source of pollution: the ferry connection [17]. Apart from
the environmental description, the railway would link Helsingør to Helsingborg, from
==PAGE:65==
4.4 Exploratory criteria analysis
53
center to center, in order to achieve the best connection to the current public transport
hubs. As a consequence, this approach would enable a functional use of real estate
within the municipality as regards local spatial planning.
Figure 4.5: ”Natura 2000” area in the Øresund strait [49].
Differently, Øresund metro features controversial aspects. The biggest issue that char-
acterizes this alternative consists of the island of Saltholm. As illustrated in Figure
4.5, Saltholm and the surrounding water is considered a protected ”Natura 2000”
area. In this respect, the island lies on the trajectory of the metro, both in the case
of drilled tunnel as well as in the case of submersible tunnel. As precondition for
the alignment of an immersed tunnel, the location have to meet the same require-
ments as the existing Øresund connection (distancing from Saltholm of 1 km) [49].
Despite this, potentially critical impacts were identified for the submersible tunnel,
such as the works of excavation of the seabed in violation of the island conservation
or the temporary construction impact within a ”Natura 2000” area [50]. Therefore,
the drilled tunnel is considered more environmentally friendly than the submersible
tunnel. In this respect, it is estimated that the drilled solution with separated tracks
==PAGE:66==
4.4 Exploratory criteria analysis
54
will not have an impact on the environment in the Øresund, either during the con-
struction or operational phase [50]. The only uncertainty is recognised in the disposal
of the marine surplus material, considered as potential major environmental impact
because could directly affect the Øresund habitats [50]. Moreover, another factor to
take into consideration is the impact of the infrastructure on the housing market. In
effect, the addition of rapid transit (metro) system yields dense urbanization around
its stations, resulting in a substantial increase of the real estate value in surrounding
areas. Furthermore, the lower housing prices in Skåne could be the driving force
behind a potential flow of Danes to Malmö, similarly to what happened after the im-
plementation of the Øresund bridge, spreading smoothly the population of the GCA
across the Øresund.
Figure 4.6: Artificial island and nature protection in Landskrona [13].
In the case of the Europaspåret, the most important aspects concern the municipality
of Landskrona. As illustrated in Figure 4.6, an artificial island built with the surplus
masses would be placed in front of Landskrona, with the purpose to make the tunnel
==PAGE:67==
4.4 Exploratory criteria analysis
55
across the strait shorter [13]. Furthermore, due to its location in the south of the
existing island of Gråen, the artificial island would not affect the Øresund waterflow,
and additionally it would allow the preservation of the protected area ”Natura 2000”
and the nature reserve in close proximity of the Saxå river [13]. Apart from the en-
vironmental description, the construction of the European track and the new station
in Landskrona will encourage urban development and favour the attractiveness of the
city. In effect, in parallel to the progress of the railway, a new neighbourhood can be
built in the old industrial area, with the purpose to create new housing better con-
nected to the Copenhagen metropolitan area [44]. Concerning the city of Copenhagen,
the stretch of the tunnel lands in Nordhavn and business areas, without affecting the
landscape and the housing environment.
4.4.5
Criterion 5: Increased Capacity
As a consequence of the implementation of the Fehmarn Belt Fixed Link, the capacity
limits and bottleneck situations will increase in the border between Sweden and Den-
mark. Therefore, the need to endow the Øresund strait with a better capacity. The
evaluation was conducted by analyzing the main priorities that the criterion aims to
solve, in order of importance: increased passenger capacity, increased freight capacity,
increase of capacity in long-range transportation and increase of capacity in terms of
local traffic.
As stated in the introduction of this thesis (subsection 1.4.1), it is assumed that the
HH link project will be integrated in the Kystbanen, the current regional railway line
between Helsingør and Copenhagen. Therefore, a similar capacity to that used on
the regional line will be transferred across the north of the Øresund strait. Currently,
a maximum of 11 trains per hour and direction can travel in the last kilometres of
railways, from Snekkersten to Helsingør [51]. On the other hand, forecasts indicate
that the passenger capacity at full operation would be lower in case of a HH link.
Additionally, the increased capacity will not directly lead to an increase of freight
capacity. Most likely, the overall capacity on rails will be affected by the shift of
10% of commuters from the Øresund bridge to the HH link [6], thus allowing a slight
==PAGE:68==
4.5 Analysis of Outcomes
56
increase of the maximum freight capacity on the Øresund bridge.
Similarly, the Øresund metro can boost the passenger capacity effectively and effi-
ciently. The trains implemented will consist of four carriages [49] able to travel at
a maximum speed of 120 km/h and with a departure every 1.5 minutes [21]. As a
result, the estimated passenger capacity at full operation is 4,320 passenger per hour
[49]. Therefore, it would report an increase of 75% in terms of passenger capacity
compared to the current across the strait, highlighting the increase of capacity with
regard to local traffic as the main strength of the metro alternative. In effect, the
new connection between Copenhagen and Malmö aims to catch the daily commuters
who travel on the Øresund bridge. The load of the Øresund bridge would be relieved
by the regional trains, and the capacity would be released for more freight trains. In
this respect, the metro is partially capable of affecting the freight capacity across the
strait.
Alternatively, the Europaspåret aims to increase both passenger and goods transport,
allowing to solve major traffic and transport problems in the medium and long term.
According to the report published by the Landskrona municipality, the European
track will be able to increase the capacity by approximately 100% compared to today
[13]. The new infrastructure will implement 15 trains more per hour and direction,
with the opportunity of routing a certain amount of trains through the tunnel to the
depot in Nordhavn, where the trains can also be turned around [44]. Furthermore,
the Europaspåret has the possibility of providing a direct link towards the Fehmarn
Belt tunnel [13]. Therefore, the European track would combine the highest degree of
freedom and flexibility in terms of freight and passengers transport, assuring a great
adaptability for the railway timetable in the Greater Copenhagen Area.
4.5
Analysis of Outcomes
In this section, the MCDA techniques are applied to assess the outcomes of both
survey and exploratory criteria analysis. Following the methodological process shown
in Figure 4.1, after the introduction of the concepts concerning DSSs in Step 1 and
==PAGE:69==
4.5 Analysis of Outcomes
57
the identification of the assessment criteria in Step 2, the weighting of criteria rep-
resents the Step 3. In this respect, the criteria weights are determined by using the
SMARTER technique. Therefore, the pre-determined ROD weights are introduced
through the usage of this technique and they are applied to the outcomes of the survey.
Based on the number of criteria taken into account, the 5 ROD weights assigned are
listed in a sequence from the largest to the smallest: 0.35, 0.27, 0.19, 0.13 and 0.06.
After the criteria weight, the pair wise comparisons need to be determined according
to the Step 4.
Preference
Explanation
Intensity of
importance
Indifference
Neither of the two alternatives is preferable
over the other
0
Weak
One alternative is slightly preferred over the
other
2
Definite
One alternative is definitely preferred over
the other
4
Strong
One alternative is strongly preferred over
the other
6
Very Strong
One alternative is very strongly preferred
over the other
8
Compromise
Can be implemented for indefinite conclusion
between standard preferences values
1, 3, 5, 7
Table 4.2: REMBRANDT scale.
Consequently, the information reported in the exploratory criteria analysis are con-
verted into numerical values (δjk) according to the REMBRANDT scale (see Table
4.2) and inserted in the comparison matrices. Then, the input values (δjk) are trans-
formed according to the equation 4.1:
==PAGE:70==
4.5 Analysis of Outcomes
58
rjk = eln(1+ε)+δjk = eln(2)+δjk = 2δjk
(4.1)
where, the numerical values (δjk) previously entered are transformed into new values
(rjk) on a geometric scale, characterised by a progression factor needed to justify the
value conversion [30]. In this respect, the scale parameter (γ) is equal to ln(1+ε)
and the progression factor (1+ε) is set to 2. As a consequence, the scores for the
infrastructures are calculated using the geometric mean method for each row of the
transformed matrix [30].
Finally, the methodological process ended with the vali-
dation of results in Step 5.
This represents the final output of the model, which
aims to perform the final ranking of the three different alternatives. Therefore, using
the standard multiplicative model, the final scores are calculated with the following
equation 4.2:
Sj =
m
∏
i=1
(
n
∏
k=1
r1/n
ijk )ci
(4.2)
where, m is the number of the criteria, n displays the number of the alternatives and
ci is the criterion weight.
4.5.1
Weighting of criteria
According to the final ranking compiled by the stakeholders in the part 3 of the
survey, the criteria are weighted with pre-determined ROD weights as indicated by
the SMARTER technique. Subsequently, the weights are normalized, and based on
the order of preference, it was set up a common ranking, reflecting the average of the
7 different rankings (#1-#7) recommended by the stakeholders. The rankings are
depicted in Table 4.3, where C1, C2, C3, C4 and C5 are the five criteria taken into
account, following the order of the Table 4.1.
==PAGE:71==
4.5 Analysis of Outcomes
59
Stakeholder
C1
C2
C3
C4
C5
Common
Rank
4
3
2
5
1
ROD weight
0.13
0.19
0.27
0.06
0.35
#1
Rank
3
5
1
4
2
ROD weight
0.19
0.06
0.35
0.13
0.27
#2
Rank
5
4
1
3
2
ROD weight
0.06
0.13
0.35
0.19
0.27
#3
Rank
5
3
2
4
1
ROD weight
0.06
0.19
0.27
0.13
0.35
#4
Rank
5
3
2
4
1
ROD weight
0.06
0.19
0.27
0.13
0.35
#5
Rank
1
4
2
5
3
ROD weight
0.35
0.13
0.27
0.06
0.19
#6
Rank
3
2
4
5
1
ROD weight
0.19
0.27
0.13
0.06
0.35
#7
Rank
4
2
3
5
1
ROD weight
0.13
0.27
0.19
0.06
0.35
Table 4.3: Output of the survey.
The outcome of the survey conducted shows that ”increased capacity” is the criterion
considered most important with a ROD weight of 0.35. In this respect, four stake-
holders out of seven have ranked the criterion 5 how the most relevant. Regarding
the criterion ”accessibility”, it was ranked as the top priority impact by two stake-
holders out of seven, positioning itself to number two. The criteria ”socio-economic
robustness” and ”contribution to EU green corridors” are ranked respectively in third
and fourth position as priorities. In closing, the ”impact on land-use” is the criterion
which is given lower priority, with a ROD weight of 0.06. In effect, three stakeholders
out of seven have ranked the criterion 4 as the less relevant.
==PAGE:72==
4.5 Analysis of Outcomes
60
4.5.2
Scoring of alternatives
In order of determining the impact of the alternatives within the assessment cri-
teria, the scoring process is performed.
In this respect, comparison matrices are
implemented, and filled with appropriate values based on the research conducted in
the exploratory criteria analysis (see section 4.4). In the matrices the HH link, the
Øresund metro and the Europaspåret are respectively identified as ”alternative 1”,
”alternative 2” and ”alternative 3”.
C1: Socio-economic robustness
Comparisons (δjk)
Transformation (rjk)
Alt. 1
Alt. 2
Alt. 3
Alt. 1
Alt. 2
Alt. 3
Score
Alt. 1
0
5
2
1
32
4
5.04
Alt. 2
-5
0
-4
0.03125
1
0.0625
0.12
Alt. 3
-2
4
0
0.25
16
1
1.59
Table 4.4: Comparison matrix for the ’socio-economic robustness’ criterion.
C2: Contribution to EU green corridors
Comparisons (δjk)
Transformation (rjk)
Alt. 1
Alt. 2
Alt. 3
Alt. 1
Alt. 2
Alt. 3
Score
Alt. 1
0
-3
-6
1
0.125
0.015625
0.12
Alt. 2
3
0
-4
8
1
0.0625
0.79
Alt. 3
6
4
0
64
16
1
10.08
Table 4.5: Comparison matrix for the ’contribution to EU green corridors’ criterion.
C3: Accessibility
Comparisons (δjk)
Transformation (rjk)
Alt. 1
Alt. 2
Alt. 3
Alt. 1
Alt. 2
Alt. 3
Score
Alt. 1
0
-6
-3
1
0.015625 0.125
0.12
Alt. 2
6
0
4
64
1
16
10.08
Alt. 3
3
-4
0
8
0.0625
1
0.79
Table 4.6: Comparison matrix for the ’accessibility’ criterion.
==PAGE:73==
4.5 Analysis of Outcomes
61
C4: Impact on land-use
Comparisons (δjk)
Transformation (rjk)
Alt. 1
Alt. 2
Alt. 3
Alt. 1
Alt. 2
Alt. 3
Score
Alt. 1
0
7
3
1
128
8
10.08
Alt. 2
-7
0
-6
0.0078125
1
0.015625
0.05
Alt. 3
-3
6
0
0.125
64
1
2
Table 4.7: Comparison matrix for the ’impact on land-use’ criterion.
C5: Increased capacity
Comparisons (δjk)
Transformation (rjk)
Alt. 1
Alt. 2
Alt. 3
Alt. 1
Alt. 2
Alt. 3
Score
Alt. 1
0
-3
-5
1
0.125
0.03125
0.16
Alt. 2
3
0
-3
8
1
0.125
1
Alt. 3
5
3
0
32
8
1
6.35
Table 4.8: Comparison matrix for the ’increased capacity’ criterion.
Based on the matrices presented above, in terms of socio-economic benefits, the HH
link is slightly preferred over the European track (see Table 4.4), due to the similar
results achieved in the FRA. On the other hand, the affiliation to the ”Core Network
Corridor” makes the Europaspåret strongly preferred over the HH link and clearly
preferred over the Øresund metro, in the criterion ”contribution to EU green corri-
dors” (see Table 4.5). In the Table 4.6, an estimated growth of 1 million more people
capable of travelling across the strait within 60 minutes and an addition of 500,000
more workplaces [9] make the metro much more preferable than the other two alter-
natives in terms of accessibility. Moreover, as shown in Table 4.7, the connection
Copenhagen-Landskrona and the HH link are strongly preferred over the Øresund
metro, this choice is a consequence of the environmental issues that involve the con-
struction of the railway between Copenhagen and Malmö. Finally, the Europaspåret
is clearly preferred over the metro and the HH link in terms of ”increased capacity”
(see Table 4.8), this choice is the consequence of the strategic advantage both in terms
of passenger and freight capacity represented by the European track. It is important
==PAGE:74==
4.5 Analysis of Outcomes
62
to specify that the pair wise comparisons performed under the criterion ”increased
capacity” were evaluated by a team of experts from ’Ramboll’, due to the lack of data
and the uncertainties linked to this impact.
4.5.3
Validation of results
In the last Step of the methodology the final scores and ranking of the alternatives are
determined. In this respect, the values of the multiplicative aggregation are shown in
Table 4.9.
Alternative
MCDA
Rank
HH Fixed Link
0.063
3
Øresund Metro
0.253
2
Europaspåret
0.684
1
Table 4.9: Final result of the MCDA methodology.
With a final score of 0.684, the Europaspåret is considered the most suitable project
according to the MCDA approach. Therefore, it is relevant to underline that the
Copenhagen-Landskrona connection was assessed as one of the two best alternatives
in every pair wise comparison performed. The Øresund metro placed second in the
final ranking with a normalized score of 0.253. The main influence on the final score
was provided by the accessibility criterion, where the metro alternative stands as the
best infrastructure. Finally, the HH link shows a result of 0.063. The poor score in
the three top priority criteria (increased capacity, accessibility and contribution to EU
green corridors) relegate the HH link as the less appropriate railway link according
to the proposed methodology.
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 5
Composite Assessment
This chapter introduces a specific composite model for the final assessment:
”COSIMA”. This new approach aims to combine the CBA and the MCDA in order
to provide a better picture of the case study, defining a final outcome that can vary
depending on the MCDA% applied.
5.1
Combining CBA and MCDA
In contrast to what was proposed in the chapter 4, the composite assessment aims
to match and combine the socio-economic appraisal and the MCDA as two separate
analysis. As a consequence, only the CBA part of the socio-economic appraisal is
considered and a new criteria list is implemented in the MCDA, with the aim of
removing the ’socio-economic robustness’ as criterion, and thus, re-perform the whole
analysis.
From the Cost-Benefit Analysis side, it is essential to extract the sum of benefits of
the CBA items i for each alternative k and the profitability indicators. Concerning
the profitability indices, the choice fell on the B/C-rate, according to the motivation
previously provided in the subsection 3.2.2. Therefore, the main outputs of the CBA
for each alternative, needed to perform the COSIMA, are shown in Table 5.1.
B/C-Rate
Vi(Xik) [Bill. DKK]
HH link
1.43
28.5
Øresund Metro
0.83
18.9
Europaspåret
1.41
54.7
Table 5.1: B/C-rate and the sum of benefits (Vi(Xik)) for the tree alternatives.
At the same time, the weights for the criteria (wj) and the value-function of the
==PAGE:76==
5.1 Combining CBA and MCDA
64
MCDA criteria for each alternative (VFj(Yjk)) need to be computed in the Multi-
Criteria Decision Analysis. Hence, based on the responses of the survey introduced
in the section 4.3, the new criteria with their respectively ROD weights are listed in
Table 5.2.
Criterion
Rank
ROD weight
NC1
Contribution to EU green corridors
3
0.19
NC2
Accessibility
2
0.30
NC3
Impact on land-use
4
0.09
NC4
Increased capacity
1
0.42
Table 5.2: ROD weights assigned to the new criteria.
Then, the scoring of the alternatives within each criterion is performed according to
the REMBRANDT technique. The same scores assigned in Tables 4.5, 4.6, 4.7 and
4.8 are reproduced for the respective criteria. Furthermore, as shown in the Table
5.3, the results of the pair-wise comparisons are normalized, and then transformed
into a linear value function on a local scale that goes from 0 to 100.
NC1
NC2
NC3
NC4
HH link
0
0
100
0
Øresund Metro
7
100
0
14
Europaspåret
100
7
19
100
Table 5.3: Value function scores of the alternatives within each criterion.
Next, the shadow prices (UPj) are calculated in order to obtain the bjk values. There-
fore, the UPj prices are defined with the help of the summation of benefits from the
CBA. In this respect, the sum of the benefit values for the Helsingør-Helsingborg
connection is used for the calibration of the model, due to the highest B/C-Rate of
the HH link amongst the other alternatives. Assuming an equal balance (weight) in
terms of percentage between CBA (50%) and MCDA (50%), now the MCDA should
”count the same” of the CBA.
==PAGE:77==
5.2 Results
65
5.2
Results
Based on the calculations computed, it is possible to proceed with the summation of
the benefits in order to obtain the total value for each alternative. The CBA results
are measured in billion Danish Kroner (Bill. DKK) as a monetary unit. On the other
hand, the unity measure adopted in the MCDA is the ”assessment Bill. DKK”, an
arbitrary monetary unit used in order to obtain a comparable value with the CBA.
As a consequence, the result of the sum between ”Bill. DKK” and ”assessment Bill.
DKK” is expressed in ”attractiveness Bill. DKK”. In addition, assuming an alpha
(α) indicator equal to 50%, the TRR values are calculated according to the equation
2.8.
HH link
Metro
Europasp.
Method
Unit
Benefits
28.5
18.9
54.7
CBA
Bill. DKK
Cost
20
22.9
38.9
CBA
Bill. DKK
B/C-rate
1.43
0.83
1.41
CBA
NC1
0
4
60.2
MCDA
Bill. DKK*
NC2
0
95
6.4
MCDA
Bill. DKK*
NC3
28.5
0
5.5
MCDA
Bill. DKK*
NC4
0
18.1
133
MCDA
Bill. DKK*
Tot. MCDA
28.5
117.1
205.1
MCDA
Bill. DKK*
Tot. Value
57
136
259.8
CBA+MCDA
Bill. DKK**
TRR
2.85
5.94
6.68
*assessment Bill. DKK
**attractiveness Bill. DKK
Table 5.4: Results of the COSIMA analysis with the MCDA% set to 50.
The results are depicted in the Table 5.4, where the Europaspåret is identified as
the most suitable alternative, based on both TRR and total value. The good per-
==PAGE:78==
5.2 Results
66
formance of the European track is mainly due to the high scores obtained with the
criteria NC4 and NC1, which are respectively weighted as the first and third priority
criteria. In effect, the shadow prices are directly linked to the weights of the new cri-
teria, that strongly influence the final outcomes of COSIMA. Similarly, the Øresund
metro shows an acceptable TRR, despite the low score in terms of benefits in the
CBA. Alternatively, the HH link results the less attractive project as a result of the
zero values shown in NC1, NC2 and NC4, that penalize the Helsingør-Helsingborg
connection.
Figure 5.1: TRR values for the three alternatives as a function of the MCDA%.
Another way of displaying the outcomes of the COSIMA is illustrated in the Figure
5.1.
In the graph the variation of the TRR is expressed in accordance with the
MCDA%. In this respect, an increase in MCDA% leads to a direct growth of the
TRR. Differently, the CBA calculations are not affected by any change during all
stages of the composite assessment. The graph shows that the TRR increases more
rapidly for the Europaspåret and the Øresund metro than for the HH link.
The
increase is highly correlated with the MCDA criteria that are considered the most
important.
In effect, the ROD weights in Table 5.2 highlight ’increased capacity’
==PAGE:79==
5.2 Results
67
and ’accessibility’ as the top priority criteria. As a result, the European track and
the metro that both show high scores in these criteria, will also exhibit the largest
increase in their TRR values and vice-versa.
Finally, the setting of the MCDA%
value requires attention. Based on the MCDA% the attractiveness of an alternative
on another can change (eg.: for a MCDA% lower than 14, the HH link is preferred over
the Øresund metro). Usually, the decision-makers agree upon a precise percentage or
a short interval, that frequently falls between 20-30% [35]. In this specific case, the
MCDA% is set to 50, in accordance with the table of results (see Table 5.4). This
decision is adopted due to the dimension of the infrastructures assessed. Therefore, it
is generally recommended to consider high MCDA% when the alternatives are major
infrastructure projects, in order to provide a more balanced analysis that takes into
consideration all the impacts that affect the alternatives [35].
==PAGE:80==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
This chapter discusses the findings and the limitations of the analysis performed and
relates them to the research questions and the objectives stated in the introduction.
The main purpose of the discussion is to convert the outcomes of the thesis in terms
of policy implications, but also research directions.
6.1
Discussion of Main Results
All the analysis performed provide different outcomes in terms of preference ranking
between the alternatives. In this respect, the main results of the different assessments
can be summarized in the Table 6.1.
Ranking
CBA
FRA
MCDA
COSIMA
NPV
IRR
BCR
HH Fixed Link
2
2
1
1
3
3
Øresund Metro
3
3
3
3
2
2
Europaspåret
1
1
2
2
1
1
Table 6.1: An overview of the main rankings based on the assessments conducted.
The majority of the rankings point to the Europaspåret, as the infrastructure that
should be prioritized. In effect, the railway link Copenhagen-Landskrona is a prof-
itable business in socio-economic terms. It is also considered the most suitable alterna-
tive according to the MCDA and COSIMA methodologies. Of the three alternatives
examined, the European track is the project that best fits into the ”Core Network”
of the TEN-T, while at the same time creating full redundancy for both freight and
passenger, decongesting the Øresund bridge with the highest degree of freedom and
flexibility. Alternatively, the Øresund Metro and the HH fixed Link are placed in dif-
ferent positions in accordance with the assessment chosen. As observed in the table
==PAGE:81==
6.1 Discussion of Main Results
69
above, the metro ranks as third choice in all the evaluations concerning the socio-
economic appraisal, based on its infeasibility from an economic perspective. However,
the integration of labour market in Copenhagen-Malmö and the improvements in ac-
cessibility play a major role for the purpose of the MCDA and COSIMA. In effect,
when all the impacts are taken into account the metro results the second infrastructure
that should be prioritized. The HH fixed link is the alternative that better perform
in the feasibility risk assessment, with low chances of being an unprofitable project.
Despite this, the connection in the northern part of the strait shows major limitations
in the analysis that aims to incorporate all the impacts. The extension of the regional
line does not entirely solve the capacity issue and does not lead to the improvement
of the European railway network compared to the other two alternatives.
At the same time, the decision support systems used are discussed. In the Table 6.1,
the Cost-Benefit Analysis is represented with the output of the 3 main profitability
indicators: NPV, IRR and B/C-rate. However, the CBA is a tool characterized by
several limitations, the most important is the difficulty to convert non-marketed ef-
fects and intangible impacts into monetary values. Therefore, the only analysis that
provide a broader view are the MCDA and the COSIMA. Both analysis take into
account the socio-economic appraisal and the additional impacts. But, the COSIMA
is marked by the interpretation of the unit prices of the MCDA criteria and the
high uncertainties of the CBA outcomes. In effect, the non-implementation of the
TERESA and the missing of EU subsidies in the CBA model, lead to approximate
calculations, potentially affected by errors.
Furthermore, the high environmental
benefits shown in the CBA of the HH link constitute a controversial value. In this
respect, the benefit should be lower, based on the implementation of electric ferries,
that represent a greener solution compared to the previous ferry connections, source
of extensive pollution. As a consequence, the MCDA is considered the most compre-
hensive assessment. This decision support tool enables the assessment of the impacts
of transport initiatives, incorporating the feasibility risk assessment, less susceptible
to variation compared to the CBA. The FRA module represents a key strength in the
overall evaluation, acting as a regulator for the inaccuracies in cost and the demand
estimation. On the other hand, the methodological framework also has limitations.
==PAGE:82==
6.2 Research Questions
70
The approach is characterized by subjective evaluations, demonstrated by the fact
that cannot measure the ”goodness” of the alternatives. This is also represented by
the individual perceptions of the key stakeholders in the ’weighting of criteria’. In
effect, it is relevant to underline that in the case of the survey, each respondent had
no opportunity of interact with the others, precluding discussions and trade-offs in
the group.
This represents a limitation in the process, because it does not allow
to generate a ranking that reflects a compromised common agreement between the
stakeholders involved. Finally, it is important to emphasise the trade-off between the
socio-economic appraisal and the MCDA. Based on the survey results, the CBA out-
comes have been surprisingly ranked as second-to-last criterion, with a weight of 0.13.
Moreover, the ’strategic impacts’ are considered more significant in the global sce-
nario. This represents a questionable insight, in fact, the economic gain traditionally
plays the leading role in transport policy-making.
6.2
Research Questions
The main research questions formulated in Chapter 1 can be answered as follows:
• Which is the most suitable scenario that has to be prioritized in the Øresund
region?
According to the ranking Table 6.1, the Europaspåret is considered the most
suitable project to prioritize.
• Can the theory of decision analysis be appropriate to assess major investment
projects?
The theory of decision analysis enables to accomplish a comprehensive appraisal
based on both a quantitative and qualitative approach.
• What is the analysis that should have the biggest influence?
The MCDA is considered the most comprehensive assessment. It takes into
account all the main impacts that affect the planning of a transport infras-
tructure and allows the participation of the stakeholders for the weighting of
==PAGE:83==
6.3 Further insights on Survey findings
71
criteria. Therefore, the methodological process proposed, based on the SASI ap-
proach, is considered the most suitable analysis to be applied to large transport
investments.
• What are the core criteria that should be included in a wider impact assessment?
It is recommended to follow the EUNET framework as guideline for a wider
assessment. In this respect, it is highly advised to include ’core impacts’ as
quantifiable effects, ’strategic territorial impacts’ related to tangible phenomena
and ’strategic non-territorial impacts’ that include intangible effects. Therefore,
the 5 criteria applied in the MCDA cover this range of impacts.
6.3
Further insights on Survey findings
The survey outcomes displayed in Table 4.3 show the result of the final ranking that
was requested in the part 3 of the form. But, in addition, the majority of the key
stakeholders involved has recommended to add other impacts to the criteria list. In
the section 4 of the survey, part of the respondents has emphasised the importance
of the ”co-working with the current railway infrastructure”. In a response, this new
item was ranked second, highlighting how much is relevant for some stakeholders that
the new link best fits into the existing railway network. Furthermore, respondents ex-
pressed the importance of redundancy, in other words, the necessity of an alternative
route in case of major shut-down on the Øresund link. However, the redundancy is
partially considered in the accessibility criterion, underlining which alternatives pro-
vide a full redundancy both for passengers and freight and which alternatives cover
only the passenger transport. Moreover, the other responses collected suggested to
evaluate the impact on tourism, the structure of the financial and organization model
of the alternatives and the multilevel contributions of the infrastructure in terms of
supporting a shift from road to rail.
==PAGE:84==
6.4 Political implications
72
6.4
Political implications
The decision support systems used in transport policy-making represent the most
comprehensive appraisal tools. Despite this, the politicians’ perspective play a funda-
mental role in the decision process. In this respect, the new fixed Øresund connections
are expected to be the subject of high-level political discussions between the end of
2020 and the beginning of 2021 [52].
As shown in Figure B.1 (Appendix B), the ”Öresundståg” stretches from Sweden/-
Malmö to Helsingør at the moment.
From 2023, the Kystbanen will be used ex-
clusively by Danish regional [13]. This choice was taken by the Danish Ministry of
Transport in order to decongest the coast line [53]. Consequently, there is the new
opportunity for connecting Helsingborg through the Danish regional trains, as illus-
trated in Figure B.2 (Appendix B). In effect, according to the last report released by
the ’Region Skåne’, a railway tunnel from Helsingborg - Helsingør is highly requested
by the Swedish region within 2040 [54]. However, the news arriving from the danish
side, show a loss of public interest for the HH connection [52]. The main reasons are
attributable to the high costs of the HH tunnel as a solution for local railway, and
the priority in the assessment of the new ’Kattegat connection’, that aims to connect
the two largest cities in Denmark.
The Øresund metro alternative is supported by several parliamentary motions in
Sweden [52]. The attractiveness of the project is dictated by the decreasing of travel
time between Copenhagen and Malmö.
Furthermore, the Swedish authorities are
confident in receiving the EU support in terms of subsidies, similarly to the ’rapid
transit railway line S4’ that aims to link Hamburg with Lübeck [52]. However, it
is unclear how the railway will be linked to the Copenhagen metro system. Most
likely, the metro will be designed as a separate shuttle system between Malmö C and
Copenhagen H, or as integral part of the M7 line.
Despite the positive performance shown in Table 6.1, the European track is perceived
as a project with an extremely weak position outside Landskrona [52]. In effect, the
Region Skåne seems to prefer the HH link over the Europaspåret [54].
==PAGE:85==
6.4 Political implications
73
To summarize, the global scenario is unclear from the Danish side, and on the Swedish
side, the municipalities concerned did not reach yet an agreement on which infras-
tructure prioritize. Therefore, as a consequence of the political implications, a useful
approach is proposed in the Figure 6.1. Obviously, this methodology is considered a
direct consequence of the work previously done in the thesis.
Figure 6.1: Proposed decision support tool for transport policy-making.
==PAGE:86==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusions
In this last chapter, first, the conclusions of the thesis are presented. Then, recom-
mendations and research directions proposed for future work are discussed.
7.1
Conclusions
The convergence of the combined DSSs has made it possible to demonstrate the de-
cision making framework as a valuable tool to assess the transport projects in all
their aspects. Taking the development of a new transport link in the Øresund as
case study, the thesis has identified the most suitable alternative, in order to address
the practical evaluation from an economic, strategic and sustainable perspective. In
this respect, the European track stands as the project that needs to be prioritized.
However, with the approval of the political community, the construction of a new
infrastructure does not necessarily exclude the implementation of another one. In ef-
fect, some infrastructures are complementary between them, based on their strengths
highlighted during this work. At the same time, they could address different prob-
lems, by encouraging synergy between transportation systems, in order to ensure high
standards of flexibility across the strait.
7.2
Recommendations and Future Work
Findings of this work suggest that a continuous upgrade of cost, benefits and tech-
nical feasibility studies has to be addressed in order to ensure a higher community
acceptance. This can be also represented in terms of policies, where the different key
stakeholders have to cooperate. Furthermore, before implementing the methodology
(MCDA) of this thesis is recommended to consult the EUNET framework in order to
have an overview of the measurable indicators and the assessment tools. For example,
==PAGE:87==
7.2 Recommendations and Future Work
75
the Geographic Information Systems (GIS) is recommended as a tool for the analysis
of the accessibility criterion. However, in this specific case, the download of the geo-
data may be subject to country regulations that do not allow the use of specific map
layers, reason why this tool was not applied in this thesis.
From this thesis methodology and results, further research and new implementations
can be developed as improvements and expansion of the case of study. Therefore,
several aspects of possible further work are presented below:
• Expansion of the case of study: the work can be extended with the im-
plementation of new alternatives, if these projects will be based on a detailed
feasibility study.
• Expansion of the approach of the methodology: in the methodological
framework, the section ”exploratory criteria analysis” analyze the core crite-
ria that affect the transport projects. In this respect, this analysis could be
supported by the the implementation of GIS, allowing the use of GIS-based
methods for the assessment of the transport infrastructure development projects.
Furthermore, it would be a plus to include a group of experts (e.g. external con-
sultants, experienced decision making strategists, etc.) to assess the different
criteria in order to reach a higher level of fairness in the results, as was done for
the criterion ’increased capacity’. Finally, new criteria could be implemented
based on the recommendations provided in the last section of the survey.
• Identifying the proper shift from the Øresund bridge: a more detailed
study in order to obtain the most likely shift of travellers from the Øresund
bridge to each of the alternatives. Additionally, the loss can be quantified in
economic terms from the bridge perspective.
• Improvements in the CBA: an extra approach would be recommended in
order to perform the CBA in the best way.
This requirement involves the
implementation of TERESA, capable of addressing the issues concerning the
taxation module. Furthermore, it is required a more thorough investigation of
the allocation of EU subsidies for each alternative.
==PAGE:88==
APPENDIX A
==PAGE:89==
A
77
==PAGE:90==
A
78
==PAGE:91==
A
79
==PAGE:92==
A
80
==PAGE:93==
A
81
==PAGE:94==
A
82
==PAGE:95==
A
83
==PAGE:96==
APPENDIX B
Figure B.1: Schematic picture of today’s train traffic in Skåne [54].
==PAGE:97==
B
85
Figure B.2: New connectivity plan proposed by the Region Skåne for 2040 [54].
==PAGE:98==
Bibliography
[1]
United Nations. Paris Agreement. 2015. url: https://unfccc.int/files/
essential_background/convention/application/pdf/english_paris_
agreement.pdf.
[2]
European Commission. The European Green Deal. 2019. url: https://ec.
europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/european-green-deal-communication_
en.pdf.
[3]
Agency for railways. Fostering the railway sector through the European Green
Deal. 2020.
[4]
European Commission. Connecting Europe Facility. 2020. url: https://ec.
europa.eu/transport/themes/infrastructure/cef_en.
[5]
European Commission. Trans-European Transport Network - TEN-T priority
axes and projects 2005. 2005.
[6]
Mattias Schiöth, Beatrice Granström, John Fridlund, Robert Sommar, Anders
Lundberg and Henrik Andersson. Strategiska scenarier för tågtrafiken i Greater
Copenhagen. 2019.
[7]
European Environment Agency. GHG emissions by main sector in the EU-
28, 1990-2017. 2019. url: https://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/
figures/ghg-emissions-by-main-sector.
[8]
European Commission. The Scandinavian - Mediterranean Corridor. 2020. url:
https://ec.europa.eu/transport/modes/rail/ertms/corridors/scandi-
navian-mediterranean-corridor_en.
[9]
Ramboll. Unlocking the transnational potential in the Fehmarn Belt region. 2018.
[10]
Intraplan Consult GmbH BVU Beratergruppe. Verkehrsprognose für eine Feste
Fehmarnbeltquerung 2014 - Aktualisierung der FTC-Studie von 2002. 2016.
==PAGE:99==
Bibliography
87
[11]
Greater Copenhagen. About Greater Copenhagen. 2020. url: https://www.
greatercph.com/about.
[12]
Trafikverket. A new generation railway – new main lines for high-speed trains.
2020. url: https://www.trafikverket.se/en/startpage/planning/high-
speed-railway/.
[13]
Kreera Samhällsbyggnad, published by Landskrona Municipality. Europaspåret,
Connecting Sweden and Denmark. 2019.
[14]
Øresundsbro Konsortiet. The Øresund Bridge and its Region: 18 years. 2018.
[15]
Trafikverket, Transport- og Boligministeriet and Sverigeförhandlingen. Resande
och transporter over Öresund. 2017.
[16]
Sydöstra Skånes Samarbetskommitté. Infrastruktur och byutveckling i Öresund.
2020.
[17]
Ramboll. Bilateral study of HH connection investigations (in Swedish). 2018.
[18]
Larsen and Skougaard. HH-forbindelsens lønsomhed - samfundsøkonomiske bereg-
ninger (in Danish). 2010.
[19]
Trafikverket and Vejdirektoratet. Kommissorium / Projektspecifikation for strate-
gisk analyse / förberedande studie af fast forbindelse mellem Helsingør og Hels-
ingborg. 2018.
[20]
The Municipality of Copenhagen. Øresundsmetro. 2017. url: https://www.kk.
dk/oeresundsmetro.
[21]
Municipality of Copenhagen and City of Malmö. Öresund Metro connects Greater
Copenhagen, Results of phase 3 - preliminary study. 2017.
[22]
Davide Sartori, Gelsomina Catalano, Mario Genco, Chiara Pancotti, Emanuela
Sirtori, Silvia Vignetti, Chiara Del Bo. Guide to Cost-Benefit Analysis of Invest-
ment Projects, Economic appraisal tool for Cohesion Policy 2014-2020. 2015.
[23]
Raffaele Grimaldi. Technological innovations in rail freight transport: an ap-
praisal framework and supporting tools. 2016.
[24]
Michael Bruhn Barfod, Steen Leleur. Socio-economic analysis in the transport
sector. 2014.
==PAGE:100==
Bibliography
88
[25]
Leleur. Road Infrastructure Planning – A Decision-Oriented Approach. 2000.
[26]
Kim Bang Salling. Assessment of Transport Projects: Risk Analysis and Decision
Support. 2008.
[27]
Hans-Jürgen Engelbrecht. Natural capital, subjective well-being, and the new
welfare economics of sustainability: Some evidence from cross-country regres-
sions. 2009. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/
pii/S0921800909003243.
[28]
Michael Bruhn Barfod, Kim Bang Salling. A new composite decision support
framework for strategic and sustainable transport appraisals. 2014.
[29]
Vose. Risk Analysis – A Quantitative Guide. 2000.
[30]
Michael Bruhn Barfod, Steen Leleur. Multi-criteria decision analysis for use in
transport decision making. 2014.
[31]
EUNET/SASI. The EUNET/SASI Final Report, Socio-Economic and Spatial
Impacts of Transport. 2001.
[32]
Olson. Springer Series in Operations Research, Decision Aids for Selection
Problems. 1996.
[33]
Roberts and Goodwin. Weights Approximations in Multi-attribute Decision
Models. 2002.
[34]
Michael Bruhn Barfod. An MCDA approach for the selection of bike projects
based on structuring and appraising activities. 2012. url: https://www.science-
direct.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0377221711010472.
[35]
Michael Bruhn Barfod, Kim Bang Salling, Steen Leleur. Composite decision
support by combining cost-benefit and multi-criteria decision analysis. 2010.
[36]
Leleur, Petersen and Barfod. The COSIMA Approach to Transport Decision
Making – Combining Cost-benefit and Multi-criteria Analysis for Comprehen-
sive Project Appraisal. 2007.
[37]
Finansministeriet. Notat - Nøgletalskatalog (in Danish). 2019.
==PAGE:101==
Bibliography
89
[38]
Center for Transport Analytics, Technical University of Denmark. Transport
Economics Unit Prices (in Danish). 2020. url: https://www.cta.man.dtu.
dk/modelbibliotek/teresa/transportoekonomiske-enhedspriser.
[39]
Statistics Denmark. Documentation of statistics for Net Price Index. 2020.
[40]
Sydöstra Skånes Samarbetskommitté. IBU-update, Update of the HH analysis
(in Danish). 2014.
[41]
Trafikverket. Maria - Helsingborg C, double track tunnel, JSY1814 (in Swedish).
2016.
[42]
Incentive Partners. Samfundsøkonomiske beregninger på Øresundsmetro. 2013.
[43]
Incentive Partners. Samfundsøkonomisk screening af Øresunds- metroen (in
Danish). 2013.
[44]
Kreera Samhällsbyggnad, published by Landskrona Municipality. Europaspåret
- An investigation of new core network connections in the Öresund region for
international and regional development. 2017.
[45]
Innovation and Networks Executive Agency. CEF support to Scandinavian -
Mediterranean Corridor. 2018.
[46]
HH-Gruppen. Fixed connection Helsingborg - Helsingör, one connection two
tunnels (in Swedish). 2020.
[47]
Municipality of Copenhagen and City of Malmö. The Öresund Metro – our
future connection. 2018. url: https://oresundsmetro.com/en/knowledge-
bank/much-larger-joint-labour-market.
[48]
European Commission. Natura 2000. 2020. url: https://ec.europa.eu/
environment/nature/natura2000/index_en.htm.
[49]
Ramboll. Installation estimate – coast to coast (in Danish). 2013.
[50]
Municipality of Copenhagen and City of Malmö. Result of phase 2 - Environ-
mental issues (in Danish). 2013.
==PAGE:102==
Bibliography
90
[51]
Trafikstyrelsen - Danish Transport Authority. Capacity and bottlenecks in the
rail network (in Danish). 2012. url: https://transportministeriet.dk/
media / 2387 / notat - om - kapacitet - i - den - kollektive - trafik . pdf ?
fbclid=IwAR2nw7T420fcDZqNZBhWDKaQ_f0HIVKx3jLumj0WzjZiZoy2ECA_K1YDPKQ.
[52]
Sydsvenskan. Each one with a tunnel vision (in Swedish). 2020.
[53]
Teknologiens Mediehus. Punctuality on the Coastal Line is in free fall (in Dan-
ish). 2018. url: https://ing.dk/artikel/punktligheden-paa-kystbanen-
frit-fald-212818.
[54]
Region Skåne. Train strategy, strategy for the development of regional train
traffic in Skåne (in Swedish). 2020.
==PAGE:103==
==PAGE:104==
Technical University of Denmark
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
Akademivej, Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. +45 45 25 48 00
www.man.dtu.dk
