==PAGE:1==
Climate-tool for Investigating
 a Buildings Impact on its
Surrounding Outdoor Spaces
Frederikke Karstensen (s153078)
Maria Taarnhøj (s153871)
Supervisor: Christian Rønne
M.Sc. Thesis
Department of Civil Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Title Page
Title Climate-tool for Investigating a Building’s Impact on its Surrounding Outdoor Spaces
Project Type Master Thesis
ECTS Points 35 ECTS
Period 3.2.2020 - 3.8.2020
Authors Maria Taarnhøj and Frederikke Karstensen
Study Numbers s153871 and s153078
Study Line Architectural Engineering
University The Technical University of Denmark
Supervisor Christian Rønne, associate professor at DTU Civil Engineering
==PAGE:3==
Forord
This master thesis has been developed at DTU Civil Engineering by students Frederikke Svanekær
Karstensen and Maria Taarnhøj. The workload corresponds to 35 ECTS points for each student,
and is the ﬁnal part of the graduate program, Architectural Engineering at DTU. The project began
on the 3rd of February 2020 and ended on the 3rd of August 2020, lasting a total of 26 weeks.
The thesis would not have been the same without the time, help and guidance from certain individ-
uals. First, we would like to thank our supervisor, associate professor at DTU Civil Engineering and
Architect MAA, Christian Rønne, for support, inspiration and ideas throughout the project.
Furthermore, we would like to give thanks to the architects which took time to answer our questions:
Jakob Strømann-Andersen, Lars Toksvig, Thomas Snog and Sam Coolidge.
Last but not least, we would like to thank our friends and family for their support throughout the
project. A special thanks to Søren, Dennis, Helene, Peter and Alexander, for taking their time to
proofread the project, and give us constructive feedback.
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In the early phases of designing a new building, Architects often ﬁnd it too diﬃcult and time
consuming to incorporate analyses of the physical qualities of the surrounding outdoor spaces. This
is in spite of the importance and the massive impact that a building have on the surrounding outdoor
spaces. Therefore, the aim of the project was to create a tool which would make it easier for the
architects and decision-makers to incorporate the surrounding outdoor spaces into their work in the
early design phases.
The tool is called Climate Optimization Tool for Urban Spaces (COTUS) and functions in Grasshop-
per for Rhino, as this is the program which is most often used by architects in the early design
phases. COTUS contains three diﬀerent analyses in a single script; a solar radiation analysis, a wind
environment analysis and an outdoor comfort analysis. The solar radiation measures the amount of
radiation from the sun in kWh/m2 in a speciﬁc period, and it provides an image of where there is
sun and shadow on the site. The wind environment analysis measures the wind speed and pressure
on the site in m/s and Pa. It provides a snapshot of the site showing where there are lee, and
where the critical areas with a lot of wind are. The critical areas can be very diﬃcult to predict as,
for instance, corners and small passages can aﬀect the wind movement a lot. Finally, the outdoor
comfort analysis measures the user comfort on the site in UTCI ◦C. The comfort is based on the
four parameters: air temperature, solar radiation, relative humidity and wind speed.
As COTUS is made as a user-friendly tool for architects - their knowledge and experience has been
in focus throughout the tool development.
COTUS is made as a Grasshopper script, since the
architects are already using Rhino in their work. The tool provides thorough guidance for the user,
which means that no prior experience in Grasshopper is needed. The user-friendliness includes a
number guide for each step of each analysis, a blue box in all places where actions needs to be done
along with a short description of what and how it should be done.
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Aim
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Delimitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Vocabulary list . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Thesis Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Method
7
2.1
Semi-Structured Interviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Literature Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Tool Development: Trial and Error Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Case Study Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5
Method for the Working Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Literature Study
15
3.1
Role of the City . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Creating Good Outdoor Spaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
A Buildings Impact on its Surrounding Outdoor Spaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3.1
A Buildings Impact on the Wind Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3.2
A Buildings Impact on the Solar Radiation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3.3
A Buildings Impact on the Outdoor Comfort . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
==PAGE:8==
3.4
Tools for Urban Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4
Tool Development
29
4.1
Rhino and Grasshopper 3D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Plug-ins for Grasshopper
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2.1
Ladybug . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2.2
Butterﬂy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.3
Tool Properties
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3.1
Inputs and Outputs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3.2
Internal Data Processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5
Case Study
53
5.1
Introduction to the SDE-Competition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.2
Area Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.3
Analysis Inputs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.4
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.4.1
Solar Radiation Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.4.2
Wind Environment Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.4.3
Outdoor Comfort Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.5
Case Study Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6
Discussion
67
7
Conclusion
75
8
Further Studies
77
==PAGE:9==
9
Bibliography
79
10 Appendix
85
10.1 Appendix A: Correspondence with Architecture Companies . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
10.2 Appendix B: Picture of Grasshopper Analysis and Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
10.3 Appendix C: Picture of Grasshopper Radiation Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
10.4 Appendix D: Picture of Grasshopper Wind Environment Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . 101
10.5 Appendix E: Picture of Grasshopper Outdoor Comfort Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
10.6 Appendix F: Design Proposal for SDE
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
10.7 Appendix G: Case Study Results: Solar Radiation Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
10.8 Appendix H: Case Study Results: Wind Environment Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . 109
10.9 Appendix I: Case Study Results: Outdoor Comfort Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
1
INTRODUCTION
1
Introduction
During the long and cold winters, in the Nordic climate, people are forced to spend most of their
time indoors. As the spring starts, people immediately seeks outside to enjoy the beginning of the
sun and warmth. People are sun bathing or having a picnic in the parks, walking in the streets
or barbecuing in their gardens. When the weather is nice, all available outdoor spaces are in use
because it is commonly known that the sun and warmth might not last for long.
Therefore, the quality of the outdoor spaces is crucial. Not only their layout and decorations, but
especially their physical qualities, which gives the best possible conditions for a successful outdoor
space. It is important to remember, that diﬀerent qualities are considered attractive depending on
the location. In the Nordic climate, people wish to stay in the sun and where there is lee and warmth.
Whereas in a Southern climate, people search for shadow and breezes to stay comfortable.
Often the outdoor areas are not thoroughly considered before a building project is ﬁnished. This is a
huge problem, because a building’s geometry, highly aﬀects the outdoor spaces around them. Two
of the most important physical qualities in an outdoor space, are the sun and shadow conditions,
and the wind conditions. The buildings can create much shade if they are placed close together, or
if the outdoor spaces are places to the north or east side of the buildings. The buildings can also
aﬀect the wind conditions for better or worse. Better if they create lee or worse if their shape create
unfavourable wind conditions because of corners or small passages. Furthermore, the climate changes
will cause more frequent extreme weather events in the future, which makes it even more important
to have the quality of the outdoor spaces in mind, during the development of new buildings.
According to various architect ﬁrms, it is diﬃcult and time consuming to incorporate analyses of
the physical qualities, and therefore it is often neglected [47]. However, according to architectural-
engineer, Jakob Strømann from Henning Larsen Architects, there is also an increasing interest from
building developers to incorporate outdoor spaces in the early design phases. That has also proven
to be a winning formula for Henning Larsen Architects [43].
In this project, we will therefore investigate the possibility of creating an user-friendly tool, which
can be incorporated into the early stages of building design. The aim of the tool is to help architects
examine a building’s impact on its surrounding outdoor spaces.
Page 1 of 111
==PAGE:12==
1
INTRODUCTION
1.1
Aim
In the ﬁrst level of information in the design process, and in the early design phases, the building
advisor, often the architect, prepare a profession model. This contains of the geometry and structure
of the building, and the buildings relation to the surrounding outdoor spaces [8]. The architects,
which were interviewed for this project, said that some of them conducted a sun and shadow study,
whereas others just had the sun and shadow conditions in mind, during the design process. Almost
none of the architects we talked to, looked into the outdoor comfort or wind environment, because
of the complexity in the simulations (see appendix A).
Therefore, it is important that the surrounding outdoor spaces are taken into consideration early
in the design process, because the design proposal can not be altered in later processes. Once the
geometry of the design proposal is determined, the design of the buildings functional and physical
properties begin.
This has lead to the following problem deﬁnition:
Problem Deﬁnition
How can we develop a tool, which makes it easier for decision-makers, to take outdoor
spaces into account, in the early phases of building design?
This thesis will investigate the problem statement, based on the interviews conducted with architec-
tural ﬁrms. The interviews clariﬁed, how the early phases of building design is structured, and how
much the outdoor spaces are taken into consideration in these phases. Based on these interviews,
this project will be investigate how to make the tool, in a way which is tailored to their needs and
way of working.
The aim of the tool is to make the calculations simple and user-friendly, so anyone can do them in a
relatively short time, and with no need for prior experience within the ﬁeld. Thereby, the architects
will be able to incorporate the tool into their work, and use it in the early phases of a building
project. Thus, making better requisites for the outdoor spaces.
1.2
Delimitation
It was considered necessary to specify a set of delimitations, in order to establish the boundaries of
the thesis. The delimitations are about the user’s abilities in Rhino and SketchUp, and the choosing
of parameters, which has been investigated in the project.
Before beginning the development of the tool, it is assumed that the user has a little knowledge
Page 2 of 111
==PAGE:13==
1
INTRODUCTION
of Rhino or SketchUp, and prior experience drawing buildings in the two programs. Furthermore,
if the user is using SketchUp, it is assumed that they know how to convert a SketchUp-ﬁle into
a Rhino-ﬁle. It was not assumed that the user has any knowledge of, how to use Grasshopper, or
know how to conduct analyses in Grasshopper.
It was also necessary to make some delimitations during the tool development, as the time frame
made it impossible to investigate every possible impact, a building has on its surrounding outdoor
spaces. Several possible parameters was considered, and three was selected, based on interviews with
architects and based on what experience from previous projects told us was the most important.
This was solar radiation as a sun/shadow study, wind environment and outdoor comfort.
The solar radiation was selected, because it is an analysis which often is a requirement in the
development plans for a city [47]. The wind environment analysis was chosen, because architects
have expressed a frustration, about the complexity in a wind environment analysis. Therefore, it
is often not taken into consideration when designing a building, even though it can be extremely
important for the outdoor spaces. The outdoor comfort analysis was chosen, because it would be
interesting to look into how the users of the urban areas, experience the outdoor spaces. Neither
the solar radiation, nor the wind environment analysis, say anything about the user-experience of
the outdoor spaces, which is extremely important for a future outdoor space.
1.3
Vocabulary list
Below is a vocabulary list with deﬁnitions for the diﬀerent vocabularies, which can act as a clariﬁ-
cation for the reader throughout this thesis.
• AI: A danish architect and engineering ﬁrm located in Copenhagen.
• Arkitema: A Scandinavian architect ﬁrm located in Aarhus, Copenhagen, Stockholm, Malmø
and Oslo.
• Butterﬂy: A plug-in for Grasshopper used for wind environment simulations.
• Calculation Surface: A surface drawn in Rhino, which the calculation will be carried out on.
• Canvas: The background in the Grasshopper script. All components of the script is placed
on the canvas.
• Component: The small ”boxes” in the Grasshopper script that each has a speciﬁc role in
order to carry out the diﬀerent analyses.
Page 3 of 111
==PAGE:14==
1
INTRODUCTION
• Creo Architects: A danish architect ﬁrm located in Odense.
• Gradient Map: An image of the output with colours representing the conditions.
• Grasshopper: A plug-in for Rhino used to make the diﬀerent analyses in the tool.
• Green Mobility: Sustainable transportation, such as walking, cycling and electrical vehicles.
• Group: A cluster of components, panels and notes in Grasshopper, joined together in a box.
• Henning Larsen: A danish architect ﬁrm located in Copenhagen.
• Ladybug: A plug-in for Grasshopper used for the solar radiation and outdoor comfort analysis.
• Mesh: A division of an object into small boxes. Used for the wind environment analysis.
• Open Source: A type of computer software where the copyright holder grants users the rights
to use, change, and distribute the software to anyone and for any purpose.
• Panel: A textbox in Grasshopper - for this thesis the blue panels are the one that needs an
input from the user.
• Pedestrian Level: A point 1.5 m above the ground, approximately corresponding to the
height of pedestrians. Used in Grasshopper for simulations where the pedestrians are the area
of interest.
• PLH: A danish architect ﬁrm located in Copenhagen.
• Plug-in: A software component which acts as an extension to an existing computer program
and adds a speciﬁc feature.
• Rhino: A 3D-drawing and modelling program.
• Script: A list of commands which automates the execution of tasks. In this case the script is
the collection of the diﬀerent groups, components, panels and notes.
• SketchUp: A 3D-drawing and modelling program.
• Sustainable Development Goals (SDG): A set of goals deﬁned by the UN, which aim to
end poverty, protect the planet and ensure prosperity for everyone by 2030.
• Toggle: Changing between two operating modes, such as on/oﬀ.
• Urban Space: Open spaces in cities, often used as parks or squares.
• Vandkunsten: A danish architect ﬁrm located in Copenhagen.
Page 4 of 111
==PAGE:15==
1
INTRODUCTION
1.4
Thesis Structure
The structure of the thesis is visualized below, in ﬁgure 1. The thesis begins with a section about
the methods used in the project. Next, is a literature study, which investigates the theoretical back-
ground behind urban development, the parameters and existing tools. It is thought to begin broadly,
with the general role of the city, and then slowly narrowing the subject towards the tool and its
parameters.
Then the development of the tool is described. This is again beginning broadly, with an introduc-
tion to the program and plug-ins, then an overview of the tool properties, and ﬁnally a thorough
explanation of the internal processing of data, in the three diﬀerent analyses. Then a case study is
conducted, and ﬁnally the tool is discussed in regards to the learnings of the case study, the diﬀerent
sources of errors and the tool parameters.
Page 5 of 111
==PAGE:16==
1
INTRODUCTION
Figure 1: Thesis Structure
Page 6 of 111
==PAGE:17==
2
METHOD
2
Method
This chapter will describe the methods used throughout the thesis. Each method will include why it
was found necessary, along with general theory about the method, and how it has been implemented
in the thesis. Furthermore, the chapter will include the methods used, both directly and indirectly,
during the creation of the tool: Interviews, literature study, trial and error method and case study.
It will also include a section about the working process, during the thesis, and how the outbreak of
COVID-19 aﬀected the work.
2.1
Semi-Structured Interviews
The interviews were used in this thesis, as a method of gaining more knowledge as to how the
architects work. This is both in regards to how their process generally is, and which programs they
use to draw in, so the tool could be tailored to their needs and way of working.
Additionally, we were also very interested in ﬁnding out, whether they already investigate the physical
outdoor environment, and if so, how they do it. This was mainly to investigate, if the architects
were aware, that it is important to incorporate this into the early design phases, and if the methods
they use, if any, were similar to the one we were making.
The semi-structured interview, is a form of interview, which is formalized and planned [24]. It is
conducted based on an interview guide, which contains a series of questions that encourage a dialog,
while still keeping the interview under control. It is important, that the questions in the interview
guide is formulated openly and unbiased, so the interviewee will not be biased by the opinions of the
interviewer, while also compelling them to elaborate on their answers [1].
The interview guide makes it easy to get the necessary answers, while keeping it possible to ask
follow-up questions. It is considered an especially advantageous method, when there is more than
one interviewer, and in cases where it is only possible to interview once [1]. Generally it is a good
method to gain deep insight into experiences, dynamics and knowledge, which was otherwise not
accessible [24], and it is especially this which makes the interview valuable.
One of the few disadvantages of the method, and something which is important to be aware of, is the
possibility that the responses can be subjective, and be an expression of the interviewees individual
views, such as political orientation or style of communication. However, as long as this is kept in
mind, it is not something which is necessarily a problem.
Page 7 of 111
==PAGE:18==
2
METHOD
The questions for the interview guide used in this thesis, were formulated in a way, so they would
be easy to understand, while also being open for the interviewee to give a short answer. This was a
deliberate choice, because we wanted to make it possible for the interviews to be short. Experience
has told us that this would make it more likely for the companies to respond, and participate in the
interviews. It was also important for us, to get responses from several architectural ﬁrms, so we
could ﬁnd out if there was a general procedure or not.
Initially, we sent out the questions in an email, as we found this an appropriate way to approach
them, and they could answer the email quickly, if they did not wish to spend a long time on it.
Several people responded that they would like to speak to us, instead of merely answering the email.
Due to COVID-19, this had to be over the phone. Despite this, the results turned out much better
than the emails, as it made it possible for us, and them, to elaborate further on questions and
answers. In most cases it was one of the partners from the ﬁrm, who answered the questions. This
was very positive since they have a deep insight into the work in the ﬁrm. Emails and transcripts of
interviews can be seen in appendix A.
2.2
Literature Study
A literature study is a method where existing knowledge about a speciﬁc subject is gathered. This
gives a strong scientiﬁc and theoretic foundation for the project. It is usually carried out in the
beginning of a project, as a preliminary exploration of the problem or subject, and it is a good way
to get a better orientation of the subject and specify the problem [30]. By analysing the sources,
you get a clear picture of the ﬁeld and how your own research ﬁt in. Thereby, it will be possible to
discuss in a critical and objective way.
The literature study was considered relevant for this project, because it provided an insight into how
urban planning and outdoor spaces has been done in the past, and how it is done in the present. It
has also been used to get a better understanding of what a good outdoor space is, and which tools
is currently in use to analyse and measure it. It is important to know which tools already exists, so
that the tool which is developed in this project, can be adjusted and improved, based on the existing
tools’ pros and cons.
Furthermore, the literature study has been used to investigate the theory behind the parameters,
which the tool simulates for. And which physical properties in wind, sunlight and comfort aﬀect,
how a building is aﬀecting the surrounding outdoor areas.
The ﬁrst part of a literature study is to gain a general knowledge about the subject in order to
get a general impression of the investigation area. This is done by listing relevant keywords into a
Page 8 of 111
==PAGE:19==
2
METHOD
master list [16]. Since we already had an extensive knowledge about the overall subject of outdoor
spaces and urban planning, we did not ﬁnd it necessary to make an actual list. However, some of
the keywords that was used were: Outdoor space, urban planning, tools for urban development,
sustainability in urban areas and building impact on surrounding areas.
Based on the keywords, the next step is to gather all relevant literature. It is recommended to search
in all languages that you have reading skills in, and in all places where relevant literature can be
found [16]. For this project, we searched in english and danish. The main research took place on
bibliotek.dk, which is an online search engine containing all books, newspapers, and magazines for
all libraries in Denmark, including University libraries. Furthermore, we searched regularly on DTU
FindIt, Google and on their search engine for academic literature, Google Scholar. An additional
way of ﬁnding relevant literature, is to check the bibliography in the found literature, and thereby
ﬁnd further relevant material.
After the search, the literature must be sorted, so that only the most important sources are left.
This was done by ﬁrst evaluating the material based on relevance and then its quality based on
scientiﬁc validity. The quality of a publication can be determined based on a range of factors, and
there are several methods which can help, if needed [32]. Generally, where the article is published,
can tell a lot about the scientiﬁc validity. The expertise of the author is also important to look at,
both in regards to quality and validity. Experts are often associated with an academic institution,
has published wide and broad, and is often quoted by others. It is also important to be aware of
the reliability of the information from websites, as well as using the newest literature as much as
possible. This lowers the risk of basing the project on outdated or unreliable information [30].
Once the literature has been sorted, the information in the selected literature should be processed.
The publications must be studied thoroughly, while considering what the problem is and how they
address it in the literature. Also which theories they use, what the results and conclusions are, as
well as how this information can be transferred into our own project.
2.3
Tool Development: Trial and Error Method
For the tool development, we primarily used the trial and error method. The trial and error method
is quite easy to use. Basically, you try something, and if it does not work, you try a new thing.
Simply by repeating the trials, the errors are reduced, and at the end, the understanding gained
during the process, creates the solution [42]. As mentioned, during the development of the tool,
this was the most used method. This was not because we did not know what we were doing, but
because we often encountered errors in the script, due to complications and the diﬀerent building’s
Page 9 of 111
==PAGE:20==
2
METHOD
geometries.
Before the tool development, experience told us, that for each project, case or analysis made in
Grasshopper, the user needs to make a new script, which would ﬁt the speciﬁc geometry.
As
previously mentioned, it was strived to make the tool user-friendly for architects, to investigate the
surrounding outdoor spaces in early design phases of a building geometry. However, creating a new
script for each variation of a building geometry, is not very user-friendly. Therefore, it was important
to create a tool that could be used for every possible geometry.
Grasshopper is an open source program, which means that researchers, specialists, professors, stu-
dents etc. have the possibility of sharing their scripts. Each script is diﬀerent and contain diﬀerent
components, even though they run similar analyses.
We have investigated and compared many
scripts, for each of the diﬀerent analyses. Each component in each script has been thoroughly inves-
tigated, to understand why the component is important, and how the component is working. The
knowledge gained here, made it possible to create one script for each analysis, containing information
from all the previous scripts.
After each script was created, we tried to run the analysis on many diﬀerent geometries and calcu-
lations surfaces, to make sure it worked as it should. Every time we found an error, we went back
in the script, tried to understand the error and why it occurred, and then tried to run the analysis
again. At last, after countless of trials, we had developed a tool conducting the diﬀerent analyses
on every geometry without any errors.
It was also important that the results from the script we developed, was consistent with results from
real life experiments. When the script worked on every geometry, without any errors, we tried to
compare the results from real life experiments. Especially the wind environment analysis had caught
our attention, because it was extremely diﬃcult to create the script and run a simulation, that gave
an accurate result without any errors. However, by comparing the simulated wind analysis, with the
wind analysis conducted by the wind environment professor at DTU, Holger Koss, we discovered
that the results were the same.
2.4
Case Study Analysis
According to Shona McCombes, a case study examines a speciﬁc subject place, group, person, event,
etc., and is commonly used in educational, business or social research [31]. A case study is used
as many diﬀerent things. It can be used as a comparative investigation, that shows the relation
between two or more subjects. It can also be used to gather results, which can help to predict future
Page 10 of 111
==PAGE:21==
2
METHOD
trends, provide understanding on an important problem or illuminate hidden issues [50].
Before conducting a case study, it is essential to consider the research problem. The research problem
is the problem that needs to be investigated. The University of Southern California has set up a list
of questions to consider while choosing the research problem [50]:
• Does the case represent an example of a problem that requires an in-depth analysis?
• Does the case provide important insight in a hidden problem?
• Does the case oﬀer a new direction in future research?
These questions were an important part of our consideration, during the process of choosing the case.
It was also extremely important for us to choose a case, that somehow provided new knowledge about
the tool. We strived to choose a case where the use of the tool could provide broader knowledge
about the tool, and more insight into whether the tool worked as expected.
The case study was conducted on a speciﬁc site, as a comparative investigation of a before/after
study. This should help provide insight and understanding of the buildings impact on the surrounding
outdoor spaces. It was conducted in the Mirker District in Wuppertal, Germany. Further elaboration
on the area is described in chapter 5 Case Study. This case was chosen because a new tall building
is being proposed, and the case would give the opportunity to make an in-depth analysis of the
building’s impact. It might therefore provide information about hidden problems which the new tall
building could cause. This would both be useful for the architects working on the case, by oﬀering
them information that they could use, in future design proposals for the area. As mentioned, it was
also useful for this project, as it gave us more information about how the tool works, if there are
any issues with the tool and thus how it might be improved.
2.5
Method for the Working Process
Based on previous experiences, we decided to write our master thesis together. We knew that we
collaborate well, as we have previously written several large projects together, including our bachelor
thesis.
This has taught us, that while we have the same interests and approximately the same
knowledge, we also have diﬀerent strengths, which are expressed when we are working together. We
are good at guiding and seeking counsel with each other. And we often discuss procedures, results
and explanations and ask each other critical questions.
We often work parallel with each other, sometimes on diﬀerent things and sometimes on the same
Page 11 of 111
==PAGE:22==
2
METHOD
thing. When one of us has written a section of the thesis, the other one always proofreads and
adjusts. It is extremely important for us, that we both have a thorough understanding of what the
other one is doing, and why it has importance for the project. We discuss what each section must
contain, and every result gained from the diﬀerent analyses. During the tool development it was
crucial for us that we both worked on the same analyses, because we both wished to understand
each analysis.
Our collaboration and the development of the thesis turned out to be much more complicated than
anticipated, due to COVID-19. Not long after the project had started, COVID-19 came to Denmark,
and during the 6th week of the project, the country shut down almost completely. This ended up
having a massive impact on the working process, and our way of working had to be altered quite a
bit.
Since DTU was closed, and it was encouraged to see as few people as possible, we could not work
together in person anymore. This is something that is very important to us, since we like to discuss
and lean on each other. As mentioned, we consider it to be one of our strengths and it is one of
the reasons why we decided to work together. Therefore, we decided to Skype with the cameras on,
all day, while working. This meant that we could still discuss the problems we encountered and the
results. This still posed many problems, for instance it was harder to show each other the problems
or solutions that we wanted to talk about. We made it work by sending pictures back and forth.
Although it was much more diﬃcult and we often experienced that we did not talk about the same
problems. During the separation, it was very important for us that we worked on the same analysis,
because we both wanted to understand each of the analyses that the tool is based on. Again, this
was a major problem, since we found it diﬃcult to share all the new information and solutions to
the errors we discovered, because we could not see each others computer screens.
Luckily, as Denmark gradually reopened, we also felt it was safe for us to meet in person again.
Although it was still not possible for us to use our oﬃce at DTU, it was productive to the process,
that we where able to talk in person, which was very positive for the working process.
We were also not able to meet with our supervisor, from March and forward. Our meetings were then
held over Skype, which both posed some pros and cons. It was challenging, because our supervisor
likes to make illustrations of the things he talk about, which is usually very helpful. However, this
was not possible to do over Skype. It was also not possible for us to show him the tool, while it
was being developed. These challenges, we believe, made the meetings with our supervisor more
time consuming. For instance we had to spend some time acquainting him with the project, in the
beginning of each meeting, and we feel that if he had been able to meet in person, he would have
Page 12 of 111
==PAGE:23==
2
METHOD
had more knowledge about the project.
There were also positive aspects of having meetings with out supervisor over Skype. Our supervisor
is usually very busy and he can sometimes be diﬃcult to arrange a quick meeting with. But during
the COVID-19, he was not as busy as usual and therefore we were able to have a short, unplanned
meeting, if we had a quick question. This was nice because then we did not have to wait for our
questions to be answered.
Lastly, our project was also aﬀected by COVID-19, in the process of developing the tool. We were
supposed to meet in person, with one of the Rhino and Grasshopper experts at DTU, but because
of COVID-19 this was not possible. It was also not possible to do virtually, as he was supposed to
teach us about the diﬀerent plug-ins and their possibilities. Before COVID-19, we were depending
on this meeting, because we did not have much experience with tool development in Grasshopper,
and we hoped that he would be a huge help and even a co-supervisor. Instead, this was something
that we needed to do ourselves, which was rather diﬃcult and time consuming, since we only had
the guidance we could ﬁnd on online sources.
Page 13 of 111
==PAGE:24==
2
METHOD
Page 14 of 111
==PAGE:25==
3
LITERATURE STUDY
3
Literature Study
Before designing the tool, relevant topics were investigated in order to gain a deeper knowledge
about the subject. First, the role of the city throughout the years will be explained. Then, it will be
investigated, how specialists deﬁne a good outdoor space, and how a building aﬀect its surrounding
outdoor spaces on the three parameters: Wind environment, solar radiation and outdoor comfort.
Finally, an elaboration on why tools are used in urban developments, are held up against the interviews
with the architects.
3.1
Role of the City
Cities are made for humans by humans, and its primary purpose should be to provide value for
humans, and improve the quality of life for the people living there and using it. Everything that the
city is contributing with, should have a positive aﬀect on the people living there.
All through the history of cities, the structure and layout of the city has been aﬀecting the behaviour
of its inhabitants. The physical structure of the city, and urban planning, is a major part of each
city, even though it periodically has been neglected through history. Today, some of the historic
ideals in urban planning can still be seen. This is for instance, town squares, short walking distances
and the ”boulevard culture” originates from the urban regeneration of Paris in 1852 [20], and it is
still something which we are using a lot today.
According to the danish architect and urban planner, Jan Gehl, in his book ”Byer for mennesker”
[20], the focus on the cities providing value for the humans, has been neglected since the middle
of the 19th century. Especially, the human dimension were neglected in favour of creating more
space for the growing amount of cars and the growth of the cities in general. This resulted in less
space for the people, and an increase in pollution, noise level and risk of accidents. Along with the
development, came the new ideal of the modernistic urban planning. The thought was to create
a separation of functions, which meant that the individual building was in focus, rather than the
coherence of the city. It was also popular to omit all unnecessary decorations and ideals, such as
symmetry [11]. The urban theorist, Jane Jacobs, described in her book ”The Death and Life of
American Cities” [25] how this would end urban spaces and life in the city, and result in dead and
lifeless cities. Jan Gehl also express his concern regarding this tendency, in his book ”Byer mellem
mennesker”, as he feels the buildings became more and more isolated, distant and reserved [20].
Page 15 of 111
==PAGE:26==
3
LITERATURE STUDY
After the 1970’s, the modernistic ideal faded, and the cities were once again becoming more dynamic
and mixed-used. The cities are growing rapidly, as more people are moving away from the countryside,
and into the cities. Where in the 1950’s, it was only 30% of the worlds population that lived in cities,
it is now approximately 55%, and it is estimated that in 2050 it will be 70% [49]. Therefore, it is
necessary to reorganize the priorities, so the city development is mainly focused on the people who
are using the city. By doing so, it is possible to create living, safe, sustainable and healthy cities.
If more people are walking, biking or staying in an outdoor space, it will appear more alive, which
instantly makes it appear safer and healthier. Having a large amount of green mobility is also very
attractive for cities at the moment, because of the 17 UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
This also contributes to making the city more healthy, for instance in regards to lowering pollution
and noise [20].
It is therefore important to keep the people and inhabitants in mind, when transforming the cities
and creating new urban spaces. For instance, instead of expanding the roads and spaces for cars, it
would be better to expand the bicycle network. This will create better conditions for children and
elders with safe sidewalks and bicycle lanes, and invite them to use the green areas for exercise or
relaxation in connection with their everyday life.
3.2
Creating Good Outdoor Spaces
A good urban space does not have one uniform deﬁnition, because they often are being used for
diﬀerent purposes and by diﬀerent people. There are some fundamental qualities, that should be
met, in order to make the best possible outdoor space. The ﬁrst quality which should be fulﬁlled is
the physical environment, because nobody wants to stay in a space that is not comfortable.
This is something that architect and urban planner, Jan Gehl, is reﬂecting upon in his book ”Livet
mellem husene”, where he says: ”Where there is created better physical possibilities, the outdoor
activities will have a tendency to increase in number, duration and diversity” [21]. This means that
the urban spaces, that have good physical quality, will have a tendency to increase the amount of
voluntary activities. This is illustrated in ﬁgure 2 below.
Page 16 of 111
==PAGE:27==
3
LITERATURE STUDY
Figure 2: Correlation between physical quality and the amount of activities [21]
As the ﬁgure shows, the amount of necessary activities is not dependent on the physical quality.
But, both the social activities and especially the optional activities, increase when the physical
environment is good.
Jan Gehl states in his book, ”Byer for Mennesker”, that few things are more important for comfort
and well-being in outdoor spaces, than the climate present [20]. And it is one of the most essential
quality criteria, for people’s movement in the cities. The climate factors that Jan Gehl ﬁnds have an
impact on the experience of comfort is: Air temperature, humidity, chill factor and solar radiation.
Furthermore, a range of personal factors such as clothing and physiological diﬀerences also aﬀect
the comfort. It is important to note that the desired qualities can vary a lot, depending on the
region, situation, location and season [20].
Other fundamental qualities, which should be fulﬁlled for the urban space to be truly successful, is
factors such as safety and dimensions. Jan Gehl has developed a tool, which can be used to evaluate
or identify problems in an existing urban space, or used in the development of a new urban space.
He believes that the best and most well-functioning outdoor spaces around the world, all show a
comprehensive consideration on all 12 parameters.
The tool is called the ”12 Urban Quality Criteria” and consist of 12 parameters to evaluate the
urban space on. A picture of the tool is visualized in ﬁgure 3 below.
Page 17 of 111
==PAGE:28==
3
LITERATURE STUDY
Figure 3: 12 Urban Quality Criteria by Jan Gehl [20]
The tool is divided into three categories: Protection, Comfort and Enjoyment. The three categories
should be prioritized in the mentioned order. According to Jan Gehl in ”Byer for Mennesker”, there
should be a reasonable protection against risks, insecurity and unpleasant sensory inﬂuences, before
any other considerations [20]. This is for instance protection against traﬃc, accidents, crime and in
particular negative impacts from the climate such as draught, cold/heat, wind or noise.
After the basic protection is ensured, the next step Gehl ﬁnds essential for a good urban space,
is that the space provides good comfort. This is evaluated through six criteria about whether the
urban space gives opportunity to walk, stand, sit, watch, speak and do activities. It is also important
that they are considered for diﬀerent seasons and for diﬀerent times of day. Lastly, the enjoyment
should be considered. This is mostly related to whether there is a human scale, aesthetic qualities
Page 18 of 111
==PAGE:29==
3
LITERATURE STUDY
and possibilities to enjoy positive climatic qualities, such as sun/shadow and lee/breeze, depending
on the location and season [20].
The ”12 Urban Quality Criteria” is being widely used, and is considered very eﬀective. One of the
disadvantages of the tool, is that it is a qualitative tool, rather than a quantitative tool. The output
will be based on personal experience and opinion, instead of objective data about the outdoor space.
Thus, the outputs might be diﬀerent, depending on the user of the tool.
The philanthropic union Realdania, is also very interested in the quality of life in the built environ-
ment, and sustainable urban development [35]. They have created a tool called ”Tool for Sustainable
Urban Development” in 2012, which aim to evaluate, adjust and require diﬀerent demands regard-
ing sustainability in the development of urban areas. The tool is developed for professional urban
planners, such as municipalities, consultants and so forth [35]. It is based on 23 diﬀerent indicators,
divided into three categories: Environment and Resources, Social and Health and Economy.
The tool can be adjusted to diﬀerent needs, and can be used in three diﬀerent ways [35]:
• Simple Use where the user uses the indicators as a check-list, to get an overview of whether
the desired assets of sustainability, has been managed.
• Flexible Use where the user chooses some of the indicators, which they ﬁnd relevant for the
project, and rank these on a scale of 1-5.
• Full Use where all the indicators are considered relevant for the project, and are ranked on a
scale of 1 - 5.
Each score for the diﬀerent indicators can be added to a Excel-sheet created speciﬁc for the tool.
The sheet creates a weighted average and is able to tell which category that performs best.
As with the ”12 Urban Quality Criteria”, one of the challenges with the tool is that is is qualitative.
Since the user ranks the diﬀerent indicators, it solely the user’s experience and thoughts, which
decide whether the outdoor space is sustainable, not actual data.
3.3
A Buildings Impact on its Surrounding Outdoor Spaces
This section contain theory about each of the parameters, which will be in the tool: Wind environ-
ment, solar radiation and outdoor comfort. The theory behind the parameters will be discussed, to
provide a deeper understanding of the parameters, and how they might aﬀect the outdoor spaces.
Page 19 of 111
==PAGE:30==
3
LITERATURE STUDY
3.3.1
A Buildings Impact on the Wind Environment
Architect Søren Nielsen Berg describes wind as the movement of air and a re-balance in the pressure
diﬀerence [4]. High pressure causes the air to slowly ﬂow down, while low pressure causes the air
to slowly ﬂow up [45]. Studies from the 1960’s and 1970’s shows the increasing realization of the
impact, which a tall building can have on the wind conditions in the area surrounding the building.
Tall buildings tend to intercept the high wind speeds, which exist higher up in the air, and deﬂect
them to the ground level [46].
Studies also show, that when the wind meets a building, it creates a low pressure in the leeward
side, and a high pressure in the windward side. Turbulence is created in the pressure zones, and
is causing the wind to move in diﬀerent directions and with diﬀerent wind speeds [5]. This might
cause the surrounding areas at the bottom of the building to be uncomfortably windy [46].
Figure 4: Visualization of how the wind reacts when meeting a building geometry [46]
As mentioned, a buildings height also has an impact on the wind environment. If the building is
more than three storeys tall, the wind speeds will increase at the pedestrian’s level, and thereby
impact the surrounding outdoor spaces and buildings. If the building is four times higher, or more,
than the surrounding buildings, the wind speeds at the pedestrians level will double, compared to
the wind speeds at the top of the building [4].
The dimensions of a building have a huge impact on, how the wind aﬀect the surrounding outdoor
spaces. Buildings with sharp edges creates the most uncomfortable situation for the pedestrians
Page 20 of 111
==PAGE:31==
3
LITERATURE STUDY
because of the turbulence. Whereas, round buildings do not create turbulence, due to the lack of
edges.
When conducting a wind environment analysis, it is important to look at the surrounding area. The
surrounding area, and the obstacles on the ground, are often described with a roughness coeﬃcient.
The lowest part of the atmosphere is experiencing lower wind speeds, because of the friction with
the earth - this is called the boundary layer.
The height of the boundary layer, above the ground, varies due to the obstacles on the ground. The
height of the boundary layer will be tallest, where the obstacles on the ground are the biggest. This
implies, that the roughness coeﬃcient increases, when the height of the boundary layer increases.
The largest roughness coeﬃcients are experienced in dense urban areas, with tall buildings. Whereas,
the smallest roughness coeﬃcient, is experienced in wetlands or across ﬁelds [46].
Figure 5: An example of three diﬀerent boundary layer with diﬀerent roughness coeﬃcient [46]
Diﬀerent groups of buildings also have an impact on the wind environment in the city. In a low and
dense group of buildings, where all the buildings are the same height, and only have a narrow space
in between them, the wind will act like a blanket. The wind will move above all the buildings, and
thereby create a limited amount of wind in between the buildings. In urban block buildings, the
courtyard will not be bothered by the wind. Whereas, the streets will experience high wind speeds,
especially around the corners of the block.
The design of diﬀerent outdoor spaces impact the wind environment as well. The three most common
Page 21 of 111
==PAGE:32==
3
LITERATURE STUDY
eﬀects are described below:
• The Barrier Eﬀect appears where the building is rather low, but abnormally long. The wind
will create turbulence along the leeward side of the buildings facade. This most often happens,
when the wind hits diagonally on the longitudinal side of the building [5].
• The Venturi Eﬀect appears in the entrance of gates, or at small passages, between two
buildings. The wind speed increases at compression, and will be the largest, where the passage
is smallest [46].
• The Passage Eﬀect appears in long and straight outdoor spaces, such as streets. The pressure
compensation along the buildings will cause the wind speed to increase [5].
All these eﬀects will create unpleasant situations for pedestrians and users of the outdoor areas.
Therefore, it is crucial for the design of the building and outdoor space, to try to avoid situations,
where these eﬀects might happen.
It might be diﬃcult for someone, without prior knowledge about wind to understand, what the
diﬀerent wind speeds imply. In 1805 Francis Beaufort developed the Beaufort Scale, which describes
what diﬀerent wind speeds correspond to. The scale is visualized below, and starts at 0 - 0.2 m/s
which is described as ”calm” - where smoke rises vertically, and ends at >32.7 m/s and is described
as “hurricane” [46].
Page 22 of 111
==PAGE:33==
3
LITERATURE STUDY
Figure 6: The Beaufort Scale on Land [46]
3.3.2
A Buildings Impact on the Solar Radiation
A solar radiation analysis is also known as a ”Sun and Shadow study”. It is the study of when the
surrounding outdoor spaces experience shadows caused by a building. According to Richmond Hill, a
sun and shadow study is a technical analysis or document, that illustrates a visual model. It provides
a description of the shadows cast by a proposed geometry, on its surrounding outdoor spaces, at
various times of day, throughout the year [48]. These surrounding outdoor spaces includes streets,
parks, residential areas, community outdoor areas and public realms [9]. A sun and shadow study is
Page 23 of 111
==PAGE:34==
3
LITERATURE STUDY
most often conducted on the solstice dates: June 21st (summer solstice), September 21st or March
21st (spring and autumn equinox) or on December 21st (winter solstice) [9].
The solar radiation can have a huge impact on the outdoor comfort. Today, a solar radiation analysis
is often a requirement in development applications, because the impact on outdoor spaces has an
importance for zoning plans, site plans and oﬃcial plan amendments. However, a solar radiation
analysis is not always a requirement, when developing new geometries for urban context.
It is not as simple as one might think, to determine how much a building will aﬀect the solar
radiation, as it depends on the individual design, location and orientation of the building. Specialists
disagrees about when a solar radiation analysis is necessary. Some believe that it is necessary if the
buildings are more than 11 m high, and some say 5 - 6 storeys high. Others ﬁnd it necessary, if the
building is to be placed in mid- and high-density areas, where additional height is being requested,
near shade-sensitive uses or on sites where diﬀerent height and massing conﬁgurations are possible
[7].
Research shows, that buildings generally have a larger impact on the surrounding outdoor space, if
they are located SE, S and SW of the area rather than if they are located NW, N and NE of the
area [44]. For instance, if a 50 m long and 50 m tall building is located south of the outdoor space,
there is a large risk, that it might have a negative impact on the outdoor space, rather than if the
building was placed north of the outdoor space [44]. Therefore, it should be strived to place and
design the building so the shadow will not impact the buildings surrounding outdoor spaces.
When designing new buildings for urban spaces, there is a rule of thumb, which is important to
remember, regarding shadows cast by the new building proposals: The shadow cast by the new
design proposals must not reach a line 7.5 m from the existing buildings exterior walls [9]. It is
widely discussed if this is a general rule or just a ”rule” to consider during urban development.
3.3.3
A Buildings Impact on the Outdoor Comfort
In 1973, researcher A. D. Penwarden, made one of the ﬁrst steps towards calculating outdoor
comfort, which was not a thing that had previously been investigated thoroughly. The conventional
comfort theories relied on a steady-state model, where the production of heat was equivalent to
the heat losses to the environment. While the environmental parameters which aﬀect the comfort
conditions outdoors are similar to the ones indoors, they are much more complex outdoor, because
the variability areas as well as the range of activities are much wider [33].
Penwarden made a thermal comfort equation for outdoor activity, by adapting a mathematical
expression made for indoor environments. The equation takes air movement, air temperature, solar
Page 24 of 111
==PAGE:35==
3
LITERATURE STUDY
radiation, metabolic rate and clothing level into account, to calculate the thermal comfort. The
equation strives to achieve thermal equilibrium, which means that, for instance, a high temperature
does not necessarily mean that the comfort is bad. It only means that the higher the air temperature
is, the more the other variables need to be adjusted, in order to maintain a thermal equilibrium, and
thus having good outdoor comfort [33].
As for today, when talking about outdoor comfort, it is possible to make the calculations more
complicated. Although the primary parameters are still the same as Penwarden was looking at. This
includes air temperature, solar radiation, wind speed and relative humidity along with the metabolic
rate and clothing level. Some would also argue that noise level, precipitation, vibration and air
quality are essential parameters for the outdoor comfort. However, they will not be included in the
following [46].
The air temperature is described, as the measure of how hot or cold the air is. The air temperature
is aﬀected by the solar radiation, and aﬀects the relative humidity, the wind direction and wind
speed. Furthermore, it aﬀects the precipitation such as rain, sleet and snow [18]. People tend to
adjust to the air temperature, either by putting on more clothes, in cold conditions, or by removing
layers of clothes, in hot conditions [46]. By changing the clothing level, the thermal equilibrium is
maintained.
As previously mentioned, solar radiation is about the sun and shadow conditions, and does also have
a major impact on a person’s thermal comfort. In cold climates, such as Northern Europe, people
tend to welcome the extra heat gained from the solar radiation. Whereas, people in warm climates,
like the Southern Europe, generally prefer to stay in shaded areas to reduce the heat input from the
sun [46]. Direct sunlight is likely to increase the outdoor air temperature, which can prolong the
outdoor season during Spring and Autumn [5]. The outdoor season is the period of a year where
it feels natural to stay outdoor. For instance, in the Nordic climate the outdoor season goes from
May to September [5]. If the surrounding buildings are designed in a way where they shield from
the wind, and do not shield for the sunlight, the outdoor season can be prolonged with up to 1 - 2
months [5].
In an outdoor comfort analysis, the wind speed can also be one of the main reasons for not staying
in a particular outdoor space. Large wind speeds (> 8 m/s) are often a disruptive and unpleasant
factor in outdoor spaces. Whereas, small wind speeds (< 4 m/s) can feel refreshing, especially in a
warm climate.
The relative humidity does not have a massive impact on the outdoor comfort in cold conditions,
because the humidity usually is low. However, in hot conditions, where the humidity is high, the
Page 25 of 111
==PAGE:36==
3
LITERATURE STUDY
human body needs to increase the heat losses to maintain thermal comfort, which is achieved by
sweating [46]. The high humidity can therefore tend to feel unpleasant.
Overall, as previously mentioned, it can be complicated to determine whether an outdoor condition
is comfortable or not.
Researches and scientists have investigated how to measure the outdoor
comfort, and have found many diﬀerent ways to measure it. Some of the more common outdoor
comfort indices are:
• Standard Eﬀective Temperature (SET) is a comprehensive comfort temperature index,
calculated through skin wettedness and skin temperature [55].
• Physiological Equivalent Temperature (PET) is used to measure heat stress in outdoor
spaces, also known as the output of Munich Energy Balance Model (MEMI) [55].
• Predicted Mean Vote (PMV) predicts the mean value for a group of individuals, using
parameters as clothing insulation, metabolic rate, radiation temperature, dry temperature,
relative humidity and wind speeds [55].
• Universal Thermal Climate Index (UTCI) take relative humidity, wind speed, air tem-
perature and solar radiation into account, then compare these parameters with two diﬀerent
models: A physiological model and a clothing model [55]. The output is then regarded as
the reference environmental temperature causing strain. The output is measured in UTCI ◦C,
and can be observed in a ﬁgure 7. As the ﬁgure shows, the optimal to strive for, is the green
area, with a UTCI of 9 - 26 ◦C. For this thesis the outdoor comfort will be calculated using
the UTCI-index.
Page 26 of 111
==PAGE:37==
3
LITERATURE STUDY
Figure 7: Explanation of UTCI [26]
3.4
Tools for Urban Development
There exists several diﬀerent tools, for the evaluation of urban spaces. For instance, the previously
mentioned ”12 Urban Quality Criteria” by Jan Gehl or the Shadow Study tool in SketchUp. In
general, tools are used to design solutions, and to evaluate and choose between diﬀerent alternatives
[14]. Tools in urban development are either used, because it is a requirement from the people that
ﬁnance the project, or because it helps create an overview of the problems and opportunities, in a
project.
Studies show, that there are pros and cons related to the use of tools, in projects regarding urban
development. Some of the pros can be, that a tool can be used in the developing process of a
building, to legitimize diﬀerent design solutions or to investigate diﬀerent designs before choosing a
ﬁnal design. It can also be used as an analysis or evaluation, which can motivate the stakeholders
to create a better solution.
The cons are mostly related to the unknown factors. This is for instance not having enough knowledge
about how to use the tool, the data necessary is not available, or if the tool is too abstract or too
case oriented, so it only applies to one speciﬁc case [14]. One of the main reasons why tools are
not being used, is because they often are too complicated. Many technical tools, using quantitative
data, are developed by scientists with an extensive knowledge about the speciﬁc topic, and the
Page 27 of 111
==PAGE:38==
3
LITERATURE STUDY
development. However, they often forget about the usability, where the input data must be obvious,
and the output data must be easy to understand. When a tool is too complicated it often requires
many resources, and a lot of time to learn, implement and use, which the user often does not have
[14].
This is conﬁrmed by the architect ﬁrms Vandkunsten, PLH and AI (see appendix A). They often
experience that some tools and analysis are too complicated to carry out. Vandkunsten often use
an external company for the wind speed simulations, because of the complexity. Whereas, AI and
PLH does not look into the wind speed simulations at all, because they ﬁnd it too complicated.
AI and PLH mention, that they look into the solar radiation by doing a shadow analysis in the 3D
program SketchUp. SketchUp has a very user-friendly platform, which makes it easy for the user to
draw the diﬀerent designs. The shadows can be analysed by using the model’s latitude and longitude,
the selected time zone and the model’s cardinal orientation (N, S, E or W) [38]. Vandkunsten does
not use any tools for the solar radiation analysis. They do have it in mind in the beginning of the
design phase, but solely rely on their intuition.
Henning Larsen was the only ﬁrm that use Grasshopper, for their investigation. They explained, that
they looked into solar radiation, wind comfort and noise, by using diﬀerent scripts, run by diﬀerent
experts. Looking into these parameters early in the design phase, gave them a massive advantage,
and has often let them to win projects, because few other ﬁrms have the expertise to carry out these
investigations.
Many of the asked ﬁrms indicated, that a user-friendly tool which investigated climate parameters,
would be extremely interesting for them, as it would make it possible for them, to further investigate
the quality of the surrounding outdoor spaces, in their future work with urban development.
Page 28 of 111
==PAGE:39==
4
TOOL DEVELOPMENT
4
Tool Development
This chapter will concern the development of the tool, which has been named: Climate Optimization
Tool for Urban Spaces (COTUS). First, the technical program used in the tool development will be
described. Next, a description of the plug-ins Ladybug and Butterﬂy. And ﬁnally, a description on
how each analysis is carried out, and an elaboration of how the input data are processed.
As previously mentioned, the two most common drawing programs used by architects in the early
design phases, are Rhino and SketchUp. It is strived to make the tool as user-friendly as possible,
which is why it was decided to make it in Rhino. Since it is possible to convert SketcUp-ﬁles to
Rhino-ﬁles, it would be easy for every ﬁrm to implement the tool in their daily work, and to their
desired use.
4.1
Rhino and Grasshopper 3D
Rhino is a 3D-modelling tool for designers and architects.
It is known for its almost limitless
possibilities, within architectural complexity.
It is used to create, document, animate, edit and
analyze diﬀerent surfaces and solids, with no limit of size, degree or complexity, which makes it
very user-friendly for people not accustomed to 3D modelling. Grasshopper 3D, which COTUS is
developed in, is a plug-in for Rhino that allows the user to create algorithmic modelling on buildings
designed in Rhino [51]. From now on we will refer to Grasshopper 3D as Grasshopper.
COTUS is a Grasshopper script consisting of two diﬀerent plug-ins, each with a speciﬁc function.
One of the main reasons for choosing to develop the tool in Grasshopper, is because of the ability
to add plug-ins in the program. Since the tool should be user-friendly and easy to access, it was
advantageous that the diﬀerent analyses ran in the same script. In the early stages of the development
process, our ﬁrst ideas about the tool development was to use three diﬀerent programs, one for each
analysis.
And then trying to simplify and visualize the results in an excel-sheet.
However, by
only using Grasshopper, we can avoid unnecessary simpliﬁcations, which would otherwise have been
needed. Grasshopper makes it possible to create the three diﬀerent analyses in one script. The user
can then run the required analysis, without needing to change the software. It is also possible to
only run one or two of the analyses in the tool, if desired.
Grasshopper is a very graphic program. This means that another beneﬁt of using Grasshopper, is
Page 29 of 111
==PAGE:40==
4
TOOL DEVELOPMENT
that the user do not need to have a thorough knowledge about programming or scripting, in order
to understand and use the tool. Every component has a range of inputs and outputs, which are
described when the cursor is hovering over it.
The user does also not need to have prior knowledge about programming or scripting when developing
a tool. The mathematical functions which are needed in the analysis of a building geometry, are
integrated. Tools in Grasshopper are developed by dragging components onto the canvas, and linked
by drawing lines between their various inputs and outputs. Almost all components has a range of
inputs and outputs.
Some components are missing an input, which is ones that the user start
dragging onto the canvas. The output to these components are then connected to the inputs of the
subsequent components. At last, the user has created a script of linked components for the desired
analysis [36].
4.2
Plug-ins for Grasshopper
Grasshopper has a variety of diﬀerent plug-ins, which can be downloaded from the internet, and
added to the program.
Each type of plug-in can make a diﬀerent type of analysis and has its
own properties and purpose. For this project, the most interesting plug-ins to use are some of the
Ladybug-tools developed by Mostapha Sadeghipour Roudsari. The Ladybug-tools consist of four
diﬀerent plug-ins: Ladybug, Honeybee, Butterﬂy and Dragonﬂy.
For the development of COTUS the two plug-ins Ladybug and Butterﬂy will be used. Whereas,
Dragonﬂy and Honeybee will not be used, since their properties does not ﬁt the desired analyses,
which will be incorporated in the tool.
The two plug-ins that have been used to investigate and analyze are the following:
• Ladybug is used to analyze the solar radiation and the outdoor comfort, for the surrounding
outdoor space of a building design.
• Butterﬂy is used to analyze how the wind environment impact the surrounding outdoor spaces,
of the building design.
Both plug-ins will be further described in the following sections.
Page 30 of 111
==PAGE:41==
4
TOOL DEVELOPMENT
4.2.1
Ladybug
Ladybug is an environmental plug-in for Grasshopper.
The plug-in makes it possible to import
weather-ﬁles from around the world and, with it, create a variety of analyses with 3D interactive
graphics [54].
The creator of the plug-in, had noticed how one of the problems, which he often encountered, was
that results of simulations like these, often are presented in a report or a spreadsheet, which makes
it diﬃcult for designers to understand and thus use in their project. Therefore, the creator had a
focus on making the results very visual and graphic, to make them easier for outsiders to understand
[37]. Ladybug is mostly related to analyses regarding outdoor comfort. The output can be visualized
diﬀerently depending on the analysis, this can for instance be with a wind-rose, sun-path or gradient
map [54].
For the development of COTUS, Ladybug has been used to measure the sun and shadow conditions
on a site. This has been done as a solar radiation analysis, which is a way of measuring the amount
of sun on a site in a speciﬁc period of time.
It was also used to make a comfort analysis, where the overall comfort is calculated based on wind
speed, solar radiation, relative humidity and air temperature. The four parameters are compared
and the overall comfort is determined using the UTCI-index.
4.2.2
Butterﬂy
Butterﬂy is a plug-in capable of creating and running computational ﬂuid dynamics (CFD) simula-
tions by using BlueCFD Core, which is an open source CFD engine created to run several advanced
simulation models [27].
Butterﬂy is also capable of simulating the indoor airﬂow, indoor comfort, outdoor comfort, indoor
bouyancy-driven airﬂows and ventilation eﬀectiveness [27]. For this project, it has been used to
investigate the urban wind patterns and wind speeds at the pedestrians level, 1.5 m above ground
level.
As for all CFD simulations, such as Butterﬂy, it is crucial to consider the building geometry before
running a simulation. If the geometries of the buildings are too detailed the simulations cannot run,
due to complications with the mesh. This will be further elaborated in the following.
Page 31 of 111
==PAGE:42==
4
TOOL DEVELOPMENT
4.3
Tool Properties
As previously mentioned, COTUS consist of three diﬀerent analyses in one script. It is possible for
the user to conduct only one analysis without conducting the others, if they are not interested in all
three. Thus, as said, it is not a requirement to conduct all the analyses when using the tool.
4.3.1
Inputs and Outputs
Each of the three analyses have diﬀerent inputs and outputs. To make it as simple as possible, a table
has been made for each analysis to show, which inputs they need and which outputs they provide.
After each table, a short explanation of each input and output is given. A thorough explanation of
all inputs and outputs will be explained later, in section 4.3.2, Internal Data Processing.
Solar Radiation Analysis
Figure 8: Inputs and Outputs in the Solar Radiation Analysis
The solar radiation analysis needs four diﬀerent inputs. First, the location of the site, needs to
be set. The analysis also need to have an analysis period, which is speciﬁed with a month, date
and time of day. Lastly, it needs the building geometries, drawn in Rhino, along with a calculation
surface.
The output from the analysis is a gradient map showing the amount of solar radiation in the analysis
period measured in kWh/m2.
Page 32 of 111
==PAGE:43==
4
TOOL DEVELOPMENT
Wind Environment Analysis
Figure 9: Inputs and Outputs in the Wind Environment Analysis
The wind environment analysis needs ﬁve diﬀerent inputs. First, the building geometries and the
calculation surface need to be imported to the script. Then, the average wind speed at the reference
height (10 m) must be inserted. The wind speed must be in m/s. In Denmark it is possible to ﬁnd
the average wind speed, at the reference height, at the DMI-webside [10]. Lastly, the roughness
coeﬃcient must be set. This is a number between 0 - 7, depending on how many obstacles, there
are in the surrounding landscape. A table explaining the diﬀerent numbers is shown in ﬁgure 23 in
section 4.3.2 under Wind Environment Analysis.
The analysis creates three diﬀerent outputs. One visualizing the velocity vectors, one visualizing the
gradient map of the wind speed in m/s and one visualizing the gradient map of the wind pressure
in Pa.
Outdoor Comfort Analysis
Figure 10: Inputs and Outputs in the Outdoor Comfort Analysis
Page 33 of 111
==PAGE:44==
4
TOOL DEVELOPMENT
The inputs in the outdoor comfort analysis are quite similar to the inputs in the solar radiation
analysis. First a location must be selected. Then, an analysis period must be determined, with
a month, date and time of day. At last, the calculation surface and building geometries drawn in
Rhino, must be loaded into the script.
The output is a gradient map, of the Universal Thermal Climate Index (UTCI), measured in ◦C. The
map is an average of one hour of the selected analysis period.
4.3.2
Internal Data Processing
The following section, will be a thorough explanation of how each of the diﬀerent analyses in the
tool work. This includes what the user actively needs to do, in order to get the analysis output,
along with an explanation of all the internal data processing, there is in the tool, and what it means
for the analyses.
A picture of each analysis is visualized in appendix B - E.
Before the analyses are carried out, it is essential that the plug-ins, Ladybug and Butterﬂy for
Grasshopper, are downloaded and installed. If the plug-ins are not installed, the tool cannot run.
This thesis will not describe how to do this, as there are several thorough guides to it online.
Each analysis will be carried out for a simple test geometry, to visualize what the results typically
look like. The simple test geometry can be seen in ﬁgure 11 and 12. The three buildings in the
test geometry are respectively 6 m, 9 m and 30 m high. The diﬀerent heights of the buildings are
chosen, because it illustrates how diﬀerent geometries aﬀects the surrounding outdoor spaces. All
analyses are simulated on the 21st of June.
Figure 11: Test Geometry (top view)
Figure 12: Test Geometry (perspective view)
Page 34 of 111
==PAGE:45==
4
TOOL DEVELOPMENT
Solar Radiation Analysis
The solar radiation analysis can be seen in appendix C. The ﬁrst step of the solar radiation anal-
ysis is to import the climate data. As previously mentioned, Ladybug has the ability to import a
weather-ﬁle, also called an EPW-ﬁle. The ﬁle contains various types of weather information, such as
relative humidity, direct and diﬀuse radiation, wind direction, wind speed and precipitable water [6].
All data are available for each hour of a year [19]. There are weather-ﬁles from all over the world,
and 20 diﬀerent sources have provided them. This means, that the way the data is processed is not
precisely the same for each site, as the derived time period is diﬀerent, depending on the source.
The data in Denmark is from the International Weather for Energy Calculations (IWEC), where they
use data from up to 18 years in the period 1982 - 1999 for most stations [15]. IWEC also provides
the EPW-ﬁles for a large part of western Europe, including the rest of Scandinavia, United Kingdom
and Germany.
Figure 13: Loading EPW-ﬁle
The EPW-ﬁle is downloaded through Grasshopper by setting the toggle to ”True” (see ﬁgure 13),
and thus opening the EnergyPlus website. Here all locations are marked with a coloured dot. The
desired location is selected, and the data is transferred to Grasshopper by selecting ”Copy Link to
Clipboard” and then inserting the link into the blue panel. A picture of the EnergyPlus website is
visualized in ﬁgure 14.
Page 35 of 111
==PAGE:46==
4
TOOL DEVELOPMENT
Figure 14: EnergyPlus website [29]
The loading of the EPW-ﬁle means that the solar radiation analysis is accustomed to the speciﬁc
site.
Therefore, it can be used all around the world and for all types of cases, since the solar
radiation varies a lot depending on the location. The tool also makes it possible to accustom for
local preferences of when to use the outdoor spaces. For instance in Denmark, the temperature is
often not very high, and therefore the outdoor spaces are not being used throughout the day. But
mostly during the middle of the day, where the temperature is the highest. In warmer countries such
as Spain or Italy, the temperature during the summer is so high, that the outdoor areas become
unusable during the middle of the day. Instead they are being used more during the mornings and
evenings, where the climate is more comfortable. The analysis period can take this into account,
and only simulate for the periods of time where the outdoor space is most likely to be used.
Based on the EPW-ﬁle, Grasshopper will generate a skymatrix, which is a subdivision of the sky
into squares, creating a dome. This is needed in the analysis, for Grasshopper to calculate the sky’s
radiation for each hour of the year.
After creating the skymatrix, the analysis period needs to be determined. As visualized below, in
ﬁgure 15, the analysis period is adjusted with sliders ranging from 1 to 12, 31 and 24 depending on,
Page 36 of 111
==PAGE:47==
4
TOOL DEVELOPMENT
whether it is the month, day or hour. There are three ”from” sliders representing the exact time
of year where the analysis should start, and three ”to” sliders representing the end of the analysis
period. Thereby, it is possible to simulate for either a single hour, a whole day or a month. If the
purpose of the analysis is to see where there is sun at a speciﬁc time of day and year, for instance
during lunch break, it is recommended that the analysis period is limited to 1 - 3 hours. The purpose
of the analysis can also be to determine whether there are areas, which are always shaded, and in
these cases it can be beneﬁcial to analyse for a whole day. Although it is possible to simulate for
any time of year, the analysis is often carried out at three speciﬁc periods: At winter solstice (21st
of December), at spring equinox (21st of March) or at summer solstice (21st of June).
After the analysis period is determined, Grasshopper will automatically use the analysis period to
determine, which of the calculated skymatrix’ that should be used.
Figure 15: Analysis Period
Then the calculation surface and buildings should be deﬁned in Grasshopper. The analysis can both
be carried out on the ground level, which is the most common when analysing outdoor spaces, but it
can also be on facades, for instance if the user is investigating the amount of sun on balconies. If the
analysis is carried out on the ground level, the user needs to make a surface underneath the buildings,
which should be selected as the calculation surface. It is very important that the calculation surface
is created/drawn as a very low box in Rhino. The height of the box does not have to be more 0.01
m, and must be placed above the ground level. If the calculation surface is not drawn as a box, the
analysis will be unable to run. The calculation surface is loaded into Grasshopper by right clicking
on the panel, and selecting ”Set One Brep”. The buildings are then selected. The existing buildings
and the design proposal should be selected here. They are selected by right clicking the panel and
selecting ”Set Multiple Breps”. Figure 16 below, shows where they are loaded into the script.
Page 37 of 111
==PAGE:48==
4
TOOL DEVELOPMENT
Figure 16: Import geometry and run analysis
The next step is the decision of how coarse the analysis should be. The coarseness is how many
squares Grasshopper should divide the analysis area into. The coarseness is dependable on the size
of the site. It is determined in ”GridSize” (see ﬁgure 16), and the standard grid size of 1 m is usually
appropriate. If it is too coarse, the gradient map output will not be nuanced or accurate enough.
And if it is too ﬁne-graded, Rhino can have issues running the analysis, and the program is in risk
of crashing. This also applies for the wind environment analysis and the outdoor comfort analysis.
After these settings are determined, the analysis can run. This is done by setting the toggle to
”True” in the ”Run Solar Radiation Analysis”-component.
Finally, the output will be visualized. As previously mentioned, the output is a gradient map showing
the amount of solar radiation in kWh/m2, on the calculation surface during the analysis period. It is
visualized automatically, when the toggle is set to ”True” in the previous step. Below is a visualization
of a solar radiation analysis of the test geometry, carried out in Copenhagen on the 21st of June at
12.00 - 14.00.
Page 38 of 111
==PAGE:49==
4
TOOL DEVELOPMENT
Figure 17: Example of the solar radiation analysis output with the test geometry
It is not necessary to do more. But, the legend can be modiﬁed by setting the upper and lower limit
and the interval between the numbers. This is done by inserting a number in the blue panels and
dragging a line to either ”lowBound”, ”upperBound” or ”numSegments”, see ﬁgure 18. If this is
not changed Grasshopper will automatically make a legend, that suits the results.
Figure 18: Display results
Page 39 of 111
==PAGE:50==
4
TOOL DEVELOPMENT
Wind Environment Analysis
The wind environment analysis can be seen in appendix D. Before starting to work with Butterﬂy, it is
essential to consider the design of the geometry. Unnecessary geometry details must be simpliﬁed as
much as possible. This means that each building should be modelled as a box, for instance without
details such as columns or balconies [17]. It is also important to consider the wind direction. Before
starting the analysis, the geometries and calculation surface must be rotated to ﬁt the direction of
the wind. The table below, describe how many degrees the geometries and calculation surface must
be rotated to ﬁt the wind direction.
Figure 19: Wind direction and corresponding rotation angle
The ﬁrst step in the analysis is to import the building geometry. This is done by right clicking on
”Buildings” and selecting ”Set One Brep” or ”Set Multiple Brep” depending on, whether there are
one or more buildings on the site. It is important to select all the existing buildings, and the design
proposal on the site.
Grasshopper then uses the building geometry to create a butterﬂy geometry, which is necessary to
make the following analysis possible. The reﬁnement level for the geometry is chosen during the
creation as well. For this analysis the reﬁnement level for the geometry is set to (2,2). The higher
the interval of numbers the more reﬁned the geometry will be and the longer the analysis will take.
The level (2,2) should be enough to get a accurate result.
Page 40 of 111
==PAGE:51==
4
TOOL DEVELOPMENT
Figure 20: Import geometry and create butterﬂy geometry
A reﬁnement region is automatically created as well. The reﬁnement region is created around the
geometry, and is a small invisible box surrounding all buildings on the site. The reﬁnement region is
important for the analysis because of the mesh.
After the building geometries are loaded into the script, the calculation surface should be imported.
As with the solar radiation analysis, the calculation surface is the surface where all the buildings
are placed. This is done by right clicking on ”Calculation Surface”, then selecting ”Set One Brep”,
since there only is one calculation surface. It is important to remember that the surface must have
holes in it, where the buildings are intersecting with the surface. The holes are made in Rhino, and
there is a thorough guidance on how to do it in the top of the Grasshopper script, see ﬁgure 49 in
appendix B. If the holes are not drawn the calculation can not run, because of an error in the mesh.
Furthermore, it is crucial to remember that the calculation surface should not be too big because
the surface must be within the boundaries of the wind tunnel to prevent any errors.
Figure 21: Import calculation surface
When the calculation surface is loaded into the script, a series of test points are generated for the
surface. This is necessary for the visualization of the result. The surface is divided into a grid, which
can be altered in regards to grid size and distance from base surface. As for the solar radiation
Page 41 of 111
==PAGE:52==
4
TOOL DEVELOPMENT
analysis, the grid size alter the coarseness of the grid and determine the reﬁnement of the future
gradient map. As a standard, the grid size is set to 1 m, which is a medium coarseness, causing
the result visualization to be acceptably nuanced while still having a rather short calculation time.
The distance from surface refers to the height which the calculation will be done in. Typically, the
calculation should be carried out at the pedestrian level.
Afterwards, Butterﬂy simulates a wind tunnel around the geometries. The size of the wind tunnel is
calculated automatically in the tool, and are based on the heights and widths of the geometries. It
is possible to change the size of the wind tunnel if necessary under ”tunnel-params”, see ﬁgure 22.
However, Grasshopper is fully capable of creating the wind tunnel without manual help, which also
makes it much more user-friendly.
Figure 22: Creating the wind tunnel by setting the wind speed and roughness coeﬃcient
It is also possible to change the reference height of the wind, the wind speed and the roughness
coeﬃcient of the cite, for the wind tunnel. As default, the reference height is set to 10 m, which
is an universal reference height, when measuring wind speeds. Hence, it is not necessary to change
the reference height. The roughness coeﬃcient should be changed based on the building geometry’s
surrounding spaces. The higher roughness coeﬃcient is, the more obstacles has the surrounding land-
scape. This is both in terms of buildings and vegetation. A description of the diﬀerent coeﬃcients
can be seen in table 23 below. They can also be seen in the script in the ”createCaseFromTunnel”-
component by letting the cursor hovering over ”landscape”.
Page 42 of 111
==PAGE:53==
4
TOOL DEVELOPMENT
Figure 23: Description of the diﬀerent roughness coeﬃcients
Unfortunately, it is not possible to change the direction of the wind, since the plug-in is not fully
developed yet. As mentioned in the beginning of the chapter, the desired wind direction should be
achieved by rotating the geometry. When rotating geometries with large calculation surfaces, it is
possible to rotate the geometry, so the calculation surface is outside the boundaries of the wind
tunnel. If the calculation surface is outside the wind tunnel, the mesh cannot be generated and the
analysis cannot run. The desired wind speed can be achieved by changing the number connected to
Page 43 of 111
==PAGE:54==
4
TOOL DEVELOPMENT
the ”Wind Vector”.
By setting the toggle to ”True” the wind tunnel is created. After the creation of the wind tunnel,
the grading component is used to give a more eﬃcient way of reﬁning the mesh, and substitute the
reﬁnement region.
The next step is to create the mesh. A mesh splits the geometry into a number of pieces, then do
calculations for each piece, and ﬁnally put them back together [39]. In this case the wind speed
and wind pressure will be calculated for each piece of the mesh. It is important to do the mesh
generation, because it is not always the same pressure and velocity acting at every piece [39].
Figure 24: Create block mesh and snappy hex mesh
The block mesh is created ﬁrst. The block mesh decompose the geometry into three dimensional,
hexahedral blocks, where the edges of the blocks can be arcs, splines or straight lines [22]. The
block mesh is illustrated in ﬁgure 25 below.
Figure 25: Example of a block mesh
Page 44 of 111
==PAGE:55==
4
TOOL DEVELOPMENT
Thereafter, the snappy hex mesh is generated. The snappy hex mesh is reﬁning the block mesh by
splitting the cells from the block mesh surrounding the geometry [23].
As previously mentioned, the reﬁnement region and the grading both help reﬁne the mesh in the
analysis. The more pieces the geometry is split into, the more accurate the calculations will be.
However, it is often time consuming to calculate every piece in a mesh of high quality. Therefore,
meshes with lower quality is preferred in a simple analysis.
Next, the variables that are being tested in the analyses, is determined. The test variables is set
to analyze the wind speeds and the wind pressure.
Then the preparatory work for the plotted
residuals starts. The residuals show when the solution is convergent. If the user stops the analysis
before the solution is convergent, the results might not be accurate. By right clicking on ”Rec” and
selecting ”Select One Brep” the program then opens the Rhino Geometry where the user can draw
a rectangle. When the solution starts running, the residuals plotted at diﬀerent graphs are shown
inside this rectangle. The solution can be stopped once the graphs are convergent, that is, when
the graphs are not changing in values. An example of a residual plot is visualized below in ﬁgure
26. Figure 26 shows four diﬀerent graphs in the ﬁrst part of the plot, before they start to converge.
One plot showing the pressure, one showing the speed in the x-direction, one showing the speed in
the y-direction and one showing the speed in the z-direction.
Figure 26: Example of Residuals Plot
When the mesh has been generated, the test variables has been chosen and the rectangle for the
residuals has been drawn, it is possible to start the simulation of the solution. By setting the toggles
to ”True”, the simulation starts running.
Page 45 of 111
==PAGE:56==
4
TOOL DEVELOPMENT
Butterﬂy only simulates a snapshot of the given wind speed and pressure in the surrounding outdoor
spaces instead of an hour determined solution, like the solar radiation analysis and the outdoor
comfort analysis do. This is due to the calculation time. As for the solar radiation analysis, it is
possible to import EPW-ﬁles for a given location in Butterﬂy. However, the smallest interval of time
in the EPW-ﬁles are of one hour. And simulating one hour of wind, even on a small geometry, can
take around 24 - 48 days of computational time. Therefore, all wind simulations are carried out as
a snapshot [19], meaning that the analysis is an instantaneous image of the conditions.
The solution automatically ﬁnishes after 600 iterations for a simple model, because the residuals
should be convergent at this point. It is also possible to stop the simulation manually, if the user
wants to. As mentioned, this is not recommended since the solution might be inaccurate due to the
missing simulation time. The solution is visible during the simulation time, and is renewed every 60
seconds.
Butterﬂy prints the users desired solution. The solution can be a map showing the diﬀerent wind
velocity vectors, or a gradient map showing either the wind pressure or the wind speed. Each of the
diﬀerent solutions has been put into a group, to make it more user-friendly. The illustrated results
below, are all simulated for a wind speed of 6 m/s at the reference height of 10 m. The wind speed
at 6 m/s is chosen, because it is the average wind speed in June in Denmark [52].
Page 46 of 111
==PAGE:57==
4
TOOL DEVELOPMENT
Figure 27: Result visualization
If the desired solution is the wind velocity vectors, then the user should right click on the ”VDisEx”-
component, and select ”Preview” in the group ”Visualize Velocity Vectors”, see ﬁgure 27. The wind
velocity vectors are illustrated in ﬁgure 28 below.
Note: Figure 28, is of a simulation with a wind speed of 14 m/s and a roughness coeﬃcient of 1.
This has been done to make a better visualization of the velocity vectors.
Page 47 of 111
==PAGE:58==
4
TOOL DEVELOPMENT
Figure 28: Example of the velocity vector output with the simple test geometry
If the user wants the tool to display the diﬀerent wind speeds for the gradient map, then the
user should right click on ”reColorMesh”-component and select ”Preview” in the group ”Visualize
Gradient Map of Wind Velocity” (see ﬁgure 27). If a gradient map of wind pressure is desired, the
user should right click on ”reColorMesh”-component and select ”Preview” in the group ”Visualize
Gradient Map of Wind Pressure”. Both visualizations are pictured in ﬁgure 29 and 30 below.
Figure 29: Example of gradient map of velocity
Figure 30: Example of gradient map of pressure
Page 48 of 111
==PAGE:59==
4
TOOL DEVELOPMENT
Outdoor Comfort Analysis
The outdoor comfort analysis can be seen in appendix E. Similar to the solar radiation analysis,
the ﬁrst step is to download and import the climate data (EPW-ﬁle) containing all needed weather
information for the selected outdoor comfort analysis.
This is done in the exact same way, as
described in the solar radiation analysis, by setting the toggle to ”True” and copying the link from
the EnergyPlus website, to the blue panel in Grasshopper, see ﬁgure 31.
In this analysis, there is loaded statistics from the EPW-ﬁle into Grasshopper, which makes it possible
to analyse, for instance for an extreme hot week or an typical spring week. In this statistical option,
the recommended analysis period changes based on the historical statistics and actual data from
the speciﬁc location. Depending on which source that calculated the data, the time period for the
statistics can vary, but it is usually 15 - 20 years [15].
The recommended analysis period can be shown, by dragging a line from the desired statistical time
period to the panel on the right. The output will then be a series of numbers, as shown below in
ﬁgure 31. The numbers are referring to the month, date and hour, which would be good in order to
make the simulation for the selected statistic. In the example presented, the statistics shows, that a
typical spring week in Copenhagen is on the 5th - 11th of April from 01.00 - 24.00, which can then
be inserted into the analysis period if desired. It is optional to use this feature, otherwise the user
can merely analyse for the typical summer solstice, or spring equinox, as with the solar radiation
analysis.
Figure 31: Turning the toggle to ”True” and importing the EPW-ﬁle
Page 49 of 111
==PAGE:60==
4
TOOL DEVELOPMENT
After this, the geometry should be loaded into the script. Like for the other analyses, all the existing
buildings and the design proposals should be selected in ”Buildings”, by right clicking and selecting
”Set Multiple Breps”. Then, the calculation surface should be set. As with the wind environment
analysis, this should be a surface with holes, where the buildings are intersecting the surface. As
mentioned, in the wind environment analysis, the holes are made in Rhino, and there is a thorough
guidance on, how to do it in the top of the Grasshopper script.
The next step of the analysis is for Grasshopper to generate a mesh, based on the calculation surface.
This step will automatically create a series of test points, where the outdoor comfort calculation is
carried out. The mesh can be altered, in regards to grid size and distance from base surface. As
for the previous two analyses, the grid size is set to 1 m, which is a medium coarseness, causing the
picture to be acceptably nuanced, while still having a rather short calculation time. The ”distance
from surface” refers to which height the calculation will be done in. Typically, the calculation should
be carried out at pedestrian level. If, for some reason, the area of interest is higher above the ground,
for instance balconies, this can be altered by changing the number in the ”Generate Mesh”-group.
Then the analysis period should be determined. The setup is once again the same as the solar
radiation analysis, with sliders representing month day and hour, where the calculation should begin
and end. As for the solar radiation analysis, the analysis period can be carried out down to one
hour, which can be preferable, if the interest is to ﬁnd out, which areas are comfortable at a speciﬁc
time of the day. The analysis period can also be for a day or a week, if it is desired to investigate
the average outdoor comfort for an entire day or an entire week. It is just important to remember,
that the average for a week also will include the night, where most people do not use the outdoor
spaces, and the results can therefore be misleading.
The next part of the analysis is a series of internal calculations in Grasshopper. The average is
calculated based on the data from the EPW-ﬁle, and the analysis period. This is carried out for
three of the four parameters of the comfort analysis: Air temperature, wind speed and relative
humidity. First, the data for each parameter is selected out of an annual hourly data stream, based
on the analysis period. After this, the average of all the hours are made for each parameter. It is
necessary to take the average in order to ﬁt the results on the UTCI-index. Figure 32 shows the
processing of the three paramteters.
Page 50 of 111
==PAGE:61==
4
TOOL DEVELOPMENT
Figure 32: Processing of air temperature, wind speed and relative humidity
The last of the four parameters, solar radiation, is calculated in a diﬀerent way, as shown in ﬁgure
33. The analysis period, buildings, calculation surface and various info from the EPW-ﬁle: Infrared
radiation, base temperature, diﬀuse horizontal radiation, direct normal radiation and location, are
all used to calculate how much direct and diﬀuse solar radiation, there is on the site. The output
is then an estimated mean radiant temperature for each hour of the analysis period. Lastly, the
average of this is calculated, if the analysis period is longer than one hour.
Page 51 of 111
==PAGE:62==
4
TOOL DEVELOPMENT
Figure 33: Processing of solar radiation
Based on the calculated average for the four parameters, the UTCI is calculated. This is done by
setting the toggle to ”True”. The gradient map output will then be shown, and if the legend is
as desired, no further adjustments needs to be done. However, like in the two other analyses, it is
possible to adjust the legend in regards to the upper and lower limit, and the interval between the
numbers. This is done in the same way, as the two previous analyses.
Below is a visualization of an outdoor comfort analysis of a simple geometry, carried out in Copen-
hagen on the 21st of June at 12.00 - 14.00.
Figure 34: Example of the outdoor comfort analysis output with the test geometry
Page 52 of 111
==PAGE:63==
5
CASE STUDY
5
Case Study
In this chapter, a case study utilizing the Climate Optimization Tool for Urban Spaces (COTUS)
is carried out. This has been done to gain more insight into how the tool works, and if it has any
issues, which could be improved. The chapter will start, with an introduction to the Solar Decathlon
Competition, which is necessary for the understanding of the chosen case. Next, a site description
and a site plan for the area will be described and explained. Then, the analysis will be carried out
along with a description of the necessary input and output for the analysis. Finally, the results will
be discussed, and concluded on.
The case study will be based on a before/after study, where a current area is investigated and
compared to a possible future plan for the same area. The area, for the case study, will be The
Mirker Quarter in Wuppertal, Germany, since the Solar Decathlon Europe (SDE) team in Denmark
were very interested in using the tool for their investigation of this speciﬁc area.
5.1
Introduction to the SDE-Competition
SDE is an university-level, student competition. The vision is to create accessible clean-energy living
solutions, for the people on this planet [40]. SDE was launched in 2002, and has been happening
every second year since then. The competition challenges diﬀerent university-teams, from all over
the world to build, design and operate innovative and eﬃcient buildings, powered only by renewable
energy [41].
The next competition will be in 2021, and will take place in Wuppertal, Germany. More speciﬁcally
at the Mirker Quarter, which is illustrated in ﬁgure 35 below.
Page 53 of 111
==PAGE:64==
5
CASE STUDY
Figure 35: The Mirker Quarter in Wuppertal
This year, the SDE competition will focus on a sustainable energy transition, in an urban context,
with a main focus on resource eﬃciency, climate change protection and closed-life-cycle construction
[40]. Three diﬀerent cases were presented, as the urban and architectural challenges, towards climate
neutrality. Each team should chose to focus on one of the three cases. The cases were: Renovation
& Extension, Closing Gaps, and Renovation and Addition of Storey [2]. The DTU-team has chosen
to focus on the third option, Renovation and Addition of Storey, where they should strive to create a
building design, that must not harm the surrounding outdoor spaces. The speciﬁc site is illustrated
in ﬁgure 35, and is highlighted in the red circle. In this case the DTU-team must add one or more
storeys, to an existing building (marked with red in the ﬁgure), which currently has two storeys and
a total height of 6.5 m. The outdoor area of interest is located just north of the building. Since
the building is placed south of the outdoor area, it is very important, that the design proposal, does
not make the outdoor area unusable. Therefore, it is essential to investigate, how the addition of
storeys will aﬀect the outdoor spaces.
5.2
Area Description
The Mirker Quarter is characterized by a high density of buildings, and nearly no large green areas.
The northern part of the area is known for its richly decorated facades, and high quality renovated
buildings with some green paths and playgrounds. Whereas, the southern part of the area is known
Page 54 of 111
==PAGE:65==
5
CASE STUDY
for the low quality of living and the building’s unsanitary conditions [34]. Although, the last couple
of years several urban and architectural plans has been developed for the area, which creates a
potential for further urban development [2].
Figure 36: The speciﬁc site for the case study [2]
Figure 36 shows the site surrounding the speciﬁc building, where more storeys need to be added.
The site is well visited by the locals, since it is one of the few green spaces in the area. Currently,
the southern part of the site is used as a terrace of one of the cafes, and the eastern part is used as
a parking lot [2]. As mentioned, the urban spaces are very important for the competition. Besides
the building design task, the development of the neighbourhood plays a huge role. It is addressed
in the project description, that the teams should think about diﬀerent urban design solutions, which
could include the area. This includes urban mobility solutions, shared spaces, energy networks, open
space design etc. [2]. Since the building is placed south of the outdoor area, the addition of storeys
could have a negative impact on the surrounding outdoor spaces, if the urban spaces are not taken
into consideration in the early design phases.
5.3
Analysis Inputs
The case study will be based on a design proposal made by the architects from DTU’s SDE-team.
The design proposal consist of four additional storeys to the building marked with green in ﬁgure
36. This is assumed to be an additional 12 m, bringing the total height of the building to 18.5 m.
The full proposal can be seen in appendix F.
Page 55 of 111
==PAGE:66==
5
CASE STUDY
A series of inputs are necessary for the analysis. The various inputs are mentioned in the previous
chapter, in table 8, 9 and 10. The speciﬁc inputs for the case study, are elaborated in the following:
• Location: The site is located in Wuppertal in Germany. The nearest EPW-ﬁle is from D¨ussel-
dorf, approximately 30 km east of Wuppertal, and is the one which will be used for this
analysis. This location will be set in both the solar radiation analysis and outdoor comfort
analysis.
• Analysis Period: All analyses will be carried out at summer solstice on June 21st. This was
chosen, since the outdoor areas are used the most during the summer, and therefore it is the
most interesting period to investigate whether the conditions are satisfactory or not. The solar
radiation analysis and outdoor comfort analysis, have also been carried out at spring equinox
(March 21st). These will only be presented in appendix G and I, as their purpose is only to
support arguments.
The solar radiation and outdoor comfort analysis, will be carried out at three diﬀerent times,
during the day. One in the morning from 9.00 - 10.00, one at noon from 12.00 - 13.00, and
one in the afternoon from 15.00 - 16.00. This is done to investigate whether there are areas,
which are favourable at some parts of the day, but not at others.
As previously mentioned, when conducting the wind environment analysis it is only possible to
do it as a snapshot. Due to a long simulation time and the fact that the average wind speed
does not change much throughout the day, only one wind analysis will be carried out.
• Calculation Surface: The SDE-team is mainly interested in the conditions for the park area
of the site, as shown by the green hatched area, in ﬁgure 36. Therefore, the future park will
be the calculation surface for all three analyses. The surrounding area is exclusively used for
transportation, and will not be a part of the calculation surface. Since the park will be used for
longer periods of time and for more sedentary activities, the physical conditions are extremely
important here.
It is important that the calculation surfaces are drawn correctly. In the solar radiation analysis,
it should be a very low box, with a height of approximately 0.01 m. In the wind environment
and outdoor comfort analysis, the calculation surface should be a surface with holes, where
the buildings are intersecting. For the case study it has not been necessary to make holes in
the surface, as the surface is not touching any buildings.
• Building Geometries: The main building is chosen, along with the design proposal of four
new storeys on its top. Additionally, the buildings surrounding the design proposal are selected,
Page 56 of 111
==PAGE:67==
5
CASE STUDY
as they can impact the results. This means that all buildings shown in ﬁgure 36 are in the
simulation, as they are located relatively close to the site and are likely to aﬀect the surrounding
outdoor spaces. It is important to note, that the buildings will be simpliﬁed in order to make
the simulations work. An illustration of the building geometries in Rhino are visualized in
ﬁgure 37 and 38 below.
• Average wind speed and direction for a given date: In the wind environment analysis,
the wind speed at the reference height needs to be set. Weatherspark is a website, where the
average weather data for all sorts of parameters is gathered [53]. According to the website,
the average wind speed in Wuppertal ,on June 21st is 4.9 m/s, which is what is inserted into
Grasshopper for the analysis. The wind direction is mainly from west [53] and according to
table 19, this means that the site should be rotated 90◦to the right.
• Roughness Coeﬃcient: In the wind environment analysis, the roughness coeﬃcient should
be set as well. The roughness coeﬃcient is set to 6. According to table 23, this is described as
”a landscape regularly covered with similar-size obstacles with open spaces of the same order
of magnitude as obstacles height, for instance densely built-up area, without much variation
in the building height”.
The current case site and the design proposal’s case site is presented below:
Figure 37: Top view of current (left) and future (right) case site
Page 57 of 111
==PAGE:68==
5
CASE STUDY
Figure 38: Perspective view of current (left) and future (right) case site
5.4
Results
This section will contain the results from the solar radiation, wind environment and outdoor comfort
analysis for the case study. As mentioned, all three analyses have been carried out for the current
conditions and for the conditions with the new design proposal. The results, before and after the
new design proposal, are presented next to each other, to make it easier to compare, how much the
outdoor spaces will be aﬀected by the additional storeys.
5.4.1
Solar Radiation Analysis
The solar radiation analysis has been carried out at three diﬀerent times of day: 9.00 - 10.00, 12.00 -
13.00 and 15.00 - 16.00. This has been done to show, if there are areas which have good conditions
at some parts of the day, but not at others. The results are visualized in the ﬁgures below.
Figure 39: Current (left) and future (right) conditions from 9.00 - 10.00
Page 58 of 111
==PAGE:69==
5
CASE STUDY
Figure 40: Current (left) and future (right) conditions from 12.00 - 13.00
Figure 41: Current (left) and future (right) conditions from 15.00 - 16.00
As seen in ﬁgure 39 - 41, the design proposal will mostly aﬀect the outdoor spaces in the southern
part of the park, where the solar radiation lies around 0 - 0.6 kWh/m2 during the whole day. This
indicates, that the area is in shade. Currently, the building is causing a small amount of shade, but
the new design proposal make the shaded area bigger, especially in the middle of the day around
noon. However, during the summer, this can possibly be an advantage, if the temperature is so
high, that people will seek shade for comfort. This will be studied further in the outdoor comfort
analysis.
The design proposal does not aﬀect the rest of the outdoor space, in terms of solar radiation. In the
northernmost part, the solar radiation is lower, than at the rest of the site during the morning and
afternoon. However, this is caused by the existing buildings, and not by the new design proposal.
Generally, if the outdoor space is seen as a whole, the amount of solar radiation corresponds quite
well with the historical average amount, of daily solar radiation, in Wuppertal. In June, there is
an monthly average of 153 kWh/m2 [12] which approximately corresponds to 5.1 kWh/m2 pr. day.
Page 59 of 111
==PAGE:70==
5
CASE STUDY
This is distributed as a curve, which peaks in the middle of the day, where the sun is at its highest,
and therefore most powerful. Hence, the results, of around 1.1 kWh/m2 in the morning, and then
more during noon and again less in the afternoon, is what can be expected. Therefore, it can be
concluded that the outdoor space overall is good, in terms of solar radiation, both currently and
with the new design proposal.
It is important to note, that the relatively low impact of the buildings on the solar radiation is likely
related to the fact, that the analysis has been carried out at summer solstice on June 21st. This is
considered to be the period, where most people will be using the park. This is also the time of year,
where the sun is placed highest on the sky, thereby creating as little shade as possible.
As mentioned the analysis have also been carried out at spring equinox, at March 21st, and can
be seen in appendix G. These also show, that the design proposal has the biggest inﬂuence on the
solar radiation in the middle of the day. As predicted, the area, where the design proposal is causing
shadow is larger in March than in June, which is due to the lower position of the sun in the sky.
5.4.2
Wind Environment Analysis
The wind environment analysis is only carried out for a snapshot of a day, due to the long simulation
time. Additionally, the average wind speed does not change much throughout the day, which would
make it unnecessary to carry out more than one analysis.
The results from the wind speed analysis and the wind pressure analysis is visualized below in ﬁgure
42 and 43, and are showing the wind environment at 1.5 m above the ground level with a reference
wind speed of 4.9 m/s from west.
Figure 42: Wind speed with current (left) and future (right) condition
Page 60 of 111
==PAGE:71==
5
CASE STUDY
Figure 43: Pressure with current (left) and future (right) condition
As seen in ﬁgure 42, the wind speeds are rather low and does not exceed 1 m/s. The low wind
speeds at the ground level, might be due to the relatively low wind speed, at the reference height.
As said, the wind speed at the reference height is 4.9 m/s, and as previously discussed, the wind
speed at the ground level in urban areas, will be lower compared to the wind speeds at the ground
level in wetlands or across ﬁelds. This is due to the obstacles at the ground level in cities, and the
roughness coeﬃcient.
Figure 42 also shows, that the design proposal are lowering the wind speeds at the site. At the current
design, most of the area have wind speeds between 0.24 - 0.38 m/s. However, in the northeast part
of the area the wind speeds are relatively high, compared to the rest of the site. The new design
proposal has wind speeds down to 0.05 - 0.19 m/s. With the new design proposal the largest wind
speeds are in the southwest and northeast part of the area. The increasing wind speeds at the
southwest area are due to the height of the new design proposal, because the high wind speeds, at
the reference height, are forced to the ground. It is important to be alert to the fact, that with a
higher wind speed at the reference height, the wind speeds at the ground will increase. Hence, with
a larger wind speed at the reference height these areas experience even larger wind speeds, and will
thereby always be the two most exposed areas at the site. This has been investigated, and is shown
in appendix H.
The scientists and researchers Lawson and Penwarden has a saying; that if the mean wind speed
at a particular location exceeds 5 m/s for more than 20% of the time, then the conditions are
unacceptable [46]. This saying does not apply to this design proposal. However, it can be important
to take into consideration if the geometry of the design proposal changes.
Figure 43 shows how the pressure changes across the site. As with the wind speed, the new design
Page 61 of 111
==PAGE:72==
5
CASE STUDY
proposal minimizes the pressure across the site. It can be seen, that the areas with the largest wind
speeds, are also the areas with the most pressure, which is due to the movement of the air.
It can therefore be concluded, that the design proposal does not have a negative impact on the
surrounding outdoor spaces, when looking at the wind environment, as it was feared. As mentioned
earlier, tall buildings might increase the wind speeds at the pedestrians level. However, the wind
speed did not increase in this case. This is likely because of the wind direction, and the fact that
the new design proposal is only two storeys taller, than the surrounding buildings to the west of the
site. The new design proposal is therefore shielding the site for higher wind speeds.
5.4.3
Outdoor Comfort Analysis
As with the solar radiation analysis, the outdoor comfort analysis have been carried out at June
21st, at three times of day: 9.00 - 10.00 in the morning, at noon from 12.00 - 13.00 and ﬁnally in
the afternoon from 15.00 - 16.00.
Figure 44 - 46 below, shows the results from the analyses. As for the previously analyses, the ﬁgures
on the left are of the current conditions and the ones on the right is of the conditions with the new
design proposal.
Figure 44: Current (left) and future (right) conditions from 9.00 - 10.00
Page 62 of 111
==PAGE:73==
5
CASE STUDY
Figure 45: Current (left) and future (right) conditions from 12.00 - 13.00
Figure 46: Current (left) and future (right) conditions from 15.00 - 16.00
With the UTCI ◦C, which comfort is measured in, it is important to remember, that it is not the
actual temperature, which is shown in the legends, but an index of how the outdoor comfort is.
As explained in the literature study earlier, and shown in ﬁgure 7, the outdoor space is considered
optimal and comfortable, if the comfort level is between 9◦C and 26 ◦C. This means, that if outdoor
spaces are outside the area with no thermal stress, they will be marked bright red, if there is heat
stress, or dark blue, if there is cold stress.
As the ﬁgures above show, the new design proposal has an impact on the comfort in the outdoor
spaces throughout the day. In ﬁgure 44, the area which are close to or lower than 9 ◦C, is larger in
the new design proposal compared to the current conditions. According to ﬁgure 7, this indicates
that there will be a ”slight cold stress” in the bottom of the outdoor area.
The same is illustrated in ﬁgure 45 of the area from 12.00 - 13.00. With the current conditions,
there is a small area which has a low UTCI, thus indicating a ”slight cold stress”. However, this area
is much larger with the new design proposal. This means, that the analysis predicts that the entire
Page 63 of 111
==PAGE:74==
5
CASE STUDY
southern area will not be comfortable to use in the middle of a day in June.
In the afternoon, the UTCI is reduced a bit in the western part of the outdoor space, which could
be related to the buildings to the west. The UTCI in the southern area has increased a bit and the
lowest UTCI in all of the outdoor space is around 13 ◦C, which is within the range that is considered
to have ”no thermal stress”.
As was mentioned earlier, it is important to have in mind that these analyses have been carried out
during the summer, where there are generally higher air temperatures, solar radiation, and lower
wind speeds, than the rest of the year [53]. Therefore, it is highly probable that the area with bad
conditions will be larger at other parts of the year. This has been investigated in appendix I, where
the outdoor comfort analysis have been carried out during spring equinox, at March 21st. Although
the area generally is experiencing a ”slight cold stress”, due to the time of year, the design proposal
is causing a larger part of the area to experience ”moderate cold stress”, which is when the UTCI is
below 0 ◦C, than with the current conditions. This is a tendency which is applicable all throughout
the day.
Considering the solar radiation and wind environment analyses, it is not surprising that the comfort
level in the southern part of the outdoor area, is sub-optimal. The building is currently not very tall
with only two storeys, however with the additional four storeys, which the new design proposes, it
is natural that it will create more shade. In the wind environment analysis, the highest wind speeds
also occurs in the southwest side of the outdoor area, likely because of turbulence. Both of these are
negative contributing factors to the outdoor comfort analysis. While there has not been conducted
an analysis, which investigates the last two parameters of the comfort analysis, air temperature and
relative humidity, they are assumed to both aﬀect the UTCI positively for this case. The temperature
is around 15 - 20 ◦C in Wuppertal in June [53], which is also not too high nor too low, and will
likely contribute positively to the outdoor comfort. Furthermore, the relative humidity is generally
dry [53], which is also positive.
Overall, the new design proposal does contribute negatively to the outdoor comfort in the outdoor
space. Especially in the most southern part of the site, where ”slight cold stress” can be expected.
If the whole outdoor space is considered, there is still a large part of the area, which is within the
range with ”no thermal stress”, and can therefore be considered comfortable.
Page 64 of 111
==PAGE:75==
5
CASE STUDY
5.5
Case Study Conclusion
Based on the three analyses, it can be concluded that the new design proposal has some impacts
on the outdoor space. In regards to the solar radiation, the design proposal results in less solar
radiation in the southern part of the outdoor area, throughout the whole day, which means that
this area will experience more shadow, than currently. However, there were already some shadow in
this area caused by the existing building, and the diﬀerence is rather small. The wind environment
analysis showed, that the design proposal actually has a positive impact on the outdoor area. The
most vulnerable area, in regards to the wind environment, is mainly the northeast part of the outdoor
area. With the current conditions both the wind speed and pressure is quite low, and the new design
proposal lowers both even further. Although the design proposal also creates a bit more wind in
the southwest part of the area. Lastly, the comfort analysis showed that the southern part of the
area, again, is the most exposed area. The existing building causes a small part of the area to have
an UTCI, which indicates a small cold stress, all through the day. However, with the new design
proposal, this area is larger, especially around noon.
Overall, it can be concluded, that the new design proposal has a positive impact on the overall
wind conditions. Although, it also has some negative impacts, mainly on the southwest part of
the outdoor space, there are still a large part of the outdoor area, which has attractive qualities.
Therefore, the analysis concluded that, in regards to the outdoor physical conditions, there no strong
arguments against building the design proposal.
Page 65 of 111
==PAGE:76==
5
CASE STUDY
Page 66 of 111
==PAGE:77==
6
DISCUSSION
6
Discussion
The discussion will mainly concern the properties, limitations and possibilities of the tool, experienced
during the case study. This includes, what the case study has taught us about the tool, and what the
sources of errors are. Furthermore, it will include a discussion of the user-friendliness, and whether
it could be improved. And lastly, which possibilities there could be, in regards to expanding the tool,
with more analyses.
Case Study
While carrying out the case study, we learned a lot about the tool, and which advantages and
disadvantages it has. One of the ﬁrst things we learned, was regarding the inputs. Initially a concern
was, that determining the inputs, would be one of the more diﬃcult aspects of the tool. However,
during the case study we learned, that even though it can appear, as if there are many diﬀerent
inputs, it was actually not many of them which needed a lot of knowledge, to be determined. Some
of the inputs are the same in the diﬀerent analyses, which means that it is only seven diﬀerent
inputs that are needed, for all three analyses to run. Since the user will have a speciﬁc case in mind,
when using the tool, the buildings, calculation surface and location are all easy to insert, once the
geometries are drawn in Rhino. Additionally, the tool provides recommendations for the analysis
period, which also makes these easy to insert. The roughness coeﬃcient is also easy to determine,
based on table 23. Finally, the average wind speed and wind direction, are the most diﬃcult to ﬁnd.
However, during the case study, we discovered the website Weatherspark.com, which has weather
data from most cities around the world. And both the wind speed and direction can be found, using
this site.
During the case study, it was also discovered, that the possibilities for the complexity was larger
then anticipated, especially in regards to the wind environment analysis. While developing the tool,
the wind environment analysis often came up with fatal errors, or had an extremely long calculation
time, if the buildings were more detailed than just a square. Therefore, we were very careful, when
making the site for the case study, and actually made a simpler version initially. The simple model
ran without complications, and we then decided to try out a more detailed version. Although it was
still simpliﬁed, for instance, without notches in the facade, this also ran ﬂawlessly and quickly. The
wind environment analysis for the case study, ended up taking only approximately 7 hours to run.
Page 67 of 111
==PAGE:78==
6
DISCUSSION
This is very quick compared to the normal, of around 24 hours.
The shortened calculation time, in the wind environment analysis, taught us that it can be advan-
tageous to make a small calculation surface, while of course still including the area of interest. For
instance roads are often not very important for the outdoor area, since this is not a place where
people will stay for long. This is also why, it was not included in the case study. Here, only the area
which should be converted into a park, was chosen for the calculation surface. We also suspect, that
the lower calculation time, could have something to do with the fact that the calculation surface did
not intersect with any buildings. Therefore, we would advice future users of the tool, to take this
into consideration.
The case study also provided a lot of knowledge, about the outputs of the tool. For instance in
regards to the gradient maps, where it was discovered, that it was actually quite important that the
legend had same intervals. Otherwise the program will set the intervals automatically, based on the
output. This makes it much more diﬃcult to compare design proposals. Since our case study was
based on a before/after study, it was very important to have results, that could be easily compared.
The case study also revealed, that even though all the results are visualized and compared, it can be
diﬃcult to make a ﬁnal recommendation, as there can be both advantages and disadvantages with
a new design proposal. For instance in the case study, the design proposal both posed some pros
and cons. The new design proposal resulted in more shadow and low comfort, in the southern part
of the area. Although there was also still a large area, where the conditions had not been worsened.
Furthermore, the wind environment analysis revealed, that the design proposal actually had some
positive eﬀects on a large part of the area, even though there were higher wind speeds in one area
of the site, which had not experienced wind speed problems before. A solution, which could make it
easier to asses the results, could be if the results featured an overall rating of the site. For instance,
in the solar radiation analysis, this could be a single number next to the gradient map where the
average kWh/m2, for the entire calculation surface, was calculated. This would make it more clear
whether the overall conditions had improved or worsened, and thus make it easier to conclude if the
design proposal overall is beneﬁcial.
It is also possible, that the results can be diﬃcult to interpret, for users with little knowledge about
solar radiation, wind speed and wind pressure, and the UTCI-index.
For instance in regards to
UTCI, it can easily be forgotten that the unit is not the normal temperature in celcius, but the
UTCI-equivalent temperature. Also, for someone who does not know a lot about wind speeds or
solar radiation, it is diﬃcult to know what is acceptable and what is not. A solution could be if the
results came with a picture or reference to the Beaufort scale in the wind environment analysis or
the UTCI-index in the outdoor comfort analysis.
Page 68 of 111
==PAGE:79==
6
DISCUSSION
Overall, the case study was found to be very educational in regards to the tool. As mentioned, there
were a few things which could be improved. However, none of them were major ﬂaws and generally
we feel the case study proved that COTUS is very useful.
Sources of Errors
During the case study some sources of errors occurred, that was not obvious to us before. It is
important to notice, that there will always occur sources of errors, when developing a tool. This
is because of simpliﬁcations in the developing process, thus it is impossible to reproduce climate
phenomenons in a tool, precisely as it would be in a real-life situation. It can be diﬃcult to tell,
whether the sources of error has a major or minor impact on the results.
One of the main sources of errors, is the level of detail, when drawing the building geometries.
The building design, as well as the surrounding buildings, must be drawn with very few details.
Especially in the wind environment analyses, because the details easily can create errors in the
mesh. Due to the low level of details, important data about the building’s impact on its surrounding
outdoor spaces, can be lost. This could occur in all three analyses. In the solar radiation analysis,
the simpliﬁcation of the geometries could be the cause of missing shade. In the wind environment
analysis, the simpliﬁcation means, that many of the edges on the building geometries have been
removed, which could cause inaccuracies in wind speeds, and occurrences of turbulence. Finally,
for the outdoor comfort analysis, the missing shadows and turbulence can have an impact on the
outdoor comfort, since turbulence with high velocity and large shadows can contribute to creating
discomfort, especially in a Nordic climate.
Another source of error, is the lack of all surrounding buildings, which especially play a role in
the wind environment analysis. It is generally recommended to draw the immediate surrounding
buildings, however it is not necessary to include the buildings of the entire neighbourhood. This is
due the extensive time it would take to draw, which could be a limitation in the early design phase,
where the tool should be used. Additionally, the simulation time in the wind environment analysis,
would also be much longer, if it should run for all the buildings in a city. As mentioned, it took
around seven hours to run each wind environment analysis, for the case study, but it could easily have
been much longer. Although it would be more beneﬁcial, to include as many surrounding buildings
as possible, as they are very important in a wind environment analysis. All buildings in a city have an
impact on the wind speed, and the movement of the wind, but it is simply not possible to simulate
everything. By looking at the geometry from the case study, there are several areas, around and
between the buildings, that in real-life are blocked, for instance, by a building or wall. The roughness
Page 69 of 111
==PAGE:80==
6
DISCUSSION
coeﬃcient somewhat corrects for this issue, as it describes the amount of obstacles for the wind, for
instance the surrounding buildings and the level of vegetation. Therefore, by inserting the roughness
coeﬃcient, it is possible to tell the analysis that the simulations should run for a city context rather
than a country context. However, despite inserting the roughness coeﬃcient, the lack of surrounding
buildings will still be a source of error, because the tool does not know the exact properties of the
surroundings based on the roughness level.
Another source of error lies with the determination of the location, in the solar radiation and outdoor
comfort analysis. The website which provides the location speciﬁc weather data through EPW-ﬁles,
does not have data available for every possible location. This means that most cases are simulated
with the nearest weather-ﬁle. This is a source of error, because it is possible to simulate for a
completely wrong weather phenomenon. However, by choosing a weather-ﬁle close to the research
area it is possible to minimize this source of error.
Even though many of above mentioned sources of errors are minor, it is still important to consider
them during the analysis, and when discussing the results. They have an impact on the results,
although it is diﬃcult to tell how much, as it is diﬀerent in each case.
User-Friendliness
The user-friendliness is an obvious topic to discuss, as it was one of the most important aspects,
during the development of the tool. This is because is important, that the tool should be possible
to use by people, with no prior knowledge about Grasshopper.
All throughout the development of the tool, the user-friendliness was considered. The tool was de-
veloped in Grasshopper, because most architects use Rhino, in the early design phases of a building
design. The easy implementation of Grasshopper in Rhino, was considered a help for the architects,
because they do not need to learn a new drawing program.
One way, the tool has been made user-friendly, is the visual eﬀects to guide the user through the
analysis (shown in ﬁgure 47 below). All places where the user need to take action, such as inserting
an input or running an analysis, is marked blue. This will draw the users attention, and make it
easy for the user to focus only on the absolutely necessary things, if they are only interested in the
results. Simultaneously, it is also possible, for people who are more interested in each component, or
the underlying mechanisms, to get thoroughly acquainted with every part of the diﬀerent analyses.
Each of the three analyses in the tool, has a series of numbers, representing the steps, which the
actions needs to be carried out in. This is also to make the tool as easy as possible to use, and to
Page 70 of 111
==PAGE:81==
6
DISCUSSION
make sure that the analysis will run, since one missed step can result in the analysis not running,
or running faulty, for instance with the wrong location or wind speed. Each number and step also
have a short descriptive text, to help the user with what they need to do, and thus lessen confusion
and the time they need to spend.
Figure 47: Picture from Grasshopper showing an example of colour, numbers and text
In general, all analyses have been made to be as simple as possible, and only the necessary aspects
of the analyses, have been included. For experienced users, it would be possible to run the analysis
more complicated. For instance, with more inputs, such as changing the size of the wind tunnel, or
changing the relaxation factor. However, they are not necessary, in order to get an output which
is suﬃcient for a general overview, because the tool already generates a wind tunnel and relaxation
factor, suﬃcient for the geometry. Therefore, it was concluded, that it would only confuse the user,
if there were too many options, for making the analyses more detailed. For instance, the wind
analysis has almost endless customization possibilities. However, it is already quite complicated, and
include a lot of parameters, so adding more would likely only result in confusion of the user.
Additionally, the initial thought, was to also include another analysis, which investigated the outdoor
acoustics.
But due to the lack of the user-friendliness, it was removed.
The only plug-in for
Grasshopper, which could investigate outdoor acoustics, was primarily made for indoor acoustics,
and feature with the outdoor acoustics did not seem fully developed. Furthermore, both the setup
and the execution of an analysis was extremely complicated, and required a lot of professional input
Page 71 of 111
==PAGE:82==
6
DISCUSSION
information, which would make it very diﬃcult to use for non-experts.
While the tool is made as user-friendly as possible, there are still some places where it is suboptimal.
This is in relation to the required knowledge of the user. As mentioned, the average wind speed and
direction, which are both dependent on the location can be rather diﬃcult to ﬁnd. Weatherspark.com
was used for this problem in the case study. The website contains the average weather data, for all
sorts of parameters, which are gathered, based on data from 1980 to 2016. Therefore, a solution
could be to link to the Weatherspark website in the Grasshopper document, and perhaps also make
a short guide, on how to ﬁnd the required data on the website, as it has a lot of various weather
information.
Another weakness in the tool, in relation to user-friendliness, is with the interpretation of the results.
It can be diﬃcult to interpret the results, and thereby make a ﬁnal conclusion on whether the design
proposal has a negative impact on the surrounding outdoor environment or not. Especially, if the
user does not have a lot of prior knowledge about the parameters. As mentioned, a solution to this,
could be to present the results in a form of rating, for instance with the average amount pr. m2.
This would make it easy to see, if the design proposal lowers or hightens the overall solar radiation,
wind speed, wind pressure or UTCI, and how much it changes. This would also be advantageous, if
more than one design proposal was tested. The rating could be presented in Excel, as it is possible
to transfer data from Rhino and Grasshopper, into Excel. This could also be beneﬁcial for users,
who are not very experienced in Grasshopper, since they could do the data processing in a more
commonly known program.
Another solution could be, to make a sort of user manual, which could be a ”How to Interpret the
Results”. This document could contain information about each of the parameters, and what the units
mean. It could also contain the Beaufort scale, and the table of the UTCI outdoor comfort index,
as these two are really important for the understanding of the results. It might also be beneﬁcial,
to link to the Weatherspark website, as it has all sorts of weather data, from all around the world.
Besides the wind data, it also includes humidity and air temperature, amongst many other things.
Plug-in Possibilities
There exist a ton of diﬀerent plug-ins for Grasshopper, which can analyse diﬀerent geometries. But
not all plug-ins can analyse the surrounding outdoor spaces, of the geometries. In the following,
possible plug-ins which could be implemented in the tool is discussed.
In the beginning of the project, we investigated the possibility for measuring outdoor acoustics, in
Page 72 of 111
==PAGE:83==
6
DISCUSSION
addition to the plug-ins for measuring solar radiation, outdoor comfort and wind environment.
The outdoor acoustics could be measured by using the plug-in Pachyderm Acoustical Simulations,
which has the ability to measure both indoor and outdoor acoustics. It is commonly known, that
noise can have an impact on whether the outdoor spaces will be used or not. Therefore, noise can
be an important factor to look into. After working with the plug-in Pachyderm for some weeks, it
was concluded, that the analysis was not possible to make user-friendly, for a number of reasons.
First of all, the Rhino model should be much more detailed compared to the other analyses, which
is not possible at this level of information, and at this point of the design phase. The geometry
should be deﬁned in diﬀerent layers, because every layer in Pachyderm is deﬁned as a new material.
But at this level of information, the architects has likely not thought about materials, but only
about the overall design geometry. For each material, the user must calculate the scattering and
the transparency. Furthermore, Pachyderm requires to know, where windows and doors are placed
in the facade. This is also not yet determined at this level of information, and therefore not possible
to tell. Although it could possible to decide, and incorporate these information in the model, it will
be very time consuming and too detailed for the aim of the tool.
Pachyderm also requires the user to insert a line-source, which is were the noise is coming from.
When inserting the line-source, the user must also insert the number of bicycles, motorcycles, cars,
busses, trucks, along with the average speed, frequency and sound power level for each vehicle.
And, at last, the user must also know the exact vibration time of the surrounding buildings, the
calculation surface and the design proposal, before the simulation can run. These estimations require
that the user has an in-depth knowledge, about acoustical calculations before using the tool, which
contradict the idea of making the tool user-friendly. However, the plug-in could deﬁnitely be useful,
if the tool was also used the later design phases, of the design proposals.
Another plug-in which might have been interesting to look into, is Dragonﬂy, which also is one
of the four Ladybug tools. Dragonﬂy models and estimates large-scale climate phenomena. By
implementing Dragonﬂy, it could be interesting to look into urban heat island modelling, where the
EPW-ﬁles make sure to account for the urban heat island eﬀect, by using urban geometries and
properties. It could also be interesting to look into the thermal satellite images, which uses the
Landsat Program to visualize thermal images, and try to understand how temperatures vary over
cities [28]. Furthermore, Dragonﬂy can investigate climate change projections, the actual met year,
urban district energy models and create hourly precipitations.
It can be discussed, how much a building can aﬀect the output from Dragonﬂy, because a single
building might not have a huge eﬀect on the urban heat island phenomena, for instance. Dragonﬂy
function at its best, if the investigation is for an entire city, instead of a minor area.
Page 73 of 111
==PAGE:84==
6
DISCUSSION
It could also be interesting to look into the rain water treatment, in the surrounding outdoor space.
But once again, the discussion rises whether a building will impact this phenomena. A buildings
impact on the rain water, is primarily related to the fact that the building is a sealed area, and
therefore the rain water cannot penetrate the ground. The rain water treatment and collection are
more about the slope and foundation of the area, rather than the design of the building. Although
it could be interesting to investigate, how much of an impact a building geometry has on the rain
water treatment and rain water collection, there has not yet been developed a plug-in which makes
it possible to investigate this in Grasshopper.
Page 74 of 111
==PAGE:85==
7
CONCLUSION
7
Conclusion
The interviews with the architects acted as the base point for the project, as they are the main
decision-makers in the early phases of building design. Based on the interviews, it came to our
attention, that although they are aware of the importance of the surrounding outdoor spaces when
designing a new building, they most often do not carry out any actual analyses, because they ﬁnd it
to diﬃcult and time consuming. Although they have it in mind, they merely rely on their intuition.
Therefore, the aim and main goal has been to make Climate Optimization Tool for Urban Spaces
(COTUS) as user-friendly as possible, with the architects in mind the entire time.
COTUS has been developed in the plug-in Grasshopper for Rhino. This is because the architects
stated, that they mainly use Rhino, in the early design phases of a building proposal.
COTUS
consists of three diﬀerent analyses, compiled into one Grasshopper script, as this was considered
to be the simplest solution for the architects to assess. The three analyses are a solar radiation
analysis, a wind environment analysis and an outdoor comfort analysis. These were selected based
on the architects needs. The solar radiation analysis is often a requirement in urban development
plans, whereas the wind environment analysis is an analysis, which the architects ﬁnd interesting,
because of the popularity in developing rather tall buildings in cities and it is an important inﬂuencer
in outdoor spaces. However, the current options for conducting a wind environment analysis are too
complicated for the architects’ expertise and thus most often neglected. Finally, the outdoor comfort
analysis was not speciﬁcally requested by the architects. However, the analysis was considered to
be very relevant, as it provides an overview of the outdoor situation around the proposed building
geometry, and gives extremely useful information about the user’s experience of the outdoor spaces.
As mentioned, the user-friendliness has been the key in the development of COTUS. All three
analyses have been thoroughly processed and simpliﬁed, to keep them from causing unnecessary
confusion for the user. Additionally, the user is guided through each analysis, step by step, with
explanations for the diﬀerent components. They are furthermore helped by the coloured panels,
which highlights where the user must add information, to make the analysis run. All this is added,
to help minimizing confusion, and the time needed on learning the properties of the tool.
Furthermore, the results are presented as a visual image, which makes it intuitive to understand
and assess. During the discussion, a few instances where the results could be more helpful and
Page 75 of 111
==PAGE:86==
7
CONCLUSION
user-friendly was identiﬁed, and ought to be added, before COTUS is put into use. This is for
instance to provide pictures of the Beaufort scale and UTCI-index into the Grasshopper script, or
print them next to the results, in order to help the user understand the results better. Additionally,
when using COTUS, it is important to make it clear, for the user to note, that some sources of errors
occur. This is, for instance, the diﬃculty of recreating exact weather phenomenons in a simulation,
or the necessity of simplifying building geometries. This could easily be called to their attention, by
pointing it out, either in a notation in the Grasshopper script or next to the results.
Based on these initiatives, we believe that COTUS is a user-friendly tool, which will be easy to imple-
ment and help make it easier for architects to take the surrounding outdoor spaces into consideration,
in the early phases of building design.
Page 76 of 111
==PAGE:87==
8
FURTHER STUDIES
8
Further Studies
Based on the discussion, where the tool was evaluated, there were a few places where the tool could
be improved. Even though the tool generally works well, there were a few things which we believe
would ease the use and enhance the experience.
As previously mentioned, some of the inputs for the analyses might be diﬃcult to ﬁnd, if the user
does not have prior experience within the diﬀerent ﬁelds. For instance, it can be diﬃcult to ﬁnd the
wind speed and wind direction for a given location. The proposed solution was to include information
about the website Weatherspark.com, in the Grasshopper script, as the necessary information should
be available on the website.
Additionally, the outputs and results turned out to be more diﬃcult to interpret and conclude on,
than intended.
This is a bit more complicated to solve and has several possible solutions.
As
mentioned earlier, a solution to the problem could be to create a rating with the average for each
analysis on the entire calculation surface. For instance, in the wind environment analysis, when
comparing several diﬀerent design proposals, the results could be presented as an average of the
wind speed on the calculation surface, for each of the diﬀerent design proposals. Thereby, it can
easily be concluded, which design proposal is experiencing the overall highest or lowest wind speeds,
instead of just for a speciﬁc area of the surface. It could also be a solution to make a document of
”How to Interpret the Results”. The document could help explaining the units and the user could
compare the given results to the Beaufort scale or the UTCI-index for a better understanding of the
output.
Since this is very dependent on the diﬀerent users, it could be a good idea to investigate more
about their knowledge within the diﬀerent areas (for instance, their knowledge and understanding
of UTCI) and if more guidance is needed in regards to interpreting the results. It could be done
through more in-depth interviews with the diﬀerent architectural ﬁrms or through a survey. This
would make it possible to adjust the illustrated outputs to their needs. For instance, it could also
be investigated which output would be more beneﬁcial and how they would like it presented.It could
be presented in a simple Word-document, an integrated part of the Grasshopper script or perhaps
as an Excel-document.
Excel would most likely be an option, since it is possible to transfer data from Grasshopper to Excel.
Page 77 of 111
==PAGE:88==
8
FURTHER STUDIES
Then the data could be processed beforehand, and thereby be easier to understand and process
further, or customize.
If the solution would be to make a ”How to Interpret the Results”-document, it could also include
more information about the sources of errors, so that the user can be aware of the limitations of the
tool. It could possibly also include some information about the possibilities of making the analyses
more complicated, or speciﬁc for the desired case.
Another thing, which became apparent during the case study and which could help ease the inter-
pretation of the results, is regarding the legends. The legends for each analysis should be the same,
as this makes the comparison much easier. This can easily be solved in Grasshopper by presetting
the ”lowBound” and ”highBound” limit and attaching them to the component. It is important, that
the explanation is also extended to include an introduction on, how the limits should be adjusted, if
there are areas which are bright red or blue, as this would mean that the limits are not optimal and
the gradient map might then be misleading.
Page 78 of 111
==PAGE:89==
REFERENCES
9
Bibliography
[1] Aarhus Universitet (2019): ”Interviews”
http://metodeguiden.au.dk/interviews/ (Visited on 1.7.2020)
[2] Bergische Universit¨at Wuppertal (2019): ”Wuppertal goes Urban! Urban situations deﬁned. Call
for teams addendum a”
[3] Bertelsmann Stiftung and Sustainable Development Solutions Network (2019): ”Sustainable
Development Report 2019”, Pica Publishing.
[4] Bjerg, Søren Nielsen (1996): ”Vind i uderum”, Klimalaboratoriet / AAA.
[5] Bjerg, Søren Nielsen (2012): ”Vindmiljø i arkitekturen”
https://www.re-ad.dk/ws/ﬁles/39545731/vind.pdf (Visited on 5.3.2020)
[6] Big Ladder Software: ”EnergyPlus Weather File (EPW) Data Dictionary”
https://bigladdersoftware.com/epx/docs/8-3/auxiliary-programs/energyplus-weather-ﬁle-epw-
data-dictionary.html#energyplus-weather-ﬁle-epw-data-dictionary (Visited on 30.4.2020)
[7] Bouwmeester, R. et al. (2019): ”Sun and Shadow Study Terms of Reference”
https://guelph.ca/wp-content/uploads/Guelph-Sun-Shadow-Study-Terms-of-Reference-19-05-
27.pdf (Visited on 27.2.2020)
[8] Bruhn, Simone (2018): ”Guide i bygningsmodellering p˚a forskellige informationsniveauer”, Bach-
elor Thesis, Danmarks Tekniske Universitet.
[9] City of Mississauga (2014): ”Standards for Shadow Studies”
http://www6.mississauga.ca/onlinemaps/planbldg/UrbanDesign/FinalStandards ShadowStudies
July2014.pdf (Visited on 27.2.2020)
[10] Danmarks Meteorologiske Institut: ”Vejrarkiv”
https://www.dmi.dk/vejrarkiv/ (Visited on 16.3.2020)
[11] Dansk Arkitektur Center: ”Modernismen”
https://dac.dk/viden/artikler/modernismen/ (Visited on 25.2.2020)
Page 79 of 111
==PAGE:90==
REFERENCES
[12] Deutscher Wetterdienst: ”Maps of global radiation, annual average and monthly average”
https://www.dwd.de/EN/ourservices/solarenergy/maps globalradiation average.html?nn=495
490#buehneTop (Visited on 29.6.2020)
[13] DTU SDE team (2020): ”Konceptbeskrivelse”, Technical University of Denmark.
[14] Elle, Morten & Jensen, Jesper Ole (2004): ”Værktøjer til bæredygtig byudvikling”, Stads- og
havneingeniøren, nr. 11, 95. ˚argang.
[15] EnergyPlus: ”Weather Data Sources”
https://energyplus.net/weather/sources (Visited on 30.4.2020)
[16] Eriksen, Thor (2016): ”S˚adan foretager man et litteraturstudie”
https://www.scribbr.dk/struktur-i-din-afhandling/saadan-foretager-man-et-litteraturstudie/
(Visited on 21.4.2020)
[17] Fan, Jianhua (2018): ”Note 4: Geometry Creation Using Design-Modeler”
https://cn.inside.dtu.dk/cnnet/ﬁlesharing/download/78a0bfa5-25cb-40bd-9f1a-4d53b35cc04f
(Visited on 8.5.2020)
[18] Fondriest Staﬀ(2010): ”What Is Air Temperature”
https://www.fondriest.com/news/airtemperature.htm (Visited on 2.3.2020)
[19] Galanos, Theodoros, et al. (2018): ”How to Generate Wind Velocities at Site for All Hours of
the Year”
https://discourse.ladybug.tools/t/how-to-generate-wind-velocities-at-site-for-all-hours-of-the-
year/3149 (Visited on 21.4.2020)
[20] Gehl, Jan (2010): ”Byer for mennesker”, Bogværket.
[21] Gehl, Jan (1971): ”Livet mellem husene”, Arkitektens Forlag
[22] Greenshields, Chris (2018): ”OpenFOAM v6 User Guide: 5.3 Mesh generation with blockMesh”
https://cfd.direct/openfoam/user-guide/v6-blockMesh/ (Visited on 11.5.2020)
[23] Greenshields, Chris (2018): ”OpenFOAM v6 User Guide: 5.4 Mesh generation with snappy-
HexMesh”
https://cfd.direct/openfoam/user-guide/v6-snappyhexmesh/ (Visited on 11.5.2020)
[24] Hastrup, Kirsten, et al., (2013): ”Kulturanalyse - kort fortalt”, Forlaget Samfundslitteratur,
Frederiksberg.
Page 80 of 111
==PAGE:91==
REFERENCES
[25] Jacobs, Jane (2011): ”Death and Life of Great American Cities”, Random House.
[26] Kr¨uger, Eduardo (2011): ”UTCI Equivalent Temperature”
https://www.researchgate.net/ﬁgure/Concept-of-UTCI-as-categorized-equivalent-temperature-
scale-derived-from-the-dynamic ﬁg1 265227362 (Visited on 27.7.2020)
[27] Ladybug Tools: ”Butterﬂy”
https://www.ladybug.tools/butterﬂy.html (Visited on 16.4.2020)
[28] Ladybug Tools: ”Dragonﬂy”
https://www.ladybug.tools/dragonﬂy.html (Visited on 10.7.2020)
[29] Ladybug Tools: ”Epw-Map”
https://www.ladybug.tools/epwmap/ (Visited on 27.7.2020)
[30] Martin, Bella & Hanington, Bruce (2012): ”Universal Methods of Design”, Rockport Publishers.
[31] McCombes, Shona (2019): ”How to do a case study”
https://www.scribbr.com/methodology/case-study/ (Visited on 2.7.2020)
[32] Møller, Anette Fløe: ”Systematisk litteraturstudie, SLS”, VIA University College, Aarhus.
[33] Nikolopoulou, Marialena (2004): ”Environmental Diversity in Architecture, chapter 7”, Spon
Press.
[34] Quartier Mirke (2017): ”DAS QUARTIER MIRKE”
https://quartier-mirke.de/mirke/ (Visited on 25.02.2020)
[35] Realdania By (2012): ”Værktøj til bæredygtig byudvikling”, Realdania By og Byg.
[36] Reilly, Chris (2014): ”What is Grasshopper?”
https://www.lynda.com/Grasshopper-tutorials/What-Grasshopper/174491/194087-4.html
(Visited on 16.4.2020).
[37] Roudsari, Mostapha Sadeghipour (2013): ”Ladybug: A Parametric Environmental Plugin for
Grasshopper to Help Designers Create an Environmentally-Conscious Design”, Adrian Smith +
Gordon Gill Architecture, Chicago, U.S.A.
[38] SketchUp: ”Casting Real-World Shadows”
https://help.sketchup.com/en/sketchup/casting-real-world-shadows (Visited on 27.2.2020)
[39] Sharma, Prem (2015): ”Why do we mechanical engineers do meshing in ANSYS, and what’s
the use of meshing?”
Page 81 of 111
==PAGE:92==
REFERENCES
https://www.quora.com/Why-do-we-mechanical-engineers-do-meshing-in-ANSYS-and-whats-
the-use-of-meshing (Visited on 11.5.2020)
[40] Solar Decathlon Europe (2019): ”SDE Editions”
https://solardecathlon.eu/sde-editions/ (Visited on 25.02.2020)
[41] Solar Decathlon Europe (2019): ”the SDE Story”
https://solardecathlon.eu/the-sde-story/ (Visited on 25.02.2020)
[42] Shrestha, Praveen (2017): ”Trial and Error Learning”
https://www.psychestudy.com/behavioral/learning-memory/trial-error-learning
(Visited
on
2.7.2020)
[43] Strømann-Andersen, Jakob (2020): ”Interview with Jakob Strømann-Andersen, Henning Larsen
Architects”, Appendix A.
[44] Taarnhøj, Maria & Karstensen, Frederikke (2018): ”Udvikling af gode uderum i Trac´eet”,
Bachelor Thesis, Techical University of Denmark.
[45] The National Center for Atmospheric Research & the UCAR Oﬃce of Programs: ”The Building
Blocks of Weather”
https://eo.ucar.edu/basics/wx 2.html (Visited on 4.3.2020)
[46] The Task Committee on Outdoor Human Comfort of the Aerodynamics Committee (2003):
”Outdoor Human Comfort And Its Assessment”
American Society of Civil Engineers / ASCE
[47] Toksvig, Lars (2020): ”Interview with Lars Toksvig, PLH Architects”, Appendix A.
[48] Town of Richmond (2012): ”Sun & Shadow Study”
https://www.richmondhill.ca/en/shared-content/resources/documents/595-sun-shadow-study-
terms-of-ref.pdf (Visited on 27.2.2020)
[49] United Nations, Department of Economics and Social Aﬀairs: ”Population Division”
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2016/06/q-a-do-our-cities-make-us-sick/
(Visited
on
20.2.2020)
[50] University of Southern California (2020): ”Organizing Your Social Sciences Research Paper”
https://libguides.usc.edu/writingguide/casestudy (2.7.2020)
[51] VisualARQ: ”What is Rhino?”
https://www.visualarq.com/info/what-is-rhino/ (Visited on 16.4.2020)
Page 82 of 111
==PAGE:93==
REFERENCES
[52] Weatherspark: ”Average Weather on June 21 in Copenhagen”
https://weatherspark.com/d/74001/6/21/Average-Weather-on-June-21-in-Copenhagen-
Denmark#Sections-Wind (Visited on 15.6.2020)
[53] Weatherspark: ”Average Weather on June 21 in Wuppertal”
https://weatherspark.com/y/58162/Average-Weather-in-Wuppertal-Germany-Year-Round (Vis-
ited on 15.6.2020)
[54] Wintour, Paul (2016): ”Ladybug & Honeybee”
https://parametricmonkey.com/2016/03/13/ladybug-honeybee/ (Visited on 16.4.2020)
[55] Zare,
Sajad,
et
al.
(2018):
”Comparing
Universal
Thermal
Climate
Index
(UTCI)
with selected thermal indices/environmental parameters during 12 months of the year”
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S221209471730110X (Visited on 26.6.2020)
Inspirational Texts
[56] Fan, Jianhua (2018):
”CFD on Buildings, Note 4:
Geometry Creation Using Design-
Modeler”,11124 Computational Fluid Dynamics vedrørende bygninger, DTU Civil Engineering,
Technical University of Denmark.
[57] Fan, Jianhua (2018): ”CFD on Buildings, Note 5: Meshing Method”, 11124 Computational
Fluid Dynamics vedrørende bygninger, DTU Civil Engineering, Technical University of Denmark.
[58] Fan, Jianhua (2018): ”CFD on Buildings, Note 7: Global Mesh Control”, 11124 Computational
Fluid Dynamics vedrørende bygninger, DTU Civil Engineering, Technical University of Denmark.
[59] Fan, Jianhua (2018): ”CFD on Buildings, Note 8: Local Mesh Control and Volume Decom-
position”, 11124 Computational Fluid Dynamics vedrørende bygninger, DTU Civil Engineering,
Technical University of Denmark.
[60] Foreningen Dansk Byøkologi (2005): ”Bæredygtig Byudvikling”, Medlemsblad for Foreningen
Dansk Byøkologi, nr. 2, ˚argang 8.
[61] Koss, Holger: ”CWE: Computational Wind Engineering”, DTU Civil Engineering, Technical
University of Denmark.
[62] Københavns Kommune (2018): ”Kanzoner i København”.
Page 83 of 111
==PAGE:94==
REFERENCES
[63] Larsen, Henrik (2018): ”DTU embraces the UN’s 17 Sustainable Development Goals”
https://www.dtu.dk/english/news/2018/04/dtu-embraces-the-uns-17-sustainable-
development-goals?id=564729c4-76e2-4b1c-92e9-5d0f5996af78 (Visited on 20.2.2020)
[64] Møller, Kathrine Leenders (2018): “Multi-criteria decision support for refurbishment of Danish
Primary Schools“, Master Thesis, Technical University of Denmark.
[65] Nielsen, Amalie Nordstrøm, & Torp, Emilie Alstrup (2019): ”Udvikling af CPTED-værktøj til
byrumsanalyser ved danske stationer”, Bachelor Thesis, Technical University of Denmark.
[66] Realdania By&Byg (2015): ”Ny inspiration til byudvikling”.
[67] Realdania By&Byg (2018): ”Udviklingsplaner som værktøj i byudvikling”.
[68] Sakhat, Sara Anne-Sophie Loft (2017): ”Urban Design - Post Occupancy Evaluation of new
climate facilities”, Master Thesis, Technical University of Denmark.
[69] SDE Team Denmark (2020): ”SEVA, Techical Volume”
[70] Susse, Georg (2013): ”Bæredygtig byudvikling”, Erhvervsh˚andbogen: Grøn lov og praksis,
Aalborg Universitet.
[71] Svarre, Birgitte (2013): ”Attraktive Byrum - de 12 kvalitetskriterier”, Gehl Architects.
[72] United Nations: ”Millennium Development Goals”
https://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/poverty.shtml (Visited on 20.2.2020)
[73] United Nations: ”Sustainable Development Goals”
https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdgs (Visited on 20.2.2020)
Page 84 of 111
==PAGE:95==
10
APPENDIX
10
Appendix
10.1
Appendix A: Correspondence with Architecture Companies
We sent out an e-mail to six diﬀerent architecture companies. They were chosen based on whether
their webside indicated that they took outdoor spaces into consideration in their design process.
Three of them we found to take it into consideration and three had no mentioning of outdoor spaces
and it was therefore assumed that they do not take outdoor spaces into consideration during their
design phases.
The companies with a focus on outdoor spaces:
- Henning Larsen, mail@henninglarsen.com
- Vandkunsten, vandkunsten@vandkunst.dk
- Arkitema, info-danmark@arkitema.dk
The companies without a focus on outdoor spaces:
- PLH Arkitekter, plh@plh.dk
- AI Arkitekter & Ingeniører, ai@ai.dk
- Creo Arkitekter, creo@creoarkitekter.dk
The following e-mail was sent out to each company:
Kære ...,
Vi er to studerende fra Architectural Engineering p˚a DTU. Vi er igang med vores kandidatspeciale,
der omhandler udviklingen af et digitalt værktøj til vurdering af bygningers p˚avirkning af de fysiske
egenskaber i et uderum, s˚asom sol- og vindforhold.
I den forbindelse er vi meget interesseret i at vide, hvordan designprocessen af bygninger foreg˚ar i
forskellige arkitektvirksomheder.
Vi ville derfor sætte stor pris p˚a, hvis I kort kunne fortælle lidt om, om I tager højde for sol- og
vindforhold i de omkringliggende uderum i jeres designproces af bygninger, og hvis I gør, hvorn˚ar i
processen I overvejer det, samt hvordan I tager højde for det.
P˚a forh˚and mange tak.
Page 85 of 111
==PAGE:96==
10
APPENDIX
De bedste hilsner
Maria Taarnhøj og Frederikke Karstensen
Vandkunsten
Vandkunsten Arkitekter put us in contact with one of their Architect MAA, Sam Coolidge, who
answered the following to the questions posed in the e-mail.
Hej Frederikke og Maria,
Det lyder som et interessant studie.
Det er lidt svært at svare p˚a over en kam fordi alle projekter er forskellige.
B˚ade i forhold til
dokumentationskrav og hvad der fokuseres p˚a i designprocessen.
Generelt kan man sige at sol og lysforhold er i baghovedet allerede n˚ar vi tegner de første skitser,
p˚a lige fod med andre parametre som adgangsforhold, funktionelle krav, osv. I første omgang p˚a
et erfaringsmæssigt skøns-niveau, hvor vi med sitets orientering i mente vurdere hvor der f.eks.
er morgensol, aftensol og hvilke omr˚ader der kan være problematiske ifht lys. I alle aﬂeveringer
i byplansskalaen, om det f.eks er konkurrencer eller lokalplaner, vedlægger vi skyggediagrammer,
typisk fra jævndøgn og sommersolhverv. I projekter hvor vi har en mistanke om at dagslys kan
være et problem, f.eks hvis der skal være en særlig høj bebyggelsestæthed, f˚ar vi i tidlige stadier
kontrolleret vores design med dagslyssimuleringer. Jo tidligere i processen man opdager problemer,
jo nemmere er de selvfølgelig at reagere p˚a.
Med mindre sitet har en særlig udfordring med vind, undersøges vindforhold først i en senere del
af processen. Ofte bruges landskabet og beplantningsstrategien til at skabe læ. Det vil være en
ekstern virksomhed som simulere vind, da det er en tungere simulering som vi ikke selv kan lave. P˚a
baggrund af deres anbefalinger tilpasses landskabet og bygningskroppen.
Jeg h˚aber at svaret kan bruges.
Venlig hilsen,
Sam Coolidge, arkitekt maa
AI Arkitekter & Ingeniører
Page 86 of 111
==PAGE:97==
10
APPENDIX
AI Architects put us in contact with Creative Manager, Partner and Architect MAA, Tomas Snog.
Hej Frederikke og Maria
Det gør vi. . .
Vi bruger det i de tidlige skitseringsfaser og frem til dispositionsforslag.
Sol og skygge h˚andterer vi i sketchup.
Vind har vi prøvet, men programmerne har ikke været s˚a gode. . . sketch up har vist et program under
udvikling.
Det er super vigtigt, s˚a her er plads til forbedring.
Vand kigger vi p˚a i Scalgo – det er forholdsvis nyt for mange, men ogs˚a et super vigtigt omr˚ade.
Med venlig hilsen
Tomas Snog
Hej Tomas,
Mange tak for hjælpen.
Vi har lige et lille spørgsm˚al mere: Hvilke programmer bruger I i jeres skitseringfaser?
S˚a som
Sketch-Up, Rhino, AutoCAD eller andet?
De bedste hilsner
Maria og Frederikke
Primært Sketch up
Og lidt cad
Med venlig hilsen
Tomas Snog
PLH Arkitekter
PLH prefered to have a phone interview where we could the questions from the e-mail. We inter-
viewed Lars Toksvig, Partner and Architect MAA. The interview took place over the phone, due to
COVID-19. It is transcribed below:
Frederikke: Hej Lars. Du snakker med Frederikke og Maria fra DTU. Vi havde aftalt et interview
Page 87 of 111
==PAGE:98==
10
APPENDIX
her nu.
Lars: Ja, to sekunder, jeg skal lige ind i mødelokalet.
Frederikke: Okay.
En del af interviewet er desværre g˚aet tabt pga. problemer med mikrofonen.
Lars: indbygget.. videnskab til videnskab... s˚a er det daglyssimuleringer og alt muligt. Det er jo
noget der ligger p˚a rygraden. Det er .. det er bare et andet ord for god arkitektur. Det synes jeg
jo er interessant nok. Selvfølgelig lægger vi jo altid bygningen og placerer bygningen s˚adan s˚a man
bruger dagslyset mest hensigtsmæssigt. Vil jeg sige er en af, alts˚a hele det der med hvordan man
placerer sig i terrænet eller p˚a grunden, det er jo en af de første øvelser. Hvor ligger bygningsmassen
hensigtsmæssigt i forhold til dagslys orientering. Det er helt sikkert en af de første ting vi tager
fat p˚a. Ogs˚a n˚ar vi skal lave masterplaner, alts˚a hvor er det solsiden er og hvor er det bedst med
hensyn til vind og s˚a videre og s˚a videre, studier. Det er da noget der er med i overvejelserne. S˚a
ja til det svar [griner]. Vi gør det s˚a tidligt som muligt, fordi du kan jo ikke, du skal ikke for langt i
et projekt, før at det er for sent, n˚ar du har placeret tingene.
Frederikke: Jo. Helt præcist. Vi tænkte ogs˚a p˚a, bruger i nogle værktøjer til det eller er det bare
er jeres egen ekspertise i bruger til at ﬁnde ud af hvor det er mest hensigtsmæssigt at lægge de her
bygninger?
Lars: Alts˚a jeg vil sige, umiddelbart s˚a har vi jo en intuition til hvorn˚ar, alts˚a det er jo meget nemt at
sidde med et kompas eller en nordpil [Frederikke griner]. S˚a ved man jo nogenlunde hvordan tingene
ser ud. Men vi laver ogs˚a skyggestudier, og specielt n˚ar man laver planlægning, alts˚a lokalplaner
og s˚adan noget, der kræver de at der er skyggestudier, hvor man tager jævndøgn og Juni og hvad
hedder det midsommer, og s˚a ogs˚a i December, s˚a man ligesom har spektret. Det er der noget med.
Frederikke: Ok, øhm..
Lars: Og det kan vi jo stille meget nemt. Vi har jo, alts˚a p˚a SketchUp eller alle 3D programmer,
der kan vi jo sætte solen efter klokkeslet og højdegraden.
Frederikke: Jo, det er rigtigt. Hvad for nogle programmer bruger i typisk n˚ar i tegner og designer
jeres bygninger?
Lars: Det vil sige. Alts˚a primært, i de første indledende skitser s˚a er det SketchUp og Rhino.
Page 88 of 111
==PAGE:99==
10
APPENDIX
Frederikke: Okay.
Lars: Og s˚a 2D. Det er jo s˚a AutoCAD.
Frederikke: Ja, okay, i bruger ikke Revit til 3D tegninger?
Lars: Jo det gør vi senere hen. Men alts˚a vores. Vi har fundet at Revit er lidt for meget at tegne
op i forhold til de indledende studier. S˚a vores konkurrencehold sidder tit og arbejder i SketchUp og
i Rhino, og n˚ar vi s˚a har f˚aet opgaven, s˚a kører vi det over i Revit.
Frederikke: Okay. Helt perfekt. Det er nogle rigtig gode svar [griner]. Det er lige noget vi kan bruge
i vores opgave. Det er virkelig godt.
Lars: Ja, det er godt [griner]. Bare sig hvad jeg skal svare [griner].
Frederikke: Jo tak, jo tak [griner]. Har vi ﬂere spørgsm˚al?
Maria: Hvad med i forhold til vind?
Frederikke: N˚arh. N˚ar i kikker p˚a det rundt om bygningerne. Ser i s˚a p˚a vindforhold p˚a noget
tidspunkt? Hvordan bygningen p˚avirker vinden?
Lars: Jaa alts˚a lidt, i at høje bygninger kan lave noget turbulens. Ellers s˚a er det begrænset hvor
meget vi laver vindstudier.
Det er noget der ogs˚a er et krav i lokalplaner at man laver de der
vindstudier.
Frederikke: Ja.
Lars: Men sædvanligvis er der ikke s˚a meget at gøre ved det fordi en bygning fylder det den gør,
den laver den turbulens den gør. Man kan arbejde lidt med facaden. Jeg tror lidt, det er lidt søgt,
men alts˚a nogen gange har vi for eksempel, er vi igang med at tegne et hovedsæde nu til en større
bank og der har vi kunnet advokere for at vores facade, eftersom der var meget relief i facaden, s˚a
var den med til at bremse vinden og rykke vinden, men alts˚a det er ogs˚a fordi vi synes det var en
fed facade, for at være helt ærlig.
Frederikke: Okay [griner]. Tager i højde for andre faktorer, udover sol, n˚ar i laver jeres designs? Er
der andet i kikker p˚a, hvordan bygningerne p˚avirker det omkringlæggende? Jeg tænker komfort eller
udendørs akustik eller..
Lars: Der er noget blænding nogen gange, alts˚a at man ikke skal have for meget blænding. Ja,
Page 89 of 111
==PAGE:100==
10
APPENDIX
det er jo meget at tilpasse sig, der er jo hele det æstetiske og det der med at passe sig ind i det
eksisterende miljø og at der er noget slægtskab til bygningen, det bruger vi jo lang tid p˚a. S˚a der er
jo hele det her visuelle, det er jo, det kan man jo godt sige at vi prøver at passe bygnignen visuelt
til omgivelserne. Og s˚a meget det der med at f˚a, alts˚a arbejde meget med kantzonerne, det synes
jeg jo er ret vigtigt for fortællingen. Det er jo at n˚ar man har en bygning s˚a vil alt det der foreg˚ar,
alts˚a det er jo Jan Gehl hvis i kender ham.
Frederikke: Jo, det gør vi.
Lars: S˚a vil alt det der foreg˚ar over 4 meters højde, det er ret ligegyldigt for bylivet.
S˚a den
der kantzone, alts˚a nede i, hvordan møder bygningen jorden og hvad er det der sker lige der hvor
mennesker kommer tæt p˚a bygningerne, hvor de interagerer. S˚a det er helt sikkert at det er det der
hvad tilfører bygningen til omgivelserne.
Frederikke: Okay.
Lars: Og det er helt sikkert. Det arbejder vi rigtig meget med hvordan ˚abner bygningen sig, hvordan
er den imødekommende, hvor at, alts˚a og der er det meget i Københavns Kommune her, der har vi
en stadsarkitekt, der er meget opmærksom p˚a hvordan livet mellem bygningerne er, og det er vi jo
s˚a ogs˚a alts˚a. Det er sjældent at vi bare tegner en bygning der bare st˚ar som s˚adan en eller anden
skulptur p˚a en plads uden at man forholder sig til omgivelserne. Det er et meget stort samspil med
omgivelserne vil jeg sige.
Frederikke: Okay. Det er rigtig godt.
Livet ved bygningerne.
Frederikke: Ja. Ja, men øhm..
Lars: Er der siddemuligheder? Er der grønt? Hvad er det for nogle, alts˚a er det en h˚ard belægning,
hvordan møder bygningen sine omgivelser. Og hvad er det for noget ophold man ønsker.
Frederikke: Okay. Ja, meen det er rigtig godt. Jeg tror faktisk bare, det var bare det vi gerne ville
vide.
Lars: Godt. I er velkomne til at kontakte mig igen hvis der er noget.
Frederikke: Jo tak, hvis vi kommer p˚a ﬂere ting s˚a skal vi nok kontakte dig.
Lars: Det er godt. Held og lykke med opgaven.
Page 90 of 111
==PAGE:101==
10
APPENDIX
Frederikke: Jo og tusind tak for hjælpen.
Lars: Det var s˚a lidt.
Henning Larsen
We wrote the e-mail to Jakob Strømann-Andersen, who is Partner and Head of Sustainability En-
gineering. He also preferred to have an interview over the phone. The interview is transcribed
below.
Jakob: Hallo, det er Jakob.
Maria: Hej, det er Maria og Frederikke fra DTU. Vi har en aftale her kl. 14.00 om at vi m˚atte ringe
til dig.
Jakob: Ja, det er rigtigt. Den er lige præcis 14.00 kan jeg se.
Maria: Ja, det er den [griner]
Begge griner.
Maria: Vi er jo i gang med vores kandidat speciale, hvor vi er i gang med at lave et værktøj i Rhino.
Jakob: I g˚ar p˚a DTU ikke?
Maria: Jo, det gør vi.
Jakob: S˚a husker jeg rigtigt.
Maria: Vi læser bygningsdesign p˚a DTU.
Jakob: Bygningsdesign, ja. Det kender jeg godt.
Maria: Ja, vi har ogs˚a haft et kursus med dig en gang.
Jakob: Ja ja.
Maria: Vi laver et værktøj i Rhino til hvordan man kan vurdere bygningers p˚avirkning af s˚adan de
fysiske egenskaber, s˚a som sol-, komfort- og vindforhold.
Jakob: Ja
Page 91 of 111
==PAGE:102==
10
APPENDIX
Maria: Tanker er, at vi gerne vil lave det s˚adan at det skulle kunne gives ud til nogle virksomheder,
s˚a det kunne blive lettere for jer at lave de her analyser. Og s˚a var det at vi gerne ville høre lidt om,
hvordan I gør ude i arkitekt virksomhederne.
Jakob: Ja, det kan jeg da godt snakke lidt om. Det er primært nogle af vores eksperter som sidder
og udvikler de værktøjer, som vi bruger. Vi bruger rigtig meget de her mikroklimatiske værktøjer -
det er vel det som I ogs˚a gerne vil udvikle, ikke?
Maria: Jo mere eller mindre.
Jakob: Vind, sol, luftfugtighed, temperatur, støj - eller hvad er jeres m˚al, hvad vil I gerne m˚ale?
Maria: Alts˚a vi har sol og vindforhold, og s˚a vil vi ogs˚a gerne se p˚a noget udendørs komfort.
Jakob: Ja, øhm...
Lang pause med mange øhm’er.
Maria: Jeg kan m˚aske fortælle lidt om... m˚aske, alts˚a bruger I nogle programmer til ligesom at ﬁnde
ud af de her ting eller hvordan gør I?
Jakob: Vi bruger det samme som I gør. Vi har et Rhino-Grasshopper-Honeybee program. Hvor vi
kører vind studier, sol studier og tilsammen f˚ar komfort ud af det alts˚a UTCI. Vi kører s˚adan et
integreret webﬂow via Grasshopper og Honeybee.
Maria: Er det noget som I altid har med i jeres projekter? Og er det noget som I altid tager højde
for?
Jakob: Øhm, ja. Specielt n˚ar vi laver masterplaner og udviklingsprojekter. Udviklingsprojekter, hvor
der er ﬂere bygninger, s˚a kører vi det ind over. Vi tegner alt op i Rhino her p˚a tegnestuen.
Maria: Ja okay.
Jakob: S˚a p˚a den m˚ade, s˚a er det meget integreret. Men det jeg tænkte p˚a, det var m˚aske, at i
stedet for at udvikle et værktøj, som vi allerede har brugt tid p˚a, kunne vi m˚aske ﬁnde ud af hvad I
kunne bygge oven p˚a vores værktøj. S˚a I kan gøre vores værktøj mere præcist eller putte en ekstra
parameter ind i vores værktøj.
Maria: Ja.
Jakob: Hvad var tanken? Var det at bygge det fra scrats? Eller hvordan?
Page 92 of 111
==PAGE:103==
10
APPENDIX
Maria: Vi har prøvet at undersøge om det var noget som fandtes i forvejen, inden vi ligesom gik i
gang med det. Og vi har ikke rigtig fundet nogle stedet hvor der var noget. S˚a det var lidt derfor vi
tænkte at vi kunne lave det her.
Jakob: Ja okay. Men vi har et integreret værktøj herinde, som vores eksperter arbejder med. S˚a
nu har I fundet nogle som har det. Men jeg tænkte egentlig at I skulle snakke med Mathias, det er
ham som har udviklet det, s˚a kan han forklare jer det tekniske setup omkring det og hvordan det er
bygget op. Jeg ved ikke hvor meget I er inde i det?
Maria: Jo, det kunne da være spændende.
Jakob: Jeg kan lige høre ham om han har tid. Han sidder lige her.
Jakob har en samtale med Mathias, som vi ikke kan høre.
Jakob: Han har desværre ikke tid lige nu. Men han vil kontakte jer n˚ar han f˚ar muligheden for det.
Skal han kontakte jer p˚a den mail I har sendt til mig?
Maria: Ja, det ville være ﬁnt.
En del af interviewet er desværre g˚aet tabt pga. problemer med mikrofonen.
Jakob: S˚a efterspørger de nogle solkomfort studier, s˚a de sikre at der ikke er skygge p˚a en plads. S˚a
efterspørger de vindkomfort studier, hvis det er omkring et højhus. S˚a prøver vi at give kunderne de
forskellige referencer som de efterspørger.
Maria: Okay.
Jakob: Men vi bruger hele pakken i konkurrencer for det gør, at vi kan vinde projekter.
Maria: Ja okay.
Jakob: N˚ar vi kan dokumentere at udemiljøet bliver bedre end det var før. Alts˚a at vi kan forlænge
sommeren, efter˚aret eller udesæsonen. Det er det vi kigger p˚a, s˚a vi kan optimere vores strukturer
og komfort i udemiljøer. Og alts˚a forlænger den periode hvor det er rart at bevæge sig udenfor, og
skærmer f.eks. for vind der hvor der skal være læ i forbindelse med indgange til cafeer.
Maria: Ja.
Jakob: Det vi arbejder p˚a som vi synes ogs˚a kunne være spændende og som kan være vores næste
step det er, og som ogs˚a kobler sig til den m˚ade hvorp˚a man programmere, det er den m˚ade man
Page 93 of 111
==PAGE:104==
10
APPENDIX
bruger byen p˚a, alts˚a funktionerne i byen. F.eks. hvis I g˚ar ned i Nyhavn ved kanalen, der er lige
meget plads p˚a begge sider, p˚a den ene side af kanalen er der rigtig meget liv og aktivitet og p˚a den
anden side er der stort set dødt. Det er jo fordi der er sol p˚a den ene side og skygge p˚a den anden
side.
Maria: Ja.
Jakob: S˚a det handler om hvordan man kan lave byer som har liv, men ogs˚a s˚a man kan vurdere
hvor skal forretningerne ligge, hvor skal caferne ligge, hvor skal beboelsen ligge, hvor kan jeg f˚a ﬂest
penge for mine kvadratmeter - det er super spændende. S˚a det link kunne være sjovt at arbejde
med, s˚adan hvordan man ligesom kan putte kroner og øre p˚a godt mikroklima. S˚a det ikke kun
handler om mennesker, men det ogs˚a handler om at dem der bygger byen for noget ud af det, s˚a de
skaber bedre kvalitet i det de bygger.
Maria: Ja, ja. Det er ogs˚a s˚adan noget, som vi synes er rigtig spændende.
Maria: Er det noget som s˚adan... nu hvor du siger, at I laver det i jeres tilbud til konkurrencer, er
det s˚a noget i vinder p˚a fordi der ikke er nogle andre som laver det? Ved du noget om det?
Jakob: B˚ade ja og nej. Der er ikke s˚a mange andre som laver det, for vi integrere det i vores design,
s˚a det bliver en del af den m˚ade vi formgiver p˚a. Der er mange som bare laver det bagefter, som
s˚adan en validering af deres design. Men vi ændre jo designet undervejs, s˚a tit laver vi f.eks. tre
forskellige analyser undervejs som viser hvordan var det før, hvordan var det undervejs og hvordan
er det nu med de nye design, og s˚a putter vi ogs˚a landskab p˚a, s˚a vi viser hvordan vi beplanter -
viser de træer, hvor solen kan komme ned igennem og det grønne som kan blokere vind. Det med
at arbejde i forskellige lag med design ind over, det er det vi vinder p˚a. S˚a vi kan m˚ale p˚a om vi gør
noget bedre end det var før.
Maria: Ja okay. Det var ogs˚a noget af det vi havde tænkt p˚a, at det ville være fedt hvis man kunne
integrere værktøjet rigtig tidligt i design fasen. S˚a det lyder super spændende, at det er noget som
I allerede gør.
Jakob: Ja, ja. S˚a skal det jo køres i starten. Der ﬁndes jo værktøjer, som kan nogle af de her ting,
hvad hedder det nu, ej nu har jeg glemt det. I har ikke stødt p˚a nogle værktøjer endnu?
Maria: Alts˚a øhm, vi har tidligere arbejdet med ENIV-met, soundplan og s˚adan nogle ting.
Jakob: Ja, det er blevet bedre efterh˚anden. Det har jeg arbejdet med.
Page 94 of 111
==PAGE:105==
10
APPENDIX
Maria: Ja, men det var ogs˚a derfor vi tænkte, at hvis man laver det i Rhino, s˚a kan det være
nemmere for folk og tegnestuer at implementere.
Jakob: Ja, det er meget nemmere. Det er meget nemmere fordi vi kan arbejde med vores analyser
direkte i det program som vi tegner i.
Maria: Ja.
Jakob: Ja, men hvad hedder det. Jeg synes at det lyder spændende. Men det kan være at jeg lige
sender jer mailen til Mathias, s˚a kan I skrive til ham hvad jeres tanker er, og s˚a vi kan ﬁnde ud af
hvor der er et udviklings potentiale. Det er jo ikke sjovt at udvikle noget, som allerede er udviklet i
forvejen tænker jeg.
Maria: Nej det er det ikke. Men det lyder rigtig spændende, vi vil rigtig gerne have hans mail.
Jakob: S˚a kan han jo ligesom guide jer og fortælle hvor der mangler noget, som vi gerne vil have at
I kigger p˚a s˚adan lidt mere dynamisk. S˚a kan I m˚aske ogs˚a f˚a adgang til nogle af vores scripts, s˚a I
kan prøve at teste dem.
Maria: Ja, det kunne være rigtig spændende.
Jakob: Havde I andet eller var det bare det I havde?
Maria: Nej, det var bare det. Du har f˚aet svaret p˚a rigtig mange af vores spørgsm˚al - det var bare
s˚adan lidt generalt vi gerne ville vide.
Jakob: Ja, ja. Det er en stor del af det vi gør og designer, nu hvor udemiljøet bliver vigtigere og
vigtigere for byerne i fremtiden, s˚a vi kan bevæge os udenfor og mødes udenfor. Alle ﬂytter jo tilbage
til byen. S˚a det er super relevant at kigge p˚a s˚adan et værktøj som bliver mere integreret, men ogs˚a
super relevant at kigge p˚a noget nyt til det som allerede er derude i forvejen.
Maria: Ja, ja, jamen.
Jakob: Skal jeg ikke bare lige smide jer en mail tilbage med Mathias’ oplysninger?
Maria: Jo, det m˚a du meget gerne, og mange tak fordi du havde tid til at svare p˚a vores spørgsm˚al.
Jakob: Ja, ingen stress. Det lyder godt. Jeg smider en mail i løbet af i dag.
Maria: Ja, mange tak. Hej, hej.
Page 95 of 111
==PAGE:106==
10
APPENDIX
Note: We never did get the email or scripts from Henning Larsen, and they did not answer our
emails after this meeting.
Creo Architects & Arkitema
After several attempts to contact Creo Architects and Arkitema there were still no answers. There-
fore, there is no answers from these ﬁrms presented in the appendix.
Page 96 of 111
==PAGE:107==
10
APPENDIX
10.2
Appendix B: Picture of Grasshopper Analysis and Introduction
The three analyses are in the same Grasshopper script, and an overview is visualized below in ﬁgure
48. Appendix C, D and E will have large pictures of each individual analysis.
Figure 48: Overview of the Grasshopper Script
Above the analyses is an introduction of a few things which the user should be aware of, when
carrying out the analyses, and how to do or check them.
Below, on ﬁgure 49, is a picture of the introduction.
Page 97 of 111
==PAGE:108==
10
APPENDIX
Figure 49: Introduction to Grasshopper Script
Page 98 of 111
==PAGE:109==
10
APPENDIX
10.3
Appendix C: Picture of Grasshopper Radiation Analysis
On the following page is a picture of the solar radiation analysis in Grasshopper.
NB: The orange line between the two components are only because the previous steps have not been
carried out. Once this is done the line will turn grey.
Page 99 of 111
==PAGE:110==
10
APPENDIX
Page 100 of 111
==PAGE:111==
==PAGE:112==
10
APPENDIX
10.4
Appendix D: Picture of Grasshopper Wind Environment Anal-
ysis
On the following page is a picture of the wind environment analysis in Grasshopper.
NB: The orange line and components are only because the previous steps have not been carried out.
Once this is done they will turn grey.
Page 101 of 111
==PAGE:113==
10
APPENDIX
Page 102 of 111
==PAGE:114==
==PAGE:115==
10
APPENDIX
10.5
Appendix E: Picture of Grasshopper Outdoor Comfort Analysis
On the following page is a picture of the outdoor comfort analysis in Grasshopper.
NB: The orange lines and components are only because the previous steps have not been carried
out and the buildings have not been loaded. Once this is done they will turn grey.
Page 103 of 111
==PAGE:116==
10
APPENDIX
Page 104 of 111
==PAGE:117==
==PAGE:118==
10
APPENDIX
10.6
Appendix F: Design Proposal for SDE
The following pictures are of the design proposal from the architects in the DTU Solar Decathlon
Team.
The drawings are 1:200.
Figure 50: SDE design proposal from DTU [13]
Page 105 of 111
==PAGE:119==
10
APPENDIX
Figure 51: SDE design proposal from DTU [13]
Page 106 of 111
==PAGE:120==
10
APPENDIX
10.7
Appendix G: Case Study Results: Solar Radiation Analysis
The following images are a solar radiation analysis of the case site. The analysis have been carried
out on the 21st of March.
Figure 52: Current (left) and future (right) layout from 9.00 - 10.00
Figure 53: Current (left) and future (right) layout from 12.00 - 13.00
Figure 54: Current (left) and future (right) layout from 15.00 - 16.00
Page 107 of 111
==PAGE:121==
10
APPENDIX
Page 108 of 111
==PAGE:122==
10
APPENDIX
10.8
Appendix H: Case Study Results: Wind Environment Analysis
During the case study, a wind environment analysis was carried out for 4.9 m/s which is the average
windspeed at the site. However, to investigate whether the high wind speeds always appear in the
same area of the calculation surface, the analysis was also carried out for a windspeed of 14 m/s
at the reference height of 10 m above the ground. The results are visualized in ﬁgure 55 and 56,
below.
By comparing ﬁgure 42 with 55 it can be seen that the high wind speeds appear in the same areas
at the calculation surface. And by comparing ﬁgure 43 with 56 it can be seen that the high pressure
appear in the same area as well.
Figure 55: Wind speed with current (left) and future (right) conditions for a windspeed of 14 m/s
Figure 56: Pressure with current (left) and future (right) conditions for a windspeed of 14 m/s
Page 109 of 111
==PAGE:123==
10
APPENDIX
Page 110 of 111
==PAGE:124==
10
APPENDIX
10.9
Appendix I: Case Study Results: Outdoor Comfort Analysis
The following images are an outdoor comfort analysis of the case site. The analysis have been carried
out on the 21st of March.
Figure 57: Current (left) and future (right) layout from 9.00 - 10.00
Figure 58: Current (left) and future (right) layout from 12.00 - 13.00
Figure 59: Current (left) and future (right) layout from 15.00 - 16.00
Page 111 of 111
