==PAGE:1==
Processing and analysis of drone-based mag-
netic data from Perros Guirec, France
A study of coastal mafic dykes
Master Thesis
DTU Space
Department of Geomagnetism
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
A study of coastal mafic dykes
Master Thesis
August, 2020
By
Jacob Thejll Petersen, Msc. stud.
Supervised by
Arne Døssing Andreasen, Senior researcher
Mick Emil Kolster, Ph.D. stud.
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Geomagnetism, Centrifugevej, Building 356, 2800
Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.space.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Geomagnetism, De-
partment of Space, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for
the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics, signal
processing and electromagnetism.
ii
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Geophysical surveys are a billion dollar industry and used for mining natural resources.
For air-based magnetic surveys the Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (drones) represent a novel
technology for sampling geomagnetic data. Drones provides a cheap and fast method
of collecting high resolution magnetic survey data needed for small scale geomagnetic
research.
In this thesis data from a drone-based survey collected in Perros Guirec, France was pro-
cessed and analysed. The aim was to explore whether processing techniques developed
for large scale aeromagetnic could be used effectively on drone-based magnetic surveys.
In addition the processed Perros Guirec survey was analysed with the goal of detecting
mafic-dykes in the subsurface.
The Perros Guirec surveys were handled in 4 phases: The pre-processing, the medium-
processing, the final-processing and the analysis. Each phase are sub-divided into sev-
eral steps. Amongst the interesting processing steps are a levelling method without tie
lines and a grid merging method capable of creating a representative grid of the entire
survey. The analysis, in addition to enhancement filters, consist of a tilt-depth method. 2
formulations of the 3D Euler deconvolution and an inverse-based dike modelling method.
These analysing method was used to model the mafic dykes of the Perros Guirec survey
and was supplemented and validated by visual imaging and susceptibility measurements.
The large scale aeromagetnic processing techniques provided suitable for methods not
requiring the existence of a base level shared by all sub-surveys. The modelling methods
agreed upon the existence of 3 mafic dykes, one of which could not be confirmed by visual
imaging. Generally, only the positions of the dikes agreed with visual imaging and both
the half-width and dip angle of the dykes was poorly resolved.
Yet magnetic methods could not sufficiently describe the observed surface geology in this
area. The small dykes with a low susceptibility could not be fully verified and require
further refinements of dike modelling methods. In future, drone-based magnetic surveys
can become useful in tool for small scale geological research.
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost I want to thank my supervisor Senior Researcher Arne Døssing An-
dreasen for given me the opportunity to make this project in an awesome field of study. I
have learned a lot from him and his guidance.
Also a thank to my other supervisor Ph.D. stud. Mick Emil Kolster for supervision.
Lastly, thanks to my family and friends for the support. A special thank to Simon and
Karen.
iv
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
==PAGE:7==
Nomenclature
Notation for mathematical representations
1. a - bold lower case letters denotes vectors
2. B - bold upper case letters denotes matrices or vector fields
3. F[a(x)] - denotes the 1D Fourier transformed of the vector a in the dimension kx.
4. F[A(x, y)] - denotes the 2D Fourier transformed of the matrix A in the dimensions
kx and ky.
5. · - denotes the dot product
6. × - denotes the cross product
7. a = P
i ai - using the sum operator to index the vector a
8. A = P
i
P
j Ai,j - using the sum operator to index the matrix A
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Planning phase of an drone-based magnetic survey
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Processing phase
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Interpretation phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4
Goal and methodology of this report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Theory
9
2.1
Modelling Earth’s magnetic field
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Total-field anomaly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.3
Filter Transformations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Magnetic field of sheet bodies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3
Method
21
3.1
Pre-processing phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.2
Medium-processing phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.3
Final-processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
3.4
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4
Results
39
4.1
The pre-processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
4.2
Medium-processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
4.3
Final-processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
4.4
Enhancement filters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
4.5
Dyke modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
5
Discussion
59
5.1
The Perros Guirec survey parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
5.2
The processing approaches for the Perros Guirec survey
. . . . . . . . . . 60
5.3
The approaches for analysis of mafic dykes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
5.4
Theoretical reflections and improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
6
Conclusion
69
References
71
A Appendix
73
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
The geophysical industry world-wide generated USD 14.43 Billion in 2018 and is projected
to reach USD 20.59 Billion by 2026 as estimated by fortune business insights (2019). One
aspect of the geophysical industry is to provide geophysical surveys which are a collection
of spatial data measured using a range of different sensing techniques. These techniques
focus on measuring different properties of Earth including seismic, gravity, magnetism
and electromagnetism. Collectively geophysical surveys provide natural resources such
as oil, gas, minerals and metals (Aurty 2020). A sub-category of the geological surveys is
the magnetic surveys which specifically targets the magnetic properties of the geological
features of interest. Dependent on the scale and location of the targeted geology, three
magnetic surveys sub-categories exist: the land-based, the marine-based and the air-
based.
Land-based magnetic surveys are typically performed by walking with the magnetometer
attached to a backpack. An advantage by using land-based magnetic surveys is that the
measurements are close to the geology of interest producing the best spatial resolution.
Hence these surveys are particularly suitable for small scale geophysical research and
mining purposes.
Marine-based magnetic surveys are performed by towing the magnetometer with a ship.
The marine-based surveys provide the closest distance to underwater geology. This mag-
netic survey type has been vital for geophysical research particularly in the field of plate
tectonic.
Lastly, air-based magnetic surveys or aeromagnetic surveys are performed from either
planes, helicopters or recently unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV). The chosen vessel tows
the magnetometer in a bird connect to the vessel by a wire. Naturally aeromagnetic sur-
veys have lower spatial resolution then land- and marine-based survey methods due to
the increased distance between the instrument and geology. However, air-based surveys
yield a large coverage of an area and hence suitable for large scale surveys. Recent ad-
vancements in both UAV and magnetometer technologies have made UAV-based mag-
netic survey substantially cheaper and faster than other air-bases methods for small scale
surveys (Nikulin and De Smet 2019). In addition, UAVs can fly at lower altitudes which
improves the spatial resolution of the surveys.
This thesis primarily focuses on processing a dataset from an UAV-based magnetic sur-
vey. The survey was conducted at Perros Guirec, France and is part of a larger geo-
physical survey. Perros Guirec is a city located on the northern coast of France. This
area contains geology associated with bodies of igneous rock. These igneous rocks form
geological features like dykes, stills and batholiths. Specifically this thesis aims to study
a dyke system, which was observed in the survey. The goal of this report is therefore
twofold: to process an UAV-based magnetic survey and to analyse the underground dyke
system of the coastal Perros Guirec.
1.1
Planning phase of an drone-based magnetic survey
The planning phase of an drone-based magnetic survey is similar to other type of magnetic
survey. The overall goal of a magnetic surveys is to measure the total-field intensity over
a piece of targeted geology. That geology has an associated total-field anomaly which is
isolated from the total-field intensity.
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
1
==PAGE:12==
Generally, magnetic surveys are planned such that the measurements lay on a grid cov-
ering the area of interest. The lines of the grid are called flight lines and tie lines. Figure
1.1. illustrates a typical magnetic survey setup. The arrows illustrates the flight direction
of the drone/vehicle. The tie lines are measured orthogonal to the flight lines and are less
frequent.
Figure 1.1: A typical setup for a magnetic survey. The small black dots illustrate individual
observations. The red lines denote flight lines and the blue lines denote tie lines. The
arrows indicate the drone’s flight direction. Each time the vehicle turns the flight direction
changes.
The first step in the planning process is to select the survey method. The choice of survey
method depends on the scale of the geology, the desired spatial resolution and the cost
of the survey. If the air-based approach was deemed optimal for observing the targeted
geology certain survey parameters need to be determined. Erwin Ebner 1995 gave an
extensive list of survey parameters and a selection of the most important are listed below
and will be elaborated upon.
• Flight line orientation
• Flight line spacing
• Flight altitude
• Sampling rate of the magnetometer
Flight line orientation should optimally be in the direction of magnetic north. This pa-
rameter has to do with how magnetic objects are magnetized, specifically the induced
magnetized. The best resolution is obtained when the flight lines are orientated along
the anomaly signal. However, if the geology has a significant remnant magnetization the
2
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
==PAGE:13==
flight line orientation becomes less important. This is because the anomaly signal can
now be orientation in any direction and it is impossible to accommodate this effect during
the survey.
The flight line spacing is another important factor for the resolution of the anomaly signal.
A. B. Reid 1980 discussed the importance of the flight line spacing in relation to the flight
altitude. He recommend, for contour maps, gradient computations or modelling of the
anomaly signal the flight line spacing should be 2, 1 or 1/2 times the altitude respectably.
This is to ensure that the resolution is sufficiently for the targeted purpose.
The flight altitude has already been discussed a fair bit in regard to its effect on the
anomaly resolution. Luyendykl 1997 noted, as a rule of thump, that an anomaly sig-
nal with a wavelength less than that of the flying height of the survey is likely to be noise.
Consequently, any wavelengths emitted from a magnetized object less than the flight alti-
tude are undetectable. This is the reason why the spatial resolution of the anomaly signal
is highly dependant on the flight altitude.
The quality of the magnetometer also influences the achievable resolution. Typically mag-
netic surveys measure the total-field intensity. This is because the total-field intensity is
insensitivity to orientation and hence highly suitable for being towed by vehicles. Total-
field intensity magnetometers can be manufactured relatively small without compromising
with a good resolution and accuracy Nikulin and De Smet 2019. The sampling rate of the
magnetometer will be denoted as the along line sampling rate as this determines how
many observation can be measured along a line. Accordingly, the along line sampling
rate is highly important for the spatial resolution of the anomaly signal.
Altogether these survey parameters restrict the overall resolution and quality of the mag-
netic survey. There is naturally a trade-off between cost, quality and coverage.
1.2
Processing phase
After the planning phase and the in-field measurements, the processing phase follows.
The recorded data are considered raw data. In the processing phase any potential sources
of errors are removed from the raw data. Furthermore, the processing phase involves grid-
ding of the magnetic data and preparing the data to be visualized as a smooth surface.
By using different shading and contouring techniques a surface can be visually analysed
by an interpreter.
1.2.1
Sources of errors
Luyendykl 1997 reviewed the effects of different errors sources effecting an aeromagnetic
survey. Using a drone-based survey as example the relevant error sources are listed
below:
• Navigational effects
• Time variations of Earths magnetic field
• Wave noise
• Instrumental errors
Navigational errors are mostly due to errors associated with the on-board GPS system.
GPS systems have two types of errors: The internal errors associate with accuracy and
precision, and the external errors associate environmental interference. Contemporary
GPS instruments typically have an accuracy of a few meters. However, environmental
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
3
==PAGE:14==
interference can introduce a bias to the positional data of the survey. Examples of en-
vironmental interferences which can affect aeromagnetic surveys are multipathing and
ionospheric disturbances.
Earth’s external field contributes to all time variations with periods less than 4 years. It is a
highly chaotic and rapidly changing field. It is driven by radiation from the sun which gives
the external field some periodic signals. One of these signals is the 24 hours variation
which varies from a few tens of nanotesla a day. A non periodic feature is the magnetic
storms occurring due to solar flares from the sun. A magnetic storm change the magnetic
field locally by hundreds of nanoteslas followed by an exponentially decay back to stable
over a period of days (C. Finlay and Olsen 2019).
As air-based magnetic surveys are performed at a constant altitude, the topography can
affect the measurements. Large topography variation can be expected over coastal ar-
eas when the beach to ocean profile is steep. This might prove an issue for the Perros
Guirec survey and will be discussed in section 5.3.5. However, topography variations are
generally small relative to the altitude and hence almost negligible.
Coastal surveys can have additional interference from waves and the ocean. Luyendykl
1997 mentions that the Australian Geological Survey Organisation (AGSO) has reportedly
measured signals from oceanic swells at 1.5 nT from a flying height of 80 m. Oceanic
swells are very large oceanic structures and are probably not noticeable by a drone-based
coastal survey.
Instrumental errors can either be from the magnetometer, the GPS system or the data-
logger. The data-logger is the system which read magnetometer observation and the GPS
observation and records them. Typically these errors only affect a single data point or a
small number of neighboring data points.
1.2.2
Processing techniques
This section is a review of different processing technique used to mitigate the error sources
mentioned in the previous section the raw magnetic survey data to a smooth gridded
surface.
Generally, processing starts by remove instrumental errors from the raw magnetic data.
Instrumental errors tend to result in either spiked data or data gaps. A spike is data point
significantly different than its neighbors and a gap is a section of the data missing. Nav-
igation errors might also show up as discontinuities in the data and should be removed.
Instrumental errors can be removed manually or by filtering techniques (Luyendykl 1997).
A problem arises when using drones/airplanes to measure the magnetic field and that is
the drone itself is magnetized. This effect can be mitigated by carrying the magnetome-
ter in a so-called bird. The bird is a vessel towed by a wire from the measuring vehicle.
However, this creates a discrepancy between the spatial position of the GPS measure-
ment and the magnetometer measurement. The discrepancy can be described by the
length of the wire. If this is not corrected for, two adjacent lines will be offset by twice the
wire length due to the measuring direction being opposite for the two lines. his is called
parallax correction and is a fundamental problem of measuring the magnetic field from a
magnetized object
The conversion from the total-field intensity to the total-anomaly intensity is done by re-
moving any magnetic contributions not derived from the geology. The non-geological
magnetic contributions are the external field, main field and low degree crustal fields (see
Section 2.2). As discussed in the previous section, the external field is highly chaotic
4
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
==PAGE:15==
which complicates the modelling. Therefore the external field is typically monitored by a
nearby magnetic observatory or an in-field stationary magnetometer called a base station.
The process of removing the external field is called diurnal correction.
The main field is a slowly changing field and can therefore be modelled. Main field models
are provided by the International Geomagnetic Reference Field (Thébault et al. 2015) or
by CHAOS-7 geomagnetic field model (C. C. Finlay et al. 2019). CHAOS-7, in addition to
the main field, also models the low degree crustal fields.
By performing diurnal correction and removing the modelled main field and crustal field,
the total-field intensity is reduced to only the total-anomaly field. The total-anomaly field
is a field associated with the geology and should not be mistaken for being the´actual field
from the geology.
Levelling is a processing technique aiming to remove any discrepancies between the mea-
sured total-field intensity from flight lines. It can be used to eliminate directional biases
in the measurements. It is an essential processing technique for high quality magnetic
surveys (Luyendykl 1997). Luyendykl 1997 describes two levelling methods. The loop
closure methods and the polynomial levelling methods. These are considered the stan-
dard methods in accordance with AGSO. The disadvantages of both these methods are
increased cost of a survey due to requiring tie lines and problems when tie lines and flight
lines connect over high gradient areas of the anomaly field. For that reason, tie lines
are primarily measured for the levelling process and are disregarded afterwards. White
and Beamish 2015 proposed a tie line free method. This method levels the aeromag-
netic surveys to its low wavelength information. White and Beamish 2015 showed that
this method was comparable to the standard levelling methods while providing a mostly
automated levelling process.
Gridding is the process of interpolating the measured magnetic data to a 2D grid. Gen-
erally, magnetic data are gridded using either the bidirectional or the minimum curvature
interpolation method. The bidirectional is essentially two orthogonal 1D interpolations
whereas the minimum curvature interpolation is a 2D method. Billings and Richards 1997
recommend the bidirectional method if the magnetic survey had a high along line sampling
rate and the minimum curvature method if the survey was spatially sampled or re-sampled
from a grid. This recommendation is based on an analysis of the wavelength information
in the gridded data.
After gridding the magnetic data some residual levelling errors can become apparent.
Residual levelling errors are removed using micro-levelling techniques. Many different
techniques for micro-levelling magnetic grids has been developed. Commonly, the micro-
levelling is a type of low-pass filter which focus on removing errors along flight lines. A
standard method is to combine a high pass filter with a directional filter to isolate noise
along the flight lines direction and then remove that noise from the grid.
At this point in the data processing, the micro-levelled grid can to be visualized. Magnetic
data are naturally non-linear and require non-linear contour-coloring. A contour-coloring
helps to distinguish between small and large sources. Cooper 2003 showed that sun
shading is an useful visualisation tool as it enhances linear features in the magnetic data.
Sun shading is particularly useful for the detection of dyke signatures in the magnetic data
which is the interest of this thesis.
A final addition to the processing of magnetic data can be to merge multiple gridded
survey together. Minty et al. 2003 described a method which identifies the best base
level shift and then literately adds polynomials to the merging grids to ensure a smooth
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
5
==PAGE:16==
overlap. The grids are subsequently completely merging using a feathering method by
Cheesman, MacLeod, and Hopllyer 1998. A feathering method is a procedure which
stitches two grids together leaving no overlap errors. Cheesman, MacLeod, and Hopllyer
1998’s method splits the overlap errors into representative sine functions with different
wavelengths. These sine functions are then propagated back into the merging grids by
a distance proportional to their wavelengths. The blending method is another feathering
algorithm. It works by assigning a weight to data points in an overlap zone for each over-
lapping grids. The new data point in the merged grid is then a weight mean of the data
point of the merging grids.
1.3
Interpretation phase
After the processing phase the magnetic data should be ready to be analysed and in-
terpreted. Interpretation techniques work either on gridded data (3D) or along the flight
lines (2D). However, some techniques are general enough to be used in both 3D and 2D.
Interpretation techniques are usually within these three categorized: filtering methods,
window (deconvolution) method or forward/inverse method.
Filter techniques are operations which are applied directly to the grids or flight lines. Sim-
ple filter techniques are the derivatives filters these calculates the 3 spatial derivatives of
the anomaly field. These filters provide a fast interpretation of the area. More advanced
filters, which requires the assumption that the anomaly field is a potential field, are the
reduction to pole filter and the upward/downward continuation filter (Richard J. Blakely
1995). These filter mathematically chance aspects of survey.
Some of the most insightful filters are the tilt derivative and analytic signal Richard J.
Blakely 1995. The tilt derivative can be used to equalize the source magnitude giving
small and large source the same relative magnitude. Salem et al. 2007 showed that
the tilt derivative could be used to estimate depth over steep geology. This method is
called tilt-depth. The analytic signal was developed as a 2D filtering method but was
generalized to the 3D case. The 3D representation of the analytic signal is actually a
vector field. In this thesis the analytic signal will just referred to the magnitude of its vector
field representative. The analytic signal will enhance the entire magnetic source.
Windowing techniques or deconvolutions involve sliding a window across the grid or along
the flight line. Each window position then encompass a small amount of magnetic data.
The windowed data are then used in a calculation. The two common methods are the
Euler deconvolution and the Werner deconvolution (Richard J. Blakely 1995). The Euler
deconvolution exploit a principle called homogeneity and solves for the magnetic source
position. Werner deconvolution fits a 2D thin dyke model to flight lines. The Euler de-
convolution can be used both in 2D and 3D while the Werner deconvolution is only a 2D
method. several improvements to the Euler deconvolution as been developed over the
years. One of the focus areas have been understanding the background term. Dewangan
et al. 2007 purposed an Euler deconvolutions which has an non-linear background field
and showed this could improved the Euler deconvolution’s positional estimates. Another
focus area of the Euler deconvolutions have been the structural index. structural index are
dependant on the sources’ shape and can only be an integer number (Thompson 1982).
The forward/inverse method usually requires a prior information and assumptions of the
magnetic sources. They work by exploiting the theoretical formulation of the magnetic
field emitted from idealize shape. If the geology in an area is predominantly one type
of shape the forward/inverse method can be quiet effective. McGrath and Hood 1970
formalized the magnetic field emitting from a thick sheet. This idealize thick sheet are
6
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
==PAGE:17==
typically used to model dykes. The forward/inverse methods work both in 2D and 3D.
However some idealize 2D bodies can be formulates such that mimic 3D bodies. This is
usually called 2.5D or 2.75D modelling.
1.4
Goal and methodology of this report
The primary goal of this thesis is to process and analyse a drone-based magnetic survey
from Perros Guirec, France. Amongst the standard processing techniques for magnetic
data, methods developed for large scale surveys will be tested on this small scale drone-
based survey. These are a levelling method without tie lines (White and Beamish 2015)
and a grid-merging technique (Minty et al. 2003).
As a secondary focus, the coastal mafic dykes of Perros Guirec are studied and identified
using three methods: the tilt-depth, an Euler deconvolution and an inverse dyke modelling.
The results from these methods are evaluated by comparing the results to an aerial image
of the coast.
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
7
==PAGE:18==
8
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
==PAGE:19==
2
Theory
This Section will go through some of the most important approximations necessary for
utilizing measurements of Earth’s magnetic field to infer the magnetic properties of the
geology. The main topics are how to create mathematical models of Earth’s magnetic
field, the justification of using total-field measurement to infer information of the subsurface
and the mathematical justification for applying different filters to enhance the total-field
anomalies.
2.1
Modelling Earth’s magnetic field
Any magnetic field can be described by Maxwell’s Equations and even the highly com-
plicated magnetic field of Earth is not an exception. The two Maxwell Equations which
governs magnetic fields are Ampere’s circuital law and Gauss law for magnetism.
∇× B = µ0J + µ0ϵ0
∂E
∂t
(2.1)
∇· B = 0
(2.2)
Where B is the magnetic field, E is the electric field, J is the current density. µ0 is the
magnetic permeability and ϵ0 is the vacuum permittivity. However, Earth’s magnetic field
can be considered irrotational in certain regions. An irrotational region needs J = 0 and
have a sufficiently slowly changing field (quasi static). Fortunately, the region between
Earth’s surface and up to the ionosphere can approximately be considered an irrotational
region (C. Finlay and Olsen 2019). This lets us reduces Equation 2.28 and introduces the
scalar magnetic potential V.
∇× B = 0 = −∇V
(2.3)
Now, taking the divergence and using Gauss law reduces Equation 2.3 to Laplace equa-
tion:
∇2V = 0
(2.4)
Equation 2.4 shows that in the region between Earth’s surface and the ionosphere, Earth’s
magnetic field can be considered a potential field with all its symmetric properties. Those
symmetries ensure that the field propagates smoothly throughout space and give a simple
connection between the field’s 2. derivatives.
When solving Laplace’s Equation for Earth’s magnetic field it is typically done in spherical
geometric (r,ϑ and λ) since it gives a global description of the field. It is solved using the
spherical harmonics expansion:
V (r, ϑ, λ) = a
∞
X
n=1
n
X
m=0



[gm
n cos mλ + hm
n sin mλ]
a
r
n+1
|
{z
}
Internal sources
+ [qm
n cos mλ + sm
n sin mλ]
 r
a
n
|
{z
}
External sources



P m
n (cos ϑ)
(2.5)
Where a is the radius of Earth, gm
n and hm
n are the Gauss coefficients for the internal field,
sm
n and qm
n are the Gauss coefficients for the external field, n and m are respectively the
degree and order of the spherical harmonics, P m
n is the normalized legendre polynomials.
Equation 2.5 gives a mathematical way of separating the external field from the internal
field. In addition, it shows that Earth’s magnetic field can be modelled as a superposition
of the Gauss parameters. Equation 2.5 is the basic mathematical formula used for IGRF
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
9
==PAGE:20==
and CHAOS-7 geomagnetic main field models. These models determines the internal
Gauss parameters based on magnetic observatories, SWARM and Ørsted data.
A power spectrum analysis of the internal Gauss parameters shows that the internal field
is dominated by a core field which contributes about 93 % to Earth’s full magnetic field.
Around degree 13 the lithosphere field starts to dominate the internal field, but only con-
tributes around 3 % Earth’s magnetic field. The remaining 4 % is from the fast changing
external field and the currents induced in the mantle by the changing external field (C.
Finlay and Olsen 2019).
The CHAOS-7 in addition to the core field (n>20) also models the large scale lithosphere
field (21<n<110) and a long term external field (q1
0) based on the Rc-index, which is a
measure of the activity of the magnetic ring current in the magnetosphere (C. C. Finlay
et al. 2019 and Kauristie et al. 2017). This thesis uses the CHAOS-7 to evaluate Earth’s
main field. The main field can be defined as:
Bmf = Bcore + Blith + BRc
(2.6)
Where Bmf is the main field and a superposition of Bcore, Blith and BRc. The main field
does not explain the fast chancing part of the external field. The external field has peri-
odic signals ranging from few seconds to multiple years, which complicates an accurate
modelling. Instead, the external field is monitored during the magnetic survey. This is
done by a nearby base station or magnetic observatory. In this thesis, it is assumed, that
the survey observations can be sub-divided into these 3 contributions:
Bobs = Bmf + Bext + δB
(2.7)
Where Bobs is the observations and Bext is the external field and δB is a small pertur-
bation of Earth’s magnetic field. For magnetic surveys δB is the interesting quantity as it
describes the local geology. However, to properly isolate δB from the survey, observa-
tions must have good geomagnetic main field models and a accurate monitored external
field as close to the survey location as possible.
2.2
Total-field anomaly
For simplicity and ease magnetic surveys typically just measure the magnitude of Earth’s
magnetic field, denoted the total-field intensity. The total-field intensity is not rotational
sensitive meaning it can easily be towed by vehicles. The downside is that any direc-
tional information about the field is initially lost. However, it is possible to retrieve some
directional properties of total-field intensity.
Lets start from Equation and assume that the external field has been corrected for. δB
is still a small perturbation of the main field e.g. due to a buried magnetic source in the
vicinity. These quantities are connected such that:
Bobs = Bmf + δB
(2.8)
Equation 2.8 shows that δB is easily isolated. In case the total-field intensity |Bobs| was
measured instead then:
|Bobs|= |Bmf + δB|
(2.9)
Now δB is not easily isolated due to its directional properties being lost after the norm
operator. Richard J. Blakely 1995 showed that if Bmf >> δB then Equation 2.16 can be
10
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
==PAGE:21==
solved using a first order Taylor approximation:
|Bobs| = |Bmf + δB|
(2.10)
|Bobs| = (|Bmf|2+|δB|2+2(Bmf · δB))−1
2
(2.11)
|Bobs| ≈
|Bmf|2
|Bmf|2 + 2(Bmf · δB)
|Bmf|2
 1
2
|Bmf|
(2.12)
|Bobs| ≈

1 + 2(Bmf · δB)
2|Bmf|2

|Bmf|
(2.13)
|Bobs| ≈

|Bmf|+(Bmf · δB)
|Bmf|

(2.14)
Equation 4.15 shows that the observed total-field intensity is equal to the main field and
a term related to the buried magnetic source. Now the quantity total-field anomaly ∆T is
introduced as the difference between |Bobs| and |Bmf|. ∆T is related to δB by:
∆T = |Bobs|−|Bmf|= b
Bmf · δB
(2.15)
Equation 2.15 shows that directional properties can be extracted even when the total-
field intensity is measured and if the main field is known. A geometric interpretation of
derivations can help to understand how directional information is gained. In the case
where Bmf >> δ then the direction of b
Bobs and b
Bmf would be identical. This leads to the
projection of δB onto Bmf being equal to |Bmf|−|Bobs|. This basically means that the
direction of δB along the main field can be described by ∆T.
The total-field intensity measured from a magnetic survey will be a superposition of pertur-
bation, the main field and the external field. In that case the total-field anomaly is defined
as:
∆T = |Bobs|−|Bmf|−|Bext|
(2.16)
Another property of the ∆T is that it is harmonic and therefore satisfy the Laplace Equation
if the main field is much larger and constant (Richard J. Blakely 1995). This is important
as this means we can perform filters transformations like the upward continuation and
reduction to the pole.
2.3
Filter Transformations
A filter is a mathematical operation which when applied to magnetic data can enhance
features or even change aspects of the survey. This could be enhancing edges associated
with geology, performing a phase transformation of the magnetization vector or changing
the measuring altitude of the survey. This section will present the Fourier transformation
and filtering
2.3.1
Fourier transform
In this thesis all filter operations were applied in the Fourier domain as this simplifies the
mathematical operations. Magnetic data are typically transformed to the Fourier domain
using the discrete Fourier transform (FFT). Lets consider gridded total-field anomaly data
∆T with a grid spacing of ∆x, ∆y and dimensions N x M. Using the notation by Richard J.
Blakely 1995 the 2D Discrete Fourier Transform of ∆T is given by:
F[∆Tx,y] =
N−1
X
n=0
M−1
X
n=0
∆Teiknxeikmy
(2.17)
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
11
==PAGE:22==
Where kn and km are the wavenumbers in the x direction and y direction respectively and
i2 = −1. F[∆Tx,y] represents a complex number with both an amplitude and phase. The
sampling wavenubmer of the x-direction is 2π
∆x, which means that the Nyquist wavenumber
is
2
∆x of the x-direction. The corresponding is also true for sampling wavenubmer and
Nyquist wavenumber for the y-direction. That means that all unique information lies within
this wavenumber intervals
kn =

−π
∆x
π
∆x

km =

−π
∆x
π
∆x

The wavenumbers can also be represented in polar coordinates described by:
kr =
p
k2n + k2m
kθ = arctan
km
kn

Where kr is the angular wavenumber and kθ is the direction of the angular wavenum-
ber. This representation is useful when all wavenumbers within a range or direction are
needed. The wavenumber can also be representative by the wavelengths:
λx = 2π
kn
λy = 2π
km
Where λx and λy are the wavelengths in the x direction and y direction, respectively. This
representation lets us isolate the sine functions which creates features by the specified
wavelength. The Nyquist wavenumber then corresponds to the lowest wavelength.
The FFT is a discrete approximation of the analytic Fourier transform and has some in-
herent problems. If the grid contains missing values or data gaps these have to be filled.
The grid edges should be periodic and asymptotically approach 0. This can be done by
zero padding or tapering off.
2.3.2
Derivative filters
The Fourier domain simplifies complicated mathematical operations. In the Fourier do-
main the horizontal derivatives of ∆T can by found by:
F
∂∆T
∂x

= (i · kn) · F [∆T]
(2.18)
F
∂∆T
∂y

= (i · km) · F [∆T]
(2.19)
Where F
h
∂f
∂x
i
and F
h
∂f
∂y
i
is the Fourier transformed of the derivatives. Now, the inverse
Fourier transformed can be used to get the horizontal derivative in the spatial domain.
Typically the two horizontal derivatives are combined to:
∂f
∂h =
s∂f
∂y
2
+
∂f
∂x
2
(2.20)
Where ∂f
∂h is the horizontal derivative. The symmetry of the derivatives of a potential field
enables the vertical derivative to be found using only the horizontal wavenumbers Richard
J. Blakely 1995.
F
∂∆T
∂z

= |kr|·F [∆T]
(2.21)
Where F
h
∂f
∂z
i
is the Fourier transformed of the vertical derivative. Analysing the deriva-
tive signal of the total-anomaly intensity can provide information of the underlying sources.
12
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
==PAGE:23==
The vertical derivative highlights center location of sources while the horizontal derivative
is good a highlighting edges. Combining these derivatives can provide an overall descrip-
tion of the source. The two commonly used combinations are the analytic signal and the
tilt derivative.
As =
∂∆T
∂x
2
+
∂∆T
∂y
2
+
∂∆T
∂z
2
(2.22)
TD = arctan
 ∂∆T
∂z

∂∆T
∂h

!
(2.23)
Where As and TD are the analytical signal and tilt derivative, respectively. The purpose
and usage of the analytical signal and tilt derivative was described in section 1.3. The
analytic signal enhances entire sources (independent of the magnetization Richard J.
Blakely 1995) and the tilt-derivative are used to enhances entire sources while equalizes
small and large sources.
2.3.3
Potential filters
The upward/downward continuation filers and the reduction to the pole filter are also per-
formed in the Fourier domain due to simpler formulations. However, these filters also
assumes a potential field.
The upward continuation of a total-anomaly field can be formalized as a spatial convolution
between the measured total-anomaly field and a Green’s function. However, in the Fourier
domain it is simply a multiplication.
F[∆T u] = F[∆T]F[ϕu]
(2.24)
F[∆T u] = F[∆T]e−∆z|kr|
(2.25)
Where ϕu is the Green’s function which is an exponentially decaying term of angular
wavenumber in the Fourier domain. The upward continuation filter decays higher wavenum-
bers faster than small, meaning that small wavelengths get smoothed out. If ∆z is neg-
ative then the filter turns into downward continuation filter. This has the opposite effect
and magnifies small wavelengths. The proof that the vertical derivative is, as stated in
Equation 3.21, are derived from the upward continuing 1 meters and reducing.
The reduction to pole filter is a filter which can change the magnetization vector and the
ambient field vector. It is often used to center anomalies over their sources which happens
when both vectors points upward/downward.
Assuming that the magnetization vector is c
δB =

mx
my
mz

and the ambient field
vector is b
Bmf =

fx
fy
fz

. The anomaly signal will be center above the sources when
c
δB =

0
0
1

and b
Bmf =

0
0
1

. This corresponds to measuring the anomaly signal
from a magnetized object at the north pole.
As the reduction to the pole filter changes the vectors direction it can be consider a phase
transformation in the Fourier domain Richard J. Blakely 1995. The reduction to the pole
formula is:
F[∆T RTP ] = F[∆T]F[ϕRTP ]
(2.26)
F[∆T RTP ] = F[∆T]
|k|2
a1k2x + a2k2y + a3kxky + i|k|(b1kx + b2ky)
(2.27)
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
13
==PAGE:24==
a1 = c
mz bfz −c
mx bfx
a2 = c
mz bfz −c
my bfy
a3 = −c
my bfx −c
mx bfy
b1 = c
mx bfz −c
mz bfx
b2 = c
my bfz −c
mz bfy
Where ϕRTP is the reduction to pole operation and in the Fourier domain is a com-
plex number. To create the right reduction to pole filter the magnetization needs to be
known. However, as it is often unknown the reduction to pole filter assumes an induced
magnetization along the main field direction. In such case ϕRTP is created using that
c
δB = b
Bmf =

fx
fy
fz

.
The reduction to the pole transformation is unstable near the magnetic equator. Richard
J. Blakely 1995 has proposed to either perform the reduction to the equator filter or the
more complicated equivalent sources method.
2.4
Magnetic field of sheet bodies
This section will expand upon the quantity δB, which was described as a small perturba-
tion of the main field. These small perturbations are due to magnetized objects in the part
of the lithosphere above the Curie temperature. δB can be due to induced magnetization,
remnant magnetization or both.
2.4.1
Induced and remnant magnetization
Induced magnetization is caused by an alignment of the free electrons in the material by
an ambient field. This typically results in a magnetic field which has a linear dependency
on κ in regard to the ambient field.
Remnant magnetization was engraved into the material at the time of its creation. The
engraving was done by an ancient magnetic field at the moment when the material cooled
below its Curie temperature. That means that the remnant magnetization is only depen-
dent on the ancient field (Hinze, Frese, and Saad 2018a).
The concepts can be introduced into Ampere’s circuital law to understand how δB can be
emitted from a magnetized object.
∇× δB = µ0(Jb) = µ0∇× M
(2.28)
This shows that δB is a potential field anywhere expect inside the magnetized object since
Jb = 0 in those regions. This means that outside of the magnetized object its magneti-
zation is fully described by the magnetic scalar potential. Accordingly, Equation 2.3 and
2.4 must be true for magnetized objects. The magnetic scalar potential of magnetized
objects are usually found by solving Equation 2.3 based on Biot-Savart Law instead of
solving the Laplace equation. The potential a magnetic field obtain from Biot-Savart Law
is formulated by:
VδB = µ0
4π
Z
V
M(s) · ∇s
1
|r −s|ds
(2.29)
Analytical solutions to Equation 2.29 are not always possible for any arbitrary shape.
Therefore it is necessary to apply certain approximations about the shape and magne-
tization of the body. One crucial assumption is that the body has a uniform magnetization
14
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
==PAGE:25==
throughout its volume. Further, the magnetization of the body is a function of its true
susceptibility Hinze, Frese, and Saad 2018b. This assumption is reasonable for most
magnetized objects. For highly magnetic objects a process called demagnetization oc-
cur. Demagnetization will, depending on the ambient field and the objects volume, reduce
the magnitude magnetization unevenly thought the object.
2.4.2
Sheet bodies
One idealized shape for which Equation 2.29 can be solved is the thick sheet body. The
thick sheet can by described by a sheet extending infinitely along its y dimension, from
its top extending infinitely downwards along its z dimension and a finite width on its x-
dimension (see figure 2.1).
Figure 2.1: A thick sheet body viewed from its z-x plane (left) and from the x-y plane (right).
In the z-x plane: P represent the reference point and O represent the measuring location.
X-D is then the horizontal distance from the measuring to the dyke. H is the altitude
from the dyke to the measuring plan. B is the half-width. κ is the effective susceptibility
and δ is the dip angle. The arrows indicate vector quantities where I is the ambient fields
inclination. I’ and J’ are the effective inclination of the induced and resulting magnetisation.
In the x-y plan: ψ is the strike angle. a and α are the declination of the induced and
resulting magnetisation in regard to the profile direction.
The total magnetic intensity for a uniformly magnetized thick sheet with both remnant and
induced magnetization with a strike angle of 90 degree was derived by McGrath and Hood
1970 and the notation is from Venkata Raju 2003.
∆T = P
[1
2 sin(Q)ln
( (x −D + B)2 + H2
(x −D −B)2 + H2
)
+ cos(Q)
(
tan−1
( x −D + B
H
)
−tan−1
( x −D −B
H
))]
(2.30)
Where D is the distance along the x axis from origin, B is the half-width, H is the height
above the dyke top, P is the amplitude factor and Q is the phase factor and these are
defined as:
P = 2κTsin(δ)(1 −cos2(I)sin2(α))2(1 −cos2(I)sin2(a))2
(2.31)
Q = I′ + J′ −δ −90
(2.32)
Where δ is the dip angle, I is the inclination of the ambient field. α and I’ are the effec-
tive inclination and declination of the induced magnetization and a and J’ are effective
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
15
==PAGE:26==
inclination and declination of the resulting magnetization. J’ and I’ are obtained using the
formulations below:
I′ = tan
tan(I)
cos(α)

J′ = tan
tan(J)
cos(α)

Notice that amplitude term P and phase term Q are quantifies which depends on the
magnetization and orientation of the magnetized dyke. Q and P are therefore particular
hard to obtain unless most information of the dyke is already known.
In the case where the strike angle is not 90 degrees Equation 2.30 can still be used.
However the x-axis coordinates has to projected to the new x’-axis by:
x′ = cos(ψ)(x −D)
(2.33)
Where x’ is the projected coordinates. Notice that this also changes the declinations a
and α resulting in new effective inclinations of J’ and I’.
The thick sheet has proven to be useful for modelling dykes. If the half-width of a dyke is
4 time smaller than its length downward, a thin sheet model is a good approximation for
that dyke Hinze, Frese, and Saad 2018b.
The thin dyke is a special case of the thick dyke (Equation 2.30) where B →0 which
simplifies to:
F(x) = P
xsin(Q) + Hcos(Q)
x2 + H2

(2.34)
This results well be expanded upon in section 2.4.4
Figure 2.2 shows how B, H, Q, P ad ψ effect the calculated total-field intensity for a mag-
netic dyke. B, H, P and ψ mostly effect flatness of the peak. When ψ = 90 total-field
intensity becomes constant and that because axis is turn such that it follows the strike
direction. Q chances the total-field intensity considerably these Q-curves follows a wave
like pattern and there are many configurations (I’, J’, a, α and δ ) which results in curves
that are similar. There are null spaces in Equation 2.30 for which no a dyke has no total-
field intensity (Hinze, Frese, and Saad 2018b). This happens in an ambient field with 0
inclination and a north-east strike direction.
16
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
==PAGE:27==
Figure 2.2: B-, H-, Q-, P-, ψ-curves of Equation 2.30. A standard configurations was cho-
sen. Each parameters was change independently 5 times in an interval.From uppermost
left to bottom is the parameters: B, H, Q, P and ψ.
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
17
==PAGE:28==
2.4.3
Tilt-based dyke modelling
Salem et al. 2007 showed an interesting connection between the magnetic field of an
infinite magnetized step and the tilt derivative. The derivatives of an finite magnetized
step as derived by (Nabighian 1972):
∂F
∂x = P
xsin(Q) + Hcos(Q)
x2 + z2

(2.35)
∂F
∂z = P
xcos(Q) −Hsin(Q)
x2 + z2

(2.36)
Equation 2.35 and 2.36 can be simplified further by assuming Q=0. That means the
steepness angle is 90 degrees and both the induce and remnant directions are upwards.
These simplified derivatives can be substituted into the expression of the tilt derivative.
Inserting equation 2.35 and 2.36 into 2.23 yields
TD = arctan
 x
H

(2.37)
Equation 2.37 shows that the tilt derivative is 0 on top of a magnetized step. Consequently,
the tilt derivative’s zero contour indicates the presence of a steepness in the geology
below. This features can be exploited such that it outlines step dykes. By evaluating the
horizontal derivative of the tilt derivative in locations were TD=0 yields :

∂TD
∂x

TD=0
=

H
H2 + x2

TD=0
= 1
z
(2.38)
Equation 2.38 shows that in addition to outline the step geology we can make a depth
estimate too. This depth estimate is not to the top of a dyke but somewhere along its
vertical edges.
2.4.4
Euler-based dyke modelling
Euler’s deconvoultion is not based on potential field theory but on a more board math-
ematical theory called homogeneous functions. A function f(x,y,z) is homogeneous to a
degree n if this condition is meet:
x∂f
∂x + y∂f
∂y + z ∂f
∂z = nf
(2.39)
By setting f equal to the thin dyke approximation from 2.34 into Equation 2.39 and replac-
ing H with the valuable z. :
(z((x2 −H2)cos(Q) −2zxsin(Q)))
(z2 + x2)2
+ (x((z2 −x2)sin(Q) −2zxcos(Q)))
(z2 + x2)2
= n(xsin(Q) + zcos(Q))
(x2 + z2)
(2.40)
−(xsin(Q) + zcos(Q))
(x2 + z2)
= n(xsin(Q) + zcos(Q))
(x2 + z2)
(2.41)
This shows that the total field anomaly from a dyke is homogeneous to a degree of n=-
1. The degree of homogeneity is often converted to the structural index which is N=-n.
Hence, a dyke has the structural index of 1. It can be shown that the structural index
changes based on the shape of the object (Thompson 1982). A sphere (point dipole)
would have a structural index of 3 and a slap (line of dipoles) would have structural index
of 2. The structural index is always an integer number (Thompson 1982)).
Thompson 1982 showed that Euler homogeneity Equation 2.39 could be expression as a
function of source location:
(x −x0)∂T
∂x + (y −y0)∂T
∂y + (z −z0)∂T
∂z + N(T ) = 0
(2.42)
18
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
==PAGE:29==
Where T is the measured anomaly signal in the locations [x y z] from a source located
at [x0 y0 z0] and N is the structural index. Equation 2.42 only gives the location of one
dominant source or a superposition of sources. This is because the sources interfere with
each other. To overcome this problem, it is solved twofold.
Firstly, solutions to Euler homogeneity are found in window which sliding across the
anomaly grid. This mathematical operation is called a deconvolution. Secondly, mag-
netic sources located in close proximity will interfered with each other’s anomaly signal.
This problem is solved by introducing the background signal. The measured anomaly
signal T can be split into the anomaly from a source and the background by:
T = F −B
(2.43)
Where F is the anomaly signal from the source and B is the background anomaly signal.
Inserting Equation 2.43 into Equation 2.42 using the linearity of the differential operator
yields:
(x −x0)
∂F
∂x −∂B
∂x

+ (y −y0)
∂F
∂y −∂B
∂z

+ (z −z0)∂F
∂z + N(F −B) = 0
(2.44)
Equation 2.44 now shows the expanded Euler homogeneity. Equation 2.44 can now be
solved in windows. Each window will give an estimation of the magnetic source’s location
[x0 y0 z0], the structural index N and the background B. The methods used to solve
Equation 2.44 will be elaborated on in section 3.4.3.
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
19
==PAGE:30==
20
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
==PAGE:31==
3
Method
The methodology for processing and analysing drone-based magnetic surveys is split into
four phases:
The pre-processing phase which extracts the sub-surveys. Furhtermore, this phase pre-
pares the magnetic data by changing the sub-surveys’ coordinate system and removed
outliers from the flight lines.
The medium-processing phase removes inconsistency, isolates the anomaly signal and
end by gridding the individual sub-surveys.
In the final-processing phase the gridded sub-surveys are merged into one large gridded
survey. The analysis phase applies transformation filters to aid the interpretation as well
as performing the tilt-depth method, 3D Euler deconvolution and a 2D dyke inversion.
The complete work-flow is described in Figure 3.1. The arrows indicates the work-flow
and how individual processing step are linked. Notice that after the diurnal corrections
the work-flow splits into two: one work-flow leads to the merged gridded anomaly surface
and the other leads to the (minimal processed) anomaly signal of the flight lines. Each
step in Figure 3.1 will be elaborated upon in the following sections.
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
21
==PAGE:32==
Extract sub-surveys
WGS-84 to ENO
Verification and editing
Parallax correction
Raw positional and 
magnetic survey data
Observatory data
Base station data
Diurnal corrections
Removing CHAOS
CHAOS model
Gridding (bi-dir)
Micro-levelling
Levelling to regional
Levelling to CHAOS
Upward continuation
Re-gridding (MC)
Base/trend shifts
Feathering 
2.5D dike modelling
Enhancement filters
All available geophysical 
survey data
Tilit-based modelling
Euler deconvolution
Analysis
Final-Processing
Medium-Processing
Pre-processing
Figure 3.1: Work-flow of processing and anlaysing dykes in this thesis. The box colours
assign the processes into categories: data inputs (red), pre-processing steps (green),
medium-processing steps (orange), final-processing steps (blue) and analysis steps (pur-
ple). The arrows indicates the workflow.
22
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
==PAGE:33==
3.1
Pre-processing phase
Raw drone data are essentially 5D scatter data: The 3 spatial dimensions measured by
the drones GPS in longitude, latitude and elevation above mean sea level. The temporal
dimension also measured by the drones GPS measured in seconds of the day. The total-
field intensity measured by the magnetometer at the tow bird. A data matrix S is created
to store the raw 5D scatter data.
S =

θ
λ
z
t
F

(3.1)
Where the column vectors θ, λ, z, t and F are the latitude, longitude, elevation, time
and magnetic intensity respectively. Observations are sorted after the time vector and the
length of the column vectors are equal to the number of observations (N).
3.1.1
Extracting sub-surveys
The scattered observations within S are data from the full magnetic survey represented by
the black dots on Figure 3.2a. The goal of the extracting process is to isolate observations
into sub-surveys and then group sub-survey observations into flight lines or tie lines. This
is shown in Figure 3.2a by the red and blue lines.
The extraction is done by defining a set of coordinates (C) which acts as the sub-survey’s
corners. All observations outside C are removed from S row-wise. Meanwhile, consecu-
tive accepted observations are grouped as one flight line (or tie lines).
The flight line grouping is described by a column vector Y e.g. if the i’th observations
belongs to flight line number 1 then Yi = 1. For simplicity, the notation F n is used to
denote all total-field intensity measurements belonging to flight line n:
F n =
N
X
m=1

Fm
if
n = Ym
	
(3.2)
3.1.2
Transiting to new coordinate system
The positional data in S is in the WGS-84 coordinate system. The WGS-84 coordinate
system is unsuited for magnetic surveys as it is defined by degrees and not distances.
Therefore, θ and λ are converted to a local Cartesian East-North-Up coordinate system
(ENU) by the UTM transformation. This changes column vectors θ and λ to two new
column vectors x and y. The details of the WGS-84 to UTM transformation will not be
covered in this report. The reader is instead reference to Palacios 2006 for an MATLAB
implementation and to Manchuk 2009 for an in-depth derivation.
At this point, x and y are also rotated by an angle θENU such that flight lines will be
aligning along the y-axis (See Figure 3.2b). The rotation is defined by:

xr
yr
T =
cos(θENU)
−sin(θENU)
sin(θENU)
cos(θENU)
 
x
y
T
(3.3)
xr and yr are the horizontal positional data of the observations in the rotated ENU coor-
dinate system. r is an indent which denotes that the coordinates rotated to the coordinate
system spanned by (x′, y′ and z). z are unchanged throughout the coordinate transfor-
mations.
This rotation has several advantages for the processing. First of all, it makes several
processing step easier to implement e.g. the parallax correction and the bidirectional
interpolation. It can also be used to verify survey parameters. Now, lets define Nf as the
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
23
==PAGE:34==
number of flight lines and use the notation from Equation 3.2, then 3 survey parameters
can be defined:
λc = E


Nf−1
X
n=1
E [xn
r ] −E

xn+1
r



−1
(3.4)
λa = E


Nf
X
n=1
E
∂yn
r
∂byr


−1
(3.5)
σx = E


Nf
X
n=1
V [xn
r ]1/2


(3.6)
Where λc and λa is the across-line sampling rate and along-line sampling rate. σx is a
measured of the straightness of a flight line. This is because ideally in the rotated ENU
xn
r should be constant for any n.
Figure 3.2: An example of a survey in the ENU system and in the rotated ENU system. θ
is the rotation required to align the flight lines along the y’ axis.
3.1.3
Verifying and editing the survey data
In this report, the verification and outlier editing are done manually line by line. All obser-
vations are checked and flagged if it falls within any of these outliers categories: a spike,
gap or instrumental failure. In practice the verification is done by plotting the yn
r and F n
sequentially for up to Nf. An observation is removed if it falls within any of the outlier
categories and the entire corresponding row is removed.
When the outliers have been removed, the entire data matrix S will be down-sampled
such that along-line sampling rate reduces to approximately 1 meter. The number of
observations to remove can be estimated by:
λds
a = λa
w = 1
(3.7)
Where w is the down-sampling window and λds
a is the new along-line sampling rate. To
reduce noise and avoid introducing aliasing when down-sampling the total-field intensity
24
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
==PAGE:35==
will be low-passed by a median filter beforehand. The median filter is applied on each F n
with a window size of w. After the down-sampling the pre-processing is complete. The
new data matrix Spre is defined below.
Spre =

xr
yr
z
t
F

(3.8)
The pre-processing took the raw magnetic data and extracted the sub-surveys. The sub-
surveys were transformed to a Cartesian coordinate system from which their flight lines
align with the by′ direction. Survey parameters such as the orientation and the along/cross
line sampling rate were extracted and recorded. Subsequently, the sub-surveys were
cleaned by removing outliers, low pass filtering and down-sampling.
The sub-survey
data S were now ready to precede to the more serious data corrections in the medium-
processing.
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
25
==PAGE:36==
3.2
Medium-processing phase
The data used in the medium-processing phase is the data matrix Spre, base station mea-
surements B, possibly magnetic observatory measurement O and the main field Bmf
evaluated by the CHAOS model.
The matrix B is defined as:
B =
h
tB
F B
i
(3.9)
Where tB and F B are the time and magnetic intensity of the base station measurement,
respectively. Similarly the matrix O is defined as:
O =
h
tO
F O
i
(3.10)
Where tO and F O are the time and magnetic intensity of the base observatory measure-
ment,respectively. The sampling times of B and O do not have to match. However, an
overlap of measurements is required.
3.2.1
Parallax corrections
The parallax correction is the removal of the discrepancies between the GPS measure-
ments of the drone and the magnetic measurements at the bird. The bird is attracted to the
drone by a wire with length L. During flight it will typically hang by an angle θ behind the
drone. Assuming constant velocity and relatively quiet wind conditions, the discrepancies
can be characterized by a constant horizontal and vertical shift. Consequently, that the
vertical correction is just a constant shift of the z-coordinates. The horizontal correction
is a shift of the yr coordinates. However, the shift changes sign depending on the drones
direction. The shifts applied to flight line n can be calculated by:
Vshift = Lsin(θ)
(3.11)
Hshift = i
|i|Lcos(θ)
(3.12)
Where i is the flight direction with respect to yn
r and can be found by:
i = E
∂yn
r
∂byr

(3.13)
Once the horizontal and vertical shifts have been calculated they are applied to the flight
lines line by line.
zn
p = zn −Vshift
(3.14)
yn
r,p = yn
r −Hshift
(3.15)
Where zp is the parallax corrected altitude and yr,p is the parallax corrected y′ coordinates.
p is an indent denoting that the parallax correction has been applied.
To calculate the parallax correction, θ is needed, but it is often unknown. Therefore, θ is
determine by bidirectionally interpolate the flight lines for many different values of θ. Then
the θ which gives the smoothest surface is chosen.
26
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
==PAGE:37==
3.2.2
Diurnal correction
In this report the diurnal correction is calculated based on a pseudo base station. This
pseudo base station is a combination of the survey’s base station and a nearby magnetic
observatory. The pseudo base station will fill-in gaps in the base station measurements.
Creating the pseudo base station starts by building a model which takes the observatory
data as input and returns an estimate of the on-site base station data.
First step is to maximize the cross correlation between O and B. The cross-covariance
for two stationary time series are defined as:
r(n) = 1
N
X
i
(F B
i −E[F B]) · (F O
i+n −E[F O]) = max!
(3.16)
Where r(n) is the cross-covariance between F B and a lag shifted F O. Equation 3.16 is
solved for the integer value n which maximises r(n). Next, the lagged corrected F O is
levelled to F B. This is done by defining a cost function:
ϕ =
X
i
||F B
i −F O
i+n −f(t)||= min!
(3.17)
Where ϕ is the cost function and f(t) is a 1. order polynomial. Now, the observatory data
can be used to model the on-site base station data:
d
F B =
X
i
F O
i+n + f(t)
(3.18)
Where d
F B is the estimated base station data based on the observatory data.
At this point, the pseudo base station can be created. The pseudo base station is created
such that the base station is prioritized over the observatory model. Let T denote a time
gap in the base station. The pseudo base station g
F B covering the full survey can be
expressed as:
g
F Bi =
(
d
F B
i
tO
i ∈T
F B
i
otherwise
(3.19)
The pseudo base station g
F B can be transformed to the diurnal correction by removing
the average value. Ideally, the average value represents the core and crustal field at that
location.
Fext = g
F B −E[ g
F B]
(3.20)
Fext represents the diurnal correction and can now be linearly interpolated to match the
survey’s time array t. The interpolated diurnal correction is then applied to the survey’s
total intensity array F .
Fd = F −Fext
(3.21)
Where Fd is the diurnal corrected total-field intensity, d is an indent which denote that the
diurnal correction has been applied.
3.2.3
Levelling the data
Here, the tie line free method by White and Beamish 2015 will be implemented. First,
the sub-survey is levelled to its own regional field then its levelled to a main field model.
These two levelling methods are called the mag2regional and mag2CHAOS, respectively.
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
27
==PAGE:38==
The mag2regional levelling method, as implemented in this report, can be summarised
into 3 categories: (1) constructing the regional field, (2) levelling flight-lines to the regional
field and (3) fulfilling the convergence criteria
1) Constructing the regional field starts by bidirectionally interpolate the sub-survey to a
grid. The regional field should be a smooth representation of the high wavelength struc-
tures in the sub-survey. This is done by applying a 1D low-pass filter after each inter-
polation. When the interpolated grid is constructed, it is convoluted with a 3x3 hanning
window resulting in the regional field. The important aspect of this method is that the re-
gional field is smooth but still representative of the survey. The smoothness is controlled
by two parameters: the grid spacing [dxdy] and the cut-off wavelength λc used for the low
pass filters.
2) Next step is to level the entire sub-survey to the regional field. The regional field acts
as an overall true representative of the magnetic field at the sub-survey’s location. The
regional field is re-sampled, using minimum curvature interpolation, at the positions xr
and yr to create R.
For each flight line a polynomial needs to be found, which minimizes the residuals between
that flight line and the re-sampled regional field. This is defined as:
ϕlvl,n = ||F n −Rn + Gnmn||2
2= min
(3.22)
Where ϕlvl,n are the levelling cost functions, mn are 1. order polynomials, Gn are design
matrices defined as Gn =

1
yn
r,p

and n is the flight line number. Equation 3.22 has to
be solved uniquely for each flight line.
White and Beamish 2015 solves Equation 3.22 by a robust inversion method. Robustness
is a term used when observations are given a different weight based on its residual. This
can be done by defining a hard percentile cut-off. Only percentiles in the interval [p100−p]
will be considered in the inversion.
Once mn has been determined robustly the levelling correction can be applied to each
flight line as defined below:
F n
lvl = F n + Gnmn
(3.23)
Where F n
lvl denotes the levelled flight lines data.
3) With the entire sub-survey levelled to the regional field, we can repeat 1-2 on the lev-
elled sub-survey. This produces a new regional field and a sub-survey which have been
levelled twice.
The convergence is defined as the root mean squared difference between the previous
regional field and the new regional field. Let n represent the iteration number then the
convergence criteria is defined as:
r(n) =
v
u
u
t 1
N
N
X
i
(Rold
i
−Rnew
i
)2
(3.24)
Where r(n) is the root mean squared for each iteration n. Additionally, the convergence
is required to be within a few iterations to limited the introduction of levelling errors. The
parameters affecting the convergence rate are the grid spacing, the cut-off wavelength
and the percentile cut-off. It will require some experimentation with these parameters to
get convergence within 1-3 iterations.
28
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
==PAGE:39==
Once the mag2regional levelling converges, the mag2CHAOS can be applied. The re-
gional field from the final interaction is then sparsely re-sampled. This was done by only
consider every 10th grid point.
Those re-sampled points are then levelled to the main field Bmf. For drone-based surveys
the main field can be consider constant.
ϕchaos = ||R −|Bmf|+Gcmc||2
2= min
(3.25)
Where ϕchaos is the chaos cost functions, mc is a 2D 0. order polynomial, Gc is the design
matrix defined as Gc =

1
Xq
Y q

.
Equation 3.25 is solved by a normal least squares method. The polynomial are applied
directly to the sub-survey’s flight lines.
F n
Clvl = F n
lvl + Gcmc
(3.26)
Where F n
Clvl is then the regional and main field levelled total-field intensity measurements
belonging to flight line n.
3.2.4
Removal of the main field
The sub-surveys have been diurnal corrected, levelled to its regional field and to the main
field. Now, the transformation from the total-intensity field to the anomaly intensity field
can be done. The reasons for this conversion is described in the Section 2.2 and is a
simple procedure.
T n = F n
Clvl −|Bmf|
(3.27)
Where T n is the total-anomaly intensity belonging to flight line n. This is done for each
flight line.
3.2.5
Gridding and contouring
Now the sub-survey has been corrected for the most data inconsistencies and the total-
anomaly field has been isolated meaning that the sub-survey’s flight lines are ready to be
interpolated to their receptive sub-grids. Adopted from Billings and Richards 1997 testings
on gridded magnetic data. The grid spacing will be one-forth the across line sampling rate
and the bidirectional method is used to exploit the fast along line sampling rate typical for
aeromagnetic surveys.
The coordinates of the sub-survey [xr,p yr,p zp] are gridded such that Xq, Y q and Zq
denote a spatial grid which spans the entire survey. The total-anomaly field T is then
bidirectionally interpolated to T q.
For simple notation the matrix A is defined to hold the four grid matrices.
A =

Xq
Y q
Zq
T q

(3.28)
Proper visualization of A is important for interpretation of the total-anomaly intensity. The
magnetic field is inherently nonlinear while typically contouring methods are linear.
The trick is to use the natural logarithm transform on T q. The log-transformed total-
anomaly intensity is then plotted using a normal linear colormap. Subsequently, the col-
ormap thick’s are transformed by the natural exponential again. Now, the ticks match the
original total-anomaly intensity values, while the plot can visualize both small and large
values. Other mapping functions can be used e.g. T q
r3 where r is an approximated distance
to magnetic sources.
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
29
==PAGE:40==
3.2.6
Micro-levelling
Micro-levelling is mostly a cosmetic procedure. It removes small inconsistencies, which
might be leftover from the levelling or the interpolation to grid processes. These residual
levelling errors can be classified as low wavelength noise aligned in the flight direction.
A micro-levelling filter applied optimally will only remove this flight direction noise and
nothing else. Micro-levelling starts by detrending the anomaly grid:
T qdetrend = T q −Gdetrendmdetrend
(3.29)
Where mdetrend is the best fitting low order polynomial to T q, and Gdetrend is a design
matrix. The high pass filter is created by first applying a low pass filter, then subtract this
low-passed grid from the original grid. The low-pass filter used is the Butterworth filter
formula used was:
F[T qlp] = F[T qdetrend]
(1 +
  kr
k0)
nb
(3.30)
T qhp = [T qdetrend] −T qlp
(3.31)
Where k0 and nb is the wavenumber and the filter order, respectively. Now the high
passed grid needs to be directional filtered so only small wavelength associated with flight
line errors are left. This is done using the directional-cosine filter.
F[T qdhp] = F[T qhp](1 −cosnd(θc −kθ + π
2 ))
(3.32)
Where kθ was the direction of the wavenumber, θc is the cut-of direction nd is the filter
order. Now, the micro-levelled grid is can be expressed as:
T qmicro = T q −T qdhp + f(Xq, Y q, m)
(3.33)
T qmicro is the final micro-levelled grid.
Applying the micro-levelling is an iterative process. The filter parameters has to be ad-
justed to the specified grid. The standard values for the filter parameters are nb = 8,
k0 = 4λc, nd = 0.5 and θc = 0. Once the optimal filter parameters have been determined,
the grid matrix A is updated.
A =

Xq
Y q
Zq
T qmicro
(3.34)
A now represent the fully medium processed sub-grids. The sub-surveys have been
corrected for major data inconsistencies and interpolated to its sub-grid. The medium-
processing has to be repeated for each sub-survey before continuing to the final process-
ing.
30
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
==PAGE:41==
3.3
Final-processing
The data required for the final-processing is the micro-levelled total-anomaly intensity
sub-grids. Lets denotes a series of fully pre-processed and processed sub-surveys as
Am.
Am =

Xqm
Y qm
Zqm
T qm
(3.35)
Where A denotes a grid matrix as defined by equation 5.26 and m denotes the grid num-
ber. The goal of the final-processing is to merge the m grids into one large grid. Grid 1
(A1) will be treated as the reference grid and all other grids are corrected to fit grid 1.
3.3.1
Preparing the grids
The first step is to bring all grids to an equal elevation by the upward/downward continu-
ation filters. Because the downward continuation filter can be highly unstable its recom-
mended to define A1 as the grid with highest altitude and bring all grids up to Zq1.
F[Am
u ] = F[Am]e|E[Z1]−E[Zm]|r
(3.36)
Zm
u = Zm + |E[Z1] −E[Zm]|
(3.37)
Where Zqm
u and Am
u are the altitude and total-anomaly intensity after the upward contin-
uation. The indent u denotes that the grid has been upward continued. E[Z1] and E[Zm]
are the mean altitude of the grid 1 and grid m, kr is the radial wavenumber of F[Am].
When all grids are brought to the same altitude, they will all need to be re-sampled. The
re-sampling is necessary because the definition of an overlap coordinates between neigh-
boring grids are required. This is done by defining a common grid. The common grid will
fully encompass all grids. The grid spacing of this common grid should match the grid
spacing of the densest sampled grid. The re-sampling was done using a minimum curva-
ture interpolating method as it is optimal for grid to grid interpolating (Billings and Richards
1997).
Am
u,c =

Xqm
c
Y qm
c
Zqm
u,c
T qm
u,c

(3.38)
Where indents u and c denotes that the grid has been upward continued and re-sampled
to a common grid.
3.3.2
Merging the grids
Even when neighboring grids are brought to the same altitude and re-sampled a significant
base level (0. order polynomial) and trend (1. order polynomial) between, the grids might
still be present. Minty et al. 2003 proposed a grid merging method which can preserve
high wavelength signals spanning multiple sub-grids. It works by simultaneously perform
a base level shift on all grids and afterwards sequentially trend shift grids.
As the following equations will depend on the number of grids and their position in regards
to each other the method will be explained by using four grids. The four grids are defined
as Equation 3.38 and are positioned such that:
• grid 1 overlaps with grid 2
• grid 2 overlaps with grid 1 and grid 3
• grid 3 overlaps with grid 2 and grid 4
• grid 4 overlaps with grid 3.
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
31
==PAGE:42==
This grid setup mimics that of the Perros Guirec survey. However, the method is easily
generalized to any configuration of grids. The base level shifts are found by minimizing
the base level cost function ϕbase defined as:
(3.39)
ϕbase = [(T q1
u,c + m1) −(T q2
u,c + m2)]2 + [(T q2
u,c + m2) −(T q3
u,c + m3)]2
+ [(T q3
u,c + m3) −(T q4
u,c + m4)]2
Where m1, m2, m3 and m4 are the base level corrections. The term [(T q1
u,c + m1) −
(T q2
u,c + m2)] defines the overlap between grid 1 and grid 2. This problem is ambiguous
and have a large number of solutions. However, if one base level shift is fixed at zeros
this problem is a unique solution. This is the reason for having a reference grid.
After the base level shifts have been applied the grids are trend corrected. The optimal
trend correction is calculated for each grid by minimizing cost function ϕtrend,m defined
as:
ϕtrend,1 = [(T q1
u,c + Gt1) −T q2
u,c]2
(3.40)
ϕtrend,2 = [T q1
u,c −(T q2
u,c + Gt2)]2 + [(T q2
u,c + Gt2) −T q3
u,c]2
(3.41)
ϕtrend,3 = [T q2
u,c −(T q3
u,c + Gt3)]2 + [(T q3
u,c + Gt3) −T q4
u,c]2
(3.42)
ϕtrend,4 = [T q3
u,c −(T q1
u,c + Gt4))]2
(3.43)
Where t1, t2, t3 and t4 are 2D 1. order polynomials and G is a design matrix defined
as G =

1
Xqc
Y qc

. To ensure the preservation of the long wavelengths, the trend
shifts are done sequentially by the sequence below:
1. Calculate ϕtrend,m for all grids.
2. Remove the polynomial from the grid, for which the ϕtrend,m value was lowest.
3. Repeat 1-2 until the trend corrections are small. This is usually less than the number
of grids (Minty et al. 2003 ).
Once the sequence above has been completed the grids have been trend corrected. How-
ever, even after both the base level shift and trend shifts an overlap error between neigh-
boring sub-grids will remain. These overlap errors are completely removed by applying a
feathering technique.
The feathering technique applied in this thesis is based on a grid blending method de-
scribed by Geosoft Inc. 2013. Figure 3.3 shows two grid overlapping where the star rep-
resents a grid point in the overlap zone. This grid point has two unique values one from
each grid. D1 and D2 represent the distance from that grid point to edge 1 and edge
2. The grid point of the merged grid is then a weighted average of the two values from
each grid, where the weight depends on the distances to the edges. The weights will be
constructed such that it favors grid point far away from its corresponding edge. E.g. a
merged grid point close to edge 2 will favor grid 1’s grid point value over grid 2’s. This is
to ensure a smooth transition between grids.
The blending method starts by calculating the minimum euclidean distance from all over-
lap grid coordinates to both edge 1 and 2. This gives two distance arrays d1 and d2. These
distance arrays are used to calculate the weights. The weights are found by applying a
cosine filter to d1 and d2:
w1 = 1 −cos
π
2
d1
dmax
n
(3.44)
32
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
==PAGE:43==
Figure 3.3: Two overlapping grids. The star indicate a common overlapping point. Then
D1 is the distance to edge 1 and D2 is the distance to edge 2.
w2 = 1 −cos
π
2
d2
dmax
n
(3.45)
Where w1 and w2 are the weights associated with d1 and d2, respectively. dmax is the
maximum distance for both d1 and d2. n is order of the cosine filter. The weights are made
such if e.g. d1
1 is is high then w1
1 is approximately 1. This means that the star (Figure 3.3)
is far away from edge 1 and therefore more emphasis is placed on grid 1’s grid value.
Let us define an array with all the overlap grid points. Then the merged grid can be defined
as:
T qmeg
i
= w1T q1
i + w2T q2
i
w1 + w2
(3.46)
Where T qmeg is the resulting grid from merging grid 1 and grid 2 (Figure 3.3). The feath-
ering technique described the merging of two grids. That means after the base level and
trend shift this feathering technique is iterated 3 times to these example grids. It starts by
grid 1 merging with grid 2, proceeding by merging this result with grid 3 and then finally
merging with grid 4. This results in the total-anomaly intensity being smoothly merged on
the common grid at the altitude of the reference.
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
33
==PAGE:44==
3.4
Analysis
As shown by Figure 3.1 the analysis phase uses the merged gridded survey and applies
different enhancement filters to enhance the visibility of the anomalies and to run the tilt-
depth and the Euler deconvolution dyke modelling. Second part of the analysis phase
uses the minimally processed flight lines to perform a 2.5D dyke modelling.
3.4.1
Enhancement Filters
The enhancement filters are applied as described in section 2.3.1. The grid data is trans-
formed to the Fourier domain where the specific filter is applied and then the data the is
transformed back to the spatial domain.
Below are a list of all the enhancement filter presented in this thesis in Section 2.3.1:
• x-derivative - enhances x directional features
• y-derivative - enhances y directional features
• Horizontal derivative - enhances edges of sources
• Vertical derivative - enhances center of sources
• Analytic signal - enhances entire sources (independent of the magnetization Richard
J. Blakely 1995)
• Tilt-derivative - enhances entire sources while equalizes small and large sources
• Reduction to pole - Phase transform the magnetization vector of the sources
• Upward/downward continuation - Changes the anomaly signal altitude
Determining which filters are relevant for interpreting geology is up to the interpreter. It
could also be that a combinations of filters is beneficial when interpreting geology. For
instance a reduction to pole filter is typically used first to center the anomalies over their
respective sources followed by derivative filters.
3.4.2
Tilt-depth method
The tilt-depth method is based on the method described by Richard J Blakely, Connard,
and Curto 2016 and Salem et al. 2007. It can be used to outline the horizontal position
of a dyke and give a lower bound of the dykes depth. The method is based on Equation
2.37. As shown in Section 2.4.3 the method is sensitive to steepness in the geology.
The method requires the measured anomalies to be centered above their respective
sources and anomalies should be equalized such that both small and large sources are
highlighted. This is done by using a reduction to the pole filter followed by the tilt-derivative.
Equation 2.37 showed that the rate of change of the tilt-derivative with respect to the hor-
izontal position has a simple relation to the depth if tilt-derivative equal 0.
The tilt-depth method can be explained in a few simple steps:
• Apply the reduction to pole filter to gridded total-anomaly intensity
• Then calculate the tilt-derivative (TD)
• Find the x and y coordinates of the TD’s zero contour
• Use Equation 2.20 to calculate the TD’s horizontal derivative (HTD)
• Re-Sample HTD at the x and y coordinates of the TD’s zero contour
34
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
==PAGE:45==
• Insert those re-sampled HTD values into Equation 2.37 resulting in the depth esti-
mates
As the depth estimates follow the zero contour of the TD it both outlines the magnetic
sources and provide a depth estimates based on the steepness of those sources. It is an
extremely quick procedure and provides a great first order approximation of the dominant
magnetic structures in the survey.
3.4.3
Euler-based dyke modelling
The 3D Euler deconvolution can be used to estimate the spatial coordinates of magnetic
sources. It is further possible to focus the 3D Euler deconvolution such that it becomes
sensitive to dykes. The advantage of the 3D Euler deconvolution is that it only requires
the anomaly field’s three spatial derivatives which can be estimated based on filters.
From Equation 2.44 two different Euler deconvolution can be formulated: the linear 3D
Euler deconvolution and the non-linear Euler deconvolution.
Firstly, the linear 3D Euler deconvolution is formulated such that [x0 y0 z0] are linearly
related to the anomaly field of the source F . This can be done by setting the background
field to a constant B = B0 and fixing the structural index. Since this thesis is studying
dykes the structural index is set to N=1. This ensures that a least square method can
solve for the position [x0 y0 z0] and B0 for each window.
Secondly, the non-linear Euler deconvolution is not linearly related to the source position
[x0 y0 z0]. This is because we have allowed for a more complicated description of the
background field:
B = B0 + a1x + a2y
1 + a3x + a4y
(3.47)
Where B0 is the constant background, a1, a2, a3, a4 are constants to the polynomials in the
fraction. The non-linear Euler deconvolution is solved for [x0 y0 z0], B0, a1, a2, a3, a4 and
the N. Since this formulation of the Euler deconvolution is a non-linear inverse problem
it is solved using the levenberg-marquardt method. Dewangan et al. 2007 studied the
convergence behavior of this problem and concluded that, the problem converged if the
initial model had N and z0 close to the true values. In this thesis the non-linear Euler
deconvolution is solved in each window multiple times using different N and z0 values.
Commonly, for the two formulated Euler deconvolutions are that they provide one solution
for each window position. However, if the window do not contain a sources or a source
which is not a dyke that solution will give bad. All bad solutions must be filter out. This is
usually done based on the models root mean squared and the estimated model variances
Thompson 1982. In addition FitzGerald, A. Reid, and McInerney 2004 showed that the
window size should at least be half the distance to the source.
3.4.4
Inversion-based dyke modelling
The forward dyke model is based on Equation 2.30 as derived in section 2.4.2. We wish
to model the total-anomaly intensity emitted form dykes. As shown on Figure 3.1 the dyke
modelling uses flight line data, which are pre-processed, parallax, diurnal and main field
corrected. The former two are necessary to satisfy Equation 2.16. The inversion-based
dyke modelling presented in this section is a 2D method and works only on one flight line
at a time.
The dyke modelling is done as an inverse problem formulated by:
ϕn = ||dn −Fn(yn, m, k)||2
2= min!
(3.48)
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
35
==PAGE:46==
Where ϕ is the cost function, d and y are measured anomaly field and position along
the flight line and n is the flight line number. Fn(yn, m, k) is the thick dyke model and is
formulated by:
Fn(yn, m, k) = f1(yn, m1) + f2(yn, m2) + ... + fk(yn, mk)
(3.49)
Where k represent the number of dykes and mn represent the model vectors and these
are defined as m1 =

P1
Q1
D1
B1
H1
ψ1

. These model vectors concatenates
into m =

m1
m2
...
mk

.
Solving Equation 3.48 possess some issues: (1) the number of parameters in m quickly
gets very large. (2) choosing the right initial model. Ways to solve these problems will be
elaborated in the following.
1) To reduce the number of parameters the interpreter needs to make some assump-
tions about the dykes in the survey area. The parameters P and Q are a function of the
magnetization and dip angle (see section 2.4.2) These parameters are especially hard
to determined if no prior information is available. Some assumption which are typically
reasonable could be:
Firstly, dykes in the survey area was created at the same time in a similar freezing process
under the same ancient magnetic field.
Secondly, the vertical distance from the top of the dyke to the drone is identical for all
dykes. Hence, the number of parameters can be sub-divided into common parameters
and specific parameters.
To further reduce the number of parameters, available geophysical information can be
used. Particular useful is visual information (half width, location and strike angle), sus-
ceptibility measurements, CHAOS model and information about the induced and remnant
magnetization.
The dyke parameter - Its name - how to determine them:
• T, I, D - Components of today’s main field - CHAOS
• Ta, Ia, Da - Components of ancient main field - paleomagentic measurements
• α - Angle between x axis line and magnetic North - Survey orientation
• a - Angle between the flight line and the direction of the total magnetization
• I’ - Effective inclination of the induced magnetisation - CHAOS
• J’ - Effective inclination of the total magnetisation - Paleomagentic measurements
• H - Height from top of the dykes to the observation plan - survey altitude
• κ - Susceptibility contrast between the dykes and the surrounding material - Sus-
ceptibility measurement
• B - Half-width of the dyke - visual image
• δ - Dip angle (the angle between positive the x-axis and the dyke) - borehole mea-
surements
• D - Center location of the dyke along the flight line - visual image
• ψ - angle x axis and a flight line - visual image
36
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
==PAGE:47==
If any of these parameters is known its value can be fixed in dyke model and the model
is then solved for the remaining unknown parameters. If access to all the information is
available some quantities can be left out and used as validation of the model.
2) Equation 3.48 is particular non-linear in terms of the dyke location (D). That means the
model is more likely to converge if the initial model has the dykes placed directly under
their anomaly signatures. The initial model is determined by the process is outlined below:
1. Create the representative model
2. Forward solve the representative dykes and create the contours of ϕ
3. Locate all local minimum within the contours
4. Add the dykes associated with the local minimums to the representative model
5. Repeat 2-4 until the half-width of the added dykes are below a threshold, resulting
in the initial model
The representative model is initially one dyke which has all its parameters fixed except
B and D. Next, for a each minimum in the contours of ϕ a new dyke is added to the
representative model until the added dyke becomes to small.
A more in depth description of creating the initial model starts by solving Equation 3.48
forwardly. The representative model has B and D as vector. The possible values ranges
is deemed by the interpreter. The parameters P, Q, H and ψ are fixed based on prior
knowledge. The forward model is then formulated as:
ϕi,j = ||d −Fn(yn, mr, 1)||2
2
(3.50)
where mr is a model vector and defined as:
mr =

Pr
Qr
D
B
Hr
ψr

(3.51)
ϕi,j is then inspected for local minimums. As all minimums represents dykes these are
appended to the representative model and the process is repeated until the added dykes
are too small. This final representative model is then considered the initial model. Notice
that a unique initial model is created for each flight line of the survey.
Once the number of parameters in m has been reduced and the initial model has been
determined Equation 3.48 is solved using the a levenberg-marquardt method.
Aster,
Borchers, and Thurber 2013 describes this method in-depth and a MATLAB implementa-
tion is available (MATLAB 2020).
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
37
==PAGE:48==
38
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
==PAGE:49==
4
Results
The Perros Guirec geophysical survey includes drone- and land-based magnetic mea-
surements, susceptibility measurements and a multi-spectral image. The multi-spectral
image only covers the southern parts of the survey. This report will focus on processing
and analysing the drone-based magnetic measurements.
The drone-based magnetic measurements will be processes as described in the method-
ology section 4. This section will initially focus on presenting the results of the three
processing phases followed by visualization of the processed data.
Afterwards the results Analysis phase are presented. Beginning with a manual interpre-
tation of the area based on susceptibility measurements and a Google Earth image. Then
the results of the 3 dyke modelling methods are presented
4.1
The pre-processing
The raw UAV-measured magnetic data was ordered into the 5D scatter data matrix S.
Inspecting of S showed four sub-surveys, which was subsequently extracted and named
S1, S2, S3 and S3. Figure 4.1 illustrates the spatial positions of each of the four sub-
surveys in UTM-30U coordinates.
Figure 4.1: The spatial position of the 4 sub-survey. The x-axis and y-axis denote the sub-
survey’s position in the UTM-32U coordinate system. The colourbar denotes the height
of the sub-surveys.
Based on Figure 4.1 an initial description of each sub-survey are given below:
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
39
==PAGE:50==
• S1 is the most northern sub survey.
• S2 is located below S1. It has six survey corners.
• S3 is the most southern sub-survey. It has a slightly different angle from true north
than the other sub-surveys. The susceptibility measurements are mostly of this area
• S4 is located between S2 and S3. S4 was measured almost 10 meters above the
other sub-surveys.
All the sub-surveys were rotated by their respective θENO and followed by outlier removal.
Generally, the sub-surveys had few single spikes but had many instances of both distance
gaps, time gaps and groups of spikes. Fortunately, they were all easily identified and re-
moved. The high frequency noise was removed from the flight lines using a median filter
with a window of 15 observations and subsequently flight lines were down-sampled by ev-
ery 15 observations. The effect of outlier removal and other line corrections is elaborated
further in Section 4.2.3.
Table 4.1 shows some of easily extracted information of each sub-survey. Notice that the
sub-surveys were not measured from the same elevation. The sampling rates for both
the along-line and the across-line were identical for all sub-surveys. Nf is the number of
flight lines, which for the four sub-surveys was either 18 or 22. The straightness measure
σx range from about 0.94-0.15 meters across all sub-surveys.
Sub-survey
H
Nf
λc
λds
a
λa
θENO
std(x)
1
17.7 m
18
1
10 m−1
16 m−1
0.96 m−1
-36.6 deg
0.094 m
2
16.3 m
22
1
10 m−1
16 m−1
0.97 m−1
-36.6 deg
0.15 m
3
14.0 m
18
1
10 m−1
16 m−1
0.95 m−1
-49.6 deg
0.098 m
4
29.3 m
22
1
10 m−1
16 m−1
0.97 m−1
-36.6 deg
0.12 m
Table 4.1: Shows all the relevant information extracted during the pre-processing. H is
the altitude of the measuring plane. Nf is the number of flight lines. λc is the across-
line sampling rate per meter. λds
c and λc are down-sampled and raw along-line sampling
rate per meter. θENO is the angle of rotation applied to align the flight lines. std(x) is the
straightness measure presented in 3.1.2
40
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
==PAGE:51==
4.2
Medium-processing
The medium-processing involves several different complicated processing steps as shown
by the work-flow (Figure 3.1). This section will start by presenting the results of the paral-
lax correction and diurnal corrections. Afterwards, the results from the levelling, gridding
and micro-levelling are visualized; first in 3D plots, then in 2D. The 3D plots showcase the
effect of the processing on the entire sub-survey whereas the 2D plots is more suited to
present the effects on a single line.
4.2.1
parallax correction
As all sub-surveys were measured with the same drone-bird setup, the same parallax
correction was done to them all. The wire was 5 meters long, however the angle was
unknown. Hence the angle was chosen by visually identifying the degree which gave
the smoothest bidirectional interpolated surfaces. The angle chosen was 45 degrees.
Appendix section 4.2 includes examples of different parallax corrections. They clearly
demonstrate that a angle of approximately 60 degrees gives the smoothest surfaces.
Figure 4.2: Shows the parallax correction using L=5, but using different values of θ. Top-
left θ=20. Top-right θ=40. Bottom-left θ=60. Bottom-right θ=80
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
41
==PAGE:52==
4.2.2
The pseudo base station
The methodology behind the pseudo base station was developed specifically because
the in-field base station ran out of battery before sub-survey 4 was measured. Figure
4.3a shows the observatory measurements. The observatory to base station model was
calculated by maximising Equation 3.16 and minimizing Equation .
The observatory to base station model and the in-field base station are shown on Fig-
ure 4.3b. The pseudo base station was then created by merging the in-field base station
measurements with the model (Equation 3.19). Figure 4.3c shows the external field as
measured by the pseudo base station (Equation 3.20). From 4.3c it is shown that at ap-
proximately 8-10 in the morning the external field changes rapidly, which is coincidentally
when the on-site base station runs out of battery. Without diurnal correction sub-survey
4 would have errors ranging from 0-5 nT due to the external field.
Figure 4.3: The diurnal correction. The top shows the observatory data. In the middle, the
base station measurements and the model of the base station made using the observatory
data is shown. Bottom shows the calculated external field based on the pseudo base
station.
42
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
==PAGE:53==
4.2.3
Levelling, gridding and micro-level
All 4 sub-surveys were levelled based the method described in section 3.2.3. Both the
mag2regional and mag2CHAOS levelling were applied to each sub-survey. The levelling
parameters used in the mag2regional was grid spacing for regional field, wavelength cut-
off, percentile cut-off and number of iterations.
Generally, this thesis implementation of the mag2regional would not converge if the cut-
off wavelength or the percentile cut-off was too high. The grid spacing did not change the
results significantly. Through experimenting it was found that for convergence before 3
iterations: The cut-off percentile should be below 10 and the wavelength cut-off should
be below 6 time the flight line spacing.
The sub-surveys 1,2 and 3 were relatively well behaved as they only required a cut-off
wavelength on 40 m−1 and a percentile cut-off on 5 to converge. Sub-survey 4 was
harder to level it required a cut-off wavelength on 60 m−1 and percentile a cut-off on 10
to converge. The levelling was judged manually based on how smooth the levelled grid
(Figure 4.4d) looked after each iteration.
Figure 4.4a shows the bidirectional interpolation of an un-levelled S1. Notice that un-
levelled S1 has a significant line-to-line discrepancy as evident by the line features. Figure
4.4b displays the smooth regional field from the final iteration. The levelling error appears
on Figure 4.4c. These errors align with the line-to-line discrepancy. Lastly, Figure 4.4d
shows the levelled S1 where the line-to-line discrepancy has been significantly reduced.
Figure 4.4: Full levelling of S1. Top-left shows the un-levelling S1. Top-right shows the
smooth regional field of R1. Bottom-left shows the levelling errors between the un-levelling
and the regional field. Bottom-right shows the levelled S1.
Generally, S1 required just a small correction to the inner flight lines on just a few nT.
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
43
==PAGE:54==
However, very large corrections were done to the outer flight lines (> 5nT). In Appendix
Figure A.2, A.3 and A.4 shows the three other sub-survey’s levelling. Usually the outer
lines are not corrected more than the inner lines, and the corrections are on the scale of
0-5 nT along a flight line.
Following Equation 3.25 the regional fields were levelled to the CHAOS model by the
mag2CHAOS process. The sub-surveys are relatively small compared to the resolution
of the CHAOS model. For this reason the CHAOS-model was only evaluated at the sub-
survey’s center location. The regional field was spatially sampled to only considering
every 10th grid point. The spatially sampled regional field was then levelled to the single
CHAOS field point using a 0. order polynomial. Subsequently, the 0. order polynomial
was applied to each flight line and the CHAOS was then removed fully. This converts the
flight line data from the total-field intensity to the total-anomaly intensity.
Figure 4.5 shows the gridded and micro-levelled sub-surveys rotated back to their original
UTM-32U system (minus a constant offset). The gridded of each sub-survey was done
using the bidirectional method with a grid spacing of 2 meters. The micro-levelling was
applied before the rotation. The Butterworth had a cut-off wavelength of 4 · λc and order
8 and the directional cosine filter cut-off direction 0 and order 0.5.
Figure 4.5: Gridded sub-surveys after the medium-processing. Top-left shows sub-survey
1. Top-right shows sub-survey 1. Bottom-left shows sub-survey 3. Bottom-right shows
sub-survey 4. The colourbar is fixed for all sub-surveys.
From 4.5 the S3 and S4’s total-anomaly intensity have more long thin features whereas
the S1 and S2’s total-anomaly intensity have one large dominant feature. Interestingly,
even though S4 was measured 10 meters above the other surveys, it shows the strongest
anomaly feature.
44
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
==PAGE:55==
4.2.4
Summary of all line corrections
Corrections have so far been shown on 3D plots. However, the relative magnitude of
these corrections are better visualize in a 2D plot. The downside of the 2D plotting is that
only one flight line can visualized. All the line corrections applied to each flight lines was:
• Outlier removal
• Down-sampling with median filter
• Parallax correction
• Diurnal correction
• Levelling to regional
• Levelling to CHAOS
• Micro-levelling
Figure 4.6 displays a representative flight line (S4 flight line 14) it has both a time gap
and a group of spikes. These outlier measurements are most like due to a data-logger
error. This was common error which multiple flight line had. Figure 4.6 also shows all the
correction applied to the representative flight line. The pre-processed line includes outlier
removal, down-sampling with median filter and parallax correction. The micro-levelled
flight line was sampled using the minimum curvature method.
Notice that the main field is not removed as Figure 4.6 aims to show only the relative
magnitude of each correction.
Figure 4.6: Relative magnitude corrections to the raw representative flight line from S4
flight line 14. The correction showcased are pre-processed, diurnal correctioned, leveled
to regional, leveled to chaos and micro-leveled. To the right, a zoomed-in view of the
anomaly maximum appears.
The parallax correction show up as a constant offset in the along line distance of the raw
data. The diurnal correction changes the magnitude of the intensity field by a very small
amount relatively to the magnetic signatures measured. The levelling to regional cor-
rection seems to reduce the magnitude of the total-field intensity in local maximums and
opposite for local minimums. These corrections are < 5 nT. The levelling to CHAOS is by
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
45
==PAGE:56==
far the correction with the largest magnitude. This correction changes the measured field
by > 100 nT. The micro-levelling correction is similar to the levelling to regional correction
in that it reduced local maximums and increased local minimums. These corrections are
also < 5 nT.
46
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
==PAGE:57==
4.3
Final-processing
The grids S1, S2, S3 and S4 shown in Figure 4.5 was merged. As evident from table 4.1,
the four sub-surveys were all measured at different heights. Since, S4 was measured at
the height altitude it was chosen as the reference grid. As shown in Figure 4.1 S1 overlaps
with S2. S2 overlaps with S1 and S4. S3 overlaps with S4. The reference S4 overlaps with
two other sub-surverys: S2 and S3.
This means that S1, S2 and S3 were respectively brought 11.6 meters, 13 meters and 15.3
meters up using the upward-continuation filter. Furthermore, all sub-surveys were rotated
by their respectively θENO back to the UTM-32U and was re-gridded to a common grid.
A summary of grid-merging process can be seen in Table A.1. Table A.1 shows the fitted
polynomials found by minimizing Equation 3.39 and 3.40-43. The largest trend shift was
applied to S3. S1 required the most corrections in order to fit with S2 and S4. The initial
overlap rms error was 194.0119 nT. For comparison, after the base level shift the overlap
rms error was reduced to 21 nT and after the 4 trend shifts the overlap rms error was 17
nT.
After the polynomial shifts the averaged-based merging algorithms were applied to merge
the sub-surveys, which produced the full merged survey. The order of the cosine filter
was 0.5 (see Equation 3.44 and 3.45). The merged survey are shown in Figure 4.7. To
visualize the merging a profile was drawn from the top of S1 all the way to S3 (see Figure
A.9). This profile covers all the grid merging areas. The total-anomaly intensity along the
profile is shown on Figure 4.8.
Figure 4.8 shows large offsets between the sub-survey’s along the profile. Figure A.1
shows that this is due to the levelling to CHAOS algorithm. However the trends change
are similar to both Figure 4.8 and A.1.
Unfortunately, as shown on Figure 4.7 and 4.8, the merging areas of the sub-survey’s
was on top of large anomaly signals. This can influence the quality of the merging. The
magnetic survey shows mostly straight anomaly signatures in the southern parts while the
northern parts show more large round signatures. The largest magnetic signature was in
S4.
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
47
==PAGE:58==
Figure 4.7: The merged sub-survey. The sub-surveys were merged at an altitude of 29.3
meter above mean sea level.
Figure 4.8: The total-anomaly intensity along the profile. The profile sampled the gridded
sub-survey individually and then sampled the merged grid.
48
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
==PAGE:59==
4.4
Enhancement filters
Figure 4.7 represent the full processed drone-based magnetic survey of Perros Guirec. In
this section the enhancement filters are applied to Figure 4.7 as described in section 3.4.1.
This is done do get an overall interpretation of the geology in the Perros Guirec survey.
Figure 4.9 shows 5 different filters chosen because they individually shows interesting
features of survey.
These filters are especially important for the overall interpretation of the coastal area.
These filtered clearly highlights the structural differences between the northern part and
the southern parts. The total anomaly signal in the northern part seems to mainly to due
to one large body, while the total anomaly signal from the southern parts seems to manly
be due to horizontal bodies. These horizontal bodies could be dykes. Especially, The
horizontal and tilt derivatives highlights the dyke-like signatures in the southern parts.
The analytical signals shows how the largest anomaly from S3 was actually two dyke-like
structures.
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
49
==PAGE:60==
(a) The reduced to pole filter. The magnetization
is assumed to only be induced.
(b) The horizontal derivative of Figure 4.7.
(c) The vertical derivative of Figure 4.7.
(d) The analytical signal of Figure 4.7.
(e) The tilt derivative of Figure 4.9a.
Figure 4.9: Illustrates five examples of enhancement filters used on Figure 4.7. These
filters can provides additional information about the subsurface
50
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
==PAGE:61==
4.5
Dyke modelling
This section will present the results of the 3 dyke modelling techniques disused in section
3.4. As a quality control, the visual data has been manually interpreted and the all visual-
dykes have been map in Figure 4.10. Based on the positions of the visual-dykes and
susceptibility measurements 5 dyke systems has been defined. These are also shown in
Figure 4.10.
Figure 4.10: Google Image of the southern parts of the Perros Guirec. The white lines are
manually placed dykes. The dykes are grouped into dyke systems 1-5. Black lines are
the sub-survey 3 borders. The dots are the susceptibility performed and are described by
the colourbar.
Dyke system 1 contains one dyke with a relativity small susceptibility less than 20 · 10−3.
Its strike angle is approximately 40 degrees in regard to the survey direction.
Dyke system 2 contains three dyke with a susceptibility in the range 30 · 10−3 to 80 · 10−3.
Their strike angles are approximately 40 degrees, but the middle dye changes strike angle
to approximately 0 degree.
Dyke system 3 contains one dyke with a susceptibility ≈50 · 10−3. Its strike angle is
approximately 40 degrees.
Dyke system 4 contains many merged dykes. The susceptibility is rather small < 20 ·
10−3 however the center dyke seems to have a much higher susceptibility ≈150 · 10−3.
Generally, the strike angle fro the dykes are approximately 40 degrees.
dyke system 5 also contains many merged dykes. Again the susceptibility is rather small
< 20·10−3 except one measurement at around susceptibility ≈100·10−3. The large dyke
has a strike angle of approximately 45 degrees. The two left-most dykes has strike angles
of -45 degrees and the 2 right-most dykes has strike angles of 45 degrees.
The following sections will present the results of the dyke-modelling method based on the
magnetic data. In section 5.3.5 the results of the dyke-modelling methods are discussed
in comparison to Figure 4.10.
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
51
==PAGE:62==
4.5.1
Dyke modelling using tilt-depth
The tilt-depth method provides depth estimates and outlines magnetic sources associated
which steep geology. These features can be used to find dyke-like signatures present in
the magnetic survey. It can be used as a 1. order method since it uses no prior information
from the survey site.
The method uses the fully processes grid 4.7 and applies the reduction to pole filter fol-
lowed by the tilt derivative filter. This filter grid was shown in Figure 4.9e. The reduced to
the pole filter ensures that zero contour naturally outlines the magnetic sources and the
tilt derivatives gives an equal weight to both small and big sources.
The tilt-depth method as outlined in Section3.4.2 was then applied on 4.7. The results are
shown in Figure 4.11 where its overlaid on the visual image.
Figure 4.11: The depth to sources estimated by the tilt-depth method. The dots are the
depths given by the colourbar. Notice the outlined features on sub-survey 3. These are
long straight features which could represent dykes.
Figure 4.11 confirms the idea that the southern parts are dyke-like structures. Dyke-like
structures are characterized by straight outlines of the sources.
This is seen exclusively in the southern parts (sub-survey 3 and 4). In addition these
straight sources seems to be shallow sources, but extend at least 20 meters into the sub-
surface. Notice that the tilt-depth method do not find the distance to the top of the source
but somewhere along the edges. The 3 dyke-signatures within sub-survey 3 seems to be
signals from the dyke systems 2, 4 and 5 (Figure 4.10). Figure A.5 shows a zoomed-in
view of sub-survey 3.
The northern structure seems to be a large deep source. It do not appear to be dykes as
the outlines are not straight, but more round.
52
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
==PAGE:63==
4.5.2
Dyke modelling using Euler deconvolution
The 3D Euler deconvolution can provide both the horizontal and the vertical position as-
sociated with the top of the sources. In section 2.4.4 it was derived that the structural
index of a dyke was N=1. This was used to focus the 3D Euler deconvolution to mainly
catch dyke-like signatures.
To obtain good results using the 3D Euler deconvolution the gradient of the survey needs
to be smooth. This was done by upward continued the processes survey (Figure 4.7) an
addition 5.7 meters. This brought the altitude of the survey to 35 meters. The window
size should at least be 35x35 meters. Since the grid spacing is 2 meters the window
will encompass 19x19 grid points, which corresponds to a window of 36x36 meters. In
section 3.4.3 two 3D Euler deconvolution was formulated: The linear Euler deconvolutions
with constant background (N=1) and the non-linear Euler deconvolutions with non-linear
background. As the 3D Euler deconvolution gives a solution for each window all the bad
solutions need to be filter away. This was done based the filtering criteria below: The
filters using on the linear Euler the solutions :
• The covariance of the x and y should less be than 0.01 m2
• The variance of the z should be less than 0.01 m2
• the rms error between the Euler model and the data should be less than 10 nT
• The estimated x and y needs to be within the window original window.
The filters using on the non-linear Euler the solutions :
• the covariance of the x and y should less be than 0.01 m2
• the variance of the z should be less than 0.01 m2
• the rms error between the Euler model and the data should be less than 10 nT
• The estimated structural index need to lie within the interval

0.9
1.1

• Whether the solution converged
Figure 4.12 and 4.13 shows the filtered linear Euler and non-linear Euler solutions re-
spectively. The linear Euler have fewer solutions than the non-linear Euler. However
the number of solution essentially depends on the filtering method. Overall, It seems like
the non-linear Euler captures the structure of the magnetic sources more than the linear
Euler.
The shallow solution (blue dots) could be dyke-like signatures. These sources actually
aligns with the visual dyke system 2 and 4. These dyke-like signatures seems to agree
with the results from the tilt-depth method.
The deeper sources (green and yellow) at least 20 meters below surface seems to show
structures which are located in between the dyke systems.
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
53
==PAGE:64==
Figure 4.12: The results from the linear Euler deconvolutions with constant background.
The structural index was fixed to 1 such that the method focuses on dyke features. The
white lines are survey borders and the visual-dykes. The dots are the depths given by the
colourbar.
Figure 4.13: The results from the non-linear Euler deconvolutions with non linear back-
ground. The structural index was a variable which was estimated along with the positions.
The white lines are survey borders and the visual-dykes. The dots are the depths given
by the colourbar.
54
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
==PAGE:65==
4.5.3
Inversion-based dyke modelling
The inversion-based dyke modelling can provide horizontal and vertical position as well
as dip angle and an estimation of the remnant magnetization. The method was explained
Section 3.4.4 and will be used on the minimally processes flight lines from sub-survey 3.
The inversion-based dyke modelling solves the inverse problem formulated in Equation
3.48 one flight line at a time.
Part 1 of the inversion-based dyke modelling is to determine the common dyke parameters
and individual dyke parameters. This is done based on prior information and assumption
of the survey site.
Firstly, the effective susceptibility was defined as the median of the susceptibility mea-
surements that values was 14 · 10−3. Its assumed that all dykes have the same effective
susceptibility.
Secondly, The visual image shows that most dykes have strike angles of 40 degrees. The
rest of the information in the visual image (position and half-width) are used as validation.
Thirdly, the Chaos model is evaluated at the survey location to get the magnitude, inclina-
tion and declination of the main field. These are used to calculated the effective inclination
of the induced magnetization and the angle from profile to magnetic north. Initially, the
direction of the remnant magnetization will be assumed equal the direction of the induced
magnetization.
Fourthly, since the steepness of the coast to ocean profile is unknown the distance from
measurement plan to the top was assumed meters for all dykes.
The above mentioned assumption leads to the following common dyke parameters for the
Perros Guirec survey.
• Effective inclination of the induced magnetization - I’ = 64.4 degrees
• Effective inclination of the remnant magnetization - J’ = 64.4 degrees
• Angle from profile to magnetic north - α = 50.5 degrees
• Angle from profile to remnant dedication - a = 50.5 degrees
• Altitude above the dyke top - H = 20
• Total-field intensity of the ambient field - T = 47901.21 nT
• Effective susceptibility - κ = 14 · 10−3
• Dip angle - δ = 90 degrees
• Strike angle - ψ = 40 degrees
The dyke specific parameters, which has to be estimated for each dyke, are then:
• half-width - B
• Position along flight line - D
Part 2 is to create the representative dyke of the area. The representative dyke is then a
dyke with all the common parameters where the half-width (B) and position (D) are varied.
B is varied from 1-20 meters in a nonlinear interval. D is varied from the start of the line
to the end with 1 meter interval. Figure A.6 show the contour plots of line 4. The first
iterations revels 3 dykes signatures appear in the contour. Next iteration 4 more dykes
shows up these are however much thinner. Iteration 3 give one more extremely small
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
55
==PAGE:66==
dyke with a half-width less than 1 meter. Figure 4.14a shows the initial model and the
results of the exploitation of the parameter space. These plots only show the results from
line 4 and every line will have its own contour and initial model.
Part 3 is to solve Equation 3.48 for every line. This means that part 2 have to be repeated
resulting in a unique initial model for each line. These initial models has to be optimized
based on Equation 3.48 resulting in Model 1. Now the remnant magnetization parameters
are considered common variables and model 1 is optimized again resulting in Model 2.
Finally the dip angles for dykes also becomes an unknown and model 2 is optimized a
final time resulting in Model 3.
3 models has now been created for each flight line. Model 1 estimated the half-width and
position of dykes. Model 2 estimated the half-width, position and a global remnant mag-
netization. Model 3 estimates the half-width, position, dip angle and the global remnant
magnetization. An example of the initial model, Model 1, Model 2 and Model 3 is shown
for flight line 4 in Figure 4.14. Notice that the blue lines in Model 1 and 2 are similar as
they only differ by a different in remnant magnetization. Model 3 differ a lot since each
dyke vary its dip angle in unrealistic ways.
Figure 4.14: Iversion-based dyke modelling results. The black lines indicate the measured
total-anomaly intensity. The blue lines are individual dyke signatures. Red lines are a
superposition of all the blue lines represent the modelled total-anomaly intensity. Top-left
shows the initial model. Top-right shows Model 1. Bottom-left shows Model 2. Bottom-
right shows Model 3.
Figure 4.15 shows the results of Model 1 for all flight line in sub-survey 3. The location
fits very well with some of the large dike systems. At least dyke system 2, 3 and 4 shows
a dyke which is consistent thought all flight lines. Dyke system 1 and 5 seems to have
widely scatter solutions. Generally the half-width seems a lot smaller than the visual-dykes
indicates.The result for Model 2 is similar to Model 1 and is shown in Figure A.7.
Figure 4.16 and 4.17 shows the results for Model 3 where both the half-width and dip
angle was estimated. For the most part Model 1 and Model 3 agrees on the location of
56
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
==PAGE:67==
the dykes expect for are seemingly large dyke coming from the right. This large dyke has
a half-width of 20 meters, with a very inconsistent dip angle ranging from 45-165 degrees.
Generally, Model 3 seems to estimate wider dykes and dip angle within 75-105 degrees.
The dip angels are generally very inconsistent as they chance along the dykes.
Figure 4.15: The results from Model 1 in the inverse-based dyke modelling. Model 1
only estimates the position and half-width. The white lines are survey borders and the
visual-dykes. The dots are the half-width estimates given by the colourbar.
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
57
==PAGE:68==
Figure 4.16: The half-width results from Model 3 in the inverse-based dyke modelling.
Model 3 estimates the position, half-width, dip angle and global remnant. The white lines
are survey borders and the visual-dykes. The dots are the half-width estimates given by
the colourbar.
Figure 4.17: The dip angle results from Model 3 in the inverse-based dyke modelling.
Model 3 estimates the position, half-width, dip angle and global remnant. The white lines
are survey borders and the visual-dykes. The dots are the dip angle estimates given by
the colourbar.
58
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
==PAGE:69==
5
Discussion
This section will initially discuss the survey parameters which was used in measuring the
Perros Guirec surveys and then discuss the results of the three processing phases. Then
a discussion and interpretation of the coastal subsurface of Perros Guirec based on the
results of the analysis phase. Finally a reflection of the methods and suggesting for further
research.
5.1
The Perros Guirec survey parameters
The Perros Guirec survey had four sub-surveys, which was conducted at the coastal re-
gions of Perros Guirec. These were conducted sequentially throughout the early morning
to early afternoon on October the 28th, 2019. As discussed in section 1.1, the survey
parameters for the four sub-surveys are displayed in Table 4.1.
As this thesis was not involved in the planning phase or the in-field measuring phase
survey, parameters were extracted during the pre-processing. In the following the survey
parameters will be discussed and how these can affect further processing processes.
The survey orientation in regards to magnetic north can be calculated by adding θENU to
the declination of the main field. This gives an orientation of 37.5 degrees for sub-survey
1, 2, 4 and an orientation of 50.6 degrees for sub-survey 3. This means that the induced
magnetization of the geology is not aligned with the flight lines. However, the survey
was conducted over an area which exhibits dykes with highly remnant magnetization and
consequently, the orientation can be disregarded.
From Table 4.1 it appeared that the flight line spacing for all the sub-surveys was 10 me-
ters. The measuring altitude varied for four sub-surveys. For sub-survey 1, 2 and 3 the
altitude was less than 20 meters and for sub-survey 4 it was approximately 30 meters.
A. B. Reid 1980 discussed the relationship between altitude and flight line spacing. Ac-
cording to his recommendations for gradient computations, the flight spacing and altitude
should be equal but for modelling single anomalies the flight line spacing should be half
that of the altitude. This indicates that, as measured, sub-survey 1, 2 and 3 are unsuitable
for modelling single anomalies, while sub-survey 4 is suitable.
In this work he also mentions that this can be corrected somewhat for by an upward-
continuation. However, it is an additional processing step which could have been avoided
by planning such that all sub-survey was measured at the same altitude. There is no
obvious reason for the altitude difference and it is likely that an instrumental error or some
in-field error has occurred.
A comparison of the across line sampling rate λc = 1
10 m−1 and an along line sampling rate
λa = 16 m−1 showed that along line sampling rate was 160 time denser than the across-
line sampling rate. Taking into account the sub-survey’s altitudes and the wavelength of
anomalies expected at that altitude, sub-survey 1, 2 and 3 showed a slight under-sampling
of the anomalies in the across line direction and a large over-sampling in the along line
direction. In contrast, sub-survey 4 had a slight over-sampling of the anomalies in the
across line direction due to its altitude.
As mentioned, in section 1.1, understating the surveys innate spatial resolution was nec-
essary to perform the following processing phases. The across line spacing is used in the
levelling and gridding of the survey data. Altitude information is needed for merging in the
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
59
==PAGE:70==
final-processing. The spatial resolution is particularly important in the analysis phase to
and restricts the analysis to certain kind of sources which be measured and modelled.
5.2
The processing approaches for the Perros Guirec survey
This section will be concerned with discussing the results of the three processing phases
of the Perros Guirec survey leading to an overall quality evaluation based on the results
of the processing and survey parameters.
5.2.1
Pre-processing
The pre-processing had 3 major steps: the sub-survey extracting, the coordinate system
transformation and the outlier removal/median filter.
During the sub-survey extracting and outlier removal it became evident that the survey
data had a problem with recording GPS data properly. The unused tie lines for sub-survey
4 had every second GPS data point recording in a line at the other side the survey area.
The flight lines had large sections with missing data points or discontinuities. One of the
strangest features was distance gaps with no corresponding time gaps. All these GPS
errors are likely due to an instrumental error associated with the data logger.
Despite these GPS problems the flight lines were reasonably straight as shown in Table
5.1. Based on the std(x′) the sub-surveys were straight within 0.5 meters with a con-
fidence interval of 97.5 %. This measure assumes a Gaussian distribution. However,
some flight lines had much higher deviation at the beginning and end of the flight lines.
This could be explained by the path of the drone started turning (see Figure 1.1). It is
important that flight lines are straight as both the parallax and bidirectional interpolation
assumes straight lines.
As discussed in the previous section, the along line sampling rate was over-sampled.
Consequently, to reduce the data size and make the processing run faster, these was
down-sampled by using a median filter with a window of 16 observation. The median filter
smoothed out any periods less than 1 meters in the signal. The anomaly field variations
from the geology on less than 1 meter, should be undetectable from the drone’s altitude.
In summery, the pre-processing went rather smoothly expect for the odd GPS measure-
ments.
5.2.2
Medium-processing
The medium-processing involves multiple steps. In short, the overall theme is to remove
inconsistencies between flight lines, isolating the total-anomaly intensity and changing the
data structure from flight lines to a grid.
The best parallax correction as judged by Figure 4.2, suggested that the angle between
the wire and the normal vector of the drone was 60 degrees with the wire length set to
5 meters. This parallax correction moved the flight lines about 4.2 meters horizontally
and 2.5 meters vertically. The parallax correction definitely improved the consistency
between flight lines as also evident from the gridding (Figure 4.2). However, it is unlikely
that the true parallax correction remains equal throughout the entire survey. The parallax
correction is dependent on the wire length and the angle. While the wire length stays
constant, the angle is dependent on the speed of the drone and the wind velocity.
As the applied parallax correction is judged based on the smoothness of the gridded
surface, it is evident that the grid spacing would effect that judgment. Hence, grid spacing
should already be decided prior to the medium-processing. This is such that the parallax
correction can be judged based on the smoothness of the gridded surface with that grid
60
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
==PAGE:71==
spacing. That grid spacing choice for all sub-survey was 2.5 meters or 1 fourth the across
line spacing.
The diurnal correction was done using the pseudo base station. The pseudo base station
was created using data from the magnetic observatory in Chambon la Forêt, France and
the on-site base station. The Chambon la Forêt magnetic observatory data was lag-
corrected and levelled ( bF B) to the on-site base station F B (see Figure 4.3b). bF B was then
merged with F B such that observatory data extended the on-site data. Consequently,
sub-survey 1, 2 and 3 were just diurnal corrected using F B while sub-survey 4 was diurnal
corrected using bF B.
It was difficult to assess whether bF B captured this trend or lagged this decrease. Alterna-
tively, the diurnal correction of sub-survey 4 could have been fixed e.g at 0 nT or even the
last measured observation of the on-site base station. Nevertheless, setting the diurnal
correction to a fixed value would likely result in a 5 nT error based on the evolution of the
field.
The peak at around 7.15 hours, seen in figure 4.3, is interesting since it alludes to a po-
tential flaw in the pseudo base station. Models of the daily solar variation by C. Finlay and
Olsen 2019 shows that westward currents could be a common feature of the daily solar
variation in France. In the latitudinal direction Perros Guirec and Chambon-la-Forêt are
about 85 km apart. A westward current would increase the external field in Chambon la
Forêt while decreasing the external field in Perros Guirec as seen at 7.15 hours. To im-
prove the methodology behind the pseudo base station it would have to take into account
the daily solar variation.
The mag2regional by White and Beamish 2015 was modified slightly to check for conver-
gence of the levelling. This complicated finding the optimal levelling parameters as the
recommended levelling parameters would not converge. While White and Beamish 2015
tested the mag2regional on large scale aeromagnetic surveys. In comparison, the Perros
Guirec survey was a relatively small scale survey with some extremely large anomalies.
These survey size differences would effect the smoothing and the amount of cultural in-
terfering (interfering noise from human made structures).
The Perros Guirec showed, that the cultural interfering tolerance (p) should be reduced
and that less smoothing (λk) was needed on the regional field. However, the difference
in smoothing could be due to many factors e.g. the smaller scale of the survey, bigger
anomalies or just the use of the Butterworth filter. Figure 4.4 and Figure A.2, A.3 and
A.4 shows the mag2regional levelling of the four sub-surveys. Focusing on sub-survey 1,
Figure 4.4a shows unlevelled sub-survey 1 and illuminating the grid shows discrepancies
along the flight lines. Then after the levelling in Figure 4.4d. Having a look at Figure 4.4c,
the gridded levelling correction showed primarily corrections aligned along the flight lines.
Some levelling correction in sub-survey 2 and 4 was blurred out between lines, this could
indicate that the smoothing might have been too much in that area (see Figure A.2 and
Figure A.4).
Levelling with tie lines can be considered levelling the (flight line) survey to an independent
(tie line) survey, but with a difference of 90 degrees in orientation. The levelling process
helps to correct any biases associated with survey orientation. Hence, levelling a survey
without tie lines cannot take into account any biases along the flight lines. However,
unleveled data can still remove line-too-line discrepancies as seen by the mag2regional
results. Accordingly, the choice to level a survey with tie lines or without tie lines depends
on whether to remove flight line biases or not.
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
61
==PAGE:72==
The results of the mag2CHAOS levelling of the sub-surveys were evaluated in regards
to how much each sub-survey was corrected. The goal of the mag2CHAOS was to level
the sub-surveys to the main field which gives the sub-surveys a common reference field.
Based on the profile drawn in Figure 4.7, even after the upward continuation to a common
altitude the sub-survey showed a significant difference in total-anomaly intensity (Fig-
ure 4.8). This is likely due to the small area of the sub-surveys and their associated
large anomalies. Consequently, a base level cannot be determined, and therefore the
mag2CHAOS fails. However, since the mag2CHAOS levelling correction was a constant
the merging algorithm corrected the large offsets and explained why the base shifts are
so large in Table 6.2. In hindsight, levelling to main field could be done after the merging,
such that the base level of the the survey would have been better determined.
The gridding of a magnetic survey from flight lines to grid generally reduces the spatial
resolution due to the down-sampling of the measurements. The grid spacing used for
all the sub-surveys was 2 meter in both directions meaning the along line measurements
were being down-sampled and this can introduce aliasing. Subsequently, the cross line
spacing was up-sampled. However, this up-sampling was not based on data but solely
on the interpolating method which can produce artefacts across lines. For the four sub-
surveys there were no obvious cross line artifact or aliasing on the interpolated grid. The
bidirectional interpolating was chosen since it more fatefully represents the along line data
and gives less aliasing effects (Billings and Richards 1997).
The relative magnitude change of all corrections are shown in Figure 4.6. The paral-
lax correction appeared as a constant offset of the raw data; this distance is 4.2 meters.
Since the anomalies of the survey had magnitudes of hundreds of nano-Tesla the diurnal
correction only changed the magnitude by a very small amount. The levelling to regional
correction removed the line discrepancy as evident from Figure 4.4c, but as Figure 4.6
seems to indicate that this was partly accomplished by reducing the magnitude of anoma-
lies. The by far biggest change to the measurements were the levelling to the CHAOS
model. This correction changed the measured data by > 100 nT. The micro-levelling also
reduced the magnitude of anomalies similarly to the levelling correction.
Overall the medium-processing was successful in creating a smooth gridded total-anomaly
intensity surface of the 4 sub-surveys. As shown it was mostly the parallax correction and
the mag2regional levelling which removed line discrepancies. mag2CHAOS appeared to
be biased based on the magnitude and number of anomalies in the sub-surveys and the
correction was widely different for each sub-survey. Based on the evolution of the external
field the pseudo base station seemed to give a more accurate diurnal correction for sub-
survey 4. However, all these corrections seemed to reduce the magnitude of anomalies
by 100 nT which is not ideal.
5.2.3
Final-processing
The final-processing is about merging the gridded sub-surveys into one large grid. This
large grid represents the total-anomaly intensity of the entire Perros Guirec survey.
Sub-grids 1, 2 and 3 were brought to the measuring altitude of sub-grid 4 using the upward
continuation filter. Subsequently, the base and trend shifts from Table A.1 were applied.
The base shift seems to just correcting the mag2CHAOS levelling. Figure A.1, shows
the merging without the mag2CHAOS. Further, the initially grid overlap errors are much
smaller than shown in Figure 4.8. However, the following trend shifts are similar for the
two cases. The trend shifts for sub-grid 1 and 2 are both rather small. In contrast, the
two trend shifts to sub-grid 3 were very large. Clearly, the trend of sub-grid 3 and the
corresponding trend of the merged grid are quite different. When merging the sub-grids
62
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
==PAGE:73==
one issue emerging was that the overlap was on top of high gradient areas. This magnifies
any coordinate errors and sub-grid 3 and 4 did merge at the edge of the largest anomalies
of the survey.
The feathering technique appeared to work well for creating a smooth transition from grid
to grid. The problem with the chosen weighted averaged approach is that overlap errors
are largely ignored. The feathering technique developed by Cheesman, MacLeod, and
Hopllyer 1998 take these into account and could have been applied to display the overlap
errors.
In summary, the final-processing was successful in creating one smooth merged grid of
the entire Perros Guirec survey. However, some of the trend shifts required for creating
the merged grid were large - especially for sub-grid 3. Consequently, there are some
inconsistencies between the merged grid and the sub-grids.
5.3
The approaches for analysis of mafic dykes
This section contains a discussion of the results of the analysis of the Perros Guirec survey
including a broad analysis of the Perros Guirec survey based on enhancement filters and
a more in-depth analysis of the dykes in the southern parts of the survey. These dykes
are analysed using tilt-depth method, Euler deconvolution and an inverse dyke modelling
scheme.
5.3.1
An interpretation based on filters
The merged grid of the entire Perros Guirec survey was transformed using various filters.
The filters can enhance certain aspects and contribute to the initial manual interpretation
of the survey. Based on the merged grid (Figure 4.7) the southern parts had at least
4 dykes with an east to north-east strike direction. The northern parts showed a large
anomaly at least 200x200 meters in size. This is likely a batholith based on the prior
information of the survey area.
Based on all the filters we can confirm that at least 4 dykes are in the survey although
the tilt derivative and the analytic signal indicate the presence of addition dykes in sub-
survey 3 and 4. There does not seem to be any dykes signatures hidden in the batholith
or generally in sub-survey 1 and 2. However, these sub-surveys were upward continued
more than 10 meters which could have removed signatures from small dykes. This is
because of the way the upward continuation smooth out short wavelength features. As
this thesis is a study of mafic dykes the interesting area is the sub-survey 3 and 4, which
were the target area for the dyke modelling.
5.3.2
Tilt-depth dyke modelling
As disused in section 3.4.2 the tilt-depth dyke modelling does not inherently identify dykes,
but it finds steep structures. As the dykes likely extend far down into the subsurface, the
tilt-depth might highlight the dykes. However, they might have to be large enough to mimic
a vertical step.
The results of the tilt-depth method are shown for the entire survey in Figure 4.11 and a
zoomed version of sub-survey 3 in Figure A.5. The tilt-depth method only resolves the
largest dykes in dyke system 2 and 4. It also appeared like dyke system 5 merged with
a large unseen dyke. Tilt-depth gives depth estimates of the edges of the dyke at 15-
20 meters (see ). This only means that the dykes which extend at least 15-20 meters
potentially could extend even further. Sub-survey 4 showed just one large dyke, but its
depth estimate was 20-35 meters. The batholith in the northern parts seemed to extend
even deeper than the dykes.
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
63
==PAGE:74==
The downside of the tilt-depth method is that the data must be reduced to the pole which
is an uncertain filter since the remnant is not known. It also seems to only find the large
scale structures which could either be a limitation of the method or the fact that the grids
were upward continued 10 meters up.
5.3.3
Euler-based dyke modelling
Euler-based dyke modelling was done by a 3D Euler deconvolution on the full merged grid.
Section 2.4.4 derived that the structural index of a dyke was 1 and in section 3.4.3 two
Euler methods were formulated: the linear Euler deconvolution with constant background
and the nonlinear Euler deconvolution with a nonlinear background. All the 3 derivatives
were found in the Fourier domain. However, it was necessary to upward continued the
gradients to 35 meters, along with the grid, to reduce noise.
These two methods show similar results but the nonlinear method appeared to catch more
features than the linear version (see Figure 4.12 and 4.13). They seemed to agree where
the two methods overlap. The linear Euler deconvolution with the constant background
was filtered slightly more by constraining the horizontal solution to be within the window,
but the addition condition was required to make the solutions less scattered. Generally,
the Euler-based dyke modelling showed dyke-like features as the solution follow straight
lines. The 3 resolved dykes from the tilt-based method also appeared in the Euler solution
as shallow sources. However, like the tilt-based method, the Euler solutions do not fully
agree with the manually place dykes based on the aerial photos. The large dyke in sub-
survey 4 has been split into two dykes. These cannot be seen on the visual image, but
according to the Euler solutions, these are also deeper structures (15-20 meters below
the surface). The Euler solution also indicates some really deep structures in-between
the three steep dykes.
As mentioned previously, the Euler-based method requires a filtering process to filter out
all the wrong/bad solutions. The core of these filters was the variance requirements, which
was set to 0.01 m2 and then the root mean square requirement which was set to 10 nT.
The variance requirements removed the bulk of the bad solutions while root mean square
requirement mostly removed some of really scattered solutions. The linear Euler also had
the window requirements of the horizontal solution. This was because solutions would be
outside the survey area and also the solutions had a weird circular structure. All of these
were removed by the window requirements. For the non-linear Euler, the structural index
was limited to 0.9 to 1.1; this was done to remove any objects which could not be classified
as dykes. However, these filter settings were just set to produce solutions which looked
reasonable compered to the aerial images.
The non-linear Euler method also let us estimates the structural index. Based on the
theory of homogeneity the structural index can not be a floating number. Any magnetic
object has integer structural index. However, research on the Euler method has shown
that the structural index and the depth estimate are strongly correlated meaning they are
best fitted together and fixing one of them creates a bias in the solution (Dewangan et al.
2007). Low altitude magnetic surveys need larger window sizes, thus needing more time
calculating. Furthermore, the nonlinear Euler requires an extensive search of the param-
eter space to find the global minimum. For these two reasons, I would not recommend the
nonlinear approach for ground and low elevation drone magnetic surveys unless access
to substantial computing resources.
The Stavrev 1997 developed a linear Euler with a linear background using the principle
of Differential Similarity Transform. This could prove a fast and sufficient method.
64
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
==PAGE:75==
5.3.4
Inversion-based dyke modelling
Inversion-based dyke modelling was based on the thick dyke Equation 2.30 for the dyke
parameters. However, this proved extremely difficult for multiple reasons: (1) ambiguous
solutions, (2) peak shape, (3) converges and initial model .
1) The thick dyke Equation has multiple solutions which equally well fits the anomaly field.
The two most ambiguous terms were the phase term Q and amplitude term P.
In this report, P was split into its smaller part which was individually controlled by: the
intensity of the ambient field, susceptibility, direction of induced, direction of remnant and
dip angle. The first 3 were fixed and the latter 2 were estimated. Q was similarly split into
its smaller terms: direction of induced, direction of remnant and dip angle. Only the latter
two were estimated.
Both Q and P needs the direction of remnant and dip angle meaning these are almost
inseparable when Q and P are estimated. The total-anomaly field of a dyke with a dip
angle of 90 degrees can e.g. be made to look like any of the curves from Figure 2.2e just
by changing its remnant direction.
2) Another problem is that almost all the parameters affect the peak shape (strike angle,
half-width B, amplitude P, phase Q and altitude H as see by Figure 2.2). This report fixed
the strike angle and altitude meaning that any variation in the peak shape is controlled
only by the half-width, P and Q.
In Model 1 Q was fixed assuming (induced = remnant and 90 dip angle). It was possible
to fit the total-anomaly intensity somewhat well despite forcing Q = -40 degrees.
Model 2 allows the remnant to be estimated as a common parameter. This change Q for all
the dykes in the area from Q = -40 to Q =-51. This is only a slight change. In fact, model 1
and model 2 are similar as shown by the line Figure 4.14. Figure A.8 shows a contour map
of the remnant parameters shows that multiple values of Q give identical results. Hence,
according to this method, it is impossible to predict the true remnant magnetization of the
dykes based on this data. For instance Figure A.8 shows a possible configuration in the
northern hemisphere and a possible configuration in hemisphere southern depending on
the angle between the profile and the remnant declination.
Model 3 estimates the dip angle for each dyke and then the common remnant. This
enables the full range of the curves in Figure 2.2. This can also be seen by the total-
anomaly intensity from the individual dykes in the line example 3 in Figure 4.14 where
some dykes clearly are unrealistic.
Generally, the three models agreed upon the position and half-width of the dykes. In
comparison to the visual data, the half-width estimates seemed way too small. However,
the position seems to match quite well. The small half-widths could be caused by some
other parameter filling out the shape of the peak. It could also be some theoretical problem
in the formulation of the inverse-based dyke modelling.
3) The representative model proved to be a great tool for building the initial model and
ensuring Converges. The representative model created by fixing all parameters except
the position and half-width. The initial model had dykes placed somewhat correctly based
on the aerial image. However, it struggled locating the smallest of dykes as these was not
well resolved in the contours (Figure A.6). Figure 4.14 from 100 meters to 200 meters it
clearly showed 3 dyke signatures of which 2 of them were on top of the large one. Due to
the flat nature of the local minimum of the representative model between 100-200 meters
these two dykes were fitted as one.
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
65
==PAGE:76==
The initial model is the most important aspect of the inversion-based dyke modelling. This
is because the dykes positions are extremely hard to move during the optimization and
need to be placed close to the true dyke locations prior to the optimization. The other
parameters are less sensitive and easier to optimise.
This initial model is used to initiate the fitting of model 1, which subsequently becomes
the initial model of model 2 etc. For this reason, the optimisation are force down one
minimum and the full parameter space was not searched sufficiently for a better model.
A more sophisticated method could be the Monte Carlo Markov Chain (MCMC) which
can effectively sample the parameter’s space and search for other minimums in this high
dimensional space.
5.3.5
Overall interpretations
This section will be a discussion of Figure 4.10. The visual-dykes will be discussed in
combination with the dykes found based on the 3 dyke modelling methods. Figure 5.1
shows the coastal area of Perros Guirec with the visual-dykes, weakly resolved dykes
and strongly resolved dykes. Weakly resolved dykes are only based on the inverse-based
method. Strongly resolved dykes are resolved by all the methods.
Dyke system 1 only had one visual-dykes with a low susceptibility which is hard to see in
the magnetic data.. The inverse-based method did seem to catch some of the anomaly
signal from that dyke.
Dyke system 2 had three visual-dykes. The Euler-based, tilt-based and inverse-based
method all resolved the large right-most dyke. The tilt-based method indicated that this
dyke extends far down into the subsurface. Furthermore, the inverse-based method found
a dyke in-between the left and middle visual dykes. This is likely because the dykes was
to close to be resolved separately.
The third dyke system contained one visual-dykes with high susceptibility. It was not
resolved by the Euler-based, nor the tilt-based methods. It was however resolved by the
inverse-method did resolve but it seemed to indicate another strike angle with a much
more direct path into dyke system 2.
Dyke system 4 contained many merged visual-dykes. Expect for the large dyke, all the
smaller ones had a low susceptibility. The magnetic data strongly resolved a large dyke
which was found by all the methods. The tilt-based method indicated that this dyke ex-
tended far down into the subsurface. The inversion-based method also showed signs of
a dyke in the water.
Like dyke system 4, dyke system 5 contained many merged visual-dyke with low sus-
ceptibility. However, none of these was identified by any of the methods. A possible
explanation of this is that these were obscured by a large unseen dyke from sub-survey
4. It is the largest dyke found and it extends the furthest down based on the tilt-depth.
The weakly resolved dyke from the inversion could indicate the visual-dyke merge with
the large unseen dyke, but this is not confirmed.
As already discussed the half-width estimates are generally about half of the expected
based on the visual image. Based on the 3 dyke modelling methods 3 major dykes was
found as shown by the three green lines in Figure 5.1. based solely on the inversion
based method 5 minor dykes was found as shown by the red lines in Figure 5.1.
A possibility all the visual-dykes and weakly resolved dykes are connect to these major
dykes. Another explanation could be that these dykes have a weak susceptibility and
was simply obscured by the three major dyke. The mean and standard deviation of the
66
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
==PAGE:77==
dip angles for all solutions associated with the major dykes were for the left-most dyke
94.8 ± 40.2 degrees, middle dyke 84.9 ± 24.0 degrees and right-most 94.5 ± 55.5 degrees.
The right-most major dyke has dip angle ranging widely, but from Figure 5.1 it clearly have
a different strike angle. This is likely why its parameters seems to very.
Figure 5.1: White lines are dykes placements based on the aerial image. Red lines are
dyke placements with weak confirmation by the dyke models. Green lines are dyke place-
ments with weak confirmation by the dyke models. Black lines show the start of the survey
and white dots shows survey corners.
5.4
Theoretical reflections and improvements
Some of the processing techniques used in this thesis was originally develop for large/-
continental scale magnetic surveys. This was true for the mag2regional, mag2CHAOS
and the grid merging algorithm. However the Perros Guirec magnetic survey is consid-
erably small scale, but for the most parts the method could still be applied. Though the
mag2CHAOS seems to be fail as the base level of a sub-survey was not well defined.
The mag2regional seems to perform the levelling reasonable as most discrepancies was
removed. The trend shifts in the grid merging algorithm might also have been to extreme
(see Figure 4.8), but for further research the trend cost functions could be regularized to
limit large trend shifts.
The approximation of the total-anomaly intensity limits us to only consider the magnetic
field from the geology along the main field. This is acceptable if the anomalies are due
to induced magnetization. In the Perros Guirec survey however, the anomalies also have
a significant remnant magnetization. This particularly affects the dyke modelling since
the modelling magnetic field of the dykes is not translated correctly into the measured
total-anomaly field by the dot product of the main field.
Further improvements to the inversion-based dyke modelling could including gradients.
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
67
==PAGE:78==
Small dykes show a more clear signal in the horizontal and vertical derivatives of the
anomalies. This could perhaps be used to Inversion-based dyke modelling’s resolution
of small dykes. Coupled with a more optimal way of sampling the parameter space using
the mentioned MCMC method would likely result in better models with lower root mean
squared errors.
The Perros Guirec geophysical survey also collected land-based magnetic data. Since
the land-based measurement are closer to the ground the data-set would have a better
spatial resolution. For any further research of the coastal area of Perros Guirec using this
data-set in addition to the drone-based data could potential provide a better understand of
the dyke systems. Additional geophysical information could have been used to improve
the subsurface mapping, this could have been gravity or borehole measurements.
68
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
==PAGE:79==
6
Conclusion
This thesis presented a method to process and analyse drone-based magnetic data. This
method was demonstrated on a drone-based magnetic survey done at the coastal area of
Perros Guirec, France, to identify mafic dykes in Earth’s subsurface. Several processing
techniques were presented and used on the Perros Guirec magnetic survey. Amongst
the successful techniques presented was the tie-line free levelling and the grid-merging
techniques. These were developed as continental scale processing techniques, but were
successfully used to level and merge the smaller scale sub-surveys into one represen-
tative grid of the entire Perros Guirec survey. The levelling to CHAOS technique failed
because the sub-surveys did not have a well-defined base level. A different levelling to
CHAOS technique might work better after the merging if the base level is well-defined.
The processes gridded magnetic data were analysed using tilt-depth and 3D Euler de-
convolution methods. Minimally processed flight line data was analysed by an inverse
dyke modelling method. Amongst the three presented analyses techniques, the tilt-depth
method proved to be a quick and effective method to get an overview of the survey’s
subsurface. It revealed that the southern parts of the Perros Guirec survey were mainly
shallow mafic dykes, while the northern parts largely consisted of a deep batholith. The
two presented 3D Euler deconvolutions provided mostly a horizontal estimate of the 3
major dykes. The 3D Euler deconvolutions might have produced more reliable depth esti-
mate if used on the individual gridded sub-survey or even a 2D Euler deconvolutions along
flight lines. The inversion-based dyke proved to be the method which captured most dyke
anomaly signals. However, this method has several limitations: it requires a lot of prior
information and several assumptions about the dykes are needed before the method can
be applied.
In conclusion, based on the three presented analyses techniques, the Perros Guirec sur-
vey had 3 major dykes. 2 of which could be visually confirmed however an unseen dyke
was predicted by the magnetic approaches. Based solely on the inversion-based dyke
modelling the 3 major dykes had half-widths of approximately 7 meters and dip angles of
90 degrees. The estimate of the dip angles proved to be unstable. The inversion-based
dyke modelling additionally identified 5 more dykes. These showed some positional sim-
ilarities to the visual dykes.
Generally, it seems that some visual dykes were not sufficiently magnetic to be resolved
by the modelling techniques presented. Perhaps, due to interference from the major large
dykes or just a too low effective susceptibility. In addition, the inversion-based dyke mod-
elling predicted thinner dykes than what was expected based on the visual-dykes. This
might be a theoretical flaw in the inverse-based dyke-modelling presented in this the-
sis. To improve the dyke-modelling either addition of geophysical information could be
included or more refined dyke modelling technique could be used. Addition of geophysi-
cal information could be gravity or borehole measurements and a refined inverse-based
dyke modelling could include gradients coupled with a more optimal way of sampling the
parameter space.
All in all the thesis showed that it was feasible to use establish aeromagnetic techniques
for drone surveys. The data from Perros Guirec was analysed and showed strong indi-
cations of three large magnetic dykes. Further exploration is need to completely map the
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
69
==PAGE:80==
underground geology in this area but the result presented in this thesis is an excellent
starting point.
70
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
==PAGE:81==
References
Aurty, Dan (Jan. 2020). Geophysical Service Market Size, Share, Demand And Remark-
able Growth Rate Till 2026 | Fortune Business Insights™- The Midland Weekly. URL:
http://midlandweekly.com/2020/01/24/geophysical-service-market-size-share-demand-
and-remarkable-growth-rate-till-2026-fortune-business-insights/.
Nikulin, Alex and Timothy S. De Smet (June 2019). “A UAV-based magnetic survey method
to detect and identify orphaned oil and gas wells”. In: Leading Edge 38.6, pp. 447–452.
ISSN: 19383789. DOI: 10.1190/tle38060447.1.
Erwin Ebner (1995). “Project Planning and Management for Magnetic Gravity Surveys |
CSEG RECORDER”. In: CSEG RECORDER 20.06. URL: https://csegrecorder.com/
articles/view/project-planning-and-management-for-magnetic-gravity-surveys.
Reid, A. B. (Feb. 1980). “Aeromagnetic survey design.” In: Geophysics 45.5, pp. 973–
976. ISSN: 00168033. DOI: 10.1190/1.1441102. URL: https://library.seg.org/doi/abs/
10.1190/1.1441102.
Luyendykl, A P J (1997). Processing of airborne magnetic data. Tech. rep.
Finlay, Chris and Nils Olsen (2019). Lectures Notes in Geomagnetism MSc Course 30740.
Thébault, Erwan et al. (Dec. 2015). “International geomagnetic reference field: The 12th
generation international geomagnetic reference field - The twelfth generation”. In: Earth,
Planets and Space 67.1, p. 79. ISSN: 18805981. DOI: 10.1186/s40623-015-0228-9. URL:
http://www.earth-planets-space.com/content/67/1/79.
Finlay, C C et al. (2019). DTU candidate field models for IGRF-13. Tech. rep.
White, James C. and David Beamish (2015). “Levelling aeromagnetic survey data without
the need for tie-lines”. In: Geophysical Prospecting 63.2, pp. 451–460. ISSN: 13652478.
DOI: 10.1111/1365-2478.12198.
Billings, Stephen and Dave Richards (1997). “Quality Control of Gridded Aeromagnetic
Data 1 Introduction 2 Fourier Transforms of Gridded Data”. In: Geophysics, p. 65.
Cooper, G. R.J. (2003). “Feature detection using sun shading”. In: Computers and Geo-
sciences 29.8, pp. 941–948. ISSN: 00983004. DOI: 10.1016/S0098-3004(03)00091-8.
Minty, Brian R.S. et al. (2003). “Merging airborne magnetic surveys into continental-scale
compilations”. In: Geophysics 68.3, pp. 988–995. ISSN: 00168033. DOI: 10.1190/1.
1581070.
Cheesman, Stephen, Ian MacLeod, and Greg Hopllyer (1998). “A new, rapid, automated
grid stitching algorithm”. In: Exploration Geophysics 29.3-4, pp. 301–305.
Blakely, Richard J. (Jan. 1995). Potential Theory in Gravity and Magnetic Applications.
Cambridge University Press. DOI: 10 . 1017 / cbo9780511549816. URL: /core / books /
potential-theory-in-gravity-and-magnetic-applications/348880F23008E16E663D6AD14A41D8DE.
Salem, Ahmed et al. (Dec. 2007). “Tilt-depth method: A simple depth estimation method
using first-order magnetic derivatives”. In: The Leading Edge 26.12, pp. 1502–1505.
ISSN: 1070485X. DOI: 10.1190/1.2821934.
Dewangan, Pawan et al. (2007). “Automatic interpretation of magnetic data using euler
deconvolution with nonlinear background”. In: Pure and Applied Geophysics 164.11,
pp. 2359–2372. ISSN: 00334553. DOI: 10.1007/s00024-007-0264-x.
Thompson, D. T. (Feb. 1982). “EULDPH: a new technique for making computer-assisted
depth estimates from magnetic data.” In: Geophysics 47.1, pp. 31–37. ISSN: 00168033.
DOI: 10.1190/1.1441278. URL: https://library.seg.org/doi/abs/10.1190/1.1441278.
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
71
==PAGE:82==
McGrath, P. H. and Peter J. Hood (Feb. 1970). “The dipping dike case: A Computer Curve-
matching method of magnetic interpretation”. In: Geophysics 35.5, pp. 831–848. ISSN:
19422156. DOI: 10.1190/1.1440132. URL: https://library.seg.org/page/policies/terms.
Kauristie, K. et al. (Mar. 2017). On the Usage of Geomagnetic Indices for Data Selection
in Internal Field Modelling. DOI: 10.1007/s11214-016-0301-0. URL: https://link.springer.
com/article/10.1007/s11214-016-0301-0.
Hinze, William J, Ralph R B Von Frese, and Afif H Saad (2018a). “10 Magnetization of
Earth materials”. In: Gravity and Magnetic Exploration, pp. 252–275. ISBN: 9780511843129.
– (2018b). 13 Magnetic anomaly interpretation, pp. 338–412. ISBN: 9780511843129.
Venkata Raju, D. Ch (Feb. 2003). “LIMAT: A computer program for least-squares inversion
of magnetic anomalies over long tabular bodies”. In: Computers and Geosciences 29.1,
pp. 91–98. ISSN: 00983004. DOI: 10.1016/S0098-3004(02)00108-5.
Nabighian, Misac N (1972). “THE ANALYTIC SIGNAL OF TWO-DIMENSIONAL MAG-
NETIC BODIES WITH POLYGONAL CROSS-SECTION: ITS PROPERTIES AND USE
FOR AUTOMATED ANOMALY INTERPRETATION t”. In: GEOPHYSICS 37.3. DOI:
10.1190/1.1440276. URL: https://library.seg.org/page/policies/terms.
Palacios, Rafael (2006). deg2utm - File Exchange - MATLAB Central. URL: https://www.
mathworks.com/matlabcentral/fileexchange/10915-deg2utm.
Manchuk, John G (2009). Conversion of Latitude and Longitude to UTM Coordinates.
Tech. rep. URL: http://www.gpsy.com/gpsinfo/geotoutm/.
Geosoft Inc. (2013). montaj GridKnit How-To Guide Getting Started with montaj GridKnit.
Tech. rep. URL: www.geosoft.com.
Blakely, Richard J, Gerald G Connard, and Julia B Curto (June 2016). “Tilt Derivative
Made Easy: Theory | Contour Line | Map”. In: URL: https://www.scribd.com/document/
435796395/Tilt-Derivative-Made-Easy-07-2016.
FitzGerald, Desmond, Alan Reid, and Philip McInerney (June 2004). “New discrimination
techniques for Euler deconvolution”. In: Computers and Geosciences 30.5, pp. 461–
469. ISSN: 00983004. DOI: 10.1016/j.cageo.2004.03.006.
Aster, Richard C., Brian Borchers, and Clifford H. Thurber (2013). Parameter Estimation
and Inverse Problems. Elsevier Inc. ISBN: 9780123850485. DOI: 10.1016/C2009-0-
61134-X.
MATLAB (2020). Solve nonlinear least-squares (nonlinear data-fitting) problems - MAT-
LAB lsqnonlin. URL: https://www.mathworks.com/help/optim/ug/lsqnonlin.html.
Stavrev, Petar Y. (Mar. 1997). “Euler deconvolution using differential similarity transfor-
mations of gravity or magnetic anomalies”. In: Geophysical Prospecting 45.2, pp. 207–
246. ISSN: 00168025. DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2478.1997.00331.x.
72
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
==PAGE:83==
A
Appendix
S1
S2
S3
Base level
−250.7691
−130.32
75.57
Trend shift 1
—
—
−0.1 −0.67x + 1.06y
Trend shift 2
−0.15 + 0.12x −0.05y
—
—
Trend shift 3
65.38 −0.03x −0.12y
—
—
Trend shift 4
—
−0.01x
—
Table A.1: Shows the polynomial applied to the gridded sub-surveys 1, 2 and 3 in order
to fit with sub-surveys 4.
Figure A.1: The total-anomaly intensity along the profile. The profile sampled the gridded
sub-survey individually and then sampled the merged grid. This plot shows the profile of
sub-surveys if the mag2CHAOS was not applied.
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
73
==PAGE:84==
Figure A.2: Full levelling of S2. Top-left shows the un-levelling S2. Top-right shows the
smooth regional field of R2. Bottom-left shows the levelling errors between the un-levelling
and the regional field. Bottom-right shows the levelled S2.
Figure A.3: Full levelling of S3. Top-left shows the un-levelling S3. Top-right shows the
smooth regional field of R3. Bottom-left shows the levelling errors between the un-levelling
and the regional field. Bottom-right shows the levelled S3.
74
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
==PAGE:85==
Figure A.4: Full levelling of S4. Top-left shows the un-levelling S4. Top-right shows the
smooth regional field of R4. Bottom-left shows the levelling errors between the un-levelling
and the regional field. Bottom-right shows the levelled S4.
Figure A.5: The depth to sources estimated by the tilt-depth method zoomed in on sub-
survey 3. The dots are the depths given by the colourbar. Notice the outlined features on
sub-survey 3. These are long straight features which could represent dykes.
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
75
==PAGE:86==
Figure A.6: Shows the contours of representative model for the inversion-based mod-
elling. Red dots indicates local minimums.
Figure A.7: The half-width results from Model 2 in the inverse-based dyke modelling.
Model 2 estimates the position, half-width and global remnant. The white lines are sur-
vey borders and the visual-dykes. The dots are the half-width estimates given by the
colourbar.
76
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
==PAGE:87==
Figure A.9: The merged sub-survey. The sub-surveys were merged at an altitude of
29.3meter above mean sea level. Black line is the profile line.
Figure A.8: Shows the contours of declination and inclination using Model 1 for the
inversion-based modelling. Red dots indicates local minimums.
Processing and analysis of drone-based magnetic data from Perros Guirec, France
77
==PAGE:88==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Centrifugevej, Building 356
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.space.dtu.dk
