==PAGE:1==
  
 
 
 
 
 
Approval Procedure for miRNAs 
as biomarkers for diabetes in FDA 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Master thesis: 
Approval Procedure for miRNAs as 
biomarkers for diabetes in FDA 
 
 
 
Supervisors: 
Ane Sofie Böhm Nielsen (Novo Nordisk) 
Peter Heegaard (Technical University of Denmark) 
 
 
 
 
Azadeh Pourzamani 
21.09.2020 
==PAGE:3==
2 
 
Thesis title: 
Approval Procedure for miRNAs as biomarkers for diabetes in FDA 
 
Master student: 
Azadeh Pourzamani (s151314) 
 
Supervisors: 
Ane Sofie Böhm Nielsen, Senior Director, RA Policy and Intelligence, Novo Nordisk 
Peter Heegaard, Professor, DTU Bioengineering 
 
ECTS: 
35 
 
Submission date:  
21nd of September, 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark (DTU) 
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine 
 
 
DTU Bioengineering 
Søltofte Plads, Building 202 
2800 Konges Lyngby 
Denmark 
Novo Nordisk 
RA Policy and Intelligence 
 
 
Regulatory Affairs 
Vandtårnsvej 108 
2860 Søborg 
Denmark 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
3 
 
Table of contents 
Preface ................................................................................................................................................ 4 
Abstract ............................................................................................................................................... 5 
List of abbreviations ............................................................................................................................ 6 
1 
Introduction ................................................................................................................................ 8 
2 
Background ............................................................................................................................... 10 
2.1 
Biomarkers ............................................................................................................................ 10 
2.1.1 
Biomarker performance parameters ................................................................................ 12 
2.1.2 
Biomarkers qualification process ...................................................................................... 13 
2.2 
Diabetes ................................................................................................................................ 15 
2.3 
Biomarkers of diabetes ......................................................................................................... 16 
3 
Methodology ............................................................................................................................. 19 
4 
Aim of project ........................................................................................................................... 21 
5 
Biology of miRNAs and their regulatory role in diabetes ......................................................... 22 
5.1 
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) ............................................................................................................ 22 
5.2 
Examples of potential miRNA based biomarkers of diabetes............................................... 24 
6 
Regulatory decision process for biomarkers in the FDA ........................................................... 29 
6.1 
Submission stages ................................................................................................................. 30 
6.2 
Evidentiary framework .......................................................................................................... 32 
7 
Analysis of the two submitted LOI to FDA ................................................................................ 40 
7.1 
Accepted LOI (Circulating biomarkers for diagnosis of NASH) ............................................. 40 
7.2 
Not accepted LOI (Blood eosinophil count) .......................................................................... 45 
8 
Discussion: Proposal for elements to be included in the evidentiary framework to qualify 
miRNAs as biomarkers for diabetes. ................................................................................................. 51 
9 
Future Outlook .......................................................................................................................... 56 
10 
References ............................................................................................................................ 57 
11 
Appendices ............................................................................................................................ 60 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
4 
 
Preface 
 
This master thesis serves as the final phase of the degree in Master of Science, in 
Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering, at Technical University of Denmark (DTU), 
and covers 35 ECTS points required to obtain the degree. The project work was 
carried out between the 1st of February and 30th of September, 2020, as collaboration 
between DTU Bioengineering, Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine and 
was supervised by Professor Peter Heegaard and Novo Nordisk, Department of 
Regulatory Affairs, Policy and Intelligence and also by supervised by Ane Sofie 
Böhm Nielsen. 
It is well indispensable for me to mention those people without whom this thesis 
project would not have been achieved. I would like to thank my supervisor  
Ane Sofie Böhm Nielsen for her greatly valuable collaboration and beneficial 
discussion. I would also like to thank the patience and guidance of Professor Peter 
Heegaard who has supported facilitating this thesis by his guidance on the structural 
execution.  Finally, I would like to show my gratitude to my beloved husband as he 
paved the way for me by his comprehensive support.  
 
==PAGE:6==
5 
 
Abstract 
Based on the statistical results released by International Diabetes Federation (IDF), 
the global diabetes prevalence in 2019 is estimated to have been 9.3% (463 million 
people) and is predicted to rise to 10.2% (578 million) by 2030. Furthermore, as 
announced by WHO, in 2016, an estimated 1.6 million deaths were directly caused 
by diabetes. Diabetes is a chronic, metabolic disease specified by upraised level of 
blood sugar, which, in the long run, triggers serious damage to the heart, blood 
vessels, eyes, kidneys and the nerves. The first diabetes diagnosis has an important 
role; if the disease is discovered at early stages (before irreversible outcomes), the 
getting tight control of the blood glucose might help prevent the worsening of the 
complications. When it comes to diabetes diagnosis, there are usually some 
shortcomings; usually, it is carried out once the irreversible damage has occurred. 
Thus, novel diagnostic methods are required to detect different modes of diabetes 
before the development of the disease. Circulating miRNAs are small non-coding 
RNAs, which are released in body fluids and are involved in regulating several 
developmental and physiological processes; their abnormal expression level has 
been related to growth of diseases including diabetes. So, they have been suggested 
in many studies as potential biomarkers in diagnosing diabetes. The current thesis 
has furnished comprehensive information on the potential use of miRNA signatures, 
particularly for diabetes. Furthermore, for miRNAs to be qualified as biomarkers for 
diagnosing diabetes, comprehensive Information on biomarker selection and 
validation, biomarker assay method validation and application, clinical validation 
and implementation must be submitted to the FDA and other responsible authorities 
designated as a reference for development and regulatory approval of a drug or 
therapeutic. The biomarker qualification process encompassing three sequential 
stages of LOI, QP and FQP is discussed in this thesis. The very master thesis ends up 
with a proposal for elements to be included in the evidentiary framework to qualify 
miRNAs as biomarkers for diabetes, which facilitates the biomarker qualification 
process for future utilization.  
==PAGE:7==
6 
 
List of abbreviations 
 
A2M 
Alpha 2 Macroglobulin 
ADA 
American Diabetes Association 
ASCOT 
Anglo Scandinavian Cardiac Outcomes Trial 
BQP 
Biomarker Qualification Program 
BEST 
Biomarkers, EndpointS, and other Tools 
CVD 
CardioVascular Disease 
CMVs 
Cell-derived Membrane Vesicles 
CDER 
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research 
CHI3L1 
Chitinase-3-Like Protein 1 
COPD 
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease 
COU 
Context Of Use 
CBQC 
COPD Biomarker Qualification Consortium 
DDTs 
Drug Development Tools 
FPG 
Fasting Plasma Glucose 
FDA 
Food and Drug Administration 
FNIH 
Foundation for the National Institutes of Health 
FFA 
Free Fatty Acid 
FQP 
Full Qualification Package 
HbA1c 
Hemoglobin A1c 
HDL 
High-Density Lipoproteins 
hESCs 
human Embryonic Stem Cells 
ICS 
Inhaled CorticoSteroids 
 IDF 
International Diabetes Federation 
LOI 
Letter Of Intent 
LDL 
Low-Density Lipoproteins 
miRNA 
micro RNA 
NAS  
NAFLD Activity Score 
==PAGE:8==
7 
 
NIH 
National Institutes of Health 
NPV 
Negative Predictive Value 
NGS 
Next-Generation Sequencing 
NAFLD 
Non- Alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease 
NIMBLE 
Non Invasive BioMarkers of MetaBolic Liver DiseasE 
NASH 
Non-Alcoholic SteatoHepatitis 
NIS4 
Non-Invasive Score 4 
OGTT 
Oral Glucose Tolerance Test 
OTC 
Over-The-Counter 
PPV 
Positive Predictive Value 
QP  
Qualification Plan 
RT-PCR 
Reverse Transcription-PCR  
SOP 
Standard Operating Procedure 
UTR 
Un-Translated Region 
VLDL 
Very-Low-Density Lipoprotein 
WHO 
World Health Organization 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:9==
8 
 
1 Introduction 
 
WHO has announced that approximately 422 million people around the world  have 
diabetes and that diabetes and its outcomes cause 1.6 million deaths each year. 
Diabetes is a chronic disease which is of three main types; Type1, Type 2 and 
Gestational diabetes.  
Presently, type 1 diabetes cannot be prevented; however, diagnosis of type 2 
diabetes at early stage would be possible and beneficial. Predicting type 2 diabetes 
leads to orchestrating effective approaches to prevent the disease and to prevent its 
complications. It is important to have an effective early-stage diagnosis of the disease 
to prevent both the prevalence and the worsening outcome of the progression. 
American Diabetes Association (ADA) expresses standard measurements to 
diagnose diabetes including OGTT, FPG and HbA1c. Although all of them or 
combination of them diagnoses diabetes, they suffer from disadvantages such as 
invasiveness, time-consuming, variability and poor sensitivity. Above all, the 
present methods are reliable for the detection of diabetes subjects or pre-diabetes 
cases that are mostly close to diabetes. Thus, there is a certain need for biomarkers 
which would detect individuals being at risk for the manifestation of type 2 diabetes 
at early stages. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) as short non-coding RNAs that inhibit target 
mRNA translation are highlighted in current researches due to their potential as 
biomarkers of diseases. Growing bodies of evidence propose that the expression 
signature of a specific set of miRNAs has changed in the progress of several diseases 
namely Diabetes [1], [2].  
The master thesis covers three main aims in the line with the use of miRNAs as 
biomarkers for early diagnosis diabetes. As the first aim, this project will review 
some promising circulating miRNAs and numbers of vigilant studies around them. 
The results of the review present that miRNAs are promising markers to dissolve 
novel pathway in the detection of diabetes. That is, in the near future, probably a 
==PAGE:10==
9 
 
miRNA or combination of miRNAs panel with the quiet high specificity and 
sensitivity and desired strength which can be used as a diagnostic or prognostic 
biomarker for diabetes will be found. This, however, needs to be qualified and 
accepted by the reference authorities such as FDA before use in drug development 
programs. As the second goal of the project, the biomarker qualification process 
includes three sequential stages of LOI, QP, FQP and related frameworks will be 
reviewed. In this regard, the strengths and the shortcomings of two submitted 
biomarker’s LOI and FDA comments on them will also be analyzed to make clear 
what determinants are evidence of the FDA decision-making rule. As the final aim, 
based on miRNAs features, the result of reviewing the FDA comments and 
guidelines the master thesis provides a suggestion on elements to be included in the 
evidentiary framework to qualify miRNAs as biomarkers for diabetes.  Overall, the 
main aim of the current project is to simplify the approval process for the involved 
companies that might be of interest to introduce miRNAs as biomarker for diabetes. 
 
 
==PAGE:11==
10 
 
2 Background 
 
2.1 Biomarkers 
A biomarker is an impartially measured and assessed indicator of normal biological 
processes, pathogenic processes, or pharmacological responses to therapeutic 
intervention. Biomarkers could be in the form of antibodies, microbes, DNA, 
RNA/miRNA, metabolites and / or proteins. Change of biomarker concentration, 
structure, and function may be connected with the start or progression of a disorder 
[3]. The biomarker different categories that was classified by the BEST (Biomarkers, 
EndpointS, and other Tools) can be seen in table 1. 
Various categories of biomarkers may help diagnose a sickness and predict later 
disease severity and outcomes. They could also be useful in the identification of the 
best therapy for a patient since they can monitor the safety or efficiency of treatment.  
A clinical trial’s ‚endpoints‛ are measurements of what happens to cases in the trial. 
To reach this measurement, researchers usually use clinical or surrogate endpoints. 
Clinical outcomes are the most reliable clinical trial endpoints as directly measure 
the effects of therapy on bodies ---whether they function better or the therapy 
increase the chance of life ---. In some clinical trials, Surrogate endpoints/biomarkers 
could be considered as a stand-in for, but not as a replacement of, clinical outcomes. 
For example Systolic blood pressure is a validated surrogate endpoint or biomarker 
that correlates with occurrence of stroke as a clinical outcome [4]. 
There are several benefits pertinent to using biomarkers/surrogate endpoints as 
clinical outcomes/endpoints in trials; in some cases that the clinical endpoints may 
be achieved after a long time, biomarkers can supply temporary evidence about the 
safety and efficacy of such treatments though more precise clinical data needs be 
collected. Biomarker usage as clinical endpoints reduces the risk of harm; 
furthermore, it draws smaller and more efficient studies and decreases the number 
of studied cases; the faster the new treatments are approved, the more effective trials 
==PAGE:12==
11 
 
will be done the faster the overall drug development process will grow. Drug 
development depends on biomarkers to evaluate efficacy and safety in order to get a 
drug on the market.  Biomarkers are used in basic, translational, and clinical research 
as well as in clinical settings to aid medical product development and inform patient 
care decisions [4]. 
 
Biomarker’s  Category 
Description 
Susceptibility/risk biomarker 
A biomarker that manifests the possibility for 
developing a disease or medical condition in subjects 
who does not currently have a clinically evident 
disease or the medical condition. 
Diagnostic biomarker 
A biomarker that discovers a disease or to discern 
people with subtypes of the disease. 
Monitoring biomarker 
A biomarker used to measure up constantly 
evaluating the condition of a disease or evidence of a 
medical product. 
Prognostic biomarker 
A biomarker to show the potential of a clinical event, 
or disease. 
Predictive biomarker 
These biomarkers used to distinguish people who are 
more prone  to experience a positive or destructive 
effect from exposure to a medical product or an 
environmental agent in comparison with similar cases 
without the intended biomarkers. 
Pharmacodynamic/Response 
biomarker 
A biomarker that shows the occurrence of a biological 
response  in an individual in exposure to  a medical 
product or an environment agent 
Safety biomarker 
The measurement of these biomarkers indicates the 
possibility, presence , or extent of toxicity as an 
unfavorable effect of a medical product or an 
environment agent 
Table1: The biomarkers categories based on BEST information [5] 
 
==PAGE:13==
12 
 
2.1.1 Biomarker performance parameters 
Biomarker assessment help improve the statistical evaluation and reporting of 
biomarker studies; biomarker assessment covers issues that researchers should be 
aware of when planning their studies, analysts when analyzing a paper and readers 
when reading results. For instance, despite its complications and difficulty, 
assessment of diagnostic biomarkers that are used for the critical decision of whether 
a subject has a specific medical condition for which treatment may be indicated or 
whether a case should be enrolled in a clinical trial studying a particular disease 
turns out to be highly important. The criteria for determining good biomarker 
candidates include strength (A strong link between the indicator and outcome), 
consistency (The correlation continues in different subjects, places, times and the 
like), plausibility ( Reliable mechanisms explain the association between the marker 
and the disease and the mode of action of the interference) and Coherence (The 
relation between the disease and the indicator should consistently be associated with 
the natural history of the disease and the marker). Specificity is one of the most 
critical issues in biomarkers assessment. It means how specifically the marker detects 
the disease or how is the rate of the false positive. The more rate of false-positive 
shows the biomarker's specificity to detect the disease is less. Sensitivity is also 
important; it shows the lowest amount of the markers which enables to detect the 
intended outcome [6]. 
The essential points of a diagnostic biomarker test validation are specificity and 
sensitivity; as a comprehensive diagnostic biomarker test, all patients_ with the 
disease or disease subset must be identified (100% sensitivity), and no patients 
without the disease would be diagnosed with the disease (100% specificity). 
However, in reality, no biomarker test has ideal clinical and analytical sensitivity 
and specificity, and trade-offs between these points should be accepted.  Aside from 
sensitivity and specificity, other quantifications of diagnostic test performance such 
as accuracy, precision, reproducibility, and repeatability need to be assessed [5], [7]. 
==PAGE:14==
13 
 
Positive predictive value (PPV); the rate of those who tested positive and actually 
have the disease or condition, and negative predictive value (NPV); the number of 
those who tested negative and truly do not have the disease or condition, are also 
critical to be noticed. 
Furthermore, when using paper as sources of evaluation of the clinical value of a 
biomarker and its role to the proposed use, it is crucial to take into account whether 
or not the published study applies to the intended situation. Plus, the limitations of 
the published studies should also be considered. For example:  the prevalence of the 
disease in the study population, size of the study population, selection of the cut-off, 
the impact of comorbidities, and selection of patients; whether they belong to the 
proposed-use population or not [7]. 
 
2.1.2 Biomarkers qualification process 
The competence of biomarkers is based on a formal regulatory process, that within 
the asserted context of use, a biomarker can be relied upon to have a particular 
application in medical product development and regulatory review. The regulatory 
review refers to processes used by regulatory bodies to supervise the rules, 
regulations, and other policies issued by governmental agencies. In regulated 
industries such as pharmaceuticals, medical devices, food industries and the like 
regulatory affairs controls the safety and efficacy of products in several areas such as 
pharmaceuticals, veterinary medicines, medical devices and on the like. Regulatory 
affairs`  function ensures that the companies supply products that are safe and make 
a valuable contribution to public health [8]. 
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is a federal organization of the United 
State, with the responsibility of maintaining the safety of public health by ensuring 
the safety, efficacy and security of human and veterinary drugs, biological products 
and medical devices.  
==PAGE:15==
14 
 
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER) as the largest of FDA's six centers 
is mainly responsible for the evaluation of new drugs_ prescription and 
nonprescription or over-the-counter (OTC) drugs_ before entering the market. CDER 
established the Biomarker Qualification Program (BQP) to work with external 
stakeholders, integrating and qualifying assessable and reliable biomarkers as drug 
development tools (DDT). 
BQP is the most common pathway to develop biomarkers as drug development tools 
providing a framework to guide requestors who develop biomarkers to be used in 
regulatory 
decision-making. 
Qualified 
biomarker 
means 
that 
biomarker 
measurement is feasible and reliable and supports a specific purpose in drug 
development [9]. 
  
 
==PAGE:16==
15 
 
2.2 Diabetes 
Diabetes is a chronic disease which is of three main types; Type 1 is an autoimmune 
disease, often diagnosed in childhood. In type 1, β-cells1  of the pancreatic islets are 
unable to produce insulin. Type 2 --- as the most common type--- is a metabolic 
disease that commonly occurs later in life. The basis of type 2 diabetes is on normal 
β‐cells,  but these cells are not function as normal and the number of the cells may be 
less than normal, which cause inability to cope with extreme functional demands. 
Lifestyle and genetic factors are amongst various factors which intensify this 
weakness. There are allelic variants of many genes that collectively have roles in the 
risk of type 2 diabetes development. These genes are mostly involved in β‐cells 
development, function, and survival. The more number of risk alleles an individual 
carries, the more aspects of β‐cells function is declined [10], [11]. Lack of physical 
activity, obesity or even the overweight could also increases the risk of type 2 
diabetes. Studies have demonstrated that there is link between obesity, insulin 
resistance [12]. Type 2 diabetes commonly starts with insulin resistance2 , in the 
increase of which genes/family history and lifestyle play a great role. Last, but never 
the least, gestational diabetes is a type of diabetes that happens at pregnancy. During 
the pregnancy, the placenta external link produces hormones that contribute to 
insulin resistance. If the body fails to sustain the level of insulin to overcome insulin 
resistance, gestational diabetes occurs. Overweight and obesity may accompany 
insulin resistance, thus, they may cause gestational diabetes. Genes and family 
history also increase the possibility of diabetes during pregnancy that can be 
explained by the more globally rate of gestational diabetes in African Americans, 
American Indians, Asians, and Hispanics/Latinas [13].  
                                                          
1 The pancreas is one of the organs in our body which is responsible to make hormones; it includes groups of 
cells which are called pancreatic islets (islets of Langerhans). Β‐cells are a subgroup of the pancreatic islet that 
makes the insulin. 
 
2Insulin resistance can be described as an inappropriately high level of plasma insulin needed to control 
metabolic homeostasis; when body cells_ muscles, fat, and liver _ do not react well to insulin and could not to 
use the blood glucose to produce energy (6, 7).  
==PAGE:17==
16 
 
There are several serious health problems associated with diabetes such as eye 
complication (e.g., retinopathy), kidney disease (nephropathy), non- alcoholic fatty 
liver disease (NAFLD), high blood pressure, stroke, cardiovascular ailments as well 
as diabetic coma arising from severe fluctuations in blood glucose. The risk of heart 
attacks and strokes in diabetes patient is two-to three-folds more than that of healthy 
individuals. Neuropathy (nerve damage), as another diabetes complication increases 
the infliction of foot ulcers, infection, and in severe cases, it will result in amputation. 
Diabetic retinopathy is a considerable reason for blindness; 2.6% of global blindness 
[14], [15]. 
 
2.3 Biomarkers of diabetes 
American Diabetes Association (ADA) expresses standard measurements to 
diagnose diabetes: 
1. Oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) is a using method to diagnose diabetes. 
For this test, the subject should be fast overnight, and the fasting blood sugar 
level is measured. After drinking a sugary liquid, blood sugar levels are 
tested periodically for the next two hours. After two hours, a blood sugar 
level of less than 140 mg/dL (7.8mmol/L) is normal, more than 200 mg/dL 
(11.1 mmol/L) is indicative of diabetes and the range between those two 
indicates pre-diabetes (individuals at high risk of developing diabetes).  
2. Fasting plasma glucose (FPG) test is also considered as a reference for 
diagnosing diabetes. A blood sample will be taken after an overnight fast 
(being fast for 8 hours). The test level less than 100 mg/dL (5.6 mmol/L) is 
normal. Between 100 to 125 mg/dL (5.6 to 6.9 mmol/L) is considered pre-
diabetes. Equal or above 126 mg/dL (7 mmol/L), on the repeating test, 
represents diabetes [16]. 
3. HbA1c is glycated hemoglobin; when hemoglobin (oxygen-carrying protein 
in red blood cells) joins with glucose in the blood, it becomes glycated.  The 
==PAGE:18==
17 
 
measurement of the glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) depicts the average blood 
sugar levels over a period of weeks/months. HbA1c is considered as a marker 
to diagnose diabetes. The elevated level of HbA1c can be an indicator to show 
poor control of blood glucose. The test level less than 42 mmol/L(< 0.6%) is 
normal, between 42 to 47 mmol/mol (6.0 to 6.4%) is assumed pre-diabetes, 
and more than 48 mmol/mol (> 6.5%) is an indication of diabetes [17]. 
 
The OGTT is one of standards using for diagnosing type 2 diabetes; however, it is 
not proper for mass screening since it is a time-consuming test with poor 
reproducibility of the results. Claiming that it is more convenient and has better 
reproducibility, the ADA suggested using FPG for diagnosis of diabetes. However, it 
also suffers from some cons; a single test is not reliable and must be repeated or do 
another type of screening tests. In comparison with the OGTT, the FPG is a less-
sensitive test. Being fast for eight hours is inconvenient as well. Moreover, FPG is not 
enough strong indicators of future CVD events, while 2-h OGTT and HbA1c are 
good predictors of CVD. Measurement of HbA1c could hence be regarded as an 
alternative approach to improve the detection of diabetes. In comparison with the 
OGTT and FPG, the HbA1c test is faster, is more convenient, does not require 
fasting, albeit it suffers from some obstacles[17]. Biological variability; A study was 
done by Kilpatrick et.al to estimate the natural potential of HbA1c as a screening test 
for type 2 diabetes by determining the biological variation in non-diabetic subjects. 
The results show that non-diabetic HbAlc values fluctuate markedly between 
subjects, while values in the same individual change little with time. This means that 
even HbA1c measurements have a limitation as a test for screening type 2 diabetes. 
By the same inter-individual differences in diabetic subjects, the case with the same 
glycemic control may vary by at least 1-2%, which has implications in setting HbA1c 
targets [18], [19]. Furthermore, Wiener et. al. study has shown that the levels of 
diagnostic sensitivity of HbA1c were not as high as the level of specificity reported. 
==PAGE:19==
18 
 
Although the differences may be related to glycated hemoglobin method differences, 
most of the available evidence proposes that HbA1c is slightly less sensitive than 
FPG for diagnostic purposes [20].  
Considering the above-mentioned limitations pertinent to the existing biomarkers 
for diabetes and all serious diabetic complications the identification of pre-diabetes 
or diabetes at early stages (before irreversible damage) to terminate the progression 
to diabetes and its serious complications is a public health priority. The lack of 
availability of reliable non-invasive tools of detection type 2 diabetes, at the early 
stages, represents a major barrier for the identification of subjects for 
pharmacological intervention and prevention of diabetic serious outcomes. The 
identification of such biomarkers would facilitate and accelerate the development of 
therapeutic interventions for diabetes.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:20==
19 
 
3 Methodology 
This thesis encompasses a narrative, evaluative literature review on analysis the 
literature reviews the body of literature, and also draws conclusions about the topic 
and identifies the gaps or variances in a body of knowledge within the subject of 
approval procedure for miRNAs as biomarkers for diabetes. The thesis provides a 
summary and analysis of the individual studies results, according to the defined 
aim: determining the role of miRNAs as biomarkers for diabetes. In this Project, 
inconsistencies and disagreements in the FDA considerations around the existing 
suggested biomarkers are looked into and some proposed documents and elements 
to acceptance miRNAs as biomarkers for diabetes are reflected upon.  
‚How-to‚ of the research and selection of the studies based on objectives are critical 
issues that should be considered when reading this thesis. Having been conducted in 
a pilot project as part of the thesis preparation, the thesis objectives must be defined 
as the first step; the very first aim is elucidating the role of miRNAs as biomarkers in 
diabetes. With this in mind, the next step consists of the first literature search on the 
topic which was carried out on Google, DTU Findit, PubMed, and through personal 
discussions with professional scientist who are involved in the ‚Biomarkers‛ topic at 
Novo Nordisk.  
As for the second aim of the thesis: Analysis of the regulatory process currently in 
force for biomarkers in the FDA, the FDA official website including many 
framework and guidance was considered as the main reference. It is noteworthy that 
the selection of these frameworks was also done on basis of discussion with the 
supervisor as a regulatory professional with considering of the relevance to topic. To 
reach the next aim of project, it was decided to review and to analyze existing 
documents around the two submitted biomarkers to FDA. Through the search on the 
list of qualified biomarkers, no final accepted biomarker were found close to the 
topic of the dissertation, so we went to the list of submitted LOI to the FDA 
biomarker qualification program. The accepted LOI that was reviewed in this thesis 
==PAGE:21==
20 
 
was a miRNA as a biomarker, however for NASH which is a metabolic disorder. So 
there are many similarities with the intended aim of the project --miRNAs for 
diabetes--- and it would be a good choice for analyses the FDA comments. It was the 
only one related to the project topic, thus the next selection should have the 
advantage to be selected. The not-accepted one was elected since we wanted to 
found the gaps and weaknesses of the submitted documents. Within the list of not-
accepted LOI for BQP, the blood eosinophil counts for COPD was the only one 
which has been rejected two times. That is, besides the FDA comments, the 
applicants' responses also available and it would be informative. Finally, a proposal 
on factors to be included in the evidentiary framework to qualify miRNAs as 
biomarkers for diabetes  is suggested based on the results from the above reviews, 
discussion with supervisors and writer's (the master student`s ) own impressions. 
 
 
==PAGE:22==
21 
 
4 Aim of project 
 
This master thesis has focused on the reviewing process with the aim of improving 
and developing the regulatory process for miRNAs as potential biomarkers to 
diagnose diabetes at early stages. By using the suggested system for data collecting, 
the process of gathering and submitting the documents for qualifying miRNAs may 
be more manageable, and the chance of approval will increase. The aims consist of:  
1. Elucidating the role of miRNAs as potential biomarkers for diabetes. 
 In this regard, the pros and cons of present methods which use to diagnose diabetes 
have been analyzed, the regulatory role of miRNAs in diabetes based on several 
studies has explained to finally, clarify whether miRNAs could assume as valuable 
biomarkers for diabetes.  
2. Analysis of the regulatory frameworks currently in force for biomarkers in the 
FDA.  
The approval process for biomarker qualification and evidentiary framework for 
biomarkers in FDA was investigated. The submitted documents and FDA comments 
and considerations regarding the two submitted LOI to the FDA have been reviewed 
to reach an overview of what kinds of documents would be notable in regulatory 
decision- making.  
3. Define a proposal on elements to be included in the evidentiary framework to 
qualify miRNAs as biomarkers for diabetes in the FDA in the future.  
Comparing miRNAs characteristics with approved biomarkers and investigating the 
documents considered by the FDA was led to propose a suggestion on elements of 
the evidentiary framework that must be included to qualify miRNAs as biomarkers 
for diabetes. 
 
==PAGE:23==
22 
 
5 Biology of miRNAs and their regulatory role in diabetes 
 
5.1 MicroRNAs (miRNAs)  
MiRNAs are small non-coding RNAs, accounting for 1–3% of the mammalian 
genome with about 19-25 nucleotides generated from a well-organized RNA 
processing event. More than 2000 miRNAs have thus far been discovered in humans. 
MiRNAs normally perform post-transcriptional regulation by pairing with the 3’- 
un-translated region (UTR) of target mRNA(s) to regulate mRNA degradation or 
translation, and they are involved in many physiological processes, such as:  cellular 
development, proliferation and differentiation, metabolism and homeostasis. 
MiRNAs that originate from genomic regions, firstly transcribed into pre-miR (an 80-
120 nucleotides primary transcripts). This process is done in the nucleus by RNase III 
‚Drosha‛. These pre-miRNAs are exported to the cytoplasm via Exportins and later 
processed into miRNAs by Dicer (an endonuclease). The mature miRNAs will 
thereafter be assembled into the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC) to present 
their function as an expression regulator. MiRNAs have developed as important 
regulatory non-coding RNAs that harmonize cellular responses to physiological 
disorders and disease conditions. An increasing body of literature emphasizes the 
important roles of miRNAs as biomarkers in diagnosing several diseases such as 
diabetes [3], [21]. 
Circulating miRNAs which are released in body fluids can be found in saliva, serum, 
plasma, as well as in the milk. It could be the result of some events such as: passive 
leakage from cells due to injury, apoptosis, etc., active secretion by cell-derived 
membrane vesicles (CMVs) like exosomes (Exosomal miRNAs) or active secretion 
via a protein-miRNA complex (Non-exosomal miRNAs). Extracellular vesicles (EVs) 
that work as carrier and is produced by cells, based on the size and biogenesis 
include three type exosomes, microvesicles (MVs), and apoptotic bodies. Exosomes 
are the smallest EVs which may carry several types of molecules, such as lipids, 
proteins, lipid rafts, mRNAs, miRNAs, and other non-coding RNAs [3]. Circulating 
==PAGE:24==
23 
 
exosomal miRNAs as the source for biomarker development might have more 
advantages in compare with non-exosomal, cell-free, or whole unfractionated 
samples. I) They are stable because of their packaging in vesicles (e.g. in exosomes), 
and their resistance to the effect of ribonucleases. This stability means that they are 
long-lived in biological fluids and are therefore suggested as ideal diagnostic and 
prognostic biomarkers [22]. II) Circulating miRNAs are tissue-specific (in terms of 
type and concentration). For instance, the miR-378 family is majorly expressed in the 
muscle and myocardium, while miR- 449c-3p and miR-449b-3p are specific to the 
spleen and miR-449c-5p and miR-449b-5p are highly expressed in the kidney. 
Accordingly, different diseases may have different circulating miRNA profiles 
which enable the analysis of low-abundance proposed molecules in a less complex 
environment [21], [22]. III) They are released in body fluids and the collection of 
body fluids such as blood derivatives, saliva, or urine is easy to make, so circulating 
exosomal miRNAs are easily accessible and non-invasive markers. They can be 
measured by using collected patient samples with standard blood gathering 
techniques which provides a mechanism to collect critical patient data with normal, 
noninvasive procedures, however, the low amount of circulating miRNAs triggers 
challenges for proper quantification and detection. The efficiency and reliability of 
detecting miRNAs in plasma and serum samples is important, and standard 
methods to detect miRNAs in liquid biopsies are critical. Three main methods are 
used to evaluate the expression levels of miRNAs, namely;  real-time reverse 
transcription-PCR 
(RT-PCR), 
microarray 
hybridization 
and 
next-generation 
sequencing (NGS ) [23]. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:25==
24 
 
5.2 Examples of potential miRNA based biomarkers of diabetes 
 
Many studies have done to show circulating miRNAs have been proposed as being 
useful in diagnostics as biomarkers for diseases.  In this section, some studies and 
published literature will be reviewed, with the aim of clarifying the possible role of 
certain miRNAs as biomarkers for the diagnosis of type 2 diabetes at early stages. 
Pancreatic β-cells play a crucial role in glucose homeostasis by secretion of insulin. 
Some of the miRNAs affect β-cells by the regulation of cell survival and apoptosis, 
proliferation, differentiation, or function, especially insulin secretion.  
MiRNAs target cell apoptosis-related genes (e.g, Bax) and the anti-apoptotic gene 
(e.g, Bcl-2) to regulate β-cells survival and apoptosis. A study by Belgard et al is 
manifested that up-regulating of the miR-200 family in mice causes β-cells apoptosis 
and lethal type 2 diabetes by indirect activation of the pro-apoptotic genes Trp53 and 
Bax [24]. 
MiRNAs have shown positive and negative affect in β-cells proliferation. For 
example miR-375 which is mainly expressed in both human and mouse pancreatic β-
cells affect the β-cell by different pathways. MiR-375 targets some of the cell growth 
and proliferation-associated genes, such as Cadm1, Id3, Smarca2, Aifm1, and the 
like. [25]. Based on Poy et al. study in miR-375 knockout mice, the β-cell mass was 
affected; miR-375 deletion leads to a 1.7-fold increase in the pancreatic cell number 
in comparison with that of the controls [26]. In addition, miR-17 targets Menin, an 
important protein in the regulation of gene transcription, β-cells cycle, and 
apoptosis. So as the study by Yaxi Chen et al also approves , the miR-17 promotes 
pancreatic β-cells proliferation [27]. 
Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) have the potential to differentiate into many 
adult cell types, based on law experiments, the human body is prohibited, so human 
embryonic stem cells (hESCs) are used as the best alternative. MiRNAs are 
developing as key regulators of hESC differentiation and embryonic development. A 
==PAGE:26==
25 
 
study was done by Hinton et al that investigated the expression level of miRNAs in 
the differentiation of hESCs and definitive endoderm to pancreatic lineages. The 
results manifested that miR-375 could play a critical role in early development since 
it is up-regulated in definitive endoderm formation. [28]. In Chen et. al. study 
miRNAs from T3pi (pancreatic islet-like cell clusters derived from T3 cells) were 
analyzed and compared with those of undifferentiated hESCs. The results have 
shown that these cells (T3pi) have a higher level of expression of miR-186, miR-199-a 
and miR-339, therefore theses miRNAs may have critical roles in the development of 
the pancreas and differentiation of β-cells [29]. Late researches by Kredo-Russo et. al. 
have also confirmed that miR-7 and miR-375 play important role in pancreatic β-
cells differentiation and development [30]. Two studies by Shaer et. al. on miR-7, and 
by Nathan, G et.al on miR-375 are done in vitro that have shown stimulate the 
expression of miR-7 or miR-375 helps to differentiate human Pluripotent Stem Cells 
(hPSCs) into induced Pluripotent Stem Cells (iPSCs). These findings support the 
theory of the role of miR-375 and miR-7 in the regulation of the human β-cell 
phenotype. Based on the finding,  miR-375 and miR-7 could be assumed as 
regulators to facilitate the generation of functional insulin-producing cells following 
the ex-vivo expansion of human islet cells [31], [32]. Additionally, studies have 
confirmed there are other potential miRNAs that are involved in human pancreatic 
islet differentiation and development, as well; for example miR-30d, let-7e, miR-21, 
miR-9, and miR-376 [33]. 
 
 
==PAGE:27==
26 
 
MiRNAs are also associated with the glucose-regulated insulin secretion of β-cells. 
MiR-375 targets the MTPN (a gene encoding myotrophin).  Myotrophin is a protein 
which exocytoses the insulin granules and regulates the insulin secretion of β-cell. 
Moreover, miR-375 directly affects PDK1 mRNA; PKD1 is a gene involved in 
activation of the PI3-Akt pathway which affects glucose stimulation, the expression 
of the insulin gene and DNA synthesis in β-cells. Thus, miR-375 may be  assumed as 
a regulator of the insulin secretion of β-cells [25]. Gomes et al. study on miR-29a has 
shown miR-29 down-regulates insulin secretion as they directly target Stx-1a; Stx-1a 
is 
a 
t-SNARE 
protein 
associated 
with 
insulin 
exocytosis 
[34]. 
Pullen T.J et al study has also proven that miR-29a contributes to the silencing of 
monocarboxylate transporter 1 (Mct1), which may affect insulin secretion [35]. 
Tao Zhang et al study has revealed that the miR-126 was the only miRNAs that their 
expression level is significantly decreased in pre-diabetes and type 2 diabetes. 
Although miR-15a, miR-223, and miR-29b have also shown changing expression 
levels in type 2 diabetes cases, there is no significant correlation between any of them 
and type 2 diabetes. The ROC curve analysis manifested that miR-126 identifies 
individuals with diabetes from non-diabetes cases with an AUC of 0.8056 (P < 0.001). 
Further, the evaluation of the performance of logistic regression has confirmed that 
the sensitivity is 77.78% and specificity is 66.67%. Based on the findings, the authors 
adopted a cut-off point of plasma miR-126 level in individuals with normal blood 
glucose levels (less than 35) that predicts they are more likely to become diabetes in 
the next 2 years. The most critical aspect of this result is that the miR-126 was 
changed before the manifestation of type 2 diabetes. It could be a predictor at the 
early stages of diabetes before the irreversible complications [36].  
Many evidence shows that circulating miRNAs not only have the potential in 
predicting the onset of diabetes itself but also possess pre-clinical significance for the 
assessment of diabetic complications. For instance, diabetic retinopathy is an eye 
disease that can trigger eyesight problems and final blindness.  Previous studies by 
==PAGE:28==
27 
 
Pastukh et al assumed the miR-122 level could change in different stages of diabetic 
retinopathy, with a considerable down-regulation in the Proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy (PDR). Quantifying the miR-122 level regularly in people with diabetes 
could help the staging of the diabetic retinopathy [37]. Moreover, the Jordan et al 
research indicates that miR-192 may reflect diabetic nephropathy pathogenesis --- 
Diabetic nephropathy (diabetic kidney disease) is kidney damage that could be an 
outcome of diabetes, a high level of glucose can cause kidney. MiR-192 targets and 
suppresses ZEB2. ZEB2 is controlling transforming growth factor (TGF)‐β activity in 
the high-glucose environment of diabetic nephropathy and could be important to 
monitor and prevent diabetic nephropathy advancement [38]. Non-alcoholic fatty 
liver disease (NAFLD) is a metabolism syndrome in which non-alcoholic reasons 
contribute to increasing fat in the liver and associated with type 2 diabetes and 
atherosclerotic vascular disease. Diabetes patients have 4 to 11 fold higher risk of 
developing NAFLD. A survey by Dan Ye et.al. was done to show that whether the 
alterations in circulating miRNAs affect the NAFLD progression. In this study, 
plasma miR-17, miR-20a, miR-20b, and miR-122 were compared in type 2 diabetes 
patients with and in those without NAFLD. The results presented that miRNAs 
increased in liver NAS (NAFLD Activity Score), and this elevation can be detected 
earlier in comparison with existing markers such as FPG, OGTT, triacylglycerol (TG) 
and the like. Data showed plasma miRNAs have the potential to early diagnose and 
elaborately assess the risk of NAFLD in type 2 diabetes subjects [39].  
Ectopic lipid collection in the liver is one of the hinders insulin signaling and 
increases hepatic insulin resistance that could be assumed as one of the diabetes 
causes. Since prolonged hyperlipidemia has been connected with progressive β-cell 
dysfunction and β-cell apoptosis, it resulting in impaired insulin production. (26)The 
most abundant miRNA in the liver is miR-122. It has been involved in the regulation 
of lipid homeostasis, free fatty acid (FFA) metabolism, and lipogenesis. Plus, miR-
122 specifically is crucial for cholesterol synthesis and very-low-density lipoprotein 
==PAGE:29==
28 
 
(VLDL) secretion in the liver. Hence, scientists were attracted to clarify the role of 
miR-122 in metabolic disease. A study by Peter Willeit et.al was done that managed 
a series of examinations in the prospective Bruneck Study, the randomized 
controlled Anglo-Scandinavian Cardiac Outcomes Trial (ASCOT), and experiments 
in mice and cell culture; with combining lipidomics, proteomics, and miR-122 data. 
The results that are confirmed by in vivo and in vitro tests show the miR-122 level is 
higher in people with metabolic syndrome or type 2 diabetes but not in those with 
cardiovascular disease (CVD). The circulating miR-122 has a correlation with lipid 
subspecies which includes saturated and monounsaturated fatty acids. The miR-122 
level has a direct correlation with main lipids (triglycerides, LDL cholesterol, and 
HDL cholesterol), and by effect, cholesterol-lowering statin therapy (12-months, 
atorvastatin 10 mg) significantly reduces the serum level of miR-122. It reduced in 
the supernatant of atorvastatin-treated murine hepatocytes and serum of 
atorvastatin-treated wild-type mice. [40], [41]. 
By and large, the results of numerous surveys on miRNAs as biomarkers for 
diabetes indicate that miRNAs and their target genes compose a complex regulatory 
network that is involved in the regulation of pancreatic ß-cell actions and the 
abnormality in the regulation of miRNAs play crucial roles in the start and progress 
of diabetes. Moreover, recent studies confirm that miRNAs exist both inside and 
outside cells, so exosomal circulating miRNAs turn into an attractive choice for non-
invasive biomarkers for the diagnosis and prognosis of diabetes. As promising 
disease biomarkers, miRNAs manifest convincing advantages: non-invasiveness, 
stable in biological fluid, tissue-specific and the most important is that miRNAs 
could be a predictor at the early stages of diabetes before the irreversible 
complications, however, the desired specificity and sensitivity in miRNAs test not 
yet attain, and the further research is needed.  
 
==PAGE:30==
29 
 
6 Regulatory decision process for biomarkers in the FDA 
 
Drug Development Tools (DDTs) are methods, materials, or measures that have the 
potential to promote drug development. One example could be biomarkers. To 
support DDT development efforts, FDA established qualification programs for 
biomarkers. The purpose of the Biomarker Qualification Program (BQP) is to work 
with external stakeholders to improve biomarkers as drug development tools. 
Qualified biomarkers promote the efficiencies and innovation in drug development 
followingly  advance the public health. 
Owing to the fact that biomarkers have long been used in drug development, one 
approval pathway for biomarkers is the use of a biomarker as part of the 
development of a specific investigational new drug or a biologic.  Regulatory 
approval via this process is assigned to biomarkers that can be used for that specific 
drug. The data for this accepted biomarker can be used by other drug companies if 
the biomarker finally proves to have more generalized applicability. 
Another approval pathway for biomarkers is the Biomarker Qualification Program 
(BQP). Literally, this road qualifies a biomarker for a particular context of use.  A 
qualified biomarker will be openly available and applicable for any drug 
development program for which the context of use is proper --- devoid of any need 
to review the information. 
All pathways have strengths and weaknesses; however, based on some reasons and 
points such as: the resources are available, the type of biomarker, and opportunities 
for collaboration with others it is decided which pathway be more appropriate for 
which biomarker, albeit, this selection is not always clear in early development 
stages [9]. 
 
 
==PAGE:31==
30 
 
6.1 Submission stages 
 
After enacting the 21st Century Cures Act on December 2016, the new Section 507 
Qualification of Drug Development Tools was added to the FDA which instates an 
updated process for biomarker qualification. This novel approval process includes 
three submission stages that can be seen in Fig. 1; they are: the Letter of Intent (LOI), 
the Qualification Plan (QP), and the Full Qualification Package (FQP). Based on 
some factors --- like scientific competency of the qualification submission--- FDA 
decides to accept or reject a qualification submission at each stage. Acceptance of any 
step by FDA means that the requestor is allowed to proceed to the next step. 
The LOI presents the primary information that can include general data about the 
biomarker, the proposed context of use (COU), beside the explanation of how the 
biomarker benefits the drug development need. The LOI will be accepted, if the 
biomarker has the potential to manage an unmet need in drug development. 
Afterward, the requester will be asked to submit a qualification plan (QP). 
The Qualification Plan (QP) provides supportive information to qualify the 
biomarker for the proposed context of use (COU). It depicts accurate data on the 
propriety of the biomarker measurement method, a summary of the studies and 
study designs for subsequent studies to confirm the potential of the biomarker in 
drug development. The QP will be further analyzed to determine whether the plan 
to support the qualification of the biomarker is acceptable or not. 
The final stage of submission data is FQP. The FQP carries all collected data to 
support the qualification of biomarker for the proposed COU. The FQP is the basis of 
FDA final decision [42], [43]. 
==PAGE:32==
31 
 
 
Fig 1: The three sequential stages of biomarkers qualification plan in FDA 
 
 
==PAGE:33==
32 
 
6.2 Evidentiary framework 
Historically, a biomarker is approved based on accumulated evidence that leads to 
the acceptance of the potential of the biomarker in drug development. This evidence 
was deemed as part of specific drug development. The challenge was the lack of 
regulatory processes to evaluate the wider use of the biomarker. Although the 
establishment of the legacy (pre-Cures Act) Biomarker Qualification Program by the 
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research in 2007 was helpful, it has been hindered 
by the lack of a clear, predictable, and precise regulatory framework for the type and 
level of evidence needed to support regulatory decision-making using biomarkers. 
Thus, the Evidentiary Framework Guidance for Industry and FDA Staff was 
updated in December 2018. This guidance is a supplementary step towards 
informing future guidance that will specifically address this need. It is now broadly 
applicable to all biomarker qualification submissions regardless of the type of 
biomarker or context of use (COU). Therefore, requests for the qualification of a 
biomarker should follow the current evidentiary framework. Overall, the three 
Sequential Stages; LOI, QP and FQP describes the process of getting a biomarker 
qualified at FDA – and the guidance with the evidentiary framework describes the 
content of a biomarker development program – and mostly the content in the FQP. 
All FDA’s guidance documents explain the Agency’s current thinking on a subject; it 
means that they are recommendations, not legal responsibilities [43]. 
The framework as can be seen in Fig .2 includes:  
1. Describing the drug development need (Needs assessment)  
2. Defining the COU (Context of Use),  
3. Considering the expected benefits of the biomarker intended to be  qualified 
for use (Benefit)  
4. Considering the possible risks correlated with the proposed use of the 
biomarker in a drug development program (Risk) 
==PAGE:34==
33 
 
 
Fig 2: Summary of the content of the FDA evidentiary framework [43] 
 
Needs assessment 
The needs assessment is a comprehensive description of why a biomarker is needed 
for drug development. The needs assessment should  
 Describe, where there is an unmet medical need, the use of biomarkers may 
advance drug development. The degree of an unmet medical need in the 
related condition should be considered; the higher the unmet need, the more 
efficient the use of the intended biomarker. 
 Represent the current drug development perspective, usage and limitations of 
existing biomarkers versus the added value of the new biomarker. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:35==
34 
 
Context of Use 
Based on section 507 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FD&C Act), the 
phrase ‘context of use’ demonstrates the condition in which the biomarker (as a drug 
development tool) will be used in drug development and regulatory review. The 
COU is a brief report of a biomarker's defined use in drug development. Each 
biomarker qualification application should focus on a single COU because different 
supportive data are needed for different COU. 
COU covers two components: 
 The biomarker category  
 The biomarker’s proposed use in drug development [43]. 
 
The biomarker category  
In the spring of 2015, the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and FDA worked 
together coming up with the development of the BEST (Biomarkers, EndpointS, and 
other Tools), resource with the aim of improving communication, aligning 
expectations, and improving scientific understanding. The BEST glossary provides a 
common understanding of the issues in communication on topics related to 
biomarkers. The BEST glossary periodically updated with adding terms and 
clarifying data, has classified biomarkers in seven biomarker categories (can be 
reached in table 2) [5]. 
 
 
==PAGE:36==
35 
 
The biomarker’s proposed use in drug development 
The proposed use in drug development must include, as suitable: I) Purpose of use 
in drug development. For example ‚The selected biomarker ‚panel‛ (e.g., NIS-4, 
OWLiver®, ProC3/C6, ELF, or combination thereof) is a diagnostic enrichment 
biomarker intended for use, in conjunction with clinical factors, to identify patients 
likely to have liver histopathologic findings of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH).‛ 
II) Recommended stage of drug development (e.g. drug development clinical trials 
focused on pre-cirrhotic stages of NASH). III)  Clinical trial size or model system 
(e.g., patients with a nonalcoholic fatty liver disease activity score (NAS) ≥4 and liver 
fibrosis stages 2 or 3 (by Brunt/Kleiner scale) [43], [44]. 
COU can be speculated as the first step of the qualification of a biomarker. Owing to 
the fact that the gathering data to support a biomarker for qualification program is a 
time-consuming process, at the first step applicants could focus more on qualifying a 
biomarker for a COU. This process later follows the accumulation of further 
evidence that may help qualify the biomarker for a COU with a more expanded 
scope in the future [42]. 
 
Assessment of Benefits and Risks 
To get the acceptance of a biomarker as a qualified one, the requester should depict a 
crystal-clear description of the expected risks, benefits and the possible risk 
mitigation efforts of the biomarker for the intended COU. The balance of these data 
(risk, benefits, and risk mitigation strategies) plays an important role in the decision 
around the strength of evidence.  
Benefits: If the biomarker usage benefits the patients engaging in the clinical trial( 
for example a safety biomarker that identifies toxicity earlier) or general drug 
development and regulatory decision-making( for example decreasing the sample 
==PAGE:37==
36 
 
size in the clinical trial by using a  prognostic biomarker which enriches patient 
population)  , it may be considered as a beneficial biomarker for use in drug 
development.  
Risks: The potential risk of a biomarker could mean the consequences of the 
situation in which the relation between the biomarker and outcome of interest does 
not indicate what it is expected to show. It is firmly related to the biomarker 
category and the proposed COU. Where one exists, the imprecise or incorrect 
prediction of the risk (e.g. toxicity) purports a risk where none exist as both are 
considered as potential risk of a biomarker. 
Risk mitigation strategies: The possible risks of biomarkers may be relieved; as an 
instance, a prognostic biomarker expected to be used in enrichment clinical trials 
may fail to identify rapid progression cases. In such a case, an interim analysis for 
sample size re-estimation may be a risk mitigation strategy.   
Generally, a biomarker developer should answer these questions to specify the 
possible risk and benefits of the desired biomarker for intended COU: 
 How do the existing biomarkers for the proposed COU work in comparison 
with the novel biomarker? Does the biomarker potential to add value to drug 
development? 
 What are the foreseen consequences if the biomarker is fails to function 
properly? What are the mitigation strategies? [42] 
 
Evidence to support COU 
Evidence to support qualification includes data to support clinical validation and 
analytical validation. Ostensibly iterative and dependent on one another, clinical 
validation and analytical validation are separate processes. The precision of the 
==PAGE:38==
37 
 
analytical and clinical validation conducted for biomarker qualification must 
support the utility of the proposed COU 
Clinical validation is a set of data that provide evidence for the biomarker's relation 
with the outcome of interest in the desired COU. This report should cover what is 
known about the biomarker’s role in the outcome pathway of interest, information 
about the pathophysiology and molecular bases of the disease, as well as, the 
biomarker's position in the disease pathway. Altogether, these data sets should 
verify that the correlation between the biomarkers and the outcome of interest is 
acceptable for the COU. The data of correlation between the biomarker and clinical 
outcomes should come from multiple independent data sources and supported by 
statistical analyses.  
The evaluation of the degree and reliability of relation between a biomarker and an 
outcome of interest is the backbone of statistical analyses in biomarker qualification.  
There are the different statistical procedure for estimating the relationship between 
the biomarker and clinical outcome of interest; for example,  in the case of binary 
outcome measures such as the presence or absence of disease, clinical sensitivity and 
specificity, and positive and negative predictive values or evaluating receiver 
operating characteristic curves can be used. Regression models are used in 
continuous outcome measurement, such as disease progression. After establishing 
the relationship between biomarker and outcome of interest, some cut-offs3  on a 
continuous biomarker can be considered. Comparing the clinical outcomes of at-risk 
individuals with each different biomarker cut-off will help to select the best cutoffs. 
In some cases that selection of specific cut-off may not be fit, describing a spectrum 
of threshold values for the biomarker could be more appropriate. Due to the lack of 
set quantitative criteria to show the strength of the association between biomarker 
and outcome of interest, criteria based on parameters such as the threshold values 
                                                          
3 Cut-off is the value limitation for biomarker tests, which at or above it, a test result is defined to be positive 
(or in a specific category) and the value below which the result is determined to be negative (or in a different 
category). 
==PAGE:39==
38 
 
for sensitivity and specificity, and the presence of a gradient can be used. These data 
can provide confidence that the relationship is relevant, reliable, and statistically 
strong. Furthermore, supportive data should be discussed to show whether a robust 
biological reason supports the theory of the biomarker’s role in the desired COU and 
whether the results from one investigation or there are various evidence. Overall, the 
supportive data must be strong enough to support the association between the 
biomarker and the clinical outcome and consequently assert the biomarker 
qualification [43], [45]. 
Analytical validation confirms that the performance characteristics of the biomarker 
tests are acceptable for the desired COU. Biomarkers will be accepted independent 
of the method of measurement; in other words, the qualification of a biomarker does 
not equal the approval of a diagnostic device for use in clinical practice. Likewise, 
the acceptance of a biomarker test by the Center for Devices and Radiological Health 
or by Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER) does not mean that the 
biomarker is qualified for use in drug development. However, the relevant 
performance properties of the biomarker tests need to be assessed by analytical 
validation studies. That is, the appropriate method validation should be done in 
early clinical studies so that these analytical results can be used to evaluate whether 
the method affords the sensitivity, precision, and robustness of the assay.  In a 
biomarker test as an evaluation system, three main parts are involved: Source or 
materials for measurement, an assay for obtaining the measurement and method 
which is a criterion for interpreting those measurements. All of these components 
should be assessed in the analytical validation studies and concluded to be 
admissible. For example, for a radiographic or physiologic biomarker, measurement 
sources, including sample collection, preparation and storage protocols, must be 
assessed based on analytical validation. Moreover, other biomarker assay 
components such as supplies, equipment, software and instructions should be 
established and strictly followed during validation testing to ensure acceptability. 
==PAGE:40==
39 
 
Further details such as reagent versions, lot numbers and software versions also 
should be considered since these factors help find modifications to the test and could 
alter performance. Biomarker measurements are represented in various ways: 
directly from a biomarker test or by an interpretation of biomarker test results (e.g., 
radiographic image analysis and the combination of individual biomarker 
measurements in a defined algorithm to determine a composite biomarker score). 
Reliable, objective and acceptable interpretation should be confirmed in the 
analytical validation studies; otherwise, chances are error introduced into the 
biomarker analysis [43], [46]. Fig .3 illustrates a biomarker validation approach. 
  
 
Fig 3: Biomarker validation approach [43] 
 
==PAGE:41==
40 
 
7 Analysis of the two submitted LOI to FDA 
 
In this part of project, two submitted LOI will be reviewed, one of which was 
accepted by the FDA while the other was rejected.  The FDA comments on both LOI 
will be analyzed to make clear what factors are critical through the FDA decision-
making process. 
7.1 Accepted LOI (Circulating biomarkers for diagnosis of NASH) 
Biomarker Project Information 
Circulating Biomarkers for Diagnosis of Non-Alcoholic Steatohepatitis (NASH), is a 
diagnostic biomarker that includes the selected biomarker panel (NIS-4, OWLiver®, 
ProC3/C6, ELF, or combination thereof). The requesting organization is Foundation 
for the National Institutes of Health Biomarkers Consortium (FNIH) and Non 
Invasive BioMarkers of MetaBolic Liver DiseasE (NIMBLE) supports the project.  
LOI submission Date (original) 
02/26/2019 
LOI submission Date (updated) 
10/15/2019 
LOI Accepted Date 
February 10, 2020 
 
The submitted LOI from FNIH to qualify the intended biomarker includes needs 
assessment and COU, followed by adding information for each one of the four 
biomarkers to be tested as part of the study. The FDA accepted the LOI and believes 
that there is an unmet drug development need and that the development of the 
proposed biomarker has the potential to identify patients for inclusion in 
investigational NASH drug clinical trials. The FDA’s main comment was that before 
the Qualification Plan (QP) is submitted, it must be clear which biomarker(s) it is 
desired to be qualify. If the qualification of multiple biomarkers is intended, 
guidelines for use and interpretation of the proposed biomarkers should hence be 
provided. 
==PAGE:42==
41 
 
 
Drug Development Need (Needs assessment) 
The NIMBLE’s LOI covers all needs assessment requirement:  
In the first step, the very LOI describes the disease and its subgroup. Briefly but 
bright explains what the disease is and what its progress stages are. Afterward, the 
LOI explains the unmet need; a public health priority in this regard could be the 
identification of cases at risk of progression to cirrhosis and clinically meaningful 
adverse outcomes and the development of efficient therapies for these subjects. It 
continues by explaining the current standards, casting light on the drawbacks of 
existing methods.  Then, the LOI explains how the novel biomarker affects and 
benefits drug development and the applicants specify the biomarker proposed use in 
drug development. Additionally, an exact definition of the studied patients, in which 
stage of the disease the biomarker is effective, also should be described. 
In the case under study, Biomarkers for NASH, since the disease biology and clinical 
studies are different, fostering various approaches to therapy and assessment, 
distinguishing patients with NASH and fibrosis stage 2 or higher as well as 
differentiating those with cirrhosis (Stage 4 fibrosis) from those with the earlier-stage 
disease is vitally important.  In the LOI, requestors represent this statement: 
 
They cleared what they meant by ‚at-risk NASH‛. They said:‛ In this LOI, we focus 
on those with NASH with high disease activity (NAS ≥ 4) and fibrosis stages 2-3 that 
we refer to as ‚at-risk‛ NASH. A separate LOI will be submitted for non-invasive 
tools to diagnose NASH with cirrhosis.‛ 
 
==PAGE:43==
42 
 
If the biomarker target disease like NASH is multifaceted, the effect of multiple 
contributory factors such as a sedentary lifestyle must be considered and quantified.  
The FNIH NIMBLE team also mentioned that the intended biomarker was selected 
based on publically available data, available in the reference section for each 
biomarker [44]. 
 
Context of Use (COU) 
The requestor’s COU statement in LOI can be seen in the following table 
 
 
Additional information for each one of the four biomarkers is submitted however, as 
the focus of the current thesis is on the miRNAs as a biomarker, in this section 
supplementary data of the Non-Invasive Score 4 (NIS4), a molecular biomarker  
includes 
(microRNA34a-5p 
[miRNA-34a], 
alpha2 
macroglobulin 
[A2M], 
Hemoglobin A1c [HbA1c), Chitinase-3-Like Protein 1 [CHI3L1, aka YKL40]),  will be 
reviewed in more details. NIS4 Marker information provided by Genfit includes: 
biomarker information and interpretation, analytical consideration, clinical 
consideration and supporting information [44]. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:44==
43 
 
Analytical methods 
The NIS4 NASH Diagnostic Test is an In Vitro Diagnostic Multivariate Assay 
(IVDMIA) Test that measures a score based on the quantification of four individual 
analytes: 
 miR-34a-5p: estimated  by real time quantitative polymerase chain reaction 
using a Bio-Rad CFX96 thermo-cycler 
 A2M 
(Alpha2-Macroglobuline): 
measurement 
is 
done 
 
by 
immunenephelometry using a Siemens BNII or BNProspect instrument with 
kits OSAM09 or OSAM15 
 CHI3L1 (Chitinase-3-Like Protein 1): estimation is done by  using solid-phase 
immunoassay with a kit from R&D Systems 
 HbA1c: measured by HPLC using a Bio-Rad HPLC D10 with kit 220-0101 or 
Variant II with kit 270-2455 
This score has a value ranging from 0 to 1 and indicates the risk likelihood for 
having active NASH (NAS=4) with significant fibrosis (F=2). The analytical methods 
for all components of the NIS-4 multi-component biomarker (Data from GENFIT) 
can be seen in the table 2. Analytical considerations for each component of the NIS4 
diagnostic test will be submitted upon request [44]. 
 
Table 2: Analytical Consideration [44] 
==PAGE:45==
44 
 
Clinical Considerations  
The studied population would be adult --- aged18 or above--- who have a high 
likelihood for NASH with adequately advanced fibrosis to be at high risk of 
progression to unfavorable liver outcomes. NIS4 is to be used with a single, high-
value cut-off relating to a diagnostic PPV>80% for high diagnostic confidence. NIS4 
diagnostic performance was prepared in RESOLVE-IT DIAG.  
The diagnostic cut-off is set at 0.617 to discover cases with active NASH and 
significant fibrosis (NAS≥4 & F≥2) with a specificity goal of 85% which should yield 
a high (> 80%) positive predictive value.  Sensitivity, specificity, and PPV are 
changeable by different prevalence in the condition to diagnose (within the group 
NAS≥4 & F≥2) 
Generally, the performance characteristics of NIS4 shows a slight rate of false-
positive(<15%), It means there is a narrow level of false-positive so a few cases of 
liver biopsies do not meet the histological entry criteria [44], [47]. 
Summary of NIS4 diagnostic performance can be seen in table 3. 
 
Cut-Off 0.617 
RESOLVE-IT DIAG 
N 
487 
Prevalence 
55% 
RUROC 
0.82 
Accuracy 
75% 
Sensitivity 
60% 
Specificity 
85% 
Table 3: NIS 4 Diagnostic Performance [44] 
 
 More information regarding NIS4 can be find in the appendix 1. 
 
 
==PAGE:46==
45 
 
 
7.2 Not accepted LOI (Blood eosinophil count) 
 
Biomarker Project Information 
Blood eosinophil count is considered as Predictive and Prognostic Biomarker for 
Pulmonary disease, specifically Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD). 
The requesting organization is The COPD Biomarker Qualification Consortium 
(CBQC).  
The First LOI submission 
August 2016 
The First rejection 
December 2017 
The Second (updated version) LOI submission 
March 2019 
The Second Rejection 
August 2019 
  
The very first submitted LOI included five main parts: drug development needs, 
biomarker information and administrative information, COU, analytical and clinical 
consideration. The FDA decided not to accept it into the CDER Biomarker 
Qualification Program. The FDA announced decision based on some reasons and 
prepared comments on some parts. Requestors then prepared and submitted an 
updated LOI includes response to FDA comments, which was also rejected.  Both 
FDA decision letters, first and second one, embodied comments and questions that 
demonstrated CDER’s scientific concerns related to the proposed biomarker and 
context of use. The requestor’s statements and the FDA comments is to be reviewed 
in this section [48], [49]. 
 
 
==PAGE:47==
46 
 
Drug Development Need (Needs assessment) 
The table below shows the requestor claim on drug development need 
 
The FDA scientists believe that the needs assessment for qualification is inadequate. 
Since, previously in clinical trials of anti-inflammatory drugs, peripheral blood 
eosinophil counts were utilized as a predictive biomarker, the use of blood 
eosinophil count as a biomarker for COPD would not advance drug development. 
Even if requestors assume that the aim of the qualification is to form a standard 
eosinophil threshold cut-off that could better discover which patients are more likely 
to respond, the available data are not sufficient and certain to support [48], [50]. 
 
Context of Use (COU) 
The requestor’s COU statement can be seen in the following table. 
 
At the first rejection, the FDA was concerned about the biomarker category: FDA 
scientists believe that the COU shows that blood eosinophil count is aimed as a 
predictive biomarker and a prognostic biomarker. Albeit a biomarker can play a 
proper role as both a predictive and prognostic marker since the required supportive 
==PAGE:48==
47 
 
data would be different for different COUs. CBQC, however, responded that their 
main aim of the project would be qualified the biomarker as a predictive biomarker 
to enrich for subject populations. 
The FDA mentioned that requestors must clarify the patient population and the class 
of therapy for which the COU is developed. Since, based on the submitted LOI,  
blood eosinophil count may not be a helpful enrichment tool for new drugs that 
target non-eosinophil associated inflammation. This may cause a challenge about the 
generalizability of the results; If the intended biomarker is used in studies for classes 
of drugs where it is not predictive of response, then there is a risk of unnecessarily 
excluding patients from the study. CBQC answered the desired patient population is 
‚high risk‛ COPD patients with a history of exacerbation(s) in the previous year. The 
clinical exacerbation history improves the identification of patients who are more 
likely to experience exacerbations in the future. The blood eosinophil count is 
expected to subdivide aforesaid high-risk patients based on the level of eosinophilic 
inflammation present. Generally, the FDA concluded that there are some 
contradictories in clarifying the purpose of the use of the blood eosinophil count to 
enrich the study population of COPD. 
CBQC  mentioned some papers and researches and  presented some evidence to 
clarify the potential of blood eosinophils as a predictive biomarker for different 
classes of drugs, such as ICS, anti-IL-5, and PDE4 inhibitors, in a population at high 
risk of exacerbations [48], [49]. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:49==
48 
 
Analytical Consideration 
Regarding the analytical validation of the blood eosinophil count as a biomarker, the 
FDA scientists concerned about two items. For the first challenge, the measurement 
methods and used devices. In this regard, the FDA has recommended clarifying 
these items: The measurement method(s) that will be used to get blood eosinophil 
count. These devices were specifically developed to assess eosinophil count or not? 
A short description of the device limitations and how these restrictions could 
impress the COU for this biomarker must be submitted. . Second challenge was  the 
variability of analyses; post-hoc and retrospective analyses are introduced to support 
the COU by studying blood eosinophil count in COPD patients. It is not easy to 
understand if these analyses were done in the same manner and by the validated 
process CBQC responded that the Qualification Plan will cover critical analytical 
considerations in more detail. 
 
Clinical Consideration 
First FDA was concerned about the clinical trial patient population. Based on 
information in LOI, FDA has concluded that requestors intend to use the same 
definition for any range of moderate to severe exacerbations commonly used in 
clinical trials. That`s while, clarification and preparation detailed definition of 
moderate to severe pulmonary exacerbations in COPD patients in the submission is 
needed. Moreover, it should be clear if applicants plan to limit the COU to only 
COPD patients with a history of moderate and severe exacerbations. The separate 
patient subgroup that will be targeted should also be defined.  
CBQC respond: The COU will be limited to patients with a history of moderate to 
severe exacerbations; with a similar definition of exacerbation in clinical trials. 
Eosinophilic COPD is accompanied by multiple forms of inflammations; however, 
there is no accepted classification of the inflammatory profiles. So, the requestor's 
plan is to use blood eosinophils count to identify COPD patients with eosinophilic 
==PAGE:50==
49 
 
lung inflammation, presenting with or without other mechanisms of lung 
inflammation. 
Second, the applicants are required to submit explanation of existing biomarkers or 
standards that are currently used for the COU, Comparison of the blood eosinophil 
count effects, and its added value with other methods.  
CBQC responded: clinical history of exacerbations is currently used to determine at-
risk individuals. Since no other biomarkers are presently in use, blood eosinophils 
count is a unique predictive biomarker within this high-risk population. 
Next, based on the LOI information  the blood samples are collected by standard 
venipuncture ,while a standard operating procedure (SOP) must be used(collecting 
blood for blood eosinophil count)  to improve mitigation of the influence of 
variables; an SOP for collecting blood samples for the COPD subjects should be 
submitted.  
CBQC responded: Although the collection of blood by venipuncture is a simple 
procedure that is normally performed in clinical practice and research, an SOP on 
this will be provided in the next submission. 
Lack of consensus in the literature turns out to be one of the other issues that 
concern. For example, the LOI has referenced to Siddiqui et al. and Pavord et al. 
paper, both of whom them have concluded that more studies are needed to confirm 
the role of blood eosinophil count as a biomarker for COPD. Another concern is the 
external variables that may impact on the measurement of blood eosinophils count 
(e.g. Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS), and asthma). To respond to the FDA's comments 
regarding the clinical considerations, CBQC prepared a detailed explanation with 
examples and references which can be reached in the appendix 2. [48], [49]. 
 
 
==PAGE:51==
50 
 
Final decision of FDA about Blood Eosinophil Counts for COPD 
Despite the CBQC responses and submission of the updated LOI, The FDA scientists 
have concluded not to Accept it into the CDER BQP. The decision was based on drug 
development need considerations, COU and biological plausibility considerations. 
The FDA scientists were not convinced about the drug development need as they 
believe that the needs assessment for qualification is insufficient and, the prepared 
data are not sufficient and certain to support. Furthermore, they believe that the data 
from clinical trials do not support the use of the peripheral blood eosinophil count 
biomarker in predicting the rate of exacerbation endpoints or lung function 
endpoints. At this time, there is no logic- from both mechanistic or experimental 
viewpoint- that the efficacy of other ‚novel‛ therapies would be predicted by 
peripheral blood eosinophil.  
The variation in outcomes for the use of blood eosinophil counts as a predictive 
biomarker can be seen in papers. The FDA scientists believe that the studies do not 
appropriately discuss the within-subject variability of peripheral blood eosinophil, 
while the within-subject variability of peripheral blood eosinophil is not insignificant 
and is high over time. Figures are skewed by factors such as season, hormonal state, 
and time of day, fasting versus fed state, comorbid conditions, use of medications 
and the like. Consequently, the reliability of peripheral blood eosinophil count as a 
predictive biomarker in COPD will be affected and limited by the within-subject 
variability [50]. 
 
 
==PAGE:52==
51 
 
8 Discussion: Proposal for elements to be included in the evidentiary 
framework to qualify miRNAs as biomarkers for diabetes. 
 
The reviewed studies presented in this thesis depict that in the near future, miRNAs 
as valuable choices of biomarkers for type 2 diabetes at early stages or a predictor for 
that matter, helping to prevent the progression the disease, may serve and the 
clinical trials will start to validate their effectiveness. In such a case, the involved 
companies should follow the biomarker qualification process before the use of the 
novel biomarker in drug development programs. In this part of the thesis, based on 
the mentioned data in the prior 6 sections a proposal for the evidentiary framework's 
factors that should be submitted to the FDA to qualify miRNAs as biomarkers for 
diabetes will come under scrutiny.  
The first step will be the submission of the LOI which presents the fundamental 
information. The first part of the LOI is the presentation of the drug development 
need (need assessment). Based on the reviewing of not-accepted LOI, the intended 
biomarker should be uniquely beneficial for the unmet need. In other words, the 
miRNAs as novel biomarkers should be the only marker for diabetes or have a 
higher advantage than existing methods.  The NIS4 as a biomarker for NASH that as 
an accepted case was reviewed was not the only marker for NASH, but it possesses 
more pros than the current methods. As shown in Section 7.1, the needs assessment 
part comprehensively explains the drawbacks of the present techniques. Specifying 
the studied patients, in which stage of the disease, the biomarker is effective, also 
must be explained. 
 
Proposed Drug Development Need Statement 
Diabetes affects 9.3% (463 million people) around the world and causes 
approximately 1.6 million deaths. Loss or impairment of pancreatic islet (β-cells) 
==PAGE:53==
52 
 
function results in dysregulated blood glucose that gives rise to the life-threatening 
metabolic disease "Diabetes" with short and long term complications. Diabetes is 
usually recognized once islet β-cells are damaged. In type 1 diabetes (T1D), clinical 
symptoms show up when more than 80% of islet β-cells are already lost to 
autoimmunity. During the rise of type 2 diabetes, islet damages and weaknesses 
maintain normoglycemia for years without symptoms before reaching a state of 
detectable by regular tests. Early tracing of islet cell stress before the loss of islet 
function may help to delay or relieve the onset of diabetes. The diagnosis of diabetes 
relies on three standard methods. In OGTT practice, the individual fasts overnight 
and their blood sugar level is checked before and after drinking a sugary liquid for 
two hours; it is time-consuming and inconvenient with poor reproducibility. The 
alternative method is FGP; it requires the subject to be fast as well then the blood 
sugar level will be checked. It is easier and more convenient to compare with OGTT, 
however, it is not enough sensitive. Plus, to ensure a positive result, it should be 
repeated twice. The last method is HbA1c which is quick, needs no fasting and is so 
convenient while it suffers from variability and weak standardization of assays and 
poor sensitivity. The lack of availability of reliable non-invasive markers of diagnosis 
diabetes at an early stage, before irreversible damage of pancreatic islet, represents a 
major barrier for drug development. The drug development needs that will be 
addressed by this qualification are the diagnostic of those with type 2 diabetes and 
pre-diabetes. The current project objective is, through a systematic evaluation of this/ 
these promising biomarker/ biomarkers to identify a biomarker (or biomarker panel) 
that will be non-invasive, strong (showing the desired specificity) and sensitive to 
identify type 2 diabetes and pre-diabetes. 
Next part of LOI is assigned to the COU. Based on section 7; the biomarker category 
should be exactly mentioned in the COU, the patient population and the class of 
therapy for which the COU is developed must be cleared, the purpose of the use of 
the intended biomarker should clarify.   
==PAGE:54==
53 
 
Referring to the section 4; multiple studies have concluded that dysregulated plasma 
level of miRNAs was witnessed years before the onset of type 2 diabetes and in pre-
diabetes and therefore could be used as a biomarker to evaluate the risk of 
developing the disease. Hence, miRNAs (either individually or in combination) 
might be used to diagnose diabetes at early stages and pre-diabetes in the near 
future. 
 
Proposed Context of Use Statement  
The selected biomarker is a diagnostic biomarker intended for use to identify 
patients likely to have type 2 diabetes or pre-diabetes; Individuals with normal 
blood glucose levels and diagnosed pre-diabetes based on the combination of tests 
FPG and OGTT are desired, exclude those with common diabetic complications such 
as retinopathy, nephropathy, and cardiovascular disorders. 
 
Proposed benefit and risk assessment 
MiRNAs as biomarkers for diabetes in comparison with existing markers are more 
convenient and enable diagnosis diabetes at early stages while, the current tests 
allow the detection of patients with diabetes or susceptible cases close to disease. 
Moreover, miRNAs have shown the ability for assessment of diabetic complications. 
If the specificity of miRNAs not enough being strong, the combination of a panel of 
various miRNAs or other present markers can enhance predictive values. 
 
Proposed Analytical consideration 
Scrutinizing sections 6 and 7 clarifies what the key analytical points for FDA are. 
Elucidating the measurement method(s) that will be used to profiling miRNAs; 
whether these tools were specifically developed to assess miRNA expression level or 
==PAGE:55==
54 
 
not a summary of the device limitations and how these limitations could impress the 
COU for this biomarker must be duly submitted (this is exactly one of the FDA 
consideration regarding the COPD biomarker that has been reviewed in section 7.2). 
The efficiency and reliability of detecting miRNAs in plasma and serum samples are 
also important (i.e quickly identify thousands of miRNAs with high sensitivity and 
specificity).  The standard operating procedure (SOP) that is used to collect blood 
and method of quantifying miRNAs must be submitted.   
Considering data from section 2.1.1 and 5 for miRNAs to be deployed as a 
biomarker, certain analytical information and interpretation must be appraised. 
Sensitivity and specificity are two key features of a diagnostic biomarker test; 
accuracy, reproducibility, PPV and NPV also need to be considered.  Some variable 
factors are proven to affect the level of circulating miRNAs such as:  age, gender, 
lifestyle, BMI, smoking habits and physical activity level required to be evaluated in 
researches. 
 
Proposed Clinical consideration 
Based on the FDA comments around clinical supporting data that was reviewed in 
section 6 and 7 and due to the miRNAs characterizations,  the clinical information 
submitted to the FDA should cover the following items: Clarification and 
preparation detailed definition of the clinical trial patient population is required to 
submit. A precise description of the specific cut-off/threshold values for the 
expression level of miRNAs that determines the subgroup of diabetes cases of 
interest, for example, the stage of diabetes or pre-diabetes, is critical as well ( It was 
the first FDA concerning about clinical consideration for COPD biomarker that 
mentioned in section 7.2). Diagnostic performance of the intended miRNA(s) should 
show high diagnostic confidence by high specificity, and a high level of positive 
predictive values. These parameters depict how specific does the intended miRNA 
detects the target and how the other miRNAs affect the result and make false-
==PAGE:56==
55 
 
positive cases. The sensitivity that may be changeable by various thresholds is also 
important to be high enough to confirm that the desired miRNA can perfectly detect 
patients with diabetes or susceptible individuals as much as possible (with reference 
to section 2.1.1.).  The applied literature should exactly analyze and an agreement in 
the literature should be cleared.  If there is uncertainty in the literature, it should be 
discussed and explained (Lack of consensus in the literature has mentioned in 
section 7.2 as the last FDA concerns on clinical validation) 
 
==PAGE:57==
56 
 
9 Future Outlook 
 
During the structured review of the current status and information of correlation 
between miRNAs as biomarkers and diabetes stages, it got obvious that numerous 
studies had already been managed on the subject. In spite of that, it is suggested for 
future studies to look into the larger clinical studies on potential miRNAs to further 
confirm the conclusion of miRNAs regulatory roles in diabetes cases. Since the 
specificity of a single miRNA may not be enough strong, the combination of 
multiple miRNAs or other current indicators must be considered to improve 
predictive values. 
 Regulatory-wise, another interesting subject could be an investigation on the next 
two submissions stages QP and FQP for miRNAs as biomarker for diabetes by 
considering FDA Study data4  standards. With the current status of diabetes growing 
universally, it is important to have an effective early-stage diagnosis of the disease to 
prevent both the prevalence and worse outcome of the progression. Not only is there 
a need to conduct more in-depth studies on elucidating the role of using miRNA 
profiles to predict the onset of diabetes or to diagnose the disease at an early stage, 
revealing the upstream regulation and downstream targets of pancreatic miRNAs, 
but the studies to come should also follow a standardized study protocol, with well-
established definitions on impacting factors namely gender, age, interventional 
disease, drug consumption and lifestyle factors. Besides, investigating FDA Study 
data standards should lead to farther facilitating the standard way to exchange 
clinical and nonclinical documents and data between applicants and FDA. 
 
 
                                                          
4 FDA Study data standards provide a uniform general framework for planning study data, including templates 
for datasets, standard names for variables; identify appropriate controlled terminology and standard ways of 
doing calculations with common variables 
==PAGE:58==
57 
 
10 References 
 
[1] 
S. Vasu, K. Kumano, C. M. Darden, I. Rahman, M. C. Lawrence, and B. Naziruddin, “MicroRNA 
Signatures as Future Biomarkers for Diagnosis of Diabetes States,” Cells, vol. 8, no. 12, p. 
1533, 2019. 
[2] 
M. Kim and X. Zhang, “The Profiling and Role of miRNAs in Diabetes Mellitus,” J. Diabetes Clin. 
Res., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 5–23, 2019. 
[3] 
J. Wang, J. Chen, and S. Sen, “MicroRNA as Biomarkers and Diagnostics,” J. Cell. Physiol., vol. 
231, no. 1, pp. 25–30, 2016. 
[4] 
K. Strimbu and J. Tavel, “What are Biomarkers?,” Curr. Opin. HIV AIDS, vol. 5, no. 6, pp. 463–
466, 2010. 
[5] 
F.-N. B. W. Group, BEST ( Biomarkers , EndpointS , and other Tools ) Resource. Silver Spring 
(MD): Food and Drug Administration (US), 2020. 
[6] 
J. K. Aronson, “Biomarkers and surrogate endpoints,” Br. J. Clin. Pharmacol., vol. 59, no. 5, pp. 
491–494, 2005. 
[7] 
S. Ekelund, “Biomarker assessment – what to be aware of,” acutecaretesting.org, vol. 
October, pp. 1–10, 2012. 
[8] 
J. M. Sauer and A. C. Porter, “Preclinical biomarker qualification,” Exp. Biol. Med., vol. 243, 
no. 3, pp. 222–227, 2018. 
[9] 
FDA, “CDER Biomarker Qualification Program,” 2018. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DevelopmentApprovalProcess/DrugDevelopmentToolsQualificati
onProgram/ucm561587.htm. [Accessed: 15-Sep-2020]. 
[10] 
G. Leibowitz, N. Kaiser, and E. Cerasi, “β-Cell failure in type 2 diabetes,” J. Diabetes Investig., 
vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 82–91, 2011. 
[11] 
M. Y. Donath and J. A. Ehses, “Mechanisms of beta-cell death in diabetes,” Pancreat. Beta Cell 
Heal. Dis., vol. 54, no. December, pp. 75–89, 2008. 
[12] 
A. S. Al-Goblan, M. A. Al-Alfi, and M. Z. Khan, “Mechanism linking diabetes mellitus and 
obesity,” Diabetes, Metab. Syndr. Obes. Targets Ther., vol. 7, pp. 587–591, 2014. 
[13] 
I. Blackberry, “Diabetes,” in Practical Strategies and Tools to Promote Treatment 
Engagement, W. O’Donohue, L. James, and C. Snipes, Eds. Springer US, 2017, pp. 187–209. 
[14] 
Y. K. Monfared, M. Honardoost, M. R. Sarookhani, and S. A. Farzam, “Circulating miR-135 May 
Serve as a Novel Co-biomarker of HbA1c in Type 2 Diabetes,” Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol., vol. 
191, no. 2, pp. 623–630, 2020. 
[15] 
World Health Organization, “Diabetes,” 2020. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/diabetes. [Accessed: 30-Aug-2020]. 
[16] 
MAYO CLINIC, “Diabetes - Diagnosis,” 2020. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/diabetes/diagnosis-treatment/drc-
20371451#:~:text=Fasting blood sugar test.,%2FL) is considered prediabetes. [Accessed: 30-
Aug-2020]. 
[17] 
D. R. Jesudason, K. Dunstan, D. Leong, and G. A. Wittert, “Macrovascular risk and diagnostic 
criteria for type 2 diabetes: Implications for the use of FPG and HbA1c for cost-effective 
==PAGE:59==
58 
 
screening,” Diabetes Care, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 485–490, 2003. 
[18] 
P. G. Colman, G. I. Goodall, P. Garcia-Webb, P. F. Williams, and M. E. Dunlop, 
“Glycohaemoglobin: A crucial measurement in modern diabetes management. Progress 
towards standardisation and improved precision of measurement,” Med. J. Aust., vol. 167, 
no. 2, pp. 96–98, 1997. 
[19] 
E. S. Kilpatrick, P. W. Maylor, and B. G. Keevil, “Biological Variation of Glycated Hemoglobin, 
Implications for diabetes screening and monitoring,” Diabetes Care, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 20–23, 
1998. 
[20] 
K. Wiener and N. B. Roberts, “The relative merits of haemoglobin A(1c) and fasting plasma 
glucose as first-line diagnostic tests for diabetes mellitus in non-pregnant subjects,” Diabet. 
Med., vol. 15, no. 7, pp. 558–563, 1998. 
[21] 
J. Yu, W. Su, X. Zhang, F. Zheng, and Y. Guan, “MicroRNAs in type 2 diabetes mellitus: 
Important for the pathogenesis but uncertain as biomarkers,” J. Diabetes, vol. 12, no. 9, pp. 
697–700, 2020. 
[22] 
N. N. S. B. N. M. Kamal and W. N. S. Shahidan, “Non-exosomal and exosomal circulatory 
MicroRNAs: Which are more valid as biomarkers?,” Front. Pharmacol., vol. 10, no. January, 
2020. 
[23] 
A. Git et al., “Systematic comparison of microarray profiling, real-time PCR, and next-
generation sequencing technologies for measuring differential microRNA expression,” RNA, 
vol. 16, pp. 991–1006, 2010. 
[24] 
B. F. Belgardt et al., “The microRNA-200 family regulates pancreatic beta cell survival in type 
2 diabetes,” Nat. Med., vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 619–627, 2015. 
[25] 
X. Li, “MiR-375, a microRNA related to diabetes,” Gene, vol. 533, no. 1, pp. 1–4, 2014. 
[26] 
M. N. Poy et al., “miR-375 maintains normal pancreatic α- and β-cell mass,” Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. U. S. A., vol. 106, no. 14, pp. 5813–5818, 2009. 
[27] 
Y. Chen et al., “MicroRNA-17-92 cluster regulates pancreatic beta-cell proliferation and 
adaptation,” Mol. Cell. Endocrinol., vol. 437, pp. 213–223, 2016. 
[28] 
A. Hinton et al., “A distinct microRNA signature for definitive endoderm derived from human 
embryonic stem cells,” Stem Cells Dev., vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 797–807, 2010. 
[29] 
B. Chen et al., “Identification of microRNAs expressed highly in pancreatic islet-like cell 
clusters differentiated from human embryonic stem cells,” Cell Biol. Int., vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 
29–37, 2011. 
[30] 
S. Kredo-Russo et al., “Pancreas-enriched miRNA refines endocrine cell differentiation,” Dev., 
vol. 139, no. 16, pp. 3021–3031, 2012. 
[31] 
A. Shaer, N. Azarpira, M. H. Karimi, M. Soleimani, and S. Dehghan, “Differentiation of human-
induced pluripotent stem cells into insulin-producing clusters by microRNA-7,” Exp. Clin. 
Transplant., vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 555–563, 2016. 
[32] 
G. Nathan et al., “MiR-375 promotes redifferentiation of adult human β cells expanded in 
vitro,” PLoS One, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 1–18, 2015. 
[33] 
J. Feng, W. Xing, and L. Xie, “Regulatory roles of microRNAs in diabetes,” Int. J. Mol. Sci., vol. 
17, no. 10, pp. 1–12, 2016. 
==PAGE:60==
59 
 
[34] 
P. R. Gomes et al., “Long-term disruption of maternal glucose homeostasis induced by 
prenatal glucocorticoid treatment correlates with miR-29 upregulation,” Am. J. Physiol. - 
Endocrinol. Metab., vol. 306, no. 1, pp. 109–120, 2014. 
[35] 
T. J. Pullen, G. da Silva Xavier, G. Kelsey, and G. A. Rutter, “miR-29a and miR-29b Contribute 
to Pancreatic  -Cell-Specific Silencing of Monocarboxylate Transporter 1 (Mct1),” Mol. Cell. 
Biol., vol. 31, no. 15, pp. 3182–3194, 2011. 
[36] 
T. Zhang, L. Li, Q. Shang, C. F. Lv, C. Y. Wang, and B. Su, “Circulating miR-126 is a potential 
biomarker to predict the onset of type 2 diabetes mellitus in susceptible individuals,” 
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., vol. 463, no. 1–2, pp. 60–63, 2015. 
[37] 
N. Pastukh, A. Meerson, D. Kalish, H. Jabaly, and A. Blum, “Serum miR-122 levels correlate 
with diabetic retinopathy,” Clin. Exp. Med., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 255–260, 2019. 
[38] 
J. Y. Z. Li, T. Y. Yong, M. Z. Michael, and J. M. Gleadle, “Review: The role of microRNAs in 
kidney disease,” Nephrology, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 599–608, 2010. 
[39] 
D. Ye et al., “Plasma miR-17, miR-20a, miR-20b and miR-122 as potential biomarkers for 
diagnosis of NAFLD in type 2 diabetes mellitus patients,” Life Sci., vol. 208, no. July, pp. 201–
207, 2018. 
[40] 
P. Willeit et al., “Circulating MicroRNA-122 is associated with the risk of new-onset metabolic 
syndrome and type 2 diabetes,” Diabetes, vol. 66, no. 2, pp. 347–357, 2017. 
[41] 
D. I. Patoulias, “Is miRNA-375 a promising biomarker for early detection and monitoring of 
patients with type 2 diabetes?,” Arch. Med. Sci. - Atheroscler. Dis., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 119–122, 
2018. 
[42] 
H. B. Burke and W. E. Grizzle, “Clinical Validation of Molecular Biomarkers in Translational 
Medicine,” Biomarkers Cancer Screen. Early Detect., no. November, pp. 256–266, 2017. 
[43] 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Food and Drug Administration and C. for D. E. 
and R. (CDER) C. for B. E. and R. (CBER), “Biomarker Qualification: Evidentiary Framework 
Guidance for Industry and FDA Staff,” FDA, no. December, pp. 1–16, 2018. 
[44] 
T. Kamphaus and A. J. Sanyal, “Biomarker Qualification Letter of Intent (LOI) Content 
Elements: Circulating Biomarkers for Diagnosis of Non-Alcoholic Steatohepatitis (NASH),” 
2019. 
[45] 
S. F. Shariat et al., “Statistical consideration for clinical biomarker research in bladder cancer,” 
Urol Oncol., vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 389–400, 2010. 
[46] 
C. H. Chau, O. Rixe, H. Mcleod, and W. D. Figg, “Validation of Analytical Methods for 
biomarkers Employed in Drug Development,” Clin. cancer Res., vol. 14, no. 19, pp. 5967–
5976, 2008. 
[47] 
N. EICHENBAUM and H. LAVIN, “GENFIT Announces Results of NIS4, an Investigational Non- 
Invasive NASH Diagnostic, at AASLD 2019,” GENFIT, no. 20120523, pp. 32–33, 2011. 
[48] 
D. D. Merrill, “BIOMARKER QUALIFICATION LETTER OF INTENT (LOI),” Washington, 2017. 
[49] 
D. D. Merrill and C. Pasquale, “BQP Qualification Program - DDT QUALIFICATION SUBMISSION 
letters,” DDT #000057, 2019. 
[50] 
C. Leptak and B. Karimi-Shah, “LOI Decision letter - FDA,” 10903 New Hampshire Avenue, 
2019. 
==PAGE:61==
60 
 
 
11 Appendices 
 
Appendix 1: More information about the NIS4, as a part of Circulating Biomarkers 
for Diagnosis of NASH     
Appendix 2: The CBQC response to the clinical considerations in a more detailed 
explanation with examples and references 
 
==PAGE:62==
 
 
 
Biomarker Qualification Letter of Intent (LOI) Content Elements 
 
 Administrative Information  
 
1. Submission Title:  
 “Circulating Biomarkers for Diagnosis of Non-Alcoholic Steatohepatitis (NASH)” 
DDTBMQ000084 
2. Requesting Organization: Foundation for the National Institutes of Health Biomarkers Consortium  
11400 Rockville Pike, Suite 600 
North Bethesda, MD 20852 
Phone: (301) 402-5311 
Website: https://fnih.org/what-we-do/biomarkers-consortium  
 
• Primary Point of Contact:  
Tania Kamphaus, PhD 
Scientific Program Manager 
Phone: (301) 435-6247 
Email: TKamphaus@fnih.org  
 
• Alternate Point of Contact:  
Arun J. Sanyal, MD 
Professor 
Virginia Commonwealth University School of Medicine  
1250 E Marshall Street, Richmond, VA 23298 
Phone: (804) 827-0716 
Email: arun.sanyal@vcuhealth.org  
 
• Supporting or participating organizations or individuals  
FNIH Biomarkers Consortium | Non Invasive BioMarkers of MetaBolic Liver DiseasE (NIMBLE)  
Project Steering Committee: Arun Sanyal, MD (VCU); Rohit Loomba (UCSD); Claude Sirlin, MD (UCSD); Anthony Samir, MD 
(MGH-Harvard); Sudha Shankar, MD (AZ); Roberto Calle, MD (Pfizer); Sarah Sherlock, PhD (Pfizer) 
 
3. Submission Dates:  
LOI submission date (original)-  02/26/2019 
LOI submission date (updated)- 10/15/2019 
 
Appendix 1
==PAGE:63==
 
 
 
Drug Development Need Statement  
 
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) affects 30% of adults in the United States and is characterized by accumulation 
of excess triglycerides in the liver. By definition, it is not due to consumption of harmful amounts of alcohol. It has two 
principal subtypes: (1) nonalcoholic fatty liver (NAFL) and (2) nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH).  NASH, especially in 
those who have developed some fibrosis, progresses to cirrhosis and end-stage liver disease, much more frequently than 
NAFL. The identification of patients at risk of progression to cirrhosis and clinically meaningful adverse outcomes, and the 
development of effective therapies for these patients, is a public health priority. Both NAFL and NASH are however 
relatively asymptomatic until advanced disease is present and cannot be readily diagnosed or distinguished from each 
other by clinical and routine laboratory tests. The diagnosis and staging of NASH therefore relies on a liver biopsy with 
histological assessment of the liver; and such an assessment represents the reference standard for this purpose. Liver 
biopsies are however invasive, painful and carry a limited but real risk for catastrophic complications including death. 
Furthermore, histologic evaluation using liver biopsy is significantly limited by moderate accuracy at best, due to the small 
amount of material gathered for examination relative to the size of the liver, and due to interpreter variability.  
Akin to the situation in clinical practice described above where diagnosis of NASH is dependent on histologic assessment, 
at present, the only way to identify patients with NASH for participation in clinical trials is a liver biopsy. Patients are 
selected to undergo screening with liver biopsy through an assessment of their probability of having NASH that depends 
on clinical history and non-specific laboratory values. Unfortunately, selection of subjects for biopsy via clinical means is 
imperfect and leads to a high frequency of biopsies in patients that end up not meeting the histopathologic entry criteria 
for NASH necessary for inclusion in clinical trials. The screen-failure rate across phase 2b-3 trials for NASH range from 50-
80%. The lack of availability of reliable non-invasive means of enriching the population of subjects undergoing liver-biopsy 
that are likely to meet the histopathological criteria for NASH with fibrosis represents a major barrier for identification of 
subjects eligible for pharmacological intervention and therefore for enrollment in clinical trials. The identification of such 
markers would enable clinical trials and accelerate the development or pharmacologic therapeutic interventions for NASH. 
These are patients that on biopsy show evidence of active NASH (defined by presence of steatohepatitis and a NAFLD 
activity score (NAS) of 4 or more) with fibrosis score ≥2 and are thus identified as a population of patients with NASH with 
a higher probability to progress to adverse liver outcomes due to the stage of fibrosis.  
This underscores the urgent need for robust, reliable, readily deployable non-invasive tools that identify subjects with a 
high probability of meeting the histopathologic criteria for active NASH with fibrosis stage 2 or more.  In considering those 
with NASH and fibrosis stage 2 or higher, it is also important to distinguish those with cirrhosis (Stage 4 fibrosis) from those 
with earlier stage disease because the disease biology and clinical course are different requiring different approaches to 
therapy and assessment.  In this LOI, we focus on those with NASH with high disease activity (NAS ≥ 4) and fibrosis stages 
2-3 that we refer to as “at risk” NASH.  A separate LOI will be submitted for non-invasive tools to diagnose NASH with 
cirrhosis. 
The drug development need that will be addressed by this qualification is the diagnostic enrichment of “at-risk  NASH” 
patients for inclusion in drug development trials.  
The development of NASH follows a complex interplay of mechanisms where genetic susceptibility coupled with 
environmental factors such as sedentary lifestyle and excess energy intake results in hepatic steatosis, insulin resistance, 
enhanced di novo lipogenesis, lipotoxicity, hepatocyte oxidative stress and mitochondria disfunction, and activation of 
inflammatory pathways with inflammatory infiltration, and ultimately resulting, in some patients, to fibrosis and organ 
damage, including cirrhosis. The multifaceted nature of the pathogenesis of NASH means that the influence of multiple 
contributory factors needs to be taken into account and quantified if we hope to determine non-invasively the level of 
==PAGE:64==
 
 
risk of a patient to progress to adverse liver outcomes. This is true whether we are trying to draw a correlation of 
biomarkers directly with these clinical outcomes, or through and intermediate step such as showing correlation with 
histological liver findings that are themselves associated with liver outcomes (e.g., fibrosis).    A number of circulating and 
imaging-based biomarkers have been shown to have a degree of correlation with liver biopsy histological assessment. 
These biomarkers provide read-outs on some of these varied pathways contributing to NASH pathogenesis. However, 
these biomarkers have not been systematically and independently evaluated.  The NIMBLE Project’s overarching objective 
is, through a systematic evaluation of these promising biomarkers (both individually and in a number of potential 
combinations) to identify a biomarker (or biomarker panel) that will be both robust and sensitive to identify “at-risk” NASH 
patients.   
This application is limited to testing four selected circulating biomarker panels which may eventually be considered as 
stand-alone panels or in combination to identify active NASH with stage 2-3 fibrosis. The FNIH NIMBLE team selected these 
biomarkers based on publicly available data (peer-reviewed publication) supporting their analytical and clinical 
performance, as well as data summaries provided by the biomarker developers. The supporting information for each 
biomarker is available within the reference section. Summary data for each of the biomarkers is provided in sections 
below.   
The team is aware of several other biomarkers modalities including imaging (ultrasound and MR-based) and functional 
biomarkers that have sufficient supporting data to warrant additional investigation. These markers are not part of the 
current LOI. However, a number of promising imaging markers are being assessed in a parallel study and will be the 
subject of a separate LOI. A separate LOI will also be submitted for the noninvasive diagnosis of cirrhosis due to NASH.  
It is possible that some biomarkers are superior in performance to others. Decisions on the final biomarker or biomarker 
panel (to be part of a future qualification plan submission) will be made after all initially selected biomarkers are tested 
and analyzed.  
The circulating biomarkers that are part of this LOI are listed in the table below. These biomarkers reflect the activity of 
different pathways contributing to the etiopathogenesis of NASH. It is possible that a combination of these markers more 
accurately predicts who is the “at risk” NASH patient and correlates better with histological assessment.  
Biomarker 
NASH 
(inflammation) 
NAS 
(composite 
histological score) 
Fibrosis 
Composite 
(Biomarker with more 
than one analyte) 
NIS 4 
X 
X 
X 
OWL Liver 
X 
X 
X* 
PRO-C3 
X 
X 
Siemens (ELF) 
X 
X 
* Multiple lipid species 
 
Context of Use Statement (500 characters) The selected biomarker “panel” (e.g., NIS-4, OWLiver®, ProC3/C6, 
ELF, or combination thereof) is a diagnostic enrichment biomarker intended for use, in conjunction with clinical factors, 
to identify patients likely to have liver histopathologic findings of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) and with a 
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease activity score (NAS) ≥4 and liver fibrosis stages 2 or 3 (by Brunt/Kleiner scale); and thus 
appropriate for inclusion in liver biopsy-based NASH drug development clinical trials focused on pre-cirrhotic stages of 
NASH.    
==PAGE:65==
 
 
In the remaining document, we provide information for each one of the four biomarkers to be tested as part of this 
study. 
1. NIS4 Marker  
(Please note: information below summarizes information provided by Genfit) 
Biomarker Information and Interpretation  
 
1. Biomarker name: Non-Invasive Score 4 [NIS4] (microRNA 34a-5p [miRNA 34a], alpha2-macroglobulin [A2M], 
Hemoglobin A1c [HbA1c), Chitinase-3-Like Protein 1 [CHI3L1, aka YKL40]). Biomarker type: Molecular. Unique molecular 
ID: UniProt (http://uniprot.org/) - alpha2-macroglobulin (P01023), hemoglobin A1c (P69905), CHI3L1/YKL40 (P36222).  
miRBase (http://www.mirbase.org/) - microRNA 34a-5p (miRBase MIMAT000025).  
2. Analytical methods: The NIS4 NASH Diagnostic Test is an In Vitro Diagnostic Multivariate Assay (IVDMIA) Test that 
calculates a score based on the quantification of four individual analytes:  
a. miR-34a-5p: measured by real time quantitative polymerase chain reaction using a Bio-Rad CFX96 thermo-cycler 
b. A2M (Alpha2-Macroglobuline): Measured by immunonephelometry using a Siemens BNII or BNProspect 
instrument with kits OSAM09 or OSAM15 
c. CHI3L1 (Chitinase-3-Like Protein 1): Measured using solid-phase immunoassay with a kit from R&D Systems  
d. HbA1c: Measured by HPLC using a Bio-Rad HPLC D10 with kit 220-0101 or Variant II with kit 270-2455  
 
3. Measurement units and limit(s) of detection: The NIS4 NASH Diagnostic Test is an In Vitro Diagnostic Multivariate Assay 
(IVDMIA) Test that calculates a score based on the quantification of four individual analytes: miR-34a-5p, CHI3L1 
(Chitinase-3-Like Protein 1), and A2M (Alpha2-Macroglobuline) and HbA1c. This score has a value ranging 0 to 1 and 
assigns the risk probability for having active NASH (NAS≥4) with significant fibrosis (F≥2).  
 
4. Biomarker interpretation and utility: Genfit NASH NIS4 was developed/trained in the GOLDEN Elafibranor Phase II drug 
trial and internally validated in a first set of 467 patients screened for RESOLVE-IT Elafibranor Phase III drug trial. As shown 
in Figure 2, NIS4 demonstrated similar performances with an AUC of 0.82 and 0.81 in the Training and Validation cohorts.  
Figure 1: Training, Optimization and Validation of NIS 4. 
 
Analytical Considerations 
==PAGE:66==
 
 
Table 1: The analytical 
methods for each measured 
component of the NIS-4 multi-
component biomarker (Data 
courtesy GENFIT) Analytical 
considerations for individual 
components of the NIS4 
diagnostic test can be 
provided upon request. 
 
 
 
Clinical Considerations  
A tool that can enrich the selection of patients submitted to a liver biopsy, limiting it to subjects with a higher probability 
of meeting the required histopathologic criteria would be a welcomed tool for both patients and Sponsors. A schematic 
description of the proposed use of this biomarker is illustrated below in Figure 2. 
The biomarker would be used in an adult population (aged 18 or above) considered to have a high likelihood for NASH 
(e.g., absence of a history of alcohol abuse, clinical characteristics of metabolic syndrome, elevated liver fat content by 
imaging, and/or elevated liver enzymes) with sufficiently advanced fibrosis to be at high risk of progression to adverse 
liver outcomes. NIS4 is to be used with a single, high-value cut-off correlating to a diagnostic PPV>80% for efficient referral 
and high diagnostic confidence. NIS4 diagnostic performance was determined in RESOLVE-IT DIAG. Diagnostic cut-off is 
set at 0.617 to diagnose patients with active NASH and significant fibrosis (NAS≥4 & F≥2) with a specificity goal of 85% 
which should yield a high (> 80%) positive predictive value.  Sensitivity, specificity, and PPV can be altered by different 
prevalence in the condition to diagnose, but also in disease distribution in the group above NAS≥4 & F≥2.  In addition, the 
overall performance characteristics of NIS4 would indicate a limited number of false-positive and hence limit the number 
of liver biopsies on patients that do not meet the histological entry criteria.  
Figure 2: NIS 4 Diagnostic Performance.  
If an individual yields a NIS4 score below the high cut-off, these 
patients are recommended for follow-up and re-test at regular 
intervals at the discretion of the attending physician. Given the slow 
progression of NASH in most patients, initially missing a subject with 
F≥2 should not result in adverse outcomes so long as continued 
monitoring is maintained. Results from RESOLVE-IT longitudinal 
samples and biopsies should support the determination of the ideal 
frequency of re-testing as a function of a baseline or initial NIS4 value. The NIMBLE study will help provide such additional, 
external information. 
Supporting Information  
Support for the role of miR-34a 
Due to their role in modulating both cellular processes and expression levels in disease processes, circulating miRNAs have 
been proposed as biomarkers for different pathologies, including liver disease, cardiac diseases, diabetes, cancer, kidney 
alterations, neurodegenerative diseases, allergy and asthma, amongst many others. 
 
==PAGE:67==
 
 
By using samples collected during Elafibranor clinical trials (GOLDEN-505 and RESOLVE-IT) and other external cohorts, 
GENFIT identified >10 miRNAs whose circulating levels are altered in patients with active NASH and significant fibrosis. 
Among the ones identified, miR-34a demonstrated the highest diagnostic value in identifying patients with active NASH 
and significant fibrosis. Circulating levels of miR-34a increase with both NASH disease grade (e.g. NAS) and fibrosis stage. 
Furthermore, miR-34a outperformed all other markers previously reported in the literature (notably CK18-M30, CK18-
M65, PIIINP) for detection of active NASH and significant fibrosis. In line with its potential roles in NASH pathophysiology 
and arguing in favor of its use for diagnosis of active NASH with significant fibrosis, miR-34a is present in very low levels in 
presumed “healthy” blood donors (Table 2).  
 
Table 2: Expression levels of miR-34a in healthy vs diseased individuals (data courtesy Genfit) 
“Healthy” donors  
Mean (sd) (nbr) 
NTBT GOLDEN  
Mean (sd) (nbr) 
TBT GOLDEN 
Mean (sd) (nbr) 
p-value 
NTBT vs TBT 
40 (6) (100) 
218 (15) (110) 
435 (34) (160) 
<0.0001 
NTBT = Not=To-Be-Treated patients; TBT = To-Be-Treated patients; GOLDEN = GOLDEN Phase II Elafibranor drug trial; sc = 
standard deviation; nbr = numbers 
Support for the role of A2M 
Alpha-2-macroglobulin or A2M is the second most important biomarker in the NIS4 test. A2M is a plasma inflammation 
glycoprotein with anti-protease and anti-fibrinolytic activities. It is produced in the liver and its levels are greatly increased 
when fibrosis develops. A2M has an important role in protease inhibition thus allowing an increase in collagen production 
by reduction of collagenase activity.  
Support for the role of CHI3L1/YKL-40 
Chitinase-3-like protein (also known as YKL-40) is a secreted glycoprotein implicated in liver fibrosis.  CHI3L1 is expressed 
by many different types of cells, such as monocytes, macrophages, endothelial cells, and chondrocytes. It has also been 
shown that CHI3L1 is able to suppress matrix metalloproteinase production, such as MMP-1, MMP-3 and MMP-13, 
induced by IL-1 and TNF-α. Evidence suggests that CHI3L1 may utilize its chitin binding ability to communicate with other 
signal transduction pathways to modulate various physiologic processes, such as inflammation, apoptosis, tissue 
remodeling, cell growth, and angiogenesis.  
Those performances have been presented in various posters at AASLD 2016/2017, EASL 2017/2018 and NASH Biomarkers 
2017 (Reference A: NIS4 References #’s 10-13).  
LABCORP has signed a license agreement to perform NIS4 for clinical research worldwide, which includes performing 
the 4 assays and calculating the score with the required assays techniques and instruments, and within a CLIA/CAP 
certified environment. The scoring information can be requested from Genfit and LABCORP. 
 
2. OWLiver®   
 
(Please note: information below summarizes information provided by One Way Lipidomics) 
Biomarker Information and Interpretation  
1. Biomarker name: OWLiver® (triglycerides panel with varying saturation of associated fatty acids plus Body Mass Index 
[BMI]); Biomarker type: Molecular. Unique molecular ID: ID for OWLiver is not formally stablished because it is an “in vitro 
diagnosis” based in an algorithm combining 25 different molecular (trigylicerides) markers. 
2. Analytical methods:  OWLiver® is a lipidomic serum test based on two sequential analyses for discrimination between 
normal liver and NAFLD and then, NASH from NAFL (simple steatosis). This is based on two logistic regression algorithms 
==PAGE:68==
DDT #000057 
BQP Qualification Program Cover Letter 
 
Date: March  25th, 2019 
Subject: DDT QUALIFICATION SUBMISSION 
DDT Type: Biomarker Qualification 
ATTN: CDER-Biomarker Qualification Program 
C/O CDER Document Room: Upon receipt notify:  
CDER-BiomarkerQualificationProgram@fda.hhs.gov 
 
Biomarker DDT Tracking Number: #000057 
Check 
Here 
Submission Type 
X 
Letter of Intent 
 
Qualification Plan 
 
Full Qualification Package  
X 
Update of Above (Check two, this box and one above) 
X 
Other (Integrated Response to FDA QRT LOI 
Feedback): 
 
Biomarker Name(s): Blood Eosinophil Count 
 
Context of Use: Describe the intended drug development use for the biomarker named above 
(1 to 2 sentences, see the graphic below for how to write the context of use.)  
 
Proposed Context of Use 
Blood eosinophil count is qualified as a predictive biomarker to enrich for subject populations more 
likely to respond to current and novel pharmacological COPD interventions in clinical trials. 
 
Contact Information:  
Debora D. Merrill 
 
 
 
 
Cara Pasquale 
COPD Foundation 
 
 
 
 
COPD Foundation 
3300 Ponce de Leon Blvd. 
 
 
 
3300 Ponce de Leon Blvd. 
Miami, FL  33134 
 
 
 
 
Miami, FL  33134 
866-731-2673, x410  
 
 
 
866-731-2673, x312 
FAX: 866-929-3487 
 
 
 
 
FAX: 866-929-3487 
 
Purpose Statement: To provide responses to FDA questions and comments, received 
12/18/2017, including an updated Letter of Intent.   
 
In addition, we would like to request a meeting with the BQT (assuming the updated LOI is 
accepted to enter the program) to review our data evidentiary plan as we work toward the 
Appendix 2
==PAGE:69==
DDT #000057 
BQP Qualification Program Cover Letter 
 
more detailed Qualification Plan documentation.  If the LOI is accepted our current plan is to 
move forward with a literature-based approach as opposed to full data integration but would 
like BQRT’s thoughts on if that is an acceptable approach. 
 
Submission Statement: This email has been checked for viruses by Microsoft Office 365's 
Advanced Threat Protection. WARNING: Although the company has taken reasonable 
precautions to ensure no viruses are present in this email, the company cannot accept 
responsibility for any loss or damage arising from the use of this email or attachment. 
Additional Instructions for LOI/QP/FQP1 submissions: For every electronic submission, a 
comprehensive table of contents should be submitted containing three or four levels of detail, 
with the appropriate bookmarks to key referenced sections in the document. 
                                                            
1 LOI: Letter of Intent; QP: Qualification Plan; FQP: Full Qualification Plan 
==PAGE:70==
4 
 
PDE4(12). We intend to use data from already completed clinical trials of ICS, PDE4 inhibitors and 
anti-IL5 treatments to evaluate the predictive ability of blood eosinophils in high risk COPD patients.  
 
Analytical Considerations 
FDA Comments 
1. You identify specific analysers which can be used for blood eosinophil counts, stating that 
these analysers are FDA cleared. Elsewhere in the LOI, it appears that non-FDA cleared 
hematology analysers (e.g., laboratory developed tests) will be used. The different technical 
parameters of each device could affect the acceptable range for determination of elevated 
blood eosinophil count. In addition, it is unclear if these devices can measure or count the 
blood eosinophil. A white blood cell count and granulocyte count may not give the correct 
parameters for the proposed COU. 
 
• 
Please clarify which measurement method(s) will be used to obtain blood eosinophil 
count. Please indicate if the above devices were specifically developed to assess 
eosinophil count. Please provide a brief description of the device limitations and how 
these limitations may affect the COU for this biomarker. 
• 
Please provide a 51OK number or PMA number for the intended use of the devices if 
they were cleared or approved by the FDA. This information is needed to ensure the 
devices were cleared by the FDA for blood eosinophil count and can consistently 
provide correct eosinophil count to support the COU. If you are not proposing to use 
FDA cleared devices with the same indication for use as you propose additional data 
will be necessary to validate and provide supportive evidence of the precision, 
sensitivity, and specificity of the methodology. 
 
2. Post-hoc and retrospective analyses are proposed to support the COU by studying blood 
eosinophil count in COPD patients. It is unclear if the data for these analyses were collected 
and analysed in the same manner, and if the processes were validated. Since this variability 
across studies could affect our ability to accurately interpret the strength of the evidence, 
please share how these concerns will be addressed. 
CBQC Response 
We plan to report details of important analytical considerations in the Qualification Plan, including 
aspects of measurement variability including precision around proposed measurement thresholds. 
 
Clinical Considerations 
FDA Comments 
3. Please clarify the clinical trial patient population for whom your COU will apply. 
 
• 
We presume that you intend to use the same definition of moderate to severe exacerbations 
commonly used in clinical trials, building off the work of Anthonisen et. al. (2). Please clarify 
and provide a detailed definition of moderate to severe pulmonary exacerbations in COPD 
patients in your submission. 
==PAGE:71==
5 
 
• 
Do you intend to restrict your COU to only COPD patients with a history of moderate and 
severe exacerbations? Please clarify if this is your intent and ensure the data that will be 
provided in support of the COU used this definition. 
• 
Please further define the discrete patient subgroup that you plan to target and provide more 
detail on how a specific blood eosinophil count threshold would improve identification of 
these clinical trial subjects. Please define and describe the distinct inflammatory profile of this 
subgroup and provide any evidence that supports the utility of this blood eosinophil count 
threshold to discriminate between these subjects and those with other inflammatory profiles 
(i.e., primarily neutrophilic inflammation). 
 
CBQC Response 
 
We intend to use the same exacerbation definition that is used in clinical trials. 
 
The COU will be restricted to patients with a history of moderate to severe exacerbations 
The patient subgroup that we wish to target are individuals with eosinophilic lung inflammation. Blood 
eosinophil counts are a practical means of identifying these individuals. The relationship between 
blood and sputum eosinophil counts in COPD has been reported as statistically significant but with an 
r value <0.5(16-18), indicating a modest or weak strength of relationship. However, sputum eosinophil 
sampling is prone to variability, and is by no means a gold standard for measuring eosinophilic lung 
inflammation. A bronchoscopy study (n=41) evaluating COPD patients with blood eosinophils <150 
cells/µL versus >250 cells/µL showed greater eosinophil numbers in the bronchoalveolar lavage and 
bronchial mucosa, and increased airway remodelling in the latter group(16). This indicates a distinct 
inflammatory profile in COPD patients with higher blood eosinophil counts and supports the case to 
use different pharmacological approaches to treat this subgroup. 
 
COPD is caused by multiple biological mechanisms. Eosinophilic COPD can co-exist with other forms 
of inflammation / remodelling caused by other mechanisms. There is no accepted classification of 
COPD according to inflammatory profiles. We intend to use blood eosinophils to identify COPD 
patients with eosinophilic lung inflammation, which may exist with or without other mechanisms of 
lung inflammation being present. 
 
FDA Comment 
 
4. Please provide a description of how drug development trials would differ should this biomarker 
be qualified. If other biomarkers or criteria are currently used for this purpose, please briefly 
provide the added value of blood eosinophil count compared with currently used clinical trial 
design methods 
 
CBQC Response 
At present, clinical trials of anti-inflammatory drugs commonly use a clinical history of exacerbations 
to enrich the population for at risk individuals. No other clinical criteria are commonly used. Blood 
eosinophils are being proposed as a predictive biomarker within this high-risk population. No other 
biomarkers are presently in widespread use that would influence this proposal. 
FDA Comments 
 
==PAGE:72==
6 
 
5. You state that a standard operating procedure (SOP) will not be used to collect blood for blood 
eosinophil count because the blood samples are collected by standard venipuncture. If an SOP is 
not used to collect blood samples, it is unclear how you will mitigate the influence of variables 
(e.g., timing and chronicity of inhaled or systemic corticosteroid use, concomitant asthma, 
parasitic infections, timing of exposure to other environmental allergens, etc.) that may have an 
impact on blood eosinophil count. 
• 
Provide information for the blood collection method used in your studies and 
comparability across studies. If you plan to conduct prospective trials, please develop an 
SOP for collecting blood samples for the COPD subjects. 
• 
The LOI states that inhaled corticosteroids (JCS) do not affect blood eosinophil count. The 
literature is unclear on whether there is any statistically significant effect (3-5) of JCS on 
blood eosinophil levels over time, although the magnitude of the effect is consistently 
thought to be clinically insignificant. Please address the potential impact of JCS on your 
measurement of blood eosinophils count. 
 
CBQC Response 
 
Issues concerning SOP: the collection of blood by venepuncture for haematology analysis is routinely 
performed in clinical practice and research and is a simple procedure. Our proposal will provide 
guidance (an SOP) on this.  
Regarding external variables; the presence of concomitant asthma should not alter the procedure or its 
interpretation, as it is the level of eosinophilic inflammation in COPD (with or without asthma) that we 
wish to develop as a predictive biomarker. In cases of parasitic infection or oral corticosteroid use, which 
can both significantly affect blood eosinophil counts, then this biomarker should not be used. Regarding 
inhaled corticosteroids, we will evaluate the literature carefully for any effect, but this appears to be 
small and not sufficient to cause problems with the interpretation of results. For example, post-hoc and 
prospective analysis using blood eosinophils to predict ICS effects have shown positive predictive results 
while included patients taking ICS and not taking ICS at the point when blood eosinophils were 
measured. 
FDA Comments 
 
6. In describing the mechanistic rationale in support of the proposed biomarker, you state that 
airway eosinophils are increased in a subset of COPD patients experiencing increased frequency of 
exacerbations. You also state that it is technically challenging to measure eosinophils in sputum 
and there is a correlation between sputum eosinophil count and blood eosinophil count. While 
there is a body of literature that favours the idea that sputum eosinophilia may be linked to COPD 
exacerbations, the prognostic value of the sputum measure is unclear (6). Retrospective data may 
suggest that sputum eosinophilia may have some utility in identifying patients that will respond to 
corticosteroids with respect to exacerbations or other measures; however, prospective, well-
designed trials are limited (7, 8). In addition, the ability of blood eosinophil count to predict 
sputum eosinophilia appears to vary widely in its test characteristics when measured in different 
contexts (9) (10). Note, it may not be necessary to prove this link within the COU if the case can be 
adequately supported using blood eosinophil count alone. 
 
 
==PAGE:73==
7 
 
CBQC Response 
Blood and sputum eosinophils are both surrogate biomarkers of eosinophilic lung inflammation. The 
problems with using sputum measurements is well documented e.g. many centres lack expertise to 
perform this method, some patients cannot produce a sample and sputum cell counts can be prone to 
high variability. Studies have shown a relationship between blood and sputum eosinophils, with r value 
<0.5(16-18), indicating a modest or weak strength of relationship. However, sputum eosinophil sampling 
is prone to variability, and is by no means a gold standard for measuring eosinophilic lung inflammation. 
A bronchoscopy study (n=41) evaluating COPD patients with blood eosinophils <150 cells/µL versus >250 
cells/µL showed greater eosinophil numbers in the bronchoalveolar lavage and bronchial mucosa, and 
increased airway remodelling in the latter group(16). 
We have previously mentioned sputum eosinophils as providing supportive evidence that eosinophilic 
COPD is a distinct entity, and have quoted some evidence to support sputum eosinophils being both a 
prognostic and predictive biomarker. The published information on sputum eosinophils during 
exacerbations is mechanistically important, as it shows that some exacerbations have a high level of 
eosinophilic airway inflammation, which supports the case to target eosinophilic inflammation to 
prevent exacerbations. However, we wish to be clear that the focus this submission on the development 
of blood eosinophils as a predictive biomarker. 
 
FDA Comments 
7. Lack of consensus in the literature (see Appendix) highlights the need for additional information, 
analyses, or prospective studies to adequately address the outstanding questions about the role 
of blood eosinophil count as a biomarker without confounding factors. The two papers cited in 
the LOI (Siddiqui et al and Pavord et al) both conclude that further prospective studies are needed 
to clearly evaluate blood eosinophil count's role in the treatment of COPD subjects. 
 
• 
Please briefly discuss your interpretation of the available literature, and your plan to provide 
additional information or analyses that address this uncertainty 
• 
In the setting of the totality of literature addressing this topic, the summary of post­hoc 
analysis data provided in the LOI may not be sufficient to support the COU 
CBQC Response 
The aim of our submission is to perform a pooled analysis of all available data from clinical trials to 
determine the predictive ability of blood eosinophils to determine the effects of ICS on exacerbation 
rates and other important clinical outcomes, e.g. health status and lung function. Additionally, we will 
study the robustness of the measurement of blood eosinophils, evaluating parameters that may 
influence reproducibility. To support this analysis plan, then our interpretation of the current literature 
is set out below. 
The relationship between blood eosinophils and exacerbations 
Clinical trials of ICS/LABA versus LABA (post-hoc analysis) and triple therapy versus long acting 
bronchodilator treatments (pre-specified analysis) performed in patients at high risk of exacerbations 
have shown an increased exacerbation rate in patients with higher blood eosinophil counts who were 
not randomised to ICS treatment(1-3, 8). This shows that blood eosinophil counts may be a prognostic 
biomarker in high risk patients who have not been treated with ICS. Cohort studies have produced 
conflicting results regarding the potential of blood eosinophil counts as a prognostic biomarker; this is 
==PAGE:74==
8 
 
partly due to the inclusion of low risk patients and the confounding effects of ICS use. We are not 
interested in developing blood eosinophils as a prognostic biomarker.  
Post-hoc analysis of ICS/LABA versus LABA 
A large post-hoc analysis of 3 clinical trials (n=4528) comparing ICS/LABA with LABA showed a significant 
ICS effect  at > 100 cells/µL, with the effect size increasing with higher blood eosinophil counts(1). 
Similar findings have been reported in other post-hoc analyses of clinical trials comparing ICS/LABA 
versus LABA(2, 3). Pooling the results of these and other studies with a similar design will increase the 
statistical power to determine the relevant blood eosinophil threshold levels. 
In your interpretation of Siddqui et al, you raise a point about the highest eosinophil quartile having a 
higher exacerbation rates. In reply, we consider that the rates between 1.4 – 1.51 / year are reasonably 
similar and do not confound the conclusion.  You also raise a point about stratification by percentage 
showing different results. In reply, one reason for this is the reduced statistical power in such subgroup 
analysis; this is the purpose of our proposal to pool data for more robust analysis. Also, we will focus on 
absolute eosinophil counts (not percentage), as percentage are influenced by other blood cell numbers. 
In your interpretation of Pascoe et al, you raise a comment in a response article. This post-hoc analysis 
was the first to generate the hypothesis about the predictive ability of blood eosinophil counts. The 
pooled analysis that we are planning will have sufficient statistical power to overcome the type of 
criticism in the response article.    
Post-hoc analysis of fluticasone propionate studies 
You have mentioned the Pavord et al paper, and Barnes et al, analysing clinical trial data with the ICS 
fluticasone propionate(19, 20). In the Pavord paper, you express concern that one trial (out of three) 
included in the paper is not supportive. In response, it should be noted that this trial did not specifically 
recruit high risk patients (i.e. with a history of exacerbations in the last year), while the two supportive 
studies in the paper included only high risk patients. It is our intention to focus on the predictive ability 
of blood eosinophils in high risk patients. The ISOLDE study is also mentioned, which again did not 
recruit specifically high risk patients. These studies including non-high risk patients are less relevant to 
our submission. 
FLAME trial 
It is important to read the subsequent published analysis of blood eosinophils in FLAME, and the 
subsequent correspondence debate(21). In summary, the effect of ICS/LABA was lowest when blood 
eosinophils <150 cells/uL, which demonstrates a predictive ability of this biomarker. The analysis in the 
initial paper was pre-specified, but too simplistic (i.e. using a single cut-off to dichotomize the 
population) to analyse the predictive ability of the biomarker properly. 
Biomarker directed exacerbation treatment  
The study by Bafadhel et al concerns oral corticosteroid use and provides some mechanistic information 
that some exacerbations are eosinophilic(22). It is not directly relevant to our submission.  
 
Mepoluzimab studies 
We are proposing to evaluate blood eosinophils as a predictive biomarker of drug effects in COPD 
patients with a history of exacerbations; this is important, as we are intending to use this biomarker only 
==PAGE:75==
9 
 
in this COPD subset. The main “criticisms” of blood eosinophils as an “imperfect biomarker” are listed 
below, with a response against the criticism: 
a) “Blood eosinophils do not consistently relate to exacerbation rate”. Response: The inclusion of 
patients who at low risk of exacerbations in such cohorts, and the confounding effects of 
concurrent ICS therapy, causes variation in results between studies(13-15). This contrasts with 
the consistent findings in clinical trials of patients at high exacerbation risk, where the 
exacerbation rate is related to blood eosinophil counts in patients not treated with ICS.  
b) “Blood eosinophils do not show a strong correlation with sputum eosinophils”. Response: 
sputum eosinophils are by no means a “gold standard” of eosinophilic inflammation in the lungs. 
Sputum eosinophils are prone to variability, which contributes significantly to the reported 
moderate / weak associations between blood and sputum eosinophils. There is a bronchoscopy 
study that has shown significantly different airway inflammation in COPD patients with blood 
eosinophils > 250 cells /µL(16). 
Triple therapy studies 
Three clinical trials comparing “triple therapy” (ICS/LABA plus long acting muscarinic antagonist; LAMA) 
against LAMA monotherapy or LABA/LAMA combination (i.e. no ICS treatment) have prospectively 
shown that blood eosinophil counts predict the effect of the ICS component of triple therapy(7-9).  
These key studies provide evidence of the potential of blood eosinophils as a predictive biomarker 
within a population at high risk of exacerbations.  
 
Statistical Considerations 
FDA Comments 
8. You plan to pool post-hoc analyses of multiple clinical trials to establish cut-off / threshold values 
above which blood eosinophil counts predict a greater reduction in exacerbation rates. 
Establishing cut-off values generally requires independent data sets for discovery and validation 
of the cut-point. In addition, the device(s) used to measure the biomarker should be analytically 
validated around the proposed blood eosinophil count threshold (e.g., cutoff value) to be used to 
connate elevated eosinophil count. 
 
• 
Please review the revised COU to describe the specific blood eosinophils count threshold 
that defines the subgroup of COPD subjects of interest (i.e. the severity and frequency of 
exacerbations or response to therapies. 
CBQC Response 
Statistical modelling of data from clinical trials involving ICS has already been performed e.g. 
approximately 10,000 patients in the IMPACT study, and > 4,500 patients in a pooled analysis of 
ICS/LABA treatment. Other trials have also used statistical modelling, and we will describe these data 
independently. For PDE4 inhibitors, further analysis will be performed. After this analysis, the 
threshold(s) proposed will be analysed further regarding device analytical performance.  
This document has earlier revised the COU of blood eosinophils as a predictive biomarker in COPD 
patients at high exacerbation risk. 
