==PAGE:1==
Decadal changes in physical
oceanographic conditions on the East
Greenland Shelf
Mischa Saes
s182567
Supervisors
Colin Stedmon and André Visser
November 1, 2020
==PAGE:2==
Thesis
Abstract
This study aims to identify any existing relations between the sea surface temperature
(SST), wind stress curl and wind speed in the North Atlantic, covering the region between
58 and 82°N and 48°E to 9°W. Two satellite datasets are used: a reanalysis dataset spanning
the years between 1988 and 2020, and a near-real time dataset spanning the years between
2007 and 2020. Between 1988 and 2020, most of the region north of Iceland sees a positive
correlation between SST and time. South of Iceland, no such relation is observed. Principal
component analysis (PCA) is used as a tool to identify spatial and temporal patterns in the
SST, wind stress curl and wind speed. The PCA model conﬁrms that the regions north of
Iceland behaves diﬀerent from the region south of Iceland. In the SST model, a convincing
North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO) pattern is observed, indicating the impact of atmospheric
patterns on SST. Some imprint of NAO is also found in the wind stress curl model, although
the corresponding component likely also includes variability from a diﬀerent source. The
link between NAO and wind speed is weaker than between NAO and wind stress curl.
1
==PAGE:3==
Thesis
1
Introduction
Oceans play a signiﬁcant role in mitigating the eﬀect of climate change. Not only do they
act as sinks for carbon dioxide, they also absorb surface heat[14]. The Atlantic Meridional
Overturning Circulation (AMOC) carries the "warm", carbon dioxide rich surface water into
the deep ocean, where it is stored for many generations.
Climate change is considered one of the major problems of our society [15]. It has sub-
stantial eﬀects on the human society. These eﬀects can be direct or indirect. Examples of
direct eﬀects include global air temperature rise, more severe storms or intensiﬁed periods
of rainfall [15]. Indirect eﬀects cause a wave of subsequent eﬀects, where for example atmo-
spheric patterns can aﬀect the ﬂow of ocean currents, which inﬂuences all trophic levels of
the ecosystem [27].
The oceans act as a two edged sword. Sea level rise will cause substantial problems
to everyone living close to the coast. Yet on the positive side, oceans have given us more
time to solve the climate change issue we are dealing with [15][14]. Millions of individuals
depend on the ocean food and income. Fisheries are important for both the local and global
economy. It may be clear that the oceans play a crucial role in the future of our society.
1.1
Research question and relevance of the study
The physical state of the oceans is important for our ecosystems. Salinity and tem-
perature inﬂuence the distribution of ﬁsh stocks, while the availability of nutrients directly
impacts the presence and composition of plankton communities. Through bottom up con-
trol, nutrient availability has a cascading impact on ﬁsh stocks [27][20]. As a result, physical
or climatic forcing can lead to ecosystem regime shifts. A regime shift refers to signiﬁcant
changes across multiple trophic levels within the ecosystem over regional extend, leading
to a new stable state [20]. Regime shifts are not only of natural origin, as anthropogenic
activities can also cause regime shifts [42].
Around the 1920s and 1930s, the North Atlantic ocean was aﬀected by an increase in
ocean temperatures, not only due to atmospheric temperature increase, but also as a result
of changes in ocean circulation. As a consequence, the cold water species that were present
in the area, such as polar cod and capelin, retreaded northward, while being replaced by
warmer water species such as herring, cod and Haddock. This regime shift had substantial
socio-economic eﬀects as ﬁsheries suddenly had to deal with diﬀerent ﬁsh species [20].
Regime shifts can have a substantial eﬀect. When one commercially interesting ﬁsh
species is replaced by another, a regime shift might be acceptable from a socio-economic
point of view. However, when a regime shift results in a severely diminished ﬁsh stock, the
eﬀect on both the ecosystem and the society that depends on it is substantial.
Understanding of past and present changes in the physical condition of the oceans can
tell us to understand how ecosystems might shift. In this paper, I will attempt to study past
and current changes in sea surface temperature (SST) in the East Greenland region. The
geographic extent of the study area covers the area between 58°N (one and a half degree south
of cape Farewell) and 82°N, the northern boundary of Kong Frederiks VIII’s Land in the Fram
Strait. In east-west direction, the study area spans from 48°E (3.4°west of Cape Farewell)
2
==PAGE:4==
Thesis
1.1
Research question and relevance of the study
to 9°W, covering the entire Fram Strait (Figure 1 and Figure 2). Both shelf waters and the
open sea are studied in this region. Additionally, trends and variations in both atmospheric
wind stress curl and wind speed cubed will be studied. Wind stress curl can impact ocean
circulation [31], whereas wind speed cubed is a measure for energy transfer between wind
and the top ocean layer (personal conversation with Dr. André Visser). Finally, the observed
trends and variations in SST and wind regimes will be compared to diﬀerent atmospheric
and oceanographic indices for possible relations.
Figure 1: Overview of surface currents north of Iceland [24].
3
==PAGE:5==
Thesis
2
Theory
The study area can roughly be divided into an area north of Iceland (ﬁgure 1) and
an area south of Iceland. In the northern area, surface waters are of Arctic origin in the
west and of Atlantic origin in the east. Polar Waters (PW) exit the Arctic ocean via the
western Fram Strait as the East Greenland Current (EGC). This relatively cold (less than
0°C) and fresh water (compared to Atlantic water) ﬂows over the East Greenland shelf and
along the East Greenland slope break, where the core of the EGC is found. At the shelf,
the EGC is inﬂuenced by melt water originating from Greenland. Below the polar surface
currents, Arctic water of Atlantic origin is found, referred to as Arctic Atlantic Water (AAW)
or Modiﬁed Atlantic Water.
This water constitutes of water of Atlantic origin that has
circulated trough the Arctic ocean. It has kept some of the key characteristics of Atlantic
water by being warmer and more saline than PW [24][43].
Part of the south ﬂowing PW deviates away from the slope to the east, where it aﬀects
the surface waters in the Nordic seas. In the eastern North Atlantic, relatively warm and
saline Atlantic water ﬂows northwards as the Norwegian Atlantic current (NWAC). Part of
this water ﬂows on this journey into the Barents Sea, while the remaining part continues in
the North Atlantic as the West Spitsbergen Current (WSC) [24]. When in the Fram Strait,
or just north of it, part of the WSC follows the EGC and recirculates back south as the
Return Atlantic Current (RAC) [9][24].
Figure 2: Overview of surface cur-
rents south of Iceland. The blue
lines represent the "cold" subpo-
lar gyre (SPG) currents. The red
lines represent the "warm" and
saline Atlantic subtropical gyre
currents.
The green lines rep-
resent the mix of the two wa-
ter masses.
The light blue line
shows the the suggested deviation
of some of the EGC current dur-
ing a period with a weak subpolar
gyre (SPG). Adjusted ﬁgure based
on ﬁgure by Hátún et al., 2005
[28].
Southwest of Iceland, the polar EGC is conﬁned to the shallow, narrow region along
the East Greenland Coast. Atlantic waters and Arctic waters are circulated in a cyclonic
4
==PAGE:6==
Thesis
2.1
Atmospheric patterns
rotation as the subpolar gyre (SPG). The North Atlantic Current (NAC) forms a wide current
southeast of Iceland that can be divided into a western and an eastern branch . The western
branch forms the eastern limit of the subpolar gyre, which follows a path south of Iceland
towards the southern tip of Greenland. Some of the western NAC branch water crosses the
Iceland-Shetland ridge northward and leaves the SPG (Figure 1 and Figure 2) [24][7][45].
The eastern NAC branch forms the northern limit of the subtropical gyre.
Part of
this branch returns southward, while the rest follows a path northward to meet part of the
western branch NAC near the Rockall Trough in the area between Ireland and Iceland. This
mix of subpolar and subtropical waters ﬂows northward splits up in two directions. Part of
the mix follows a path to the north to feed the area North of Iceland, where it forms the
NWAC.
The other part of the mix ﬂows to the west to become part of the Irminger Current (IC)
south of Iceland. This current splits up west Iceland. The majority of the water ﬂows south
to meet the subpolar gyre water, which then turns southward along the shelf, adjacent to the
EGC [28]. The remaining part of the IC turns north along the western coast of Iceland via
the Denmark Strait. North of Iceland, it merges with the East Iceland Current, a current
that is a a branch of the EGC forming approximately 500km north of the Denmark Strait
(Figure 1 and Figure 2) [46][12].
2.1
Atmospheric patterns
The North Atlantic atmosphere can be described by atmospheric patterns. Each of
these patterns is described by speciﬁc modes that describe the geographic distribution of
high and low pressure ﬁelds.
The North Atlantic Oscilation (NAO) is a leading atmospheric pattern over the Northern
Hemisphere that has no preferred timescale and it does not depend on ocean-atmosphere
interactions for its existence.
Within season variation, inter annual variation as well as
decadal variation are important. NAO impacts rainfall patterns, air temperature, winds
and storms when swinging from one phase to another. Additionally, it has the potential to
impact the North Atlantic SST through diﬀerent processes. For example, the NAO is linked
to cold water anomalies in the region south of Iceland[31][16][18][28]. Although the NAO
cannot be deﬁned in one unique way, it is commonly deﬁned as one of the leading modes
of an empirically-determined orthogonal function (EOF) on the 500 hPa height during the
northern hemisphere winter [33][32]. The NAO is related to the sea-level pressure (SLP)
diﬀerence between the Arctic and subtropics around the Atlantic. A positive NAO index
refers to an increased SLP gradient between the Azores High and the Icelandic Low [34].
Flipping of the NAO sign is the result of redistribution of atmospheric mass [18].
A similar indicator of the atmospheric state is given by the East Atlantic Pattern (EAP).
This pressure anomaly is found east of the NAO over the subpolar Gyre. A positive phase
is associated with a high pressure system over Spain and North Africa and a low pressure
system over the eastern SPG [34][2].
The Arctic Oscilation (AO) is an indicator that is deﬁned by the pressue diﬀerence
between the Arctic Ocean and the Northern Atlantic and Paciﬁc oceans, which impacts the
jet stream location. During a positve phase, the pressure over the northern Atlantic and
5
==PAGE:7==
Thesis
2.1
Atmospheric patterns
Paciﬁc oceans is higher than average, whereas the pressure over the Arctic ocean is lower
than average. The jet stream is found more further north than usual during this phase. This
pressure distribution leads to northward shifted storms and much of the northern hemisphere
sees fewer outbreaks of cold air. Most of the cold air remains trapped within the polar regions.
The negative AO phase, a reversal of these events [3][1].
6
==PAGE:8==
Thesis
3
Methods
3.1
Data availability
For this study two datasets are used, which are both delivered via Copernicus, "the
European Programme for the establishment of a European capacity for Earth Observation".
SST is estimated by both a reanalysis dataset (RA) as well as a near-real time dataset (NT).
Near-real time data is directly estimated via both Infra-red and microwave sensors, deployed
on diﬀerent platforms [19], whereas models are used to combine and interpolate observations
multiple sources in reanalysis datasets [17].
The near-real time satellite data is available via the Copernicus Marine data portal. This
service only allows for a maximum ﬁle size of 1024Mb, a python script is used for automated
downloading. The SST_GLO_SST_L4_NRT_OBSERV ATIONS_010_001 dataset is
produced by the OSTIA (Operational Sea Surface Temperature and Ice Analysis) system
developed by the Met Oﬃce. It uses satellite data provided by the GHRSST framework
(Group for High Resolution SST). The dataset used in this paper has global coverage on a
0.05° resolution grid and includes daily sea surface foundation temperature data (temperature
of upper 10m of the ocean, free of diurnal temperature variations), sea ice cover and analysis
error. In order to remove bias errors, the satellite observed SST is compared in-situ SST
measurements (drifting buoys) and ENVISAT Advanced Along Track Scanning Radiometer
(AATSR) SST observations [19].
The ERA5 reanalysis dataset is available via Copernicus Climate Change Service data
portal.
It is produced since 2020 by the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather
Forecasts (ECMWF) and provides a signiﬁcant upgrade in spatial and temporal resolution
compared to previous reanalysis products. The spatial resolution depends on the data type,
the temporal resolution is hourly. The dataset includes atmospheric data over land and
oceans, ocean wave data, SST and sea ice data and the data is available within 3 months after
the observation. The observations are compared to independent measurements for estimating
the ﬁt of the (temperature and wind) data. The ERA5 dataset has global coverage since
1950 [29].
The foundation SST is available in the ERA5 dataset. Before September 2007 SST is
based on the HadISST2 dataset. From September 2017 onwards, SST is based on the OSTIA
dataset [29]. Wind stress curl is not provided by the ERA5 dataset. Instead, it is calculated
by:
∇× τ = ∂τy
∂x
−∂τx
∂y
(1)
where
∂τx = 1
2(τx(i+1)(j+1) + τx(i+1)(j)) −1
2(τx(i)(j+1) + τx(i)(j))
(2)
and
∂τy = 1
2(τy(i+1)(j+1) + τy(i)(j+1)) −1
2(τy(i+1)(j) + τy(i)(j))
(3)
τx and τy represent the instantaneous eastward turbulent surface stress and the instantaneous
northward turbulent surface stress respectively. The wind speed is given in northward (v)
7
==PAGE:9==
Thesis
3.2
Data preparation
Dataset type
Parameter
Coverage
Temporal
resolution
Spatial
resolution
OSTIA
near-real time
Analysed SST
Global
Daily
0.05°
Sea Ice Fraction
Global
Daily
0.05°
Analysis Error
Global
Daily
0.05°
ERA5
Reanalysis
Foundation SST
Global
Hourly
0.25°
10m u and v-component
of wind
Global
Hourly
0.25°
Instantaneous
eastward/northward
turbulent surface stress
Global
Hourly
0.25°
Table 1: Overview of the two diﬀerent datasets and the used parameters.
and eastward (u) direction. Therefore, wind speed is calculated as
√
u2 + v2
(4)
Table 1 gives an overview of the two datasets. Both wind speed and instantaneous wind
stress are estimated by scatterometer [29].
The near-real time data is delivered as NetCDF (Network Common Data Form) format,
whereas the reanalysis data has the GRIB (General Regularly-distributed Information in
Binary form) format. Python is used as the main data analysis tool. The Xarray package
can handle both NETCDF as well as GRIB data. Together with Dask, it allows for parallel
computing, which reduces the required computing power and internal memory signiﬁcantly.
3.1.1
Data sensitivity
A review of the analysis error of the near-real time SST data performed in this study
concludes that the error is largely independent of season, except for the East Greenland
shelf. Here, the analysis error is slightly larger during winter and spring than during the
other seasons. The yearly averaged analysis error on the continental slope and deep ocean
is ∼1°C before 2014 and ∼0.5°C onward (see appendix "sensitivity analysis" for results of
the sensitivity analysis).
The analysis error correlates with the sea ice fraction. In a region of 70% ice, the analysis
error is maximum 0.5°C higher than in ice free regions. In areas with a sea ice fraction of
more than 0.7, the analysis error increases substantially.
3.2
Data preparation
In this study, the geographic coverage of both datasets is limited to the study area.
The reanalysis dataset covers the temporal range between 1988 and 2020, the near-real time
dataset contains all data between 2007 and 2020, temporal averages are calculated for both
(daily, weekly, monthly and seasonal). To reduce the impact of sea ice fraction on the SST
8
==PAGE:10==
Thesis
3.3
Principal component analysis
in the near-real time dataset, datapoints where the sea ice fraction is more than 0.25 are
excluded. For the reanalysis dataset, the sea ice regions are not excluded for two reasons.
First, it is a reanalysis dataset where models are included to optimize the data, hereby
reducing the impact of sea ice. Second, in the 1980’s, the sea ice extend was much larger
than today, which would lead to a great reduction in the amount of available data.
For the ﬁrst analysis, daily seasonal SST averages are calculated. To remove the impact
of increasing SSTs due to climate change, these datasets are detrended by subtracting the
global of northern hemisphere average SST anomalies. For comparison, these datasets are
also normalised according to equation 5.
This procedures have only been applied when
stated. The global and northern hemisphere SST anomalies are downloaded from Met Oﬃce
Hadley Centre.
3.3
Principal component analysis
Principal component analysis (PCA) is applied to weekly averaged SST data and to daily
averaged wind stress curl and wind speed cubed data. The choice for daily averaged data for
the two wind related datasets is based on the high variability of wind. The more constant
nature of SST allows for a slightly more computational power friendly weekly averaged
dataset. PCA is a technique that aims to reduce the dimension (size) of the data whilst
preserving the key information[37]. To prepare the data for PCA, it is organised in a matrix
where data varies in time along the vertical axis, while the horizontal axis represents the
diﬀerent longitudinal/latitudinal pairs.
In order to remove the impact of the mean and the spread of the data, the input data
is normalized to form a new matrix M:
M = xij −x.j
sx.j
(5)
where xij is the measured signal at time i and location j, x.j its mean over time and sx.j the
corresponding standard deviation. The data in matrix M could be presented as a cloud in
a two dimensional ﬁgure, where for example, there would be SST on one axis and time on
the other. PCA then aims to create a new orthogonal reference system with one to many
axes, in which the variance of data along each of the axes is maximised, while minimizing
the error when projected onto the new axes. Each axis could represent the combination of
one or more factors [22][30][37]. This approach to data-analysis allows to extract meaningful
signals while simultaneously reducing noise [22].
Matrix M can be described in terms of scores (y) and loadings (a):
yn = aT
n M
(6)
where n could be any of the components. The scores, y is a vector with a length equal to
the number of "samples", or in this case, the number of time steps (rows). Vector a has a
length equal to the number of variables, or locations (columns) in this case. The number
of components that are used to describe the data depends on the data and the explained
9
==PAGE:11==
Thesis
3.3
Principal component analysis
variance of each of the components [37]. In matrix from, the relation between the scores,
components and the normalised data can be described as:
Y = MAT
(7)
where Y is the full scores matrix and A the full loadings matrix. The scores of the PCA
essentially describe a modelled signal over time. In this study, each principal component
reconstructs, with a single time series, the development of the sea surface temperature over
time. The loadings form a map of weights for each of the principal components. Math-
ematically, the loadings matrix can be described as a matrix with the eigenvectors of the
variance-covariance matrix MM T [30].
For each of the principal components, a new dataset (M ∗) can be formed:
M ∗
n(.j) = ynanjsx.j + x.j
(8)
which will give the ﬂuctuation of SST over time at geographic location j as a function of
component n. This can assist in understanding the role of each component. Finally, the
relation between M, a and y can be described as:
mij =
N
X
n=1
yinanj + eij
(9)
where mij represents an element of the measured SST matrix M at time i and location j,
N is the total number of components and eij is the analysis error the PCA model cannot
account for. For this study, PCA has been applied on the dataset as a whole. Additionally,
PCA wit a single component is also applied on four separate quadrants, east and west of
18°W and north and south of 64.5°N. The results are compared to the results from the full
model.
10
==PAGE:12==
Thesis
4
Results
4.1
SST observations
Figure 4.1.A shows the winter averaged SST between 1988 and 2020. The distribution of
the temperature anomaly varies throughout the years, where 1988 and 2003 are representing
two contrasting years.
In 1988, the winter SST anomaly is between -0.5 and -1°C over
almost the entire study area. In 2003, the winter SST is approximately 0.5-1°C above the
mean. There are some patterns in the geographical coverage of the anomalies. Especially in
the years 2003, 2015 and 2018, there are areas that experienced higher than average SSTs,
while other areas experienced SSTs below the climatic average. In the area south and west
of Iceland (Irminger Sea), SST increased between 1994 and 2003, with the winter of 2003
showing the highest SST. After 2003, a decrease in SST is observed. For the area north of
Iceland (Nordic Seas), a varying increase since 1988 is observed, with warmest years being
2018 and 2020.
The variation in SST is greater for the summer months than for the winter months
(ﬁgure 4.1.B). As with winter conditions, SST was highest in 2003, with temperatures more
than 1°C above the long term mean. The overall regional trends are similar to trends in the
winter months, with the Irminger Sea experiencing the highest temperatures between 2003
and 2013, and then a subsequent decrease in temperatures. In the Nordic Seas, SST shows
a overall increase from 1988 to 2020.
From daily averaged SST’s, a detrended (using northern hemisphere averages), nor-
malised SST index is calculated for both the regions north of Iceland and south of Iceland
(64.5 °N), see ﬁgure 4.1.C. These indices conﬁrm many of the observations based on the
seasonal averages. Additionally, they give a good understanding of temporal SST variations.
Between 1988 and 2000, 2010 and 2012 and from 2015 onward, warming in south of Iceland
corresponds to cooling in the north and the other way around. In the other years, cooling
and warming occurs in the entire study area more simultaneously.
4.1.1
Trends in SST - RA data
The overall warming trends observed across the region are conﬁrmed by a signiﬁcant
positive linear correlation between time and SST for the years 1988 to 2020 (ﬁgure 4.1.1.A).
For all months, the majority of the area north of Iceland, this trend is signiﬁcant with a
signiﬁcance level of 95%.
The yearly increase in SST varies between 0.0125°C to above
0.15°C. Close to Greenland, this trend becomes insigniﬁcant (p>0.05). South of Iceland,
there is also no signiﬁcant linear trend.
Similar trends are observed when comparing the observations to the global SST seasonal
mean (ﬁgure 4.1.1.B). Between 1988 and 2020, the observed winter, spring and autumn SST
increased between approximately 0.8 and 1.8 times faster than the average global SST. For
the summer, the SST change is at least 2 times as fast. In each of the months, a band of
surface waters which have warmed more than 3.5 times faster than on average is observed,
running from the southern tip of Greenland to the area north of Iceland. From there, this
band either follows the eastern boundary of the Greenland Basin or crosses the Greenland
11
==PAGE:13==
Thesis
4.2
PCA
Basin on the way north.
4.1.2
Trends in SST - NT data
The near-real time SST data, which spans the time from 2007 to 2020, shows a more
complicated picture (ﬁgure 4.1.2.A). In all seasons, a negative linear correlation between time
and SST is observed in the Irminger Sea. For winter and spring, this correlation is signiﬁcant
for most of the region (p<0.05). For the summer season, the correlation is only signiﬁcant
for the region southwest of Iceland. During autumn, the correlation is only signiﬁcant for
the very south of the study area. The cooling varies between 0.05°C per year in the autumn
to more than 0.15°C per year for the summer.
In the Nordic Seas, a signiﬁcant warming trend over time is observed for most of the
region for the winter and spring seasons. This trend is predominantly insigniﬁcant for the
summer season. For the autumn season, a signiﬁcant linear trend prevails over the open
ocean. Locally, the warming trend can be more than 0.15°C per year in the winter, spring
and autumn. Despite this correlation, the R- value shows that still up to 45% of the variation
remains unaccounted for in these signiﬁcant areas (ﬁgure 4.1.2.A). In the Irminger Sea, less
of the observed variation is explained by the cooling trend.
The bottom row in ﬁgure 4.1.2.A shows the regression P-value for each of the seasons.
Major parts of the study area have a P-value close to 0 for all seasons except for the summer
season. In each of the seasons, narrow bands of insigniﬁcance are present around the Norwe-
gian coast (except in autumn), from the Norwegian coast to Iceland and west and southwest
of Iceland, along the east Greenland shelf and slope to the area south of Cape Farewell. For
the summer season, these narrow bands are present in the region north of Iceland. Finally,
they are observed over the east Greenland shelf during the autumn season.
Few signiﬁcant trends are observed in the Nordic Seas when the measured seasonal SST
is plotted against the Global mean seasonal SST (ﬁgure 4.1.2.B ). Only during spring, part
of the Nordic Seas shows a signiﬁcant trend (with a signiﬁcance of 5%). South of Iceland, a
signiﬁcant negative trend between global mean seasonal SST and measured seasonal SST is
observed, except for the summer. For autumn, the region with a signiﬁcant trend is smaller
than for winter and spring.
4.2
PCA
In order to ﬁnd spatial and temporal trends in the SST, wind stress curl and wind
speed, a principal component analysis is applied. The goal is to decompose the combined
signal into independent underlying trends. For SST, both the high resolution near-real time
dataset as well as the lower resolution reanalysis dataset are studied. For the wind related
data, only the reanalysis data is used.
4.2.1
PCA - SST
Principal component analysis was applied to both a weekly averaged near-real time
daily dataset and a weekly averaged reananalysis four-daily dataset, hereafter referred to as
12
==PAGE:14==
Thesis
4.2
PCA
the NT and RA datasets. The data coverage for the analysis is 2007 to 2019 for the NT
dataset 1988 and 2020 for the RA dataset. The results reveal that much of the variations
is due to seasonal ﬂuctuations in temperature (ﬁrst component in the models, explain 92
and 77 % of the variation for NT and RA data respectively). The PCA loadings of this
component are almost uniformly distributed across the region for both models except for
a narrow band northwest of Iceland, where the ﬁrst component is less pronounced (ﬁgures
4.2.1.A and 4.2.1.B).
4.2.2
PCA - NT SST model
The subsequent components of the NT model explain notably less of the temperature
variability than the ﬁrst component (ﬁgure 4.2.1.A). In the NT model the second and third
component explained 3.14% and 1.04% of the variance. These components resemble multi
year trends, which are much more subtle than a seasonal trend, which explains why the ex-
plained variance of these components is much lower than of the ﬁrst component. The loading
maps for the second and third principal components show clear geographical trends (Figure
4.2.1.A). A distinct north-south gradient is observed for component two. The loadings in the
north are predominantly negative, while a major region in the southern area shows positive
loadings. This area extends from the Greenland Sea shelf break in the west all the way
to the Shetland Islands and the Faroe Islands in the East, covering the latitudes from the
southern limit of the study area up to Iceland. Component three shows a more east-west
trend in loadings, from strongly negative loadings in the western region of the study area,
to somewhat positive loadings in the eastern area.
The scores for the second component in the NT model are mainly positive between 2007
and 2013 (Figure 4.2.1.A). From 2013 onward, the scores decreases to a minimum 2019. From
late 2019, the score increases again. Recombining the scores and loadings to calculate the
contribution to the measured SST, we ﬁnd that this components represents a a temperature
decrease from 2007 to 2019 in the southern area, which is linked to a concurrent temperature
increase in the northern area (not shown in a ﬁgure).
4.2.3
PCA - RA SST model
The second principal component in the RA dataset explains 4.5% of the observed vari-
ance and has the highest weight at the northeast Greenland shelf, a region aﬀected by winter
ice (ﬁgure 4.2.1.B). The score resembles a seasonal signal, with some spikes during the au-
tumn. The third component explains 2.88% of the observed variance. There is an area with
high positive loadings on the east Greenland shelf, while the loadings on the east Greenland
shelf break and deep ocean are mostly negative. The score for this component shows multi-
year variations, with a signiﬁcant decrease in loadings after 2013. The fourth component is
dominated by a band of negative loadings over the east Greenland shelf (ﬁgure 4.2.1.C). The
score does not show any multi year trend. The ﬁfth component, which explains 1.45% of
the observed variation, has a loadings maps which is very similar to the loadings map of the
second component of the NT model. Between 1988 and 1996, the score is negative. From
1996 to 2014 it is mainly positive and from 2014 onward the score is negative again. Finally,
13
==PAGE:15==
Thesis
4.3
PCA applied on wind data
the sixth principal component explains 1.1% of the observed variance. There is a band of
negative loadings between Iceland and Cape Farewell. The rest of the study area has mostly
positive loadings. The scores resemble a seasonal signal.
The for the RA dataset reconstructed SST time-series using equation 8, show that the
third component is responsible for a ca. 1.5°C variation at two locations, one north of Iceland
and one south of Iceland (ﬁgure 4.2.3.A). It is related to a positive trend north of Iceland and
a negative trend in the south. The ﬁfth component explains less of the observed variation
in temperature, less than 1°C. The other components are not reconstructed, as they do not
show any multi-year trends.
4.2.4
PCA on quadrant models - SST
The single component PCA, applied to four diﬀerent quadrants of the NT dataset,
resulted in four quadrant models that scatter around a 1:1 line when plotted against the
ﬁrst component from the full model (ﬁgure 4.2.4.A and ﬁgure 4.2.4.B). A similar approach
for the RA model resulted in a similar result. This is a strong indication that the seasonal
pattern in SST is similar from the North near Svalbard, to the south near Cape Farewell. If
the transition from summer to winter in the north would happen earlier than in the south,
this would show up as a deviation from the 1:1 lines, as the result from the full model is an
average for the whole area. Looking at the results more closely, there is more spread around
the 1:1 line for the western quadrants compared to the full model than there is for the eastern
quadrants. For both the NT and RA datasets, the diﬀerence between the ﬁrst and fourth
quadrant results and the full models results show no clear trends, indicating that the ﬁrst
components represent the same variation. For the other two quadrants, for both datasets,
the diﬀerence between the full model and the quadrant model does indicate temporal trends
(ﬁgure 4.2.4.A and ﬁgure 4.2.4.B).
For four locations, the SST reconstructed from the ﬁrst component of the full model
is compared to the measured SST. These locations are chosen to cover a large geographical
extend. For each of the locations, the reconstructed SST matches well with the measured
SST. Visually, the two locations in the mid (North of Iceland) and the west (south-east
Greenland), show slightly more spread than the other two locations (ﬁgure 4.2.4.C and
ﬁgure 4.2.4.D).
4.3
PCA applied on wind data
4.3.1
PCA - wind stress curl
The ﬁrst component of the PCA analyses performed on the daily averaged data wind
stress curl explains 7.4% of the variance in the data (ﬁgure 4.3.1.A). The score has a highly
seasonal pattern. The loadings map shows a band of negative values around the coast of
Greenland, whereas the rest of the study region has a positive loading.
The loadings map of the second component (explained variance: 5.6%) shows a negative
loading in the Irminger Sea and around Iceland. Positive loadings are found west of Iceland,
near the Greenland coast, and over the Greenland and Norwegian Seas. The score shows a
14
==PAGE:16==
Thesis
4.3
PCA applied on wind data
multi-year trend after applying a two year rolling average. The third principal component
(explained variance: 4.9%) has negative loadings west of a line from Svalbard to Iceland.
On the other side of this line, the loadings are positive. Between 1988 and 1994, the score
is predominantly negative. From 1994 until 2013, the score is mostly positive, to become
negative from 2013 onward.
4.3.2
PCA - wind speed
For wind speed cubed, the ﬁrst component shows a strong seasonal pattern. Peaks in
scores are observed for the winter months, whereas the low scores are mainly associated with
summer months. The loadings map shows almost uniformly distributed positive loadings.
The combination of scores and loadings leads to the conclusion that strong winds are more
prominent in the winter months than in the summer months. A third (32.6%) of the observed
variation is explained by the ﬁrst component. The second component (explained variance:
11.5%) is associated with a north-south division in loadings, with mostly positive loadings
in the north (above 70°N) and negative loadings in the south. The two year averaged score-
timeseries is associated with mainly negative scores for 1988-1990 and for 2012-2015. The
other months are associated with neutral to positive scores. The third principal component
has a loadings map where positive loadings are found above 75° north and west and southwest
of Iceland. No pattern is observed in the scores timeseries. The third component has an
explained variance of 7.2%.
15
==PAGE:17==
Thesis
5
Discussion
In the ﬁrst part of the discussion, the observed trends in measured SST are reviewed.
Here, also the movement of fronts will be discussed. Then, there will be a short paragraph
on the diﬀerence between the quadrant PCA models and the full PCA models, and why the
decision was made to abandon the quadrant models. The discussion regarding the full PCA
models is preceded by a literature review. This might be considered unorthodox, however,
due to the complexity of the matter, the reader is provided a high level overview of the
factors to be considered. The ﬁndings from the literature review are ﬁnally discussed in light
of the PCA (SST, wind stress curl and wind speed cubed).
5.1
Interpretation of linear trends in SST and observations
The analysis on seasonal averaged SSTs and the tests for linear SST trends show that
the north and south of Iceland share a diﬀerent history in SST. There are periods when the
north and south of Iceland are more or less in harmony, while there are also periods when
the trends in SST are profoundly diﬀerent (ﬁgure 4.1.C). The diﬀerence in observed SST
trends in the RA dataset and the NT dataset shows the inﬂuence of the time interval (ﬁgure
4.1.1.A and ﬁgure 4.1.2.A). A signiﬁcant relation between SST and both the time and global
mean SST for the interval 1988 - 2020 is seen for a large part of the study area, with two
exceptions: 1) a region on the northeast Greenland shelf and, 2) the region south(west) of
Iceland (Irminger Sea).
Exception one, in the northeast Greenland shelf region, the trend-less region is larger in
the winter and spring than in the summer. This is partly explained by the the presence of
sea ice in winter and spring. In summer, very little sea ice is present in the region according
to the sea ice fraction available in both datasets. Both winter and spring sea ice cover have
reduced substantially over the last 30 years, which complicates the picture [8].
Exception two, the Irminger Sea is an area of long term variability. A study by Bulgin et
al., shows that the SST in the Irminger sea has increased between 1981 and 2018. However,
when the SST anomaly is compared decade by decade, a cooling is observed in the nineteen-
eighties and during the twenty-ten decade, while a strong warming trend (over 2°C per
decade) is observed during the nineteen-nineties and no to little warming is seen throughout
the twenty-zeros [10]. The recent cooling trend in the region south of Iceland is conﬁrmed
by the results from the NT dataset in this study and previous studies [24][10][41][16][34].
The potential cause of this cooling will be discussed further down in the discussion. For
all seasons, albeit only small for the autumn season, a region is present where there is a
signiﬁcant cooling trend over time.
The 1988-2020 RA dataset contains just over three
decades of data, whereby each decade shows a diﬀerent trend in the Irminger Sea, and thus
no overall linear trend.
Apart from the two exceptions mentioned above, the P values associated with the cor-
relations between monthly SST and time for the intervals 1988-present and 2007-present are
strikingly diﬀerent (ﬁgure 4.1.1.A and ﬁgure 4.1.2.A). Whereas the minimum P value for
the extended period is almost exclusively below 0.10, bands of high P values (up to 1) are
observed for all seasons in the reduced period. These bands occur at the inﬂection points
16
==PAGE:18==
Thesis
5.2
PCA - Quadrants
between the areas that are warming up and the areas that are cooling down. These fronts
are situated at regions where diﬀerent waters meet. A front is expected north of Iceland,
along the east Greenland shelf, where the Arctic EGC meets the AAW of Atlantic origin
[48]. Often, this front is covered by either sea ice or by a sea ice meltwater lens, thereby
blocking the front to be visible in the surface ocean [8][43].
The clearest front to be seen in the NT dataset has an east-west direction between
60° and 65°N, running from southern Norway, via Iceland to the southern tip of Greenland.
During autumn, the start of the front is found west of the Shetland Islands. The northern
autumn limit of the front is found near the Faroer Islands. From autumn via winter to spring,
the front propagates northwards east of Iceland, only to dissipate in summer. This leads to
the conclusion that water of the SPG is moved across the Greenland-Scotland ridge to the
Nordic Seas, following the mechanism described by Hátún et al., (2005) [28]. These waters are
getting cooler with time, which is in contrast with the waters that are already present in the
Nordic Seas, which explains the presence of a band where no trends are observed. The part
of this front, located between Iceland and Cape Farewell, strongly resembles the boundaries
between the Irminger Current (IC) and the EGC, and between the EGC and the coastal
part of the EGC [43] (ﬁgure 5.1.A). This coastal part of the EGC is considered a subset; the
East Greenland Coastal Current (EGCC). The EGCC is a low salinity, southward ﬂowing
jet and is formed south of the Denmark strait and bound to the East Greenland inner shelf.
The formation of the EGCC is assumed to be bathymetry related. The EGC and EGCC are
separated based on two factors; current speed and salinity. The EGC and IC are separated
based on salinity only. The EGC is deﬁned where the salinity is below 34.8. The width
and volume transport of both the EGC and EGCC not only depend on the season, it is also
bathymetry guided [43][6]. An important factor for the location of the fronts between the
EGC and EGCC and between the EGC and the IC is wind induced Ekman transport. Wind
forcing impacts the currents widths and depths via Ekman processes. Narrower EGC and
EGCC currents are expected with downwelling (winds to the south) inducing winds, leading
to front deepening, whereas wider an shallower EGC and EGCC currents are expected with
upwelling inducing winds, leading to front shallowing. Strong downwelling winds can cause
strong vertical mixing of the water masses on either side of the front [35][43].
5.2
PCA - Quadrants
Comparing scores for the ﬁrst component in the full and quadrant SST models leads to
the conclusion that the ﬁrst components of the full and quadrant models do not represent the
same pattern, especially for the central northern part and the central southern part (ﬁgure
4.2.4.A and ﬁgure 4.2.4.B). Clearly, each of the scores represents the seasonal variations in
SST. Yet, the ﬁrst component in the quadrant models is represented by two components in
the full models. For the reduced dataset (NT dataset), the ﬁrst component in the quadrant
model is represented by the ﬁrst and second component in the full model, whereas the
ﬁrst component for the quadrant models based on the RA dataset is represented by the
ﬁrst and third components. These ﬁndings are conﬁrmed by the loadings maps of the second
component for the full model on the NT dataset (ﬁgure 4.2.1.A) and the third component for
the full model on the RA dataset (ﬁgure 4.2.1.B) which show a similar pattern, with opposite
17
==PAGE:19==
Thesis
5.3
Previous studies
signs north and south of Iceland. Hence, the sensitivity of the results depend on the chosen
geographical location. In this study, the quadrant models do not add any substantial value
for this study, which is why the decision was made to abandon this approach.
5.3
Previous studies
The cooling over the SPG observed in the last decade is also observed in previous studies.
This section attempts to highlight the diﬀerent potential causes of this cooling.
5.3.1
Short time-scales
A positive wind stress curl in the subpolar North Atlantic, which is associated with a
positive NAO phase, causes Ekman pumping, hereby signiﬁcantly thinning the surface layer
[25]. When a storm passes after thinning of the surface, the surface layer has thinned so much
that the surface stratiﬁcation can be removed. The ocean surface is now preconditioned [47].
When, in such a case, a severe winter storm passes, deep convection of surface waters can
occur, which is an important process in deep water formation [45]. A recent study, based
on the long-term ocean circulation observations (LOCO) moorings located in the central
Irminger Sea, suggested that atmospheric conditions with strong local winter cooling led to
a record mixed depth of 1400m in the Irminger Sea in the winter of 2014-2015. During this
particularly cold and long winter, surface stratiﬁcation was completely removed and in the
entire basin, a new convective water mass was present. This situation resembles the situation
of the 1990’s, which was linked to a positive NAO phase [16]. The strong convection event of
the 2014-2015 winter is not limited to the Irminger Sea. Mixed layer depths in the Labrador
Sea reached 1700-1800m, whereas a mixed layer depth of 1700m has been recorded by Argo
Floats south of Cape Farewell. A deep convection over such a broad area has not been
observed before [39][49]. This large scale convection event was assigned to a positive NAO
index by de Jong et al., (2016) [16], or partly by Yashayaev and Loder (2016) [49]. Josey et
al., (2018) noted that most heat loss occurred during the winter 2013-2014, when the EAP
was dominant. They suggest that the two consecutive winters and the corresponding leading
atmospheric modes need to be taken into account as well [34].
A reduction in SST with a positive phase of the NAO is related to surface heat ﬂuxes,
lateral advection of heat (horizontal process) [16] and Ekman pumping (vertical process)
[18][34]. Strengthened westerly winds are partly responsible for heat loss between the ocean
surface and the atmosphere. Heat loss is greatest over the Labrador Seas, Irminger Seas
and the East Greenland Shelf north of Iceland, wheres heat loss due to Ekman processes is
dominant within the center of the SPG [18].
5.3.2
Medium time-scales
The salinity of Atlantic inﬂow waters into the Nordic Seas has been linked directly to
SPG strength [28]. Waters from the subtropical gyre (STG) and the SPG meet and mix in
the eastern subpolar North Atlantic to contribute to the NAC. The relative contribution of
each gyre is dependent on the SPG index. The SPG index is deﬁned as the second component
18
==PAGE:20==
Thesis
5.3
Previous studies
in an EOF, applied on sea surface height (SSH) in the North Atlantic region between 30°N
and 66°N. SSH is dependent on sea water density: temperature and salinity [26][13]. Fresher
and colder SPG waters have a relatively large contribution to the NAC in years with a strong
SPG (a high SPG index). While the contribution of NPG waters to the NAC is relatively low
during years with a weak or small SPG. The temperature and salinity in the Irminger and
Iceland Basins are also associated with the SPG. Cold and fresh subarctic waters dominate
the region south of Iceland with a strong SPG, whereas warmer and more saline NAC derived
waters dominate when the SPG circulation is weak [28][27]. This process could potentially
be controlled by the NAO dynamics [23]. Non-linear links between NAO patterns and the
SPG index are suggested via wind stress curl [25] and ocean state [36].
Wind stress curl patterns are believed to be one of the responsible factors for cooling
and freshening of the North Atlantic (south of Iceland) [31]. Changes in wind stress curl
patterns associated with a switch of the NAO phase and with the East Atlantic Pattern
(a second leading atmospheric mode in North Atlantic climate). A negative NAO phase is
related to a wind stress curl pattern of positive wind stress curl over the North west Atlantic
between Ireland, Iceland, the southern tip of Greenland and Canada (the Newfoundland and
Nova Scotia Coasts). A region of negative wind stress curl is found south east of this region.
During this phase, the Labrador Current (LC), which is a continuation of the EGC current,
is forced along the Newfoundland Coast as a geostrophic balance between wind stress curl
induced Ekman forcing and the Coriolis force.
During a positive NAO phase, the wind stress curl pattern, an arm of negative curl,
connected to the large negative wind stress curl pattern described above, develops along the
Newfoundland coast. As a result, most of the LC current is rerouted across the Atlantic
Ocean towards Ireland, thereby freshening and cooling the southern (eastern) branch of the
NAC. Eﬀectively, a "high speed" corridor can develop between the positive and negative wind
stress curl regions, providing a pathway for a geostrophic current where the Coriolis force is
balanced by Ekman forces which expands the SPG in eastward direction. This pattern can
evolve within two to four years and is believed to have caused the largest freshening event
of the eastern subpolar North Atlantic in the last 120 years between 2012 and 2016 [31].
5.3.3
Long time-scales: AMOC
A decrease in SST and SSS between 2005 and 2014 is reported. SLP and wind stress
curl patterns for that interval could have led to increased surface heat ﬂuxes (ocean to
atmosphere) and Ekman upwelling. Yet, the spatial extend of the surface cooling is greater
than what would be expected based purely on SLP and wind stress curl patterns [41].
Additionally, the observed amount of cooling is larger than can be accounted for by changes
in surface heat ﬂuxes and Ekman pumping [41]. Therefore, an additional process is required
to observe temperature variations.
The strength of the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC) is believed to
be a driver for temperature changes in the North Atlantic. It is suggested that strengthening
of the AMOC leads to an increase in northward heat and salt transport, and as a result,
leads to an increase in the SPG SST [14][41][11]. The strength of the AMOC is deﬁned
by the Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation (AMO) index, which is provided by the NOAA
19
==PAGE:21==
Thesis
5.4
Results in perspective
Earth System Research Laboratory.
An area weighted average is calculated from a 5°×
5°resolution, detrended, monthly Kaplan SST dataset covering the North Atlantic between
the equator and 70°N [21]. Recently, a new index, based on the diﬀerence between the mean
SST over the SPG and the global mean SST for the winter and spring months is proposed
[11].
The density deep Labrador Sea water (1000 - 2500m) is seen as an important proxy for
AMOC strength [40]. Modelling results show that a decrease in deep Labrador Sea water
density anomalies leads to a simultaneous decrease in AMOC strength leading to reduced
SST’s in the eastern SPG [41], although a lag between a reduction in deep Labrador Sea
Water density and changes in the wider AMOC basin has also been reported [14]. The
reduction in deep Labrador Sea water densities is preceded by 5 to 10 years by a negative
NAO trend, coincides with a warming trend in the eastern SPG and is followed by a warming
trend in the upper Labrador Sea Water a few years later. Warming of the upper Labrador
Sea Water is associated with a reduction of deep convection and deep Labrador Sea Water
densities, which leads to the conclusion that the NAO index is a major driver of the AMOC
strength [41].
5.4
Results in perspective
Principal component analysis provides a robust method to identify underlying trends
in the data. Initial analysis of averaged SSTs of the regions north of Iceland and south of
Iceland show, that there is some resemblance between the average SST trend from the region
south of Iceland and both the NAO index and the SPG index (ﬁgure 5.4.A). If any of the
atmospheric patterns have an impact on the SST, via either wind stress curl or wind speed,
PCA could reveal this. For each of the three elements (SST, wind stress curl and wind speed
cubed), the ﬁrst principal component represents the seasonal variation in the data.
The second and fourth principal SST components from the 1988-2020 PCA RA model
show a strong imprint of what seems to be the impact of sea ice (ﬁgure 4.2.1.B and ﬁgure
4.2.1.C). These components are not further discussed in this paper, since the focus is not
on sea ice. The sixth component does not show any multi-year trends and is therefore not
discussed either. A comparison between the ﬁfth SST component and the NAO and SPG
indices indicates a link between SST and the NAO and SPG (ﬁgure 5.4.B). Especially the
ﬁfth SST component and NAO behave in a coherent manner. There are two exceptions: in
August 2004 and in the year 2018 the two indices do not match. For August 2004, this is
explained by a peak in SST score for the ﬁfth component, which remains unexplained. The
reason for the mismatch in 2018 is unknown. Interestingly, the second component of the
PCA NT model shows a very similar pattern as the ﬁfth component of the RA dataset. The
major diﬀerence between the two datasets is however an increase in the score of the ﬁfth
component RA SST model in 2018, which is absent in the second component of the NT SST
model.
For the observed diﬀerences, there could be a few explanations.
Even though each
principal component is independent of the other components, this does not mean that one
component aligns completely with one eﬀect. This could explain why one eﬀect does not
always align with one component. Another explanation could lie in the fact that atmospheric
20
==PAGE:22==
Thesis
5.4
Results in perspective
systems have a high temporal variability, as seen in wind stress curl and wind speed cubed
results. The temporal variability is also seen in the NAO index. The NAO index in ﬁgure
5.4.B is averaged with a two year rolling average, because of this high variability. Very
negative or positive single NAO events could be smoothed by the rolling average, while
these "strong" negative or positive events could be the ones that trigger SST changes in
the ﬁrst place. Finally, any relation between NAO, wind stress curl and SST is believed to
be strongest in the winter months [31][16][34]. Yet, in this study, summer and winter NAO
and SPG index values, as well as the SST components, share an equal weight in the rolling
average calculation. Potentially, this leads to a mismatch between the SST results and the
NAO index.
The comparison between the ﬁfth SST component and AMO does not yield any clear
results. This might be due to the choice of the AMO index. The AMO timeseries presented
in the literature shows a strong decrease in value after 2012 [11]. Such a decrease is not seen
within the dataset presented in this study. The AMO index by Cesar et al., is not available
[11]. If the AMO index presented would have shown a sharp decrease after 2012, the AMO
could be considered as one of the possible contributors to the ﬁfth PCA component. However,
since the peaks in AMO do not line up with with the peaks in the ﬁfth PCA component,
the NAO is considered the major contributing factor for the that component.
In a similar way, the third principal RA SST component is compared to the AO, the
AEP and the monthly increase in the northern hemisphere averaged SST (ﬁgure 5.4.C).None
of the indices show a strong correlation with the ﬁfth component, although both the NH SST
and EAP follow a positive trend from mainly negative values in the nineties to positive values
after 2000. The third principal component follows a trend in the opposite direction. When
the reconstructed temperature variations for the third and ﬁfth SST principal components
are compared to the monthly averaged northern hemisphere temperature, it shows that
the third principal component is responsible for a temperature rise in the northern region
that is comparable to the NH averaged temperature rise, although the peaks of the signals
do not line up. This third component could encompass some of the northern hemisphere
background warming, although this not likely to be the only driver for this component. The
reconstruction of the ﬁfth component shows that the inﬂuence of the NAO is less than a
degree Celsius.
Overall, PCA shows that the measured SST is inﬂuenced by factors with diﬀerent spatial
patterns. The contribution of each pattern to the measured SST varies with time, which
explains why each region within the study area has its own SST history. This eﬀect is seen
in the timeries of averaged SSTs from the regions north and south of Iceland (ﬁgure 4.1.C).
There are times when SST trends in these regions are opposite, whereas at other times,
the SST’s trends are more similar. This is likely related to the third and ﬁfth principal
components. During times when the averaged SST’s north and south of Iceland ﬂuctuate
in a similar manner, the score of these components is relatively close to 0, thereby reducing
the impact of the respective component (8).
The third principal component of wind stress curl is compared to NAO and SPG (ﬁgure
5.4.D, top). A positive NAO is associated with an intensiﬁed low pressure ﬁeld over Iceland,
and as a result, an Ekman pumping inducing anticyclonic ocean circulation is expected near
Iceland, which is the consequence of a positive wind stress curl [18][25][31]. After 2004, the
21
==PAGE:23==
Thesis
5.5
Outlook
third wind stress curl component is in anti-phase with the NAO index. A similar relation
between the two factors is seen between 1988 and 1995 approximately, albeit less coherent
than after 2004. Between 1995 and 2004, the NAO and the third component of the wind stress
curl model behave in a diﬀerent manner. Yet overall, a positive NAO phase coincides with
a negative wind third wind stress curl component. Taking the loadings map into account, a
positive wind stress curl dominates over a broad band along the East Greenland coast and
the region south of Iceland during a positive NAO phase, which somewhat agrees with data
reported in the literature[31][18]. In some years, the Wind stress curl component leads the
ﬁfth SST component, while in other years they more or less overlap (ﬁgure 5.4.D, top). The
results in this report show that there is a link between the NAO index, wind stress curl and
the SST. Whether cooling only occurs via direct interaction with the atmosphere or also via
the diversion of the Labrador Current cannot be diﬀerentiated based on only SST.
A comparison between the second principal component of wind speed cubed and the
NAO index shows that there is some coherence between the two factors, although this relation
is not strong enough to draw any conclusions (ﬁgure 5.4.D, bottom). Comparing the second
components of both wind speed cubed and wind stress curl, AMO, AO and AEP shows that
there is no match between the two second components and the three (atmospheric) patterns
(ﬁgure 5.4.E, top). There is on the other hand, almost a perfect match between the second
components of wind stress curl and wind speed cubed. This indicates that there is a strong
relation between the wind stress curl and wind speed. What the driving force behind those
two factors is, remains unfortunately unknown. Finally, a comparison between the third
wind speed cubed component and the before mentioned (atmospheric) patterns does not
reveal any causal relations (ﬁgure 5.4.D, bottom).
One question that remains is the question why the regions north of Iceland and south
of Iceland often experience diﬀerent SST trends? Based on the data used in this report, that
question cannot be answered. As the SST trends in section 5.1 have shown, spill over of cold
and "fresh" SPG waters to the northern side of the Iceland-Shetland ridge, could have led
to a simultaneous SST decrease in the north of Iceland and south of Iceland regions. This
is however not the case. Temperature decrease in the south coincides with Temperature
increase in the north, which is conﬁrmed by the PCA models. One explanation is that with
a weak SPG, when warm, salty Atlantic appear as west as the Irminger Sea [28], somewhat
inhibit the southward ﬂow the cold EGC waters, which leads to an increase in EGC waters
in the region North of Iceland. More study is however necessary to either conﬁrm or disprove
this theory.
5.5
Outlook
The observed cooling of the North Atlantic is explained by diﬀerent processes. Implying
that only one factor is relevant is likely wrong. The results in this paper show that the
observed cooling is related to the NAO phase. Previous studies have proposed that the
interaction between the atmosphere and the ocean surface is not a one-way interaction
[38][44][41]. The NAO variability has been suggested as a driver of North Atlantic cooling
[31][16], as a driver of AMOC variability [41] and as being driven by AMOC variability [38].
A factor that has not been discussed in this report is the freshwater content of the North
22
==PAGE:24==
Thesis
5.5
Outlook
Atlantic, although recent studies have proposed that the freshwater supply from sea ice,
ice-bergs and summer melting over Greenland, is a factor contributing to North Atlantic
cooling [4] and NAO variability [38].
To better understand what will happen in the future, the links between the diﬀerent
factors need to be better understood. As AMOC strength is expected to remain low for the
next two decades [14], one dominant NAO phase could be expected. This study has only
focused on SST, wind stress curl and wind speed. However, for a better understanding of
the processes involved, a longer period should be studied. Additionally, surface height and
sea surface salinity data should be included as well. Since the regions north of Iceland and
south of Iceland often share opposite temperature trends, these regions could be studied in
separate PCA models. Additionally, argo ﬂoat and CTD data should be included, as the
surface waters are impacted by freshwater melt [43], which reduces the ability of satellites
to measure the characteristics of the surface ocean.
Previous studies have shown that variability in the North Atlantic waters can strongly
impact the ecosystem [27][20][5]. Via bottom-up control, changes in ocean currents, temper-
ature or salinity can then impact zooplankton communities via phytoplankton communities,
which can then impact commercially interesting ﬁsh stocks all the way up to pilot whales.
The study region is prone to future changes, not only in temperature, but also in the location
of fronts, the inﬂow of nutrient rich Atlantic waters and the frequency of storms. Each of
these changes will inﬂuence the ecosystem. For us to understand and predict these changes,
more research is needed, especially for the region north of Iceland, where relatively little is
known.
23
==PAGE:25==
Thesis
6
Conclusions
The north Atlantic is a complicated system with a region that is experiencing a unique
cooling trend over the last decade. This cooling trend has been explained in multiple ways;
reduced transport of heat northward by a reduction in the strength of the Atlantic Merid-
ional Overturning Circulation, increased subpolar gyre strength, NAO related surface cool-
ing, NAO related rerouting of cold, Arctic currents and ﬁnally by changes in the inﬂow of
freshwater in the North Atlantic. This study shows, based on PCA, that there is a link
between the SST and the NAO index. The data also suggest a link between the NAO index
and wind stress curl. Here, the PCA model is less conclusive. No strong link between NAO
and and wind speed cubed is found. The reason for the opposite trends between the Nordic
Seas and the subpolar gyres is unknown. A direct link between SST and AMO, as suggested
in the literature, is not found in this study.
24
==PAGE:26==
Thesis
References
References
[1] Arctic Oscillation (AO) | Teleconnections | National Centers for Environmental Infor-
mation (NCEI).
[2] Climate Prediction Center - East Atlantic (EA).
[3] Climate Variability: Arctic Oscillation | NOAA Climate.gov.
[4] David Allan and Richard P. Allan.
Seasonal Changes in the North Atlantic Cold
Anomaly: The Inﬂuence of Cold Surface Waters From Coastal Greenland and Warming
Trends Associated With Variations in Subarctic Sea Ice Cover. Journal of Geophysical
Research: Oceans, 124(12):9040–9052, 12 2019.
[5] Olafur S Astthorsson, Astthor Gislason, and Steingrimur Jonsson. Climate variability
and the Icelandic marine ecosystem. Deep-Sea Research II, 54:2456–2477, 2007.
[6] Sheldon Bacon, Abigail Marshall, N. Penny Holliday, Yevgeny Aksenov, and Stephen R.
Dye. Seasonal variability of the East Greenland Coastal Current. Journal of Geophysical
Research: Oceans, 119(6):3967–3987, 6 2014.
[7] Barbara Berx and Mark R. Payne. The Sub-Polar Gyre Index – a community data
set for application in ﬁsheries and environment research. Earth System Science Data,
9(1):259–266, 4 2017.
[8] Jesper Boje and Colin Stedmon. WORKING GROUP ON INTEGRATED ECOSYS-
TEM ASSESSMENT OF THE GREENLAND SEA (WGIEAGS). ICES SCIENTIFIC
REPORTS, 2(75), 2020.
[9] R H Bourke, A M Weigel, and R G Paquette. The Westward Turning Branch of the
West Spitsbergen Current. Technical report, 1988.
[10] Claire E. Bulgin, Christopher J. Merchant, and David Ferreira. Tendencies, variability
and persistence of sea surface temperature anomalies. Scientiﬁc reports, 10(1):7986, 5
2020.
[11] L. Caesar, S. Rahmstorf, A. Robinson, G. Feulner, and V. Saba. Observed ﬁngerprint
of a weakening Atlantic Ocean overturning circulation. Nature, 556(7700):191–196, 4
2018.
[12] M. Casanova-Masjoan, M. D. Pérez-Hernández, R. S. Pickart, H. Valdimarsson, S. R.
Ólafsdóttir, A. Macrander, D. Grisolía-Santos, D. J. Torres, S. Jónsson, K. Våge, P. Lin,
and A. Hernández-Guerra. Along-Stream, Seasonal, and Interannual Variability of the
North Icelandic Irminger Current and East Icelandic Current Around Iceland. Journal
of Geophysical Research: Oceans, 125(9), 9 2020.
[13] Léon Chaﬁk. North Atlantic subpolar gyre index. Dataset version 3.0. Bolin Centre
Database.
25
==PAGE:27==
Thesis
References
[14] Xianyao Chen and Ka Kit Tung. Global surface warming enhanced by weak Atlantic
overturning circulation. Nature, 559(7714):387–391, 7 2018.
[15] R.K. Pachauri Core Writing Team and L.A. Meyer (eds.). IPCC, 2014: Climate Change
2014: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fifth As-
sessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Technical Report
349, ICES, 2019.
[16] Marieke Femke de Jong and Laura de Steur. Strong winter cooling over the Irminger Sea
in winter 2014–2015, exceptional deep convection, and the emergence of anomalously
low SST. Geophysical Research Letters, 43(13):7106–7113, 7 2016.
[17] D. P. Dee, M. Balmaseda, G. Balsamo, R. Engelen, A. J. Simmons, and J. N. Thé-
paut. Toward a consistent reanalysis of the climate system. Bulletin of the American
Meteorological Society, 95(8):1235–1248, 8 2014.
[18] Clara Deser, Michael A. Alexander, Shang-Ping Xie, and Adam S. Phillips. Sea Surface
Temperature Variability: Patterns and Mechanisms. Annual Review of Marine Science,
2(1):115–143, 1 2010.
[19] Craig J. Donlon, Matthew Martin, John Stark, Jonah Roberts-Jones, Emma Fiedler,
and Werenfrid Wimmer. The Operational Sea Surface Temperature and Sea Ice Analysis
(OSTIA) system. Remote Sensing of Environment, 116:140–158, 1 2012.
[20] Kenneth F. Drinkwater. The regime shift of the 1920s and 1930s in the North Atlantic.
Progress in Oceanography, 68(2-4):134–151, 2 2006.
[21] David B. Enﬁeld, Alberto M. Mestas-Nuñez, and Paul J. Trimble. The Atlantic Mul-
tidecadal Oscillation and its relation to rainfall and river ﬂows in the continental U.S.
Geophysical Research Letters, 28(10):2077–2080, 5 2001.
[22] David Forsyth. Applied Machine Learning. Springer International Publishing, 2019.
[23] Nicholas P. Foukal and M. Susan Lozier. Assessing variability in the size and strength
of the North Atlantic subpolar gyre.
Journal of Geophysical Research:
Oceans,
122(8):6295–6308, 2017.
[24] C. Gonzalez-Pola, K. M. H. Larsen, P. Fratantoni, and A. Beszczynska-Möller. ICES
Report on Ocean Climate 2018. Technical Report 349, ICES, 2019.
[25] Sirpa Häkkinen, Peter B. Rhines, and Denise L. Worthen. Atmospheric blocking and
Atlantic multidecadal ocean variability. Science, 334(6056):655–659, 11 2011.
[26] H. Hátún and L. Chaﬁk. On the Recent Ambiguity of the North Atlantic Subpolar
Gyre Index, 8 2018.
26
==PAGE:28==
Thesis
References
[27] H Hátún, M R Payne, G Beaugrand, P C Reid, A B Sandø, H Drange, B Hansen,
J A Jacobsen, and D Bloch. Large bio-geographical shifts in the north-eastern Atlantic
Ocean: From the subpolar gyre, via plankton, to blue whiting and pilot whales. Progress
in Oceanography, 80(3-4):149–162, 2009.
[28] Hjálmar Hátún, Anne Britt Sande, Helge Drange, Bogi Hansen, and Heoinn Valdimars-
son. Ocean science: Inﬂuence of the atlantic subpolar gyre on the thermohaline circu-
lation. Science, 309(5742):1841–1844, 9 2005.
[29] Hans Hersbach, Bill Bell, Paul Berrisford, Shoji Hirahara, András Horányi, Joaquín
Muñoz-Sabater, Julien Nicolas, Carole Peubey, Raluca Radu, Dinand Schepers, Adrian
Simmons, Cornel Soci, Saleh Abdalla, Xavier Abellan, Gianpaolo Balsamo, Peter Bech-
told, Gionata Biavati, Jean Bidlot, Massimo Bonavita, Giovanna De Chiara, Per
Dahlgren, Dick Dee, Michail Diamantakis, Rossana Dragani, Johannes Flemming,
Richard Forbes, Manuel Fuentes, Alan Geer, Leo Haimberger, Sean Healy, Robin J.
Hogan, Elías Hólm, Marta Janisková, Sarah Keeley, Patrick Laloyaux, Philippe Lopez,
Cristina Lupu, Gabor Radnoti, Patricia de Rosnay, Iryna Rozum, Freja Vamborg, Se-
bastien Villaume, and Jean Noël Thépaut. The ERA5 global reanalysis. Quarterly
Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society, 146(730):1999–2049, 7 2020.
[30] Steven M Holland. Principal Component Analysis (PCA). Technical report, Department
of Geology, University of Georgia, 2019.
[31] N. Penny Holliday, Manfred Bersch, Barbara Berx, Léon Chaﬁk, Stuart Cunningham,
Cristian Florindo-López, Hjálmar Hátún, William Johns, Simon A. Josey, Karin Mar-
gretha H. Larsen, Sandrine Mulet, Marilena Oltmanns, Gilles Reverdin, Tom Rossby,
Virginie Thierry, Hedinn Valdimarsson, and Igor Yashayaev. Ocean circulation causes
the largest freshening event for 120 years in eastern subpolar North Atlantic. Nature
Communications, 11(1):1–15, 12 2020.
[32] James W Hurrell and Clara Deser. North Atlantic climate variability: The role of the
North Atlantic Oscillation . Journal of Marine Systems, 79:231–244, 2009.
[33] James W. Hurrell, Yochanan Kushnir, Geir Ottersen, and Martin Visbeck. An overview
of the north atlantic oscillation. In Geophysical Monograph Series, volume 134, pages
1–35. Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 2003.
[34] Simon A. Josey, Joel J.M. Hirschi, Bablu Sinha, Aurélie Duchez, Jeremy P. Grist, and
Robert Marsh. The recent atlantic cold anomaly: Causes, consequences, and related
phenomena. Annual Review of Marine Science, 10:475–501, 2018.
[35] Steven J. Lentz and John Largier. The inﬂuence of wind forcing on the Chesapeake Bay
buoyant coastal current. Journal of Physical Oceanography, 36(7):1305–1316, 7 2006.
[36] Katja Lohmann, Helge Drange, and Mats Bentsen. A possible mechanism for the strong
weakening of the North Atlantic subpolar gyre in the mid-1990s. Geophysical Research
Letters, 36(15):n/a–n/a, 8 2009.
27
==PAGE:29==
Thesis
References
[37] Alejandro C. Olivieri. Principal Component Analysis. In Introduction to Multivariate
Calibration, pages 57–71. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2018.
[38] M. Oltmanns, J. Karstensen, G. W. K. Moore, and S. A. Josey. Rapid Cooling and In-
creased Storminess Triggered by Freshwater in the North Atlantic. Geophysical Research
Letters, 47(14), 7 2020.
[39] A. Piron, V. Thierry, H. Mercier, and G. Caniaux. Gyre-scale deep convection in the
subpolar North Atlantic Ocean during winter 2014–2015. Geophysical Research Letters,
44(3):1439–1447, 2 2017.
[40] Jon Robson, Dan Hodson, Ed Hawkins, and Rowan Sutton. Atlantic overturning in
decline?, 12 2014.
[41] Jon Robson, Pablo Ortega, and Rowan Sutton. A reversal of climatic trends in the
North Atlantic since 2005. Nature Geoscience, 9(7):513–517, 6 2016.
[42] John H Steele. Regime shifts in the ocean: reconciling observations and theory.
[43] David A. Sutherland and Robert S. Pickart.
The East Greenland Coastal Current:
Structure, variability, and forcing. Progress in Oceanography, 78(1):58–77, 7 2008.
[44] R. T. Sutton, G. D. McCarthy, J. Robson, B. Sinha, A. T. Archibald, and L. J. Gray.
Atlantic multidecadal variability and the U.K. acsis program. Bulletin of the American
Meteorological Society, 99(2):415–425, 2 2018.
[45] Matthias Tomczak and J. Stuart Godfrey.
Regional Oceanography, an introduction.
Elsevier, 1 edition, 1994.
[46] H Vilhjálmsson. Capelin (Mallotus villosus) in the Iceland–East Greenland–Jan Mayen
ecosystem. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 59(5):870–883, 10 2002.
[47] André Visser. Physical oceanography lecture, 2018.
[48] A.-M. Weﬁng, M. Christl, C. Vockenhuber, M. Rutgers van der Loeﬀ, and N. Casacu-
berta. Tracing Atlantic Waters Using 129I and 236U in the Fram Strait in 2016. Journal
of Geophysical Research: Oceans, 124(2):882–896, 2 2019.
[49] Igor Yashayaev and John W Loder. Recurrent replenishment of Labrador Sea Water
and associated decadal-scale variability. 1000.
28
