==PAGE:1==
Insulin-stimulated regulation of
skeletal muscle carnitine uptake by
OCTN2
Jonas El Mongy Jørgensen
s134896
MSc thesis - 30 ECTS
Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering
October 20, 2020
==PAGE:2==
Preface & acknowledgement
This project is the outcome of a master thesis carried out from May to Oc-
tober 2020. The project was performed at The Department of Biomedical
Sciences, Copenhagen University, using the facilities of Exercise Laborato-
ries (Xlab) and the Core Facility for Integrated Microscopy (CFIM). The
project was written by Jonas El Mongy Jørgensen, Pharmaceutical Design
and Engineering student, DTU, under the supervision of Clara Prats along
with external supervision provided by Casper Hempel.
Special thanks to Clara Prats for involving me in this interesting project
and for the valuable supervision throughout the project period; it has been
great to work with you once again. Thanks to Casper Hempel for the prac-
tical assistance and guidance and a thanks to both supervisors for making
the project possible. I would also like to thank Rannv´a Dahl for providing
support and for the collaboration; best of luck with your project in the future.
Finally, a thanks to everyone else who have helped me during the project.
1
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Carnitine plays a key role in β-oxidation of fatty acids by transporting long-
chain fatty acyl (LCA) coenzyme A (CoA) into the mitochondrial matrix.
Transport of carnitine is mediated by the transmembrane protein carni-
tine/organic cation transporter 2 (OCTN2). Mutations in the gene coding for
OCTN2 (SLC22A5) results in the autosomal-recessive disorder systemic pri-
mary carnitine disease (SCD) which is characterized by an impaired carnitine
transport. Previous research have shown that conditions of hyperinsulinemia
and hypercarnitinemia stimulates carnitine uptake in healthy human subjects
and that muscle contraction induces carnitine uptake via translocation of
OCTN2 in rat hindlimb muscles. Therefore, we hypothesized that (1) insulin
stimulates OCTN2 translocation to the plasma membrane (PM), in a manner
similar to GLUT4, thereby facilitating carnitine uptake in healthy subjects;
and (2) that this mechanism is impaired in SCD which causes the intrinsic
reduction in skeletal muscle carnitine uptake. Vastus lateralis muscle biop-
sies were taken from eight healthy subjects (control group) and eight SCD
patients (SCD group) once before and after a 6 h hyperinsulinemic clamp
intervention. Translocation of OCTN2 vesicles was measured indirectly by
optically sectioning the subsarcolemmal cytoplasmic volume on top of the
nuclei in muscle cells. Upon insulin stimulation, the depletion of transport
vesicles residing in the subsarcolemmal storage pool was measured as an indi-
cation of vesicle translocation to the sarcolemma. Translocation of GLUT4
vesicles was measured as a positive control of translocation. OCTN2 and
GLUT4 vesicles were stained using α-OCTN2 and α-GLUT4 speciﬁc anti-
bodies while α-SERCA2 ATPase were used to perform ﬁbertyping. Z-stacks
of skeletal muscle ﬁbers were obtained by confocal microscopy. Maximum
projections were obtained using Zen software. Image analysis and quantiﬁca-
tion of GLUT4 and OCTN2 vesicle density was performed using CellProﬁler.
The combination of hyperinsulinemia and hypercarnitinemia resulted in
OCTN2 translocation in type I ﬁbers of the control group (p < 0.05) while
the SCD group did not show any OCTN2 translocation in any ﬁbertype. The
control group showed GLUT4 translocation in type I ﬁbers (p < 0.05) and a
trend of GLUT4 translocation was also observed in type II ﬁbers while the
SCD group showed GLUT4 translocation in type I ﬁbers only (p < 0.01).
The present study indicates that OCTN2 translocates from a subsarcolem-
mal vesicle pool upon insulin stimulation which likely is the reason behind
the increased carnitine uptake observed in healthy subjects and that this
mechanism seems to be impaired in SCD, which could explain the decreased
skeletal muscle carnitine uptake ability in these patients. The present ﬁnd-
2
==PAGE:4==
ings could show importance in the treatment of SCD in which little in known
regarding skeletal muscle metabolism and proposes an impaired intracellular
signaling mechanism in which OCTN2 translocation to the PM is impaired.
3
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.1
Carnitine homeostasis in healthy and SCD patients . .
6
1.2
Carnitine’s role in β-oxidation of fatty acids . . . . . .
8
1.3
Insulin-induced up-regulation of skeletal muscle carni-
tine uptake in healthy subjects
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.4
Insulin stimulation of GLUT4 vesicle translocation
. .
12
1.5
Contraction-induced up-regulation of rat skeletal mus-
cle carnitine uptake via OCTN2 translocation . . . . .
14
2
Project scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Materials and methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1
Subjects and study design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
The ﬂuorescence principle
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
Principles of immunohistochemistry . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4
Confocal microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.5
Experimental protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.5.1
Buﬀers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.5.2
Immunohistochemical analysis of muscle ﬁbers 24
3.5.3
Test 1: primary α-GLUT4 IgG and secondary
α-rabbit IgG A488 speciﬁcity . . . . . . . . .
25
3.5.4
Test 2: primary α-OCTN2 speciﬁcity and mouse
IgG1 α-GLUT4 optimal concentration . . . .
29
3.5.5
GLUT4 and OCTN2 translocation in healthy
persons and SCD patients . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.6
Quantiﬁcation of GLUT4 and OCTN2 vesicle trans-
location
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.7
Image analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.7.1
Cellproﬁler pipeline design . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.7.2
Evaluation of pipeline robustness . . . . . . .
43
3.8
Statistical analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4
==PAGE:6==
6
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
7
Future perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5
==PAGE:7==
1. BACKGROUND
1
Background
1.1
Carnitine homeostasis in healthy and SCD patients
Carnitine is an amino acid derivative that plays a key role in intermediary
metabolism in which its primary function is to regulate the transport of long-
chain fatty acids from the cytosol to the mitochondrial matrix where fatty
acid β-oxidation occurs. Other functions of carnitine include the preservation
of membrane integrity, the stabilization of a physiologic CoA/acetyl-CoA
ratio in mitochondria and the decrease of lactate production. Carnitine is
mainly stored intracellularly in the heart and in skeletal muscle which rely on
fatty acid oxidation but also in small fractions in the liver, kidney and plasma.
Among various peripheral tissues muscle is likely the main target of carnitine
transport. The ratio between carnitine muscle conc. and plasma conc. is
around 50:1 or 100:1 [8, 7]. In humans, carnitine primarily exists in a free
form as free carnitine and as acylcarnitine esters; a pool of carnitine bound
to several acyl groups that are distributed throughout the body for various
functions. The two forms are shown in Figure 1. At rest, the carnitine pool
is distributed as 80-90 % free carnitine, 10-20 % short-chain acylcarnitines
and < 5 % long-chain acylcarnitines is skeletal muscle. Carnitine does not
undergo metabolic changes and is thus eliminated as free carnitine in the
urine [8].
Figure 1: Carnitine and acylcarnitine [28]. R represents an alkyl group of
up to 18 carbons in which acetylcarnitine (R = CH3) is the most prevalent one.
Carnitine homeostasis is maintained by intestinal absorption from the diet,
moderate endogenous synthesis and eﬀective renal reabsorption. When the
plasma carnitine conc. increases, the renal excretion increases and the reab-
sorption decreases. Transport of carnitine to the plasma membrane (PM) is
facilitated by OCTN2 and to a lesser extent by the low-aﬃnity transporter
OCTN1. OCTN2 is a PM protein that transports carnitine in a sodium-
dependent manner but also facilitates sodium-independent cellular eﬄux of
6
==PAGE:8==
1. BACKGROUND
acylcarnitines. It is mainly involved in maintaining carnitine homeostasis
resulting from intestinal absorption, distribution to tissues and renal excre-
tion/reabsorption. OCTN2 is expressed ubiquitously in diﬀerent tissues such
as adrenal gland, brain vessels, heart, kidney, skeletal muscle and small intes-
tine. In small intestinal enterocytes, OCTN2 is located in the brush border
membrane (BBM) where it is mainly involved in organic cation absorption.
In renal proximal tubules, OCTN2 assists in cation release across the BBM
into the tubular lumen. OCTN2 has a high aﬃnity for carnitine and carni-
tine derivatives and its loss-of-function causes the genetic disease systemic
primary carnitine deﬁciency. The incidence of SCD in newborns ranges from
1:142,000 is the US to 1:300 in the Faroe Islands.
In SCD patients, the
intracellular and plasma carnitine conc. is decreased together with a very
high rate of renal carnitine excretion due to impaired intestinal absorption
and renal reabsorption of carnitine. This consequently leads to the inabil-
ity of carnitine to perform its functions; especially in β-oxidation of fatty
acids. During infancy, SCD can cause cerebral symptoms and hypoketotic
hypoglycemia (Reye Syndrome), leading to sudden death, and progress to
skeletal muscle weakness and cardiomyopathy at later stages [8, 11]. Re-
search regarding skeletal muscle metabolism in SCD is scarce but it has been
shown that SCD patients suﬀer from decreased fat oxidation during moderate
intensity exercise (60 % VO2 max) and compensate with increased carbohy-
drate oxidation. Carnitine supplementation increases fat oxidation in these
patients but the rate does not reach values of a healthy person. This is in line
with patients reporting less fatigue and increased endurance upon carnitine
supplementation [15].
SCD can be treated by lifelong carnitine supplementation which can increase
the carnitine plasma concentration (conc.) to nearly normal values. How-
ever, it cannot bring the skeletal muscle carnitine content to normal values
as carnitine is not properly stored in the muscles. After administration, car-
nitine must be transported from the plasma to tissues. Since muscle has
a particularly low net turnover of carnitine, it is highly resistant to car-
nitine supplementation. Furthermore, when administered orally, carnitine
bioavailability is only up to 15 % and most of the carnitine is recovered in
the urine. Unabsorbed carnitine is completely degraded by bacteria in the
large intestine to produce trimethylamine which upon intestinal absorption
is oxidized in the liver to form trimethylamine-N-oxide (TMAO). TMAO has
been shown to promote atherosclerosis and to enhance cardiovascular risk in
animals and a positive correlation between TMAO and cardiovascular events
has also been found in humans. With these considerations in mind, there
is a need for a more eﬃcient way to store skeletal muscle carnitine in SCD
7
==PAGE:9==
1. BACKGROUND
patients [8, 21].
1.2
Carnitine’s role in β-oxidation of fatty acids
Fatty acids from diet and adipose tissue hydrolysis can cross the PM and
enter the muscle cell by fatty acid transport proteins (FATPs), fatty acid
translocase (FAT/CD36), caveolins and PM fatty acid-binding proteins
(FABPpm). Once in the cell, long-chain fatty acids are activated to long-
chain fatty acyl-CoAs (LCA-CoAs) by a family of acyl-CoA synthetases
(ACS) which are present at the PM, mitochondria and lipid droplets. The
activation reaction sequesters LCA-CoA thioesters inside the cell and main-
tains intracellular free long-chain fatty acids to low concentrations, allow-
ing further uptake of fatty acids.
As LCA-CoAs are unable to cross the
inner mitochondrial membrane (IMM), they bind to carnitine by carnitine
palmitoyltransferase-1 (CPT-1), located on the external surface of the outer
mitochondrial membrane (OMM). CPT-1 catalyzes the transfer of acyl groups
from LCA-CoAs to carnitine to form acylcarnitines and free CoASH. The
acylcarnitines then diﬀuse through the OMM which is permeable to small
molecules and then translocate to the mitochondrial matrix through the
IMM; a process mediated by the carnitine-acylcarnitine transporter (CACT).
CACT transports acylcarnitines into the matrix in exchange for free carni-
tine present in the matrix. Once in the mitochondrial matrix, fatty acyl units
are transported from carnitine to CoASH by carnitine palmitoyltransferase-
2 (CPT-2), forming LCA-CoAs which then enter the β-oxidation pathway.
CPT-2 also converts fatty acylcarnitines to free carnitine which, via CACT,
is able to exit from the mitochondria in exchange with other acylcarnitines.
An overview of this process is shown in Figure 2 [8].
β-oxidation of a fatty acid involves the recurring breakdown of the fatty acyl-
chain into a two-carbon acetyl-CoA unit which is simultaneously oxidized
to produce reduced cofactors in the form of NADH and FADH2. Further
oxidation of acetyl-CoA via the TCA cycle produces ATP and additional
NADH and FADH2. At the IMM, the electrons from NADH and FADH2
pass through the electron transport chain (ETC) to oxygen which is reduced
to water. During the passage of electrons throughout the various complexes
of the ETC, energy is released to generate a transmembrane proton gradient
which is used to produce ATP. The complete fatty acid oxidation yields a
signiﬁcant amount of ATP [8].
Mitochondrial acetyl-CoA is also generated from pyruvate, a product from
the glycolytic pathway which enters the muscle cell via GLUT4. Pyruvate is
8
==PAGE:10==
1. BACKGROUND
Figure 2: The role of carnitine in β-oxidation (modiﬁed from [8]). Car-
nitine functions at the level of the mitochondrial membranes in which it is respon-
sible for the transport of fatty acids into the mitochondrial matrix where they are
oxidized to produce NADH and FADH2 and processed to acetyl-CoA molecules.
Acetyl-CoA enters the TCA cycle to produce even more NADH and FADH2 which
then enter the ETC to generate numerous ATP molecules. Acetyl-CoA can also
be produced via glycolysis. See text for further information.
translocated into the mitochondrial matrix via the pyruvate carrier (MPC).
Once in the mitochondria, pyruvate is converted to acetyl-CoA through pyru-
vate dehydrogenase (PDH) [8].
1.3
Insulin-induced up-regulation of skeletal muscle car-
nitine uptake in healthy subjects
Previous research on healthy subjects reported that during high intensity ex-
ercise (> 75 % Wmax) muscle free carnitine content dropped to 30 % of the
total carnitine content along with a decrease of 35 % in the fat oxidation rate
and it was hypothesized that the muscle free carnitine availability became
limiting to fat oxidation at the concentration of ca. 5 mmol (kg×dm)−1 dur-
ing exercise [16]. In continuation of this research, [26] reported an increase in
skeletal muscle carnitine content upon a combination of hypercarnitinemia
and hyperinsulinemia, thereby demonstrating an ability of insulin to increase
the carnitine content in skeletal muscle. It was furthermore shown that these
9
==PAGE:11==
1. BACKGROUND
results were associated with an increase in OCTN2 mRNA expression, while
hypercarnitinemia alone did not alter expression. Whether the increase in
transcription was due to increased skeletal muscle carnitine content or in-
creased insulin levels requires further research but presents another target at
the transcriptional level in enhancing skeletal muscle carnitine content [26].
As insulin increases sarcolemmal Na+/K+-ATPase activity by stimulating
intracellular Na+-ﬂux, it was hypothesized that insulin simultaneously stim-
ulate Na+-dependent skeletal muscle carnitine transport and thereby increase
the uptake of skeletal muscle carnitine via OCTN2. Likewise, Na+-dependent
skeletal muscle uptake of other nutrients such as amino acids and creatine
is also augmented by insulin. Moreover, ouabain, a potent Na+/K+-ATPase
pump inhibitor, inhibits carnitine transport in isolated muscle cells, suggest-
ing similarities between the two transmembrane proteins [26]. Additionally,
it has been shown that exosomal OCTN2 transport activity measured is pro-
teoliposomes is dependent on NaCl in which a conc. of 80 mM stimulated the
carnitine uptake signiﬁcantly. A conc. higher than 80 mM did not stimulate
carnitine uptake further [2].
It was speculated that the increase in skeletal muscle total carnitine content
could inhibit the decline in fat oxidation observed at high intensity exercise
and at increased glycolytic ﬂux (carbohydrate oxidation), thereby enhancing
the ability to oxidize fat in skeletal muscle. This would have a positive eﬀect
on patients suﬀering from metabolic diseases such as type II diabetes (T2D)
and obesity in which the ability to oxidize fat by skeletal muscle is impaired
during exercise, possibly due to a high glycolytic ﬂux and subsequently low
free carnitine availability, ultimately limiting the transport of LCA-CoA into
the mitochondria for subsequent oxidation. Since intramuscular lipid accu-
mulation is associated with insulin resistance (IR) and the fact that both
weight loss and exercise are required to reduce IR, the ability to increase
skeletal muscle carnitine content could potentially be used to treat these
metabolic diseases [26]. In this regard, especially long-term carnitine admin-
istration should be most eﬀective in the treatment of IR [31].
In this regard, [24] reported a 15 % increase in skeletal muscle carnitine
content, also during conditions of hypercarnitinemia and hyperinsulinemia.
Along with these results, muscle PDC activity and muscle lactate content
dropped 30 % and 40 %, respectively. As described in the Randle cycle, an
increase in fat oxidation results in an increase in muscle acetyl-CoA, conse-
quently inhibiting PDC activity and thereby decreasing glycolytic ﬂux (car-
bohydrate oxidation). Accordingly, a reciprocal relationship exists between
10
==PAGE:12==
1. BACKGROUND
fat oxidation and carbohydrate oxidation in skeletal muscle. Therefore, the
observed decrease in PDC activity and lactate content along with an increase
in muscle carnitine content could be explained as a result of increased fat ox-
idation. In this way, these results indicate a carnitine-mediated switch in
fuel metabolism towards fat oxidation [24].
In the same study, muscle glycogen content and LCA-CoA content of the
carnitine group increased by 30 % and 40 %, respectively.
Prior to the
development of TD2 in obese patients, insulin becomes unable to activate
glycogen synthase. The fact that increasing muscle carnitine content might
induce glycogen synthase activity proposes a direct relation of carnitine to
glycogen synthase activity and hence glycogenesis, which could be relevant in
the prevention of T2D. This observation therefore favors the argument that
glycolytic ﬂux was inhibited upon the increase in muscle carnitine content,
thus favoring fat oxidation instead [24].
It hasn’t been studied if the inhibition of fat oxidation during exercise in
obese and TD2 patients is due to free carnitine availability in skeletal mus-
cle. Nevertheless, these patients suﬀer from increased glycolytic ﬂux during
exercise (and consequently decreased fat oxidation) which potentially could
be alleviated by increasing the free carnitine availability in skeletal muscle.
Whether or not an increase in muscle carnitine content has an eﬀect on mus-
cle fuel metabolism in IR patients (obese/T2D), as was the case for healthy
male subjects, remains to be investigated [24]. These results are however
interesting in the light of [27] suggesting carnitine possibly inhibits the neg-
ative consequences of carbohydrate overfeeding on insulin signaling genes,
thus indicating a positive eﬀect of carnitine on insulin and in the reduction
of fat gain.
In continuation of these observations, [27] demonstrated in healthy subjects
that the increase in skeletal muscle carnitine content can regulate energy
metabolism over a period of 12 weeks. Carbohydrate and carnitine supple-
mentation (carnitine group) increased skeletal muscle carnitine content sig-
niﬁcantly compared to carbohydrate supplementation only (control group).
Furthermore, the total body fat mass of the control group increased signiﬁ-
cantly while the carnitine group was unaltered, as a 20 % increase in skeletal
muscle carnitine content prevented the accumulation of 1.8 kg body fat mass
which was related to a daily intake of a high carbohydrate beverage. At low
intensity exercise (50 % VO2 max), energy expenditure increased signiﬁcantly
in the carnitine group compared to the control group and was likely due to
an increased rate of fat oxidation in the carnitine group. There were no dif-
ferences in skeletal muscle CPT1 max activity between the groups, however,
11
==PAGE:13==
1. BACKGROUND
the CPT1 activity experienced a drop in the control group as opposed to
the carnitine group whose activity appeared more stable, indicating a stim-
ulation of CPT1 activity by carnitine, which supports the concept of muscle
free carnitine availability as the limiting factor to fat oxidation [27].
Plasma insulin threshold
In the basal state of healthy persons, plasma carnitine levels is around 50
µmol/L, and with OCTN2 harboring an in vitro Km for carnitine around
10-fold lower than this value, skeletal muscle carnitine uptake is saturated
and likely the reason that oral supplementation alone does not eﬀect skeletal
muscle carnitine content. However, during hyperinsulinemia and hypercar-
nitinemia, an increase in skeletal muscle uptake occurs simultaneously with
decreased plasma levels, showing a correlation exists between uptake in mus-
cle and plasma clearance. In this regard, the plasma insulin conc. at which
plasma carnitine levels decrease notably has been estimated to be around a
conc. of no less than 90 mU/L upon carnitine infusion. Thus, this level of
insulin is suﬃcient to mediate muscle carnitine uptake to a degree similar to
concentrations above this value and is therefore a threshold value that should
be taken into account [23]. Although this is a relatively high plasma insulin
concentration, it is still possible to achieve without the necessity to use in-
travenous infusion which is rather invasive and unpractical in the everyday
setting. In this regard, orally administered carnitine has been shown to be
augmented when accompanied by carbohydrate ingestion [25].
1.4
Insulin stimulation of GLUT4 vesicle translocation
In the skeletal muscle cell, uptake of glucose happens by facilitated diﬀusion
by the glucose transporters GLUT1 and GLUT4. GLUT1 resides primarily in
the sarcolemma and does not translocate, and its expression is 400-fold lower
than GLUT4. Translocation of GLUT4 to the surface is vital for increasing
glucose uptake during exercise. About 90 % of the intracellular GLUT4 sep-
arates equally into two pools of GLUT4, with one being recruited mainly by
insulin and the other by contractions [9, 13, 22].
In the resting, basal state of the muscle cell (without stimuli), most GLUT4
is located at a perinuclear storage compartment (containing GLUT4 storage
vesicles; GSV) and at cytosol-dispersed vesicles (containing insulin-responsive
vesicles; IRV). Only a small fraction is located at the PM and is regulated by
endocytosis and exocytosis of GLUT4 vesicles. Additionally, GLUT4 largely
populates a common recycling compartment. Any GLUT4 present at the PM
12
==PAGE:14==
1. BACKGROUND
reaches the recycling compartment followed by the storage compartment, and
thus the storage compartment is maintained constantly. In isolated muscle
ﬁbers, a signiﬁcant amount of GLUT4 vesicles are located immobilized be-
neath the sarcolemma and transverse tubules (T-tubules). The T-tubules
is a membrane channel system which is responsible for propagating neural
signals and encompass most of the PM as they consists of deep invaginations
of the sarcolemma [9, 13, 22].
Upon insulin stimulation, the storage compartment is depleted as GLUT4
levels rise at the PM. Around 20% of the intracellular GLUT4 quickly reaches
the PM. The GSV feeds into the IRV which reach the PM. Insulin regulates
the increase of IRV and their transport to the PM, allowing GLUT4 to move
away from its retention in inactive cycling between the storage and recy-
cling compartment. The perinuclear compartment diﬀuses, and the cytosol-
dispersed vesicles disperse even further in which 15-40 % of the total GLUT4
fuses with the PM via a signal cascade caused by the binding of insulin to
its receptor [9, 13, 22]. There is generally a higher GLUT4 expression in
slow type I, oxidative ﬁbers compared to fast type II ﬁbers which are more
glycolytic [22].
13
==PAGE:15==
1. BACKGROUND
1.5
Contraction-induced up-regulation of rat skeletal
muscle carnitine uptake via OCTN2 translocation
[7] reported an increase in carnitine uptake upon muscle contraction at which
co-localization was observed between a muscle PM marker, dystrophin, and
OCTN2, thus indicating translocation of OCTN2 to the PM as seen in Fig-
ure 3. This observation is interesting because muscle contraction, in addition
to insulin stimulation, is known also to promote GLUT4 translocation and
thus indicate a similarity between GLUT4 and OCTN2 translocation. How-
ever, previous research within the group indicate that it is hard to conclude
whether the increased co-localization is due to an increase in the PM or in
the subsarcolemmal vesicle pool instead due to limit of resolution.
Figure 3: Dystrophin and OCTN2 co-staining [7]. OCTN2 was increased
at the sarcolemma and around capillary vessels upon contraction (A-D) and co-
localized with dystrophin.
14
==PAGE:16==
2. PROJECT SCOPE
2
Project scope
The project aims to investigate insulin-induced OCTN2 translocation dur-
ing conditions of hyperinsulinemia and hypercarnitinemia and it is the ﬁrst
study in which OCTN2 translocation has been measured in SCD patients.
Previous studies in healthy subjects have shown that insulin stimulates car-
nitine uptake in skeletal muscle while inducing the expression of OCTN2
mRNA. Therefore, it was hypothesized that OCTN2, in a mechanism simi-
lar to that of insulin-induced GLUT4 translocation, translocates to the PM,
thereby facilitating skeletal muscle carnitine uptake and that this mechanism
is impaired in SCD, thus causing the intrinsic incapability of storing carnitine
intracellularly in skeletal muscle.
Measuring translocation in muscle tissue is a rather troublesome thing to
do as muscle ﬁbers possess a complex three-dimensional structure, compli-
cating the ability to locate spots on the ﬁber surface that are suitable for
immunoﬂuorescence-based imaging. It it thus diﬃcult to directly measure
an increase of vesicles in the PM. Therefore, a method was introduced in
the present study that instead quantiﬁes the depletion of subsarcolemmal
vesicles in skeletal muscle cells by optically sectioning the subsarcolemmal
cytoplasmic volume on top of the myonuclei once before and after insulin
stimulation. This cytoplasmic area was chosen as a suitable area to detect
storage vesicles in close proximity to the PM, thus readily available translo-
cation and subsequent PM fusion. This area does therefore not represent the
volume of the whole cell but was intended to be representative of an intra-
cellular, subsarcolemmal pool containing GLUT4 and OCTN2 vesicles that
are ready to undergo translocation to the PM.
This study can thereby provide insight into whether SCD patients would
beneﬁt from carnitine administration under conditions of hyperinsulinemia,
either as a direct administration of insulin or via an eﬀect that induces the
plasma insulin level to above 90 mU/L. For patients with naturally induced
insulin levels, such as obese and T2D patients, carnitine supplementation
could be considered in order to increase skeletal muscle carnitine uptake and
alleviate their intrinsic disability to oxidize fat. However, further research is
needed to verify this eﬀect.
15
==PAGE:17==
3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
3
Materials and methods
3.1
Subjects and study design
Sixteen Faroese subjects (age 18-46 years; 14 men and 2 women) were in-
cluded in the study of which eight were SCD-patients, homozygous for the
c.95 A > G mutation in the SLC22A5 gene (coding for OCTN2) and eight
were healthy subjects. The subjects were matched in age, gender, body com-
position and physical activity level. All SCD-patients were taking their daily
oral L-carnitine supplementation as normal during the intervention. None of
the patients suﬀered from any other illnesses (e.g. metabolic diseases) that
could interfere with the interpretation of the results.
The subjects reported to the lab on two diﬀerent days at which they had
underwent overnight fasting ( ≈10 hours) and had abstained from strenuous
exercise for the previous 24 hours. Furthermore, alcohol, tobacco and drinks
with caﬀeine were not allowed for 10 hours before testing. On the ﬁrst day,
the participants had their health status determined by a physical examination
including medical history, an electrocardiogram, a full blood count and also
an electrolyte assessment and SCD genotyping. This was followed by a body
composition scan and an exercise test determining VO2 max and maximal
fat oxidation. On the second experimental day, the subjects underwent a
hyperinsulinaemic clamp, had their resting metabolic rate measured as well
as muscle biopsies taken and urine collected.
The insulin clamp setup was performed in line with the protocol performed
by [26]. The subjects received a 6 hr euglycaemic hyperinsulinaemic clamp
with an insulin (Actrapid, Novo Nordisk A/S, Bagsværd, Denmark) infusion
rate of 105 mIU (m2 × min)−1 with the aim of establishing a hyperinsuli-
naemic insulin plasma level of 150 mIU/L for 6 hours. The fasting blood
glucose concentration of 4.7 ± 0.1 mM/L was preserved by infusion of a 20
% glucose solution. After 1 hr of steady state, a 5 hr 60 mM L-carnitine solu-
tion (MEDICE Arzneimittel p¨utter GmbH, Iserlohn, Germany) was infused
intravenously in conjunction with the insulin clamp. During the ﬁrst 10 min,
15 mg/kg carnitine was infused in order to rapidly increase the plasma conc.
to ≈550 µmol/L and was followed by a 290 min constant infusion of 10 mg
(kg × h)−1 to preserve hypercarnitinemia.
Skeletal muscle biopsies were taken at two diﬀerent time points; once just
before (basal) and once at the end (clamp) of the hyperinsulinaemic clamp.
The muscle biopsies were acquired from vastus lateralis during local anes-
thesia by the use of the Bergstrøm technique [1]. A piece of the muscle was
ﬁxed with 2 % paraformaldehyde supplemented with 1.2 % picric acid for
subsequent immunostaining of single muscle ﬁbers.
16
==PAGE:18==
3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
3.2
The ﬂuorescence principle
Fluorophores possess the ability to absorb light for a very short period, usu-
ally billionths of a second, after which they re-emit the light again.
At
a certain wavelength, electrons of ﬂuorophores can be excited by photons
which results in the re-emission of photons with a slightly higher wavelength
(approx. 20-50 nm higher). This shift in wavelength between absorption and
emission light is known as the Stokes shift and is depicted in Figure 4a. Upon
light excitement, the electrons jump to the lowest excited state (S1), taking
the lowest vibrational level. The electrons will then follow de-excitation in
the form of ﬂuorescence while coming down to its earlier ground state (S0)
as seen in Figure 4b [10, 12].
(a) Stokes shift [10]. Fluorophores ab-
sorb light (λ1) at a certain absorption
spectrum after which they re-emit the
light at a slightly higher wavelength (λ2).
This diﬀerence between the peak wave-
length of absorption and emission is the
Stokes shift.
(b) Jablonski diagram [4]. Electrons
of ﬂuorophores are excited upon light ab-
sorption into an excited state (S1) and
undergoes de-excitation via ﬂuorescence
to its former ground state (S0), usually
occurring in nanoseconds. The electrons
can also relax to the ground state via in-
tersystem crossing to the lowest triplet
state, (T1)
Figure 4: Principles of ﬂuorescence.
17
==PAGE:19==
3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
3.3
Principles of immunohistochemistry
Antibodies (Abs) belong to the group of proteins called immunoglobulins
(Igs) which exist in the blood of immunized individuals. Igs are comprised of
5 major classes, IgG, IgA, IgM, IgD and IgE. Each IgG molecule is composed
of two identical heavy chains (H) and two identical light chains (L) and each
chain has a constant part (C) and a variable part (V). The general structure
of IgG is shown in Figure 5. The tip of each arm is formed by the variable
part of the heavy chain (VH) and the light chain (VL), forming a variable
region which include the antigen binding site. Each antibody (Ab) contains
two identical variable regions and thus two antigen binding sites which can
consist of a broad number of diﬀerent amino acids, enabling Abs to recognize
an equally extensive variation of antigens. The antigen-binding site of the Ab
consists of three hypervariable loops from both VH and VL. These loops are
known as complementary-determining regions because the surface they form
is complementary to the size and shape of the antigen they bind. The site
to which the Ab bind is known as an epitope and binding is held together
by noncovalent forces. In this regard, monoclonal Abs are a homogenous
population of Igs directed against a single speciﬁc epitope while polyclonal
Abs are directed against several epitopes within the same antigen. The CH3
domain embodies the functional properties of the subclasses (IgG1, 2, 3,
4) which is used in subclass-speciﬁc secondary Abs, thus enabling indirect
staining as depicted in Figure 6 [19, 3].
18
==PAGE:20==
3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
Figure 5: Structure of an IgG Ab (modiﬁed from [17]). The IgG Ab is
the most common Ab found in the blood of humans. In terms of immunohisto-
chemistry, IgGs and IgMs are the most commonly used Abs. An IgG consists of
two heavy chains (blue chains) and two light chains (red chains) in which each
chain consists of a variable part (V) and a constant part (C). The Ab structure is
stabilized by inter- and intrachain disulphide bonds (SS) and can undergo cleavage
into either two antigen-binding fragments (Fab, monovalent) and one crystalline
fragment (Fc) or one antigen-binding fragment (F(ab’)2, bivalent, not shown) only.
See text for further details.
Figure 6: Indirect staining (modiﬁed from [3]). The primary Ab binds to
the antigen of interest followed by binding of the secondary Ab to the primary Ab.
The ﬂuorophore is conjugated to the secondary Ab.
19
==PAGE:21==
3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
3.4
Confocal microscopy
The idea of confocal microscopy is to block out-of-focus emission light from
the specimen by inserting a pinhole in the image plane in front of the de-
tector, so that only emission light from the focus point of the specimen is
gathered by the detector, hence being confocal. The position of the pinhole
in the image plane thus determines what point in the focal plane that reaches
the detector. This enables optical sectioning and 3D imaging. In the past,
a second pinhole was inserted in the excitation path so that excitation light
also was in focus with the point in the sample. This is not necessary by using
collimated laser light. When the excitation light is reﬂected by the dichroic
mirror and passed through the objective, it hits the specimen it multiple
focal planes. By adding the pinhole before the emission light hits the de-
tector, it’s possible to block any out-of-focus light and signiﬁcantly improve
the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) compared to bright-ﬁeld microscopy, despite
collecting a lower number of photons. In laser scanning confocal microscopy
(LSCM), the excitation beam is generally deﬂected by the use of a pair of
galvanometer mirrors which are controlled by the acquisition software to be
able to move the beam in the x or y dimension. A set of telescopes is placed
in the optical path between the galvanometer mirrors and the objective to
avoid clipping of the beam by the objective. The telescope images an in-
termediate position between the mirrors on the objective’s back aperture,
which results in the position of the beam at the objective’s back aperture
to be stationary during scanning. The only thing changing is the angle of
the beam in relation to the objective, focusing the beam at diﬀerent spots
within the focal plane and thus generating the image pixel-by-pixel. The
light is collected and collimated with the same objective and is directed back
over the galvanometer mirrors so that the detection path has no divergence
when reaching the pinhole [30, 12].
Resolution:
The resolution of a system is deﬁned as the minimum distance in which two
points still can be seen separately and thus resolved. The minimum lateral
distance or the limit of resolution Rlateral that still can be resolved is given
by
Rlateral =
1.22λ0
NAobjective + NAcondenser
(1)
in which the value of 1.22 originates from the ﬁrst zero of the Bessel function
in the Airy disc, λ0 is the wavelength of light in vacuum and NA is the
numerical aperture of the objective and condenser. The numerical aperture
is given as NA = nsin(α) in which n is the diﬀractive index of the immersion
20
==PAGE:22==
3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
Figure 7: LSCM principle [12]. (a) illustrates the function of the pinhole and
how only emission light from the focal plane is detected. (b) shows the setup in
LSCM.
oil between the objective and the specimen and alpha is equal to half the
opening angle of the objective [10, 12]. Usually, the NA of the objective is
the same as NA of the condenser and Rlateral can then be written as
Rlateral =
1.22λ0
2 · NAobjective
(2)
where R is the distance of the maximum/center of the Airy disc to its ﬁrst
minimum. This diﬀraction-limited resolution is known as the Rayleigh crite-
rion. The objective and tube lens images a point in the object as a somewhat
blurred spot which is surrounded by diﬀraction rings (Airy discs) rather than
as a bright disc with sharply deﬁned edges. The Airy discs are a cause of
21
==PAGE:23==
3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
the objective aperture’s limiting function in which they are found behind the
objective, acting as a hole. The radius of the Airy disc in the pinhole’s plane
is calculated by
rAiry disc = Rlateral × magnificationtotal
(3)
in which the total magniﬁcation of the microscope is equal to the product
of the eyepiece and objective magniﬁcation. The diameter d (equal to 2 ×
Rlateral) is equivalent to 1 AU (Airy unit) so that
1 AU = d =
1.22λ0
NAobjective
(4)
For a confocal system, the resolution is deﬁned as the distance (∆x in Figure
8 below) between the principal maximum and the ﬁrst minimum of the point
spread function (PSF) (see Figure 8 below). The PSF is the intensity distri-
bution or the probability of detecting a point source in the image plane. If
a point source was imaged by two perfect lenses, the PSF is the Airy disc [12].
Nevertheless, the real resolving power of a microscope depends on the SNR
which is optimal at a pinhole size of 1 AU. At this size, 86 % of the light
collected by the objective passes through the pinhole. An increase in the
pinhole size results in increased brightness of the image, an eﬀect that comes
with a decreased sharpness. Thus, a decrease in the pinhole size enhances
the resolution, but in turn results in a decrease of the number of detected
photons. Consequently, pinhole size is used to adjust the thickness of the
optical section rather than improving resolution [12].
22
==PAGE:24==
3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
Figure 8: Optical resolution [12] (a) shows a depiction of the lateral PSF in
3D, (b) shows a depiction of the lateral PSF from the top in 2D, (c) shows a slice
through the middle of the PSF. The left column illustrates the Rayleigh criterion
in which the PSFs with a smaller distance than ∆x cannot be resolved. The mid-
dle column illustrates the Sparrow criterion in which two objects can be resolved
as long as the valley/dip between the maximums of the PSFs is detectable. In the
right column the PSFs are too close to each other and merges to be indistinguish-
able and blurry.
23
==PAGE:25==
3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
3.5
Experimental protocols
3.5.1
Buﬀers
The buﬀers that were used in the immunohistochemical analysis are shown
in Figure 9.
Figure 9: Buﬀers used in methods. The elements of each buﬀer are shown in
the right column.
3.5.2
Immunohistochemical analysis of muscle ﬁbers
Approximately 20-30 muscle ﬁbers from each subject were teased using pin-
cers and a microscope in a silicone-bottom covered petri dish containing PBS.
Fibers were then transferred to a microplate containing IB and subsequently
incubated over-night with primary Abs. The following day ﬁbers were washed
3 times 30 min on a shaker following over-night incubation with secondary
Abs. Fibers were then incubated with DNA-speciﬁc dye Hoescht H-33342
diluted in IB (1/4000) to visualize myonuclei. Fibers were then washed on
a shaker 3 times 30 min with IB followed by 1 times 10 min with PBS and
mounted with SuperFrost glass slide (Menze-Glaeser, Germany) using Vec-
tashield mounting medium covered with a 1.5 mm cover slip and sealed with
transparent nail polish.
24
==PAGE:26==
3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
3.5.3
Test 1: primary α-GLUT4 IgG and secondary α-rabbit IgG
A488 speciﬁcity
The optimal conc. for an Ab is one that is saturated and thereby able to
reach all its target antigens in the sample without binding unspeciﬁcally to
other antigens. If the conc. is too low, the Ab is unable to reach all the anti-
gens, thus producing false negative pixels as these go undetected. However,
too high a conc. results in a higher degree of unspeciﬁc binding, potentially
causing the detection of false positive pixels. These tests therefore sought to
ﬁnd the optimal concentrations of Abs, thereby increasing the robustness of
both GLUT4 and OCTN2 detection.
Previous test staining (now shown) had indicated that a secondary goat
α-rabbit A568 Ab, which was planned to bind to the rabbit α-GLUT4 Ab,
detected some unspeciﬁc antigens which were likely being endogenous plasma
proteins. Therefore, three new secondary α-rabbit Abs were compared for
speciﬁcity in order to use one of them for detecting the rabbit IgG α-GLUT4
Ab instead. However, the unspeciﬁc binding could also be due to unspeci-
ﬁcity by the primary rabbit IgG α-GLUT4 Ab and thus another candidate
for α-GLUT4 detection (i.e. mouse IgG1 α-GLUT4 Ab) was included in the
test to compare the speciﬁcity of rabbit α-GLUT4 Ab vs mouse α-GLUT4
Ab. Similar speciﬁcity of the two α-GLUT4 Abs would then indicate that
they both are speciﬁc for GLUT4 and thus the unspeciﬁc binding would likely
be due to unspeciﬁcity by the secondary goat α-rabbit A568 Ab. The test
setup is shown in Figure 10.
25
==PAGE:27==
3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
Figure 10: Test 1 overview of staining. Immunohistochemical analysis was
performed as described in section 3.3.2. Well 1 and 2 were incubated with the two
diﬀerent α-GLUT4 Abs. Well 3 were incubated with a combination of the two
α-GLUT4 Abs in order to observe co-localization indicating similar speciﬁcity. A
new goat α-rabbit IgG A488 Ab was used to bind to rabbit IgG α-GLUT4 in well
1 and 3. In wells 4 - 6, the three new α-rabbit IgG Abs were incubated without
primary Ab to test speciﬁcity indicated by no binding. Speciﬁcity was compared
to that of the goat α-mouse IgG A568 Ab. The goat α-rabbit IgG A488 Ab in
well 1, 3 and 4 is the same (goat1). The goat α-rabbit IgG A488 Ab in well 6 is
diﬀerent from the one in well 1, 3 and 4.
26
==PAGE:28==
3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
Results
As seen in Figure 11, the mouse IgG1 α-GLUT4 Ab seemed to be overly
saturated at the concentration of 1/250 and it was therefore decided to dilute
this Ab 1/500 and 1/1000 in the next test to achieve a better saturation.
Furthermore, the two α-GLUT4 Abs showed a great deal of co-localization
(Figure 12, right) thus indicating that they mainly bind to the same target,
although the rabbit IgG α-GLUT4 Ab seemed to bind more targets than the
mouse IgG1 α-GLUT4 Ab.
The secondary α-rabbit IgG Abs showed no unspeciﬁc binding and were
concluded to be good for future usage (not shown).
27
==PAGE:29==
3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
Figure 11:
mouse IgG1 α-GLUT4 diluted 1/250.
The conc.
is overly
saturated and unspeciﬁc binding is evident.
Figure 12: α-GLUT4 co-staining. Two diﬀerent α-GLUT4 Abs were stained
separately (left images) and together (right image). Upper left: mouse IgG1 α-
GLUT4 diluted 1/250. Lower left: rabbit IgG α-GLUT4 diluted 1/500. Right:
Co-staining of the two α-GLUT4 Abs. Red channel: mouse IgG1 α-GLUT4. Green
channel: rabbit IgG α-GLUT4.
28
==PAGE:30==
3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
3.5.4
Test 2: primary α-OCTN2 speciﬁcity and mouse IgG1 α-
GLUT4 optimal concentration
This test investigated the speciﬁcity of two diﬀerent rabbit IgG α-OCTN2
Abs. These Abs were each co-stained with an α-OCTN1/2 Ab (data not
shown). Furthermore, the mouse IgG1 α-GLUT4 Ab from the previous test
was diluted further to check for a more optimal concentration than 1/250.
The setup of the test is shown in Figure 13.
Figure 13: Test 2 overview of staining. Immunohistochemical analysis was
performed as described in section 3.3.2.
Two diﬀerent primary rabbit IgG α-
OCTN2 Abs were incubated separately in well 1 - 4 in the given concentrations.
Additionally, the mouse IgG1 α-GLUT4 Ab from the previous test were diluted
1/500 and 1/1000 in well 5 and 6, respectively.
The two diﬀerent rabbit IgG
α-OCTN2 Abs were each co-stained with a mouse IgG1 α-OCTN1/2 Ab to in-
vestigate speciﬁcity (well 7 and 8). For secondary incubation, the goat α-rabbit
IgG A488 Ab from the previous test (goat1) was selected to bind to the two rab-
bit IgG α-OCTN2 Abs. The goat α-mouse IgG A568 Ab, also from the previous
test, was chosen to bind to the mouse IgG1 α-GLUT4 Ab and to the mouse IgG1
α-OCTN1/2 Ab.
Results
The PA5-102460 Ab seemed to be saturated overall with low unspeciﬁc bind-
ing, however, one ﬁber out of seven ﬁbers imaged seemed to contain some
unspeciﬁc binding while the rest of the imaged ﬁbers seemed without any un-
speciﬁc binding as shown in Figure 14 and 15. However, only one conc. was
29
==PAGE:31==
3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
tested and it would have been more appropriate to test more concentrations
in order to evaluate saturation of this Ab more comprehensively. Neverthe-
less, it was estimated that the conc. was suitable since both α-OCTN2 Abs
looked quite similar in speciﬁcity.
30
==PAGE:32==
3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
Figure 14: PA5-102460 α-OCTN2 diluted 1/200. This Ab appeared without
unspeciﬁc binding in general and was the Ab that was selected to bind to OCTN2
at the given conc..
Figure 15: PA5-102460 α-OCTN2 diluted 1/200.
31
==PAGE:33==
3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
The PA5-66554 Ab was tested in three diﬀerent concentrations which did
not seem to vary that much in saturation as OCTN2 vesicles were observed
clearly at all three concentrations. However, the decrease in conc. seemed to
decrease unspeciﬁc binding. This Ab could thus also have been used to bind
to OCTN2 and would perhaps have been the most suitable one as diﬀerent
concentrations were tested. However, it should be noted that the producers of
the Abs (ThermoFischer) stated that the optimal conc. for the PA5-102460
Ab was 1/200. Example images from the three diﬀerent concentrations are
shown in Figure 16, 17 and 18.
Figure 16: PA5-102460 α-OCTN2 diluted 1/100.
32
==PAGE:34==
3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
Figure 17: PA5-102460 α-OCTN2 diluted 1/200.
33
==PAGE:35==
3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
Figure 18: PA5-102460 α-OCTN2 diluted 1/400.
34
==PAGE:36==
3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A 1/1000 of the conc. of the α-GLUT4 mouse IgG1 Ab (MA1-83191) seemed
optimal since at this relatively low conc., the unspeciﬁc binding decreased
compared to the earlier tested conc. of 1/250. Furthermore, the conc. still
seemed to be saturated as many high intensity pixels were evident as seen
in Figure 19. Additionally, this Ab was used because the previously tested
α-GLUT4 Ab was a rabbit IgG like the two tested α-OCTN2 rabbit IgGs.
Since the MA1-83191 is an α-GLUT4 mouse IgG1 there wont be a problem
in detection.
Figure 19: MA1-83191 α-GLUT4 diluted 1/1000. The Ab seemed to be at
a more or less balanced saturation and was chosen to bind to GLUT4 at the given
conc.. No optimal conc. was stated by the producers (ThermoFischer).
35
==PAGE:37==
3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
3.5.5
GLUT4 and OCTN2 translocation in healthy persons and
SCD patients
Fibers from each subject were stained as described in section 3.3.2 and an
overview is presented in Figure 20. Image acquisition was performed with a
Zeiss LSM700 through a 63x/1.40 oil DIC Plan-Apochromat objective. Diode
lasers were used to excite Hoechst at 405 nm, Alexa Fluor 488 at 488 nm,
Alexa Fluor 568 at 555 nm and Alexa Fluor 647 at 639 nm. Pinhole was set to
1 AU for the 488 nm channel and kept for the other three channels to match
optical section thickness for all channels. Imaging conditions (laser intensity,
detection gain, oﬀset) were set to avoid empty and saturated pixels and were
kept constant when acquiring images to be compared. Z-stacks of images
following the Nyquist-Shannon sampling theorem (0.35 µm apart) from the
beginning/top of the nuclei and down to the middle were used to acquire
maximum projections. GLUT4 and OCTN2 translocation was quantiﬁed by
measuring the diﬀerence in vesicle density at the subsarcolemmal region at
the basal state and after clamp stimulation using the program CellProﬁler.
Figure 20: Overview of staining of ﬁbers from healthy persons and SCD
patients. α-SERCA2 ATPase Ab was added in order to enable ﬁbertyping. PA5-
102460 was chosen to detect OCTN2 vesicles and MA1-83191 was chosen to detect
GLUT4 vesicles.
36
==PAGE:38==
3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
3.6
Quantiﬁcation of GLUT4 and OCTN2 vesicle trans-
location
Tissue of skeletal muscle is rather complex and it has been diﬃcult to streng-
then the overall comprehension of GLUT4 traﬃcking dynamics in general
research. The muscle ﬁbers contain thousands of nuclei and large amounts of
contractile proteins are integrated in conjunction with tendon attachments
and capillaries in a complicated 3D structure as depicted in Figure 21. Lay-
ers of connective tissue envelop the muscle, bundles of the muscle and each
muscle ﬁber within the bundle. These technical barriers complicate the de-
tection of GLUT4 and OCTN2 vesicles. Furthermore, the staining process
underlying immunoﬂuorescence is a rather invasive method, and all together
these factors can introduce artifacts as both false positives and false negatives
[13]. An image example of the muscle ﬁber in shown in Figure 22.
Therefore, the translocation of GLUT4 and OCTN2 vesicles was measured
indirectly by imaging at the top of the nuclei in muscle cells where the thick-
ness of the subsarcolemmal cytoplasm is very small. Upon insulin stimulation
of the cell, the depletion of transport vesicles residing in the subsarcolemmal
reservoir pool was quantiﬁed as indication of translocation to the PM. An
illustration of this area is shown in Figure 23.
Moreover, time resolution of this method is limited, as both the measurement
at basal and stimulation is at one single time point and not a continuous
session [13]. However, measuring at these time points does after all oﬀer
information regarding vesicle traﬃcking during translocation, although it
could be more extensive and does not say anything about which intracellular
compartments the vesicles go through (e.g.
shuttle between storage and
recycling compartment).
37
==PAGE:39==
3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
Figure 21: Structure and organization of skeletal muscle [13].
Left: Macroscopic view of skeletal muscle. The muscle is attached to the bone
via the tendon. The muscle consists of multiple layers of connective tissue. The
epimysium surrounds the whole muscle, the perimycium envelops each bundle of
ﬁbers (fascicle) and the endomysium covers each single ﬁber. These layers of tissue
pose diﬃculties to detection via IHC-based imaging.
Right: The PM of the muscle ﬁber. The PM consists of the sarcolemma with neu-
romuscular junctions that facilitate nerve impulses for contraction. The T-tubules
run into the ﬁber and propagates the nerve impulses along the ﬁber. Myoﬁbrils ﬁll
up most of the intracellular space and other organelles such as the Golgi complex
are thus spread out in separate elements throughout the cell.
38
==PAGE:40==
3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
Figure 22: Image example of a whole ﬁber. Nuclei are shown in
blue, GLUT4 in green and OCTN2 in red.
Figure 23: Sketch of the subsarcolemmal vesicle pool residing in the
cytoplasm of the muscle cell. The area of interest is shaded in grey and contains
intracellular GLUT4 and OCTN2 storage vesicles ready to undergo translocation
and PM fusion.
39
==PAGE:41==
3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
3.7
Image analysis
After maximum projections were acquired, each projection was split into
images of separate channels. Since the projection consisted of four channels,
it was split into four images. These images were then converted to grayscale
images and subsequently used as input to the pipeline, constituting a subset.
3.7.1
Cellproﬁler pipeline design
The overall purpose of the pipeline was to be able to function in an appro-
priate manner on the diﬀerent types of images present in the sample size.
The images can for an example vary in intensity and pose diﬃculties in de-
termining true pixels/objects of interest. It can be challenging to ﬁnd the
optimal balance of the various parameters when considering the design and
the end result will always be a compromise containing certain limitations
that decrease the accuracy. However, these limitations are constant and ap-
pear on all images, thereby not changing the precision of the method and
consequently not interfering with a detected diﬀerence between sample popu-
lations. A high degree of accuracy is desirable in order to make sure that the
method actually measures what is desired (i.e. diﬀerences in vesicle density
and thus translocation). Artifacts are undesirable as they occur randomly
and can compromise both accuracy and precision. Therefore, it was the aim
to optimize accuracy and precision and thereby the overall robustness of the
detection method.
The objects of interest (nuclei and vesicles) vary in intensity.
Therefore,
an automatically-calculated thresholding method was chosen over a man-
ual threshold as it ”adapts” to the intensity of each image. The intensity
threshold inﬂuence whether the pixel will be considered as foreground which
represents the objects of interest or background. A higher threshold results
in fewer objects as only the brightest objects are kept, whereas a lower thres-
hold will include more dim objects.
The thresholding algorithm of choice for both nuclei and vesicle images was
the Otsu method two classes [20, 18] since background pixels usually domi-
nated the histograms in an unimodal distribution of pixel intensity in many
images. However, bimodal distributions were also observed, in which group-
ing into three classes would have been more appropriate as eventual lower
intensity vesicles are discarded with the two class method on a bimodal distri-
bution. In this case, it could be useful to be able to modify the thresholding
method based on the pixel intensity histogram, however, this feature was
40
==PAGE:42==
3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
unfortunately not used (nor known) in the present method and could have
increased the accuracy.
The Otsu method separates foreground and background pixels by minimizing
the variance within each class and assumes that 50 % of the image is covered
by objects. If a higher percentage of the image is covered instead, the Otsu
method will produce a slightly biased threshold. Since the images vary a
lot in coverage of objects, it is hard to say to what degree this occurred.
However, for nuclei objects, some images were zoomed in on a single nucleus
as seen in Figure 26 and thereby exceeds the 50 % coverage degree. There-
fore, this could cause an artifact. Nevertheless, the Otsu method is still an
appropriate algorithm to use on a data set of images that vary substantially
in object coverage [18].
Although an automatic thresholding method is favorable, it may at times
produce a rather poor threshold for unusual images or images with arti-
facts. For an example if the image is very dim due to insuﬃcient staining
as seen in Figure 26, it can be hard to separate background pixels from the
foreground. As the Otsu method attempts to divide the two classes, the
calculated threshold will be unreasonably low and thus include false positive
pixels in the foreground. Therefore, a minimum threshold value was set for
both nuclei and vesicles by analyzing the pixel intensity value of background
and foreground pixels in a selection of dim images in order to ﬁnd a threshold
value that was suitable for the majority of images. Thus, if the calculated
threshold falls below this value, the minimum threshold value overrules the
calculated one, thereby providing a form for safety net [18].
In contrary, if the image suﬀers from a lot of noise, the threshold is calcu-
lated as unreasonably high and pixels that are actually true positives will
be interpreted as false negatives instead. This is especially an issue for the
detection of vesicles as these may be lost in the count. For the detection
of vesicles, it is equally important to avoid false negative as false positive
pixels, as we are interested in the true number of vesicles. With regard to
the nuclei, false negative pixels are favored over false positive pixels as we are
only interested in vesicles related to the nuclei. Therefore, we would rather
loose a part of the nucleus and still have a remaining part containing only
true positive pixels than add a false area to the nucleus. However, loosing a
nucleus area could still alter the vesicle density and thereby the accuracy.
An example of such noise can be seen for OCTN2 vesicles (red) in the max
projection of Figure 25 in which the upper part of the image suﬀers from
noise. However, an upper threshold was not set and could have been consid-
ered in order to improve accuracy.
41
==PAGE:43==
3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
The module ”IdentifyPrimaryObjects” was used to identify both nuclei and
vesicles. For nuclei identiﬁcation, the size interval was set to identify objects
with an area in the range of 5027 – 31416 pixels2. This was selected in order
to ﬁlter out noise and reduce false positive pixels in images with relatively
low SNR as seen in Figure 27. Nuclei were smoothed by the use of a Gaussian
function with a standard deviation of σ = 2.23 as this value seemed appro-
priate in producing whole nuclei objects while simultaneously preserving the
edges. A minimum threshold of 0.155 was set by comparing pixel intensity of
the nuclei and surrounding noise. Nuclei were not declumped as we are not
interested in the number of nuclei but only the area. Therefore, objects that
touches the border of the image were also included. Any holes in both nuclei
and vesicles were ﬁlled as objects (mainly the nuclei) can vary in intensity
within the object itself.
The module ”EnhanceOrSuppressFeatures” was used on GLUT4 and OCTN2
vesicles before identiﬁcation and enhances the intensity of certain pixels by
the application of image processing ﬁlters. In this case, the vesicles were
interpreted as ”speckles” which are areas of enhanced intensity relative to
the immediate neighborhood [18].
For vesicle identiﬁcation, the size interval was set to identify objects with
an area in the range of 12.57 – 78.54 pixels2 as vesicles mainly appeared in
that size range. The vesicles were smoothed by a Gaussian function with a
standard deviation of σ = 1.00 to induce uniformity within the vesicle and
remove eventual holes or jagged edges caused by noise [18]. A lower value
of σ was chosen to preserve the sharpness of the vesicle shape. A minimum
threshold of 0.21 was set by comparing pixel intensity of the vesicles and
surrounding noise. Vesicles were declumped by intensity as the vesicles tend
to have only a single peak of brightness at the center and gets dimmer towards
the edges). Each intensity peak is counted as a separate object as seen in
Figure 24 and the objects can be of any shape. The vesicles were although
ﬁltered on eccentricity in which a maximum value of 0.75 was chosen in order
to ﬁlter out noise and potential artifacts by ensuring a degree of ellipticity
within the vesicles with the aim of inducing detection accuracy. The direct
eﬀect of each module can be seen in the following section (3.7.2).
42
==PAGE:44==
3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
Figure 24: Declumping by intensity. .
3.7.2
Evaluation of pipeline robustness
The pipeline used to quantify GLUT4 and OCTN2 vesicles was qualitatively
evaluated on robustness. The following set of images are thus included to
illustrate how objects are selected or deselected.
Nuclei robustness
Nuclei were the objects that seemed to vary the most in intensity. As they
are relatively big objects, the chance of an uneven SNR within the object is
highest in nuclei compared to GLUT4 and OCTN2 objects which are con-
siderably smaller. An example of this is shown in Figure 25 and 26. In the
case of low SNR throughout the whole image, the pipeline has the potential
to discriminate between noise and objects as seen in Figure 27. Nevertheless,
there can be images in which the pipeline potentially could fail, e.g. if the
minimum threshold is not appropriate to the given image.
43
==PAGE:45==
3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
Figure 25: Nuclei robustness. Well-deﬁned nuclei with low SNR are easily
detected.
However, if part of the nucleus is dim, it will be excluded from the
nucleus object as false negative pixels. The max projection represents the input
image and the ”outlines” image cycle shows which detected objects are discarded
(purple) and kept (green).
Figure 26: Nuclei robustness. In this type of low SNR within the nucleus, the
pipeline is more or less able to discriminate between objects and noise due to the
combination of a size ﬁlter and a minimum threshold. However, some pixels are
detected as false negatives.
44
==PAGE:46==
3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
Figure 27: Nuclei robustness. In images with low SNR in general, the pipeline
is more or less able to discriminate between objects and noise and seems rather
accurate despite having few false positive pixels.
45
==PAGE:47==
3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
GLUT4 robustness
The GLUT4 Ab seemed to have high speciﬁcity and GLUT4 vesicles usually
appeared with high SNR compared to OCTN2.
Figure 28: GLUT4 vesicle detection in a type I ﬁber of the SCD group.
”Enhanced GLUT4” shows which objects are enhanced by the module (bright
objects). ”Filtered GLUT4” shows an overlay of total kept objects (in color) and
the enhanced objects (uncolored).
Figure 29: GLUT4 vesicle detection in a type I ﬁber of the SCD group.
GLUT4 accumulation at the trans-Golgi apparatus is declumped into separate
vesicles.
46
==PAGE:48==
3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
Figure 30: GLUT4 vesicle detection in a type I ﬁber of the SCD group
after clamp stimulation.
Figure 31:
GLUT4 vesicle detection in a type I ﬁber of the control
group after clamp stimulation.
47
==PAGE:49==
3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
OCTN2 robustness
The OCTN2 detection was in general robust even though some images suf-
fered from low SNR.
Figure 32: OCTN2 vesicle detection in a type I ﬁber of the SCD group
at the basal state.
Figure 33: OCTN2 vesicle detection in a type I ﬁber of the SCD group
at the basal state.
48
==PAGE:50==
3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
Figure 34: OCTN2 vesicle detection in a type I ﬁber of the SCD group
after clamp stimulation.
Figure 35: OCTN2 vesicle detection in a type I ﬁber of the control
group after clamp stimulation.
49
==PAGE:51==
3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
Figure 36: OCTN2 vesicle detection in a type II ﬁber of the SCD group
at the basal state. An example of an artifact due to unspeciﬁc binding. Left:
The deﬁned nucleus area and the OCTN2 vesicles detected within. Right: Detected
OCTN2 vesicles and the maximum projection containing unspeciﬁc binding. In
this case, some of the unspeciﬁc binding is counted as vesicles.
50
==PAGE:52==
3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
3.8
Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was calculated by SigmaPlot software. The mean value
of each sample population was used to compare diﬀerences. The entire data
set consisted of sixteen sample populations.
All sample populations had
an N = 8 except for the control basal (N = 7) in which both the control
group and the SCD group were grouped upon ﬁbertype and had their average
GLUT4 and OCTN2 translocation measured by quantifying the diﬀerence
in vesicles at the basal state and after clamp stimulation. Normality was
ensured by the Shapiro-Wilk’s test and equal variance by the Brown-Forsythe
test. Paired t-tests were performed on the means of GLUT4 and OCTN2
translocation in type I and type II ﬁbers in the control and SCD group to
assess signiﬁcance in translocation upon clamp stimulation. Two-sample t-
tests were conducted to assess diﬀerences in mean values between the control
and the SCD group. In case of not normally distributed data, the Mann-
Whitney U-test was conducted instead. In case of unequal variances following
a normal distribution, Welch’s t-test was conducted instead.
51
==PAGE:53==
4. RESULTS
4
Results
In total, 931 maximum projections were converted into image subsets and
included in the study in which GLUT4 and OCTN2 vesicle density were
quantiﬁed using CellProﬁler software. Z-stacks were acquired by manually
moving the objective of the microscope to suitable spots of detection. Each
Z-stack was modiﬁed such that only image slices from the top of the nuclei
and down to the middle of the nuclei were included in the maximum projec-
tion. Additionally, nuclei varied in focal planes so that manual edits had to
be performed in order to enable the images for subsequent analysis.
The amount of images included in the study varied substantially between
the sample populations, as the quality and tissue complexity of the ﬁbers in
each sample population varied a lot as well. An example of input images
at which the number of OCTN2 and GLUT4 vesicles were close to being
representative of the estimated mean values of the sample populations are
provided in Figure 37.
Insulin-induced OCTN2 translocation:
In the control group, a signiﬁcant decrease in OCTN2 vesicles was observed
upon insulin stimulation in type I ﬁbers (p < 0.03), indicative of OCTN2
translocation. No signiﬁcant decrease in OCTN2 vesicles was observed upon
insulin stimulation in type II of the control (p > 0.4). In contrast to the
control group, no signiﬁcant OCTN2 translocation was observed in neither
type I ﬁbers (p > 0.7) nor type ﬁbers (p > 0.5) of the SCD group.
No signiﬁcant diﬀerence in OCTN2 content in the subsarcolemmal vesicle
pool between type I and type II ﬁbers was observed in the basal state of
the control group (p < 0.06), as no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in OCTN2 content
in the subsarcolemmal vesicle pool between type I and type II ﬁbers was
observed in the basal state of the SCD group (p > 0.5).
No signiﬁcant diﬀerence in basal OCTN2 content in the subsarcolemmal
vesicle pool was observed between the control and SCD group in type I
ﬁbers (p > 0.26) and the same was evident in type II ﬁbers (p > 0.89).
The estimated mean values of OCTN2 vesicle density across the sample pop-
ulations are depicted in Figure 38.
Insulin-induced GLUT4 translocation:
In the control group, a signiﬁcant decrease in GLUT4 vesicles was observed
upon insulin stimulation in type II ﬁbers, indicative of GLUT4 transloca-
tion (p < 0.05). Signiﬁcant translocation was however not observed in type I
ﬁbers, yet a trend was observed (p < 0.1). The SCD group showed signiﬁcant
GLUT4 translocation upon insulin stimulation in type I ﬁbers (p < 0.01),
52
==PAGE:54==
4. RESULTS
Figure 37: An example of an image subset from the control and SCD
group in either type I or type ﬁbers before and after clamp stimulation.
The red and green channels represent OCTN2- and GLUT4-containing transport
vesicles, respectively. The blue channel represents myonuclei and the grey channels
represents SERCA2 ATPase, determining ﬁbertype. Clustering of GLUT4 vesicles
in trans-Golgi compartments was seen in close proximity to nuclei
which was not the case in type II ﬁbers (p > 0.39).
No signiﬁcant diﬀerence in basal GLUT4 content in the subsarcolemmal vesi-
cle pool between the control and SCD group in neither type I nor type II
ﬁbers was observed, although a trend was observed in that of type II ﬁbers, in
which the control group had a higher GLUT4 content in the subsarcolemmal
vesicle pool compared to the SCD group (p < 0.1).
The estimated mean values of GLUT4 vesicle density across the sample pop-
ulations are depicted in Figure 39.
53
==PAGE:55==
4. RESULTS
Figure 38: Mean OCTN2 density in type I ﬁbers (left histogram) and
type II ﬁbers (right histogram) in healthy controls and SCD patients in
the basal state and after clamp stimulation. White and black bars represent
the control group and the SCD group, respectively, at the basal state. Blue and
black bars represent the control group and the SCD group, respectively, after
clamp stimulation. All values are means ± SEM. * P < 0.05, ** P < 0.01
54
==PAGE:56==
4. RESULTS
Figure 39: Mean GLUT4 density in type I ﬁbers (left histogram) and
type II ﬁbers (right histogram) in healthy controls and SCD patients in
the basal state and after clamp stimulation. White and black bars represent
the control group and the SCD group, respectively, at the basal state. Blue and
black bars represent the control group and the SCD group, respectively, after
clamp stimulation. All values are means ± SEM. * P < 0.05, ** P < 0.01.
55
==PAGE:57==
5. DISCUSSION
5
Discussion
Insulin-induced OCTN2 translocation
The major ﬁnding of this study was the observation of insulin-induced OCTN2
translocation in type I ﬁbers of the control group, which was not evident in
any ﬁbertypes of the SCD group. This novel observation is in accordance
with our hypothesis that OCTN2 follows translocation upon insulin stimula-
tion, thereby increasing skeletal muscle carnitine uptake as seen in previous
research on healthy subjects [26]. However, as translocation was measured
indirectly, it cannot with 100 % certainty be concluded that OCTN2 translo-
cated to the PM, although this would be most plausible.
[7] reported carnitine uptake via OCTN2 translocation to the PM upon mus-
cle contraction and stated that OCTN2 likely translocates as it exists not only
in the sarcolemma but also intracellularly, in a fashion similar to GLUT4.
Therefore, it is likely that OCTN2, like GLUT4, is located in intracellular
storage pools and can undergo translocation upon both muscle contraction
and insulin stimulation of the cell, providing signiﬁcance to our hypothesis
of insulin-induced OCTN2 translocation as the fundamental mechanism be-
hind skeletal muscle carnitine uptake. The study by [7] is interesting but
it could be controversial as to whether the co-localization is actually due
to an increase of OCTN2 at the PM or due to an increase of subsarcolem-
mal OCTN2 vesicles instead. However, as the present study indicates an
insulin-induced decrease in the subsarcolemmal OCTN2 pool and given that
contraction also decreases the subsarcolemmal OCTN2 pool (should be inves-
tigated), it is more likely that the observed co-localization by [7] was indeed
due to increased OCTN2 at the PM and not due to increased subsarcolem-
mal OCTN2. However, the contraction-induced biopsy in [7] was taken just
ﬁve minutes after stimulation had begun, revealing a huge time diﬀerence to
the present study (6 h) which should be taken into account. Consequently,
the experimental setting is much diﬀerent compared to that of the present
study and it might not be appropriate to compare the studies as directly.
In this regard, a mechanism in which the subsarcolemmal OCTN2 pool is
replenished by OCTN2 translocation from a deeper perinuclear storage pool
while simultaneously undergoing subsarcolemmal OCTN2 translocation to
the PM could potentially exist, similarly to the mechanism of GLUT4 [14].
As we in the present study only took one biopsy after insulin stimulation (at
the 6 h time point), it could be possible that the subsarcolemmal OCTN2
pool was replenished at a later time point at which insulin stimulation had
ended for some time. A biopsy at this time point could therefore perhaps
illuminate if any replenishment had occurred by measuring if the subsar-
colemmal OCTN2 pool had increased.
56
==PAGE:58==
5. DISCUSSION
However, signiﬁcantly increased OCTN2 mRNA expression has been ob-
served during hypercarnitinemia and hyperinsulinemia in healthy subjects,
indicating that the muscle cell is producing more OCTN2 transporters in or-
der to replenish the deeper perinuclear OCTN2 storage pool, thereby favoring
the proposed mechanism described above. Furthermore, as hypercarnitine-
mia alone did not alter mRNA OCTN2 expression in healthy subjects [26],
it seems highly likely that the observed OCTN2 translocation in the present
study was due to insulin stimulation and not an increased plasma carnitine
level.
In contrast to type II fast-twitch, glycolytic ﬁbers, type I slow-twitch ox-
idative ﬁbers contain more mitochondria and are therefore better capable
of performing β-oxidation. In rat skeletal muscle, type I ﬁbers have been
shown to possess a higher skeletal muscle carnitine uptake ability along with
a higher expression of OCTN2 and that these two factors were related with
each other. Furthermore, type I was also dominant in acetylcarnitine in the
basal state [5, 6]. All together, these observations thus indicate a higher
carnitine metabolism in type I ﬁbers which consequently rely on carnitine
transport to a higher degree than type II. This is in line with the ﬁndings of
the present study in which OCTN2 translocation in the control group was
observed only in type I ﬁbers and not in type II (Figure 38).
Additionally, the control group showed a strong trend (p < 0.06) towards a
higher OCTN2 density in the basal state of type I ﬁbers compared to type II,
indicating that cells of type I ﬁbers of the control group are ”well-equipped”
in OCTN2 transporters in the subsarcolemmal vesicle pool which are ready
to translocate to the PM. Thus, type I ﬁbers are more prepared to transport
carnitine into the skeletal muscle cell and thereby better capable of oxidizing
fat compared to type II ﬁbers in the control group.
In contrast to the control group, no OCTN2 translocation was observed in
neither type I ﬁbers or type II ﬁbers in the SCD group. This ﬁnding suggests
that the ability of OCTN2 to translocate is impaired in SCD which could
explain the intrinsic inability to take up carnitine in the skeletal muscle from
the plasma. Additionally, basal OCTN2 density was higher in the control
group compared to the SCD group in type I ﬁbers (p = 0.267). Thus, it
seems that cells of type I ﬁbers of the SCD group aren’t as ”well-equipped”
in OCTN2 transporters in the subsarcolemmal vesicle pool as the control
group.
57
==PAGE:59==
5. DISCUSSION
To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst study that provides an indication of insulin-
induced OCTN2 translocation in healthy persons and that this mechanism
seems to be impaired in SCD. Mutations in the OCTN2 gene has been
shown to decrease the mature OCTN2 mRNA expression and result in non-
functional transporters, verifying that loss-of-function mutations are indeed
responsible for the disease state in SCD [29]. However, the present ﬁndings
could suggest that a combination (rather than an OCTN2 loss-of-function
alone) of OCTN2 loss-of-function and decreased OCTN2 translocation might
exists in SCD. Further research must be conducted to investigate whether
OCTN2 loss-of-function or impaired OCTN2 translocation are the greater
cause of impaired skeletal muscle carnitine uptake.
[15] reported that carnitine supplementation alone could increase fat oxida-
tion in SCD patients during moderate intensity exercise. This ﬁnding is in
contrast with other studies stating that carnitine supplementation alone can-
not increase skeletal muscle carnitine uptake which is saturated and thus un-
likely to be increased as previously described. The reason for the increase in
fat oxidation anyway (although not reaching rates of healthy persons) could
be explained by the substantial increase in plasma carnitine levels, thereby
decreasing the concentration gradient of carnitine from plasma to muscle. In
this regard, it could be interesting to see if skeletal muscle carnitine content
in SCD could be increased upon hyperinsulinemia and hypercarnitinemia and
if the fat oxidation ability had increased compared to oral supplementation
alone.
In this regard and in continuation of the present study, tissue samples are
being analyzed to see if conditions of hyperinsulinemia and hypercarnitine-
mia resulted in a higher skeletal muscle carnitine uptake in the SCD group.
If these results show that there isn’t any increase of skeletal muscle carnitine
content, the present ﬁndings suggest that it could possibly be due to a deﬁ-
cient insulin-induced OCTN2 translocation mechanism.
If the future tissue sample results instead show that there still is an in-
crease in skeletal muscle carnitine content, the present study propose that
although impaired OCTN2 translocation is evident in SCD, it is not caus-
ing the impaired carnitine uptake. Thus, there must be another reason for
the impaired skeletal muscle carnitine uptake with the most likely one be-
ing OCTN2 loss-of-function.
Furthermore, the eﬀect of insulin on induc-
ing sodium-dependent skeletal muscle carnitine uptake could also explain an
insulin-induced increase in carnitine uptake in SCD despite the impairment
of OCTN2 translocation.
58
==PAGE:60==
5. DISCUSSION
Insulin-induced GLUT4 translocation
The control group showed signiﬁcant GLUT4 translocation upon insulin
stimulation in type II ﬁbers with a trend of translocation in type I as well
(p < 0.01). In contrary, the SCD group showed signiﬁcant GLUT4 translo-
cation in type I ﬁbers and a trend of a higher basal GLUT4 density in the
subsarcolemmal vesicle pool in type I ﬁbers compared to that of type II
(p < 0.1). This ﬁnding indicates that cells of type I ﬁbers of the SCD group
are ”well-equipped” in GLUT4 transporters in the subsarcolemmal vesicle
pool which are ready to translocate to the PM. Thus, type I ﬁbers are more
prepared to transport glucose into the skeletal muscle cell and thereby bet-
ter capable of oxidizing carbohydrate compared to type II ﬁbers in the SCD
group.
In line with these observations, a much smaller diﬀerence in GLUT4 translo-
cation across ﬁbertypes in the control group compared to the SCD group
was evident as can be visualized in Figure 39. As previous discussed, the
opposite phenomena was the case regarding OCTN2 in which the diﬀerence
in OCTN2 translocation between ﬁbertypes in the control group compared
to the SCD group was much higher (Figure 38).
All together, these ﬁndings suggest a shift in fuel metabolism towards a state
of an increased ability to oxidize carbohydrate in type I ﬁbers of SCD and
are in accordance with previous observations stating that a reduction in fatty
acid metabolism is compensated by induced carbohydrate oxidation [27, 15].
The fact that a trend was observed in type II ﬁbers, in which the control
group had a higher basal GLUT4 density in the subsarcolemmal vesicle pool
compared to that of the SCD group, indicates a decreased amount of subsar-
colemmal GLUT4 transporters available for translocation to the PM, ulti-
mately expressing an impaired glucose uptake ability in type II ﬁbers of the
SCD group. As SCD patients suﬀer from decreased fatty acid metabolism
(although especially at exercise), they naturally rely primarily on carbohy-
drate oxidation to fuel metabolism and are consequently in a constant state
of perinuclear GLUT4 shortage which aren’t easily replenished. This directly
aﬀects the subsarcolemmal vesicle pool and could explain the observed lower
basal GLUT4 density in this pool which therefore also struggles to be replen-
ished. However, this is in contrast to that of type I ﬁbers of the SCD group
as mentioned above.
Additionally, the basal GLUT4 density in the subsarcolemmal vesicle pool
in type II ﬁbers of the SCD group was similar to those in both type I and
II ﬁbers of the control group after clamp stimulation. This could indicate
a deﬁcit of subsarcolemmal GLUT4 in type II ﬁbers of the SCD group at
59
==PAGE:61==
5. DISCUSSION
the basal state (which would be expected to have been considerably higher
as seen in type I) which could be due to an increased rate of translocation,
thus further causing the cell to struggle in replenishing the subsarcolemmal
GLUT4 pool.
Type I ﬁbers have been shown to be metabolically ﬂexible and are conse-
quently highly adaptable in using fat and carbohydrate as fuel and to tran-
sition between the two [6]. This feature could explain why we in the present
study only see signiﬁcant GLUT4 translocation upon insulin stimulation in
type I ﬁbers in the SCD group and not in type II. It could also explain
the greater diﬀerence in basal GLUT4 density in the subsarcolemmal vesi-
cle pool between ﬁbertypes in the SCD group, as the type I ﬁbers possibly
have shifted towards a metabolic state of induced carbohydrate oxidation,
compensating for the decreased ability to oxidize fat.
60
==PAGE:62==
6. CONCLUSION
6
Conclusion
In conclusion, this is the ﬁrst study to report subsarcolemmal OCTN2 translo-
cation in skeletal muscle of healthy subjects during hypercarnitinemia and
hyperinsulinemia which may provide an explanation to previously observed
skeletal muscle carnitine uptake under the same conditions. Furthermore,
the present study found that this mechanism is impaired in skeletal muscle
of SCD, possibly causing the reduced skeletal muscle carnitine uptake ob-
served in these patients.
Additionally, subsarcolemmal GLUT4 translocation was observed in skeletal
muscle of both healthy subjects and SCD patients during hypercarnitinemia
and hyperinsulinemia.
Taken together, the results are in agreement with previous studies favoring
a down-regulated fat oxidation capability in skeletal muscle of SCD which is
compensated by up-regulated carbohydrate oxidation instead.
61
==PAGE:63==
7. FUTURE PERSPECTIVES
7
Future perspectives
With regard to the discussed intracellular OCTN2/GLUT4 replenishment
mechanism, it could be relevant to investigate the OCTN2 and GLUT4
mRNA expression in the SCD muscle as well with the same conditions as
in the present study. In contrast to healthy subjects, one would probably
not expect a signiﬁcant increase in OCTN2 mRNA expression but rather an
increase in GLUT4 mRNA expression instead. This is due to the observa-
tion that OCTN2 does not seem to undergo subsarcolemmal translocation to
the PM, in which there is no need to replenish neither the subsarcolemmal-
or perinuclear storage pool as neither one is depleted upon insulin stimu-
lation. Furthermore, data within the current research group indicate that
the resting fuel metabolism of the SCD muscle cell is shifted almost entirely
towards carbohydrate oxidation. This is in line with the indication of an
intracellular GLUT4 shortage in type II ﬁbers of the SCD group observed
in the present study in which the cell is constantly trying to cover the im-
mense need of rapidly depleted GLUT4 transporters. Thus, examining the
OCTN2/GLUT4 mRNA expression could further verify the indicated obser-
vations of the present study.
Additionally, it could be worth investigating if muscle contraction could in-
duce OCTN2 translocation in SCD patients. If that is the case, treatment
could perhaps be improved by a combination of carnitine supplementation
with physical activity in order to increase skeletal muscle carnitine uptake
from the plasma.
It hasn’t been clearly studied whether the inhibition of fat oxidation dur-
ing exercise in both SCD and obese/TD2 patients is due to free carnitine
availability in skeletal muscle or not. However, studies in healthy subjects
have shown that increasing the skeletal muscle carnitine content via insulin
stimulation can increase fat oxidation, and even oral carnitine supplemen-
tation alone can increase fat oxidation in SCD patients as well. Therefore,
there is a strong indication that obese and T2D patients could beneﬁt from
an induced carnitine uptake and with intrinsically increased levels of insulin
due to the disease state, it should be worth investigating if oral carnitine
supplementation can increase intramuscular fat oxidation in these patients
and thereby decrease IR.
62
==PAGE:64==
Bibliography
[1]
J Bergstrom. “Percutaneous needle biopsy of skeletal muscle in physi-
ological and clinical research.” In: Scandinavian journal of clinical and
laboratory investigation 35.7 (Nov. 1975), pp. 609–16. issn: 0036-5513.
url: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1108172.
[2]
Lara Console et al. “Characterization of Exosomal SLC22A5 (OCTN2)
carnitine transporter”. In: Scientiﬁc Reports 8.1 (Dec. 2018), p. 3758.
issn: 2045-2322. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-22170-7. url: http:
//www.nature.com/articles/s41598-018-22170-7.
[3]
Dako Denmark A/S. “Immunohistochemical Staining Methods”. In:
IHC Guide. 2013.
[4]
Michael Eck. “Performance enhancement of hybrid nanocrystal-polymer
bulk heterojunction solar cells : aspects of device eﬃciency, repro-
ducibility, and stability”. PhD thesis. 2014.
[5]
Y. Furuichi et al. “OCTN2 is associated with carnitine transport capac-
ity of rat skeletal muscles”. In: Acta Physiologica 200.1 (2010), pp. 57–
64. issn: 17481708. doi: 10.1111/j.1748-1716.2010.02101.x.
[6]
Yasuro Furuichi et al. “Imaging mass spectrometry reveals ﬁber-speciﬁc
distribution of acetylcarnitine and contraction-induced carnitine dy-
namics in rat skeletal muscles”. In: Biochimica et Biophysica Acta
- Bioenergetics 1837.10 (2014), pp. 1699–1706. issn: 18792650. doi:
10.1016/j.bbabio.2014.05.356. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.bbabio.2014.05.356.
[7]
Yasuro Furuichi et al. “Muscle contraction increases carnitine uptake
via translocation of OCTN2”. In: Biochemical and Biophysical Research
Communications 418.4 (2012), pp. 774–779. issn: 0006291X. doi: 10.
1016/j.bbrc.2012.01.101. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
bbrc.2012.01.101.
63
==PAGE:65==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[8]
Antonio Gnoni et al. “Carnitine in human muscle bioenergetics: Can
carnitine supplementation improve physical exercise?” In: Molecules
25.1 (2020). issn: 14203049. doi: 10.3390/molecules25010182.
[9]
Javier R. Jaldin-Fincati et al. “Update on GLUT4 Vesicle Traﬃc:
A Cornerstone of Insulin Action”. In: Trends in Endocrinology and
Metabolism 28.8 (2017), pp. 597–611. issn: 18793061. doi: 10.1016/
j.tem.2017.05.002. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tem.
2017.05.002.
[10]
H. G. Kapitza. “Microscopy from the very beginning”. In: Carl Zeiss
Oberkochen (1997), pp. 1–48.
[11]
Hermann Koepsell. “Organic cation transporters in health and dis-
ease”. In: Pharmacological Reviews 72.1 (2020), pp. 253–319. issn:
15210081. doi: 10.1124/pr.118.015578.
[12]
Ulrich Kubitscheck. Kubitscheck, U. 2013. Principles of Light Microscopy,
In “Fluorescence Microscopy: From Principles to Biological Applica-
tions“, edited by Ulrich Kubitscheck. Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, 1st edi-
tion, 527 pages. 2013. isbn: 978-3-527-32922-9.
[13]
Hans P.M.M. Lauritzen and Jonathan D. Schertzer. “Measuring GLUT4
translocation in mature muscle ﬁbers”. In: American Journal of Physi-
ology - Endocrinology and Metabolism 299.2 (2010), pp. 169–179. issn:
01931849. doi: 10.1152/ajpendo.00066.2010.
[14]
Hans P.M.M. Lauritzen et al. “Kinetics of contraction-induced GLUT4
translocation in skeletal muscle ﬁbers from living mice”. In: Diabetes
59.9 (2010), pp. 2134–2144. issn: 1939327X. doi: 10.2337/db10-0233.
[15]
Karen Lindhardt Madsen et al. “L-carnitine improves skeletal muscle
fat oxidation in primary carnitine deﬁciency”. In: Journal of Clini-
cal Endocrinology and Metabolism 103.12 (2018), pp. 4580–4588. issn:
19457197. doi: 10.1210/jc.2018-00953.
[16]
Luc J. C. van Loon et al. “The eﬀects of increasing exercise intensity
on muscle fuel utilisation in humans”. In: The Journal of Physiology
536.1 (Oct. 2001), pp. 295–304. issn: 00223751. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-
7793.2001.00295.x. url: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1111/j.
1469-7793.2001.00295.x.
[17]
Liliana Loureiro et al. “Challenges in Antibody Development against
Tn and Sialyl-Tn Antigens”. In: Biomolecules 2015 (2015), pp. 1783–
1809. doi: 10.3390/biom5031783.
64
==PAGE:66==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[18]
Claire McQuin et al. “CellProﬁler 3.0: Next-generation image process-
ing for biology”. In: PLOS Biology 16.7 (July 2018). Ed. by Tom Mis-
teli, e2005970. issn: 1545-7885. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.2005970.
url: https://dx.plos.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.2005970.
[19]
Kenneth Murphy and Casey Weaver. Immunobiology. 2016. isbn: 9780815345053.
[20]
Nobuyuki Otsu. “A Threshold Selection Method from Gray-Level His-
tograms”. In: IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics
C.1 (1979), pp. 62–66. issn: 0018-9472.
[21]
J. Rasmussen et al. “Carnitine Levels in Skeletal Muscle, Blood, and
Urine in Patients with Primary Carnitine Deﬁciency During Intermis-
sion of l-Carnitine Supplementation”. In: 2014, pp. 103–111. doi: 10.
1007/8904_2014_398. url: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/
8904%7B%5C_%7D2014%7B%5C_%7D398.
[22]
Erik A. Richter and Mark Hargreaves. “Exercise, GLUT4, and skeletal
muscle glucose uptake”. In: Physiological Reviews 93.3 (2013), pp. 993–
1017. issn: 00319333. doi: 10.1152/physrev.00038.2012.
[23]
Francis B. Stephens et al. “A threshold exists for the stimulatory eﬀect
of insulin on plasma L-carnitine clearance in humans”. In: American
Journal of Physiology - Endocrinology and Metabolism 292.2 (2007),
pp. 637–641. issn: 01931849. doi: 10.1152/ajpendo.00508.2006.
[24]
Francis B. Stephens et al. “An acute increase in skeletal muscle carni-
tine content alters fuel metabolism in resting human skeletal muscle”.
In: Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism 91.12 (2006),
pp. 5013–5018. issn: 0021972X. doi: 10.1210/jc.2006-1584.
[25]
Francis B. Stephens et al. “Carbohydrate ingestion augments L-carnitine
retention in humans”. In: Journal of Applied Physiology 102.3 (2007),
pp. 1065–1070. issn: 87507587. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.01011.
2006.
[26]
Francis B. Stephens et al. “Insulin stimulates L-carnitine accumulation
in human skeletal muscle”. In: The FASEB Journal 20.2 (Feb. 2006),
pp. 377–379. issn: 0892-6638. doi: 10.1096/fj.05-4985fje. url:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1096/fj.05-
4985fje.
[27]
Francis B. Stephens et al. “Skeletal muscle carnitine loading increases
energy expenditure, modulates fuel metabolism gene networks and pre-
vents body fat accumulation in humans”. In: Journal of Physiology
591.18 (2013), pp. 4655–4666. issn: 00223751. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.
2013.255364.
65
==PAGE:67==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[28]
A.S.W. Tordiﬀe. “The metabolic proﬁling of cheetahs (Acinonyx juba-
tus): a systems biology approach to understanding the chronic diseases
they suﬀer in captivity”. In: October (2017). doi: 10.13140/RG.2.2.
17314.32960. url: http://www.nwu.ac.za/%7B%5C%%7D0Ahttps:
//repository.nwu.ac.za/handle/10394/31734.
[29]
Y. Wang et al. “Mutations in the organic cation/carnitine transporter
OCTN2 in primary carnitine deﬁciency”. In: Proceedings of the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences 96.5 (Mar. 1999), pp. 2356–2360. issn:
0027-8424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.96.5.2356. url: http://www.pnas.
org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.96.5.2356.
[30]
E.N. WARD and R. PAL. “Image scanning microscopy: an overview”.
In: Journal of Microscopy 266.2 (May 2017), pp. 221–228. issn: 00222720.
doi: 10.1111/jmi.12534. url: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1111/
jmi.12534.
[31]
Ying Xu et al. “L-carnitine treatment of insulin resistance: A system-
atic review and meta-analysis”. In: Advances in Clinical and Experi-
mental Medicine 26.2 (2017), pp. 333–338. issn: 24512680. doi: 10.
17219/acem/61609.
66
