==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Department of 
Wind Energy 
Master Report 
 
 
 
Aeolus space lidar for wind energy applications 
 
 
Lorenzo Lugaresi 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0415 
December 2020 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
Author: Lorenzo Lugaresi 
Title: Aeolus space lidar for wind energy applications 
 
Lorenzo Lugaresi 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0415 
December 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical University of Denmark 
with a unique integration of research, education, innovation and public/private 
sector consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities develop new 
opportunities and technology for the global and Danish exploitation of wind 
energy. Research focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are central 
for the development, innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education at the education. 
Project period:  
July – December 2020 
 
 
 
 
ECTS: 30 
 
Education: Master of Science 
 
 
 
 
Supervisor(s): 
Ioanna Karagali 
Nikolas Angelou 
DTU Wind Energy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Remarks: 
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399 
4000 Roskilde 
Denmark 
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk 
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
In the wind energy world, wind resource assessment plays a crucial role in the planning and
development of a wind farm. Prior to erecting a wind farm, wind engineers must be conﬁdent
of the suitability of the site for wind power generation. The main characteristics of wind
are its speed and its direction. The speed can be described with wind proﬁles since wind
speed intensity increases (and varies) along with height, such information will aid the wind
resource assessment of a wind farm over its expected lifetime.
Conventionally anemometers installed on meteorological masts at diﬀerent heights are used
to measure wind speed and thus develop wind proﬁles. Hence measurement campaigns have
been carried out by erecting masts of tens of meters to ideally match the hub-height of the
desired turbines. This procedure is slowly being replaced with remote-sensing techniques
performed by lidars, that avoid the diﬃculty of building structures in complex and remote
areas. Wind lidar measurements are nowadays acquired both ground-based and airborne.
Another key factor in promoting remote-sensing campaigns is that wind energy has followed
a trend of building and exploiting oﬀshore winds along with reaching higher and higher hub
altitudes. Far from the coast erecting meteorological masts is challenging and reaching high
altitudes is not feasible, thus new solutions must be found.
Launched in August 2018, Aeolus, part of the Living Planet Programme of ESA, is the ﬁrst
satellite to acquire wind proﬁles on a global scale that could aid weather forecasts. The in-
strument uses light scattering of aerosols to measure the Doppler Eﬀect and therefore gather
data on wind. Since the launch in August 2018 a Calibration and Validation phase is/has
been held such to analyze the data and perform collocated comparison measurements.
A comparison with a ground lidar and a validation of the satellite L2B product is assessed in
this study. The quality of the acquired measurements for the Aeolus satellite are investigated
thanks to the use of classiﬁcation and statistical analysis. Good agreements with the lidar
observations could be achieved for both satellite wind products.
iii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Data and Methods
4
2.1
Aeolus Wind Observations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Ground Proﬁler Wind Observations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Experimental Site Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Methodology and Comparison procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Satellite Data Pre-processing
11
3.1
Error Estimates Threshold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.1
Correlation with other Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Timeseries Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.1
Vertical Satellite Measurements Resolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4
Aeolus vs. Ground Based Lidar Comparison
24
4.1
Statistical and Sensitivity Analyses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.1.1
Orbit node (Ascending or Descending) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.1.2
Atmospheric Classiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Wind Proﬁling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2.1
Period 1: 2018/10-2019/01 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2.2
Period 2: 2019/02-2019/06 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5
Discussion & Summary
32
List of Figures
I
List of Tables
III
Nomenclature
IV
References
V
iv
==PAGE:5==
1
Introduction
Measurements of wind speed and direction, used as input for weather models or wind resource
assessment, are traditionally retrieved by calibrated anemometers mounted on tall met masts.
Yet, this traditional method is becoming more and more challenging and expensive as wind
turbines continue to grow in size reaching taller heights and higher winds. Moreover, due
to the trend of exploiting oﬀ-shore areas for wind energy production, the cost complexity of
wind measurement campaigns through anemometers is impractible. Erecting meteorological
masts or installing lidar (Light Detection And Ranging) instrumentation far from the coast
and in complex and remote terrains is not an easy task. Hence, to acquire and perform wind
measurements in such areas a more eﬃcient and adequate observing system is needed.
Aeolus is the ﬁrst satellite mission to acquire wind proﬁles and wind measurements on a
global scale. This type of information is at the core of the development and growth of the
wind energy industry. Wind measurements represent an important asset for wind energy
production. Whether speaking of development, maintenance or even doing research to im-
prove weather forecasting models, wind proﬁle and their acquisition method prove to be
essential. Remote sensing techniques can aid the retrieval of wind measurements and their
proﬁles, and have nowadays consolidated their position in the wind resource assessment
ﬁeld against anemometers and meteorological masts. New technologies around the turn of
the millennium strengthened the quality and performance of wind remote sensing instru-
mentation (Pena Diaz, 2015; Mikkelsen, 2014), that now surely oﬀer reliable alternatives to
the installation of previously developed instrumentation. Nonetheless, lidars are considered
state of the art machinery. Although this streak of groundbreaking innovations, satellite
wind measurements are yet to be fully seen and implemented in wind energy applications.
The question today, and throughout this whole work, is whether in the foreseeable future
this type of wind acquisition can be of use to the the wind energy production world.
Launched on the 22nd of August 2018, the satellite Aeolus was sent in order to prove that
measuring global wind-proﬁles from space using laser technology can meet meteorological
requirements for improving weather forecast models. Built to demonstrate new space tech-
nologies and observing techniques while carrying one of the most sophisticated instruments
ever to be put into orbit, the Atmospheric LAser Doppler INstrument is a Doppler wind
lidar probing the lowermost 30km of the atmosphere for wind proﬁling. Besides, the satellite
could play a crucial role in improving knowledge on how such wind measuring method could
be used for wind energy application. A concept of the satellite is shown in Figure 1.
As of May 2020 the Aeolus data products have gone public after having undergone various
bias corrections. A ﬁrst raw level of data (Level-0) is processed by ESA to obtain and render
public the following products:
• Level-1 data are time-series of preliminary science data along the satellite’s orbit where
basic calibration has been applied,
• Level-2A data are time-series of aerosol and cloud layer information along the satellite’s
orbit,
Page 1 of 32
==PAGE:6==
• Level-2B data are time-series of fully processed proﬁles of wind along the satellite orbit.
Level-2B products have been used worldwide to evaluate and assess the satellite performance.
Guo et al. (2020), published in August 2020, evaluates an in-situ comparison between the
measurements of the satellite and various Radar Wind Proﬁlers (RWP). The study reports
the criteria used for collocation of measurements between the two diﬀerent types of mea-
surements and the challenges encountered in comparing acquisition with diﬀerence both
spatial and temporal. Another relevant study (Baars et al., 2020) published the 11th of Nov
2020, validates the satellite measurements against observations acquired over the Atlantic
ocean from a research vessel radiosondes. The latter paper’s conclusions and results seem
promising, and the methods of validation were of great inspiration for the ﬁnalization of this
thesis.
Other than terrain complexity and accessibility, as widely addressed by the World Mete-
orological Organization (WMO) "the global meteorological observing system is suﬀering
from a shortage of observations in speciﬁc regions, especially in the Southern Hemisphere,
in the lower stratosphere, and over the oceans" (Baars et al., 2020). Observations around
the globe are not equally distributed, making it hard for wind farm developers to perform
studies in regions where wind energy production could blossom, or even ideally where new
wind development zones could open up new opportunities for the production of renewable
energy.
Figure 1: "Proﬁling the world’s winds" ESA
Nowadays, sound and light wave propagation and backscatter detection instrumentation
such as sodars and lidars are broadly deemed as dependable remote sensing measurements
techniques for wind energy applications. Remote sensing of wind by light, today, means
probing the atmosphere from the ground using light beams. Instruments such as lidars are
able to detect Doppler shifts in the backscattered light, and, through the processing of such
Page 2 of 32
==PAGE:7==
interference along the beam direction, wind speed can be inferred. Typically a ground based
proﬁler transmits either a continuous or a pulsed radiation along three or more inclined
direction, and a projection of such measures determines both the horizontal wind speed and
its direction.
The New European Wind Atlas (Petersen and Jørgensen, 2014) project, launched on a
European Union level, aims at developing a new generation of tools for spatial planning
and wind farm design by establishing basic experimental campaigns of unparalleled quality,
creating a data bank from a series of intensive measuring campaigns. Within this context,
the Alaiz Experiment (ALEX17) with its measurement equipment provides a "high-quality
database to explore wind ﬂow phenomena and derive validation datasets of high-resolution
mesoscale-to-microscale models" (Cantero et al., 2019).
The primary goal of this work is to compare and evaluate the performance of the measure-
ments acquired by the Aeolus mission. Therefore, indirectly, scratching the surface of the
possibilities, but also the challenges, that could arise by integrating satellite measurements
in the processes surrounding the wind energy world.
The data produced by one of the
Ground-Based Lidar (GBL) in the Alaiz Experiment is used as the "truth" reference with
which the satellite validation will be performed. This work is split in three main parts, the
following section 2 will provide the reader a basic understanding of the data involved and
methods necessary to read and extract information out of them.section 3 discusses how the
above mentioned instruments data have been analyzed and cleaned. Chapter 4 instead pro-
vides comparison results between the two instruments by approaching a few key sensitivity
studies. Finally, section 5 is dedicated to discussions and conclusion.
Page 3 of 32
==PAGE:8==
2
Data and Methods
2.1
Aeolus Wind Observations
Launched in August 2018, Aeolus, part of the Living Planet Programme of ESA, is the ﬁrst
satellite to acquire wind proﬁles on a global scale. Orbiting on a weekly repeating sun-
synchronous track, at an altitude of 320 km, it is equipped with a satellite-borne Doppler
wind lidar system ALADIN Stoﬀelen et al. (2005). The instrument uses a high-spectral-
resolution backscatter lidar that operates in the UV spectrum at 355 nm wavelength. This
laser wavelength can detect both molecules and particles. The signal is separated by the
hardware into two diﬀerent receiver channels, the Rayleigh and the Mie, that correspond
respectively to molecular and particle backscatter.
The receiving signal is split in sequential time intervals and therefore into altitude ranges,
deﬁning the vertical spatial resolution of the wind proﬁle. The hardware limits the retrieval
of range bins to 24 for both channels, with a minimum of 250 m and a maximum of 2000 m
for distance between vertical bins. The maximum altitude at which it can measure wind is
32 km of altitude referenced to the geoid. The average ground track velocity is of 7.2km∗s−1.
The ﬁnal outputs of Aeolus are "proﬁles of one component of the horizontal vector along the
laser line-of-sight (LOS)" (Reitebuch et al., 2019), thus projecting the measurement on the
horizontal component, the HLOS (Horizontal-Line-of-Sight).
The geometry of the retrieval can be seen schematically in Figure 2. The satellite is not
nadir-pointing but is taking measurements 35◦oﬀ-nadir.
Figure 2: Aeolus measurement geometry and principles (Stoﬀelen et al., 2005).
As stated in Reitebuch et al. (2019), "the number of laser pulse returns [...] is a conﬁgurable
Page 4 of 32
==PAGE:9==
2.2
Ground Proﬁler Wind Observations
parameter and determines the minimum along-track horizontal resolution for the raw data",
typically 20 accumulated laser pulses (called “measurement”) account for 3 km. Furthermore,
"observations" are an average of 600 gathered pulses. The Level2B algorithm is performed
on-ground and classiﬁes the atmospheric observations in clear and cloudy air. Figure 3 shows
the sampling terminology used for the L2B processor, described in Rennie et al. (2020).
Figure 3: Diagram of Aeolus sampling terminology (Rennie et al., 2020).
In this study, the wind products that overpass the selected region from the 3rd of October
2018 to the 26th of September 2019 are collected for comparison. Moreover, the satellite
crosses over the area both during an ascending and a descending orbit. The ascending orbit
overpass over Alaiz happens every Wednesday around 17:50 (UTC) while the descending
orbit every Thursday around 06:20 (UTC).
Table 1: Track overpass
Orbit
Azimuth
Overpass day
Overpass time (UTC)
Ascending
∼260°
Wednesday
∼17 : 50
Descending
∼100°
Thursday
∼06 : 20
2.2
Ground Proﬁler Wind Observations
Lidar wind proﬁling is a common process in wind resource assessment. It is common that
the temporal resolution of the lidar acquisitions are a 10-min averaged winds measurement,
whilst the spatial resolution is 100 m and measurement are retrieved up to 2000 m from
ground. All the instrument’s measurements include a horizontal wind component and the
wind direction information. These latter parameters are used to project the ground proﬁler
measurement of the wind vector to the line of sight of Aeolus.
Page 5 of 32
==PAGE:10==
2.3
Experimental Site Description
The data provided by the lidar includes the three cardinal components of the wind vector,
a horizontal on the West-East axis (u), a horizontal on the North-South (v) and ﬁnally a
vertical component (w). The ﬁrst two are are used to estimate the horizontal wind speed
and direction, as shown in Figure 4. The vertical wind might instead be used to further
assess and explore reasons of undesired diﬀerences between the Aeolus and the Alaiz GBL
horizontal measurements. Another parameter introduced by the lidar is the carrier-to-noise
(CNR) ratio. For this study the data of the GBL will be ﬁltered solely for carrier-to-noise
ratios equal to zero.
Figure 4: Lidar measurement geometry and principle and wind vector reconstruction. Pena
Diaz (2015)
2.3
Experimental Site Description
The Alaiz test site is used as a case-study for this research, Figure 5 represents a Digital
Elevation Model of the area. The site is located in the center of the Navarre region of Spain.
Such region is characterized by bold contrast in its geographic features. Topographically
to the North are located the Cantabrian Mountains and the Pyrenees, while to the South
is the Iberian System. This mountainous ridges leave space in between to the vast Ebro
Valley, sweeping from northwest to southeast. As discussed in Jiménez et al. (2013), the
topography of the area "ensures an interesting interaction with the atmospheric dynamics".
As a matter of fact, a strong wind is channeled through the valley from the north-northwest
region, where the Bay of Biscay is located, and "is responsible for a signiﬁcant share of the
wind power produced in Spain" Cantero et al. (2019).
The central point of the study area represents the ground based proﬁler’s location, the
coordinates are:
Page 6 of 32
==PAGE:11==
2.4
Methodology and Comparison procedure
Table 2: Coordinates of GBL
Latitude
Longitude
42.79°
−1.63°
The red circle in Figure 5 describes an area of less than 100km distance from the posi-
tion of the lidar in Alaiz. The radius was chosen as a compromise between the number of
measurements points of intersection and a reasonable limit for the distance between the two
instrumentation acquisition. Moreover, other papers such as the Guo et al. (2020) and Baars
et al. (2020) have chosen similar limits. The full covered area by the 100 km radius red circle
is of 39951 km2, centered at the coordinated of the GBL.
Figure 5: Digital elevation map of the study area.
2.4
Methodology and Comparison procedure
To validate the Aeolus wind products, the Level 2B was chosen. The analysis methodology
used to conduct the research relied on a iteration of data manipulation, data analysis, and
interpretation. Therefore, the work was split in three main phases:
1. Pre-Processing: Selection and extraction of Aeolus observation and parameters in a
coding (Python) environment; screening and classiﬁcation of data (e.g time-frames and
altitude ranges).
2. Wind Proﬁle Analysis: Satellite observation interpretation; Ground Proﬁler Measure-
ment altitude binning and proﬁling; data matching procedure and interpretation.
3. Results: Quantitative analysis, sensitivity; estimation of correlation; discussion of re-
sults.
Page 7 of 32
==PAGE:12==
2.4
Methodology and Comparison procedure
Studies, such as Guo et al. (2020) and Baars et al. (2020), served as an inspiration for many
features of the research. In this study, L2B products are gathered for the comparison with
the GBL, containing both the Mie and Rayleigh channel observations and HLOS winds.
Moreover only tracks overpassing the study area were collected in order to avoid abundance
of unused data. The ﬂowchart of the described methodology is shown in Figure 6.
Figure 6: Methodology ﬂowchart
Due to signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the measurement retrieval of the Aeolus satellite and the
GBL, it turns out necessary and crucial to be consistent on the data matching procedure: the
measurements must synchronize in both time and space, and for the latter both vertically
and along the same direction. Figure 7 shows the general approach for the comparison set-up
procedure. The color scheme follows the same reasoning of Figure 6.
Page 8 of 32
==PAGE:13==
2.4
Methodology and Comparison procedure
Figure 7: Flowchart of the procedures used to achieve the comparison between Aeolus and
the GBL.
To obtain data matching in time, the acquisition of both datasets should have the minimum
temporal diﬀerence between themselves. Since the start of the analysis, only measurements
of the ground-based proﬁler that are within an hour distance (prior or post) from the satellite
overpass have been ﬁltered. This means measurements in between 05:20 (UTC) and 07:20
(UTC) on Thursdays and in between 16:40 (UTC) and 18:40 (UTC) on Wednesdays.
Since Aeolus cannot measure the direction of the wind but only the component along its LOS,
the ground based lidar measurements must undergo a manipulation. The GBL horizontal
wind vector (uhor) is thus projected onto the Aeolus HLOS using the following:
uHLOS,GBL = cos(α −θ) · uhor
(1)
α represent the azimuth angle, that is included in the L2B product , while θ is the wind
direction. A simple scheme is provided in Figure 8 in order to help the reader visualize all the
components involved. It must be noted that α is measured (as stated in Table 3) clockwise
from north on the target-to-satellite axis.
Page 9 of 32
==PAGE:14==
2.4
Methodology and Comparison procedure
Figure 8: Simple schematic of Horizontal matching procedure for the Aeoulus HLOS and
the GBL wind measurements.
Another procedure is necessary in order to perform a spatial numerical comparison of the
two acquisitions. The vertical resolution of the two instruments does not match. While the
satellite measures with a minimum vertical diﬀerence of 200 m and a maximum of 2000 m,
the ground proﬁler always measures every 100 m above its location. Due to this vertical
inconsistency the matching along the height is described accordingly throughout the text,
sometimes by averaging more levels of altitude of the GBL together, other times accepting
only the closest altitude measurements.
Page 10 of 32
==PAGE:15==
3
Satellite Data Pre-processing
Data selection and ﬁltering are included in this section.
Emphasis is given to the data
quality validations performed during the research. All these steps are fundamental in order
to evaluate with consistency the comparison between Aeolus and the ground-based lidar.
Table 3 lists the available L2B product parameters used in this study. All the three columns
are reported as given in Dabas and Poli (2012). The parameters include date, acquisition
time, ranges altitude, latitude, longitude, line-of-sight wind and other auxiliary data.
Table 3: Selected Parameter list.
Tag Name
Description
unit
Datetime_cog
CoG Date and time of the current accumulation.
UTC
Which_range_bin
stores the range bin number this wind result belongs
to.
Altitude_bottom
Bottom altitude for this accumulation. The altitude
is reference to a geoid.
m
Altitude_top
Top altitude for this accumulation. The altitude is
reference to a geoid.
m
Altitude_vcog
Vertical COG altitude for this accumulation. The
altitude is reference to a geoid.
m
WGS84_to_Geoid_-
Altitude
Height of geoid above WGS84 ellipsoid
m
Alt_of_DEM_-
Intersection
Altitude of DEM intersection for the CoG of the
current accumulation
m
LOS_azimuth
Topocentric Azimuth of the target-to-satellite
pointing vector measured clockwise from north
deg
Latitude_cog
CoG latitude for this accumulation.
10-6degN
Longitude_cog
CoG longitude for this accumulation.
10-6degE
XXX_wind_velocity
Wind velocity given in cm/s and rounded to the
nearest integer.
cm/s
Validity_ﬂag
Validity ﬂag (1 or TRUE = valid, 0 or FALSE =
invalid) attached to the reported wind height bin
velocity.
N_meas_in_class
Number of measurements used to construct the
accumulation used to derive the current XXX wind
result .
Integration Length
Integration length for the reported XXX wind.
m
Observation type
remember if this was a cloud or no-cloud proﬁle.
HLOS_error_-
estimate
Error estimate reported by the XXX processing
algorithm, as deﬁned in Rennie (2018).
m/s
Altitude values are extremely important to locate the wind measurements in the vertical
Page 11 of 32
==PAGE:16==
direction (height) and to subsequently group and average all matching values of the GBL. The
acronym CoG stands for Center of Gravity and depicts the central point of the acquisition
in space both vertically or horizontally (for detailed speciﬁcs refer to Rennie et al. (2020)).
As described in section 2 Aeolus bins the acquisitions into vertical ranges.
Range bins
are strictly correlated to the height of the measurement. Besides the Altitude_CoG also
the top and bottom altitudes of the accumulation are given, allowing a deﬁnite separation
between two range bins. Due to the dynamical nature of the measurement, as the satellite
is continuously moving along its track, the height values of adjacent ranges do not always
match the bottom values of the next. All altitude values described up to now are referred
to the geoid. The values WGS84_to_Geoid_Altitude and Alt_of_DEM_Intersection store
necessary information to evaluate the vertical comparison with the ground-based lidar. The
diﬀerence between the latter and the other altitude parameter provides the height above
ground of the measurement.
Coordinates of the measurements are given in degree units and refer to the CoG. These
values are used for a ﬁrst screening, since the data given relates to a full track of the satellite
(roughly 90min of acquisitions). Also previously mentioned in section 2, all the measurements
obtained within 100 km from the GBL are ﬁltered and kept for the analysis. Figure 9 shows
all the measurements under the above-mentioned condition of 100 km distance from the
Alaiz ground proﬁler.
Figure 9: Measurements within 100km radius from GBL plotted over their coordinates of
acquisition. GBL position in green dot.
The HLOS wind measurement itself, is given with the tag name "XXX_wind_velocity"
where the XXX stands for one of the two acquisition channels, Mie or Rayleigh. Following
the tag name we ﬁnd parameters used for ﬁltering and screening, or classiﬁcation parameters
that will be evaluated in the upcoming section. These parameters are used used for data
ﬁltering, in order to avoid that wind measurements with high random error estimates or
uncertainties would aﬀect the comparison with the GBL.
Page 12 of 32
==PAGE:17==
The ﬁrst quality check is done through a feature given within the L2B product the validity
ﬂag, either having a value of 1 (valid) or 0 (not valid). For this thesis only Aeolus measure-
ments with a validity ﬂag equal to 1 were included. In Table 4 percentages of valid data are
reported along with the number of measurements in brackets. Both the full data-set and the
distance selected data are reported.
Full-Track
<100 km
Mie
13.36% (555337)
12.65% (2375)
Rayleigh
90.5% (1463500)
87.8% (6301)
Table 4: Valid measurements
The Rayleigh channel has a higher percentage of valid products. The ratio of total number
of valid measurements between the Mie and the Rayleigh is 1-to-3. Both channels seem to
have a similar data availability.
Figure 10 shows a frequency distribution of the Aeolus measurement for both channels within
the selected 100 kilometer distance. Values of horizontal line-of-sight winds are binned every
1 m s−1. On the vertical axis the density is provided, this can be read as the relative likelihood
that a certain measurement can occur. Both channels follow a gaussian distribution centered
at 0 m s−1.
Figure 10: Frequency distribution histogram of the Aeolus uHLOS measurements.
The Observation_Type classiﬁcation processing has diﬀerent methodologies for the two chan-
nels due to their diﬀerent particle-molecule acquisition. This allows to classify data, accord-
Page 13 of 32
==PAGE:18==
ing to the processor chain, into four wind atmospherics observations (Rennie, 2018; Baars
et al., 2020):
• Mieclear is wind derived in atmospheric regions with zero particle backscatter using
the Mie methodology, which, since in clear-sky conditions no Mie wind should be
detectable, is only possible if the classiﬁcation failed to detect particle backscatter,
• Rayleighclear is wind derived in atmospheric regions without any particle backscatter,
thus in clear skies using the Rayleigh methodology,
• Miecloudy is wind derived in atmospheric regions with non-zero particle backscatter
using the Mie methodology,
• Rayleighcloudy is wind derived from measurements with non-zero particle backscatter,
thus in a cloudy or particle-loaded environment using the Rayleigh methodology.
A temporal distribution of the observation types is given in Figure 17 and Figure 16 for
the Rayleigh and the Mie channel respectively.
On the horizontal axis are reported the
dates of the weeks and on the vertical the percentages of the corresponding air condition
measurements. It can be seen the distributions are not similar between diﬀerent channels,
likely due to a diﬀerent measurement classiﬁcation algorithm. For the Mie channel, the
percentage of cloudy atmospheric conditions is much higher than the clear, populating around
80% of the measurements whilst for the Rayleigh the ratio of cloudy and clear measurements
is nearly 1-to-1. Later in chapter 4.1.2 the diﬀerence between the performance of the four
classes will be assessed.
Figure 11: Weekly observation type percentage Timeseries, Mie.
Page 14 of 32
==PAGE:19==
3.1
Error Estimates Threshold
Figure 12: Weekly observation type percentage Timeseries, Rayleigh.
3.1
Error Estimates Threshold
The Level 2B product provides a HLOS error estimation for each range bin in the observation
proﬁles. Following recommendations from papers such as Baars et al. (2020) and Guo et al.
(2020), in this study only data under 7.5 m s−1 for the Rayleigh channel and 5 m s−1 for the
Mie channel are accepted. The process of estimation of such values is shown in section 17.
and section 18. of Rennie (2018).
(a) Mie channel.
(b) Rayleigh channel.
Figure 13: Aeolus wind measurements against height, color graded by error threshold ﬁlter-
ing. Dark colored points pass the ﬁltering, whilst light colored ones do not.
Figure 13a and Figure 13b show HLOS wind measurements over height for the Mie and the
Rayleigh channel respectively. From these images it can be concluded that the higher the
value of the HLOS wind speed the higher the chance that the error estimates are over the
Page 15 of 32
==PAGE:20==
3.1
Error Estimates Threshold
deﬁned thresholds. Interestingly, it also seems that the measurements of the channels behave
symmetrically with respect to the central vertical axis (0 m s−1). Due to the geometry of the
acquisition, it is important to remember that the HLOS is one component of the wind and
since it is referenced over the line of sight of the satellite it can also be acquired as a negative
value. Within the study area, wind measurements over 70 m s−1 are a rare occurrence or
are due to very high errors in the acquisition.
The comparison of the Aeolus measurements is performed with a ground based lidar that
measures wind up to 2000 m from the ground, thus Figure 14a and Figure 14b present a
close-up of the previous images between more ﬁtting range of altitudes. As it can be seen
the Mie channel seems to acquire data with a higher accuracy than the Rayleigh. While
most of the measurements of the Mie channel are distributed within the −20 m s−1 +20 m
s−1 HLOS range, this is not true with the Rayleigh channel where the population of uHLOS
measurements is much more sparse.
(a) Mie channel
(b) Rayleigh channel
Figure 14: Close up of Figure 13a and Figure 13b, between 0 m and 2500m referenced to
the geoid. The dashed grey horizontal lines represent the height from ground.
Figure 15 shows the density distribution histogram of the L2B product error estimates for
both the Mie and the Rayleigh channel measurements acquired within a 100 km from the
GBL. The chosen threshold are reported with dashed vertical lines, the values to the left
are considered valid while the ones to the right are not. The relative likelihood, for both
acquisitions, follows a Weibull distribution, tending to 0 as the error estimates approach
0 from above. It can be concluded from the shape of the two distributions that the Mie
channel in average delivers measurements with lower error estimates in comparison with the
Rayleigh. The peak of the distribution for the latter is found to the right of the chosen
threshold, while the peak for the Mie is within the values of error estimates accepted for the
study.
Page 16 of 32
==PAGE:21==
3.1
Error Estimates Threshold
Figure 15: Density distribution histogram of the error estimates from Aeolus measurements.
In Table 5 are reported the total percentages of measurements passing the ﬁltering for the
the error estimates (Err) and for the double of such values (Err*2).
<Err
<Err∗2
Tot. n of meas (N)
Mie
53.32%
80.37%
647
Rayleigh
28.11%
62.34%
1110
Table 5: Basic Error thresholds ﬁltering statistics
Furthermore, to visualize the temporal distribution of error threshold passing measurements
the following (Figure 16 and Figure 17) stacked-bar percentage plots are provided. On the
horizontal axis can be found the date of the weeks while on the vertical the percentage of
measurement that during that week pass or don’t pass the ﬁltering. The data is thus grouped
per week of the year and the valid measurements are counted. Once again it is shown that the
Mie error estimates are lower than the Rayleigh. Although it is interesting to see that during
winter season (around December 2018) Rayleigh performs worse than during spring and early
summer. The diﬀerence could be related to variations of molecular particulate throughout
the seasons, or to other atmospheric conditions that impact the acquisition.
Page 17 of 32
==PAGE:22==
3.1
Error Estimates Threshold
Figure 16: Stack-bar plot of the weekly averaged percentage of Mie ﬁltered measurements.
Figure 17: Stack-bar plot of the weekly averaged percentage of Rayleigh ﬁltered measure-
ments.
3.1.1
Correlation with other Parameters
In this section the error estimate parameter and its behaviour are further assessed. The aim
is to evaluate whether and how the bias of the L2B products are aﬀected by other factors
related to the typology of acquisition.
Figure 18 presents the average measurements bias plotted as a function of the average altitude
of each range, starting with lower altitudes to the left.
Both the full-track dataset and
the subset of measurements within 100 km from the GBL are shown. The Rayleigh error
estimates, for both datasets, decrease for increasing altitudes, or vice-versa for decreasing
distances from the satellite.
This behaviour is not present for the Mie error estimates,
although there is a signiﬁcant oﬀset between the full-track and the GBL proximity dataset,
the ﬁrst, as a matter of fact, has an average 10 m s−1 higher error estimate per range. As
Page 18 of 32
==PAGE:23==
3.1
Error Estimates Threshold
pointed previously the Rayleigh channel presents higher average error estimates than the
Mie channel when comparing the 100 km dataset.
Figure 18: Range bin average altitude against average error estimate
The number of measurements that a L2B accumulation is constructed upon are shown in
Figure 19 on the horizontal axis and the mean error estimate are plotted on the vertical axis,
for both Mie and Rayleigh and both full and 100 km datasets. It is seen that the Aeolus
measurement bias decreases for higher accumulated measurements. Similarly to Figure 18,
the Rayleigh channel over Alaiz presents higher average error estimates than the Mie. Whilst
this latter acquisition typology measures signiﬁcantly diﬀerent error estimates if referring to
the full data set or the 100 km, where the last is in average 10 m s−1 than the other.
Figure 19: Aeolus number of measurements parameter against average error estimate
The Integration_Length is representative of the horizontal scale of the observation, it re-
Page 19 of 32
==PAGE:24==
3.1
Error Estimates Threshold
ﬂects the latitude-longitude start and stop of the acquisition. Figure 20 and Figure 21 show
a scatter plot of the error estimates as a function of the integration length of the measure-
ment for the Mie and Rayleigh channel respectively, only for the 100km dataset. In these
plots the measurements have been classiﬁed according to their observation_type. The Mie
channel error estimates behaviour, with respect to the Rayleigh, is well-deﬁned, as the Ae-
olus bias estimations decrease with increasing integration length. Similar could be said for
the Rayleigh although the ranges of error estimates per integration length values are more
scattered. The more the measurements latitude/longitude start and stop are distant the less
Aeolus L2B is uncertain.
It is interesting to see, in Figure 20, how better does the Miecloudy measurement perform
compared to the Mieclear, while no such improvement or diﬀerence is found between the
Rayleighclear and Rayleighcloudy acquisitions. This could be strictly related to the fact that
"Mie HLOS wind require strong particulate backscatter to ensure a high signal to noise"
(Rennie, 2018), thus clear air conditions acquire higher uncertainties compared to cloudy
conditions. In the following chapters (subsubsection 4.1.2) this behaviour will be assessed in
comparison also with the GBL measurements.
Figure 20: Scatter plots of measurement error estimates against integration length, Mie
channel
Page 20 of 32
==PAGE:25==
3.2
Timeseries Analysis
Figure 21: Scatter plots of measurement error estimates against integration length,Rayleigh
channel.
3.2
Timeseries Analysis
Figure 22 shows averages of the HLOS winds, for all measurements, over their week of
acquisition. For this current analysis the wind measurements are ﬁltered according to the
previous stated parameters (validity ﬂag and error estimates) but are also extracted only if
in range of the GBL altitudes, thus between 0 m and 2500 m referenced to the geoid.
It is observed, in Figure 22, that quite important chunks of data are missing around two
main periods corresponding roughly to February 2019 and July 2019. Regular data quality
controls are performed by the Aeolus Cal/Val teams, resulting in a list of data to be excluded
(AeolusLog). Regarding the ﬁrst period an anomaly was detected nullifying the acquisitions
between the 14th of January and the 20th of February 2019. The second period instead
was due to an operational switch of the instrument’s laser beams.
Since the change of
laser and the anomaly also aﬀected the altitude ranges of acquisition, to make the vertical
decomposition of data more consistent and reliable, it was decided to split the full data set
into three subsets delimited by the missing period of data. The following table reports the
starting and ending dates of each period, excluding the not retrieved dates.
Stat date
End date
Period 1 (P1)
03/10/2018
11/01/2019
Period 2 (P2)
20/02/2019
16/06/2019
Period 3 (P3)
16/07/2019
26/09/2019
Table 6: Time period ranges
Page 21 of 32
==PAGE:26==
3.2
Timeseries Analysis
Figure 22: Aeolus mean wind timeseries, averaged per week, within 100 km from the GBL.
Figure 23 shows the number of measurements acquired per week where only the ﬁltered
measurements were counted, separated according to the channel of acquisition, and colored
accordingly, red for Rayleigh and blue for Mie. According to the division of period subsets
given in Table 3 it can be seen that the least number of measurements acquired is obtained
in P3. Whilst P2 is the period with the highest population, in particular for the Mie channel.
Figure 23: Weekly count of valid measurements, within 100 km from the GBL.
3.2.1
Vertical Satellite Measurements Resolution
The operational changes in the acquisition throughout the year of analysis made the com-
parison process with the GBL decisively chaotic: for same range bin of measurements the
CoG Altitude varied quite signiﬁcantly due to the operational changes. Grouping by ranges
the HLOS winds throughout the whole year is not been spatially consistent. Due to this
inconsistency, it is necessary to split the data into the the subsets: P1, P2 and P3.
Page 22 of 32
==PAGE:27==
3.2
Timeseries Analysis
It must be noted however "that a major intended application for the L2B product is its
use by the numerical weather prediction community and hence altitude is referenced to a
geoid" (Dabas and Poli, 2012). Since the geoid height above the WGS84 reference ellipsoid
is also provided in the L2B/L2C Product, the altitude above the WGS84 ellipsoid can be
inferred. This information will be crucial when directly comparing the satellite proﬁle with
the GBL, since the latter is simply referenced to the altitude above ground. Negative al-
titudes measurements were ﬁltered out, due to the obvious reason that no wind can occur
under ground.
(a) Mie channel range n◦18
(b) Rayleigh channel range n◦20
Figure 24: 3D plots of measurements position according to latitude, longitude and altitude
for speciﬁc ranges of the whole data-set.
Figure 24a and Figure 24b report the large diﬀerence in altitude for speciﬁc ranges through-
out the whole data-set, plotted along their coordinates. For example, looking at the Mie
channel, it can be seen that the the markers for P1 (reversed triangles) populate in average
lower altitudes compared to the P2 (squares) and the P3(triangles) markers. Each period
has a diﬀerent level of heights due to changes in the operations of the satellite. The division
into period thus allows to compute a proper allocation (as described in subsection 2.4) of
the GBL data into groups that match the ranges bins altitude of the satellite.
All the satellite parameters used for the study are introduced in this section. The whole er-
ror estimates ﬁltering process is necessary to exclude data with high biases from the Aeolus
satellite. The timeseries analysis was necessary to justify the lack of some days of measure-
ments throughout the dataset Additionally a range altitudes diﬀerence through periods is
observed and a sequential division in subsets of the data is performed. Although no com-
parison with the GBL is shown yet this chapter presents a qualitative assessment of the
performance of both acquisition channel, Mie and Rayleigh. Spatially along height it seems
that the Rayleigh does not perform as well as the Mie, with a particular high percentage of
biases in the lower altitudes.
Page 23 of 32
==PAGE:28==
4
Aeolus vs. Ground Based Lidar Comparison
In this section, the comparison between Aeolus and the GBL measurements will be dis-
cussed. a sensitivity analysis, and later by means of two dedicates case studies analyses.
subsection 4.1 will cover the sensitivity analysis whereas subsection 4.2 describes two case
studies.
4.1
Statistical and Sensitivity Analyses
This subsection is dedicated to assessing the impact parameter have on the ﬁnal comparison.
The output of the L2B product includes a few classiﬁcation parameters, such as the obser-
vation type. A study was carried out to assess how these parameters aﬀect the measurement
and the comparison between the ﬁnal wind proﬁles. As described in chapter 2.4 to achieve
a numerical comparison between the values, a manipulation of the GBL measurements is
processed. Acquisition of the ground proﬁler and the satellite must be closest as possible
spatially and temporally.
Frequency distributions of the horizontal line-of-sight satellite measurement (both Mie and
Rayleigh) and the horizontal ground proﬁler projections are shown in Figure 25 for all the
3 period subsets deﬁned in chapter 3.2. A normal distribution is obtained, the dashed lines
represent the 1 standard deviation percentile, such that 68.27% of the relative data occurs
within those ranges. It has to be noted that the positive standard deviation vertical line
for the GBL (green) and the Mie (blue) channel overlap in the ﬁgure. Table 7 reports some
statistical metrics of the dataset.
Figure 25: Frequency distribution histogram and plot of uHLOS measurements
Page 24 of 32
==PAGE:29==
4.1
Statistical and Sensitivity Analyses
count
mean [m s−1]
min [m s−1]
max [m s−1]
std [m s−1]
GBL
9651
0.18
-38.07
42.46
4.36
Mie
401
1.79
-12.16
21.58
6.11
Rayleigh
313
-0.68
-28.57
23.32
10.52
Table 7: Filetered measurements statistical metrics for all acquisition typologies.
In the following chapters, in order to visualize the comparison between matching measure-
ments scatterplots are provided, with the Aeolus measurements on the vertical axis and the
ground proﬁler measurements on the horizontal axis. A simple linear regression is then com-
puted in order to quantitatively understand how well the two measurements perform. This
method is applied for two main sensitivity analyses. One (subsubsection 4.1.1) regarding
the track and satellite orientation and orbital node the other (subsubsection 4.1.2) on the
atmospherics classiﬁcation parameter given in the L2B product.
4.1.1
Orbit node (Ascending or Descending)
The orbital node of the acquisition aﬀects many parameter of the Aeolus measurement,
both temporal and spatial. It is straight forward to understand the temporal diﬀerence of
the weekly repeating ascending and descending overpasses, as the ﬁrst occurs during late
afternoon, around 10 min before 18:00, and the second in early mornings at 6:20 am. It
is trivial instead to understand how this could aﬀect the comparison with the GBL, wind
is highly aﬀected by daily diurnal and nocturnal temperatures and cycles. Each node has
diﬀerent orientations of the LOS, the azimuth angle which deﬁnes the projection of the
horizontal wind measured by the ground-based lidar changes. The ascending has an average
260◦azimuth angle while the descending 100◦.
In Figure 26 the scatter-plots of the satellite uHLOS and the GBL wind measurements pro-
jected on the HLOS, are presented. The GBL measurements are averaged over the vertical
height matching range bin altitudes of Aeolus. The GBL measurements are also averaged
over two hours, one hour before and one hour after the overpass of the satellite. The plots
are divided into columns according to channel of acquisition (Mie and Rayleigh) and in two
rows according to orbital node (ascending and descending). A linear regression ﬁtting is also
assessed for all subsets of data, and values of oﬀset and slope are provided in the legend of
the plots. The shaded areas surrounding the linear regressions represent the 95% conﬁdence
interval, meaning that with 95% conﬁdence level the population of these scatter-plots will
fall within the area.
The linear regression models present similar oﬀsets per channel, negative for the Rayleigh
and positive for the Mie: in average the ﬁrst measures 0.6 m s−1 lower than the GBL while
the second measures above 2 m s−1. The slope values suggest instead the behaviour of the
correlation between observation the longer the distance from the central point. Looking at
Mie’s ascending and descending plots conﬁdence intervals areas do not present as substantial
diﬀerences as between Rayleigh’s ones.
Page 25 of 32
==PAGE:30==
4.1
Statistical and Sensitivity Analyses
(a) Ascending Mie uHLOS vs GBL uHLOS.
(b) Ascending Rayleigh uHLOS vs GBL uHLOS.
(c) Descending Mie uHLOS vs GBL uHLOS.
(d) Descending Rayleigh uHLOS vs GBL uHLOS.
Figure 26: Scatter plot and linear regression ﬁtting for diﬀerent orbit nodes.
Mie
Rayleigh
Ascending
0.4636
0.4245
Descending
0.6524
0.1025
Table 8: Figure 26 correlation coeﬃcients for diﬀerent orbit nodes.
Table 8 presents the correlation coeﬃcients of the previous plots. Both the highest and
lowest correlation are achieved along the descending track respectively for the Mie and the
Rayleigh. Ascending node correlations instead are consistent for both acquisition channels.
The highest performing case is the Mie descending.
Page 26 of 32
==PAGE:31==
4.1
Statistical and Sensitivity Analyses
4.1.2
Atmospheric Classiﬁcation
Figure 27 shows scatter-plots that follow the same principle of the ones presented in the
previous section, although this time classiﬁed by atmosphere conditions during acquisition.
The ground lidar measurements on the horizontal axis are projected against the correspond-
ing satellite measurement on the vertical axis. Linear ﬁtting model are reported and their
descriptive equation can be found in the legend. Shaded areas represent 95% conﬁdence
intervals. A brief explanation and analysis of the Observation_type parameter is given in
section 3. It was concluded that while the cloudy and clear conditions for the Rayleigh share
a similar population percentage, the Mie cloudy atmosphere acquisitions are signiﬁcantly
more present than the Mie clear. This can be also seen in the scarceness of comparable
acquisitions in Figure 27a.
(a) Mieclear uHLOS vs GBL uHLOS
(b) RayleighclearuHLOS vs GBL uHLOS
(c) Miecloudy uHLOS vs GBL uHLOS
(d) RayleighcloudyuHLOS vs GBL uHLOS
Figure 27: Scatter plot and linear regression ﬁtting for diﬀerent observation types.
Page 27 of 32
==PAGE:32==
4.2
Wind Proﬁling
Mie
Rayleigh
Clear
0.8343
0.3502
Cloudy
0.4841
0.3674
Table 9: Figure 26 correlation coeﬃcients for diﬀerent observation types.
In Table 9 the correlation coeﬃcients of the atmospheric classiﬁcation scatter plots are pre-
sented. Due to low measurements the Mie clear correlation coeﬃcient can not be regarded
as representative of the comparison between Aeolus and the GBL wind HLOS measure-
ments. The Mie cloudy case having numerous measurement that could be compared and a
higher correlation coeﬃcient than both Rayleigh cases is the best performing atmospheric
classiﬁcation acquisition.
4.2
Wind Proﬁling
For the ﬁrst 2 period subsets only a few cases (between Mie or Rayleigh, cloudy or clear,
ascending or descending) were chosen as representative in order to avoid the reporting of
too many ﬁgures and wind proﬁles. These cases are supported by visual, wind proﬁles, and
statistical means, scatter-plots with linear ﬁtting model an error estimates bar-charts. Due
to lack of descending node measurements and the presence of too few range bins under 2000
m in P3 no reporting of that speciﬁc speciﬁc period is given. The Mie clear observation
acquisitions being too few and less accurate, as seen in subsubsection 4.1.2, are not included
either.
Wind proﬁles of the projected line-of-sight wind measurements from the ground based lidar
are plotted and averaged upon the whole period for every height of acquisition above ground
level (a.g.l), every 100 m up to 2000 m. In the same wind proﬁle plots the average range
bin wind measurements from Aeolus are shown according to the stated case. Both proﬁles
of Aeolus and GBL measurements provide error-bar equal to the standard deviations of the
measurements grouped upon. Due to the above ground altitude variations per range bin of
the satellite measurements also vertical error-bars are provided, this does not apply for the
ground base lidar since it acquires data always at the same static heights.
The scatter-plots are constructed by acquiring the closest encounter in time and space of the
GBL to the speciﬁc Aeolus wind measurement. For example a satellite, uHLOS measurement
acquired at 06:23 on a Thursday at a height above ground of 125 m will be compared with a
10-min averaged acquisition of the ground lidar at 100 m above ground. Throughout these
plots linear regression models are provided along with their 95% conﬁdence interval.
As shown in the previous chapter the Mie cloudy descending observations are expected to
achieve a better and more accurate measurement with respect to the GBL.
Page 28 of 32
==PAGE:33==
4.2
Wind Proﬁling
4.2.1
Period 1: 2018/10-2019/01
In this ﬁrst case study are discussed the measurements acquired in Period 1 (P1).
The
period covers the whole winter season of the northern hemisphere. Throughout this period
the number of satellite ranges present within the lidar’s reach is the highest, 7 ranges for
the Mie and 6 for the Rayleigh are acquired below 200m from ground. Due to the satellite
operational settings of this period (ranges and altitudes of the satellite are adjustable to a
certain degree) it is therefore possible to evaluate
The left column of Figure 28 shows the HLOS wind velocity proﬁles measured by the ground
lidar (green), the Miecloudy ascending (blue triangles) the Miecloudy descending (reversed tri-
angles) and the Rayleighclear ascending (red triangles). The ground based proﬁler projected
wind observation are the averages of the 10 min measurement within the 1 hour prior or
post the overpass of Aeolus, the error bars the standard deviations of such grouping. Aeolus
measurements are the result of the averaging of all the acquisitions within one range bin,
both for altitudes and uHLOS, thus the vertical error bar connected to the relative marker
indicate the variations of altitudes within one range. while the horizontal ones the variation
of the measurements. The central columns in Figure 28 report the average L2B error esti-
mates for the range bin connected to their height. The rightmost plots are the scatterplots
of the satellite measurements and the closest encounter of the GBL.
Looking at either the wind proﬁles or at the linear regressions, the Miecloudy measurements are
in a surely better agreement with the GBL measurements compared with the Rayleighcloudy.
Regarding the latter error estimates averages fall under the 5.0 m s−1 only for the highest
range, that has, as a matter of fact, the highest ﬁtting with the GBL proﬁle.
It is also noted that the comparison performance may diﬀer for ascending (17:50 UTC) and
descending (06:20 UTC) Aeolus orbits due to the daily atmospheric cycle over land. The
GBL wind proﬁles are diﬀerent and for altitudes above 1000 m higher HLOS components
are measured during the ascending overpass, around early evening.
Page 29 of 32
==PAGE:34==
4.2
Wind Proﬁling
(a) Miecloudy descending node
(b) Miecloudy ascending node
(c) Raylieghcloudy ascending node
Figure 28: P1: To the left Aeolus and GBL wind proﬁles and standard deviations, in the
center the satellite average error estimates per range, to the right matching acquisition
scatter-plot and linear regression.
Page 30 of 32
==PAGE:35==
4.2
Wind Proﬁling
4.2.2
Period 2: 2019/02-2019/06
This second case section discusses the measurements acquired in Period 2 (P2). The period
starts around late February and ends in mid June. Aeolus operational settings make it so
that the number of range bins in our comparable heights are less than in P1, 5 for the Mie
channel and only 2 for the Rayleigh. The plots in Figure 29 follow the same principle as the
ones of the previous chapter.
Due to the lack of ranges for the Rayleigh it is hard to state whether the uHLOS between the
satellite and the GBL have a good ﬁtting, nonetheless the lowest Aeolus range bin for the
Rayleighcloudy ascending node case obtains an average wind measurement less than 1 m s−1
distant from the ground lidar proﬁle. The Miecloudy acquisition has an oﬀset of +3.7 m s−1
suggesting that the ground proﬁler measurements might not be projected along the same
exact direction.
(a) Miecloudy ascending node
(b) Raylieghclear ascending node
Figure 29: P2: To the left Aeolus and GBL wind proﬁles and standard deviations, in the
center the satellite average error estimates per range, to the right matching acquisition
scatter-plot and linear regression.
Page 31 of 32
==PAGE:36==
5
Discussion & Summary
The L2B products form the Aeolus satellite mission have been compared with in-situ wind
measurements obtained from a ground based lidar installed for the Alaiz experiment cam-
paign (Cantero et al., 2019). A bi-weekly overpass of the satellite over the interested region
allowed to extract and compare data throughout almost a full year, from October 2018 to
October 2019. All measurements within 100 km distance from the ground proﬁler of two
tracks with diﬀerent orbit nodes were extracted. Numerous parameters extracted within the
L2B product were used to perform a classiﬁcation of the measurements and a sensitivity
analysis. Since the comparison is performed with a lidar instrument data, only the lowest
vertical portion of the Aeolus measurement could be validated. This impacted greatly in
the population of data that was compared. The analysis of wind proﬁles demonstrated that,
in the lower layer of the atmosphere, Aeolus is capable of measuring winds along its line-
of-sight with a satisfactory reliability within diﬀerent ranges of uncertainty. Moreover with
the investigation of speciﬁc cases it was shown that Aeolus is able to measure wind speed in
both clear (particle-free) and cloudy (dense aerosol) conditions, thanks to the Rayleighclear
and Miecloudy products, respectively. (Sun et al., 2014) assess that, in the likelihood that a
cloud or aerosol layer is positioned inside the measurement bin, the satellite can acquire two
wind measurements, one for the Mie and the other for the Rayleigh channels.
The main challenge of the comparison lays within the low temporal resolution of Aeolus
measurements, which prevented the possibility of matching with consistency the continuous
lidar measurements. Moreover, another main challenge was represented by the substantial
diﬀerence in the scope of application of the Aelous satellite. The scale range used in this thesis
was, in fact, extremely limited with respect to the designed application, analyzing winds at
very low altitudes. The vertical resolution of low altitudes’ Aeolus acquisitions makes a wind
proﬁle comparison demanding or even meaningless for certain days of acquisition. Regulating
the errors of heights assignment for the satellite measurements would have given a more solid
basis to the comparison.
The increasing of the intersecting points between an in-situ instrument and the satellite could
be highly beneﬁcial to the comparison. As a matter of fact, the horizontal sampling volume
of the satellite, which is 86km along the satellite track and between 200 m or 2 km in the
vertical, does not seem optimal for complex terrains. More intersecting measurements could
be used to understand how future satellite for wind observations should be designed.
This study contributes to the understanding of the capabilities of Aeolus in supporting wind
resource assessment studies. A procedure for Aeolus data validation using lidar wind proﬁles
has been implemented and applied to case studies. The obtained results appear promising
and in light of the increasing global wind measurements database, the integration of such
measurements into wind modeling should be considered very relevant.
Page 32 of 32
==PAGE:37==
List of Figures
List of Figures
1
"Proﬁling the world’s winds" ESA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Aeolus measurement geometry and principles (Stoﬀelen et al., 2005). . . . . .
4
3
Diagram of Aeolus sampling terminology (Rennie et al., 2020). . . . . . . . .
5
4
Lidar measurement geometry and principle and wind vector reconstruction.
Pena Diaz (2015) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
5
Digital elevation map of the study area. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
6
Methodology ﬂowchart . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
7
Flowchart of the procedures used to achieve the comparison between Aeolus
and the GBL. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
8
Simple schematic of Horizontal matching procedure for the Aeoulus HLOS
and the GBL wind measurements. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
9
Measurements within 100km radius from GBL plotted over their coordinates
of acquisition. GBL position in green dot.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
10
Frequency distribution histogram of the Aeolus uHLOS measurements. . . . .
13
11
Weekly observation type percentage Timeseries, Mie.
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
12
Weekly observation type percentage Timeseries, Rayleigh. . . . . . . . . . . .
15
13
Aeolus wind measurements against height, color graded by error threshold
ﬁltering. Dark colored points pass the ﬁltering, whilst light colored ones do not. 15
14
Close up of Figure 13a and Figure 13b, between 0 m and 2500m referenced to
the geoid. The dashed grey horizontal lines represent the height from ground.
16
15
Density distribution histogram of the error estimates from Aeolus measurements. 17
16
Stack-bar plot of the weekly averaged percentage of Mie ﬁltered measurements. 18
17
Stack-bar plot of the weekly averaged percentage of Rayleigh ﬁltered mea-
surements. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
18
Range bin average altitude against average error estimate . . . . . . . . . . .
19
19
Aeolus number of measurements parameter against average error estimate . .
19
20
Scatter plots of measurement error estimates against integration length, Mie
channel
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
21
Scatter plots of measurement error estimates against integration length,Rayleigh
channel. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
22
Aeolus mean wind timeseries, averaged per week, within 100 km from the GBL. 22
23
Weekly count of valid measurements, within 100 km from the GBL. . . . . .
22
24
3D plots of measurements position according to latitude, longitude and alti-
tude for speciﬁc ranges of the whole data-set.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
25
Frequency distribution histogram and plot of uHLOS measurements
. . . . .
24
26
Scatter plot and linear regression ﬁtting for diﬀerent orbit nodes. . . . . . . .
26
27
Scatter plot and linear regression ﬁtting for diﬀerent observation types. . . .
27
28
P1: To the left Aeolus and GBL wind proﬁles and standard deviations, in the
center the satellite average error estimates per range, to the right matching
acquisition scatter-plot and linear regression. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
Page I of VI
==PAGE:38==
List of Figures
29
P2: To the left Aeolus and GBL wind proﬁles and standard deviations, in the
center the satellite average error estimates per range, to the right matching
acquisition scatter-plot and linear regression. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
Page II of VI
==PAGE:39==
List of Tables
List of Tables
1
Track overpass
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Coordinates of GBL
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Selected Parameter list. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Valid measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
5
Basic Error thresholds ﬁltering statistics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
6
Time period ranges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
7
Filetered measurements statistical metrics for all acquisition typologies. . . .
25
8
Figure 26 correlation coeﬃcients for diﬀerent orbit nodes. . . . . . . . . . . .
26
9
Figure 26 correlation coeﬃcients for diﬀerent observation types.
. . . . . . .
28
Page III of VI
==PAGE:40==
Nomenclature
Nomenclature
ALADIN Atmospheric LAser Doppler INstrument
CoG
Center of Gravity
DEM Digital Elevation Model
DWL Dopple Wind Lidar
ESA
European Space Agency
GBL Ground Based Lidar
HLOS Horizontal Line of Sight
LOS
Line of Sight
NWP Numerical Weather Prediction
RS
Remote Sensing
RWP Radar Wind Proﬁler
UTC Coordinated Universal Time
WGS84 World Geodetic System
WMO World Meteorological Organization
WRA Wind Resource Assessment
Page IV of VI
==PAGE:41==
References
References
AeolusLog, . Aeolus calibration/validation team, aeolus cal/val data quality control and
exclusion list. URL: https://www.aeolus.esa.int/confluence/#all-updates.
Baars, H., Herzog, A., Heese, B., Ohneiser, K., Hanbuch, K., Hofer, J., Yin, Z., Engelmann,
R., Wandinger, U., 2020. Validation of Aeolus wind products above the Atlantic Ocean.
Atmos. Meas. Tech. Discuss. , 1–27doi:10.5194/amt-2020-198.
Cantero, E., Fernando, Javier, Pedro, Jakob, Nikola, Michael, Daniel, Belén, Joan, 2019.
Alaiz Experiment (ALEX17): Campaign and Data Report , 106URL: https://zenodo.
org/record/3187482, doi:10.5281/zenodo.3187482.
Dabas, A., Poli, P., 2012.
ADM-Aeolus Level-2B / 2C Processor Input / Output Data
Deﬁnitions Interface Control Document Authors 40.
ESA, . Esa - introducing aeolus. URL: https://www.esa.int/Applications/Observing_
the_Earth/Aeolus/Introducing_Aeolus.
Guo, J., Liu, B., Gong, W., Shi, L., Zhang, Y., Ma, Y., Zhang, J., 2020. Technical Note :
First comparison of wind observations from ESA ’ s satellite mission Aeolus and ground-
based Radar wind proﬁler network of China , 1–36.
Jiménez, P.A., Dudhia, J., González-Rouco, J.F., Montávez, J.P., García-Bustamante, E.,
Navarro, J., Vilà-Guerau De Arellano, J., Muñoz-Roldán, A., 2013.
An evaluation of
WRF’s ability to reproduce the surface wind over complex terrain based on typical circu-
lation patterns. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos. 118, 7651–7669. doi:10.1002/jgrd.50585.
Mikkelsen, T., 2014. Lidar-based research and innovation at DTU wind energy- A review.
J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 524, 0–16. doi:10.1088/1742-6596/524/1/012007.
Pena Diaz, A., 2015. Remote Sensing for Wind Energy. Technical Report. DTU Wind
Energy.
Petersen, L., Jørgensen, E., 2014. The new European wind atlas, Wind energy : opportunities
and CHALLENGES of global wind energy development Small Wind World Market .
Reitebuch, O., Lemmerz, C., Lux, O., Marksteiner, U., Rahm, S., Weiler, F., Witschas, B.,
Meringer, M., Schmidt, K., Huber, D., Stieglitz, H., Isaksen, L., Rennie, M., Kloe, J.D.,
Marseille, G.j., Stoﬀelen, A., 2019. Initial Assessment of the Performance of the First
Wind Lidar in Space on Aeolus. Proc. 29th Int. Laser-Radar Conf. 01010, 0–3.
Rennie, M., Tan, D., Andersson, E., Rance, M.É., 2020. AEOLUS LEVEL-2B ALGORITHM
THEORETICAL BASIS DOCUMENT ( MATHEMATICAL DESCRIPTION OF THE
AEOLUS LEVEL-2B PROCESSOR ) Authors .
Rennie, M.P., 2018. An assessment of the expected quality of Aeolus Level-2B wind products.
EPJ Web Conf. 176, 1–4. doi:10.1051/epjconf/201817602015.
Page V of VI
==PAGE:42==
References
Stoﬀelen, A., Pailleux, J., Källén, E., Vaughan, J.M., Isaksen, L., Flamant, P., Wergen,
W., Andersson, E., Schyberg, H., Culoma, A., Meynart, R., Endemann, M., Ingmann, P.,
2005. The atmospheric dynamics mission for global wind ﬁeld measurement. Bull. Am.
Meteorol. Soc. 86, 73–87. doi:10.1175/BAMS-86-1-73.
Sun, X.J., Zhang, R.W., Marseille, G.J., Stoﬀelen, A., Donovan, D., Liu, L., Zhao, J., 2014.
The performance of Aeolus in heterogeneous atmospheric conditions using high-resolution
radiosonde data. Atmos. Meas. Tech. 7, 2695–2717. doi:10.5194/amt-7-2695-2014.
Page VI of VI
