==PAGE:1==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Department of Civil Engineering
Assessment of earthquake performance of retaining walls
23th October, 2020
Author: Valentina Leoncino
Student number: 193499
Supervisor:
Professor Varvara Zania
==PAGE:2==
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
Brovej
Building 118
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Title:
Assessment of earthquake performance
of retaining walls
Project:
MSc Graduation Thesis
Project period:
February 11th - October 23rd 2020
Author:
Valentina Leoncino
Supervisor:
Professor Varvara Zania
Pages: 105
Finished 23-10-2020
Synopsis:
The aim of this project is to investigate the
performance of anchored retaining walls when
subjected to earthquake loading.
First, the
earthquake design methods for retaining walls
will be described.
Second, the pseudostatic
method will be applied analytically according
to EC8 guidelines, ending up with walls with
diﬀerent ﬂexural rigidities. Then, a set of real
earthquake records will be selected.
Third,
pseudostatic and non-linear numerical analyses
will be performed and an optimized design for
the wall will be proposed. For each earthquake
selected, the site response and the soil structure
interaction eﬀects on the seismic behavior of
the soil-wall systems and the stress deformation
will be evaluated.
Finally, the performance
of the walls will be assessed by means of
the performance design guidelines developed by
PIANC.
==PAGE:3==
Preface
Dear reader,
this document is the result of the ﬁnal project to complete my MSc. degree in Civil Engineering. I
would like to thank professor Varvara Zania for her supervision, her patience and the opportunity
given to write my thesis at DTU in Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering.
Reading guide
The report uses the Harvard-method literature reference, where sources that are used refer to the
author’s last name and the year of the publication in brackets - Surname [Year]. Tables and ﬁgures
produced by the author have no sources. In case of a ﬁgure or table taken from a source, but which
has been modiﬁed by the author, a reference to the source is written with the same reference format
as mentioned above.
Tables, ﬁgures and equations are numbered by chapter, number and location in the chapter.
iii
==PAGE:4==
Table of Contents
I
Introduction
1
Chapter 1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Report structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
II Theoretical background
4
Chapter 2
Seismic analysis of anchored retaining walls
5
2.1
Anchored retaining walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Seismic design methods for retaining walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Seismic design according to EC8
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Performance based design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
IIIMethodology
23
Chapter 3
Preliminary design
24
3.1
Geometry of the problem and soil properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2
Seismic parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3
Design approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.4
Evaluation of forces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.5
Dimensioning of the wall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.6
Choice of wall stiﬀness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.7
Earthquakes selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
Chapter 4
Numerical analysis
31
4.1
FE model for time-history analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
FE model for pseudostatic analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3
Optimized wall design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
IVResults
38
Chapter 5
Pseudostatic results
39
5.1
Analytical results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2
FEM results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
Chapter 6
FEM non-linear analysis results
51
6.1
Summary of the time-history analysis results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.2
Site response
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.3
Soil-structure interaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
iv
==PAGE:5==
Table of Contents
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
6.4
Soil-wall system response
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
V Discussion and conclusion
83
Chapter 7
Discussion of the results
84
7.1
Pseudostatic analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
7.2
Scaling of the earthquake records following EC8 guidelines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
7.3
Non-linear time history analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
7.4
Assesment of the walls seismic response
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
Chapter 8
Conclusion and further analysis
105
Bibliography
106
VIAppendix
109
Appendix A Elastic soil eigenfrequency
110
Appendix B Seismic zonation for Italy
112
Appendix C PLAXIS 2D model for pseudostatic analysis
113
Appendix D 1D ground response analysis
114
Appendix E Residual vs. maximum bending moments
116
v
==PAGE:6==
Part I
Introduction
==PAGE:7==
Introduction 1
1.1
Background
The aim of this project is to investigate the seismic performance of anchored retaining walls designed
according to Eurocode 8 guidelines [EN 1998-5, 2004]. The walls under investigation retain an
excavation of non-liqueﬁable cohesioneless soil under the water table.
Retaining wall failures due to seismic events can cause great economical losses for a local region,
especially when they are used to support vital structures and infrastructures. Bridge abutment walls
or harbour quay walls are characteristic cases in which a retaining wall with submerged backﬁll is
constructed.
Experience accumulated from failures occurred in recent earthquakes has shown that in many cases
the seismic performance of retaining walls has met the requirements of an operational retaining
structure, when soil liquefaction was not involved.
Seismic vulnerability of retaining systems is usually related to the strength degradation of saturated
cohesionless soils in the backﬁll and the foundation. In this regard, very limited number of cases
of high earth pressures have been reported in the past [Psarropoulos et al., 2011]. Nevertheless, as
highlited by many authors, retaining walls seem to be designed rather conservatively [Gazetas et
al., 2015]. Last but not least, the "ductility" introduced in EC8 by means of the factor r does not
apply to non-gravity walls.
In view of all the above mentioned considerations, special attention is given in this study to the
performance based design concept, recently developed to overcome the limitations of conventional
seismic design. The objective of the performance-based design is to evaluate the seismic response
of the structure with respect to allowable limits (e.g. displacement, stress, ductility/strain). In
this regard, the main reference for this study will be the code "Seismic Design Guidelines for
Port Structures" developed by PIANC World Association for Waterborne Transport Infrastructure
[PIANC, 2001].
In order to better evaluate the seismic performance of the walls, this study will also focus on
the site response and the soil-structure interaction analyses.
Most modern seismic codes (e.g.
ASCE 41-06, ASCE 7–10, Eurocode 8, Italian technical code NTC2008, Mexico City BuildingCode)
recommend accounting for soil–structure interaction eﬀects in the seismic design of structures, due
to the modiﬁcations on the seismic waves in terms of both amplitudes and frequency content.
1
==PAGE:8==
1.2. Problem formulation
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
1.2
Problem formulation
The aim of the project previously introduced leads up to the problem formulation on which the
project is based:
What is the seismic performance of an anchored retaining wall designed following EC8 guidelines?
Detailing this main task, the speciﬁc problems can be formulated below:
• what are the most typical types of failure of anchored retaining walls?
• how did anchored retaining walls behave during past seismic events?
• what are the methods of seismic analysis for retaining walls?
• what are the Eurocode guidelines to follow in order to design a retaining wall seismically?
• what is the current state of the art and practice on the concept of performance based design?
• what is the inﬂuence of ﬂexibility of the wall and non-linearity of the soil on seismic response
of a retaining wall-soil system?
• given a soil deposit with a certain water table and escavation depth, how to design an anchored
retaining wall in a given seismic zone in Italy?
• how to select earthquake records for performing a non-linear time history analysis of the
retaining wall-soil system?
• how to set up a PLAXIS 2D ﬁnite element model in order to perform a non-linear time history
analysis of the retaining wall-soil system?
• how to set up a PLAXIS 2D ﬁnite element model in order to perform a pseudostatic analysis
of the retaing wall-soil system?
• what is the non-linear behaviour that the soil experiences, given ﬁve diﬀerent earthquakes
selected?
• what is the seismic assesment on the wall-soil system from the pseudo-static FEM analysis,
given two diﬀerent ﬂexural rigidities of the wall?
• what is the seismic assesment on the wall-soil system from the non-linear FEM analysis, given
ﬁve diﬀerent earthquake records and two diﬀerent ﬂexural rigidities of the wall?
• in view of the above results, can the FEM pseudostatic analysis improve the seismic design
of anchored retaining walls in an economical way?
• how the optimized wall can be designed?
• what is the performance assessment of the three walls under investigation, according to PIANC
guidelines?
• could the Performance based design be considered a more economical design method, given
the above results?
1.2.1
Project Limitations
This study is subjected to the following main limitations.
To begin with, the soil deposit under investigation is modelled as a saturated medium but responding
in drained conditions, so that no excess pore pressure develops during seismic loading. The soil
under investigation has a coeﬃcient of permeability such that the pore water is considered free to
move with respect to the solid skeleton. Nevertheless, hydrodinamics forces are neglected in this
study, due to the fact that they are not implemented in PLAXIS 2D yet.
In [Gazetas et al., 2016] a proper modeling of the dynamic action of water in front of a steel sheet
pile wall was explored in ABAQUS. The study compares distress (in terms of bending moments)
2
==PAGE:9==
1.3. Report structure
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
and horizontal deﬂection of the wall as obtained with and without the hydrodynamics forces and
demonstrates that their action has a rather negligible eﬀect on the order of 5% for bending moments
(for acceleration levels between 0.15–0.45g). The deformations, however, are usually slightly more
sensitive.
The second limitation of this study is represented by the fact that the risk of liquefaction is neglected.
During earthquakes, liquefaction is one of the signiﬁcant factors leading to ground failure of loose
to medium dense sand and silts below the water table. In this study the soil deposit is made of
dense sand with friction angle of φ = 35°. Thus, this paper assumes that liquefaction is unlikely to
occur in the soil deposit.
1.3
Report structure
Based on the problem formulation stated in the previous section, the report is presented in the
following structure.
Firstly, a review of the theoretical background is presented. The seismic behaviour of anchored
retaining walls in previous seismic events is investigated, as well as the diﬀerent types of failure
which can occur. A brief review about the seismic methods of analysis is introduced, as well as the
state of practice currently followed in Europe for seismic design of retaining walls (Eurocode 8 part
5). Special attention is then given to the presentation of the Performance based design concept, in
terms of both state of the art and state of practice.
Secondly, the methodology followed in this study is illustrated. The steps followed are:
1. dimensioning analytically the wall (in terms of embedmenent depth and anchorage system)
following EC8 guidelines;
2. choosing two diﬀerent thicknesses and ﬂexural rigidities for the wall, leading to a "ﬂexible"
and a "stiﬀ" wall;
3. selecting real earthquakes records for the non linear time-history analysis;
4. setting up the PLAXIS 2D models for pseudostatic and time-history analysis;
5. performing pseudostatic analysis on the ﬂexible and stiﬀwall;
6. optimizing the wall design on the basis of the PLAXIS pseudostatic results;
7. performing time history analyses on the three diﬀerent walls, given the real earthquakes
selected;
8. assessing the performance of the above mentioned walls.
In the third part the results of all the analysis are then presented. The results include the site
response analysis of the soil deposit under investigation; in this way the eﬀect of each earthquake
on the soil non-linearity and also on the wall-soil system will be highlighted. The "non elasticity"
and the hysteretic damping of the soil during cyclic loading is taken into account by using the
Hardening Small Strain model.
Finally, the last part of the thesis is dedicated to the discussion of the results with a check of the
damage criteria proposed by [PIANC, 2001]. In the conclusion the main points of the study are
summarized and possible improvements for further analysis are suggested.
3
==PAGE:10==
Part II
Theoretical background
==PAGE:11==
Seismic analysis of anchored
retaining walls 2
2.1
Anchored retaining walls
Retaining walls are key elements of ports and harbors, transportation systems, lifelines and are used
throughout seismically active areas.
One of the most common type of walls is represented by anchored retaining walls, which are mostly
used in marine engineering but also as bridge abutments, basement walls and may be used for
heights of excavation until 20m.
Anchored quay walls are mostly encountered above concrete structures in marine environments.
Anchored steel sheet-pile walls are used as retaining structures in wharves and quays, owing mainly
to their easy installation and because the soft or loose soils that usually underline such waterfront
structures may not support the additional weight of gravity concrete walls without massive soil
replacement or improvement.
Depending on the ﬂexibility, this type of walls can move suﬃciently to develop minimum active
and/or maximum passive earth pressures. In this case the wall can be classiﬁed as "yielding wall"
and they usually display a strong soil structure interaction, especially at the anchorage depth.
Diﬀerent conﬁgurations for this type of retaining structure are depicted in Fig. 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Diﬀerent conﬁgurations for anchored retaining walls [Colt et al., 2008]
5
==PAGE:12==
2.1. Anchored retaining walls
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
2.1.1
Types of failures of anchored retaining walls
Under static conditions, retaining walls are subjected to the body forces related to the mass of the
wall, to the soil pressures and to the external forces such as those transmitted by braces. During an
earthquake, however, inertial forces and changes in soil strength may violate equilibrium and cause
permanent deformation of the wall. Failure, whether by sliding, tilting and bending, or some other
mechanism, occurs when these permanent deformations become excessive.
Possible modes of failure for tied-back retaining walls are depicted in Fig. 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Possible modes of failure for tied-back retaining walls [Sabatini et al., 1999]
Two modes of earthquake-induced failure for anchored walls are considered for the seismic design:
internal failure and external failure. Internal failure is characterized by failure of an element of the
wall system such as the tendons, ground anchors, or wall itself.
External failure is characterized by a global failure of the wall similar to that which occurs in many
slope stability problems, with the failure surface passing beyond the end of the anchors and below
the toe of the wall.
6
==PAGE:13==
2.1. Anchored retaining walls
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
A possible internal failure mechanism is shown in Fig.2.3, corresponding to mechanisms (a), (b),
and (c) in Fig.2.2 , with an active failure wedge immediately behind the wall, a passive wedge
immediately in front of the embedded toe of the wall, and the anchor developing their ultimate
capacity.
Figure 2.3: Internal and external failure mechanisms for walls in sand [Sabatini et al., 1999]
2.1.2
Past seismic performance of anchored walls
Observations that are available indicate overall good performance of anchored wall systems subjected
to strong ground motions in earthquakes, when soil liquefaction is not involved.
In [Ho et al., 1990] the authors conducted a survey of the response of ten anchored walls following
the Whittier earthquake of 1987, in the Los Angeles area, California. The authors concluded that
all the anchored walls examined performed very well and experienced little to no loss of integrity
due to the earthquake.
The same conclusion was drawn following a survey of the performance of anchored walls conducted
after the 1994 Northridge earthquake [Lew et al., 2010].
In [Gazetas et al., 2016] the following observations emerge about the performance of anchored
bulkheads subjected to strong earthquake shaking:
• most of the observed earthquake failures resulted from large-scale liquefaction of loose
cohesionless soils mainly in the backﬁll retained soil, common in port and harbor facility
site;
• another frequent but not as dramatic type of anchored bulkheads damage, takes the form
of excessive permanent seaward “bulging” and tilting of the sheet-pile wall, accompanied by
excessive movement of the anchor wall relatively to the surrounding soil; such failures are
due either to inadequate passive anchor-wall resistance, or to insuﬃcient strength of the main
sheet-pile wall, or to both.
A detailied record of the failure of anchored quay walls induced by earthquakes in Japan was
reported by [Japan Port and Harbour Association, 1979]. Severe damage occurred to quay walls
during the 1964 Niigata Earthquake in Niigata Port. Most quay walls were sheet pile bulkheads.
The swelling and tilting of sheet piles towards the sea associated with large ground settlement was
typical. An example is shown in Fig. 2.4. It was reported that this type of damage occurred mostly
in bulkheads with poor anchor resistance and that at some locations the tie rods had snapped.
7
==PAGE:14==
2.1. Anchored retaining walls
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Figure 2.4: Cross-section of damaged sheet pile bulkhead after Niigata earthquake, 1964 [Japan Port and
Harbour Association, 1979]
In the Chilean Earthquake of 1960, similar types of quay wall failure were reported at Puerto Montt
[Duke et al., 1963]. Anchored sheet pile bulkheads along the coast were pushed outwards up to 0.9
m over a length of 400m, with resulting settlement and distortion of railway trucks founded on the
backﬁll. Other examples of large ground movements in saturated ground near retaining structures
were found following the Philippines Earthquake of 1990 and the Costa Rica Earthquake of 1991.
When it comes to liquefaction, experience accumulated from failures occurred in recent earthquakes
has shown that in many cases the seismic performance of retaining walls has not met the
requirements of an operational retaining structure. There are many examples of retaining walls
(primarily harbour quay walls) that have failed during a seismic event due to liquefaction, such as
in Kobe, Japan 1995. This earthquake caused extensive lateral spreading of ground throughout the
waterfront area in and around Kobe Port. [Lai, 1998] summarizes the variety of failure modes due
to liquefaction on anchored walls based on the case histories during the Kobe earthquake. Typical
failure/deformations modes which occurred are depicted in the following Figure.
Figure 2.5: Typical failure/deformation modes of anchored sheet pile walls due to liquefaction [Lai, 1998]
8
==PAGE:15==
2.2. Seismic design methods for retaining walls
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
2.1.3
Inﬂuence of soil non-linearity on seismic response of retaining walls
Despite its structural simplicity, the seismic response of a wall (retaining even a single soil layer) is a
rather complicated problem. The dynamic interaction between the wall and the retained soil is the
primary factor that increases the complexity of the problem, especially when material non-linearities
are involved.
Both dynamic response of restrained walls and soil ampliﬁcation of ground acceleration are aﬀected
by soil non-linearity. The latter is a crucial parameter which is usually not taken appropriately into
account by the seismic norms. As an example, seismic norms (such as the Eurocode 8), being based
on the limit equilibrium methods, underestimate the role of the potential soil ampliﬁcation behind
a retaining wall.
In general, it can be said that soil non-linearity increases the degree of complexity of the
investigation, being either beneﬁcial or detrimental for the distress of a rigid retaining system
depending on the circumstances, i.e.
soil type and frequency content of the seismic motion
(Psarropoulos et al. [2011]).
2.1.4
Inﬂuence of ﬂexural rigidity on seismic response of retaining walls
In [Sitar et al., 2015], a review of traditional methods of analysis shows that the ﬂexibility of the
retaining structure and its foundation plays a very important role in the magnitude of the predicted
seismic loads and that increased wall ﬂexibility signiﬁcantly decreases their magnitude.
Already [Mononobe et al., 1932] observed that stiﬀer structures, rigidly attached at the base
experience higher seismic loads by granular backﬁll. Centrifuge experiments conducted by [Candia
al., 2013] show that the Mononobe Okabe solution [Mononobe et al., 1929], generally adopted by
seismic codes, indeed provides a reasonable upper bound for stiﬀstructures.
In [Steedman et al., 1993] centriguge tests are performed and the results show how the seismic
reponse of anchored quay walls depend critically on the stiﬀness of the soil-structure system. In
particular, the authors highlight how the stiﬀness of the wall-soil system can decrease during base
shaking and this can cause resonant vibration, as a consequence of the deterioration of soil stiﬀness
in the backﬁll.
2.2
Seismic design methods for retaining walls
The methods of design for retaining walls can be subdivided into three categories [PIANC, 2001]:
• simpliﬁed methods;
• simpliﬁed dynamic methods;
• dynamic methods.
The choice of the type of analysis depends on the accuracy degree required by the structure to
design.
The simpliﬁed methods are based on the pseudo-static approach developed by [Mononobe et al.,
1929]. In this approach, constant forces are introduced in a limit equilibrium calculation, and the
seismic analysis of a retaining wall is treated similarly to the evaluation of the safety against a
collapse mechanism. The wall is assumed to be rigid, the soil has a rigid-perfectly plastic behavior
and the seismic coeﬃcient k is constant along the height of the wall.
9
==PAGE:16==
2.3. Seismic design according to EC8
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
The simpliﬁed dynamic methods are based on the Newmark sliding block concept. The Newmark
model analyzes the sliding of a rigid block on a plane surface, assuming a rigid-plastic behaviour at
the interface between them. The threshold acceleration value is evaluated from limit equilibrium
considerations. When this acceleration value is reached, the surface moves with an acceleration
higher than the block.
The displacement is computed by integrating the relative accelerations
twice, until the velocity between them returns to zero again .
Figure 2.6: Newmark sliding block model [Yiğit, 2020]
Finally, the fully dynamic methods (FEM non-linear analyses) are the only ones capable to estimate
the permanent deformation of the structure during earthquake loading taking into account the
non-linear behaviour of the soil.
Dynamic analyses are considered as the most comprehensive
tool available to predict seismic response of a geotechnical system. Neverthless, dynamic analyses
require not only much eﬀort and time, but also appropriate values for the input parameters, which
are diﬃcult to obtain. Last but not least, the outcome of these analyses is highly sensitive to the
choice of the soil model.
Therefore, in engineering practice most designs are still based on a pseudo-static approach. The
latter has been proven quite eﬀective especially for gravity walls [Kramer, 1996].
2.3
Seismic design according to EC8
Eurocode8 ("Design of structures for earthquake resistance") deals with foundations and
geotechnical problems in part 5 [EN 1998-5, 2004].
EC8-5 is developed in 7 chapters plus six
appendices (Annexes A to E).
Chapter 7 is dedicated to the design of retaining walls. Given the premise that the use of any
consolidated method of analysis is permitted, indeed the most conspicuous part of the chapter is then
dedicated to simpliﬁed methods and the pseudostatic approach to analyze the seismic conditions is
described.
2.3.1
Seismic earth thrust
In evaluating the seismic actions on the wall, it is prescribed that the increments of earth pressures
may be computed by means of the Mononobe Okabe method [Mononobe et al., 1929].
10
==PAGE:17==
2.3. Seismic design according to EC8
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
The total design thrust Ed is calculated as:
Ed = 0.5 · γ∗
· (I ± kv) · K · H2 + Ews + Ewd
(2.1)
where γ∗=soil unity weight; kv=vertical seismic coeﬃcient; H=wall height; Ews=static water force;
Ewd=hydrodynamic water force; K=earth pressure coeﬃcient (static + dynamic).
The dynamic
force may be taken to act at the same point as the static force.
Once the design action Ed has been determined, the anchored wall must be veriﬁed against the
rotational capacity failure, so that Ed must be lower or equal to the design resistance Rd:
Rd ≥Ed
(2.2)
As for the Coulomb theory in static conditions, the Mononobe-Okabe theory implies very high values
for passive earth pressure coeﬃcient when the soil-wall friction is considered. For this reason, in
EC8 the evaluation of passive pressure is conducted assuming zero soil-wall friction.
Therefore, as regards the inclination of the thrust on the wall due to the static and the dynamic
action, it can not be taken greater than (2/3)φ for the active state, and must be taken equal to zero
for the passive state.
2.3.2
Seismic active and passive earth pressure coeﬃcients
In Annex E it is suggested to calculate the the seismic active and passive earth pressure coeﬃcients
KAE, KPE by the following expressions:
KAE =
cos2(φ −θ)
cos θ cos(δ + θ)
h
1 +
q
sin(φ+δ) sin(φ−θ)
cos(δ+θ)
i2
(2.3)
KPE =
sin2(φ −θ)
cos θ sin(θ)
h
1 −
q
sin(φ) sin(φ−θ)
sin(θ)
i2
(2.4)
with φ= soil shear resistance angle; δ= backﬁll-wall friction angle and θ= seismic inertia angle.
The values of γ∗and θ depend on water condition in the soil.
Two extreme water conditions are deﬁned in Eurocode 8, depending on soil permeability k. For
k < 5 ∗10−4m/s the water moves with the solid skeleton (restrained water condition), whereas for
highly permeable backﬁll (k > 5 ∗10−4m/s), it is assumed that water can move independently of
the solid skeleton during earthquake (free water condition).
The expressions for θ and γ∗for soils above the water table and for submerged soils are listed in
Table 2.1.
11
==PAGE:18==
2.3. Seismic design according to EC8
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
backﬁll condition
water condition
seismic inertia angle θ
unit weight γ∗
above the water table
-
θ = tan−1 (kh/ (1 −kv))
γwet
fully submerged
free
θF = tan−1 
γd
γb
kh
1−kv

γb = γsat −γw
fully submerged
restrained
θR = tan−1 
γSat
γb
kh
1−kv

γb = γsat −γw
Table 2.1: Expressions for θ and γ∗for homogeneous backﬁll
2.3.3
Choice of seismic coeﬃcients
The key aspect of the pseudo-static method is the choice of seismic coeﬃcients, necessary to calculate
equivalent pseudo-static forces on the retaining structure.
In deﬁning the criteria for the determination of the seismic action, EC8 introduces a series of
parameters whose values are deﬁned for each european Country (the so-called Nationally Determined
Parameters, NDP). The parameters included in the relevant Nationals Annexes are:
• reference peak ground acceleration on type A ground agR;
• soil factor S.
The determination of seismic forces is dependent of their intensity on tolerable and actually
permitted displacement of the structure.
In EC8 part 5, at 7.3.2.2 clause (4), it is stated that the
horizontal seismic coeﬃcient kh should be evaluated as:
kh = agR · γl · S/(g · r)
(2.5)
where γI = importance factor of the structure; agR is the the design ground acceleration on type A
ground; g is the acceleration of gravity g; S is the ampliﬁcation coeﬃcient, depending on soil type
(over a depth of 30 m), and r is a function of the displacement dr that the retaining structure can
accept.
The factor r can be therefore deﬁned as "ductility factor" and takes the values listed in Table 2.2
depending on the type of retaining structure.
type of retaining structure
r
Free gravity walls that can accept a displacement up to dr 300 αS (mm)
2
Free gravity walls that can accept a displacement up to dr 200 αS (mm)
1.5
Flexural reinforced concrete walls, anchored or braced walls
1
Table 2.2: Values for r depending on the type of retaining wall
As it can be seen, the prescribed value of r = 1 in EC8 for non-gravity walls implies that this type
of wall cannot accept displacements therefore that the behaviour of such structures is fragile.
EC8 also prescribes that for non-gravity walls the eﬀects of vertical acceleration (kv) may be
neglected.
2.3.4
Anchorage system design
As calculations as well as post-earthquake observations have shown that the slope of the potential
failure wedge is ﬂatter than under static condition, the length of the anchor shall be increased with
12
==PAGE:19==
2.4. Performance based design
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
respect to the length computed under static conditions to ensure that the anchor system is located
outside this potential failure wedge. For anchored retaining walls, Eurocode8 suggests that the
distance between the anchor and the wall shall exceed the distance required for non-seismic loads
following the expression:
Le = Ls(1 + 1.5α · S)
(2.6)
where Le is the distance in seismic condition, while Ls in static conditions. S represents the soil
ampliﬁcation factor while the coeﬃcient α is deﬁned as:
α = agRγI
g
(2.7)
where γI is the importance factor of the structure; agR is the the design ground acceleration on
type A ground; g is the acceleration of gravity.
2.4
Performance based design
Performance-based design is an emerging concept, developed from the lessons learned from
earthquakes occurred in the 1990’s [Iai et al., 1993].
This new methodology was developed to overcome the limitations of conventional seismic design,
which does not provide information of the structural performance when the limit of the force-
balanced is exceeded.
Performance-based approach provides information on the performance of the structure (when the
limit of the force-balance is exceeded) in engineering terms such as displacements, limit stress state
and ductility/strain limit, selecting the damage level consistent with the needs of the users/owners.
With regard to retaining walls, the seismic performance is commonly expressed in terms of
permanent displacements at the end of the earthquake [PIANC, 2001].
2.4.1
State of practice
In the performance-based design diﬀerent degrees of seismic protection are prescribed with respect
to the limit state being analysed.
EC8 takes into account performance criteria, both encouraging the utilization of dynamic analyses
which allow to assess the behaviour of the wall under real excitations, and proposing a reduction
factor r in the simple pseudostatic method. The value of r depends on the amount of “displacement”
tolerable by the structure. Nonethless, as shown in the previous section, the ductility represented
by the r factor does not apply to anchored retaining walls.
The main reference for this study will be the code "Seismic Design Guidelines for Port Structures"
developed by PIANC, World Association for Waterborne Transport Infrastructure [PIANC, 2001].
In this code performanced based design is covered and damage criteria are proposed for anchored
retaining walls, as it will be explained in next section.
Fig 2.7 shows the ﬂowchart proposed by [PIANC, 2001] for seismic performance evaluation of
structures.
13
==PAGE:20==
2.4. Performance based design
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
The principal steps taken in the performance-based design are:
1. choosing a performance grade: this step is typically done by referring to tables and selecting
the damage level consistent with the needs of the users/owners;
2. deﬁning damage criteria: deﬁning which is the acceptable damage in terms of engineering
parameters such as displacements, limit stress states, or ductility factor;
3. evaluating seismic performance of a structure: this step is typically done by comparing the
response parameters from a seismic analysis of the structure with the damage criteria. If
the results of the analysis do not meet the damage criteria, the proposed design or existing
structure should be modiﬁed.
Figure 2.7: Flowchart for seismic performance evaluation[PIANC, 2001]
Two levels of earthquake motions are typically used as reference motions, in [PIANC, 2001] deﬁned
as follows:
• Level 1 (Ll): earthquake motions with probability of exceedance of 50% during the life-span
of the structure;
• Level 2 (L2): earthquake motions with a probability of exceedance of 10%.
The earthquake level combined with the acceptable damage gives the "performance grade" S,A,B,C,
as shown in the following table.
14
==PAGE:21==
2.4. Performance based design
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Performance grade
Earthquake L1
Earthquake L2
Grade S
Degree I: serviceable
Degree I: serviceable
Grade A
Degree I: serviceable
Degree II: repairable
Grade B
Degree I: serviceable
Degree III:near collapse
Grade C
Degree II: repairable
Degree IV: collapse
Table 2.3: Performance grades S,A,B and C [PIANC, 2001]
As it can be seen, for a design earthquake Level1 it is required that the structure remains repairable
as highest level of damage. In other words, with a level of motion that is likely to occur during
the life span of the structure, the "worst" performance admissible is that the structure remains
repairable. On the other hand, at the design stage the user/owner of the structure can for example
choose that "Collapse" is an acceptable performance if an earthquake Level2 occurs (performance
grade C).
With regard to performance of anchored retaining walls, since displacements and damages of the
anchored wall are expected, in [PIANC, 2001] a preferred sequence to reach ultimate states is
proposed.
In particular, if a damaged anchor is more diﬃcult to restore than the wall, the appropriate sequence
is given as follows:
1. displacements of anchor;
2. yield at sheet pile wall (above mudline);
3. yield at sheet pile wall (below mudline);
4. yield at anchor;
5. yield at tie-rod.
Figure 2.8: Preferred sequence for yield of sheet pile wall [PIANC, 2001]
Damage criteria for anchored retaining walls
According to the case histories and as already introduced, the typical failure modes of anchored
retaining walls during earthquakes include the deformation or failure at the structural members
such as the anchor and the wall, as well as the failure at the embedment.
Considering the failure modes just mentioned, the damage criteria for anchored retaining walls are
given in the following tables.
15
==PAGE:22==
2.4. Performance based design
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
The following Table was proposed by [Uwabe, 1983] based on the empirical data of earthquake
damages, and the parameter for specifying damage criteria is the maximum residual displacement
at the top of the sheet-pile wall. The deﬁnitions of the damage levels are:
• Degree 0 - No damage;
• Degree I - Negligible damage to the wall itself;
• Degree II - Noticeable damage to the wall itself;
• Degree III- General shape of anchored sheet-pile preserved, but signiﬁcantly damaged;
• Degree IV- Complete destruction, no recognizable shape of wall remaining.
Level of damage
Maximum residual displacement at the top (cm)
Degree 0
0
Degree I
<30
Degree II
30–100
Degree III
100–200
Degree IV
>200
Table 2.4: Damage criteria according to [Uwabe, 1983]
The following tables show the criteria proposed by PIANC (2001) expressed in terms of both residual
displacements and stress states at the structural members. The deﬁnitions of the damage levels are:
• Degree I - Minor or no structural damage, little or no loss of serviceability;
• Degree II - Controlled structural damage, short-term loss of serviceability;
• Degree III- Extensive structural damage in near collapse, long-term or complete loss of
serviceability;
• Degree IV- Complete structural damage, complete loss of serviceability;
Level of damage
Normalized residual horizontal displacement d/H
Degree I
less than 1.5%
Degree II
N/A
Degree III
N/A
Degree IV
N/A
Table 2.5: Damage criteria according to [PIANC, 2001]: residual displacements, top of the wall
Level of damage
Residual tilting towards the sea
Degree I
less than 3 degrees
Degree II
N/A
Degree III
N/A
Degree IV
N/A
Table 2.6: Damage criteria according to [PIANC, 2001]: residual tilting of the wall
Level of damage
Peak response stresses/strain: wall (above mudline)
Degree I
elastic
Degree II
Plastic (less than ductility factor/strain limit)
Degree III
Plastic (less than ductility factor/strain limit)
Degree IV
Plastic (beyond ductility factor/strain limit)
Table 2.7: Damage criteria according to [PIANC, 2001]: serviceability of the wall above mudline
16
==PAGE:23==
2.4. Performance based design
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Level of damage
Peak response stresses/strain: wall (below mudline)
Degree I
elastic
Degree II
elastic
Degree III
Plastic (less than ductility factor/strain limit)
Degree IV
Plastic (beyond ductility factor/strain limit)
Table 2.8: Damage criteria according to [PIANC, 2001]: serviceability of the wall below mudline
Level of damage
Peak response stresses/strain: anchor
Degree I
elastic
Degree II
elastic
Degree III
Plastic (less than ductility factor/strain limit)
Degree IV
Plastic (beyond ductility factor/strain limit)
Table 2.9: Damage criteria according to [PIANC, 2001]: serviceability of the anchor
It can be noticed that Table 2.5 refers to the normalized residual horizontal displacement, deﬁned
as the ratio d/H, with d= residual horiontal displacement at the top of the wall; H= height of the
wall from mudline. As stated in [PIANC, 2001], alternative criterion for Degree I is proposed with
respect to diﬀerential horizontal displacement less than 30 cm.
Therefore, the deﬁnitions of damage levels in terms of displacements proposed by Uwabe [1983] and
[PIANC, 2001] are generally equivalent (Degree I of the latter covers Degrees 0 and I of the former).
With regards to the criteria expressed in terms of stresses, looking at tables 2.6 and 2.7 it can be
noted that Degree II for the wall diﬀers with respect above/below mudline. The reason for this
is that structural damage structural damage to the embedded portion of a sheet pile is generally
diﬃcult to restore, and this necessitates higher seismic resistance.
17
==PAGE:24==
2.4. Performance based design
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
2.4.2
State of the art
For each of the methods of seismic design, already introduced in the previous sections, a review of
the state of the art in the framework of the Performance Based design for anchored retaining walls
is proposed.
Simpliﬁed analysis
Application of simpliﬁed analysis in the framework of Performance Based design usually includes
conventional force-balance approach combined with statistical analysis of case history data.
A semi-empirical variant of the limit equilibrium method was developed for small levels of
acceleration by [Gazetas et al., 1990]. Using case history data referring to successful, moderately
damaged, severely damaged and collapsed steel-sheet-pile walls, interpreted using the Mononobe-
Okabe method, a Seismic Design Chart was constructed, as shown in the following Figure.
Figure 2.9: Empirical seismic Design Chart proposed by [Gazetas et al., 1990]
The two parameters used in the chart are:
• eﬀective anchor index EAI:
EAI = g
h
(2.8)
where g is the horizontal distance of the anchor–tie point from the Mononobe Okabe active
failure surface, assumed to originate at the eﬀective point of rotation of the wall; h is the free
height of the wall.
• embedment participation index EPI:
EPI = FPE
FAE
[1 +
f
(f + h)]
(2.9)
where f is the depth from the mud-line to the point of rotation; FAE, FPE are the resultant
active and passive forces respectively.
18
==PAGE:25==
2.4. Performance based design
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Figure 2.10: Inclination of the critical active failure plane[Gazetas et al., 1990]
The depth f can be calculated using soil-structure interaction analysis or estimated as:
f =
1 + k′
e
2
−φ′ −20◦
50◦

h
(2.10)
The seismic coeﬃcient k′
e and the inclination of the critical active failure plane can be estimated
using the following expressions:
k′
e =
(
kh
1−kv
above the water table
(an/g)max
1−2(an/g)max/3
below the water table
(2.11)
αAE ≈45◦+ φ
2 −135◦ k′
e
1.75
(2.12)
The parameters EAI and EPI were related to the degree of recorded damages and the chart was
calibrated using case histories and analyses reported in [Gazetas et al., 1990]. In this approach,
three types of expected damage are distinguished: small or no deformation (zone I) with seaward
top displacement of 0–30 cm; moderate deformation involving seaward top displacement of 30–80
cm (Zone II); and, ﬁnally, excessive displacement ( > 80 cm up to collapse) (Zone III).
This chart represents a tool for a crude preliminary evaluation of steel sheet-pile walls of small
to medium height (H=10 m), in relatively dense non-liqueﬁable soil, subjected to small level of
accelerations.
The drawbacks of the chart are that it does not discriminate with reference to the nature of the
ground motion (frequency content, number of signiﬁcant cycles, etc.)
and does not reﬂect the
layering of the retained and the foundation soil.
Comparison of degrees of damage with EAI and EPI showed signiﬁcant trends in the characteristics
of anchored bulkheads that performed well and those that performed poorly. Anchored bulkheads
with high EAI and EPI values (zone I) generally suﬀered little or no damage. On the contrary,
anchored bulkheads with low EAI and EPI values (zone III) usually suﬀered severe damage.
19
==PAGE:26==
2.4. Performance based design
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Displacement based analysis
As mentioned in [PIANC, 2001],
with this method it is "possible to evaluate extent of
displacement/stress/ductility/strain based on assumed failure modes”. This analysis is based on
the displacement Newmark method and this paragraph illustrates its applicability to anchored
retaining walls.
In [Towata et al., 1978] a method for predicting the displacements of anchored retaining walls under
dynamic stresses caused by liquefaction is proposed.
The Authors assume a type of kinematic
mechanism with the translation of a single rigid block consisting of the support structure and
embankment together, as shown in the following Figure.
Figure 2.11: Rigid-block motion equivalent model and related forces for anchored retaining walls [Towata et
al., 1978]
According to this kinematic approach, the forces acting on the wall-ground wedge are exclusively
due to the weight force and the inertia forces, while the resistant forces are provided by the passive
resistance and the reaction on the constraint (T). The expression for the yielding acceleration is
then calculated from the equations of equilibrium (horizontal and vertical translation).
The following picture shows the values of yielding acceleration function of the friction angle of the
soil, calculated according to Towata’s method and considering diﬀerent embedment ratios d/h and
anchorage depth ratio da/h. As an example, with friction angle of 30 degrees, the stability of the
wall is not achieved with embedment depth ratio lower than 0.65.
Figure 2.12: Yielding acceleration values function of the embedmnent ratio d/h, anchorage ratio and friction
angle of the soil, calculated according to Towata’s method [Vecchietti et al., 2006]
20
==PAGE:27==
2.4. Performance based design
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
In [Psarropoulos et al., 2007] a numerical application of the method developed by [Towata et al.,
1978] in the case of dry soil is presented. The numerical study performed in order to validate the
accuracy of the Towata method in terms of displacements predicted.
In this regard two accelerograms are selected, with comparable PGA but substantial discrepancy
between spectral characteristics. Fig. 2.13 shows the equilibrium wedge modiﬁed by [Psarropoulos
et al., 2007] for dry soil.
Figure 2.13: Rigid-block motion equivalent model proposed by [Towata et al., 1978] modiﬁed for dry soil
[Psarropoulos et al., 2007]
The conclusions from the study are the following:
• the peak ground acceleration has a minor impact on the wall displacements, comparing to the
impact of the frequency content of each motion;
• the analytical work of Towata et al. [1978] seems to overestimate substantially the passive
resistance, however the method may lead to very large displacements.
Dynamic non-linear analysis
As mentioned in [PIANC, 2001], with this method it is "possible to evaluate both failure modes and
the extent of the displacement/stress/ductility/strain”.
Regarding the application of this method on anchored retaining walls, one of the ﬁrst and most
comprehensive studies was made by [Iai et al., 1993], which conducted a ﬁnite element analysis on
ﬁeld performance of anchored retaining walls. The damages investigated were caused by Nihonkai
Chubu Earthquake, 1983 (M=7.7). The soil parameters were calibrated testing the soil taken from
the two sites and the original earthquake record was utilized.
The results of the ﬁnite element analysis (in terms of bending moments and displacements) are
consistent with the observed performance and demonstrates the capability of the eﬀective stress
model to diﬀerentiate between damage and no damage.
In [Gazetas et al., 2015] a comparative study with numerical analysis of the performance of the
anchored quay-wall shown in Fig.2.14 is conducted.
21
==PAGE:28==
2.4. Performance based design
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Figure 2.14: Anchored quay-wall with multy-layered backﬁll investigated [Gazetas et al., 2015]
In the study, liquefaction phenomenon is not investigated and the PGA of the motion applied is 0.5g.
The backﬁll is made of multi-layered cohesive soil. The wall has rigidity EI = 1.45 ∗106kNm2/m.
The numerical analysis are made with both ABAQUS and PLAXIS, while the analytical methods
involved are both the Mononobe Okabe and the Beam-on-Winkler-Foundation approach.
One of the results of the study is that the Beam-on-Winkler-Foundation and the Pseudo-static
methods over estimates the bending moments, while PLAXIS and ABAQUS results are close. The
displacements from the FE analysis have substantial diﬀerences and depend on the diﬀerent soil
constitutive model utilized; on the other hand, with the Beam-on-Winkler-Foundation method the
displacements are much lower.
Figure 2.15: Results of the study in terms of bending moment and deformed shape of the wall [Gazetas et
al., 2015]
The major conclusion from the study is that the simpliﬁed methods (Mononobe Okabe and Beam-
on-Winkler-Foundation) would often lead to an unnecessarily conservative (hence very expensive)
design.
22
==PAGE:29==
Part III
Methodology
==PAGE:30==
Preliminary design 3
3.1
Geometry of the problem and soil properties
The excavation problem under investigation is depicted in Figure 3.1. The out of plane dimensions
are considered to be much larger therefore a plane strain formulation will be followed. The wall
design retains an escavation of 6m depth and the water level table is at 4m depth. The excavation
has to be supported by a concrete wall tied back by a ground anchor (Fig. 3.2). The anchorage
depth is 1.5m.
Figure 3.1: Geometry of benchmark example [Schweiger, 2006]
Figure 3.2: Cross-section through to the grouted ground anchor to be installed in the backﬁll behind the
retaining wall
24
==PAGE:31==
3.2. Seismic parameters
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Permanent (p = 10kN/m2) and variable loads (q = 50kN/m2) are included in the design. Three
excavation steps are considered. The wall friction angle is assumed to be δ = 2/3φ for the active
side and δ = 0 for the passive side, as prescribed by [EN 1998-5, 2004].
The soil of the deposit is sand with the following properties:
parameter
description
value
unit
Model
material model
HS small
-
Type
type of material behaviour
Drained
-
γsat
soil unit weight below phreatic level
20
kN/m3
γunsat
soil unit weight above phreatic level
17
kN/m3
c
Cohesion
0
kN/m2
φ
Friction angle
35
°
ψ
Dilatancy angle
5
°
Eref
50
Secant stiﬀness in standard drained triaxial test
42 103
kN/m2
Eref
oed
Tangent stiﬀness for primary oedometer loading
42 103
kN/m2
Eref
ur
Unloading/reloading stiﬀness
126 103
kN/m2
m
Power for stress-level dependency of stiﬀness
0.5
-
γ0.7
Shear strain at which Gs = 0.722G0
0.0013
-
Gref
0
Shear modulus at small strains
110 103
kN/m2
ν′
ur
unloading/reloading Poisson’s ratio
0.3
-
Table 3.1: Soil properties
To account for the aspects related to the soil dynamics, in the numerical analyises the Hardening
Soil model with small-strain stiﬀness, based on the Hardening Soil model, is used in this study.
The Hardening Soil model already accounts for the stress dependency of the stiﬀness according to
a power law expressed by the m parameter. Compared to the Hardening Soil model, the HS small
model is extended by introducing two additional parameters: the high stiﬀness at small strain level
(G0) and the shear strain at which G has reduced to 70% of the initial G0 (γ0.7).
3.2
Seismic parameters
The seismic parameters are chosen for a retaining wall to be designed in Italy with importance
factor γI = 1 and a peak ground acceleration of 0.25g (seismic zone 2).
The Nationally Determined Parameters, NDP, are included for Italy in the code [OPCM 3274, 2003].
The seismic zonation is shown in the Appendix, while the following table shows the ampliﬁcation
factor for diﬀerent soils categories.
soil type
soil factor
A
1
B,C,E
1.25
D
1.35
Table 3.2: Italy NDP values of soil factor S for diﬀerent soils categories
The soil ampliﬁcation factor can be evaluated once the shear velocity vs of the soil is known. The
calculation of vs is shown in the Appendix. Being the calculated value within the range 180-360
m/s, the soil under investigation is type C therefore the factor S used will be 1.25.
25
==PAGE:32==
3.3. Design approach
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
The seismic horizontal coeﬃcient kh, as already explained in the previous Chapter, is therefore:
kh = agR · γl · S/(g · r) = 0.3125
(3.1)
3.3
Design approach
As highligthed in [Bond et al., 2013], the Eurocode design approaches for retaining walls are chosen
diﬀerently by each european Country. Design approach DA1-C2 is adopted in Italy for geotechnical
design in seismic conditions [Simonelli, 2010], [Pane et al., 2012].
The wall will be therefore designed with the following partial factors:
unfavourable variable actions
unfavourable permanent actions
tanφ
favourable actions
1.3
1.00
1.25
1.00
Table 3.3: Partial factors according to design approach DA1C2
The variable load is reduced in seismic conditions by means of the factor ψ, which is typically in
the range of 0.1 to 0.8, depending on the variability of the loading type. In this study, a value of
0.3 is adopted.
3.4
Evaluation of forces
The wall is subjected to three kinds of forces: the seismic earth forces, the forces due to water
(hydrostatic), the surcharge loads.
3.4.1
Seismic soil thrusts
The active and passive soil thrusts are calculated following equation 2.1. As explained in Chapter
2, only two extreme water conditions are deﬁned in Eurocode 8, depending on soil permeability.
The expressions suggested refer only to a homogeneous soil, i.e. they are not valid for partially
submerged backﬁll. In such a case Eurocode 8 does not indicate how to select γ∗.
For the soil thrust in the active side, the approach chosen for the calculations in this report is the
one suggested by [PIANC, 2001] and [Kramer, 1996]. In particular, γ∗is calculated as an average
unit weight based on the volumes of soil within the active wedge that are below and above the water
table:
γ∗= γbλ2(1 −ru) + γwet
 1 −λ2
(3.2)
where γb = buoyant or submerged soil unit weight; γwet = soil unit weight above the water level;
ru=excesss water pressure, assumed to be ru = 0 within the soil layer under investigation.
25
==PAGE:33==
3.5. Dimensioning of the wall
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Figure 3.3: Notation for partially submerged backﬁll [Kramer, 1996]
3.4.2
Surcharge loads thrusts
The surcharge permanent load p is assumed to result in an assumed uniform increase in lateral
stress over the entire height of the wall. The surcharge variable load q is assumed constant from a
depth of 6m. Using a 2:1 distribution, the load q is halved at this depth.
3.4.3
Water thrust
As already anticipated, the hydrodynamic eﬀects on the water are in this study neglected.Therefore,
the assumed distribution for the water thrust is triangular (hydrostatic). Moreover, no groundwater
ﬂow is involved.
3.5
Dimensioning of the wall
The stability of the anchored wall is evaluated with respect to gross stability and stresses induced
in structural components (e.g. the maximum bending moment on the wall).
In particular, gross stability is evaluated to determine the embedment length, by means of the free
earth support method.
Therefore, the wall is assumed to be rigid, rotating about the point where support is provided by
the anchor. The embedment depth is then calculated on the basis of achieving moment equilibrium
at the anchor level.
The anchor force is calculated on the basis of horizontal force equilibrium, and the point of maximum
bending moment is determined from zero shear force on the shear force diagram.
For the anchorage system design, the following parameters are utilized:
parameter
description
value
unit
Ls
Spacing out of plane
1.1
m
α
Anchor inclination
20
°
D
grout body diameter
0.4
m
Table 3.4: anchorage system design inputs
3.6
Choice of wall stiﬀness
As highlighted in [Vermeer, 2001], dimensioning the anchored wall by means of the free earth support
method does not involve any stiﬀness parameter.
26
==PAGE:34==
3.6. Choice of wall stiﬀness
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Once that the maximum moment is calculated, the thickness of the wall can be therefore decided
based on diﬀerent ﬂexural and axial rigidities. The wall under investigation is designed with two
diﬀerent thicknesses and stiﬀnesses for academical investigations purposes. As a consequence, the
FEM analyses will be conducted for a "ﬂexible" wall and a "stiﬀ" wall, in order to assess the impact
of stiﬀnesses on the seismic response.
27
==PAGE:35==
3.7. Earthquakes selection
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
3.7
Earthquakes selection
In order to perform the time history non-linear analyses, in this study ﬁve real ground motion
records are selected from the Paciﬁc Earthquake Engineering Research Center (PEER) database.
All the earthquakes chosen are deﬁned at the outcropping bedrock and the selection is made in order
to cover diﬀerent scenarios mostly in terms of frequency content. The main criterion is therefore
to ﬁnd a wider range as possible for mean and predominant period and their ratio, in order not to
have mono-cromatic records. This will lead to diﬀerent responses in the soil deposit, because of the
diﬀerent ways in which the soil non-linearity is triggered.
The ﬁrst parameter on which the selection is based is the predominant period (Tp), which is the
period at which the maximum spectral acceleration occurs in an acceleration response spectrum.
This is a single parameter that provides a useful but crude representation of the frequency content
of a ground motion. Infact, as it can be seen from Fig. 3.4, motions with very diﬀerent frequency
contents can have the same predominant period.
Figure 3.4: Two hypotetical Fourier amplitude spectra with the same predominant period but very diﬀerent
frequency content [Kramer, 1996]
Therefore, since it is of great importance to know the general frequency content of the motion,
the mean period Tm is taken into consideration as well. Tm is calculated as a weighted average
of the period values
1
fi over a range with weights equal to the square of the spectral acceleration
amplitudes Ai at these periods:
Tm =
X
i
A2
i (1/fi) /
X
i
A2
i
(3.3)
The following table shows the values of signiﬁcant duration SD, predominant period Tp, average
period Tm, ratio Tm/Tp, distance R ( closest distance to the rupture surface) and magnitudo of the
selected records.
Earthquake
Tm[s]
Tp[s]
Tm/Tp
R [Km]
Magnitudo
SD[s]
Chi Chi, Taiwan, 1999
1.17
0.83
1.4
56.14
7.62
25.9
Coyote Lake, California U.S., 1979
0.24
0.09
2.7
10.67
5.74
6.8
Landers, California U.S., 1992
1.45
0.1
14.5
2.19
7.28
13.8
Loma Prieta, California U.S.,1989
0.36
0.2
1.8
9.64
6.93
6.5
Northridge, California U.S.,1994
0.48
0.4
1.2
20
6.69
4.3
Table 3.5: Earthquakes selected
As it can be seen, all the earthquakes selected have similar values in terms of magnitudo, between
5.74 and 7.62.
28
==PAGE:36==
3.7. Earthquakes selection
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
The earthquake which has the highest value of predominant period is Chi Chi, with an also high
value in mean period. On the other hand, Northridge is the record which has the smallest value of
the ratio Tm/Tp.
An important role is also played by the signiﬁcant duration, which is a measure of how many cycles
of signiﬁcant motion a structure will experience; this is indeed very relevant with regards to the
accumulation of displacements. Within this selection, two extreme cases are represented by Chi Chi
and Northridge, with a signiﬁcant duration of 25.9 seconds and 4.3 seconds respectively.
All of the earthquakes selected are recorded at a distance R less than 20 Km except for Chi Chi.
From the literature it is well known that earthquake ground motions recorded at short site-to-source
distances (less than 10 km) can have signiﬁcantly diﬀerent characteristics than those recorded at
distances greater than 25 km. In particular, in the near-ﬁeld zone, the ground motions may be
distinguished by short-duration impulsive motions, and high-frequency content.
Once the records are selected, they must be appropriately scaled. Spectrum matching procedures
for real accelerograms are summarized in Fahjan et al. [2008]. In this study, the scaling procedure in
time domain is applied to the selected real acceleration records in order to have same PGA (0.25g).
This was made in order to investigate in a more rigorous way the non-linearity induced in the soil
by earthquakes with diﬀerent frequency content but same PGA.
Another modiﬁcation applied to the original records is related to the sign of the acceleration values.
As it will be explained in the chapter about pseudostatic FEM analysis, the direction of the motion
found to be more destabilizing for the model under investigation is in the positive values of x.
Therefore, in order to have the most detrimental eﬀect, the accelerogram have their peaks in the
positive values of ax.
The spectra in terms of horizontal PSA[g] of the selected records, normalized with the peak ground
acceleration 0.25g, are shown in Fig.3.5. The acceleration time histories are shown in the pictures
from Fig. 3.6 to Fig. 3.10.
Figure 3.5: Horizontal PSA spectra of the earthquake selected
From the accelerograms it can be noted that they have all mostly symmetrical cycles. When the
record is not symmetrical, it would move the structure in one direction and not move back, therefore
creating more displacements (in case of symmetrical cycles, the motion is somehow de-celerated).
29
==PAGE:37==
3.7. Earthquakes selection
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Figure 3.6: Chi Chi earthquake horizontal accelerogram, PGA 0.25g
Figure 3.7: Coyote Lake earthquake horizontal accelerogram, PGA 0.25g
Figure 3.8: Landers earthquake horizontal accelerogram, PGA 0.25g
Figure 3.9: Loma Prieta earthquake horizontal accelerogram, PGA 0.25g
Figure 3.10: Northridge earthquake horizontal accelerogram, PGA 0.25g
30
==PAGE:38==
Numerical analysis 4
4.1
FE model for time-history analysis
In order to develop the FE model of the retaining wall, PLAXIS 2D has been used. As already
anticipated, it is assumed that a 2D plane-strain condition exists by considering that the length of
the retaining wall is signiﬁcantly large in comparison to the extents in the x- and y-directions.
The implementation of the 2D non-linear analysis entails seven distinct phases:
1. initial phase;
2. wall installation and loads application;
3. ﬁrst escavation;
4. anchor installation;
5. second escavation;
6. ﬁnal escavation;
7. seismic loading.
The phases until the last excavation aim at reproducing the stress regime in the soil and the wall
prior to the earthquake.
Since the retaining wall is to be modelled for the seismic case, which will involve propagation of the
shear waves through the backﬁlland foundation soil, special attention is given on ensuring that the
boundary eﬀects are minimized from the analysis. Therefore, the dimensions of the model have to
be carefully calibrated.
4.1.1
Dynamic boundary conditions
The eﬀect of the earthquake on the soil-retaining wall system is simulated by applying through a
prescribed displacement the horizontal acceleration-time history at the base of the FE model.
The base of the model is ﬁxed so that the soil deposit is considered overlying a rigid base (bedrock).
The lateral boundaries for carrying out the seismic analysis are set in order to take into account
that the earthquake shear waves are reﬂected back into the soil from the boundaries of the domain
under consideration. Therefore, the dynamic boundary conditions applied are the "Free-ﬁeld" both
at the left and at the right vertical boundaries. The following Figure shows the model conditions
utilized for the FEM non-linear calculations.
31
==PAGE:39==
4.1. FE model for time-history analysis
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Figure 4.1: Model conditions for the seismic analysis (phase 7)
4.1.2
Dimensions of the model
Figure 4.2: PLAXIS model after the last excavation phase
The ratio between the width and height at the right and left side of the model (considered after the
last escavation phase) is chosen in such a way that the above-mentioned reﬂection of the seismic
wave propagation throughout the soil deposit is attenuated as much as possible. In order to validate
the dimensions of the model, free ﬁeld conditions have to be checked at a distance far enough from
the wall as well as from the boundaries (roughly 5 times the height of the model).
The model utilized in this study extends at the active side of retained soil to a horizontal distance
of 300m from the wall and to a depth of 20m down to the rock substratum. At the passive side the
model extends to a horizontal distance of 200 m from the wall and to a depth of 14m down to the
ﬁxed base (rock substratum). The wall is placed at x = 200m.
Two columns of soil are considered at x = 95m and x = 350m. The horizontal acceleration spectra
at the top of these soil columns are compared with the ones achieved at the top by means of a 1D
analysis, as shown in the Appendix.
The following Table resumes all the afore-mentioned dimensions:
total width of the model
500m
location of the wall
x = 200m
width left side of the model
200m
width right side of the model
300m
height left side of the model
14m
height right side of the model
20m
location of column left side
x = 95m
location of column right side
x = 350m
Table 4.1: model dimensions, position of wall and position of the soil columns
32
==PAGE:40==
4.1. FE model for time-history analysis
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
4.1.3
Mesh element size
The soil has been modelled by using 15-noded triangular elements of the PLAXIS 2D library.
Special attention is given to the size of the mesh elements. In particular, as suggested in [Bakr et
al., 2018], the maximum size of any element should not be greater than 20% of the wavelength of
a shear wave propagating through the soil:
hemax = λmin
5
= vs,min
5fmax
(4.1)
where vs,min is the lowest shear wave velocity in the soil and fmax the maximum frequency
component of the input wave (i.e.
the highest frequency component that contains appreciable
energy).
For the case under investigation, the vs,min in the soil deposit is 73m/s while the maximum frequency
of the seismic input motions is 11Hz (predominant frequency of Coyote Lake earthquake). Then
the maximum height of an element of the FE mesh should be hemax = 1.3m.
The mesh element size calculated is utilized in the model in such a way that the distribution is as
much regular as possible. The same mesh element size is utilized for the 1D analysis, explained in
the Appendix.
Figure 4.3: Mesh of the model for time history analysis
Figure 4.4: Mesh of the model for time history analysis, vicinity of the wall
4.1.4
Dynamic time parameters
The time step δt used in the Dynamic calculation for each earthquake is given by:
δt =
∆t
m · n
(4.2)
where ∆t is the Dynamic time interval parameter, i.e. the duration of the earthquake, m is the
number of maximum steps and n is the Number of sub steps. The number of maximum steps
is equal to the number of multipliers that deﬁne the input signal, while PLAXIS automatically
calculates the proper number of substeps n, for a given number of steps m.
33
==PAGE:41==
4.1. FE model for time-history analysis
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Earthquake
dynamic time interval [s]
number of maximum steps
Chi Chi
53
13250
Coyote Lake
17
1700
Landers
48
9600
Loma Prieta
26
4600
Northridge
17
850
Table 4.2: Dynamic time parameters for each earthquake
4.1.5
Calibration of the Rayleigh damping coeﬃcients
In earthquake engineering problems soil stiﬀness decays with the increasing strain level induced by
the loading, and the sequence of loading and unloading paths generates an hysteretic loop with
dissipation of energy and consequent damping.
The total amount of damping is in this study introduced through the frequency-dependent Rayleigh
formulation in terms of viscous damping, that has to be consistent with the level of strain induced
by the earthquake applied.
In order to calibrate these two coeﬃcients, it is necessary to deﬁne the target damping ratios ξ and
the related frequencies. As suggested in [PLAXIS, 2015], the same value of ξ is kept for both Target
1 and 2 , generally chosen between 0.5 and 2% when HS small model is involved. For this study a
value of 1% is chosen.
When it comes to select the appropriate frequencies, the range is chosen in order to cover the
frequency content of all the earthquakes selected. In this study, the average frequencies of the two
"opposite" cases (Chi Chi 0.85 Hz and Coyote lake 4 Hz ) are considered. The Rayleigh damping
coeﬃcients utilized are then α =0.08810, β=0.6563 E-3. The following Fig. shows the calibration
made in PLAXIS.
Figure 4.5: Calibration of Reyleigh coeﬃcients
34
==PAGE:42==
4.2. FE model for pseudostatic analysis
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
4.1.6
Water conditions
The borehole under investigation is made of non-liqueﬁable sand under water table. Therefore, the
soil is modeled as a saturated medium but responding in drained conditions, so that no excess pore
pressure develops during seismic loading.
In this study, no dynamic water eﬀects are considered. The water loads are transformed to surface
loads acting on the model boundaries. As such, they are simply static loads during a full dynamic
(time-history) analysis.
In all the phases the pore pressure calculation type set is "phreatic", therefore no steady state
groundwater ﬂow is involved in this study.
4.1.7
Soil-retaining wall interaction
The interaction between the soil and the retaining wall is modelled by positive and negative
interfaces, as shown in Fig.
4.2.
The interface strength parameter is set as Rinter = 0.7 for
both passive and active side of the wall.
4.1.8
Properties of structural elements
In this study, the wall is modelled as a plate while the ground anchor is modelled by a combination
of a node-to-node anchor and an embedded beam. The input properties of the structures will be
explained in Chapter 5, where the results from the design analytical calculation are shown.
4.2
FE model for pseudostatic analysis
The implementation of the 2D pseudostatic analysis entails seven distinct phases:
1. initial phase;
2. wall installation and loads application;
3. ﬁrst escavation;
4. anchor installation;
5. second escavation;
6. ﬁnal escavation;
7. pseudostatic loading.
Being this a force-based analysis, the eﬀects of the seismic loading is represented by equivalent
inertial forces, which are approximated as constants body forces. The magnitude of these forces
is proportional to the horizontal acceleration imposed. When the horizontal pseudo-static force is
applied to the model, the soil will move in the opposite direction.
In the study under investigation, being the active side of the escavation at the right side of the
model, the most detrimental eﬀect is achieved with horizontal acceleration applied with positive
sign.
The pseudostatic phase is applied with a range of accelerations varying from 0.3125g (design value)
to 0.4g, in order to evaluate the yielding acceleration of the wall-soil system.
Basically, the FE model for pseudostatic analysis remains the same as the one set for the time
history analysis, except from the mesh total dimensions and for the soil-retaining wall interaction.
35
==PAGE:43==
4.2. FE model for pseudostatic analysis
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
4.2.1
Mesh dimensions and element size
As highlighted in [Kontoe et al., 2012], in pseudo-static FEM calculations care should always be
taken to inspect the possible interaction between the physically expected failure mechanism of the
wall and the soil layer mechanism. A possible interaction between the two mechanisms can occur
when the boundaries of the model are too close to the wall, as shown in the Appendix.
Comparing to the model for the time history analysis, the model for the pseudo-static analysis has
a mesh with increased height. In particular, the bottom boundary of the model is placed further
away from the top of the model (40 m away, rather than 20 m).
The adopted size of the mesh elements is 1.5 m in the vicinity of the wall, achieved by applying a
coarseness factor of 0.09 in this area. This is made in order to resemble as much as possible the
mesh conditions of the time history analysis model in such a way that the results from the two
diﬀerent analyses are comparable.
Figure 4.6: Mesh for the pseudostatic analysis
Figure 4.7: Mesh for the pseudostatic analysis, vicnity of the wall
4.2.2
Soil-retaining wall interaction
As in the model for time history analysis, the interaction between the soil and the retaining wall is
modelled by positive and negative interfaces. However, for the pseudostatic FEM calculation the
interface strength parameter is set as Rinter = 0.7 for the active side of the wall and Rinter = 0 for
passive side of the wall. This is made in order to resemble the design provisions from [EN 1998-5,
2004] and lead to more comparable results between analytical and FEM analyses.
36
==PAGE:44==
4.3. Optimized wall design
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
4.3
Optimized wall design
As it will be seen in Chapter 5, the FEM numerical anlyses will lead to a ﬁnal design for the wall,
which will be deﬁned as "optimized wall".
As it will be explained, the FEM pseudostatic analysis results for "ﬂexible" and "stiﬀ" wall will
show that the design analytical calculation, conducted by means of the Mononobe-Okabe theory, is
to some extent fair for the stiﬀwall but conservative for the ﬂexible wall.
In particular, from the pseudostatic results for the ﬂexible wall it is clear that the bending moment
distribution is over estimated compared to the analytical solution. At the same time, the level of
anchor utilization remains low.
Therefore, an optimization is made in order to achieve a more economical design, by saving material
(decreasing the thickness of the wall) and improving the mobilization of the anchorage system in
terms of Tskin.
The steps followed for the optimization of the ﬂexible wall are the following:
1. keeping the value of the embedment depth from the initial design;
2. re-designing the wall thickness on the basis of the maximum moment value from the FEM
pseudostatic analysis;
3. re-designing the anchorage system on the basis of the anchor force value from the FEM
pseudostatic analysis;
4. increasing the Tskin.
In the time history analyses the same set of earthquakes will be applied to the "ﬂexible", "stiﬀ" and
"optimized" wall, and the eﬀects will be examined in terms of the damage indicators (maximum
moment, skin friction and relative displacements).
37
==PAGE:45==
Part IV
Results
==PAGE:46==
Pseudostatic results 5
5.1
Analytical results
In the current section the results from the analytical calculations for the design of the wall will
be reported. The design of the wall will be also checked by means of the empirical seismic chart
introduced in Chapter 2.
5.1.1
Wall dimensions and force distributions
The wall under investigation is designed with the following dimensions and forces:
parameter
description
value
unit
d
embedment depth
6
m
Lfix
grout body length
6
m
Lfree
anchor length
8
m
Mrd
design bending moment
500
kNm/m
T
horizontal net thrust
270
kN/m
Teff
force transferred to the anchor
330
kN
Tskin
skin friction
60
kN/m
Table 5.1: Wall design outputs
The following Figures show the earth pressure distributions on the passive and active side along the
wall height. The seismic active and passive earth pressure coeﬃcients for the seismic soil thrusts
are 0.6 and 2.3 respectively.
Figure 5.1:
Distribution of active earth pressure
along the height of the wall
Figure 5.2: Distribution of passive earth pressure
along the embedded height of the wall
39
==PAGE:47==
5.1. Analytical results
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Fig. 5.3 shows the distribution of the shear force T along the height of the wall. It can be seen that
T = 0 at y = 14.3m. This is the depth where the maximum moment, Mrd, was calculated.
Figure 5.3: Shear force distribution along the hegith of the wall from the analytical calculation
5.1.2
Veriﬁcation of the design with the empirical seismic chart
The design of the wall was checked on the basis of the empirical seismic design introduced in
Chapter 2. The calculation of the parameters EAI and EPI was carried out in order to predict the
performance of the wall.
The following results:
• αAE = 42°
• f = 2.64m
• k′
e = 0.3125
lead to values of EAI = 1.3 and EPI = 1.2. As a consequence, the wall is included in the "small
or no deformation (zone I)" area of the chart.
5.1.3
Thickness of the wall: ﬂexible and stiﬀwall
The thickness of the wall can be decided with respect to diﬀerent axial and ﬂexural rigidities, EA
and EI, as explained in the previous section. In this way the preliminary design ended up with two
diﬀerent walls, "ﬂexible" and "stiﬀ" wall. The two walls have the same Mrd from the analytical
calculations.
The outcome of the design for the sections of the ﬂexible and stiﬀwall is shown in the following
tables:
parameter
description
value
unit
EA
axial rigidity
12 ∗106
kN/m
EI
ﬂexural rigidity
kN/m2/m
t
wall thickness
0.37
m
Table 5.2: "ﬂexible" wall stiﬀness parameters
40
==PAGE:48==
5.2. FEM results
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
parameter
description
value
unit
EA
axial rigidity
48 ∗106
kN/m
EI
ﬂexural rigidity
24 ∗105
kN/m2/m
t
wall thickness
0.75
m
Table 5.3: "stiﬀ" wall stiﬀness parameters
5.2
FEM results
In the following sections the outcome from the FEM pseudostatic calculations is presented, with the
indication of the yielding accelerations values ay achieved for each wall conﬁguration. As already
anticipated, the FEM pseudostatic results will lead to the design of an optimized wall.
The results are reported in terms of:
• bending moment distributions;
• shear force distributions;
• active and passive earth pressure distributions;
• deformed shape of the walls;
• failure wedges in terms of incremental displacements;
• Tskin along the horizontal length of the grout body together with the design value Tmax and
the average value.
The results will highlight the impact of the wall stiﬀness, especially when it comes to the active
earth pressure distribution and the bending moment distributions.
In particular, it will be seen that the two walls experience very diﬀerent patterns in terms of bending
moment and earth pressure. The conclusion drawn will be that the Mononobe Okabe theory is to
some extent fair for the stiﬀwall but tends to overestimate in a large way the bending moment for
the ﬂexible wall. Another consideration can be made about the "arching" experienced by the earth
pressure in the ﬂexible wall, due to the presence of the anchor and the fact that the wall bends
around this point.
Moreover, the results show that the earthpressure is mobilized according to the diﬀerent deformed
shapes, which depend on the wall stiﬀness.
The ﬂexible wall is subjected to a large extent to
bending, while the stiﬀwall experiences tilting and sliding. Moreover, the Tskin distributions reveal
that the ﬂexible wall does not experience any yielding in the anchor, while the stiﬀwall is on the
limit capacity in few points of the horizontal length.
The failure wedges, plotted in terms of incremental displacements, show how the failure mechanism
can be deﬁned as "global" for all the walls (for the stiﬀwall to the largest extent). This can be
interpreted as the reason why the yielding acceleration values are so close for all the walls under
investigation.
41
==PAGE:49==
5.2. FEM results
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
5.2.1
Flexible wall ay = 0.3199g
Figure 5.4: Bending moment distribution along the height of the ﬂexible wall
Figure 5.5: Shear force distribution along the height of the ﬂexible wall
Figure 5.6: Active pressure distribution along the height of the ﬂexible wall
42
==PAGE:50==
5.2. FEM results
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Figure 5.7: Passive pressure distribution along the embedded height of the ﬂexible wall
Figure 5.8: Incremental displacements ∆u [m], ﬂexible wall
Figure 5.9: Deformed shape, ﬂexible wall
43
==PAGE:51==
5.2. FEM results
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Figure 5.10: Tskin distribution along the horizontal length of the grout body, ﬂexible wall
5.2.2
Stiﬀwall ay = 0.3196g
Figure 5.11: Bending moment distribution along the height of the stiﬀwall
44
==PAGE:52==
5.2. FEM results
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Figure 5.12: Shear force distribution along the height of the stiﬀwall
Figure 5.13: Active earth pressure distribution along the height of the stiﬀwall
Figure 5.14: Passive earth pressure distribution along the embedded height of the stiﬀwall
45
==PAGE:53==
5.2. FEM results
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Figure 5.15: Incremental displacements ∆u [m] ,stiﬀwall
Figure 5.16: Deformed shape, stiﬀwall
Figure 5.17: Tskin distribution along the horizontal length of the grout body, stiﬀwall
46
==PAGE:54==
5.2. FEM results
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
5.2.3
Optimized wall ay = 0.313g
From the above shown FEM results it is clear that the ﬂexible wall experiences a maximum value
of bending moment much lower than the one which was designed for, but at the same time higher
values in terms of maximum horizontal net thrust are found. The following table resumes the above
mentioned values:
calculation
Mmax[kNm/m]
Tmax[kN/m]
FEM
220
340
analytical (design)
500
270
Table 5.4: Comparison between maximum bending moment and net thrust values between analytical and
FEM calculations (ﬂexible wall)
The optimized wall is therefore designed with lower moment (decreased to 180kNm/m, with new
thickness 0.2m) and the embedment dept is kept as the initial design value, d = 6m.
With regards to the modiﬁcations for the anchorage system, in order to achieve more mobilization
of the anchor capacity, the following modiﬁcatons are applied:
• the inclination of the anchor is decreased from 20° to 10°;
• the free length is increased from 8m to 9m;
• the spacing out of plane is increased from Ls = 1.1m to Ls = 1.2m;
• the diameter of the grout body is decreased from 0.4m to 0.3m.
• the ﬁxed length remains the same as the one of the initial design;
• since the shear force is higher, the Tskin of the optimized wall is higher (69kN/m).
The following table resumes the parameter for the optimized wall and in the following section the
FEM result are shown.
t [m]
Mmax[kNm/m]
Tskin[kN/m]
Ls[m]
D[m]
α[°]
Lfree[m]
EA[kN/m]
EI[kN/m2/m]
0.2
180
69
1.2
0.3
10
9
15 ∗106
7 ∗104
Table 5.5: Parameters for the optimized wall
From the FEM results it will be seen that, indeed, with the new design the anchor is more mobilized.
This can be seen from the graph which illustrates the Tskin distribution, which in a larger part of the
horizontal length of the grout body gets slighlty closer to the design value. Regarding the bending
moment, a maximum value of 148kNm/m is reached, therefore closer to the design value as well.
47
==PAGE:55==
5.2. FEM results
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Figure 5.18: Bending moment distribution, optimized wall
Figure 5.19: Shear force distribution, optimized wall
Figure 5.20: Active earth pressure distribution, optimized wall
48
==PAGE:56==
5.2. FEM results
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Figure 5.21: Passive earth pressure distribution, optimized wall
Figure 5.22: Incremental displacements ∆u [m], optimized wall
Figure 5.23: Deformed shape (0.3125g acceleration), optimized wall
49
==PAGE:57==
5.2. FEM results
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Figure 5.24: Tskin distribution for the optimized wall
50
==PAGE:58==
FEM non-linear analysis
results 6
6.1
Summary of the time-history analysis results
The current Chapter contains the outcome of the FEM non-linear analysis. For each of the ﬁve
ground motions selected, the following results are presented:
Site response
• horizontal acceleration spectra at x = 350m (free ﬁeld conditions) taken at the bottom,
middle and top of the model for evaluation of the induced non-linearity in the soil in terms
of predominat modes;
• stress-strain cycles at the middle of the model (y = 10m) in free ﬁeld conditions (x = 350m)
for evaluation of the induced non-linearity in the soil in terms of yielding and hysteretic
damping.
Soil-structure interaction
• horizontal acceleration spectra taken at the top of the model at x = 200m (wall location) and
x = 350m (free ﬁeld conditions) for evaluation of the soil-structure interaction in terms of
wall soil-system predominat modes;
• horizontal acceleration spectral ratios (top/bottom) at x = 350m (free ﬁeld conditions)
and x = 200m (wall location) for ﬂexible and stiﬀwall for evaluation of the soil-structure
interaction in terms of eﬀect of the wall stiﬀness;
• PGA proﬁles along the height of the model in free ﬁeld conditions and at the location of the
wall.
Soil-wall system response
• time histories of accelerations at the top of the wall (ﬂexible and stiﬀ);
• time histories of relative horizontal displacements at the top of the wall (ﬂexible and stiﬀ);
• time histories of rotational displacements at the top of the wall (ﬂexible and stiﬀ);
• active and passive soil wedges in terms of total deviatoric strains for ﬂexible and stiﬀwall;
• deformed shapes of ﬂexible, stiﬀand optimized wall;
• bending moments on ﬂexible, stiﬀand optimized wall;
• active and passive earth pressure distributions on for ﬂexible, stiﬀand optimized wall;
• distribution of Tskin along the horizontal length of the grout body for ﬂexible, stiﬀand
optimized wall;
• average values of Tskin for ﬂexible, stiﬀand optimized wall.
51
==PAGE:59==
6.2. Site response
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
6.2
Site response
The variation of the seismic signal throughout the soil deposit, in terms of amplitude and frequency
content, is here evaluated by means of the site response analysis, performed in free ﬁeld conditions
(x = 350m).
When the ﬁve earthquakes selected are applied to the soil deposit, diﬀerent non-linearities are
induced. This depends on the frequency content of each motion which triggers the soil response in
a diﬀerent way, even with the same PGA (0.25g).
It will be seen that, due to its ﬁlter eﬀect, the soil deposit under investigation modiﬁes the seismic
waves by amplifying the signal at some speciﬁc frequencies (e.g.
Northridge earthquake) and
damping it at some others (e.g. Coyote Lake earthquake).
In Chapter 7 all these factors will be discussed and related to the wall response during the diﬀerent
excitations.
6.2.1
Horizontal acceleration spectra
In this section the horizontal spectra at the bottom (y = 0m), middle (y = 10m) and top (y = 20m)
of the model in free ﬁeld conditions are shown in order to highlight, for each earthquake, how the
eigenperiod of the soil increases from its elastic eigenvalue (0.345s) to the inelastic one. Furthermore,
a "guess" of the second mode of the soil is made.
Figure 6.1: Acceleration spectra at bottom, middle and top of the model in free ﬁeld conditions
52
==PAGE:60==
6.2. Site response
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Figure 6.2: Acceleration spectra at bottom, middle and top of the model in free ﬁeld conditions
Figure 6.3: Acceleration spectra at bottom, middle and top of the model in free ﬁeld conditions
Figure 6.4: Acceleration spectra at bottom, middle and top of the model in free ﬁeld conditions
53
==PAGE:61==
6.2. Site response
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Figure 6.5: Acceleration spectra at bottom, middle and top of the model in free ﬁeld conditions
6.2.2
Deviatoric stress-strain cycles
The stiﬀness decrease of the soil is higlighted in this section by means of the deviatoric stress-
strain cycles, plotted in free ﬁeld condition at the middle of the model (y = 10m) for each
earthquake. It can be observed that in case of earthquakes with more signiﬁcant duration (e.g.
Chi Chi earthquake) more cycles occur. With more non-linearity induced, the energy dissipation
increases and, accordingly, the soil experiences more damping.
On the other hand, it is evident how the Coyote Lake earthquake induces an almost "elastic"
response, with a very small hysteresis cycle. This can be related to the fact that this earthquake
triggers to a larger extent the second mode of the soil, as it will be further discussed in Chapter 7.
Figure 6.6: Chi Chi: total cartesian deviatoric strains plotted against cartesian eﬀective deviatoric stresses
at the location x = 350m, y = 10m
54
==PAGE:62==
6.2. Site response
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Figure 6.7: Coyote Lake: total cartesian deviatoric strains plotted against cartesian eﬀective deviatoric
stresses at the location x = 350m, y = 10m
Figure 6.8: Landers: total cartesian deviatoric strains plotted against cartesian eﬀective deviatoric stresses
at the location x = 350m, y = 10m
Figure 6.9: Loma Prieta: total cartesian deviatoric strains plotted against cartesian eﬀective deviatoric
stresses at the location x = 350m, y = 10m
55
==PAGE:63==
6.3. Soil-structure interaction
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Figure 6.10: Northridge: total cartesian deviatoric strains plotted against cartesian eﬀective deviatoric
stresses at the location x = 350m, y = 10m
6.3
Soil-structure interaction
In this section the soil-structure interaction eﬀects will be shown. For each of the earthquakes
applied, because of diﬀerent responses found in the free ﬁeld analysis, also diﬀerent responses at
the location of the wall will be found.
The acceleration spectra at the top of the wall are shown only for the case of ﬂexible wall, and then
by means of the spectral ratios plotted for both ﬂexible and stiﬀwall the impact of the two diﬀerent
rigidities will be highlighted.
From all the Figures it will be evident that the existence of the wall imposes a vertical boundary
on the overall wall-soil structure system which makes the whole model stiﬀer.
Finally, the PGA proﬁles along the height of the wall will show that the ﬂexible wall experiences
overall more ampliﬁcation comparing to the stiﬀwall. The reason is that a more ﬂexible wall system
permits more shear deformation and, thus, higher levels of accelerations are developed behind the
wall.
6.3.1
Horizontal acceleration spectra, ﬂexible wall
To begin with, for each earthquake applied the horizontal acceleration spectra are plotted for the
top of the model where the free ﬁeld conditions apply (x = 350m) and at the top of the model
where the wall is located (x = 200m). For each graph, the "initial" acceleration spectrum (at the
bottom of the model) is plotted as a reference.
The comparison is made in order to observe how the wall modiﬁes the model response in terms
of ampliﬁcation and eigenmode of the wall-soil system. In this regards, the wall-soil system eigen
period is highlighted as well as the the soil eigenperiod, found from the site response analysis.
56
==PAGE:64==
6.3. Soil-structure interaction
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Figure 6.11: Acceleration spectra at the bottom of the model and at the top in x = 200m and x = 350m,
Chi Chi
Figure 6.12: Acceleration spectra at the bottom of the model and at the top in x = 200m and x = 350m,
Coyote Lake
Figure 6.13: Acceleration spectra at the bottom of the model and at the top in x = 200m and x = 350m,
Landers
57
==PAGE:65==
6.3. Soil-structure interaction
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Figure 6.14: Acceleration spectra at the bottom of the model and at the top in x = 200m and x = 350m,
Loma Prieta
Figure 6.15: Acceleration spectra at the bottom of the model and at the top in x = 200m and x = 350m,
Northridge
6.3.2
Spectral ratios
In the following Figures, the spectral ratios top-bottom of the model for each earthquakes are shown.
They are plotted for both ﬂexible wall and stiﬀwall as well as in free ﬁeld conditions.
From the Figures it can be noticed that the pattern of the spectral ratio is to a large extent the
same for ﬂexible and stiﬀwall, except for the lower periods. Infact, the stiﬀwall has the eﬀect of
making the soil overall "softer" for all the earthquakes, except from Chi Chi.
From all the Figures it is also evident that for all the earthquakes, except from Chi Chi and
Northridge, the wall-soil systems and the soil have the same period of ampliﬁcation. This means
that the wall vibration is completely driven by the free-ﬁeld ground motion.
58
==PAGE:66==
6.3. Soil-structure interaction
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Figure 6.16: Spectral ratio top/bottom of the layer,
in the free ﬁeld (x=350m), ﬂexible wall and stiﬀ
wall(x=200m), Chi Chi
Figure 6.17: Spectral ratio top/bottom of the layer,
in the free ﬁeld (x=350m), ﬂexible wall and stiﬀ
wall(x=200m), Coyote Lake
Figure 6.18: Spectral ratio top/bottom of the layer,
in the free ﬁeld (x=350m), ﬂexible wall and stiﬀ
wall(x=200m),Landers
Figure 6.19: Spectral ratio top/bottom of the layer,
in the free ﬁeld (x=350m), ﬂexible wall and stiﬀ
wall(x=200m),Loma Prieta
Figure 6.20: Spectral ratio top/bottom of the
layer, in the free ﬁeld (x=350m), ﬂexible wall
and stiﬀwall(x=200m),Northridge
59
==PAGE:67==
6.3. Soil-structure interaction
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
6.3.3
PGA proﬁles
The following Figures show the proﬁles of the PGA (in absolute values) plotted along the height of
the model, at the location of the wall and in free ﬁeld conditions.
As it can be seen, the proﬁles display diﬀerent patterns related both to the stiﬀness of the wall and
to each earthquake applied. As an example, the stiﬀness of the wall "negates" the ampliﬁcation in
the case of Coyote Lake and Landers, where the proﬁle goes very straight up until 10 meters along
the height. It can be also observed that in Chi Chi and Northridge the ampliﬁcation at the top of
the wall displays very close values when ﬂexible and stiﬀwalls are compared.
Figure 6.21:
Distribution of PGA along the
model height, Chi Chi
Figure 6.22:
Distribution of PGA along the
model height, Coyote Lake
Figure 6.23:
Distribution of PGA along the
model height, Landers
Figure 6.24:
Distribution of PGA along the
model height, Loma Prieta
Figure 6.25:
Distribution of PGA along the
model height, Northridge
60
==PAGE:68==
6.4. Soil-wall system response
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
6.4
Soil-wall system response
In this section the eﬀects of each earthquake on the wall-soil system will be shown.
The response of the soil-retaining wall system is ﬁrstly presented in terms of horizontal relative
displacements and relative rotational displacements at the top of the wall.
For the sake of
comparison, the accelerograms from each earthquake are also shown and are restricted to the time
interval in which the maximum values occur in order to focus on the overcome of the yielding
acceleration of the wall-soil system.
The displacements and rotations are relative with respect to the bottom of the model. In this study
a positive horizontal displacement and/or rotation means that the retaining wall moves towards
the backﬁll soil, while a negative displacement and/or rotation means that the retaining wall moves
away from the backﬁll soil.
It has to be noted that the peak displacements on the ﬂexible and optimized wall are not at the
top the top of the wall, but at the point of maximum bending. Nevertheless, in the Performance
Based approach only the displacement at the top is deﬁned as a criterion. The reason is that this
location is the only one visible at the end of the earthquake, so that the damage can be tracked.
The rotation of the retaining wall is computed by:
θ = tan−1(∆tw −∆bw
H
)
(6.1)
where ∆tw is the relative horizontal displacement at the top of the retaining wall ∆bw is the relative
horizontal displacement at the base of the wall and H is the height of the wall.
Secondly, a comparison between the residual deformed shapes of the wall for each earthquake is
presented, as well as between the bending moments and the active and passive pressure distributions
at the end of the time history analyses.
It will be observed that the earth pressure is mobilized according to the diﬀerent deformed shapes,
in this case depending not only on the diﬀerent stiﬀnesses of the wall but also on the diﬀerent
earthquake applied.
Regarding the anchor, the response is presented in terms of Tskin, showing the distribution along
the horizontal length of the grout body for each earthquake and a comparison between average
values.
Comparing the Tskin and bending moment distributions, among all the earthquakes it will be seen
that a common pattern can be displayed: the higher the values of the moments on the wall, the
lower values of average Tskin on the grout body are found.
Finally, for each earthquake the residual active and passive wedges are shown, in terms of total
deviatoric strain γs.
61
==PAGE:69==
6.4. Soil-wall system response
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
6.4.1
Flexible wall
Chi Chi
Figure 6.26: Accelerogram at the top of the ﬂexible wall: comparison with yielding acceleration, Chi Chi
Figure 6.27: Time history of relative horizontal displacements at the top of the ﬂexible wall, Chi Chi
Figure 6.28: Time history of relative rotational displacements at the top of the ﬂexible wall, Chi Chi
62
==PAGE:70==
6.4. Soil-wall system response
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Coyote Lake
Figure 6.29: Accelerogram at the top of the ﬂexible wall: comparison with yielding acceleration, Coyote
Lake
Figure 6.30: Time history of relative horizontal displacements at the top of the ﬂexible wall, Coyote Lake
Figure 6.31: Time history of relative rotational displacements at the top of the ﬂexible wall, Coyote Lake
63
==PAGE:71==
6.4. Soil-wall system response
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Landers
Figure 6.32: Accelerogram at the top of the ﬂexible wall: comparison with yielding acceleration, Landers
Figure 6.33: Time history of relative horizontal displacements at the top of the ﬂexible wall, Landers
Figure 6.34: Time history of relative rotational displacements at the top of the ﬂexble wall, Landers
64
==PAGE:72==
6.4. Soil-wall system response
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Loma Prieta
Figure 6.35: Accelerogram at the top of the ﬂexible wall: comparison with yielding acceleration, Loma Prieta
Figure 6.36: Time history of relative horizontal displacements at the top of the ﬂexible wall, Loma Prieta
Figure 6.37: Time history of relative rotational displacements at the top of the ﬂexible wall, Loma Prieta
65
==PAGE:73==
6.4. Soil-wall system response
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Northridge
Figure 6.38: Accelerogram at the top of the ﬂexible wall: comparison with yielding acceleration, Northridge
Figure 6.39: Time history of relative horizontal displacements at the top of the ﬂexible wall, Northridge
Figure 6.40: Time history of relative rotational displacements at the top of the ﬂexible wall, Northridge
66
==PAGE:74==
6.4. Soil-wall system response
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Figure 6.41: Deformed shapes for each earthquake, ﬂexible wall
Earthquake
ux,rel top [m]
ux,rel max bending [m]
ux,rel tip [m]
rotation [°]
Chi Chi
-0.034
-0.08
-0.051
4.43
Coyote Lake
-0.008
-0.027
-0.005
- 0.99
Landers
-0.016
-0.037
-0.012
-1.1
Loma Prieta
-0.018
-0.05
-0.012
-1.57
Northridge
-0.028
-0.072
-0.028
- 0.03
Table 6.1: Residual rotations and displacements, ﬂexible wall
Figure 6.42: Residual bending moments for each earthquake, ﬂexible wall
67
==PAGE:75==
6.4. Soil-wall system response
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Figure 6.43: Residual active pressure distributions for each earthquake, the ﬂexible wall
Figure 6.44: Residual passive pressure distributions for each earthquake, ﬂexible wall
Figure 6.45: Distributions of Tskin along the horizontal length of the grout body, ﬂexible wall
68
==PAGE:76==
6.4. Soil-wall system response
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Figure 6.46: Average values of Tskin on the grout body, ﬂexible wall
Figure 6.47: Total deviatoric strains γs, Chi Chi ﬂexible wall
Figure 6.48: Total deviatoric strains γs, Coyote Lake ﬂexible wall
69
==PAGE:77==
6.4. Soil-wall system response
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Figure 6.49: Total deviatoric strains γs, Landers ﬂexible wall
Figure 6.50: Total deviatoric strains γs, Loma Prieta ﬂexible wall
Figure 6.51: Total deviatoric strains γs, Northridge ﬂexible wall
70
==PAGE:78==
6.4. Soil-wall system response
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
6.4.2
stiﬀwall
Chi Chi
Figure 6.52: Accelerogram at the top of the stiﬀwall: comparison with yielding acceleration, Chi Chi
Figure 6.53: Time history of relative horizontal displacements at the top of the stiﬀwall, Chi Chi
Figure 6.54: Time history of relative rotational displacements at the top of the stiﬀwall, Chi Chi
71
==PAGE:79==
6.4. Soil-wall system response
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Coyote Lake
Figure 6.55: Accelerogram at the top of the stiﬀwall: comparison with yielding acceleration, Coyote Lake
Figure 6.56: Time history of relative horizontal displacements at the top of the stiﬀwall, Coyote Lake
Figure 6.57: Time history of relative rotational displacements at the top of the stiﬀwall, Coyote Lake
72
==PAGE:80==
6.4. Soil-wall system response
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Landers
Figure 6.58: Accelerogram at the top of the stiﬀwall: comparison with yielding acceleration, Landers
Figure 6.59: Time history of relative horizontal displacements at the top of the stiﬀwall,Landers
Figure 6.60: Time history of relative rotational displacements at the top of the stiﬀwall, Landers
73
==PAGE:81==
6.4. Soil-wall system response
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Loma Prieta
Figure 6.61: Accelerogram at the top of the stiﬀwall: comparison with yielding acceleration, Loma Prieta
Figure 6.62: Time history of relative horizontal displacements at the top of the stiﬀwall, Loma Prieta
Figure 6.63: Time history of relative rotational displacements at the top of the stiﬀwall, Loma Prieta
74
==PAGE:82==
6.4. Soil-wall system response
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Northridge
Figure 6.64: Accelerogram at the top of the stiﬀwall: comparison with yielding acceleration, Northridge
Figure 6.65: Time history of relative horizontal displacements at the top of the stiﬀwall, Northridge
Figure 6.66: Time history of relative rotational displacements at the top of the stiﬀwall, Northridge
75
==PAGE:83==
6.4. Soil-wall system response
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Figure 6.67: Deformed shapes for each earthquake, stiﬀwall
Earthquake
urel top [m]
urel tip [m]
rotation [°]
Chi Chi
-0.053
-0.056
0.87
Coyote Lake
-0.014
-0.005
-2.41
Landers
-0.023
-0.012
-2.9
Loma Prieta
-0.031
-0.016
-4.02
Northridge
-0.048
-0.028
-3.03
Table 6.2: Residual rotations and displacements, stiﬀwall
Figure 6.68: Residual bending moments for each earthquake, stiﬀwall
76
==PAGE:84==
6.4. Soil-wall system response
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Figure 6.69: Residual active pressure distributions for each earthquake, stiﬀwall
Figure 6.70: Residual passive pressure distributions for each earthquake, stiﬀwall
Figure 6.71: Distributions of Tskin along the horizontal length of the grout body, stiﬀwall
77
==PAGE:85==
6.4. Soil-wall system response
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Figure 6.72: Average values of Tskin on the grout body, stiﬀwall
Figure 6.73: Total deviatoric strains γs, Chi Chi stiﬀwall
Figure 6.74: Total deviatoric strains γs, Coyote Lake stiﬀwall
78
==PAGE:86==
6.4. Soil-wall system response
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Figure 6.75: Total deviatoric strains γs, Landers stiﬀwall
Figure 6.76: Total deviatoric strains γs, Loma Prieta stiﬀwall
Figure 6.77: Total deviatoric strains γs, Northridge stiﬀwall
79
==PAGE:87==
6.4. Soil-wall system response
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
6.4.3
Optimized wall
Figure 6.78: Deformed shapes for each earthquake, optimized wall
Earthquake
ux,rel top [m]
ux,rel max bending [m]
ux,rel tip [m]
rotation [°]
Chi Chi
-0.042
-0.1
-0.05
2.03
Coyote Lake
-0.007
-0.036
-0.006
- 0.5
Landers
-0.016
-0.05
-0.013
-0.82
Loma Prieta
-0.019
-0.06
-0.013
-1.5
Northridge
-0.035
-0.097
-0.031
- 0.8
Table 6.3: Residual rotations and displacements, optimized wall
Figure 6.79: Residual bending moments for each earthquake, optimized wall
80
==PAGE:88==
6.4. Soil-wall system response
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Figure 6.80: Residual active pressure distributions for each earthquake, optimized wall
Figure 6.81: Residual passive pressure distributions for each eartquake, optimized wall
Figure 6.82: Distribution of Tskin along the horizontal length of the grout body, optimized wall
81
==PAGE:89==
6.4. Soil-wall system response
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Figure 6.83: Average values of Tskin on the grout body, optimized wall
82
==PAGE:90==
Part V
Discussion and conclusion
==PAGE:91==
Discussion of the results 7
7.1
Pseudostatic analysis
In this section the results from the pseudostatic analyses will be discussed.
To begin with, it can be observed that the "global failure" mechanism is the predominant one for
the case of the wall-soil system under investigation. This could be seen from the failure wedges in
terms of incremental displacements as well as from the values of yielding accelerations for ﬂexible,
stiﬀand optimized wall, resumed in the following table.
Wall
yielding acceleration [g] (design value: 0.3125g)
ﬂexible
0.3199
stiﬀ
0.3196
optimized
0.313
Table 7.1: Yielding acceleration
Although a mechanism of global failure can be described as the predominant one, the diﬀerent
stiﬀnesses lead the walls to deform in diﬀerent ways (bending for the ﬂexible and optimized walls,
sliding for the stiﬀone):
Figure 7.1: Comparison between deformed shapes for the ﬂexible, stiﬀand optimized wall
Figure 7.1 shows that with higher stiﬀness the mechanism turns to the sliding one instead of the
bending one. The lower is the stiﬀness, the more the wall bends and the displacements at the tip
84
==PAGE:92==
7.1. Pseudostatic analysis
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
are lower, in contrast to what happens at the top of the wall.
The way in which each wall deforms depends indeed on the structural rigidity but also, accordingly,
to the earthpressure distribution. In particular, diﬀerent patterns of earth pressure are displayed
for ﬂexible and stiﬀwall. For the ﬂexible wall the eﬀective active distribution shows signiﬁcant
arching below the anchor, as opposed to what happens in the stiﬀwall case. This happens because
the backﬁll soil, which is stiﬀin the case under investigation, transfers a large part of the active
pressure by arching.
All these aspects cannot be included in the analytical calculations in which the soil structure
interaction cannot be analyzed. As a consequence, the earthpressure in the ﬂexible wall around
the anchor is much higher than in Mononobe Okabe but signiﬁcantly lower at the tip of the wall.
On the other hand, the Mononobe Okabe solution represents a quite fair estimation for the
earthpressure distribution on the stiﬀwall, even though it is indeed an upper bound solution
both for the active side (overestimated, mostly at the tip of the wall) and for the passive side
(underestimated along the whole embedment depth).
Figure 7.2: comparison between the active earth pressure distributions for the ﬂexible, stiﬀand optimized
wall
85
==PAGE:93==
7.1. Pseudostatic analysis
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Figure 7.3: comparison between the passive earth pressure distributions for the ﬂexible, stiﬀand optimized
wall
When it comes to the bending moments distribution on the ﬂexible and stiﬀwall, larger values are
found for the stiﬀwall, even though the earth pressure is overall lower in this case.
This could be explained by means of equilibrium considerations. The moment distribution depends
infact on the acting forces on the wall: earth pressure, water pressure and anchor force. In this
regards, larger moment are related to less anchor force (which is stabilizing). This can be seen from
Fig. 7.5, where the shear distributions for all the walls are plotted.
To conclude, it has to be said that the computed bending moments for the ﬂexible wall are small
also due to signiﬁcant amount of active stresses arching at the base ﬁxity.
Concerning the bending moment on the stiﬀwall, more typical results are obtained. Infact, as
already explained, below the anchor classical active earth pressure patterns are reached. Therefore,
the bending moment value agrees well to the one that follows from the analytical design procedure.
Figure 7.4: comparison between bending moments for the ﬂexible, stiﬀand optimized wall
86
==PAGE:94==
7.1. Pseudostatic analysis
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Figure 7.5: comparison between the shear force distributions for the ﬂexible, stiﬀand optimized wall
As a consequence of the above mentioned considerations, when it comes to the anchor mobilization
the ﬂexible wall displays higher values of Tskin comparing to the stiﬀwall case (in which, however,
yielding values are reached at few points of the horizontal length). From the following Figures it
can be also seen the result of the modiﬁcation of the anchorage system in the optimized wall, which
led to a more utilization of the anchor capacity and, accordingly, higher values of Tskin.
Figure 7.6: comparison between the Tskin distributions for the ﬂexible, stiﬀand optimized wall
87
==PAGE:95==
7.1. Pseudostatic analysis
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Figure 7.7: comparison between the Tskin average values for the ﬂexible, stiﬀand optimized wall
88
==PAGE:96==
7.2. Scaling of the earthquake records following EC8 guidelines
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
7.2
Scaling of the earthquake records following EC8 guidelines
According to the Eurocode8 part 1 [EN 1998-1, 2004], the real earthquake records should be scaled
to satisfy the criterion for spectrum compatibility, namely the diﬀerence between the average and
the target spectrum does not exceed 10% in the period range from 0.15s to 2s. In this way, they
should match the elastic design spectrum given in the Eurocode 8 for speciﬁed seismic region and
soil type.
In the case under examination, the target response spectrum would be the elastic acceleration
response spectrum Type1 for soil type A, being the records selected from outcropping rock and with
a Magnitudo higher than 5. The following table resumes the parameters for the target spectrum to
be utilized.
Spectrum type
1 (high seismicity)
Seismic component direction
horizontal
Reference PGA[g]
0.25
Structural damping
5%
Ground type
A
Soil factor S
1
Importance factor
1
TB
0.15
TC
0.4
TD
2
Table 7.2: Target spectrum parameters
The spectra of the scaled earthquake with the average spectrum and the target one are shown in
Figures 7.8 and 7.9 with Figure 7.9 showing the range of periods 0.15-2s, with the best ﬁt which
could be achieved with the ﬁve earthquakes selected. The following table resumes the PGAs and
the scaling factors for the ﬁve records selected.
Earthquake
initial PGA[g]
scaling factor
ﬁnal PGA[g]
Chi Chi
0.14
1.6
0.22
Coyote Lake
0.09
3
0.27
Landers
0.7
0.56
0.4
Loma Prieta
0.4
0.83
0.33
Northridge
0.41
1
0.41
Table 7.3: Scaling parameters
89
==PAGE:97==
7.2. Scaling of the earthquake records following EC8 guidelines
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Figure 7.8: Target, mean and scaled earthquakes horizontal acceleration response spectra
Figure 7.9: Target, mean and scaled earthquakes horizontal acceleration response spectra, periods from 0.15s
to 2s
90
==PAGE:98==
7.3. Non-linear time history analysis
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
7.3
Non-linear time history analysis
7.3.1
Site response
In this section the results obtained from the site response analysis will be discussed.
The aim of the site response analysis was to highlight the eﬀect that each of the ﬁve earthquakes
has on the non-linearity of the soil deposit under investigation. The inelastic soil-eigen period could
be found, and the diﬀerent responses in terms of stiﬀness of the soil for each earthquake could be
observed. A "guess" was made about the second inelastic eigenperiod, which was highlighted with
a question mark. The following table resumes the values obtained.
Earthquake
Tp/Tsoil,el
soil ﬁrst mode [s]
PSA(’g’)[]
soil second mode? [s]
PSA(’g’)[]
Chi Chi
≃2
0.46
1.4
0.165
0.8
Coyote Lake
≃0.2
0.38 (elastic)
0.65
0.18
1.7
Landers
≃0.3
0.48
1
0.165
0.9
Loma Prieta
≃0.6
0.49
1.2
0.185
1.4
Northridge
≃1
0.49
2.5
0.18
1
Table 7.4: Modes of vibration of the soil and corresponding PSA for each earthquake
From the above results it is clear that the soil behaviour strongly depends on the ratio Tp/Tsoil,el,
where Tp is the predominant period of the excitation and Tsoil,el is the elastic eigenperiod of the
soil layer. As it is expected, for frequencies close to the fundamental frequency of the soil layer,
resonance phenomenon takes place. This is the case of Northridge earthquake, in which the soil
ﬁrst inelastic mode reaches the highest value of spectral horizontal acceleration PSA.
On the other hand, for certain earthquakes, such as Coyote Lake, this decrease in frequency content
is less evident, leading to a much stiﬀer response of the soil. In such cases, it can be said that the
soil remains in an almost elastic regime. Together with lower values of eigenperiod achieved and
less non-linearity induced, a predominancy of the "second" mode of vibration can be observed. As
a consequence, the guessed value of second eigenmode reaches for Coyote Lake the highest value of
PSA.
The excitation of the second mode in Coyote Lake could be also observed from the PGA proﬁles.
As the following Figure shows, the PGA proﬁle in free ﬁeld conditions "turns back", which means
that there is an inﬂuence of higher modeshapes.
Figure 7.10: Distribution of PGA along the model height, Coyote Lake
91
==PAGE:99==
7.3. Non-linear time history analysis
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
To summarize, in this study the induced soil non-linearity is evident to the largest extent for
two earthquakes, Northridge and Chi Chi. For the latter, more yielding and energy dissipation
was shown in the stress-cycle graph. This can be related to the longer duration of the Chi Chi
earthquake.
Along with investigating the eigenmodes of the soil deposit, another purpose of the site response
analysis is to ﬁnd how each earthquake is ampliﬁed once the signal travels from the bedrock to the
top of the soil layer.
Eurocode8, by means of the soil factor S, prescribes that the seismic demand for structures on soil
is greater than that of structures on hard soil or rock. The following Figure shows a comparison
between soil factor suggested for soil type C and the ampliﬁcation factors found for each of the
earthquakes in this study.
Figure 7.11: Comparison between the ampliﬁcation of each earthquake and EC8 ampliﬁcation factor for soil
type C
From the Figure it is evident that the soil factor S, which does not take into account soil non-
linearity, frequency content and acceleration level of the ground motion, is a very rough estimation
on how a speciﬁc type of soil ampliﬁes the motion. Only the ampliﬁcation displayed for Landers
can ﬁt somehow the value proposed.
Therefore, it can be concluded that the current approach adopted in Eurocode8 to account for site
ampliﬁcation eﬀects is insuﬃcient because of the dependency not only on the stiﬀness of the speciﬁc
soil but also on the intensity and the frequency content of the ground motion applied.
92
==PAGE:100==
7.3. Non-linear time history analysis
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
7.3.2
Soil-structure interaction
In this section the results from the soil-structure interaction analysis will be discussed. As already
highlighted, the presence of the retaining wall imposes a vertical boundary condition, leading to:
• stiﬀer response of the whole model;
• ampliﬁcation of the acceleration in the backﬁll.
These two eﬀects will be here investigated.
To begin with, in the following table the eigenmodes of the soil and the wall-soil system are shown.
Earthquake
soil ﬁrst mode [s]
wall-soil system ﬁrst mode [s]
Chi Chi
0.46
0.43
Coyote Lake
0.38 (elastic?)
0.38
Landers
0.49
0.49
Loma Prieta
0.49
0.49
Northridge
0.49
0.46
Table 7.5: Soil and wall-soil system modes of vibration
As it can be seen, the motion is completely driven by the backﬁll for Landers, Loma Prieta and
Coyote Lake, in which the ampliﬁcation is at the same period for soil and wall-soil system. In
particular, in Coyote Lake the soil-wall system response is as stiﬀas the one already highlighted in
the site response analysis.
The earthquakes in which the inﬂuence of the wall is evident to the largest extent are Northridge
and Chi Chi. The following Figures show the spectral ratio for this two cases.
Figure 7.12: Spectral ratio top/bottom of the layer, in the free ﬁeld (x=350m), ﬂexible wall and stiﬀ
wall(x=200m),Chi Chi
93
==PAGE:101==
7.3. Non-linear time history analysis
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Figure 7.13: Spectral ratio top/bottom of the layer, in the free ﬁeld (x=350m), ﬂexible wall and stiﬀ
wall(x=200m),Northridge
When it comes to compare diﬀerent ﬂexural rigidities it can be seen that Chi Chi has a stiﬀer wall-
soil system response when it come to the stiﬀwall. One of the reasons can be that the eigenfrequency
of the structure becomes lower and Chi Chi is the motion with the largest values of both Tm and
Tp.
Regarding the ampliﬁcations eﬀect due to the presence of the wall, in the following Figures the
PGA proﬁles for Northridge and Chi Chi are shown.
Figure 7.14:
Distribution of PGA along the
model height, Chi Chi
Figure 7.15:
Distribution of PGA along the
model height, Northridge
As it can be seen, in Chi Chi the PGA proﬁle increases all the way up along the height of the
model. As a consequence, for this earthquake more displacements at the tip of the wall are found.
The reason is that the wall under investigation is a long element, therefore the deformations are
inﬂuenced by the rotation and deformation at the tip. This is more evident for Chi Chi, in which
the motion moves the base of the wall more than in other earthquakes.
On the other hand, in Northrige the proﬁle is to a large extent vertical until y = 8m. Moreover,
in Northridge the PGA proﬁle displays same patterns in case of stiﬀand ﬂexible wall and the
acceleration at the top is higher in case of ﬂexible wall compared to the stiﬀwall. The opposite
conclusions are drawn for Chi Chi. This can be again related to the frequency content of Chi Chi,
as it will be explained further in the next section.
94
==PAGE:102==
7.3. Non-linear time history analysis
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
7.3.3
Soil-wall system response
In this sections the eﬀect of the non-linear analyses on the walls under investigation will be discussed.
To begin with, the eﬀect of each earthquake is evaluated in terms of deformed shapes. In this
regard, particular attention will be given to the earthquakes which represent "extreme" cases in
terms of their detrimental or not detrimental eﬀect on the wall.
The Tables below give an overview of the response for each wall in terms of residual displacements
and rotations and, accordingly, the following Figures show the deformed shapes, for each earthquake,
plotted for ﬂexible, stiﬀand optimized wall.
From the Figures it will be noticed that in the optimized wall the decrease of the stiﬀness and the
modiﬁcation to the anchor system lead to a diﬀerent conﬁguration comparing to the one of the
ﬂexible wall. For the most detrimental earthquakes the results is that the wall experiences not only
more bending but also slightly higher values in the displacements at the top of the wall.
Earthquake
ux,rel top [m]
ux,rel tip [m]
rotation [°]
Chi Chi
-0.034
-0.051
4.43
Coyote Lake
-0.008
-0.005
- 0.99
Landers
-0.016
-0.012
-1.1
Loma Prieta
-0.018
-0.012
-1.57
Northridge
-0.028
-0.028
- 0.03
Table 7.6: Residual rotations and displacements, ﬂexible wall
Earthquake
top of the wall [m]
tip of the wall
rotation [°]
Chi Chi
-0.053
-0.056
0.87
Coyote Lake
-0.014
-0.005
-2.41
Landers
-0.023
-0.012
-2.9
Loma Prieta
-0.031
-0.016
-4.02
Northridge
-0.048
-0.028
-3.03
Table 7.7: Residual rotations and displacements, stiﬀwall
Earthquake
ux,rel top [m]
ux,rel tip [m]
rotation [°]
Chi Chi
-0.042
-0.05
2.03
Coyote Lake
-0.007
-0.006
- 0.5
Landers
-0.016
-0.013
-0.82
Loma Prieta
-0.019
-0.013
-1.5
Northridge
-0.035
-0.031
- 0.8
Table 7.8: Residual rotations and displacements, optimized wall
95
==PAGE:103==
7.3. Non-linear time history analysis
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Figure 7.16: Comparison between deformed shapes,
Chi Chi
Figure 7.17: Comparison between deformed shapes,
Coyote Lake
Figure 7.18: Comparison between deformed shapes,
Landers
Figure 7.19: Comparison between deformed shapes,
Loma prieta
Figure 7.20: Comparison between deformed shapes, Northridge
96
==PAGE:104==
7.3. Non-linear time history analysis
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
The above Tables and Figures show that the most detrimental eﬀects on the wall-soil system under
investigation are caused by Northridge and Chi Chi.
The site response analysis had already anticipated that these two earthquakes would induced more
non-linearity in the soil response and the soil-structure interaction analysis had showed that for this
two cases the motion is not driven completely by the free ﬁeld, therefore the wall response is more
triggered.
On the opposite side, Coyote Lake has the lowest impact on all the walls investigated. The following
Table resumes these main characteristics for all the earthquakes.
Earthquake
Tp/Tsoil,el
soil mode [s]
wal-soil system mode[s]
PSA ﬁrst mode(’g’)[]
SD[s]
Chi Chi
≃2
0.46
0.43
1.4
25.9
Coyote Lake
≃0.2
0.38 (elastic)
0.38
0.65
6.8
Landers
≃0.3
0.48
0.49
1
13.8
Loma Prieta
≃0.6
0.49
0.49
1.2
6.5
Northridge
≃1
0.49
0.46
2.5
4.3
Table 7.9: Earthquake main characteristics
From the data highlighted in the above Table, special attention should be given to the signiﬁcant
duration SD. In this regards, the time histories of the displacements at the top of the ﬂexible wall
for the two extreme cases (Northridge and Chi Chi) are plotted together for the sake of comparison.
Figure 7.21: comparison between relative displacement time histories, Chi Chi and Northridge earthquakes
Indeed it is clear how the earthquake duration plays an important role in the eﬀects on the wall. In
particular, Chi Chi, which displays less ampliﬁcation than Northridge, causes a detrimental eﬀect
on the wall that can be related to a larger extent to the number of signiﬁcant cycles developed
during the motion.
When it comes to the residual rotations, from the Tables 7.6, 7.7 and 7.8 it can be noticed that
Chi Chi is the only case in which the rotation is positive. Moreover, for all the earthquakes, except
from Chi Chi, the rotations are signiﬁcantly lower for the ﬂexible and optimized walls, comparing
to the stiﬀwall. For the sake of simplicity, the following Tables show the rotations for Chi Chi and
Northridge (ﬂexible and stiﬀwall):
97
==PAGE:105==
7.3. Non-linear time history analysis
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
rotation Chi Chi [°]
wall
4.43
ﬂexible
0.87
stiﬀ
Table 7.10: relative rotations, Chi Chi
rotation Northridge [°]
wall
-0.03
ﬂexible
-3.03
stiﬀ
Table 7.11: relative rotations, Northridge
One of the reasons for the diﬀerences highlighted in the Tables above can be that in Chi Chi the
stiﬀwall makes the soil stiﬀer, while for Northridge it makes the soil softer. This happens because
a long period motion like Chi Chi aﬀects more a ﬂexible structure, while a short period motion like
Northridge aﬀects more a stiﬀstructure. As a result, the bending moment has the lowest value for
Chi Chi in the stiﬀwall, as the following Figures shows:
Figure 7.22:
Residual bending moments for each
earthquake, ﬂexible wall
Figure 7.23:
Residual bending moments for each
earthquake, stiﬀwall
All these considerations lead to the conclusion that Chi Chi, due to its frequency content, triggers
to the largest extent the global failure of the soil-wall system, and this is even more visible in the
case of stiﬀwall.
Infact, global failure in Chi Chi means high values of displacements and high values of bending
moment for the ﬂexible wall, while for the stiﬀwall the wall and the anchors are protected by the
global failure and therefore they do not get aﬀected by the earthquake in the same detrimental way
as in the ﬂexible wall.
The following Figure shows the accelerograms for three nodes on the passsive and active wedges
for Chi Chi (ﬂexible wall). This case is chosen because the global failure is clearly visible from the
deviatoric strains. As it can be seen, the motion is syncronous so the nodes has the same motion
and the wedge moves as a translational mechanism.
98
==PAGE:106==
7.3. Non-linear time history analysis
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Figure 7.24: Total deviatoric strains γs, Chi Chi ﬂexible wall
Figure 7.25: Accelerograms for three nodes on the failure wedge, Chi Chi ﬂexible wall
The following Figures show for Chi Chi the sum phase displacements for each type of wall. It is
evident, once again, that the stiﬀwall is more prone to a global failure.
Figure 7.26: Sum phase displacements, Chi Chi ﬂexible wall
99
==PAGE:107==
7.3. Non-linear time history analysis
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Figure 7.27: Sum phase displacements, Chi Chi stiﬀwall
Figure 7.28: Sum phase displacements, Chi Chi optimized wall
Regarding the earth pressure distributions on the walls, the following Figures show a comparison
for each wall between pseudostatic earth pressures and the average values calculated from all the
earthquakes applied. In this way, a discussion can be made on how the pressure distribution changes
from one type of analysis to the other.
Figure 7.29:
Comparison between average active
pressure from the time history analyses and the
pseudo static one, ﬂexible wall
Figure 7.30: Comparison between average passive
pressure from the time history analyses and the
pseudo static one, ﬂexible wall
100
==PAGE:108==
7.3. Non-linear time history analysis
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Figure 7.31:
Comparison between average active
pressure from the time history analyses and the
pseudo static one, stiﬀwall
Figure 7.32: Comparison between average passive
pressure from the time history analyses and the
pseudo static one, stiﬀwall
Figure 7.33:
Comparison between average active
pressure from the time history analyses and the
pseudo static one, optimized wall
Figure 7.34: Comparison between average passive
pressure from the time history analyses and the
pseudo static one, optimized wall
To begin with, it has to be said that the pressure distributions from the time history analyises
represent the residual values and not the maximum ones. Nevertheless, judging from the maximum
and residual bending moments proﬁles shown in the Appendix, the diﬀerence between maximum
and residual pressure distributions can be assumed small, accordingly.
Given this premise, it can be observed that for all the types of wall the non-linear time history
analysis results in much smaller values of both active and passive earthpressure, comparing to the
ones from the pseudo-static analysis. As a consequence, also the eﬀects of the arching, in the ﬂexible
and optimized walls, are less evident.
In order to highlight how the magnitude of the lateral earth pressure is highly inﬂuenced by the
direction of the retaining wall movement, the following Figures show the passive earthpressure
distributions and the deformed shapes of the walls for all the earthquakes.
101
==PAGE:109==
7.3. Non-linear time history analysis
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Figure 7.35: Residual passive pressure distributions
for each eartquake, ﬂexible wall
Figure 7.36: Deformed shapes for each earthquake,
ﬂexible wall
Figure 7.37: Residual passive pressure distributions
for each eartquake, stiﬀwall
Figure 7.38: Deformed shapes for each earthquake,
stiﬀwall
Figure 7.39: Residual passive pressure distributions
for each eartquake, optimized wall
Figure 7.40: Deformed shapes for each earthquake,
optimized wall
For all the walls under investigations, it is noted that the magnitude of the retaining wall
displacement has a signiﬁcant eﬀect on the development of the passive lateral earth pressures,
depending on the earthquake applied.
This is particularly evident for two opposite cases, Chi Chi and Coyote Lake.
The large
displacements at the tip of the wall in Chi Chi can be related to the fact that the passive earth
102
==PAGE:110==
7.3. Non-linear time history analysis
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
pressure is not fully mobilized and displays lower values comparing to the other earthquakes. On the
contrary, in Coyote Lake the displacements are very small and the passive earth pressure displays
higher values, especially below the excavation, at the depths between y = 10m and y = 14m.
With regards to the anchor utilization, the following Figure shows the distributions of the average
values of Tskin from all the earthquakes applied, plotted for each wall. As a reference, the design
values of Tskin are also indicated.
Once again it can be noticed that in the conﬁguration of the optimized wall more utilization of the
anchor is achieved. Nevertheless, the distribution is still far from the limit condition. This can be
once again related to the global failure mechanism of the soil-system under investigation.
Figure 7.41: comparison between the Tskin average distributions for each wall
103
==PAGE:111==
7.4. Assesment of the walls seismic response
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
7.4
Assesment of the walls seismic response
The current section is dedicated to the evaluation of the seismic performance of the walls under
investigation.
The following tables show the levels of damage displayed by each wall, for each earthquake applied.
The damages criteria are here checked in terms of both residual displacements and stress states at
the structural members.
As it can be seen, the damage on the Optimized wall can be categorized as Degree I: Minor or
no structural damage (little or no loss of serviceability) for each of the criteria that can be deﬁned
according to the needs of the users/owners of the structure.
The same conlcusion can be drawn for the ﬂexible and stiﬀwall if residual displacements or
serviceability of the wall and anchor are deﬁned as damage criteria.
On the other hand, when it comes to the residual tilting, the ﬂexible and the stiﬀwall display in
some cases a rotation higher than 3 degrees. As it could be seen from the tables in Chapter 2, the
guidelines developed by [PIANC, 2001] deﬁne the level of damage Degree I for a residual tilting less
than 3 degrees and higher values are not available. Nevertheless, it can be said that the residual
tilting indeed represents for the walls under investigation the strictest criterion to be checked.
Flexible wall
Earthquake
residual displacement
residual tilting
serviceability wall
serviceability anchor
Chi Chi
Degree I
N/A
Degree I
Degree I
Coyote Lake
Degree I
Degree I
Degree I
Degree I
Landers
Degree I
Degree I
Degree I
Degree I
Loma Prieta
Degree I
Degree I
Degree I
Degree I
Northridge
Degree I
Degree I
Degree I
Degree I
Table 7.12: Check of damage criteria for the ﬂexible wall
Stiﬀwall
Earthquake
residual displacement
residual tilting
serviceability wall
serviceability anchor
Chi Chi
Degree I
Degree I
Degree I
Degree I
Coyote Lake
Degree I
Degree I
Degree I
Degree I
Landers
Degree I
Degree I
Degree I
Degree I
Loma Prieta
Degree I
N/A
Degree I
Degree I
Northridge
Degree I
N/A
Degree I
Degree I
Table 7.13: Check of damage criteria for the stiﬀwall
104
==PAGE:112==
7.4. Assesment of the walls seismic response
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Optimized wall
Earthquake
residual displacement
residual tilting
serviceability wall
serviceability anchor
Chi Chi
Degree I
Degree I
Degree I
Degree I
Coyote Lake
Degree I
Degree I
Degree I
Degree I
Landers
Degree I
Degree I
Degree I
Degree I
Loma Prieta
Degree I
Degree I
Degree I
Degree I
Northridge
Degree I
Degree I
Degree I
Degree I
Table 7.14: Check of damage criteria for the optimized wall
Once the level of damage for each wall is deﬁned, the performance grade can be assessed.
In the current study the design PGA has probability of exceedance 10% in 50 years therefore the
earthquake Level 2 is the one utilized in the assessment. As Table 7.15 shows, the Optimized wall
has performance Grade S for each of the damage criteria. The same can be said for ﬂexible and
stiﬀwall, except from the case of the residual tilting. If the latter is taken as damage criteria, it
could be guessed that the ﬂexible wall and stiﬀwall would be assessed with Grade A.
Performance grade
Earthquake L2
Grade S
Degree I: serviceable
Grade A
Degree II: repairable
Grade B
Degree III:near collapse
Grade C
Degree IV: Collapse
Table 7.15: Performance grades S,A,B and C for design earthquake L2 [PIANC, 2001]
On the basis of the above results, it could be concluded that the walls designed in this study
represent a very conservative solution. It can be concluded that a performance based design of the
wall could lead to a more economical design because higher degrees could be deﬁned as acceptable
damages. Needless to say, this would be a choice of the user/owner of the structure.
105
==PAGE:113==
Conclusion and further
analysis 8
In this report, an investigation on the performance of anchored retaining walls, designed according
to the Eurocode8 guidelines, was presented.
Diﬀerent ﬂexural rigidities were included in the investigation, in order to highlight the impact of
the stiﬀness on the structural response. Moreover, an optimized design for the wall was proposed.
Pseudostatic and non-linear time history analyses were implemented, applying a set of ﬁve
earthquakes and analysing the responses in terms of non-linearity developed by the soil deposit, soil
structure interaction and stresses/deformations induced on the walls.
Finally, the performance of the walls was assessed in the framework of the Performance based design
method.
The problem formulation on which the project was based:
What is the seismic performance of an anchored retaining wall designed following EC8 guidelines?
leads to the following considerations.
To begin with, the comparison between the results of the present study with the pseudo-static
methods clearly highlights that the latter overestimate the seismic earth pressure, especially when
high values of wall ﬂexibility are involved.
Further, from the study it has been stressed that the Performance based design indeed could
represent a more realistic and economical method when seismic analysis is involved.
Eurocode8 takes into account performance criteria for retaining walls, proposing a reduction factor
depending on the amount of displacement tolerable by the structure. However, this ductility does
not apply to anchored retaining walls, which are then considered by EC8 as "fragile" structures.
Further investigations could involve diﬀerent stiﬀnesses of the soil deposit, analysing the impact of
diﬀerent combinations (e.g. soft soil-ﬂexible wall, soft soil-stiﬀwall), inclunding also as a variable
the anchorage system ﬂexibility.
105
==PAGE:114==
Bibliography
Bakr et al., 2018. Bakr et al. A ﬁnite element performance-based approach to correlate
movement of a rigid retaining wall with seismic earth pressure. Soil Dynamics and Earthquake
Engineering, 2018.
Bond et al., 2013. Bond et al. Eurocode 7: Geotechnical Design Worked examples, JRC
Scientiﬁc and policy reports, 2013.
Candia al., 2013. Candia al. Seismic Earth Pressures on Retaining Structures in Cohesive Soils.
Report number: UCB GT 13-02Aﬃliation: Department of Civil and Environmental
Engineering, UC Berkeley, 2013.
Colt et al., 2008. Colt et al. Evolution of the Stability Work from Classic Retaining Walls to
Mechanically Stabilized Earth Walls. Bulletin of the Polytechnic Institute of Jassy, 2008.
Duke et al., 1963. Duke et al. Response of soils, foundations, and earth structures to the
Chilean earthquakes of 1960. Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, 1963.
EN 1998-1, 2004. EN 1998-1. Eurocode 8: Design of structures for earthquake resistance Part1:
General rules, seismic actions and rules for buildings, 2004.
EN 1998-5, 2004. EN 1998-5. Eurocode 8: Design of structures for earthquake resistance Part 5:
Foundations, retaining structures and geotechnical aspects, 2004.
Fahjan et al., 2008. Fahjan et al. Scaling of earthquake accelerograms for non-linear dynamic
analyses to match the earthquake design spectra. The 14th World Conference on Earthquake
Engineering October 12-17, 2008, Beijing, China, 2008.
Gazetas et al., 1990. Gazetas et al. Empirical seismic design method for waterfront anchored
sheetpile walls. Proceedings , Design and performance of earth retaining structures, 1990.
Gazetas et al., 2015. Gazetas et al. Seismic Analysis of Anchored Sheet-Pile Walls: Are We
Over-designing? Proceedings 6th International Conference on Earhquake Geotechnical
Engineering, 2015.
Gazetas et al., 2016. Gazetas et al. Seismic analysis of tall anchored sheet-pile walls. Soil
Dynamics and Earthquake Engineering, 2016.
Ho et al., 1990. Ho et al. Sesimic performanceof tied-back walls, Proceedings, ASCE Specialty
Conference on Design and Performance of Earth Retaining Structures,. Geotechnical Specialty
Publication No. 25, 1990.
Iai et al., 1993. Iai et al. Finite Element Analysis of Earthquake Induced Damage to Anchored
Sheet Pile Quay Walls. Soils and Foundations, 33, 1993.
Japan Port and Harbour Association, 1979. Japan Port and Harbour Association. Bureau
of Ports and Harbours. Technical standard of ports and harbour facilities, 1979.
106
==PAGE:115==
Bibliography
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Kontoe et al., 2012. Kontoe et al. An important pitfall of pseudo-static ﬁnite element analysis.
Computers and Geotechnics, 2012.
Kramer, 1996. Kramer. Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering. Prentice Hall, New Jersey, 653 p.,
1996.
Lai, 1998. Lai. Rigid and ﬂexible retaining walls during Kobe earthquake. Proceedings, 4th
International Conference on Case Histories in Geotechnical Engineering, 1998.
Lew et al., 2010. Lew et al. Seismic Earth Pressures: Fact or Fiction? Earth Retention
Conference (ER), 2010.
Mononobe et al., 1929. Mononobe et al. On the Determination of Earth Pressures during
Earthquakes. Proceedings, World Engineering Congress„ 1929.
Mononobe et al., 1932. Mononobe et al. Experimental Investigation of Lateral Earth Pressures
During Earthquakes. Bull. Earthq. Res. Ins., Tokyo, Vol. X:884-902, 1932.
OPCM 3274, 2003. OPCM 3274. Norme tecniche per il progetto, la valutazione e l’adeguamento
sismico degli ediﬁci, 2003.
Pane et al., 2012. Pane et al. Eurocodice 8: valutazione delle azioni sismiche al suolo ed eﬀetti
sulla spinta dei terreni. EUCENTRE PRESS, 2012.
PIANC, 2001. PIANC. Seismic design guidelines for port structures. 2001.
PLAXIS, 2015. PLAXIS. Ground response analysis in PLAXIS 2D, 2015.
Psarropoulos et al., 2011. Psarropoulos et al. Eﬀects of soil non-linearity on the seismic
response of restrained retaining walls. Structure and Infrastructure Engineering, 2011.
Psarropoulos et al., 2007. Psarropoulos et al. Seismic behaviour of ﬂexible retaining structures:
numerical modelling vs. simpliﬁed approaches. Proceedings, 4th International Conference on
Earthquake Geotechnical Engineering, 2007.
Sabatini et al., 1999. Sabatini et al. Ground anchors and anchored systems, Geotechnical
Circular No. 4, FHWA-IF-99-015, Federal Highway Administration, Department of
Transportation, Washington DC., 1999.
Schweiger, 2006. Schweiger. Results from the ERTC7 benchmark exercise. Computational
Geotechnics Group, Institute for Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, Graz University
of Technology, Graz, Austria, 2006.
Simonelli, 2010. Simonelli. Osservazioni sul progetto di paratie secondo gli Eurocodici e le norme
tecniche per le costruzioni (NTC08). 2010.
Sitar et al., 2015. Sitar et al. On Seismic Response of Stiﬀand Flexible Retaining Structures.
Proceedings, 6th International Conference on Earthquake Geotechnical Engineering, 2015.
Solomos et al., 2008. Solomos et al. A review of the seismic hazard zonation in national
building codes in the context of Eurocode8, JRC Scientiﬁc and technical reports, 2008.
Steedman et al., 1993. Steedman et al. On the behaviour of quay walls in earthquakes.
Geotechnique 43, 1993.
107
==PAGE:116==
Bibliography
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Towata et al., 1978. Towata et al. Prediction of lateral movement of anchored bulkheads induced
by seismic liquefaction. Soil and Fondations. Soil and Fondations Vol. 27, No. 4, JSSMFE, 1978.
Uwabe, 1983. Uwabe. Estimation of earthquake damage deformation and cost of quaywalls based
on earthquake damage records. Technical Note of Port and Harbour Research Institute, 1983.
Vecchietti et al., 2006. Vecchietti et al. Metodi per la valutazione degli spostamenti di strutture
di sostegno in presenza di sisma. IARG, 2006.
Vermeer, 2001. Vermeer. On single anchored retaining walls. PLAXIS BULLETIN nr.10, 2001.
Yiğit, 2020. Yiğit. Prediction of amount of earthquake-induced slope displacement by using
Newmark method. Engineering geology, 2020.
108
==PAGE:117==
Part VI
Appendix
109
==PAGE:118==
Elastic soil eigenfrequency A
The elastic fundamental frequency of the soil deposit is deﬁned as the frequency at which the most
signiﬁcant ampliﬁcation can be expected, and it corresponds to the ﬁrst mode shape. The following
formula is used:
f = vs
4H
(A.1)
where vs represents the shear wave velocity and H is the thickness of the soil layer.
The value of vs has been chosen as an average value over the whole depth.
Based on the shear stiﬀness proﬁle G and the unit weight of soil γ, it is possible to calculate the
shear wave velocity proﬁle with depth by using the following formula:
vs =
s
G
ρ
(A.2)
where ρ is equal to the ratio of γ over the gravity acceleration g .
In this study the HS small model is used and the stress dependency is expressed by:
G = Gref
0
 c · cos ϕ −σ′
3 · sin ϕ
c · cos ϕ + pref · sin ϕ
m
(A.3)
where the shear stiﬀness is a function of the shear modulus at small strains Gref
0
, the eﬀective stress,
the strength parameters (c and φ) and the m parameter which depends on the soil type (in this
study m = 0.5).
Considering the average values of vs and the proﬁles showed in the following Figures, the following
results are found for the passive side:
vs = 201.34m/s
(A.4)
T = 0.28s
(A.5)
At the active side of the model:
vs = 236.55m/s
(A.6)
T = 0.345s
(A.7)
110
==PAGE:119==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Figure A.1: Shear wave velocity proﬁle with depth and average shear wave velocity, left side of the model
Figure A.2: Shear wave velocity proﬁle with depth and average shear wave velocity, right side of the model
Figure A.3: Unit weight distribution, right side of the model
111
==PAGE:120==
Seismic zonation for Italy B
For most of the applications of EC8, the hazard is described in terms of a single parameter, i.e.
the value of the reference peak ground acceleration on type A ground. National territories are
subdivided by the National Authorities into seismic zones, in the interior of which the hazard is
assumed to be constant.
As the following Figures show, in Italy four seismic zones are deﬁned according to the value of the
maximum ground acceleration ag whose probability of exceedence is 10% in 50 years.
Figure B.1: Seismic zonation, Italy [Solomos et al., 2008]
Figure B.2: Values of peak ground accelerations for the italian seismic zones [Solomos et al., 2008]
112
==PAGE:121==
PLAXIS 2D model for
pseudostatic analysis C
Comparing to the one of the time history model, the height of the pseudo-static model has to
be increased so that the wall failure mechanism does not interact with the soil deposit failure
mechanism.
Therefore, the height of the model for the pseudostatic analysis is 40m instead of 20m. The following
Figures show the plastic stress points developed at the base of the model for each case. For the
model with 40m height it is clear that the plastic points do not contact with those developed around
the wall. In this case, the two developed mechanisms do not interact with each other.
Figure C.1: Plastic points at failure for PLAXIS model with 20m height.
Figure C.2: Plastic points at failure for PLAXIS model with 40m height.
113
==PAGE:122==
1D ground response analysis D
In order to check the free ﬁeld conditions in the PLAXIS wall model, a 1D ground response analysis
(with tied degrees of freedom) is performed for one column corresponding to the left region of the
model and another column corresponding to the right region of the model.
The following Figures show the columns used, with mesh element sizes corresponding to the ones
in the wall model.
Figure D.1: Soil column for comparison with the left side of the model (14m height)
Figure D.2: Soil column for comparison with the right side of the model (20m height)
114
==PAGE:123==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
The following Figures show the comparison between horizontal acceleration spectra at the top of
each column and corresponding point in the wall model in free ﬁeld conditions. The analysis was
performed applying Chi Chi earthquake.
Figure D.3: Comparison between acceleration spectra from 1D analysis and free ﬁeld conditions, passive
side
Figure D.4: Comparison between acceleration spectra from 1D analysis and free ﬁeld conditions, active side
115
==PAGE:124==
Residual vs. maximum
bending moments E
The bending moments from the time history analyses for the stiﬀand ﬂexible walls are here presented
in their maximum and residual values.
Figure E.1: Residual and maximum bending moment distributions, Chi Chi
Figure E.2: Residual and maximum bending moment distributions, Coyote Lake
116
==PAGE:125==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Figure E.3: Residual and maximum bending moment distributions, Landers
Figure E.4: Residual and maximum bending moment distributions, Loma Prieta
Figure E.5: Residual and maximum bending moment distributions, Northridge
117
