==PAGE:1==
Perception of speech and source location
with individual and non-individual head-
related transfer functions
Master Thesis
DTU Health Tech
Hearing Systems
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual
head-related transfer functions
Master Thesis
December, 2020
By
Jan Louis Geerken
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Hearing Systems, Ørsteds Pl. 352, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.hea.healthtech.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Hearing Systems, Depart-
ment of Health Tech, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Jan Louis Geerken - s182700
Signature
Date
ii
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
When listeners are confronted with speech in noise, different cues affect speech intelligi-
bility. Among them, spatial separation of target and masker is a key aspect. Anatomical
features of head and shoulders provide localization cues, that are contained in the indi-
vidual Head-Related Transfer Function (HRTF). As virtual reality applications become
more common, optimizing the perception of sound with non-individual HRTFs is a topic of
current research. In this paper, results from behavioral localization perception and speech
intelligibility measurements are presented for individual and non-individual HRTFs. The
subject pool consisted of 11 young, normal hearing listeners. For the speech reception
threshold (SRT) measurements, pinna size difference and head size difference between
listener and tested HRTF were used as indicators for the conformity of HRTFs. Spatial
release from masking (SRM) was measured for 90° and 180° horizontal source separation.
A correlation was found between pinna size similarity and the ability to resolve ambiguous
localization tasks (front-back confusions), suggesting pinna size similarity could be used
as a simple but effective indicator for HRTF conformity. For 90° horizontal source sepa-
ration, no correlation of SRM and head size difference was found, implicating that cues
contained in a personalized HRTF are more relevant than an increase of ILD and ITD
provided by a non-individual HRTF. In the case of 180° horizontal source separation, no
correlation was found between SRM and pinna size difference, which is believed to be due
to erroneous measurements. Further research is required to clarify this relationship.
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my three supervisors for their assistance in preparing this thesis.
Axel Ahrens [PhD], Postdoctoral researcher at DTU Health Tech
Tobias May [PhD], Associate Professor at DTU Health Tech
Torsten Dau [PhD], Head of Section and Professor at DTU Health Tech
iv
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Coordinate systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Sound localization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Speech Intelligibility and the Cocktail-Party Scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Head-Related Transfer Function (HRTF) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Methods
11
3.1
HRTF Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Behavioural Experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Results
18
4.1
HRTF and Test-Retest Reliability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2
Front-Back Pattern Discrimination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3
Localization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.4
Speech Intelligibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5
Discussion
36
5.1
HRTF and Test-Retest Reliability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.2
Behavioral Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.3
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6
Conclusion
41
6.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
A Statistics
45
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Blindness separates people from things;
deafness separates people from people.
- Helen Keller
What is it, that separates humans from more primitive animals? What is the foundation
that allowed humans to populate every corner of the earth, building cities of millions?
What is the skill, that allows humans to cooperate with other individuals they have never
seen in their life? While the answer to each of these questions can certainly fill entire
books, there is something that each answer must contain: Language. To be more precise,
it is the ability to develop and communicate abstract ideas. Language is the tool that
allows planning. It allows the construction of a common identity through shared culture
and values. Religion, ownership and statehood are concepts upon which human civilization
has long been based. Without an elaborate vocabulary, none of these abstract ideas could
have been developed [Harari, 2011].
In short, the importance of language can not be
overestimated.
To be able to partake in society, one must be able to communicate using language. In
most situations, this communication happens through speech. The reception of speech
happens via hearing, hence the sense of hearing is vital to be able to connect to people.
As Helen Keller expressed in her quote above, the inability to talk to people leads to
disconnection from them. To ensure good speech intelligibility, the brain uses different
techniques to unmask sound.
The inner workings of these processes are complex and
not fully understood.
While physiological aspects of the outer, middle and inner ear
can be explained and modeled sufficiently, the neuronal and cognitive stages still remain
partly in the dark. Spatial separation of sources plays a major role and is still a topic
of current research. To perceive spatial sound, humans make use of anatomical features
that change the structure of incoming sound signals. It is possible to characterize the
shape of the head, torso and outer ear of a person mathematically as the Head-Related
Transfer Function (HRTF). Furthermore, after measuring the HRTF of a person, it is
possible to use the data to process any sound in a way that it can be replicated over
headphones to achieve the illusion of three dimensional, directional sound. For this, one
can either use their own personal HRTF or alternatively, another person can put on
headphones and listen to the sound with someone else’s ears, i.e. with a non-individual
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
1
==PAGE:10==
HRTF. When convoluting a signal with well fitting HRTFs, one can achieve an accurate
3D spatialization of sound using headphones. In cases where the shape of head and torso
of the donor are different from that of the listener, the illusion collapses.
Specifically
differences in the shape of the pinna can lead to severely impaired sound localization
ability, as has been shown by deforming listener’s pinnae using molds [van Opstal, 2016].
Listening with non-individual HRTF recordings often leads to confusions in localization
in the median plane, sometimes resulting in front-back confusions [Møller et al., 1996].
Synthesizing new HRTFs can be done using different techniques. They are often based on
pinna size parameters in an attempt to improve the quality of the illusion. The results
are called individualized HRTFs. When using non-individual HRTFs, localization abilities
are compromised to some extend. But what about speech intelligibility? The ability to
understand speech is based on many different skills and aspects, only one of which is
sound localization precision. What happens to the speech reception threshold of subjects
in different conditions, when they are compromised by listening with non-individualized
HRTFs? Can their performance be correlated to sound localization abilities or pinna size
parameters of the corresponding HRTFs?
In this thesis, the above questions will be investigated. Behavioral measurements were
conducted, in which subjects perform localization tasks and speech intelligibility mea-
surements in different hearing conditions. Throughout the experiments, special emphasis
was be put on the occurrence of front-back confusions. Monaural and binaural cues were
modified by letting subjects listen to stimuli with individual and non-individual reference
HRTFs. The results could shed light on the concept of spatial unmasking of speech and
the requirements for successful HRTF personalization. As the application of spatial audio
becomes more common, especially in consumer electronics, researchers are trying to find
ways to optimize individualized HRTFs. These can serve as a replacement for individ-
ual HRTFs, as the corresponding measurements are elaborate and impractical for such
applications. This thesis aims to provide valuable insight to solve the task.
As a start, necessary background information about HRTF related listening cues are out-
lined in chapter 2. This includes binaural cues, which emerge from differences between
the signals received at the left and the right ear, and monaural cues, which emerge from
the filtering of incoming sound due to the anatomy of a subject at each ear individually.
Next, the experimental design will be depicted in chapter 3. It contains measurements of
each subject’s HRTF, and the subsequent measurements of localization ability and speech
intelligibility. After presentation of the results in chapter 4, there will be a discussion in
chapter 5 about possible correlation between HRTF, localization and speech intelligibil-
ity, or the lack thereof. Finally, the limitations of the study will be highlighted and a
conclusion will be drawn in chapter 6, also suggesting possible future work based on the
findings.
2
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
==PAGE:11==
2
Background
This chapter outlines the information required to understand the structure of the exper-
iments and the meaning of the results. Furthermore, the current state of science will be
presented, specifically the underlying research and open questions that go with it.
2.1
Coordinate systems
In the following, the direction from which sound approaches a listener will be expressed
in terms of polar coordinates. This way, any direction on a sphere around the listener can
be described by a pair of data; azimuth angle ϕ and elevation angle θ (see figure 2.1a).
The three planes outlined in figure 2.1b will be of special importance. On all points on
the median plane, the azimuth angle is zero. On the horizontal plane, the elevation angle
is zero. A sagittal plane is any plane parallel to the median plane, that is centered on the
aural axis.
(a) Spherical coordinate system showing
azimuth angle ϕ and elevation angle θ.
(b) Interaural polar axis coordinate system
showing relevant planes.
Figure 2.1: Coordinate systems used in this thesis. Adopted from [Iida, 2019].
2.2
Sound localization
In terms of biological evolution, it is hard to overstate how beneficial it is for any living
being to be able to assess the location and distance of sound sources. Whereas our eyes
can only see what is in front of us and isn’t obstructed by another object, we can hear
sound from any direction at all times.
Listeners are able to localize sound sources in
different scenarios with differing precision. For a single source, changes as little as 1° can be
distinguished for some angles and sounds - a characteristic which is called localization blur
[Blauert, 1997]. Furthermore, this localization precision is only slightly compromised by
reflections, echoes and reverberation due to the precedence effect. Multiple sound sources,
for example two or more talkers, can also be located simultaneously. It has been shown
that the ability to localise a target signal can dramatically increase speech intelligibility
in a noisy environment [Cherry, 1953].
In this section, the fundamental cues used by
listeners to localise sound and the resulting benefits in terms of speech intelligibility will
be outlined.
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
3
==PAGE:12==
2.2.1
Binaural cues
Binaural cues are constituted by differences between signals arriving at the two ears of
a listener.
The two resulting fundamental cues are Interaural Time Difference (ITD)
and Interaural Level Difference (ILD). They are used predominantly for horizontal sound
localization.
Interaural time difference
Depending on the direction from which a soundwave is approaching, a difference in arrival
time between the two ears emerges. For any direction on the median plane, the interaural
time difference is zero. For an azimuth angle of ±90° it is maximum. In the case of a
plane wave, the ITD can be shown and calculated in an idealized way. This assumption
can be made if the distance to the sound source is large, especially for lower frequencies.
Furthermore, we will simplify the head to be shaped spherically.
Figure 2.2: Simplified illustration of ITD for a simplified, spherical head and incident
plane wave [Xie, 2013].
The corresponding ITD for the illustration shown in figure 2.2 can be calculated by
[Xie, 2013]
ITD(θ) = a
c (sin(θ) + θ)
with 0 > θ > π
2
(2.1)
The interaural time difference depends on the shape of the subject’s head, specifically on
it’s width and length, which are incorporated as the radius a. θ is the angle of incidence
and c is the speed of sound. It can be seen in equation 2.1, that the ITD will be identical
for all frequencies. It usually lays in the range of 0 - 700 µs depending on the direction of
the incident wave and for the standard speed of sound in air of 343 m
s .
Interaural level difference
Similar to interaural time differences, level differences between the ears emerge depending
on the direction of incident sound. The sound pressure level at the contralateral ear (the
ear further away from the sound source) will be attenuated to an extent that varies with
frequency due to shadowing effects by the head. The extent to which sound waves are
4
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
==PAGE:13==
able to bend around objects depends on the wavelength in relation to the dimensions of
the object. Sound waves of higher frequency (and therefore smaller wavelengths) are less
able to bend around obstacles and are instead reflected, increasing the shadowing effect
and therefore the ILD [van Opstal, 2016].
2.2.2
Monaural cues
Whenever a sound source is located on the median plane of a listener, sound localization
becomes a more difficult task. The minimum localization blur in the horizontal direction
is reported to be much smaller than in the vertical direction, with values of 2° and 3.5°
respectively [Middlebrooks and Green, 1991]. The previously mentioned binaural cues are
unavailable in the median, since for any position on the median plane the traveling path is
symmetrical for the left and right ear. More generally speaking, this is also true for different
locations of a sound source on the surface of any sagittal plane and the resulting cone when
”connecting” it to the ears; A phenomenon which is known as the cone of confusion. On
the cone, any two sources that are placed symmetrically around the interaural axis result
in approximately equal ITDs and ILDs. Regardless of the missing binaural cues, listeners
are usually able to correctly localize sound sources on both the median plane and the
cone of confusion. This usually happens with the help of slight movements of the head,
which again result in binaural cue changes. However, even when the head of a subject is
stabilized and binaural cues are withheld completely, listeners can often correctly identify
the position of a sound source.
While binaural cues are mainly related to the shape of the head, monaural cues are as-
sociated with the presence and shape of the pinna. Unlike binaural cues, they are not
quantified as differences between, but instead as properties of each ear individually. Like
in the binaural case, monaural cues can be investigated both in the time and frequency
domain. The pinna acts as a linear filter, with a transfer function that changes over di-
rection of incidence and distance to the source. By convoluting this direction dependent
transfer function with incident sound, the pinna codes spatial attributes of the sound field
into temporal and spectral attributes of the sound arriving in the ear [Blauert, 1997]. The
name of this function is the head-related transfer function (HRTF). It is important to note
that a single HRTF in itself only contains monaural cues, but by incorporating the delay
and magnitude differences between the ears, the monaural HRTFs can be extended to bin-
aural HRTFs. The physical effects of the pinna on the sound field are manifold: reflection,
shadowing, dispersion diffraction, interference and resonance. A detailed description of
the shape and effects of the HRTF will follow in chapter 2.4.
2.3
Speech Intelligibility and the Cocktail-Party Scenario
The brain organizes audiological stimuli into auditory events, which are distributed in
space. The sum of these events is called the auditory scene [Blauert, 1997]. The process
of organizing auditory events over space and time is called auditory stream segregation
[Blauert, 2013](also: auditory scene analysis [Bregman, 1994]), where the organization of
auditory events is called grouping).
Auditory stream segregation is partly enabled by
spatial hearing, which is in turn greatly dependent on binaural listening, meaning that
if a subject receives monaural input (only from one ear), both localization precision and
speech intelligibility are constrained. If the auditory scene has been successfully organized
into separate auditory events, listeners are able to focus their attention on some target
event, while suppressing other, interfering sources. For example, in a room with many
interfering talkers, listeners can focus their attention to the person talking specifically to
them, filtering out any non-target speech very effectively. A phenomenon which has been
coined the ”cocktail-party effect” [Cherry, 1953]. The ability of a subject to selectively
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
5
==PAGE:14==
focus on auditory events refers to two conceptually distinct challenges: The ability to
organize different sources (talkers) into spatially distinct auditory events and the ability to
focus on, or switch focus between them. The first, called segregation, is a psychoacoustical
problem, and will to a large extend be the topic of this thesis. The latter, called streaming,
is a cognitive problem of directing attention and distinct from the acoustical aspect.
If the target signal is speech, two types of masking effects are often separated, although
not clearly distinguished. Energetic masking simply refers to a decrease in audibility or
intelligibility due to similar frequency content, i.e., overlapping excitation patterns in the
cochlea or auditory nerve [Durlach et al., 2003]. Informational masking on the other hand
is not clearly defined. It can be assumed, that informational masking will be substantial if
the masker is a same sex talker, saying intelligible words. This will be of importance in the
following experiments. The improvement in speech intelligibility that can be attributed
to the spatial separation of auditory events is usually expressed as the spatial release from
masking (SRM). So far, the connection between binaural speech perception and local-
ization abilities is not completely clear [Bronkhorst, 2015]. The improvement of speech
intelligibility under different circumstances is usually expressed as a change in the speech
reception threshold (SRT). The speech reception threshold is some SNR, at which a cer-
tain rate of words can be identified correctly by a listener. Many different factors can have
substantial impacts on the SRT. The type of target speech, spectral differences between
target and interfering sounds, the spatial configuration of the sound sources, fluctuations
in level (modulations) of the interfering sounds are some of them [Bronkhorst, 2000]. Spa-
tial separation of target and interferer can result in a reduction of the SRT by up to 10dB
[Bronkhorst, 2015]. Binaural listening allows for different approaches to increase speech
intelligibility. In the case of horizontal source separation, the different ILDs of target and
masker lead to different signal to noise ratios (SNR) at the ears. This allows listeners to
choose the ear with the better SNR, increasing their SRT, a phenomenon which is called
better ear listening. In this case, the increase of speech intelligibility is purely due to
changes in energetic masking. Similarly, a horizontal separation of source and masker also
increases the ITD and introduces a phase shift between left and right ear. This can be
used as another cue for source separation and also increases the SRT in a process called
binaural unmasking [Hirsh, 1948]. Binaural models have been developed that calculate
the energetic SRM for a given horizontal target and source separation via ILD and ITD.
One such model by Jelfs [Jelfs et al., 2010] will be consulted to compare its results with
the measurement results of this thesis.
Binaural cues can be excluded from an experiment by separating the location of target and
masker in a way that ILD and ITD of target and masker are approximately the same, for
example by introducing a spatial separation along the median plane. It has been shown
by Freyman [Freyman et al., 2001] that the SRT can be improved by changing only the
perceived location of the interfering auditory event with an additional source using the
precedence effect. In this way, Freyman ensured no change in energetic masking, but they
could still show a reduction of SRT by up to 8 dB for interfering speech. However, the
same experiment has led to an improvement of only 1 dB for interfering noise. In another
experiment, it has been shown that separating target speech and interfering speech by
±50° vertically increases Speech intelligibility by 7 %, which is equivalent to an increase
in signal level of only 1.3 dB [McAnally et al., 2002], suggesting grouping effects are more
distinct in the case of horizontal separation.
6
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
==PAGE:15==
2.4
Head-Related Transfer Function (HRTF)
HRTFs are investigated most efficiently in the amplitude spectrum. The phase spectrum
does not play an important role [Kulkarni et al., 1999], it is only the relative phase dif-
ference between the ears that matters in the horizontal separation of sources. So far, the
influence of spectral features of the HRTF on the localization of sound has not been under-
stood completely. However, it has been shown that spectral notches and peaks above 5kHz
play an important role in the vertical localization of auditory events. More specifically,
the position of the first notch at about 5-6 kHz in the spectrum, called the pinna notch
has been shown to be an important cue [Xie, 2013]. The physical phenomenon leading to
notches in the HRTF has not been determined with satisfying certainty. It has been pro-
posed for example, that reflected waves from the concha might lead to interference effects.
The position of notches is elevation dependent, which is why they serve as appropriate
cues for vertical localization. The position of the peaks in the spectrum on the other hand,
is independent of vertical angle. It has been shown extensively that they can be attributed
to resonances in the outer ear [Blauert, 1997]. Since monaural cues rely on a multitude of
peaks and notches, that are dispersed over a wide frequency range, it follows that vertical
localization and resolving front-back ambiguities is drastically impaired for stimuli of low
bandwidths, a connection that has also been shown experimentally [Butler, 1986].
Assuming that only the position and magnitude of peaks and notches is crucial in vertical
localization, the HRTF can be parameterized as done by Iida [Iida, 2019]. Here, the first
peak is denoted P1, the first notch is N1, the second peak is P2 etc.. It has been shown
experimentally that the resulting model can be reduced to only the first two peaks and
notches each: P1, P2, N1 and N2 [Iida and Ishii, 2018]. Figure 2.3 shows an exemplary
HRTF over different vertical angles, with the corresponding positions of these parameters
indicated.
Figure 2.3: HRTF over different vertical angles and the position of frequency peaks and
notches P1, P2, N1 and N2 [Iida, 2019].
2.4.1
HRTF recordings and playback
The HRTF is usually determined by measuring the Head-Related Impulse Response (HRIR)
first. The underlying assumption is that the system under consideration is linear and time-
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
7
==PAGE:16==
invariant (LTI), meaning that it can be characterized entirely by its impulse response. In
the case of measuring a HRIR, the linearity aspect is of little concern, whereas the assump-
tion, that the system under consideration is time invariant, relies heavily on the absence
of subject movement during the measurement. In the time domain, the response/output
y(t) of a system to any input x(t) can be found as the convolution of the input with the
impulse response h(t).
y(t) = x(t) ∗h(t)
(2.2)
When an ideal impulse is used as the input signal, the resulting output is the impulse
response of the system itself.
However, this theoretical consideration is of limited use
for measuring the impulse response, since a perfect impulse is infinitely short and can
therefore not be reproduced in reality. Alternatively, other measurement signals are used
and the measured output transformed mathematically to yield the impulse response. It
is customary to use an exponential sine sweep as the test signal and yield the impulse
response as the convolution of the output signal with the inverse of the test signal x−1(t)
[Farino, 2007]. The same has been done in the following experiments. Finally, the HRTF
can be calculated as the Fourier-transform of the impulse response.
When measuring HRIR, the impulse response is measured individually for each ear and
each direction. Microphones are placed at the entrance of a subject’s ear canals, and the
measurement signal is played over a loudspeaker. The measurement can then be repeated
for other directions by moving the loudspeaker. Another variable is the distance of the
loudspeaker to the subject. The aspect of distance however, is of secondary concern. It
is generally accepted that HRTFs do not change significantly for source distances >1m,
they do however change significantly for distances <1m [Enzner et al., 2013]. In summary,
characterizing a subject is not based on ”one” HRTF but rather a collection of HRTFs for
different angles and distances. Once a measurement is completed, it is possible to convolve
a binaural HRIR with a given sound signal to yield a stereo output that contains the cues
a listener uses to locate sound. Therefore, when the sound is played back over headphones,
for the subject it can sound exactly as if the sound is coming from the direction of which
the HRIR has been recorded. However, this illusion of directional sound is quite sensitive
and quickly destroyed if, for example, visual information corresponding to the sounds is
missing or if the listener simply moves their head.
2.4.2
Individualization of HRTF
As of now, it is rather costly to measure a subject’s HRTF, and it requires a special labo-
ratory and equipment. Therefore the use of personal HRTFs outside of research purposes
is rare. The use of non-personal HRTFs often gives unsatisfactory results. These include
inaccurate localization, internalization and front-back confusions. It is therefore an inter-
esting subject of research to find ways to recreate the sensation of listening with a personal
HRTF using different methods.
Differences between personal and non-personal HRTFs
The characteristics of the HRTF depend directly on the shape of the head and pinnae of
the corresponding subject. Differences in the anatomy between subjects lead to drastic
differences in the HRTF and since pinna and head dimension vary widely, using the HRTF
of another person usually yields unsatisfactory results. For the same reasons, standardizing
HRTFs and finding a ”one size fits all” solution has not been possible. The quality of HRTF
reproduction is often quantified in terms of the localization error, the difference between
the auditory event pointed out by the subject and the actual position of the sound source
in degrees.
In this regard, differences between lateral and vertical localization should
be considered. Lateralization (based on ILD and ITD) is rather robust. Both ILD and
ITD change monotonically in each direction, meaning that the resulting error will usually
8
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.4: Localization precision when using the HRTF of another subject with differ-
ent pinnae size (S, M and L refer to the size of the corresponding HRTF or subject)
[Morimoto and Ando, 1980]
be one dimensional. For vertical localization however, the complicated structure of the
HRTF and the corresponding cues are discontinuous and can lead to more drastic or
sometimes fatal errors like front-back confusion [Iida, 2019]. Based on experimental data,
it is hypothesized that the HRTF of a subject with large pinna is usually much more
compatible with a subject with small pinnae than the other way around [Iida, 2019].
Such experimental data is shown exemplary in figure 2.4.
While generally, the use of
non-individual HRTF primarily results in an increase in the rate of front-back confusions
[Wenzel et al., 1993], this phenomenon sometimes disappears when a subject with small
pinnae uses the HRTF of a subject with large pinnae. Another disadvantage of using
non-personal HRTFs, though closely related to the degraded localization, is the missing
externalization of the auditory scene. Externalization refers to the sensation that sound
originates from some point outside of the individual, whereas for internalized sound, the
source is perceived to be inside the head.
Artificial heads
One way to record spatial audio is by using artificial heads. Artificial heads have been
developed mainly for research purposes. Famous examples include 45BB KEMAR from
GRAS, the TYP 4128-C HATS from Brül&Kjaer or the KU100 from Neumann. Further-
more, there are less professional binaural microphones on the market with which one can
record sound and videos with binaural audio. Artificial heads include rough shapes of
the head and, with more detail, the shape of the human pinna. Sometimes the shoulders
or the entire torso are included. The dimensions of the artificial heads are usually based
on average measurements of subject’s head and pinnae dimensions. It has been shown
that the HRTF of different dummy heads fit some subjects, but on average yield very bad
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
9
==PAGE:18==
results in the perception of vertical direction and distinction of front and back directions
[Iida, 2019] [Møller et al., 1999].
HRTF databases
Another approach is to pick a HRTF from a database.
An individualized HRTF can
be picked based on different parameters like head and pinna dimensions. Examples for
HRTF databases include LISTEN, CIPIC and ITA, which have varying spatial resolution
but all come with a set of dimension parameters. The parameters used by the creators
of the CIPIC database are shown in figure 2.5.
In addition to simply selecting some
HRTF that resembles the chosen parameters of the listener, a completely new HRTF can
by synthesized from multiple HRTFs in an attempt to further individualize the result.
Different methods of selecting, generating or synthesizing a preferable HRTF based on
databases are shown by Iida [Iida, 2019].
Figure 2.5:
Head and Pinna size parameters as used in the CIPIC HRTF database
[Algazi et al., 2001]. For the following experiments, parameters x1, x3, d5 and d6 were
determined for all subjects and are used as a measure of HRTF similarity
10
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
==PAGE:19==
3
Methods
The purpose of this experiment is to investigate the difference between using one’s personal
HRTF (individual) and using other’s HRTFs (non-individual) in speech-in-noise intelligi-
bility tasks. Furthermore, the subject’s performance in terms of sound localization is to
be tested in relation to pinna size similarity. It has been established in chapters 2.2 and
2.3 that the use of individual HRTF is crucial for vertical localization and the avoidance
of front-back confusion.
It has been established that spatial separation of target and
masker generally leads to a spatial release of masking. It is hypothesized that the use of
personalized HRTFs leads to an increase in both localization performance and SRT for
vertically separated sources. This effect is investigated mainly for the case of a front-back
scenario. However, changes for horizontally separated sources are expected to show a less
clear advantage for individual HRTFs, or no advantage at all. When the subjects are given
the opportunity to use better ear listening, it might even be possible that non-individual
HRTFs with larger ITD and/or ILD provide cues that improve the SRT of subjects be-
yond what they are able to achieve with their own HRTF. The amount of ITD and ILD
change mainly with the head width and length respectively, which is why they are used
as additional parameters. 11 young, normal hearing adult listeners were selected. For
all subjects, an age below 30 years and a hearing level of <20dB HL was confirmed. All
participants provided informed consent and all experiments were approved by the Science-
Ethics Committee for the Capital Region of Denmark (reference H-16036391). During the
experiment, some size parameters where measured using a caliper. Based on similar mea-
surements conducted by the makers of the CIPIC database from figure 2.5, the parameters
chosen were head width (x1), head length (x3), pinna width (d6) and pinna height (d5).
In this study, particular emphasis will be put on the similarity of pinna dimensions. To
be able to compare them, a weighted parameter combining pinna width and height has
been calculated and assigned to each subject. It is noted that the similarity of HRTFs
can not be fully simplified to the difference of pinna height and width, however these two
parameters are assumed to have a major influence. In table 3.1, the subjects are listed
and ordered by size.
Subject tag
s133
s235
s336
s437
s539
s639
s740
s841
s942
s1042
s1147
head width x1
[mm]
140
150
145
157
145
149
152
159
144
149
159
head depth x3
[mm]
180
180
179
199
190
190
201
191
193
197
199
pinna height
d5 [mm]
58
57
57
61
62
62
63
64
67
64
71
pinna width d6
[mm]
21
24
25
25
28
27
29
29
29
31
35
head size
x1+x3
2
160
165
162
178
167.5
169.5
176.5
175
168.5
173
179
pinna size
d5+2d6
3
33
35
36
37
39
39
40
41
42
42
47
Table 3.1: List of subjects with their size parameters. Reference HRTFs: small: s133,
medium: s639, large: s1147
For each subject, left and right pinna were measured individually. Differences between
left and right pinna never exceeded the standard deviation of the measurement technique.
Therefore, all subjects were assumed to have symmetrical pinnae. Each subject was given
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
11
==PAGE:20==
a tag, ordered by pinna size with the pinna size itself given in the index. All experiments
were conducted in the Audio-Visual Immersion Lab (AVIL) on DTU Lyngby campus
in building 354. The AVIL is an anechoic chamber with 64 loudspeakers positioned in
a sphere around the subject. The radius of this sphere is 2.4 m. However, only 48 of
the loudspeakers have been used as a part of this project.
These where organized in
three horizontal rings around the subject. One ring with an elevation angle of 0° and a
loudspeaker every 15° in the azimuth, resulting in 24 loudspeakers. Additionally, there
are two rings at elevation angles +28° and -28°, each with a loudspeaker for every 30° in
the azimuth, resulting in 12 loudspeakers per ring.
For the localization and speech intelligibility tasks, subjects had to complete each task in
five different listening conditions. The first one is called loudspeaker, where the stimulus
was played over the loudspeakers in the lab. Trials that are played in this condition will be
called loudspeaker trials. The rest were called sHRTF, mHRTF, lHRTF and ownHRTF
where sounds were convolved with an HRIR to create a stimulus that sounds as if it
is coming from the corresponding loudspeaker. The stimulus would then be played over
headphones. Trials that are played in one of these four conditions will be collectively called
headphone trials. In the condition ownHRTF, the subject’s own corresponding HRTF was
used. In conditions sHRTF, mHRTF and lHRTF, the HRTF of another subject was used.
The three reference HRTFs were selected based on the pinna size parameter from table
3.1. The prefixes s, m, l refer to the sizes small, medium and large, meaning that they
were taken from the subjects with the smallest pinnae (s133), the largest pinnae (s1147),
and the one whose pinnae are closest to the median of all subjects (s639). The loudspeaker
listening condition serves as a reference condition, where it is assumed that the ”real”
performance of the subjects is measured. Uncertainties with the differing quality of HRTF
measurements are excluded. Accordingly, the analysis of factors in each experiment will
be done by considering differences between the headphone conditions only. For all three
behavioural measurements, listening conditions were the same and have been organized as
follows: For each run, all trials played in the loudspeaker condition were played towards
the beginning of the run, with a randomized order of possible patterns/loudspeaker/task,
depending on the experiment. This way, the subjects can familiarize themselves with the
task. After the loudspeaker trials, the headphone trials were performed, with all trials
being mixed in a fully randomized order.
3.1
HRTF Measurements
In a first round of measurements, each subject had their HRTF measured in the AVIL. A
pair of binaural microphones (4560-OC-F-B00 from DPA Microphones) was placed at the
entry of the subject’s ear canals. From every loudspeaker, an exponential sweep with a
duration of three seconds was played and recorded by both microphones, resulting in 128
separate sound files that can be seen as the system output. Based on those, the impulse
responses were estimated (see section 2.4.1) It has been established in the literature that
when using the first 2 ms of the HRIR, the amplitude spectrum coincided with that of the
full-length HRTF [Iida, 2019]. Thus, the HRIR were truncated to 130 samples after the
maximum value and 80 samples before the maximum value. With a sampling frequency
of 48 kHz, this corresponds to approximately 2.7 ms and 1.7 ms respectively. The HRIR
of each subject was normalized to a maximum amplitude of one. Based on the HRIR, the
HRTF was calculated as the Fourier transform of each HRIR.
The head position was not physically fixed, but subjects were instructed very clearly to
move as little as possible and face the frontal loudspeaker. Six full HRTF measurements
were conducted for each subject, each of which lasted four minutes. After the first three
12
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
==PAGE:21==
measurements, the subject was asked to take a break, after which the microphones were
positioned again. The fourth HRTF measurement of every subject was used for the fol-
lowing experiments. The reason for this is discussed in section 4.1.
Figure 3.1: B&K HATS artificial head with DPA 4560 CORE microphone in the AVIL
lab at DTU
From the similarity of all six measurements, conclusions about the test-retest reliability
and the overall quality of the results can be drawn. It is assumed that there are four
possibly significant sources of random error during the measurement:
1. The subject’s movements during a measurement
2. The subject’s differing position between or during measurements
3. The different positioning of the microphones
4. Noise and non-linearities in the measurement hardware
When measuring subject’s HRTF in the lab, all of these effects are confounded.
The
attribution of errors to any one of them is therefore not possible.
In an attempt to
investigate some of the errors individually, experiments were designed in which other
sources of errors are excluded. As a first measurement, multiple HRTF were measured with
a HATS, without making any changes to its position or the position of the microphones.
The measurement setup using a HATS can be seen in figure 3.1. In comparison to hu-
man subjects, the measurement conditions using an artificial head are more stable and
controlled. Not only does the HATS not move, it is also perfectly symmetrical. There-
fore, the first round of measurements contains purely the random error stemming from
imperfections in the measurement hardware (error 4.). Secondly, HATS measurements
have been conducted where after every run the microphones were roughly repositioned.
Therefore, this measurement includes errors number 4 and 3. It is expected that error
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
13
==PAGE:22==
4 will be small and insignificant, meaning that from this measurement clear conclusions
about error 3 can be drawn. For measurements involving subjects, differentiating between
different sources of error is more complex. Subjects will always move a certain amount
(errors 2 and 1). By doing the aforementioned two sets of three measurements each, it
could be argued that errors 2 and 1 can be investigated by comparing the agreement of
each set internally, and error 3 by comparing the agreement of the sets with each other.
Finally, it is noted that the conclusions about error 3 that have been drawn from the HATS
experiments can not be fully translated to real subjects: Both the microphone frame and
the foam windscreens were only available in one size. This size fit some subjects much
better than others, an issue that could appear as a large type 3 error for some subjects.
For the analysis, it will be assumed that the quality of HRTF measurements (i.e. how
much it resembles the ”real” HRTF of the subject) can be related to the absence of ran-
dom errors. The resulting agreement between all six measurements will be quantified as
the mean absolute deviation (MAD) from the average. It is noted that the correlation
between MAD and measurement quality must not necessarily be unambiguous, because it
does not include systematic errors and biases. It is, however, a meaningful indicator.
3.2
Behavioural Experiments
The localization experiments were divided into two separate experiments, each with a
different approach. Both focused on the front-back confusion aspect of sound localization.
The first was designed to be a discrimination task rather than a typical localization task.
In it, patterns of sounds travelling around the subject were presented. In the second,
single sounds were presented and the subject was tasked with precisely pointing out the
direction. Finally, speech intelligibility measurements were designed in a way to be able
to compare results from all experiments.
3.2.1
Front-Back pattern discrimination
A pattern of sounds was played over the horizontal loudspeaker ring in the AVIL. More
precisely, a series of noise bursts (pink spectrum, 100 ms duration, Tukey window with
20 ms ramps) was played in either a full circle or two half circles in either one direction. The
resulting patterns are visible in figure 3.2, which is the image that was shown to subjects
during the experiment. With the pattern always starting to the left of the subject, four
patterns are possible: back-front (BF), front-back (FB), back-back (BB) and front-front
(FF). The subjects were tasked with correctly identifying the played pattern and selecting
it on a user interface. Subjects could then click on one of the images to select their choice.
Given that the only task in this experiment was to differentiate frontal and rear directions,
every incorrect response is classified as a front-back confusion. In this experiment, one
run consisted of each possible combination of pattern and condition repeated twice. The
full experiment involved two runs, each starting with the loudspeaker trials. The duration
of the experiment was approximately 15 to 25 minutes depending on the subject and
consisted of 80 trials in total.
3.2.2
Localization
Another localization experiment was performed, in which the stimulus was played on
one specific loudspeaker which the subject then had to identify.
Similarly to the last
experiment, the stimulus was a noise burst, except it was played longer (pink spectrum,
250 ms duration, Tukey windows with 20 ramps). The subject was then tasked to select
the loudspeaker from which they think the sound originated using a VR framework (HTC
VIVE VR controller, same as in [Ahrens et al., 2019]). The subjects were not wearing
the glasses, but only used the controller to point in the direction of the loudspeaker. For
each run, every possible combination of 24 loudspeakers and 5 conditions was played once,
14
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.2: GUI from the first localization task displaying the four possible patterns
resulting in 120 trials per run. Two repetitions were conducted, resulting in 240 trials in
total. The experiment took approximately 20 to 30 minutes per on the subject.
3.2.3
Speech Intelligibility
In this experiment, the speech reception threshold (SRT) of speech in noise was measured
in terms of the SNR between speech and noise at which 70 % of the words are correctly
identified. The framework used was Dantale II, a danish matrix sentence test. In this
framework, a target sentence consisting of five words is to be understood by the subject.
The first word of the target sentence is a name, and each consecutive word is randomly
chosen from a set of 10 possible words each. The words are organized in a way that none
of them can be deduced from context to other words. Figure 3.3 shows the graphical user
interface that was presented to the listeners. The GUI shows the target word (name) as
well as the possible responses to the four word categories. After listening to the sentence,
the subject was tasked with selecting the words they think they heard.
Based on the response, the SNR is increased or decreased by changing the level of the target
speech. The masker remains at a constant level of 60 dB SPL. For each reversal, the step
size of the SNR change is decreased to approach the SRT of the subject, which has been
set at the 70 % correctly identified words mark. Making use of the signal detection theory
[Wickens, 2001], based on the assumption that the internal excitation follows a Gaussian
distribution, the behaviour of a subject can be represented with a psychometric curve,
showing the cumulative probability density function over SNR. The psychometric function
that is assumed to hold for this experiment is sketched in figure 3.4. The smallest possible
amount of correctly identified words is 10 %, which corresponds to random guessing in a
10-AFC test.
Four different masker configurations were tested. For each masker configuration, the target
speech was played from the direction in front of the subject (0° azimuth, 0° elevation). As
maskers, both speech and noise were used. The speech was another talker of the same gen-
der (female), saying another combination of words from the Dantale II set. The noise was
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.3: GUI used in the SRT measurements showing all possible words from the
Dantalle II set.
Figure 3.4: Psychometric function assumed for the SRT measurement, based on the as-
sumption that the internal excitation follows Gaussian distribution.
16
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
==PAGE:25==
Name
Masker
Masker origin
ITD & ILD
Parameter
Starting SNR
Colocated Speech
Speech
0◦
≈0
SRTCoS
5dB
FrontBack
Speech
180◦
≈0
SRTFbS
-10dB
Colocated Noise
Noise
0◦
≈0
SRTCoN
-10dB
Side
Noise
−90◦
≈max
SRTSideN
-20dB
Table 3.2: Masker configurations used in the speech intelligibility measurement
speech modulated, and had the same long-term spectrum and broadband envelope with
random phase. For the processing of the noise, statistical properties of the corresponding
speech signal were used. All possible combinations result in 20 trials. The experiment
took approximately 80 to 120 minutes depending on the subject. The names and specifi-
cations of the four masker configurations are described in table 3.2. After completing the
first round of measurements, a bug was found in the Matlab code through which the mea-
surement was performed: Due to a faulty randomization algorithm, some combinations of
listening condition and masker configuration were measured multiple times, while others
were not measured at all. Another round of experiments was scheduled to measure the
combinations that were missing for each subject.
In the analysis, the measured SRTs are combined to calculate the Spatial Release from
Masking (SRM) for two different cases.
SRMSpeech = SRTCoS −SRTFbS
(3.1)
SRMNoise = SRTCoN −SRTSideN
(3.2)
For both speech masker configurations, it is assumed that ITD and ILD are approximately
zero.
Therefore there are no substantial binaural cues, leaving the subjects only with
monaural cues, which are mostly related to pinna dimensions. It has been established that
monaural cues are important for vertical localization and avoiding front-back confusions.
This means that the SRMSpeech (equation 3.1) could be directly relatable to how well
the used HRTF fits the corresponding subject and to the rate of front-back confusions.
Apart from this however, there is also an additional discrimination cue in the front-back
configuration from energetic masking by the differences in the spectra.
In contrast, for the noise conditions, the spatial release from masking, SRMNoise (equation
3.2), includes binaural cues. Since the masker origin in the two conditions differs by 90◦,
better ear listening is expected to dominate the resulting masking release. The results
from this part of the experiment are compared to the results of a binaural speech in noise
intelligibility model as a sanity check. Here, the model proposed by Jelfs [Jelfs et al., 2010]
was used.
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
17
==PAGE:26==
4
Results
4.1
HRTF and Test-Retest Reliability
To investigate the test-retest reliability of the measurement setup in a controlled environ-
ment, HRTF measurements were performed with an artificial head (HATS). Depending
on the setup, different sources of error can be investigated separately (cf. section 3.1).
Figure 4.1 shows the results for this measurement. Left and right ear are color coded with
different shades of blue and red respectively. The results for each ear seem to be congruent
with very small variations, indicating a small error from the measurement system. The
data show that there are large differences between left and right ear, which might be due
to asymmetrical microphone positioning.
To assess the influence of microphone positioning, six more HRTF measurements of the
HATS were performed, in which after every measurement the microphones were taken off
and then roughly repositioned. The resulting HRTFs are shown exemplary for the frontal
direction and the left ear in figure 4.2. It can be seen that the deviation between measure-
ments exceeds 10 dB for some frequencies. Furthermore, it can be seen that the deviations
increase with frequency. The frequency dependency is due to the shorter wavelength at
high frequencies and the resulting stronger dependency on positional small changes of the
microphones. It is noted that during this experiment, the variation of microphone posi-
tions was intentionally high. This way, it can be assumed that the maximum amount of
this type of error is covered in the results.
In figure 4.3 the measured HRTF of a real subject (s133) is shown. The underlying HRIR
that have been used to calculate these HRTFs are shown in figure 4.4. The color coding
corresponds to before the break (blue) and after the break (red). It can be seen that
the variance between measurements is much higher before the break than after, a pattern
that was also visible with other subjects. Based on this observation, the fourth HRIR
measurement was selected to calculate the stimuli in the following experiments for every
subject. Concerning the HRTF measurements of other subjects, it is noted that the quality
of the measurements is either similar to, or better than that of subject s133. To be able
to quantify the test-retest reliability and compare subjects, the mean absolute deviation
(MAD) of all six measurements was calculated. The MAD is shown for three directions
and averaged over left and right ear in table 4.1. As mentioned, the deviation is the highest
for s133’s 0◦measurement. From the boxplot representation in figure 4.5 it can be seen
that the majority of MAD values was below 2 dB. The smallest value was achieved for
s1042’s 180◦measurement for the left ear shown in figure 4.6. Here, both the deviations
before and after changing microphone positions, as well as deviations within these sets are
remarkably small.
18
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4.1: HRTF measurements of an artificial head (HATS) without any changes made
between measurements. Left and right ear, frontal direction.
Figure 4.2: HRTF measurements of an artificial head (HATS) with rough repositioning of
the microphones after every run. Left ear, frontal direction.
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 4.3: HRTF measurements for subject s133 showing improved test-retest reliability
in runs 4, 5 and 6 after the break. Left ear, frontal direction.
Figure 4.4: HRIR measurements for subject s133. Left ear, frontal direction.
20
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
==PAGE:29==
Azimuth
s133
s235
s336
s437
s539
s639
s740
s841
s942
s1042
s1147
0◦
3.4
1.3
1.4
1.7
2.3
1.4
1.0
2.0
1.4
0.6
1.5
90◦
2.4
1.4
1.1
1.2
2.8
1.2
1.5
1.7
1.3
1.2
1.7
180◦
2.9
1.0
1.1
0.6
2.0
0.8
1.2
0.9
1.0
0.6
0.9
Table 4.1: Mean absolute deviation (in dB) of all HRTF measurements bandpassed from
4 kHz to 16 kHz. Averaged over left an right ear.
Figure 4.5: Boxplot representation of table 4.1
Figure 4.6: All six right ear HRTF measurements from 180◦Azimuth angle of subject
s1042, who had the best mean absolute difference of all measurements displayed in table
4.1.
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
21
==PAGE:30==
4.2
Front-Back Pattern Discrimination
In the analysis of this experiment, the performance of subjects is investigated for each
subject individually (figure 4.7), grouped by conditions (figure 4.8) and as a function of
pinna size (figures 4.9 and 4.10).
In figure 4.7, the performance of each subject is shown as correct and incorrect responses
for all patterns individually. The total number of presented trials for each pattern is equal,
corresponding to 25%. Therefore, if a subject answers correctly in every trial, there will be
four blue bars of equal size, each exactly reaching the 25% mark. This can be observed for
subject s336, who responded correctly in all trials. Similarly, there are other subjects who
made only very few errors (e.g. subjects s740, s942 and s1147). Looking at the subjects
who had more incorrect responses, there is a clear tendency towards incorrectly choosing
the back-back (BB) pattern. Both the amount of incorrect responses and total responses
was the highest for the BB pattern for all subjects, apart from subjects s539 and s1147.
For other patterns, the amount of incorrect responses was small, or at least smaller than
the amount of correct responses.
In figure 4.8, the average performance of all subjects is shown for each listening condition
in a boxplot. In the loudspeaker condition, it can be seen that the percentage of correct
responses is 100% most of the time, with only few subjects making minor errors. Similar
results can be seen when subjects used their own HRTF, although there are slightly more
errors. Similarly, the results with the small HRTF (sHRTF) also led to few errors in the
pattern detection. The performance in the conditions with the medium (mHRTF) and the
large HRTF (lHRTF) showed less correct responses with 78 % and 42 % correct responses,
respectively. However, no significant difference was found between the ownHRTF and
the mHRTF conditions (t(40)=-1.76, p=0.41) but the difference between ownHRTF and
lHRTF was found to be statistically significant (t(40)=-4.14, p=0.0016).
The individual performance of subjects was correlated with the corresponding similarity to
the presented HRTFs. This similarity was expressed as the pinna size difference which was
calculated based on the pinna size parameter and is shown in table 3.1. Both the pinna
size difference and the absolute pinna size difference are shown, because an asymmetry
for positive and negative pinna size differences was found. In figure 4.9 the performance
of each subject is shown with respect to their pinna size difference in each headphone
condition.
Additionally, a second order polynomial was fitted to the data, showing a
peak in correct responses for a pinna size difference of +9 mm. In figure 4.10, the same
data is plotted over the absolute value of the pinna size difference. Additionally, a linear
regression line has been fitted. For the linear regression, a statistically relevant negative
correlation is found with r = -0.386 and p = 0.014. This suggests that for increased pinna
size difference, the amount of correct responses is reduced linearly.
22
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.7: Distribution of correct and incorrect responses per pattern for each subject.
The blue line indicates the real occurrence of 25%. per pattern. See figure 3.2 for an
overview of the four patterns.
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.8: Correct responses in each listening condition for all subjects in the front-back
pattern discrimination task: Median (red), upper and lower quartile (blue), min/max
values (black) and outliers (red crosses) [F(4, 40) = 8.13, p < 0.001].
Figure 4.9:
Correct responses in each headphone condition for all subjects in
the front-back pattern discrimination task.
Scattered over pinna size difference
(pinna size of the subject −pinna size of the reference HRTF).
2nd order poly-
nomial fit shown as the black line. Center of gravity for each condition indicated as larger
circles.
24
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.10: Correct responses in each headphone condition for all subjects in the pat-
tern front-back pattern discrimination.
Scattered over absolute pinna size difference
(|pinna size of the subject −pinna size of the reference HRTF|). 1st order polyno-
mial / linear regression fit shown as the black line. Center of gravity for each condition
indicated as larger circles.
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
25
==PAGE:34==
4.3
Localization
In the analysis of the results from this experiment, heavy emphasis was put on the occur-
rence of front-back confusion when using non-individualized HRTF. First, the distribution
of horizontal localization errors is investigated for each subject. In figure 4.11, horizontal
errors are shown binned into groups, that are related to the severity of the error. Different
colors in the stacked bars indicate the listening condition. In the horizontal plane, loud-
speakers are separated by a minimum of 15°, which is why absolute horizontal errors <7.5°
are closest to the correct loudspeaker and therefore assumed to be correct. The small er-
rors are then due to imperfections of the pointing method. Accordingly, a horizontal error
of <22.5° corresponds to missing the correct loudspeaker by one, and a horizontal error
of <37.5° corresponds to missing the correct loudspeaker by two. Any horizontal error
>37.5° corresponds to missing the correct loudspeaker by three. Localization errors this
large will be classified as front-back confusion in the following. Similar to the front-back
pattern discrimination, subjects show a wide range of individual performance.
For each subject, the total number of front-back confusions was summed and the rate of
occurrence of each listening condition in this sum was calculated. This way, the differing
performance of subjects is normalized, allowing for an investigation of the relative influence
of listening conditions on performance.
In figure 4.12, the results off all subjects are
plotted in a boxplot grouped by conditions. In the loudspeaker condition, all subjects
had very little or no front-back confusions. Besides that, almost no difference can be seen
between the medians in the four headphone conditions. The p-values for rejecting the
null hypothesis that any two headphone conditions have an influence on the front-back
localization abilities are shown in appendix A. In short, none of the headphone conditions
show a statistically significant difference from each other.
Similar to the results from the front-back discrimination experiment, performance over
pinna size similarity and absolute similarity have been plotted separately in figures 4.13 and
4.14. The asymmetric shape of the 2nd order polynomial from the previous experiment is
no longer present. Instead, a peak in subject performance is seen at a pinna size difference
close to zero. From the linear regression analysis of absolute pinna size difference, a very
clear correlation with r = 0.48 and p = 0.001 was found, similar to that in the previous
experiment. Again, this suggests a linear dependence of front-back discrimination ability
to absolute pinna size difference.
26
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.11: Horizontal localization error for all subjects, sorted into four stacked bins.
Based on the grouping, errors have been classified into no/small errors denoting <37.5°
horizontal error, and fatal errors denoting >37.5° horizontal error.
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.12: The rate of occurrence of the corresponding condition in the total sum of fatal
errors for all subjects is plotted over different listening conditions: Median (red), upper
and lower quartile (blue), min/max values (black) and outliers (red crosses) [F(4, 50) =
86.5, p < 0.001]
Figure 4.13: The rate of occurrence of the corresponding condition in the total sum of fatal
errors for all subjects is scattered over pinna size difference (pinna size of the subject −
pinna size of the reference HRTF). 2nd order polynomial fit shown as the black line.
Center of gravity for each condition indicated as larger circles.
28
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.14:
The rate of occurrence of the corresponding condition in the total
sum of fatal errors for all subjects is scattered over absolute pinna size difference
(|pinna size of the subject −pinna size of the reference HRTF|). 1st order poly-
nomial fit shown as the black line. Center of gravity for each condition indicated as larger
circles.
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
29
==PAGE:38==
4.4
Speech Intelligibility
In this section, results from the speech intelligibility experiment are shown in terms of
the subjects’ performance in each listening condition (figure 4.15), the spatial release from
masking SRMSpeech, in which speech was used as a masker (figures 4.16 and 4.17) and the
spatial release from masking SRMNoise, in which modulated noise was used as a masker
(figures 4.19 and 4.20). Finally, ITD and ILD for all subjects will be shown in figure 4.21.
In figure 4.15, SRTs of all masker configurations are shown representatively for the loud-
speaker condition. In general, the results look very similar for all listening conditions: In
the colocated masker configuration, SRT values were by far the highest with the vast ma-
jority of values above 0 dB. However, there are two outliers at -19 dB and -22 dB. Outliers
like this also occurred in headphone conditions. SRT values for the front-back configura-
tion are much lower, showing the effects of spatial release from masking SRMSpeech which
will be further analysed later. In the colocated noise configuration, SRT values were also
much lower than for colocated speech, even though the amount of energetic masking was
equal for both configurations. This is attributed mainly to a difference in informational
masking between speech and noise interferers. The spatial release from masking between
colocated noise and side configurations, SRMNoise, is notably smaller than SRMSpeech.
Figure 4.16 shows the spatial release from masking with speech interferer, SRMSpeech, for
all listening conditions as a boxplot. On average, it is the smallest for the loudspeaker
condition, and the largest for sHRTF. However, no statistically significant influence of any
listening condition was found (more details in Appendix A). There are outliers around or
below 0 dB, indicating the spatial separation of target and masker posed no advantage or
even a disadvantage of spatial separation for some subjects. The same data (excluding
loudspeaker condition) is plotted over pinna size difference in figure 4.17. The 2nd degree
polynomial fit is showing no clear correlation. Similarly, performance over absolute pinna
size difference is plotted in figure 4.18. The corresponding linear regression line exhibits
no correlation with r = -0.004 and p = 0.98.
Figure 4.19 shows the SRM with noise interferer, SRMNoise, for all listening conditions.
Again, it is the smallest in the loudspeaker condition, although only by a small margin.
It is the highest for ownHRTF and lHRTF which show a high variability. Again, there
are outliers in all headphone conditions, one of which is below 0 dB. The only pair of
conditions for which the null hypothesis can be rejected with satisfying certainty, is the
pair mHRTF-ownHRTF (t(37.7)=-3.66, p=0.0065). Additionally, the figure also includes
results from calculations made in a binaural model suggested by [Jelfs et al., 2010]. The
model uses ILD and ITD differences between listening conditions to predict the SRM. For
all three reference conditions, the prediction was inside the upper and lower quartile.
In figure 4.20 the data for all headphone conditions is plotted over the head size difference
(width and length, see figure ) instead of pinna size difference, as the former is expected
to have a larger impact on the speech intelligibility in the given masker configuration.
However, no correlation is found between the two parameters.
Finally, ITD and ILD for all subjects over the left half of the horizontal plane are shown
in figure 4.21, where the three reference HRTF are highlighted as colored lines. A negative
number corresponds to the left side input arriving earlier (ITD) or being louder (ILD).
Differences in ITD and ILD are fairly small between reference HRTFs, even though their
differences in head and pinna size are large. Both ITD and ILD at 0◦are different for all
reference HRTFs. The deviations from zero are -0.5 dB / 125 µs for lHRTF, 2.3 dB / -83 µs
for mHRTF and 3.9 dB / -42 µs for sHRTF. The maximum ILD for all three reference
HRTFs was at an angle of -75◦, rather than 90◦.
30
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.15: SRTs values of all masker configurations from table 3.2, shown for the loud-
speaker hearing condition.
Figure 4.16: Spatial Release from Masking (SRMSpeech) determined as the difference be-
tween SRT measurements in the colocated speech and front-back configurations [F(4, 37) =
1.54, p = 0.212].
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.17: Spatial Release from Masking (SRMSpeech) is scattered over pinna size dif-
ference pinna size of the subject −pinna size of the reference HRTF). 2nd order
polynomial fit shown as the black line. Center of gravity for each condition indicated as
larger circles.
Figure 4.18: Spatial Release from Masking (SRMSpeech) is scattered over absolute pinna
size difference |pinna size of the subject −pinna size of the reference HRTF|). 1st
order polynomial fit shown as the black line. Center of gravity for each condition indicated
as larger circles.
32
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.19:
Spatial Release from Masking (SRMNoise) determined as the difference
between SRT measurements in the colocated noise and side configurations [F(4, 38) =
5.6, p = 0.0012].
Black circles the results from a binaural model suggested by Jelfs
[Jelfs et al., 2010].
Figure 4.20: Spatial Release from Masking (SRMNoise) is scattered over head size differ-
ence head size of the subject−head size of the reference HRTF). 1st order polynomial
fit shown as the black line. Center of gravity for each condition indicated as larger circles.
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.21: Interaural differences in the frequency range 1kHz - 8kHz shown for all
subjects as a boxplot: Median (red), upper and lower quartile (blue), min/max values
(black) and outliers (red crosses). The three reference HRTF highlighted as lines.
34
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
==PAGE:43==
4.4.1
Localization vs SRMSpeech
Finally, the performance of subjects in each localization experiment is compared to their
benefit from spatial separation of target and masker in the speech intelligibility measure-
ments, SRMSpeech (figure 4.17). All combinations of subjects and headphone conditions
are scattered separately for the front-back pattern discrimination experiment (figure 4.22)
and for the localization experiment (figure 4.13). In both cases, no statistically significant
correlation was found between the parameters.
Figure 4.22: Linear correlation between front-back pattern discrimination performance
(figure 4.9) and SRMSpeech (figure 4.17). Linear regression line in black. Center of gravity
for each listening condition indicated as larger circle.
Figure 4.23: Linear correlation between Front back localization performance (figure 4.13)
and SRMSpeech (figure 4.17). Linear regression line in black. Center of gravity for each
listening condition indicated as larger circle.
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
35
==PAGE:44==
5
Discussion
5.1
HRTF and Test-Retest Reliability
From the results of the HATS measurement in 4.1, it is concluded that the measurement
system itself is reliable and can be excluded as a source of error. If there are no variations
in microphone placement or subject movement and asymmetries, results are perfectly
reproducible. However, there are large differences between left and right ear. For artificial
head measurements, this should not be the case since in contrast to real subjects, the
anatomy of the HATS is exactly symmetrical. It is presumed that the deviation of left
and right ear can be attributed to variations in the placements of the microphones.
For the second experiment in figure 4.2, the deviations between measurements is much
larger. This suggests that the placement of the microphones has a substantial impact
on the results. In contrast to the first measurement however, the position of important
frequency peaks and notches stays approximately constant. It has been established in
chapter 2.4 that the position of these peaks and notches is the most relevant cue for
elevation detection. For subjects that showed a small MAD, like s1042 shown in figure
4.6, both the position of peaks and notches and their corresponding magnitude show little
variation.
The measurement errors originating from microphone placements remain a
source of uncertainty, but the measurements could be of sufficient quality to perform the
following experiments. The issues discussed can be observed for other loudspeakers as
well. The frontal loudspeaker one serves only as a representative depiction.
In addition to the measurement errors in the HATS measurement, 4.3 also includes move-
ments and asymmetries of the subject. It is clear that this further decreases the reliability
of the measurement and the negative effect becomes immediately apparent when looking
at the results. However, as already noted the reliability increases significantly between the
first three measurements and the rest, that have been performed after the break. Look-
ing at the high agreement between measurements 4, 5 and 6, it seems that the subject’s
movement can be eliminated as a significant factor. It can be observed that although
the deviation between HRTFs is sometimes very large, the agreement between impulse
responses is much higher. It is concluded that the shape of the HRTF is extremely sen-
sitive towards the smallest error in the HRIR measurement. The results for the mean
absolute deviation in table 4.1 are ambivalent. It appears that for some subjects, the
deviation is exceptionally small. The differences between measurements are even much
smaller than in the HATS measurements. As mentioned in section 3.1, the microphone size
was more suitable for some subjects than others. Specifically for subjects with small ears,
adequately fitting the microphones was a problem, which could have resulted in increased
MAD values. As mentioned previously, the MAD was highest for subject s133 who has the
smallest pinnae. While a good MAD and test-retest reliability are certainly evidence for
a good measurement, the question whether or not the measurement resembles the ”real”
HRTF can not be answered this way. The difference between measurement results and
the ”real” HRTF also include systematic errors and biases that can not be investigated
the way random errors were. In summary, it is noted that the different quality of the
subject’s HRTFs are a source of error that will be confounded with other effects in the
following experiments.
36
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
==PAGE:45==
5.2
Behavioral Experiments
5.2.1
Front-Back Pattern Discrimination
In the first experiment (figure 4.7), it has become clear that some subjects are overall
better at identifying front and back patterns. The differences between subjects are indeed
quite large, with some subjects showing perfect performance and others having pronounced
difficulties, showing more than 50 % incorrect responses. Two tendencies are visible: First,
subjects seem to tend to condition Back-Back (BB) as a fallback answer. It seems that
either the subject was certain of their choice, leading to correctly identified patterns or,
in case of uncertainty, subjects tended towards pattern BB. This behaviour matches theo-
retical considerations, stating that for unsatisfactory HRTF individualization, front-back
confusions lead to an inability to locate sounds in the front.
Also, disproportionately
choosing pattern BB seems to be the case more often for subjects with smaller pinnae.
When combining this with the results averaged over listening conditions (figure 4.8), it
becomes clear that almost all of the incorrect responses have been given in listening con-
ditions mHRTF and lHRTF. It has been established that the rate of front-back confusions
can be high when a non-individualized HRTF is used. What is surprising though, is that
the percentage of correct responses for listening condition sHRTF is similar to that of
ownHRTF and the loudspeaker condition. From table 4.1 it is known that the MAD is
actually the highest for sHRTF, and similar for mHRTF and lHRTF. If anything, this
would suggest that the quality of the sHRTF recording could be inferior to the other
two. A possible reason for the differing performance can be taken from the correlation
seen in figure 4.9. When plotting the performance over pinna size difference, the shape
of the polynomial fit is asymmetrical, and the peak appears at a pinna size difference of
approximately 9 mm. Given the knowledge about individualization of HRTFs, the peak
was expected to appear at a pinna size difference of zero, which mostly corresponds to
using the individual HRTF. This suggests that subjects show an increased performance
in distinguishing sounds coming from the front or from the back when using a HRTF of
a person with larger pinnae than their own. Given the small data sample, it could be
hypothesized that the polynomial fit is slightly skewed and performance actually peaks at
a pinna size difference of zero, maybe plateauing for pinna sizes larger than their own and
deteriorating for pinna sizes smaller than their own. Interestingly, this stands in direct
opposition to data provided by [Morimoto and Ando, 1980] (figure 2.4) and similar con-
clusions drawn by Iida [Iida, 2019]. These two sources predict the opposite of the findings
in this experiment.
When plotting the subject’s performance over absolute pinna size
in figure 4.10, the misplaced peak could alternatively be interpreted as random error in
agreement with the existing linear correlation. The corresponding p-value of 0.014 further
supports this view.
5.2.2
Localization
Similar to the front-back pattern discrimination experiment, different overall performance
is exhibited by the subjects in figure 4.11. As mentioned previously, differences between
the first two groups, no error (<7.5° horizontal error) and small error (<22.5° horizontal
error), will be of no concern. Instead, the focus will be on the occurrence of front-back
confusions (>32.5° horizontal error). Therefore, only those results have been summed and
the rate of occurrence of each listening conditions in the sum has been calculated. In
the comparison of listening conditions in figure 4.12, the performance in the loudspeaker
condition is again close to perfect, as expected. In the headphone conditions however, only
very small differences can be made out. If the reproduction of the personal HRTF would
be of high quality, the performance in the ownHRTF condition should be similar to that
in the loudspeaker condition. Instead, it is only slightly better than the non-individualized
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
37
==PAGE:46==
HRTFs. Given that in the previous experiment, there was a substantial difference between
headphone conditions, it is surprising that the same effect cannot be seen here. However,
when reorganising the results and plotting them over absolute pinna size difference, it
turns out that in fact a significant linear correlation can be found.
It seems that for
drastically different pinna sizes, performance deteriorates accordingly. A detail which was
not visible when comparing performance grouped by conditions. As opposed to the last
experiment, it seems that this trend also disregards whether the pinna size difference is
positive or negative, which can be seen from the 2nd degree polynomial in figure 4.13.
5.2.3
Speech Intelligibility
Starting with the comparison of masker configurations in figure 4.15, in the colocated
masker configuration, SRT values were by far the highest with at least 0 dB. However,
there are two outliers at -19 dB and -22 dB. SRT values this low are unexpected. With no
spatial separation cues available to the subject, and including informational masking from
a same sex talker, it has been shown that an SNR of >0 dB is required to achieve an SRT
of 50 % correctly identified words [Brungart, 2001]. The SRT measured in this experiment
was even higher at 70 %. Additionally, some subjects exhibited widely different colocated
speech SRT for replications of the exact same trial. For example, subject s639 had a SRT
values of - 24 dB, 4 dB, and - 24 dB in three separate trials of using their own HRTF. These
variations point towards severe problems with the measurement procedure. However, they
are limited to the colocated speech masker configuration. All other masker configurations
yield results that can be seen as realistic and have reasonable test-retest reliability.
In an attempt to explain the seemingly random results in the colocated speech masker
configuration, the following theory has been developed. It was assumed that the subject’s
psychometric function resembles the one based on the standard detection theory model
shown in figure 3.4.
This assumption could have been violated.
As opposed to most
signal-in-noise detection tasks, speech intelligibility tasks often include a large number
of different unmasking cues. This could potentially lead to a non-monotonic connection
between SNR and speech intelligibility. In figure 3.4, a hypothetical skewed psychomet-
ric function is sketched, together with effects that might govern the speech intelligibility
at a given SNR. The central idea is that the confusion of target and masker peaks at
a SNR close to 0 dB. In this case, both sounds have not only similar spectra, but also
similar loudness, making it more difficult too differentiate between the two. If the SNR
is decreased, the spectra do not change but the difference in loudness serves as an addi-
tional cue for separating the talkers. Past a certain negative SNR, this cue is compensated
by energetic masking becoming to severe, making the target inaudible. This impression
has been confirmed subjectively by subject s1147, who had particularly wide variations in
their colocated speech SRT measurements. If these considerations are true, they result in
the existence of multiple points at which speech intelligibility is 70 %. At this point, the
question remains why replications of the same measurement yield different SRT results.
As mentioned, an adaptive up-down method was used in this experiment. This means
that for each trial, the SNR is decreased until the SRT is reached, upon which the SNR
is increased again and the step size is reduced.
Subsequently, the SRT is approached
again with more precision. If the skewed psychometric function from figure 5.1 is assumed
true, and the step size is sufficiently large, the ”first” and highest SRT could sometimes
be skipped, placing the SNR closer to the ”second” or ”third” SRT. This process could
happen randomly, based on the first few answers of each run, when the step size is still
large. There are ways to explore or combat this issue in future measurements, that will
be further discussed in section 6.1.
38
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.1: Skewed psychometric function (Hypothesized)
The randomness of SRT values in the colocated speech masker configuration results in the
vast variance of SRMSpeech shown in figure 4.16. In some cases, SRMSpeech is <0 dB, which
shouldn’t be possible. Additionally, SRMSpeech was smallest for the loudspeaker listening
condition although the exact opposite was expected: In the loudspeaker condition, subjects
can make optimal use of their own HRTF for localization cues. The rate of front-back
confusions was also by far the smallest in the loudspeaker condition, which is why subjects
were expected to also achieve the best SRMSpeech. This raises further suspicion towards
the quality of the measurements. The immense variance and similar medians do not allow
for any inference about the influence of listening conditions on the SRMSpeech. This is
also reflected in the p-value of 0.212. Similarly, the SRMSpeech over pinna size difference
in figure 4.17 shows no correlation. Additionally, ITD and ILD values in figure 4.21 have
shown that 0° and 180° are asymmetrical for some subjects. This violates the assumption
made in table 3.2 and enables better ear listening and binaural unmasking as additional
cues in the front-back masker configuration. However, the values are small compared to
the variance of SRMSpeech and are therefore of secondary importance.
In the two noise masker configurations, measurements are much more reliable. This man-
ifests in the variance of SRMNoise being much smaller. Although the median values for
different listening conditions are still quite similar, their variance is now small enough to
assume statistically significant differences between conditions. Similar to the SRMSpeech
measurement, the fact that subjects had the weakest performance in the loudspeaker con-
dition remains without explanation. When assuming that the HRTF measurements and
headphone reproduction are of high quality, the results of loudspeaker and ownHRTF
condition should look similar. Ultimately, ownHRTF is an attempt to replicate the loud-
speaker condition. With this in mind, the rejected null hypothesis for the loudspeaker-
ownHRTF could be seen as evidence that at some point there must have been severe
problems either with the HRTF reproduction or the SRMNoise measurement. The differ-
ences in the medians of conditions sHRTF, mHRTF and lHRTF are small, and similar
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
39
==PAGE:48==
to the differences that were predicted by the binaural model. However, the differences
predicted by the model are extremely small compared to the variance of the data, which
is why no inference should be drawn from the comparison.
On average, subjects achieve higher SRMNoise values when using their own HRTF com-
pared to lHRTF. This could be seen as evidence that the unmasking cues contained in a
personalized HRTF are more relevant than an increase of ILD and ITD values provided by
a non-individual HRTF. The nonexistent correlation between SRMNoise and head size dif-
ference in figure 4.20 also suggests that head size and corresponding ITD and ILD changes
have negligible influence.
Localization vs SRMSpeech
One of the main objectives of this study was to investigate whether there is a correlation
between localization abilities (specifically front back discrimination) and spatial release
from masking when using non-individual HRTF. That is why, in figures 4.22 and 4.23 the
results from each experiment were plotted against each other. No statistically relevant
correlation was found. This comes to little surprise, given the problematic SRMSpeech
measurements.
5.3
Limitations
The main limitations of the study are arguably uncertainties and irregularities in the mea-
surement procedure. Starting with the pinna and head size measurements, it was assumed
that pinna height and width can be equated with the similarity of the resulting HRTFs.
It is noted that this is an oversimplification. A more detailed measurement of pinna di-
mensions would have been preferable, but would require additional equipment and time.
Secondly, uncertainties about the quality of HRTF measurements have to be respected
as a considerable source of error. In the SRMSpeech measurements, subjects exhibited
widely different SRT for repetitions of the same measurement configuration. A possible
explanation for this behaviour was hypothesized, but not validated. Additionally, there
is yet no explanation for the fact that subjects consistently had the lowest SRM values
in the loudspeaker conditions when according to theory, this should not have been the
case. No headphone equalization was included for the behavioural experiments. Ideally,
the transfer function between headphones and the entrance of the ear canal would be
compensated by an additional filter to achieve a flat frequency response. However, it has
been shown that headphone equalization only has a minimal effect on localization precision
[Schönstein and Katz, 2009] [Iida, 2019].
40
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
==PAGE:49==
6
Conclusion
In this thesis, a group of 11 normal hearing subjects had their HRTF measured and
performed behavioural measurements in front-back discrimination, localization precision
and of speech reception thresholds. The subjects performed all tasks both with their own
HRTF, and with three reference HRTFs that were selected based on maximum pinna size
difference. The pinna size difference was assumed to be linked to HRTF conformity and
roughly calculated based on pinna width and height.
Measurements of HRTFs appeared to be of differing quality, but were deemed sufficient to
continue with the experiments. Concerning the front-back discrimination measurement, it
was shown that different HRTF lead to different amounts of front-back confusion. Further-
more, it was shown that a clear linear correlation between absolute pinna size similarity
and front-back confusion exists. A non-linear correlation of front-back discrimination over
relative pinna size difference suggested a tendency that subjects perform much better when
using the HRTF of someone with large pinna as opposed to small pinna. However, this
tendency was not verified and did not reoccur in other experiments.
In the precise localization experiment, a slightly different approach was used. Instead
of only discriminating between front and back, the subjects were tasked with identifying
the exact location of a sound source from different directions. The results therefore also
include front-back confusions >45° horizontal localization error on sagittal planes, labeled
as ”fatal errors”. Subsequently, it was analysed which listening conditions these fatal errors
can be attributed to. It was shown that there is no statistically significant difference in
the rate of fatal errors between headphone conditions. There is, however, a clear linear
correlation between fatal error attribution and absolute pinna size difference.
Results in the speech intelligibility measurements were partly inconsistent. For the colo-
cated speech configuration, results were nonsensical for some subjects. Measurement vari-
ations exceeded any reasonable amount, rendering the results untrustworthy. An attempt
was made to explain the abnormalities based on informational masking, though purely
hypothetical. In compliance to the unsteady SRT measurements, no statistically relevant
influence of any listening condition was found. Neither was any correlation over pinna size
difference and no correlation with front-back localization. For the masker configurations
in which modulated noise was used as a masker, reliability of measurement results was
better and, correspondingly, a statistically relevant difference between headphone condi-
tions was found. Furthermore, the SRM with noise maskers roughly agreed with model
predictions. The fact that the SRM with noise interferers was the highest for individual
HRTFs and did not correlate with head size, suggests that ITD and ILD differences play
a subordinate role in the given configuration.
6.1
Future work
The uncertainties and limitations of this thesis could be overcome in future work. Most
importantly, measurement results for the colocated speech SRT would need to be vali-
dated. The same subjects could be tested again with another measurement procedure.
For example, the measurement method could be changed to constant stimuli, in which a
predetermined set of SNR is tested for each subject. This way, the shape of the full psy-
chometric curve can be assessed, instead of only determining the SRT value. Alternatively,
a different speech intelligibility test framework could be used, and the results compared.
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
41
==PAGE:50==
The danish version of the HINT [Nielsen and Dau, 2009] for example, was shown to have a
deviation of SRT measurements from the mean of less than 3 dB. Once reliable SRM values
for interfering speech have been found, they could be compared to pinna size difference
and localization abilities in a meaningful way. The correlation of front-back localization
and pinna size difference could be investigated further with a larger number of subjects
and a larger variability of pinna sizes. Especially the asymmetrical trend, that subjects’
performance was stable for non-individual HRTF with smaller pinnae could be further
investigated. If the trend is validated, it could be used to optimize non-individual HRTFs
to minimize front-back confusion.
42
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
[Ahrens et al., 2019] Ahrens, A., Lund, K. D., Marschall, M., and Dau, T. (2019). Sound
source localization with varying amount of visual information in virtual reality. PLoS
One, 14.
[Algazi et al., 2001] Algazi, V. R., Duda, R. ., Thompson, D. M., and Avendano, C. (2001).
The cipic hrtf database. IEEE Workshop on Applications of Signal Processing to Audio
and Acoustics, pages 99–102.
[Blauert, 1997] Blauert, J. (1997). Spatial Hearing. The MIT Press, Cambridge.
[Blauert, 2013] Blauert, J. (2013). The Technology of Binaural Listening. Springer Berlin
Heidelberg.
[Bregman, 1994] Bregman, A. (1994). Auditory Scene Analysis: The Perceptual Organi-
zation of Sound. The MIT press, Cambridge.
[Bronkhorst, 2000] Bronkhorst, A. W. (2000). The cocktail party phenomenon: a review
of speech intelligibility in multiple-talker conditions. Acta Acust united Ac, 86:117–128.
[Bronkhorst, 2015] Bronkhorst, A. W. (2015). The cocktail-party problem revisited: early
processing and selection of multi talker speech. Atten Percept Psychophys, 77(5):1465–
1487.
[Brungart, 2001] Brungart, D. S. (2001). Informational and energetic masking effects in
the perception of two simultaneoustalkers. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
109:1101–1109.
[Butler, 1986] Butler, R. A. (1986).
The bandwidth effect on monaural and binaural
localization. Hearing Research, 21:67–73.
[Cherry, 1953] Cherry, C. (1953). Some experiments on the recognition of speech, with
one and with two ears. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 25:975–979.
[Durlach et al., 2003] Durlach, N. I., Mason, C. R., Kidd, G., Arbogast, T. L., Colburn,
H. S., and Shinn-Cunningham, B. G. (2003). Note on informational masking. J. Acoust.
Soc. Am., 113:2984–2987.
[Enzner et al., 2013] Enzner, G., Antweiler, C., and Spors, S. (2013). Trends in Acquisition
of Individual Head-Related Transfer Functions. In: The technology of binaural listening
by Jens Blauert. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
[Farino, 2007] Farino, A. (2007). Advancements in impulse response measurements by
sine sweeps. Audio Engineering Society 122nd Convention.
[Freyman et al., 2001] Freyman, R. L., Balakrishnan, U., and Helfer, K. S. (2001). Spatial
release from informational masking in speech recognition. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 109:2112–2122.
[Harari, 2011] Harari, Y. N. (2011). Sapiens: A Brief History of Humankind. Harper,
New York City.
[Hirsh, 1948] Hirsh, I. (1948). The influence of interaural phase on interaural summation
and inhibition. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 20:536–544.
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
43
==PAGE:52==
[Iida, 2019] Iida, K. (2019). Head-Related Transfer Function and Acoustic Virtual Reality.
Springer Nature Singapore.
[Iida and Ishii, 2018] Iida, K. and Ishii, Y. (2018).
Effects of adding a spectral peak
generated by the second pinna resonance to a parametric model of head-related transfer
functions on upper median plane sound localization. Appl Acoust, 129:239–247.
[Jelfs et al., 2010] Jelfs, S., Culling, J., and Lavandier, M. (2010). Revision and validation
of a binaural model for speech intelligibility in noise. Hearing Research, 275:96–104.
[Kulkarni et al., 1999] Kulkarni, A., Isabelle, S., and Colburn, H. (1999). Sensitivity of
human subjects to head-related transfer function phase spectra.
J Acoust Soc Am,
49:2821–2840.
[McAnally et al., 2002] McAnally, K. I., Bolia, R. S., Martin, R. L., Eberle, G., and Brun-
gart, D. S. (2002). Segregation of multiple talkers in the vertical plane: Implications for
the design of a multiple talker display. Human Factors Annual Meeting, 46:288–591.
[Middlebrooks and Green, 1991] Middlebrooks, J. C. and Green, D. M. (1991). Sound
localization by human listeners. Annu. Rev. Psychol, 42:135–159.
[Morimoto and Ando, 1980] Morimoto, M. and Ando, Y. (1980). On the simulation of
sound localization. J. Acoust. Soc. Jap. (E), 1:167–174.
[Møller et al., 1999] Møller, H., Hanmmershøi, D., Jensen, C., and Sørensen, M. (1999).
Evaluation of artificial heads in listening tests. J Audio Eng Soc, 47:83–100.
[Møller et al., 1996] Møller, H., Sørensen, M. F., Jensen, C. B., and Hammershøi, D.
(1996). Binaural techniquedo we need individual recordings?
Journal of the Audio
Engineering Society, 44:451–469.
[Nielsen and Dau, 2009] Nielsen, J. B. and Dau, T. (2009).
Development of a danish
speech intelligibility test. International Journal of Audiology, 48:729–741.
[Schönstein and Katz, 2009] Schönstein, D. and Katz, B. F. G. (2009). Comparison of
headphones and equalization for virtual auditory source localization. J. Acoust. Soc.
Am., 123:3724.
[van Opstal, 2016] van Opstal, J. (2016).
The Auditory System and Human Sound-
Localization Behavior. Academic press, Cambridge.
[Wenzel et al., 1993] Wenzel, E. M., Arruda, M., Kistler, D. J., and Wightman, F. L.
(1993). Localization using non-individualized head-related transfer functions. J. Acoust.
Soc. Am., 94:111–123.
[Wickens, 2001] Wickens, T. D. (2001).
Elementary Signal Detection Theory.
Oxford
University Press.
[Xie, 2013] Xie, B. (2013). Head-Related Transfer Function and Virtual Auditory Display.
J. Ross Publishing.
44
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
==PAGE:53==
A
Statistics
For all calculations:
Degrees-of-freedom method: satterthwaite
P value adjustment: tukey method for comparing a family of 5 estimates
Pattern detection
contrast
estimate
df
t.ratio
p.value
Loudspeakers - sHRTF
0.07955
40
1.073
0.8194
Loudspeakers - mHRTF
0.20455
40
2.758
0.0628
Loudspeakers - lHRTF
0.38068
40
5.133
0.0001
Loudspeakers - ownHRTF
0.07386
40
0.996
0.8556
sHRTF - mHRTF
0.12500
40
1.685
0.4542
sHRTF - lHRTF
0.30114
40
4.060
0.0020
sHRTF - ownHRTF
-0.00568
40
-0.077
1.0000
mHRTF - lHRTF
0.17614
40
2.375
0.1433
mHRTF - ownHRTF
-0.13068
40
-1.762
0.4093
lHRTF - ownHRTF
-0.30682
40
-4.137
0.0016
Table A.1: Linear mixed model comparing the influence of conditions (fixed) on the per-
formance of subjects (random) in the front-back discrimination task (see figure 4.8)
Localization
contrast
estimate
df
t.ratio
p.value
Loudspeakers - sHRTF
-21.573
50
-14.079
<.0001
Loudspeakers - mHRTF
-23.292
50
-15.200
<.0001
Loudspeakers - lHRTF
-24.091
50
-15.722
<.0001
Loudspeakers - ownHRTF
-20.149
50
-13.149
<.0001
sHRTF - mHRTF
-1.718
50
-1.121
0.7946
sHRTF - lHRTF
-2.517
50
-1.643
0.4780
sHRTF - ownHRTF
1.425
50
0.930
0.8840
mHRTF - lHRTF
-0.799
50
-0.521
0.9848
mHRTF - ownHRTF
3.143
50
2.051
0.2575
lHRTF - ownHRTF
3.942
50
2.573
0.0912
Table A.2: Linear mixed model comparing the influence of conditions (fixed) on the per-
formance of subjects (random) in the localization task (see figure 4.12)
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
45
==PAGE:54==
SRMSpeech
contrast
estimate
df
t.ratio
p.value
Loudspeakers - sHRTF
-7.903
37.3
-2.066
0.2559
Loudspeakers - mHRTF
-0.536
37.3
-0.140
0.9999
Loudspeakers - lHRTF
-5.803
37.3
-1.517
0.5581
Loudspeakers - ownHRTF
-4.036
37.0
-1.086
0.8128
sHRTF - mHRTF
7.367
37.6
1.874
0.3486
sHRTF - lHRTF
2.100
37.6
0.534
0.9832
sHRTF - ownHRTF
3.867
37.3
1.011
0.8487
mHRTF - lHRTF
-5.267
37.6
-1.340
0.6687
mHRTF - ownHRTF
-3.500
37.3
-0.915
0.8893
lHRTF - ownHRTF
1.767
37.3
0.462
0.9903
Table A.3: Linear mixed model comparing the influence of conditions (fixed) on the per-
formance of subjects (random) in the speech masker configuration tasks (see figure 4.16)
SRMNoise
contrast
estimate
df
t.ratio
p.value
Loudspeakers - sHRTF
-1.940
37.7
-1.492
0.5742
Loudspeakers - mHRTF
-0.238
37.7
-0.183
0.9997
Loudspeakers - lHRTF
-3.594
37.7
-2.763
0.0631
Loudspeakers - ownHRTF
-5.000
37.3
-3.950
0.0029
sHRTF - mHRTF
1.701
38.2
1.274
0.7082
sHRTF - lHRTF
-1.654
38.2
-1.239
0.7290
sHRTF - ownHRTF
-3.060
37.7
-2.353
0.1510
mHRTF - lHRTF
-3.356
38.2
-2.513
0.1088
mHRTF - ownHRTF
-4.762
37.7
-3.661
0.0065
lHRTF - ownHRTF
-1.406
37.7
-1.081
0.8151
Table A.4: Linear mixed model comparing the influence of conditions (fixed) on the per-
formance of subjects (random) in the speech masker configuration tasks (see figure 4.19)
46
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
==PAGE:55==
Perception of speech and source location with individual and non-individual head-related transfer
functions
47
==PAGE:56==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Pl. 352
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.hea.healthtech.dtu.dk
