==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Impact of recovered phosphorus supply for 
methanotrophic cultivation and microbial 
protein production 
MSc Thesis 
Estelle Maria Goonesekera (s182235) 
Supervisors: Panagiotis Tsapekos, Irini Angelidaki, Borja Valverde-Pérez 
Department of Environmental Engineering – Technical University of Denmark 
==PAGE:2==
Preface 
This thesis was written for a Master of Science in Environmental Engineering at the 
Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The work has been performed in the 
Department of Environmental Engineering from July to December 2020 under the 
supervision of postdoc Panagiotis Tsapekos, professor Irini Angelidaki and assistant 
professor Borja Valverde-Pérez as a part of the FUBAF project funded by the Danish 
EPA - MUDP (Project FUBAF J.nr. Mst-11700508). 
  
DTU Environment, Kongens Lyngby, 08-
12-2020 Estelle Maria Goonesekera
 
==PAGE:3==
1 
 
Impact of recovered phosphorus supply for methanotrophic 
cultivation and microbial protein production 
 
Abstract 
Microbial protein is a promising alternative source of protein to traditional sources, and 
methane oxidising bacteria (MOB) are an attractive option to produce it. Though current 
production processes are first generation and rely on fossil resources, there is an 
increasing trend of using recovered residual nutrient streams to achieve a more circular 
production process. Most focus of the research into resource recovery has been with 
regard to nitrogen and methane sources, with little attention to phosphorus, also crucial 
for protein production. Batch experiments were carried out in order to test the feasibility 
of struvite and precipitated calcium phosphate (PCP) as P sources. Both nitrate and 
ammonium were tested as nitrogen sources. A preliminary screening of dissolution 
methods for PCP and struvite was also performed. It was found that pH has a larger effect 
on dissolution than temperature and that both materials dissolve best at pH 2 and 25 °C 
for PCP and 37 °C for struvite. Recommended dissolution times are 4 h for struvite and 
30 min for PCP. All treatments showed similar growth rates and biomass on methane 
yields, ranging from 0.72 to 1.11 d-1 and 0.21 to 0.29 g CDW g CH4-1, respectively. 
Precipitates formed in the combination of PCP with ammonium, which could have 
resulted in cellular stress. This was supported by finding that it had the highest amount of 
methane converted to soluble organics (15 %), together with the combination of struvite 
with ammonium, suggesting incomplete methane oxidation. The highest protein content 
was observed in the struvite with ammonium, 80 %. The lowest contents were found for 
PCP as a P source (50 %). Neither the P nor the N source affected the amino acid profile. 
Indeed, biomass harvested from the control with nitrate and ammonium with struvite 
exceeded the limit on lead content for feeds. Biomass from ammonium with struvite also 
exceeded the limit for cadmium. 
 
Table of contents 
 
1. 
Introduction ..................................................................................................................... 2 
2. 
Materials and methods .................................................................................................... 6 
3. 
Results and discussion ................................................................................................... 11 
4. 
Conclusion ...................................................................................................................... 24 
Acknowledgements ................................................................................................................ 24 
References .............................................................................................................................. 24 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
2 
 
1. Introduction 
The terms single-cell protein (SCP) or microbial protein (MP) refer to protein of 
unicellular origin, stemming from yeast, algae, bacteria or fungi (Cooney et al., 1980). 
MP production started its development during the mid-twentieth century as a result of a 
lack of protein sources and predictions of future shortages, although its development was 
restricted by low cost soya production (Strong et al., 2015). In recent times, population 
growth and the importance of protein in diet (Kihlberg, 1972), as well concerns regarding 
current and future global protein scarcity and the sustainability of protein production 
(European Commission, 2020), have renewed the need for more efficient protein sources 
(Khoshnevisan et al., 2020). Thanks to its high protein content and nutrient to biomass 
conversion efficiency (Khoshnevisan et al., 2019; Verstraete et al., 2016), MP has 
regained interest as a promising protein source. 
The newfound popularity of MP has been aided by the following three reasons. Firstly, 
advances in reactor technology and biotechnology have allowed sufficient cost reduction 
to make the process economically feasible (Kihlberg, 1972). MP from methane is 
currently commercially produced by UniBio S/A in Denmark and by Calysta in the US. 
In fact, MP is currently the closest example of a commercially successful biologically 
generated product using methane as a carbon source (Strong et al., 2015). 
Secondly, MP has been approved as a feed ingredient for all livestock species (EC, 2017). 
The protein has been used for the feed of several monogastric species (pig, broiler 
chicken, mink, fox, Atlantic salmon and Atlantic halibut), and its nutritionally favourable 
amino acid profile is comparable to conventional protein sources, such as soymeal or 
fishmeal (Øverland et al., 2010), despite a lower content of sulphur amino acids 
(Kihlberg, 1972). Nitrogen utilisation rates are also comparable, albeit digestibility is 
reduced. MP’s use as feed may thus reduce over-exploitation on protein sources suitable 
for direct human consumption (Øverland et al., 2010). Additionally, the expansion of the 
aquaculture industry and the subsequent demand for protein makes MP a promising 
product (Strong et al., 2015). 
Thirdly, MP is independent of marine origin, land use and climatic changes (Kihlberg, 
1972). This offers the possibility of relieving pressure on high-quality, limited and 
expensive protein sources (Anupama & Ravindra, 2000). Its small physical footprint 
(Kihlberg, 1972) and possibility of decoupling food production from crop production 
(Pikaar et al., 2018) are positive features in light of limited natural resources and arable 
land (Hertel, 2015; Müller et al., 2008), as is its low water demand (Kihlberg, 1972). This 
is especially relevant given the large environmental impact of livestock feed production 
(Parks, 2007) and the expected increase in demand for livestock products (Bodirsky et 
al., 2015). The production of protein crops such as soya has negative impacts on the 
biogeochemical cycles of nitrogen and phosphorus, as well as on biodiversity (Laurance 
et al., 2014). 
Methane is one of the most common substrates used for MP production. It contains carbon 
in a reduced and energy-efficient form, which bioconversion can support a high yield of 
microbial cells (Hanson & Hanson, 1996). No inhibitory effects are attributed to methane 
(Wilkinson et al., 1974),  it is economically attractive thanks to its low cost and high 
protein yield, and its gaseous nature does not leave a residue in the final product  (Cooney 
==PAGE:5==
3 
 
et al., 1980). However, protein grown on methane is less digestible than protein grown 
on methanol, although there are no differences in amino acid profile (Skrede et al., 2009). 
As a gas, methane faces mass transfer limitations (Vega et al., 1990). The advantages of 
methane as a substrate give grounds for the interest in bacteria that utilize methane under 
ambient conditions (Strong et al., 2015). Methane as a resource is cheap and abundant. 
The International Energy Agency estimates that 145 billion m3 of natural gas were flared 
worldwide in 2018 (International Energy Agency, 2020). This natural gas is release is 
related to oil extraction and flaring is a way to mitigate the impact of methane, which is 
28 - 36 times that of CO2. However, flaring also releases other pollutants such as NOx, 
CO and black carbon (Weyant et al., 2016). First generation MP production from natural 
gas allows energy recovery as MP, better resource use and control of emissions by 
sequestering a greenhouse gas (Lelieveld et al., 1993). Second generation MP can be 
produced from biomethane from anaerobic digestion, which is a renewable carbon source 
(Øverland et al., 2010; Strong et al., 2015). 
 
Methanotrophs or methane oxidising bacteria (MOB) are a group of bacteria that use 
methane as their sole carbon and energy sources. They have a more favourable protein 
content than yeast and a more digestible cell wall than algae (Bajpai, 2017; Khoshnevisan 
et al., 2019; Tsapekos et al., 2019). Their slower growth rates compared to other bacteria 
used for MP production may entail a lower nucleic acid content than in other bacterial 
proteins (Øverland et al., 2010). Mixed bacterial consortia of MOB and heterotrophs are 
beneficial for the production of MP. Pure cultures are often contaminated or lack other 
bacteria that may stabilise the culture by consuming potentially inhibitory metabolic by-
products (Bothe et al., 2002). 
Currently, the production processes for MOB are first generation: they use synthetic 
nutrient sources and the methane source is natural gas, although there is an increasing 
trend of using residual streams, as part of the ongoing process to shift to a circular 
economy. The conversion of waste products using biological processes into protein-rich 
food and fodder allows for a reduction in costs (Anupama & Ravindra, 2000), as well as 
the utilisation of materials that would otherwise cause environmental problems (Kihlberg, 
1972). Tsapekos et al. (2019) used biomethane from anaerobic digestion as a methane 
source, while Christiaens et al. (2017) used recovered ammonia as a nitrogen source. 
Khoshnevisan et al. (2019)combined both these residual sources. 
Up to now, phosphorus (P) upcycling and recovery via MOB in MP has only been studied 
in direct application of digestate (Tsapekos et al., 2020). Specific P needs of MOB have 
not been studied in an MP production context. The research into MOB P requirements 
mostly focus on MOB in the environment, where they play a vital role in the 
biogeochemical carbon cycle. However, there is an important knowledge gap when it 
comes to the importance of P for methane oxidation. Field studies have had variable 
outcomes and do not allow the inference of mechanistic principles regarding P 
requirements in MOB (Veraart et al., 2015). There are indications that different MOB 
strains have different P requirements based on their survival strategies: ruderal or stress-
tolerators. Type I and X MOB, also known as Gammaproteobacteria, tend to be ruderal 
and have high growth rates (Ho et al., 2012). In organisms with a similar survival strategy, 
==PAGE:6==
4 
 
this relates to high P requirements for rRNA and high N requirements to produce nutrient 
acquiring structures such as enzymes and other proteins (Elser et al., 1996). Type II MOB, 
also known as Alphaproteobacteria, tend to be stress-tolerators and have lower growth 
rates and are better adapted to oligotrophic environments. It is likely that, similar to other 
species adapted to similar environments, they have minimised their P requirements with 
adaptations such as high-affinity P transporters, non-phospholipids in membranes and 
smaller genomes (Van Mooy et al., 2009; Veraart et al., 2015). These differences have 
been observed in a series of studies on P limitation and supplementation in a series of 
natural environments (Gao et al., 2020; Pérez et al., 2019; Zheng et al., 2013).  
P has been the subject of sustainability research focused on food security and its 
environmental impact, as P scarcity will involve economic, social and political challenges 
(Childers et al., 2011). On the one hand, P scarcity will have an impact on food security: 
P fertilisation is crucial for high crop yields and is produced primarily from phosphate 
rock. Predictions regarding the availability of mineral P resources found in literature 
range from 30 to 300 years (Cordell & White 2011). Regardless of the uncertainty 
surrounding these estimates, authors urge other pressing issues regarding phosphate 
availability. Phosphate rock is a mineral of geopolitical importance, as most of the 
World’s phosphate rock reserves are found in only five countries, mainly Morocco 
(Baveye, 2015). This will have a significant impact on global food security and also on 
international security, as world population and subsequent food demand is predicted to 
increase (Childers et al., 2011), and with it the demand for P fertiliser (Cordell et al., 
2009). On the other hand, P, like N, can lead to eutrophication when discharged into water 
bodies, causing large and costly environmental impacts (Dodds et al., 2009). 
Additionally, the mining of phosphate rock and fertiliser production entail many negative 
environmental aspects (Baveye, 2015; Cordell & White, 2011).  
As P cycles on a geological timescale, it is essentially a non-renewable resource. There 
is also no known chemical or technological substitute for P. This requires 
transformational sustainability solutions (Ayres, 2007). Like N, it could be recovered 
from residual sources in order to make its use more efficient (Christiaens et al., 2017). 
The recovery of phosphorus from wastewater presents a possibility that would both be 
beneficial for food security and the environment; closing the human P cycle at the 
agricultural and wastewater level would be worth it in terms of savings in environmental 
costs alone (Childers et al., 2011). However,  Childers et al. (2011) also warn about the 
potential negative environmental impacts of such processes, such as large volumes of 
toxic non-market by-products, as well as high energy demand. 
The recycling of P from waste to food through microbial protein presents several 
advantages. Firstly, only 15-20 % of P added as fertiliser is taken up by crops (FAO, 
2006). Of the fraction that is taken up and harvested, Cordell et al., (2009) estimate that 
55 % is lost between ‘farm and fork’. Additionally, 50 % of the P excreted by livestock 
is returned to the land, but there are often regional imbalances regarding supply of manure 
and soil P level (Smil, 2000). Furthermore, only 10 % of human excreta are returned to 
land, and most nutrients from human excreta end up in the environment via treated 
wastewater or in landfills as sludge (Cordell et al., 2009). Secondly, phosphate fertiliser 
prices are very volatile, making food production vulnerable to market fluctuations 
(Cordell et al., 2009). Thirdly, a reason for the impracticality of recycling P is the 
==PAGE:7==
5 
 
geographical separation of livestock and crop production (Childers et al., 2011). 
Microbial protein production as food or feed offers the opportunity to recirculate 
nutrients, both urban and from livestock, back to agriculture as animal feed or as a 
fertiliser. In areas with high soil P and risk of eutrophication, second generation MP 
allows the production of feed while bypassing land-use, reducing the environmental 
impact of animal husbandry and recovering nutrients from urban areas. A significant 
challenge is, however, the consumer attitude toward recycling waste as a resource 
(Childers et al., 2011). 
The importance and projected scarcity of P demands alternative sources to phosphate 
rock, and recycling nutrients from waste is one such source. It is important to note the 
separation of these recovered P products from the waste or wastewater itself, as 
wastewater and sludge contain pathogens, organic micropollutants and heavy metals 
(Khoshnevisan et al., 2020): a robust barrier between the recovered product and its 
original form is crucial for the upcycling of nutrients to food or feed (Verstraete et al., 
2016). Two products of nutrients recycling that could potentially be used as alternative P 
sources are struvite and hydroxyapatite (Mehta et al., 2015). Struvite (NH4MgPO4· 6H2O) 
is a phosphate mineral that can form in wastewater, among others, causing fouling and 
maintenance issues in treatment plant pipes (Fattah, 2012), but it can be crystallised in a 
controlled way to recover phosphate and ammonium (Mehta et al., 2015). It typically 
contains minimal heavy metal or pathogenic contamination (Antonini et al., 2012), and 
has been used for as a slow release fertiliser (Antonini et al., 2012; Cerrillo et al., 2014) 
or in the cultivation of algae (Davis et al., 2015; Markou et al., 2019; Moed et al., 2015). 
However, its separation from the original wastewater is not fully robust. Hydroxyapatite 
(Ca5(PO4)3OH), known commercially as precipitated calcium phosphate (PCP) 
(EasyMining Sweden AB) is a phosphate product extracted from incinerated sewage 
sludge. It is a feed grade product that has undergone treatment to remove heavy metals. 
Incineration and heavy metal removal are important steps to ensure the safety of the 
product. Table 1 contains the heavy metal content of struvite and PCP available in 
literature.  
Table 1. Heavy metal content of struvite and PCP. 1Values obtained from Markou et al. 
(2019), 2Values calculated from Yoshida et al. (2015), 3Values provided by EasyMining 
Sweden AB. 
Struvite (mg/kg)
PCP (mg/kg) 
As 
<0.0221 
1.43
Cd 
0.09761 
<0.13 
Cr 
1.422 - 71 
1.73 
Cu 
58 
53 
Pb 
2.3571 
3.63 
Hg 
0.081 
<0.13 
Ni 
62
2.53 
Zn 
2932
-  
Al 
302
17003
 
==PAGE:8==
6 
 
This paper aims to 1) study the impact of substituting the phosphate salts in the MOB 
culture medium with recovered P sources, 2) determine P requirements of MOB 3) 
determine the best way to supply the recovered P sources. This is will allow the evaluation 
of the impact of the recovered P sources, but also the assessment of the effect of optimal 
P dosing according to MOB P requirements. The latter has special importance in terms of 
pH control, as phosphate is currently added in excess as the dominant pH buffer.   
2. Materials and methods 
2.1. Cultivation media and inoculum 
The cultivation media used were diluted nitrate salts, dNMS (Whittenbury & Wilkinson, 
1970), with potassium nitrate (Sigma Aldrich, USA) as a nitrogen source, and diluted 
ammonium salts, dAMS, with ammonium chloride (Sigma Aldrich, USA) as a nitrogen 
source, adapted from Whittenbury & Wilkinson (1970). A detailed composition can be 
found in Supporting Information Section 1 (SI-1) The cultivation media were autoclaved 
prior to the start of the experiment. The inocula consisted of two mixed cultures of 
methane oxidising bacteria (MOB), one adapted to the dAMS and one to the dNMS 
medium. The first was provided by Tsapekos et al. (2020), and the second was enriched 
from the first. Both had a volume of 2 L and an HRT and SRT of 4 days (see SI-5). 
Oxygen and methane were provided at a 60:40 ratio. No specific control measures were 
taken to characterise the reactors’ performance. 
 
The residual phosphorus sources used to substitute the phosphate salts in the media were 
struvite and hydroxyapatite, also known as precipitated calcium phosphate (PCP). PCP 
was 
provided 
by 
EasyMining 
Sweden 
AB 
(https://www.easymining.se/technologies/ash2phos/). 
The 
Ash2Phos 
technology 
separates phosphorus, together with iron and aluminium, through acid treatment. The 
addition of lime forms calcium phosphate, and iron and aluminium hydroxides. PCP 
contains a minimum of 16 % phosphorus. Struvite was provided by Helsingør Forsyning 
A/S (Helsingør, Denmark). Helsingør WWTP treats 76300 PE with activated sludge, 
nitrification-denitrification, and chemical P removal using AlCl2.  Struvite was recovered 
from sludge liquor in a STRUVIATM (Veolia) CSTR crystallization reactor based on the 
Turbomix® rapid mixing technology. The crystallization rector, installed after 
mesophilic anaerobic digestion (at 40 ºC) and sludge dewatering, treats liquor separated 
from sludge. Its aim is to recover P via struvite while simultaneously preventing struvite 
scaling throughout the WWTP. Struvite is precipitated by dosing MgCl2 and increasing 
pH to 8 – 9 using NaOH. The reactor is equipped with a lamella settler on top and the 
struvite crystals are harvested from the bottom. The reactor has a total volume of 4.2 m3, 
a mixing zone (below the lamellar settler) of 2.2 m3, a hydraulic retention time of 60 m3 
d-1, and a capacity of 15 kg PO4-P d-1. 
Struvite and PCP were characterised by determining total and volatile solid content of the 
solid material, as well as heavy metal content using ICP-OS and ICP-MS (see SI-2 Table 
2-1 for details regarding their composition. As both materials have low solubility, a 
dissolution experiment was carried out to determine the most appropriate pH and 
temperature to effectively dissolve them. 2 g of struvite or PCP were dissolved in 500 mL 
flasks at pH 2 or 5 and kept in incubators at 25 and 37 ºC, with continuous stirring. 10 
==PAGE:9==
7 
 
mL aliquots were taken after 0.5, 1, 2, 4 and 20 hours to measure dissolved phosphate. 
After 20 h, 50 mL were filtered to measure total suspended solids (TSS) of the filtrate. A 
further condition was autoclavation for 20 min at 121 ºC and pH 2 and 5, after which 
samples were taken for phosphate and TSS analysis. Each condition was run in duplicate. 
The autoclavation experiment lasted 3 hours, including heating to 121 ºC, 20 min at 121 
ºC and cooling to 80 ºC. 
2.2. Experimental setup 
Batch experiments were run with struvite and PCP as residual phosphorus sources, with 
a protocol adapted from Valverde-Pérez et al. (2020). 250 mL serum bottles were filled 
with medium and sealed with rubber caps and aluminium lids. The working volume was 
100 mL, with 3% v/v of inoculum. The volume of inoculum was adjusted according to 
the optical density (OD), in order to inoculate every time with the same cell dry weight 
(CDW). This was done using a correlation between CDW and OD available in SI-4. After 
inoculation, 50 mL of headspace were removed  and replaced by a 100 mL mixture of 
oxygen and pure methane with a ratio of 60:40 O2:CH4 (Tsapekos et al., 2019). Gas mix 
was replaced 50 hours after beginning of the experiment. The serum bottles were kept at 
25 °C and shaken at 120 rpm. The experiment ended whenever two similar consecutive 
values of OD were measured, indicating that the culture had reached stationary phase. 
The experimental conditions are summarised in Table 2. The ID indicates the phosphate 
source (C stands for control as the phosphate source is that of the original dAMS and 
dNMS media) and the nitrogen source (A stands for NH4+ and N for NO3-). Firstly, the 
importance of potassium for the growth of MOB was studied by comparing the growth 
of MOB in experimental conditions CA, PA and PKA, where PA contains only 
phosphoric acid (Sigma Aldrich, USA) and no K source, and PKA was supplemented 
with KCl (Sigma Aldrich, USA). The residual P sources do not contain K, although it 
might be a part of the material as a coprecipitate in struvite or as an impurity in both 
struvite and PCP. Conditions CA, CN, SA, PCPA and PCPN aimed to evaluate the 
efficacy of the residual P sources in comparison to the phosphate salts in the original 
medium recipe. Furthermore, both ammonia and nitrate were used as nitrogen sources in 
order to assess the difference between nitrate and ammonia as a nitrogen source, their 
impacts on pH and the subsequent buffering requirements of the system. 
Table 2. Experimental conditions for microbial protein production. 
ID 
Nitrogen source 
Phosphorus source 
CA
Ammonium
Na2HPO4 and KH2PO4
PA
Ammonium
H3PO4
PKA
Ammonium
H3PO4 and KCl
CN
Nitrate
Na2HPO4 and KH2PO4
SA
Ammonium
Struvite
PCPA
Ammonium
PCP
PCPN 
Nitrate 
PCP 
 
Optical density at 600 nm (OD600) was used as a measure of growth. O2, CH4 and CO2 
content in the headspace, pH and the concentration soluble ammonium, nitrate, nitrite and 
==PAGE:10==
8 
 
phosphate in the liquid phase were also tracked. When the culture reached stationary 
phase, the necessary volume for reinoculation was calculated based on the CDW-OD 
correlation in SI-4 and stored at 4 °C to be used for the next iteration. The rest was 
centrifuged at 17,000 G for 10 minutes. The supernatant was filtered using 0.2 µm glass 
fibre filters (Sartorius, Germany) and used to measure total nitrogen, total phosphorus 
and COD in the liquid phase. Buffer capacity reduction was measured on the remaining 
supernatant, as well as the initial medium. Conductivity was also measured on the original 
media. 
Each experimental condition was run in duplicate. At least three consecutive runs for each 
condition were carried out, until obtaining three comparable growth curves. In this way, 
the triplicates were run in series and system adaptations could be observed and accounted 
for.  
 
2.3. Analytical methods and calculations 
Biomass growth was tracked using Cary 50 Bio UV-Visible Spectrophotometer at 600 
nm (Varian, USA) and total suspended solids (TSS) were measured according to (APHA, 
2017) using 0.45 µm glass fibre filters (WhatmanTM). The protocol can be found in SI-4. 
Conductivity was measured using Oxi 539 Microprocessor Oximeter (WTW, Germany) 
and pH was measured using PHM210 Standard pH meter (MeterLab, Radiometer 
Analytical, France). 
Soluble compounds were measured after the filtration of liquid samples with 0.2 μm glass 
fibre filters (Sartorius, Germany). Ammonium, nitrite and nitrate were determined 
colorimetrically by a continuous-flow auto-analyser (SKALAR San++, Netherlands). 
Phosphate was determined colorimetrically using Merck (Germany) test kit 114848. Total 
dissolved nitrogen, phosphorus and COD were measured using Hach (Germany) test kits 
LCK 238, LCK 350, and LCI 400, respectively. The amino acid profile was measured by 
high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) as described in Rasouli et al. (2018). 
Centrifuged biomass pellets were freeze-dried for two days before the analysis. 10 to 15 
g of freeze-dried biomass were used for amino acid analysis. Samples were placed in 
glass vials and 300 µL of HCl 6 N were added. A further 20 mL of HCl 6 N were added 
to Teflon microwave tubes and the glass vials inserted. The tubes were then sealed and 
flushed with argon to prevent oxidative degradation. The samples were hydrolysed in a 
microwave oven (Anton Paar Multiwave 300, AT) at 500 W and 150 °C for 30 min, and 
then cooled for 15 min. Evaporated hydrochloric acid was replaced and the samples 
centrifuged in 2 mL Eppendorf vials at 13.1 rpm for 20 min. Samples were filtered using 
0.2 μm glass fibre filters (Sartorius, Germany) before analysis using HPLC (Thermo 
Scientific Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC, USA) equipped with a c18 reversed phase 
column (Agilent Technologies USA Eclipse Plus C18) and an in-line guard column 
(Macherey-Nagel Germany EC 4/2 Universal RP). Calibration was done with a 
commercial amino acid mix (AAS18, Sigma-Aldrich) containing L-Alanine, L-Arginine, 
L-Aspartic acid, L-Cystine, L-Glutamic acid, Glycine, L-Histidine, L-Isoleucine, L-
Leucine, L-Lysine, L-Methionine, L-Phenylalanine, L-Proline, L-Serine, L-Threonine, 
L-Tyrosine and L-Valine. Concentration of each amino acid was calculated by subtracting 
the water mass (18 g H20 mol-1 of amino acid) incorporated into each amino acid after 
the disruption of the peptide bonds from the recovered amino acid mass retrieved after 
==PAGE:11==
9 
 
acid hydrolysis. The masses of the individual amino acids were then added up to 
determine the total protein content. 
Elemental analysis of biomass and recovered phosphorus source composition was done 
by inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES) and inductively 
coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS). Elemental concentrations of elements were 
measured on Perkin Elmer Avio 200 Inductive Coupled Plasma-Optical Emission 
Spectrometer (ICP-OES). Samples were digested in the same way as for ICP-MS 
measurements. To enhance the measurement precision, axial view setting was used for 
measurement of concentrations <1mg/L and radial view for concentrations >1mg/L. 
Processing of the data was carried out in the SyngisticTM for ICP Software v. 2.0 from 
Perkin Elmer. Based on repeated measurement of certified in-house standards (SCP 
Science EnviroMAT), the relative standard deviation (RSD) of the measurements was 
calculated. Furthermore, each injection of the sample was measured three times, in order 
to estimate the RSD of each individual measurement. Method detection limit (MDL) was 
calculated from the calibration curve. Elemental concentrations of heavy metals were 
measured on Agilent 7700x ICP-MS Inductive Coupled Plasma-Mass Spectrometer (ICP-
MS). Before the measurement, the samples were digested in 2 ml HNO3, 1 ml HCl and 
1ml H2O2 (all of suprapur grade) and heated on a hotplate at 80°C for 3 h. The elements 
were analysed in He and No Gas mode. The sample uptake speed (nebulizer pump speed) 
was set to 0.1 rpm and the stabilization time to 40 sec. Integration time was set to 0.3 sec 
for He mode (He flow 5 mL/min). Processing of the data was carried out in the 
MassHunter 4.6 Workstation Software (v. C.01.06). Based on repeated measurement of 
certified in-house standards (SCP Science EnviroMAT), the relative standard deviation 
(RSD) of the measurements was calculated. Furthermore, each injection of the sample 
was measured three times, in order to estimate the RSD of each individual measurement. 
Method detection limit (MDL) was calculated from the calibration curve. 
The gas composition in the headspace was analysed using gas chromatography (GC Trace 
1310 Thermo Scientific, USA). For methane and carbon dioxide, an HP- Plot/Q column 
(Agilent Technologies, USA, length 15 m, diameter 0.32 mm, film 20 μm) was used. For 
oxygen, an HP-Molesieve column (Agilent Technologies, USA, length 30 m, diameter, 
0.53, film 50 μm) was used. Calibration was carried out by injecting gas mixtures of 
known concentrations: methane to carbon dioxide ratios (v/v) of 60/40, 40/30 and 5/5, 
and nitrogen to oxygen ratios (v/v) of 40/60, 70/30 and 95/5. 
From the abovementioned parameters, the growth rate and specific yields were calculated 
(Khoshnevisan et al., 2020). The growth rate was calculated as follows: 
𝜇= 𝑑ln (𝑂𝐷଺଴଴)
𝑑𝑡
 
1) 
 
where 𝜇 is the specific growth rate during the exponential phase and 𝑂𝐷଺଴଴ is the 
measured optical density at a wavelength of 600 nm. It was determined numerically using 
linear regression in Microsoft Excel. Methane and N source uptake rates were also 
estimated using linear regression in the exponential growth phase, assuming uptake 
followed first order kinetics: 
==PAGE:12==
10 
 
𝑑𝐶𝐻ସ
𝑑𝑡
= −𝑟஼ுర𝐶𝐻ସ 
2) 
 
𝑑𝑁
𝑑𝑡= −𝑟ே𝑁 
3) 
 
where 𝐶𝐻ସ is the methane content in the headspace (in mg), 𝑟஼ுర is the methane uptake 
rate in (mg CH4 d-1), 𝑁 is the content of nitrogen source (in mg) and 𝑟ே is the nitrogen 
uptake rate (in mg N d-1) 
The methane consumption was calculated based on the mass of methane fed to each batch 
reactor minus the mass of methane remaining just before feeding or at the end of the 
experimental run. The mass of methane in the headspace was calculated as follows: 
𝑚஼ுర= % 𝐶𝐻ସ· 𝑉௛· 𝑀𝑊஼ுర
100 · 𝑅· 𝑇
 
4) 
 
Where % 𝐶𝐻ସ is the percentage of methane in the headspace, 𝑉௛ is the volume of the 
headspace (adjusted to the remaining working volume), 𝑀𝑊஼ுర is the molecular weight 
of methane, 𝑅 is the universal gas constant and 𝑇 is the temperature. 
Cell dry weight (CDW) was determined using the with OD600 correlation in SI-4. CDW 
yields based on methane, phosphorus and nitrogen consumption were calculated as 
follows: 
𝑌஼஽ௐ/஼ுర൤𝑔𝐶𝐷𝑊
𝑔𝐶𝐻ସ
൨=
𝐶𝐷𝑊ቂ𝑔
𝐿ቃ· 𝑉௅[𝐿]
Δ𝐶𝐻ସ[𝑔]
 
5) 
 
𝑌஼஽ௐ/ே൤𝑔𝐶𝐷𝑊
𝑔𝑁൨=
𝐶𝐷𝑊ቂ𝑔
𝐿ቃ
Δ𝑁ቂ𝑔
𝐿ቃ
 
6) 
 
𝑌஼஽ௐ/ே൤𝑔𝐶𝐷𝑊
𝑔𝑁൨=
𝐶𝐷𝑊ቂ𝑔
𝐿ቃ
Δ𝑃ቂ𝑔
𝐿ቃ
 
7) 
 
where 𝐶𝐷𝑊 refers to cell dry weight, 𝑉௅ is liquid volume. 
For PCPA, total and volatile solids were determined at the end of the experiment and used 
in subsequent calculations: YCDW/CH4, YCDW/N, and protein content. 
The C:N ratio was calculated as follows: 
𝐶: 𝑁=
𝑌஼஽ௐ/ே൤𝑔𝐶𝐷𝑊
𝑔𝑁
൨
𝑌஼஽ௐ/஼ுర൤𝑔𝐶𝐷𝑊
𝑔𝐶𝐻ସ൨
 
8) 
==PAGE:13==
11 
 
 
The C:P ratio was calculated based on the P content of biomass measured by ICP-OES 
and YCDW/CH4: 
 
𝐶: 𝑃=
𝐶௉൤𝑔𝐶𝐷𝑊
𝑔𝑃
൨
𝑌஼஽ௐ/஼ுర൤𝑔𝐶𝐷𝑊
𝑔𝐶𝐻ସ൨
 
9) 
In the case of N and P, these ratios correspond to their accumulation in biomass. This is 
not the case for methane, as not all is assimilated: part is metabolised to soluble organic 
by-products and part is oxidized to CO2 to produce energy. The nitrogen to protein ratio 
(N-protein) was also calculated as follows: 
𝑁−𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑡൤𝑔𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑡𝑒𝑖𝑛
𝑔𝑁
൨=
𝑔𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑡𝑒𝑖𝑛
𝑔𝐶𝐷𝑊
∆𝑁
𝐶𝐷𝑊൤𝑔𝑁
𝑔𝐶𝐷𝑊൨
 
10) 
 
Calculations and statistical analysis were carried out using Microsoft Excel and Minitab 
Statistical Software (Pennsylvania State University, 2018). All data were tested for 
normality and equal variances and the results of these tests used for all subsequent 
analysis. Means were compared either by paired 2-sample T-tests or one-way ANOVA 
with either Tukey (for equal variances) or Games-Howell (for unequal variances) 
pairwise comparisons. Data is expressed in mean values and standard error of the mean 
(SEM): 𝑆𝐸𝑀=
ௌ஽
√௡, where 𝑆𝐷 is the standard deviation of the samples and 𝑛 the number 
of samples. 
3. Results and discussion 
3.1. Residual phosphorus source characterisation 
Figure 1 shows the dissolution curves of struvite and PCP at different temperatures and 
pH values. There is a clear difference in trend between the two: in Figure 1A, the 
concentration of dissolved phosphate increases with time, albeit slightly. This is also the 
case for Figure 1B at pH 5. However, for PCP dissolution at pH 2 (Figure 1B), dissolved 
phosphate decreases with time after an initial rapid dissolution. This may be due to the 
release of the hydroxyl ion in PCP, which would raise the pH and thus decrease solubility. 
Temperature negatively correlates with pH: higher temperature results in lower pH. In 
both cases, low pH shows a larger effect on dissolution than temperature . This is further 
corroborated by autoclavation, where applying high temperature to struvite and PCP 
solutions showed stark differences between pH 2 and 5. All mean maximum phosphate 
concentrations were significantly different (p-value < 0.05) (see SI-6). Note that 
measurements were taken for the autoclavation treatment (121 ºC) after the solution had 
cooled to 80 ºC, 3 h after closing of the autoclave. 
==PAGE:14==
12 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Dissolved phosphate concentrations in A) struvite and B) PCP solutions at temperatures 
25 and 37 °C and at pH 2 and 5. Data are represented by means and SEM. 
 
Struvite and PCP are relatively insoluble. This creates challenges when supplying them 
as a part of the culture medium. The maximum possible dissolution is aimed for, in order 
to allow optimal dosing and avoid excess precipitates or particles. A practical way to 
provide dissolved phosphate free of particulates is a pre-dissolution reactor where struvite 
or PCP are dissolved at their optimum conditions before the liquid phase is added to the 
fermenter growing MOB. It is therefore important to characterise at which conditions and 
at what time maximum phosphate dissolution occurs. Studies using recovered P sources 
such as struvite for microalgae production do not describe its dissolution in detail. The 
results above show that making phosphate from struvite or PCP available in the aqueous 
phase is by no means trivial. Lowering the pH requires chemical input. Fortunately, heat 
seems to be of less relevance, saving energy costs. Dissolution of recovered P sources is 
a step in the process train that requires thorough understanding in order for it to be 
optimised in terms of resource use, chemical input, and tank volume and operation. 
 
The best performing condition for struvite was 37 ºC and pH 2. The time at which the 
maximum phosphate concentration is measured is also of relevance for the design of a 
dissolution reactor. In the case of struvite, maximum phosphate concentration was 
measured at 20 h, but there was no significant difference (p > 0.05) compared to the 
concentration at 4 h. In fact, nearly 100 % dissolution was measured practically from the 
beginning. For PCP, the best performer was 25 ºCat pH 2. Highest dissolved phosphate 
concentrations were measured 30 minutes after the start of the experiment. Here, 
residence time is a key factor to avoid re-precipitation. 
Details regarding the composition of struvite and PCP can be found in SI-2. Although 
heavy metals are present to some extent in both materials, their concentration is not above 
that of the EU’s limits for heavy metals in mineral fertiliser with the exception of 
chromium in PCP, as cited in Annex I of the Council Regulation 2019/1009/EU: he 
measured Cr content in PCP is 4.7 mg/kg dry matter and the limit is 2 mg/kg dry matter. 
Conversely, the copper content of struvite is very low (< 1 mg/kg dry matter). As Cu is 
an important element for MOB growth and enzyme synthesis, it would have to be 
supplemented in the fermenter if struvite is used as a P source (Semrau et al., 2010). 
A
B 
==PAGE:15==
13 
 
 
It should also be considered that struvite does not have a uniform composition and can 
contain impurities such as organic matter. The total and volatile solids were determined 
for struvite in order to know the actual mineral fraction of the material. Solids account 
for 60 % of struvite, 76 % of which are mineral (24 % of solids are volatile). 
 
3.2. MOB growth 
3.2.1. Preliminary assessment 
Hydrochloric acid was chosen over sulphuric acid for PCP and struvite stock preparation, 
due to its lower contribution to the ionic strength (IS) of the solution. The IS of dAMS 
and dNMS are 0.023 and 0.009 M, respectively. Valverde-Pérez et al. (2020) found that 
at an IS above 0.28 M (corresponding to 8 g L-1 NaCl) MOB are inhibited. Divalent acids 
such as H2SO4 contribute four times as much to the IC compared to monovalent acids, 
while only contributing double the protons. The IS of media with residual sources is 2.5 
to 4 times higher than in the original media, with the dissolved residual P sources 
accounting for 80-90 % of the increase. Therefore, it is important to achieve the 
dissolution of struvite and PCP in the way that least contributes to the IS. PCP and struvite 
were dissolved in HCl 0.01 M and heated at 60 °C for one hour, as described in SI-1. 
Potassium is present in excess both in dAMS and dNMS as it is added as part of the 
phosphate buffer in the form of KH2PO4. It is possible that when substituting the buffer 
by residual P sources, the cultivation media may lack K. Therefore, a preliminary study 
of MOB was carried out to determine the importance of K for MOB growth. No 
significant differences (p-value > 0.05) were found among the growth rates of the three 
conditions, indicating that the absence of potassium would not be limiting for growth. 
Furthermore, a longer-term experiment with three consecutive growth curves (each 5 days 
in length) was carried out with CA and PA to study if performance was maintained in the 
absence of K. No significant differences were observed in the growth rates in the long 
term, either. More details can be found in SI-6. 
3.2.1. Impact of the nitrogen source 
The effect of the nitrogen source, ammonium or nitrate, on MOB growth can be gauged 
from the growth parameters of CA and CN. No significant difference (p-value > 0.05) 
was observed either among the growth rates (1.11 ± 0.00 and 1.06 ± 0.07 d-1 for CA and 
CN, respectively) nor the methane uptake rates (0.65 ± 0.36 and 1.1 ± 0.7 g CH4 d-1). 
However, a significant difference was found in the maximum biomass produced: 0.41 ± 
0.02 g CDW for CA and 0.54 ± 0.03 g CDW for CN. Generally, MOB are expected to 
grow more slowly in dAMS medium due to the competition between ammonium and 
methane for the enzyme responsible for methane oxidation, yielding to slower kinetics 
(King & Schnell, 1994; Stein et al., 2006). However, above a certain methane 
concentration in the headspace, the inhibition decreases (King & Schnell, 1994) and 
ammonium can be used as a nutrient. Another notable difference (p-value < 0.05) is that 
between biomass yields on P (YCDW/P), which were 3.34 ± 0.04 and 4.52 ± 1.06 g CDW 
g P-1 for CA and CN, respectively. This may be due to MOB community composition in 
each medium. This shift can be caused by nutrient concentrations and the balance between 
elements, as well as other medium conditions (Veraart et al., 2015). Different MOB types 
==PAGE:16==
14 
 
have different P requirements, and shift in relative abundance of the different MOB 
strains may be reflected in the overall P demand.  
Type I and X MOB (Gammaproteobacteria) have been shown to follow a ‘ruderal’ 
strategy (Ho et al., 2012). These bacteria have higher P requirements, for instance for the 
P-rich rRNA necessary for growth, and are quickly limited by N (Veraart et al., 2015). 
Type II MOB, also called Alphaproteobacteria, tend to follow the ‘stress-tolerator’ 
survival strategy (Ho et al., 2012). Organisms following such a strategy have minimised 
their P requirements (Sebastian & Ammerman, 2009) using high affinity P transporters, 
excretion of P-liberating enzymes and using non-phosphorus lipids in membranes, and 
smaller genomes (Van Mooy et al., 2009). The membranes of Gamma- and 
Alphaproteobacteria have a different morphology and P content. Gammaproteobacteria 
have stacked membranes with high P demand, whereas Alphaproteobacteria have 
vesicular membranes with lower P demand (Whittenbury & Wilkinson, 1970). The 
inoculum for CA mainly contained Methylomonas (Type I, Gammaproteobacteria) and 
the Methylophylus (Betaproteobacteria) (Tsapekos et al., 2020). An increase in the 
proportion of Gammaproteobacteria could possibly lead to higher P requirements. 
Ammonia has been associated with a more diverse methanotrophic community, which 
may entail a larger proportion of low P-requirement Alphaproteobacteria. A microbial 
diversity analysis would be needed in order to corroborate the relationship between 
community structure and P demand. It is important to note that the literature studies 
comparing the effect of nitrogen sources on MOB growth were carried out at conditions 
mimicking the soil environment, with low methane concentrations. This study is focused 
on production of MP and works with much higher methane contents, which supports the 
observed lack of inhibition. It is the ratio between ammonium and methane that is 
important for inhibition (King & Schnell, 1994), oxygen content does not seem to play a 
role.  
Differences in culture behaviour were expected based on the differences in N assimilation 
pathways for ammonium and nitrate: assimilatory reduction of nitrate is less efficient than 
the direct assimilation of ammonium (Stein et al., 2006). Although none were observed 
in growth and methane oxidation rates, the N assimilation rate of CA, 1.82 ± 0.05 g N d-
1, was significantly (p-value < 0.05) higher than for CN, 1.13 ± 0.39 g N d-1.  Additionally, 
in CN ammonium was formed from nitrate and remains at low concentrations until near 
the end of the experiment, when it is depleted. This observation could possibly be due to 
dissimilatory nitrate reduction to ammonium. Nitrate being reduced to ammonium at a 
faster rate than ammonium can be assimilated is an indication of this is the dominant 
metabolic pathway (Lee & Childress, 1996). Both the predominant strains in the culture, 
Methylomonas and Methylophilus, have been shown to be able to assimilate nitrate 
(Hoefman et al., 2014; Jenkins et al., 1987).  
It should be noted that no nitrite was observed above the detection limit (0.1 mg N L-1) in 
either CA nor CN. Stein et al. (2006) observed nitrite formation for different MOB strains, 
but also found that not all MOB are capable of oxidising ammonia to nitrite. This is related 
to the biochemistry of MOB: there are two kinds of enzymes responsible for methane 
oxidation in MOB: soluble methane monooxygenase (sMMO) and particulate 
monooxygenase (pMMO). pMMO is homologous to the ammonia monooxygenase 
(AMO) present in ammonia oxidising bacteria. It is therefore plausible to expect 
==PAGE:17==
15 
 
competition between ammonium and methane for pMMO, which would result in 
inhibited growth and the formation of nitrite and nitrate. Since neither growth shows 
inhibitions nor nitrite is present, competition between ammonium and methane for 
pMMO is not significant. Nitrite not only inhibits MOB growth with negative 
implications for MP production (King & Schnell, 1994), but is also highly toxic for 
humans. Its presence would make the effluent highly unsuitable for discharge, defeating 
the sanitation aim of the process. 
A major difference between the two nitrogen sources is their effect on pH and buffer 
capacity, summarised in ¡Error! No se encuentra el origen de la referencia.. Although 
there was no significant difference (p-value > 0.05) in the pH reduction between CA and 
CN (0.58 ± 0.08 and 0.38 ± 0.09, respectively), CA showed a 70 ± 5 % decrease in BC. 
Ammonium assimilation releases protons, while nitrate reduction absorbs protons (Fuggi 
et al., 1981). This is the reason the quantity of phosphate buffer in dAMS is five times 
that in dNMS. The decrease in pH cannot, therefore, be linked to ammonium assimilation, 
since it occurs similarly in CN and CA. The increase in protons responsible for the 
decrease in pH can be assumed to be solely the contribution of CO2. CO2 does not affect 
BC because is contributes equally to protons and anionic carbon forms but it does affect 
pH, since the latter is only a measure of proton concentration.  shows similar CO2 
production for both CA and CN. The BC values obtained for CN indicate that manual 
titration is not an adequate method for solutions with low buffer capacity. However, it 
was not possible to successfully carry out a proton balance to determine how many 
protons on average are released by ammonium assimilation or absorbed by nitrate 
assimilation as in Fuggi et al. (1981). For a more detailed explanation of the phenomenon 
taking place, more precise measurements of the BC are needed. A useful metric could 
also be dissolved inorganic carbon, in order to corroborate the contribution of CO2 to pH. 
Table 3. Variations in pH and buffer capacity in CA and CN. Data are given in mean ± 
SEM. 
Conditions 
∆pH 
% ∆BC 
CA
0.58 ± 0.08
71.5 ± 2.8
CN 
0.38 ± 0.09 
-48.8 ± 63.6 
 
==PAGE:18==
16 
 
 
Figure 2. Carbon dioxide production as a function of time. Data are given in mean ± 
SEM. 
3.2.3. Biokinetic characterisation 
 shows the initial conditions of the five medium formulations for which MOB growth and 
protein accumulation was studied. Note that struvite has N source (ammonium) in excess, 
since it contains ammonium and phosphate in a 1:1 molar ratio. Struvite was added with 
reference to the desired P concentration, since the aim was to guarantee sufficient buffer 
capacity (BC). All conditions started with 52 ± 1 mg methane and 106 ± 5 mg oxygen. 
Table 4. Initial conditions in terms of concentrations of nitrogen source, dissolved 
phosphate, buffer capacity, total suspended solids and conductivity. Data are given in 
mean ± SEM. 
Condition 
mg N L-1 
mg PO4-P L-1 
BC  
(µM) 
TSS 
(mg L-1) 
C 
(mS cm-1) 
CA
25.4 ± 1.1
644 ± 104
1.02 ± 0.09
8.7 ± 4.1
198 ± 14
CN
24.0 ± 1.3
234 ± 10
0.22 ± 0.01
4.7 ± 2.9
79.8 ± 4.6
PCPN
23.9 ± 0.4
176 ± 10
0.18 ± 0.04
12.7 ± 0.7
96.7 ± 12.4
SA
107 ± 1.5
366 ± 28
0.92 ± 0.04
8.0 ± 2.3
256 ± 20
PCPA 
25.4 ± 3.5 
152 ± 11 
0.12 ± 0.00 
876 ± 103 
306 ± 8 
 
Visual comparison with CN and CA showed similar flocculation in PCPN, while SA 
showed much less flocculation and smaller aggregates, which may be related to cell 
surface charge changes resulting from a significantly higher ionic strength, which 
correlates to the conductivity in   (Zita & Hermansson, 1994). Large amounts of 
precipitates formed at the working pH (6.8) in PCPA, which also showed flocculation and 
clumping with the precipitate, likely due to extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) 
released due to stress or the effect of PCP on the surface charge of the cells, since it had 
the highest conductivity (Zita & Hermansson, 1994). 
 shows the kinetics and product yields used to characterise MOB growth under the 
different experimental conditions. The growth rates of PCPN and SA were 0.88 ± 0.05 
and 0.72 ± 0.17 d-1, which were not significantly different (p-value > 0.05) from CN and 
==PAGE:19==
17 
 
CA nor from each other. These growth rates were within the same range as in previous 
studies, such as Khoshnevisan et al. (2020), Tsapekos et al. (2020) and Zha et al. (2021).  
Neither was there a significant difference in the maximum measured OD between SA and 
CA, nor between PCPN and CN. OD600 was not a good proxy for growth for PCPA due 
to the large amount of precipitates. Total and volatile solids of PCPA were measured at 
the end of the experiment in order to calculate kinetic parameters. The results were 2.75 
± 1.0 % TS and 36.4 ± 4.1 % VS. ¡Error! No se encuentra el origen de la referencia. 
shows the growth curves for all conditions where OD was measured. CN and PCPN 
clearly produce more biomass than CA and SA, although all conditions behave very 
similarly the first 80 hours. All conditions show similar (p-value > 0.05) biomass yields 
on methane. However, these are in the lower end of the range of the values obtained in 
previous studies. 
 
Table 5. Methane and nitrogen uptake rates and biomass yields on methane, on nitrogen 
and on phosphorus. Data are given in mean ± SEM. 
Condition 
Growth 
rate 
(d-1) 
Methane 
uptake rate 
(g CH4 d-1) 
Nitrogen 
uptake rate
(g N d-1) 
YCDW/CH4 
(g CDW  
g CH4-1) 
YCDW/N 
(g CDW 
g N-1) 
YCDW/P 
(g CDW g P-1) 
CA
1.11 ± 0.00
0.65 ± 0.36
1.82 ± 0.04
0.24 ± 0.03
14.7 ± 1.1
3.34 ± 0.04
CN
1.06 ± 0.07
1.07 ± 0.75
1.13 ± 0.39
0.26 ± 0.02
22.5 ± 1.2
4.52 ± 1.06
PCPN
0.88 ± 0.05
1.58 ± 0.32
0.82 ± 0.24
0.29 ± 0.03
24.3 ± 1.1
6.58 ± 0.25
SA
0.72 ± 0.17
0.77 ± 0.66
0.23 ± 0.02
0.26 ± 0.06
15.0 ± 1.9
–
PCPA 
– 
1.16 ± 0.67 
1.38 ± 0.04 
0.21 ± 0.06 
16.2 ± 0.6 
2.48 ± 0.04 
 
 
Figure 3. Growth curves using OD600 as a proxy for growth. Data are given as mean ± SEM.
 
 
==PAGE:20==
18 
 
The average methane uptake rate shows large variability within each condition, and no 
significant differences (p-value > 0.05) were found between the recovered P sources and 
their respective controls. The methane and oxygen consumption and carbon dioxide 
production trends can be found in SI-6 Figures Figure 6-2Figure 6-3Figure 6-4. The 
nitrogen uptake rate of CN and PCPN is not significantly different. PCPA’s nitrogen 
uptake rate is not significantly different from CA’s, but SA’s is. In fact, SA has the lowest 
N uptake rate, potentially due to struvite continuing to dissolve over the course of the 
experiment, increasing the ammonium present in the liquid phase. CA, PCPA and SA 
show similar (p-value > 0.05) biomass on nitrogen yields (YCDW/N). CN and PCPN have 
the highest YCDW/N values, and therefore the lowest N accumulation. The values for 
YCDW/N within the expected range for CA, SA and PCPA, but higher for CN and PCPN 
(Khoshnevisan et al., 2020; Zha et al., 2021). Lower yields are associated with greater 
nitrogen accumulation and, thus, a higher protein content (Khoshnevisan et al., 2020).  
shows the evolution of the nitrogen concentration (as ammonium or nitrate) in the 
medium. It can clearly be seen that for CN, CA, SA and PCPA the nitrogen source is 
depleted by around 70 hours. SA has dissolved nitrogen in excess due to the composition 
of struvite (see SI-5). For CN and PCPN, nearly half of the biomass growth occurs after 
nitrate has been almost depleted. Traces of ammonium are still present in the medium, 
but at very low concentrations (< 0.5 mg/L). CA depletes ammonium at a similar time, 
but accumulates less biomass afterward. This leads to less N per unit biomass in CN and 
PCPN, which is also reflected in YCDW/N. It would be thus expected for CN and PCPN to 
have lower protein contents. If YCDW/N were to be calculated at the time when nitrogen 
source depletion occurs, the results would be: 12.2 ± 0.1 and 15.4 ± 3.7 for CN and PCPN, 
respectively. For CA and PCPA, the YCDW/N when nitrogen is depleted (12.4 ± 2.4 and 
16.2 ± 0.0) are much more similar to those at the end of the experiment (). 
It was not possible to calculate YCDW/P for SA, as the final PO43- concentration was higher 
than the initial one. Ammonia and phosphate initial concentrations were 107 ± 1.5 and 
366 ± 28, respectively. At these high concentrations, it was hypothesized that formation 
of small precipitates resulted in the underestimation of the phosphorus content at the start 
of the experiment. As pH decreases over time, it is possible that part of the precipitated 
phosphorus dissolves again yielding to slightly higher phosphorus values. Phosphate 
measurements had a high uncertainty due to the samples needing dissolution in order for 
phosphate to be in the range of measurement of commercial test kits. The instrumental 
error associated to diluting such small sample volumes and then measuring them makes 
the phosphate results unreliable. Note that the YCDW/P are lower than the YCDW/N, implying 
that MOB require more P than N to grow. This is not realistic, since bacteria have a much 
higher, usually by at least one order of magnitude, physiological requirement for N than 
for P (Elser et al., 1996). 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:21==
19 
 
Figure 4. Nitrogen source concentration (ammonium or nitrate) as a function of time. Data are 
given in mean ± SEM.
 
The composition of the dissolved phase at the end of the experiment can provide valuable 
information regarding the proportion of carbon, nitrogen and phosphorus that was 
incorporated into biomass and the proportion converted into by-products. PCPA and SA 
are the conditions were most methane, 15 ± 3 % in both cases, is converted to organic by-
products, while that percentage is significantly lower for PCPN (5.7 ± 1.3 %). Although 
the dissolved concentration of methane in the liquid phase was not measured, these 
percentages do give an indication of the conversion efficiency from carbon source to 
biomass. All conditions show similar contents of total dissolved N, except SA. 
Ammonium was present in excess throughout the experiment for SA, and some nitrate 
was formed, unlike in the case of CA. The ratio between C/N below which MOB oxidise 
ammonia instead of methane (14.3) is much higher than both that in CA and SA (2 and 
0.45) (King & Schnell, 1994). However, it was determined for pure MOB strains not 
previously adapted to ammonium, unlike this mixed consortium. No ammonium 
oxidation was observed for CA, since no nitrate was measured. The increased resilience 
may be due to a diverse community and prior acclimatisation may account for the higher 
tolerance to ammonium. Additionally, the study by King & Schnell (1994) took place at 
atmospheric conditions, while at the start of this experiment there was overpressure in the 
serum bottles, which could contribute to increased methane dissolution. The fact that 
nitrate was indeed measured in SA is an indication that competition for pMMO indeed 
occurred. Thus, the ratio below which pMMO starts oxidising ammonia instead of 
methane for this consortium is between 2 and 0.45. Even when subtracting ammonium 
and nitrate, SA continues to have the highest content of dissolved N at 7.6 ± 3.2 g N L-1. 
Thus, SA produces the most soluble N containing products. The measured concentrations 
of total P and phosphate are subject to the same uncertainty and instrumental error as 
mentioned previously. 
 
==PAGE:22==
20 
 
Table 6. Final concentrations of dissolved chemical oxygen demand, total nitrogen, total 
phosphorus and phosphate. 
Condition
Total 
dissolved 
COD (mg L-1) 
Total 
dissolved N 
(mg L-1) 
Total 
dissolved 
P (mg L-1)
Phosphate
(mg PO4-P 
L-1) 
% ∆BC 
CA
24.3 ± 4.3
2.25 ± 0.17
379 ± 1
639 ± 8
71 ± 3
CN
38.9 ± 6.3
2.04 ± 0.18
349 ± 3
131 ± 1
-49 ± 64
PCPN
23.9 ± 4.7
1.68 ± 0.10
177 ± 19
87.8 ± 9
-48 ± 49
SA
49.9 ± 2.4
119 ± 29
233 ± 1
491 ± 27
71 ± 3
PCPA 
60.4 ± 10.8 
1.98 ± 0.63 
131± 0 
169 ± 29 
-2.2 ± 1.7 
 
Precipitation in PCPA resulted in a highly reduced buffer capacity: ten times lower than 
for CA and SA. As consumption of ammonium consumes BC, pH falls rapidly. This in 
turn can cause redissolution of some of the precipitated material, resulting in a recovery 
of BC. This is the reason that pH does not fall below 5.5, although BC is low and pH does 
decreases more and more rapidly in PCPA than in the remaining conditions. Although pH 
does decrease in CN and PCPN, contrary to what was expected with nitrate as an N source 
(Fuggi et al., 1981), it does not decrease as much as the conditions with ammonium as a 
nitrogen source. The decreasing trend in pH is thought to be due to the dissolution of CO2 
produced via methane oxidation, as discussed in Section 3.2.1. Full pH trends can be 
found in SI-6 Figure 6-5Figure 6-1. 
3.2.4. Biomass characterisation 
The quality of biomass was judged based on its protein and heavy metal content. Details 
regarding biomass characterisation and N utilisation can be found in . Protein content 
ranged from 50 to 80 % (dw), a suitable content for application as animal feed (Tsapekos 
et al., 2020). It should be considered that neither cysteine nor tryptophan can be measured 
with this method, as the acidic extraction destroys both amino acids. Thus, the crude 
protein content could be even higher. SA showed the highest (p-value < 0.05) protein 
content based on amino acid summary. This is likely due to excess ammonium in the 
medium, which ensures a nitrogen source throughout the experiment, while that of the 
other conditions was depleted after 70 hours (see SI-6 Figure 6-6). PCPA showed the 
lowest due to the large amount of precipitates yielded a product with low protein content. 
CN’s N-Protein ratio was the highest, while PCPA’s was the lowest. A high N-Protein 
ratio is desirable, since it indicates increased use of N for protein accumulation. Studies 
report N-Protein ratios, perhaps counterintuitively, as the amount of protein divided by 
the assimilated nitrogen in order to facilitate comparison of protein content between 
different food sources (Sosulski & Imafidon, 1990). For comparison, the N-Protein ratio 
of eggs, meat and fish range between 5.5 and 6 (Sosulski & Imafidon, 1990) and between 
2.53 and 5.77 for microalgae (Lourenço et al., 2007). Low N-Protein ratios are a result of 
less N being stored as protein and may imply higher nucleic acid content, which is 
detrimental to health (Kihlberg, 1972), or the excretion of exopolymers due to stress (Reid 
et al., 2006). In this respect, the control compositions perform significantly better than 
those with recovered P sources. Differences in ionic strength could account for the 
==PAGE:23==
21 
 
difference between CN, CA, SA and PCPA, since it is lower in the first. However, IS 
does not account for the difference between CN and PCPN, where IS is similar. 
CA and SA with ammonium as their nitrogen source, have lower carbon to nitrogen (C:N) 
ratio ranges than CN and CP. PCPA has the largest variability when it comes to the C:N 
ratio. The carbon to phosphorus (C:P) ratios show much lower variability within each 
condition. CN and PCPN have significantly higher C:P ratios compared to CA, SA and 
PCPA. This could have some relation to the differences in growth already discussed in 
Section 3.2.2. However, the measured P values were of low reliability and require further 
investigation. The C:N and C:P ratios are related to storage of nutrients and can be species 
specific (Gao et al., 2020; Pérez et al., 2019; Zheng et al., 2013) and MOB consortia will 
have specific C:N and C:P ratios based on the dominant species present. It is by 
understanding these ranges that nutrient removal from wastewaters by methanotrophs can 
be optimised: they indicate how much N or P MOB require and, consequently, will take 
up from their surroundings. They are one of the key aspects necessary to optimise P and 
N dosing to minimise resource use in MP production while simultaneously obtaining a 
clean effluent. 
Table 7. Carbon to nitrogen and carbon to phosphorus ratios, protein content (in % dry 
weight) and nitrogen to protein ratios. Data are given in mean ± SEM. 
Condition 
C:N 
C:P 
Protein content 
(% dw) 
N-Protein 
CA
57 – 66
138
52.7 ± 1.5
2.98 ± 0.37
CN
85 – 90
361
62
4.29 ± 0.12
PCPN
79 – 91
234
48.9 ± 1.5
1.92 ± 0.42
SA
38 – 75
104
80.4 ± 4.7
1.61 ± 0.19
PCPA 
60 – 110 
103 
12.1 ± 3.2 
1.01 ± 0.52 
 
 shows the amino acid profile of all five conditions normalised by the content of lysine. 
It shows similar profiles for all conditions, with some exceptions. The content of 
asparagine (and aspartic acid) is higher in PCPA and CA, compared to the rest. Arginine 
content is slightly higher in CA and SA. Neither the use of different N nor different P 
sources seems to have greatly affected the amino acid profile when compared to those in 
literature for MOB (Hülsen et al., 2018; Rasouli et al., 2018; Tsapekos et al., 2020). 
Aspartic acid, glutamic acid, glycine and alanine make up most of the protein content. 
The first three coincide with the findings of Rasouli et al., 2018, but alanine is 
unexpectedly high, in detriment to lysine content, which was more abundant in the 
aforementioned studies. When comparing to the profile of soybean meal in Øverland et 
al., 2010, the abundance of amino acids relative to lysine is lower compared to the profiles 
for MOB, due to the lysine content of soybean. The remaining pattern is similar, with the 
aforementioned exception of alanine. Accumulating alanine to the detriment of lysine is 
problematic, since the latter is an essential amino acid and the first is not. 
==PAGE:24==
22 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Amino acid profile as % dry cell weight normalised by the content of Lysine. 
The EU legislation’s limit for lead in food is 3 mg/kg fresh weight. Only CN and SA are 
above it, with 5.7 ± 4.5 and 8.7 ± 6.9 mg/kg fresh weight (EC, 2017). Both show very 
high variability. There reason behind this finding is not clear, since CN does not have Pb 
in its medium formulation and struvite was not found to contain Pb above the detection 
limit of 1 mg/kg (EC, 2019). One of SA replicates had a Cd content of 1.7 mg/kg, but the 
other replicate did not show a result above the detection limit of 0.5 mg/kg. As the EU’s 
limit for Cd is 1 mg/kg fresh weight, SA’s bulk biomass Cd content may be above the 
limit. The maximum Hg content for all samples was below the detection limit (0.5 mg/kg) 
of ICP-MS. In the case of MP used for animal feed, none of the heavy metals surpass the 
established limits except for the one SA replicate with 1.7 mg/kg Cd (the limit being 0.6 
mg/kg dry weight) (EC, 2013). For use of MP as food the maximum content allowed is 
0.1 mg/kg fresh weight. Thus, Hg should be remeasured in a lower range. MOB biomass 
could also potentially used as fertiliser. In that case, all treatments show chromium 
contents ranging from 4.1 to 45 mg/kg dry weight, all above the 2 mg/kg dry weight limit 
(EC, 2019). One SA replicate has a Cd content of 1.7 mg/kg dry weight, again above the 
1.5 mg/kg dry weight limit for Cd. 
The nutritional value of any MP depends on growth medium, culture conditions, 
manufacture process and downstream processing (Kihlberg, 1972), and these must be 
consistent and standardised to yield uniform products (Øverland et al., 2010). PCP is 
produced in a standardised industrial process, whereas the composition of struvite highly 
depends on the quality of the influent water, which may vary considerably (Li et al., 
2019). The experimental condition using struvite also showed the largest variability in 
terms of performance parameters. 
==PAGE:25==
23 
 
 
To enable feasible use of residual P streams, it must be possible produce high quality MP. 
The protein content does not vary significantly, and all the same amino acids are present. 
The efficiency of protein accumulation is also of importance, as is a low nucleic acid 
content. PCPA is the worst performer mainly due to the precipitates formed. Even though 
methane and ammonium are consumed at fast rates, the product is largely inorganic 
material with a very low protein content. SA accumulates the most protein, is relatively 
inefficient in utilising N, as the N-protein ratio indicates. The biomass in SA also exceeds 
the EU’s limits for Cd and Pb in food, making it unsuitable for human consumption, and 
risks exceeding the Cd limit also for animal feed. PCPA and SA also have the highest 
proportion of by-products produced from methane, which means that less methane is 
valorised. PCPN is the most inefficient at accumulating nitrogen, despite producing the 
most biomass. Nevertheless, it is the best at valorising methane by producing the least 
quantity of by-products, and does not produce more carbon dioxide than the rest. The 
production of a large amount of biomass from methane after accumulating all the 
available N is an indication that PCP is N limited and could potentially accumulate much 
more protein if provided more nitrate. Assessing this potential could be a potential future 
research. For the above reasons its product is more suitable for consumption than PCPA 
or SA. 
3.2.5. Future perspectives 
From the data described above, it is clear that each experimental condition has its 
peculiarities. For instance, SA has the lowest N uptake rate but also the highest protein 
content. This may be related to the fact that N is fully depleted in the other conditions by 
the end of the experiment, while it is in excess in SA. The others stop accumulating N 
earlier while still forming biomass, while SA accumulates N more slowly but until the 
end. It may also be due to MOB using N for other products than protein in the remaining 
conditions. This has important implications for the harvesting time, and thus SRT, of the 
MOB reactor in an industrial context. 
The high phosphate concentrations in this study made reliable phosphorus measurements 
unreliable. The high concentrations are a result of phosphate being used as the dominant 
buffer. This function could be substituted by an organic buffer such as MOPSO. That 
way, the buffering requirement could be maintained whilst adding much less phosphate, 
allowing more reliable measurements. It is clear that the current medium formulation 
cannot be scaled up. Future work also bench-scale chemostat experiments focusing on 
pH control when buffers are not supplied. In a continuous setup, it would be possible to 
dose the optimum amount of P in accordance to the C:P ratios determined in Section 
3.2.4. pH should then be controlled by continuous pH monitoring and addition of acid or 
base, instead of a phosphate buffer in excess. The buffer capacity consumption 
determined for ammonium as a nitrogen source shows the importance of a pH control 
system, but more refined measurements are necessary to precisely determine a proton 
balance to dimension it. Optimum P dosing would also avoid the formation of precipitate 
in PCPA. This would increase the applicability, as its protein content would be around 60 
% if only biomass is considered. The next step within the topic is a chemostat with pH 
regulation where optimum P dosing can be studied. This would also permit a reduction 
in the ionic strength and the stress it causes on MOB. 
==PAGE:26==
24 
 
 
As was discussed in Section 3.1., the recovered P sources require dissolution prior to their 
addition to the MOB fermenter. The times at which most dissolved phosphate was 
observed can be used as a basis for the HRT of the pre-dissolution reactor. Reprecipitation 
did occur in SA, which is an indication that struvite may re-precipitate at longer HRTs. 
However, under optimum P dosing, no re-precipitation is expected in the fermenter. The 
conditions required to dissolve the recovered P sources have some impractical aspects. 
Although they dissolve at moderate temperatures and have a relatively low energy 
demand, acidification requires additional chemical input. Bubbling of CO2 in the flue gas 
(Jiang et al., 2012) from sludge ash burning (in the production of PCP) may reduce the 
quantity of chemical input, but it may also contain impurities that dissolve in water and 
could potentially inhibit or adsorb onto MOB. Studying the tolerance of MOB to flue gas 
components could be an interesting next step to make MP production even more circular. 
 
4. Conclusion 
Two residual phosphorus streams, struvite and precipitated calcium phosphate were 
evaluated for their use as phosphorus sources for cultivation of methane oxidising bacteria 
for the production of microbial protein. Neither struvite nor PCP could be directly 
supplied, since they are highly insoluble. Both sources showed resource intensive 
dissolution, as they both required low pH (down to 2) to dissolve. Neither P nor N sources 
showed any statistical difference in growth nor biomass on methane yields, and amino 
acid profile was also not affected. MOB growth and protein accumulation was possible 
with both struvite and PCP, reaching protein contents equal or above 50 %. Struvite 
showed the largest protein accumulation, 80 %, but it also surpassed EU limits for Pb and 
Cd. PCPN showed the most growth and lowest protein accumulation (50 %), indicating 
N limitation and potential for higher protein content. PCPA showed large amounts of 
precipitates and a small amount of biomass. Both SA and PCPA gave indications of ionic 
strength related stress, since they had the highest conductivities and 15 % of methane was 
converted to soluble organic by-products, the highest value of all the treatments. An 
important problem in the study were the high dissolved phosphate concentrations, which 
make it clear that the current medium formulation cannot be scaled up and further 
optimisation and control design are needed prior to this scaling up it possible. 
 
References 
Antonini, S., Arias, M. A., Eichert, T., & Clemens, J. (2012). Greenhouse evaluation and 
environmental impact assessment of different urine-derived struvite fertilizers as 
phosphorus sources for plants. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2012.07.026 
Anupama, & Ravindra, P. (2000). Value-added food: Single cell protein. Biotechnology 
Advances, 18, 459–479. 
APHA. (2017). Standard methods for the examination of water and wastewater (23rd ed.).  
Ayres, R. U. (2007). On the practical limits to substitution. Ecological Economics, 61(1), 115–
128. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2006.02.011 
Bajpai, P. (2017). Single Cell Protein Production from Lignocellulosic Biomass. In S. K. 
==PAGE:27==
25 
 
Sharma (Ed.), SpringerBriefs in Molecular Science: Green Chemistry for Sustainability.  
Baveye, P. C. (2015). Looming scarcity of phosphate rock and intensification of soil phosphorus 
research. R. Bras. Ci. Solo, 39, 637–642. https://doi.org/10.1590/01000683rbcs20140819 
Bodirsky, B. L., Rolinski, S., Biewald, A., Weindl, I., Popp, A., & Lotze-Campen, H. (2015). 
Global Food Demand Scenarios for the 21 st Century. PLoS ONE, 10(11). 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0139201 
Bothe, H., Møller Jensen, K., Mergel, A., Larsen, J., Jørgensen, C., Bothe, H., & Jørgensen, L. 
(2002). Heterotrophic bacteria growing in association with Methylococcus capsulatus 
(Bath) in a single cell protein production process. Applied Microbiology and 
Biotechnology, 59(1), 33–39. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-002-0964-1 
Cerrillo, M., Palatsi, J., Comas, J., Vicens, J., & Bonmatí, A. (2014). Struvite precipitation as a 
technology to be integrated in a manure anaerobic digestion treatment plant-removal 
efficiency, crystal characterization and agricultural assessment. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/jctb.4459 
Childers, D. L., Corman, J., Edwards, M., & Elser, J. J. (2011). Sustainability Challenges of 
Phosphorus and Food: Solutions from Closing the Human Phosphorus Cycle. BioScience, 
61(2), 117–124. https://doi.org/10.1525/bio.2011.61.2.6 
Christiaens, M. E. R., Gildemyn, S., Matassa, S., Ysebaert, T., De Vrieze, J., & Rabaey, K. 
(2017). Electrochemical Ammonia Recovery from Source-Separated Urine for Microbial 
Protein Production. Environ. Sci. Technol, 51, 6. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.7b02819 
Cooney, C. L., Rha, C., & Tannenbaum, S. R. (1980). Single-cell protein: Engineering, 
economics, and utilization in foods. Advances in Food Research, 26(C), 1–52. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0065-2628(08)60317-1 
Cordell, D., Drangert, J.-O., & White, S. (2009). The story of phosphorus: Global food security 
and food for thought. Global Environmental Change, 19, 292–305. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2008.10.009 
Cordell, D., & White, S. (2011). Peak phosphorus: Clarifying the key issues of a vigorous 
debate about long-term phosphorus security. Sustainability, 3(10), 2027–2049. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/su3102027 
Davis, R. W., Siccardi, A. J., Huysman, N. D., Wyatt, N. B., Hewson, J. C., & Lane, T. W. 
(2015). Growth of mono- and mixed cultures of Nannochloropsis salina and 
Phaeodactylum tricornutum on struvite as a nutrient source. Bioresource Technology, 198, 
577–585. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2015.09.070 
Dodds, W. K., Bouska, W. W., Eitzmann, J. L., Pilger, T. J., Pitts, K. L., Riley, A. J., … 
Thornbrugh, D. J. (2009). Policy Analysis Eutrophication of U.S. Freshwaters: Analysis of 
Potential Economic Damages. Environmental Science & Technology, 43(1), 12–19. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/es801217q 
EC. COMMISSION REGULATION (EU) No 1275/2013 of 6 December 2013 amending Annex I 
to Directive 2002/32/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards 
maximum levels for arsenic, cadmium, lead, nitrites, volatile mustard oil and harmful 
botanical im. , (2013). 
EC. COMMISSION REGULATION (EU) 2017/ 1017 - of 15 June 2017 - amending Regulation 
(EU) No 68 / 2013 on the Catalogue of feed materials. , (2017). 
EC. Council Regulation 2019/1009/EC laying down rules on the making available on the 
market of EU fertilising productsOfficial Journal  (2019). 
==PAGE:28==
26 
 
Elser, J. J., Dobberfubl, D. R., Mackay, N. A., & Schampel, J. H. (1996). Organism Size, Life 
History, and N:P Stoichiometry Toward a unified view of cellular and ecosystem 
processes. Retrieved from https://academic.oup.com/bioscience/article/46/9/674/313551 
European Commission. (2020). Deficit of global food supply system: Knowledge for policy.  
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization. (2006). Plant nutrition for food security: a guide for 
integrated nutrient management. Retrieved from  
Fattah, K. P. (2012). Assessing Struvite Formation Potential at Wastewater Treatment Plants. 
International Journal of Environmental Science and Development, 548–552. 
https://doi.org/10.7763/ijesd.2012.v3.284 
Fuggi, A., Di, V., Rigano, M., Vona, V., & Rigano, C. (1981). Nitrate and ammonium 
assimilation in algal cell-suspensions and related pH variations in the external medium, 
monitored by electrodes. Plant Science Letters, 23, 129–138. 
Gao, D., Sheng, R., Whiteley, A. S., Moreira-Grez, B., Qin, H., Zhang, W., … Wei, W. (2020). 
Effect of phosphorus amendments on rice rhizospheric methanogens and methanotrophs in 
a phosphorus deficient soil. Geoderma, 386. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoderma.2020.114312 
Hanson, R. S., & Hanson, T. E. (1996). Methanotrophic Bacteria. MICROBIOLOGICAL 
REVIEWS, 60(2), 439–471. 
Hertel, T. W. (2015). The challenges of sustainably feeding a growing planet. Food Security, 7, 
185–198. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12571-015-0440-2 
Ho, A., Kerckhof, F.-M., Luke, C., Reim, A., Krause, S., Boon, N., & Bodelier, P. L. E. (2012). 
Minireview Conceptualizing functional traits and ecological characteristics of methane-
oxidizing bacteria as life strategies. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1758-2229.2012.00370.x 
Hoefman, S., Van Der Ha, D., Boon, N., Vandamme, P., De Vos, P., & Heylen, K. (2014). 
Customized media based on miniaturized screening improve growth rate and cell yield of 
methane-oxidizing bacteria of the genus Methylomonas. Antonie van Leeuwenhoek, 105, 
353–366. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10482-013-0083-2 
Hülsen, T., Hsieh, K., Lu, Y., Tait, S., & Batstone, D. J. (2018). Simultaneous treatment and 
single cell protein production from agri-industrial wastewaters using purple phototrophic 
bacteria or microalgae – A comparison. Bioresource Technology, 254, 214–223. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2018.01.032 
International Energy Agency. (2020). Flaring Emissions – Analysis - IEA. Retrieved December 
5, 2020, from https://www.iea.org/reports/flaring-emissions 
Jenkins, O., Byrom, D., & Jones1, D. (1987). Methylophilus: a New Genus of Methanol-
Utilizing Bacteria. In INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF SYSTEMATIC BACTERIOLOGY. 
Jiang, Y., Zhang, W., Wang, J., Chen, Y., Shen, S., & Liu, T. (2012). Utilization of simulated 
flue gas for cultivation of Scenedesmus dimorphus. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2012.10.119 
Khoshnevisan, B., Dodds, M., Tsapekos, P., Torresi, E., Smets, B. F., Angelidaki, I., … 
Valverde-Pérez, B. (2020). Coupling electrochemical ammonia extraction and cultivation 
of methane oxidizing bacteria for production of microbial protein. Journal of 
Environmental Management, 265, 110560. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2020.110560 
Khoshnevisan, B., Tsapekos, P., Zhang, Y., Valverde-Pérez, B., & Angelidaki, I. (2019). Urban 
biowaste valorization by coupling anaerobic digestion and single cell protein production. 
Bioresource Technology, 290, 121743. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2019.121743 
==PAGE:29==
27 
 
Kihlberg, R. (1972). The microbe as a source of food. Annual Review of Microbiology, 26, 427–
466. 
King, G. M., & Schnell, S. (1994). Ammonium and Nitrite Inhibition of Methane Oxidation by 
Methylobacter albus BG8 and Methylosinus trichosporium OB3b at Low Methane 
Concentrationst. APPLIED AND ENVIRONMENTAL MICROBIOLOGY, 60(10), 3508–
3513. 
Kjeldgaard, A. F., & Zachariae, A. A. (2018). Performance analysis of a mixed methanotrophic 
culture grown in batch and continuous flow reactor. 27. 
Laurance, W. F., Sayer, J., & Cassman, K. G. (2014). Agricultural expansion and its impacts on 
tropical nature. Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 29(2), 107–116. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2013.12.001 
Lee, R. W., & Childress, J. J. (1996). Inorganic N assimilation and ammonium pools in a deep-
sea mussel containing methanotrophic endosymbionts. Biological Bulletin, 190(3), 373–
384. https://doi.org/10.2307/1543030 
Lelieveld, J., Crutzen, P. J., & Brühl, C. (1993). Climate effects of atmospheric methane. 
Chemosphere, 26(1–4), 739–768. https://doi.org/10.1016/0045-6535(93)90458-H 
Li, B., Boiarkina, I., Yu, W., & Young, B. (2019). Quantitative Evaluation of Wastewater Feed 
Quality for Struvite Crystallization. Clean Soil Air Water, 47, 1–11. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/clen.201900018 
Lourenço, S. O., Barbarino, E., Lavín, P. L., Lanfer Marquez, U. M., & Aidar, E. (2007). 
Calculation of new nitrogen-to-protein conversion factors. European Journal of 
Phycology, 39(1), 17–32. https://doi.org/10.1080/0967026032000157156 
Markou, G., Arapoglou, D., Eliopoulos, C., Balafoutis, A., Taddeo, R., Panara, A., & 
Thomaidis, N. (2019). Cultivation and safety aspects of Arthrospira platensis (Spirulina) 
grown with struvite recovered from anaerobic digestion plant as phosphorus source. Algal 
Research, 44. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.algal.2019.101716 
Mehta, C. M., Khunjar, W. O., Nguyen, V., Tait, S., & Batstone, D. J. (2015, February 16). 
Technologies to recover nutrients from waste streams: A critical review. Critical Reviews 
in Environmental Science and Technology, Vol. 45, pp. 385–427. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/10643389.2013.866621 
Moed, N. M., Lee, D.-J., & Chang, J.-S. (2015). Struvite as alternative nutrient source for 
cultivation of microalgae Chlorella vulgaris. Journal of the Taiwan Institute of Chemical 
Engineers, 56, 73–76. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtice.2015.04.027 
Müller, A., Schmidhuber, J., Hoogeveen, J., & Steduto, P. (2008). Some insights in the effect of 
growing bio-energy demand on global food security and natural resources. Water Policy, 
10(SUPPL. 1), 83–94. https://doi.org/10.2166/wp.2008.053 
Øverland, M., Tauson, A.-H., Shearer, K., & Skrede, A. (2010). Evaluation of methane-utilising 
bacteria products as feed ingredients for monogastric animals. Archives of Animal 
Nutrition, 64(3), 171–189. https://doi.org/10.1080/17450391003691534 
Parks, N. (2007). Livestock’s long shadow. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, 5(1), 7. 
https://doi.org/10.1890/1540-9295(2007)5[4:D]2.0.CO;2 
Pennsylvania State University. (2018). Minitab 18 Statistical Software. Retrieved from 
www.minitab.com 
Pérez, R., Casal, J., Muñoz, R., & Lebrero, R. (2019). Polyhydroxyalkanoates production from 
methane emissions in Sphagnum mosses: Assessing the effect of temperature and 
==PAGE:30==
28 
 
phosphorus limitation. Science of the Total Environment, 688, 684–690. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.06.296 
Pikaar, I., Matassa, S., Bodirsky, B. L., Weindl, I., Humpenö, F., Rabaey, K., … Popp, A. 
(2018). Decoupling Livestock from Land Use through Industrial Feed Production 
Pathways. Environ. Sci. Technol, 52, 7351–7359. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.8b00216 
Rasouli, Z., Valverde-Pérez, B., D’este, M., De Francisci, D., & Angelidaki, I. (2018). Nutrient 
recovery from industrial wastewater as single cell protein by a co-culture of green 
microalgae and methanotrophs. Biochemical Engineering Journal, 134, 129–135. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bej.2018.03.010 
Rasouli, Z., Valverde-Pérez, B., D’Este, M., De Francisci, D., & Angelidaki, I. (2018). Nutrient 
recovery from industrial wastewater as single cell protein by a co-culture of green 
microalgae and methanotrophs. Biochemical Engineering Journal, 134, 129–135. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bej.2018.03.010 
Reid, E., Liu, X., & Judd, S. J. (2006). Effect of high salinity on activated sludge characteristics 
and membrane permeability in an immersed membrane bioreactor. Journal of Membrane 
Science, 283, 164–171. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.memsci.2006.06.021 
Sebastian, M., & Ammerman, J. W. (2009). The alkaline phosphatase PhoX is more widely 
distributed in marine bacteria than the classical PhoA. ISME Journal, 3(5), 563–572. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/ismej.2009.10 
Semrau, J. D., Dispirito, A. A., & Yoon, S. (2010). Methanotrophs and copper. FEMS 
Microbiology Reviews, 34, 496–531. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1574-6976.2010.00212.x 
Skrede, A., Mydland, L. T., & Øverland, M. (2009). Effects of growth substrate and partial 
removal of nucleic acids in the production of bacterial protein meal on amino acid profile 
and digestibility in mink. Journal of Animal and Feed Sciences, 18(4), 689–698. 
https://doi.org/10.22358/jafs/66442/2009 
Smil, V. (2000). Feeding the World: A Challenge for the Twenty-First Century. Retrieved from 
https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/feeding-world 
Sosulski, F. W., & Imafidon, G. I. (1990). Amino Acid Composition and Nitrogen-to-Protein 
Conversion Factors for Animal and Plant Foods. In Food Chem (Vol. 38). Retrieved from 
https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines 
Stein, L. Y., Nyerges, G., Jason, J., & Cantera, L. (2006). Control of Defined Methanotrophic 
Populations in Soils by Co-metabolism of Ammonium. 
Strong, P. J., Xie, S., & Clarke, W. P. (2015). Methane as a Resource: Can the Methanotrophs 
Add Value? Environmental Science & Technology, 49, 4001–4018. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/es504242n 
Tsapekos, P., Khoshnevisan, B., Zhu, X., Zha, X., & Angelidaki, I. (2019). Methane oxidising 
bacteria to upcycle effluent streams from anaerobic digestion of municipal biowaste. 
Journal of Environmental Management, 251, 109590. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2019.109590 
Tsapekos, P., Zhu, X., Pallis, E., & Angelidaki, I. (2020). Proteinaceous methanotrophs for feed 
additive using biowaste as carbon and nutrients source. Bioresource Technology, 313, 
123646. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2020.123646 
Valverde-Pérez, B., Pape, M. L., Kjeldgaard, A. F., Zachariae, A. A., Schneider, C., Hélix-
Nielsen, C., … Smets, B. F. (2020). Dewatering methanotrophic enrichments intended for 
single cell protein production using biomimetic aquaporin forward osmosis membranes. 
Separation and Purification Technology, 235, 116133. 
==PAGE:31==
29 
 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seppur.2019.116133 
Valverde-Pérez, B., Xing, W., Zachariae, A. A., Skadborg, M. M., Kjeldgaard, A. F., Palomo, 
A., & Smets, B. F. (2020). Cultivation of methanotrophic bacteria in a novel bubble-free 
membrane bioreactor for microbial protein production. Bioresource Technology, 
310(February), 123388. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2020.123388 
Van Mooy, B. A. S., Fredricks, H. F., Pedler, B. E., Dyhrman, S. T., Karl, D. M., Koblížek, M., 
… Webb, E. A. (2009). Phytoplankton in the ocean use non-phosphorus lipids in response 
to phosphorus scarcity. Nature, 458(7234), 69–72. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature07659 
Vega, J. L., Clausen, E. C., & Gaddy, J. L. (1990). Design of bioreactors for coal synthesis gas 
fermentations. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 3(2–3), 149–160. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/0921-3449(90)90052-6 
Veraart, A. J., Steenbergh, A. K., Ho, A., Kim, S. Y., & Bodelier, P. L. E. (2015). Beyond 
nitrogen: The importance of phosphorus for CH 4 oxidation in soils and sediments. 
Geoderma, 259–260, 337–346. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoderma.2015.03.025 
Verstraete, W., Clauwaert, P., & Vlaeminck, S. E. (2016). Used water and nutrients: Recovery 
perspectives in a “panta rhei” context. Bioresource Technology, 215, 199–208. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2016.04.094 
Weyant, C. L., Shepson, P. B., Subramanian, R., L Cambaliza, M. O., Heimburger, A., McCabe, 
D., … Bond, T. C. (2016). Black Carbon Emissions from Associated Natural Gas Flaring. 
Environmental Science & Technology, 50, 2075–2081. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.5b04712 
Whittenbury, R., & Wilkinson, J. F. (1970). Enrichment, Isolation and Some Properties of Me 
thane-utilizing Bacteria. Journal of General Microbiology, 61, 205–218. 
Wilkinson, T. G., Topiwala, H. H., & Hamer, G. (1974). Interactions in a Mixed Bacterial 
Population Growing on Methane in Continuous Culture. BIOTECHNOLOGY AND 
BIOENGINEERING, XVI, 41–59. 
Yoshida, H., Christensen, T. H., Guildal, T., & Scheutz, C. (2015). A comprehensive substance 
flow analysis of a municipal wastewater and sludge treatment plant. Chemosphere, 138, 
874–882. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2013.09.045 
Zha, X., Tsapekos, P., Zhu, X., Khoshnevisan, B., Lu, X., & Angelidaki, I. (2021). 
Bioconversion of wastewater to single cell protein by methanotrophic bacteria. 
Bioresource Technology, 320(PA), 124351. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2020.124351 
Zheng, Y., Zhang, L. M., & He, J. Z. (2013). Immediate effects of nitrogen, phosphorus, and 
potassium amendments on the methanotrophic activity and abundance in a Chinese paddy 
soil under short-term incubation experiment. Journal of Soils and Sediments, 13(1), 189–
196. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11368-012-0601-2 
Zita, A., & Hermansson, M. (1994). Effects of Ionic Strength on Bacterial Adhesion and 
Stability of Flocs in a Wastewater Activated Sludge System. APPLIED AND 
ENVIRONMENTAL MICROBIOLOGY, 60(9), 3041–3048. 
 
 
==PAGE:32==
30 
 
Supporting information 
Section 1: Culture media recipes 
The buffer concentration for de dAMS medium is up-concentrated five times with respect 
to the original dNMS recipe to account for the impact of ammonia on pH, as described in 
Kjeldgaard & Zachariae (2018). 
Table A1. dAMS medium recipe (25 mg NH4-N/L). Source: Valverde-Pérez et al. (2020). 
Items 
Chemicals 
Amount  
Comment 
Stock A 
MgSO4 x 7H2O
10 g
CaCl2 x 2H2O
1.5 g
NH4Cl
5 g
Distilled water
1 L
FeNaEDTA Stock 
FeNaEDTA
0.5 g
Distilled water
100 ml
Na2HPO4 Stock 
Na2HPO4 x 12H2O
71.7 g
Distilled water
1 L
KH2PO4 Stock 
KH2PO4
27.2 g
Distilled water
1 L
Trace solution 
Na2EDTA x 2H2O
0.5 g
FeSO4 x 7H2O
0.2 g
H3BO3
0.03 g
CoCl2 x 6H2O
0.02 g
ZnSO4 x 7H2O
0.01 g
MnCl2 x 4H2O
0.003 g
Na2MoO4 x 2H2O
0.003 g
NiCl2 x 6H2O
0.002 g
CuSO4 x 5H2O
0.025 g
Distilled water
1 L
dAMS 
Stock A
20 ml
Distilled water
800 ml
FeNaEDTA Stock
1 ml
Trace solution
1 ml
Dissolve and bring to 1L
Sterilization
Autoclave for 20 minutes, then cool down to room temperature.
pH adjustment (6.8)
KH2PO4 Stock
25 ml
Na2HPO4 Stock
25 ml
Add either KH2PO4 or Na2HPO4 until the desired pH is reached.
 
Table A2. dNMS medium recipe (25 mg NO3-N/L). Source: (Whittenbury & Wilkinson, 
1970). 
Items 
Chemicals 
Amount  
Comment 
Stock A 
MgSO4 x 7H2O
10 g
CaCl2 x 2H2O
1.5 g
KNO3
9.4 g
Distilled water
1 L
FeNaEDTA Stock 
FeNaEDTA
0.5 g
Distilled water
100 ml
Na2HPO4 Stock 
Na2HPO4 x 12H2O
71.7 g
Distilled water
1 L
==PAGE:33==
31 
 
KH2PO4 Stock 
KH2PO4
27.2 g
Distilled water
1 L
Trace solution 
Na2EDTA x 2H2O
0.5 g
FeSO4 x 7H2O
0.2 g
H3BO3
0.03 g
CoCl2 x 6H2O
0.02 g
ZnSO4 x 7H2O
0.01 g
MnCl2 x 4H2O
0.003 g
Na2MoO4 x 2H2O
0.003 g
NiCl2 x 6H2O
0.002 g
CuSO4 x 5H2O
0.025 g
Distilled water
1 L
dAMS 
Stock A
20 ml
Distilled water
800 ml
FeNaEDTA Stock
1 ml
Trace solution
1 ml
Dissolve and bring to 1L
Sterilization
Autoclave for 20 minutes, then cool down to room temperature.
pH adjustment (6.8)
KH2PO4 Stock
5 ml
 
 
Na2HPO4 Stock 
5 ml 
 
Add either KH2PO4 or Na2HPO4 until the desired pH is reached.
 
To prepare media with residual phosphorus sources: 
1. Dissolve 1.3 g PCP or 2.4 g struvite in 200 mL 0.1 M HCl (Fluka, Honeywell, 
USA). Leave to dissolve for 30 minutes at 60 ºC at a stirring speed of 500 rpm. 
2. Transfer into 500 mL volumetric flask and fill to the 500 mL mark. Leave to 
dissolve for 1 h at 60 ºC at a stirring speed of 500 rpm. 
3. Filter using 0.45 µm pore size filters. 
4. Measure conductivity (WTW Oxi 539, Germany) and dissolved phosphate in the 
filtrate. 
5. Calculate the quantity of residual phosphorus stock (𝑉௦௧௢௖௞) as follows: 
𝑉௦௧௢௖௞=  𝑉௠௘ௗ௜௨௠[𝑃𝑂ସ−𝑃]௠௘ௗ௜௨௠𝑀𝑊௉
[𝑃𝑂ସ−𝑃]௦௧௢௖௞
 
where 𝑉௠௘ௗ௜௨௠ is the desired volume of medium, [𝑃𝑂ସ−𝑃]௠௘ௗ௜௨௠ is the 
concentration of phosphate in the medium (according to dAMS or dNMS recipes 
in Table A1 and Table A2), 𝑀𝑊௉ is the molecular weight of phosphorus and 
[𝑃𝑂ସ−𝑃]௦௧௢௖௞ is the concentration of phosphate in the residual stock solution. 
6. For struvite, prepare Stock A without NH4Cl nor MgSO4 x 7H2O. 
7. Add Stock A, FeNaEDTA stock and Trace element solution to a volumetric flask. 
Add the calculated amount of residual phosphorus stock. Bring to the desired 
volume with distilled water. 
8. Autoclave (at 121 ºC for 20 minutes) and adjust pH to 6.8 using NaOH (3 M). 
 
 
==PAGE:34==
32 
 
Section 2: Residual phosphorus source composition 
 
Table 2-1. Characteristics and composition for struvite and precipitated calcium 
phosphate. Data is reported as average ± SEM for struvite. The values for PCP are the 
result of a single measurement. 
Name 
Struvite 
Precipitated calcium 
phosphate, hydroxyapatite 
Formula
MgNH4PO4 · H2O
Ca5(PO4)3OH
Cas No
1306-06-5
Total solids (%)
59.8 ± 0.3
Volatile solids (%)
23.9 ± 0.1
Trace element 
content (mg/kg) 
 
 
Aluminium
22.8 ± 1.0
1982
Arsenic
< 2
4.1
Cadmium
< 0.5
< 0.5
Chromium
< 0.5
4.7
Copper
< 1
3.9
Iron
502 ± 2
1290
Cobalt
< 0.5
0.5
Lead
< 1
2.5
Magnesium
96370 ± 1700
4840
Mercury
< 0.5
< 0.5
Nickel
< 1
2.0
Potassium
694 ± 20
217
Calcium
1437 ± 39
311360
Phosphorus
125400 ± 3140
143080
Strontium
26.0 ± 0.5
166
Titanium
< 20
96.0
Manganese
39.2 ± 0.2
90.5
Zinc 
< 10 
67 
 
Section 3: Laboratory protocols 
Batch MOB cultivation 
Start up 
1. Prepare media according to recipe in Appendix A. 
2. Measure the optical density (OD) of the inoculum. Calculate necessary volume of 
inoculum: 3 % (v/v) for the first inoculation, and using the correlation in Appendix 
D to keep the same amount of biomass for inoculation for the remaining ones. 
3. Fill 250 mL serum bottles with the desired volume of medium (100 mL minus the 
volume of inoculum calculated in step 3). 
4. Seal the bottles with butyl rubber stoppers and aluminium lids, autoclave and cool 
to room temperature and inoculate using a sterile needle. 
5. Bubble the content of the bottles with N2 gas for six minutes. 
6. With a 100 mL syringe, remove 50 mL of the headspace. Inject 60 mL of pure 
oxygen and 40 mL of pure methane. 
7. Place the bottles in a shaker at 120 rpm in an incubator at 25 °C. 
==PAGE:35==
33 
 
Sampling 
8. Sterilise the exterior of the bottles with a flame or ethanol. 
9. Take 0.2 mL samples of the headspace gas and analyse using gas chromatography. 
10. Take 5 mL liquid samples, measure pH and OD. Filter using a 0.2 µm filter and 
freeze for future analysis of dissolved compounds. 
End 
11. When two consecutive OD readings are equal, the run is completed. 
12. Store 5 mL (or more if needed) of the content at 4 °C as inoculum for the next 
run. 
13. Centrifuge the rest of the content in 50 mL Falcon tubes at 17,000 G for ten 
minutes. 
14. Filter 10 mL of the supernatant and freeze for future determination of total P and 
total N. 
15. Use at least 15 mL of the remaining supernatant for titration. 
16. Freeze the pellet to store it for amino acid analysis. 
 
Figure 3-1. 250 mL serum bottle with cultivation media and MOB. 
 
Total suspended solids 
1. Filter preparation: wash filters with distilled water, place in an inert aluminium 
dish and keep in the drying oven at 103-105 °C overnight. 
2. Remove filters from oven and allow them to reach room temperature in a 
desiccator. 
3. Weigh filter and aluminium dish together. 
4. Place the filter in the filtration unit and pour a known volume of sample over it. 
Rinse the container of the sample with water several times and filter. 
5. Once all water has been suctioned, transfer the filter to the aluminium dish. 
6. Place the dish in the oven at 103-105 °C for at least one hour. 
7. Let the sample cool in a desiccator prior to weighing (filter and dish together). 
==PAGE:36==
34 
 
8. Repeat drying-cooling-weighing steps until the change in weight is less than 4 % 
or 0.5 mg. 
 
Figure 3-2. Filtration unit for total suspended solids measurement. 
Total and volatile solids 
1. Prepare the crucibles by igniting them for 2 hours in a muffle furnace at 550 °C 
and then letting them cool to room temperature in a desiccator. 
2. Weigh the crucibles and record their weight (Wc). 
3. Place 5 g aliquots of the sample in each crucible and record their weight (Ws). 
4. Dry the samples at 103-105 °C for at least 12 hours. Allow the crucibles to cool 
to room temperature in a desiccator and weigh. 
5. Repeat drying-cooling-weighing steps until the change in weight is less than 4 % 
or 0.5 mg. Record the final weight (Wt). 
6. Ignite the crucibles in a muffle furnace at 550 °C for two hours. Cool the residue 
in a desiccator and weigh. 
7. Repeat 30-minute ignition-cooling-weighing steps until the change in weight is 
less than 4 % or 0.5 mg. Record the final weight (Wv). 
8. Calculate the content of total and volatile solids as follows: 
% 𝑇𝑆= 𝑊௧−𝑊௖
𝑊௦−𝑊௖
· 100 
% 𝑉𝑆= 𝑊௧−𝑊௩
𝑊௧−𝑊௖
· 100 
Titration 
1. Place a beaker on a magnetic stirrer and add a stir bar. 
2. Add a certain known volume of distilled water, also known as the working space. 
3. Place the pH (PHM 210, Radiometer Analytical, France) electrode in the beaker 
in a way that it does not interfere with stirring. 
4. Add a known volume of sample (at least 15 mL). 
5. Record the initial pH. 
==PAGE:37==
35 
 
6. Add acid dropwise until reaching approximately pH 4.5. 
7. Record the final pH, the volume of acid used and the concentration of the acid. 
8. Calculate the buffer capacity as follows: 
𝐵𝐶 [𝑚𝑜𝑙] = 𝜂ைுష
Δ𝑝𝐻 
where 𝜂ைுష is the number of mols of strong acid (sulphuric (FlukaTM, Honeywell, 
USA) acid in this case) used to titrate the solution, and Δ𝑝𝐻 is the change in pH 
resulting from titration. The titration was carried out with sulphuric acid 0.0481 
N. 
Dissolution of struvite and PCP 
1. Prepare solutions at pH 2 and 5 using concentrated HCl. 
2. Add 2 g of struvite or PCP to 500 mL of solution. 
3. Place bottles at pH 2 and 5 in 25 and 37 °C incubators, and set the stirring speed 
to 350 rpm. Autoclave duplicates at pH 2 and 5. 
4. Take a 10 mL aliquot and filter through a 0.2 µm filter every after 30 min, 1 h, 2 
h, 4 h and 20 h. 
5. Measure dissolved phosphate. 
6. Each condition will be run in duplicate. 
Amino acid analysis (sample preparation) 
1. Prepare samples by first freezing at -40 ºC and then freeze-drying at -99 ºC 
overnight. 
2. Add up to 15 mg of dry sample to the glass vial. 
3. Add 300 µL of 6 N HCl. 
4. Add 20 mL of 6 N HCl to the Teflon liner. 
5. Insert the glass vial holder in the Teflon liner. 
6. Remove the Connection hose from the screw cap of the vessels and attach the 
Loading adaptor bayonet.  
7. Open the pressure valve on the screw cap.  
8. Connect the 4-way-valve station to the argon (Ar) and vacuum pump.  
9. Flush the liner with Ar.  
10. Switch over to the vacuum pump and let pump for 5 seconds.  
11. Repeat steps 9 and 10 four times.  
12. Load the vessels in the microwave rotor.  
13. Any unused vessels should be filled with 20 ml 6 N HCl. 
14. During hydrolysis some of the HCl may evaporate. Fill the glass liners vials to 
300 ul after they have cooled down after hydrolysis. The samples can be stored at 
4 °C until analysis. 
ICP-OES and ICP-MS sample preparation 
1. Prepare samples by first freezing at -40 ºC and then freeze-drying at -99 ºC 
overnight. 
2. Weigh samples and record the weight. 
3. Digest samples in 2 mL HNO3, 1 mL HCl and 1 mL H2O2 (all of suprapur 
grade) and heat on a hotplate at 80 ºC for 3 h. 
==PAGE:38==
36 
 
Section 4: OD and TSS correlation 
Figure D1 shows the relationship between optical density (OD) and total suspended solids 
(TSS). The equations presented in each graph indicate the relationship between OD and 
TSS used in the study both to quantify cell growth and to determine the volume of 
inoculum needed to start each batch experiment with the same cell dry weight. 
The correlation equations are as follows: 
𝑇𝑆𝑆ௗ஺ெௌ= 0.654 𝑂𝐷଺଴଴, 𝑅ଶ= 0.9923 
𝑇𝑆𝑆ௗேெௌ= 0.570 𝑂𝐷଺଴଴, 𝑅ଶ= 0.9707 
 
 
Figure D1. Correlation between optical density (OD) at 600 nm and total suspended 
solids for the dAMS and dNMS media. 
 
Section 5: Continuous pre-adaptation reactors 
 
 
 
Figure 5-1. Continuous flow pre-adaptation reactors with MOB adapted to nitrate 
(A) and ammonium (B) as a nitrogen source. 
 
A
B
==PAGE:39==
37 
 
Section 6: MOB growth 
 
 
 
Figure 6-1. Growth curve with OD600 as a proxy for growth for control dAMS medium 
(CA), medium with phosphoric acid as the phosphate buffer (PA), and phosphoric acid 
supplemented with potassium chloride as a K source (PKA). Data are given in mean ± 
SEM.
 
Table 6-1. Short-term (5 days) growth rate and maximum OD of control dAMS medium 
(CA), medium with phosphoric acid as the phosphate buffer (PA), and phosphoric acid 
supplemented with potassium chloride as a K source (PKA). Data are given in mean ± 
SEM. 
Condition
Growth rate (d-1) 
Maximum OD 
CA
0.42 ± 0.02
0.53 ± 0.00
PA
0.57 ± 0.15
0.59 ± 0.01
PKA 
0.73 ± 0.01 
0.50 ± 0.00 
 
Table 6-2. Long-term (average of three consecutive growth curves of 5 days each) growth 
rate and maximum OD of control dAMS medium (CA) and medium with phosphoric acid 
as the phosphate buffer (PA). Data are given in mean ± SEM. 
Condition
Growth rate (d-1)
Maximum OD 
CA
0.76 ± 0.11
0.53 ± 0.05
PA 
0.64 ± 0.03 
0.56 ± 0.06 
 
==PAGE:40==
38 
 
 
Figure 6-2. Methane content in the headspace as a function of time. Data are given in 
mean ± SEM. 
 
 
Figure 6-3. Oxygen content in the headspace as a function of time. Data are given in 
mean ± SEM. 
 
 
Figure 6-4. Carbon dioxide content in the headspace as a function of time. Data are 
given in mean ± SEM. 
==PAGE:41==
39 
 
 
 
Figure 6-5. pH as a function of time. Data are given in mean ± SEM. 
 
Figure 6-6. Dissolved nitrogen source (ammonium or nitrate) as a function of time 
 
