==PAGE:1==
Integration of silicon nanowires in
microfluidic channels for the development
of sensors
Author
Eva Zeqiraj ­ s173448
Project Supervisor
Maria Dimaki ­ Senior Researcher
Jaime Castillo ­ Senior Researcher
Winnie Edith Svendsen ­ Professor
December 10, 2020
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis was prepared at the department of Bioengineering, at the Technical University
of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring the degree of Master of Science
in Engineering in Physics and Nanotechnology.
Eva Zeqiraj ­ s173448
Signature
Date
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
iii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The purpose of this project is to incorporate forests of vertically aligned nanowires on
silicon substrates in a microfluidic system which can be used for biosensing. Fast pro­
totyping and cleanroom fabrication techniques were investigated for the development of
the microfluidic systems. This project consisted of three major parts, characterizing the
various methods, designing and fabricating the microfluidic channels and the evaluation
of the channels with Biotin­Streptavidin using optical detection.
A CO2 Laser Cut and an SLA 3D printer were tested for the development of the microfluidic
channel with fast prototyping techniques. From the surface roughness characterization on
the PMMA and Topas polymer that were engraved with the CO2 Laser Cut it was shown
that this method is not suitable to fabricate microfluidic channels as it creat very rough
surfaces or burn the polymer surface. On the other hand, the 3D printer is an effective
method to fabricate a microfluidic channel were the nanowires can be Incorporated even
though there are some dimensions limitations on how low can go to the height and the
width.
The channels that were fabricated in the cleanroom were made on a Pyrex glass wafer
with photolithography and wet etching. The glass microfluidic channels do not have di­
mensions limitations, and the surface roughness is low. However, the substrate with the
nanowires can not be incorporated in the channel and need the use of a polymer structure
to integrate the nanowires and seal the channels with it. Still it was not posible to have
flow in the glass channels fabricated and this methods was not successfully.
The channels created with 3D printing were sufficient, and the nanowires were success­
fully integrated into the channels. The sealing of the microfluidic channels was leak­free,
and the flow covers the surface of the nanowire chip uniformly without creating bubbles.
The evaluation of the channels with the Biotin­Streptavidin confirms that the 3D printed
microfluidic channels with the incorporated nanowires can be used for biosensing pur­
poses.
iv
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
First of all to I would like to thank my supervisors Maria Dimaki, Jaime Castillo and Winnie
Edith Svendsen who were always available to advise and guided me. Always taking the
time to explain questions whenever I needed.
I would like to thank my friends for their support. Thanks to my parents, my sister and
Nektarios for their support and love.
Finally, I would like to thank the NaBIS group for all the amazing and inspiring time I had
during this period.
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
v
==PAGE:6==
vi
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Motivation
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Basic Principles of Microfluidics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Vertical Nanowieres array­VNW . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Glass
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Polymers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.5
Photolithography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.6
Etching
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.7
Three­Dimensional (3D) Printing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.8
Laser Cutting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Methods
13
3.1
3D printing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Laser Catting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.3
Cleanroom Fabrication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.4
PDMS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4
Characterization
19
4.1
Laser Cutting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2
3D printing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.3
Photlithography­Wet etching
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.4
Silicon Nanowires Array . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5
Results and Discussion
35
5.1
3D printed Microfluidic channels
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.2
Glass Microfluidic channel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.3
Evaluation of the channels with the Biotin­Steptavidin. . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6
Conclusion and Outlook
49
6.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
6.2
Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
Bibliography
51
A Appendix
53
A.1 Self evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
vii
==PAGE:8==
viii
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
==PAGE:9==
1
Motivation
The covid­ 19 outbreak points out the importance of the fast and on­site biosensors.
Nearly all analyses of potentially important samples are processed using expensive, ad­
vanced systems handled by highly trained staff. The testing becomes time­consuming,
and costly, which means that only some samples are checked in a given cost, and the
infected person can spread the virus in between. [2]
In the field of biosensing, often the recognition element that bonds with the analyte to be
tested can be very expensive. The sample and reagents used for the test are limited.[7]
In both situations, the reduction in sample consumption during the biosensor’s functional­
ization or regent detection is significant, without impacting the sensors performance and
sensitivity.
Microfluidics is a comprehensive technology that aims at the manipulation of small vol­
umes of fluids in microchannels[7]. The micro­channels forming the microfluidic chip to
allow small quantities of fluids to pass through different channels and connected to the
outside environment through inlet and outlet ports. The typical volume of the fluids pro­
cessed from a microfluidic channel is from 100 nL to 10 µL.[11]
Reducing conventional technology from macro to micro scale offers a significant number
of advantages: (i) minimize the sample consumption of fluids (ii) faster analysis due to the
small distance of interaction[7] (iii) environmentally friendly as it decreases the production
of waste and the energy consumption (iv) portability, as the miniaturized devices are easy
to transport and allow in situ measurements; and (viii)widely applicable building materials
including plastic at very low cost.[11]
The majority of biosensor applications require being able to detect minimal amounts of
biomarkers in relatively large volumes, interfering with biosensor efficiency and reducing
sensitivity. Therefore, an open discussion in research community is to overcome this
issue.
Various innovative solutions for enlarging the sensing surface, including 3D­structures,
have been proposed in recent decades. Forests of silicon nanowires are one such struc­
ture[22]. Because of their small radius and long length, nanowires have a very large
surface area. Therefore NWs arrays are suitable for sensing purposes, with the right func­
tionalisation, the performance can be very promising when integrating microfluidics.[23]
This project aims to fabricate leak­free sealed microfluidic channels were a SiNWs array
is incorporated. Two different fabrication methods will be investigated, the performance
of the channels will be evaluated with the Biotin­Streptavidin conjugation.
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
==PAGE:11==
2
Background
This section contains a theoretical overview of microgluidic technology. It will begin by
introducing the fundamental principles of microfluidics. Some general information about
the materials used in microfluidics, and finally, a basic understanding for some of the
channel manufacturing methods used in this project will be given.
2.1
Basic Principles of Microfluidics
There are two main classes of fluids, the liquids, and the gases, that differ by the densities
and the degree of interaction between the constituent molecules.There are two essential
parameters that characterize a liquid, the density,ρ, and its viscosity, η. [20]
The density is defined as the mass, m, per unit volume, V:
ρ = m
V
(2.1)
To understand the viscosity of a fluid, we consider two parallel planes of surface A, with
the top one sliding with velocity U. The motion of the top plane gives rise to the motion of
the fluid below and the velocity profile is linear along the x­direction (see figure 2.1). The
friction force F on the surface plane with area A (opposite to plane motion) is proportional
to the velocity variation from one plane to the other: [15] [5]
F
A = η · U
l
= −η∂U
∂x
(2.2)
The ratio of F
A = σ is called shear stress, and it has the dimensions of pressure. The
material constant η is called dynamic viscosity, and it is expressed in Pascal × second
(Pas). [15] [20] [5]Another measure of viscosity is the kinematic viscosity and is expressed
as :
ν = η
ρ
(2.3)
where ρ is the fluid density.
Figure 2.1: Fluid between moving parallel plates [15]
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
3
==PAGE:12==
Mass Conservation
The change of the total mass at every moment that fluid enters and exits an arbitrary
volume (V) bounded by a closed surface (S) is described as:[15] [5]
dm
dt = d
dt
∫∫∫
V
ρdV = d
dt −
∫∫
S
ρv · ndS
(2.4)
where n is the unit vector normal to the interface
And to have mass conservation in requires:
∂ρ
∂t + ∇· (ρ v) = 0
(2.5)
In the case of incompressible fluids, where the density remains constant over time, the
equation of mass conservation becomes[20] :
∇· v = 0
(2.6)
The conservation of mass equation states that at all times (for incompressible, steady flow)
the mass entering the control volume is equal to the mass leaving the control volume.
This equation is also often called the ’continuity equation’ because it is based on the
assumption that the fluid medium is continuous.[20] [15]
Navier­Stokes Equation
The flow of fluid through a control volume can be described by the complete Navier­Stokes
equations. These equations can be derived from the principles of conservation of mass
(equation 2.5), momentum and energy. The equations of motion for a liquid according to
Navier­Stokes equations are:
ρ
(dv
dt + v · ∇
)
v = −∇p + ρg + η∇2 · v
(2.7)
∇· v = 0
(2.8)
where g is the acceleration of gravity and ∇2 is the Laplace­operator.The Navier­Stokes
equation contains more unknown parameters than equations, making a complete analyti­
cal solution to be impossible. However, an analytical solution can be found in a few cases
under particular boundary conditions. An essential boundary condition is the so­called no
slip condition, which states that the velocities at phase boundaries (wall or other liquid)
must be equal. This means that the fluid velocity at the wall must be zero (vwall = 0) and
has important implications for such a flow velocity profile. An important solution to the
Navier­Stokes equation is the Poiseuille (or Hagen­Poiseuille) flow, which applies when
a pressure gradient is used to drive the liquid through a channel.[20] [15]
Reynold number
The fluid flow in a channel can be characterized by two regimes: laminar of turbulent
which is defined by the relative contribution of inertial and viscous forces.The flow of a
fluid through a microfluidic channel can be characterized by the Reynolds number, defined
as:[4] [20] [15]
Re = ρ · V · L
µ
(2.9)
4
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
==PAGE:13==
Where ρ is the fluid density, V is fluid velocity, µ is the fluid viscosity and L is the char­
acteristic length of the microfluidic system (channel). Due to the small dimensions of
microchannels, the Re is usually much less than 100, often less than 1. In low Reynolds
number regime, flow is completely laminar and no turbulence occurs. The transition to
turbulent flow generally occurs in the range of Reynolds number above 2000. Laminar
flow provides a means by which molecules can be transported in a relatively predictable
manner through microchannels.[4] [20] [15]
Pressure Driven Flow
In pressure driven flow, the fluid is pumped through the device via positive displacement
pumps, such as syringe pumps. One of the basic laws of fluid mechanics for pressure
driven laminar flow is the so­called no­slip boundary condition. This produces a parabolic
velocity profile within the channel (Figure 2.2), which has significant implications for dis­
tributing molecules transported within a channel. Pressure driven flow can be a relatively
inexpensive and quite reproducible approach to pumping fluids through microdevices.[4]
[20] [15]
Figure 2.2: Velocity profile for laminar flow through a circular pipe.[15]
’
2.2
Vertical Nanowieres array­VNW
Nanowires are one­dimensional shapes, ranging from few to hundred nanometers in di­
ameter and thickness. VNW arrays consist of vertically and uniformly distributed nanowires
in arrays. The use of nanowire (VNW) sensors for biomedical applications is currently a
powerful tool in various fields since it is possible to satisfy the demands for high sensitiv­
ity and high selectivity detection. Studies over the past 10 years have shown that VNW
arrays can be used for different applications, such as biosensing. Various biochemical
sensing techniques can be used by different surface functionalizations to broaden the
applications of chemical/biomolecular systems (H2O2, glucose, nucleic acids, protectin,
etc.). [16]
The high sensitivity VNW arrays come from highly specific surface areas which provide
various attachments for sensing receptor or biomarker molecules and cells. VNW ar­
rays can mostly be highly selective because of their carefully constructed geometry and
multi­level structures, which make for simple binding to particular cell structures such as
tentacles and synapses. [16]
VNW arrays can be manufactured in two methods: ”bottom up” and ”top down.” The
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
5
==PAGE:14==
Bottom­up processing involves assembling NWs from smaller units; and growing materi­
als via different routes, including chemical vapor deposition (CVD), the vapor–liquid–solid
(VLS) method, atomic layer deposition (ALD), and metal–organic vapor phase epitaxy
(MOVPE). In the top­down approaches, VNW arrays are obtained from substrate materi­
als through advanced engraving or etching processes. This include reaction ion etching
(RIE), non­optical lithography (e.g. electron beam lithography, X­ray lithography and in­
terference or holography), and metal­assisted chemical etching (MACE).[16]
2.3
Glass
Glass can be described as a non­crystalline monolithic solid consisting mainly of silicon
dioxide. Glass also includes additives or impurities that change its properties, such as its
mechanical stability and the transition temperature. Today, several glasses with various
chemical compositions and physical properties are in use. [13]
In microfluidics, brofloat glass (Pyrex) and quartz wafers are often used because they
are compatible with many clean­room processes. Quartz, silicon dioxide ’s crystalline
form, is very stiff, has a low coefficient of thermal expansion and transmits light from 180
nm (UV range) to 4.5 µm (infrared).Borofloat glass is chemically resistant, dialectical and
optically transparent (although not down to the UV range such as quartz and fused silica)
and shares many of the beneficial properties of quartz. Borofloat glass is considerably
cheaper than quartz and can be relatively easily bonded to silicon and glass, and is thus
commonly used in lab­on­a­chip applications.[19] [13]
Glass’s other advantages are its hardness (can be a disadvantage), high thermal stability
and relative biocompatibility, which extends its range of applications to DNA separation,
enzyme reactor, immunoassay, and cell biology.[11]
Nevertheless, the higher cost and time of fabrication, the difficulty to seal the microfluidic
structures and to fabricate and integrate functional units, have prevented the use of glass
in many microfluidic applications and motivate the use and development of other mate­
rials that can be easily fabricated and be compatible with a broader range of biological
applications.[19] [13]
2.4
Polymers
Polymer­based microfluidic systems appear as an interesting alternative to silicon and
glass, mainly because they are relatively inexpensive, suitable for mass production pro­
cesses and adaptable through changes in formulation and chemical modification. An
additional advantage is the wide variety of polymers available that provide a great deal
of flexibility in the choice of materials with unique properties. Plastics come in different
shapes and forms, ranging from a transparent flexible sheet to a colored, hard block.
A polymer that has the optical qualities needed for a particular application can often be
found.[11]
Polymers are a long chain of smaller molecules , called monomers, which are the basic
building blocks of polymers. Polymers are based on the element carbon, which enables
long­chain molecules to be built. Plastics are considered Bulk Polymer Materials. The
manner in which polymer chains are arranged inside the polymer material defines the
plastic’s macroscopic properties. Three main categories of plastics are categorized: elas­
tomers, thermoplastics, and thermosetting plastics, and all three categories can be used
to make microsystems.[13] [11]
Resin or plastic thermosetting polymer is a polymer that is irreversibly cured by trans­
forming a soft solid or viscous prepolymer or resin liquid. Curing is caused by heat or
6
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
==PAGE:15==
sufficient radiation and can be promoted by high pressure or by catalyst mixing. Heat is
not usually externally applied, but is often produced by is often produced by the reaction
of the resin with a curing agent (catalyst, hardener). In order to produce an infusible and
insoluble polymer network, curing results in chemical reactions that establish extensive
cross­linking between polymer chains. Until curing, the starting material for the manufac­
ture of thermosets is typically malleable or liquid, designed to be formed into the final form
or can be used as an adhesive. A plastic thermosetting polymer can not be melted for
reshaping after hardened. Thermosets are stable even in hight temperature. [13]
Elastomers (rubbers) are very elastic polymers. With a glass transition temperature far
below room temperature, they are lightly cross­linked and amorphous. They have very
weak intermolecular forces between the polymer chains which makes them flexible, and
a small force contributes to a large deformation. Relative to other polymers, elastomers
have a low Young’s modulus and very high elongation at a split.[11][13]
Thermoplastics are materials that are collectively supported by the polymer chains. These
polymers are stiff, fragile and transparent at room temperature and known as organic
glasses. Thermoplastics that are often used are Polymethylmethacrylates (PMMA) and
polycarbonate (PC). As a theromoplastic is melted, the polymer chains slide against each
other before melting, and it turns in a soften, rubbery condition. The temperature at which
the polymer begins to soften is called the glass transition temperature.[11] [13]
2.5
Photolithography
A common tool for microfabrication on silicon and glass wafers is optical lithography, also
known as UV lithography or photolithography[optical_lithography_1]. The main objec­
tive of photolithography is to use UV lamps or UV lasers to transfer a pattern from a
photomask to a photosensitive layer through exposure, see figure 2.3. After forming a
photoresist pattern, various possibilities are available, such as etching the photoresist
pattern into the material below.[13]
Figure 2.3: Process of UV lithography [14]
The various steps in a photolithography process are briefly discussed below:
Pre­treatment
Nearly all processes of microfabrication start with surface preparation. The wafer is ”ac­
tivated” by surface preparation, and the starting conditions would then be independent of
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
7
==PAGE:16==
prior process steps or waiting time.The first preparation step in lithography is a baking pro­
cess. By baking the wafer at 100­200°C overnight adsorbed water is removed.[13][12][14]
The next step is the priming of wafers, also known as the promotion of adhesion. Hex­
amethyl disilazane vapor (HMDS, (H3C)3­Si­NH­Si­(CH3)3) is applied at reduced pres­
sure. The oxygen can form a bond with the silicon atom in HMDS in the hydroxyl group
at the wafer surface, and the amine group reacts with hydrogen, releasing ammonia.
The monomolecular silane layer makes the wafer mildly hydrophobic, which avoids water
readsorption. It also ensures good wetting by photoresist .[13][12][14]
Spin­On
Photresist is normally applied with spin coating or spraying, and some photoresists are
applied to the substrate as films that are laminated. However, the most common are spun­
on photoresists. Spin­on photoresist contain an inorganic solvent that dissolves the resin,
a compound sensitive to radiation.[13][12][14]
The key parameters for film thickness control are viscosity, solvent evaporation rate and
spin speed. Film thicknesses of spincoating range from 0.1µm up to 500µm, with stan­
dard photoresist typically about 1µm. The spin­on coating thickness can generally be
expressed by the empirical expression:[13][12][14]
t =
√η
ω
(2.10)
Where t is the thickness of the coating, η is the resist viscosity and ω the spin speed.
There is still a solvent in the spin­coated resist, and a baking step is needed to force most
of the solvent out, for example, this baking is 90°C for 30min in an oven or 90°C for 60s
on a hotplate. The maximum baking temperature needs to be chosen carefully as too
high temperature will decompose the photoactive compound, leading to lower radiation
exposure sensitivity. Pre­exposure bake is often referred to as post­apply bake or soft
bake.[13][12][14]
Exposure
The method used in this project to transfer a pattern to a photoresist­coated wafer is
by using the Maskless lithography. Maskless lithography uses methods that transfer the
information directly to the substrate without using an intermediate static mask, i.e. where
the light beam is used directly to write the image (design) into the photoresist, one or more
pixels at a time. The ability to adjust lithography patterns from one run to the next, without
paying the cost of generating a new photomask, is a primary advantage of maskless
lithography.[13][12]
Some resists require post­exposure bake (PEB). It contributes to photogenerated molecules
being diffused. These molecules are responsible for changing the resist solubility in the
developer, and optical interference effects are smoothed out by this diffusion. The UV
exposure only initiates the photopolymerization process in so­called chemically amplified
resists (CARs), and a bake is required to finish it. The catalyst molecules formed by UV
exposure react during baking and generate the solubility difference between exposed and
unexposed resistance.[13][12]
Development
After exposure to light the pattern is developed using a suitable developer. In development
the soluble parts of the resist are etched away. Usually the developer is and alkaline
solution ( such as Tetramethylammonium hydroxide­ TMAH) or an organice solvent (such
as Propylene glycol methyl ether acetate ­ PGMEA).Some photoresists become more
8
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
==PAGE:17==
soluble in a developer after exposure, and they are called positive resists, an example is
AZ4562 photoresist. Another type of photoresist is the negative resist which become less
soluble after light exposure; an example is SU­8. In figure 2.4 a comparison of a negative
and positive photolithography process is shown. .[13][12][14]
Figure 2.4: A comparison of negative and positive photolithography [3].
A third kind of photoresist is the so­called image­reversal photoresist for example the
AZ5214e. This type of resist is basically a positive photoresist, but after light exposure,
the resist is subject to an image reversal process by which the exposed areas become
insoluble and the unexposed areas become soluble. For AZ5214e, the image­reversal
process is particularly simple, consisting of baking at elevated temperature followed by
exposure of the photoresist without mask, flood exposure. The image reversal process
of photoresisit is shown in figure 2.5. The advantage of image­reversal photoresist is
that finer features can be fabricated than with other photoresists. It is also an advan­
tage that the image­recersal photresist allows one photoresist to be user for both positive
and negative tones; especially in a research laboratory it is advantageous to have this
flexibility.[13][12][14]
Figure 2.5: Post exposure reversal photoresist bake [10].
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
9
==PAGE:18==
2.6
Etching
There are two steps in the pattern transfer process: lithographic resist patterning and the
subsequent etching of the underlying material. The lithographic resist patterning can be
removed in case of a mistake , however, once the pattern has been transferred by etch­
ing to solid material, reshaping is much more difficult, and often impossible.[13] Etching
is split into two classes, wet etching and plasma etching.The wet etching equipment is
a heated quartz that costs a few thousand dollars, but the plasma­etch equipment is a
vacuum chamber with an RF generator and a gas system which can cost up to millions of
dollars.[13][5]
The cross­section of etches can vary. Isotropic etchants etch with the same rate in all
directions creating cylindrical sides profile. Most wet etching profiles are isotropic. For
some etchants the etch rate is different in different directions, i.e. anisotropic. These
profiles are usually dry­etched. The wet etching of silicon or glass substrate involves
several separate steps, here glass is the main surface of reference. First, the etchant
must be transported to the surface, then the etching reactions take place, and finally, the
products must be transported away from the surface.
Wet­etching
Wet etching takes place on the surface of a solid in contact with a liquid solution, and in
general a thin immobile boundary is formed right on the surface. Transport of reactants
and products through this layer occur by diffusion. It is important to keep the liquid etchant
as homogeneous as possible to make the etching as uniform as possible. We focus on
etching of glass using a photoresist as mask, as this was what was used in this project.
Because etch rates in glass are relatively low, etching times are typically fairly long. One
problem in using photoresist as an etching mask in glass etching is its poor adhesion to
glass. The photoresist layer tends to lift off during etching, allowing the etchant to etch
the glass substrate indiscriminately. [13] [8]
Wet etching of glass is mostly done with hydrofluoric acid (HF) or buffered hydrofluoric
acid (BHF). The chemical reaction involved in wet etching glass is:[13]
SiO2 + 4HF →SiF4 + 2H2O
(2.11)
The etch rate of Pyrex glass in 40% HF at room temperature (22 0C) is about 3.4 µmmin−1,
and the etch rate of Pyrex glass in BHF (5% HF) at room temperature is about 0.04
µmmin−1. Adding 5 −10% HCL to BHF (5% HF) in creases the etch rate of Pyrex glass
to 0.23µmmin−1 at room temperature[13].
Because of the highly toxic nature of the HF used in glass etching , special safety precau­
tions must be taken. Face shields and proper chemical­resistant gloves must be used at
all times [13].
Glass is an amorphous material and wet etching is always isotropic, therefore sharp cor­
ners and high aspect ratio cannot be achieved by wet etching of glass. Inherent to isotropic
etching is under­etching of the mask, resulting in channels wider than the pattern in the
photoresist would predict. This should be taken into account when designing a mask [13]..
Several etching processes that do not use liquids to supply the echant are commonly
referred to as dry etching techniques. Dry etching technique have several benefits. Waste
from the processes is often easier to dispose of, and the process is much safer to use
than with most wet etches. However, the cost is much higher for the dry etching than the
wet etching.
10
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
==PAGE:19==
2.7
Three­Dimensional (3D) Printing
Three­dimensional (3D) printing is a method for the creation of computer­aided design
models of 3­dimensional objects. 3D printing platforms in the market can manufacture
devices with features greater than 100 um in the XY plane and as low as 25 um in the Z­
axis. Custom equipment can work well at an even higher resolution, but usually requires
thorough knowledge of the different components of a 3D printer (software/mechanics/flu­
idics) and are less likely to lead to widely reproducible designs.[17]
To achieve sub­millimeter characteristics, several 3D printing technologies may be used,
However, low­cost applications restrict the market to fused filament production (FFF) and
stereolitography (SLA) based liquid crystal display ( LCD) printers. In order to produce
3D shapes, FFF relies on fused polymer filament deposition in stacks, while SLA­based
printing relies on stacks of photosensitive resin polymerized by exposure to a specified
light wavelength.[6]
Low­cost LCD­SLA printers can outperform FFF printers in function size, but depending
on the resin used and layer height, adjusting of the printing process is needed. FFF has
a lower total cost of supplies and consumables, lower set­up complexity and is supported
by a wider community base. Due to its toxicity, waste generated by SLA printers requires
careful handling, and post­processing usually requires the use of Isopropanol for the re­
moval of uncurred resin. An SLA printer is used to fabricate many of the structures in this
project.
2.8
Laser Cutting
LASER is the acronym for Stimulated Radiation Emission Light Amplification.
In this
project a CO2 laser was used to make stuctures on polymer substrates. A CO2 laser
operates in a carbon dioxide gas mixture by electrically stimulating the molecules. If this
highly intense and invisible beam is directed through the glass, several materials can be
vaporized. A CO2 laser can be used to engrave or cut through a vast range of surfaces,
depending on the speed and strength of the predicted beam.[1]
Laser parameters, which include wavelength, strength, pulse length and repetition rate,
specify which material and geometry can be developed. Note that pulsed lasers in fem­
toseconds have shown a minimization of heat transfer and better control of ruggedness
and deepness than CO2 lasers; however, femtosecond pulsed laser is costly. Although
the CO2 laser can cut plastics up to 6mm thick easily, it is more difficult to determine the
cut depth accurately.[6]
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
11
==PAGE:20==
12
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
==PAGE:21==
3
Methods
In this section will be presented the methods were investigated and used to fabricate
the microfluidic channel. Also, the protocol for the functionalization of the SiNWs will be
presented.
3.1
3D printing
Prusa Slicer 3D printer was employed for this project. Initially, in the Fusion 360 program,
the design of the wanted structure was carried out(figure 3.1 and then moved to the Prusa
Slicer program. (figure 3.2). The designed file was then exported to a USB as a Masked
SLA file (*.sl1) and transfer the printer. The printing process began when the printer
bath was filled with resin. After printing, to remove any uncured resin on the structure,
the structure was cleaned with Isopropanol and cured with UV light. An example of a
fabricated 3D printed structure is shown in figure 3.3.
Figure 3.1: Design of structure with
the Fusion 360 program.
Figure 3.2: Prusa slicer program.
Figure 3.3: Fabricated structure with the 3D printer.
3.2
Laser Catting
The designed of the structures that wanted to engraved or to cut was done in the RDWork
v8/LaserWork v8 software[21]. The computer that carry the installed software was con­
nected to the CO2 Laser Cutting equipment. On the program was chosen if the engraving
or cutting need, also in the program can select the speed and the power of the execution.
A picture of the RDWork v8/LaserWork v8 software and the CO2 Laser Cut are shown in
figure 3.4 and 3.5
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.4:
RDWork v8/LaserWork v8
software of the CO2 Laser Cut[21].
Figure 3.5: Image of CO2 Laser Cut [1]
3.3
Cleanroom Fabrication
The cleanroom manufacturing of the microfluidic channels with the photolithograph and
the wet etching process will be discussed in the following pages.
3.3.1
UV lithography
The photolithography process started with the pre­treatment where the Pyrex wafers were
baked at 250 0C overnight. The next day it was applied the priming of the wafers with Hex­
amethyl disilazane vapour (HMDS, (H3C)3­Si­NH­Si­(CH3)3). The pre­treatment method
eliminates all adsorbed water on the wafer and promotes the photoresist’s adhesion.
After the pre­treatment, the wafers were ready to apply the photoresist. 2.2 µm of the
AZ5214E image­reversal photoresist was deposit with the Spin Coater: Gamma UV, on
both sides of the wafer followed soft baking on a hotplate for 60 seconds. The Spin
Coater: Gamma UV that was used is a fully automatic and programmable cassette­to­
cassette system, which can be used for priming and coating of UV resists on 4” and 6”
substrates. The product name is Süss MicroTec Gamma 2M spin coater.
The next step was to transfer the pattern to the photoresist­coated wafer. The patter was
designed on the CleWin5 software. Figure 3.6 shows the dimensions of the microfluidic
channel designed with the CleWin5 software. The area of the channel which overlaps
with the SiNWs when it sealed with the polymer structure, is designed to be 4.52mm2 ,
the inlet and outlet of the flow is designed to be 2mm diameter. The channel created that
drives the flow from the inlet to the flow equalization structures () is of 7mm length, and the
channel’s width is 0.5mm. In figure 3.7 is shown the the duplicated pattern of the figure
3.6 on a 4 inch wafer.
14
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.6: The design of a single channel pattern and the dimensions of the channel.
Figure 3.7: The design of duplicated channel on a pattern on a 4 inch wafer.
The pattern was transferred by means of the maskless lithography process to a photo­
coated wafer. The Maskless Aligner used was a Heidelberg­based MLA150 with a single
405nm diode laser light module, which includes high­speed direct writing. The resistor
was used here as is an image reversal photoresist, so post­exposure bake and flood
exposure needed to be carried out before developing. The bake after exposure was made
on a hot plate for 120 seconds at 1100C. In order to perform the flood exposure and
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
15
==PAGE:24==
achieve the required dose,200,2 mJ/cm2, an Ignited lamp was used with a light intensity
of 11mJ/cm2 for 18,2 seconds, and this was done with the Süss MicroTec MA6 aligner.
After exposure to light, the pattern is developed. The equipment that was used for the
development is the Süss MicroTec Gamma 2M developer. The photolithography process
was completed with hard baking of the developed wafers on a hotplate at 110 degrees for
120 seconds.
3.3.2
Wet etching
Wet etching was done after the photolithography to produce the Pyrex wafer’s microfluidic
channels. The dry etching was not chosen because the Pyrex wafer is not compatible with
the tools the Nanolab cleanroom provides.
Hydrofluoric acid or buffered hydrofluoric acid (BHF) is usually used on glass for wet
etching. The etch rate of Pyrex glass at BHF, however, is approximately 0.04µmm−1,
and it will take approximately 250min to etch the wafer at 10 µm depth. This is not only
time consuming but would also mean that photoresist would not be able to act as a mask,
as it would also be removed during the etch. The only alternative was 40% HF with an
etch rate of approximately 3­4 µmmin−1.
The wet etching was carried out in a large plastic beaker where a small amount of 40%
HF was poured, enough to cover a wafer. The wafers were submerged in the HF for 3
min. After 3 min the wafer was removed from the HF and washed in another water­filled
plastic beaker and rinsed for five minutes.
After wet etching, the resist strip bench was used to remove the left over photoresist on
the wafer. The bench consists of one Remover 1165 chemical bath, one isopropanol (IPA)
rinse bath and one water bath. The wafers were soaked for five minutes in the Remover
1165, and the IPA, then washed in the water bath.
3.4
PDMS
For this project, PDMS layers were used. A Sylgard 184 Silicone Elastomer Kit was used
to fabricate the PDMS layers, which consisted of a Silicone Elastomer Base and Silicone
Elastomer Curing agent.
In a petri dish 10 ml of Silicone Elastomer Base and 1ml of Silicone Elastomer Curing
agent were mixed for 1 minute. The mixture was divided into two separate petri dishes
and degassed for one hour. Finally the mixture was cured at 50oC for two hours. The
produced PDMS layer is shown in figure 3.8.
16
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.8: PDMS Layer fabricated with a Silicone Elastomer Kit.
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
17
==PAGE:26==
18
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
==PAGE:27==
4
Characterization
The different techniques of polymer and glass manipulation were investigated and char­
acterized in this section. The surface roughness of the engraved surfaces with Laser Cut
will be examined on two different polymers. Also, the 3D printing height and width resolu­
tion will be examined, and the surface roughness as well. Finally, the channels fabricated
in the cleanroom will be characterized regarding the surface roughness and the height.
4.1
Laser Cutting
The Laser Cutting is a very simple and fast system that can be used for many applications.
In this section, the primary objective is to investigate and test the surface roughness of
the area scanned with the laser cutter. A CO2 Laser Cutter was employed to examine it
performance on two different polymers, PMMA and Topas. TOPAS ® COC (cyclic olefin
copolymer) is a clear and extremely pure amorphous resin. It is used in a wide variety
of applications from the health and pharmaceutical industries to the packaging and elec­
tronics sectors, and more. Poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA), also known as acrylic, or
acrylic glass, is a transparent thermoplastic polymer widely used in various markets as
an alternative to the high cost and less resilient glass.
Two parameters control how the laser cutter performs: The speed at which the beam is
drawn across the surface and the power of the laser. It was therefore decided to engrave
5 mm 2 squares by changing the power, and the velocity of the laser beam on PMMA and
Topas materials.
PMMA
On the PMMA surface a pattern of three columns and six rows were engraved, see figure
4.1. The values of the power and the speed of the laser beam scanning each square are
presented in table 4.1.
Figure 4.1: PMMA surface were 5 mm 2 square were engraved with the laser cutter.
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
19
==PAGE:28==
Speed
(50mm/s)
Speed
(75mm/s)
Speed
(100mm/s)
10%Power
10%Power
10%Power
15%Power
15%Power
15%Power
20%Power
20%Power
20%Power
25%Power
25%Power
25%Power
30%Power
30%Power
30%Power
35%Power
35%Power
35%Power
Table 4.1: The power and the speed of the lases beam that engraves the PMMA surface
in the figure 4.1. Each cell corresponds to the same square in the 6x3 pattern of 4.1
Figure 4.2:
Roughness profile, of the engraved square with 10 percent power and
100mm/s speed.
In figure 4.2 a picture of the square’s roughness profile is shown, which is engraved with
10 percent power and 100 mm s speed. The profile was measured with a Stylus profiler ­
Tencor alpha step. The stylus profiler used to calculate the roughness profile has a small
vertical resolution, and the profile for the other squares could not be calculated since it
was too deep for the profilometer tip to reach the bottom of the squares. Figure 4.1 shows
that in the region being scanned with the laser beam, some distinguishing hills and valleys
have been created. The same patterns are shown also at the figure 4.2.
Since the stylus profiler was not able to measure the roughness profile of the surfaces
scanned with the laser cut, pictures were taken with the optical microscope.
20
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
==PAGE:29==
(a) 10% Power
(b) 15% Power
(c) 20% Power
(d) 25% Power
(e) 30% Power
(f) 35% Power
Figure 4.3: Engraved square with 50mm/s speed
The optical microscope images of the squares in the first column matrix in figure 4.1 are
seen in figure 4.3. The second and third columns are shown in figures 4.4 and 4.5.
(a) 10% Power
(b) 15% Power
(c) 20% Power
(d) 25% Power
(e) 30% Power
(f) 35% Power
Figure 4.4: Engraved square with 75mm/s speed
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
21
==PAGE:30==
(a) 10% Power
(b) 15% Power
(c) 20% Power
(d) 25% Power
(e) 30% Power
(f) 35% Power
Figure 4.5: Engraved square with 100mm/s speed
Although the grooves profile that was engraved with the Laser Cutter could not be mea­
sured, from the images of figures 4.1 to 4.5 shows that the laser cut produces a very
rough surface on the PMMA. It looks like the bottom surface is melted and that the higher
the power the smaller the grooves created. It also seems that the higher the speed the
smaller the grooves. However this conclusion is based purely on the optical images and
needs to be validated by profiling data, e.g. by using an AFM microscope or a profilometer
with much better resolution.
TOPAS
The Laser Cutter has also been tested on TOPAS material. Once more, the objective was
to measure the surface roughness of the TOPAS scanned with the CO2 Laser Cut. Here
as well, the same pattern of 5 mm squares in a matrix of three columns and six rows was
created, switching the speed and power of the laser for every one.
It was however, observed very quickly that the laser beam burned out the surface of
Topas. This phenomenon can be seen in figures 4.6 and 4.7. The laser beam seems to
be very violent with the topas material even at the lowest power available. The surface is
clearly melted on the edges and inside the squares the material resembles broken glass.
Therefore TOPAS was an unsuitable material for the fabrication of microfluidic channels
using the Laser Cutter
22
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.6: Topas surface were 5 mm 2
square were engraved with the laser cut­
ter.
Figure 4.7:
Topas surface melted on
the edges and inside the squares when
scaned with the laser beam.
4.2
3D printing
3D printing was considered to create a polymer microfluidic channel as an alternative
solution to the laser cutter. A list of different characterization tests are provided in the
following subsections has been made to be able to detect the limitations on the 3D print­
ing. The 3D printing manufacturing technique that is followed to build every 3D printed
structure for this project is discussed in section 3.1.
4.2.1
Height Resolution
The measurements obtained from the experiment to examine the height limitation of the
3D printer will be shown here. On a rectangular structure of 20x55mm and 3 mm height,
nine 5mm2 squares were created. The design of the tested structure is shown in figure
4.8. The height of the squares is decreased from top­left, 100 µm to 10 µm, bottom right,
with a step of 10 µm.
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.8: Fusion 360 design for height resolution.
The depth profile of the square structure was measured with the Stylus Profiler­Tencor
alpha step. The stylus profiler­Tencor resolution from the settings was 0.2 µm. In every
5mm2 squares, five different measures were taken along the width of the square. The
row data obtained from the profilometer was transferred in the origin software to do the
data handling.
A plot, as shown in figure 4.9 has been produced from the data obtained from the pro­
filometer. A horizontal line was positioned on the bottom of the plot to estimate the height
of the squares.
Figure 4.9: Example how the width of the 5mm2 was calculated
The average of the height profile measured with the profilometer in very square is pre­
sented in figure 4.10. The plots in figure 4.11 shows the comparison of the theoretical
height value with the average measured height value.
24
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.10:
Plot of the average measured
height on every square with height from 100µm
to 10µm.
Figure 4.11:
Comparison of the theoretical
height sated in the design with the measured
height value.
It is observed from figure 4.10 and the graph in figure 4.11 that the 3D printer’s height
resolution is a few micrometres ( 10­25µm) apart from the theoretical values. The ob­
served deviation is expected because the optimum resolution of the 3D printer used for
fabrication of the structures is 25µm. A higher resolution was attempted to be set, but the
printer would not complete the printing and stopped printing.
Reproducibility of height resolution
To assess whether the measurements of height are reproducible, in another rectangular
structure ten 5mm2 squares of depth 50µm and ten of 100µm were design and printed.
Data handling was performed, as mentioned above. Just three measurements along each
square were taken for this analysis.
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.12:
Plot of the average measured
height on every square with height 50µm.
Figure 4.13:
Plot of the average measured
height on every square with height 100µm.
From the results given in figures 4.12 and 4.13, the structures produced with the 3D printer
appear to be repeatable with a deviation of approximately 5µm from the designed height
.
Width resolution
The width of the 5mm2 squares was also measured. A horizontal line was placed in the
center of the graph extracted from the data measured with the profilometer. The two
values of the x­axis that the horizontal line crosses the graph were then fined as is shown
in figure 4.14. To determine the experimental width of the squares, the smaller value
subtracted from the larger value (x = x2 −x1).
26
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.14: The width of the squares was calculated from the graph, (x = x2 −x1)
The average measured width of the squares with the profilometer are shown in the figure
4.15.
Figure 4.15: Average measured width of the 5mm2 designed squares
It was observed from figure 4.15 that the performance of the 3D printer is very good for
high width value (millimeters), only a few micrometer deviation it was observed in the
measurements.
It is, however, challenging for the 3D printer to achieve a good resolution for small width
value. This was observed when several lines of 4mm in length and 100µm in height
were designed on a 4x10 mm structure; the design and the printed width characterization
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
27
==PAGE:36==
structures are presented in figures 4.16 and 4.17. These line width have been changed
from 100µm to 700µm with a 100 µm step.
Figure 4.16: Fusion 360 design for width
characterization.
Figure 4.17: 3D printed structure for the
width characterization.
The width of the designed lines was very small to be measured with the Stylus Profiler­
Tencor alpha step because the profilometer tip holder is wider than the line’s width. The
width, in this case, was measured with an optical microscope.
The width of each line is measured as it is shown in figure 4.18. For each line, five
measurements were taken, and the average width is shown in the graph in figure 4.20.
The height was also measured with the optical microscope as it is shown in figure 4.19
and the average measured height is presented at a graph in the figure 4.21
Figure 4.18: Image of the 600µm theo­
retical line where the experimental width
is measured with an optical microscope.
The scale­bar is 100 µm.
Figure 4.19: Image of the 600µm theoret­
ical line where the experimental height is
measured with an optical microscope.The
scale­bar is 100 µm.
28
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.20: Graph of the average mea­
sured width compare to the theoretical de­
signed width of the structure in figure 4.16
Figure 4.21: Graph of the average mea­
sured height of the lines in figure 4.17
The lines with theoretical width 100 and 200µm are shown in figure 4.22 and 4.23. From
the figure can be seen that at this width value, no channel with uniform depth and defined
width is created. That explains the high standard deviation error bar in the graph in figure
4.21. From 300 µm and above the widths measured correspond well with the designed
values.
Figure 4.22: Image of the 100µm theoret­
ical line. The scale­bar is 100 µm.
Figure 4.23: Image of the 200µm theoret­
ical line. The scale­bar is 100 µm.
4.2.2
Roughness
Finally, it was important to evaluate the surface roughness of the 3D printed structures to
be able to conclude whether the 3D printer used for this project is a suitable solution to
produce the microfluidic channels that the SiNWs will be incorporated in.
The study of the surface roughness was performed with the Stylus profiler ­ Tencor alpha
step. The squares fabricated to do the height characterization of the 3D printing method
have again been characterized for their surface roughness.
The roughness is created by short surface variations characterized by hills (local maximal)
and valleys (local minimal) of differing amplitudes and spacing. Two statistical parameters
usually calculate the roughness: the root mean square,Rq, and the arithmetical mean de­
viation of the measured profile, Ra. For smooth surface roughness, these values require
to be as small as possible. [mate]. The root mean square, Rq, and the arithmetical mean
deviation of the measured profile, Ra are calculated as:
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
29
==PAGE:38==
Ra = 1
n
∑
i=1
nyi
Rq =
√
1
n
∑
i=1
ny2
i
(4.1)
Where n is the number of local maximal or the local minimal and yi is their amplitude.
Squares height(μm)
Ra(μm)
Rq(μm)
100
0.131
0.1588
90
0.132
0.1642
80
0.134
0.1646
70
0.1338
0.1696
60
0.10974
0.1426
50
0.11508
0.1478
40
0.09664
0.1246
30
0.0877
0.1116
20
0.1276
0.1522
Table 4.2: The measured the root mean square,Rq, and the arithmetical mean deviation
for each square.
The measured Ra and Rq are presented on the table 4.2 and plotted in figure 4.24.
Figure 4.24
The presented data in the table 4.2 and figure 4.24 shows that the 3D printed structures
are quite smooth, with values for, Ra and Rq around 0.1 µm.
4.3
Photlithography­Wet etching
Micro­channels were fabricated with the photolithography and wet etching methods as it is
described in section 3.3.1 and 3.3.2. When the etching process was completed, and the
photoresist was removed, strange patterns were observed on the glass surface beside
30
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
==PAGE:39==
the etched channel. The glass wafer with microfluidic channels and the strange patterns
can be seen in figure 4.25 and 4.26. Since the wafer is transparent, it is not clear whether
the odd features are on the front (the side of the etched microfluidic channels) or back
surface of the wafer or both sides.
Figure 4.25: Glass wafer ware the etched
microfluidic channels can be seen.
Figure 4.26: The glass wafer where the
microfluidic channel and the unusual fea­
tures can be distinguished.
An optical microscope was employed to characterize the wafer and to verify if the strange
patterns are on the microfluid channel side or ”back ” side. The light beam was focused
on the front side, the side where the microfluidic channels were etched, and if the strange
patterns were out of focus, then it could be concluded that they are on the backside. Then
the imaging was focused on the backside, and if the strange shape can be viewed in focus,
then the conclusion was confirmed.
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
31
==PAGE:40==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 4.27: Images taken with an optical microscope focused on the front surface of the
wafer.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 4.28: Images taken with an optical microscope focused on the back surface of the
wafer.
The pictures in figure 4.27 and 4.28 are images taken in random positions on each side of
the wafer. Based on the consumption, that was mentioned above; the patterns are from
32
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
==PAGE:41==
the backside of the wafer. When the light is focused at the front surface area, the strange
lines are out of focus. On the other hand, it seems like the strange lines are in focused in
the figure 4.28, in which the channels are out of focus.
The height and the width of the channels is measured with the Stylus Profiler­Tencor
alpha step. The measurements were taken in the area that is marked in figure 4.29. One
random channel was selected for the characterization
Figure 4.29: The area of the channels where the height and width was measured.
The measured width of the channel is 4.6275 ± 0.0035mm, and the measured height is
7.46±0.283µm. According to the wet etching theory in section 3.3.2 the etch rate of Pyrex
glass in 40% HF is 3­4 µm, so the etched height of the channels should be from 9­12µm.
The deviation from the theoretical value could be because, during the etching process, the
photoresist on the wafer was removed, and the wafer was etched on the entire surface.
That could explain also the strange patterns that were observed on the wafers.
4.4
Silicon Nanowires Array
The vertical silicon nanowires array that were used in this project were fabricated in the
cleanroom using deep­UV lithography (DUV lithography) and dry etching Bosch method
on a silicon wafer. The mask of the wafer consisted of a gold thin layer and after the
etching the produced vertical nanowires had gold particle on the top.
In figure 4.30 the SEM figure of the VNW array is presented where the periodicity of
the VNWs array is clearly shown. From The SEM image in figure 4.31 we can see the
characteristic Bosch etched structure of the nanowires. Finally figure 4.32 shows the gold
particles on the top of the nananowire and their diameter. The height of the nanowires
cannot be measured but it is known that it is approximately 3 mum.
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.30: SEM image of the periodical VNWs array used in this project.
Figure 4.31:
SEM image of the verti­
cal Silicon nanowires fabricated with the
Bosch etching method.
Figure 4.32: SEM image where the width
of the nanowires is measured.
The fabrication of the SiNWs array was not part of this project. The nanowires were
provided by Jaime Castillo.
34
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
==PAGE:43==
5
Results and Discussion
The microfluidic channels that were produced with the 3D printing and the cleanroom
methods during the thesis are discussed in this chapter. Some of the issues occurring
at the time of testing are also described. Finally, the design and the fabricated working
channels are shown.
5.1
3D printed Microfluidic channels
Initially, the purpose of this project was to develop a microfluidic channel where the SiNWs
array is integrated and is used for electrochemical detection. The goal was to make use of
the benefit of the gold particles at the top of the nanowire in order to achieve an electrical
connection between the bottom and top of the nanowires, thus using these are multiple
parallel connected electrical sensors. In order for this to happen, the gold particles on
the nanowires array must make contact with a gold surface which is connected with the
electrical detection system. Figure 5.1 displays a drawing of the crossectional microflu­
idic channel demonstrating how the nanowires would be integrated into the microfluidic
channel.
Figure 5.1: Cross­section microfluidic channel model where the SiNWs are integrated and
connected with a gold surface
As the 3D printed structures were not produced in a cleanroom, deposing a thin layer
of gold on them would be complicated as they have to undergo a cleaning procedure
to be inserted in the cleanroom. However, glass chips with a thin coating of gold can
be manufactured in the cleanroom and afterwards could be integrated into the microfluid
channels.
This idea could be tested as the gold chips were available for at the time from another
project [24]. The gold chips are displayed in the figure 5.2, and the 3D printed structure
where the gold chip is incorporated is shown in figure 5.3.
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 5.2: Gold chips fabricated in the
cleanroom [24]
Figure 5.3: 3D printed structure where a
gold chip is incorporated.
However, there are two significant issues with this method. The channel characterisation
height data shows that the height resolution of the 3D printer, see section 4.2.1, is sig­
nificantly lower than the height of the vertically aligned nanowire (2­4 µm), see section
4.4.
The second issue was that the 3D printed channel heights had variations of the same order
of magnitude as the nanowire height. This issue guarantees that the SiNWs connection
to the gold chip cannot be replicated even if it was achieved to find the proper dimensions
once. It was established that the enhanced electrochemical detection where a gold chip
is connected to the VNWs array could not be accomplished by means of a 3D printer.
The new approach was the development of a 3D printed microfluidic channel where the
integrated nanowires bond to an analyte marked with a fluorescent dye and perform an
optical detection with an optical microscope. In this case, the detection area where the
nanowires chip are placed in the microfluidic channel should be sealed with a transparent
material like glass to achieve optical detection. A drawing of the cross­section of the
microfluid channel that is sealed with a glass substrate material is presented in figure 5.4.
36
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
==PAGE:45==
Figure 5.4: Cross ­section microfluidic channel sealed with a glass substrate.
During the enclosing of the microfluidic channels such as is shown in figure 5.4 several
challenges had to be addressed.
5.1.1
Design
One of the first things needed to be decided was the design of the microfluidic channels.
The idea was to design and fabricate two different models and compare their performance.
A simple design as the one is shown in figure 5.5 and a design with flow equalization
structure, like in figure 5.6.
Figure 5.5: Fusion 360 of microfluidic channel
design.
Figure 5.6: Fusion 360 of microfluidic channel design
with flow equalization structure.
The two channels were fabricated and testing. However, it was observed that the adhesive
layer used to seal the channels would collapse in vast areas, like the design in figure
5.5 and close the flow path. The flow equalization structures in the channels, on the
other hand, prevent the adhesive layer from falling on the channels. The design that was
decided to fabricate was like the design in figure 5.6. The design in figure 5.6 is inspired
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
37
==PAGE:46==
from papers found the literature review.[9] [18]
5.1.2
Dimensions
The dimension of the channels was not restricted by the definition of the thesis or its
purpose. However, the height and width characterisation of the 3D printer showed that the
printer resolution imposed certain limitations. The minimum achievable height was 25µm
and the minimum channel width was 300µm. The final dimensions that were decided
to be designed with the Fusion 360 were according to these restrictions. The inlet and
outlet channel were designed to be 1.1 mm in diameter. The field where the VNW chip
was integrated was changed according to the size of the SiNWs chip. The flow channels
were set to have a height of 100µm and width 500µm. The dimensions of the microfluidic
channels that were designed for the 3D printing fabrications are shown in figure 5.7.
Figure 5.7: 3D printed microfluidic channels dimensions.
5.1.3
Sealing the microfluidic channel
Sealing of the microfluidic channel has been an issue for this project. An adhesive layer
was required on the 3D printed channel to seal the channel with a glass substrate surface,
see figure 5.4. The adhesive layer had also to be transparent so that the optical detection
was not compromised from it and also must ensure that the sealed channel is leak­free.
Three different materials were tested for this project.
Double Sided Tape, PET (Polyester) Film
The channels were first tasted with a Double Sided Tape, PET (Polyester) Film to seal
the channel with a glass substrate. The PET tape thought was not the right solution as
the channel was disconnected and leaked after a while. The other issue was that this
tape was collapsing on the SiNW area. This material was desided that was not a proper
solution to seal the microfluidic channels.
PDMS layer
An alternative to the double­sided tape was a thin layer of PDMS. The PDMS layer was
produced as mentioned in the section 3.4. However, even with the PDMS layer, the same
problems occurred as with the PET double­side tape. The layer collapsed on the VNW
array chip and additionally the channel began to leak after a few cycles of flow in the
channels. Different thicknesses of the PDMS layer were tested however the results of the
testing wre the same. PDMS was not a satisfying material to seal the channels as well.
It was determined that the reason for the PDMS failure was that the plastic 3D printed
substrates were curved. The curvature was more pronounced in the middle and as the
PDMS channels were held in place with screws at the edges of the chip, there was a
significant gap in the middle where the chips leaked.
38
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
==PAGE:47==
Double­sided tape provided from DTU Health Tech
Finally, another double­sided tape was used for the microfluidic channel sealing. The
tape was provided from DTU Health Tech and it is a standard adhesive tape used in laser
cutting applications. Unfortunately, information on the type and the manufacturer was not
provided.
The tape was first cut with the CO2 laser cutter to prevent collapse on the VNW array
position. The microfluidic channel’s height was too small and collapsing of the tape on
the nanowires could not prevented. Therefore a hole was made in the same area as the
nanowire chip was inserted.The tape was then placed on the microfluidic channel, and a
glass substrate was mounted on the tape.
This tape had adhered strongly on the channel and the cover glass and kept the microflu­
idic channel leak­free after many cycles of flow, despite the ongoing issues with the 3D
printed chip curvature. The final design of the microfluidic channel fabricated with the
3D printing method, which is sealed and covered with a glass substrate is presented in
figures 5.8 and 5.9
Figure 5.8: Sealed microfluidic channel
fabricated with the 3D printing, front side.
Figure 5.9
Figure 5.10: Sealed microfluidic channel
fabricated with the 3D printing, back side.
5.1.4
Pressure­driven flow test
Finally, the sealed microfluidic channels had to be tested in a Pressure­driven flow system
in order to observe if the flow was covering the surface of the nanowires chip. It was also
important to make sure that during the flow no bubbles were forming.
Figure 5.11 shows the pressure­driven system that was used to drive the flow in the chan­
nels. The liquid that was used to display the flow was red colored DI water. During the
pumping when the flow arrived in the rectangular area the chip was fully covered by the
liquid starting from the middle of the chip and spreading to its corners. It was observed
that the flow equalization structures seem to work and the rectangular area fills homoge­
neously and without forming bubbles.
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.11: Pressure­driven system that was used to drive the flow in the channels.
Colored DI water was used to observe the flow in the channel.
5.2
Glass Microfluidic channel
The cleanroom fabricated channels were also sealed with the double­sided tape as the 3D
printed channels. However, in the glass microfluidic channels, a different approach to 3D
printed channels was used. The channels were fabricated on a glass wafer that has the
same height as the nanowires chip that were provided for this project. It was clear that the
nanowire chip could not be integrated in the glass fabricated microfluidic channel. Instead
of incorporating the nanowires chip into the etched glass channel, they were integrated
into a 3D printed polymer structure which was sealed with the glass microfluidic channel.
The glass channels dimension and design are discussed in the sections 3.3 and 4.4.
Figure 5.12 shows the components of the glass microfluidic channel, and figure 5.13 show
the assembled glass microfluidic channel.
40
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
==PAGE:49==
Figure 5.12: The component of the glass
microfluidic channel.
Figure 5.13: Assembled glass microflu­
idic channel.
The cleanroom fabricated channels were tested with a pressure­driven pump system, as
the 3D printed channels were tested. In figures 5.14 and 5.15 it can be seen that there is no
flow in the glass channel and is clogged. The channel leaks in the inlet. This phenomena
was due to the very small height of the glass channel. Unfortunately due to the limitation
of time, other channels with larger height were not fabricated and tested.
Figure 5.14: No flow in the glass channel
Figure 5.15: The colored liquid can be
seen leaking through the inlet.
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
41
==PAGE:50==
42
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
==PAGE:51==
5.3
Evaluation of the channels with the Biotin­Steptavidin.
Finally, the sensing performance of the 3D printed channels was evaluated with Biotin­
Steptavidin conjugation. Two nanowires chips were functionalized and then integrated
into the microfluidic channel to bond with fluorescent­marked Steptavidin during a flow
experiment. The BSA­Biotin immobilization protocol first will be presented and then the
florescent conjugation of the VNWs in the channels will be discussed. Finally the results
of the channel’s performance will be presented in the end of this chapter as well.
5.3.1
BSA­Biotin immobilization
The steps to functionalize the nanowires have been listed here.
1. In order to stabilize the VNWs, a pipette was used to pour 900 µl of D­ PBS on the
VNW chip and incubate them with gentle mixing at RT for 10 minutes.
2. After 10 minutes the buffer was removed
3. Then the NWs were washed by adding 500ul D­PBS and incubating for 5mins and
eliminate the buffer.
4. The NWs were washed four times in total.
5. Then 20µl of BSA­Biotin in a concentration of five micromolar was pipetted on the
chip and incubated for 30 minutes at RT on a rocking table
6. After the BSA­Biotin incubation the NWS were wash four times as in step 3.
The nanowires were integrated into the channel after the BSA biotin functionalizationd.
The double sided tape was used in the 3D printed channel to attach the VNW chip. The
channel was then stitched together with the glass substrate surface as mentioned in sec­
tion 5.1.3 section. The conjugation of the BSA biotin functionalised nanowires with strep­
tavidin Alexa Fluor 488 was then done under flow conditions.
5.3.2
Conjugation of Streptavidin Alexa Fluor 488
Streptavidin­Alexa488 was diluted to a concentration of five micromolar in D­PBS. After­
wards, the solution was injected into a syringe. The syringe was coupled to the microflu­
idic channel with a tube of 1.1mm in diameter, as seen in figure 5.16, in a pressure­driven
pump system.
The solution Streptavidin­Alexa488 was pumped at a flow rate of 10 µl per minute, and the
pumping was stopped when the solution covered the nanowires chip. The solution then
was incubated for 10 minutes on the channel. After 10 minutes, Streptavidin­Aleksa488
was washed out by adding 50µl D­PBS in the channels and incubate for 5 minutes. The
NWs were then washed four times before they were characterized with the optical micro­
scope.
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 5.16: Pumping of the Streptavidin­Alexa488 in the 3D printed microfluidic channel.
5.3.3
Results
The immobilization of the nanowires with BSA­Biotin and the Streptavidin Alexa Fluor
conjugation was performed for two different chips. Here the results taken with an optical
microscope are presented. The two channels that were tested are shown in figures 5.17
and 5.18. On the nanowires chip that are incorporated on the microfluidic channels some
scratches and defects can be seen that were made during the dicing and the immobiliza­
tion of the chips.
Figure
5.17:
Fist
microfluidic
channel
that
was
evaluated
with
Biotin­
Steptavidin.Scratches can be seen on the nanowires chip.
44
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
==PAGE:53==
Figure 5.18: Second microfluidic channel that was evaluated with Biotin­Steptavidin.
Scratches can be seen on the nanowires chip.
1st microfluidic channel evaluation
Fig 5.19 displays the pictures taken with the optical microscope on the first channel. The
first row reveals pictures taken with white light in three different places, and the second
row shows images taken with fluorescent light at the same places. The images shows the
successful bonding of Streptavidin Alexa Fluor with BSA­ Biotin, which was performed in
the microfluidic channel. This is more clear in the places where there is no fluorescence
because there are not nanowires there due to defects that were mentioned above.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 5.19: Images taken with an optical microscope : the first row pictures taken with
white light on different position on the chip in figure 5.17 are shown. In the second row
are the images taken with the fluorescent light at the same positions. The scale bar on
the images is 20µm.
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
45
==PAGE:54==
2nd microfluidic channel evaluation
The images taken on the second microfluidic channel for the evaluation with the Strepta­
vidin Alexa Fluor show the same results as the first channel. The first row of in figure 5.20
shows pictures taken with white light in three different places, and the second row shows
photos taken with fluorescent light at the same locations. Here, we can see the scratches
made from the nanowire chip handling as well.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 5.20: Images taken with an optical microscope on: the first row are shown pictures
taken with white light on different position on the chip in figure 5.18, the second row are
the images taken with the fluorescent light at the same positions. The scale bar on the
images is 20µm
Besides the strong signal that is detected on the nanowire array, in the images with the
fluorescent light, a strong signal is displayed on what appears to be horizontal NWs as
well. This can be seen more clearly in figure 5.21 which is a zoomed in region of figure
5.20d. In order to confirm that this signal is coming from horizontally positioned NWs the
length of these lines was measured. The length was measured on four horizontal lines
by comparing the pixel numbers of the lines with the pixel number on the scale bar. The
averaged measured length is 3.5 ± 0.098µm, which suggests that the horizontal lines are
nanowires.
46
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
==PAGE:55==
Figure 5.21: Zoomed image of figure 5.20d
These results showed that the channels manufactured for this project with integrated
nanowires could be used for fluorescence detection and can be developed and used for
biosensing applications.
Furthermore, during the pumping of the flow with the fluorescent Streptavidin in the chan­
nels, it was observed that the volume need to cover the nanowire chip in the channels was
smaller compared to the sample volume needed to do the immobilization outside of the
channels. From the images obtained with the optical microscope, the fluorescent signal
intensity on the immobilized nanowires was high.
Consequently, the results presented at this chapter proved the motivation of this project
to incorporate vertically aligned nanowires in a microfluidic channel where the volume
consumption of reagents and samples decreases, and at the same time, the sensitivity
of the sensor is optimized. These foundings an exciting path for further research on the
microfluidic channel with incorporated VNW array for developing a biosensor.
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
47
==PAGE:56==
48
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
==PAGE:57==
6
Conclusion and Outlook
6.1
Conclusion
The overall aim of this project was to incorporate an array of vertically aligned nanowires
on silicon substrates in glass or polymer microfluidic systems for creating biosensors.
The requirement for this project was to fabricate microfluidic systems incorporating small
substrates with these nanowires and test the functionalization of the nanowires under flow
conditions. The systems needed to allow for optical detection..
During the project, several fabrication techniques and designing tools have been applied.
The methods vary from 3D printing and laser cutting of plastic substrates to advanced
cleanroom processes. Different parameters were investigated and characterized for each
technique to be able to choose the optimal fabrication method for integrating forests of
nanowires into a microfluidic channel for optical detection.
First, a CO2 Laser Cutter was tested for microfluidic applications on PMMA and Topas.
The surface roughness of the materials was tested, and it was found that the Laser Cutter
either creates very rough surfaces like it was done on the PMMA, or the laser beam melts
the surface of the materials, as can be seen on the Topas surface.
From the roughness characterization that was done on an SLA 3D printer, it was found
that this method has a satisfying roughness for microfluidic applications; however, it has
some constraints on the height and width resolution. The 3D printer can not be used for
microfluidic channels less than 20­25 µm and lower width than 200­300µm. On the other
hand, SLA 3D printer is a cheap and effective way for fabricating microfluidic systems
of larger dimensions. The integration of the vertical silicon nanowires array is a straight­
forward task for the 3D printed microfluidc channels although the sealing of the channel
is challenging and requires use of the proper adhesive material.The findings of the con­
jugation tests demonstrate that the incorporation of vertically aligned nanowires inside a
microfluidic channel has many potentials for developing a biosensor by minimizing volume
usage of costly reagents and samples and simultaneously maximizing the sensitivity.
Finally, for this project, cleanroom fabricated micro­channels in glass by maskless pho­
tolithography was tested. The cleanroom fabrications of channels on the glass showed
that it could eliminate the constraint in size and dimensions that the 3D printer has. Nonethe­
less, the unsuccessful developed sealed glass channels results show that the integration
and manipulation of the channels should be different from the approach that was used for
this project.
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
49
==PAGE:58==
6.2
Outlook
Microfluidic channels where vertically aligned nanowires integrated for biosensing appli­
cations has many potentials. Due to a series of issues that were encounter during the
thesis, many experiments have been assigned for future work.
The future work should start with more experiments regarding the pressure drive flow in
the microchannels. The volume consumption of the sample regent during the experiment
can be optimized if a series of calibration experiments are performed.
After the optimization of the system, a series of evaluation experiment need to be done
with a variety of regent and samples. In this part of experiments, both the immobilization
and the conjugation should be performed in the channels.
Finally, regarding the 3D printed microfluidic channels, the last step is to fabricate mi­
crofluidic channels where for the biosensor detection is used electrochemical connection.
From the data collected during the thesis, it is clear that is impossible to use the benefit of
the gold particles at the top of the nanowires in order to achieve an electrical connection
between the bottom and top of the nanowires with the 3D printed channel. However, an
electrical connection on the bottom of the nanowires can be made. At this part of exper­
iments, the detecting electrochemical signal of the nanowires should be evaluated and
investigate the potentials and the limitation of this system as an electorchemical biosen­
sor.
50
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
==PAGE:59==
Bibliography
[1]
Ltd AEON Laser Technology Co. User Manual. MIRAPLUS.
[2]
Sune Zoëga Andreasen. “Integration of Electrochemical Detection on a Spinning
Lab­on­a­Disc Platform”. In: (2013).
[3]
Andrew R. Barron. Chemistry of Electronic Materials. 2013.
[4]
Basic Microfluidic Concepts. Last updated 8/08/2019. url: https://faculty.washington.
edu/yagerp/microfluidicstutorial/basicconcepts/basicconcepts.htm.
[5]
Jaime Castillo­Leon and Winnie Edith Svendsen. “Lab­on­a­Chip devices and Micro­
Total Analysis Systems”. In: (2015).
[6]
Jérôme Charmet et al. “Low­Cost Microfabrication Tool Box”. In: (2020).
[7]
Curtis D. Chin, Vincent Linder, and Samuel K. Sia. “Commercialization of microflu­
idic point­of­care diagnostic devices”. In: Royal Society of chemistry (2012).
[8]
Comparing methods for etching bulk glass at DTU Nanolab. 25 November 2019.
url: https : / / faculty . washington . edu / yagerp / microfluidicstutorial / basicconcepts /
basicconcepts.htm.
[9]
David R. Emerson et al. “Biomimetic design of microfluidic manifolds based on a
generalised Murray’s law”. In: (2005).
[10]
Dale E. Ewbank. Micro/Nanolithography. 2013.
[11]
Antonio Francesko, Vanessa F.Cardoso, and Senentxu Lanceros­Méndez. “Microflu­
idics for Pharmaceutical Applications”. In: ScienceDirect (2019).
[12]
Sami Franssila. Introduction to Microfabrication, Second Edition. Wiley, 2010.
[13]
Oliver Geschke, Henning Klank, and Pieter Tellemann. Microsystem Engineering of
Lab­on­a­Chip Devices. Wiley­VCH, 2011.
[14]
Tine Greibe and Thomas Anhøj. Lithography Tool Package.
[15]
B. Lautrup. Physics of Continuous Matter Exotic and Everyday Phenomena in the
Macroscopic World, 2nd Edition. CBC Press, 2011.
[16]
Xiangling Li et al. “Vertical nanowire array­based biosensors: device design strate­
gies and biomedical applications”. In: Royal Society of chemistry (2020).
[17]
Samuel Clark Ligon et al. “Polymers for 3D Printing and Customized Additive Man­
ufacturing”. In: (2017).
[18]
Wan Shi Low, Nahrizul Adib Kadri, and Wan Abu Bakar bin Wan Abas. “Compu­
tational fluid dynamics modelling of microfluidic channel for dielectrophoretic bio
MEMS application”. In: (2014).
[19]
Pamela N. Nge, Chad I. Rogers, and Adam T. Woolley. “Advances in Microfluidic
Materials, Functons, Integration and Applications”. In: Nationl Institutes of Helth
(2013).
[20]
Peter R.Lang and Yi Liu. Soft matter at aqueous interfaces. Springer, 2016.
[21]
RDworks Engraving Software User’s Guide.
[22]
Damiano Verardo et al. “Nanowires for Biosensing: Lightguiding of Fluorescence as
a Function of Diameter and Wavelength”. In: NANO LETTERS (2018).
[23]
Damiano Verardo et al. “Nanowires for Biosensing: Lightguiding of Fluorescence as
a Function of Diameter and Wavelength”. In: (2018).
[24]
Eva Zeqiraj. “Optimisation of surfaces for use in an SPRbiosensor for the detection
of adalimumab”. In: (2020).
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
51
==PAGE:60==
52
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
==PAGE:61==
A
Appendix
A.1
Self evaluation
Figure A.1: Project Plan
The project plan that was made in the begging of the thesis was very hard to follow be­
cause of the Covid­19 situation. For some time in the begging of my thesis, I did not
have to DTU and could not meet with my supervisors as well. In the cleanroom, I gain
access form the middle of June, but still, there was a long waiting time for the cleanroom
equipment training as the number of people in the cleanroom was limited. In the bioengi­
neering department, I had access from the begging of August, but during this month, it
was hard to do experiments regularly because again, the number of people using the lab
was restricted. In addition from September to the end of the thesis, I had to stay at home
for precautions reasons as either I had flue symptoms or someone in my environment
had coronavirus, and I had to do the corona test and have the corona test results before
I could go back to the lab.
However, the aim of the project was accomplished. During the thesis, a microfluidic sys­
tem was developed that incorporate forests of vertically aligned nanowires on silicon sub­
strates. The microfluidic system was leak­free, and from the evaluation that was per­
formed with BSA­Biotin ­ Streptavidin conjugations, it was shown that the microfluidic
channels developed for this project could be used for biosensing detection.
Integration of silicon nanowires in microfluidic channels for the development of sensors
53
==PAGE:62==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like
at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is
there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all!
A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an
impression of the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in
of the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match
the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Søltofts Plads, Building 221
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
