==PAGE:1==
Light Source Importance Sampling
Master Thesis
Author
Mathias Gammelmark- s134787
06/12/2020
ECTS: 30
Year of submission: 2020
Programe: Digital Media Engineering
Supervisors:
External, Kasper Engelstoft, Unity
Associate Professor, Jeppe Revall Frisvad, DTU Compute
Associate Professor, Jakob Andreas Bærentzen, DTU Compute
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Having many sources of light have become increasingly more relevant in the ﬁeld of photo realistic graphics.
Especially when modelling emissive geometry, the number of lights can quickly increase due to more complex
and interesting shapes. This project focus on the current importance sampling solution used within the Unity
environment, which has shown to scale poorly with more complex scenes containing many lights.
This thesis presents an alternative solution using a hierarchical datastructure called a lighttree, which is used
to dynamically evaluate the importance of lights per shading point, according to the individual orientation and
position. The solution is tested in a simpliﬁed framework, build alongside the project, which simulates the
pipeline of the pathtracer used in Unity’s light baking process.
Results shows a signiﬁcant improvement in sampling quality for larger scenes with above 32.000 emissive trian-
gles, over the previously used sampling technique. The hierarchy traversal does take more time, and has been
evaluated to be 10 times more expensive, over the previous technique, but has also shown to only account for
less than 3% of the total time spent on rendering in the performed tests.
Overall the higher computation time seems to be outweighed by the better sampling quality, and the technique
has shown to result in a overall faster converging image.
Page i
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis was originally intended to be performed within the Unity 3D engine. However due to some practical
issues, it was not possible for me to work on the actual Unity code apart from the very beginning and end
of the project.
This has resulted in a slight change in subject for the thesis, from being focussed only on
the importance sampling using Unity’s implementation, to also create a framework in witch to implement the
importance sampling.
This changing of plans, has resulted in many challenges and extra research in order to deﬁne and carry out the
project. But I think this has also helped in giving me a better understanding of the diﬀerent components which
ties into the importance sampling technique of the many lights.
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors Jeppe and Andreas for guiding me throughout this project and especially
Kasper from Unity, who’ve been a great help in the whole project from implementation to writing. Further I
would like to thanks Maria and Marc with proofreading and moral support.
Page ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Graphics in Games . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Raytracing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Simulating Physical Light . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Importance Sampling . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Motivation
6
3
Goal
7
3.1
Testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4
Background
8
4.1
Importance Sampling . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.2
Triangular Lights . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.3
Many Lights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.4
Hierarchical Sampling
. . . . . . . . .
12
5
Method
14
5.1
Triangular Lights . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5.2
Lighttree
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.3
Tree Traversal . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
6
Implementation
21
6.1
Pathtracing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
6.2
Raytracing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
7
Results
25
7.1
Sampling Methods . . . . . . . . . . .
26
7.2
Attenuation Terms . . . . . . . . . . .
28
7.3
Uncertainty Angle
. . . . . . . . . . .
29
7.4
Lighttree Quality . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
7.5
Framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
8
Discussion / Future Work
33
8.1
Lighttree Traversal . . . . . . . . . . .
33
8.2
Triangle Sampling
. . . . . . . . . . .
34
8.3
Lighttree Construction . . . . . . . . .
34
9
Conclusion
36
A References
38
B Additional Image Results
40
C Source Code
48
Page iii
==PAGE:5==
1.
Introduction
The topic of computer graphics is a very broad one
and is a core component in many applications, such
as games, media-players, cameras, web-browsers and
even operating systems. Just as other ﬁelds within
computer science, it is a fast-paced industry, which
shows rapid improvements within just a few years.
Looking back at the ﬁrst examples of Computer Gen-
erated Images(CGI) in movies, it was clearly visible
when the visual eﬀects were used since they didn’t
exactly ﬁt into the environments. One could actu-
ally spot the touch of the artist, that was manually
modifying every single frame.
Nowadays, CGI has come to a point where it can
become impossible to see whether something is gen-
erated or an actual photo. In fact, companies such
as IKEA are beginning to adapt CGI into marketing,
as generating images of their products digitally can
save cost, rather than taking the photos in real life.
As of 2014 up to 75% of IKEA’s catalogues where en-
tirely generated using computer graphics[Wil14]. This
comes as a bit of a surprise for the viewer, as the im-
ages look completely believable.
But what does it take to generate these realistic
images?
Of course realistic looking 3D models are
needed to capture the details of the objects in the
image, but for many companies these are already cre-
ated, when the products are designed.
For movies
or games however, this takes large teams of skilled
artists and plenty of time to create. The other part,
which is perhaps just as important, is ﬁguring out
how the light behaves in the image; or in other words,
how the light interacts with those realistic looking
models.
To accurately simulate how the light be-
haves, we need a good understanding of what light
is, and how it is interacting with even the most basic
objects and materials.
This question will ﬁnd its answer in this Introduction
chapter, by ﬁrst going over how graphics was done
previously and in current games, along with what
raytracing is and how photo realistic images are com-
puted using pathtracing.
1.1 Graphics in Games
Computer graphics is referring to the generation
and/or manipulation of images with the help of com-
puters, and have for a long time been one of the main
ways for computers and humans to interact. Graph-
ics is a very broad topic and is a core component
in many applications, such as games, media-players,
cameras, web-browsers and even operating systems.
However the sort of computer graphics relevant for
this project, is that of ﬁlms and games, which is try-
ing to imitate the real world as closely as possible.
This means modeling and simulating how lights and
shadows are behaving in the real world and how dif-
ferent materials react to the light.
Rasterizing:
Currently the most common way
graphical processing units (GPUs)are displaying im-
ages on the screen, whether it is 2D-3D models, data
visualization or text, is by using a combination of ras-
terizing and texture sampling. GPUs can only raster-
ize triangles, but it can do this extremely fast thanks
to specialized hardware, making it possible to render
billions of triangles every second.
Further by stor-
ing the ’depth’ of each pixel, one can decide whether
triangles are behind or in front of each other, help-
ing to illustrate a third dimension of the image. As
rasterization is laying the foundation for the graph-
ics of current games, many eﬀects have to be imple-
mented around its limitations, often leading to the use
of tricks and illusions to approximate the eﬀects in a
more performance-friendly way.
The following sec-
tions will provide a short introduction to how some
common eﬀects have been achieved using rasteriza-
tion and why raytracing might be the future for phys-
ically based real-time graphics.
Shadows:
To achieve dynamic shadows using ras-
terization, one would ﬁrst have to render the scene
from the shadow-casting lights perspective and store
this information in a shadow-map (texture)[Fol+96],
which can then be sampled when rendering the ﬁnal
image to test if the individual pixels are in the shadow
of another object. As a shadow-map would have to
be rendered for each light, this technique can quickly
become very expensive with many lights, often lead-
ing to game-developers having to budget the amount
Page 1
==PAGE:6==
Raytracing
Light Source Importance Sampling
of lights rather low. Further as these shadow-maps
are often stored as images, they might show artifacts
such as jagged edges, if the image does not have a
suﬃciently high resolution.
Ambient Occlusion:
Ambient occlusion is an-
other popular eﬀect, which can add a lot of realism
to a scene, by estimating how surrounding objects
are shadowing the ambient light (the light coming
from all directions). It was ﬁrst commercially used
in the game Crysis [Cry+07] in 2007, as screen space
ambient occlusion (SSAO), where a post-process is
sampling the depth-buﬀer (the depth information of
each pixel) reveals how much geometry a pixel is sur-
rounded by [Mit07]. Many other techniques are now
used, including precomputing the ambient occlusion
when designing the game and saving the result in a
texture, which can be sampled at runtime.
Figure 1.1:
Screenshot from Crysis visualizing the
SSAO on its own using the red color channel and in-
cluded in the ﬁnal result. 1
Transparency:
Transparency can be achieved by
blending the color of the drawn triangles according
to their transparency, but the triangles have to be
rendered from the back to the front, as the depth in-
formation behind a triangle is overridden. This prac-
tically means that transparent meshes often has to be
rendered in their own pass and sorted in the order of
their depth from the cameras perspective. Because
of this, early games have usually only been rendering
single layer transparency, with very simple geometry
as to not make it overlap itself, coursing further prob-
lems. This also have to be taken into consideration
when designing the game world, as too many trans-
parent objects would either break the illusion, or be
too expensive. Using raytracing can make this pro-
cess a lot simpler, as the order which the rays hit the
geometry is guaranteed by how the rays are traced
through the scene. If a transparent object is hit, an-
other ray can be traced through the transparent sur-
face.
Baking Global Illumination:
Further to achieve
global illumination in real-time, the light is often pre-
computed (Baked) into textures of the 3D models or
as light probes, which stores the global illumination
in diﬀerent parts of the scene. The process if com-
puting this global illumination is similar to that of
rendering for movies, which often takes far more time
to compute. More on this in section 1.3
Complexity:
Many of the mentioned techniques
have evolved quite a bit from the above descriptions
and more have even been added, such as volumet-
ric lights and global illumination. But as these tech-
niques get more and more elaborate, so does the com-
plexity of their implementation. Often, game devel-
opers are now choosing to use third party engines such
as Unity for handling graphics among other things, as
implementing the impressive graphics would require
a team of dedicated and experienced developers.
1.2 Raytracing
Raytracing is the act of computing intersections be-
tween rays and geometry, where a ray is often de-
scribed as vector between two points.
In graphics,
raytracing is used for simulating rays of light to com-
pute how light moves throughout a scene. The inter-
sections can e.g. be used for testing if an object is
occluding the path towards a light, or to ﬁgure out
where the light is bouncing to when being reﬂected
of a surface.
History:
Raytracing as a concept is old, with the
idea dating back to the 16th century, with Al-
brecht D¨urer who presented his apparatus D¨urers
door[Hof90].
Though as this is way before computers had been
invented, it doesn’t really count as computer graph-
ics. Within the ﬁeld of computer graphics raytrac-
ing made its debut with John Turner Whitted’s pa-
per[Whi79], with the introduction of recursive ray-
tracing, providing a practical approach for rendering
global illumination.
This has inspired many varia-
tions including pathtracing, which is widely used to-
day.
1The image is generated as screenshots using the in-game debug console to visualize the AO render target. The generated AO
image was then mixed with the ﬁnal frame using an image editor.
Page 2
==PAGE:7==
Mathias Gammelmark
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Simplicity:
The reason why ray tracing is so at-
tractive in the term of rendering, is that many of these
complicated eﬀects mentioned previously, can be re-
produced very easily with the recursive raytracing
presented by Whitted. As an example, shadows can
be computed by tracing a single ray towards the light,
to examine if any objects obscure the path. This will
result in pixel perfect shadows while completely re-
moving the need for any shadow-maps. Further the
eﬀects computed using raytracing often become more
realistic and stable, as they’re based on the real phys-
ical eﬀect and not just an approximation.
However, raytracing is extremely expensive to com-
pute compared to rasterization, and has only in the
last few years gained a foothold in real-time graphics
with the introduction of GPU ray tracing algorithms,
as well as dedicated hardware [NVI18], which has let
to an explosive increase in ray tracing performance.
As performances keep improving, it might soon be
feasible to create realtime versions of rendering al-
gorithms and produce visual applications and games
with graphical quality similar to that of the movie
industry.
1.3 Simulating Physical Light
As movies don’t have to compute images at an inter-
active rate, they can aﬀord to spend more time in the
rendering process of each frame. The movie industry
has been using raytracing for a long time to simu-
late how light behaves, using a physically based ren-
dering techniques such as pathtracing[Geo+18]. This
technique exists in many diﬀerent variations and of-
ten in combination with other techniques, to balance
strengths and weaknesses.
Global Illumination:
To understand how path-
tracing works, it makes sense to ﬁrst take a look at
what global illumination is and how it can be de-
scribed. Global illumination, or indirect illumination,
is a type of light which is indirectly being scattered
around the scene, by e.g. being reﬂected from surface
to surface. Every time a light hits a surface, this sur-
face eﬀectively becomes a source of light, by indirectly
reﬂecting the light back into the scene. Therefore by
considering how the light is hitting and interacting
with the scene as paths of light, one can describe the
global illumination as all the possible paths the light
can take.
Monte Carlo Estimation:
So to compute the
global illumination for each pixel, one would only
need to ﬁgure out the inﬁnite number of paths going
through it. However this doesn’t sound very practical
and a diﬀerent approach has to be used to solve this
inﬁnite number of paths. For this purpose a technique
known as Monte Carlo Estimation is used, where the
average of repeated random sampling of the possible
paths is used to give an estimate of the actual global
illumination. Every time a sample is added, the es-
timate becomes a tiny bit better, and as the number
of samples approaches inﬁnity, the estimate will im-
prove and eventually converge on the right solution
to the integral of all light-paths.
Pathtracing:
More speciﬁcally pathtracing works
by simulating a number of these random paths for
each pixel in the image, and then averaging their con-
tribution to give the estimate. To ensure that paths
always connect to the individual pixels, the path is
simulated in the reverse direction of the light, mean-
ing the path starts at a pixels position and goes out
into the scene, where it can connect with lights, by
randomly hitting them. However as the paths rely
on randomly hitting a light, they might not always
make a connection, meaning that the paths contribu-
tion will evaluate to zero and the sample is wasted,
resulting in a noisy image. See ﬁgure 1.2a, where 16
paths are simulated per pixel. It is notable that the
image seems dark, as many of the initial paths are
wasted, due to not hitting the light in the ceiling.
(a)
(b)
Figure 1.2: (a) Naive pathtracing and (b) Pathtracing
using Next Event Estimation (NEE). Both having 16
samples per pixel. (16 paths per pixel)
Next Event Estimation:
The chance for wast-
ing samples is proportional to the area of space the
sources of lights occupy in the scene. As large lights
have a higher chance of being hit, they will often need
less samples. However when the area of a light de-
crease, so does the chance of hitting them, and even-
tually a light becomes impossible to hit. A common
Page 3
==PAGE:8==
Importance Sampling
Light Source Importance Sampling
optimization is the Next Event Estimation or NEE,
which for each step of a path computes the direct con-
tribution of lights in the scene. This will help connect
the paths to the lights if possible, and can greatly
improve the estimated result of the pathtracing. See
ﬁgure 1.2b, where 16 paths are simulated using NEE.
It is notable that the image appear much less noisy
than its counterpart without NEE in ﬁgure 1.2a.
More Lights:
When more lights are present in a
scene, one could then either sample all the lights, or
select an amount of them at random, similar to how
directions are sampled in the pathtracing algorithm.
Often only a single light is selected, as tracing a ray to
every light, can become quite costly as a paths length
can be potentially inﬁnite. However, every time the
amount of lights is increased, the likelihood of se-
lecting each individual light becomes smaller. Fur-
thermore as some lights might be more important for
certain areas of the scene, having a lower chance of
selecting these important lights, will eventually show
up as noise in the computed image and more samples
would be needed for a good result.
Photon Mapping:
Many other techniques and
variations exist, e.g.
photon mapping where pho-
tons are simulated from the lights ahead of time and
stored in a map to later be used in ’collecting’ the
global illumination in with recursive raytracing. This
can greatly help to improve the rendering of caustics,
which is one of the more diﬃcult graphical eﬀects to
render. However this technique is inherently biased,
which means that a small error will always be intro-
duced to the rendering process and the result will
never be exactly perfect, no matter how long you run
it.
Other interesting variations are Bidirectional Path-
tracing [LW93], where paths are simulated from
both the camera and the light, and Metropolis light
Transport(MLT) [VG97], where important paths are
reused for an even better performance in diﬃcult
scenes. A rather new addition to ﬁeld of path tracing
is Manifold Exploration Pathtracing, [JM12], which
similarly to MLT can reuse or explore paths in spec-
ular reﬂections and refractions giving even better per-
formance than MLT in scenes with lots of reﬂective
materials. However these techniques are specializing
in certain types of scenes, and would for other types
be overkill and spend too much time doing something
smart, where a dumb pathtracing would be enough.
1.4 Importance Sampling
Importance sampling is a general technique used for
random sampling, and is usually paired with Monte
Carlo estimations, such as pathtracing
General Idea:
The general idea behind impor-
tance sampling is that certain random samples of a
distribution have a higher contribution than others.
If these important values are sampled more often,
the error in the distribution estimate can be reduced.
However choosing these values more often will intro-
duce a bias, but by weighing their contribution with
the likelihood of them being selected, one can ensure
that the importance sampled estimate becomes unbi-
ased.
Having a good estimate for when a certain random
sample becomes important, will reduce the error in
the Monte Carlo estimate, which for pathtracing will
result in a less noisy image. However if the impor-
tance sampling gives greater importance to samples
with a low impact, the technique can result in even
more noise than just naive pathtracing.
Therefore
care has to be given when designing these measures
of importance.
Importance sampling Lights:
Similarly to how
importance sampling helps explore the important di-
rections of certain materials, it can also help reduce
noise when sampling lights using the NEE previously
mentioned, by giving a higher probability to lights
which has a higher impact on the scene. The most
common way to importance sample, is by scaling each
lights probability over the amount of energy it emits,
which is known as energy based importance sampling.
However as the energy for a light is a global measure,
the probability of selecting a light is independent of
the distance or orientation towards a given point in
space. As a result if two lights with a similar emitted
energy have a diﬀerent distance to a shading point,
they would still have the same probability of being
sampled, even though the close one would have a sig-
niﬁcantly higher contribution, as the energy received
is approximately following an inverse square falloﬀ.
As a consequence of this eﬀect, the energy based im-
portance samplings performs better for scenes with
only few lights or in presence of lights grouped to-
gether in one place, as their distance would then also
be similar.
In order to better scale the importance sampling with
a large amount of lights, one would need to ﬁgure out
Page 4
==PAGE:9==
Mathias Gammelmark
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
a way to dynamically estimate the probability of the
lights depending on the distance and orientation to-
wards the diﬀerent areas of the scene, which is what
will be examined throughout this thesis.
Page 5
==PAGE:10==
2.
Motivation
Baking Global illumination:
Unity is currently
using pathtracing for pre-computing (Baking) global
illumination into light-maps or light-probes. This en-
ables Unity to have an expensive global illumination
eﬀect, while still maintaining a high frame rate, at
the cost of a higher memory usage and longer pro-
duction time for the developers, as they now have to
bake the light-maps or light-probes themselves. The
pathtracing is a rather expensive computation tech-
nique, which simulates how light bounces on the sur-
faces of the scene, by recursively tracing rays to col-
lect the light reﬂected from all surfaces and sources
of lights. It is a stochastic algorithm, which has to
compute many samples for each pixel or probe in the
baked global illumination to get a good result. As the
complexity of a scene increases, so does the necessary
number of samples, leading to long waiting times for
the developers using Unity, resulting in a decreased
productivity.
Many Lights:
Having many lights has become in-
creasingly relevant in the pursuit of photorealistic
graphics, as real sources of light have a physical shape
which in many cases would have to be modelled us-
ing emissive meshes. As these meshes are often con-
structed from a collection of primitive shapes like tri-
angles, the meshes can quickly sum up to thousands
of emissive primitives. As the lights get more com-
plex, it becomes increasingly more diﬃcult to esti-
mate them analytically, and often each primitive will
have to be considered as an individual source of light.
Next Event Estimation:
At the time of this the-
sis, Unity is not using any smart sampling technique
for evaluating emissive geometry and has been rely-
ing on the naive pathtracing to capture their con-
tribution by randomly hitting an emissive triangle
by chance.
Using a technique such as Next Event
Estimation (NEE) can help to signiﬁcantly improve
the performance of the pathtracer, similarly to how
Unity’s analytical lights are evaluated, which works
by tracing a direct path to a random light, every time
the pathtracing hits a surface. Using NEE can help
reduce the noise generated in the resulting image, by
ensuring the paths are connected to sources of light,
instead of relying on the path to hit them random.
Random
Sampling:
When randomly sampling
the lights of a scene, it makes sense to have a higher
probability to select lights with a high contribution.
For this purpose Unity is using an energy based im-
portance sampling technique, where a lights probabil-
ity is determined by its emitted energy. This however
gives each light a constant probability to be selected,
independent of its distance and orientation towards a
given shading point. As a result, this technique scales
poorly with many lights, especially when these lights
are distributed throughout the whole scene, due to
lights far way with very little contribution being con-
sidered equal to those close by.
Light grid:
Unity is further using a light grid which
spans the whole scene and stores the important lights
for each cell. Culling all the lights which do not have
contribution, will both help performance, but also
the importance sampling, as each light has a higher
probability of being selected, giving a slight spatial
awareness.
This does however also introduce what
can become a signiﬁcant increase in memory, as each
light can overlap multiple cells, potentially leading to
many cells storing the same information.
Dynamic Importance Measure:
Being able to
dynamically evaluate the importance measure of the
individual lights, according to their distance and ori-
entation, might signiﬁcantly improve the performance
of the pathtracing, when having many lights, as their
probability to be selected can be more in line with
their actual contribution to the local areas of the
scene. For Unity such an importance measure would
mean a more dynamic rendering process, which can
handle more complex scenes with more lights. Fur-
ther using NEE with this measure might make Unity
able to better process emissive meshes, which have a
tendency to quickly increase the amount of lights. As
a result this would give more creative freedom to the
artists using Unity, as the amount of lights would no
longer have the same impact on performance.
Page 6
==PAGE:11==
3.
Goal
Emissive Triangles:
As emissive geometries are
not handled as analytical lights, Unity relies on naive
pathtracing to pick up their contribution by randomly
hitting its surface. By ﬁrst extracting the individual
triangles which has an emissive component, the geom-
etry can be represented using a collection of emissive
triangle lights. These emissive triangles lights, can
then be handled as the other analytical lights which
is already implemented in Unity, by the use of Next
Event Estimation(NEE).
Including emissive geometry along with these other
analytical lights might signiﬁcantly increase the
amount of lights in the scene, as these geometric
shapes could hold many thousands of triangles with
emissive components. For this reason a smarter tech-
nique for handling many lights is also necessary, to
reliably support the emissive geometry.
Dynamic Importance Measure:
Unity is cur-
rently using an energy based importance sampling
technique, which selects a single light with a prob-
ability according to its emitted energy.
This does
however not scale well with many lights and complex
scenes and a diﬀerent importance measure will there-
fore be investigated, which will estimate the lights
contribution per shading point, dependent on their
distance and orientation. This will help handle many
lights, as the probabilities of the individual lights is
more closely related to their actual importance for the
local areas of the scene. Furthermore by only chang-
ing the importance sampling technique, this solution
might be able to seamlessly plug into Unity’s existing
solution, with a minimal amount of work.
Requirements:
As Unity is currently baking the
global illumination using OpenCL on the GPU, the
proposed solution for the dynamic importance mea-
sure will also be implemented using OpenCL and
work well with the GPU architecture.
As a result
this solution will need to keep a low memory foot-
print, scale well with the number of lights and con-
sider the architecture of the GPU. Preprocessing of
the lights can be done on the CPU with a higher us-
age of memory, but has to be implemented with the
runtime in mind, to maintain the interactive baking
process.
Framework:
Due to practical issues, this project
will not be able to work within the code of Unity.
For this reason a framework which can imitate the
pathtracer currently being used in Unity, will also be
designed and implemented. However to minimize the
work in this area, the framework will be simpliﬁed as
much as possible, while still being comparable with
the actual pathtracer used in Unity. For this reason,
the decision was made to only include diﬀuse materi-
als without textures, to render from a camera’s per-
spective, to avoid dealing with lightmap and probes,
and to only consider one type of light (emissive tri-
angles).
3.1 Testing
To evaluate the proposed solution the quality of the
generated images versus the time spent to compute
them will be compared. The solution will be a suc-
cess, if it can achieve the similar or better quality
within a shorter amount of time.
Quality:
To evaluate the quality of a rendered im-
age, its deviation (error) from a reference image will
be measured, which will be generated using naive
pathtracing, run over a very long time to achieve a
near perfect result. This error is usually perceived as
noise in the image, where a smaller error is equal to
a less noisy image and a better quality.
Time:
Apart from measuring the total amount of
time it takes to compute an image, the individual as-
pects of the computation, such as tracing rays, shad-
ing materials, selecting lights and building data struc-
tures will also be measured. This will help when com-
paring the results with Unity more closely, as some
parts of this projects framework is simpliﬁed, their
time can perhaps have a diﬀerent impact on the per-
formance.
Page 7
==PAGE:12==
4.
Background
The goal of the project is partly divided in two steps,
the ﬁrst is to ﬁgure out how to extract and represent
the emissive geometry as triangular lights, and the
second is to ﬁgure out how to sample the many lights
generated from this extraction. To gain insights on
both subjects, it makes sense to take a quick look at
the background of random sampling and Monte Carlo
raytracing.
Perhaps the most fundamental formulation in the
ﬁeld of graphics is the rendering equation, ﬁrst pre-
sented in [Kaj86], which describes the light emitted
from a shading point x to a given direction ω.
LS(x, ω) = Le(x, ω)+
Z
Ω
ρ(x, ω, ω′)Li(x, ω′)(−ω′ · n)dω′
(4.1)
 The
emissive
term
Le(x, ω)
describes
the
amount of light emitted from the material of the
shading point x, such as the triangular sources
of light this thesis will examine.
 The material term ρ(x, ω, ω′), also often re-
ferred to as the Bidirectional Reﬂectance Dis-
tribution Function (BRDF), describes the how
large of a portion of the incoming light from
direction ω′ to the point x is being reﬂected to-
wards the direction ω.
 The visibility term Li(x, ω′) describes mow
much light is coming from the direction ω. This
introduces a recursive nature to the equation, as
this has to be evaluated with a new iteration of
the equation.
 The geometric term (−ω′·ˆn) describes the weak-
ening factor of outgoing irradiance, due to inci-
dent angle.
This is generally the equation physically-based ren-
derers are trying to solve, using techniques such as
pathtracing.
Further, more detailed versions exist, which take pa-
rameters such as wavelength and time into consider-
ation, as these are also an important aspect of how
light behaves and interacts with the world around it.
Monte Carlo Raytracing:
The paper [Kaj86],
further presented the pathtracing technique, as men-
tioned in chapter 1, which uses random sampling of
all the possible paths of light to evaluate global illumi-
nation. This random sampling however, is more pre-
cisely performed by random sampling of the incoming
directions in integral part of equation 4.1. Each ran-
dom sample then leads to a new evaluation of the
rendering equation, which again is estimated using
random sampling. The probability of reaching a cer-
tain point of a path, generated from a Markov chain
of events, can then be described as the product of the
initial state and the probabilities of all the previous
random samples.
4.1 Importance Sampling
The theory of importance sampling applies both to
discrete and continuos distributions, such as sampling
over the area of a hemisphere, as in the rendering
equation 4.1, or selecting between individual sources
of light in the next event estimation.
4.1.1 Random Sampling
Considering a distribution D, over which the integral
of f(X) is to be evaluated, the following equation can
be made. [Mar18]
I =
1
|D|
Z
D
f(x)dx
(4.2)
In the case where it is impractical or impossible to in-
tegrate f(x), the Monte Carlo estimation can be used
to make an estimated solution ˆIn by n evaluations of
f(xi) with uniform random samples xi from D.
ˆIn = 1
n
n
X
i=1
f(xi)
(4.3)
var(ˆIn) = V ar(f(X))
n
(4.4)
This estimation introduces an error, which is de-
scribed as the variance of the estimated value of X,
V ar(ˆIn). As the variance of the estimate both de-
pends on the variance of the distribution described by
Page 8
==PAGE:13==
Mathias Gammelmark
CHAPTER 4. BACKGROUND
f(x) and the number of samples, the error of the esti-
mate can be reduced, by either increasing the number
of samples, or by ﬁnding a way to lower the variance
of each sample of f(x).
4.1.2 Reducing Variance
The basic idea of importance sampling is to draw the
random samples from a diﬀerent probability distribu-
tion function g(x), to scale the probability of a sample
xi according to its contribution in f(xi).
I =
Z
D
f(x)
g(x) g(x)dx
(4.5)
By drawing the samples from g(X) the multiplied
g(x) is eﬀectively cancelled out, resulting in the esti-
mator:
ˆIn =
1
n|D|
n
X
i=1
f(xi)
g(xi)
(4.6)
Now g(x) can be modelled to reduce the variance. In-
deed the optimal solution would be to have g(x) =
f(x), as this would cancel out the variance com-
pletely. But as f(x) may be unknown, as it is be-
ing estimated, some guessing is required. By com-
ing up with a good guess for f(x), the variance can
be reduced signiﬁcantly, further as the guess comes
closer to f(x), the variance of the estimate will also
approach zero.
4.1.3 Smirnov Transform Sampling
When a ﬁtting probability density function g(x) is
found, random samples can be drawn via the Smirnov
Transform (or inverse transform sampling)[OT13;
Mar18]. This method ﬁrst constructs a Cumula-
tive Distribution Function(CDF) according to g(x),
which describes the accumulated probability of all
values of D until the point x, or in other words the
probability that a random variable X will take a value
less than or equal to x
CDF(x) = P(X ≤x)
(4.7)
By then inverting the CDF, we can then map an uni-
form random variable in the range [0, 1] to the distri-
bution of D with a probability described by g(x).
P(x)
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
Probability Density Function
(a)
P(x<X)
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Cumulative Distribution Function
(b)
Figure 4.1: Example probability density function (a)
with its related cumulative distribution function (b)
4.1.4 Discrete Function Sampling
Using this Smirnov transform, an importance sam-
pling scheme can be setup for sampling between n
lights, similarly to how Unity is currently sampling
the analytical lights. The ﬁrst step is to describe each
lights probability of being selected according to their
assigned weights, which can be done by scaling each
weight by the sum of all the weights.
P(x) =
wx
w0 + w1 + · · · + wn
(4.8)
The CDF for a light can then be found by accumu-
lating the probability of all lights in front of it.
CDF(x) =
x
X
i=0
p(i)
(4.9)
Then, to select a random light according to the CDF,
a random value ξ is generated within a range of [0, 1].
But as inverting a discrete function is not trivial, the
CDF is instead searched for an input x, such that
ξ = CDF(x).
Predecessor Search:
As the CDF is a monoton-
ically increasing function 1, the search can be re-
duced to a predecessor search in a sorted set, where a
common approach is a binary-search algorithm. The
predecessor to ξ then corresponds to the importance
sampled light, which is selected with a probability
described by equation 4.8.
4.2 Triangular Lights
Knowing how to sample lights according to a Prob-
ability Density Function(PDF), the next step is to
determine the individual contribution of lights, to fur-
ther determine their weight and probability to be se-
lected.
1always increasing when x is increased
Page 9
==PAGE:14==
Many Lights
Light Source Importance Sampling
As already mentioned, the ﬁrst goal of the project
is to represent the emissive geometry using triangu-
lar lights. The traditional rasterization only allows
GPUs to draw in the form of triangles, therefore most
geometries are already represented in this way. Fur-
ther, by reducing more complex shapes into triangles,
the complexity of working with the lights decreases,
as only a single type of shape has to be considered.
4.2.1 Area Lights
Considering an area-light with the area A and an ir-
radiance (emitted energy per square meter) Ee, the
total emitted energy can by found by P = A ∗Ee.
Assuming that the emission is uniform over all direc-
tions, we can ﬁnd the material radiance by dividing
over the solid angle2 of the unit hemisphere L = Ee
2π .
As the radiance can be used for both describing emit-
ted and received energy, we can further use Le to ﬁnd
the contribution at an arbitrary point x by comput-
ing the projected solid angle of A on the unit sphere
with its center in x.
Solid Angle:
Describing the exact solid angle for a
triangle is an expensive operation, for which an eﬃ-
cient solution was presented in [VS83]. This eﬃcient
solution does however still include 32 multiplications,
20 additions, 3 square roots and one atan2, which
becomes quite expensive as it have to be calculated
every time a triangular lights contribution needs to
be found.
Alternatively an approximate solution can be used,
which instead describes the solid angle by the pro-
jected area onto the direction of the light, which can
be described as A × (n · ω), where n is the normal
of the triangle and ω is a direction towards it from
shading point x. Using this approximated area, the
solid angle can be found roughly by:
Ω≈A × (n · ω)
r2
(4.10)
Where r is the distance to the triangle from x. Fur-
ther as the area is constant, it can be preprocessed
and stored to avoid a few more instructions at run-
time. The approximation works well for small or far
away light, but breaks down, when the distance ap-
proaches zero, as the solid angle then goes towards
inﬁnity.
4.2.2 Visibility
To ﬁnd the actual contribution of a light, calculat-
ing the irradiance towards the shading point is not
enough, as the visibility of the triangle is not consid-
ered.
To properly consider the visibility shirley [SWZ96]
presented Monte Carlo approach for estimating the
actual contribution of multiple primitive types of
lights, including triangles. This is achieved by draw-
ing uniformly distributed random samples over the
area, and for each sample estimate the contribution as
in section 4.2.1 along with the visibility of the random
point, by tracing a ray from the shading point. The
random position can be found by using the barycen-
tric coordinates, also described in [SWZ96], by using
two random numbers ξ0 and ξ1 and the range [0 −1],
under the condition that ξ0 + ξ1 <= 1
x = p0 + ξ0(p1 −p0) + ξ1(p2 −p0)
(4.11)
A downside to using Monte Carlo estimation for eval-
uating the individual lights, is that an additional vari-
ance is introduced, resulting in a more noisy image.
Solid Angle Sampling:
However, as the distance
from the shading point is not constant to all areas
of the triangle, some areas will have higher contribu-
tion than others. To accurately model this behavior,
the samples could alternatively be drawn from the
solid angle of the triangle instead. This has previ-
ously been shown to improve the sampling quality,
especially when getting closer to a source of light
[Gam16]. Further an algorithm for sampling trian-
gles using solid angle on a sphere has been presented
in [Arv95], using stratiﬁed sampling. But this might
still result in samples which are below the horizon of
the shading point, leading to samples being wasted,
due to the geometric term. Considering a projection
to the hemisphere instead of the sphere might ulti-
mately lead to a even better sampling quality.
4.3 Many Lights
The problem of rendering with many lights has been
around for some time, so naturally other solutions al-
ready exists, but what is the problem and how does
it relate to importance sampling?
2The solid angle is describing the ﬁeld of view an object occupies as seen from a speciﬁc point.
Page 10
==PAGE:15==
Mathias Gammelmark
CHAPTER 4. BACKGROUND
Near Optimal Sampling:
Disregarding the visi-
bility, an excellent PDF can be setup, by evaluating
the contribution of each light as described in section
4.2.1 which can be sampled using the Smirnov trans-
form presented in section 4.1.3.
However, as the contribution of a light depends highly
on distance and direction, the PDF and therefore
the CDF has to be re-constructed for every shading
point. This can become a signiﬁcant bottleneck both
in terms of time spent, but also space, as each shad-
ing point will need both linear time and space with
relation to the lights.
To achieve a more scalable sampling, a simpler PDF
can be constructed, which does not consider the spa-
tial information of the lights, thereby making the
probability density independent from the shading
point. As a result, the PDF and CDF can now be pre-
computed, resulting in a sub-linear sampling, which
only depends on the predecessor search in the dis-
crete distribution sampling scheme presented in sec-
tion 4.1.4.
However, as the PDF does not consider the spatial
information of the lights, the quality of the predicted
importance, will decrease as the scene variance goes
up. Or rather as the scene becomes more complex
and interesting, the worse the importance sampling
will perform. This does also mean that as the vari-
ance of the scene has decreased the performance goes
up, meaning the technique is still viable for many
lights, as long as the scene is not too complex.
Spheres of Inﬂuence:
A common optimization
used for realtime graphics, and also currently used
in Unity, is to give each light a sphere of inﬂuence,
by deﬁning a radius based on the intensity, as to
cut oﬀthe lights, when their contributions becomes
lower than a speciﬁed threshold. For larger scenes,
this can help to greatly reduce the amount of lights
considered per pixel, as small or distant lights will
be ignored. Pairing this technique with a datastruc-
ture for quickly queuing the appropriate lights, such
as Unity’s light-grid, can further improve the perfor-
mance, by avoiding the linear iteration over all lights.
Despite the spheres of inﬂuence being great for perfor-
mance, it also introduces a certain bias in the image,
by no longer considering the lights with low contribu-
tions. The bias introduced by the sphere of inﬂuence
is small and can be adjusted to not be easily visible.
However, as Paquettes pointed out in [PPD98], when
many smaller lights are clustered together, their col-
lective contribution, becomes equal to that of a larger
light, but the sphere of inﬂuence remain the same, re-
sulting in the collective contribution to seemingly cut
oﬀ, or become unnatural looking. See ﬁgure 4.2
Figure 4.2: Illustration of the sphere of inﬂuence. 4
small spheres representing small 4 small lights and a
large sphere representing the 4 lights as a cluster.
This becomes increasingly more important when
considering emissive geometry, consisting of many
smaller triangles, which are inherently grouped to-
gether and of low intensity. To properly estimate the
contribution of these groups of lights, the radii for
all lights have to be increased, eﬀectively canceling
out the beneﬁt of the sphere of inﬂuence, as all lights
become ’important’ for the whole scene.
Further, just iterating over all lights to ﬁgure out
whether to shade them or not, can itself be quite
the computation if it has to be multiplied with the
amount of pixels in the image. A diﬀerent technique
is therefore required, which doesn’t have the same
linear dependency on the amount of lights.
4.3.1 Sub-Linear Cost
In an eﬀort to reduce the linear cost of computing
the contribution of all lights, Paquettes presented a
hierarchical approach [PPD98], later reﬁned by the
lightcuts algorithm in [Wal+05]. The technique is ef-
fectively grouping lights together according to a sim-
ilarity metric, to reduce the amount of computations,
as clusters are considered as a single source. Both
techniques are using a hierarchical datastructure also
referred to as the lighttree. The leaves of this tree rep-
resents the lights, while the internal nodes are clus-
ters of all the lights in the subtrees below it, as seen
in ﬁgure 4.3.
Page 11
==PAGE:16==
Hierarchical Sampling
Light Source Importance Sampling
Clusters
Ligths
Figure 4.3: Illustration of the lighttree, showing what
part of the tree contains clusters and what part con-
tains individual lights.
Tree Construction:
To dynamically evaluate the
clusters per shading point the lighttree is constructed
such that leaves contains all lights, and as the tree
splits the clusters get continuously more reﬁned and
precise. The construction of the tree is done once,
prior to rendering, and is achieved with a bottom up
approach, which progressively merges the two most
similar clusters, until only one remains, which then
represents the root of the lighttree.
Cluster Representation:
Each of these internal
nodes then contains a virtual point light, which rep-
resent the collective contribution for all the lights of
the subtree. Each virtual light is found by summing
the intensities of the lights it represents and a position
is determined by a weighted average of the lights po-
sitions, according to their individual intensities. Ad-
ditionally a bounding box is found, which is used for
estimating a conservative error-bound for using the
virtual light over considering all lights in the cluster
individually.
Cluster Reﬁnement:
The dynamic cut, can then
be reﬁned per shading point, by starting a reﬁnement
of the clusters from the root node. Each reﬁnement
will split a cluster into its direct sub-clusters, which
eﬀectively increases the number of light evaluations
necessary, but also improves the quality of the esti-
mate. The progressive reﬁnement of the worst cluster
will then be continued until the total error of the cut
is below a predeﬁned percentage (usually 2%), or the
maximum number of clusters is reached. When the
threshold for the total error is reached, the algorithm
is guaranteeing that the error of the estimated con-
tribution is less than or equal to the speciﬁed error
threshold.
4.4 Hierarchical Sampling
Similar to how the lighttree oﬀers a way to esti-
mate the contribution of a large amount of lights in
a strongly sub-linear fashion, it can also be used to
break the importance sampling of many lights into a
series of binary choices, each culling a large portion of
the remaining lights. This was presented in [CK18]
and later in [Yuk19], where an importance density
is constructed by predicting the maximum possible
contribution for a given cluster.
Importance Measure:
The predicted contribu-
tion both considers the spatial and orientational
bounds for the lights in the form of a bounding box
and a bounding cone, along with the accumulated
intensity.
This information is used to approximate
the distance and the angle towards any light inside
the cluster, making a much more reliable and precise
prediction. [Yuk19] Further, the prediction is reﬁned
by changing the importance measure when the shad-
ing point was too close to the clusters, completely
avoiding singularities, when the distance approaches
zero.
Hierachy Traversal:
To select a light, the hier-
archy can then be traversed by recursively selecting
between two child nodes, until a cluster only contains
a single light. At each step the probability is carried
over to keep track of the chance for selecting that spe-
ciﬁc path through the tree. The ﬁnal probability for
the selected light, can then be described as the prod-
uct of the probability for all the choices made on the
way.
P1
P2
P4
P3
Figure 4.4: Lighttree Traversal Illustration. The val-
ues p1, p2, p3 and p4 is the probabilities of each event
in the markov chain representing probability of select-
ing a light.
Page 12
==PAGE:17==
Mathias Gammelmark
CHAPTER 4. BACKGROUND
Lighttree
Construction:
Diﬀerently from the
previous presented lighttree [CK18] uses a SAH-BVH
construction scheme, with an adapted heuristic called
the Surface Area Orientation Heuristic (SAOH),
where the whole cluster of lights is recursively split
into smaller and smaller clusters, until only a single
light is present or a threshold is met. The heuristic
helps to select where to split the volume of the lights,
but can become quite expensive, if considered for all
splits.
To avoid considering all possible splits, the build pro-
cess is leveraging a binning technique presented in
[Wal07], which can help to signiﬁcantly reduce the
complexity of ﬁnding near optimal splits.
Tree splitting:
As it was noticed that the esti-
mates of the cluster importance was poor in the high
levels of the tree, an adaptive splitting approach was
further introduced in [CK18], to force the exploration
of the internal nodes until the estimated importance
of clusters was suﬃciently representative of its lights.
[Yuk19] however, combined the stochastic sampling
with the lightcuts approach, where it was used to se-
lect the representative light when the cut was reﬁned
enough.
Further Work:
Further work has gone into explor-
ing the importance sampling technique using a light
hierarchy. Notably [LXY19] who selects lights accord-
ing to the BRDF contribution, showing improvements
in handling specular materials. [MC19], explains in
detail how to use the importance sampling presented
in [CK18] on the GPU. Finally [Yuk19] presents a
combined technique of lightcut, where the represen-
tative light is selected using stochastic random sam-
pling, using similar importance measures.
Page 13
==PAGE:18==
5.
Method
The other hierarchy approaches [CK18; Yuk19] show
great results, especially when representing scenes
with many oriented lights, such as triangles. They
do however, rely on selecting multiple lights to get a
good representation of the higher levels of the light-
tree.
By having the same return value as the old impor-
tance sampling, it can be guaranteed that any han-
dling of the lights after the sampling is done, will
remain the same. This means that only a single light
can be selected.
Before going into the importance sampling, a brief in-
troduction on how the triangular lights are extracted
and treated will be presented.
5.1 Triangular Lights
The geometry of this project consists of a collection of
triangles. Each triangle is represented with a material
and 3 vertices, where each one contains information
such as position, normal and uv-coordinates. When
rendering the geometry, the attributes for a point on
a triangle can then be found by interpolating the in-
formation from all of these vertices. When loading
the scene geometry, the material of each triangle is
examined, to determine if they contain an emissive
component. If this is the case, the id of that trian-
gle is stored and later used to construct a triangular
light. Each triangular light is being represented by a
single position and two edges, as to simplify the later
calculations.
In addition, it was decided to use the geometric nor-
mal instead of the interpolated normals from the ge-
ometry, to avoid having to deal with varying normals
over an area-light, that might have complicated the
calculation of the contribution later on. As the geo-
metric normal can be found by the cross-product of
the two edges in the representation, storing it can be
avoided, saving a bit of space.
Barycentric Sampling:
To quickly get something
up and running, it was decided to use barycentric
sampling, as described earlier by [SWZ96], where uni-
formly distributed random points on the triangles can
be found, by mapping two random numbers ξ0 and
ξ1, using equation 5.1.
x = p0 + ξ0(p1 −p0) + ξ1(p2 −p0)
(5.1)
However, as mentioned in section 4.2.2 the two ran-
dom numbers need to fulﬁll the condition ξ0 +ξ1 ≤1.
This can easily be achieved by rejecting the numbers
and repeatedly generating new numbers until the con-
dition is met, but a smarter, more logical solution
can also be found.
If the condition is not consid-
ered, the sampling method would generate positions
on the parallelogram which is spanned by the two
edges, as seen in ﬁgure (5.1). This condition is ef-
fectively restricting the samples to the colored area
which represents the triangle. If the condition is not
met, the points will be uniformly distributed in the
inverted triangle, which represents the other part of
the parallelogram.
P0
P1
P2
A
B
Figure
5.1:
Visualization
of
the
parallelogram
spanned by the two edges of the triangle.
A repre-
sents the area where the condition for equation 5.1 is
met, and B represents the samples where it is not
By then inverting the samples landing in the other
part of the parallelogram, we can intuitively re-
project the rejected samples into the desired range,
by subtracting the random numbers from 1. From
the above mentioned method, we can then construct
an eﬀective sampling technique as seen in listing 5.1,
Page 14
==PAGE:19==
Mathias Gammelmark
CHAPTER 5. METHOD
where p0 is the position of the triangles ﬁrst corner
and e0 and e1 are the stored edges of the triangle.
1 point sample_barycentric (p0,e0,e1,ξ0,ξ1){
2
if (ξ0 + ξ1 >= 1){
3
ξ0 = 1 −ξ0;
4
ξ1 = 1 −ξ1;
5
}
6
return p0 + ξ0e0 + ξ1e1;
7 }
Listing 5.1: Phseudo code showing how to sample a
triangle using barycentric coordinates
As further mentioned in section 4.2.2, solid angles
sampling could also be used, which samples the trian-
gles according to their occupying space on the hemi-
sphere around the shading point. As this is a compli-
cated task, it will be not be pursued in this project.
Contribution:
The contribution of an area-light is
dependent on the solid angle spanned by the area and
the lights radiance, as described in section 4.2.1. Fur-
thermore, the precise solid angle of a triangle can be
found using the algorithm presented in [VS83]. How-
ever this technique is rather expensive, and it is there-
fore also interesting to see if the approximated solid
angles found by 5.2, can be used eﬀectively, without
introducing too much error.
Ω≈A ∗cos(θ)
d2
(5.2)
For this reason, both methods will be used, and it
will be determined whether it is worth spending more
time to ﬁnd the precise solid angle or if the rough ap-
proximation can be used instead.
5.2 Lighttree
The hierarchical light structure (lighttree), serves a
vital part in reducing the algorithmic time complex-
ity of the importance sampling to sub-linear. Further-
more as the predicted contribution of the individual
clusters are highly dependent on the tightness of the
bounds and on how well the lights are combined ac-
cording to similarity, it is important to use a good
strategy for constructing the lighttree. It is also im-
portant to consider the time spent on constructing
the lighttree, as Unity is an interactive application.
Therefore having a faster construction may be prefer-
able over better quality.
The lighttree used for this project, is entirely based
on the lighttree presented in [CK18], due to the high
similarity in goal and great representation of oriented
lights.
Some further considerations are later intro-
duced in the traversal algorithm, to better adapt to
the GPU environment and special case of triangle
lights. Before going into that, the general layout on
the construction of the tree is described.
5.2.1 Cluster Information
Each cluster is represented with a axis aligned bound-
ing box and a bounding cone, which respectively rep-
resents the spatial and orientation bounds of the con-
tained lights. Furthermore, the accumulated energy
is stored along with the IDs of the two child clusters,
which later is used for traversal.
The bounding box used for mapping the spatial
bounds is commonly used for ray tracing and other
applications, as it can easily be computed using min
and max operations.
The bounding cone is represented as an axis and two
bounding angles θo and θe. θo describes the maximum
angle any normal within the cone would deviate from
the axis. As each triangle is considered as a ﬂat emit-
ter, their individual θ0 would be 0 and the axis would
be equal to their normal. θe describes the emission
proﬁle, which is used to determine the maximum an-
gle from the normal the lights would still have an
impact. However, as the triangles are considered as
standard area-lights, their emission proﬁle would be
static at π/2 and could therefore be omitted in the
cluster bound. It is however kept, in case other types
of lights are added in the future.
axis
θ e
θ o
Figure 5.2: 2D visualization of the bounding cone.
where the darker part represents the bound for the
light directions and the lighter area represents the
bound for the emission proﬁle, which in this case is
π/2 as all lights are considered as area lights.
Page 15
==PAGE:20==
Lighttree
Light Source Importance Sampling
Cluster Merging:
A cluster’s bounds are found
by merging the bounds of all lights inside it, mak-
ing it important to have an eﬀective way of ﬁnding
the union. The spatial bound is trivial and can be
found by a minimum and maximum operation and
doesn’t need much further explanation. An algorithm
for computing the bounding cone was presented in
[CK18], which is summarized in listing 5.2.
1 cone
union_cone(cone a, cone b)
2 {
3
if (b.θo > a.θo) {
4
swap(a, b);
5
}
6
θd = acos(a.axis · b.axis);
7
thetae = max(a.θe, b.θe);
8
if (min(θd + b.θo, π) <= a.θo) {
9
return
make_cone(a.axis, a.θo, θe);
10
}
11
else {
12
θo = (a.θo + θd + b.θo)/2;
13
if (pi <= θo) {
14
return
make_cone(a.axis, π, θe);
15
}
16
θr = θo −a.θo;
17
axis = rotate(a.axis, θr, a.axis × b.axis));
18
return
make_cone(axis, θo, θe);
19
}
20 }
Listing 5.2: Phseudo code showing the union of two
bounding cones
The general idea of the algorithm is to compute a new
axis and θo to cover all directions of the contained
lights. This is done by rotating the axis as to mini-
mize the required angle, to cover the two cones, which
are being merged. The algorithm is not strictly ﬁnd-
ing the minimum bounding cone as in [BE05], but it
is a faster alternative, which can provide bounds that
are good enough in practice.
5.2.2 Tree Construction
The lighttree construction is, as mentioned earlier,
also based on what has been presented in [CK18],
which uses a fast binning technique presented in
[Wal07]. This was chosen as the used technique
mainly because it provides the opportunity to test the
lighttree with a varying quality, by changing the num-
ber of bins used. Additionally, the technique provides
faster build times, which are more inline with the in-
teractive nature of Unity. Further, as the project also
includes coding a framework for raytracing, the tree
construction can be reused for building the accelera-
tion structure for the intersection testing of geometry
and rays.
The overall concept of the tree construction is to ini-
tially represent all lights in a single cluster, which is
the root of the tree. This root cluster is then recur-
sively subdivided to represent the diﬀerent levels of
the hierarchy, using a heuristic function, which helps
determine the best way to split the clusters.
The
heuristic function is modelled to both reward spacial
similarity of the lights, as well as clusters with lights
facing the same direction, as further explained in sec-
tion 5.2.3.
A naive approach to ﬁnding the best split, would be
to check all possibilities in a full sweep of the clus-
ters. However, this becomes a rather time consuming
operation, and it is not suited for many lights, as the
running-time would increase heavily with the num-
bers of lights.
To alleviate this problem, the spatial binning tech-
nique instead considers k possible splits along an axis
i, which is evenly distributed on the range of the spa-
tial bound, deﬁned by the ith axis of the bounding
box. As described in details in [Wal07]. The computa-
tion time is then signiﬁcantly reduced, as the amount
of splits considered is constant, but the quality of the
tree also suﬀers, as not all possible splits are consid-
ered. Furthermore, this provides the opportunity to
vary the quality of the lighttree, by changing k, as
this would increase the amount of splits considered,
increasing the chance to ﬁnd a lower cost. Addition-
ally, the search for the best split is performed over
all spatial axi instead of just the widest length of the
bounding box. This is done to enable the algorithm
to ﬁnd a better potential split, according to the ori-
entation as well.
Memory:
Finally as to make the solution more
suited to the GPU architecture, the datastructure
will be packed in a continuos memory buﬀer. This
is achieved by storing the clusters in an array, and
then have the children IDs point to the index of the
child clusters.
It is also worth mentioning that since a binary tree is
used, the ﬁnal amount of internal nodes will be max-
imum N −1, where N is the total amount of lights,
or leaf nodes in the tree. Further, as the termina-
tion is limited to when a single light is present in a
cluster, the N −1 will describe the exact amount of
internal nodes, making it possible to precisely predict
the amount of clusters in the tree to 2N −1.
Page 16
==PAGE:21==
Mathias Gammelmark
CHAPTER 5. METHOD
5.2.3 Cost Function
The adapted area heuristic function mentioned earlier
is trying to reward clusters with lights.
To focus on clusters with similar oriented lights, the
standard Surface Area Heuristic(SAH) is adapted to
a Surface Area Orientation Heuristic(SAOH), which
also considers an area measure for the bounding cone.
The speciﬁc cone area measure can be found in equa-
tion 5.4, but can also be found in [CK18], where it is
explained in greater detail.
The standard SAH heuristic determines the cost of
a cluster as the surface area of the spatial bounding
box.
The surface area is a simple heuristic, which
helps to minimize the size of the bounding boxes, as
any changes to each axis would have linear response
in the cost.
Csplit = Kr
ELMA(L)MΩ(L) + ERMA(R)MΩ(R)
MAMΩ
(5.3)
The spatial measure MA is found by the surface area
of the spatial bound of a cluster. The surface area is
a simple heuristic, which helps to minimize the size
of the bounding boxes, as any changes to each axis
would have linear response in the cost. The orienta-
tion measure MΩis expressed as a solid angle measure
of the bounding cone, which is seen in equation 5.4.
This is further described in detail in [CK18], which
also explains the reasoning behind the equation.
MΩ= 2π(1 −cos θO)+
π
2

2θw sin θO−cos(θO−2θw)−2θO sin θO+cos θO

(5.4)
where θw is found by min(θO + θe, π) The energy
term E is found by the accumulated energy emitted
by the lights in a cluster and additionally a regular-
ization factor is presented, to prevent thin boxes, by
penalizing splits in an already small dimension.
Kr(i) = lengthmax
lengthi
(5.5)
In the paper, the tree cluster splitting is terminated
by either having single light, or by ﬁnding a cluster
where the splitting cost is never better than just pro-
ducing a leaf with multiple lights. which is mentioned
to be the case where the cost is equal to the accumu-
lated energy of the cluster.
Cleaf = Ec
(5.6)
However, in order to simplify the traversal algorithm,
the later condition is omitted for now so to avoid han-
dling multiple lights in a single leaf, as this would
require an additional sampling technique built inside
the traversal. However this might be a future task,
which can help reduce the variance in the ﬁnal esti-
mation.
5.3 Tree Traversal
The traversal algorithm starts from the root of the
lighttree and slowly moves towards the bottom, as
described in section 4.4. To ﬁgure out which child
cluster to select, a weight is determined for both clus-
ters, which is evaluated using an importance function,
which eﬀectively computes the potential contribution
for both clusters. When a weight is determined for
both clusters, a probability can be found by scaling
each weight with the total sum, similar to the inverse
transform presented in 4.1.3.
As this choice is bi-
nary, it can be expressed with a single probability of
selecting one cluster over another.
pj =
wj
wj + wk
(5.7)
The selection is determined by a random number ξ
and by testing whether or not it is lower than the
probability of selection the ﬁrst cluster ξ < pj. The
random number is reused to avoid generating a new
one, which can become rather expensive, as some ran-
dom number schemes rely on texture or buﬀer lookup,
such as blue noise sampling[GF16]. When the choice
is made, the random number ξ is known to lie within
either [0, p] or [p, 1], as either choice would reveal
which range it located in.
Thus, to reuse the ran-
dom number for the next iteration, it is rescaled to
again ﬁt within the range [0, 1], as seen in listing 5.3.
It should be considered that every time the random
number is re-scaled, it looses a bit of precision. For
this project a 64bit ﬂoating point is used, as the pre-
cision is more than enough to traverse the trees used
for testing in this project.
Furthermore a probability density function is being
kept track of along the way, which contains the ﬁ-
nal probability of the markov chain of events that
has led to a certain light being selected. When one
cluster is selected over another, the process is then
repeated for the selected cluster, until a leaf node is
found. When the leaf is found there is only a single
light left, as per the termination condition from sec-
tion 5.2.2. This ﬁnal light can then be returned from
Page 17
==PAGE:22==
Tree Traversal
Light Source Importance Sampling
the function along with the PDF, which represents
the probability of selecting that speciﬁc light. The
whole traversal algorithm can be seen in listing 5.3,
along with how the random number is rescaled to the
range [0, 1].
Avoiding Recursion:
It is worth mentioning that
the traversal algorithm is originally presented as a
recursive function in [CK18] However recursion does
not generally suit the GPU architecture as further ex-
plained in section 6.1. Instead the recursion can be
converted into a while loop, which also has been done
in [Yuk19] and as seen in listing 5.3.
1 (light , pdf) pick_light(T , x, ξ)
2
PDF = 1
3
while (j is not
leaf) {
4
Il = importance(T.left, x);
5
Ir = importance(T.right, x);
6
7
pl = Il/(Il + Ir);
8
pr = Ir/(Il + Ir);
9
10
if (ξ < pl){
11
ξ = ξ/pl;
12
T = T.left;
13
PDF = PDF ∗pl;
14
} else {
15
ξ = (ξ −pl)/pr;
16
T = T.right;
17
PDF = PDF ∗pr;
18
}
19
}
20
i = T.light;
21
return (i, PDF);
22 }
Listing 5.3: Lighttree traversal algortihm
5.3.1 Importance Measure
The weight, or importance measure, of each cluster
is found by equation 5.8, which also draws its inspi-
ration from [CK18]. The same parameters are being
used, such as θ′
i = max(θi−θu, 0) being the minimum
incident angle and θ′ = max(θ −θo −θu, 0) being the
minimum angle any triangles normal would form with
the direction towards the shading point x.
θ
θ
θ
u
θi
θ
0
axis
Figure 5.3: Visualization of the angles used for evalu-
ating the cluster importance. Blue being the incident
angle, Red being the uncertainty angle, green being the
bounding angle for the light directions and pink being
the angle between the direction towards the center and
the axis of the bounding cone.
The uncertainty angle θu is the minimum angle of
cone that would be able to cover the entire bounding
box, as seen from the shading point. How this will be
achieved will be further explained later on. θi is the
incident angle to the center of the cluster from the
shading point x and can be found as the dot-product
of the normal and the direction to the center. The
material term fa| cos θ′
i|E is reused from the origi-
nally presented importance measure, as the materials
is limited to the diﬀuse type, which the term is mod-
elled after. If other types of materials are added in the
future, it would deﬁnitely make sense to investigate
a more representative BRDF.
Ijk = fa| cos θ′
i|EΛjk ×
(
cos(θ′)
θ′ < θe
0
otherwise
(5.8)
The equation describes the importance of a cluster j,
when considering both j and k. fa is in this case the
materials’ diﬀuse component, where | cos θ′
i| acts as
the geometric term limiting the incoming energy E.
The energy term E is further originally presented as
the maximum emitted energy over the emitted area,
but as the triangles all have the same emission proﬁle,
this has been omitted.
The minimum incident angle to the shading point
x from any point inside the bounding box, is repre-
sented by θ′
i. Then, as the incident angle θi describes
the incident angle to x from the center of the box,
and the uncertainty angle θu describes the maximum
angle any point can have to this direction, the min-
imum angle θ′
i can be found as their diﬀerence. See
ﬁgure 5.4a
Considering the angle θ between the axis of the
Page 18
==PAGE:23==
Mathias Gammelmark
CHAPTER 5. METHOD
bounding cone and the direction to x from the cen-
ter of the bounding box. The minimum angle from a
light which is placed in the center, can be described
by θ −θo as θo describes the potential angle from the
axis any light direction could have in the cluster. To
then further consider a light placed arbitrarily inside
the cluster, the uncertainty angle further has to be
subtracted, to account for the introduced angle, by
moving to the edge of the bounding box. This can
also be considered as rotating the point x, from the
perspective of the bounding cone, see ﬁgure 5.4b
θu
θi
θ'
C
(a)
axis
θ
θ
θ'
u
x
(b)
Figure 5.4: (a) Illustration of the minimum incident
angle to any point inside the bounding box. (b) Illus-
tration of the minimum angle from a lights normal to
the shading point x.
Attenuation Term:
The attenuation term is go-
ing to be constructed in multiple diﬀerent ways, as it
is not clear which techniques are most suited, due to
the introduced techniques often being accompanied
by something else.
They all have arguments as to
why they represent the cluster better, which is why
it has been decided to test all of them, and let the
results speak for themselves.
 (Center distance) The ﬁrst technique which
was introduces in [CK18], is the usual inverse
square falloﬀ, which is calculated to the center
of the bounding box. This term acts as an av-
erage distance to any point inside the bounding
box, and therefore would return the average at-
tenuation for any contained lights, and not the
maximum attenuation.
 (Min Distance) The second technique, which
was introduced in [Yuk19], is using the mini-
mum distance to the clusters to ﬁnd the atten-
uation. The equation still uses the inverse sqr
distance, to ﬁnd the contribution, which leads
to a maximum contribution instead of the aver-
age from the center distance. However, in the
case where the shading point x is contained in
one of the boxes, its attenuation term would be
evaluated to inﬁnity.
Further the probability
of selecting a cluster is scaled by its estimated
contribution, which would mean that an inﬁnite
attenuation term would result in a 100% chance
of selecting that cluster over the other, even
though their contribution might be equal. To
counteract this eﬀect a conditional statement
has been introduced, which checks if the shad-
ing point x is too close to any of them. This has
been argued to better represent the higher levels
of the tree, but as the term evaluates to a con-
stant when the point is too close, some spacial
information is lost, which might be important
for the estimation later on.
Λij =



1
dmin
i
dmin
i
> αli ∧dmin
j
> αlj
1
otherwise
(5.9)
 (ZeroCheck) In an eﬀort to maintain some of
the spatial information, while using the mini-
mum distance, an alternative measure is taken,
when the condition in equation 5.9 is false. The
idea is to simply add a small constant to the
minimum distance, to eﬀectively push x to a
safe distance, where the term no longer evalu-
ates to inﬁnity.
Further to simplify measure,
the condition has been changed to check if the
minimum distance is zero, as this might help
speed up the evaluation a bit.
Λij =







1
(dmin
i
)2
dmin
i
> 0 ∧dmin
j
> 0
1
k + (dmin
i
)2
otherwise
(5.10)
As the optimal value of k will depend on the
scale of the scene, it has in this case been de-
cided to scale k according to the size of the
bounding box, or rather half its diagonal. The
term might not be perfect, but might work as a
middle ground between the two others.
For the purpose of the project all three options are
considered and the results will show which approach
yields the best results in terms of quality and perfor-
mance.
Page 19
==PAGE:24==
Tree Traversal
Light Source Importance Sampling
Uncertainty Angle:
The uncertainty angle θu is
found by brute force, but it will deﬁnitely make sense
to optimize this in the future, as the operation is
performed many times per shading point. The cal-
culation ﬁrst tests if the point x is contained in the
bounding box, in which case a light could just as well
be behind x and therefore π is returned. If x is not
contained, it is found as the maximum angle to all the
corners of the bounding box, by iteration over each
of them and calculating the angle. This angle can be
describes as the dot product between the directions
to the center and to the corner of the box.
cos(θ) = center −x
|center −x| · corner −x
|corner −x|
(5.11)
However as this requires the normalization of a vec-
tor, this becomes a rather expensive operation to per-
form for each corner. Instead, to reduce the amount
of operation done per corner of the bounding box, the
angle is found by the cosine law as seen in equation
5.12, based on the length of the edges a = corner−x,
b = corner −center and c = center −x, as seen in
ﬁgure 5.5.
b
a
c
  θU0
Figure 5.5: 2D Visualization of how the triangle is
arranged for ﬁnding the angle to one of the corners
of the bounding box. This process is then performed
on all 8 corners of the bounding box.
cos θ = |c|2 + |a|2 −|b|2
2|c||a|
(5.12)
Further as the length of b and c remain constant over
all corners, they only have to be computed once, and
the constant terms of equation 5.12 can be replaced
with α = |c|2 −|b|2 and β = 2|c|, as described in
equation 5.13.
cos θ = α + |a|2
β|a|
(5.13)
While computing the cos(θ) to each corner, there
is kept track of the minimum, as it represents the
biggest angle. When all corners has been computed,
the angle is returned by the arccos to the minimum
cos θ.
Approximate Angle:
Alternatively to the brute
force method, this project will also consider an ap-
proximate angle, which is found by considering the
bounding box as a sphere with a radius equal to half
the diagonal and center in the center in the box. The
maximum angle to the sphere can then be found as
the tangent angle, which would always be equal or
higher than the actual θu to the box.
Figure 5.6: Finding the approximate angle for θu by
the tangent angle to the bounding sphere which com-
pletely surrounds the bounding box.
This approach would consistently overestimate the
uncertainty angle, which would result in overestimat-
ing the contribution of each cluster, leading to the
exploration of the branches, which might not have
as high of a contribution as estimated. Furthermore,
the precision of the approximation highly depends on
the shape of the bounding box, as long and thin boxes
could have a signiﬁcant overestimation, since their di-
agonal is signiﬁcantly higher than their shortest side.
However due to the regularization factor in the tree
construction it could be assumed that the bounding
boxes would tend to have a more regular shape. The
advantage of using the approximate angle instead of
the precise angle, is that it can be computed using
less instructions and should result in a faster traver-
sal of the lighttree.
Whether it would make sense
to use the approximation then depends on whether
the speedup can outweigh the potential decrease in
sampling quality.
Page 20
==PAGE:25==
6.
Implementation
The framework which is written alongside this
project, is modelled after the general pipeline of
Unity’s pathtracer used for light baking, as to be as
similar as possible, so the results are still fairly com-
parable.
This chapter aims to shortly explain the
overall design and implementation of the framework.
Some distinctions are further made, as this projects
framework is considering rendering from a camera
perspective, where the light-baking process in Unity
is rendering lightmaps, which are applied to the 3D
models of the scene. As a result the initial prepara-
tion of light paths and ﬁnal gathering of the results
will work diﬀerently.
6.1 Pathtracing
The pathtracing is as mentioned earlier performed on
the GPU, as to accelerate and make the baking pro-
cess more interactive. To fully explain the explain the
reasoning of certain decision, it makes sense to take
a quick look at normal GPU architecture.
GPU Architecture:
Standard GPUs are achiev-
ing massively parallel execution by utilizing a Single
Instruction Multiple Data(SIMD) structure, which
is executing the same instructions on multiple points
of data at the same time, as also described in
the whitepaper for the Nvidia Turing architecture
[NVI18], which is what has been used throughout this
project in the form of the 2080 series graphics card.
This eﬀectively groups threads together in a lock-step
execution and helps to signiﬁcantly reducing instruc-
tion fetching, while also increasing the computational
density.1 To support diverging control-ﬂows, like if-
else statements or loops, a variation of the SIMD
structure called Single Instruction Multiple Threads
(SIMT) was introduced [NVI09], where masking is
used to activate and deactivate threads, depending
on whether or not they’re taking a speciﬁc path in
the code. This does however mean that threads more
often than not have to execute both branches of a con-
ditional statement, in the case that at least one thread
decides to go another way than the rest. Therefore it
is important to design code to minimize the amount
of branching within a group of threads, to fully uti-
lize the SIMD execution and to avoid having threads
waiting around.
Kernel partitioning:
The pathtracing is divided
into smaller sections called kernels, which each takes
care of their own part of the pathtracing, as to bet-
ter utilize the GPU architecture. This division is one
way to help assure a better coherency between the
groups of threads and has previously been examined
in [LKA13], where results have shown speedups be-
tween 36% and 211% by dividing the algorithm into
multiple separate specialized kernels.
It should be
mentioned that the partition in this paper is slightly
diﬀerent from that of Unity, as each material is han-
dled in a separate kernel, leading to a perhaps even
better performance than Unity, also opening up an in-
teresting future development. Furthermore local co-
herency is also important to consider, and can usu-
ally help to improve performance, but this lower level
branching can often be mitigated by the compiler.
Recursion:
An important consideration when de-
signing algorithms for the GPU is that recursion is
not widely supported, and early compilers are sim-
ply inlining functions instead of calling them.
Re-
cursion is in fact not supported in OpenCL 1.2, as
documented in [Aaf12], making it impossible for this
project to use it.
This means that all algorithms
which are primarily recursively, will have to be recon-
structed to work in an iterative manner, using looping
and manual stack allocation. Further GPUs usually
don’t have any dynamic stack, and is usually limited
to registers and local memory, so all memory which
is needed, have to be allocated in advance. Finally
some platforms have hard limits for how much time
can be spent in execution of single kernels, leading
the crashes if the kernels take too much time.
1computational density referring to having a larger amount of compute units relative to the amount control logic, as all threads
in the group share the same controller.
Page 21
==PAGE:26==
Pathtracing
Light Source Importance Sampling
6.1.1 Kernels
There is a total of six kernels, which each roughly
translate to a part of the Unity lightmapper as de-
scribed in [Gui19]. The kernels are fairly optimized
for their individual task, but have in general drawn a
lot of inspiration from the Unity implementation, to
ensure a similar environment for testing the hierar-
chical importance sampling.
- Prepare Kernel:
The ﬁrst kernel is preparing
the initial data for the paths, according to the cam-
era input and generates all the necessary samples and
resetting of buﬀers for a single pass. An example of
such a buﬀer which needs to be reset every pass is
the result buﬀer, which accumulates the contribution
for each path. The kernel is expected to have a con-
stant time, as it is only initializing the data once per
sample.
- Tracing Kernel:
The second kernel is tracing
the paths, which computes the closest intersection
with the geometry using a Bounding Volume Hierar-
chy(BVH). This kernel is expected to scale according
the complexity of the geometry and will be explained
a bit further in section 6.2.
- Shading Kernel:
The shading kernel, is where
the main part of the pathtracing algorithm is placed.
Initially it checks what geometry has been hit (if any)
and then either looks up the environment value and
returns or fetches the materials of hit geometry and
calculates the BRDF of the shading point and the
throughput of the path. Next it selects a light ac-
cording to the used importance sampling technique,
for use in the Next Event Estimation(NEE). The con-
tribution of the selected light is then calculated and
a shadow ray it prepared for later testing in the oc-
clusion kernel and its potential contribution is stored
in case it is not occluded. Lastly if more bounces are
planned, the next direction is samples according to
the BRDF, which in this case just is cosine weighted
sampling from the normal, and the direction is used
to prepare a ray for later test.
This kernel would
have a constant time for the naive approach, but as
both the energy sampling and hierarchical sampling
techniques relies on binary search to select a light, it
will for the most part be expected to scale with the
number of lights.
- Occlusion Kernel:
The occlusion kernel takes
care of testing the visibility of the selected lights from
the NEE and is expected to scale with the geometry
in the same way as the tracing kernel, as it also has
to iterate through the BVH.
- Occlusion Processing Kernel:
The occlusion
processing kernel takes the results from the occlu-
sion testing and applies the lights contribution, which
was stored in the shading kernel, to the corresponding
sample if it is visible.
- Result Processing Kernel:
The process result
kernel takes care of collecting the contribution from
each sample and apply them the their correspond-
ing pixels in the pixel buﬀer, which can then later be
draw to the screen as a texture.
When the processing of the results are complete then
one bounce of the paths are computed, and the
process is repeated from the tracing kernel to al-
low further bounces, as seen in ﬁgure 6.1. For this
project the paths are limited to 4 bounces, and rus-
sian roulette has been disabled, to reduce the amount
of noise.
Figure 6.1: Pipeline overview of the pathtracer. The
inner most kernels are executed for each bounce in
the paths, unless the path is terminated, and the outer
most kernels are executed for each sample in pixels.
Page 22
==PAGE:27==
Mathias Gammelmark
CHAPTER 6. IMPLEMENTATION
6.1.2 Random Numbers
Further it was necessary to implement a random num-
ber generator as this is not supported in OpenCL and
is fairly important for both the pathtracing and im-
portance sampling.
In an eﬀort to get some quick results, a fast pseudo
random number generator was implemented by us-
ing the design from [Mar+03], where hashing is used
to scramble previous values. The random numbers
were decided to be good enough for this project,
but it would deﬁnitely be an improvement to inves-
tigate other techniques such as blue noise, which in
[GF16; Geo+18] has shown great results in achieving
a smaller perceivable noise.
6.1.3 Compaction
To ensure better utilization of the SIMD structure on
the GPU, Unity have designed their pathtracing al-
gorithm to compact the buﬀers as much as possible,
to ensure that all active paths and rays are as tightly
packed together as possible. This is also further ex-
plained in the blog post [Gui19]
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x x
x x
x
x
x
Figure 6.2: Compaction illustration.
This will make sure that when the kernels are run,
each group of threads have a higher likelihood of con-
sisting of either all active or all inactive, To avoid
having thread laying dormant.
This is however not implemented in the framework of
this project to save time, meaning that active and in-
active paths and rays are intermixed in their buﬀers,
leading to a less coherent execution of the kernels and
lower performance.
6.2 Raytracing
An important part of the framework is the bvh traver-
sal, for intersection testing the rays with the geome-
try. This implementation will have a crucial part in
the performance of the pathtracing, but it is however
not the focus of this project, so the implementation
will remain relatively simple, which might lead to a
lower performance.
BVH Traversal:
The BVH traversal is based on
the implementation details presented in the PBR
book:[PJH16], using a stack based depth ﬁrst search,
as recursive calls are not an option. An overview of
the algorithm can be seen in listing 6.1
1 Node stack[24];
2 Node next = root;
3
4 while (next ̸= NULL){
5
Node node = next;
6
7
// If node is leaf
8
if (is_leaf(node)){
9
//
Intersect
Leaf
10
IntersectPrimitives (node);
11
} else { // Node is
internal
12
bboxL = node.left.bbox;
13
bboxR = node.right.bbox;
14
15
hitL = intersect(bboxL, ray);
16
hitR = intersect(bboxR, ray);
17
18
// is the
right
bbox
closer
19
bool right first =RCloser(hitL,hitR);
20
if (hitL ∨hitR){
21
intdeffered = −1;
22
if (right first ∨¬hitL){
23
next = node.right.index;
24
deffered = node.left.index;
25
}else{
26
next = node.left.index;
27
deffered = node.right.index;
28
}
29
if (hitL ∧hitR){
30
stack.push(deffered);
31
}
32
continue;
33
}
34
}
35
// get the
next
node
from
the
stack
36
if (stack.isEmpty ()){
37
next = NULL;
38
} else {
39
next = stack.top ();
40
stack.pop ();
41
}
42 }
43 // Store
hit
information
Listing 6.1: Stack based BVH traversal algorithm
Algorithm:
The traversal of each node in the tree
is ﬁrst checking if that node is a leaf containing tri-
angles, or an internal node containing two other child
nodes. If the node is a leaf, it contains a triangle,
which would then be intersection test, and if it is hit
the distance will be compared with previous hits to
see if it is the closest. In case it is just occlusion test-
ing, it will return true. If the node is internal, the
bounding box of its two children will be tested to see
Page 23
==PAGE:28==
Raytracing
Light Source Importance Sampling
if they need to be traversed as well. In case children
both are hit, the closest one is saved as the next node
to test, while the one further away will be pushed to
the stack for later iteration. Testing the closest one
ﬁrst can help to ensure a more eﬃcient traversal, as
the tree can be culled faster, by reducing the maxi-
mum tracing distance. If only one child-node is hit,
it will be saved as the next node to iterate. If none
of the children are hit, the next node to iterate will
be popped from the stack. This process will continue
until there is no more nodes to iterate, indicated by
the stack returning null.
Stack:
The stack is implemented as a ﬁxed array,
as dynamic allocation is not an option in OpenCL
and further as ﬁxed sized arrays oﬀers higher perfor-
mance, due to not having to allocate memory when
pushing elements. This does however mean that the
size of the stack has to be known at compile time of
the shader, due to the limitations of OpenCL [Aaf12].
As the algorithm ensures a depth ﬁrst traversal, it is
known that the stack cannot grow any larger than
the depth of the BVH tree minus one, as the root is
always checked in the beginning. For this project a
value of 24 is used, as it seems good enough to han-
dle the scenes used for testing. Assuming a balanced
binary tree for the BVH, this should be able to han-
dle geometry with 16,777,216 primitives, where the
largest scene used is the bistro with 2.829.801 prim-
itives.
This leaves a bit of room for error, as the
BVH tree cannot be expected to be perfectly bal-
anced. To reduce the space needed for the stack, it
stores the indices of the nodes instead of the actual
nodes.
This does however mean that nodes might
have to be loaded from global memory again, leading
to lower performance.
Scalability:
However for a more scalable solution
it might be an idea to use the slower global memory
in case the stack grows larger than what can ﬁt into
the faster local memory, or a hybrid solution with
only a part of the stack in global memory, in case
it grows to large.
Alternatively to avoid the limit
introduced by using the stack, an alternative stack-
less approach could be used, as e.g.
presented by
[´AS14], which instead relies on the structure of the
BVH and a backtracking scheme using a bitmask for
storing which nodes has been processed already. This
helps to signiﬁcantly reduce the memory used per ray
traversal, but also introduces a bit more complexity,
which is not needed of a small solution, as the beneﬁt
ﬁrst really shows when having larger scenes.
BVH Construction:
The Bounding Volume Hier-
achy(BVH) used for this project is constructed us-
ing the presented method from [Wal07], closely fol-
lowing their presented implementation details. This
helps to ensure an eﬃcient and fast construction and
has the added beneﬁt of also being closely related to
the lighttree construction. Initially a faster technique
was used based on the HLBVH construction method
from [PL10], where a space-ﬁlling curve is used to
sort primitives according to their placement in space.
This was however abandoned due to poor ray traver-
sal performance.
Page 24
==PAGE:29==
7.
Results
To better understand how the hierarchical sampling
technique is scaling, it is compared to both the naive
pathtracing and the energy based sampling, which
both acts as a reference to the previous scaling.
Two variations of the hierarchical sampling is tested,
namely the spatial and orientational, which respec-
tively considers only the spatial information and both
spatial and orientation bounds. Both the naive and
energy based approach are relevant, as emissive trian-
gles are currently not sampled in Unity, and therefore
relies on the naive pathtracing to pick up their contri-
bution, and the energy based sampling is representing
the current sampling strategy for analytical lights.
Further the attenuation term has 3 variants, which
respectively uses the baseline square distance, along
with the conditional attenuation which is both tested
using the distance to the center of the bounding box
and the minimum distance to the box, as introduced
in section 5.2.3 Finally both a brute force and approx-
imation term for the uncertainty angle θu, has been
presented, where the brute force, might take signiﬁ-
cantly longer, but the approximation, might not be as
tight of a bound for the angle, leading to a worse rep-
resentation of the clusters. Additionally the frame-
work is also measured, to ﬁgure out how the rendering
time is distributed among the kernels making out the
pathtracer. This is also an important step in being
able to speculate how the ﬁnal solution would work
inside Unity.
Sampling Quality:
The quality of the individual
results is measured as the Root Mean Square Error
(RMSE), which measures the squared error per pixel
of the result, compared to a reference.
RMSE =
v
u
u
t
1
Npixel
Npixel
X
n=i
(pixeli −refi)2
(7.1)
The reference images are generated by running the
naive pathtracing technique, for a long time, in this
case 100.000-1.000.000 samples per pixel. It is impor-
tant that the quality of the reference is signiﬁcantly
higher than the measured results, so that the error in
the reference is not measured instead.
Furthermore, it is important to consider that there is
a variance to the error of each run, due to the random
element of the pathtracing. This means that the same
test run multiple times might return diﬀerent results.
This variance of the error gets smaller when more
samples are used, as the error also decreases, how-
ever to get a good estimation of the error using only
a few samples, it is necessary to run the tests multiple
times and use the average RMSE, to get an accurate
depiction of the expected quality oﬀered from each
technique.
colorspace:
It should be mentioned that the result-
ing images are computed in linear color space using
32bit ﬂoating points. However this format is not suit-
able for showing on screen, which is why color correc-
tion is usually used, to map the linear values to the
range [0 −1]. So in an eﬀort to measure the visible
error, all images are color corrected before computing
the RMSE, using a gamma value of 2.2 and exposure
of 1.0.
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.1: (a) Linear color space and (b) gamma
corrected each mapped to the range [0.0,1.0], com-
monly used when showing images.
Scenes:
Four diﬀerent scenes have been selected for
testing the solution with increasing complexity and
amount of lights, to get a more full picture on how
the diﬀerent techniques reacts to the increasing com-
plexity of a scene. For each scene a reference image is
computed with one million samples and represents a
very close estimate of the real result. These reference
images can be seen in ﬁgure 7.2.
Page 25
==PAGE:30==
Sampling Methods
Light Source Importance Sampling
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 7.2:
Reference images of the four diﬀerent
scenes. Represents the true value for the rendering
equation which is estimated using Monte Carlo Ray-
tracing.
The ﬁrst scene, as seen in ﬁgure 7.2a, being the sim-
plest is the standard CornellBox, with a small area
light in the top.
The scene contains 32 triangles,
where two of them are emissive and will be refereed
to as Cornell in all further tests.
The second scene, as seen in ﬁgure 7.2b, is a variation
of the CornellBox scene, with an additional emissive
helix, to introduce a more varying source of light,
which can come from multiple direction throughout
the scene. The scene contains 1292 triangles, where
1262 of them are emissive and will be refereed to as
Helix.
The third scene, as seen in ﬁgure 7.2c, is the happy
buddha, which has more interesting surface features
and varying geometry, among a signiﬁcant increase of
triangles. The statue is placed in a open space with
a colored version of the helix from earlier resulting in
approximately the same number of lights. The scene
contains 1.088.715 triangles, where 1.260 of them are
emissive and will be refereed to as Buddha.
Finally the fourth scene, as seen in ﬁgure 7.2d, is
the Lumberyard Bistro from [Lum17] with slightly
edited materials. The scene is selected to challenge
all the sampling methods, as the scene has a very high
amount of lights, and occluding geometry. The light
is spread throughout the whole scene, and is most
likely not visible from all shading points, making it
very important to have a spatial awareness, as not
to sample lights which has very low or no impact on
a given shading point. The scene contains 2.829.801
triangles, where 32.368 are emissive and as for the
other scenes, it will be refereed to as Bistro.
All models have been downloaded from Morgan
McGuire’s Computer Graphics Archive[McG17], with
their respective licenses and sources, among many
other models. All measurements has been performed
on a Nvidia 2080 founders edition, with an Intel Xeon
W-2145 3.7GHz.
7.1 Sampling Methods
Each sampling technique is tested with 1, 10, and 100
samples, as the diﬀerences between the techniques are
still clearly perceptible to the human eye, while still
clearly showing the improvement of adding more sam-
ples. The numbers where decided from experimenta-
tion, to see where the diﬀerences where most visible,
as seen in ﬁgure 7.3.
The ﬁgures 7.3 and 7.4 shows how all the techniques
perform at 10 samples per pixel with the Buddha
scene and can help to understand what parts of the
image have the highest impact from a better or worse
importance sampling technique. The ﬁrst image (a)
is the naive approach, which can just barely show
the silhouette of the statues with a very high level of
noise. The technique does however succeed in repre-
senting the highlight at the bottom of the image. The
next image (b) is the energy sampling, which shows
signiﬁcant overall improvement, but fails to represent
the mentioned highlights, most likely as the few sam-
ples taken are going towards some of the other more
distant lights. Both the hierarchical sampling tech-
niques (c,d) shows further improvement in terms of
reducing the noise, while also being better at repre-
senting the nearby lights, with the oriented variation
(d) performing the best.
Page 26
==PAGE:31==
Mathias Gammelmark
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 7.3: Equal samples comparison between the
4 sampling methods using 10 samples per pixel. (a)
Naive pathtracing. (b) Energy based sampling, repre-
sents the old technique. (c) Spatial term only hier-
archical sampling. (d) Spatial and orientation term
hierarchical sampling.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 7.4: Diﬀerence between images show in 7.3,
compared to the reference image
From ﬁgure 7.4 it is notable that the highest error
tends to gather close to the sources of lights, and gen-
erally when a small source has a signiﬁcantly higher
contribution than the rest. Further the energy based
approach seems to be completely lacking the highlight
at the bottom of the image, which is further visible in
ﬁgure 7.3, where the two hierarchical sampling tech-
niques clearly gives higher importance to the close
sources, with the oriented variation performing the
best. Additionally it seems like the naive technique
has the lowest error close to the light sources, but this
could very well be explained by the color correction,
which tends to pack high values into a relatively small
range.
7.1.1 Scaling
The scalability of the techniques comes down to how
much time is spent on computing the samples along
with how well the lights are selected according to their
actual contribution, which in this case is measured as
the error (RMSE) for each number of samples. Hav-
ing a more scalable solution, would mean that the
RMSE needs to decrease at a faster rate while not
having too big of an impact on the rendering time.
1
10
100
Num Samples
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
RMSE
RMSE Cornell Scene
Naive
Energy
Spatial
Orientation
(a)
1
10
100
Num Samples
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
RMSE
RMSE Helix Scene
Naive
Energy
Spatial
Orientation
(b)
1
10
100
Num Samples
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
RMSE
RMSE Buddha Scene
Naive
Energy
Spatial
Orientation
(c)
1
10
100
Num Samples
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
RMSE
RMSE Bistro Scene
Naive
Energy
Spatial
Orientation
(d)
Figure 7.5: The RMSE for all scenes at 1, 10 and
100 samples, using the naive pathtracing(blue), en-
ergy sampling (orange), spatial term only (green) and
ﬁnally the full hierarchical solution (red)
Quality:
Looking at ﬁgure 7.5 it is clear that the hi-
erarchical sampling has an improved quality per sam-
ple, which was also expected from the previous ren-
derings in ﬁgure 7.3. The plotted range diﬀer from
each scene as the baseline RMSE, depend heavily on
many unknown factors, such is the overall brightness
of the scene. For this reason the naive approach is
used as a baseline, to see how the importance sam-
pling techniques perform relative to the naive path-
tracing. The initial plot with the cornell scene, shows
no diﬀerence between the sampling techniques, except
for all NNE being signiﬁcantly better than the naive
approach, which is to be expected as only two lights
are present in the scene. The addition of more lights
in the Helix scene, reveals a slightly better RMSE for
the two hierarchical techniques, with the orientation
variation being the best. Further making the geome-
try a bit more complex in the Buddha scene, makes
the diﬀerence slightly more prominent, to the point
Page 27
==PAGE:32==
Attenuation Terms
Light Source Importance Sampling
where the diﬀerence is easily visible, as seen in ﬁg-
ure 7.3.
For the last scene (Bistro) the diﬀerences
is even more visible, with the energy based sampling
performing worse than the naive pathtracing. This
diﬀerence is however a bit exaggerate, as the energy
based technique in Unity is paired with a spatial grid,
which will help lessen the impact, as only nearby
lights are considered. But it helps to show that ignor-
ing the spatial information will lead to poor scaling.
In contrast, both the hierarchical sampling techniques
seems to be relatively unaﬀected by the signiﬁcant in-
crease in scene complexity.
Time:
The time is measured in milliseconds and
plotted using a logarithmic scale, as the number of
samples follow an exponential curve.
This might
make the plot slight more diﬃcult to read, but al-
lows for the the data to be plotted in the same range,
so the are comparable to each other. It is notable
that initially the hierarchical methods are slower than
the previous energy based method, but as the scene
complexity increases, the performance of the sam-
pling becomes better. In the Buddha scene the sam-
pling techniques are using roughly the same time abd
in the bistro scene the two hierarchical techniques
has a slightly smaller execution time that the energy
based sampling. This is most likely due to the early
exit, when detecting a dead branch, where the energy
based technique is blindly continuing the searching
for a light without knowing if it is actually visible.
cornell
helix
buddha
bistro
Scene
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
ms / sample
Method Time
Naive
Energy
Spatial
Orientational
Figure 7.6: Time spent for 10 samples over all four
scenes, for each the 3 diﬀerent sampling techniques
and the naive pathtracing for reference.
It is worth noting that the spatial light sampling
seems to scale just as well as the orientation, with a
slightly worse RMSE. However as the traversal time is
lower it might be worth considering as an cheap alter-
native to the orientation variation. This could further
be motivated by having a reduced building time, as
the heavy computations in the lighttree building are
mainly limited too the bounding cone. Unfortunately
there wasn’t time to implement the construction us-
ing only the spatial information, but the build time
can be compared to the similar BVH construction
which is used for intersection testing the geometry,
which is tested in section 7.5.1.
7.2 Attenuation Terms
The three attenuation terms, Center, MinDist and
ZeroCheck are tested similarly to how the 4 sampling
methods were tested in section 7.1. Only the oriented
variation of the hierarchical sampling is used in this
case, as it is viewed as the most optimal solution.
Looking at the plots for the RMSE there isn’t any
large diﬀerences, until the scene gets more complex,
where the Center term is most often performing the
best, with the ZeroTest term closely following and the
MinDist generally giving the worst estimate.
cornell
helix
buddha
bistro
Scene
0.000
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
0.125
0.150
0.175
RMSE
Attenunation RMSE at 10spp
Center
MinDist
ZeroTest
Figure 7.7: Average RMSE for 10 samples per pixel,
of the 3 variations of the attenuation term, over all
four scenes.
Even thought their RMSE is mostly similar there is
a diﬀerence in how that error is distributed through-
out the images, as seen in ﬁgure 7.8, where the error
is color mapped with red being high error and blue
being low error, with white in the middle. The cen-
ter term(a), seems to have a very good estimation
close to the sources of light, but introduces some er-
ror further away in occluded areas, as seen at the
feat of the statue. The mindist term from [Yuk19],
show better promise in these occluded ares, but in-
troduces a signiﬁcant error closer to the lights, most
likely from treating clusters similarly when they’re
close The ZeroTest term is similarly better at repre-
senting the more distant occluded areas, but does not
Page 28
==PAGE:33==
Mathias Gammelmark
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
include the same amount of error closer to the lights,
most likely as a result of conserving the distance in-
formation when the shading point is contained in one
of the clusters.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 7.8: Per pixel deviation from the reference im-
age, for each of the 3 attenuation terms. Dark blue
represents no error, while red represents high error.
cornell
helix
buddha
bistro
Scene
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
ms / sample
Attenunation Term Time
Center
MinDist
ZeroTest
Figure 7.9: Time spent for 10 samples, for each of
the 3 attenuation terms, over all 4 scenes.
When it comes to the time spent on computing the
attenuation terms, they all have similar results, with
the center term seemingly being slightly better, lead-
ing to it having both the best time and quality, with
the ZeroTest closely after.
7.3 Uncertainty Angle
Similarly to the previous tests, the two approaches
for computing the uncertainty angle is tested by ren-
dering the 4 scenes with both methods and taking
the average of 10 iterations. It is however apparent,
in ﬁgure 7.10, that the RMSE of both approaches are
very similar, to a point where any diﬀerence could be
coursed by the variance between runs.
cornell
helix
buddha
bistro
Scene
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
RMSE
Theta U RMSE at 10spp
Center
MinDist
Figure 7.10: Average RMSE for both ways of ﬁnding
the uncertainty angle, using 10 samples per pixel.
Further as the the approximation in general is faster
than the brute force method, as seen in ﬁgure 7.11,
could potentially replace the precise approach in the
future.
cornell
helix
buddha
bistro
Scene
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
ms / sample
Theta U Time
Brute Force
Approximation
Figure 7.11: Average total render-time for both ways
of ﬁnding the uncertainty angle, using 10 samples per
pixel.
Finally it should be noted that the bistro scene have
roughly equal time for both techniques, which could
be a result of the tighter bound being able to better
conclude when a branch is dead, leading to an earlier
termination of the lighttree traversal. This could be
more prominent in even more complex scenes or with
more interesting materials.
Page 29
==PAGE:34==
Lighttree Quality
Light Source Importance Sampling
7.4 Lighttree Quality
As mentioned earlier, it is possible to vary the quality
of the lighttree, by changing the number of bins used
in the binned top-down construction. This opens up
for the opportunity to examine how the quality of the
lighttree aﬀects the performance of the hierarchical
importance sampling, which in turn, can help deter-
mine if further quality improvements could yield any
diﬀerence.
This of course is under the assumption
that changing the number of bins actually have a sig-
niﬁcant impact on the tree quality. Further it is worth
mentioning that the construction scheme might have
a diminishing return, when increasing the number of
bins, meaning that any changes in RMSE might only
be visible in the lower numbers of bins.
What is interesting to measure, here is the time spent
on building the lighttree, the time spend on render-
ing and the quality of the resulting images. All tests
has been performed with 10 samples per pixel, as to
scale the rendering time proportionally with the build
time and as the image error is more prominent when
examining the images visually. Diﬀerently from the
previous test, only the two last scenes are considered,
as the cornell basically doesn’t have tree and the helix
scene is similar to buddha scene.
2
4
8
16
32
64
128
256
512
1024
Num Bins
0.000
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
0.125
0.150
0.175
RMSE
RMSE Bins Buddha
RMSE
(a)
2
4
8
16
32
64
128
256
512
1024
Num Bins
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
RMSE
RMSE Bins Bistro
RMSE
(b)
Figure 7.12: Average total render-time for both ways
of ﬁnding the uncertainty angle
As seen in ﬁgure 7.12, the RMSE for both techniques
are very close, with only minor improvement in the
very beginning between 2 to 8 bins. This might very
well be because either there aren’t enough lights yet
to make the tree quality have a signiﬁcant impact,
or that the quality doesn’t depend that much on the
number of bins.
2
4
8
16
32
64
128
256
512
1024
Num Bins
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
ms
Time Bins Buddha
Render
Build
(a)
2
4
8
16
32
64
128
256
512
1024
Num Bins
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
ms
Time Bins Bistro
Render
Build
(b)
Figure 7.13: Average total render-time for both ways
of ﬁnding the uncertainty angle
All previous tests has been performed with 128 bins,
but could potentially also have used 32 or even 16
bins instead, as there i no discernable diﬀerence.
However as it is not clear whether this lacking diﬀer-
ence is due to the lighttree quality not having a large
impact on the traversal, or if the quality of the tree
doesn’t improve after 32 bins, it might still be inter-
esting to examine other tree construction approaches,
which could yield a higher quality.
Scene
Naive ms
Energy ms
Spatial ms
Orientational ms
Num Lights
Cornell
6.18
8.32 (+2.14)
9.37 (+9.37)
10.77 (+4.59)
2
Helix
6.17
9.65 (+3.48)
26.67 (+20.50)
31.73 (+25.56)
1262
Buddha
4.40
7.02 (+2.62)
22.45 (+18.05)
25.62 (+21.22)
1260
Bistro
6.32
9.81 (+3.49)
30.71 (+24.39)
36.47 (+30.15)
32368
Table 7.1: Average time in milliseconds spent in the shading kernel by the each of the three sampling algorithms
in the shading kernel for each scene, plus the diﬀerence from the naive approach. All measurements are taken
with 10 samples per pixel and a resolution of 512x512.
Page 30
==PAGE:35==
Mathias Gammelmark
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
7.5 Framework
The framework has been measured in its individual
kernels, to better understand where the time mainly
is spent, and to better understand how the individual
parts are scaling to changes in the scene. The times
spent can be seen in ﬁgure 7.14, where the time is
plotted on a logarithmic scale, as the diﬀerences are
quite large between the kernels (Up to 1000x larger).
prepare
trace
occlude
shade
process_oc
process_res
kernels
10
1
100
101
102
103
ms
Cornell Kernels Times
Naive
Energy
Spatial
Orientational
(a)
prepare
trace
occlude
shade
process_oc
process_res
kernels
10
1
100
101
102
103
ms
Helix Kernels Times
Naive
Energy
Spatial
Orientational
(b)
prepare
trace
occlude
shade
process_oc
process_res
kernels
10
1
100
101
102
103
ms
Buddha Kernels Times
Naive
Energy
Spatial
Orientational
(c)
prepare
trace
occlude
shade
process_oc
process_res
kernels
10
1
100
101
102
103
ms
Bistro Kernels Times
Naive
Energy
Spatial
Orientational
(d)
Figure 7.14: Logarithmic plot of the time spent in
each kernel, for the 4 diﬀerent tested methods for each
scene. All measurements are taken with 10 samples
and resolution of 512x512, equivalent to the results
shown in ﬁgure 7.3. The plot mainly illustrates the
relative scaling between the kernels over each scene.
Prepare and Process:
The Prepare and Process
kernels are, as expected, constant over all 4 scenes
with approximately 0.75 ms for the prepare kernel,
1.5ms for the process occlusion kernel and 0.4ms for
the process results kernel. It does make sense that
these are constant, as their work does not change with
either the amount of primitives or lights.
Raytracing:
The most pronounced diﬀerence be-
tween the scenes are observed in the tracing and oc-
clusion kernel. They are both roughly scaling equally,
which makes sense as they’re traversing the same
BVH. These kernels can be expected to work better in
Unity, due to a generally better raytracing algorithm
and compaction, which better packs the ray buﬀer to
avoid inactive threads as brieﬂy explained in section
6.1.3.
Shading:
The shading kernel seems to only be af-
fected by the number of lights, as there is no visible
diﬀerence between the Helix and Buddha scene, which
have roughly the same layout of lights, but diﬀerent
amounts of geometry. There is a slight increase be-
tween the Buddha and Bistro scene, where the num-
ber of lights are multiplied approximately 30x.
Sampling time:
To get an idea of the time spent
on the actual sampling, we can take a look at the in-
dividual times in the shading kernel, for each method
that is tested. Assuming that only the light sampling
is scaling with the amount of lights, it is possible to
roughly estimate the time spent on sampling, as the
diﬀerence from the naive approach, as seen in table
7.1. For the most complex scene, being the Bistro,
this roughly means that the light selection process
for 10 samples takes 3.49ms for the energy sampling,
24.39ms for the spatial and 30.15 for the orientational
hierarchical sampling. This approximately follows a
6-9x increase for the spatial traversal and a 7-10x in-
crease for the orientational traversal.
The relative
time seems to get higher, as the number of lights in-
crease, but this could very well be a result of the data
structure taking up more space, leading to poor load-
ing. The numbers should of course be taken with a
grain of salt, but it helps to show the relative time dif-
ference between the sampling techniques, which also
can be expected to be similar if the project is ported
to Unity, or any other platform.
It should be mentioned that all the NEE techniques,
does have a constant overhead of calculating the light
contribution and allocation of the shadow rays, as this
is not performed in the naive pathtracing. This value
is found to be roughly between 1-2ms, by assuming
almost no time is spent on the binary search in the
energy sampling of the Cornell scene, as there is only
two lights.
Further it is notable that the Buddha scene has a
lower time spent in the shading kernel, compared to
the other scenes.
This can be explained by it be-
ing more open, resulting in earlier termination of the
paths, as they are more likely to miss the geometry.
This diﬀerence could be accounted for, by also mea-
suring the average path length, but this has not been
done in this project.
However the hierarchy traversal cannot be considered
alone, as it only represents a small fraction of the
pathtracing algorithm. Considering the total time of
more than 1100ms for rendering the bistro scene, as
Page 31
==PAGE:36==
Framework
Light Source Importance Sampling
seen in ﬁgure 7.6, the approximately 30ms for ori-
entational hierarchical traversal represents less than
3% of the total time. The spatial traversal then rep-
resents less than 2.5% and the energy based sampling
less than 0.3%. This slight increase in rendering time
is more than being outweighed by the improvement
in rendering quality as seen in section 7.1, where it
is visible that the energy based sampling estimation
is worse than simple using naive sampling, which ap-
proximately performs the same amount of samples in
half the time.
Expected Performance:
It is hard to exactly pre-
dict how the hierarchical importance sampling would
perform inside of Unity, as there are a lot of un-
known factors, and further since the kernels wasn’t
measured in Unity, it could be diﬃcult to compare
the results. However, by observing the diﬀerence be-
tween the old importance sampling technique and the
new, it should be possible to say that the runtime
would still scale similarly, but just slightly slower.
7.5.1 Pre-Process
The pre-processing for the sampling techniques is lim-
ited to building the geometric BVH for raytracing and
either building the lighttree or the CDF buﬀer for the
energy sampling. The lighttree is build in the same
way for both the spatial and orientational variation,
so there won’t be any diﬀerence between those two
techniques at the moment.
Scene
CDF ms
Lighttree ms
Lights
cornell
0.12
0.14
2
helix
0.12
29.61
1262
buddha
0.17
19.46
1260
bistro
0.54
478.28
32368
Table 7.2:
Average time in milliseconds spent on
building the lighttree used for both the hierarchical
sampling techniques and the CDF buﬀer used for the
energy sampling. both are build using a single thread.
The lighttree is signiﬁcantly more expensive to con-
struct, in contrast to the CDF buﬀer, but still re-
mains below half a second for the bistro scene. How-
ever as the spatial sampling only requirers the bound-
ing boxes, it should be possible to achieve the same
speed as for the geometry BVH, as seen in table 7.3,
which is signiﬁcantly faster, compared to the number
of primitives. As the Helix scene is mainly made out
of emissive triangles, is should be possible to directly
compare the helix BVH construction as a potential
implementation of a spatial lighttree, which in this
case then becomes 1.3ms against the 29.61ms of the
orientational lighttree
Scene
BVH ms
Primitives
cornell
0.08
32
helix
1.30
1292
buddha
1545.61
1088715
bistro
3699.60
2829801
Table 7.3:
Average time in milliseconds spent on
building the Bounding volume Hierarchy, which is
build using a single thread.
Page 32
==PAGE:37==
8.
Discussion / Future Work
As the project was originally supposed to be imple-
mented in Unity, this of course remains as a future
work to be done, to truly know how well the hierarchi-
cal sampling would perform compared to the current
solution inside Unity.
Performance:
From the results it is show that the
hierarchical traversal is signiﬁcantly more expensive
with up to 10x higher traversal time, than the en-
ergy based sampling in the most complex scene. The
impact of this is however lowered quite a bit as the
traversal only accounts for less than 3% of the total
rendering time in the bistro scene, when using the ori-
entational samples, and only 2.5% for the spatial sam-
pling. This number will most likely change if ported
to Unity, but the relation between the techniques will
most likely stay the same. As it is expected that the
ray tracing is more eﬃcient in Unity, it can also be
expected that the fraction spent on traversal of the
lighttree is slightly higher, due to less total time spent
on rendering.
Quality:
The quality however is scaling far better
for both the variations of the hierarchical sampling,
with overall lower RMSE for all scenes except the
most simplistic scene with only two lights, where the
quality was equal.
The hierarchical approach also
seemed more suited at picking up local highlights
from nearby lights due to it higher spatial awareness.
Further it was noticed that the quality of the energy
based sampling was drastically decreasing with higher
variance in scenes and higher amounts of lights, which
came to a point where the naive pathtracing was re-
turning better results in approximately half the time,
where the hierarchical sampling seemed unaﬀected by
the increase in scene complexity.
Light Grid:
It should however be considered that
the energy sampling in the framework isn’t assisted
by the spatial grid which is used in Unity. As the
grid would only contain the lights, with an overlap-
ping sphere of inﬂuence, for each cell, it would help to
reduce the overall complexity of the lighting, by con-
sidering it in smaller sections of the scene. Having a
higher resolution of the grid, would then decrease the
number of the light per shading point, giving higher
importance to the ones which has high contribution,
but this would come with a diminishing return and a
large increase in memory usage. Further, culling the
lights according to their sphere of inﬂuence makes the
light-grid a biased approach, as explained in section
4.3, meaning that the result will not strictly go to-
wards the ground truth and might contain some small
artifacts.
As the spatial locality testing is already build in to
the hierarchical traversal, the need for the spatial grid
is not as high as for the energy based sampling. It
might however still make sense to keep the grid, but
at a lower resolution, to help reduce the traversal
time, by representing the scene with multiple smaller
trees. This would however still result in a biased solu-
tion, which can be avoided, by omitting the light grid.
Further not using the grid , or using a lower resolu-
tion, will lead to a smaller memory footprint, which
for large scenes can represent a signiﬁcant improve-
ment, as the light-grid scales both with the number
of lights and the spatial extend of the scenes. Having
more memory to spare could potentially enable more
samples per pass, leading to a perhaps more eﬃcient
rendering process.
Light Types:
It should be fairly straightforward to
add most types of lights, like the ones currently used
in Unity, as the lighttree can represent most types of
lights easily by adapting the emission proﬁle. Most
of these types has already been presented in [CK18],
with a detailed description of their individual param-
eters. There is however an exception for directional
lights, which is a special case as they do not have a
position, and therefore need their a special cost func-
tion for building the tree and a importance measure
which does not take attenuation into account.
8.1 Lighttree Traversal
The results clearly show a beneﬁt from using the hi-
erarchical importance sampling. But as the cluster
representation is poor in the top level it would make
sense to examine other techniques, such as the adap-
tive tree splitting from [CK18] or stochastic lightcut
from [Yuk19], as these techniques are very similar to
this project. Both techniques have shown to be more
Page 33
==PAGE:38==
Triangle Sampling
Light Source Importance Sampling
eﬃcient than simply selecting a single light and re-
turn a far better result in a lower time frame.
However as both techniques returns a set of lights to
sample ,instead of the single one which is currently
being used, the shading kernel would have to be mod-
iﬁed to account for a multiple lights. An additional
point to modifying the shading kernel to perform mul-
tiple light samples, is that the occlusion kernel seems
to run much faster than the trace kernel, as seen in
ﬁgure 7.14, which also makes sense from an algorith-
mic standpoint, as the occlusion can terminate early
if any intersection is found, where the trace kernel
have to ﬁnd the closest intersection.
Re-Sampling:
An alternative to modifying the
shading kernel, could be to perform a re-sampling of
the selected set of lights, as e.g. presented in [Tal05].
As the amount of lights can be selected to be rel-
atively small, it might be possible to compute and
scale their probabilities according to their actual po-
tential contribution, as presented in 4.1.3.
Further it might be interesting to combine the mod-
iﬁed shading kernel with re-sampling, to gain a even
broader exploration of the tree, while still being able
to maintain a low limit for the number of lights.
8.1.1 Visibility
The hierarchical sampling proves to be good at sam-
pling sources of light according to the potential con-
tribution, but in heavily occluded scenes, the visibil-
ity can become a considerable source of noise, which
is completely ignored in the current traversal.
A multi-pass algorithm was presented by [Don+06],
which reuses lighting information from previous
passes, to re-construct a PDF which takes the pre-
viously evaluated visibility into consideration. This
algorithm was also presented to work with clusters in
scenes with many lights, making it an interesting av-
enue to examine for the hierarchical importance sam-
pling.
A diﬀerent but similar technique has also been pre-
sented by [VKK18], where online learning is used to
guide the cluster probabilities, according to previous
passes. However this requires spatially caching of the
visibility information, which can become problematic
for larger scenes, considering the more limited mem-
ory of the GPUs.
8.2 Triangle Sampling
The sampling of the emissive triangles, are currently
done by uniformly sampling the area. However this
might not be the most optimal technique, as the area
isn’t equally distributed when projected onto hemi-
sphere around the shading point. Using solid angle
sampling can help to lower the variance in the image,
as seen in e.g.[Gam16], where solid angle sampling
of cylinders greatly help to reduce the variance gen-
erated close to the light source. Further a solid an-
gle sampling technique has been presented in [Arv95],
but as the samples are draw on the projected area on
the sphere, some samples might be below the hori-
zon, leading to a wasted light evaluation as it can’t
possibly have any contribution to that point.
Varying Emissive Materials:
Further if the tri-
angles contains varying emissive materials, such as
emissive textures, the triangle sampling would also
have to base the importance of the diﬀerent areas of
the triangles according to their emissive component.
A simple but expensive approach, could be to sub-
divide the triangles as long as the emissive materials
has a high variance within its area. This subdivision
of the complex lights was in fact also presented in
the original lightcuts paper [Wal+05], where emissive
textures were represented using a number of smaller
virtual point lights. This would lead to a very high
amount of lights, which could drive up the complexity
of the scene, but considering the better scaling of the
hierarchical sampling, this could be a viable solution.
8.3 Lighttree Construction
The lighttree is currently constructed using the
binned SAH construction presented in [Wal07], how-
ever it has previously been observed that the bottom
up approach can lead to a higher quality lighttree, as
e.g. presented in [Wal+05], where an agglomerative
clustering(AC) is used, to build the tree from the
bottom up, by iteratively pairing clusters according
to similarity.
However the naive AC algorithm have a O(N 3) time
complexity, leading to very high build times com-
pared to the SAH approach, making it unsuitable for
an interactive application, if many lights are used. To
help reduce the complexity an approximate agglom-
erative algorithm(AAC) was presented in [Gu+13],
which could construct a higher quality BVH in terms
Page 34
==PAGE:39==
Mathias Gammelmark
CHAPTER 8. DISCUSSION / FUTURE WORK
of normal raytracing than the full sweep SAH ap-
proach, in less time than the faster binned variant,
which is used for this project. The AAC approach
is using a space ﬁlling curve, for fast grouping of the
primitives, which might not ﬁt well for representing
the bounding cones, but as this technique is only us-
ing the ordering for constraining the cluster combina-
tion, it might not have such an impact on the actual
quality of the lighttree. As the primary reasoning for
using the binned SAH approach was that it oﬀered
a faster construction, it would deﬁnitely make sense
to examine AAC, to test how it performs with the
additional bounding cones used for this project.
Rebuilding:
To further lower the cost of the light-
tree construction, a rebuilding scheme could be used,
similarly to [Mor+19], where the approach show min-
imal diﬀerence compared to completely rebuilding the
whole lighttree, while still being orders of magni-
tude faster.
Even though this project doesn’t aim
to achieve real-time rendering, with the hierarchical
sampling, it is still interesting to examine lighttree
reconstruction for lowering the construction cost, by
reusing the previously build tree and rebuild the top
levels, as this could allow the use of a more expensive
building technique, oﬀering higher quality, while still
maintaining a interactive timeframe.
Page 35
==PAGE:40==
9.
Conclusion
The project set out to ﬁnd a scalable approach to
importance sample large amounts of triangular lights
inside of Unity, and has presented a hierarchical so-
lution, which for larger and more complex scenes has
shown to be far more scalable than the previously
used importance sampling in Unity. Two variations
are tested, one which considers the spatial informa-
tion of the lights and the other, which considers in
addition the lights orientation towards the shading
points.
The two variations are tested against the
naive pathtracing and previous sampling technique,
where both perform better in all test scenes, except
the simplest one, where the quality was equal, with
only a minimal increase in time spent per sample,
and the spatial variation result in a slightly lower
sampling quality, but with a faster traversal. It was
further observed that the previous technique has a
declining sampling quality, as the complexity of the
scenes grow, to a point where the naive pathtracing
returns a better result.
The selection of lights has shown to be approximately
10x more expensive than the previously used tech-
nique, which in the tests has shown to account for
less than 3% of the total time spent on rendering.
The traversal time should furthermore scale logarith-
mically with the number of lights, which also corre-
sponds to the observed data.
It was concluded that investigating a better explo-
ration of the lighttree by splitting, or selecting more
lights, might result in a better sampling quality, at
the cost of testing more lights per shading point. The
multiple lights could then potentially be re-sampled
to ﬁt into the current solution, which only supports
the sampling of one light per shading point.
Fur-
ther it might be possible to extend the current solu-
tion with a multi-pass visibility measure, which takes
lights previous contributions into account when con-
sidering their importance.
Framework:
A testing framework, which only sup-
ports diﬀuse materials without textures, and a sim-
pliﬁed model of the original Unity pipeline were con-
structed for the purpose of this project. This means
that the performance is not directly translatable to
how the technique will perform in Unity, but can be
used as a proof of concept. There is still space for
improvements before the solution can reliably replace
any current importance sampling in use in Unity, as it
is based on a very basic framework, which only mod-
els the general pipeline of the Unity pathtracer. One
of these changes, is to represent more types of light, as
only emissive triangles are considered for now. How-
ever this has been concluded to be a fairly straight-
forward process, as the algorithm only relies on the
lights bounding information, which has been deﬁned
in earlier works for a wide variety of lights.
Attenuation Term:
Three diﬀerent attenuation
terms where tested in the lighttree traversal, where
two were from existing sources and a third term,
which was introduced in this project. The tests have
shown that the simplest term, which is the inverse
square distance to the center of the bounding box
performed better, both in quality and time. The sec-
ond term which had a goal of better exploration of
the lighttree seems to have lower error further away
from the lights, while having the error mostly concen-
trated in the bright highlights. The introduced term,
works as a middle way between the two others, as it
has the same low error further away from the lights,
while having a reduced error in the bright highlights.
Further the introduced term is only marginally slower
than just calculating the inverse square distance, as
it is basically the same computation but with a small
conditional component to avoid singularities.
Uncertainty Angle:
Two approaches to ﬁnd the
uncertainty angle towards a given bounding box was
also tested: one calculating the precise angle and the
other giving a rough approximation.
It was found
that even though the approximation almost always
would over estimate the angle, the quality per sam-
ple was close to equal for both approaches, where the
approximation had a visible speedup, as the amount
of instructions are signiﬁcantly lower. Yet, it was also
noted that the brute force technique in the most com-
plex scene had an equal time to the approximation,
perhaps implying that the more tight angle could pre-
dict better when a dead branch was encountered.
Lighttree Construction:
The lighttree used were
based on the a fast binning technique, but it was con-
Page 36
==PAGE:41==
Mathias Gammelmark
CHAPTER 9. CONCLUSION
cluded that increasing the number of bins, didn’t re-
veal any signiﬁcant improvements, and only in the
range of 1-16 bins was there an observed diﬀerence.
Whether this was a result of the lighttree not being
aﬀected beyond this point or if the lighttree traver-
sal doesn’t depends as much on the quality was un-
clear, and further examinations would be necessary
to draw any proper conclusions. Previous work fur-
ther showed that using an agglomerative clustering
approach might result in a higher quality lighttree,
and that an approximate solution could build the tree
faster compared to the technique used for this project,
leading to a more interactive solution.
Outro:
In conclusion this project is considered a
success as a scalable approach to importance sam-
pling, with many triangular lights, has been pre-
sented. However it is not yet implemented in Unity,
but will most likely also scale well, in the case it is
ported, and will do so with a minimal increase in ren-
der time, which most likely will be outweighed by the
better sampling quality.
— The End —
Page 37
==PAGE:42==
Appendix A.
References
[Aaf12]
Munshi Aaftab. The OpenCL Speciﬁcation. 2012.
url: https://www.khronos.org/registry/OpenCL/
specs/opencl-1.2.pdf (visited on 12/02/2020).
[Arv95]
James Arvo. “Stratiﬁed sampling of spherical tri-
angles”. In: Proceedings of the 22nd annual confer-
ence on Computer graphics and interactive tech-
niques. 1995, pp. 437–438.
[´AS14]
Attila T ´Afra and L´aszl´o Szirmay-Kalos. “Stack-
less Multi-BVH Traversal for CPU, MIC and GPU
Ray Tracing”. In: Computer Graphics Forum.
Vol. 33. 1. Wiley Online Library. 2014, pp. 129–
140.
[BE05]
Gill
Barequet
and
Gershon
Elber.
“Optimal
Bounding Cones of Vectors in Three Dimensions”.
In: Inf. Process. Lett. 93.2 (Jan. 2005), pp. 83–89.
[CK18]
Alejandro Conty Estevez and Christopher Kulla.
“Importance sampling of many lights with adap-
tive tree splitting”. In: Proceedings of the ACM
on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques
1.2 (2018), pp. 1–17.
[Cry+07]
Crytek, Saber Interactive, Free Radical, and Cry-
tek GmbH. Crysis. It’s a game. Nov. 2007. url:
https://www.crysis.com.
[Don+06]
Michael Donikian, Bruce Walter, Kavita Bala, Se-
bastian Fernandez, and Donald P Greenberg. “Ac-
curate direct illumination using iterative adaptive
sampling”. In: IEEE Transactions on Visualiza-
tion and Computer Graphics 12.3 (2006), pp. 353–
364.
[Fol+96]
James D Foley, Foley Dan Van, Andries Van Dam,
Steven K Feiner, John F Hughes, Edward Angel,
and J Hughes. Computer graphics: principles and
practice. Vol. 12110. Addison-Wesley Professional,
1996.
[Gam16]
Manuel N Gamito. “Solid angle sampling of disk
and cylinder lights”. In: Computer Graphics Fo-
rum. Vol. 35. 4. Wiley Online Library. 2016,
pp. 25–36.
[Geo+18]
Iliyan Georgiev, Thiago Ize, Mike Farnsworth,
Ram´on Montoya-Vozmediano, Alan King, Brecht
Van Lommel, Angel Jimenez, Oscar Anson, Shinji
Ogaki, Eric Johnston, et al. “Arnold: A brute-force
production path tracer”. In: ACM Transactions on
Graphics (TOG) 37.3 (2018), pp. 1–12.
[GF16]
Iliyan Georgiev and Marcos Fajardo. “Blue-noise
dithered sampling”. In: ACM SIGGRAPH 2016
Talks. 2016, pp. 1–1.
[Gu+13]
Yan Gu, Yong He, Kayvon Fatahalian, and Guy
Blelloch. “Eﬃcient BVH construction via approxi-
mate agglomerative clustering”. In: Proceedings of
the 5th High-Performance Graphics Conference.
2013, pp. 81–88.
[Gui19]
Florent Guinier. GPU Lightmapper: A Technical
Deep Dive. 2019. url: https://blogs.unity3d.com/
2019/05/20/gpu-lightmapper-a-technical-deep-
dive/ (visited on 02/25/2020).
[Hof90]
Georg Rainer Hofmann. “Who invented ray trac-
ing?”
In:
The
Visual
Computer
6.3
(1990),
pp. 120–124.
[JM12]
Wenzel Jakob and Steve Marschner. “Manifold ex-
ploration: a Markov Chain Monte Carlo technique
for rendering scenes with diﬃcult specular trans-
port”. In: ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG)
31.4 (2012), pp. 1–13.
[Kaj86]
James T. Kajiya. “The Rendering Equation”. In:
Proceedings of the 13th Annual Conference on
Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques.
SIGGRAPH ’86. New York, NY, USA: Associa-
tion for Computing Machinery, 1986, pp. 143–150.
url: https://doi.org/10.1145/15922.15902.
[LKA13]
Samuli
Laine,
Tero
Karras,
and
Timo
Aila.
“Megakernels
Considered
Harmful:
Wavefront
Path Tracing on GPUs”. In: Proceedings of the
5th High-Performance Graphics Conference. HPG
’13. Anaheim, California: Association for Comput-
ing Machinery, 2013, pp. 137–143. url: https://
doi.org/10.1145/2492045.2492060.
[Lum17]
Amazon
Lumberyard.
Amazon
Lumberyard
Bistro, Open Research Content Archive (ORCA).
July 2017. url: http : / / developer . nvidia . com /
orca/amazon-lumberyard-bistro.
[LW93]
Eric P Lafortune and Yves D Willems. “Bi-
directional path tracing”. In: (1993).
[LXY19]
Yifan Liu, Kun Xu, and Ling-Qi Yan. “Adaptive
BRDF-Oriented Multiple Importance Sampling of
Many Lights”. In: Computer Graphics Forum 38.4
(2019), pp. 123–133. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/cgf.13776. url: https:
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/cgf.
13776.
[Mar+03]
George Marsaglia et al. “Xorshift rngs”. In: Jour-
nal of Statistical Software 8.14 (2003), pp. 1–6.
[Mar18]
Luca
Martino.
Independent
random
sampling
methods. Springer, 2018.
[MC19]
Pierre Moreau and Petrik Clarberg. “Importance
Sampling of Many Lights on the GPU”. In: Ray
Tracing Gems: High-Quality and Real-Time Ren-
dering with DXR and Other APIs. Ed. by Eric
Haines and Tomas Akenine-M¨oller. Berkeley, CA:
Apress, 2019, pp. 255–283. url: https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-1-4842-4427-2 18.
[McG17]
Morgan McGuire. Computer Graphics Archive.
July 2017. url: https://casual-eﬀects.com/data.
[Mit07]
Martin Mittring. “Finding next gen: Cryengine 2”.
In: ACM SIGGRAPH 2007 courses. 2007, pp. 97–
121.
Page 38
==PAGE:43==
Mathias Gammelmark
REFERENCES
[Mor+19]
Pierre
Moreau,
Matt
Pharr,
Petrik
Clarberg,
M Steinberger, and T Foley. “Dynamic Many-
Light Sampling for Real-Time Ray Tracing.” In:
High Performance Graphics (Short Papers). 2019,
pp. 21–26.
[NVI09]
NVIDIA. NVIDIA’s Next Generation CUDATM
Compute Architecture: Fermi. 2009. url: https :
//www.nvidia.com/content/PDF/fermi white
papers / NVIDIA Fermi Compute Architecture
Whitepaper.pdf (visited on 12/02/2020).
[NVI18]
NVIDIA. NVIDIA TURING GPU ARCHITEC-
TURE.
2018.
url:
https : / / www . nvidia .
com / content / dam / en - zz / Solutions / design -
visualization / technologies / turing - architecture /
NVIDIA - Turing - Architecture - Whitepaper . pdf
(visited on 12/02/2020).
[OT13]
Sheehan Olver and Alex Townsend. “Fast inverse
transform sampling in one and two dimensions”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1307.1223 (2013).
[PJH16]
Matt Pharr, Wenzel Jakob, and Greg Humphreys.
Physically based rendering: From theory to imple-
mentation. Morgan Kaufmann, 2016.
[PL10]
J. Pantaleoni and D. Luebke. “HLBVH: Hierarchi-
cal LBVH Construction for Real-time Ray Trac-
ing of Dynamic Geometry”. In: Proceedings of the
Conference on High Performance Graphics. HPG
’10. Saarbrucken, Germany: Eurographics Associ-
ation, 2010, pp. 87–95. url: http://dl.acm.org/
citation.cfm?id=1921479.1921493.
[PPD98]
Eric Paquette, Pierre Poulin, and George Dret-
takis. “A light hierarchy for fast rendering of scenes
with many lights”. In: Computer Graphics Forum.
Vol. 17. 3. Wiley Online Library. 1998, pp. 63–74.
[SWZ96]
Peter Shirley, Changyaw Wang, and Kurt Zimmer-
man. “Monte Carlo techniques for direct lighting
calculations”. In: ACM Transactions on Graphics
(TOG) 15.1 (1996), pp. 1–36.
[Tal05]
Justin
F
Talbot.
“Importance
resampling
for
global illumination”. In: (2005).
[VG97]
Eric Veach and Leonidas J Guibas. “Metropolis
light transport”. In: Proceedings of the 24th annual
conference on Computer graphics and interactive
techniques. 1997, pp. 65–76.
[VKK18]
Petr V´evoda, Ivo Kondapaneni, and Jaroslav
Kˇriv´anek. “Bayesian online regression for adaptive
direct illumination sampling”. In: ACM Transac-
tions on Graphics (TOG) 37.4 (2018), pp. 1–12.
[VS83]
Adriaan Van Oosterom and Jan Strackee. “The
solid angle of a plane triangle”. In: IEEE trans-
actions
on
Biomedical
Engineering
2
(1983),
pp. 125–126.
[Wal+05]
Bruce Walter, Sebastian Fernandez, Adam Arbree,
Kavita Bala, Kavita Bala, Michael Donikian, and
Donald P. Greenberg. “Lightcuts: A Scalable Ap-
proach to Illumination”. In: ACM Trans. Graph.
24.3 (July 2005), pp. 1098–1107. url: http://doi.
acm.org/10.1145/1073204.1073318.
[Wal07]
Ingo Wald. “On Fast Construction of SAH-Based
Bounding Volume Hierarchies”. In: Proceedings of
the 2007 IEEE Symposium on Interactive Ray
Tracing. RT ’07. USA: IEEE Computer Society,
2007, pp. 33–40. url: https://doi.org/10.1109/
RT.2007.4342588.
[Whi79]
Turner Whitted. “An improved illumination model
for shaded display”. In: Proceedings of the 6th an-
nual conference on Computer graphics and inter-
active techniques. 1979, p. 14.
[Wil14]
Mark Wilson. 75% of Ikea’s Catalog is com-
puter generated imagery. 2014. url: https : / /
www . fastcompany. com / 3034975 / 75 - of - ikeas -
catalog- is- computer- generated- imagery (visited
on 12/05/2020).
[Yuk19]
Cem Yuksel. “Stochastic lightcuts”. In: (2019).
Page 39
==PAGE:44==
Appendix B. Additional Image Results
Cornel Method Comparison
(a) Naive 1
(b) Energy 1
(c) Spatial 1
(d) Orientation 1
(e) Naive 10
(f) Energy 10
(g) Spatial 10
(h) Orientation 10
(i) Naive 100
(j) Energy 100
(k) Spatial 100
(l) Orientation 100
Figure B.1: Cornell scene
Page 40
==PAGE:45==
Mathias Gammelmark
APPENDIX B. ADDITIONAL IMAGE RESULTS
Helix Method Comparison
(a) Naive 1
(b) Energy 1
(c) Spatial 1
(d) Orientation 1
(e) Naive 10
(f) Energy 10
(g) Spatial 10
(h) Orientation 10
(i) Naive 100
(j) Energy 100
(k) Spatial 100
(l) Orientation 100
Figure B.2: Helix scene
Page 41
==PAGE:46==
Light Source Importance Sampling
Buddha Method Comparison
(a) Naive 1
(b) Energy 1
(c) Spatial 1
(d) Orientation 1
(e) Naive 10
(f) Energy 10
(g) Spatial 10
(h) Orientation 10
(i) Naive 100
(j) Energy 100
(k) Spatial 100
(l) Orientation 100
Figure B.3: Buddha scene
Page 42
==PAGE:47==
Mathias Gammelmark
APPENDIX B. ADDITIONAL IMAGE RESULTS
Bistro Method Comparison
(a) Naive 1
(b) Energy 1
(c) Spatial 1
(d) Orientation 1
(e) Naive 10
(f) Energy 10
(g) Spatial 10
(h) Orientation 10
(i) Naive 100
(j) Energy 100
(k) Spatial 100
(l) Orientation 100
Figure B.4: Bistro scene
Page 43
==PAGE:48==
Light Source Importance Sampling
Cornel Method Error
(a) Naive 1
(b) Energy 1
(c) Spatial 1
(d) Orientation 1
(e) Naive 10
(f) Energy 10
(g) Spatial 10
(h) Orientation 10
(i) Naive 100
(j) Energy 100
(k) Spatial 100
(l) Orientation 100
Figure B.5: Cornell scene
Page 44
==PAGE:49==
Mathias Gammelmark
APPENDIX B. ADDITIONAL IMAGE RESULTS
Helix Method Error
(a) Naive 1
(b) Energy 1
(c) Spatial 1
(d) Orientation 1
(e) Naive 10
(f) Energy 10
(g) Spatial 10
(h) Orientation 10
(i) Naive 100
(j) Energy 100
(k) Spatial 100
(l) Orientation 100
Figure B.6: Helix scene
Page 45
==PAGE:50==
Light Source Importance Sampling
Buddha Method Error
(a) Naive 1
(b) Energy 1
(c) Spatial 1
(d) Orientation 1
(e) Naive 10
(f) Energy 10
(g) Spatial 10
(h) Orientation 10
(i) Naive 100
(j) Energy 100
(k) Spatial 100
(l) Orientation 100
Figure B.7: Buddha scene
Page 46
==PAGE:51==
Mathias Gammelmark
APPENDIX B. ADDITIONAL IMAGE RESULTS
Bistro Method Error
(a) Naive 1
(b) Energy 1
(c) Spatial 1
(d) Orientation 1
(e) Naive 10
(f) Energy 10
(g) Spatial 10
(h) Orientation 10
(i) Naive 100
(j) Energy 100
(k) Spatial 100
(l) Orientation 100
Figure B.8: Bistro scene
Page 47
==PAGE:52==
Appendix C.
Source Code
The source code for the project can be found on github at the link:
https://github.com/mathiasgam/LightSourceImportanceSampling
with a commit at the time of the handin found at:
https://github.com/mathiasgam/LightSourceImportanceSampling/tree/d5e135fc67ad856315783fef163817bc60d88d36
The project is written on Windows and is not expected to work anywhere else.
The code does require an installed OpenCL driver with an environment variable deﬁning its path, along with
premake for building the project and might be rather tricky to get to run properly.
Page 48
