==PAGE:1==
 
 
DTU Management 
Sustainability Division - Energy Economics and Regulation Section 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Market configurations for wind energy 
hubs in the North Sea 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MSc Thesis 
s181590 Victor Juarez Guajardo-Fajardo 
January 2021
==PAGE:2==
 
 
 
Author 
Victor Juarez Guajardo-Fajardo 
 
Title 
Market configurations for wind 
energy hubs in the North Sea 
Project Period 
August 2020 – January 2021 
 
 
 
 
ECTS: 30 
 
 
 
 
Education 
Master of Science in Sustainable Energy, 
Energy Systems Analysis 
 
 
 
 
Supervisors 
Lena Kitzing 
Juan Gea Bermúdez 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This report was submitted in fulfilment of the 
requirements for the graduation in MSc 
Sustainable Energy with specialization in Energy 
Systems Analysis at the Technical University of 
Denmark. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
DTU Management 
Sustainability Division 
Energy Economics and Regulation Section 
DTU Lyngby Campus 
Nils Koppels Allé Building 424 
2800 Lyngby, Denmark 
www.man.dtu.dk 
Building 424 
2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
www.sys.man.dtu.dk 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
Contents 
Executive Summary ................................................................................................................................. 1 
Chapter 1. 
Introduction .................................................................................................................... 2 
1.1 
The EU future energy system and the North Sea ................................................................... 2 
1.2 
Electricity markets .................................................................................................................. 3 
Chapter 2. 
Methodology ................................................................................................................... 8 
2.1 
Energy modelling in Balmorel ................................................................................................. 8 
2.2 
Market configurations .......................................................................................................... 13 
2.3 
Socio-economic welfare analysis .......................................................................................... 15 
2.4 
Private economic feasibility analysis .................................................................................... 19 
2.5 
The energy system evaluated ............................................................................................... 23 
Chapter 3. 
Results ........................................................................................................................... 28 
3.1 
Socioeconomic results: dispatch, market prices and welfare distribution ........................... 28 
3.2 
Private economic results of offshore projects ...................................................................... 43 
Chapter 4. 
Discussion ...................................................................................................................... 48 
4.1 
Limitations of the methodology............................................................................................ 48 
4.2 
Comparison of results to previous studies ........................................................................... 52 
Chapter 5. 
Conclusions ................................................................................................................... 56 
References ............................................................................................................................................ 58 
Annex .................................................................................................................................................... 64 
 
==PAGE:4==
1 
Executive Summary 
Offshore wind development plans in the North Sea envisage energy hubs or island concepts in order 
to ensure a cost efficient and rational deployment which can foster a gradual and ordered scaling of 
projects around offshore hubs. These hubs can accommodate transmission, conversion and other 
supporting infrastructures and reduce overall costs. The current offshore wind farms, radially 
connected to the coast of their home country, can only bid their electricity at their nearest home 
country market region where they are connected. However, it is still up for discussion what market 
bidding configurations should be put in place for offshore energy hubs in the North Sea, where 
offshore wind farms will be connected to a meshed grid with connections to multiple countries. This 
thesis work investigates three possible day-ahead market configurations for offshore hubs in the 
North Sea: multiple offshore hub bidding zones, home country bidding zones and a single North Sea 
bidding zone. This investigation is based on energy system modelling results from the energy model 
Balmorel, covering all North Sea countries and other relevant Northern European countries, with a 
time horizon until 2050, year when the carbon neutrality target of the European Union should be met 
and a 100% sustainable energy system should be in place. Eight wind hubs belonging to five countries 
(Germany, Denmark, Netherlands, Norway and the UK) with a total wind capacity of 177 GW by 2040 
have resulted from the investment optimisation of the model. For these hubs, the before mentioned 
day-ahead market configurations have been simulated. Last, a balancing market simulation has also 
been executed in order to correct infeasible day-ahead dispatch schedules under the different market 
configurations. Modelling results show that the home country bidding and the single North Sea 
bidding zone options create more imbalances at the day-ahead market than the multiple hub bidding 
zone configuration. The latter market configuration reflects best the structural congestions of the 
system and therefore minimises the imbalances and dispatch corrections in the balancing market. 
Results of the balancing market simulations show significantly higher prices than the day-ahead 
market under all market configurations. In the analysis of the socioeconomic generation and 
transmission costs under the different market configurations, the multiple offshore hub bidding zone 
option presents the lowest specific costs per MWh generated. In terms of socioeconomic welfare, 
when considering imbalance settlement under one-price model for electricity generation units, the 
offshore hub bidding zone option presents the highest socioeconomic welfare due to lower imbalance 
costs and higher consumers surplus derived from lower balancing market prices. In addition to the 
socioeconomic welfare analysis, private economic feasibility studies have been developed for the wind 
farm projects installed in the North Sea connected to the hubs. Results show that the wind farms 
would need support mechanisms to be economically feasible under any of the market configurations. 
The most advantageous market configuration for the wind farm project promoters is found to be the 
home country market bidding zone option, thanks to the higher day-ahead market prices in the hubs 
compared to the other two market configurations. The higher day-ahead revenues for the offshore 
hub wind farms outweigh the increased imbalance costs under the home country market 
arrangement. Wind farms invested in 2040 show lower levels of profitability than those invested in 
2030 by reason of declining market prices as more renewable penetrate in the future. Last, another 
private economic assessment was performed for power to gas projects installed in the hubs and 
running on wind curtailment from the wind farms connected to these. For four of the eight hubs, 
profitable power-to-gas projects were found under the assumption of hydrogen prices of 5 EUR2016/kg. 
Contrary to wind farms, power-to-gas projects show to be more profitable with later investments by 
cause of increasing curtailment levels accompanying the higher renewables shares. These can 
therefore be an option to increase the profitability of the wind farms and reduce the need for support. 
==PAGE:5==
2 
Chapter 1.  Introduction 
The present thesis work aims to analyse the impact of the different market configurations that can be 
applied to offshore energy hubs. To set the scene for this analysis, perspectives for the energy system 
in the European Union pursuant decarbonisation targets are presented in this first introductory 
chapter, with a specific focus on the potential North Sea energy infrastructures. Additionally, since 
this thesis work evaluates different market configuration options, an overview of electricity markets 
in Europe is also described. 
1.1 The EU future energy system and the North Sea 
Fully committed to the Paris Agreement and its long-term goals [1] (2015), the European Union signed 
in 2019 The European Green Deal [2], a European growth strategy to transform the EU’s economy for 
a sustainable future. Accordingly, the European Council endorsed the objective of achieving a climate-
neutral European Union by 2050 and defined its strategic long-term vision to pursue a net zero green-
house gas emission economy [3]. This long-term strategy envisions an extensive electrification of the 
energy demand based on renewable energy penetration. By 2050, more than 80% of electricity will 
be coming from renewable energy sources, with electricity supplying half of the final energy demand 
in the EU [3]. To satisfy this increasing demand for electricity, production will need to raise by up to 
2.5 times above current levels [3]. An unprecedented large-scale deployment of renewables is 
happening in Europe in the coming decade. The European Investment Bank and the European 
Investment Fund aim to support 1 trillion EUR of investment in climate action and environmental 
sustainability from 2021 to 2030 [4]. Recent publications on EU dedicated energy strategies detail how 
this energy transformation is aimed to be developed. 
The strategy for energy system integration [5] (Jul 2020) advocates for a more efficient and integrated 
energy system that links energy carriers and sectors based on a highly electrified system with clean 
power and clean fuels for hard-to-electrify sectors like heavy industry or transport. 
The EU hydrogen strategy [6] (Jul 2020) seeks to promote clean hydrogen production in Europe, so 
hydrogen can be used as feedstock, fuel, energy carrier and storage to reduce green-house gas 
emissions across industry, transport, power and buildings sectors. 
The EU strategy on offshore renewable energy [7] (Nov 2020) assesses offshore energy potential in 
Europe and proposes ways forward to reinforce the role of offshore energy in the energy mix. This 
strategy sets ambitious targets for the growth of offshore renewable energies. For offshore wind, it 
foresees more than 60 GW of installed capacity by 2030 and 300 GW by 2050. This means a 5-fold 
(2030) and 25-fold growth (2050) with respect to today’s installed capacity, 12 GW. The necessary 
investments to realise the EU offshore renewable energy strategy are estimated at almost 800 billion 
EUR. The main elements of this strategy to successfully overcome the potential challenges awaiting 
offshore energy development include investment and financing, regional cooperation between 
member states, legal framework around offshore projects, markets, supply chains and innovation. 
From the different facets around offshore wind development in the EU, this thesis work deals with 
power markets that may apply to offshore energy systems, focused on the North Sea case. 
The North Sea has a high natural potential for offshore wind energy thanks to shallow waters and high 
wind speeds. The North Sea is currently the world’s leading region for deployed capacity and expertise 
in offshore wind [7]. While current offshore wind projects are deployed as national projects connected 
radially onshore, the massive large-scale deployment that is needed if offshore wind generation 
capacity targets are to be met calls for a more coordinated and strategic development approach from 
all North Sea countries. 60 or 300 GW (2030 and 2050 targets [7]) of offshore wind generation capacity 
==PAGE:6==
3 
need a more complex transmission network than point-to-point radial interconnectors from the wind 
farms to shore. 
Different coordination programmes have been created to investigate how to develop offshore energy 
infrastructures in the North Sea, e.g. The North Seas Countries’ Offshore Grid Initiative (NSCOGI) [8], 
the North Seas Energy Cooperation (NSEC) [9], North Sea Wind Power Hub Programme (NSWPH) [10], 
PROgress on Meshed HVDC1 Offshore Transmission Networks (PROMOTiON) [11] or the North Sea 
Offshore Network project [12]. Studies developed under these coordination platforms have shown 
that offshore HVDC meshed grids [13], hybrid projects combining both generation and transmission 
assets [14] and deployment under a modular hub-and-spoke concept [15] can bring substantial costs 
savings as for operation and maintenance, transmission and conversion infrastructures and other 
supporting infrastructure. According to [14], hybrid projects studied against reference conventional 
projects can translate into savings of 5 to 10% of total project costs. The same study also argues for 
costs savings with offshore hub concepts in reason of lower CAPEX of the substations, which can be 
placed on the hub and remove the need for their own offshore foundation, also allowing to build 
larger and cheaper substations. Hubs can also allow for a more cost-effective maintenance by 
accommodating staff and equipment. Additionally, power-to-gas infrastructures can also be built in 
the hubs. 
The present thesis work studies an energy system in the North Sea with offshore wind generation 
developed around multiple hubs connected to each other and to onshore networks through a meshed 
HVDC network. 
1.2 Electricity markets 
Electricity has differential characteristics from other commodities that make it unique and dependent 
on a complex sequence of markets. Electricity cannot be economically stored in large volumes yet and 
supply and demand must always match, while power load variation over time is limited to most 
generation or energy conversion units. These main limitations oblige to plan the operation of the 
system ahead and correct for possible dispatch imbalances up to the real time of delivery. A series of 
markets with different time horizons and products have been developed to incentive competition and 
facilitate economic transactions between markets agents with the final aim to achieve efficient 
markets that maximise socioeconomic welfare. 
Electricity markets have followed in Europe a continuous transformation since vertically integrated 
national electricity systems were the norm before liberalisation of the sector when the first European 
electricity directive came into force in 1996, Directive 96/92/EC [16], the First Package. Since then, 
three more packages have been released to harmonise and integrate electricity markets in the EU2. 
With these directives, vertically integrated utilities needed to effectively unbundle and national 
electricity markets were integrated. The European bodies ENTSO-E, the European Network of 
Transmission System Operators for Electricity, and ACER, Agency for the Cooperation of Energy 
Regulators, were born from these energy packages. The most recent, The Clean Energy Package [17], 
from 2019, consists of four directives and four regulations, from which Regulation EU 2019/943 on 
the internal electricity market [18] and Regulation EU 2019/944 on common rules for the internal 
market for electricity [19] are the most relevant in terms of changes introduced to electricity markets 
to EU Member States. Detailed market rules are defined in the EU network codes and guidelines. The 
main market codes that govern EU member states’ electricity markets are the capacity allocation and 
 
1 HVDC: high voltage direct current. 
2 Energy packages also set legislation for energy efficiency, renewable energy, governance, climate action, etc. 
==PAGE:7==
4 
congestion management guideline (CACM) [20], the forward capacity allocation guideline (FCA) [21] 
and the electricity balancing guideline (EBGL) [22]. Additionally, the  guideline on electricity 
transmission system operation (SOGL) [23] sets the general rules for the system operation of the 
network and has common points with the EBGL. 
Figure 1 displays an illustrative simplified scheme of the common sequence of electricity markets in 
the EU. Markets are organised by timeframe from the earliest forward markets to the latest ancillary 
services in real time of delivery of the electricity. Markets on the block above reflect financial markets 
where transactions are made between market agents, while markets on the block below show 
markets for the operation of the system, which are organised by the transmission system operators 
(TSOs) and which correspond to physical transactions. 
The commitment to physically supply or consume energy in the system is derived from balancing 
responsible party (BRP) agreements between market agents who trade physical electricity and the 
TSOs. BRPs are market participants connected to each metering point in the system that deliver or 
consume physical energy in the system. They must notify to the TSOs their consumption, generation 
or external trade operational schedule3 before the day of delivery and update on schedule changes 
during the day of delivery prior to the time of delivery (45 minutes earlier). After this moment, they 
are liable for any imbalance they incur and are subject to imbalance settlement, as it is explained 
further below in the balancing markets. Note that under the self-dispatching model, followed by most 
EU member states, BRPs can balance their schedule between their generation and demand facilities 
(see [22], Article 2.17). 
 
Figure 1. Simplified scheme of the sequence of electricity markets in Europe. Figure inspired by [24], [25] and [26]. The 
complete sequence of markets, times, auctioning/trading schemes may vary between EU Member States. The scheme shall 
only be taken as an illustrative reference of the basic markets sequence. * Some EU Member States have another tertiary 
reserve service activated after the mFRR, the replacement reserve (RR). This is not used in the Nordic system. 
Long-term energy markets can start from around four years up to one month before delivery of 
energy. These long-term markets include forward energy and cross-border capacity markets. Forward 
 
3 This energy schedule would have been traded in prior markets (forward, day-ahead, intraday) or bilaterally 
negotiated. 
==PAGE:8==
5 
energy products can be standardised through market exchange platforms or negotiated bilaterally 
over the counter (OTC). 
Energy prices are defined per bidding zone. The term biding zone is 
a key element of this thesis work, whose aim is to analyse the impact 
of different bidding zone configurations for offshore hubs. A bidding 
zone is considered as a copper plate for all electricity markets 
(forward energy and cross-border capacity markets, day-ahead and 
intraday). Only in system operation markets (balancing or 
reserves/ancillary services) run by the TSOs, internal congestions or 
bottlenecks inside a bidding zone can be contemplated. Figure 2 
shows the current bidding zone configuration in Europe. As it can be 
observed, bidding zones largely correspond to national boundaries, 
except for Italy, Denmark, Norway, and Sweden. If market agents 
want to make transactions in forward energy markets in different 
bidding zones, they need to acquire long-term cross-zonal 
transmission rights. The Forward Capacity Allocation Guideline 
(FCA) [21] regulates the allocation and calculation rules for cross-zonal transmission rights. Please note 
that day-ahead market does not involve explicit auctioning of transmission capacity, but implicit 
auctioning incorporated through the market coupling mechanism for all regions [27]. 
The main market in Europe is the day-ahead market (wholesale or spot market). This is a financial 
market, and it is not mandatory for market agents to buy or sell their energy on the spot market. It 
can be used to adjust long-term positions. Although volumes traded in the day-ahead markets may 
only be a share of the final volume of dispatched electricity4, day-ahead prices are the price reference 
in long-term contracts and close-to-delivery transactions in the balancing market. The day-ahead 
market consists of one pan-European auction at noon for the 24 hours of the next day. Bids are cleared 
according to merit order curves (increasing price bids for generation and decreasing price bids for 
demand) and are settled at the marginal offer price, where marginal demand and supply curves 
intersect. This is the market clearing price. The market mechanism by which the different national 
markets are integrated is the market coupling mechanism, Single Day-ahead Coupling (SDAC). It is a 
flow-based market coupling mechanism integrated in the central market clearing algorithm PCR5 
EUPHEMIA [28]. It optimally allocates scarce cross-border capacity by allowing cheaper electricity bids 
to flow to other bidding zones while respecting cross-border capacities. If there is no congestion 
between bidding zones, both zones receive the same market clearing price. If the line is congested, 
two different prices are cleared, a high price where the electricity flows to and a low price where the 
electricity flows from. Additionally, a congestion rent is also obtained in the line for the price 
differential, which is to be received by the TSOs. 
Once the day-ahead market is cleared, the intraday market opens. Intraday market trading can be 
done by continuous trading (where a market agent selects offers available on the electronic platform), 
by auctions or both, depending on the country. The future intraday European model will consist of a 
combination of continuous trading and auctions [25]. Day-ahead and intraday market, market 
coupling and cross-zonal intraday market design are described in the Capacity Allocation and 
Congestion Management Guideline (CACM) [20]. 
 
4 This share varies greatly between countries. See [78] for details. 
5 PCR stands for price coupling of regions 
Figure 2. Bidding zones in the EU as of 
September 2020. Figure from [25]. 
==PAGE:9==
6 
Intraday market is the last opportunity to correct 
positions in financial markets before the time of 
delivery. After the intraday gate closure, market 
positions are defined, and physical schedules are 
notified to the TSOs by all market agents. The TSOs are 
then responsible of ensuring the adequacy of the 
dispatch, that is, to make sure that supply equals 
demand at all moments and guarantee the system 
stability. To ensure this, the TSOs permanently 
monitor the frequency of the system, which in normal 
operation shall not deviate from 49.9 to 50.1 Hz. To 
maintain frequency levels and in general, ensure the 
system stability, the TSOs procure services known as 
ancillary services6. Reserves controlling frequency are the most prominent of these services and are 
often classified as primary, secondary and tertiary reserves according to their activation time 
sequence. Reserve service activation sequence is depicted in Figure 3. Table 1 describes the different 
reserve services according to the EBGL [22] and the detailed reserve products used in the Nordic 
System7. The TSOs procure these services through competitive markets. 
Reserve 
Type 
EBGL [22] 
Nordic System7 
Activation 
speed 
Purpose 
Market place 
Primary 
reserves 
Not 
mentioned 
Fast frequency 
reserves (FFR) 
(New service since 
May 2020) 
In a second Needed to handle disturbances in low inertia 
situations. Very fast response in case of large 
underfrequency. Comparable properties to 
spinning reserves (inertia). 
Hourly market with 
capacity payment. 
Only some hours and 
the volume to be 
procured may vary. 
Frequency 
containment 
reserves (FCR) 
Frequency 
containment 
reserves for 
disturbances (FCR-D) 
In seconds 
Up-regulation automatically activated in large 
frequency deviations resulting from the outage of 
major production units or lines. The aim is to 
stabilise frequency. 
Annual and hourly 
market8. 
Capacity bids. 
Frequency 
containment 
reserves for normal 
operation (FCR-N) 
In a couple 
of minutes 
Power increase or decrease. It activates continually 
and automatically for minor frequency deviation. 
The aim is to stabilise frequency. 
Annual and hourly 
market8. 
Capacity bids. 
Secondary 
reserves 
Frequency 
restoration 
reserves with 
automatic 
activation 
(aFRR) 
Automatic 
frequency 
restoration reserves 
(aFRR) 
In 5 
minutes 
Up and down regulation. It activates continually 
according to activation signal sent by the TSOs for 
minor frequency deviation. The aim is to restore 
frequency to the nominal level, 50 Hz. 
Hourly market with 
capacity payment and 
energy compensation. 
Only for some hours 
informed in advance. 
Tertiary 
reserves 
Frequency 
restoration 
reserves with 
manual 
activation 
(mFRR) 
Manual frequency 
restoration reserves 
(mFRR) 
In 15 
minutes 
Up and down regulation. Manually activated by 
TSO order to BSPs In the event of substantial 
imbalance between generation and consumption 
that cannot be restored by FCR. The aim is to 
restore frequency to the nominal level, 50 Hz. 
Balancing capacity and 
balancing energy 
market 
(further explained 
below). 
Replacement 
Reserves 
Not used 
From 15 
minutes up 
to an hour 
Active power reserve used to release or 
complement FRR in case of disturbances that last 
longer. Needed to prepare for further imbalances. 
Manually or semi-automatically activated. 
Annual and daily 
tenders. 
Table 1. Reserve services as defined by the electricity balancing guideline [22] and services procured in the Nordic System7. 
Activation speed, purpose of the service and marketplace where they are procured are detailed. Sources: [29][30][31]. 
 
6 Ancillary services include frequency services: reserves; and non-frequency services: steady state voltage 
control, reactive power control, fast reactive current injections, inertia for local grid stability, short-circuit 
current, black start capability and island operation capability. 
7 The Nordic system is formed by Denmark East (DK2), Finland, Norway and Sweden. 
8 FCR-D and FCR-N have identical conditions, content and payment terms. 
Figure 3. Activation time sequence of reserves for an
underfrequency disturbance. Inspired from [79][80][81].
==PAGE:10==
7 
Balancing markets are defined by the EBGL as all markets procuring balancing services, i.e. any 
frequency reserves: frequency containment, frequency restoration and replacement reserves ([22], 
Article 2.1-3). The EBGL seeks to harmonise and integrate reserve markets in the EU. Ongoing projects 
among EU TSOs to implement these are: FCR Cooperation [32], PICASSO (Platform for the 
International Coordination of Automated Frequency restoration and Stable System Operation) [33], 
MARI (Manually Activated Reserves Initiative) [34], TERRE (Trans European replacement Reserves 
Exchange) [35], and IGCC (International Grid Control Cooperation, for the future European Platform 
for the imbalance netting process) [36][37]. 
For the scope of this work, we concentrate on 
balancing capacity and balancing energy markets 
understood as the markets procuring manual 
frequency restoration reserves. These reserves 
are the most predominant standard product and 
set the price for imbalance settlements9. In 
balancing capacity markets, one year ahead up to 
one day-ahead of delivery, the TSO contracts to 
Balancing Service Providers (BSPs) availability 
capacities that need to be put at disposition of 
the TSO in the balancing energy market. Before 
the time of delivery, in the balancing energy 
markets, bids are placed by BSPs and the TSO 
orders these according to a merit order curve. In 
case of system imbalance10, the TSO activates 
bids successively by price order until restoring the system balance. The energy cleared in the balancing 
energy market is thus the total volume of activated bids and the market clearing price is settled at the 
price offered by the last bid activated, the most expensive for the system. Bids can be placed for 
upward regulation (increase generation/reduce demand) or downward regulation (reduce 
generation/increase demand). They can be offered both by the BSPs contracted in the balancing 
capacity market and other BSPs eligible to provide balancing services11. 
Following the balancing market, imbalance settlements are applied to all balance responsible parties 
(BRPs) for their deviations from their notified schedules. Two price settlement models can be applied. 
There is the one-price model, where all imbalances are settled at the balancing clearing price, and the 
two-price model, where involuntary imbalances that help restore the system are settled at the day-
ahead market clearing price, while imbalances contributing to the system imbalance are settled at the 
balancing market price. With the latter model, BRPs can only be penalised for their imbalances and 
not compensated for them, even when they help restoring the system balance. In the case of 
Denmark, the one-price model is applied to consumption and trade imbalances, while the two-price 
model is applied to production imbalances. It is worth clarifying that the Danish TSO, Energinet, refers 
to the balancing energy market as regulating market and balancing market corresponds to imbalance 
settlements. A detailed description of its regulation can be found in [38]. 
 
9 The EBGL sets imbalance prices as the weighted average price of frequency restoration reserves and 
replacement reserves ([22], Article 55.4 and 5). 
10 System imbalance can be either positive, when supply is higher than demand, or negative, when supply is 
lower than demand. 
11 In order to do so, they must be able to activate the capacity needed with a 15-minute notice by the TSO. This 
service can be provided though a group of generation units. 
Figure 4. Scheme of the balancing market arrangements. In 
horizontal, time of occurrence. In vertical, market actors. 
Actual markets shaded in grey, costs shaded in red. 
Information flows represented by grey arrows and money 
transfers by red arrows. Figure from [82]. 
==PAGE:11==
8 
Chapter 2.  Methodology 
This chapter presents the methodology used in this thesis work. First, the fundamentals of energy 
modelling in Balmorel, the energy modelling tool used as the basis of the analysis in this work, are 
described. Second, the different market configurations object of this work are presented, as well as 
how these have been modelled in Balmorel. Last, it is detailed how the socioeconomic analysis of 
Balmorel results and the private economic feasibility analysis for the wind farm and power-to-gas 
projects have been performed. 
2.1 Energy modelling in Balmorel 
Characteristics of energy models and Balmorel 
Energy system modelling tools are extensively used for a wide range of purposes and by many 
different energy stakeholders, from research institutions to energy regulators, transmission system 
operators, energy industry companies, governmental authorities or the European Commission. 
Among others, possible applications can be transmission infrastructures investment planning (e.g. 
models used by the ENTSOs to determine their ten-year national development plans [39]), national 
energy forecasts (e.g. RAMSES model by the Danish Energy Agency [40]), scenario building for 
decision-making (e.g. STREAM by the Danish Board of technology [41]), studies on sector coupling (e.g. 
METIS model by the European Commission [42]), analyses of the value of wind energy in the future 
(e.g. Balmorel by Ea Energy Analyses [43]), etc. 
A comparison of the most used energy modelling tools can be found in [44]. Energy models can be 
defined according to different categories. They can be described as simulation tools, where the 
operation of the energy system is simulated to supply a given demand; scenario tools, which combine 
different years to create a long-term scenario. They can also be categorised as equilibrium models, 
where energy markets are simulated and the behaviour of their market agents and prices is linked to 
part (partial equilibrium) or the whole economy (total equilibrium). Another categorisation originates 
from the type of data and results that the model focuses on. Top-down models use macroeconomic 
data to resolve energy prices or demands, while bottom-up tools analyse the system based on specific 
energy technology data. Optimisation tools rely on a mathematical optimisation model, based on 
operations research, and can optimise investments in the energy system (investment planning model) 
or the energy system operation. 
As concluded in [44], there is no energy modelling tool that addresses all issues related to energy 
systems. The optimal energy model highly depends on the specific goals and scope of the intended 
study. For the scope and aim of this work, which is to analyse the impact on the overall energy system 
of different market configuration possibilities for the North Sea offshore hubs, the model Balmorel 
was selected as an optimal modelling tool for the following reasons: it is a robust model that has been 
continuously developed since 2000; it is an open-source model; it has a complete and detailed 
characterisation of the electricity and heat systems in the Northern European countries around the 
North Sea; it models the electricity and heat system operation as an energy integrated system and it 
also accounts for sector coupling with the transport sector based on power-to-fuels; it is an 
optimisation model that allows successive layers of simulation, from investment planning to day-
ahead market and balancing market simulation at an hourly resolution (or lower if needed for the 
balancing market); and most importantly, it has recently incorporated energy hub modelling in the 
North Sea [45], which is the basis of the North Sea energy system that is investigated in this work. 
The model Balmorel was first released in 2001 by Havs Ravn et al. [46] and it has been in constant 
development since then. Balmorel is a bottom-up partial equilibrium energy system optimisation 
==PAGE:12==
9 
model with great detail of the electricity and heat systems, but with other end-user energy 
commodities available (hydrogen, biofuels and synthetic fuels). The geographical and time horizon of 
the model depends on the data used. The model setup used in this work counted with data for 
Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Finland, Germany, Netherlands, Belgium, France, Poland and the UK, from 
2025 to 2045. The geographical resolution of the different decision variables of the model varies 
hierarchically from country level to regional (electricity optimisation) and area level (highest degree 
of detail, where the heat balance is solved). The time resolution has three entities: year, season and 
timestep. The entities season and timestep are flexible and can refer to different time resolutions. 
These are changed in the successive optimisation layers, as it is explained later. 
Balmorel is coded in GAMS (General Algebraic Modelling System) language. The underlying 
mathematical optimisation model can be defined as a linear or mixed integer problem. The latter 
allows to use binary variables related to the unit commitment of generators. Other binary variables 
have been introduced, for example, related to the investment of transmission lines or the offshore 
hubs in the North Sea.  Main input data of the model are fuels, fuel costs, generation and conversion 
units, their operation constraints and investment and operational costs, transmission lines costs, hubs 
costs, lifetimes, emission factors, variable renewable energy technologies and their production 
profiles in the different areas, energy commodities demands, and storages. 
Balmorel, with an open-source character, has been developed around a base model through addons 
that have been incorporated for different purposes. Among these can be found balancing market, 
ancillary services, offshore grids, hydrogen, demand response, unit commitment, policies, etc. Some 
of these have been used in the simulations performed for this work. 
The objective function of the base model in Balmorel minimises total system costs, including 
investment costs, electricity and heat generation and transmission costs, generation, fuel and 
emission taxes, changes in consumers utility relative to electricity and heat consumption, and penalty 
costs related to infeasibilities in the model. The main constraints are the energy balance equations 
that ensure that electricity and heat supply equal demand in every timestep and region or area; 
capacity constraints that limit the generation of units; energy constraints that limit generation or 
storage over a certain time period; operational constraints, which reflect technical operational 
characteristics of generation units, like feasible operating regions of combined heat and power 
thermal units, minimum loads, ramp up and down capacity, etc. Finally, there are other constraints 
related to diverse system restrictions, like maximum investment capacity over a certain period, policy 
targets (emissions limits, renewable generation share or fossil fuel restrictions), etc. 
Balmorel simulations for this work 
Balmorel simulations executed for this thesis work have been done over already defined model 
configurations, including all input data and most setting options, stablished in previous works at DTU 
Management – Energy, Economics and Regulation. Regarding the modelling in Balmorel, contribution 
of this work is limited to add specific code lines to simulate day-ahead optimisations under scenarios 
with unlimited capacities. Additionally, Balmorel options selection had to be adjusted for day-ahead 
and balancing simulations. Last, Python codes were elaborated to process GAMS gdx files generated 
by Balmorel, in order to generate visualizations of results and export specific results12 into Excel files 
for their successive analysis. 
 
12 Balmorel results were imported as data frames with one single numerical value per row and corresponding 
attributes as columns. Python processing included, among other, filtering, merging data frames, grouping data 
by regions or areas, calculations, and generating pivot tables. 
==PAGE:13==
10 
Four successive simulation layers have been executed for this work: the “investment optimisation”, 
“full year optimisation”, “day-ahead optimisation” and “balancing optimisation”. The time horizon 
considered for the overall simulation process was intended to cover the period from 2020 until 2050, 
year where the European Union target for decarbonisation and sustainable economy should be met. 
This period is assumed to be represented by simulations of years 2025, 2035 and 2045, each of them 
representing one decade. As mentioned earlier, the geographical horizon of the simulations includes 
the most relevant Northern European countries, subdivided in regions and areas, and the North Sea 
region with potential for investment in hubs, offshore transmission grid and wind farms connected to 
the offshore hubs13. 
The investment optimisation is 
the first optimisation problem. 
The 
problem 
optimises 
the 
investment 
planning 
of 
generation 
and 
transmission 
capacity along 2025, 2035 and 
2045, needed to satisfy the 
energy demand and meet the 
policy targets of emissions and 
renewable shares at the lowest 
cost. 
Investment 
costs 
are 
annuitized, and a discount factor 
is applied at a socioeconomic 
discount rate of 4%. Details of the 
investment optimisation can be 
found in [45]. The investment run 
has been solved using linear 
programming, 
therefore 
no 
binary or integer variables can be 
considered 
that 
allow 
to 
introduce 
the 
modelling 
of 
economies of scale or lumpiness 
of investments. This is especially relevant for the offshore grid in the North Sea, as seen in [45], since 
the high voltage direct current lines and hubs investment fixed costs are larger than the investment 
variable cost per unit of capacity installed. As a result, a higher number of transmission lines is invested 
in the offshore grid, some of them with a very small capacity, than what it would have been obtained 
with a mixed integer problem (MIP). Since the investment planning is a long-term problem, it is more 
important to define a problem with a longer time horizon than to have a very detailed time resolution. 
Both cannot be assumed due to the computational heaviness of this problem, which must decide what 
generation technologies and transmission lines to invest, how much capacities, where and when to 
invest them. Thereby, the time resolution is aggregated in 16 seasons and 24 timesteps per season. 
The problem is solved for the three years considered, 2025, 2035 and 2045 (representing the 2020-
2050 period) with a rolling time horizon of 2 years. That is, when deciding the optimal investments for 
 
13 Geographical entities are: 10 countries (BE, DK, DE, FR, FI, NL, NO, PL, SE and UK); 37 regions where the 
electricity balance is defined (day-ahead bidding zones), including 16 potential hub regions; and 408 areas where 
the heat balance is defined, also with heat prices associated per timestep. 
Figure 5. Sequence of modelling optimisations executed in Balmorel. For 
simplicity in the diagram, only the main input data and results are shown. Market 
configuration scenarios are S1: offshore hub bidding zones, S2: home country 
market bidding zones, and S3: North Sea bidding zone.  
==PAGE:14==
11 
2025, data from 2025 and 2035 is considered; for 2035 investment optimisation, data from 2035 and 
2045 is contemplated, and finally for 2045, only 2045 data is available. 
The full year optimisation takes as exogenous parameters the capacity development obtained in the 
investment optimisation. The full year run optimises, for every year simulated, the planned 
maintenance of fuel-based thermal generation units and the storage use, which are long-term 
operational decisions that cannot be decided in the short-term day-ahead optimisation. Unit-
commitment constraints and variables are included in this optimisation problem. However, due to the 
complexity of the problem, the integer variables are relaxed, and the problem is solved as a relaxed 
mixed integer problem (RMIP)14. In terms of time resolution, for each of the 364 seasons (representing 
days), only 1 every 4 hours is used. [47] provides with more details about this optimisation problem. 
The day-ahead optimisation is the next optimisation problem. Availability of units in the day-ahead is 
a result of the planned maintenance defined in the prior modelling step, and the initial storage content 
at the beginning of each season (day) is also defined by the storage use from the previous full year 
run. The day-ahead problem optimises the energy dispatch for every hour in time periods every 24 
hours. The temporal entities are set then as 364 seasons (days) and 24 timesteps (hours). This 
simulation would replicate the principles of electricity day-ahead markets in Europe, in which 
generation and demand bids are scheduled according to merit order curves (from lower to higher 
marginal costs for generators; from higher to lower marginal utilities for consumers) and thereby 
social welfare is maximised. The market clearing price is found where the marginal demand and supply 
curves meet. In mathematical terms, the hourly market clearing price in each region (area for heat) 
corresponds to the dual variable or shadow price of the energy balance constraint for that region (area 
for heat). The result of this optimisation step gives the day-ahead dispatch schedule (generation, 
transmission and demand), as well as day-ahead prices for both electricity and heat for all hours and 
regions/areas. It is within this simulation step that the 3 market configuration scenarios are 
implemented. This is explained in the section Market configurations. 
Last, the balancing market simulation is executed. The balancing market is essentially a similar 
operation optimisation problem than the prior day-ahead run. However, the balancing market inherits 
from the day-ahead the unit commitment values of generation units, thus an initial restriction to the 
operation optimisation. Another fundamental difference is the time horizon of the optimisation. While 
the day-ahead optimisation had a time horizon of 24 hours, the balancing market optimises the energy 
system operation one hour15 at a time and has no foresight of what is coming in the next hour. This 
can affect all units with inter-temporal constraints, among other, generation units with ramping 
constraints, storages and hydro. Additionally, storages and hydro reservoirs behaviour is also 
influenced by the day-ahead dispatch schedule results. Basically, the hourly price found for the energy 
stored is fixed as the value of the energy that has the hydro reservoir or storage in the balancing 
market for each hour. According to that value, assimilated as marginal cost of the energy dispatched 
at that hour, will the hydro reservoir produce, or the storage produce or consume. 
The beforementioned approach to simulate the balancing market does not reflect how the balancing 
markets work in reality in most EU electricity markets, as it was explained in section Electricity 
markets. In balancing markets, the TSO only activates the necessary balancing bids to restore the 
system balance, thus it is only the imbalance perceived by the TSO that is cleared in the balancing 
 
14 In RMIP, integer variables are relaxed as continuous. For example, a binary variable that would take either 0 
or 1 values in the MIP problem, in the RMIP, could take all values between 0 and 1. 
15 The time resolution for the balancing market (and any other market) can also be set with a higher detail, 30, 
15 or 5 minutes. This is a matter of input data and setting time entities accordingly. 
==PAGE:15==
12 
energy market. Moreover, only the market agents with regulating capacity (able to respond at a 15-
minute notice to activate a certain power load, 5-10MW) can participate and impact the regulating 
market clearing price. The balancing market involves a subsequent process of imbalance settlement 
of all market agents for the imbalances they incur. Please see details in section Electricity markets. In 
the simulation that is implemented in Balmorel, all energy16 is traded for every hour and all market 
agents participate, so the balancing market clearing price could be potentially set by any of them. 
Balmorel balancing market simulation shall be regarded as a market allowing dispatch corrections 
after the day ahead market and before its time scope from the delivery time, in this work, one hour. 
Price results from this simulation must be taken with care if they are to be compared with regulating 
market prices. Despite this limitation to reflect the real behaviour of the balancing market, this 
simulation allows to correct inadequate dispatch schedules from the day-ahead market. As it is 
explained in the next section Market configurations, this is of paramount importance, since in 
scenarios S2 (home country bidding zones) and scenario S3 (North Sea bidding zone), the real 
transmission capacities between hub and home countries (scenario S2) and between hubs (scenario 
S3) are hidden to the day-ahead market and assumed unlimited. This can originate a day-ahead 
dispatch schedule with higher electricity transmission flows than what the lines can withhold. This 
infeasible day-ahead dispatch needs to be corrected in the balancing market, whose redispatch has a 
socioeconomic welfare impact. 
Modelling 
step 
Number of 
simulations17 
Number of  
optimisations 
Years (per 
simulation) 
Seasons (per 
year) 
Timesteps (per 
season) 
Time foresight 
Investment 
optimisation 
(LP) 
1 
2 
3 
16 
(weeks 
selected every 
3, starting 
from week 2) 
24 
(1 every 3 hours 
selected, from 
Thursday, Friday 
and Saturday 
2 rolling years 
(In the 2025 simulation, there 
is foresight of 2025 and 2035. 
In 2035 simulation, of 2035 
and 2045). 
Full year 
optimisation 
(RMIP) 
3 
3 
(one per year) 
1 
364 
(equivalent to 
days) 
6 
(1 every 4 hours) 
1 year 
Day-ahead 
optimisation 
(MIP) 
9 
(3 years x 3 
scenarios) 
3,276 
(9 simulations x 
364 days) 
1 
364 
(equivalent to 
days) 
24 
(equivalent to 
hours) 
1 season - day 
(covering 24 timesteps - 
hours) 
Balancing 
simulation 
(LP) 
27 
(3 simulations per 
year x 3 years x 3 
scenarios) 
78,624 
(27 simulations x 
2,912 18seasons 
per simulation) 
1/3 
8,736 
(equivalent to 
hours) 
1 
(equivalent to 
hours, same as 
season) 
1 season - hour 
(covering 1 timestep - hour) 
Table 2. Summary of the Balmorel simulations performed for this work, including the number of simulations and optimization 
problems solved, what the different hierarchical time entities correspond to, i.e. the level of aggregation or time resolution, 
and the time foresight of the model. The type of optimization problem is also mentioned in parenthesis in the first column: LP 
stands for linear programming, RMIP stands for relaxed mixed integer programming, and MIP stands for mixed integer 
programming. In total, 40 Balmorel simulations are necessary to run the whole modelling process of this work. 
Balmorel strengths and limitations 
Balmorel is a robust model whose core base model has proved to be useful and suitable for the 
multiple developments that have been implemented as addons to the model. These developments 
have been facilitated by its opensource character. Balmorel can be freely downloaded from [48]. The 
model has been applied to very diverse energy system studies, by many energy stakeholders 
throughout the world (e.g. [41][43][49][50][51]). The model has been coded in a general and flexible 
 
16 Dispatchable units withhold a share of their capacity for ancillary reserves. 
17 Simulations meant as model executions. 
18 For balancing simulations, the annual runs were divided in 3 periods because the computational time of solving 
one whole year exceeds the limit per job on DTU clusters, limited to 72 hours per job. Therefore, the 8,736 hours 
per year were divided in 3 periods of 2,912 hours. 
==PAGE:16==
13 
way that allows it to be used for very different geographical and temporal scopes and resolutions. The 
model can be used to plan the investment of multiple countries or optimise the hourly system 
operation. This has been the case of the modelling process performed for this work, where simulations 
start by defining the optimal system capacities and end in the balancing market simulations. The 
model also allows for any energy commodity and these can be easily coupled through energy 
conversion units. The energy system integrated vision of the model allows to account for sector 
coupling effects, very relevant for the interaction between electricity and heat markets, and of the 
utmost importance when simulating future scenarios with high electrification and power-to-x 
conversion [66]. Last, as mentioned in the precedent section, recent developments for the simulation 
of offshore energy infrastructures in the North Sea [45] have been added to the model  and have made 
this work possible. 
On the limitations of the model, it can be mentioned that Balmorel model is eminently a deterministic 
energy system model with perfect foresight. Some stochastic elements have been added, such as 
stochastic outages of units with commitment variables. Variable renewable energy available 
generation is modelled as an exogenous time series, although these time series have some 
stochasticity incorporated in the simulation tool CoRES where they are imported from [52]. It must be 
said that the application of a fully stochastic model with Monte Carlo or Markov chains simulations to 
the multiple stochastic elements of a complete energy system seems not possible. The model can 
already be quite computationally heavy as it. To have an idea of this, the whole modelling process for 
this work takes 40 simulations, each of them using 2 to 10 threads of 10 GB of memory, and with 
solving times ranging from some hours for the investment simulation to almost 3 days for the full-
year, day-ahead (solved as MIP) and the Balancing market simulations. 
It can also be added as possible shortcomings of Balmorel that day-ahead and balancing market 
simulations do not simulate precisely how these markets work in most European countries. Day-ahead 
markets in Europe optimise the dispatch of generation and demand bids elaborated by market agents, 
which can be simple (one hour, one volume and one price), but also complex (aggregated hourly 
orders, minimum income condition orders, load gradient orders, etc. [28]). Yet, economic theory 
reveals that the day-ahead market should behave as the day-ahead market is modelled in Balmorel 
given an atomistic market structure where all market agents act as price takers and whose optimal 
bidding price corresponds to their marginal utility or cost [53]. More important is the difference in the 
modelling approach of the Balancing market than how these markets work in most European 
countries. As mentioned earlier, while the current balancing market simulation in Balmorel assimilates 
to a day-ahead market applied to every hour (or lower timesteps if desired) with some unit 
commitments fixed from the day-ahead schedule, the balancing energy market in reality only clears 
energy volumes equal to the perceived imbalance by the TSOs and perform a subsequent imbalance 
settlement for all agents incurring in deviations from their scheduled dispatch notification [38]. 
2.2 Market configurations 
Previous works have studied possible market configurations for offshore hubs in the North Sea. A 
pioneering work from 2010, analysing offshore grids applied to the case of Kriegers Flak project 
between Germany, Sweden and Denmark, explored an offshore bidding zone option for the wind 
farms against allocating the wind farms to their respective country markets [54]. Roland Berger 
prepared and extensive study for the European Commission in 2019 about hybrid projects in the North 
Sea Region [14]. In the case analysis of the North Sea Wind Power Hub [10] for an offshore hub concept 
between Germany, the Netherlands and Denmark, they point at four market arrangement 
possibilities: commercial flows to the home markets of the offshore wind farms, dynamic flows to the 
high-price market connected to the offshore wind farm,  dynamic flows to the low-price market, and 
==PAGE:17==
14 
a dedicated bidding zone for the hub. These market setups are analysed in the report “Market setup 
options to integrate hybrid projects into the European electricity Market”, from the North Sea Wind 
Power Hub Programme, published in April 2020 [55]. In a study for the Danish part of the North Sea 
Offshore Network, NSON-DK [12], from July 2020, “Market arrangements for offshore wind energy 
networks” [56], three market possibilities are evaluated for the NSWPH, an offshore bidding zone, a 
home country setup, and a reference business as usual radial case. The most recent and complete 
study on market configurations for offshore energy hubs is the one performed by THEMA Consulting 
Group for the European Commission [57]. From the 4 possibilities conceived in [14], the two dynamic-
flow options to low and high priced markets are discarded on the grounds of discriminatory treatment 
of market agents and bidding zone instability, against articles 3.e and 33.1.c of the Capacity Allocation 
and Management Guideline (CACM) [20]. Therefore, only the two remaining options, offshore bidding 
zones and home market zones, are investigated in detail. Table 3 summarises the market 
configurations analysed in each of the beforementioned studies. 
Market configuration 
Roland Berger 
[14] 
NSWPH 
[55] 
NSON-DK 
[56] 
THEMA 
[57] 
Home country bidding zones 
x 
x 
x 
x 
Dynamic to high-price bidding zone 
x 
 
 
x 
Dynamic to low-price bidding zone 
x 
 
 
x 
Offshore bidding zone 
x 
x 
x 
x 
Table 3. Market configurations for offshore hubs studied in recent works [14] [55] [56] [57]. 
This thesis work considers the following three options for day-ahead market configurations at the 
hubs: 
1. Multiple offshore hub bidding zones (scenario S1). 
2. Home country bidding zones (scenario S2). 
3. Single North Sea bidding zone (scenario S3). 
The three day-ahead market options were simulated in the energy model Balmorel as three different 
scenarios. Day-ahead market bidding zones correspond to a geographical area to which network 
constraints are applied. Inside the bidding zone, unlimited transmission capacity is assumed, and 
consequently, all submitted bids in the same bidding zone will necessarily be subjected to the same 
unique market clearing price [28]. A bidding zone in Balmorel can be defined as a region, or 
alternatively, as it has been done for this work, separate regions can be assimilated to the same one 
by increasing the transmission capacity between them to infinite19 and setting transmission losses to 
zero. In scenario S1 (offshore hub bidding zones), regions and real capacities are left as they are in the 
day-ahead market simulation, Figure 6 (left plot); thereupon each hub is one individual market region 
with an individual price. In scenario S2 (home country bidding zones), the line capacities between the 
hubs and their respective home country regions were increased to infinite. As seen in Figure 6 (middle 
plot), unlimited lines are NO-HubWest to NO2, NO-HubEast to NO2, DK-Hub to DK1, DE-NorWin to 
DE4W, DE-BorWin to DE4W, NL-Hub to NL, UK-DoggerBank to UK and UK-HornSea to UK. The hubs in 
this case belong to their home country regions and get the same day-ahead market clearing price. In 
scenario 3 (single North Sea bidding zone), the lines set to unlimited capacity are all 15 lines between 
the hubs, Figure 6 (right plot), thus a unique price is obtained for all hubs. 
 
19 10,000 GW used in the model. 
==PAGE:18==
15 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Day-ahead market configuration options for the North Sea hubs simulated as three scenarios in Balmorel. The figures 
display the three scenarios simulated in Balmorel, S1 – offshore hub bidding zones, S2 – home country bidding zones, and S3 
– North Sea bidding zone. Colors correspond to bidding zones in the day-ahead market. Scenario S1 maintains transmission 
lines capacities as they are. In scenario S2, lines hub-home-country have unlimited capacity to ensure unique price to the 
home country region (lines color correspond to the home country and their higher width represents unlimited transmission 
between the hubs and their home country). In scenario S3, infinite capacities are stablished between the hubs and represent 
one single separate bidding zone in the day-ahead market. 
Day-ahead market configurations in scenarios S2 (home country bidding zones) and S3 (North Sea 
bidding zone) hide the true structural congestion of the system and therefore can lead to infeasible 
day-ahead dispatch schedules that include higher transmission flows than the real capacities in hub-
home country (S2) and hub-hub lines (S3). This potential inadequacies in the day-ahead dispatch 
schedules for scenarios S2 and S3 must be corrected in the balancing market by the respective TSOs. 
This issue is often disregarded in market arrangement studies. It is explained in the THEMA Consulting 
Group work for the European Commission [57], but no modelling has been performed that can offer 
an idea of the quantitative impact that these balancing market corrections may have. The present 
work does include an approach to model the Balancing market in Balmorel and address these day-
ahead inadequacies surged in scenarios S2 and S3. As mentioned in the previous section Energy 
modelling in Balmorel, the balancing market simulation does not replicate with precision how the 
balancing market works in the EU [38]. Therefore, results from this simulation must be taken with 
care, but they are at least a market modelling approach that corrects day-ahead schedule 
inadequacies resulting from market configurations in scenarios S2 and S3. 
2.3 Socio-economic welfare analysis 
A socio-economic analysis is performed in this work following a long-term perspective of the different 
market agents. The fundamental indicator for a socioeconomic analysis is the socio-economic welfare 
(SEW). In energy economics, this is often regarded from the short-term equilibrium perspective of the 
day-ahead market as the difference between the consumers’ value of electricity minus the producers’ 
cost plus the congestion rents that may arise between market regions (e.g. [58]). The maximisation of 
the socioeconomic welfare is what make energy markets efficient by maximising the energy consumed 
and minimising its cost of production [53]. 
A socioeconomic evaluation can include other concepts than SEW, like security of supply or renewable 
integration, which can be part of the indicators considered in a complete cost benefit analysis (CBA). 
An example of CBA methodologies used in the energy sector in Europe are those developed by the 
European Network Transmission System Operators for electricity and gas (ENTSOE [39] and ENSTOG 
[59]), used in their long-term network planning exercises, the ten-year national development plans 
(TYNDP). In the scope of this work, the focus will be put only in the SEW indicator and the welfare 
distribution between the different market agents in both the electricity and heat markets that are 
simulated with Balmorel. 
==PAGE:19==
16 
Welfare distribution is of paramount interest in this work thus the surplus for each market agent will 
be analysed in order to assess how the different electricity day-ahead market configurations affect 
the welfare of each of the market agents. These power market configurations will of course impact 
market agents in the heat market in reason of strong sector coupling between electricity and heat that 
will be experienced in the future integrated energy system. In Balmorel, power and heat markets are 
integrated and co-dispatched, and interact dynamically to achieve the lowest overall cost of the whole 
system. 
In the next paragraphs, welfare calculations for the different energy market agents are explained. 
Some remarks can be stated before describing these. First, it must be noted that all values are 
calculated as annuitized values for the three years simulated in Balmorel, 2025, 2035 and 2045, 
representing the three decades 2020s, 2030s, and 2040s, up to 2050, year when Europe has set its 
target of carbon neutrality. Second, although heat transmission is also simulated in Balmorel, heat 
transmission costs are disregarded in the analysis, since it is understood that these are minor 
compared to other welfare concepts in the analysis and will add minor value to the conclusions of this 
work. Last, it is worth remarking that a long-term perspective is taken in this work, so will agents’ 
surpluses include capital costs of the energy infrastructures that are invested. 
Electricity producers surplus 
Electricity producers’ surplus is calculated according to equations [1] to [5] 20. 
 
𝐸𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑒𝑟𝑠 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑙𝑢𝑠
= 𝐷𝑎𝑦 𝑎ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑 𝑟𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒𝑠+ 𝐵𝑎𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡 𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑡𝑙𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠
−𝑂𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠−𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠 
Where: 
(Eq. 1) 
 
𝐷𝑎𝑦 𝑎ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑 𝑟𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒𝑠= ∑𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑢,ℎ
𝐷𝐴× 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑟,ℎ
𝐷𝐴
ℎ,𝑟,𝑢
 
(Eq. 2) 
 
𝐵𝑎𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡 𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑡𝑙𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠= ∑(𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑢,ℎ
𝑏𝑎𝑙−𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑢,ℎ
𝐷𝐴) × 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑟,ℎ
𝑏𝑎𝑙
ℎ,𝑟,𝑢
 
(Eq. 3) 
 
𝑂𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠
= ∑𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑢,ℎ
𝑏𝑎𝑙
ℎ,𝑢
× (𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠𝑢,ℎ
𝑓𝑢𝑒𝑙+ 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠𝑢,ℎ
𝑒𝑚𝑖+ 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠𝑢,ℎ
𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑚𝑖𝑡+ 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠𝑢,ℎ
𝑂&𝑀) 
(Eq. 4) 
 
𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠= 𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑢× 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠𝑢
𝑐𝑎𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙 
(Eq. 5) 
Electricity producers’ surplus is the only market agent for which a balancing market settlement has 
been decided to be applied. As it has been explained in the section Energy modelling in Balmorel, the 
balancing market simulation does not represent precisely how the balancing market works in reality. 
The balancing market simulation shall be considered like a market simulation that allows to correct 
infeasible dispatch schedules from the day-ahead market (although it has inherent changes in the 
redispatch due to a different simulation time horizon). Therefore, in general, all market agents’ 
welfares have been calculated using balancing market results, with the exception of electricity 
 
20 Abbreviations used: h = hours, r = day-ahead market regions/zones, u = generation units, gen = generation (of 
electricity or heat), xDA = energy volume or price in day-ahead market clearing, xbal = energy volume or price in 
balancing market clearing, emi = emissions, commit = commitment, O&M = operation and maintenance. 
==PAGE:20==
17 
producers and electricity transmission. For the first, considering only balancing market results, which 
have resulted in higher prices, involves welfare gains due to the rise in prices, even when generation 
units reduce their dispatched volumes. Thus, it was considered a fairer representation of welfare to 
keep day ahead revenues for electricity generation units and add imbalance costs derived from their 
redispatch. An imbalance settlement has been applied to electricity generation units based on a one-
price model21. This allows to reflect to some extent the day-ahead market volumes and prices obtained 
under the three different market configurations and how much the balancing market settlements 
impact the socioeconomic welfare. Second, for electricity transmission, congestion rents were also 
calculated based on day ahead market results, since balancing markets are eminently localised within 
TSO regions. For the remaining market agents, only market balancing results were considered since 
these reflect better the market conditions of the final dispatch. 
Electricity consumers surplus 
Electricity consumers’ surplus is calculated according to equations [6] to [9] 22. 
 
𝐸𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑢𝑚𝑒𝑟𝑠 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑙𝑢𝑠
= 𝑊𝑖𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠 𝑡𝑜 𝑝𝑎𝑦 𝑓𝑜𝑟 𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦
−𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝑜𝑓 𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝑖𝑛 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑏𝑎𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡
−𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝑜𝑓 𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑑 
Where: 
(Eq. 6) 
 
𝑊𝑖𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠 𝑡𝑜 𝑝𝑎𝑦= ∑𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑟,ℎ
𝑏𝑎𝑙× 𝑉𝑜𝐿𝐿𝑒𝑙
ℎ,𝑟
 
(Eq. 7) 
 
𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝑜𝑓 𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦= ∑𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑟,ℎ
𝑏𝑎𝑙× 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑟,ℎ
𝑏𝑎𝑙
ℎ,𝑟
 
(Eq. 8) 
 
𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝑜𝑓 𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑑= ∑𝐿𝐿𝑟,ℎ
𝑏𝑎𝑙× 𝑉𝑜𝐿𝐿𝑒𝑙
ℎ,𝑟
 
(Eq. 9) 
Electricity consumers surplus only accounts for the energy volumes from inflexible demand (final users 
from the retail market), electric vehicles and power-to-fuels. Electric vehicles can also act as net 
producers for the grid (V2G), but this production is disregarded in the consumers surplus. Demand 
from storages and power-to-heat has not been considered to avoid double counting, since these are 
reflected in the operational costs of the producers’ welfare calculations. Transmission and distribution 
losses have not been accounted either on the demand side since these energy volumes are included 
as well in the generation costs. Consumers welfare is based on the difference between consumers’ 
willingness to pay for the electricity and the costs of purchasing it in the market (at the market clearing 
price). An additional cost has been added to consider the loss of value when demand cannot be met 
by supply and there is load shed. This is valued at the value of lost load (VoLL). A relevant simplification 
has been made to value the consumers’ willingness to pay. This has been set as the price cap for Nord 
Pool day-ahead market, 3,000 EUR/MWh, with the idea that this could be representative of the value 
of lost load (VoLL) for consumers. There are different studies however that have investigated the value 
of lost load for final consumers in different countries in Europe [60], [61], which suggest higher values. 
 
21 i.e. the difference between the balancing market and day-ahead dispatch multiplied by the balancing market 
clearing price. 
22 Abbreviations used: h = hours, r = day-ahead market regions/zones, dem = demand of electricity, xbal = energy 
volume or price in balancing market clearing. 
==PAGE:21==
18 
Although the value set for consumers’ willingness to pay affects the final welfare value, differences in 
welfare between scenarios will not be affected by it, since they will balance off, and hence the impact 
on welfare deltas from the different scenario market configurations can be analysed without influence 
of this 3,000 EUR/MWh value of lost load assumption. 
Electricity transmission surplus 
Electricity transmission surplus is calculated according to equations [10] to [13] 23. 
 
𝐸𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑚𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑙𝑢𝑠
= 𝐷𝑎𝑦 𝑎ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑 𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠−𝑂𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠
−𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠 
(Eq. 10) 
 
Where: 
𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠= ∑𝑓𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑙,ℎ
𝐷𝐴× (𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑙 𝑡𝑜,ℎ
𝐷𝐴
−𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑙 𝑓𝑟𝑜𝑚,ℎ
𝐷𝐴
)
ℎ,𝑙
 
(Eq. 11) 
 
𝑂𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠= ∑𝑓𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑙,ℎ
𝑏𝑎𝑙× 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠𝑙,ℎ
𝑂&𝑀
ℎ,𝑙
 
(Eq. 12) 
 
𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠= 𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑙× 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠𝑙
𝑐𝑎𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙 
(Eq. 13) 
Electricity transmission surplus is calculated as the sum of annual congestion rents minus operational 
and capital expenditures of the transmission lines. Congestion rents are calculated for every line as 
hourly transmission flow multiplied by the market clearing price difference between the high-priced 
zone where the energy flows to and the low-priced zone from where the electricity flows. Note that 
the beforementioned market clearing prices correspond to those of the day-ahead market simulation 
since balancing markets are mainly resolved within TSO zones24, although in the model the balancing 
market is simulated as a day ahead market. 
Heat producers surplus 
Heat producers’ surplus is calculated according to equations [14] to [17] 25. 
 
𝐻𝑒𝑎𝑡 𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑒𝑟𝑠 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑙𝑢𝑠
= 𝐵𝑎𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡 𝑟𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒𝑠−𝑂𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠
−𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠 
Where: 
(Eq. 14) 
 
𝐵𝑎𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡 𝑟𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒𝑠= ∑𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑢,ℎ
𝑏𝑎𝑙× 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑎,ℎ
𝑏𝑎𝑙
ℎ,𝑎,𝑢
 
(Eq. 15) 
 
𝑂𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠
= ∑𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑢,ℎ
𝑏𝑎𝑙
ℎ,𝑢
× (𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠𝑢,ℎ
𝑓𝑢𝑒𝑙+ 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠𝑢,ℎ
𝑒𝑚𝑖+ 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠𝑢,ℎ
𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑚𝑖𝑡+ 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠𝑢,ℎ
𝑂&𝑀) 
(Eq. 16) 
 
𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠= 𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑢× 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠𝑢
𝑐𝑎𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙 
(Eq. 17) 
Heat producers’ surplus is calculated as revenues based on balancing market simulations minus the 
operational and capital costs. Operational costs include fuel costs, emission costs, and O&M fixed and 
 
23 Abbreviations used: h = hours, l = lines, xbal = energy volume or price in balancing market clearing, O&M = 
operation and maintenance. 
24 There are cross-zonal capacities where balancing reserves can be shared between zones. Additionally, some 
regions share balancing markets, like the Nordic System. 
25 Abbreviations used: h = hours, a = heat market area, u = generation unit, xbal = energy volume or price in 
balancing market clearing, emi = emissions, commit = commitment, O&M = operation and maintenance. 
==PAGE:22==
19 
variable costs. In the case of power-to-heat units, the fuel costs correspond to the electricity market 
clearing price at which the electricity is acquired. For storages, fuel cost also accounts for heat market 
clearing prices when the heat is loaded to the storage. No balancing market settlement is assumed for 
heat producers since heat markets do not work as electricity markets. In Denmark, for example, 
district heating is regulated, and heat can only be produced to recover costs, thus producer’s surplus 
is not allowed. Most district heating areas are supplied by one or a few producers and there is no real 
competitive market. The district heating grid in Copenhagen, however, is operated under an agreed 
system plan that optimises heat and combined heat and power production according to costs [62]. 
There are also intraday adjustments to this day-ahead schedule prior to the delivery day, but there 
are not such balancing markets. It must also be stated that this day-ahead heat market schedule is 
announced at 10:30, before the moment when the day-ahead electricity auction takes place, at 12:00 
[63]. Heat and power are therefore not co-dispatched at the same moment under the same market. 
This is also an important difference with the Balmorel marker simulations, where all energy is 
dispatched at the same time. Despite all, as a theoretic exercise to evaluate the welfare gains or losses 
for heat market producers under the different electricity day-ahead market configurations, heat 
producers’ surplus is calculated as indicated in equation [14]. 
Heat consumers surplus 
Heat consumers’ surplus is calculated according to equations [18] to [21] 26. 
 
𝐻𝑒𝑎𝑡 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑢𝑚𝑒𝑟𝑠 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑙𝑢𝑠
= 𝑊𝑖𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠 𝑡𝑜 𝑝𝑎𝑦 𝑓𝑜𝑟 ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑡
−𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝑜𝑓 ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑡 𝑖𝑛 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑏𝑎𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡−𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝑜𝑓 𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑑 
Where: 
(Eq. 18) 
 
𝑊𝑖𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠 𝑡𝑜 𝑝𝑎𝑦= ∑𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑎,ℎ
𝑏𝑎𝑙× 𝑉𝑜𝐿𝐿ℎ𝑒
ℎ,𝑎
 
(Eq. 19) 
 
𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝑜𝑓 ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑡= ∑𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑎,ℎ
𝑏𝑎𝑙× 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑎,ℎ
𝑏𝑎𝑙
ℎ,𝑎
 
(Eq. 20) 
 
𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝑜𝑓 𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑑= ∑𝐿𝐿𝑎,ℎ
𝑏𝑎𝑙× 𝑉𝑜𝐿𝐿ℎ𝑒
ℎ,𝑎
 
(Eq. 21) 
Heat consumers surplus is calculated similarly as electricity consumer’s welfare, as the willingness to 
pay for the heat minus the heat cost. The VoLL for heat, however, is reduced to 500 EUR2016/MWh, 
since no price cap has been found in the literature for the heat market. This value is thus based on the 
highest heat market clearing prices obtained in the model. 
2.4 Private economic feasibility analysis 
Private economic feasibility analyses of wind farm and power to gas projects have been performed 
developing discounted cash-flow models for every specific project. A discounted cash flow (DCF) is a 
valuation method used to estimate the value of an investment based on its expected future cash flows 
[64]. A DCF model allows to estimate the present value of an investment based on its cashflows 
projections in the future. Future free cashflows (FCF), reduced in the DCF models developed for this 
work to revenues, operational costs and taxes, are discounted27 according to a discount rate that 
reflects the cost of opportunity of the capital invested, which is the expected rate of return demanded 
by investors in the best alternative project subject to the same risks [65]. Discount rate estimation can 
 
26 Abbreviations used: h = hours, a = heat market areas, l = lines, xbal = energy volume or price in balancing market 
clearing, O&M = operation and maintenance. 
27 Discounting calculation: 𝐷𝐶𝐹𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟 𝑖=
𝐹𝐶𝐹𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟 𝑖
(1+𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒)𝑖−𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒 (𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟 0) 
==PAGE:23==
20 
be a very complex exercise. For the purpose of this work, values found in the literature for similar 
projects have been used. As relevant remarks for the DCF models developed in this work may be the 
use of nominal prices28 and the incorporation of loss-carry forward for tax payments calculations. 
As mentioned, the ultimate purpose of DCF models is to valuate a project or estimate the project 
profitability. Several profitability indicators can be used to measure it. In this work, net present value, 
interest rate of return, benefit to cost ratio and levelized cost of energy have been used. Their 
calculation is described on page 22. 
Private economic feasibility of wind farm projects 
In addition to the socioeconomic perspective taken in this work, a private economic analysis of the 
wind farm projects connected to the North Sea hubs has also been performed. The offshore wind farm 
projects analysed are those resulting from the Balmorel investment optimisation. These are 13 wind 
farm projects connected to 8 hubs in the North Sea. The hubs are assumed to be part of the regulated 
energy infrastructure of the North Sea network and are hence excluded from the costs of the wind 
farm projects analysed. These wind farms are either invested in 2030 (2035 simulation results) or 2040 
(2045 simulations results). The 13 projects are presented in Table 4. 
Country 
Hub 
Offshore wind capacity 
invested in 2030 [GW] 
Offshore wind capacity 
invested in 2040 [GW] 
Total capacity 
installed by 2040 [GW] 
Germany 
DE BorWin 
9 
11 
20 
DE NorWin 
- 
20 
20 
United Kingdom 
UK Dogger Bank 
- 
20 
20 
UK HornSea 
- 
20 
20 
Denmark 
DK Hub 
18 
2 
20 
Netherlands 
NL Hub 
12 
8 
20 
Norway 
NO Hub East 
20 
17 
37 
NO Hub West 
13 
7 
20 
Total 
73 
104 
177 
Table 4. Offshore wind farm projects invested around the hubs according to Balmorel investment optimisation results. The 
projects correspond to the 13 values (capacities invested in GW) from the third and fourth columns in the table, excluding the 
last Total row. 
The private economic analysis has been performed using discounted cash flow (DCF) models for the 
different offshore wind farm projects. The operational inputs used in the DCF model are also taken 
from the Balmorel simulation results: wind production of the different offshore wind farms 
corresponds to the final dispatch from the balancing market simulation, prices used to calculate day-
ahead revenues are taken from the day-ahead simulation results and finally, balancing settlements 
are calculated based on the difference between the day-ahead dispatch schedule and the balancing 
market final dispatch, multiplied by the balancing market price. Capital and operation and 
maintenance costs have been extracted from Balmorel input data, whose main source is [66]. 
Additional assumed parameters for the DCF analysis are: inflation rate of 2% (according to the 
European Central Bank monetary policy [67]), private discount rate set at 8% following [14] (pages 5 
and 6), project lifetime of 30 years, according to Balmorel input data and [66], declining balance 
depreciation of 15% [68], and current corporate tax rates of the five countries [69]. All data 
assumptions of the private economic feasibility analysis for the wind farm project are listed in Table 
5. 
 
28 Nominal prices, in contrast to real prices, consider inflation. These are calculated as: 
𝑛𝑜𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟 𝑖= 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑙 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟 0 × (1 + 𝑖𝑛𝑓𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟 1) × (1 + 𝑖𝑛𝑓𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟 2) … × (1 + 𝑖𝑛𝑓𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟 𝑖) 
==PAGE:24==
21 
Parameter 
Value 
Source 
Inflation rate 
2% 
[67] 
Private discount rate 
8% 
[14] (pages 5 and 6) 
Corporate tax 
DE 30%, DK 22%, NL 25%, NO 22%, UK 19% 
[69] 
Depreciation 
Declining balance at 15% 
[68] 
Lifetime 
30 years 
[66] 
Specific investment 
cost 
1.72 MEUR2016/MW for 2030 investments 
1.58 and 1.63 MEUR2016/MW for 2040 investments29 
Balmorel Input data 
[66] 
O&M fixed costs 
33.57 kEUR2016/MW/year for 2030 investments 
32.22 and 32.51 kEUR2016/MW/year for 2040 investments29 
Balmorel Input data 
[66] 
O&M variable costs 
2.49 EUR2016/MWh for 2030 investments in RG1 turbines 
2.39 and 2.41 EUR2016/MWh for 2040 investments29 
Balmorel Input data 
[66] 
Wind farm production 
Balancing market final dispatch 
Balmorel 
simulation 
results 
Day-ahead revenues 
Day-ahead market dispatch x Day-ahead market clearing price 
Balmorel 
simulation 
results 
Imbalance settlement 
(Day-ahead market dispatch – Balancing final dispatch) x Balancing 
market clearing price 
Balmorel 
simulation 
results 
Table 5. Discounted cashflow model data assumptions for the 13 wind farm projects analysed. Operational and market prices 
are taken from Balmorel simulation results. Other main economic assumptions from sources indicated in the third column. 
RG1 turbines invested in 2030 correspond to projects DE BorWin 2030, DK Hub 2030, NL Hub 2030, NO Hub East 2030 and 
NO Hub West 2030. RG1 turbines invested in 2040 correspond to projects DE BorWin 2040, DE NorWin 2040, UK Dogger Bank 
2040, UK HornSea 2040, DK Hub 2040, NL Hub 2040, NO Hub West 2040. RG2 turbines invested in 2040 correspond to project 
NO Hub East 2040. 
As for the production, operational revenues and 
costs adopted for each year, since Balmorel 
simulations were only executed for years 2025, 
2035 and 2045 (only the latter two relevant since 
offshore wind farm investment connected to hub 
was obtained in 2025), values for all years along the 
project lifetimes needed to be interpolated or 
extrapolated as indicated in Figure 7. For 2030 wind 
farm investments, 2035 simulation values were 
assumed from 2030 to 2035 and 2045 simulation 
values from 2045 to 2059 (end of lifetime). As for 
values between 2035 and 2045, these were linearly 
interpolated and then applied a smooth factor30. 2040 wind farm projects assumed 2045 simulation 
values for all years along their lifetime until 2069. 
DCF models for the 13 wind farms under the 3 different scenarios (13 x 3 = 39 DCF models) were 
performed. Economic indicators chosen to indicate the economic feasibility of the projects were net 
present value (NPV), internal rate of return (IRR), benefit to cost ratio (BCR) and levelized cost of 
electricity (LCoE). Equations below show how these indicators are calculated, where r is the discount 
rate, T is the lifetime and Io is the initial investment cost. 
 
29 Different costs corresponding to closer and further wind farms to the hubs. There are different location 
possibilities for the wind farms in relation to the hubs. These are defined as wind turbine types in Balmorel, RG1 
and RG2, according to their distance to the hub. RG2 has therefore a slightly higher capital and operational costs 
than RG1 due to the longer distance to the hub. 
30 Linearly interpolated values between 2035 and 2045 were added the following factors [0.97, 0.9, 0.8, 0.67, 
0.5, 0.33, 0.2, 0.1, 0.03] multiplied by 2045 simulation value. This way, a smoother evolution of values than a 
mere straight line is obtained, and abrupt changes are avoided. 
2030 2035 2040 2045 2050 2055 2060 2065 2070
2030 OWF
project
Series2
2030 OWF
project
2040 OWF
project
Values Sim 
2035 
Values Sim 2045 
Values Sim 2045 
Values 
interpolated 
2035-2045 
Figure 7. Interpolation and extrapolation of Balmorel
simulation values for annual DCF model. 2030 wind farms 
have interpolated values between 2035 and 2045. 2040 
wind farms assume 2045 simulation values for their whole 
lifetime. 
==PAGE:25==
22 
 
𝑁𝑃𝑉= −𝐼0 + ∑
(𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒𝑠𝑡−𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠𝑡)
(1 + 𝑟)𝑡
𝑇
𝑡=1
 
(Eq. 22) 
 
0 = −𝐼0 + ∑
(𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒𝑠𝑡−𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠𝑡)
(1 + 𝐼𝑅𝑅)𝑡
𝑇
𝑡=1
 
(Eq. 23) 
 
𝐵𝐶𝑅=
∑
𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒𝑠𝑡(1 + 𝑟)𝑡
⁄
𝑇
𝑡=1
∑
(𝐼0 + 𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠𝑡(1 + 𝑟)𝑡
⁄
)
𝑇
𝑡=1
 
(Eq. 24) 
 
𝐿𝐶𝑜𝐸=
𝐼0 + ∑
(𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠𝑡(1 + 𝑟)𝑡
⁄
)
𝑇
𝑡=1
∑
𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑡(1 + 𝑟)𝑡
⁄
𝑇
𝑡=1
 
(Eq. 25) 
Private economic feasibility of power to gas projects 
Last, a feasibility study was developed for power-to-gas units installed in each of the 8 hubs obtained 
from the investment simulation results. Although PEM electrolysers is the technology option that gives 
the best operation flexibility in terms of minimum and maximum load and ramping capacity [70], 
alkaline electrolysers have been chosen for the study in reason of lower costs and higher capacities 
available compared to the current status of the PEM technology [70]. Alkaline electrolyser is also the 
technology assumed for onshore power to gas units in Balmorel investment optimisation model. It is 
also important to remark that all discounted cashflow analyses were performed with a hydrogen base 
price of 5 EUR2016/kg [71] (upper bound used from 2-5 EUR2016/kg range). 
The main assumption for these power-to-gas units is that they would operate only on curtailed wind 
power from the farms connected to the hubs where they are installed. 
Since 5 of the 8 hubs have successive wind capacity investments in 2030 and 2040, for these 5 hubs, 
two different investment timing options were assessed, 2030 and 2040. For the remaining 3 hubs, 
only the investment option in 2040 was available. Additionally, each of the project options has been 
studied under the three different scenario simulation results. This gives a total of (2 x 5 + 3) x 3 = 39 
possible projects. In other, contrarily to the wind farms feasibility study, the capacity sizes of the 
electrolysers are not determined by the investment optimisation from Balmorel. Thus, capacities for 
the electrolysers can be chosen from the available range from 0 to the maximum wind curtailment 
hourly load associated to the electrolyser over its lifetime. A simplified capacity optimisation has been 
included in this analysis by performing the discounted cash-flow analysis for a range of 10 possible 
capacity sizes for each of the 39 power-to-gas projects, from 1/10th to 10/10th of the maximum wind 
curtailment. The final number of DCFs performed was therefore 390. 
Parameter 
Value 
Source 
Inflation rate 
2% 
[67] 
Private discount rate 
8% 
[14] (pages 5 and 6) 
Corporate tax 
DE 30%, DK 22%, NL 25%, NO 22%, UK 19% 
[69] 
Depreciation 
Declining balance at 15% 
[68] 
Lifetime 
25 years 
Balmorel input data [66] 
Technology 
Alkaline electrolysers 
Balmorel input data [66] 
Specific investment cost 
0.54 MEUR2016/MW for 2030 investments 
0.52 MEUR2016/MW for 2040 investments 
Balmorel input data [66] 
O&M fixed costs 
26.95 kEUR2016/MW/year for 2030 investments 
25.73 kEUR2016/MW/year for 2040 investments 
Balmorel input data [66] 
O&M variable costs 
Assumed negligible 
Balmorel input data [66] 
Electricity to H2 conversion factor 
18.58 kg H2 / MWhe 
[71] 
Hydrogen price 
5 EUR2016/kg 
[71] 
==PAGE:26==
23 
Parameter 
Value 
Source 
Annual input electricity to 
electrolysers 
Curtailment of associated wind farms from Balmorel 
market final dispatch  
Balmorel simulation results 
Table 6. Discounted cashflow model data assumptions for the 13 power to gas projects analysed. The input electricity for the 
electrolysers corresponds to the wind curtailment from associated wind farms (connected to the same hub where the 
electrolysers are installed) resulting from the balancing market simulation results. Other main economic assumptions from 
sources indicated in the third column. It is relevant to highlight the hydrogen price assumed of 5 EUR2016/kg.  
As for annual wind curtailment values assumed along the lifetime of the projects, for 2030 power to 
gas projects, a quadratic interpolation was assumed between 2035 and 2045 curtailment balancing 
market simulation results. Power to gas projects invested in 2040 have been assumed constant values 
for all years in their lifetime (2040-2065), equal to 2045 simulation results. 
DCF models were elaborated for power to gas projects similarly as they were done for the wind farm 
projects. The same economic indicators showing the profitability of the projects were also calculated.  
2.5 The energy system evaluated 
The energy system over which this analysis is based upon is the result from a Balmorel investment 
optimisation. As it can be seen in Figure 8, the electricity system evolves to a system dominated by 
wind and solar PV. Hydro power remains relevant in Scandinavian countries, while nuclear persists in 
France, Sweden, Finland and Poland. Some gas back-up capacity is still needed by 2045 according to 
the modelling results. Gas units only mean a significant share of the mix in Germany, Poland, 
Netherlands and Belgium. There is also some minor presence of electricity storage in 2045 electricity 
mix. Different developments are experienced by different countries. While Belgium capacity only 
increases by 1 GW in the period 2025-2045, the highest increase happens for the UK, whose total 
electricity installed capacity rises from 145 GW in 2025 to 736 GW in 2045 (6-fold increase). The UK 
becomes the country with the largest electricity generation capacity in 2045, while it used to be 
Germany in 2025. 
 
Figure 8. Map of the electricity system in the ten countries simulated in Balmorel, including the offshore hubs in the North 
Sea. Left plot corresponds to 2025 and right plot to 2045. The electricity system develops towards a system dominated by 
wind and solar PV, with some hydro in Scandinavian countries, nuclear and gas back-up capacity. Total installed capacities 
per country are shown in GW and their color shading corresponds to these total capacities. Pie charts display the energy mix 
per country, except for the pie chart in the North Sea, where only wind offshore is installed. This pie chart is divided by installed 
capacities from the 5 different countries that own the hubs. 
2025 
2045 
==PAGE:27==
24 
Figure 9 displays both electricity and heat systems development for all countries aggregated. The 
aggregated electricity system evolves as described earlier. As for the heat system, which has a higher 
installed capacity than the electricity system, it reduces the share of existing fuel-based capacity in 
2025 (oil and coal are totally eliminated) and increases substantially the importance in the mix of heat 
storage (from 30% in 2025 to more than 50% in 2045) and of power-to-heat to a lower extent. Note 
that keeping constant shares in the mix can entail vast investments. For example, although power-to-
gas share in the mix only grows from 30% to 35%, its installed capacity rises from 530 GW to 970 GW. 
Related to growths in capacities, it is also 
interesting to show what would be the annual 
growths needed to achieve the installed 
capacities resulting from the model in the 
different years. This has been calculated by 
dividing the new investments in each year by 
10, which is the number of years that each of 
the simulations represent. Figure 10 shows 
these values. It can be appreciated that the 
technologies that concentrate all generation 
investments are wind, solar PV, gas units and 
municipal waste CHP units on the electricity 
system, and heat storage, power-to-gas, gas 
boilers on the heat system. On the electricity system, which more than doubles capacity from 2025 to 
2045 (when considering only the existing capacity in 2025, 2045 final capacity is 4 times higher), the 
highest decade of growth is 2030-2040. In this decade, every year should be installed almost 95 GW. 
To put this value into context, this would be 6 times the total installed capacity in Denmark in 2018 
(15 GW, [72]) or one tenth of the total installed capacity in the European Union in 2018 (930 GW, 
[73]). Regarding the heat system, the highest annual growths happen in the 2040-2050 decade, where 
270 GW of heat capacity would need to be installed every year. 
As of total generation capacity investments by country and technology in monetary terms, the UK, 
Germany and France hold around 70% of investments. The investment optimisation points to the heat 
15
48
50
26
45
21
3
1
1
0
20
40
60
80
100
Annual electricity generation 
capacity growth [GW/year]
WIND
SUN
MUNIWASTE
GAS
48
76
97
49
102
151
15
23
23
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Annual heat generation capacity 
growth [GW/year]
ELECTRIC
HEAT
MUNIWASTE
GAS
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
2025
2035
2045
Total installed electricity capacity [GW]
% installed electricity capacity
WIND
SUN
BIOFUELS
BIOMASS
ELECTRIC
H2
WASTEHEAT
MUNIWASTE
WATER
NUCLEAR
GAS
OIL
COAL
Total
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
2025
2035
2045
Total installed heat capacity [GW]
% installed heat capacity
SUN
BIOFUELS
BIOMASS
ELECTRIC
H2
HEAT
WASTEHEAT
MUNIWASTE
GAS
OIL
COAL
Total
Figure 9. Electricity and heat installed capacities in all three years simulated by fuel type. Left bar chart for electricity and 
right bar chart for heat. Fuel type mix shares are shown as percentage in primary vertical axis (left axis), while the total 
capacity is shown in the secondary vertical axis (right axis). On the heat capacity plot, heat (in red) refers to heat storage and 
electric (in purple) refers to power-to-heat. 
Figure 10. Annual growths for electricity (left) and heat (right) 
systems for the three decades 2020s, 2030s and 2040s. Electric 
stands for power-to-heat and heat stands for heat storage. 
==PAGE:28==
25 
sector as a cost-effective flexibility mechanism with large investments in power-to-heat (967 GW; 
30,523 MEUR/year) and heat storage (1,512 GW; 4,240 MEUR/year). 
 
 
Figure 11. Generation capacity cumulative investments according to investment simulation results. On the left bar chart: 
investment per country with relative shares (of capital expenditures) on the left vertical axis and total annuitized investment 
amounts on the right vertical axis (only to read for black-framed bars). On the right bar chart: investment by technology types 
with relative shares (of capital expenditures) on the left and total annuitized investment amounts on the right vertical axis 
(only to read for black-framed bars). Investment levels displayed are cumulative from previous years: 2045 values include 
investments in 2045, 2035 and 2025; 2035 values include investments in 2035 and 2025. 
There are also prominent investments in electricity transmission capacities according to the 
investment optimisation results, as shown in Figure 12. The electricity system in 2045 is highly 
interconnected; the total electricity transmission capacity increases from 112 GW in 2025 to 606 GW 
in 2045 (more than 5 times higher). The highest investment happens in lines connecting the UK, 
France, and the German region DE4-S. A major investment is also observed for the line connecting 
Poland and the German region DE4-E. UK and the German region DE4-W are the regions that have the 
largest transmission capacities by 2045. 
 
Figure 12. Electricity transmission capacity development from 2025 to 2045 according to investment optimization results. 
Lines color and thickness is proportional to their capacity, shown in GW. Additionally, blue circles in each region center 
represent the region transmission capacity (diameter proportional to that transmission capacity). 
Regarding the North Sea hubs, one hub is invested in 2025, five hubs are invested in 2035 and another 
three in 2045.The hub invested in 2025, DK Hub, does not hold any offshore wind capacity until 2035. 
In 2025, it is built for interconnection capacity between Norway and the Netherlands. This evidences 
that the 2-year rolling foresight can help the investment optimisation make anticipatory investments 
and save costs in the long-term. This effect is explained in more detail in [45]. All hubs have offshore 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
2025
2035
2045
Total investment [billion EUR/year]
% total investment per country
UNITED_KINGDOM
GERMANY
FRANCE
POLAND
NETHERLANDS
NORWAY
DENMARK
BELGIUM
SWEDEN
FINLAND
Total
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
2025
2035
2045
Total investment [billion EUR/year]
% total investment per technology type
FUEL-THERMAL
HEAT-STORAGE
P2H
SOLAR-PV
WIND-OFF
WIND-ON
2025 
2045 
==PAGE:29==
26 
wind installed capacities of 20 GW by 2045, except for the Norwegian hub NO-Hub East, which has 37 
GW. 
Hubs are highly interconnected to each other and to North Sea countries. The investment optimisation 
defines 15 hub-hub lines with a total capacity of 12.1 GW, 8 hub-home country lines of 81 GW and 28 
hub-other country lines of 130 GW. This makes a total of 51 lines connecting the hubs to other regions 
and to each other, which represent 52% of the 99 existing lines in the overall system (although only 
representing 37% of the overall transmission capacity). Figure 13 shows all hubs and their 
interconnections in 2045. 
 
 
Figure 13. Hub map plots in 2045. Each figure corresponds to one of the eight hubs invested according to investment 
optimization results. Interconnection lines from the hubs are displayed in purple. Offshore wind generation capacity 
connected to each hub (in light red) and transmission lines capacities are also indicated. 
Although a meshed grid network configuration in the North Sea will involve multiple lines, the number 
of lines in the investment optimisation results seems too many. This is mainly because the investment 
optimisation problem was solved as a linear problem (LP) instead of a mixed integer problem (MIP). 
The latter would have invested in less lines with a higher capacity on accounts of fixed investment 
costs and scale economies. Contrarily, the linear modelling approach used defines a higher number of 
lines with lower capacities. This has of course implications in the results of the simulations, both for 
dispatched flows and market clearing prices. This effect is illustrated in Figure 14, where a fictitious 
example is shown for the interconnection optimisation of 3 offshore hubs in the North Sea and the 
onshore regions Norway NO2 and Belgium BE. Please note that all lines have the same distance to 
DE-Borwin 
DE-Norwin 
UK-DoggerBank 
UK-HornSea 
DK-Hub 
NL-Hub 
NO-HubEast 
NO-HubWest 
Figure 14. Illustrative example 
of potential linear problem
solution (left figure) and mixed 
integer problem solution (right 
figure) 
of 
the 
investment 
optimisation problem. In the LP 
problem (left), there are more 
lines with lower capacity and on 
the MIP problem (right), there 
are 
fewer 
lines of higher 
capacity. 
Line 
widths 
are 
proportional 
to 
capacities. 
Congested lines in red, non-
congested lines in green. Price 
zones encircled in dotted lines. 
==PAGE:30==
27 
simplify the solution. The left figure would represent a possible solution of the LP problem, while the 
right figure would correspond to the MIP problem solution. 
While both solutions have the same total installed transmission capacity31, the MIP solution accounts 
for the fixed investment costs, not dependent on km and MW installed, and therefore seeks for a 
solution with fewer lines. It can be appreciated that the LP solution, with more lines, provides a higher 
flexibility to allocate flows in the system. Only 2 market clearing price zones are formed, and the total 
flow is 360 MWh. On the other hand, the MIP solution, with fewer lines, restricts the possible 
electricity flow paths, resulting in all lines congested and 4 different market clearing price zones. 
Different dispatches and clearing prices would have clear implications in the welfare distribution of 
market agents located in the different regions. For example, on the LP solution on the left, offshore 
wind farms connected to the hubs would receive the price of the southern region (Belgium), but only 
their marginal cost on the MIP solution on the right. 
All individual hubs have a higher transmission capacity than offshore wind capacity, around 1.12 to 
1.7 ratio between transmission capacity and wind generation installed. The ratio between the 
transmission capacity from the hubs to onshore regions and the aggregated installed wind capacity at 
the hubs is 1.2. Therefore, it is in theory possible to transmit all wind production onshore. 
Nevertheless, curtailment is likely to happen given the fact that neighbour countries also have large 
shares of radially connected wind offshore and onshore wind installed. 
Last, it can be remarked that not all possible hub-hub lines are invested. From 28 possibilities, only 15 
lines are invested with a total transmission capacity of 12.1 GW. These are presented in Table 7. 
Values in [GW] 
DE 
BorWin 
DE 
NorWin 
UK 
DoggerBank 
UK 
HornSea 
DK 
Hub 
NL 
Hub 
NO 
HubEast 
NO 
HubWest Total 
Total 
hub 
DE BorWin 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 
1.7 
DE NorWin 
- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 
3.4 
UK DoggerBank 
- 
1.8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 
4.3 
UK HornSea 
- 
0.2 
0.1 
 
 
 
 
 
- 
0.3 
DK Hub 
- 
0.3 
1.3 
- 
 
 
 
 
- 
2.4 
NL Hub 
1.7 
0.5 
- 
- 
0.4 
 
 
 
- 
4.0 
NO HubEast 
- 
- 
1.1 
- 
0.2 
- 
 
 
- 
3.7 
NO HubWest 
- 
0.7 
0.1 
- 
0.1 
1.5 
2.4 
 
- 
4.7 
Total 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
12.1 
- 
Table 7. Hub-hub interconnection lines according to investment optimisation results. 15 hub-hub lines out of 28 possible are 
invested with a total capacity of 12.1 GW. Total capacity from each individual hub can be read on the last column. Note that 
the sum of these does not give 12.1 GW, but 24.5 GW because these numbers include duplicated lines, e.g. the first value in 
the last column “Total Hub”, 1.7 for DE BorWin, corresponds to the line DE BorWin – NL Hub. This 1.7 GW are also accounted 
in the NL Hub total capacity, which is 4.0 (6th value in the last column). 
 
 
31 and similar investment costs if these are linearly calculated as specific cost [MEUR/km/MW] x lines distance 
[km] x capacity [MW]. 
==PAGE:31==
28 
Chapter 3.  Results 
3.1 Socioeconomic results: dispatch, market prices and welfare distribution 
Before presenting the socioeconomic welfare results, the fundamentals of the energy dispatch 
differences between the three scenarios simulated in Balmorel are described. These dispatch 
differences and the market prices associated can help explaining the socio-economic welfare results 
object of this section. The following dispatch concepts have been analysed: detail of day-ahead and 
balancing market dispatch schedules by market argent and technology type, market clearing prices, 
transmission lines overflow and curtailment. 
Day-ahead market dispatch schedule 
As mentioned in section Market configurations, scenarios S2 (home country market bidding zones) 
and S3 (North Sea bidding zone) carry assumptions of infinite lines capacity in the day-ahead market 
to simulate single priced bidding zones. S2 assumption affects 5 hub-home country lines in 2035 with 
25 GW of capacity and 8 lines in 2045 with 81 GW. S3 assumption affects 6 lines in 2035 with 5 GW 
and 15 lines in 2045 with 12 GW. In contrast, scenario S1 (offshore hub bidding zones) includes in the 
day-ahead market all actual transmission capacities and thus reflects the real structural congestions 
of the system. These assumptions for the different day-ahead market configurations imply different 
day-ahead dispatch schedules, which are shown in Table 8. Differences are shown taking S1 (offshore 
bidding zones) as reference from which deltas of S2 (home country) and S3 (North Sea) are calculated. 
Deltas are detailed by electricity and heat generation and demand types. Values have also been 
disaggregated geographically into hubs, neighbouring regions and remaining regions. 
In general, it must be said fist that an infinite change in transmission capacity impacting multiple lines 
has consequences for all units in the system. The energy system simulated is highly integrated, with 
sector coupling technologies like power to heat, power to fuels, electric vehicles or combined heat 
and power. Therefore, it is difficult to find the cause-effect relation from the day-ahead market 
configuration assumptions under the different scenarios to the different day-ahead dispatch 
schedules for all generation and demand types. However, some differences can be identified to be 
directly related with the day-ahead market configuration. 
Wind offshore generation dispatch in the hubs, for example, is higher in scenarios S2 (home country) 
and S3 (North Sea) than in scenario S1 (offshore bidding zones), as one could expect from an increase 
in transmission capacity in the hubs. This increase of wind generation in the hubs seems to affect 
negatively the wind offshore and onshore dispatch from neighbouring regions. A seemingly common 
effect of scenarios S2 (home country) and S3 (North Sea) for both years simulated is that CHP back 
pressure units reduce their dispatch compared to S1 (offshore bidding zones). In general, this is also 
true for extraction CHP units, with an exception for scenario S3 (North Sea) in 2035. This CHP 
generation dispatch affects then the heat system dispatch and therefore, there will be spill over 
changes related to it. As for electricity demands, only the inflexible demand remains unchanged for 
all scenarios. Electric vehicles, power to fuels, power to heat, and losses change endogenously in the 
model. It is difficult to assess the cause of individual changes since all agents interact in the market to 
achieve the lowest cost dispatch. 
Overall, it is remarkable that the total generation and demand decrease in scenarios S2 (home 
country) and S3 (North Sea)32 compared to scenario S1 (offshore bidding zones). This can happen since 
 
32 except for scenario S3 in 2045. 
==PAGE:32==
29 
a significant amount of the energy dispatched is endogenously defined by the model, related to energy 
conversion units and storages. 
It must be stated that the values presented on Table 8 are not so significant compared to the total 
dispatch. These delta values only represent on average 1% of the dispatch from scenario S1. Detailed 
changes presented in Table 8 can be seen in relative terms, as percentage of S1 dispatch in Table 34 
in the Annex. 
Day-ahead clearing market differences originated by the different market configurations have a more 
significant impact in terms of market clearing prices, as described on page 33. Although minor, day-
ahead dispatch differences are also relevant since they condition the final balancing market dispatch. 
As it will be seen on page 41, socioeconomic welfare calculations assumed in this work are 
predominantly based on the final balancing market. 
Differences to S1 
[GWh] 
2035 
2045 
Hubs 
Neighbour 
regions 
Others 
Total 
Hubs 
Neighbour 
regions 
Others 
Total 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
Electricity Generation 
Wind Offshore 
805 2,028 
-293 
-1,926 -154 
41 
358 
144 8,728 6,462 -8,346 -4,956 -444 123 
-62 
1,629 
Thermal CHP-BP 
0 
0 
-792 
-317 
-458 -234 -1,250 -551 
0 
0 
-421 
-302 
-360 -276 -780 
-578 
Thermal CHP-EX 
0 
0 
-9 
13 
-31 
-22 
-40 
-9 
0 
0 
-22 
-14 
-64 
-4 
-86 
-18 
Thermal Condensing 
0 
0 
231 
-286 
-120 -320 
111 
-606 
0 
0 
370 
136 
-3,062 890 -2,692 1,026 
Hydro Run-of-River 
0 
0 
0 
0 
25 
83 
25 
83 
0 
0 
0 
0 
3 
3 
3 
3 
Intraseasonal storage 
0 
0 
-72 
80 
-557 -589 
-629 
-509 
0 
0 
-5 
87 
-90 
-73 
-95 
14 
Solar-PV 
0 
0 
0 
0 
-93 
-81 
-93 
-81 
0 
0 
0 
0 
-10 
-6 
-10 
-6 
Wind Onshore 
0 
0 
-80 
-8 
-163 
-12 
-242 
-21 
0 
0 
-3 
-2 
-115 136 -118 
134 
Hydro reservoirs 
0 
0 
460 
-308 1,243 295 
1,703 
-13 
0 
0 
2,360 
-596 
10 
-819 2,370 -1,415 
Total 
805 2,028 
-555 
-2,752 -307 -839 
-56 
-1,562 8,728 6,462 -6,066 -5,646 -4,131 -26 -1,469 790 
Electricity Demand 
Distribution Losses 
8 
20 
18 
13 
-35 
-68 
-9 
-35 
90 
60 
-120 
-56 
59 
29 
29 
32 
Transmission Losses 
171 -189 -1,290 
-554 
-187 -124 -1,306 -867 
845 
-572 -5,128 -1,113 
-86 
-204 -4,369 -1,889 
Power to heat 
0 
0 
2,378 
1,142 -170 -1,009 2,207 
133 
0 
0 
2,370 
1,664 
743 1,071 3,113 2,735 
Electric vehicles 
0 
0 
-37 
-74 
-63 
-48 
-100 
-121 
0 
0 
-124 
-114 
10 
2 
-114 
-112 
Intrasesaonal storage 
0 
0 
-96 
115 
-753 -788 
-848 
-673 
0 
0 
-7 
120 
-120 
-97 
-127 
23 
Inflexible demand 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Power to X 
0 
0 
-1,483 
306 
1,483 -306 
0 
0 
0 
0 
-1,049 
-820 
1,049 820 
0 
0 
Total 
179 -169 
-510 
948 
275 -2,341 
-56 
-1,562 935 
-512 -4,058 
-320 
1,654 1,622 -1,469 790 
Heat Generation 
Boilers 
0 
0 
-2,459 -1,076 
726 1,280 -1,733 205 
0 
0 
-3,196 -1,496 -1,082 -866 -4,277 -2,362 
Thermal CHP-BP 
0 
0 
-758 
-320 
-520 -272 -1,278 -591 
0 
0 
-399 
-76 
-489 -339 -888 
-415 
Thermal CHP-EX 
0 
0 
-15 
17 
-46 
6 
-61 
23 
0 
0 
-45 
-29 
-129 
-17 
-175 
-46 
Power to heat 
0 
0 
2,513 
1,006 -152 -1,057 2,360 
-51 
0 
0 
3,333 
1,786 1,599 1,022 4,932 2,808 
Interseasonal storage 
0 
0 
-1,258 
-986 
-273 -293 -1,531 -1,279 
0 
0 
-256 
313 
71 
-620 -185 
-307 
Intraseasonal storage 
0 
0 
-668 
368 
253 
64 
-416 
433 
0 
0 
-950 
69 
-1,175 1,166 -2,124 1,235 
Solar heating 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Total 
0 
0 
-2,645 
-990 
-13 
-271 -2,658 -1,260 
0 
0 
-1,513 
566 
-1,204 345 -2,717 911 
Heat demand 
Interseasonal storage 
0 
0 
-1,802 -1,367 -321 -342 -2,124 -1,709 
0 
0 
-457 
527 
112 -962 -345 
-435 
Intraseasonal storage 
0 
0 
-724 
393 
289 
74 
-435 
467 
0 
0 
-1,001 
27 
-1,252 1,231 -2,254 1,258 
Inflexible demand 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Transmission losses 
0 
0 
-119 
-15 
19 
-2 
-100 
-17 
0 
0 
-56 
12 
-65 
76 
-122 
88 
Total 
0 
0 
-2,646 
-990 
-13 
-270 -2,658 -1,259 
0 
0 
-1,515 
566 
-1,206 345 -2,720 911 
Table 8. Day-ahead dispatch schedule differences from scenarios S2 (home country bidding zones) and S3 (North Sea bidding 
zone) to S1 (offshore bidding zones). Values in annual GWh for years simulated 2035 and 2045. Differences are grouped in 
hubs, neighbor regions to hubs and other regions and detailed by the following categories: electricity generation, electricity 
demand, heat generation and heat demand, divided into the different generation and demand types. Abbreviations: CHP-BP: 
Combined heat and power-Back pressure units; CHP-EX: combined heat and power-Extraction units. 
Balancing market final dispatch 
The balancing market final dispatch is highly conditioned by the day-ahead market because the 
commitment of thermal units is inherited from the day-ahead dispatch. This means that generation 
units that were scheduled in the day-ahead market need to be scheduled in the balancing market, at 
==PAGE:33==
30 
least at its minimum load. Also, the change in their dispatch will be limited by their ramping capacity. 
As it has been explained in the methodology section (from page 9), the balancing market simulated in 
Balmorel does not represent exactly how the energy balancing markets work in general in the EU. In 
the balancing market model used in Balmorel, all the energy is traded again and not only the 
imbalances expected by the TSO. The model is similar to the day-ahead market optimisation and the 
difference is that in the balancing market, the dispatch is optimised every hour with no foresight of 
the 24 hours that the day-ahead counts with, and there are unit commitments fixed from the day-
ahead dispatch schedule. 
Table 9 presents the differences in final dispatch from the balancing market simulations between 
scenarios S2 (home country bidding zones) and S3 (North Sea bidding zone) and scenario S1 (offshore 
hub bidding zones). 
Like on the day-ahead dispatch, the total energy dispatched in the balancing market is lower in 
scenarios S2 (home country) and S3 (North Sea) than in scenario S1 (offshore bidding zones). On the 
electricity demand side, the decrease is noticeable for power to heat and electric vehicles. Storages 
are also less often used with both demand and generation (charge and discharge) diminished. One 
plausible explanation for this lower dispatch are the higher electricity prices cleared under scenarios 
S2 and S3. Higher electricity prices, for example, increase the marginal cost of power to heat units, 
thus alternative heat generation sources may be used more often. Another presumable reason for the 
storages behaviour and electric vehicles (which can act as electricity storages for the system) may lie 
in the time horizon of the balancing market. As explained above, the reduced time foresight on the 
balancing market may lead to a reduced use of storage units, limited to store excess energy or 
generate any missing energy in each scoped hour. 
As for the hubs, while the final generation is lower in scenario S2 (home country) than in scenario S1 
(offshore bidding zone), the final dispatch for scenario S3 (North Sea) is greater than in scenario S1. 
These generation dispatch differences correspond, in opposite direction, to the curtailment levels 
presented on page 39. These differences in hubs wind curtailment between scenarios are of special 
relevance for the profitability of power-to-gas projects (page 45). 
While the day-ahead dispatch differences have a limited effect in the final welfare (according to the 
approach taken to calculate it in this work), balancing market dispatch differences have a higher 
impact. Nevertheless, as it is explained on page 41, on account on the small dispatch differences 
between scenarios compared to the annual dispatch (see Table 35 for detail), it is rather the balancing 
market clearing price differences that determine what scenario leads to a higher or lower welfare. 
Differences to S1 
[GWh] 
2035 
2045 
Hubs 
Neighbour 
regions 
Others 
Total 
Hubs 
Neighbour 
regions 
Others 
Total 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
Electricity Generation 
Wind Offshore 
-334 55 -2,767 -1,363 
-102 
-96 
-3,204 
-1,404 -1,849 1,276 -10,383 
-4,073 
-641 
-156 
-12,873 
-2,954 
Thermal CHP-BP 
0 
0 
-1,146 -589 
-594 
-396 
-1,739 
-985 
0 
0 
-739 
-526 
-495 
-412 
-1,234 
-938 
Thermal CHP-EX 
0 
0 
20 
26 
25 
0 
45 
26 
0 
0 
-19 
-13 
-63 
-4 
-82 
-17 
Thermal Condensing 
0 
0 
-472 
-471 
-1,248 -1,135 
-1,719 
-1,606 
0 
0 
-598 
-466 
-3,914 
-419 
-4,512 
-884 
Hydro Run-of-River 
0 
0 
0 
0 
-14 
-8 
-14 
-8 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Intraseasonal storage 
0 
0 
-307 
-21 
-752 
-747 
-1,059 
-768 
0 
0 
-304 
-133 
-730 
-569 
-1,035 
-702 
Solar-PV 
0 
0 
1 
1 
-43 
19 
-42 
19 
0 
0 
-1 
-1 
-4 
0 
-5 
0 
Wind Onshore 
0 
0 
-47 
-10 
-20 
-62 
-67 
-72 
0 
0 
6 
7 
-123 
82 
-117 
89 
Hydro reservoirs 
0 
0 
-762 -1,562 
-994 
-2,167 
-1,756 
-3,728 
0 
0 
1,029 
-1,155 
-724 
-1,434 
305 
-2,589 
Total 
-334 55 -5,479 -3,989 -3,742 -4,592 
-9,555 
-8,526 -1,849 1,276 -11,010 
-6,360 
-6,694 
-2,912 -19,553 
-7,996 
Electricity Demand 
Distribution Losses 
-3 
1 
-114 
-179 
-250 
-194 
-368 
-372 
-19 
14 
-303 
-110 
-494 
-265 
-816 
-362 
Transmission Losses 
11 
9 
70 
11 
-165 
-114 
-84 
-94 
9 
27 
0 
20 
-487 
-324 
-479 
-277 
Power to heat 
0 
0 
448 
-1,099 -3,403 -2,618 
-2,955 
-3,717 
0 
0 
-1,935 
217 
-4,113 
-991 
-6,048 
-774 
==PAGE:34==
31 
Differences to S1 
[GWh] 
2035 
2045 
Hubs 
Neighbour 
regions 
Others 
Total 
Hubs 
Neighbour 
regions 
Others 
Total 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
Electric vehicles33 
0 
0 
-1,028 -1,456 -2,556 -1,329 
-3,584 
-2,785 
0 
0 
-1,971 
-1,025 
-8,836 
-4,643 -10,807 
-5,668 
Intrasesaonal storage 
0 
0 
-346 
-7 
-1,025 
-995 
-1,370 
-1,002 
0 
0 
-384 
-132 
-1,002 
-772 
-1,386 
-903 
Inflexible demand 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Power to X 
0 
0 
-1,483 
306 
1,483 
-306 
0 
0 
0 
0 
-1,049 
-820 
1,049 
820 
0 
0 
Total 
7 
9 
-2,453 -2,424 -5,915 -5,555 
-8,361 
-7,970 
-10 
40 
-5,643 
-1,850 
-13,884 -6,174 -19,537 
-7,983 
Heat Generation 
Boilers 
0 
0 
-2,251 -573 
1,150 1,480 
-1,101 
906 
0 
0 
-3,057 
-1,394 
-498 
-525 
-3,555 
-1,920 
Thermal CHP-BP 
0 
0 
-516 
-69 
-53 
-89 
-568 
-158 
0 
0 
-195 
-28 
-167 
-22 
-362 
-50 
Thermal CHP-EX 
0 
0 
27 
36 
-4 
20 
23 
56 
0 
0 
-37 
-24 
-193 
-29 
-229 
-53 
Power to heat 
0 
0 
-2,185 -3,282 -8,218 -5,435 -10,403 -8,717 
0 
0 
-3,270 
-1,284 
-8,973 
-4,374 -12,243 
-5,659 
Interseasonal storage 
0 
0 
-1,290 -906 
-106 
-228 
-1,395 
-1,134 
0 
0 
1,470 
666 
1,726 
832 
3,196 
1,498 
Intraseasonal storage 
0 
0 
-4,197 -1,039 -2,881 -1,010 
-7,078 
-2,049 
0 
0 
-4,842 
-1,868 
-4,593 
-751 
-9,436 
-2,618 
Solar heating 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Total 
0 
0 
-
10,411 -5,833 
-
10,111 -5,263 -20,523 
-
11,095 
0 
0 
-9,931 
-3,932 
-12,698 -4,869 -22,629 
-8,801 
Heat demand 
Interseasonal storage 
0 
0 
-2,200 -1,945 -1,387 -1,114 
-3,587 
-3,059 
0 
0 
-2,328 
93 
-2,758 
-1,616 
-5,086 
-1,522 
Intraseasonal storage 
0 
0 
-5,731 -2,160 -4,951 -2,491 -10,683 -4,651 
0 
0 
-6,115 
-2,700 
-6,430 
-1,493 -12,544 
-4,193 
Inflexible demand 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Transmission losses 
0 
0 
-278 
-58 
-241 
-34 
-519 
-92 
0 
0 
-225 
-103 
-298 
-21 
-523 
-124 
Total 
0 
0 
-8,209 -4,163 -6,580 -3,639 -14,789 -7,802 
0 
0 
-8,667 
-2,710 
-9,486 
-3,130 -18,153 
-5,840 
Table 9. Balancing market dispatch differences from scenarios S2 and S3 to S1. Values in annual GWh for years simulated 
2035 and 2045. Differences are grouped in hubs, neighbor regions to hubs and other regions and detailed by the following 
categories: electricity generation, electricity demand, heat generation and heat demand, divided into the different generation 
and demand types. Differences in total deltas between generation and demand can be caused by hours with infeasibilities in 
the model where the energy balance cannot be met with the available units. 
Balancing market dispatch adjustments 
Day-ahead dispatch schedules in scenarios S2 (home country bidding zones) and S3 (North Sea bidding 
zone) need to be corrected in the balancing market, as they rely on infinite transmission capacities 
that are limited in reality. Scenario S1 (offshore bidding zones), on the other hand, does not a priori 
imply any dispatch correction from the day-ahead schedule since it accounts for all actual network 
constraints. Nonetheless, as explained in section Energy modelling in Balmorel (from page 9), due to 
the different time horizon of the balancing market simulation compared to the day-ahead market 
simulation, differences have been obtained also under S1 (offshore bidding zones) between the day-
ahead and balancing market simulation results. Accepting this implicit redispatch for all scenarios, 
regardless of changes made to the system between the day-ahead and the balancing simulation, it is 
still possible to analyse how large the redispatch differences are from day-ahead to balancing market 
results under the three scenarios. 
Dispatch differences between day-ahead and balancing market for scenarios S2 (home country) and 
S3 (North Sea) have been compared against the dispatch difference for scenario 1 (offshore bidding 
zones). These ratios (disS2Ba - disS2DA) / (disS1Ba - disS1DA) and (disS3Ba - disS3DA) / (disS1Ba - disS1DA) inform 
how larger or lower the dispatch differences from day-ahead to balancing market are for scenarios S2 
and S3 compared to S1. These values are presented in Table 10. It is clear from Table 10 that the day-
ahead market configurations chosen in scenarios S2 (home country) and S3 (North Sea) induce 
considerably higher differences. These can be interpreted to some extent to the imbalance corrections 
needed in scenarios S2 and S3, although it is not possible to identify the accountable share of dispatch 
differences caused by the day-ahead market configuration (real imbalances caused in the day-ahead 
market) and the share caused by the modelling itself (dispatch difference caused by the time horizon 
of the optimisation). In order to identify redispatch caused by imbalances from day-ahead, examples 
 
33 EVs net charging in the balancing market is fixed from the day ahead dispatch. Therefore, differences between 
scenarios found in the day ahead market should remain the same. This has not happened due to infeasibility 
variables activated, which modified the EVs demand in the balancing market. 
==PAGE:35==
32 
for specific hours when transmission capacities are overused in the day-ahead schedule, in scenarios 
S2 and S3, are analysed on page 35. 
In this analysis it is concluded that scenarios S2 (home country) and S3 (North Sea) incur in higher 
dispatch differences, which will have consequences in terms of socioeconomic welfare. The extent of 
these also depends on the price differences obtained in the day-ahead and the balancing market. 
(𝐝𝐢𝐬𝐒𝐢
𝐛𝐚𝐥−𝐝𝐢𝐬𝐒𝐢
𝐃𝐀)
(𝐝𝐢𝐬𝐒𝟏
𝐛𝐚𝐥−𝐝𝐢𝐬𝐒𝟏
𝐃𝐀) 
2035 
2045 
Hubs 
Neighbour regions 
Others 
Total 
Hubs 
Neighbour regions 
Others 
Total 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
Electricity Generation 
Wind Offshore 
21.3 36.2 
10.2 
1.1 
0.3 
4.4 
10.7 
5.2 148.8 72.4 
3.4 
0.0 
9.4 13.0 16.7 
6.6 
Thermal CHP-BP 
0.0 
0.0 
10.4 
8.2 
1.7 
1.8 
3.1 
2.9 
0.0 
0.0 
7.2 
5.4 
1.6 
1.6 
2.6 
2.2 
Thermal CHP-EX 
0.0 
0.0 
264.1 
118.6 
8.7 
4.0 
12.6 
5.8 
0.0 
0.0 
2.4 
0.4 
1.4 
1.0 
2.8 
1.5 
Thermal Condensing 
0.0 
0.0 
23.1 
6.8 
13.6 10.1 16.1 
9.2 
0.0 
0.0 
78.6 
48.4 
9.0 13.4 20.4 21.4 
Hydro Run-of-River 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
2.2 
3.7 
2.2 
3.7 
0.0 
0.0 
39.1 
38.4 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
Intraseasonal storage 0.0 
0.0 
3.5 
2.1 
1.8 
1.6 
2.3 
1.8 
0.0 
0.0 
1.7 
1.5 
1.4 
1.3 
1.5 
1.4 
Solar-PV 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
4.8 
8.6 
5.1 
9.1 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.8 
0.8 
0.8 
0.8 
Wind Onshore 
0.0 
0.0 
4.4 
1.2 
0.4 
1.2 
0.3 
1.2 
0.0 
0.0 
10.4 
9.9 
1.3 
3.2 
1.0 
3.0 
Hydro reservoirs 
0.0 
0.0 
672.3 
689.8 
1.7 
1.8 
2.2 
2.2 
0.0 
0.0 
3.9 
2.2 
1.1 
1.1 
1.3 
1.2 
Total 
21.3 36.2 
12.2 
3.8 
1.9 
2.0 
3.2 
2.6 148.8 72.4 
3.7 
1.4 
1.3 
1.4 
2.9 
1.9 
Electricity Demand 
Distribution Losses 
21.3 36.2 
2.5 
3.2 
5.3 
3.5 
3.6 
3.4 104.0 43.5 
2.6 
1.5 
7.4 
4.4 
5.2 
3.0 
Transmission Losses 126.5 154.2 
115.8 
47.5 
0.1 
0.6 
31.4 19.5 140.0 98.5 
145.4 
31.4 
5.6 
2.4 
29.3 11.6 
Power to heat 
0.0 
0.0 
2.4 
2.7 
2.8 
1.9 
2.7 
2.2 
0.0 
0.0 
2.6 
1.6 
2.7 
1.7 
2.7 
1.6 
Electric vehicles 
0.0 
0.0 
5.4 
7.1 
9.6 
5.4 
7.7 
6.1 
0.0 
0.0 
6.8 
3.8 
10.6 6.0 
9.6 
5.5 
Intrasesaonal storage 0.0 
0.0 
3.0 
2.0 
1.8 
1.6 
2.2 
1.7 
0.0 
0.0 
1.6 
1.4 
1.4 
1.3 
1.5 
1.3 
Inflexible demand 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
Power to X 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
Total 
94.4 96.0 
2.1 
2.9 
3.5 
2.3 
2.9 
2.5 190.7 109.9 
1.4 
1.4 
3.6 
2.3 
2.9 
1.9 
Heat Generation 
Boilers 
0.0 
0.0 
1.0 
4.0 
1.1 
0.0 
1.1 
1.3 
0.0 
0.0 
2.6 
2.1 
17.6 10.7 
6.8 
4.6 
Thermal CHP-BP 
0.0 
0.0 
2.9 
3.0 
3.4 
1.9 
3.2 
2.4 
0.0 
0.0 
2.3 
1.3 
2.1 
2.1 
2.2 
1.8 
Thermal CHP-EX 
0.0 
0.0 
44.2 
19.6 
4.6 
0.9 
8.9 
2.9 
0.0 
0.0 
2.2 
1.8 
1.8 
1.2 
1.8 
1.1 
Power to heat 
0.0 
0.0 
2.4 
2.2 
2.6 
1.9 
2.5 
2.0 
0.0 
0.0 
2.1 
1.5 
2.4 
1.7 
2.2 
1.6 
Interseasonal storage 0.0 
0.0 
1.0 
1.1 
2.0 
1.4 
1.2 
1.2 
0.0 
0.0 
2.1 
1.2 
2.8 
2.6 
2.4 
1.7 
Intraseasonal storage 0.0 
0.0 
2.9 
1.8 
2.3 
1.5 
2.6 
1.6 
0.0 
0.0 
2.9 
1.9 
2.0 
1.6 
2.4 
1.7 
Solar heating 
0.0 
0.0 
0.4 
0.9 
0.0 
0.0 
2.5 
1.3 
0.0 
0.0 
3.8 
1.1 
0.0 
0.0 
3.8 
1.1 
Total 
0.0 
0.0 
2.7 
2.1 
2.4 
1.7 
2.5 
1.8 
0.0 
0.0 
2.3 
1.7 
2.2 
1.5 
2.2 
1.6 
Heat demand 
Interseasonal storage 0.0 
0.0 
1.7 
2.0 
1.5 
1.4 
1.6 
1.5 
0.0 
0.0 
2.2 
1.3 
2.0 
1.2 
2.0 
1.2 
Intraseasonal storage 0.0 
0.0 
2.9 
2.0 
2.4 
1.7 
2.6 
1.8 
0.0 
0.0 
2.5 
1.8 
2.0 
1.5 
2.2 
1.6 
Inflexible demand 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
Transmission losses 
0.0 
0.0 
21.2 
4.9 
5.7 
1.6 
9.7 
2.6 
0.0 
0.0 
4.3 
2.6 
5.3 
2.8 
18.9 10.5 
Total 
0.0 
0.0 
2.7 
2.0 
2.1 
1.6 
2.4 
1.7 
0.0 
0.0 
2.4 
1.7 
2.0 
1.4 
2.1 
1.5 
Table 10. Differences in absolute delta from day-ahead to balancing dispatch from scenarios S2 and S3 to S1. First, for the 3 
scenarios, differences between the day-ahead and balancing dispatch were calculated for all generation and demand types 
displayed on the table. Then, the absolute value was computed for all the latter differences. Last, the absolute values of 
balancing-day-ahead differences for scenarios S2 and S3 were divided by those of scenario 1. These ratios offer a view of how 
much higher or lower is the balancing redispatch in scenarios S2 and S3 compared to the redispatch in scenario S1 for all 
generation and demand types. Values in ratio for years simulated 2035 and 2045. 
==PAGE:36==
33 
Last, the correlation between the amount of 
redispatch (difference between day-ahead and 
balancing dispatch) and the difference in market 
clearing prices between day-ahead and balancing 
markets has been evaluated. The scatter plot in Figure 
15, showing total annual values of dispatch 
adjustments 
and 
annual 
average 
(generation 
weighted) price differences, points at a direct 
correlation between redispatch and price deltas. As it 
can be appreciated, scenario S2 (home country) 
points lie in the upper right corner (high redispatch, 
high price deltas), while scenario S1 (offshore bidding 
zones) points sit on the lower left corner (low 
redispatch, low price deltas) and scenario S3 (North 
Sea) points are more located in the middle area. The 
home country market arrangement leads to the 
highest redispatch levels and the highest price 
increase from day-ahead to balancing market prices. 
Model infeasibilities have been found in the balancing simulation. Infeasibility variables found 
correspond to electricity and heat balance equations, net charging of electric vehicles, storage 
equations, hydro reservoirs water content constraints, fuel restrictions per country, and some unit 
commitment unit constraints. Infeasibilities may have been originated by fixing variables from the day 
ahead simulation into the balancing market. Variables fixed were unit commitment variables, storages 
and hydro reservoir energy values. A considerably larger number of infeasible variables has been 
obtained under scenarios S2 (home country) and S3 (North Sea). These variables are related to the 
incapacity of the system to respect all constraints in the balancing market. Scenarios S2 and S3 need 
to correct their dispatches when facing the real transmission capacities of hub-home country and hub-
hub lines respectively. These transmission capacity changes and the fixed variables from the day ahead 
market seem to have left the model without resources to meet all system constraints, and therefore 
raised infeasibilities. Balancing market clearing prices were affected as these infeasibility variables 
have penalty costs associated, as it is seen in the next section. A more thorough analysis would be 
needed to precise the origin of all infeasibility variables. Nonetheless, a specific analysis of the 
electricity and heat balance has been done in order to determine at least on which hours the energy 
balance constraints were not respected, caused by generation shortage or excess. As it can be seen in 
Table 11, imbalances found were mainly caused by generation shortage34. Imbalances are 
substantially higher under scenarios S2 (home country) and S3 (North Sea). From these two, the home 
country bidding zone arrangement leads to the highest socioeconomic costs derived from not 
supplying the demand required by the system, valued at VoLL. Yet, it must be stated that the size of 
these imbalances is very low compared to the total annual dispatches. 
 
 
 
34 A small amount of generation heat excess was found for Poland. 
Figure 15. Scatter plot between redispatch size (on x 
axis, in GWh) and market clearing price delta 
between balancing and day-ahead markets (on y 
axis, in EUR/MWH). Points disaggregated by 
scenario (S1, S2, S3) and region type (hubs, 
neighbour regions, others). 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Balancing - Day ahead price [EUR2016/MWh]
Balancing - Day ahead dispatch [TWh]
S1-Hubs
S2-Hubs
S3-Hubs
S1-Neigh
S2-Neigh
S3-Neigh
S1-Other
S2-Other
S3-Other
==PAGE:37==
34 
Generation 
shortages on 
Unit 
S1 
S2 
S2 
2035 
2045 
2035 
2045 
2035 
2045 
Electricity 
hours 
31 
0 
222 
5 
151 
2 
TWh 
-67 
0 
-1,261 
-17 
-623 
-13 
MEUR 
-200 
0 
-3,784 
-50 
-1,869 
-39 
Heat 
hours 
5,503 
4,082 
5,732 
4,322 
5,622 
4,110 
TWh 
-3 
-3 
-9 
-7 
-6 
-6 
MEUR 
-850 
-827 
-2,570 
-2,169 
-1,837 
-1,715 
Table 11. Electricity and heat imbalances found as generation shortages in the system by scenario and years simulated 2035 
and 2045. Number of hours, amount of imbalance in TWh, and the cost of this shortage in MEUR. Generation shortages are 
valued at VoLL for electricity and heat: 3,000 and 300 EUR/MWh respectively. 
Electricity market clearing prices 
The analysis on day-ahead and balancing 
market clearing prices under the three 
scenarios confirms that the offshore 
bidding 
zone 
market 
arrangement 
(scenario S1) presents the lowest prices at 
the hubs. See Figure 16 as an example for 
the Danish hub and Table 13 for generation 
weighted average values for all hubs. 
Conversely, home country bidding zones 
arrangement (S2) shows the highest prices 
at the hubs, while the North Sea bidding 
zone setup (S3) has a price between the 
latter two. 
Second, balancing market prices are 
observed to be significantly higher than 
day-ahead market prices for all scenarios, 
regions and years. The home country 
market arrangement (S2) yields the highest 
balancing market prices, followed by the 
North Sea bidding zone option (S3), and 
last, by the offshore bidding zones market 
configuration 
(S1), 
which 
minimises 
balancing market prices for all regions and 
years. See Table 13, right column group. 
As mentioned earlier, model infeasibilities found in the balancing simulation, which raised penalty 
values in the objective function, must be the reason for balancing market clearing prices above 300 
EUR/MWh, as observed in Figure 16. Unfortunately, the complexity of the system and its modelling 
has not allowed to determine precisely which price level corresponds to which infeasibility and why 
these have occurred. Nevertheless, the analysis on energy balance infeasibilities showed correlation 
with higher electricity prices. In the case of electricity, all imbalances found correspond to clearing 
prices equal to the model penalty cost of 509.6 EUR/MWh. In the case of heat, hours with imbalances 
show a higher average electricity price than in heat balanced hours, as shown in Table 12. Note that 
balancing prices are higher in S2 (home country) and S3 (North Sea), where there are more hours and 
higher imbalances, as seen in Table 11. 
Figure 16. Price duration curves for day-ahead (up) and balancing 
(down) market clearing prices under the three scenarios simulated 
and years 2035 (left), 2045 (right). On y axis, values in EUR2016/MWh, 
on x axis, % of hours of the year. Annual mean prices in parentheses. 
==PAGE:38==
35 
Average Electricity Prices [EUR/MWh] 
S1 
S2 
S3 
2035 
2045 
2035 
2045 
2035 
2045 
Hours with heat imbalance 
86 
102 
156 
157 
127 
136 
Hours with heat balance 
59 
59 
92 
92 
82 
82 
Relative price increase [%] 
45% 
73% 
70% 
71% 
55% 
67% 
Table 12. Average electricity market clearing prices in the balancing market simulation for hours with heat imbalances and 
for hours without heat imbalances. Averages were computed as simple averages per region, identifying hours with 
imbalances per region. Finally, the values shown in the table correspond to simple averages of regions’ values. The relative 
price increase on the last row correspond to the difference between average prices in hours with heat imbalances and hours 
with heat balance divided by the latter. 
Without full detail of correlations of every infeasibility with high prices, it can only be concluded that 
home country market bidding zones (S2) and North Sea bidding zone (S3) lead to significantly larger 
dispatch adjustments (Table 10), a higher number of infeasibilities in the model (Table 11) and higher 
balancing market prices (Table 13). 
Regions 
Average day-ahead market prices 
Average balancing market prices 
2035 
2045 
2035 
2045 
S1 
S2 
S3 
S1 
S2 
S3 
S1 
S2 
S3 
S1 
S2 
S3 
Hubs 
31.0 
38.2 
37.4 
20.4 
23.8 
23.2 
42.9 
57.7 
57.1 
34.0 
44.5 
43.2 
Neighbour regions 
39.8 
40.1 
40.1 
26.2 
26.2 
26.5 
56.6 
89.1 
80.8 
46.3 
73.4 
62.5 
Other 
39.8 
39.9 
40.0 
31.2 
31.1 
31.3 
57.0 
84.4 
76.4 
57.1 
86.0 
78.0 
Table 13. Average day-ahead and balancing market prices in real 2016 EUR/MWh for all three scenarios and simulated years 
2035 and 2045. Annual average prices considered for individual regions were weighted with generation volumes. The 
aggregation into the three categories hubs, neighbour regions and other was made with simple averages from the generation 
weighted prices for individual regions comprised. 
Table 14 (left column group) shows the largest differences between balancing and day-ahead market 
prices for scenario S2 (home country), followed by scenario S3 (North Sea) and last, scenario S1 
(offshore bidding zones). As mentioned earlier, this comes in line with the differences in dispatch 
between balancing and day-ahead markets found for the three scenarios, being the highest for 
scenario S2, then S3 and finally, S1. Higher dispatch difference goes hand in hand with higher market 
price difference between balancing and day-ahead and the maximum are found for scenario S2. The 
home country bidding zone arrangement (S2) is concluded to be the one that leads to the highest 
differences in dispatch and clearing price between the day-ahead and the balancing market. How this 
affects the socioeconomic welfare depends on how welfare is calculated, as it is explained on page 41. 
Regions 
Differences from day-ahead to 
balancing market prices 
Differences in day-ahead prices to S1 
Differences in balancing prices to S1 
2035 
2045 
2035 
2045 
2035 
2045 
S1 
S2 
S3 
S1 
S2 
S3 
S1 
S2 
S3 
S1 
S2 
S3 
S1 
S2 
S3 
S1 
S2 
S3 
Hubs 
11.9 19.5 19.8 13.6 20.8 20.0 
- 
7.2 
6.4 
- 
3.3 
2.7 
- 
14.8 14.3 
- 
10.5 
9.1 
Neighbour 
regions 
16.8 49.0 40.6 20.1 47.2 36.0 
- 
0.3 
0.4 
- 
0.0 
0.3 
- 
32.5 24.2 
- 
27.1 
16.2 
Other 
17.2 44.5 36.3 25.8 54.9 46.6 
- 
0.1 
0.2 
- 
-0.1 
0.1 
- 
27.4 19.4 
- 
29.0 
20.9 
Table 14. Differences in market prices in real 2016 EUR/MWh. Three differences are displayed: on the left, differences for all 
three scenarios between the balancing and the day-ahead market; on the middle, differences between day-ahead market 
prices in scenarios S2 and S3 compared to S1; on the right, differences between balancing market prices in scenarios S2 and 
S3 compared to S1. Annual average prices considered for individual regions were weighted with generation volumes. The 
aggregation into the three categories hubs, neighbour regions and other was made with simple averages from the generation 
weighted prices for individual regions comprised. 
Day-ahead transmission lines overflow 
Infinite transmission capacity assumed in hub-home country lines (scenario S2, home country market) 
and hub-hub lines (S3, North Sea bidding zone) for the day-ahead market can lead to scheduled 
transmission flows higher than the actual capacity of the lines. Scenario S2 home country market 
==PAGE:39==
36 
arrangement affects 8 hub-home country lines with a total capacity of 81 GW, while scenario S3 North 
Sea bidding zone market setup affects 15 hub-hub lines of 81 GW transmission capacity. Table 15 
shows the day-ahead transmission overflow for all hub lines affected in relative and absolute terms 
(% of overflow over final transmission dispatch in the balancing market and in GWh). As it can be seen 
in Table 15, the North Sea bidding zone (S3) prompts the highest levels of day-ahead overflows and 
the hubs that concentrate the largest hub-hub overflows are the Netherlands hub, UK DoggerBank, 
and the German Norwin. The hub-hub lines that concentrate the largest levels of overflows are 
HornSea-NorWin, NL Hub-BorWin, and DoggerBank-NO East. As for scenario S2, with overflows 
affecting hub-home country lines, the DK hub and NorWin hub present the largest overflows in 2045. 
Naturally, the transmission overflows are higher in 2045 since there are more hubs and lines installed. 
The conclusion from this analysis is that scenario S3 generates the highest levels of flows that cannot 
be dispatched according to the actual lines’ capacities. These overflows need to be resolved in the 
balancing market, where the real capacity for all transmission lines is considered. How the day-ahead 
overflows affect the final balancing market prices and redispatch (generation, demand and 
transmission) of the day-ahead schedules is yet not straightforward, since there are multiple options 
to rebalance the dispatch, e.g. change in demand, generation, sector coupling units, storages, change 
in transmission flows, etc. 
Values in % 
and (GWh) 
DE 
UK 
DK 
NL 
NO 
Year 
Scen
ario 
BorWin 
NorWin 
Dogger 
Bank 
HornSea 
DK Hub 
NL Hub 
NO East 
NO West 
2035 
S2 
20% 
(13,084) 
- 
- 
- 
9% 
(10,375) 
20% 
(18,865) 
6% 
(8,632) 
29% 
(25,214) 
S3 
37% 
(24,712) 
- 
- 
- 
54% 
(63,477) 
86% 
(81,435) 
25% 
(34,849) 
51% 
(44,602) 
2045 
S2 
22% 
(30,555) 
38% 
(47,899)  
17% 
(21,523) 
6% 
(8,537) 
39% 
(42,266) 
19% 
(25,131) 
4% 
(8,709) 
31% 
(33,179) 
S3 
32% 
(43,991) 
75% 
(93,681) 
83% 
(103,824) 
60% 
(85,521) 
61% 
(66,305) 
91% 
(123,214) 
33% 
(64,926) 
48% 
(53,302) 
Table 15. Transmission lines overflow in day-ahead simulations for all 8 hubs in simulated years 2035 and 2045, in scenarios 
S2 (home country bidding zone, where unlimited capacity is assumed in the day-ahead market between the hub and their 
home country region) and S3 (North Sea bidding zone where unlimited transmission capacity is assumed between the hubs). 
Values are displayed as a percentage calculated from the ratio between day-ahead overflow over final balancing market 
flows. In parenthesis are shown absolute day-ahead overflows in GWh. 
As it is pointed on page 41, the imbalances caused by the day-ahead schedule of scenario S2 have the 
highest impact in terms of final market prices and units redispatch. This can be explained by the fact 
that the consequences of hub-hub overflows on onshore regions may be limited by the right hub-
home country lines capacities considered in the day-ahead market under scenario S3. The North Sea 
hubs are more homogeneous regions, with similar generation units and no demand associated, thus 
dispatch corrections motivated within the hubs seem to affect less to the overall system than the 
imbalances caused by hub-home country lines infinite capacity assumption under scenario S2. 
In order to get a more tangible idea of the implications of imbalances originated by the infinite capacity 
assumptions of the home country (S2) and North Sea (S3) market arrangements, dispatching examples 
for specific hours when these imbalances occur are detailed in the following paragraphs, where day-
ahead and balancing market dispatch differences between scenarios are described. 
 
 
==PAGE:40==
37 
1. 02/01/2045 06:00 - Hub-home country line overflow caused by home country market setup (S2) 
On the 02/01/2045 at 06:0035, the day-ahead dispatch schedule under the home country market 
arrangement assigns flows from the German hubs NorWin and BorWin to Germany (DE4-W region) of 
30.2 and 30.9 GWh respectively, while the actual transmission capacities of these lines are 12.7 and 
15 GW. A total overflow of 33.4 GWh stems from the day-ahead dispatch, which needs to be corrected 
in the balancing energy market. Day-ahead and balancing market dispatches under scenario S2 are 
displayed in Figure 29, while dispatches for the same hour under the offshore bidding zone 
arrangement are shown in Figure 30. Dispatch differences (or balancing redispatch) are summarized 
in Table 16. Day-ahead and balancing dispatch values on the 02/01/2045 06:00, under offshore hub 
bidding zones (S1) and home country bidding zones (S2) can be found in Table 28 to Table 31. 
Scenario 
Region 
Export 
Import 
Curt 
Wind-
Off 
P2H 
EV 
Thermal 
Storage 
Price 
S1 
Hubs 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0.0 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
Neighbour 
regions 
21 
0 
172 
-172 
-176 
0 
0 
0 
0.5 
0.03% 
0% 
89% 
-0.04% 
-0.13% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
3% 
Others 
0 
19 
0 
0 
2 
0 
2 
0 
0.9 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0.01% 
0% 
4% 
Total 
21 
19 
172 
-172 
-174 
0 
2 
0 
0.5 
0.01% 
0.01% 
89% 
-0.03% 
-0.05% 
0% 
0.01% 
0% 
3% 
S2 
Hubs 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
-12.5 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
-81% 
Neighbour 
regions 
-42,685 
-1,468 
9,422 
-9,422 
29,844 
-13,298 
-1,646 
-398 
301.7 
-36% 
-2% 
INF* 
-2% 
31% 
-11% 
-51% 
-22% 
1,975% 
Others 
1,513 
-39,124 
0 
0 
-6,240 
-19,206 
219 
0 
380.7 
9% 
-17% 
 0% 
0% 
-3% 
-20% 
2% 
0% 
1,960% 
Total 
-41,173 
-40,592 
9,422 
-9,422 
23,605 
-32,504 
-1,428 
-398 
223.3 
-14% 
-14% 
INF* 
-1% 
8% 
-15% 
-9% 
-6% 
1,338% 
Table 16. Dispatch differences between balancing and day-ahead markets under scenarios S1 (offshore bidding zones) and 
S2 (home country market bidding zones) on the 02/01/2045 06:0035, example of hour with overflow in a hub-home country 
line. As it can be easily appreciated, scenario S2 (home country) leads to a highly more significant redispatch than scenario 
S1 (offshore bidding zones). Values in MWh and % from the day-ahead dispatch. *Please note that INF values refer to a 
change from 0 in the day ahead to any value in the balancing market. 
Looking in detail to the redispatch of every individual region36 under scenario S2 (home country 
bidding zones), the following main dispatch corrections are observed: 
• 
UK exports are reduced by -43,786 MWh. Other neighbouring countries slightly increase them, 
leading to the -42,685 MWh on Table 16 (row S2-Neighbour regions, column Export). 
• 
UK increases it power-to-heat consumption by 32,224 MWh to absorb all energy that cannot 
longer be exported. Other neighbouring regions slightly decrease their power-to-heat 
consumption, leading to the 29,844 MWh value on Table 16 (row S2-Neighbour regions, 
column P2H). 
• 
UK reduces its offshore wind production by 9,422 MWh, which is curtailed (see Table 16, row 
S2-Neighbour regions, column Curt and Wind-Off). 
• 
The German regions, DE4-N, DE4-W, DE4-S, which receive now less energy from the hubs, 
must decrease the electric vehicles (EVs) consumption by 32,504 MWh. This seems to be the 
main driver for the high price changes between the balancing and day-ahead market. Note 
that EVs net charging is fixed in the balancing market from the day ahead. Thus, variations are 
originated then by infeasibility variables raised by the model. These variables have a penalty 
 
35 The corresponding Balmorel model time entities are Y=2045, S=S002, T=T06.  
36 Redispatch values only displayed aggregated by categories: hubs, neighbor regions and others for 
simplification of Table 16. 
==PAGE:41==
38 
cost associated and are used when EV’s cannot be charged within the time-load range 
designed for them. See the work on [74] for details on electric vehicles modelling. EVs penalty 
costs must have influenced the balancing market clearing prices. 
• 
As indicated, prices decrease in the hubs (and the UK, wind exporter) and rise elsewhere. The 
hubs capture price in the day-ahead market was the one of their home countries. Once hub-
home country lines are restricted to their capacity, this results in congestion for all, hence the 
prices at the hubs become the marginal costs of the offshore wind generation units, 2.9 
EUR/MWh. In onshore regions, in turn, prices rise. As mentioned, the very high market 
clearing price in the balancing market may be explained by the penalty associated to the 
electric vehicles charging. 
As it can be observed in Table 16 (upper rows corresponding to S1), the balancing market redispatch 
is barely appreciable under scenario S1 (offshore bidding zones), where in the day-ahead market the 
actual hub-home country lines capacities were already included. Dispatch changes are minor and have 
no major effects on energy volumes nor clearing prices. These changes are mostly related to the time 
scope of the balancing simulation (one hour) compared to the day-ahead simulation (24 hours). 
2. 19/05/2045 14:00 - Hub-hub line overflow caused by North Sea market setup (S3) 
On the 19/05/2045 at 14:0037, the day-ahead dispatch schedule under the North Sea bidding zone 
arrangement assigns flows from the German hub Borwin to the Dutch hub NL Hub of 24.5 GWh, while 
the real capacity of the line is 1.7 GW. An overflow of 22.8 GWh is induced by the North Sea bidding 
zone market setup (S3) on the day-ahead dispatch. This needs to be corrected on the balancing 
market. As with the previous example, balancing and day-ahead dispatches are plotted in Figure 31 
(scenario S3) and Figure 32 (S1). The differences between balancing and day-ahead dispatches are 
analysed in Table 17. Detailed values for day-ahead and balancing dispatch can be found in Table 34 
and Table 35 respectively. 
For this specific hour, characterised by a high solar PV production, the main points observed on the 
balancing redispatch are the following: 
• 
Energy was flowing in the day-ahead dispatch from German regions to the hub Borwin, and 
from there, together with other flows and the hub own production to the Dutch hub. With 
the hub-hub capacity constraint applied, all German regions reduce their storage generation 
by 1,915 MWh (see value in Table 16, row S3-Total, column Storage Gen) and there is no flow 
from German regions to the hub Borwin. New flows appear from DE4W to the Norwegian hub 
NO East and to the UK. 
• 
Power-to-heat consumption increases by 2,621 MWh in DE4-S. It receives now a higher flow 
from DE4-W that it uses to generate heat. Other regions reduce their power-to-heat 
consumption, especially Finland, inducing a total increment of 1,147 MWh (Table 16, row S3-
Total, column P2H). 
• 
UK was importing energy from the hubs in the day-ahead dispatch. It sees now its imports 
reduced, which is translated in a decrease of electric vehicles consumption of 1,655 MWh 
(Table 16, row S3-Total, column EV). 
• 
It is not easy to determine what change derived the high balancing market clearing prices 
under scenario S3. While electric vehicles may be a reason due to the associated penalties 
applied in the model, the storage behaviour can also intervene. 
 
37 The corresponding Balmorel model time entities are Y=2045, S=S169, T=T14. 
==PAGE:42==
39 
Again, as in the previous example, the redispatch under the offshore bidding scenario (S1), seen on 
Table 16, top rows, is much lower than the one resulting from the North Sea bidding zone dispatch 
(S3). The difference is more acute in terms of market clearing price deltas form balancing to day-ahead 
markets. Day-ahead and balancing dispatch values on the 19/05/2045 14:00, under offshore hub 
bidding zones (S1) and under North Sea bidding zones (S3) can be found in Table 32 to Table 35. 
Scenario 
Region 
Export 
Import 
Curt 
P2H 
EV 
Stor. Dem 
Stor. Gen 
Thermal 
Price 
S1 
Hubs 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
  
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
4% 
Neighbour 
regions 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
  
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
4% 
Others 
-390 
-372 
0 
-319 
0 
0 
-344 
-7 
1 
  
-0.3% 
-1% 
0% 
-0.3% 
0% 
0% 
-50% 
0% 
5% 
Total 
-390 
-372 
0 
-319 
0 
0 
-344 
-7 
1 
  
-0.2% 
-0.2% 
0% 
-0.2% 
0% 
0% 
-22% 
0% 
4% 
S3 
Hubs 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
370 
  
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
1,081% 
Neighbour 
regions 
0 
-1,260 
0 
60 
-1,655 
-282 
-757 
0 
371 
  
0% 
-1% 
0% 
0.1% 
-2% 
-60% 
-99% 
0% 
1,082% 
Others 
1,048 
2,172 
0 
1,086 
0 
-1,109 
-1,158 
0 
347 
  
1% 
10% 
0% 
1% 
0% 
-16% 
-100% 
0% 
1,349% 
Total 
1,048 
912 
0 
1,147 
-1,655 
-1,391 
-1,915 
0 
362 
  
1% 
1% 
0% 
1% 
-1% 
-19% 
-100% 
0% 
1,154% 
Table 17. Dispatch differences between balancing and day-ahead markets under scenarios S1 (offshore bidding zones) and 
S3 (North Sea bidding zone) on the 19/04/2045 14:00, example of hour with overflow in a hub-hub line. As it can be easily 
appreciated, scenario S3 (North Sea) leads to a highly more significant redispatch than scenario S1 (offshore bidding zones). 
Values in MWh and % from the day-ahead dispatch. 
In conclusion, it has been shown through these two examples how the imbalances originated from the 
forced infinite transmission capacity assumptions under home country and North Sea market 
arrangements, are more substantial in both energy volumes and, more importantly, in terms of market 
clearing prices. As it has been seen, market clearing prices in the balancing market can attain very high 
levels, which will be reflected as higher balancing costs. 
Curtailment 
The difference in curtailment levels driven by the different day-ahead market configurations assumed 
in the three scenarios is shown in Figure 17. The levels presented correspond to the final dispatch 
settled by the balancing market results. In the two left plots, the overall curtailment for the whole 
system is the lowest for scenario S1 (offshore hub bidding zones), and the highest for scenario S2 
(home country bidding zones). In contrast, for the hubs, scenario S1 is not the one that yields the 
lowest level of curtailment, but scenario S3 (North Sea bidding zone). 
 
Figure 17. Curtailment in the system and the North Sea hubs under the different scenarios. Two left bar charts present the 
total system curtailment. Two right bar charts present offshore wind curtailment in the North Sea hubs. Curtailment 
correspond to the final dispatch from the balancing market simulation results after simulating the day-ahead market with 
the three different scenario assumptions: S1 hub bidding zones (red), S2 home country bidding zones (blue) and S3 (North 
Sea bidding zone (green). 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
2035
Total curtailment [TWh]
0
100
200
300
400
500
2045
0.0
5.0
10.0
15.0
20.0
2035
Hubs curtailment [TWh]
0
20
40
60
80
100
2045
S1
S2
S3
==PAGE:43==
40 
To have some perspective of the values presented before, Table 18 indicates how much the 
curtailment in the hubs (two graphs on the right above) represent from the total wind production 
available. These values vary greatly between the different hubs. The highest curtailment levels are 
found in the Norwegian and the Danish hub, with relative values from 13% to 18% of the total available 
wind production. The UK hubs, in contrast, has the lowest levels of curtailment (1% to 2%). Regarding 
the evolution of curtailment along the years, curtailment increases significantly in 2045 compared to 
2035, both in absolute (around 4 times higher) and in relative terms (almost twice as much) because 
of the higher renewable energy penetration in 2045. As it will be seen in the power-to-gas projects 
feasibility analysis, this increasing curtailment fosters profitability of these projects.  
Hub 
2035 
2045 
Cap 
S1 
S2 
S3 
Cap 
S1 
S2 
S3 
GW 
% 
GWh 
% 
GWh 
% 
GWh 
GW 
% 
GWh 
% 
GWh 
% 
GWh 
DE - BorWin 
9 
4.2% 
1,734 
4.3% 
1,778 
4.2% 
1,765 
20 
8.8% 
8,369 
8.8% 
8,398 
8.7% 
8,303 
DE - NorWin 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
20 
5.6% 
5,472 
5.7% 
5,572 
5.6% 
5,418 
UK - 
DoggerBank 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
20 
2.3% 
2,202 
2.3% 
2,246 
2.3% 
2,230 
UK - HornSea 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
20 
1.1% 
1,054 
1.1% 
1,108 
1.1% 
1,075 
DK - Hub 
18 
5.6% 
4,780 
5.6% 
4,844 
5.6% 
4,783 
20 
14.1% 
13,235 
14.5% 
13,555 
13.8% 12,925 
NL - Hub 
12 
1.6% 
932 
1.7% 
967 
1.7% 
953 
20 
7.4% 
6,851 
7.5% 
6,895 
7.5% 
6,920 
NO - Hub East 
20 
5.5% 
5,390 
5.6% 
5,494 
5.5% 
5,419 
37 
13.7% 
23,375 
13.8% 
23,623 
13.4% 23,005 
NO - Hub 
West 
13 
7.2% 
4,740 
7.3% 
4,829 
7.0% 
4,603 
20 
17.5% 
17,220 
18.5% 
18,231 
16.9% 16,627 
Total hubs 
72 
5.0% 
15,577 
5.1% 
17,911 
5.0% 
17,523 
177 
9.2% 
77,778 
9.5% 
79,628 
9.1% 
76,502 
Table 18. Curtailment in the North Sea hubs in simulated years 2035 and 2045 for the three scenarios (S1 hub bidding zones, 
S2 home country bidding zones, and S3 North Sea bidding zone). Curtailment is presented in percentage calculated as the 
absolute curtailment divided by the offshore wind available (production + curtailment) and in absolute value as GWh. 
Socioeconomic cost 
For the socioeconomic costs of all energy dispatched under the three different scenarios simulated, 
balancing market results have been considered since these correspond to the final dispatch schedule38 
and thereby the final costs of the energy dispatched in the system. For this concept, only generation 
and transmission operational and capital costs are considered. Moreover, fuel costs from power-to-
heat and storages have not been included, since they would imply double-counting of generation 
costs. The fuel cost of power-to-heat, for example, is the value of the electricity that is consumed by 
the heat pumps and electric boilers to produce heat. However, the socioeconomic cost of this 
electricity has already been considered in the generation costs of those units that produced that 
electricity. Likewise, the demand side is disregarded in this socioeconomic cost analysis. 
Figure 18 presents generation and transmission costs for the overall energy, electricity and heat 
dispatched in the balancing market under the three scenarios and years simulated 2035 and 2045. 
Values are presented as absolute values in million EUR2016 and in EUR2016/MWh. It can be appreciated 
that the offshore hub bidding zone arrangement (scenario S1) leads to the lowest total specific costs 
per MWh in both 2035 and 2045. The differences are very slight however: 2.6 and 0.3 cents of 
EUR/MWh between S2 and S1 in 2035 and 2045 respectively, and 4.3 and 1.2 cents of EUR/MWh 
between S3 and S1 in 2035 and 2045. In terms of absolute costs, offshore bidding zones arrangement 
leads to higher overall costs due to higher energy volumes dispatched under this scenario, as seen in 
Table 9. The differences are small since the balancing market dispatch differences under different 
 
38 This statement is only true according to the modelling of the balancing market in Balmorel considered in this 
work, which comprises all energy traded in the system. In real balancing markets in Europe, only volumes 
corresponding to the imbalance perceived by the TSO are cleared and bids are received from regulating market 
agents, BSPs. Later, imbalance settlements are accounted for all agents incurring in imbalances to their day-
ahead scheduled dispatch.  
==PAGE:44==
41 
scenarios are not that significant when compared to the total annual dispatch (1% on average), as it 
was observed on the balancing market dispatch analysis on page 29. 
In conclusion, the higher operational expenditures and thereby higher total costs (since capital costs 
are the same for all scenarios) resulting from the offshore hub bidding zone is compensated by the 
higher energy volumes dispatched, both for electricity and heat. Hence, specific costs per MWh are 
concluded to be minimised under the offshore hub bidding zone market configuration. 
 
 
Figure 18. Socioeconomic generation and transmission costs of the final energy dispatch schedule according to the balancing 
market results under the three scenarios and years simulated 2035 and 2045. The first row corresponds to specific costs in 
EUR2016/MWh and the second row to total annual costs in thousands MEUR2016. In columns, from left to right, total energy 
costs, electricity costs and heat costs. Specific costs in EUR/MWh have been calculated as (annual generation costs + annual 
transmission costs) / annual generation. Heat transmission costs have been disregarded in the calculations. 
Mere real generation and transmission costs are shown in Figure 18. This socioeconomic cost analysis 
ignores then the value of electricity perceived by the different market agents and, also, its value in 
time. For example, this simple cost view does not allow to know that the cost of heat production when 
accounting for the market value of the electricity purchased by power-to-heat units increases under 
scenarios S2 and S3 due to higher electricity balancing market clearing prices. The following analysis 
on socioeconomic welfare does give insights on these fundamental concepts of welfare distribution 
for the different market agents and the value of energy over time. 
Socioeconomic welfare 
As explained in section Socio-economic welfare analysis, a long-term perspective has been taken to 
calculate the socioeconomic welfare. Unlike the often-used short-term socioeconomic welfare 
concept based on the day-ahead market marginal demand and supply curves (welfare as area between 
the two and their intersection), in this work, all costs concepts are incorporated, both fixed operational 
costs and capital expenditures and not only marginal values. This way, a more complete and long-term 
view of the value and cost of the energy for all market agents is perceived. 
Balancing market results have been considered for the calculations of welfare for the different market 
agents. However, with the aim to replicate to some extent the functioning of balancing market 
settlements for electricity producers, a balancing settlement with one-price model has been applied 
22.5
23.0
23.5
24.0
24.5
25.0
2035
2045
Cost per MWh of energy [2016 
EUR/MWh]
S1 Hub bid zone
S2 Home country
S3 North Sea bid zone
27.5
28.0
28.5
29.0
29.5
30.0
30.5
31.0
31.5
2035
2045
Cost per MWh of electricity 
[2016 EUR/MWh]
14.5
15.0
15.5
16.0
16.5
17.0
17.5
18.0
2035
2045
Cost per MWh of heat [2016 
EUR/MWh]
180
190
200
210
220
230
240
250
260
2035
2045
Annual generation and trans. 
cost [2016 MEUR x1000]
110
120
130
140
150
160
170
180
190
200
2035
2045
Annual electricity generation and 
trans cost [2016 MEUR x1000]
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
2035
2045
Annual heat generation cost 
[2016 MEUR x1000]
==PAGE:45==
42 
to all electricity generation units. The difference between the balancing dispatch and day-ahead 
dispatch, multiplied by the balancing market price was the settlement to be paid or earned by 
generation units on top of their day-ahead market revenues. With this assumption for welfare 
calculations, the highest socioeconomic welfare is obtained under scenario S1 (offshore hub bidding 
zones), Figure 19. 
 
 
 
Figure 19. Socioeconomic welfare under the three different scenarios and years simulated 2035 and 2045. The first row 
corresponds to specific value in EUR2016/MWh and the second row to total annual welfare in thousands MEUR2016. In columns, 
from left to right, total energy welfare, electricity welfare and heat welfare. Specific welfare in EUR/MWh have been 
calculated as (annual producers surplus + annual consumers surplus + annual transmission surplus) / (annual generation + 
annual demand + annual transmission). Heat transmission costs have been disregarded in the calculations. 
The higher welfare in scenario S1 (offshore hub bidding zones) can be explained by the higher 
imbalance costs incurred by the producers in scenarios S2 and S3 and the higher electricity and heat 
consumers surplus in scenario S1 due to lower balancing market prices. Detailed welfare delta values 
from scenarios S2 and S3 compared to S1, for all market agents, are presented in Table 19. Balancing 
market clearing prices seem to be the key driver for the differences in market agent’s welfare under 
different market arrangements. Higher balancing market prices imply higher producers surplus 
(although there is a negative effect for electricity producers derived from the imbalance settlement 
assumed) and congestion rents, whilst lower consumers surplus. The balance between the two 
oppositely affected market agents, generation and transmission on one side, and consumers on the 
other, defines the total socioeconomic welfare. As seen in Table 19, when comparing the home 
country market bidding zones (S2) and North Sea bidding zone (S3) arrangements to the offshore hub 
bidding zones configuration (S1), the negative delta on consumers surplus (plus the increase in 
imbalance settlement costs), on red, is higher than the positive delta in producers and transmission 
surplus. Consequently, the maximum socioeconomic welfare is achieved under the offshore hub 
bidding zones option. 
 
 
1,100
1,105
1,110
1,115
1,120
1,125
1,130
2035
2045
Value per MWh [EUR2016/MWh]
S1 Hub bid zone
S2 Home country
S3 North Sea bid zone
875
880
885
890
895
900
905
2035
2045
Value per MWhe [EUR2016/MWh]
220
221
222
223
224
225
226
227
2035
2045
Value per MWhhe [EUR2016/MWh]
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
2035
2045
Annual energy system welfare [ 
MEURx106]
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
2035
2045
Annual electricity system welfare 
[MEURx106]
1.80
1.81
1.82
1.83
1.84
1.85
1.86
2035
2045
Annual heat system welfare 
[MEURx106]
==PAGE:46==
43 
Differences in welfare to S1 
EUR2016/MWh 
MEUR2016 
2035 
2045 
2035 
2045 
S2-S1 
S3-S1 
S2-S1 
S3-S1 
S2-S1 
S3-S1 
S2-S1 
S3-S1 
Electricity producers day-ahead revenues 
0.85 
0.65 
0.71 
0.71 
3,287 
3,481 
2,708 
4,132 
Electricity producers imbalance settlement 
-0.06 
-0.03 
-0.05 
-0.03 
-265 
-158 
-223 
-168 
Electricity producers surplus 
1 
1 
1 
1 
3,152 
3,389 
2,619 
4,007 
Electricity consumers surplus 
-44 
-36 
-34 
-22 
-120,649 -171,658 -93,168 -104,564 
Heat producers surplus 
24 
21 
16 
13 
101,276 
89,964 
68,813 
55,396 
Heat consumers surplus 
-32 
-30 
-22 
-19 
-125,638 -115,527 -85,904 
-72,435 
Electricity transmission surplus 
27 
25 
16 
15 
42,045 
68,884 
25,928 
42,969 
Electricity socioeconomic welfare (El SEW) 
-8 
-4 
-7 
-2 
-75,451 
-99,386 
-64,620 
-57,589 
Heat socioeconomic welfare (He SEW) 
-2 
-2 
-2 
-2 
-24,363 
-25,563 
-17,091 
-17,040 
Socioeconomic welfare (SEW) 
-10 
-7 
-8 
-4 
-99,814 
-124,949 -81,711 
-74,628 
Table 19. Differences in socioeconomic welfare per market agent between scenarios S2 (home country bidding zone) and S3 
(North Sea bidding zone) compared to scenario S1 (hub bidding zones). Differences calculated as Si – S1. Values are shown in 
absolute MEUR2016 and specific welfare in EUR2016/MWh. The balancing settlement is for all scenarios an imbalance cost for 
producers. The minus difference must be read as a higher imbalance cost in scenarios S2 and S3 with respect to scenario S1. 
3.2 Private economic results of offshore projects 
In this section are presented results from the private economic analyses performed for the wind farm 
projects and the power-to-gas units running on wind power curtailed. 
Wind farms private economic analysis 
A total of 13 wind farms are invested according to the investment planning optimisation from Balmorel 
simulation results, the “investment run”. The optimal North Sea system according to the simulation 
results consists of 8 hubs, 5 wind farms invested in 2035 with a total generation capacity of 74 GW, 
and 8 more wind farms in 2045 with 103.5 GW additional capacity. Since this work assumes that results 
from 2035 are representative from all 2030-decade and results from 2045 reflect the 2040-decade, 
wind farm investments in 2035 are considered to start operation in 2030 and 2045 investments in 
2040. 
The main key economic indicators obtained from the discounted cashflow analysis for all 13 wind farm 
projects are presented in Table 20. As it can be observed, no wind farm is commercially viable, 
according to the specific costs assumed in the model and the market prices resulting from day head 
and balancing market simulations. 
 Wind Farm 
Cap 
NPV 
IRR 
BCR 
LCOE 
[2020 MEUR] 
[%] 
[ratio] 
[2020 EUR/MWh] 
[GW] 
S1 
S2 
S3 
S1 
S2 
S3 
S1 
S2 
S3 
S1 
S2 
S3 
DE – BorWin (2030) 
9 
-5,936 
-4,681 
-5,735 
3.0% 
4.0% 
3.1% 
0.76 0.83 0.77 53.23 52.58 
52.96 
DE – BorWin (2040) 
11 
-12,608 
-11,930 
-12,508 
0.0% 
0.6% 
0.1% 
0.63 0.67 0.63 46.29 46.39 
45.89 
DE – NorWin (2040) 
20 
-26,964 
-21,118 
-22,272 
-2.6% 
0.8% 
0.2% 
0.50 0.68 0.64 46.15 45.73 
44.98 
UK – DoggerBank (2040) 
20 
-21,641 
-19,940 
-20,623 
0.5% 
1.3% 
1.0% 
0.61 0.65 0.64 44.43 43.82 
44.14 
UK – HornSea (2040) 
20 
-22,025 
-20,566 
-21,120 
0.3% 
1.0% 
0.8% 
0.60 0.64 0.62 44.26 44.17 
44.27 
DK Hub (2030) 
18 
-23,608 
-10,344 
-10,469 
-1.9% 
4.1% 
4.0% 
0.50 0.81 0.80 54.08 53.86 
53.87 
DK Hub (2040) 
2 
-2,101 
-1,470 
-1,526 
-2.4% 
1.8% 
1.5% 
0.48 0.70 0.68 46.17 46.04 
45.37 
NL Hub (2030) 
12 
-16,081 
-7,334 
-8,305 
-2.5% 
3.7% 
3.1% 
0.50 0.80 0.76 53.03 52.92 
53.83 
NL Hub (2040) 
8 
-10,643 
-8,006 
-8,325 
-3.5% 
0.7% 
0.3% 
0.45 0.65 0.62 45.76 45.94 
46.16 
NO East (2030) 
20 
-10,356 
-8,836 
-8,515 
4.4% 
4.9% 
5.0% 
0.83 0.86 0.87 52.01 52.02 
51.65 
NO East (2040) 
17 
-19,078 
-18,136 
-18,309 
0.3% 
0.8% 
0.7% 
0.60 0.63 0.62 53.41 53.21 
53.82 
NO West (2030) 
13 
-7,439 
-6,329 
-6,184 
4.0% 
4.7% 
4.7% 
0.81 0.85 0.86 54.45 52.69 
52.43 
NO West (2040) 
7 
-6,383 
-5,860 
-5,968 
1.5% 
2.2% 
2.0% 
0.68 0.72 0.71 44.28 43.14 
43.65 
Table 20. Key economic indicators found for the 13 wind farm projects investigated. In columns, results for net present value 
(NPV), internal rate of return (IRR), benefit-to-cost ratio (BCR) and levelized cost of energy (LCoE) for all three scenarios 
simulated according to the different day-ahead market configurations: S1 hub bidding zone, S2 home country bidding zone, 
and S3 North Sea bidding zone. 
Figure 20 shows the benefit to cost ratio (BCR) for all wind farm projects invested in 2030 and 2040. 
As shown in the figure and Table 20, wind farms invested in 2030 yield a higher profitability in reason 
of higher capture prices. 
==PAGE:47==
44 
 
Figure 20. Benefit to Cost ratio (BCR) in scenario 2 (most favourable for offshore wind farm developers) for wind farms 
installed in 2030 (left) and 2040 (right) in the North Sea hubs. Bubble sizes and colours in the hub locations vary proportionally 
to BCR result in scenario 2. The ratio between available transmission from the hub and wind generation capacity is displayed 
in green and average capture prices in the hubs in red. All BCR are lower than 1, hence no wind farm is economically feasible 
without supports according to the costs assumed and simulation results for dispatched production and market prices. 
As expected, capture prices are the lowest in scenario 1 (offshore hub bidding zones), where the price 
is defined by the wind farms marginal costs or alternatively the lowest neighbouring price when there 
is transmission congestion. Also expectedly, the highest capture price occurs in scenario 2 (home 
country bidding zone), where the hubs prices are the same as those of their home country regions. 
Figure 21 shows the high direct correlation between the 
capture price and BCR achieved. S1 capture prices remain at 
the lower range (see blue cloud of points concentrated in the 
bottom-left area of the chart), while S2 capture prices lie on 
the upper range (red point on the upper-right area) and S3 
capture prices (green points) in between. 
Figure 21. Scatter plot of capture price and BCR. Benefit-to-cost ratio (BCR) 
in y axis and average capture price of the wind farms over their lifetime in 
x axis. The 3 scenarios simulated are S1 hub bidding zones (blue), S2 Home 
country bid zones (red), S3 North Sea bid zone (green). 
The correlation between profitability levels and average capacity factor was also analysed. One would 
expect that the higher the capacity factor, the higher the profitability of the wind farm. However, this 
is not the case as it can be appreciated in Figure 22. Capacity factor has an inverse correlation with 
capture price, and therefore, also with BCR. Although surprising, it seems reasonable since the higher 
the capacity factor, the more wind is generated, which replaces other more expensive units in the 
merit order curve and thereby induces lower market clearing prices. 
 
 
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
10
20
30
40
BCR [ratio]
Average Capture Price [2020 EUR/MWh]
S1
S2
S3
==PAGE:48==
45 
 
Capture prices are compared in Figure 23 with the levelized cost of energy. For all wind farms in the 
same hubs, wind farms invested in 2030 receive a higher capture price than wind farms invested in 
2040. The support needed (gap price to achieve the LCOE of the wind farms) would be therefore lower 
for 2030 wind farms than for 2040 wind farms. Although the specific capital and operational 
expenditures are assumed to be lower for wind farms invested in 2040, the general decrease in market 
prices due to a higher penetration of renewable energy sources makes 2040 wind farms less profitable 
and needing more support. 
Figure 23. LCOE and capture price for 
the 13 wind farm projects analysed (5 
projects to be invested in 2030 and 8 
projects 
in 
2040 according 
to 
investment simulation results). In 
grey, the average capture price 
received by the wind farms. In red, 
the difference between the levelized 
cost of energy and the capture price. 
This is the missing retribution per 
MWh needed to achieve commercial 
viability, i.e. support needed per 
MWh. 
Power-to-gas private economic analysis 
Results of the economic feasibility of the power-to-gas projects show a wide interval of profitability 
levels, as shown in Figure 24, where net present value values for all 390 project options are presented. 
Figure 24. Profitability range for all 13 power-to-gas project options, 
under all scenarios and all capacity sizes investigated. Only the 
maximum and minimum NPV values for all three scenarios are presented 
in coloured lines. The remaining results in between lie within the grey 
area. 
The differences in profitability levels are due to the 
variability in curtailment for the different wind hubs, in 
terms of total curtailed volume, but most importantly 
depending on the curtailment load pattern in time. The key 
parameter to achieve profitability is found to be the 
capacity factor of the electrolyser, as it can be seen in 
Figure 25. A positive correlation is found between the 
capacity factor and the benefit-to-cost ratio of the project, while the LCOH2 decays exponentially with 
the capacity factor. Looking at the left plot in Figure 25, the threshold capacity factor above which 
projects are profitable is around 10 to 11%. However, as seen in the right graph in Figure 25, it is not 
a question of increasing as much as possible the capacity factor, a matter of reducing the size of the 
-20,000
-15,000
-10,000
-5,000
0
5,000
10,000
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
NPV [2020 MEUR]
Capacity P2G as % of Max Curtailment [%]
S1
S2
S3
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
S1 S2 S3 S1 S2 S3 S1 S2 S3 S1 S2 S3 S1 S2 S3 S1 S2 S3 S1 S2 S3 S1 S2 S3 S1 S2 S3 S1 S2 S3 S1 S2 S3 S1 S2 S3 S1 S2 S3
DE
BorWin
2030
DE
BorWin
2040
DE
NorWin
2040
UK
Dog.Bank
2040
UK
HornSea
2040
DK
Hub
2030
DK
Hub
2040
NL
Hub
2030
NL
Hub
2040
NO
Hub E
2030
NO
Hub E
2040
NO
Hub W
2030
NO
Hub W
2040
[2020 EUR/MWh]
Capture price
LCOE-Capture Price
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
40%
45%
50%
55%
60%
BCR [ratio]
Average capacity factor [%]
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
40%
45%
50%
55%
60%
Average Capture Price [2020 
EUR/MWh]
Average capacity factor [%]
Figure 
22. 
Scatter 
plots
showing inverse correlations 
between average capacity 
factors and benefit to cost 
ratio (left chart), in reason of 
inverse 
correlation 
with 
capture price (right chart), 
which seems to be the most 
determining parameter of the 
two. 
==PAGE:49==
46 
electrolyser, but there is a trade-off between the cost and revenue reduction by decreasing the size 
of the power-to-gas unit. The optimal size does not correspond then to the highest capacity factor at 
the smallest size, but to the size that maximizes the sum of discounted revenues minus discounted 
costs, i.e. the net present value of the project. The highest level of curtailment in 2045 compared to 
2035 simulation results is the cause that power-to-gas projects invested in 2040 yield a higher 
profitability than those projects invested in 2030. 
 
 
 
Figure 25. Benefit to cost ratio (left), LCOH2 (centre) and NPV (right) correlation with capacity factors of the electrolysers. In 
red, results for power-to gas units invested in 2040; in blue, results for investments in 2030. 390 results corresponding to 39 
possible projects evaluated in 10 capacity sizes are shown as scatter plots of the economic indicator (in y axis) and the 
average capacity factor (in x axis). 
Four out of the eight wind hubs are found to yield profitable P2G projects. These the Norwegian wind 
hubs NO Hub West and East, the German hub DE-BorWin and the Danish DK Hub. Results for these 
hubs are shown in Figure 26, where their net present value is displayed for all three scenarios and the 
10 different capacities assessed (as a percentage of the maximum curtailment). As earlier mentioned, 
the maximum NPV is achieved at an intermediate size that optimally balances revenues and costs 
reduction. Optimal capacities range from 20% to 60% of the maximum electrolyser load. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 26. Net present values for power-to-gas projects found profitable in the hubs NO-Hub West, NO-Hub East, DK Hub and 
DE BorWin. Results are shown for all 10 capacity levels studied for each project and the 3 scenarios simulated in Balmorel. 
It is interesting to remark that profitability levels are higher for projects invested in 2040 compared to 
the same installation invested in 2030. This is because of higher curtailment in 2045 simulation results 
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
0%
10%
20%
30%
Benefit to Cost Ratio - BCR [ratio]
Capacity factor [%]
2030 P2G units
2040 P2G units
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0%
10%
20%
30%
LCOH2 [2020 EUR/kg H2]
Capacity factor [%]
-15.0
-13.0
-11.0
-9.0
-7.0
-5.0
-3.0
-1.0
1.0
3.0
5.0
7.0
0%
10%
20%
30%
NPV [2020 MEUR] [x1000]
Capacity factor [%]
-2
0
2
4
6
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
NPV [2020 MEUR x1000]
NO - Hub W 2040
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
NO - Hub E 2040
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
DK - Hub W 2040
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
DE - BorWin 2040
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
NPV [2020 MEUR x1000]
Capacity as % of Max 
Curt.[%]
NO - Hub W 2030
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Capacity as % of Max 
Curt.[%]
NO - Hub E 2030
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Capacity as % of Max 
Curt.[%]
DK - Hub W 2030
S1
S2
S3
==PAGE:50==
47 
compared to 2035 in reason of higher renewable energy shares. This is the contrary trend to the wind 
farms profitability results, where it was found that 2030 wind farm projects lead to higher profitability 
levels due to higher capture prices. 
 
==PAGE:51==
48 
Chapter 4.  Discussion 
In this chapter, it is first discussed what limitations may arise from the methodology used. In particular, 
data assumptions, modelling results from the investment optimisation, which define the energy 
system over which this work is based upon, the modelling approach for day-ahead and balancing 
markets, and how the inclusion of imbalance settlement for electricity producers impact 
socioeconomic welfare results. Secondly, results of this thesis work are compared with previous works 
about market arrangements for offshore hubs, with special focus on the recent work by THEMA 
Consulting Group [57], which has served as the basis for the conclusions on market arrangements in 
the offshore strategy for the EU [75]. 
4.1 Limitations of the methodology 
Data assumptions 
This thesis work deals with a very long-term future time horizon, with simulation of the system up to 
2045, and private economic analyses of assets invested in 2040 with lifetimes spanning up to 2070. 
This fact, of course, involves a great level of uncertainty and results shall never be taken as potential 
forecasts of what can be expected in the future. On the contrary, results of the modelling and the 
analyses of this work are aimed to explain market dynamics and implications of the different market 
configurations to the socio-economic welfare and to the economic feasibility of offshore energy 
projects in the North Sea. Nevertheless, the high uncertainty of the many data assumptions taken 
imply a high uncertainty on the quantitative impacts resulting from the analyses performed, namely 
welfare distributions and profitability indicators. No sensitivity analysis has been performed either on 
the modelling simulations or the private economic feasibility models. Since the aim of this work is to 
give some light to the potential implications of the different market configurations, the base case data 
assumptions were considered sufficient to explain the market dynamics and implications to the 
different market agents and the hubs. It is worth mentioning that the whole simulation process 
executed in Balmorel for this thesis work takes around 7 days to complete (1 day for the investment 
optimisation, 2 days for the full-year run, 1.5 days for the day-ahead and 3 days for the balancing 
market simulation). This makes it difficult to run the simulation process several times with different 
data assumptions and it would also be difficult to choose what parameters to change from the vast 
amount of input data that goes into Balmorel model. As for the private economic feasibility models 
for the offshore wind farms and the power-to-gas projects, a sensitivity analysis would have been 
practically possible for some key economic assumptions, like discount rate or inflation, although this 
was left out of this thesis work since results obtained under the base case assumptions already give a 
picture of the profitability of the projects and how this is affected by the different market 
configurations. 
 
 
==PAGE:52==
49 
The energy system evaluated 
The energy system underpinning this work is product of 
the Balmorel investment optimisation. This simulation 
was executed as a linear problem, which left out the 
possibility to consider economies of scale or lumpiness of 
investments. As a result, there may be too many assets 
invested, some of which of low capacity. This effect seems 
clear in the transmission investments of the North Sea 
offshore grid, where a total of 51 lines are invested from 
99 lines in the system. Some of these lines have a capacity 
of only 200 MW. A mixed integer problem would have 
allowed to account for economies of scale and lumpiness 
of investments, as indicated in [45]. Thereby, the system 
over which the day-ahead and balancing market 
simulations are performed may not be that realistic. 
Likewise, when comparing the investments in offshore wind generation to scenarios targeted by 
relevant bodies, like The European Commission on its recently released EU offshore renewable energy 
strategy [7], and Wind Europe [76], it can be observed that the resulting offshore wind capacities from 
the investment optimisation may be oversized to what is generally expected. This can be appreciated 
in Figure 27. 
The modelling of day-ahead and balancing markets 
The day-ahead market simulation in Balmorel corresponds to a generation cost optimisation problem 
with a time horizon of 24 hours and a time resolution of one hour. This optimisation problem 
represents well how the generation is cleared in the wholesale market under perfect competition 
assumption. Generation bids are priced at the marginal cost and ordered by increasing costs forming 
the supply merit order curve. As for the demand curve, although some demand flexibility is 
represented in Balmorel and endogenous demand from conversion units does differ in value 
(according to the costs it can save to the system with its output), a large share of the demand is 
considered exogenous and inflexible. Albeit market price and generation load duration curves can 
reflect those resulting from real day-ahead markets, notable differences exist between this modelling 
approach and the day-ahead market in the EU, which flows the market clearing algorithm PCR 
EUPHEMIA [28]. In EU day-ahead market, both demand and generation need to be offered with bids, 
formed by a volume and a price. The algorithm sorts these forming the demand and generation curves 
and the market clearing happens where these two intersect. It is a socioeconomic welfare 
maximisation problem. Moreover, accepted bids can be more complicated than a mere hourly price 
and volume. These can be aggregated in blocks for several hours and carry complex conditions, like a 
minimum income condition, a scheduled stop or load gradient. Another difference to be mentioned 
in the day-ahead modelling of Balmorel and the real wholesale market in the EU is that Germany is 
modelled in Balmorel for this work with four different bidding zones, while it has a unique bidding 
zone in reality (see Figure 2). 
More important are the differences between the balancing market simulation approach taken in 
Balmorel and how balancing markets work in most EU countries. As it has been explained in page 12, 
Balmorel models the balancing market as a day-ahead market with a one-hour39 time horizon (against 
a 24 hour horizon for the day-ahead simulation) and unit commitments of thermal units fixed from 
 
39 A higher time resolution can be selected: 30, 15, or 5 minutes. 
12 GW
300 GW
450 GW
730 GW
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050
EU Offshore wind capacity [GW]
EU offshore strategy
WindEurope
Balmorel optimisation
Figure 27. Offshore wind capacities foreseen by 
Wind Europe [76] and the European Commission on 
its EU offshore renewable energy strategy [7],
compared to Balmorel investment optimisation 
l
==PAGE:53==
50 
the day-ahead simulation. Yet, the balancing services markets work with two markets: a balancing 
capacity market, where the TSO contracts capacity from balancing service providers and a balancing 
energy market, where the TSO asks for upward and downward regulation bids and clears those need 
to restore the expected imbalance so the balancing cost for the TSO is minimised. A major difference 
are therefore the volumes traded. In reality, only the imbalance perceived by the TSO is cleared in the 
balancing energy market, whilst in the Balmorel simulation the whole energy volume to be dispatched 
every hour is marketed. It has also been observed that the hourly time horizon of the Balmorel 
balancing market simulation, in contrast to the 24-hour time horizon of the day-ahead market, 
generates differences in the dispatch of storages and hydro reservoirs, albeit everything is remained 
unchanged in both simulations. This has been observed in the results for the scenario 1 (offshore 
bidding zones), where no changes are made to the model between the day-ahead and the balancing 
simulation. There is an inherent change in the dispatch of the balancing market compared to the day-
ahead emerging from the time horizon difference in the optimisations. 
Last, infeasibility variables have been found in the balancing market simulations. These variables are 
introduced in the model as slack variables so the model can always get a feasible solution. These 
variables have penalty costs associated which affect the objective function and dual variables, 
therefore dispatch and market clearing prices. A further analysis would be needed to determine what 
caused each of the infeasibility variables in the model. The extent of their cause and implications has 
not been completely clarified in this work and we could only conclude that a higher number of 
infeasibilities was obtained for scenarios S2 (home country) and S3 (North Sea) than for S1 (offshore 
hub bidding zones), affecting dispatch adjustments and especially balancing market clearing prices. 
Socioeconomic welfare calculations 
Results presented for socioeconomic welfare in page 41 are mostly based on the final dispatch and 
prices obtained from the balancing market simulation, except for electricity producers, for whom 
revenues were split into day-ahead revenues stemming from the day-ahead simulation and imbalance 
settlements calculated as the balancing market price times the difference in balancing and day-ahead 
dispatches. It was decided to apply imbalance settlements to electricity producers to mimic to some 
extent the electricity imbalance costs that redispatch means to the system. It must be recalled that 
redispatch is always a cost to the system since the re-dispatched energy in the balancing market has 
a minimum cost (either for generation or consumption) set at the day-ahead price level. The day-
ahead price is the cap for downward regulation bids, so additional demand would buy electricity at a 
lower price than the day-ahead, and cease of generation would only pay back a lower amount to what 
they earned in the day-ahead market for what they are ceasing to generate. The day-ahead price is 
also the floor for upward regulation bids. A cease of demand would be paid back more than what they 
paid in the day-ahead market and extra generation would cost more than what it costed in the day-
ahead market. If this imbalance settlement had not been applied and electricity producers’ surplus 
would have been calculated as the rest of market agents, simply according to the balancing market 
results, overall results change, as it can be seen in Table 21. The socioeconomic welfare is maximised 
in scenario S2 (home country market bidding zone), in contrast to what is concluded in chapter Results, 
page 41, where socioeconomic welfare is found to be maximised in scenario S1 (offshore bidding 
zones). 
 
 
==PAGE:54==
51 
 
Welfare distribution 
[EUR2016/MWh] 
2035 
2045 
S1 
S2 
S3 
S1 
S2 
S3 
Imb 
Set 
No 
Imb 
Set 
Imb 
Set 
No 
Imb 
Set 
Imb 
Set 
No 
Imb 
Set 
Imb 
Set 
No 
Imb 
Set 
Imb 
Set 
No 
Imb 
Set 
Imb 
Set 
No 
Imb 
Set 
Electricity producers surplus 
10 
26 
11 
56 
11 
50 
-4 
14 
-4 
38 
-4 
29 
Electricity consumers surplus 
2,952 
2,952 
2,908 
2,908 
2,918 
2,918 
2,959 
2,959 
2,924 
2,924 
2,937 
2,937 
Heat producers surplus 
30 
30 
54 
54 
46 
46 
24 
24 
44 
44 
36 
36 
Heat consumers surplus 
441 
441 
409 
409 
419 
419 
449 
449 
420 
420 
431 
431 
Electricity transmission surplus 
8 
8 
35 
35 
25 
25 
9 
9 
33 
33 
24 
24 
Electricity socioeconomic welfare 
(El SEW) 
890 
898 
882 
905 
883 
904 
904 
913 
899 
920 
902 
917 
Heat socioeconomic welfare 
(He SEW) 
226.4 
226.4 
224.0 
224.0 
224.6 
224.6 
224.2 
224.2 
221.7 
221.7 
222.4 
222.4 
Socioeconomic welfare (SEW) 
1,116 
1,124 
1,106 
1,129 
1,108 
1,128 
1,128 
1,137 
1,121 
1,141 
1,124 
1,140 
Table 21. Socioeconomic results difference with and without imbalance settlements for electricity producers. Each row 
corresponds to a market agent surplus or aggregated system welfares. In columns, divided by years, scenarios S1 (offshore 
bidding zones), S2 (home country bidding zones) and S3 (North Sea bidding zone), and the two electricity producers welfare 
calculation approaches: “Imb Set”, imbalance settlement, where revenues are calculated as the sum of day-ahead revenues 
plus imbalance settlement, and “No Imb Set”, where revenues are calculated as balancing market revenues. Results are given 
in real 2016 EUR/MWh. Considering imbalance settlements, total socioeconomic welfare is maximized in scenario S1 (offshore 
bidding zones); see columns “Imb Set” for the different years and scenarios), while not assuming these and calculating 
welfares directly according to balancing market results, the socioeconomic welfare is maximized in scenario S2 (home country 
bidding zones); see columns “No Imb set” for the different years and scenarios. 
On the one hand, without imbalance settlements, producers surplus increase considerably as their 
revenues raise due to the higher balancing market prices compared to day-ahead prices (prices 
indicated in Table 13). This increase is bigger, the higher balancing market prices are, which are related 
to the amount of necessary redispatch (see Table 10). The higher balancing market prices occur in 
scenario S2, home country bidding zones, where the largest redispatch is required. Higher electricity 
balancing market prices impact positively electricity and heat producers (heat balancing market prices 
are also higher), as well as congestion rents. In turn, consumers surplus is negatively affected. The 
overall effect for the electricity system and total socioeconomic welfare is positive, as it can be seen 
in Table 22, columns “No Imb Set”, row “El SEW” and row “SEW”. 
On the other hand, when assuming imbalance settlements, the positive effect for electricity producers 
is lowered and outweighed by the negative effect on consumers welfare, so the overall electricity and 
total socioeconomic welfare is negative. It is worth remarking that heat consumers surplus negative 
effect from higher balancing market prices is larger than heat producers surplus positive effects, being 
the heat socioeconomic welfare maximised in scenario S1, offshore bidding zones. 
Welfare distribution delta to S1 
[EUR2016/MWh] 
2035 
2045 
S2-S1 
S3-S1 
S2-S1 
S3-S1 
Imb  
Set 
No Imb  
Set 
Imb  
Set 
No Imb  
Set 
Imb  
Set 
No Imb  
Set 
Imb  
Set 
No Imb  
Set 
Electricity producers surplus 
0.8 
30.0 
0.6 
24.4 
0.5 
24.1 
0.6 
14.9 
Electricity consumers surplus 
-44.0 
-44.0 
-34.0 
-34.0 
-35.5 
-35.5 
-22.3 
-22.3 
Heat producers surplus 
24.1 
24.1 
16.3 
16.3 
20.8 
20.8 
12.8 
12.8 
Heat consumers surplus 
-32.3 
-32.3 
-22.1 
-22.1 
-29.7 
-29.7 
-18.6 
-18.6 
Electricity transmission surplus 
26.5 
26.5 
16.3 
16.3 
24.8 
24.8 
15.5 
15.5 
Electricity socioeconomic welfare (El SEW) 
-7.7 
7.3 
-6.6 
5.6 
-4.5 
6.8 
-2.4 
4.4 
Heat socioeconomic welfare (He SEW) 
-2.4 
-2.4 
-1.8 
-1.8 
-2.5 
-2.5 
-1.8 
-1.8 
Socioeconomic welfare (SEW) 
-10.1 
4.8 
-8.4 
3.8 
-7.0 
4.3 
-4.2 
2.6 
Table 22. Welfare distribution deltas from scenarios S2 (home country bidding zones) and S3 (North Sea bidding zone) 
compared to scenario S1 (offshore bidding zone) with both socioeconomic welfare calculation approaches: with and without 
imbalance settlements for electricity producers (“Imb Set” and “No Imb Set”). Values in real 2016 EUR/MWh. 
==PAGE:55==
52 
4.2 Comparison of results to previous studies 
As mentioned in section Market configurations, previous studies have analysed possible market 
arrangements to be applied to offshore hubs [14][55][56][57]. The possibilities conceived by these are 
offshore bidding zones, home country markets and dynamic hub bidding zones attached to either high 
or low-price onshore neighbouring bidding zone. 
Dynamic biding zones are analysed and discarded as a viable option both in [55] and [57] because they 
behave discriminatorily for offshore wind farms in the hubs compared to other generation units in 
onshore bidding zones. Dynamic flows to high-price market area imply positive discrimination to 
offshore wind farms in the hubs as they are guaranteed the capture price of the highest priced 
connected bidding zone. Oppositely, dynamic flows to low-price market area imply negative 
discrimination to offshore wind farms [55]. This effect violates the regulatory principle of non-
discriminatory treatment of market participants, as mandated in article 3.e of the Guideline on 
Capacity Allocation and Congestion Management (CACM) [20]. Moreover, the same guideline requires 
bidding zone stability on its article 33.1.c, which would not be accomplished either with dynamic 
bidding zones. On top of this, [57] reflects on the impossibility of implementing this changing market 
setup in the day-ahead market, since market clearing prices are a result, among other things, of 
bidding zones setup and not the other way around. This thesis work has therefore not considered 
dynamic flow bidding zones in the analysis. 
The two main options that are compared in previous works are then offshore bidding zones against 
home country market bidding zones. Conclusions of all studies converge to the same points, also in 
line with the results of this thesis work. A summary of the conclusions arrived in the different studies 
can be found in Table 23. 
Market 
config. 
NSWPH 
[55] 
NSON-DK 
[56] 
THEMA 
[57] 
Present work 
Offshore 
hub 
bidding 
zones 
(S1) 
▪ Hamper 
profitability of 
generation 
investments. 
▪ Adaptations 
needed for 
welfare 
redistribution 
from TSO 
congestion rents 
to OWF owners. 
▪ Efficient 
dispatch. 
▪ Maximises SEW. 
▪ Lower profits 
for OWF. 
▪ Lower 
producers 
surplus. 
▪ Maximises 
SEW. 
▪ Higher 
congestion 
rents. 
▪ Hamper profitability of 
generation investments 
(revenue reduction 
estimated at 1 to 5%). 
▪ Adaptations needed for 
welfare redistribution from 
TSOs to OWF owners or 
increased support payments 
to OWF. 
▪ Can more easily adapt to 
network changes. 
▪ Workable adaptations of 
current regulation to 
implement this option. 
▪ Efficient dispatch. 
▪ Maximises SEW. 
▪ Lowest capture prices at the hubs, thus lowest 
profitability for the OWF (revenue reduction 
estimated at 20% from home country option). 
▪ Need of higher support for OWF at the hubs. 
▪ Higher congestion rents in hub lines. 
▪ Maximises SEW. 
▪ Most efficient dispatch; highest dispatched 
volumes.  
▪ Lowest generation and transmission specific 
cost. 
▪ Efficient dispatch. 
▪ Lowest dispatch adjustments in the balancing 
market. Lowest volume and price deltas 
between day-ahead and balancing markets. 
▪ Lowest balancing market prices. 
==PAGE:56==
53 
Market 
config. 
NSWPH 
[55] 
NSON-DK 
[56] 
THEMA 
[57] 
Present work 
Home 
country 
bidding 
zones 
(S2) 
▪ Requires 
significant 
regulatory 
changes. 
▪ Inefficient 
dispatch. 
▪ Lower SEW. 
▪ Lower SEW. 
▪ Lower 
congestion 
rents. 
▪ Higher profits 
for OWF. 
▪ Higher 
producers 
surplus. 
 
▪ Requires significant 
regulatory changes. 
▪ Inefficient dispatch. 
▪ Price distortion. 
▪ Lower SEW. 
▪ Higher TSO activity to 
correct infeasible DA 
dispatch. 
▪ Forced market outcomes: 
priority dispatch for OWF in 
home country market and 
potential flows against price 
differentials. 
▪ Provides greater revenues 
for OWF. 
▪ Inefficient dispatch; lowest dispatched 
volumes. 
▪ Motivates day-ahead infeasible dispatch 
schedules. 
▪ Highest dispatch adjustments in the balancing 
market. Highest volume and price deltas 
between day-ahead and balancing markets. 
▪ Lowest SEW. 
▪ Highest generation and transmission specific 
cost. 
▪ Highest dispatch adjustments in the balancing 
market. 
▪ Highest balancing market prices. 
▪ Highest capture prices at the hubs, thus 
highest profitability for the OWF (revenues 20% 
higher than in offshore bidding zones). 
▪ Highest curtailment at the hubs, thus highest 
profitability for power-to-gas projects installed 
at the hubs. 
North 
Sea 
bidding 
zone 
(S3) 
Not considered. 
Not applicable 
(one hub 
analysed). 
Not considered. 
In general, intermediate results between 
offshore bidding zones and home country 
market bidding zones arrangements.  
Dynamic 
to high 
or low-
price 
bidding 
zone 
▪ Discriminatory 
treatment. 
▪ Instability of 
bidding zones. 
Not 
considered. 
▪ Discriminatory treatment. 
▪ Instability of bidding zones. 
Not considered. 
Table 23. Summary of results from previous works about market arrangements for offshore hubs. The market arrangements 
conceived are home country bidding zones, offshore bidding zones and dynamic bidding zones to low and high price bidding 
zones connected to the hubs. With greater or lower detail and nuance, all studies arrive to similar conclusions. 
Hereunder, the main conclusions drawn by previous studies are discussed in more detail and 
compared to the results of this thesis work. 
Prices in the hubs 
Home country bidding zones lead to higher prices in the hubs and thereby higher revenues for the 
offshore wind farms connected to the hubs. In contrast, the offshore wind farms receive a lower 
capture price with the offshore bidding zone market setup. Results of this thesis work also through 
this conclusion. Table 13 shows average day-ahead market prices under the different market 
arrangements in the hubs and it can be observed that scenario S2, home country bidding zones, 
perceives the highest price among the three scenarios evaluate din this work. Results of the private 
economic analysis of the wind farms also evidence this, see Table 20, where the offshore wind farms 
are found to have a higher profitability under scenario S2 (home country bidding zones). The single 
North Sea bidding zone (S3), market arrangement option covered in this work but not in the previous 
studies mentioned, gives intermediate price results between offshore bidding zones (S1) and home 
country bidding zones (S2), i.e. day-ahead prices in the hubs are higher than in scenario S1 but lower 
than in scenario S2. As concluded by [57], the offshore bidding zone arrangement induces the highest 
need for supports for the offshore wind farms connected to the hubs. This effect can also be observed 
in the results of this thesis work, in Figure 23, where the difference between the LCoE and the capture 
price can give an idea of how much support per MWh would each offshore wind farm need be 
economically feasible. The highest supports are need in scenario S1, the offshore bidding zones market 
arrangement, where the lowest capture prices happen. 
==PAGE:57==
54 
Welfare distribution 
Price differences between offshore 
hubs and onshore regions arising 
from the two market arrangements 
allocate differently the value of the 
hybrid 
energy 
infrastructure 
(generation 
+ 
transmission) 
to 
offshore wind farms and hub-home 
country 
transmission 
interconnectors. While the home 
country market allocates all value to 
the wind farms (no congestion rents 
are possible in the interconnector 
since this is assumed an internal line 
in this market setup), the offshore 
bidding zone arrangement reallocates 
some value from the offshore wind 
farms to the interconnector, now a cross-border line earning congestion rents for any price 
differentials between the hubs and the onshore zones. Modelling results of this work also show this 
effect, as it can be appreciated in Figure 28. Offshore wind farms capture the largest revenues under 
home country market bidding zones (S1), where no congestion rents exist in hub-home country lines. 
While the North Sea bidding zone (S3) lowers moderately the revenue shares from the offshore wind 
farms, offshore bidding zones (S1) decrease offshore wind farms revenues by around 20% compared 
to scenario S2 (see right plot in Figure 28). This 20% represents 2.3 and 2.5 billion EUR2016 (2035 and 
2045 results), which divided by the total offshore hub wind production means losses for the offshore 
wind farms of 7.1 and 3.3 EUR2016/MWh. This loss level is considerably higher than the one concluded 
in [57]. In this study, wind farms revenues reduction is estimated at 1 to 5%, with 11% for limited hub 
cases. This limited reduction, which is also taken as a reference in the EU offshore renewable energy 
strategy ([77], page 15), stems from the topology of the network assumed. In [57], there is limited 
congestion between the hubs and their home country regions due to the large hub-home country 
transmission capacities chosen (compared to the generation capacity at the hubs). As stated in [57], 
section 3.2.2, this network topology limits the market clearing differences between the two market 
arrangement options compared, home country bidding zones and offshore bidding zones. Contrarily, 
the network topology assumed in this work, which is endogenously optimised in the Balmorel 
investment optimisation, shows frequent congestions in hub-home country lines since hubs cannot 
evacuate full load wind production through the hub-home country lines alone40. Congestion levels 
were presented in Table 15, where values of energy overflows in hub-home country lines range from 
4% (line NOEast-NO2, 2045) to 39% (line DKHub-DK1, 2045) of the final dispatched flows obtained in 
the balancing market simulation. In annual hours, congestions can happen up to 5,679 (line DKHub-
DK1, 2045). 
 
 
40 Wind capacities / hub-home country line capacities, in GW (2045) assumed in this work: 37/8 (NOEast-NO2), 
20/2 (NOWest-NO2), 20/3 (DKHub-DK1), 20/15 (DEBorWin-DE4W), 20/13 (DENorWin-DE4W), 20/11 (NLHub-
NL), 20/13 (DoggerBank-UK), 20/17 (HornSea-UK). 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
S1
S2
S3
S1
S2
S3
2035
2045
Day-ahead market revenues shares [%]
Figure 28. Day-ahead revenues allocation between offshore wind farm
generation at the hubs and congestion rents from transmission lines to the 
hubs under the three scenarios simulated S1 (offshore bidding zone), S2 
(home country bidding zones) and S3 (North Sea bidding zone) and the years 
simulated 2035 and 2045. On the left, annual absolute values in billion 
EUR2016. On the right, relative shares. 
0
5
10
15
20
25
S1
S2
S3
S1
S2
S3
2035
2045
Day-ahead market revenues [billion EUR]
ConRent Hub-Country
ConRent Hub-Hub
ConRent Hub-HomeCountry
Rev Hubs
==PAGE:58==
55 
Dispatch efficiency (maximal SEW) 
All previous studies conclude that the market arrangement that leads to the optimal dispatch is the 
offshore bidding zone option, the market arrangement that reflects the structural congestions of the 
system. As explained in section Socio-economic welfare analysis, the efficient dispatch is the one that 
maximises socioeconomic welfare, maximising overall consumption utility and minimising production 
cost. This thesis work also finds a maximum socioeconomic welfare under the offshore bidding zone 
option (scenario S1), as shown in Figure 19. The home country market bidding zone would give the 
lowest welfare, while the single North Sea market arrangement would give a welfare between the 
latter two. As mentioned earlier in page 50, these results are obtained when accounting for imbalance 
settlements only for producers. Welfares calculated based on day-ahead results lead to the highest 
socioeconomic welfare under the home country market arrangement (S2). However, this cannot be 
taken as a final valid result since the day-ahead dispatch incurs in infeasible schedules in at least 4,791 
and 5,679 hours41 (2035 and 2045 results respectively) when flows between the hubs and their home 
countries exceed their real transmission capacities. As discussed on page 50, welfares calculated 
without imbalance settlement for electricity producers, also realise a maximum welfare under the 
home country market arrangement. Yet this result is also concluded not to represent a fair view of 
reality since balancing market results should not comprise all energy volumes traded but only the 
expected imbalances, so producers profit would be rather overestimated due to the higher balancing 
market prices under the home country market bidding zones. 
Infeasible day-ahead dispatch schedules 
[57] includes in their conclusions and recommendations that the home market solution suffers from 
a greater need for system operator activity to fix infeasible market dispatch solutions. This is also a 
highlight from this work, in which a modelling of the balancing market has been executed to quantify 
the imbalance corrections derived from inadequate day-ahead dispatches stemming from system 
transmission constraints hidden to the day-ahead market under home country bidding zones (S2) and 
North Sea bidding zone (S3). Transmission capacities of hub-home country and hub-hub lines remain 
unknown to the day-ahead market under scenarios S2 and S3 respectively. It is only in the balancing 
market that these transmission constraints appear and induce imbalance corrections with a higher 
cost for the system. On page 31, it was concluded that the highest balancing dispatch adjustments 
were found for the home country bidding zones arrangement (S2) and the lowest for offshore bidding 
zones setup (S1). As for the market clearing prices, which can give an idea of the value of the latter 
adjustments, on page 33 it was found that balancing market prices were higher for scenario S2 (home 
country) and lower for S1 (offshore bidding zones). More specifically, imbalance settlements for 
electricity producers were calculated and proved to be the higher under scenarios S2 (home country, 
highest imbalance costs) and S3 (North Sea), compared to S1 (offshore bidding zones), as it can be 
seen in Table 19. 
 
 
41 Results from overflows analysis under scenarios S2 and S3, in hub-home country lines and hub-hub lines 
respectively. See page 30 for details. 
==PAGE:59==
56 
Chapter 5.  Conclusions 
This thesis work has been based on modelling results from Balmorel which covered the whole 
simulation process from investment optimisation until balancing market. Three possible market 
arrangements for the offshore hubs at the North Sea have been applied to the Balmorel day-ahead 
and balancing simulations as three different scenarios: scenario S1 simulated an offshore bidding zone 
market setup, scenario S2 a home country market bidding zones option, and scenario S3 a single North 
Sea bidding zone for all hubs. Day-ahead simulation and balancing market results have been used in 
this work to elucidate the socioeconomic impact of the three market configurations, as well as the 
consequences for the private economic feasibility of wind farms and power-to-gas projects connected 
to the hubs. For the latter, specific discounted cashflow models were developed for the different 
investment projects. 
Day-ahead market simulations evidenced higher electricity market clearing prices in the hubs under 
the home country market setup (S2), while the lowest capture prices in the hubs were obtained under 
the offshore bidding zone arrangement (S1). Finally, the North Sea bidding zone setup (S3) would get 
prices in between. This finding is aligned to previous works [55][56][57] and shows the need for higher 
support schemes for the wind farms under the offshore bidding zone configuration. Unlike with the 
hubs, electricity prices trends under the three scenarios in neighbouring onshore countries vary with 
regions and years. 
Balancing market simulations revealed significantly higher electricity market clearing prices under 
home country (S2) and North Sea (S3) bidding zones options compared to offshore bidding zones (S1). 
The difference is more accused in onshore regions, up to 60% higher price under S2 (home country) 
than S1 (offshore bidding zones) in 2045. S2 presents the most expensive balancing market prices of 
all market configurations. 
Balancing market average prices are more expensive than day-ahead prices for all scenarios. Scenario 
S2 (home country) presents the largest dispatch correction energy volumes and price deltas to day-
ahead market, followed by S3 (North Sea) and last S1 (offshore bidding zone). It must be said that 
overall energy volume dispatch changes under the different scenarios are around 1% of the total 
annual dispatch. Differences between market configurations seem to be more accused in terms of 
prices, with changes of up to 60% from one scenario to another. 
In terms of final energy volumes dispatched in the balancing market, it was found that they were lower 
in the home country (S2) and North Sea (S3) options than in the offshore bidding zones setup (S1). In 
particular, power-to-heat production is reduced considerably in the balancing market dispatches of 
scenarios S2 and S3, seemingly due to higher electricity balancing market prices.  
There is more curtailment, overall and at the hubs, under scenario S2 (home country). The lowest 
curtailment in the hubs is found for scenario S3 (North Sea). 
Socioeconomic generation and transmission costs are found to be slightly lower for scenario S1 
(offshore hub bidding zones) by reason of lower specific costs per MWh of energy generated (0.1 to 
0.2% lower). 
Socioeconomic welfare is concluded to be higher for scenario S1 (offshore bidding zones) when a 
balancing settlement under one-price model is applied to electricity generation units. The reason for 
this higher welfare under scenario S1 is originated in the lower balancing market prices, which results 
into higher consumers welfare. This result is aligned with previous works [55][56][57], where the 
socioeconomic welfare is found to be maximised under offshore hub bidding zones. Nevertheless, as 
==PAGE:60==
57 
discussed earlier in page 50, in case no imbalance settlements are applied, the socioeconomic welfare 
obtained under scenario S2 (home country market) is the largest due to a higher producers surplus.  
According to the investment optimisation, 13 wind farms would be invested around 8 hubs belonging 
to 5 countries. Under the economic assumptions indicated in Table 5 for the discounted cash-flow 
models developed for all projects, none of them was found to be economically viable without support. 
The highest profitability levels are in general achieved under the home country bidding zones scheme 
(S2), where there are higher day-ahead market prices in the hubs. Benefit-to-cost ratios range in S2 
from 0.63 in the least profitable wind farm (NO Hub East invested in 2040) to 0.86 in the most 
profitable wind farm project (NO Hub East invested in 2030). Profitability decreases with later 
investments for all hubs due to the decline in day-ahead market prices in 2045 compared to 2035 
simulation results due to the greater share of renewables in the system. It was found that wind farms 
profitability is directly correlated to the average capture price at the hub. Capacity factor, however, is 
not, since higher capacity factors seem to result in lower market prices and the latter has the highest 
impact on the profitability results. 
As for the potential power-to-gas projects to be installed at each of the 8 hubs, under the economic 
assumptions mentioned in Table 6, 4 hubs out of the 8 are found to be profitable. These are the power-
togas projects installed at the Norwegian hubs, the Danish hub and one of the German hubs in 2040. 
Optimal capacity sizes for the electrolysers (alkaline type) are found to be in the range from 10 to 50% 
of the maximum curtailment hourly load (the highest working load for the electrolyser), and it was 
evidenced that their profitability is directly correlated with the average capacity factor of the 
electrolysers. 
The opposite profitability development in time is seen for power to gas projects than in wind farms. 
In the case of power to gas projects, later investments see higher curtailment levels which increases 
the capacity factor of the electrolysers. It would seem favourable to invest in power to gas projects in 
later years where more curtailment is expected and reduce the need for support for the wind farms. 
Given all previous results, it can be concluded that the offshore bidding zone market arrangement 
(S1), the option that reflects better the structural congestions of the system, can lead to the most 
efficient dispatch and therefore, the maximal socioeconomic welfare. It requires less balancing 
dispatch corrections. On its downside, as previous works also concluded, it yields lower revenues to 
wind farms connected to the hubs, thus to a higher need for support schemes. The home country 
market bidding zones arrangement has been found to be the more advantageous for both the wind 
farms and power-to-gas projects by reason of higher day-ahead market prices and higher curtailment 
levels respectively. The North Sea bidding zone market configuration has yielded results in between 
the other two market arrangement options. 
 
==PAGE:61==
58 
References 
[1] 
United Nations, “Adoption of the Paris Agreement,” Conf. Parties its twenty-first Sess., 2015. 
[2] 
European Commission, “The European Green Deal,” Eur. Comm., 2019, doi: 
10.1017/CBO9781107415324.004. 
[3] 
European Commission, “2050 long-term strategy | Climate Action,” 2050 Long-Term Strategy, 
2018. . 
[4] 
“The EIB Group Climate Bank Roadmap 2021-2025.” [Online]. Available: 
https://www.eib.org/en/publications/the-eib-group-climate-bank-roadmap. [Accessed: 04-
Jan-2021]. 
[5] 
European Commission, “EU strategy on energy system integration | Energy.” [Online]. 
Available: https://ec.europa.eu/energy/topics/energy-system-integration/eu-strategy-
energy-system-integration_en. [Accessed: 04-Jan-2021]. 
[6] 
European Commission, “Hydrogen | Energy.” [Online]. Available: 
https://ec.europa.eu/energy/topics/energy-system-integration/hydrogen_en. [Accessed: 04-
Jan-2021]. 
[7] 
European Commission, “EU strategy on offshore renewable energy | Energy.” [Online]. 
Available: https://ec.europa.eu/energy/topics/renewable-energy/eu-strategy-offshore-
renewable-energy_en. [Accessed: 04-Jan-2021]. 
[8] 
“The North Seas Countries’ Offshore Grid Initiative (NSCOGI) | European MSP Platform.” 
[Online]. Available: https://www.msp-platform.eu/practices/north-seas-countries-offshore-
grid-initiative-nscogi#:~:text=In order to achieve the,those renewable sources and 
infrastructure. [Accessed: 04-Jan-2021]. 
[9] 
“The North Seas Energy Cooperation | Energy.” [Online]. Available: 
https://ec.europa.eu/energy/topics/infrastructure/high-level-groups/north-seas-energy-
cooperation_en. [Accessed: 04-Jan-2021]. 
[10] 
“Northseawindpowerhub.” [Online]. Available: https://northseawindpowerhub.eu/. 
[Accessed: 04-Jan-2021]. 
[11] 
“PROMOTioN - Home.” [Online]. Available: https://www.promotion-offshore.net/. [Accessed: 
04-Jan-2021]. 
[12] 
“North Sea Offshore Network project - NSON-DK.” [Online]. Available: https://www.nson-dk-
project.dk/. [Accessed: 04-Jan-2021]. 
[13] 
“Executive Summary PROMOTiON.” [Online]. Available: moz-extension://35d0efa2-acd7-
431c-8f88-af996d8c2b3b/enhanced-
reader.html?openApp&pdf=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.promotion-
offshore.net%2Ffileadmin%2FPDFs%2F20201013-promotion-executive-summary_ENG.pdf. 
[Accessed: 04-Jan-2021]. 
[14] 
R. B. G. Directorate-General for Energy (European Commission), “Hybrid projects - 
Publications Office of the EU.” [Online]. Available: https://op.europa.eu/en/publication-
detail/-/publication/59165f6d-802e-11e9-9f05-01aa75ed71a1/language-
en?WT.mc_id=Searchresult&WT.ria_c=37085&WT.ria_f=3608&WT.ria_ev=search#. 
[Accessed: 04-Jan-2021]. 
[15] 
North Sea Wind Power Hub (NSWPH), “Modular Hub-and-Spoke: Specific Solution Options.” 
[Online]. Available: moz-extension://35d0efa2-acd7-431c-8f88-af996d8c2b3b/enhanced-
reader.html?openApp&pdf=https%3A%2F%2Fnorthseawindpowerhub.eu%2Fwp-
==PAGE:62==
59 
content%2Fuploads%2F2019%2F07%2FConcept_Paper_3-Specific-solution-options.pdf. 
[Accessed: 04-Jan-2021]. 
[16] 
The European Parliament and the Council of the European Union, “Directive 96/92/EC of the 
European Parliament and of the Council of 19 December 1996 concerning common rules for 
the internal market in electricity.” [Online]. Available: https://eur-
lex.europa.eu/eli/dir/1996/92/oj. [Accessed: 04-Jan-2021]. 
[17] 
European Commission, “Clean energy for all Europeans package | Energy.” [Online]. 
Available: https://ec.europa.eu/energy/topics/energy-strategy/clean-energy-all-
europeans_en. [Accessed: 04-Jan-2021]. 
[18] 
The European Parliament and the Council of the European Union, “Regulation (EU) 2019/943 
of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 June 2019 on the internal market for 
electricity.” [Online]. Available: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2019/943/oj. [Accessed: 04-
Jan-2021]. 
[19] 
The European Parliament and the Council of the European Union, “Directive (EU) 2019/944 of 
the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 June 2019 on common rules for the internal 
market for electricity and amending Directive 2012/27/EU.” [Online]. Available: https://eur-
lex.europa.eu/eli/dir/2019/944/oj. [Accessed: 04-Jan-2021]. 
[20] 
European Commission, “Commission Regulation (EU) 2015/1222 of 24 July 2015 establishing 
a guideline on capacity allocation and congestion management.” [Online]. Available: 
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2015/1222/oj. [Accessed: 04-Jan-2021]. 
[21] 
European Commission, “Commission Regulation (EU) 2016/1719 of 26 September 2016 
establishing a guideline on forward capacity allocation.” [Online]. Available: https://eur-
lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2016/1719/oj. [Accessed: 04-Jan-2021]. 
[22] 
European Commission, “Commission Regulation (EU) 2017/2195 of 23 November 2017 
establishing a guideline on electricity balancing.” [Online]. Available: https://eur-
lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2017/2195/oj. [Accessed: 04-Jan-2021]. 
[23] 
European Commission, COMMISSION REGULATION (EU) 2017/ 1485 - of 2 August 2017 - 
establishing a guideline on electricity transmission system operation | Enhanced Reader. . 
[24] 
F. S. of R. Fabien Roques, “Market design for electricity – Comparing the US and EU | Fabien 
Roques - YouTube.” [Online]. Available: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uD8j1Mmc3Ws&feature=youtu.be. [Accessed: 04-Jan-
2021]. 
[25] 
Florence School of Regulation, “Electricity markets in the EU - Florence School of Regulation.” 
[Online]. Available: https://fsr.eui.eu/electricity-markets-in-the-eu/. [Accessed: 04-Jan-2021]. 
[26] 
Pierre Pinson, “Renewables in Electricity Markets – Pierre Pinson.” [Online]. Available: 
http://pierrepinson.com/index.php/teaching/. [Accessed: 04-Jan-2021]. 
[27] 
Nord Pool, “Explicit and implicit capacity auction.” [Online]. Available: moz-
extension://35d0efa2-acd7-431c-8f88-af996d8c2b3b/enhanced-
reader.html?openApp&pdf=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.nordpoolgroup.com%2Fglobalassets%2F
download-center%2Fpcr%2Fhow-does-it-work_explicit-and-implicit-capacity-auction.pdf. 
[Accessed: 05-Jan-2021]. 
[28] 
NEMO Committee, “Euphemia public description: Single Price Coupling Algorithm.” [Online]. 
Available: moz-extension://35d0efa2-acd7-431c-8f88-af996d8c2b3b/enhanced-
reader.html?openApp&pdf=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.nordpoolgroup.com%2F4adb91%2Fgloba
lassets%2Fdownload-center%2Fsingle-day-ahead-coupling%2Feuphemia-public-
description.pdf. [Accessed: 04-Jan-2021]. 
==PAGE:63==
60 
[29] 
FinGrid - Electricity Transmission System Operator in Finland, “Reserves and balancing power 
- Fingrid.” [Online]. Available: https://www.fingrid.fi/en/electricity-
market/reserves_and_balancing/#reserve-products. [Accessed: 04-Jan-2021]. 
[30] 
Fingrid, “Reserve products and reserve market places - Publicpresentation material,” 03-Sep-
2020. [Online]. Available: moz-extension://35d0efa2-acd7-431c-8f88-
af996d8c2b3b/enhanced-
reader.html?openApp&pdf=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.fingrid.fi%2Fglobalassets%2Fdokumentit
%2Fen%2Felectricity-market%2Freserves%2Freserve-products-and-reserve-market-
places.pdf. [Accessed: 10-Jan-2021]. 
[31] 
RTE Services Portal, “Manual frequency restoration reserve and replacement reserve.” 
[Online]. Available: https://www.services-rte.com/en/learn-more-about-our-
services/respond-to-the-manual-frequency.html. [Accessed: 10-Jan-2021]. 
[32] 
ENTSOE, “Frequency Containment Reserves (FCR).” [Online]. Available: 
https://www.entsoe.eu/network_codes/eb/fcr/. [Accessed: 10-Jan-2021]. 
[33] 
ENTSOE, “PICASSO - The Platform for the International Coordination of Automated Frequency 
Restoration and Stable System Operation.” [Online]. Available: 
https://www.entsoe.eu/network_codes/eb/picasso/. [Accessed: 10-Jan-2021]. 
[34] 
ENTSOE, “MARI - Manually Activated Reserves Initiative.” [Online]. Available: 
https://www.entsoe.eu/network_codes/eb/mari/. [Accessed: 10-Jan-2021]. 
[35] 
ENTSOE, “TERRE - Trans European Replacement Reserves Exchange.” [Online]. Available: 
https://www.entsoe.eu/network_codes/eb/terre/. [Accessed: 10-Jan-2021]. 
[36] 
ENTSOE, “IGCC Merger - Imbalance Netting.” [Online]. Available: 
https://www.entsoe.eu/network_codes/eb/imbalance-netting/. [Accessed: 10-Jan-2021]. 
[37] 
European Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity (ENTSO-E), “All TSOs’ 
proposal to further specify and harmonise imbalance settlement in accordance with Article 
52(2) of the Commission Regulation (EU) 2017/2195 of 23 November 2017 establishing a 
guideline on electricity balancing | Enhanced Reader.” [Online]. Available: moz-
extension://35d0efa2-acd7-431c-8f88-af996d8c2b3b/enhanced-
reader.html?openApp&pdf=https%3A%2F%2Feepublicdownloads.entsoe.eu%2Fclean-
documents%2Fnc-
tasks%2FEBGL%2FEBGL_A52.2_181218_ALL%2520TSOs%2520proposal_ISH_proposal_for%2
520submission.pdf. [Accessed: 04-Jan-2021]. 
[38] 
Energinet, “Market Regulations | Energinet.” [Online]. Available: 
https://en.energinet.dk/Electricity/Rules-and-Regulations/Market-Regulations. [Accessed: 
04-Jan-2021]. 
[39] 
European Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity (ENTSO-E), “3rd ENTSO-E 
Guideline for Cost Benefit Analysis of Grid Development Projects (Draft version).” [Online]. 
Available: moz-extension://35d0efa2-acd7-431c-8f88-af996d8c2b3b/enhanced-
reader.html?openApp&pdf=https%3A%2F%2Feepublicdownloads.blob.core.windows.net%2F
public-cdn-container%2Ftyndp-documents%2F2020-01-28_3rd_CBA_Guidleine_Draft.pdf. 
[Accessed: 04-Jan-2021]. 
[40] 
Danish Energy Agency, “Models | Energistyrelsen.” [Online]. Available: 
https://ens.dk/en/our-services/projections-and-models/models. [Accessed: 04-Jan-2021]. 
[41] 
Danish Board of Technology, “Energi for fremtiden.” [Online]. Available: moz-
extension://35d0efa2-acd7-431c-8f88-af996d8c2b3b/enhanced-
reader.html?openApp&pdf=https%3A%2F%2Ftekno.dk%2Fwp-
==PAGE:64==
61 
content%2Fuploads%2F2015%2F01%2Fnummer245.pdf. [Accessed: 04-Jan-2021]. 
[42] 
European Commission, “METIS studies - sector coupling.” [Online]. Available: 
https://ec.europa.eu/energy/studies_main/final_studies_en?field_associated_topic_tid=154
97&=Refine+results. [Accessed: 04-Jan-2021]. 
[43] 
Alberto Dalla Riva, Janos Hethey, and Aisma Vitina, “IEA Wind TCP Task 26: Impacts of Wind 
Turbine Technology on the System Value of Wind in Europe,” Nov. 2017. 
[44] 
D. Connolly, H. Lund, B. V. Mathiesen, and M. Leahy, “A review of computer tools for 
analysing the integration of renewable energy into various energy systems,” Applied Energy. 
2010, doi: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2009.09.026. 
[45] 
J. Gea-Bermúdez, L. L. Pade, M. J. Koivisto, and H. Ravn, “Optimal generation and 
transmission development of the North Sea region: Impact of grid architecture and planning 
horizon,” Energy, 2020, doi: 10.1016/j.energy.2019.116512. 
[46] 
F. Wiese et al., “Balmorel open source energy system model,” Energy Strateg. Rev., 2018, doi: 
10.1016/j.esr.2018.01.003. 
[47] 
J. Gea-Bermúdez, K. Das, H. Koduvere, and M. J. Koivisto, “Day-Ahead Market Modelling of 
Large-Scale Highly-Renewable Multi-Energy Systems: Analysis of the North Sea Region 
towards 2050,” Energies, 2020, doi: 10.3390/en14010088. 
[48] 
“The Balmorel Open Source Project - Download model.” [Online]. Available: 
http://balmorel.com/index.php/downloadmodel. [Accessed: 04-Jan-2021]. 
[49] 
“The Balmorel Open Source Project - Publications.” [Online]. Available: 
http://www.balmorel.com/index.php/publications. [Accessed: 04-Jan-2021]. 
[50] 
J. Ikäheimo, E. Pursiheimo, J. Kiviluoma, and H. Holttinen, “Role of power to liquids and 
biomass to liquids in a nearly renewable energy system,” IET Renew. Power Gener., 2019, doi: 
10.1049/iet-rpg.2018.5007. 
[51] 
L. Göransson and F. Johnsson, “Cost-optimized allocation of wind power investments: A 
Nordic-German perspective,” Wind Energy, 2013, doi: 10.1002/we.1517. 
[52] 
M. Koivisto et al., “Using time series simulation tools for assessing the effects of variable 
renewable energy generation on power and energy systems,” Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: 
Energy and Environment. 2019, doi: 10.1002/wene.329. 
[53] 
S. Stoft, Power System Economics. 2010. 
[54] 
S. T. Schröder, P. Meibom, S. Spiecker, and C. Weber, “Market impact of an offshore grid - A 
case study,” in IEEE PES General Meeting, PES 2010, 2010, doi: 10.1109/PES.2010.5590044. 
[55] 
North Sea Wind Power Hub Programme, “Market setup options to integrate hybrid projects 
into the European electricity market,” Apr. 2020. 
[56] 
L. Kitzing and M. Garzón González, “Market arrangements for offshore wind energy 
networks,” 2020. 
[57] 
Directorate-General for Energy (European Commission) and THEMA Consulting group, 
“Market arrangements for offshore hybrid projects in the North Sea - Publications Office of 
the EU,” Nov. 2020. 
[58] 
M. Roach and L. Meeus, “The welfare and price effects of sector coupling with power-to-gas,” 
Energy Econ., 2020, doi: 10.1016/j.eneco.2020.104708. 
[59] 
European Network of Transmission System Operators for Gas (ENTSOG), “2nd ENTSOG 
Methodology for Cost-Benefit Analysis of Gas Infrastructure Projects,” 18-Feb-2019. [Online]. 
==PAGE:65==
62 
Available: moz-extension://35d0efa2-acd7-431c-8f88-af996d8c2b3b/enhanced-
reader.html?openApp&pdf=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.entsog.eu%2Fsites%2Fdefault%2Ffiles%2
F2019-
03%2F1.%2520ADAPTED_2nd%2520CBA%2520Methodology_Main%2520document_EC%252
0APPROVED.pdf. [Accessed: 04-Jan-2021]. 
[60] 
Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators (ACER) and Cambridge Economic Policy 
Associates Ltd (CEPA), “Study on the estimation of the value of lost load of electricity supply 
in Europe - ACER/OP/DIR/08/2013/LOT 2/RFS 10,” Jul. 2018. 
[61] 
A. Ratha, E. Iggland, and G. Andersson, “Value of Lost Load: How much is supply security 
worth?,” in IEEE Power and Energy Society General Meeting, 2013, doi: 
10.1109/PESMG.2013.6672826. 
[62] 
Varmelast, “Varmelast - Historien kort.” [Online]. Available: https://www.varmelast.dk/om-
varmelast/historien-kort. [Accessed: 04-Jan-2021]. 
[63] 
Nord Pool, “Day-ahead market | Nord Pool.” [Online]. Available: 
https://www.nordpoolgroup.com/the-power-market/Day-ahead-market/. [Accessed: 04-Jan-
2021]. 
[64] 
J. Tham and I. Vélez-Pareja, Principles of Cash Flow Valuation: An Integrated Market-Based 
Approach. 2004. 
[65] 
J. A. de Matos, Theoretical Foundations of Corporate Finance. 2018. 
[66] 
Danish Energy Agency and Energinet, “Technology Data-Energy Plants for Electricity and 
District heating generation,” Apr-2020. [Online]. Available: moz-extension://35d0efa2-acd7-
431c-8f88-af996d8c2b3b/enhanced-
reader.html?openApp&pdf=https%3A%2F%2Fens.dk%2Fsites%2Fens.dk%2Ffiles%2FStatistik
%2Ftechnology_data_catalogue_for_el_and_dh_-_0009.pdf. [Accessed: 04-Jan-2021]. 
[67] 
European Central Bank, “Monetary Policy.” [Online]. Available: 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/mopo/html/index.en.html#:~:text=The primary objective of 
the,2%25 over the medium term. [Accessed: 04-Jan-2021]. 
[68] 
pwc, “Denmark - Corporate - Deductions.” [Online]. Available: 
https://taxsummaries.pwc.com/denmark/corporate/deductions#:~:text=Depreciation 
allowances on buildings (other,on a declining balance basis. [Accessed: 04-Jan-2021]. 
[69] 
KPMG, “Corporate tax rates table - KPMG Global.” [Online]. Available: 
https://home.kpmg/xx/en/home/services/tax/tax-tools-and-resources/tax-rates-
online/corporate-tax-rates-table.html. [Accessed: 04-Jan-2021]. 
[70] 
S. Schiebahn, T. Grube, M. Robinius, V. Tietze, B. Kumar, and D. Stolten, “Power to gas: 
Technological overview, systems analysis and economic assessment for a case study in 
Germany,” Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, doi: 10.1016/j.ijhydene.2015.01.123. 
[71] 
G. Glenk and S. Reichelstein, “Economics of converting renewable power to hydrogen,” Nat. 
Energy, 2019, doi: 10.1038/s41560-019-0326-1. 
[72] 
Danish Energy Agency, “Energy in Denmark 2018 - Data, tables, statistics and maps,” 2020. 
[73] 
eurostat, “Maximum electrical capacity, EU-27, 2000-2018 (MW).” [Online]. Available: 
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-
explained/index.php?title=File:Maximum_electrical_capacity,_EU-27,_2000-2018_(MW).png. 
[Accessed: 04-Jan-2021]. 
[74] 
J. Gea-Bermúdez et al., “The role of sector coupling in the green transition: A least-cost 
energy system development in North Europe towards 2050,” TechRxiv, 2020. 
==PAGE:66==
63 
[75] 
European Commission, “Guidance on electricity market arrangements: A future-proof market 
design for offshore renewable hybrid projects - Commission Staff Working Document 
accompanying the document An EU strategy to harness the potential of offshore renewable 
energy for a climate neutral future,” 2020. 
[76] 
Wind Europe and BVG Associates LLP, “Our energy, our future How offshore wind will help 
Europe go carbon-neutral,” Nov. 2019. 
[77] 
European Commission, “An EU Strategy to harness the potential of offshore renewable 
energy for a climate neutral future,” 2020. 
[78] 
Frontier Economics and European Commission, “Overview of European Electricity Markets - 
METIS Technical Note T4.” 
[79] 
ENTSOE, “Nordic Balancing Philosophy,” Jun. 2016. 
[80] 
Jan Jeriha (UL), Vesna Borozan (UKIM), and Catalin Chimirei (CRE), “CROSSBOW Project EC - 
National balancing and wholesale electricity markets structure and principles,” Institution of 
Engineering and Technology (IET), Jan. 2017. 
[81] 
Ramboll, “Ancillary Services from New Technologies - Technical Potentials and Market 
Integration,” Dec. 2019. 
[82] 
R. A. C. van der Veen and R. A. Hakvoort, “The electricity balancing market: Exploring the 
design challenge,” Util. Policy, 2016, doi: 10.1016/j.jup.2016.10.008. 
 
==PAGE:67==
64 
Annex 
Relative differences in day-ahead and balancing dispatches between scenarios S2 (home country 
bidding zones) and S3 (North Sea bidding zone) to S1 (offshore hub bidding zones) 
Differences to S1 [%] 
2035 
2045 
Hubs 
Neighbour  
regions 
Others 
Total 
Hubs 
Neighbour  
regions 
Others 
Total 
 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
Electricity generation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wind Offshore 
0% 
1% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
1% 
1% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
Thermal CHP-BP 
0% 
0% 
-2% 
-1% 
-1% 
0% 
-1% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
-2% 
-1% 
-1% 
-1% 
-1% 
-1% 
Thermal CHP-EX 
0% 
0% 
-1% 
1% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
-9% 
-6% 
-1% 
0% 
-3% 
-2% 
Thermal Condensing 
0% 
0% 
1% 
-1% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
3% 
1% 
-1% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
Hydro Run-of-River 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
Intraseasonal storage 
0% 
0% 
-1% 
1% 
-4% 
-4% 
-2% 
-1% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
2% 
-1% 
-1% 
0% 
0% 
Solar-PV 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
Wind Onshore 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
Hydro reservoirs 
0% 
0% 
1% 
-1% 
1% 
0% 
1% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
10% 
-3% 
0% 
-1% 
3% 
-1% 
Total 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
-1% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
Electricity demand 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Distribution Losses 
0% 
1% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
1% 
1% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
Transmission Losses 
21% 
-23% 
-12% 
-5% 
-1% 
-1% 
3% 
-10% 
56% 
-38% 
-30% 
-7% 
0% 
-1% 
8% 
-15% 
Power to heat 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
Electric vehicles 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
Intrasesaonal storage 
0% 
0% 
-1% 
1% 
-4% 
-4% 
-2% 
-1% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
2% 
-1% 
-1% 
0% 
0% 
Inflexible demand 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
Power to X 
0% 
0% 
-1% 
0% 
1% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
2% 
1% 
1% 
0% 
Total 
3% 
-3% 
-2% 
-1% 
-1% 
-1% 
0% 
-1% 
8% 
-5% 
-4% 
-1% 
0% 
0% 
1% 
-2% 
Heat generation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Boilers 
0% 
0% 
-1% 
-1% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
-5% 
-2% 
-1% 
-1% 
-2% 
-1% 
Thermal CHP-BP 
0% 
0% 
-1% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
Thermal CHP-EX 
0% 
0% 
-1% 
1% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
-9% 
-6% 
-1% 
0% 
-3% 
-2% 
Power to heat 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
Interseasonal storage 
0% 
0% 
-8% 
-6% 
-1% 
-1% 
-3% 
-2% 
0% 
0% 
-1% 
1% 
0% 
-1% 
0% 
0% 
Intraseasonal storage 
0% 
0% 
-1% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
-1% 
0% 
-1% 
1% 
-1% 
0% 
Solar heating 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
Total 
0% 
0% 
-2% 
-1% 
0% 
0% 
-1% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
-2% 
-1% 
0% 
0% 
-1% 
0% 
Heat demand 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Interseasonal storage 
0% 
0% 
-8% 
-6% 
-1% 
-1% 
-3% 
-2% 
0% 
0% 
-1% 
1% 
0% 
-1% 
0% 
0% 
Intraseasonal storage 
0% 
0% 
-1% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
-1% 
0% 
-1% 
1% 
-1% 
0% 
Inflexible demand 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
Transmission losses 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
Total 
0% 
0% 
-2% 
-1% 
0% 
0% 
-1% 
-1% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
Table 24. Day-ahead dispatch schedule differences from scenarios S2 (home country bidding zones) and S3 (North Sea bidding 
zone) to S1 (offshore hub bidding zones). Values in % of scenario S1 day-ahead annual dispatch. 
Differences to S1 [%] 
2035 
2045 
Hubs 
Neighbour  
regions 
Others 
Total 
Hubs 
Neighbour  
regions 
Others 
Total 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
Electricity generation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wind Offshore 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
-1% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
Thermal CHP-BP 
0% 
0% 
-3% 
-1% 
-1% 
-1% 
-1% 
-1% 
0% 
0% 
-3% 
-2% 
-1% 
-1% 
-1% 
-1% 
Thermal CHP-EX 
0% 
0% 
2% 
2% 
0% 
0% 
1% 
1% 
0% 
0% 
-7% 
-5% 
-1% 
0% 
-3% 
-2% 
Thermal Condensing 
0% 
0% 
-2% 
-2% 
0% 
0% 
-1% 
-1% 
0% 
0% 
-4% 
-3% 
-2% 
0% 
-2% 
-1% 
Hydro Run-of-River 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
Intraseasonal storage 
0% 
0% 
-5% 
0% 
-5% 
-5% 
-4% 
-2% 
0% 
0% 
-6% 
-3% 
-5% 
-4% 
-4% 
-2% 
Solar-PV 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
Wind Onshore 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
Hydro reservoirs 
0% 
0% 
-2% 
-5% 
-1% 
-1% 
-1% 
-2% 
0% 
0% 
4% 
-5% 
-1% 
-1% 
1% 
-2% 
Total 
0% 
0% 
-1% 
-1% 
-1% 
-1% 
-1% 
-1% 
0% 
0% 
-2% 
-2% 
-1% 
-1% 
-1% 
-1% 
Electricity demand 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Distribution Losses 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
Transmission Losses 
1% 
1% 
1% 
0% 
-1% 
-1% 
0% 
0% 
1% 
2% 
0% 
0% 
-1% 
-1% 
0% 
0% 
Power to heat 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
Electric vehicles 
0% 
0% 
-1% 
-1% 
-1% 
-1% 
-1% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
-2% 
-1% 
-1% 
0% 
Intrasesaonal storage 
0% 
0% 
-4% 
0% 
-5% 
-5% 
-3% 
-2% 
0% 
0% 
-6% 
-2% 
-6% 
-4% 
-4% 
-2% 
Inflexible demand 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
Power to X 
0% 
0% 
-1% 
0% 
1% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
2% 
1% 
1% 
0% 
Total 
0% 
0% 
-1% 
0% 
-1% 
-1% 
-1% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
-1% 
0% 
-1% 
-1% 
-1% 
0% 
Heat generation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Boilers 
0% 
0% 
-1% 
0% 
0% 
1% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
-4% 
-2% 
0% 
-1% 
-2% 
-1% 
Thermal CHP-BP 
0% 
0% 
-1% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
Thermal CHP-EX 
0% 
0% 
1% 
2% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
1% 
0% 
0% 
-7% 
-5% 
-2% 
0% 
-3% 
-2% 
Power to heat 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
==PAGE:68==
65 
Differences to S1 [%] 
2035 
2045 
Hubs 
Neighbour  
regions 
Others 
Total 
Hubs 
Neighbour  
regions 
Others 
Total 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
S2 
S3 
Interseasonal storage 
0% 
0% 
-8% 
-6% 
0% 
-1% 
-3% 
-2% 
0% 
0% 
3% 
1% 
3% 
1% 
2% 
1% 
Intraseasonal storage 
0% 
0% 
-4% 
-1% 
-2% 
-1% 
-2% 
-1% 
0% 
0% 
-5% 
-2% 
-3% 
-1% 
-3% 
-1% 
Solar heating 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
Total 
0% 
0% 
-2% 
-1% 
0% 
0% 
-1% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
-2% 
-1% 
0% 
0% 
-1% 
0% 
Heat demand 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Interseasonal storage 
0% 
0% 
-9% 
-8% 
-3% 
-3% 
-4% 
-4% 
0% 
0% 
-3% 
0% 
-3% 
-2% 
-2% 
-1% 
Intraseasonal storage 
0% 
0% 
-5% 
-2% 
-3% 
-2% 
-3% 
-1% 
0% 
0% 
-5% 
-2% 
-4% 
-1% 
-3% 
-1% 
Inflexible demand 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
Transmission losses 
0% 
0% 
-1% 
0% 
-1% 
0% 
-1% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
-1% 
0% 
-1% 
0% 
-1% 
0% 
Total 
0% 
0% 
-4% 
-3% 
-2% 
-1% 
-2% 
-1% 
0% 
0% 
-2% 
-1% 
-2% 
-1% 
-1% 
0% 
Table 25. Balancing dispatch differences from scenarios S2 (home country bidding zones) and S3 (North Sea bidding zone) to 
S1 (offshore hub bidding zones). Values in % of scenario S1 balancing market annual dispatch. 
Annual day-ahead and balancing dispatches under all scenarios 
Balancing market dispatch 
[TWh] 
2035 
2045 
Hubs 
Neighbour regions 
Others 
Total 
Hubs 
Neighbour regions 
Others 
Total 
S1 
S2 
S3 
S1 
S2 
S3 
S1 
S2 
S3 
S1 
S2 
S3 
S1 
S2 
S3 
S1 
S2 
S3 
S1 
S2 
S3 
S1 
S2 
S3 
Electricity generation 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Wind Offshore 
332 332 334 
849 
848 
847 
53 
53 
53 1,234 1,234 1,234 765 773 771 1,957 1,948 1,952 
440 
440 
441 3,161 3,161 3,163 
Thermal CHP-BP 
0 
0 
0 
45 
44 
44 
65 
65 
65 
110 
109 
109 
0 
0 
0 
26 
25 
25 
49 
48 
48 
74 
73 
74 
Thermal CHP-EX 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
11 
11 
11 
12 
12 
12 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
Thermal Condensing 
0 
0 
0 
26 
27 
26 
405 
405 
404 
431 
431 
431 
0 
0 
0 
14 
15 
14 
243 
240 
244 
257 
255 
258 
Hydro Run-of-River 
0 
0 
0 
17 
17 
17 
109 
109 
109 
126 
126 
126 
0 
0 
0 
17 
17 
17 
109 
109 
109 
126 
126 
126 
Intraseasonal storage 
0 
0 
0 
6 
6 
6 
14 
14 
13 
20 
19 
19 
0 
0 
0 
5 
5 
5 
13 
13 
13 
18 
18 
18 
Solar-PV 
0 
0 
0 
259 
259 
259 
717 
717 
717 
976 
976 
976 
0 
0 
0 
432 
432 
432 
720 
720 
720 1,152 1,152 1,152 
Wind Onshore 
0 
0 
0 
335 
335 
335 
864 
863 
864 1,198 1,198 1,198 
0 
0 
0 
338 
338 
338 
893 
893 
894 1,231 1,231 1,232 
Hydro reservoirs 
0 
0 
0 
34 
34 
33 
146 
147 
147 
180 
182 
180 
0 
0 
0 
23 
25 
22 
120 
120 
119 
143 
145 
141 
Total 
332 332 334 1,571 1,571 1,569 2,384 2,384 2,383 4,287 4,287 4,285 765 773 771 2,812 2,806 2,806 2,592 2,588 2,592 6,169 6,167 6,170 
Electricity demand 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Distribution Losses 
3 
3 
3 
106 
106 
106 
99 
99 
99 
208 
208 
208 
8 
8 
8 
155 
155 
155 
134 
134 
134 
297 
297 
297 
Transmission Losses 
1 
1 
1 
10 
9 
10 
21 
21 
21 
33 
31 
32 
2 
2 
1 
17 
12 
16 
34 
34 
34 
53 
48 
51 
Power to heat 
0 
0 
0 
671 
673 
672 
844 
843 
843 1,515 1,517 1,515 
0 
0 
0 
830 
832 
831 1,022 1,023 1,023 1,851 1,855 1,854 
Electric vehicles 
0 
0 
0 
166 
166 
166 
214 
214 
214 
380 
380 
380 
0 
0 
0 
447 
447 
447 
581 
581 
581 1,028 1,028 1,028 
Intrasesaonal storage 
0 
0 
0 
8 
8 
8 
19 
18 
18 
27 
26 
26 
0 
0 
0 
7 
7 
7 
18 
18 
18 
25 
25 
25 
Inflexible demand 
0 
0 
0 
682 
682 
682 1,021 1,021 1,021 1,703 1,703 1,703 
0 
0 
0 
719 
719 
719 1,072 1,072 1,072 1,791 1,791 1,791 
Power to X 
0 
0 
0 
200 
198 
200 
222 
223 
221 
422 
422 
422 
0 
0 
0 1,069 1,068 1,068 
55 
56 
56 1,124 1,124 1,124 
Total 
4 
4 
4 1,843 1,843 1,844 2,440 2,440 2,437 4,287 4,287 4,285 
10 
11 
9 3,243 3,238 3,242 2,916 2,918 2,918 6,169 6,167 6,170 
Heat generation 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Boilers 
0 
0 
0 
205 
202 
203 
261 
262 
263 
466 
464 
466 
0 
0 
0 
71 
68 
69 
105 
104 
104 
176 
172 
173 
Thermal CHP-BP 
0 
0 
0 
99 
98 
98 
167 
167 
167 
266 
264 
265 
0 
0 
0 
83 
82 
83 
152 
151 
152 
235 
234 
234 
Thermal CHP-EX 
0 
0 
0 
2 
2 
2 
20 
20 
20 
22 
22 
22 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
10 
10 
10 
11 
11 
11 
Power to heat 
0 
0 
0 1,455 1,458 1,456 1,763 1,763 1,762 3,218 3,221 3,218 
0 
0 
0 1,634 1,638 1,636 1,978 1,979 1,979 3,612 3,617 3,615 
Interseasonal storage 
0 
0 
0 
16 
15 
15 
30 
30 
30 
46 
44 
45 
0 
0 
0 
47 
46 
47 
58 
58 
57 
104 
104 
104 
Intraseasonal storage 
0 
0 
0 
104 
104 
105 
143 
144 
143 
248 
247 
248 
0 
0 
0 
106 
106 
107 
140 
139 
141 
247 
245 
248 
Solar heating 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Total 
0 
0 
0 1,881 1,878 1,880 2,386 2,386 2,385 4,266 4,264 4,265 
0 
0 
0 1,942 1,940 1,942 2,442 2,441 2,443 4,384 4,381 4,385 
Heat demand 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Interseasonal storage 
0 
0 
0 
23 
21 
22 
43 
43 
43 
66 
64 
64 
0 
0 
0 
74 
73 
74 
90 
90 
89 
163 
163 
163 
Intraseasonal storage 
0 
0 
0 
109 
108 
109 
149 
150 
149 
258 
258 
259 
0 
0 
0 
112 
111 
112 
147 
145 
148 
258 
256 
260 
Inflexible demand 
0 
0 
0 1,723 1,723 1,723 2,168 2,168 2,168 3,891 3,891 3,891 
0 
0 
0 1,723 1,723 1,723 2,172 2,172 2,172 3,896 3,896 3,896 
Transmission losses 
0 
0 
0 
26 
26 
26 
25 
25 
25 
51 
51 
51 
0 
0 
0 
33 
33 
33 
34 
34 
34 
67 
67 
67 
Total 
0 
0 
0 1,881 1,878 1,880 2,386 2,386 2,385 4,267 4,264 4,265 
0 
0 
0 1,942 1,940 1,942 2,442 2,441 2,443 4,384 4,381 4,385 
Table 26. Day Ahead dispatch under all scenarios S1 (offshore hub bidding zones), S2 (home country bidding zones) and S3 
(North Sea bidding zone). Values in TWh. 
Balancing market dispatch 
[TWh] 
2035 
2045 
Hubs 
Neighbour regions 
Others 
Total 
Hubs 
Neighbour regions 
Others 
Total 
S1 
S2 
S3 
S1 
S2 
S3 
S1 
S2 
S3 
S1 
S2 
S3 
S1 
S2 
S3 
S1 
S2 
S3 
S1 
S2 
S3 
S1 
S2 
S3 
Electricity generation 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Wind Offshore 
331 331 332 
848 
846 
847 
53 
53 
53 1,233 1,230 1,232 765 763 766 1,956 1,945 1,952 
440 
440 
440 3,161 3,148 3,158 
Thermal CHP-BP 
0 
0 
0 
45 
43 
44 
65 
65 
65 
110 
108 
109 
0 
0 
0 
26 
25 
25 
48 
48 
48 
74 
73 
73 
Thermal CHP-EX 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
11 
11 
11 
12 
12 
12 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
Thermal Condensing 
0 
0 
0 
26 
26 
26 
405 
403 
404 
431 
429 
429 
0 
0 
0 
14 
14 
14 
243 
239 
243 
257 
253 
256 
Hydro Run-of-River 
0 
0 
0 
17 
17 
17 
109 
109 
109 
126 
126 
126 
0 
0 
0 
17 
17 
17 
109 
109 
109 
126 
126 
126 
Intraseasonal storage 
0 
0 
0 
6 
5 
6 
14 
13 
13 
19 
18 
19 
0 
0 
0 
4 
4 
4 
12 
11 
11 
16 
15 
16 
Solar-PV 
0 
0 
0 
259 
259 
259 
717 
717 
717 
976 
976 
976 
0 
0 
0 
432 
432 
432 
720 
720 
720 1,152 1,152 1,152 
Wind Onshore 
0 
0 
0 
335 
335 
335 
863 
863 
863 1,198 1,198 1,198 
0 
0 
0 
338 
338 
338 
893 
893 
893 1,231 1,231 1,232 
Hydro reservoirs 
0 
0 
0 
34 
33 
32 
143 
142 
141 
177 
175 
173 
0 
0 
0 
22 
23 
21 
114 
113 
112 
136 
136 
133 
Total 
331 331 332 1,571 1,566 1,567 2,380 2,376 2,376 4,283 4,273 4,274 765 763 766 2,810 2,799 2,804 2,584 2,578 2,581 6,159 6,139 6,151 
Electricity demand 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Distribution Losses 
3 
3 
3 
106 
106 
106 
99 
98 
98 
208 
207 
207 
8 
8 
8 
155 
154 
154 
134 
133 
133 
297 
296 
296 
Transmission Losses 
1 
1 
1 
10 
10 
10 
21 
21 
21 
33 
33 
33 
2 
2 
2 
17 
17 
17 
34 
33 
34 
53 
52 
52 
Power to heat 
0 
0 
0 
670 
670 
669 
842 
838 
839 1,511 1,508 1,508 
0 
0 
0 
827 
825 
827 1,019 1,015 1,018 1,846 1,840 1,845 
Electric vehicles 
0 
0 
0 
166 
165 
164 
214 
211 
213 
380 
376 
377 
0 
0 
0 
447 
445 
446 
580 
571 
576 1,027 1,016 1,021 
Intrasesaonal storage 
0 
0 
0 
8 
7 
8 
19 
18 
18 
26 
25 
25 
0 
0 
0 
6 
6 
6 
16 
15 
15 
22 
21 
21 
Inflexible demand 
0 
0 
0 
682 
682 
682 1,021 1,021 1,021 1,703 1,703 1,703 
0 
0 
0 
719 
719 
719 1,072 1,072 1,072 1,791 1,791 1,791 
Power to X 
0 
0 
0 
200 
198 
200 
222 
223 
221 
422 
422 
422 
0 
0 
0 1,069 1,068 1,068 
55 
56 
56 1,124 1,124 1,124 
Total 
4 
4 
4 1,842 1,839 1,839 2,437 2,431 2,431 4,283 4,274 4,275 
10 
10 
10 3,239 3,233 3,237 2,910 2,896 2,904 6,159 6,139 6,151 
Heat generation 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Boilers 
0 
0 
0 
204 
202 
204 
261 
262 
263 
466 
465 
467 
0 
0 
0 
71 
68 
70 
105 
104 
104 
176 
172 
174 
Thermal CHP-BP 
0 
0 
0 
99 
98 
99 
167 
167 
167 
266 
265 
266 
0 
0 
0 
83 
83 
83 
152 
152 
152 
235 
235 
235 
Thermal CHP-EX 
0 
0 
0 
2 
2 
2 
20 
20 
20 
22 
22 
22 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
10 
10 
10 
11 
10 
11 
==PAGE:69==
66 
Balancing market dispatch 
[TWh] 
2035 
2045 
Hubs 
Neighbour regions 
Others 
Total 
Hubs 
Neighbour regions 
Others 
Total 
S1 
S2 
S3 
S1 
S2 
S3 
S1 
S2 
S3 
S1 
S2 
S3 
S1 
S2 
S3 
S1 
S2 
S3 
S1 
S2 
S3 
S1 
S2 
S3 
Power to heat 
0 
0 
0 1,452 1,449 1,448 1,758 1,750 1,753 3,210 3,200 3,201 
0 
0 
0 1,628 1,625 1,627 1,970 1,961 1,966 3,598 3,586 3,592 
Interseasonal storage 
0 
0 
0 
17 
15 
16 
30 
30 
30 
47 
45 
46 
0 
0 
0 
48 
50 
49 
58 
60 
59 
107 
110 
108 
Intraseasonal storage 
0 
0 
0 
102 
98 
101 
141 
138 
140 
243 
236 
241 
0 
0 
0 
104 
100 
103 
137 
132 
136 
241 
232 
239 
Solar heating 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Total 
0 
0 
0 1,876 1,866 1,870 2,378 2,368 2,373 4,255 4,234 4,244 
0 
0 
0 1,935 1,925 1,931 2,433 2,420 2,428 4,368 4,345 4,359 
Heat demand 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Interseasonal storage 
0 
0 
0 
23 
20 
21 
41 
40 
40 
64 
60 
61 
0 
0 
0 
72 
70 
72 
87 
84 
85 
159 
154 
157 
Intraseasonal storage 
0 
0 
0 
106 
101 
104 
146 
141 
143 
252 
241 
247 
0 
0 
0 
108 
102 
105 
141 
135 
140 
249 
237 
245 
Inflexible demand 
0 
0 
0 1,723 1,723 1,723 2,168 2,168 2,168 3,891 3,891 3,891 
0 
0 
0 1,723 1,723 1,723 2,172 2,172 2,172 3,896 3,896 3,896 
Transmission losses 
0 
0 
0 
26 
25 
26 
25 
25 
25 
51 
51 
51 
0 
0 
0 
33 
33 
33 
34 
33 
34 
67 
66 
67 
Total 
0 
0 
0 1,878 1,869 1,874 2,380 2,373 2,376 4,258 4,243 4,250 
0 
0 
0 1,937 1,928 1,934 2,434 2,424 2,431 4,371 4,352 4,365 
Table 27. Balancing dispatch under all scenarios S1 (offshore hub bidding zones), S2 (home country bidding zones) and S3 
(North Sea bidding zone). Values in TWh. 
Plots of dispatch on the 02/01/2045 at 06:00 (hub-home country line overflow) 
 
==PAGE:70==
67 
 
Figure 29.Day-ahead (up) and balancing market (down) dispatch plots under the home country market arrangement (scenario 
S2). Energy flows between regions are displayed with color and width proportional to flow amount. Regions encircled in green 
are exporting and those in red are importing. Production and demand shares are shown on pie charts (left pie charts 
correspond to generation and right pie charts to demand). Overflows signaled on top figure with dotted red line. 
 
==PAGE:71==
68 
 
Figure 30. Day-ahead (up) and balancing market (down) dispatch plots under the offshore bidding zone market arrangement 
(scenario S1). Same details as Figure 29. In contrast to Figure 29 (home country market bidding zones, S2), the differences 
between day-ahead and balancing market dispatches are substantially lower in scenario S1. 
Plots of dispatch on the 19/05/2045 at 14:00 (hub-hub line overflow) 
 
==PAGE:72==
69 
 
Figure 31. Day-ahead (up) and balancing market (down) dispatch plots under the North Sea bidding zone market arrangement 
(scenario S3). Same details as Figure 29. Overflows signaled on top figure with dotted red line. Corrected flow signaled on 
bottom figure with dotted green line. 
 
==PAGE:73==
70 
 
Figure 32. Day-ahead (up) and balancing market (down) dispatch plots under the offshore bidding zone market arrangement 
(scenario S1). Same details as Figure 29. In contrast to Figure 31 (North Sea bidding zone, S3), the differences between day-
ahead and balancing market dispatches are substantially lower in scenario S1. 
Results of disptach on the 02/01/2045 at 06:00 (hub-home country line overflow) 
Region 
Exp. 
Imp. 
Curt 
P2H 
EVs 
Power to 
fuels 
Inflexible 
demand 
Stor 
Dem 
Stor 
Gen 
Wind 
Off 
Wind 
On 
Hydro Thermal Price 
Hubs 
161,686 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
163,453 
0 
0 
0 
2.9 
Neighbour 
regions 
75,624 121,268 192 
176,964 
98,759 
182,184 
72,542 
0 
1,265 416,680 84,495 3,237 
2,944 
20.5 
Others 
17,415 127,624 0 
159,081 
86,273 
10,842 
129,586 
2,125 
4,702 
95,882 168,692 9,744 18,048 24.4 
Total 
254,725 248,892 192 
336,045 
185,032 193,026 
202,128 
2,125 
5,968 676,016 253,187 12,981 20,992 15.9 
Table 28. Day-ahead market dispatch results on the 02/01/2045 06:00 under offshore hub bidding zones arrangement 
(scenario S1). Values in MWh. 
Region 
Exp. 
Imp. 
Curt 
P2H 
EVs 
Power to 
fuels 
Inflexible 
demand 
Stor 
Dem 
Stor 
Gen 
Wind 
Off 
Wind 
On 
Hydro Thermal Price 
Hubs 
161,686 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
163,453 
0 
0 
0 
2.9 
Neighbour 
regions 
75,645 121,268 364 
176,788 
98,759 
182,184 
72,542 
0 
1,265 416,508 84,495 3,237 
2,944 
21.2 
Others 
17,415 127,643 0 
159,083 
86,273 
10,842 
129,586 
2,125 
4,702 
95,882 168,692 9,724 18,050 25.3 
Total 
254,746 248,911 364 
335,870 
185,032 193,026 
202,128 
2,125 
5,968 675,844 253,187 12,962 20,994 16.4 
Table 29. Balancing market dispatch results on the 02/01/2045 06:00 under offshore hub bidding zones arrangement 
(scenario S1). Values in MWh. 
 
 
==PAGE:74==
71 
Region 
Exp. 
Imp. 
Curt 
P2H 
EVs 
Power 
to fuels 
Inflexible 
demand 
Stor 
Dem 
Stor 
Gen 
Wind 
Off 
Wind 
On 
Hydro Thermal Price 
Hubs 
161,686 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
163,453 
0 
0 
0 
15.4 
Neighbour 
regions 
118,754 147,723 
0 
137,746 122,113 182,184 
72,542 
0 
1,782 416,873 84,495 
3,237 
4,077 
15.9 
Others 
16,569 142,707 
0 
159,097 
97,079 10,842 
129,586 
0 
4,718 
95,882 168,692 9,744 
11,359 19.5 
Total 
297,009 290,430 
0 
296,843 219,192 193,026 202,128 
0 
6,500 676,208 253,187 12,981 15,436 16.9 
Table 30. Day-ahead market dispatch results on the 02/01/2045 06:00 under home country market bidding zones 
arrangement (scenario S2). Values in MWh. 
Region 
Exp. 
Imp. 
Curt 
P2H 
EVs 
Power 
to fuels 
Inflexible 
demand 
Stor 
Dem 
Stor 
Gen 
Wind 
Off 
Wind 
On 
Hydro Thermal Price 
Hubs 
161,686 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
163,453 
0 
0 
0 
2.9 
Neighbour 
regions 
76,069 131,817 9,422 
167,126 
108,815 182,184 72,542 
0 
1,384 407,451 84,495 3,237 
2,431 334.4 
Others 
18,082 118,020 
0 
153,322 
77,873 10,842 129,586 
0 
4,718 
95,882 168,692 9,744 11,578 398.7 
Total 
255,837 249,838 9,422 
320,448 
186,688 193,026 202,128 
0 
6,102 666,786 253,187 12,981 14,009 245.3 
Table 31. Balancing market dispatch results on the 02/01/2045 06:00 under home country market bidding zones arrangement 
(scenario S2). Values in MWh. 
Results of disptach on the 19/05/2045 at 14:00 (hub-hub line overflow) 
Region 
Exp. 
Imp. 
Curt P2H 
EVs 
Power 
to fuels 
Inflexible 
demand 
Stor 
Dem 
Stor 
Gen 
Wind 
Off 
Wind 
On 
Solar 
PV 
Hydro Thermal Price 
Hubs 
27,386 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
27,668 
0 
0 
0 
0 
34 
Neighbour 
regions 
0 
136,485 
0 
77,808 182,184 96,493 
498 
844 67,174 42,885 36,493 216,703 2,818 
3,855 
34 
Others 
142,533 26,831 18,772 112,161 10,842 131,814 
6,842 
694 59,703 12,014 49,166 344,904 20,983 24,760 
26 
Total 
169,919 163,317 18,772 189,968 193,026 228,307 
7,340 
1,537 126,878 82,566 85,659 561,607 23,800 28,615 31.6 
Table 32. Day-ahead market dispatch results on the 19/05/2045 14:00 under offshore hub bidding zones arrangement 
(scenario S1). Values in MWh. 
Region 
Exp. 
Imp. 
Curt P2H 
EVs 
Power 
to fuels 
Inflexible 
demand 
Stor 
Dem 
Stor 
Gen 
Wind 
Off 
Wind 
On 
Solar 
PV 
Hydro Thermal Price 
Hubs 
27,386 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
27,668 
0 
0 
0 
0 
36 
Neighbour 
regions 
0 
136,485 
0 
77,808 182,184 96,493 
498 
844 67,174 42,885 36,493 216,703 2,818 
3,855 
36 
Others 
142,143 26,459 18,772 111,842 10,842 131,814 
6,842 
350 59,703 12,014 49,166 344,904 20,983 24,753 
28 
Total 
169,529 162,944 18,772 189,650 193,026 228,307 
7,340 
1,194 126,878 82,566 85,659 561,607 23,800 28,608 33.0 
Table 33. Balancing market dispatch results on the 19/05/2045 14:00 under offshore hub bidding zones arrangement 
(scenario S1). Values in MWh. 
Region 
Exp. 
Imp. 
Curt 
P2H 
EVs 
Power 
to fuels 
Inflexible 
demand 
Stor 
Dem 
Stor 
Gen 
Wind 
Off 
Wind 
On 
Solar 
PV 
Hydro Thermal Price 
Hubs 
27,386 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
27,668 
0 
0 
0 
0 
34 
Neighbour 
regions 
0 
136,337 
0 
77,808 
67,017 182,184 96,493 
470 
763 42,885 36,493 216,703 2,818 
3,995 
34 
Others 
136,373 21,094 18,772 112,361 60,851 10,842 131,814 6,831 1,158 12,014 49,166 344,904 20,983 25,270 
26 
Total 
163,759 157,431 18,772 190,169 127,868 193,026 228,307 7,301 1,921 82,566 85,659 561,607 23,800 29,266 31.4 
Table 34. Day-ahead market dispatch results on the 19/05/2045 14:00 under North Sea bidding zone market arrangement 
(scenario S3). Values in MWh. 
Region 
Exp. 
Imp. 
Curt P2H 
EVs 
Power 
to fuels 
Inflexible 
demand 
Stor 
Dem 
Stor 
Gen 
Wind 
Off 
Wind 
On 
Solar 
PV 
Hydro Thermal Price 
Hubs 
27,386 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 27,668 
0 
0 
0 
0 
403.8 
Neighbour 
regions 
0 
135,077 
0 
77,868 
65,362 182,184 96,493 
188 
6 42,885 36,493 216,703 2,818 
3,995 404.9 
Others 
137,420 23,266 18,772 
113,447 
60,851 10,842 131,814 5,722 0 12,014 49,166 344,904 20,983 25,270 372.6 
Total 
164,807 158,343 18,772 
191,315 
126,213 193,026 228,307 5,910 6 82,566 85,659 561,607 23,800 29,266 393.7 
Table 35. Balancing market dispatch results on the 19/05/2045 14:00 under North Sea bidding zone market arrangement 
(scenario S3). Values in MWh. 
