==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Department of 
Wind Energy 
Master Report 
 
 
 
Load prediction using LiDAR measurements and machine 
learning 
 
 
Jens Visbech Madsen 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0417 
January 2021 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
Author: Jens Visbech Madsen 
Title: Load prediction using LiDAR measurements and machine learning 
 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0417 
January 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical University of Denmark 
with a unique integration of research, education, innovation and public/private 
sector consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities develop new 
opportunities and technology for the global and Danish exploitation of wind 
energy. Research focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are central 
for the development, innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education at the education. 
Project period:  
August 2020 – January 2021 
 
ECTS: 30 
 
Education: Master of Science 
 
 
Supervisor: 
Tuhfe Gocmen 
Albert Meseguer 
DTU Wind Energy 
 
Antoine Larvol 
Windar Photonics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Remarks: 
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark. 
 
 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399 
4000 Roskilde 
Denmark 
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk 
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the Department of Wind Energy at the Technical
University of Denmark (DTU) as partial fulﬁllment of the requirements for becoming
a Master of Science in Engineering (Wind Energy).
First of all, I would like to express my gratitude to my two main supervisors from
DTU Wind Energy, Tuhfe and Albert, and to my co-supervisor from Windar Photon-
ics, Antoine. The circumstances have been hectic with COVID-19 around but I have
really appreciated you taking the time for our weekly meetings, always providing
useful feedback and answers to my questions.
I would also like to thank the Department of Wind Energy for providing ofﬁce space
for the most part of the project and to my fellow students at the ofﬁce for good
companionship.
Finally, I would like to thank my friends, family and especially my girlfriend who
have had to bear over with me through the last 5 months.
Thank you.
iii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Nacelle-mounted LiDARs have the capability of providing a preview of the wind
ﬁeld in front of the rotor. Such a preview can be implemented for predictive wind
turbine control and ultimately improve power performance and reduce structural
loads. This study investigates the potential of using LiDARs and machine learning for
short-term forecast of the electrical power and blade root ﬂapwise bending moment
on an 850 kW Vestas V52 wind turbine.
A time delay analysis was performed to assess the time scales of relevance for the
forecast models. The analysis showed a good agreement between the true time to
impact and the expected time to impact based on focus distance and advection wind
speed. Especially, the 4-beamed LiDAR was found to be in very good compliance
with the theoretical time to impact.
The surrogate models developed in this study have been shown capable of forecasting
short-term electrical power and blade ﬂapwise bending moment based exclusively
on LiDAR measurements as inputs. Generally, the models were found capable
of forecasting overall trends with low biases but showed insufﬁciency in terms of
capturing the relatively high-frequent ﬂuctuations of the blade ﬂapwise bending
moment. The blade is exposed to asymmetrical loading which is highly inﬂuence by
the rotational speed of the turbine and the rotor-local wind, and these characteristics
were not represented very well in any of the models. The surrogate models based
on inputs from the 4-beamed LiDAR showed a signiﬁcantly better performance
compared to the models based on the 2-beamed LiDAR with up to 35 % lower mean
absolute error for electrical power and 13 % for the ﬂapwise bending moment.
iv
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Page
Preface
iii
Abstract
iv
Contents
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Literature review
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Research objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Background
8
2.1
Wind measurements with LiDAR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Machine learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.1
Artiﬁcial neural networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Methodology
16
3.1
Experimental setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.1
DTU V52 wind turbine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.2
LiDAR system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Qualitative data exploration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
Statistical measures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4
Data acquisition and preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.4.1
Sequential transformation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.4.2
Feature selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.4.3
Hyperparameter tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.4.4
Summary of model architectures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
v
==PAGE:6==
4
Results
42
4.1
Validation of LiDAR measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.2
Spectral analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.3
Time delay analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.4
Forecasting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.4.1
Single-step forecasting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.4.2
Multi-step forecasting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5
Discussion
63
6
Conclusion
68
Bibliography
70
Appendices
77
A
Three-dimensional wind vector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
B
Periods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
C
Visualization of turbulence box . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
D
Loss functions and target histogram
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
F
Forecast error statistics and distributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
vi
==PAGE:7==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
During recent years, the deployment of new wind turbines has helped push the total
amount of installed capacity to more than 650 GW [1]. The persisting increase of
installed capacity is the result of a global ambition to minimize CO2 emissions but
has also been greatly inﬂuenced by the economical attractiveness of wind energy.
The levelized cost of energy (LCoE) describes the lifetime cost relative to energy
generation and is typically used for consistent comparisons of energy sources [2].
Despite the gradual rollback of subsidies, the LCoE of wind energy has kept de-
creasing which highly can be accredited to the continuous research and development
within the wind industry.
Figure 1.1: Global development of total installed wind energy capacity [1].
1
==PAGE:8==
For wind energy to keep its competitiveness in the energy market, it is essential to
keep innovating and optimizing all phases of the wind turbine’s life. A main area of
study that still shows great potential for reducing cost, is optimizing the way wind
turbines are operated. Operational expenses can be reduced, e.g. by increasing power
performance through optimal control strategies, condition monitoring of the wind
turbines, and mitigating structural loads, thereby increasing the designed lifetime of
the turbine.
Common for the above-mentioned issues is the necessity to measure several proper-
ties, typically collected and stored by the supervisory control and data acquisition
(SCADA) system of the wind turbine. Such measurements include operational infor-
mation (power output, rotational speed, yaw, pitch angle, etc.), structural properties
(blade and tower bending moments, vibrations, etc.), and meteorological measure-
ments (air temperature, rain, wind speed, and direction).
It comes as no surprise, that the wind speed plays an inevitably part in the power
generation P of a wind turbine through the well-known relation:
P = 1
2CpρAU3
(1.1)
where Cp is the power coefﬁcient, ρ is the air density, A is the rotor-swept area and
U is the wind speed. From this relation, it is seen, how the power is proportional to
the wind speed to the power of three.
Apart from being the main driver for power generation, the wind speed also greatly
inﬂuences the structural loads on the wind turbine blades and tower. The structural
loads on the turbine that are of particular interest typically concern the blade root
ﬂap- and edgewise bending moments as well as the tower base normal (fore-aft)
and lateral (side-side) bending moments. These loads, among others, are considered
fundamental and mandatory to be measured for veriﬁcation of design load models
when introducing new wind turbine types [3]. Structural loads are typically measured
with strain gauges, but such measurement systems are very expensive to install and
maintain. After installation, the strain gauge system requires a calibration of the
sensors, and these sensors will have to be re-calibrated frequently during the lifetime
of a wind turbine [4].
The structural loads and the power production are delicately balanced by the wind
turbine controller. Under normal operation, the main purpose of a wind turbine con-
troller is to obtain the highest operational efﬁciency by maximizing the power but at
the same time ensure safe operation under all wind conditions. Today, wind turbines
typically operate with a feedback (FB) controller which, as the name indicates, relies
on monitored parameters being fed back to the control system. The control system
will then react either by deﬁning new set-points or maintain its current operational
2
==PAGE:9==
settings. This type of conventional control strategy is not optimal as any transient
event poses an unknown disturbance to the control system which can only be rectiﬁed
in a delayed manner. The disturbance will therefore have to pass through the entire
wind turbine before the effects can actually be observed in the monitored parameters.
As indicated, this might lead to unexpected fatigue or extreme loads on the structure
[5].
A way of mitigating such loads could be by providing the controller with measure-
ments of the upstream wind, hence allowing for a feedforward (FF) control strategy.
Such wind preview can be measured with remote sensing techniques, e.g using
nacelle-mounted light detection and ranging (LiDAR) systems. This type of LiDAR
system has shown a promising potential to reduce structural loads and increase power
production through a forward-looking approach [6, 7]. In conjunction, the competi-
tiveness and new developments of nacelle-mounted LiDARs have made possible the
production of cheap and reliable systems that can be installed in a wind turbine with
marginal operational costs [8, 9]. Figure 1.2 illustrates a simpliﬁed implementation
of a LiDAR system allowing for a combined feedforward and feedback controller.
Figure 1.2: Simpliﬁed block diagram showing how a LiDAR system can be implemented to
provide a preview of the wind, thereby allowing for a combined feedforward and feedback
controller [10].
Though modern nacelle-mounted LiDAR systems are able to measure the wind
accurately prior to impact, an ongoing problem is the ability to accurately model
the evolution of the instantaneous wind ﬁeld ahead of the rotor and the impact it
will entail on power generation and structural loads of the wind turbine. For that
reason, it is desirable to investigate how forward-looking LiDARs can be used for
accurately modeling the wind ﬁeld and ultimately determine the resulting power
generation and structural loading. Such representation could perhaps be modeled by
3
==PAGE:10==
high-ﬁdelity computational ﬂuid dynamics (CFD), but such simulations are often
slow and unsuited for real-time applications. It would be much more feasible to
deﬁne and train a surrogate model that could provide a fast and robust prediction of
power and relevant loads based entirely on LiDAR measurements. Machine learning
(ML) and artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) offer a data-driven approach to developing
surrogate models that can be used for such time series forecasting.
1.2
Literature review
The idea of using a forward-looking LiDARs for enhanced wind turbine control is not
a new concept. The technique was demonstrated back in 1970s but applications were
limited by the, back then, complex and expensive LiDAR systems. However, the
rapid development in the telecommunication industry allowed for the development
of cheaper, smaller and more reliable LiDAR systems based on ﬁber-optics [6].
The earliest case study deploying a nacelle-mounted LiDAR was performed back
in March 2003 with a scanning LiDAR mounted on a 2.3 MW wind turbine which
documented the LiDARs capability to measure wind speeds in front of the rotor [11].
This study paved the way for many following studies investigating, employing, and
yielding the beneﬁts of forward-looking nacelle-mounted LiDARs.
A much more recent study, [12], addresses some of the today-known applications
for using LiDAR-assisted control in terms of reducing the overall LCoE. The main
suggested applications from the study can be summarized as:
• Increasing annual energy production (AEP) by augmenting different AEP
strategies through an improved representation of real-time wind inﬂow. This
would be the most immediate way of reducing LCoE.
• Reduction of structural loads, both fatigue and extreme, using feed-forward
control strategies. Such implementation allows for introducing lighter and less
expensive designs as well as a possible increase in the wind turbine lifetime.
• Wind class upgrade of wind turbines to operate at sites with a more severe
wind climate than originally intended. This could allow for general use of
cheaper wind turbine designs and ultimately a reduction in LCoE.
• Dynamic power rating by characterizing real-time turbulence intensity, which
could allow for optimal power production in cases of speciﬁc load and grid
requirements.
4
==PAGE:11==
Especially applications for reduction of structural loads have already been well-
investigated in many separate studies [5, 13, 14, 15]. Common for these studies
is the use of high-ﬁdelity aeroelastic load simulations, e.g. using HAWC2 [16]
or FAST [17], and a general lack of ﬁeld tests for evaluating the true effects of
LiDAR-enhanced control.
In one study, a linear model was suggested for predicting the gust impact time based
on multiple spinner LiDAR measurements at different LiDAR focus ranges [18]. The
study then investigated the potential of implementing the gust time prediction model
into the wind turbine control for extreme load mitigation. A case study was simulated
using HAWC2 with a LiDAR module that allows for de-rating the wind turbine based
on LiDAR values. Load mitigation up to 18% was found for the ﬂapwise bending
root moment peak with a 20 seconds response time. For a response time of only 0.5
seconds, no signiﬁcant load reduction was observed. This additionally emphasizes
the difﬁculty related to implementing a model that allows for the controller to react
fast enough to actually mitigate loads. Obviously, higher wind speeds will entail a
shorter time window for the controller as well as the focus distance of the LiDAR
system.
Another study suggested a model-based predictive approach to reduce asymmet-
ric loads by implementing individual blade pitching [19]. These harmonic loads
are responsible for a great part of the blade fatigue damage. A model predictive
controller (MPC) utilizing the LiDAR preview was implemented for a 5MW wind
turbine and tested in the FAST simulator. The results showed a signiﬁcant reduction
of low-speed shaft and blade root ﬂapwise bending moments.
One of the major challenges related to the implementation of forward-looking Li-
DARs, is the very important and difﬁcult discipline of reconstructing useful wind
ﬁeld characteristics (wind speed, direction, wind veer, and shear). It has been found
possible to accurately and robustly determine free stream wind characteristics of
10-min data using experimental data from two nacelle-mounted LiDAR systems.
However, reconstruction of wind characteristics on a much shorter time-scale is still
a very relevant and ongoing research topic [20].
A similar study looked into the complexity related to extrapolating LiDAR-retrieved
wind speeds measured ahead of the rotor plane [21]. In the study, the rotor-effective
wind (REWS) speed is estimated using autoregressive models based on far-ﬁeld
LiDAR measurement. Wind turbine blockage and atmospheric and site conditions
were not considered. The rotor-effective wind speed is typically used to represent
the wind speed that optimally should be fed to the controller and governs the turbine
response. It can be deﬁned as the wind speed averaged across the rotor plane. In
[22], a model is proposed for retrieving the rotor-effective wind speed from nacelle-
5
==PAGE:12==
mounted LiDARs based on ﬁeld measurements.
The use of artiﬁcial intelligence and more speciﬁcally machine learning, in the
wind industry is becoming still more prevalent caused by the feasible properties of
such models. State of the art of artiﬁcial intelligence applications for wind energy
includes wind power forecasting, operation and maintenance (O&M) through predic-
tive condition monitoring, wind turbine and farm control and load validation [23].
Especially, the ﬁeld of power forecasting is of great interest as renewable energy
sources, such as wind or solar, are occupying a continuously larger share of the
electricity market. Due to the stochastic nature of renewable energy sources and the
functionality of many electricity markets, the ability to accurately forecast and trade
one’s expected power generation is the main driver for revenue. In electricity markets
with a high penetration of renewable sources, very short-term power forecast is also
becoming more relevant for grid regulation and general power system balancing
[24].
The minute-scale forecasting of wind power has been assessed in [25]. The imple-
mentation of forward-looking LiDARs was deemed applicable for both power grid
balancing and wind turbine control for short-term forecast horizons (1s to 30min).
Neural networks are proposed as great models for such forecasting applications
with the major limitations being the computational demands, historical data, and the
ﬂuctuating forecast horizon due to varying environmental conditions.
The use of recurrent neural networks for forecasting short-term power availability
has already been investigated in [26]. The study proposed a model-free approach for
dynamic estimation of available power based only on wind speed measurements as
input. The developed network was found capable of complying with the most recent
grid codes requiring high accuracy estimations of the power availability at 1-min
intervals.
In terms of machine learning applications related to structural wind turbine loads,
it has primarily been with the purpose of load validation. Here, different surrogate
models have been trained on high-ﬁdelity load databases to provide a quick assess-
ment of site-speciﬁc loads based on 10-min simulations [27]. The capability of using
nacelle-mounted LiDAR wind retrievals as inputs for training such load validation
surrogate models has also been documented. The LiDAR measurements were fed to
aeroelastic load simulations and the results were compared to similar simulations
with meteorological mast measurements as inputs. In many cases, the simulations
with LiDAR measurements as input resulted in lower uncertainty than those from
the meteorological mast [28, 29].
6
==PAGE:13==
1.3
Research objectives
As indicated in the above review of previous work, there exists a lack of studies
evaluating the use of machine learning for immediate forecasting of variables relevant
for LCoE reduction, i.e. power generation and structural loads. For that reason,
the main objective of this thesis is to investigate the potential of using LiDARs
and machine learning models, namely neural networks, to establish a robust and
generalized surrogate model for short-term multivariate multi-step forecasting. Two
different models are developed based on inputs from two separate LiDAR systems,
one using 2 beams and the other using 4 beams. The LiDARs have been mounted
on the nacelle of an 850 kW Vestas V52 wind turbine located at Risø, Denmark.
The LiDARs provide a preview of the wind ﬁeld which can be used for short-term
forecasting. The forecast target features of the surrogate models are electrical power
and blade root ﬂapwise bending moment of a single blade, which are measured
continuously on the wind turbine and synchronized with the LiDAR measurements.
The thesis attempts to answer the following research questions:
1. How well can machine learning models forecast electrical power?
2. How well can machine learning models forecast structural loads?
3. Which machine learning models are most suited for forecasting electrical
power and structural loads?
4. Is there a difference between how well the surrogate models forecast power
and loads when using the 2- or 4-beamed LiDAR setup as input?
1.4
Thesis outline
This introduction is followed by chapter 2 which explains the basic functionality
of the LiDARs as well as the concepts of the machine learning models used in
this thesis. Chapter 3 gives a detailed description of the methodology including
the experimental setup, data acquisition, preprocessing, and modeling. The results
obtained throughout the study are presented in chapter 4 and discussed in chapter 5.
Finally, the conclusion in chapter 6 summarizes the ﬁndings of the study.
7
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 2
Background
The following chapter is separated into two sections. The ﬁrst section provides the
reader with a general background related to the functionality of LiDAR systems. The
second section gives a brief description of the principles behind machine learning,
and more speciﬁcally the type of models that will be used in the present study.
2.1
Wind measurements with LiDAR
LiDARs are a general type of remote sensing technique that emits and receives light
to make representations of a target. In terms of LiDAR anemometry, the principles
of the optical Doppler effect is used. Doppler LiDARs gather information about the
shift in frequency of the light that is emitted from the LiDAR and reﬂected back off
the target. Essentially, the governing principle is very similar to that of a radar but
where the radio frequencies are designed to penetrate the atmosphere with the least
attenuation, the LiDAR frequencies are designed to interact with the atmosphere [30].
Figure 2.1: Example of Doppler shift phenomena from
police car siren.
The Doppler effect is often de-
scribed with the well-known ex-
ample of a moving police car
emitting sound waves from its
siren, see Figure 2.1. In this
scenario, there will be a differ-
ence in pitch observed by a per-
son being approached by the car
and a person being departed by
the car. For the person being ap-
proached by the car, the sound waves are compressed (blue shift) and so a higher
pitch will be observed. Oppositely, for the person being departed by the car, the
8
==PAGE:15==
sound waves are expanded (redshift) and hence, a lower pitch is observed.
The exact same principle is valid for light waves and has already been widely used
in astrophysics for determining the motion of distant astronomical objects. For the
Doppler effect to be applicable for anemometry, it requires something to reﬂect off.
Luckily, the atmosphere, where we measure the wind, is typically ﬁlled with micro-
scopic solid or liquid particles (>1 µm), referred to as aerosols. The light emitted
from a source will reﬂect off the aerosols and back to the source. The velocity of the
aerosols then imparts a shift in frequency (δ f) of the backscattered light which can
be described by:
δ f = 2V f
c
= 2V
λ
(2.1)
where f and λ are the frequency and wavelength of the laser-emitted light, respec-
tively, V is the velocity of the aerosols, representing the wind, and c is the speed
of light (2.998·10 m/s) [30]. Due to the physics of the electromagnetic waves, the
Doppler effect is only measurable in the direction of the laser beam. In cases where
the wind is moving completely transverse to the beam, the net Doppler shift will
be zero. This allows for the retrieval of only the radial or line-of-sight (LOS) wind
speed. However, advanced LiDAR systems using multiple or scanning beams, have
the capability to measure multiple LOS wind speeds which can be transformed to
the traditional wind vector under certain ﬂow assumptions.
Generally, we distinguish between two types of signal processing for determining
the frequency shift; the direct (incoherent) and the coherent detection methods. For
direct detection, the frequency shift is determined directly using optical frequency
analyzers. On the other hand, the coherent detection method features a local os-
cillator that mixes the emitted light with the backscattered light. The result is a
beating signal from where a photodetector can accurately measure the difference
frequency [31]. In terms of coherent LiDARs, we further distinguish between two
technologies, namely the continuous-wave and pulsed LiDARs. The pulsed wave
LiDAR transmits a sequence of short pulses from where it measures the frequency
shift of each pulse. This way the focus range is determined by the time of ﬂight and
be changed quickly for multi-range measurement. The continuous-wave LiDAR,
on the other hand, focuses a continuous, high-intensity beam at a ﬁxed target range
from where the frequency shift is measured continuously [32]. This allows for fast
data processing but it limits the ability to quickly change the focus range because the
beam needs to be refocused. Generally, the continuous-wave LiDAR has proven to
perform better for shorter ranges (below 300m) compared to pulsed LiDARs [33].
The main stages of the signal processing for a continuous-wave coherent LiDAR
have been summarized in Figure 2.2. The signal processing consists of transforming
9
==PAGE:16==
the beating signal into the frequency domain using the Fast-Fourier-Transformation
(FFT). The resulting Doppler spectrum is typically very noisy, so to improve the
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), spectral averaging is used, which results in a more
distinct Doppler peak, indicating the Doppler wind speed. Finally, the LOS wind
component can be retrieved using a velocity estimation algorithm, e.g. using the
centroid or median method [6].
Two LiDAR systems are used in the present study are both nacelle-mounted
continuous-wave coherent LiDARs. The speciﬁc LiDAR conﬁgurations and formu-
las for estimating horizontal turbine inﬂow will be described further as part of the
experimental setup in section 3.1.
Figure 2.2: Generic outline of the LiDAR wind signal processing from [6].
2.2
Machine learning
This section describes the general functionality of machine learning models, and
more speciﬁcally the ones used in the present study. A major motivation for introduc-
ing machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence is the ability to automatically learn
and map complex dependencies between multiple inputs and outputs. Generally,
we distinguish between two types of machine learning. The ﬁrst uses unsupervised
learning, where no dependent variable is available for mapping any relations. Essen-
tially, the learning is done by the model working on its own to discover relations or
patterns. Typically, this type of machine learning is very useful for descriptive tasks
such as clustering or anomaly detection.
The other type, which is used for most practical problems, is supervised learning.
10
==PAGE:17==
Here, we have a set of descriptive input variables X and a dependent output variable
y mapped through a model:
y = f(X)
(2.2)
This allows for mapping the relation based on observations from both X and y.
In such a case, the training of the model is performed by known output variables
supervising the learning, hence the name. Supervised learning is typically very good
for predictive tasks such as regression, which is the type of problem encountered in
this study.
2.2.1
Artiﬁcial neural networks
There exists a wide variety of different models when it comes to the ﬁeld of machine
learning such as artiﬁcial neural networks (ANN), random forests (RF), and support
vector machines (SVM). In the present study, the focus will be on artiﬁcial neural
networks, which will simply be referred to as neural networks for the remaining part
of the thesis.
A neural network is a type of computing system that roughly tries to mimic the
architecture of the biological neural networks in the brain [34]. The neural network
contains layers of nodes, with each node being individually interconnected to all the
nodes in the neighboring layers. The network always has one input layer and one
output layer. Between the input and output layers, a number of hidden layers can
be speciﬁed. If two or more hidden layers are used, the network is referred to as a
deep neural network (DNN). An example of a generic deep neural network with two
hidden layers is shown in Figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: Example of a deep neural network with two hidden layers.
11
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.4: Basic structure of an artiﬁcial neuron [35].
Each node in the network represents an artiﬁcial neuron that has a number of inputs
and produces a single output, often forwarded to multiple neurons in the next layer.
The basic structure of a neuron is quite simple and has been visualized in Figure 2.4.
Going from inputs to output consist of three main steps:
1. the inputs are weighted individually
2. the weighted inputs are summed together with a bias value
3. the summation is passed through an activation function
Mathematically, the output of neuron i with n inputs, can be calculated as:
yi = f
  
n
∑
k=0
wikxk
!
+bi
!
(2.3)
where f is the activation function, xk and wk are the kth input and corresponding
weight. The bias term is represented by bi and is a critical component in the neuron,
as it allows for shifting the activation function. The activation function can be deﬁned
according to the problem type at hand with typical examples of activation functions
being linear, binary, tanh, or Gaussian [35].
The training of a neural network essentially consists of adjusting the weights and
biases for each neuron to give the highest accuracy, i.e. minimizing the error between
the model-predicted outputs and the true outputs. The error measure is deﬁned with
a cost or loss function which is periodically evaluated during training, in the same
fashion as a traditional optimization problem. Different learning algorithms can be
implemented for training a model depending on the problem type. When the neural
network was originally introduced, it was actually quite difﬁcult to establish a robust
12
==PAGE:19==
and effective optimization method for adjusting the weights and biases. However, in
1986, an article was published introducing a back-propagation training algorithm for
computing the gradient [36]. The algorithm works by initializing the weights and
biases, e.g. using random guesses, from where the error of the output layer prediction
is then calculated. The algorithm then moves backward through the hidden layers,
calculates the error contribution from each connection, and adjusts the weights and
biases, e.g. using gradient descent. The process is repeated until a certain level of
accuracy or loss has been reached.
As indicated above, there are quite a few parameters (hence choices) that are involved
in the creation of a neural network, and for machine learning models in general. We
denote these as hyperparameters which are further separated into two categories.
Firstly, the learning hyperparameters which affects the learning process of the model.
This includes learning rates, batch sizes, and training epochs and, secondly, the
model hyperparameters which affects the actual topology of the model. The model
hyperparameters are ﬁxed and do not change during training. They may directly
inﬂuence the performance of the model and conﬁguration of these can be quite
challenging. Examples of model hyperparameters are the number of hidden layers
and nodes, weight regularization, and activation functions.
Recurrent neural networks
The choice of neural network highly depends on the problem type. For regular
regression problems where the dataset consists of a collection of observations, inde-
pendent of time, the above-mentioned traditional feedforward neural network is very
useful. However, there is a considerate difference between these types of machine
learning problems and the ones concerning time series, where observations are taken
sequentially in time [37]. Time series problems add a complexity related to temporal
dependency. This might be introduced through temporal dependency between inputs
but also between outputs or a combination. To add on top of this, the temporal
dependency might span different temporal structures such as short-term trends or
even seasonal effects. The traditional feedforward neural networks do not store or
pass any information backward. This also means that if historical data is passed to a
feedforward neural network, it does not consider any temporal dependencies which
can be an unfortunate disadvantage. For that reason, it might not be very useful in
terms of time series forecasting, where we typically study a phenomenon that have a
strong auto-correlation. This is especially present in the ﬁeld of meteorology [38].
In this case, it might be appropriate to use a neural network that does consider tem-
13
==PAGE:20==
poral dependency between samples, referred to a recurrent neural network (RNN).
These classes of neural networks have the advantage of using internal state memory
(hidden states) to process sequences and allow for information to persist [39]. This
gives a dynamic behavior that is very suited for time series forecasting.
This thesis will implement a speciﬁc type of recurrent neural network, namely the
long short term memory (LSTM). The principle behind LSTM was originally intro-
duced in 1997 [40] and has since been presented in a couple of different variations.
The applications of LSTM span across multiple disciplines such as speech recogni-
tion, robotic control, image captioning, and of course, time series forecasting [41].
One of the main design objectives of the LSTM was to overcome the problem of
long-term dependencies which other recurrent neural networks typically also struggle
with. The lack of ability to map long-term dependencies is caused by the vanishing
gradient problem in the backpropagating learning algorithm. It occurs because the
gradients have a tendency to decrease as the algorithm propagates backward through
the layers, thereby decreasing the learning from earlier layers. This effectively results
in many recurrent neural networks having a short-term memory which in certain
cases is also desired [39].
The LSTM seeks to overcome the problems through the introduction of the cell state
and its three gates. The common structure of an LSTM unit is outlined in Figure 2.5.
Figure 2.5: Basic structure of a LSTM cell from [42]
The ﬁrst gate (forget gate) decides which information should be kept and which
should be discarded. This is done based on the ﬁrst sigmoid function which scales
information from the previous hidden states and the current input to a value between
0 (for forgetting) and 1 (for keeping). The hidden states contain information on the
previous inputs. The second gate (input gate) is used for updating the cell state. It
14
==PAGE:21==
consists of two parts; the ﬁrst part passes the previous hidden states and the current
input through a tanh function thereby scaling the values between -1 and 1 which
helps regulate the network. The second part is actually another forget gate also with
a sigmoid function. The output from the sigmoid function is multiplied with the
output from the tanh function to determine which input information to keep or forget.
The cell state can then be calculated based on the previous cell state and outputs
from the forget and input gates. The updated cell state is then passed on to the next
timestep. Finally, we have the output gate which determines the hidden states that
will be passed on to the next timestep. The output gate is also composed of two parts;
the ﬁrst part is a forget gate that passes the previous hidden states and the current
input through a sigmoid function. The second part takes the updated cell state and
passes it through a tanh function. The outputs from the sigmoid and tanh functions
are then multiplied to give the next hidden states [42].
The full network is then constructed in a similar fashion as for the traditional feedfor-
ward network in Figure 2.3, however, the number of parameters in an LSTM layer is
four times that of the traditional feedforward network because of the four interacting
layers.
15
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 3
Methodology
The ﬁrst step towards creating reliable and useful surrogate models is acquiring
and preparing high-quality data. This chapter describes the experimental setup and
introduces the data and models used throughout the thesis. This includes a thorough
presentation of the experimental setup, data acquisition, preparation, ﬁltering, and
modeling process.
The measurement campaign was carried out as part of the EUDP project LiDAR-
assisted control for REliability IMprovement (LICOREIM). The overall purpose
of this project is to develop and demonstrate LiDAR-assisted wind turbine control
strategies for improving overall wind turbine performance [43].
3.1
Experimental setup
The experimental data used in this thesis have been conducted in the period between
01/08-2020 and 01/12-2020. The test site is DTU Risø Campus which is located
next to Roskilde Fjord, Denmark (UTM coordinates 55.68629◦N, 12.09759◦E). A
geographical map of the area is shown in Figure 3.1. In addition, the locations of the
wind turbine and the corresponding meteorological mast have been marked.
The terrain at the test site is dominated by farmland with roughness length estimated
to z0 = 0.05 m [44]. Roskilde Fjord is located in the western direction of the test
wind turbine, thus providing a wind sector with good conditions. The direction of
the fjord gives a general positive terrain slope towards the wind turbines leading to a
small speed-up of the wind. Several buildings are located very near the wind turbine
in a north-northeast direction. In addition, a nearby Vestas V27 wind turbine has
been operating during the measurement period. This turbine is located south-west of
the test turbine and causes signiﬁcant wake effects.
16
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.1: Map showing the test site and the location of the wind turbine and meteorological
mast.
3.1.1
DTU V52 wind turbine
The wind turbine used in the measurement campaign is a Vestas V52 turbine, see
Figure 3.2. The wind turbine is a test turbine owned by DTU and is used for various
different research purposes. The turbine is a variable speed, collective pitch control
turbine with a rated power of 850 kW and belongs in the IEC class Ia [45, 46]. The
rotor diameter is 52 m, covering a swept area of 2124 m2 and the hub height is at
44 m height. The wind turbine has a cut-in wind speed of 4 m/s and a cut-out wind
speed of 25 m/s.
Figure 3.2: Photograph of the V52 test turbine erected at DTU Risø. Image source: www.
vindenergi.dtu.dk
17
==PAGE:24==
Strain gauge system
Structural loads are among the parameters that are very difﬁcult to measure accurately.
There are typically a lot of different conditions that must be taken into consideration
to ensure high quality of the load measurements [47]. The structural loads on the
test turbine are measured using a strain gauge system. Strain gauges are able to
measure the strain on an object by utilizing the change in electrical resistance of a
metallic foil pattern as it deforms. When an object is deformed, the foil stretches
or compresses which changes the electrical resistance. The change of electrical
resistance is then measured, e.g. using a Wheatstone bridge. Finally, the change in
resistance is converted to meaningful load values using a transfer function which
consists of a gain and an offset [4]. A costly and time-consuming disadvantage of
strain gauges is the requirement of initial calibration and frequent re-calibration to
determine the transfer function. Typically, the strain gauge sensors are calibrated
using blade pull and/or gravity loads which allows for determining the gain and
offset from known loads.
The structural loads on the DTU test turbine at Risø have been indirectly validated
on multiple occasions showing good coherence [48, 18, 49]. The measured channels
from the strain gauge system and the operating system of the wind turbine are
summarized in Table 3.1 below.
Table 3.1: Summary of measurement channels related to the wind turbine. In the calibration
columns, a "-" indicates that the channel is a direct measure.
Channel
Database name
Description
Calibration
Blade ﬂapwise
bending moment
[kNm]
MxA1
strain gauge (r = 1.4m)
G = 723.5
O = −524.9
Blade edgewise
bending moment
[kNm]
MyA1
strain gauge (r = 1.4m)
G = −756.7
O = −235.2
Tower base fore-aft
bending moment
[kNm]
MxTB
strain gauge at
tower bottom
G = −15953.4
O = −1217.1
Tower base side-side
bending moment
[kNm]
MyTB
strain gauge at
tower bottom
G = −15953.4
O = 3413.2
Electrical power
[kW]
PowAct
Net available power
-
Rotational speed
[RPM]
ROT
low speed shaft
-
Pitch angle
[deg]
pitch
collective pitch angle
-
Yaw angle
[deg]
yaw
yaw angle north-aligned
-
18
==PAGE:25==
Meteorological mast
A meteorological mast has been installed approximately 120 m (2.3 D) west-
northwest of the wind turbine, which corresponds to the prevailing wind direction of
the site. The meteorological mast has numerous sensors installed, but in relation to
the scope of this thesis, it is primarily wind speed and wind direction measurements
that are of relevance. The wind speed is measured at 31, 44, 57, 70 m and the wind
direction is measured at 41 m.
3.1.2
LiDAR system
For this measurement campaign, two different LiDAR systems, both manufactured
by Windar Photonics A/S, have been employed; a 2-beamed and a 4-beamed LiDAR.
Both LiDARs have been mounted on the nacelle of the V52 wind turbine measuring
directly in front of the turbine. A major advantage of nacelle-mounted LiDARs is
the independence to wind direction as the LiDAR is always yawing with the nacelle.
This gives a much higher availability compared to wind speeds measured with a
meteorological mast where only a limited wind section provides coherent wind
conditions.
The 2-beamed LiDAR measures at a focus distance of 37 m which results in a
measuring plane located 32 m (0.6 D) ahead of the wind turbine rotor. The 4-beamed
LiDAR measures at a focus distance of 62 m resulting in a measuring plane located
59 m (1.1 D) ahead of the rotor. The sampling rate of both LiDAR systems is 1Hz,
however, the scan time per beam is 0.5 s and 0.25 s for the 2- and 4-beamed LiDAR,
respectively. This means that it should be possible to upsample the 2-beamed LiDAR
to 2Hz and the 4-beamed LiDAR to 4Hz, on the condition that the individual LOS
samples within each second are shifted.
The speciﬁcations of the two LiDAR systems have been summarized in Table 3.2.
19
==PAGE:26==
Table 3.2: Speciﬁcations of the 2- and 4-beam LiDAR systems.
2-beam
4-beam
Focus distance d f
[m]
37
62
Rayleigh length zR
[m]
2.1
6.0
Half-cone opening angle α
[deg]
30
18
Azimuth angle
[deg]
90 & 270
45, 135, 225 & 315
Distance focus points - rotor ∆x
[m]
32
59
Distance LiDAR - rotor dNac
[m]
≈1
≈1
Scan time per beam
[s]
0.5
0.25
Sampling rate
[Hz]
1
1
Reconstruction of three-dimensional wind
Figure 3.3: Conﬁgurations of the LiDAR beams. Blue is the 4-beamed LiDAR and red is the
2-beamed LiDAR.
As mentioned in section 2.1, the LiDARs are able to measure only the radial wind
speeds along each beam. However, in many applications it is more meaningful to
express the wind in terms of the three-dimensional wind vector of form:
u(x,t) =


u(x,t)
v(x,t)
w(x,t)


(3.1)
where u represents the horizontal component, v represents the horizontal lateral
component and w represents the vertical component, all as a function of space and
20
==PAGE:27==
time.
The simplest wind speed that can be derived from the LiDARs is the rotor-averaged
wind speed. This is possible under the assumption that the turbine is perfectly aligned
with the prevailing wind direction and that there is no vertical wind speed component,
i.e. v = 0 and w = 0. In that case, the rotor-averaged wind speed can simply be
estimated as the horizontal wind speed component averaged across the number of
beams:
Ue f f = 1
B
B
∑
i=i
VLOS,i
cosα
(3.2)
where B is the number of beams and VLOS,i represents the line-of-sight wind speed
for beam i.
Besides the rotor-average wind speed, it is also possible to retrieve a multi-dimensional
wind vector when using multiple beams. This can be done using pairs of horizon-
tally aligned beams (VLOSleft and VLOSright) where the following ﬂow conditions are
assumed:
1. It is assumed that there is no vertical wind, i.e. w = 0.
2. It is assumed that the local wind is homogeneous across the spatial difference
between the focus points of the two beams, i.e. the wind components u and v
are identical at the two focus points.
Following the above assumptions, it is possible to retrieve the horizontal wind speed
components based on the LiDAR geometry using a simple linear system. For two
beams, the linear system is:
"
VLOSleft
VLOSleft
#
=
"
cos(α)
−sin(α)
cos(α)
sin(α)
#"
u
v
#
(3.3)
Which can be solved to give the two horizontal components:
u =
VLOSleft +VLOSright
2cos(α)
v =
VLOSright −VLOSle ft
2sin(α)
(3.4)
From these two components it is also possible to calculate the yaw misalignment and
the horizontal wind speed scalar:
U =
p
u2 +v2
φ = arctan
v
u

(3.5)
For a wind turbine perfectly aligned with the wind direction, the v-component would
be 0 and u = U.
A similar approach can be used for the 4-beamed LiDAR, only now the 4-beamed
21
==PAGE:28==
system is treated as two separate subsystems consisting of the two upper beams
and the two lower beams. This allows for retrieving the horizontal wind speed
components at two different heights [50]. Theoretically, it should also be possible to
retrieve the three-dimensional wind vector based on a linear system utilizing three
beams at a time, thus allowing for four different combinations. This approach is
described in Appendix A, but it was found that it entailed some uncertainty due to
measuring height instability.
A neat feature of estimating the wind speed at two heights is the ability to estimate
wind shear. Wind shear is the change of horizontal wind speed as a function of height.
Wind shear is a critical wind parameter, especially for large wind turbines where the
vertical position of the blade tip might span several hundred meters. In terms of the
scope of this thesis, the wind shear might also be of relevance as input to a surrogate
model. The wind shear is typically characterized by the general expression:
U2
U1
=
h2
h1
α
(3.6)
where α is the wind shear exponent, U1 is the wind speed measured at height h1 and
U2 is the wind speed measured at height h2.
Finally, it should be mentioned that the above derivations do not take into con-
sideration any wind turbine tilt. In such case, transformation matrices should be
applied.
3.2
Qualitative data exploration
Before starting on the data ﬁltering and modeling, it is always advised to do a
qualitative exploration of data. This gives an idea of the speciﬁc wind climate of
the investigated site during the measurement period. It should be stressed that the
following data exploration covers only the data acquired during the measurement
period (01/08-2020 to 30/11-2020) and can therefore be signiﬁcantly impacted by
seasonal or inter-annual trends, which is not captured in this relatively short period.
Figures 3.4-3.6 show distribution plots of the 10-min wind statistics measured
from the meteorological mast during the study. Using the 10-min mean wind
speed, it is assumed that the wind speed distribution is also representative of the
location of the wind turbine. Figure 3.4 shows the normalized histogram of the wind
speeds measured at 44 m height, corresponding to the hub height of the turbine. In
addition, the Weibull parameters have been ﬁtted to the observations using maximum-
likelihood estimation. It is seen that the most common wind speeds are between 4-6
22
==PAGE:29==
m/s and that no extreme wind speeds have been observed during the measurement
period.
Figure 3.4: Distribution of wind speed measured from the meteorological mast at 44 m.
Figure 3.5 shows the distribution of wind directions and the wind speed distributed
across wind directions. It is observed that the prevailing wind direction is southwest,
however, the highest wind speeds are seen coming from west-northwest.
Figure 3.5: Distribution of wind direction measured from the meteorological mast at 41 m.
23
==PAGE:30==
As previously mentioned, the location of the test site gives rise to direction-dependent
variations in turbulence intensity due to obstacles and the terrain. The turbulence
intensity describes the wind speed ﬂuctuations relative to the average wind speed,
typically measured over 10-minutes:
TI = σU
µU
(3.7)
To assess the inﬂow conditions, the turbulence intensity is plotted as a function of
wind direction in Figure 3.6. It should be stressed that the ﬁgure is based on measure-
ments from the meteorological mast and is therefore not completely representative
of the wind turbine. This is especially seen by the big spike at 100◦which, in fact, is
caused by the wake of the test turbine itself. As expected, the wind coming from the
fjord (west) tends to have a low turbulence intensity as the ﬂow from this direction is
uninterrupted.
Figure 3.6: Distribution of turbulence intensity as function of wind direction measured from
the meteorological mast.
In addition to assessing the wind climate of the test site, it is also of relevance to
do a qualitative exploration of the structural loads measured on the wind turbine
blades. Figure 3.7 shows statistics of the root bending moments of the three blades
in both ﬂap- and edgewise direction. The bending moments are plotted as a function
of the 10-min mean wind speed measured by a nacelle-mounted sonic anemometer.
The data has been ﬁltered to only show measurements under normal operation. As
expected, the loads on each of the three blades are very similar in appearance. From
the ﬁgures, it can also be seen which wind speed regions give rise to the biggest
loads. For both ﬂap- and edgewise direction, this is observed to occur between 10-12
m/s. In this region, the wind turbine is still producing below rated power and is
24
==PAGE:31==
therefore operating with an optimal pitch angle. However, when operating at this
pitch angle, the blades and rotor are also taking the highest load. This wind speed
region is where the turbine is most vulnerable to extreme gust events and this region
is therefore of particular interest. The edgewise bending moments are also similar
for all three blades. Here, we see a much more signiﬁcant difference between the
minimum and maximum observation which is caused by the self-weight of the blade
changing with each rotation. In addition, the mean edgewise bending moment is seen
to have a small peak around the same wind speed region as for the ﬂapwise bending
moment. This is caused by the ﬂap- and edgewise bending moments being sums
of the normal and tangential loads. The proportion of normal and tangential loads
that go into the ﬂap- and edgewise bending moments is a function of pitch angle,
therefore we see some normal loading going into the edgewise bending moment
causing this behavior.
Figure 3.7: 10-min minimum, maximum and mean blade root bending moments as function
of wind speed.
A similar plot can be made for the electrical power and pitch angle, which is shown
in Figure 3.8. The bin-averaged power graphs represent the measured power curve of
25
==PAGE:32==
the wind turbine. Below rated wind speed we clearly see the power being proportional
to the wind speed cubed as described in Equation 1.1. After rated wind speed is
reached, the wind turbine controller limits the power generation to rated power by
collectively pitching the blades.
Figure 3.8: 10-min minimum, maximum and mean electrical power and pitch angle.
3.3
Statistical measures
When creating forecasting models, it is necessary to deﬁne statistical measures and
diagnostic tools that allow for a fair evaluation of the models. In terms of forecasting
models, the goodness of a model can be identiﬁed from three distinct characteristics
[51]:
• consistency; forecasts should be based on the best judgment of the forecaster,
with a basis in the knowledge available at the time
• quality; forecast conditions should correspond closely to observed conditions
at the valid time of the forecast
• value; forecasts should bring additional beneﬁts when used as input to decision-
making
The most simple statistical measure is the forecast error εt+k|t:
εt+k|t = yt+k|t −ˆyt+k|t
(3.8)
where yt+k|t is the observation at time t for time t +k and ˆyt+k|t is the forecast at time
t for time t +k.
From the forecast error, follows a number of statistical measures that each provides
information about the performance of a model. The bias as function of lead time k,
is given by:
bias(k) = 1
T
T
∑
t=1
εt+k|t
(3.9)
26
==PAGE:33==
The mean absolute error (MAE) as function of lead time k is given by:
MAE(k) = 1
T
T
∑
t=1
|εt+k|t|
(3.10)
Mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) as function of lead time k is:
MAPE(k) = 1
T
T
∑
t=1

εt+k|t
yt+k|t

(3.11)
The root-mean-square error (RMSE) as function of lead time k is given by:
RMSE(k) =
s
1
T
T
∑
t=1
ε2
t+k|t
(3.12)
Although the above measures are given as a function of lead time, they do also apply
to generic problems for comparison between two sample sets. In some cases, it can
also allow for a more fair comparison by normalizing the above measures either by
the true mean or the true minimum-maximum range.
In addition to the statistical measures listed above, the performance of the surrogate
models will also be challenged against a reference model using a simple persistent
forecasting strategy. The persistence reference model uses a very simple procedure
where the observation at time t is used as forecast for all lead times:
ˆyt+k|t = yt
for k = 1,2,...
(3.13)
Although simple, the persistence model turns out to be a very strong competitor
when working with meteorological data. However, it should be stressed, that the
comparison between a surrogate model using only LiDAR measurements as inputs
and a persistent reference model using historical measurements of the targets as
inputs, cannot be used for a one-to-one comparison. Instead, it can provide a good
indication to, how far ahead in time a surrogate model outperforms the persistent
reference model.
3.4
Data acquisition and preprocessing
The following section describes how the data are collected and transformed into a
form suitable for modeling and the full data ﬂow from acquisition to ﬁnal form is
described in detail. Readying the data for training and validation is a signiﬁcant step
towards creating robust and accurate surrogate models and ensures that erroneous
or irregular data is not inﬁltrating the training process and thus model performance.
27
==PAGE:34==
The initial data acquisition ﬂow is visualized in Figure 3.9 which shows how the four
measurement systems are synchronized to match the high sampling frequency of 50
Hz which is used for the strain gauge system. The 50 Hz synchronized data is then
stored together with basic 10-min statistics containing mean, minimum, maximum,
and standard deviations.
Figure 3.9: Data acquisition ﬂow from measurement systems to database storage.
The next step in the process is to apply a base ﬁlter using queries on the 10-min
statistics. The purpose of this ﬁlter is to ensure adequate inﬂow direction and normal
operation of the turbine. In terms of power forecasting, it does not make sense
to include data where the turbine is not operational. This is mainly due to the
functionality of the regressive surrogate models, which do not distinguish between
binary states such as operational or not operational. It could be argued, that the
structural load forecasting is still somewhat relevant when the turbine is not operating.
This is obviously caused by the wind still imposing structural loads on the wind
turbine during standstill. However, during standstill, the turbine will typically be
pitched at an angle where loads are not very critical. For the present study, where the
objective is to develop a surrogate model for forecasting short-term electrical power
and blade ﬂapwise bending moment, non-operational data are not included.
The wind direction sector was chosen to be between 265◦and 395◦which showed
nice and low turbulence intensities as shown in Figure 3.6. To ensure turbine
operation, a threshold was applied to the rotational speed, the electrical power, and
the pitch angle. The reason for the relatively high wind speed threshold is to ensure
that the distributions of the electrical power and ﬂapwise bending moment are not too
skewed. Ideally, the two target features would be uniformly distributed to avoid any
biases but it was found that this threshold worked well. The ﬁlters are summarized
below.
28
==PAGE:35==
Table 3.3: First query applied to the 10-min database.
Parameter
Condition
Wind speed
[m/s]
4 < U
Wind direction
[deg]
265 < θ < 295
El. power
[kW]
0 < P
Rotational speed
[RPM]
16 < Ω
Collective pitch
[deg]
θp < 23
After the above ﬁltering was applied to the 10-min data, the resulting timestamps
were extracted and used to make a query for the 50 Hz database. That way only the
relevant 50 Hz data were retrieved which signiﬁcantly reduced the data quantities
and thereby the computational time. The result was a total of 981 10-min periods
corresponding to 5.58 % of the available periods in the entire measurement period.
Appendix B shows a more time-structured overview of the chosen periods. A caption
matrix is visualized in Figure 3.10 which shows the distribution of wind speeds
and turbulence intensities for the chosen periods. We see how the majority of the
observations are clustered around the overall mean wind speed of 7.97 m/s and the
mean turbulence intensity of 11.40 %.
Figure 3.10: Caption matrix showing the wind speed and turbulence intensity distribution of
the ﬁnal 10-min periods.
29
==PAGE:36==
Figure 3.11 shows a 20-second example of the 50 Hz synchronized data. The ﬁgure
shows the electric power, the ﬂapwise bending moment of the three blades, and the
LOS wind speeds from the two LiDAR systems. As mentioned, the LiDAR systems
sample at 1 Hz which gives the square-like behavior when synchronized with the 50
Hz data. Depending on the sampling and synchronization of the LiDAR system, it is
possible to make the LOS sample shifted and thereby allow for an upsampling to a
frequency determined by the number of beams, i.e. 2 Hz for the 2-beamed LiDAR
and 4 Hz for the 4-beamed LiDAR. However, as seen in the ﬁgure, the 2-beamed
LOS wind speeds are sampled synchronously and can therefore not be upsampled.
For the 4-beamed LiDAR, it can be seen that the sampling of the four LOS wind
speeds is done asynchronously, which allows for upsampling. However, from a
qualitative assessment, it was chosen to only upsample to 2 Hz for the 4-beamed
LiDAR and keep the 1 Hz resolution for the 2-beamed LiDAR.
Figure 3.11: Example of a unprocessed 50 Hz time series of power, ﬂapwise bending moment
and LOS wind speeds from the 2- and 4-beamed LiDAR systems.
30
==PAGE:37==
It should also be observed, that some LiDAR samples are deemed invalid, indicated
by a 0-value (represented by the sudden vertical drops in Figure 3.11). This invalidity
is caused by the blade blockage of the beams. Within a half-second, each beam
samples 18 times and if a sufﬁcient share of these samplings indicates the presence
of a blade, the half-second is ﬂagged and given a 0-value. Blade blockage occurs
much more frequently for the 4-beamed LiDAR because of the smaller opening
angle. It is also found that the two top pair beams of the 4-beamed LiDAR had
a signiﬁcantly lower availability compared to the bottom pair. This is most likely
caused by a variation in the blade surface area between the top and bottom pairs.
In this thesis, the problem with invalid LiDAR samples is approached with a zero-
tolerance strategy. This strategy is implemented by simply ﬁling all 50 Hz LiDAR
samples that contain a 0-value with NaNs, which allows for an effective ﬁlter
technique later on. The advantage of this approach is that, if resampling or moving
bins are introduced later on, there will be no invalid data leaking into a bin, thereby
causing a bias. Another strategy could be to interpolate invalid data but it was found
that this approach was not very reliable for longer periods of invalid data. Therefore,
the zero-tolerance strategy was used.
As previously mentioned, one of the main objectives of this thesis is to evaluate how
well both the 2- and 4-beamed LiDAR systems can forecast electrical power and
blade ﬂapwise bending moments. For any forecast to be feasible, this requires a down-
sampling of the wind turbine channels to match those of the LiDAR systems. Also,
it is of interest to investigate how down-sampling affects the target features, i.e. how
much information we lose about the original signals. There exist several different
methods for resampling time series but in this thesis, the downsampling is performed
using linear interpolation. A way of evaluating the effects of resampling is by
comparing the error between the original 50 Hz signal and the resampled signal. This
is illustrated in Figure 3.12 which shows; (a) time series of the electrical power and
ﬂapwise bending moment for different resampling frequencies and (b) normalized
mean absolute percentage error between the 50 Hz data and data resampled to lower
resolution.
31
==PAGE:38==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.12: (a) Example of a 20-seconds time series of power and ﬂapwise bending moment
showing how the signal changes when resampling to lower frequencies. (b) mean absolute
percentage error calculated between the original 50 Hz signals and the signals downsampled
to a various lower frequencies.
From the ﬁgures it can be seen that the signal of the electrical power is not signif-
icantly different when depicted by a lower temporal resolution. The difference is
more signiﬁcant for the ﬂapwise bending moment which, when downsampled, only
captures the overall trend of the signal. It should be stressed that when downsam-
pling the signal of the ﬂapwise bending moment, the peaks, which are of especial
importance in terms of extreme load mitigation, are not very well rendered by the
downsampled signals. Resampling to 1 Hz results in a mean absolute percentage
error of 1.06% for electrical power and 5.37% for ﬂapwise bending moment. The
corresponding values when resampling to 2 Hz are 0.78% and 3.41%, respectively.
Figure 3.13: Histogram of the measured power where
the three erroneous power values (225, 277 and 491
kW) can be seen as unusual peaks.
After removing invalid LiDAR
measurements and resampling
the 2- and 4-beamed data to 1
Hz and 2 Hz, respectively, a
second ﬁlter was applied. The
second ﬁlter is required to re-
move unwanted or erroneous
measurements within each 10-
min period. The ﬁlter is more
or less identical to the one ap-
plied on 10-min statistics, ne-
glecting the wind speed and di-
rection thresholds. In addition
to the above-mentioned ﬁlters, it was found from a visual inspection of the power
32
==PAGE:39==
distribution, that there existed certain power values that had an unusually high num-
ber of occurrences (see Figure 3.13). The values were deemed erroneous and were
therefore discarded from the remaining data.
3.4.1
Sequential transformation
Figure 3.14: Array structure of input data for
LSTM network.
As mentioned in section 2.2, an LSTM
network contains memory blocks. For
the memory to be meaningful it requires
the dataset to be continuous. The result-
ing 10-min periods from the ﬁrst ﬁlter
(Table 3.3), were indeed not continuous.
For that reason, the discontinuous peri-
ods were patched together using NaNs.
This operation does not add any value
to the dataset but it allows for sequenc-
ing the data. Every LSTM layer expects
the input data to be structured in a speciﬁc three-dimensional shape consisting of
samples, timesteps, and features, see Figure 3.14). It is the timestep dimension
that is unique for recurrent neural networks which allow for introducing memory.
This speciﬁc format can be achieved by using sequential transformation. Table 3.4
shows an example of a dataset that has been sequentially transformed. Using this
approach for sequential transformation, it should be noticed that the target value
at each timestep (except for the ﬁrst and last rows containing NaNs) is actually
predicted nout times at different lead times. Similar, the input features are all past
observations starting from t −1 and all the way to t −nlag. It should also be noticed
that there will always be at least one timestep between the inputs and outputs, making
it a forecast in a time-wise sense. However, because of the physical distance between
the measurement plane of the LiDARs and the rotor plane of the turbine, using too
few time lags might effectively make the forecast a hindcast.
This general transformation is useful for many different applications as the param-
eters nlag and nout are arbitrary. In terms of applying this transformation, to our
speciﬁc problem, it might be relevant to limit nlag and nout, i.e. including too few
steps might not provide the model with enough information but including too many
steps might make the model computational inefﬁcient. The physical dimensions of
the experimental setup and the operational wind speed range of the wind turbine give
a good estimation of the time scales that we expect to be of relevance for the model.
33
==PAGE:40==
Table 3.4: Practical example of sequential transformation of a 10-minute time series with
two input variables and one target variable. The transformation is performed using three
historical timesteps (nlag) and three predictive timesteps nout. Red shade indicates cells where
the transformation is not applicable, either because of missing historical or future values.
t
xt−1
1
xt−1
2
xt−2
1
xt−2
2
xt−3
1
xt−3
2
yt
1
yt+1
1
yt+2
1
2020-08-01 12:30:00
NaN
NaN
NaN
NaN
NaN
NaN
189.62
173.60
168.57
2020-08-01 12:30:01
6.34
5.25
NaN
NaN
NaN
NaN
173.60
168.57
181.02
2020-08-01 12:30:02
5.92
4.42
6.34
5.25
NaN
NaN
168.57
181.02
...
2020-08-01 12:30:03
3.37
4.36
5.92
4.42
6.34
5.25
181.02
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
2020-08-01 12:39:56
7.45
6.89
...
...
...
...
268.31
245.89
263.66
2020-08-01 12:39:57
8.01
7.11
7.45
6.89
...
...
245.89
263.66
257.12
2020-08-01 12:39:58
7.78
6.34
8.01
7.11
7.45
6.89
263.66
257.12
NaN
2020-08-01 12:39:59
9.29
5.73
7.78
6.34
8.01
7.11
257.12
NaN
NaN
The effect of changing nlag, in terms of forecasting performance, have been visualized
in Figure 3.15 and 3.16. These ﬁgures show heat maps of the mean absolute
percentage error and the percentage error standard deviation when using a ﬁxed
forecast horizon and a varying number of time lags. The results have been generated
from a simple LSTM network based only on LOS wind speeds and the scores should
therefore only be used for illustrative reasons. From the ﬁgures, we see a very clear
trend in terms of forecast horizon which is visible for both the 2- and 4-beamed
LiDAR models. The model based on the 2-beamed LiDAR appears to perform best
for a forecast horizon around 1-5 seconds whereas the model based on the 4-beamed
LiDAR performs best for a forecast horizon of 4-10 seconds. The forecast horizon
is obviously affected a lot by the wind speed and the distance between the LiDAR
measurement plane and the rotor plane. We also see that both models perform
better when including a sufﬁcient number of time lags. This is especially visible
for the model based on the 4-beamed LiDAR which, when using very few time
lags, performs very poorly. As previously mentioned, this is caused by the forecast
effectively becoming a hindcast for too small time lags, e.g. the ﬂapwise bending
moment measured at time ti would actually be induced by LiDAR wind speed
measured at some previous time ti−n where n is an unknown step size dependent on
the time delay. It is also seen that the performance of both models reaches a number
of lags where it does not improve further by including more time lags. Based on
the above assessment it was chosen to use 10 seconds of time lag and for forecast
horizon (nlag = nout = 10 s) for the model using inputs from the 2-beamed LiDAR.
For the corresponding model based on the 4-beamed LiDAR, it was chosen to use
20 seconds of time lag and for forecast horizon (nlag = nout = 20 s).
34
==PAGE:41==
Figure 3.15: Using 2-beamed LiDAR VLOS as input for varying lags and a ﬁxed horizon.
Figure 3.16: Using 4-beamed LiDAR VLOS as input for varying lags and a ﬁxed horizon.
35
==PAGE:42==
3.4.2
Feature selection
Feature selection is the process of determining which features contributes the most to
accurately forecast the target variables. If too few features are included, the surrogate
models will have a hard time mapping the relation between inputs and outputs. On
the other hand, if too many features are included it might effectively decrease the
accuracy of the surrogate models. For that reason, proper feature selection is an
important step towards creating robust and accurate models. Feature selection can
be based solely on data-driven decisions but typically some intuition and trial and
error are required to determine the best features.
One way of evaluating the importance of a feature is by calculating its correlation
with the target features. For this purpose, we introduce the Spearman rank-order
correlation coefﬁcient rs which is non-parametric and therefore works better for
monotonic relations which are not necessarily linear [52]. Figure 3.18 shows the
Spearman correlation coefﬁcient calculated between the available LiDAR features
and the two target features with a lag of 4 seconds for the 2-beamed LiDAR features
and 7.5 seconds for the 4-beamed LiDAR features. This lag is only used for illus-
trative purposes and is based on the advection wind speed being approximately 8
m/s. It should be noticed that two additional features have been added in ﬁgures
representing a moving average and standard deviation of the horizontal wind speed
based on a 60 seconds window. We generally see a high correlation for features
that are strongly related to the horizontal wind speed, e.g. the individual LOS wind
speeds and the u-components. This is also expected when considering the horizontal
wind speed to be the main driver for both electrical power and blade ﬂapwise bending
moment.
Figure 3.17: Snapshot of the wind ﬁeld at the rotor plane showing the LiDAR focus points.
36
==PAGE:43==
From a qualitative analysis of the individual LOS wind speeds, it was found that they
were able to capture local wind speed ﬂuctuations which were not fully captured by
the traditional wind components from Equation 3.4 and 3.5. This is because each
focus points of the two LiDARs are located at different places across the rotor plane
as illustrated in Figure 3.17. We also see the variation in rotor-local wind speed.
Figure 3.18: Spearman correlation coefﬁcient for
The above assessment of the Spearman correlation coefﬁcients could be used for
a completely data-driven ﬁlter feature selection, e.g. by choosing only the ﬁve
most correlated features. However, one of the drawbacks of using data-driven
feature selection is the neglecting of multicollinearity. This issue occurs when the
input features are correlated with each other and can have a negative impact on the
surrogate model. In many observational experiments, it is very difﬁcult to completely
avoid multicollinearity, as the data are typically somewhat correlated by nature, e.g.
we expect the LOS wind speeds to be naturally correlated as they measure the same
local wind. The ﬁnal feature selection was based on a trial and error process where
different combinations of features were used and the performance was compared.
The features that were ultimately found to be performing best, and therefore used in
the forecasts, are summarized below:
37
==PAGE:44==
VLOS:
all individual LOS wind speeds
U:
horizontal wind speed scalar
φ:
yaw misalignment
σU
60s:
moving standard deviation of horizontal
wind speed based on a 60 s window
α:
wind shear exponent which is only
available for the 4-beamed LiDAR
After choosing the ﬁnal features, the modeling can be initialized. The ﬁrst step is
to divide the dataset into a training set and a test set. In some cases, a validation is
also created with the purpose of validating the accuracy of the model during training,
e.g. to avoid over-ﬁtting. However, in this thesis, the test set was also used for
validation during training, and a designated validation set was therefore not created.
The training/test split was chosen to be an 80%/20% split and the splitting was done
using random selection which is possible after the sequential transformation has
been performed. This ensured more or less identical characteristics of the training
and test sets which is critical in terms of creating a generic and representative model.
After splitting the data, they were scaled using a min-max normalization to scale
the data to values between -1 and 1. Practically, the scaler is ﬁtted to the training
data only, and then both training and test sets are normalized with that scaler. It is
important that the scaling is done after splitting the data into training and test sets.
This is done to prevent information about the test set, leaking into the model, thereby
creating a biased model.
As previously mentioned, real-life time series typically contain some sort of invalid
or missing data. This often results in a discontinuity in the time series where certain
periods of data are missing or invalid. When working with LSTM networks, it
is quite essential that the sequential transformation is performed on a continuous
dataset. If not, the network might model incorrect temporal dependencies between
observations which can be harmful to the performance. To ensure continuity in the
time series, it is possible to pad the missing or invalid timestamps. Padding is very
useful for ensuring continuity in a time series but does not add new information.
Padding can be done through different methods which might be more or less useful,
depending on the problem. The type of padding also determines when the scaling
should be performed. If the padding is done with the aim of masking the values, it
should be applied after the scaling. This way, the padding value is not recognized
as a true value and is not scaled. Oppositely, if the padded value is based on an
average of a prior observation, it represents a physical value and should therefore
be included before the scaling. In this thesis, the padding was done using masking
38
==PAGE:45==
and was therefore performed after scaling. The padding value was chosen to be
999 which is signiﬁcantly different from the scaled range between -1 and 1 and is
therefore easily identiﬁed by the masking layer. This allows for the surrogate model
to identify all the values that have been padded and then skip these timesteps.
3.4.3
Hyperparameter tuning
As described in section 2.2, the process of tuning the network-speciﬁc hyperparame-
ters can be of great importance for the overall performance of a surrogate model. In
the present study, which utilized LSTM networks, a number of speciﬁc hyperparam-
eters have been tuned.
The ﬁrst hyperparameter tuning that was performed was for the number of units and
layers in the network. In general, the number of units and/or layers has an effect on
the networks’ learning capacity, i.e. using a too simple network might result in a low
learning capacity which typically results in underﬁtting. Oppositely, using an overly
complex network typically results in overﬁtting. In addition, complex networks will
have a high number of trainable parameters requiring a larger amount of data to
achieve convergence. To assess the effect of network size, an exhaustive search was
applied for a relatively coarse grid space. The number of layers was varied between
[1, 2, 3] layers with a number of units varying from [10, 25, 50, 100] units, giving
a total of 84 combinations. For each combination, the percentage mean error and
percentage error standard deviation were calculated to assess the performance of
each combination. Generally, it was found that a single layer did not have a sufﬁcient
learning capacity and resulted in high error standard deviations. For the networks
using two and three layers, the results were ambiguous and no clear conclusion
could be derived regarding the optimal network size. However, based on qualitative
assessment, the ﬁnal network was chosen to contain two layers, each having 50 units.
This network size generally showed a good performance and did not have a too high
number of trainable parameters compared to the available training dataset.
In terms of activation function, the hyperbolic tangent function was used. It was
generally found that this activation function was best suited when combined with the
negative-positive min-max scaler and multivariate outputs.
The next tuning was performed for the learning hyperparameters with the purpose
of optimizing the training process. The loss function was chosen to be the mean
absolute error which has proven to be advantageous over other metrics, e.g. the
root-mean-square error [53].
The Adam solver was chosen as the training algorithm. This optimizer is a stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) method that is based on adaptive moment estimation. The
39
==PAGE:46==
optimizer has been found to be computationally efﬁcient with little memory require-
ment. It is also invariant to a diagonal rescaling of gradients and is well suited for
problems that are large in terms of data and/or parameters [54]. Adaptive learning
was chosen based on a qualitative assessment which is shown in Figure 3.19b. Here,
the learning rate is reduced when the loss reaches a plateau. In addition, the loss
function was investigated for different sample sizes. The results are visualized in
Figure 3.19a and show a faster convergence for a higher number of samples. We see
that when using 250,000 samples, the loss function converges after 10-15 epochs.
Other hyperparameters, e.g. dropout or weight regularization, were not found to con-
tribute to the overall performance of the models and were therefore not implemented.
Typically, these hyperparameters are used in cases of overﬁtting but this was not
deemed necessary.
(a) Number of samples
(b) Learning rate
Figure 3.19: Examples of loss curves for the a 20% test size using a) different total sample
sizes with adaptive learning rate and b) different learning rates for a ﬁxed sample size of
50,000.
3.4.4
Summary of model architectures
In this thesis, the popular deep learning API, Keras, is used which runs on top of
the end-to-end platform TensorFlow [55]. Based on the previously described feature
and hyperparameter assessment, the common architecture of the ﬁnal models is
summarized in Figure 3.20. The model architectures are identical for the two models
with the only exception being the dimensions of the inputs and outputs. For that
reason, we see a larger number of trainable parameters for the model using the
4-beamed LiDAR measurements as inputs. The ﬁrst layer is the masking layer which
identiﬁes the timesteps to skip. The next layer is an LSTM layer with 50 units and
the hyperbolic tangent as the activation function. The following layer is also an
LSTM layer with 50 units. Finally, a regular densely-connected layer is added which
forces the model to output the desired shape, which in this case will be the two target
40
==PAGE:47==
features and the forecast horizon (10 s for the 2-beamed LiDAR model and 20 s for
the 4-beamed LiDAR model).
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.20: Summary of the two ﬁnal models. (a) visualizes the model architecture and (b)
summarizes the number of trainable parameters for each of the two models.
41
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 4
Results
In this chapter, the results obtained throughout the study are presented. Initially, a
general validation of the LiDAR measurements is presented as well as a very brief
spectral analysis of the two target features. A time delay analysis is also performed
to assess the wind ﬁeld development and time to impact. Finally, the forecast results
from the developed surrogate models are presented and analyzed.
4.1
Validation of LiDAR measurements
The main objective of the thesis is to evaluate how accurately electrical power and
blade ﬂapwise bending moment can be forecasted, using only LiDAR measure-
ments as inputs. To ensure integrity and a generally good quality of the LiDAR
measurements, they are validated internally and against measurements from the
meteorological mast. This validation is performed using 10-min statistics which
ensures that the spatial difference between the instantaneous measurements becomes
negligible when they are averaged over a long time duration of 10 minutes. Besides,
to have comparable measurements, it is necessary to have the wind turbine aligned
quite accurately with the meteorological mast. This is done to minimizes the spatial
variability that might be across the wind ﬁeld. Aligning the meteorological mast and
the wind turbine ensures that the meteorological mast and the LiDARs observe the
same wind
Initially, the horizontal wind speed scalars measured with the two LiDAR systems
are compared to the wind speed measured with the meteorological mast at 44 m
height. The comparison is shown in Figure 4.1. A linear ﬁt shows the trend and
offset together with the coefﬁcient of determination R2 and the root-mean-square
error (RMSE). It can be seen from both ﬁgures, that the trends are very close to
unity as well as the R2-values. This indicates a strong linear correlation between
42
==PAGE:49==
the LiDARs and the meteorological mast. However, in terms of offset, both LiDAR
systems systematically underestimate the horizontal wind speed compared to the
meteorological mast. This is most likely caused by the induction zone of the wind
turbine, where both measurement planes of the LiDARs are located. The induction
zone causes a slow-down of the wind speed which causes the LiDARs to underesti-
mate the wind speed. It is possible to apply an induction-correction using the method
proposed in [22]. Although it should be stressed, that the LiDARs do not measure
incorrectly, they simply measures the wind speed in a deﬁcit induced by the wind
turbine.
(a) 2-beamed LiDAR
(b) 4-beamed LiDAR
Figure 4.1: One-to-one comparison between 10-min LiDAR- and mast-derived mean hori-
zontal wind speed.
A similar comparison can be made for the turbulence. As mentioned, the turbulence
intensity is given as the wind ﬂuctuation relative to the mean wind speed and the
site-speciﬁc turbulence typically has a big contribution to the lifetime fatigue damage
on the turbine. In terms of forecasting power and ﬂapwise bending moment, the
wind speed ﬂuctuation is also of great importance as it gives an estimate of the local
stochasticity of the wind, which is expected to affect the performance of a surrogate
model.
Figure 4.2 shows the comparison of the turbulence intensity measured with the two
LiDARs and the turbulence intensity measured by the meteorological mast. Again, a
linear trend is observed, though with a signiﬁcantly larger spread, for both LiDARs.
The systematic underestimation is again present, indicated by the negative offset
for both LiDARs. As mentioned in section 2.1, the LiDAR effectively works as a
low-pass ﬁlter and causes attenuation of the measured ﬂuctuations. The dissipation
43
==PAGE:50==
of turbulence energy measured from continuous-wave LiDARs has been studied in
multiple papers and there have been presented several ways of correcting for this
attenuation, e.g. using average spectra [56, 57, 58]. However, no correction has been
applied to the LiDAR observations used in the present study.
(a) 2-beamed LiDAR
(b) 4-beamed LiDAR
Figure 4.2: One-to-one comparison between 10-min LiDAR- and mast-derived turbulence
intensity.
One major advantage of the 4-beamed LiDAR is the inclination of the beams. As
mentioned, this allows for retrieving the horizontal wind speed at two heights, which
can be used to estimate the vertical wind shear. The wind shear describes how much
the wind speed changes as a function of height and is typically characterized by the
wind shear exponent α which was introduced in Equation 3.6. Figure 4.3 shows the
comparison of 10-min shear exponents retrieved from the 4-beamed LiDAR and the
meteorological mast. For the 4-beamed LiDAR, the shear exponents are calculated
directly from the equation using the two available heights whereas a least-square
ﬁt has been implemented for the meteorological mast based on measurements at
ﬁve different heights. From the comparison, a lot of scattering is observed with
the R2-value being just below 20%. However, it can be seen that a more intense
clustering is seen in the region 0 < α < 0.15, which appears to be more linearly
distributed.
44
==PAGE:51==
Figure 4.3: One-to-one comparison between 10-min LiDAR- and mast-derived shear expo-
nent.
Finally, the yaw misalignment is analyzed which is measurable with the two LiDARs.
Correcting for yaw misalignment is one of the main cornerstones of nacelle-mounted
LiDARs as it allows for dynamic tracking and correction of wind turbine yaw
misalignment. This can potentially result in signiﬁcant improvement in power
production. As mentioned in section 2.1, the yaw misalignment is calculated from the
relative magnitudes of the two horizontal wind components. In terms of forecasting
ability, the yaw misalignment is also expected to have an inﬂuence. For a large
yaw misalignment, the wind that is measured might not accurately represent the
rotor-local wind speed because the wind is coming at an angle. For a large focus
distance, the yaw misalignment does not need to be very large before the LiDAR-
measured wind ﬁeld actually completely passes the rotor. In fact, there might be
a quite signiﬁcant difference between the wind ﬁeld measured ahead of the rotor
and the wind actually impacting the rotor, if a large yaw misalignment and/or a
large focus distance is present. However, it should be mentioned that this effect also
requires a signiﬁcant amount of spatial variability in the wind ﬁeld. Appendix C
shows an example of a video of a simulated turbulence box based on the measured
wind conditions of the site. Here, the spatial variability across the rotor plane can
clearly be observed. For even larger rotors, this effect obviously becomes more
signiﬁcant.
45
==PAGE:52==
Figure 4.4 shows a comparison of the LiDAR-derived yaw misalignment based on
the 10-min statistics. Generally, a relatively low yaw misalignment is observed for
the two LiDARs, but it does appear to skewed for low wind speeds.
Figure 4.4: Wind turbine yaw misalignment measured with the two LiDARs. The values are
based on 10-min statistics.
4.2
Spectral analysis
It is of particular interest to analyze the LiDARs’ ability to capture variations in the
target features that are of interest for the forecasts. This can be done by looking
into the frequency domain of the target features which help identify the spectral
energy distribution. The power density spectra (PSD) of the two target features were
calculated and the results can be seen in Figure 4.5. The spectra are based on 50 Hz
observations of a 10-min time series with a mean wind speed of ¯U = 16.4 m/s which
means that the rotational speed is expected to be more or less constant. In such steady
operational conditions, the behavior of the wind turbine becomes periodic. This is
seen by the very distinct peaks caused by the forced response from the rotational
speed and its harmonics. These peaks are visible for the ﬂapwise bending moment
because of the relative variations in rotor-local wind speed. As the blade sweeps the
rotor plane it experiences these local wind variations and we see this asymmetric
loading as the once-per-revolution (1P) components in the PSD together with its
harmonics (2P, 3P, 4P, etc.). For a three-bladed wind turbine, the rotor works as a
ﬁlter because the blades are 120◦out of phase, i.e. analogous to 3-phase power. This
means that the rotor torque and thrust will experience only the harmonics at 3P, 6P,
etc. Because of the electrical power being directly proportional to the rotor torque, a
46
==PAGE:53==
very distinct peaks is visible in Figure 4.5a at 3P.
(a) Power density spectrum of electrical power.
(b) Power density spectrum of ﬂapwise bending moment.
Figure 4.5: Power density spectra of a 10-min time series with a mean wind speed of
¯U = 16.4 m/s, i.e. above rated. The dashed lines indicate multiples of the rotational speed.
As previously mentioned, in order to make feasible forecasts of the target values,
using the LiDARs as inputs, it requires a downsample to make the signals compatible.
As indicated in Figure 3.12, this entails a loss of information which can also be
evaluated by looking at the PSD. Figure 4.6 shows the normalized cumulative
spectral energy as a function of frequency. The major part of the energy is located in
the frequency range that is capturable by the effective sampling frequencies of the
LiDARs.
47
==PAGE:54==
Figure 4.6: Cumulative spectral energy normalized by the total energy of the spectra.
4.3
Time delay analysis
Figure 4.7: Side-view of the rotor plane, the two LiDAR measuring planes and the measuring
plane of the meteorological mast. The physical distance between the rotor plane and the
three measuring planes are visualized by the three bottom arrows.
As previously mentioned, the principles of LiDAR-assisted feedforward control
relies entirely on the LiDAR being able to accurately measure the wind ahead of the
rotor. The spatial difference between the measuring planes of the LiDARs and the
rotor plane (see Figure 4.7), causes a natural time delay between the wind preview
measured by the LiDARs and the wind impacting the wind turbine. The time delay is
typically based on the hypothesis of frozen turbulence which assumes that the local
wind and turbulent eddies behave as frozen and advect through the air [38]. The
48
==PAGE:55==
hypothesis is especially relevant for wind energy as it allows for simple assumptions
about the wind ﬁeld ﬂow which can be utilized for remote wind sensing applications.
It is, however, still important to understand and address how this time delay behaves
and what inﬂuence it might have on the surrogate models’ ability to forecast power
and structural load.
It comes as no surprise, that the two biggest contributors to the time delay are the
physical distance between the measurement plane and the rotor plane and the average
wind speed. In the most naive proposal, the time delay ∆t is linearly dependent on
the distance ∆x and average wind speed U, simply by:
∆t = ∆x
U
(4.1)
The above equation represents the ideal time delay when only considering two
physical quantities, namely the focus distance and advection wind speed. In terms
of relating a wind preview measured by the LiDARs to our two target features, we
need to consider a more appropriate representation of the time delay which will be
denoted the time to impact. In [59], the measurable time to impact is comprised of
the physical arrival time and some time delays introduced by the LiDAR processing
and the delayed response from the wind turbine. The arrival time is mainly affected
by the distance and wind speed but also by the induction zone caused by the wind
turbine decelerating the wind in front of the rotor. The time delays from the LiDAR
are caused by the delay due to scan time. The time delays from the wind turbine
are introduced by the inertial response of the rotor and blade which means that an
instantaneous change in wind speed will not cause an instantaneous change in our
target values. Especially the rotor inertia is expected to cause a larger time delay for
the electrical power compared to that of the blade, which typically responds quite
rapidly to a change in wind speed.
A way of studying the time to impact is by comparing how well the LiDAR-measured
wind speed and the target values are correlated at different time lags. Figure 4.8
shows the calculated normalized cross-correlation between wind speed and the two
target values. From the ﬁgures, three distinct peaks at three different time lags for
both electrical power and ﬂapwise bending can be seen. As expected, the 2-beamed
LiDAR peaks ﬁrst, followed by the 4-beamed LiDAR and ﬁnally the meteorological
mast. Based on the distances between the rotor and each of the three measurement
planes as shown in Figure 4.7, this is also the behavior that is expected. Another
feature is the magnitude of the correlation which is also seen to vary quite a bit.
Generally, the 4-beamed LiDAR shows a better correlation with both target features
compared to the 2-beamed LiDAR. The meteorological mast shows the lowest
correlation. We also see a signiﬁcantly higher overall correlation between the three
49
==PAGE:56==
wind speeds and the electrical power compared to the ﬂapwise bending. This is also
expected when looking at the distribution plots in Figure 3.7 and Figure 3.8, where
a monotonic relation between power and wind speed was observed. This relation
is non-monotonic for the ﬂapwise bending and therefore, a lower correlation is
expected. Finally, we also see a difference between the shape of the correlation peaks
between the electrical power and the ﬂapwise bending. Generally, the correlation
peaks with the electrical power are seen to be more sharp compared to the correlation
peaks for the ﬂapwise bending. Here, the peaks are observed to be a bit ﬂatter.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.8: Cross-correlations between the two target features and the three wind speed
measurements.
The ﬁgures above are based on one long time series from the data preprocessing
described in section 3.4. This time series covers a wide variety of wind speeds
and therefore gives a general idea about the expected time to impact. However, as
50
==PAGE:57==
indicated by Equation 4.1, the time delay strongly depends on the local wind speed.
This can be validated by separating the entire dataset into shorter subseries, e.g. of
10 minutes, and then calculating the cross-correlation for each subseries. This gives
a series of cross-correlations, similar to those in Figure 4.8, from where the time lag
yielding the highest correlation can be extracted. This allows for plotting the mean
wind speed of the subseries as a function of the optimal time lag. This is shown in
Figure 4.9 for the two LiDARs and the meteorological mast. This way it is possible
to compare how well the observed time delay ﬁts the theory from Equation 4.1 which
is shown as a red solid curve. Due to the resampling rate of the LiDAR signals,
the points are discretized. Generally, a good trend is observed for all three systems,
though, with a quite signiﬁcant difference in variance. The 4-beamed LiDAR clearly
shows the overall best agreement with Equation 4.1 with the true observations being
clustered tightly around the red curve. For the 2-beamed LiDAR, quite a lot of scatter
is observed around the red curve but still a good overall trend.
Figure 4.9: Wind speed as function of time delay with highest correlation based N 10-minute
time series. Notice that the x-axes are different for the three plots whereas the y-axes are
identical.
51
==PAGE:58==
4.4
Forecasting
The following section presents the forecast results obtained from the surrogate
models. All forecasts are based on the model architecture presented in Figure 3.20.
4.4.1
Single-step forecasting
In the ﬁrst forecasts, sequences of input features will be used to predict a single
multivariate (i.e. both electrical power and blade ﬂapwise bending moment) output
at a ﬁxed lead time. The inputs features are the ones previously described in
subsection 3.4.2. In the time delay analysis from section 4.3 and speciﬁcally the
correlation graphs in Figure 4.8, it was found that there existed a lead time which
yielded the highest correlation with the two target features. Based on these ﬁndings,
the ﬁxed lead time for the 2-beamed single-step forecasting model was chosen to be
4 seconds and the corresponding lead time for the 4-beamed model was 7.5 seconds.
The number of historical timesteps (nlag) used for the 2- and 4-beam models are
10 and 20 seconds, respectively. As mentioned, the 2-beamed model uses 1 Hz
resampled data whereas the 4-beamed model uses 2 Hz resampled data. For that
reason, the 4-beamed model will also be trained and tested on approximately twice
as much data as the 2-beamed model. Distribution plots of the target values for the
training and test sets can be found in Appendix D together with the loss histories
from training. Based on these plots, it is expected that the training and test sets are
representative and that the trainable model parameters have converged.
Figure 4.10 and Figure 4.11 show the one-to-one comparison between the observed
and forecasted target values for the two models. From the ﬁgures, we observe a
quite good trend for both models on both target values with slopes ranging from
0.86-0.97 indicating small biases. The offsets are generally observed to be positive
for the electrical power and negative for the ﬂapwise bending moment. It is found
that both models are able to capture the electrical power in the full range from 0-850
kW. This is not the case for the ﬂapwise bending moment, for neither model, which
is seen as a clear cut-off value around -500 kNm. Also, this is seen as a clear lack
of forecasted values below -500 kNm, indicating the models’ inability to capture
high-load peaks. This consequence is also reﬂected in the relatively large negative
offsets for the ﬂapwise bending. An overall better performance is found for the
4-beam model with lower variance for both target values. Especially, the electrical
power forecast appears to be signiﬁcantly better for the 4-beamed model with a lower
MAE and a higher R2-value. This difference is not as signiﬁcant for the ﬂapwise
bending forecast.
52
==PAGE:59==
Figure 4.10: One-to-one correlation plots of predicted and true value based only on 2-beamed
LiDAR inputs.
Figure 4.11: One-to-one correlation plots of predicted and true value based only on 4-beamed
LiDAR inputs.
The above statements can be supported by directly comparing the time series of the
forecasted target values and the true observed values. Such comparison can be found
in Figure 4.12 which shows an example of a 10-min time series of the true observed
target values and the corresponding forecasts from the two models. As mentioned,
the two models forecast at two different ﬁxed time horizons and the two forecasts
require synchronization to be comparable in the same time domain.
The top plot shows the time series of electrical power and we generally observe a
good trend for both forecasts. Especially the 4-beam model captures many of the
true peaks without lag but still has some problems estimating the true amplitude of
53
==PAGE:60==
the peaks. The same behavior is present for the 2-beam forecast which also shows a
good overall trend.
When looking at the bottom plot which shows the time series of the ﬂapwise bending
moment, it is clearly seen that the models are unable to capture the high-frequent
ﬂuctuations from the true bending moments. Looking at the forecast from the 4-
beam model, we actually do see some relatively high-frequent ﬂuctuations but the
amplitudes of the ﬂuctuations are simply too low to match those of the true signal.
Figure 4.12: 10-minute time series of true power and ﬂapwise bending together with predic-
tions based on the 2- and 4-beamed LiDARs.
Figure 4.13 and Figure 4.14 visualizes the error distributions from the two forecasts.
A box plot has been plotted on top of the histogram with the box indicating the 25%,
50%, and 75% percentiles and the whiskers indicating the lower and upper outlier
limits. Looking at the ﬁgures, the error distributions are observed to be centered
around 0 indicating a low bias. The error distributions of the electrical appears to be
more steep compared to the ﬂapwise bending moment.
In addition to these distribution plots of the forecast errors, the statistical characteris-
tics of the errors as function of different features have also been studied. The results
54
==PAGE:61==
can be found in Appendix F. Generally, no signiﬁcant trends for were found between
the forecast errors and operational and atmospheric conditions. From the standard
deviation of the forecasts errors, it was found that the 2-beam model appeared to
be more sensitive to operational conditions such as pitch angle or rotational speed,
compared to the 4-beam model.
Figure 4.13: Error distribution of predictions from the 2-beamed LiDAR.
Figure 4.14: Error distribution of predictions from the 4-beamed LiDAR.
The distribution of the errors can be investigated even further by looking at the
cumulative distribution functions (CDF) which are shown in Figure 4.15 below.
From these ﬁgures, we can identify the quantiles that are exceeded with a certain
probability. For the 2-beam model, the inter-quantile ranges [0.25:0.75] are identiﬁed
to be [−24 : 26] kW and [−22 : 23] kNm. The corresponding ranges for the 4-beam
model are [−21 : 12] kW and [−16 : 24] kNm. These intervals indicate the error
ranges that are expected to be observed with a 50% probability. Generally, the
forecast errors for the 4-beam model are found to be be smaller compared to the
2-beam model.
55
==PAGE:62==
Figure 4.15: Cumulative density functions of the errors.
Finally, the error statistics have been summarized in Table 4.1. This table also
compares the corresponding error statistics from the persistence model. Generally,
the two LSTM models are found to be outperforming the corresponding persistence
models. An individual difference between the performance of the two persistence
models can also be seen. This is caused by the different forecast horizons of the two
models. Hence, it is expected that the 2-beam persistence model performs better as
the forecast horizon is shorter.
Table 4.1: Summary statistics of errors from the single-step forecasting. The statistics are
shown for the two LiDAR models and for the corresponding persistence model.
Power
Flapwise bending
ME
[kW]
MAE
[kW]
MAPE
[%]
RMSE
[kW]
ME
[kNm]
MAE
[kNm]
MAPE
[%]
RMSE
[kNm]
LSTM-model
1.46
34.38
11.52
47.54
0.30
28.35
8.71
36.70
2-beamed
persistence
0.23
45.92
14.14
64.83
-0.15
30.75
9.18
40.90
LSTM-model
-4.19
23.47
11.52
33.38
4.02
25.93
8.87
33.38
4-beamed
persistence
-0.02
59.21
22.30
82.86
-0.14
37.26
11.23
49.09
4.4.2
Multi-step forecasting
From the previous section, it was shown how it was possible to use the surrogate
models with a sequence of LiDAR measurements as inputs to forecast the two target
features at a ﬁxed lead time. Despite the larger forecast horizon used for the 4-beam
model, it was found to be outperforming the 2-beam model. In this section, we
will go a bit further and design the LSTM models to make multi-step forecasts, i.e
56
==PAGE:63==
forecasting a sequence of values several timesteps ahead. This type of sequence-
to-sequence forecasting is very useful and allows for evaluating how far, and with
what accuracy, into the future it is possible to make meaningful forecasts using the
models.
Again, the full data set and features will be used with 80% reserved for training and
the remaining 20% for testing. Histograms of the training and testing target values
are shown in Appendix D together with the loss histories visualizing the development
of the loss function throughout the training. As speciﬁed earlier, the forecast horizon
is 10 s for the 2-beam model and 20 s for the 4-beam model.
Figure 4.16: Forecast summary of electrical power using the 2-beam model.
The results from the multi-step forecast based on inputs from the 2-beamed LiDAR
are displayed in Figure 4.16 and Figure 4.17 for the electrical power and ﬂapwise
bending moment, respectively. The subﬁgure in the top right corner visualizes the
MAE, RMSE, and MAPE as a function of lead time, the subﬁgure in the top left
57
==PAGE:64==
corner visualizes the one-to-one plot for the lead time with the lowest MAE and,
ﬁnally, the bottom plot shows a 10-min time series of the observed and forecasted
value.
From the one-to-one and time series plots, we see a very similar behavior as for the
single-step forecast. The electrical power forecast shows a low bias with a good
capture of the overall trend and the full power range. The ﬂapwise bending forecast
still shows a cut-off value of around -500 kNm indicating the inability to capture
high-frequent ﬂuctuations. Again, the overall trend is captured as seen by the time
series comparison.
Figure 4.17: Forecast summary of ﬂapwise bending using the 2-beam model.
Looking at the performance of the 2-beam model forecast as a function of lead time,
it can be seen how the statistical measures generally increase as a function of lead
time which supports the ﬁndings from Figure 3.15. The electrical power forecast is
seen to be relatively more sensitive to the forecast horizon compared to the ﬂapwise
58
==PAGE:65==
bending forecast. It can also be observed that the forecast horizon giving the best
results is only 1-2 seconds. This forecast horizon is a bit contradictory to the results
from the time delay analysis which found the maximum correlation for a time lag
of 4 seconds (see Figure 4.8a and 4.8b). However, it should be stressed that there is
a signiﬁcant difference between comparing the single feature cross-correlation and
the results from the surrogate models. The surrogate models are fed a sequence of
historical measurements and seek to minimize the loss function for all lead times.
Therefore, it will have a harder time performing particularly well for a single lead
time compared to ﬁndings from the cross-correlation analysis.
A similar multi-step forecast has been made based on inputs from the 4-beam
LiDAR. The results from the forecast of electrical power and ﬂapwise bending
moment are shown in Figure 4.18 and Figure 4.19, respectively.
Figure 4.18: Forecast summary of electrical power using the 4-beam model.
59
==PAGE:66==
Looking at the forecast performance as a function of lead time, an optimal forecast
horizon is found at around 1-6 seconds. Again, this does not correspond exactly
to the ﬁndings from the time delay analysis but we do see a more feasible forecast
horizon for the 4-beam model compared to the 2-beam model. Furthermore, a more
distinct peak is observed for the electrical power compared to the ﬂapwise bending.
In terms of the one-to-one correlation plot, we see the same behaviors as found for
both the single-step forecasts and the multi-step forecast from the 2-beam model.
The forecasted electrical power captures the true power quite well, whereas the
ﬂapwise bending moment forecast is not capturing the high-frequency ﬂuctuations.
However, the statistical measures are found to be better than previously observed
with an electrical power MAE of 21.06 kW and a R2-value of 0.98 indicating the
surrogate model’s ability to capture the true ﬂuctuations. The corresponding values
for the ﬂapwise bending moment were found to be 24.18 kNm and 0.90 for the MAE
and R2, respectively. Looking at the time series plots we also see a very good trend
for the electrical power forecast which captures many of the true peaks. The ﬂapwise
bending moment forecast is still missing the high-frequent ﬂuctuations.
Figure 4.19: Forecast summary of ﬂapwise bending using the 2-beam model.
60
==PAGE:67==
From the time-ahead plots, it has generally been found that the forecast of the elec-
trical power is more sensitive to lead time. This is especially visible for the 4-beam
model, where the statistical measures worsen as a function of time ahead for the
electrical power compared to the ﬂapwise bending. For the electrical power, the
ﬂuctuations of the true power are captured quite well by the surrogate models and
therefore, are relatively more sensitive to forecast horizon. This is not the case for
the ﬂapwise bending moment forecast, where the surrogate models are unable to
capture the high-frequent ﬂuctuations, which causes the forecast to be less sensitive.
Next, the MAE obtained from the two surrogate models will be compared with
the corresponding MAE obtained using the persistence model. This comparison
is shown Figure 4.20 for both electrical power and ﬂapwise bending moment. As
mentioned in section 3.3, the persistence model is a univariate model and is therefore
based exclusively on the target values as inputs. It provides a good benchmark for
evaluating the performance of the surrogate models.
Looking at the MAE for electrical power forecast, the persistence model is perform-
ing very well for a very short time horizon but with the MAE drastically increasing as
the time horizon increases. The 4-beam model is seen to outperform the persistence
model for time horizons larger than 2 seconds. The corresponding time horizon for
the 2-beam model is 4 seconds. For the ﬂapwise bending moment, the MAE from
the persistence model behaves signiﬁcantly differently by ﬂuctuating at a ﬁxed rate.
This ﬂuctuation is directly related to the concept described in section 4.2 with the
ﬂapwise bending moment being strongly related to the rotational speed of the turbine.
The average rotational speed of the full data set used for training and testing was
found to be 22.8 RPM, corresponding to an average period of:
¯T =
60RPM
s−1
22.8RPM = 2.63 s
This is the same period that is observed in the ﬂuctuations below which supports the
previous ﬁndings. As mentioned earlier, these ﬂuctuations are not present for the
electrical power because the rotor works as a ﬁlter when combining all three blade
contributions. Disregarding the ﬂuctuations, the surrogate models have generally
been found to outperform the persistence model even for small time horizons.
61
==PAGE:68==
Figure 4.20: Comparison of MAE for the two surrogate models and the persistence model.
62
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 5
Discussion
In this chapter, the results are further interpreted and discussed with the main focus
on evaluating the limitations of the developed surrogate models with reference to the
research questions presented in section 1.3.
Generally, it has been found that the surrogate models developed throughout this
study are capable of forecasting short-term electrical power and ﬂapwise bending
moment based exclusively on LiDAR measurements as inputs. The models have
been able to capture the overall trends with low biases and especially the forecasts of
electrical power show very promising results. In terms of forecasting the ﬂapwise
bending moment, some major limitations are seen, as the models are simply unable
to capture high-frequent ﬂuctuations, even for downsampled data. Capturing these
peaks is of particular relevance in terms of load mitigation as the main part of a wind
turbine’s fatigue damage is caused by a few very strong gusts [38]. The inability
might be caused by various limitations introduced either by the LiDAR functionality
or by the surrogate model itself.
It should be recognized that the forecasts presented in this study are based solely
on LiDAR measurements and that LiDARs, like any other measuring devices, are
exposed to some inherent uncertainty which inﬂuences the application and accuracy
of the measurements. First of all, it is necessary to acknowledge the turbulent wind
as a complex and stochastic process. The whole concept of utilizing forward-looking
LiDARs relies on the ability to accurately model the wind ﬁeld evolution across
the LiDAR focus range. Taylor’s frozen hypothesis has been shown to be a good
assumption and allows for a simple way of modeling the wind ﬁeld evolution [60].
However, in terms of forecasting, e.g. ﬂapwise bending moments, the instantaneous
load on the blade is strongly dependent on the spatial position of the blade, and the
rotor-local wind speed. Such local wind variation is very difﬁcult to accurately repre-
63
==PAGE:70==
sent using the LiDAR systems. Here, one of the main conditions that are required for
estimating the wind speed with the LiDARs is the assumption of homogeneity across
the measurement plane. Essentially, this means that the LiDAR generalizes the wind
ﬁeld based on its focus points. This is clearly seen as a limitation in the forecasts
of ﬂapwise bending moment where the high-frequent ﬂuctuations caused by the
rotation of the blades and variations in the local wind ﬁeld are not captured by the
surrogate models. This effect is not nearly as critical when it comes to forecasting
electrical power because the electrical power is a sum of the contributions from all
three blades, with the rotor working as a ﬁlter. This also explains why the models
are observed to be capable of capturing the full range of electrical power.
In extension to the above, the generalization of an entire rotor based on only a
few numbers of measurement points has been investigated in a previous study [61].
The importance of the number of measurement points, measurement distance, and
opening angles was evaluated for different LiDAR conﬁgurations. From the study, it
was found that a 4-beamed LiDAR generally performs better in terms of representing
the rotor-effective wind speed. These ﬁndings support the results from this study,
which showed a generally better performance of the surrogate models based on the
4-beamed LiDAR compared to the 2-beamed LiDAR. Utilizing 4 beams rather than
two provides a better representation of the wind impacting the turbine.
The conﬁguration of the two LiDAR systems used in this study has previously been
evaluated in terms of ﬁnding the optimal opening angles which gives the highest
wind speed coherence [22]. For the 2-beamed LiDAR, the optimal opening angle
was found to be 13.2◦which is a signiﬁcant reduction compared to the current
conﬁguration. For the 4-beamed LiDAR, the optimal opening angle was found to be
22.4◦which is not very far from the current conﬁguration. These ﬁndings support
the general observation throughout this study, that the 4-beamed LiDAR is more
capable of accurately measuring the representative wind ﬁeld.
Finally, it needs to be stressed that we also have a possible limitation for both LiDAR
systems caused by the probe volume averaging. As it was shown in Figure 2.2, the
averaged Doppler spectrum obtained from the FFT of the LiDAR detector output
is used for determining the Doppler shift which allows for estimating the radial
wind speed. The peak of the Doppler spectrum which indicates the frequency shift
and hence radial wind speed is typically spread over some range of frequencies.
There exist different methods for determining which Doppler frequency to use for
the ﬁnal estimation of the radial wind speed. The centroid method, which is the
most dominant method for modern continuous-wave LiDARs, has been used in the
present study for determining the LOS wind speeds. The centroid method has proven
to be very useful for applications such as yaw misalignment correction but it lacks
64
==PAGE:71==
the ability to capture high-frequent ﬂuctuations, thereby acting as a low-pass ﬁlter.
The negative effect of spatial averaging when using the centroid method was also
observed in this study when comparing the LiDAR-derived wind speed ﬂuctuations
with the ﬂuctuations measured with the meteorological mast. Here, the LiDARs
were found to systematically underestimate the wind ﬂuctuations. Another study
has compared the turbulent wind speed derived using different methods, namely the
centroid, median and maximum methods [62]. Here, it was found that the maximum
method performed best in terms of reducing the effects of spatial averaging but it
consistently performed worst when comparing the RMSE from sonic anemometers.
It was advised to use the median method for the best retrieval of a point-like time
series with a high effective sampling rate.
In the last part of the measurement campaign of this thesis, the LOS wind speeds
were also retrieved using the maximum method. This allowed for a short case study
to evaluate the effects of using this method rather than the centroid method. However,
it was found that the use of the maximum method for retrieving the LOS wind speeds
did not result in any signiﬁcant improvements in terms of forecasting the electrical
power or ﬂapwise bending moment.
Throughout the thesis, it has been observed that the signal of the ﬂapwise bending
moment is greatly impacted by the rotational speed of the turbine. As mentioned
in section 4.2, this is primarily caused by the frozen wind phenomena which have
been visualized in Appendix C. It has also been seen that the wind characteristics
measured by the LiDARs are independent of any turbine related parameters and
therefore do not provide any information about the turbine operation. When the
surrogate models are trained entirely on LiDAR-based measurements, it might be
difﬁcult for the models to learn this periodic behavior. This is, by default, not a
limitation related to LiDARs itself but it does limit the capability of surrogate models
when relying entirely on LiDAR features as inputs. To investigate the effect of
introducing the rotational speed as an input to the surrogate models, a short case
study was performed. Here, two different models were trained; one using only the
input features as described in subsection 3.4.2 and one using the same features but
also including a value between -1 and 1, indicating the vertical position of a generic
blade. Such a feature can be extracted from the rotational speed to generate a signal
that should follow the same periodic behavior of the ﬂapwise bending moment.
When considering the geometry of the LiDAR system it should in fact be possible to
estimate the rotational speed based on measuring the frequency of blade blockage.
This is possible for both the 2- and 4-beamed LiDAR, and if this feature is extracted,
it could be used as an additional input feature. From the short case study, it was
65
==PAGE:72==
found that the implementation of a generic vertical blade position, did not cause
any improvements for capturing the high-frequent ﬂuctuations. However, an overall
improvement of the MAE was found in the forecast of the electrical power when
including this extra input feature.
Another thing that needs to be addressed is the consequence of downsampling.
As previously mentioned, the LiDAR systems use a sampling frequency of 1 Hz
whereas the wind turbine operation and load channels are sampled at 50 Hz. For any
forecast to be feasible, the 50 Hz signals have to be downsampled to correspond-
ing frequencies as that of the LiDAR signals. In this study, the resampling was
performed using linear interpolation. Unfortunately, this also means that the true
representation of the signals is not given because some information is discard during
the resampling process. This was illustrated in Figure 3.12 which showed the mean
absolute percentage error of the 50 Hz signal and the corresponding downsampled
signal. It was found that the blade ﬂapwise bending moment was relatively more
affected by resampling compared to the electrical power. This is caused by the
ﬂapwise bending signal being governed by more high-frequent ﬂuctuations com-
pared to the signal of electrical power. From this, we also see a clear advantage
of using the 4-beamed LiDAR which, if synchronized properly, should allow for a
higher resampling frequency compared to the 2-beamed LiDAR. Although these
are still somewhat insigniﬁcant errors, it should be remembered, that these errors
are not considered when calculating the statistical measures used for evaluating the
performance of the forecasts. Essentially, they should be added on top of the regular
forecast error.
The development of the surrogate models strongly relies on a combination of data-
driven decisions and a trial and error approach. A particularly emphasize has been
on evaluating the parameters used for the sequential transformation, i.e. nlag and
nout. These parameters govern how much historical data is introduced to the network
and also how far the forecast horizon should be. From the time delay analysis in
section 4.3, and more speciﬁcally Figure 4.9, it was found that there is a signiﬁcant
variation in the optimal time lag which is strongly dependent on the mean wind
speed. However, all forecasts performed during this study have been based on a
ﬁxed sequence length of 10 s for the 2-beam models and 20 s for the 4-beam models.
These timesteps were found adequate for covering all the expected time lags relative
to our observed wind speed domain. A disadvantage of this approach is that it relies
on the surrogate models to determine which historical timesteps are more relevant
in terms of minimizing the loss function. Because of the varying optimal time lag
66
==PAGE:73==
as a function of wind speed, it might be difﬁcult for the models to generalize this
dynamic behavior. It might be more feasible to only feed the model with a short
range of historical timesteps that we expect will have the biggest impact on a forecast.
Such an approach could perhaps be introduced through dynamic masking, e.g. by
using a moving average of the horizontal wind speed to determine the expected time
of impact. If a ﬁxed forecast horizon is used, it should be possible to continuously
mask historical timesteps that are expected to be irrelevant for the speciﬁc forecast
horizon.
67
==PAGE:74==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
The use of LiDAR-enhanced wind turbine control has shown promising potential
for increasing power performance and reducing structural loads on wind turbines.
Nacelle-mounted LiDARs are capable of remotely measuring the wind ﬁeld in front
of the rotor which can be fed to the wind turbine controller, thereby allowing for
a feed-forward control strategy. These beneﬁts have been documented in the past,
primarily based on computational simulations.
In this thesis, the potential of using machine learning for short-term forecast of
the electrical power and blade root ﬂapwise bending moment is investigated. A
speciﬁc type of recurrent neural network, namely the long-term short-memory, has
been employed to develop robust and generalized surrogate models for short-term
multivariate multi-step forecasting. The surrogate models are trained with inputs
measured from two separate nacelle-mounted LiDARs which have been mounted on
top of a Vestas V52 wind turbine.
Initially, the LiDAR measurements were validated against a nearby meteorolog-
ical mast to ensure adequate quality of the data. 10-minute statistics were used to
mitigate the inﬂuence of the physical distance between the wind turbine and the
meteorological mast. A very good agreement was found for the horizontal wind
speed which showed R2-values of 0.99 and 0.98 for the 2- and 4-beamed LiDARs,
respectively. However, the LiDAR measurement planes were found to be within the
induction zone of the turbine causing a small underestimation. In terms of validating
the LiDARs’ ability to measure wind ﬂuctuations and wind shear, the results were a
bit more ambiguous. The wind ﬂuctuations were found to be systematically underes-
timated by the LiDARs which is caused by the probe volume averaging, effectively
working as a low-pass ﬁlter. The wind shear estimated from the 4-beamed LiDAR
showed little correlation with the wind shear estimated from the meteorological mast.
68
==PAGE:75==
The implementation of forward-looking LiDARs for enhanced wind turbine control
heavily relies on the ability to accurately model the wind ﬁeld evolution across
the LiDAR measuring range. The assumption of Taylor’s frozen turbulence allows
for a very simple and yet reliable model which is very useful for remote sensing
applications. The time to impact was analyzed by computing the cross-correlation
between the mean horizontal wind speed, measured with the two LiDARs, and the
two target variables. This allowed for identifying which time lag and LiDAR system
resulted in the highest correlation with each of the two target values. As expected
from the focus distances, the 2-beamed LiDAR resulted in the shortest time lag of 4
seconds, followed by the 4-beamed LiDAR with a time lag of 7 seconds, and ﬁnally,
the meteorological mast resulted in a time lag of 14 seconds. For both electrical
power and blade ﬂapwise bending moment, the maximum correlation was found to
be higher for the 4-beamed LiDAR compared to the 2-beamed LiDAR. To further
analyze how the expected time to impact changes as a function of wind speed, the full
dataset was split into subseries of 10 minutes, and a time delay analysis was carried
out independently for each subseries. This allowed for a comparison between the
empirically derived time delay and a theoretical time delay based on focus distance
and mean wind speed. Generally, the empirical time delays were found to follow the
theoretical trend and especially the 4-beamed LiDAR was found to be in very good
compliance with the theoretical time delay.
The surrogate models developed in this thesis have been shown capable of fore-
casting short-term electrical power and blade ﬂapwise bending moment based on
LiDAR measurements as inputs. Generally, the models have been able to forecast
the overall trends with low biases. The forecasts of electrical power were shown
to capture the full range of the observed power (850 kW) which was not the case
for the ﬂapwise bending moment. Here, the models were unable to capture the
relatively high-frequent ﬂuctuations which is a major drawback in terms of extreme
load mitigation. The reason for this inability is the ﬂapwise bending moment being
highly dependent on the rotor-local wind and the rotational speed of the turbine.
These characteristics are not very well captured by any of the two LiDARs.
The surrogate models based on inputs from the 4-beamed LiDAR showed a signiﬁ-
cantly better performance compared to the models based on the 2-beamed LiDAR.
The 4-beam model showed a 35 % lower mean absolute error for electrical power
and 13 % for the ﬂapwise bending moment. The 4-beam model was found to have a
peak forecast horizon of 4-5 seconds compared to 1-2 seconds for the 2-beam model
which is caused by the difference in focus distance of the two LiDARs. In addition,
69
==PAGE:76==
the 4-beamed LiDAR is able to provide an effectively higher sampling frequency
which allows for a better representation of the true power and ﬂapwise bending.
70
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
[1] World Wind Energy Association. World wind capacity at 650,8 GW, Corona
crisis will slow down markets in 2020, renewables to be core of eco-
nomic stimulus programmes. https://wwindea.org/blog/2020/04/16/
world-wind-capacity-at-650-gw/, 2020. [Online; accessed 20-August-
2020].
[2] Lazard. Levelized Cost of Energy and Levelized Cost of Storage 2019. https:
//www.lazard.com/perspective/lcoe2019, 2019. [Online; accessed 20-
August-2020].
[3] International-Electrotechnical-Commission et al. IEC 61400-13 Wind Turbines–
Part 13: Measurement of Mechanical Loads, 2015-12, 2015.
[4] Stefan Keil. Technology and practical use of strain gages: with particular
consideration of stress analysis using strain gauges. John Wiley & Sons, 2017.
[5] David Schlipf, Po Wen Cheng, and Jakob Mann. Model of the correlation
between lidar systems and wind turbines for lidar-assisted control. Journal of
Atmospheric and Oceanic Technology, 30(10):2233–2240, 2013.
[6] Michael Harris, Maureen Hand, and A Wright. Lidar for turbine control.
National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, CO, Report No. NREL/TP-
500-39154, 2006.
[7] Andrew Scholbrock, Paul Fleming, David Schlipf, Alan Wright, Kathryn
Johnson, and Na Wang. Lidar-enhanced wind turbine control: Past, present,
and future. In 2016 American Control Conference (ACC), pages 1399–1406.
IEEE, 2016.
[8] Windar Photonics. WindEye Product Brochure, 2018.
[9] Ebba Dellwik, Mikael Sjöholm, and Jakob Mann. An evaluation of the WindEye
wind lidar. 2015.
71
==PAGE:78==
[10] Eric Simley, Lucy Pao, Rod Frehlich, Bonnie Jonkman, and Neil Kelley. Anal-
ysis of wind speed measurements using continuous wave LIDAR for wind
turbine control. In 49th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting including the New
Horizons Forum and Aerospace Exposition, page 263, 2011.
[11] Michael Harris, David J Bryce, Adrian S Coffey, David A Smith, Jochen Birke-
meyer, and Ullrich Knopf. Advance measurement of gusts by laser anemometry.
Journal of Wind engineering and industrial aerodynamics, 95(12):1637–1647,
2007.
[12] Eric Simley, Pietro Bortolotti, Andrew Scholbrock, David Schlipf, and Kather-
ine Dykes. IEA Wind Task 32 and Task 37: Optimizing Wind Turbines with
Lidar-Assisted Control Using Systems Engineering. In Journal of Physics:
Conference Series, volume 1618, page 042029. IOP Publishing, 2020.
[13] David Schlipf. Prospects of multivariable feedforward control of wind turbines
using lidar. In 2016 American Control Conference (ACC), pages 1393–1398.
IEEE, 2016.
[14] Dominique Philipp Held. Inﬂow Measurements by Nacelle Mounted Lidars for
Wind Turbine and Farm Control. 2019.
[15] E Simley. Wind speed preview measurement and estimation for feedforward
control of wind turbines. PhDT, 2015.
[16] Torben Juul Larsen and Anders Melchior Hansen. How 2 HAWC2, the user’s
manual. December 2007, 2007.
[17] Jason M Jonkman, Marshall L Buhl Jr, et al. FAST user’s guide. Golden, CO:
National Renewable Energy Laboratory, 365:366, 2005.
[18] Albert Meseguer, Torben J. Larsen, Jennifer Rinker, and Héctor Villanueva.
V52 Model Validation: Simulation and Measurements Comparison. 2017.
[19] Mathias Madsen, Jakob Filsø, and Mohsen Soltani. Preview-based asymmetric
load reduction of wind turbines. In 2012 ieee international conference on
control applications, pages 1424–1429. IEEE, 2012.
[20] Antoine Borraccino, David Schlipf, Florian Haizmann, and Rozenn Wagner.
Wind ﬁeld reconstruction from nacelle-mounted lidar short-range measure-
ments. Wind Energy Science, 2(1):269, 2017.
72
==PAGE:79==
[21] Ashim Giyanani, WAAM Bierbooms, and GJW van Bussel. Estimation of rotor
effective wind speeds using autoregressive models on Lidar data. In J. Phys.
Conf. Ser, volume 753, pages 1–14, 2016.
[22] Dominique Philipp Held and Jakob Mann. Lidar estimation of rotor-effective
wind speed - An experimental comparison. Wind Energy Science, 4(3):421–438,
2019.
[23] Ju Feng. Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Wind Energy (AI4Wind): A state of the art
report. 2019.
[24] Gregor Giebel, Joël Cline, Helmut Frank, Will Shaw, Bri-Mathias Hodge,
Pierre Pinson, George Kariniotakis, and Caroline Draxi. The new IEA Wind
Task 36 on Wind Power Forecasting. In 3rd International Conference Energy
& Meterology, 2015.
[25] Ines Würth, Laura Valldecabres, Elliot Simon, Corinna Möhrlen, Bahri
Uzuno˘glu, Ciaran Gilbert, Gregor Giebel, David Schlipf, and Anton Kaifel.
Minute-scale forecasting of wind power—results from the collaborative work-
shop of IEA Wind task 32 and 36. Energies, 12(4):712, 2019.
[26] Tuhfe Göçmen, Jaime Liew, Albert Meseguer Urban, and Alan Wai Hou Lio.
Model-free Estimation of Available Power using Deep Learning. Wind Energy
Science Discussions, pages 1–29, 2019.
[27] Nikolay Dimitrov, Mark C Kelly, Andrea Vignaroli, and Jacob Berg. From
wind to loads: wind turbine site-speciﬁc load estimation with surrogate models
trained on high-ﬁdelity load databases. Wind Energy Science, 3(2):767–790,
2018.
[28] Nikolay Dimitrov and Anand Natarajan. Application of simulated lidar scan-
ning patterns to constrained Gaussian turbulence ﬁelds for load validation.
Wind Energy, 20(1):79–95, 2017.
[29] Nikolay Dimitrov, Antoine Borraccino, Alfredo Peña, Anand Natarajan, and
Jakob Mann. Wind turbine load validation using lidar-based wind retrievals.
Wind Energy, 22(11):1512–1533, 2019.
[30] Alfredo Peña, Charlotte Bay Hasager, Julia Lange, Jan Anger, Merete Badger,
Ferhat Bingöl, Oliver Bischoff, Jean-Pierre Cariou, Fiona Dunne, Stefan Emeis,
et al. Remote sensing for wind energy. DTU Wind Energy, 2015.
73
==PAGE:80==
[31] Chris Slinger and Michael Harris. Introduction to continuous-wave Doppler
lidar. Summer School in Remote Sensing for Wind Energy, Boulder, USA, 11,
2012.
[32] Chris Hill. Coherent focused lidars for Doppler sensing of aerosols and wind.
Remote Sensing, 10(3):466, 2018.
[33] Ernst Brinkmeyer and Thomas Waterholter. Continuous wave synthetic low-
coherence wind sensing Lidar: motionless measurement system with subse-
quent numerical range scanning. Optics Express, 21(2):1872–1897, 2013.
[34] Charu C Aggarwal et al. Neural networks and deep learning. Springer, 2018.
[35] Simon Haykin. Neural networks: a comprehensive foundation. Prentice-Hall,
Inc., 2007.
[36] David E Rumelhart, Geoffrey E Hinton, and Ronald J Williams. Learning
representations by back-propagating errors. nature, 323(6088):533–536, 1986.
[37] George EP Box, Gwilym M Jenkins, Gregory C Reinsel, and Greta M Ljung.
Time series analysis: forecasting and control. John Wiley & Sons, 2015.
[38] Jacob Berg, Jakob Mann, and Morten Nielsen. Notes for DTU course 46100:
Introduction to micro meteorology for wind energy. 2013.
[39] Christopher Olag. Understanding lstm networks. https://colah.github.
io/posts/2015-08-Understanding-LSTMs/, 2015. [Online; accessed 15-
December-2020].
[40] Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural
computation, 9(8):1735–1780, 1997.
[41] Max Kuhn, Kjell Johnson, et al. Applied predictive modeling, volume 26.
Springer, 2013.
[42] Michael Phi. Illustrated Guide to LSTM’s and GRU’s: A step by step explana-
tion. Towards Data Science, 2018.
[43] Energiforskning. LICOREIM - Lidar-assisted Control for REliability IMprove-
ment. https://energiforskning.dk/node/9638, 2020. [Online; accessed
08-October-2020].
[44] IELP Troen and Erik Lundtang Petersen. European wind atlas. 1989.
74
==PAGE:81==
[45] Wind Turbine Models. Vestas V52. https://en.wind-turbine-models.
com/turbines/71-vestas-v52, 2020.
[Online; accessed 23-November-
2020].
[46] Anand Natarajan, Troels F Pedersen, et al. Remaining Life Assessment of
Offshore Wind Turbines subject to Curtailment. In The 28th International
Ocean and Polar Engineering Conference. International Society of Offshore
and Polar Engineers, 2018.
[47] A Cuerva. Some aspects on wind turbines monitoring. General considerations
and loads on horizontal wind turbines. Technical report, Centro de Investiga-
ciones Energeticas Medioambientales y Tecnologicas (CIEMAT), 1996.
[48] US Paulsen, M Gomiero, Torben J Larsen, and E Benini. Load validation of
aero-elastic simulations with measurements performed on a 850kW horizontal-
axis wind turbine. In The Science of Making Torque from Wind 2018, volume
1037, 2018.
[49] Jennifer M Rinker, Morten H Hansen, and Torben J Larsen. Calibrating a wind
turbine model using diverse datasets. In Journal of Physics: Conference Series,
volume 1037, page 062026. IOP Publishing, 2018.
[50] Antoine Larvol. WindVision Setup and measurement capabilities. Technical
report, Windar Photonics A/S, 2016.
[51] Allan H Murphy. What is a good forecast? An essay on the nature of goodness
in weather forecasting. Weather and forecasting, 8(2):281–293, 1993.
[52] Daniel Zwillinger. CRC standard mathematical tables and formulae. CRC
press, 2002.
[53] Cort J Willmott and Kenji Matsuura. Advantages of the mean absolute error
(MAE) over the root mean square error (RMSE) in assessing average model
performance. Climate research, 30(1):79–82, 2005.
[54] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimiza-
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
[55] François Chollet et al.
Keras.
https://github.com/fchollet/keras,
2015.
75
==PAGE:82==
[56] Alfredo Peña, Jakob Mann, and Nikolay Krasimirov Dimitrov. Turbulence
characterization from a forward-looking nacelle lidar. Wind Energy Science,
2(1):133–152, 2017.
[57] Emmanuel Branlard, Anders Tegtmeier Pedersen, Jakob Mann, Nikolas An-
gelou, Andreas Fischer, Torben Mikkelsen, Michael Harris, C Slinger, and
BF Montes. Retrieving wind statistics from average spectrum of continuous-
wave lidar. Atmospheric Measurement Techniques Discussions, 6(1), 2013.
[58] IN Smalikho. On measurement of the dissipation rate of the turbulent energy
with a cw Doppler lidar. Atmospheric and oceanic optics c/c of optika atmosfery
i okeana, 8:788–793, 1995.
[59] Fiona Dunne, Lucy Y Pao, David Schlipf, and Andrew K Scholbrock. Impor-
tance of lidar measurement timing accuracy for wind turbine control. In 2014
American Control Conference, pages 3716–3721. IEEE, 2014.
[60] David Schlipf, Davide Trabucchi, Oliver Bischoff, Martin Hofsäß, Jakob Mann,
Torben Mikkelsen, Andreas Rettenmeier, J Trujillo, and Martin Kühn. Testing
of frozen turbulence hypothesis for wind turbine applications with a scanning
lidar system. In 15th International symposium for the advancement of boundary
layer remote sensing. ISARS, 2010.
[61] Mahmood Mirzaei and Jakob Mann. Lidar conﬁgurations for wind turbine
control. In J. Phys. Conf. Ser, volume 753, page 019, 2016.
[62] Dominique P Held and Jakob Mann. Comparison of methods to derive ra-
dial wind speed from a continuous-wave coherent lidar Doppler spectrum.
Atmospheric Measurement Techniques, 11(11), 2018.
[63] Jakob Mann. The spatial structure of neutral atmospheric surface-layer turbu-
lence. Journal of ﬂuid mechanics, 273:141–168, 1994.
76
==PAGE:83==
Appendices
77
==PAGE:84==
A
Three-dimensional wind vector
It should theoretically be possible to calculate the three-dimensional wind vector
when the LiDAR system has three or more beams. For the 4-beamed LiDAR used in
the present study, a linear system can be made from the LiDAR conﬁguration and
the four individual LOS:


LOS1
LOS2
LOS3
LOS4

=


cos(α)
−sin(α)
sin(α)
cos(α)
sin(α)
sin(α)
cos(α)
sin(α)
−sin(α)
cos(α)
−sin(α)
−sin(α)




u
v
w


(1)
This essentially means that we can recover the three wind components from four
different combinations of the LOS beams as:
u123 = LOS1+LOS3
2cos(α)
v123 = LOS2−LOS1
2sin(α)
w123 = LOS2−LOS3
2sin(α)
(2)
u124 = LOS2+LOS4
2cos(α)
v124 = LOS2−LOS1
2sin(α)
w124 = LOS1−LOS4
2sin(α)
(3)
u134 = LOS1+LOS3
2cos(α)
v134 = LOS3−LOS4
2sin(α)
w134 = LOS1−LOS4
2sin(α)
(4)
u234 = LOS2+LOS4
2cos(α)
v234 = LOS3−LOS4
2sin(α)
w234 = LOS2−LOS3
2sin(α)
(5)
However, the main drawback of using this method is the instability caused by
the height differences. When using three beams, we will always be using either
the top or the bottom pair which will cause an imbalance. For that reason, we
obtain signiﬁcantly different wind speed components depending on which beam
conﬁguration we choose.
78
==PAGE:85==
B
Periods
Based on the measurement period between 01/08-2020 and 01/12-2020, a total
number of 17,568 10-min periods should theoretically be available. After having
applied the below query to the 10-min database, the number of 10-min periods was
down to 981. The distribution of the 10-min periods is visualized on the timeline
below.
Parameter
Condition
Wind speed
[m/s]
4 < U
Wind direction
[deg]
265 < θ < 295
El. power
[kW]
0 < P
Rotational speed
[RPM]
16 < Ω
Collective pitch
[deg]
θp < 23
79
==PAGE:86==
C
Visualization of turbulence box
The following link will direct you to a short video visualizing a turbulence box that
represents the atmospheric conditions at the test site. The turbulence box is created
using the Mann model [63]. The video also indicates the size of the rotor and the lo-
cations of the LiDARs’ focus points. The video is shared securely with Google Drive.
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1wW2vMTPEH40_BcrfGjoZMTcc27IN-AMc/
view?usp=sharing
80
==PAGE:87==
D
Loss functions and target histogram
2-beam single step
Figure 1: Train and test distributions of (left) electrical power and (right) blade ﬂapwise
bending moment.
Figure 2: Loss history of the train and test sets.
81
==PAGE:88==
4-beam single-step
Figure 3: Train and test distributions of (left) electrical power and (right) blade ﬂapwise
bending moment.
Figure 4: Loss history of the train and test sets.
82
==PAGE:89==
2-beam multi-step
Figure 5: Train and test distributions of (left) electrical power and (right) blade ﬂapwise
bending moment.
Figure 6: Loss history of the train and test sets.
83
==PAGE:90==
4-beam multi-step
Figure 7: Train and test distributions of (left) electrical power and (right) blade ﬂapwise
bending moment.
Figure 8: Loss history of the train and test sets.
84
==PAGE:91==
F
Forecast error statistics and distributions
2-beam model
Figure 9: Rotational speed as function of forecast error.
Figure 10: Blade pitch angle speed as function of forecast error.
Figure 11: Yaw misalignment as function of forecast error.
85
==PAGE:92==
Figure 12: 60-second average wind speed as function of forecast error.
Figure 13: 60-second standard deviation of wind speed as function of forecast error.
86
==PAGE:93==
4-beam model
Figure 14: Rotational speed as function of forecast error.
Figure 15: Blade pitch angle speed as function of forecast error.
Figure 16: Yaw misalignment as function of forecast error.
87
==PAGE:94==
Figure 17: 60-second average wind speed as function of forecast error.
Figure 18: 60-second standard deviation of wind speed as function of forecast error.
Figure 19: 60-second standard deviation of wind speed as function of forecast error.
88
