==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Department of 
Wind Energy 
Master Report 
 
 
 
Numerical simulation of incompressible isothermal flows 
using the Lattice Boltzmann Method 
 
 
Morten Løgstrup Bjerg 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0423 
January 2021 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
Author: Morten Løgstrup Bjerg 
Title: Numerical simulation of incompressible isothermal flows using the 
Lattice Boltzmann Method 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0423 
January 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical University of Denmark 
with a unique integration of research, education, innovation and public/private 
sector consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities develop new 
opportunities and technology for the global and Danish exploitation of wind 
energy. Research focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are central 
for the development, innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education at the education. 
Project period:  
August 2020 – January 2021 
 
ECTS: 30 
 
Education: Master of Science 
 
 
Supervisor: 
Martin O. L. Hansen 
DTU Wind Energy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Remarks: 
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark. 
 
 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399 
4000 Roskilde 
Denmark 
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk 
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This report documents the work of a 30 ECTS master thesis project within the depart-
ment of Wind Energy at the Technical University of Denmark. The project was carried
out under the supervision of Associate Professor Martin O. L. Hansen.
Thank you Martin for introducing me to the Lattice Boltzmann Method and for allowing
me to pursue my own academic interests while patiently guiding me through this project.
Morten L. Bjerg
i
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
In this report, the Lattice Boltzmann Method (LBM) for numerical simulation of
incompressible isothermal ﬂuid ﬂows is investigated. LBM has received increasing
interest within recent years and is considered a viable alternative to Navier-Stokes based
numerical solvers [1][2]. LBM has been adopted by many diﬀerent research communities
utilising computational ﬂuid dynamics. However, despite the maturity of the method
and recent eﬀorts to collect fragmented knowledge into one source by e.g. Kr¨uger et al.
[1], LBM has yet to break through in the wind energy research community. The aim
of this project is to support the broader adoption of the Lattice Boltzmann Method
by outlining the fundamentals of LBM for icompressible isothermal ﬂuid ﬂows in a
concise and accessible manner. The review of the numerical method focusing on only
the most pertinent aspects is backed by three validated benchmark simulations, coded
from scratch in the open-source language Python. Furthermore, the knowledge base of
the LBM wind energy research community is extended by the simulation of a vertical
axis wind turbine using a novel LBM variant.
The three classic validation cases Lid Driven Cavity [3], Backward-facing Step [4]
and Forced Poiseuille Flow show excellent agreement when compared to computational,
experimental and analytical results from literature. These ﬂow cases validate the
implementation of a basic incompressible isothermal LBM solver along with some of
the most common boundary conditions such as velocity inlet, no-slip and open outﬂow.
Building upon the LBM fundamentals the recently developed LBM variant Simpliﬁed
and Highly Stable Lattice Boltzmann Method abbreviated SHSLBM [5] is introduced.
SHSLBM is an improvement in terms of numerical stability and algorithmic simplic-
ity when compared to the common LBM variant using the Bhatnagar-Gross-Krook
(BGK) collision operator [6]. Using SHSLBM, a 2D Actuator Line [7] simulation of
a wind turbine is performed on a high-performance graphical processing unit (GPU).
The turbine simulation manages a respectable 850 mil. grid point updates per second
and the azimuthal blade loads compare well to the results of a validated vortex model [8].
Simulation results found in recently published literature suggest that state-of-the-
art LBM is very attractive for CFD simulations of incompressible ﬂuid ﬂows even at
high Reynolds numbers [9][10]. The competitiveness of LBM is likely to grow even more
in the future following the trend of high-performance computing on GPUs [11].
All the codes developed in this project are made available online for others to use at
https://github.com/mbjerg/LBM codes master thesis.
ii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
2
2
Lattice Boltzmann fundamentals
4
2.1
Physical origin
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
The Lattice Boltzmann Method equations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.1
The lattice structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.2
The Lattice Boltzmann equation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.3
Lattice units and similarity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.4
Stability, accuracy and simulation parameters . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Outlining the basic algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.1
Collision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.2
Streaming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.3
Boundary conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.4
Computation of macroscopic quantities . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Overview of codes and GPU programming
16
3.1
Code overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
GPU programming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
LBM-BGK validation simulations
18
4.1
Lid Driven Cavity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2
Backward-facing Step . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3
Forced Poiseuille Flow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5
Simpliﬁed and Highly Stable LBM
25
5.1
Diﬀerence between common LBM and SHSLBM . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.2
SHSLBM boundary conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.3
Wind turbine Actuator Line model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.4
GPU acceleration with PyCuda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.5
VAWT simulation results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6
Discussion
34
6.1
Evaluation of self-developed code
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6.2
Available LBM software
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.3
Future prospects of LBM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
7
Conclusion
39
References
40
Nomenclature
42
Appendix
45
A
Predictor step GPU kernel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
1
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
Modern wind turbine technology has evolved tremendously over the last decades fol-
lowing the oil crisis of the 1970s. Early prototypes were clunky structures with heavy
concrete towers and tiny rotors (by today’s standards). Given their correspondingly
small power outputs, these early machines served more as symbols of a vision than
viable means of power generation. Wind turbine technology of today has accelerated
beyond what most of the pioneers would have dared to imagine. At the time of writing,
the construction of the largest wind farm in Denmark, Kriegers Flak,1 is well underway.
The total electrical power output of the farm is 604.8MW on a windy day. These huge
wind farm power plants are cost-competitive and the Danish government relies heavily
on wind in order to succeed with their plans for a green transformation. Though modern
wind turbine technology has matured a lot, there is still room for improvement.
Now in order to further advance the ﬁeld of wind energy, sophisticated modern design
tools are required. One such tool is computational ﬂuid dynamics (CFD). CFD is
concerned with numerical simulation of ﬂuid ﬂows and the use of this tool has steadily
increased with the rise in computational power over the years [12][13]. CFD allows engi-
neers to get valuable insights to complex ﬂow behavior which are not easily described by
lower-order models and impractical or downright impossible to study with experiments.
Though CFD is an important part of modern ﬂuid machinery design, the use is still
limited by the considerable computational cost. Accurate large scale computations such
as wind farm simulations are extremely expensive in terms of simulation time [10]. The
acceleration of CFD simulations is therefore of great value to any industry dealing with
ﬂuid dynamics.
Traditional CFD methods are based on numerical approximations of the famous Navier-
Stokes (N-S) equation but an alternative method called the Lattice Boltzmann Method
(LBM) [1][2] has emerged and serves as a promising alternative to conventional N-S
based CFD. Due to the inherently parallel nature of LBM, it can better leverage the
computational power of modern-day supercomputers. Despite the many promising
reports of drastic speed-ups compared to conventional N-S CFD, LBM has not been
broadly adopted by the wind energy community yet.
This slow adoption of the method can possibly be attributed to the fact that the
early form of the method had issues with numerical stability at higher Reynolds num-
bers and was limited to uniform grids [1]. Furthermore, the catalogue of user-friendly
professional grade software is sparse and writing an advanced solver from the bottom is
no trivial task. It requires solid experience in numerical methods, software development
and high-performance computing not to mention suﬃcient time and resources. Hence,
for researchers primarily concerned with the physics of a particular problem, the use of
LBM as a tool can be a challenge in itself. However, the Lattice Boltzmann Method has
evolved a lot over the years and numerical improvements such as the cumulant collision
1https://group.vattenfall.com/dk/vores-forretning/vindprojekter-i-danmark/
kriegers-flak
2
==PAGE:7==
operator [14] have made it possible to perform impressive wind turbine simulations
[9][10] and ambitious open-source software projects such as Palabos [15] have made
LBM more accessible.
This master thesis project aims to support the broader use of LBM for incompressible
isothermal ﬂows in the following three ways.
• Firstly, by outlining the fundamentals of the method in a clear and concise manner.
Providing all the necessary information to write a basic solver from scratch and
the base knowledge needed to use a professional LBM software.
• Secondly, by solving three classic ﬂow cases in Python to solidify the theory and
provide a code base for others to work from.
• Thirdly, by drawing the attention to a very recent and promising LBM variant
called SHSLBM [5]. The capabilities of this new variant is demonstrated by an
advanced simulation of a vertical axis wind turbine.
Finally, the report also includes a discussion about the current state of the Lattice
Boltzmann Method and the future prospects of the method for CFD simulations of
incompressible isothermal ﬂows.
3
==PAGE:8==
2
Lattice Boltzmann fundamentals
This ﬁrst large section of the report cover the absolute fundamentals of the Lattice
Boltzmann Method. It will brieﬂy touch upon the very abstract physical origins of the
model and walk through all the discrete equations required for numerical implementation.
The main reference for this section is the extensive textbook on the subject by Kr¨uger
et al. [1] along with the more application oriented textbook by Mohamad [2].
2.1
Physical origin
It is important to get a feeling for the physical origins of the Lattice Boltzmann Method.
Conventional computational ﬂuid dynamics (CFD) attempts to approximate the famous
Navier-Stokes (N-S) equation (1) which along with the continuity equation (2) govern
the vast majority of ﬂuid ﬂows [16]. The version of the N-S equation and the continuity
equation shown below govern the special but common case of incompressible ﬂows.
∂u
∂t + ∇· (uu) = −1
ρ∇p + ν∇2u
(1)
∇· u = 0
(2)
The (incompressible) Navier-Stokes equation is nothing but conservation of linear
momentum but takes the complicated form of a highly non-linear partial diﬀerential
equation. The unknown variables of which we seek to solve are the three velocity
components u = (u, v, w) and the pressure p and these are functions of the three spatial
coordinates x, y, z and time t itself. Coupled with the continuity equation, governing the
conservation of mass, we have 4 equations and 4 unknowns and the system is closed. The
N-S govern all the beautiful and complex ﬂows we encounter in nature. What is truly
remarkable, is the fact that the N-S belongs to the ﬁeld of continuum mechanics and
only cares about the macroscopic quantities u and p. Observing the chaotic behavior of
something as simple as a drop of milk dissolving in a cup of coﬀee, one could easily think
that such incredible unpredictability must be due to some complicated interactions
happening at the molecular level. The fact of the matter is that all the complexity is
perfectly captured at the macroscopic layer. Knowing u and p at every point in space
at a given instance in time is all we need to predict what happens at the next instance
in time [17].
Figure 1: Cup of coﬀee left overnight on the oﬃce desk. On a macroscopic level, the coﬀee
is cold and perfectly still the morning after. On a microscopic level, the individual particles
are shooting left and right at incredible speeds.
4
==PAGE:9==
Though it is suﬃcient to consider tangible macroscopic quantities when modelling ﬂuid
ﬂows, one might still wonder what really happens at the microscopic scale? At the
microscopic scale, the ﬂuid is made up of an immense number of very small individual
particles, vibrating and moving through space. The molecules interact by collision and
bounce oﬀeach other, exchanging momentum in the process. Now, these collision are
in fact also quite simple and we could predict ﬂuid ﬂows by tracking all these small
particles and their respective collisions. Unfortunately, this would just be impractical
to the point of being unfeasible. It would require too much computer memory and
too many computations to be considered more than a thought experiment and to
be useful for anything but the simplest problems. The Austrian physicist Ludwig
Boltzmann realized that one could also take a mesoscopic view. What really matters is
the probabilistic distribution of particle velocities. Consider the cup of coﬀee depicted
in Fig. 1. It has been left overnight and it appears to be perfectly still and frankly quite
cold. Our macroscopic perception tells us that the velocity ﬁeld u must be practically
zero everywhere. However, on a microscopic level, the particles are moving around in
space at velocities much diﬀerent from the macroscopic motion. Some particles move at
tremendous speeds, hundreds of meters per second, while others are almost at rest. The
macroscopic perception of velocity is a result of the distribution of particle velocities at
that point in space. Let f(x, ξ, t) be the density of particles with velocity ξ at a point
in space x and time t. The continuous Boltzmann transport equation governing the
time evolution of f is shown below in (3). The expression includes the inﬂuence of an
external body force F [1].
∂f
∂t + ξ ∂f
∂x + F
ρ
∂f
∂ξ = Ω(f)
(3)
f is related to the macroscopic variables through moments expressed as integrals over
the whole velocity space. The two lowest order moments relate f to the mass density
ρ (4) and momentum density ρu (5). Higher order moments include the total energy
density and internal energy density. The compact notation is adopted from Kr¨uger et
al. [1] and uses d3ξ to deﬁne the integral as a triple integral over the space of ξ.
ρ(x, t) =
Z
f(x, ξ, t) d3ξ
(4)
ρ(x, t)u(x, t) =
Z
ξf(x, ξ, t) d3ξ
(5)
The collision operator Ω(f) on the right-hand-side of (3) is the troublesome part. This
source term depends on f and Boltzmann’s original collision operator is a complicated
double integral over velocity space which makes (3) an integro-diﬀerential equation
and it is extremely diﬃcult to solve and not of much practical interest [2]. So why
bother working with this abstract transport model? It turns out that the discretized
Boltzmann equation in combination with a simple approximation for Ω(f) results in
surprisingly straightforward and eﬃcient solution algorithm.
5
==PAGE:10==
2.2
The Lattice Boltzmann Method equations
We are gonna make a leap here and jump straight from the continuous Boltzmann
transport equation (3) to the discrete equations, ready for implementation on a computer.
The particle distribution function spans a seven-dimensional space as f is a function of
x, y, z, ξx, ξy, ξz, t. Three spatial coordinates, three coordinates in velocity space and one
in time. The discretization of velocity space reduces the three-dimensional continuous
velocity space to a small set of discrete velocities. This results in numerical stencils
which resemble lattices covered in the next paragraph. Readers left unsatisﬁed by
absence of mathematical derivations are referred to the all-encompassing account given
by Kr¨uger et al. [1].
2.2.1
The lattice structure
The discretized version of the Boltzmann equation is called the Lattice Boltzmann
Equation.
The Lattice part refers to the computational ’stencil’ of the numerical
scheme. Therefore reader needs an introduction to the lattice terminology and the
stencil deﬁnitions in order to understand the numerical algorithm.
Figure 2: A uniform grid is shown on the right and the D2Q9 stencil is enlarged on the
left. D2Q9 has 9 discrete distribution functions fi with indices i = 0, 1, 2.. 8 at each grid
point. These distribution functions are represented by blue arrows pointing in the direction of
propagation. f0 is just a point in the center as it is stationary. Indices 1-8 propagate with
velocity ci to neighbouring points in the arrow direction during a timestep.
While reading this paragraph, inspect Fig. 2 which is a sketch of the D2Q9 stencil
used for all simulations in this project. The ﬂow domain of interest is discretized into
a ﬁnite number of grid points. This is similar to e.g. a ﬁnite diﬀerence grid, though
the lattice grid is spatially uniform. In other words, all grid points are spaced ∆x
apart. Each grid point houses q discrete particle distribution functions fi(x, t). These
are discrete representations of the continuous particle distribution function f of the
Boltzmann transport equation (3). One distribution function typically denoted f0
permanently resides at the lattice node. During a timestep, the other q −1 discrete
6
==PAGE:11==
particle distribution functions fi propagate through space at a velocity ci such that they
arrive at a neighbouring node at exactly time t+∆t. The number of neighbouring nodes
of course depends on the dimensions of the system. For a two-dimensional grid (2D),
each node is surrounded by 8 neighbouring nodes. For a three-dimensional (3D) grid, the
number of neighbours is 26. The diﬀerent possible numerical stencils are named DdQq.
d for the number of spatial dimensions and q for the number of discrete distribution
functions located at each node. Hence, a stencil which is ’linked’ to all neighbouring
nodes in 3D is called D3Q27 (remember f0). The choice of Q is a compromise between
accuracy and computational cost and depends on the complexity of the physics. In
order to properly resolve ﬂow physics at the accuracy of the Navier-Stokes equation,
D2Q9 is commonly used for 2D and D3Q19 or D3Q27 for 3D simulations. In Fig. 2, the
9 discrete distribution functions are depicted as blue arrows pointing in the direction of
propagation towards a neighbouring node and each direction is given an index. E.g. the
discrete particle distribution function propagating straight up has index i = 2 and is
denoted f2. Each direction is associated with a propagation velocity ci and a so-called
directional weight wi and those depend on the particular stencil. For the D2Q9 stencil
the velocity set and weights are shown in (6) and (7).
ci = ∆x
∆t































"
0
0
#
,
for i = 0
"
±1
0
#
,
"
0
±1
#
,
for i = 1, 2, 3, 4
"
±1
±1
#
,
for i = 5, 6, 7, 8
(6)
wi =





4/9
for i = 0
1/9
for i = 1, 2, 3, 4
1/36
for i = 5, 6, 7, 8
(7)
Note that these variables come from the special discretization of velocity space and
appear in the discrete Lattice Boltzmann equations presented in the next subsection.
Lattice stencils also have a distinct speed-of-sound which in the case of D2Q9 is given
by (8) below.
c2
s = 1
3
∆x2
∆t2
(8)
2.2.2
The Lattice Boltzmann equation
Having covered the lattice grid terminology, we are now equipped for the discrete
equations. Lattice Boltzmann equation (9) is the core equation of the Lattice Boltzmann
Method. It describes the change of the discrete particle distribution functions fi over
7
==PAGE:12==
time ∆t as the they propagate from a lattice node at x to a neighbouring node at
x + ci∆t. fi(x, t) changes as particles collide.
fi(x + ci∆t, t + ∆t) = fi(x, t) + Ωi(x, t)
(9)
The redistribution of the particle distribution functions at a lattice node due to par-
ticle collisions is modelled by the so-called collision operator Ωi(x, t). As previously
mentioned, the original collision operator is notoriously diﬃcult to work with. However,
there is a simple collision operator that despite its simplicity can actually simulate
the N-S equations and it is the Bhatnagar-Gross-Krook operator [6]. This collision
operator is often referred to as the BGK operator and Lattice Boltzmann Methods
using BGK are named LBM-BGK. Other collision models exist but only BGK is used
in this project. The BGK operator shown in (10) models the collision by a simple
relaxation of the discrete distribution functions towards an equilibrium distribution
function (11) which depends on the macroscopic quantities u and ρ at the grid point,
the velocity set (6), lattice weights (7) and the lattice speed of sound (8).
Ωi = −fi −f eq
i
τ
∆t
(10)
f eq
i (x, t) = wiρ

1 + u · ci
c2
s
+ (u · ci)2
2c4
s
−u · u
2c2
s

(11)
It can be shown that the so-called relaxation rate τ is directly related to the kinematic
viscosity through (12) [1].
ν = c2
s

τ −∆t
2

↔τ = ν
c2
s
+ ∆t
2
(12)
It is worth elaborating a little bit on the relation between the relaxation constant τ and
the kinematic viscosity ν. The relation is derived through so-called Chapman-Enskog ex-
pansion which is a mathematical procedure establishing the link between the microscopic
equations and continuum mechanics and a common reference is Chapman’s own book
[18]. Performing Chapman-Enskog expansion on the Boltzmann transport equation
with the BGK collision operator results in the incompressible Navier-Stokes equation
and illuminates the relation between τ and ν. This link is of immense importance since
we truly believe the N-S equations faithfully represents ﬂuid physics and any other
numerical technique must in the end approximate N-S. It is important to underline the
fact that the conventional Lattice Boltzmann Method is limited to incompressible ﬂows
as the Chapman-Enskog expansion assumes a small Mach number. The mach number
being the ratio between a characteristic velocity U and the speed of sound cs [16]. In
other words, the changes in density due to pressure should not impact the ﬂow behavior
signiﬁcantly. This constraints might appear to be quite limiting but are in fact valid
for many ﬂows of engineering interest and wind energy aerodynamics is no exception.
The discrete distribution functions fi are related to macroscopic quantities through sum-
mation while the continuous f was related to macroscopic quantities through moments.
The ﬂuid density and ﬂuid velocity are readily obtained through (13) and (14).
ρ(x, t) =
X
i
fi(x, t)
(13)
8
==PAGE:13==
ρu(x, t) =
X
i
cifi(x, t)
(14)
The pressure is obtained through a simple equation of state involving the lattice speed
of sound (8). As stated before, LBM simulates incompressible ﬂuid ﬂows. However, the
pressure ﬁeld is obtained by allowing density to ﬂuctuate just slightly. The density is
directly coupled to the pressure by equation (15) shown below [1].
p′ = c2
sρ′
(15)
ρ′ is the density deviation from the ﬂuid mean density ρ0.
ρ′ = ρ −ρ0
(16)
It is important to emphasize that only the pressure diﬀerences in the domain are physi-
cally meaningful. Similar to the incompressible N-S equation, the absolute pressure is
arbitrary and does not impact the solution [12]. This simple treatment of the pressure
ﬁeld through an equation state is often mentioned as a key advantage of LBM. In
conventional Navier-Stokes based solvers simulating an incompressible ﬂuid, the pres-
sure is obtained by solving the so-called Poisson equation for pressure. It involves the
solution of a sparse matrix equation and it is the most expensive step within these solvers.
The Lattice Boltzmann Method deﬁned by equations (9)-(14) is 2nd order accurate
in space and at least 1st order accurate in time. This order of accuracy is equivalent
to most common N-S solvers [12]. Furthermore, LBM is characterized as an explicit
method as it is not necessary to solve an equation in order to advance in time. This
also makes LBM best suited for transient problems as the ﬁne temporal resolution
associated with explicit methods are costly for steady-state problems compared to
dedicated steady-state N-S solvers [1].
2.2.3
Lattice units and similarity
The LBM has its own unit system and it is important to get a grip of it. Judging by
the numerous questions on this topic posted at the largest LBM community forum 2,
the unit system causes a lot of confusion. Inspecting (9-12), it is evident that ∆x and
∆t appear quite a few times. It is both numerically eﬃcient and convenient to deﬁne
∆x = ∆t = 1 such that the lattice spacing ∆x becomes the fundamental unit for length
and ∆t becomes the fundamental unit for time. This deﬁnition forms the basis for the
so-called lattice unit system which is denoted by a subscript lu. It is perfectly valid
to do so but it means that the physical systems expressed in perhaps SI units needs
to be converted to lattice units prior to simulation. There is also a more convenient
way to work with the lattice unit system. Dimensional analysis of the incompressible
Navier-Stokes equation show that the ﬂow is fully deﬁned by the Reynolds number (17)
alone.
Re = UL
ν
(17)
2https://palabos-forum.unige.ch/
9
==PAGE:14==
U is a characteristic velocity, L a characteristic length and ν is the kinematic viscosity
of the ﬂuid. If the Reynolds number computed in physical units is equal to the Reynolds
number computed in lattice units, dynamic similarity is ensured and the ﬂows are
equivalent if also geometric similarity is respected.
physical units
UL
ν
= UluLlu
νlu
lattice units
(18)
Ulu, Llu and νlu are essentially ’free’ parameters but both numerical stability and
accuracy depend on these values [1]. This leads us to the next section which covers
stability, accuracy and choice of simulation parameters.
2.2.4
Stability, accuracy and simulation parameters
In the previous paragraph, it was made clear that values for Ulu, Llu and νlu must be
chosen such that dynamic similarity is ensured by matching of the Reynolds number.
However, each of these parameters inﬂuence the accuracy and stability of the solver.
• Ulu is a characteristic ﬂow speed deﬁned by some boundary condition, typically
some component of the inﬂow velocity. It is important to understand that the
density is allowed to ﬂuctuate a tiny bit in order to obtain the pressure via an
equation of state. But LBM only recovers the Navier-Stokes equation in the limit
of a small Mach number. In other words, it approximates the incompressible
Navier-Stokes equation and the numerical error scales with the Mach number.
Thus, the Mach number must be kept small. Deﬁning ∆x = ∆t = 1, the speed
of sound in lattice units becomes
p
1/3 ≈0.577. A rule of thumb is to make
sure that Ulu < 0.1 →Malu < 0.173. Note that the Ulu speciﬁed by a boundary
condition might not be representative of the local velocity magnitude all-over the
domain. E.g. the inlet velocity to a converging nozzle might satisfy the low Mach
number requirement, while the outlet might not. In that case, the inlet velocity
must be reduced until the ﬂow can be considered incompressible in the whole
domain.
• νlu is the kinematic viscosity of the ﬂuid in lattice units. This parameter is
quite ﬂexible but aﬀects both the accuracy and stability of the LBM solver. The
best numerical accuracy is obtained for τlu = 1 corresponding to νlu = 1/6 [1].
However, because the characteristic velocity must be kept low Ulu ≪
p
1/3, high
Reynolds number ﬂows can only be simulated with a reasonably low number
of grids points by decreasing the kinematic viscosity νlu. As νlu is decreased, τ
approaches 0.5 (see (12)) and the solver becomes unstable. How close the solver
can get to τ = 0.5 eﬀectively limits the range of possible Reynolds numbers. Note
that because ν has units of [m2/s], the physical viscosity is related to the lattice
viscosity through ν = νlu∆x2/∆t where ∆x and ∆t are in physical units as well.
• Llu directly determines the spatial resolution as it is the number of grid points
representing the physical length L. Increasing the number of grid points increases
the accuracy of the solution but at the expense of a drastically increased compu-
tational cost. As for any numerical method, the spatial resolution should be just
10
==PAGE:15==
suﬃcient to capture the physical behavior to a satisfactory degree of accuracy.
No more, no less and this sweet-spot can be located with a mesh convergence
study. One complication arises though. In LBM, the spatial resolution appears in
the Reynolds number calculation along with Ulu and νlu and one might be forced
to use an excessive number of grid points in order get a stable solution for high
Reynolds number ﬂows. This is a severe problem for BGK collision operator but
can be alleviated by using more sophisticated alternatives to BGK.
2.3
Outlining the basic algorithm
We have now both seen the discretized Lattice Boltzmann equation and how the physical
problem is converted to lattice units by respecting dynamic similarity. We have also
discussed how the key parameters Ulu, Llu and νlu aﬀect the accuracy and stability of
the solver. We are now ready to get an overview of the time-stepping algorithm itself.
Fig. 3 shows the basic outline of the algorithm.
Yes
No
Setup simulation
Collision
Streaming
Boundary conditions
Update macroscopic variables
Done?
Post-processing
Figure 3: Outline of the basic LBM algorithm marching forward in time by sequential
execution of the steps collision, propagation, boundary conditions and macroscopic variables.
The ﬁrst step is to setup the simulation by deﬁning the simulation parameters and
by generating the grid. Then the discrete distribution functions fi are initialized to
represent the initial condition of the physical problem. E.g. if the initial ﬂow-ﬁeld
is perfectly at rest and the pressure ﬁeld is uniform, fi is set equal to the discrete
equilibrium function f eq
i
corresponding to u = 0 and ρ = 1. Following the initialization
comes the actual time-stepping loop consisting of 4 subroutines: collision, streaming,
boundary conditions and macroscopic variables. Collision and streaming is actually a
11
==PAGE:16==
splitting of (9). Collision and streaming could perfectly well be realized in a one-step
procedure which is more eﬃcient but it is common and convenient to perform this split.
The 4 subroutines are covered individually in the subsections below.
2.3.1
Collision
The collision or relaxation towards equilibrium accounts for the non-linear nature of the
governing equation and is purely local. The distribution functions arriving (through
streaming) at a particular grid point all relax towards the equilibrium distribution
function (11) which depends both on the directional index i and the macroscopic values
at that point in space. In the case of the D2Q9 stencil, this means that 9 distribution
functions have to be computed at each grid point and relaxed towards equilibrium. It
is a lot of ﬂoating point operations but on the upside it is a purely local operation and
embarrassingly parallel.
The resulting relaxed distribution functions are denoted f ∗
i . Equation (19) shows
the relaxation computation for the BGK collision operator model. Note that it is simply
the right-hand-side of the Lattice Boltzmann equation (9) combined with (10).
f ∗
i (x, t) = fi(x, t)

1 −∆t
τ

+ f eq
i (x, t)∆t
τ
collision
(19)
2.3.2
Streaming
The streaming step moves all the post-collision distribution functions f ∗
i to the respective
neighbouring grid point as expressed by (20) and visualized in Fig. 4. As an example, in
the particular case of the D2Q9 stencil, f ∗
5 located at grid point [igrid, jgrid] propagates
at a velocity of c5 = (1, 1)∆x/∆t and thus arrives at grid point [igrid + 1, jgrid + 1] over
the time of one iteration ∆t. This streaming can be executed as an embarrassingly
parallel operation by copying from one array to another. All nodes within the bulk ﬂow
stream in the described manner, however, boundary nodes stream diﬀerently to account
for boundary conditions. The required modiﬁcation is treated in the next chapter.
fi(x + ci∆t, t + ∆t) = f ∗
i (x, t)
streaming
(20)
12
==PAGE:17==
streaming
Figure 4: During the streaming step, fi’s with indices 1-8 (D2Q9) propagate along their
characteristic lines to a neighbouring grid point. The drawing only shows the streaming
process of the central grid point but the process applies to all grid points in the domain except
the boundary nodes which stream diﬀerently.
2.3.3
Boundary conditions
Boundary conditions are a essentially what deﬁnes the solution to any partial diﬀerential
equation. From a numerical point of view, careful treatment is essential as the accuracy
of the boundary conditions impact the accuracy of the overall solution. Even when the
number of boundary nodes only make up a fraction of the total number of nodes in the
domain. It is thus both important to pick boundary conditions that faithfully capture
the physics of the problem and implement these boundary conditions with a numerical
accuracy corresponding to at least that of the bulk solution.
In this section, only the so-called bounce-back method is covered. This method alone
is suﬃcient to simulate the so-called Lid Driven Cavity benchmark problem. Other
boundary conditions will be introduced as needed later on in the report. Bounce-back is
probably the most famous of all boundary condition types within the LBM framework.
It can be used to impose Dirichlet type boundary conditions for velocity. Meaning
that a known velocity can be enforced at a boundary. This also includes the no-slip
condition which speciﬁes that the ﬂuid velocity at solid wall is exactly equal to the wall
velocity. Now, in conventional Navier-Stokes based CFD, the macroscopic properties
directly appear in the equations [12]. In other words, if the velocity is zero at a wall, a
velocity of zero can simply be inserted in the discretized equations at the wall node.
However, within LBM, velocity and density (indirectly pressure) are found as moments
of the discrete distribution functions at a node. The issue is that this leaves multiple
degrees of freedom. For the D2Q9 stencil, it is a combination of 9 discrete distribution
functions fi which must results in the desired macroscopic properties (velocity and
pressure) at the boundary node [1]. The bounce-back scheme works by modifying the
streaming step according to (21) for fi’s propagating through a physical boundary. uw
13
==PAGE:18==
is the boundary velocity and ρw is the boundary density. uw is a known value and
ρw can be approximated as the local value at the boundary position denoted xb. The
post-collision distribution functions f ∗
i streaming through a boundary are reﬂected back
into the domain. Subscript ˆi means the opposing index. E.g. index i = 3 is opposite
index i = 1 and vice versa (see Fig. 2).
fˆi(xb, t + ∆t) = f ∗
i (xb, t) −2wiρw
ci · uw
c2
s
(21)
This is best explained by an example. Fig. 5 illustrate the streaming step at a boundary
node next to a vertical boundary. After collision at time t, the distribution functions
with index 2, 5, and 8 stream along their characteristic lines to a neighbouring node and
reach their destination at t + ∆t. Ready for the next collision. Distribution functions
with index 6, 3 and 7 are about to stream out of the domain through the boundary
and are instead reﬂected back such that f8 = f ∗
6, f1 = f ∗
3 and f5 = f ∗
7. It is very
important to note that the location of the boundary is ∆x/2 from the boundary node.
This bounce-back scheme is 2nd accurate just like the discretization of the bulk ﬂow.
There is a variation of the bounce-back scheme where the wall is perceived as being
located exactly on the boundary node. This bounce-back scheme is easier to implement
but the accuracy degrades to 1st order.
Figure 5: Bounce-back modiﬁes the streaming at the boundary grid points. Grid points
located next to a physical boundary. Distribution functions located at a boundary node
position xb streaming through the boundary are reﬂected back into the domain. Note that
the actual physical boundary is located ∆x/2 from the boundary node.
2.3.4
Computation of macroscopic quantities
The last step within the main loop does not require much elaboration. The collision
and subsequent streaming of the distribution functions must now be reﬂected at the
macroscopic level. Both ρ and u are readily obtained through the simple summations
14
==PAGE:19==
shown in (13) and (14). Macroscopic quantities which are then used to compute the
equilibrium distribution functions in the next timestep.
15
==PAGE:20==
3
Overview of codes and GPU programming
In the upcoming sections of the report, results of 4 simulations are presented. This
short section gives an overview of the source codes and provides some technical details
which might be of interest to the reader. The source codes have all been made publicly
available at https://github.com/mbjerg/LBM codes master thesis in case the reader
would like to inspect those.
3.1
Code overview
Table 1 lists the 4 codes developed in this project along with the section of the report it
appears in and the requirements in terms of programming language and hardware. The
primary language is Python 3 for all simulations. Speciﬁcally Python version 3.7.4 but
no exotic features were used so any recent version of Python 3 should work just ﬁne. A
few common Python modules were used. Most noteworthy is the Numpy module which
greatly extends the numerical capabilities of the Python language. Numpy routines are
actually compiled C code which means that computations using this module execute at
almost the speed of high performance languages like C, C++ and Fortran.
Codes 1-3 listed in Table 1 make extensive use of Numpy but execute in serial. Serial
meaning that they do not take advantage of the multi-core architecture of modern
central processing units (CPUs). The last code, 4 in Table 1, exploits the parallel
nature of the LBM algorithm.
Table 1: Overview of the codes developed in this project. The codes are written in Python
3.7.4 and depend on common Python modules such as Numpy, Numba and Matplotlib. The
VAWT code runs on Nvidia GPUs using the module PyCuda.
Code
Section
Language
Hardware
1. Lid Driven Cavity
4.1
Python 3
CPU
2. Backward-facing Step
4.2
Python 3
CPU
3. Forced Poiseuille Flow
4.3
Python 3
CPU
4. VAWT
5
Python 3, Cuda C
CPU, Nvidia GPU
3.2
GPU programming
Using the Python module PyCuda, it is possible to execute code in parallel on Nvidia
graphical processing units (GPUs). The parts of the code executing on the GPU is
written in Cuda C which is a programming language developed speciﬁcally for Nvidia
GPUs but it is very similar to plain C [19]. GPU programming introduces some non-
trivial concepts and a signiﬁcant eﬀort was put into learning the basics of PyCuda and
Cuda C in this project. It is well worth the eﬀort though and GPU programming can
be very powerful if the numerical algorithm is suitable [11].
A single CPU found in a consumer grade computer typically has 2-16 cores. Each
core is optimized to solve a single task as fast as possible such that an action like
16
==PAGE:21==
opening a browser window happens quickly. If the task can be split into multiple partial
problems, it can be divided among the cores and solved in parallel. The motivation
behind GPUs was diﬀerent as they were invented to eﬃciently render pixels on a
computer screen. Each pixel can be rendered independently from the other pixels and
it is an inherently parallel task. The speed of which one pixel is rendered does not
matter. What matters instead is how fast the full screen is updated. While each GPU
’core’ is slow-paced compared to a CPU core, a high-end GPU has thousands of them
working in parallel at the same time. A GPU is said to be optimized for throughput. An
excellent reference on Nvidia GPU programming is the Nvidia Programming Guide [19].
Explaining GPU programming in detail is outside the scope of this report, the main
point is that code 4 runs in parallel on Nvidia GPUs which means that the computa-
tional burden is spread across hundreds an even thousands of independent cores working
at the same time. Code 4 was developed on a laptop with a Nvidia GeForce GTX
960M GPU. This GPU has 2GB memory and thus cannot store large grids. However,
the DTU Computing Center 3 maintains multiple high-performance Nvidia GPUs
accessible to students. The large grid required for the code 4 simulation was performed
on one of these Nvidia Tesla V100 16GB GPUs.
3https://www.hpc.dtu.dk/
17
==PAGE:22==
4
LBM-BGK validation simulations
This section of the report presents the three LBM simulations named: Lid Driven
Cavity, Backward-facing step and Forced Poiseuille Flow. Each ﬂow case is presented
separately and additional theory, beyond what has already been covered in section 2, is
introduced as needed. The simulation results are compared against published literature
in order to validate the practical implementation. Note that a few variable names are
reused between ﬂow cases. The deﬁnition of the variable should be clear from the
context of the subsection it appears in.
4.1
Lid Driven Cavity
Fluid dynamicists need no introduction to the classic Lid Driven Cavity ﬂow. However,
for the sake of clarity, this benchmark problem is brieﬂy introduced. Lid Driven Cavity
is a 2D square cavity occupied by a ﬂuid. Three solid walls are stationary and one
wall (the lid) is translating at a constant speed and drives a rotating ﬂow ﬁeld. Lid
Driven Cavity is a common validation case within CFD in general and e.g. the study
by Perumal and Dass [20] include a similar LBM simulation. The cavity geometry is
sketched in Fig. 6.
x
y
U
L
L
(a)
(b)
Figure 6: (a) Lid Driven Cavity sketch. (b) Streamline plot giving a qualitative impression
of the Lid Driven Cavity ﬂow upon reaching a steady-state with a Reynolds number of 1000.
The ﬂow is fully-deﬁned by the Reynolds number (22). U is the lid translation speed,
L is the domain dimension and ν the kinematic viscosity of the ﬂuid.
Re = UL
ν
(22)
It is common to simulate a Reynolds number of 1000 as the resulting ﬂow ﬁeld has
some interesting qualitative characteristics and converges to a steady state which makes
18
==PAGE:23==
it convenient to validate against reference results. The Lid Driven Cavity is simulated
only using the information already provided in the theory sections since all boundary
conditions can be modelled with the bounce-back method. The LBM simulation was
carried out with a grid resolution of 251×251 points meaning that the characteristic
length in lattice units becomes Llu = 251. The kinematic viscosity was set to a stable
value of νlu = 0.01 (lattice unit system) and the magnitude of the lid velocity must
necessarily be |Ulu| ≈0.04 in order to match the Reynolds number of 1000. This
corresponds to a small Mach number of 0.07 and the incompressibility assumption is
valid. The steady-state convergence criteria was based on the the global mean kinetic
energy. The relative change of the mean kinetic energy per timestep was checked every
500 iterations and the steady-state tolerance was set to 10−6. The convergence criteria
could arguably be lowered but 61, 000 grid points turned out to be a signiﬁcant burden
for the serial Python solver and the results are in excellent agreement with reference
data from literature.
Figure 7:
Dimensionless steady-state pressure and velocity proﬁles sampled along the
horizontal and vertical centerlines. The velocities u and v are made dimensionless by |U| and
the pressure p by ρ0U2. The pressure is set to zero at the cavity center in order to compare
with the computations by Bruneau & Saad [3]. The spatial resolutions is 251×251 nodes.
Fig. 7 show horizontal and vertical velocity and pressure proﬁles compared to the
simulation results by Bruneau & Saad [3]. A qualitative impression of the steady-state
ﬂow ﬁeld is given by the streamline plot in Fig. 6. Both the expected large primary
vortex in the middle of the cavity and the two secondary vortices located in the bottom
19
==PAGE:24==
corners are clearly visible. This validates the basic implementation of the Lattice
Boltzmann Method and is the critical foundation for further extensions.
4.2
Backward-facing Step
Backward-facing-step is another classic benchmark case which has been thoroughly
investigated over the years. Diﬀerent variations of course exists but in this project,
a setup matching that of the experiment of Armaly et al. [4] is chosen. Fig. 8 is a
schematic drawing of the geometry. The simulation is similar to that of Rullaud et al.
[21] though they used a diﬀerent collision operator.
s
h
x
y
fully developed inflow
open outflow boundary
step expansion
Figure 8: Schematic drawing of the backwards-facing-step domain. A fully developed velocity
proﬁle enters on the left and suddenly expands at an expansion ratio of S/h = 0.94. Far
downstream a fully developed velocity proﬁle is reestablished.
It is again a two-dimensional problem but in this case a ﬂuid ﬂow is driven through
a long channel which suddenly expands at a ratio of S/h = 0.94. This results in
ﬂow separation and a recirculation region is established just behind the step. Far
downstream of the step, a fully developed channel ﬂow is reestablished and the ﬂow
exits the domain. For high Reynolds numbers, the exact extend of the recirculation
region can be diﬃcult to capture which makes this particular benchmark popular for
comparing the performance of diﬀerent turbulence models. In this small study of a
steady laminar ﬂow at a low Reynolds number of 389, only the velocity proﬁles are
compared to those of the measurements of Armaly et al. [4]. The Reynolds number is
in the experiment deﬁned based on two times the channel height 2h and the mean inlet
velocity U.
Re = 2hU
ν
(23)
In the real experiment by Armaly et al. [4], the channel naturally has a third dimension
but the three-dimensional eﬀects are negligible. When conducting the experiment, a
long entrance before the step-expansion is necessary such that velocity proﬁle upon
reaching the expansion can be considered fully developed. For a laminar pipe ﬂow, it
can be shown that the fully developed velocity proﬁle is parabolic [16]. Assuming that
y = 0 is the bottom wall of the channel, the fully developed inﬂow proﬁle is exactly
described by (24). hhalf is half the full channel height h and umax is the centerline
velocity uin(hhalf). Note that the mean velocity used in the deﬁnition of the Reynolds
20
==PAGE:25==
number is related to the maximum velocity through U = 2/3umax.
uin(y) = umax
 
1 −(y −hhalf)2
h2
half
!
,
y ∈[0, h]
(24)
The long entrance region is not necessary for the simulation though as the fully developed
proﬁle (24) can be imposed as a boundary condition close to the step, saving grid
points while still respecting the physics of the problem. The boundary condition at the
inlet is thus implemented by inserting the parabolic function (24) into the standard
bounce-back equation (21). The backwards-facing-step also requires the introduction of
a new boundary condition. The ﬂow leaves the domain with a velocity which is not
known before the simulation. This calls for an open boundary condition such as the
anti-bounce-back method [1] described by equation (25).
fˆi(xb, t + ∆t) = −f ∗
i (xb, t) + 2wiρw

1 + (ci · uw)2
2c4
s
−u2
w
2c2
s

where
uw = u(xb) + 1
2[u(xb) −u(xb+1)]
(25)
Note how the unknown boundary velocity uw is extrapolated from known values at the
internal points u(xb) and u(xb+1). The subscript b + 1 refers to the grid point next to
the boundary grid point u(xb) following the wall normal direction. ρw is set equal to
the reference ﬂuid density ρ0.
A velocity magnitude plot of the steady-state velocity ﬁeld is shown in Fig. 9, in-
dicating the recirculation region just behind the step. The recirclation region is also
evident from the plots in Fig. 10 showing an inversion of the velocity proﬁles. The
velocity proﬁles match the experiment of Armaly et al.[4] very well and validate the
implementation of both a non-uniform inlet proﬁle and the open outﬂow boundary
condition.
Figure 9: Visualization of the steady-state velocity magnitude ﬁeld for the backwards-facing-
step simulation. The x-axis is normalized by the step height S and the y-axis is normalized
by the channel inlet height h. The velocity magnitude is normalized by the centerline velocity
at the inlet. The Reynolds number is 389 to match the experiment of Armaly et al.[4].
21
==PAGE:26==
Figure 10: Velocity proﬁles at four diﬀerent downstream positions. The proﬁles are nor-
malized by the inlet centerline velocity. The proﬁles are in excellent agreement with the
experiment of of Armaly et al.[4]. Note that the leftmost plot is exactly at the expansion
point (x/S = 0) which is why the velocity is zero below y/h = 0.
4.3
Forced Poiseuille Flow
This last validation case is about external forces. The study of a laminar ﬂow though
a 2D channel sketched in Fig. 11 is perhaps the simplest case of a ﬂow driven by an
external body force and referred to as Forced Poiseuille Flow in this report. A similar
simulation is carried out by e.g. Kr¨ueger et al. [1].
periodic inflow
periodic outflow
x
y
flow driven by body force
H
Figure 11: Schematic drawing of the simulation setup of the forced channel ﬂow simulation.
A periodic boundary condition coupling between outlet and inlet mimics the physics of an
inﬁnitely long channel. A constant body force acts at every point in space. Starting from rest,
the ﬂow develops into a parabolic velocity proﬁle given by the analytical solution (27).
This last validation validation case is about external forces. The study of a laminar
ﬂow though a 2D channel sketched in Fig. 11 is perhaps the simplest case of a ﬂow
driven by an external body force. Given the simplicity of problem, it happens to have
an analytical solution which makes it an excellent benchmark to validate body force
implementations. Starting from rest, the ﬂow develops until it reaches a steady state
characterized by a constant parabolic velocity proﬁle. The steady-state velocity is
one-dimensional as u(y) only depends on the y-coordinate. The ﬂow is driven by either
a body force Fx acting in the x-direction only and/or a pressure gradient ∂p/∂x and
22
==PAGE:27==
the analytical expression is given by equation (26) assuming a coordinate system with
y = 0 at the center of the channel (see Fig. 11) [1].
u(y) = 1
2ν
∂p
∂x −Fx
 "
y2 −
H
2
2#
,
y ∈

−H
2 , H
2

(26)
H is the channel height and ν is the kinematic viscosity of the ﬂuid. Only considering
the constant body force Fx as a driving mechanism, we are left with
u(y) = −Fx
2ν
"
y2 −
H
2
2#
(27)
and the maximum velocity located at the channel center y = 0 must be
umax = FxH2
8ν
(28)
The Reynolds number is deﬁned based on the centerline velocity and the channel height.
Re = Humax
ν
(29)
The analytical solution is for a fully developed ﬂow. The fully developed ﬂow can be
achieved even in a small domain by simulating a pipe of inﬁnite length. A periodic
boundary coupling is made between the inlet and outlet. Whatever ﬂows through the
outﬂow boundary is prescribed on the inﬂow side and vice versa. This conveniently
translate directly to the streaming process of the LBM algorithm. As an example, f1 at
an outﬂow boundary node propagates out of the domain during streaming and becomes
f1 at the corresponding inlet point.
Now, the body force implementation in LBM is not quite as simple. Recall that
the boundary condition treatment is complicated by the many diﬀerent implementa-
tions resulting in the same behavior at the N-S level. This same goes for external body
force modelling. The method used for this project, perhaps the most popular one, is
called Guo forcing [22]. Guo forcing works by adding a source term Si to the collision
operator. In the presence of a force, the collision step is now performed according to
equation (30) instead of (19).
f ∗
i (x, t) = fi(x, t)

1 −∆t
τ

+ f eq
i (x, t)∆t
τ + Si(x, t)∆t
(30)
The source term is deﬁned as in equation (31) below.
Si(x, t) =

1 −∆t
2τ

wi
ci −u
c2
s
+ (ci · u)ci
c4
s

· F
(31)
Finally, an additional term is added to the velocity ﬁeld in the presence of a force in
order to achieve second-order space-time accuracy [1]. The macroscopic velocity is now
obtained from fi with (32) instead of (14).
u(x, t) = 1
ρ
X
i
cifi(x, t) −F ∆t
2ρ
(32)
23
==PAGE:28==
An arbitrary low Reynolds of 50 number within the laminar regime for channel ﬂows
was simulated. The kinematic viscosity was set to the optimal value νlu = 1/6 and the
pipe height was resolved with 100 grid points so Hlu = 100. Dynamic similarity then
requires umax,lu = 0.083 and these parameters are inserted in (28) to isolate for the
body force in the lattice unit system Fx,lu. The time-evolution of the centerline velocity
was monitored to ensure that the ﬂow had reached a steady state upon termination.
A velocity magnitude plot is shown in Fig. 12 along with the horizontal velocity
proﬁle. The agreement is excellent as expected and validates the implementation of
a body force. However, is is important to remark that the simulation predicts the
centerline velocity to be ≈2% higher than the exact analytical solution. This is a
well-known issue with the BGK collision operator and referred to as the velocity slip
problem [1]. The problem stems from the fact even though the physical wall is assumed
to be located ∆x/2 from the boundary node, the actual location is weakly dependent
on the value of τ and thus the kinematic viscosity ν. This is another drawback of
the simple BGK collision operator and can resolved by adopting more sophisticated
collision operators. Diﬀerent choices of collision operators will be treated in more depth
in the discussion section.
(a)
(b)
Figure 12: (a) Velocity magnitude plot of the channel ﬂow at steady-state. The magnitude
is normalized by the centerline velocity of the exact analytical solution umax. (b) Velocity
proﬁle predicted by the LBM simulation compared to the exact analytical solution and also
normalized by umax.
24
==PAGE:29==
5
Simpliﬁed and Highly Stable LBM
Hopefully, it has become clear that the conventional LBM algorithm is somewhat simple
despite the abstract background theory. However, LBM-BGK suﬀers from serious
stability issues at moderate to high Reynolds numbers. All the validation simulations
in presented in the previous sections are laminar and essentially toy problems in the
context of modern CFD. However, in this section we will instead drastically improve
the stability by implementing a variation of LBM which is at the forefront of LBM
research. The variation has been named the Simpliﬁed and Highly Stable Lattice
Boltzmann Method and is more conveniently referred to as SHSLBM. The method is
covered in depth in the book Simpliﬁed and Highly Stable Lattice Boltzmann Method:
Theory and Applications by Chen and Shu published September 2020 [23] . The ﬁrst
articles on SHSLBM date back only a couple of years (see [5]). Furthermore, we will
also be using GPU acceleration, leading to a signiﬁcant speed-up compared to the
previous LBM-BGK implementations in this project. Improving the stability and the
computational speed enables us to perform a 2D simulation of a vertical axis wind
turbine (VAWT) using the Actuator Line method (AL).
5.1
Diﬀerence between common LBM and SHSLBM
So how does the SHSLBM diﬀer from conventional LBM? Conventional LBM models
the time evolution of the discrete particle distribution function fi which is directly
linked to the macroscopic quantities through summation. In fact, in order to advance
in time, one does not even have to store the macroscopic quantities. One can save the
eﬀort of reading/writing to the memory and just compute the macroscopic quantities
on the ﬂy when needed for the equilibrium distribution function f eq
i .
SHSLBM avoids the whole trouble of working with fi completely by using a predictor-
corrector step approach. The predictor and corrector steps are shown below in (33) and
are derived in the aforementioned book by Chen and Shu [23].
ρ∗=
X
i
f eq
i (x −ci∆x, t −∆t)
predictor step
ρ∗u∗= ci
X
i
f eq
i (x −ci∆x, t −∆t)
(33)
ρ(x, t) = ρ∗
corrector step
ρ(x, t)u(x, t) = ρ∗u∗(τ −1)
X
i
f eq
i (x + ci∆x, t)
−(τ −1)ρ(x, t −∆t)u(x, t −∆t) + F ∆t
SHSLBM still faithfully approximates the Boltzmann transport equation and also takes
advantage of the simple BGK collision operator but the algorithm is expressed through
macroscopic quantities. The expressions for the equilibrium distribution function f eq
i ,
the BGK relaxation constant τ appearing in predictor-corrector steps and the velocity
stencils are exactly those already presented in the theory section. The important
implications of using SHSLBM is covered in the bullet points below.
25
==PAGE:30==
• Working with macroscopic quantities greatly simpliﬁes the treatment of boundary
conditions. In conventional LBM, a wide variety of boundary condition methods
enforce the same macroscopic boundary condition due to the extra degrees of
freedom when modelling fi. Furthermore, some non-trivial bookkeeping is required
to enforce the boundary conditions. This is especially a headache in 3D and makes
it challenging to write a clean generic algorithm. As SHSLBM indirectly models
fi using the macroscopic quantities, boundary conditions can thus be enforced in
a straight-forward manner just like N-S based solvers.
• SHSLBM is less memory hungry. With conventional LBM, a D3Q27 stencil has
to store 27 distribution functions at each grid point but is not required to store
the macroscopic ﬁelds: u, v, w, ρ. With SHSLBM, only macroscopic ﬁelds must
be kept in memory. This is more important than one might think. For instance,
the most resourceful HPC CPU node at DTU Physics has a staggering 760GB
of memory while most top-end GPU’s only have 32GB memory. LBM is often
praised for its performance on GPU’s where storage is a real concern for large
grids.
• The most important advantage of SHSLBM over LBM-BGK is the stability. The
predictor-corrector type algorithm retains the 2nd order spatial accuracy but with
a dramatic increase in stability. In other words, it is possible to drive τ much
closer to the limit of 0.5.
• An obvious drawback of SHSLBM is the additional computational cost of having
to traverse through the domain twice. Once for the predictor step and once for the
corrector step. Hence, the naive prediction would be that SHSLBM is twice the
cost of conventional LBM. In practice it is most likely more complicated than that
as the speed also comes down to how well the algorithm exploits the hardware
resource. It is also noteworthy that the reported speed-ups of LBM over N-S are
generally much higher than a factor of two so this additional cost of SHSLBM
could very well be worth it considering the beneﬁts outlined in the bullet points
above.
5.2
SHSLBM boundary conditions
As mentioned, the SHSLBM boundary treatment is simpler than that of the conventional
LBM-BGK. Recall that with the bounce-back method, the collision and streaming
steps apply to all grid points in the domain and boundary conditions are enforced
by modifying the streaming process for grid points next to a physical boundary. The
boundary grid point does not coincide with the location of the physical boundary.
Instead, the physical boundary is perceived as being located at a distance ∆x/2 from
the boundary grid point. However, in the SHSLBM variant, the predictor and corrector
steps only apply to internal grid points. In other words, grid points which are located
within the bulk ﬂuid. The boundary grid points in SHSLBM do coincide with the
boundary and are directly prescribed by the physical boundary value. Values unknown
at the boundary are approximated from internal grid points to the desired accuracy.
26
==PAGE:31==
Let us make it concrete by going through the boundary conditions needed to model the
vertical axis wind turbine. In order to model the VAWT, a velocity boundary condition
is required along with an open boundary condition at the outlet of the domain. As
shown in Fig. 13, the free wind speed V∞(x-direction) is assumed known at the inlet
and the two lateral boundaries. At the outlet boundary, the pressure is assumed to be
a ﬁxed static pressure p0. Since the absolute pressure does not matter, we can enforce a
constant pressure outlet by specifying ρ0 to be some arbitrary value like 1 lattice units
at this boundary. The key point is that ﬁxed known values like V∞and ρ0 just need to
be assigned to the respective boundary grid points and require no special treatment
in regards to collision/streaming since the predictor and corrector steps only apply to
internal grid points.
Though some values are known at the boundaries, the pressure is left free at the
velocity boundaries (inlet and lateral) and the velocity is left free at the outlet boundary.
Left free meaning that the gradient normal to the wall is zero. Using Taylor expansion,
it can be shown [13] that the ﬁrst derivative g(1) of some arbitrary scalar function g
can be approximated by a one-sided 3-point stencil on a uniform grid as shown in (34).
g(1)(xb) =
1
2∆x[−3g(xb) + 4g(xb+1) −g(xb+2)]
(34)
Here, we again use the notation xb to denote a boundary grid point and xb+1 and xb+2
are the two internal grid points in the wall normal direction. Now, if the derivative g(1)
is zero, (34) yields an approximation for the boundary value g(xb).
g(xb) = 4g(xb+1) −g(xb+2)
3
(35)
The approximation is formally 2nd order accurate [13] like the bulk LBM scheme. Using
(35), the pressure (or rather density) can be approximated at velocity boundaries and
the velocity can be approximated at the outlet pressure boundary.
It is important to note that the approximation (35) depends on internal points which
are updated both in the predictor step and the corrector step of the SHSLBM algorithm.
Hence, the boundary value approximations also have to be updated two times during
an iteration. Once after the predictor step and again after the corrector step.
5.3
Wind turbine Actuator Line model
The vertical axis wind turbine (VAWT) under investigation is a classic H-type turbine
with two straight blades. These types of turbines can be modelled fairly well in 2D by
considering a horizontal cross plane through the rotor. This 2D view is depicted in Fig.
13 and from this perspective the VAWT is simply two airfoils rotating about a central
axis. The modelling results are assumed to be valid at every vertical position and can
thus be multiplied by the turbine height to give the total forces on the turbine. This
method of course neglects the more complicated interactions at the blade tips. Table 2
lists the geometric parameters of the turbine and the simulated operating conditions.
27
==PAGE:32==
Table 2: Parameters deﬁning the geometry and the operating conditions of the VAWT. Nb
is the number of blades, λ is the tip-speed-ratio, D is the turbine diameter, cb is the airfoil
chord length, V∞is the free wind speed and αp is the blade pitch angle.
Airfoil
Nb
λ
D [m]
cb [m]
V∞[m/s]
αp [deg]
NACA 0021
2
2.58
2
0.265
8
6
V
V
V
p0
D
x
y
Figure 13: Schematic drawing of the computational domain. The free stream velocity V∞is
imposed on both the inlet boundary on the left and on the two lateral boundaries. The ﬂow
leaves the domain through the pressure boundary on the right. Note that the airfoils are just
for the purpose of visualization. In the Actuator Line model, the airfoils are replaced by body
forces.
The presence of the airfoil is modelled using the Actuator Line method (AL) [7]. Instead
of resolving the geometry of the airfoils, the presence of the blade is represented by a
body force computed from tabulated airfoil polars. This simpliﬁcation has two impor-
tant implications. Firstly, the very thin boundary layer at the airfoil surface does not
have to be spatially resolved with AL. In order to get accurate lift and drag prediction
of airfoils with CFD, the spatial resolution close to the airfoil surface must be very high.
In practice, this requires a non-uniform mesh to save grid points further away form the
airfoil and even then, is quite expensive. Secondly, one does not have to deal with the
trouble of dynamic meshing. A moving airfoil requires the mesh to be updated every
timestep to account for the movement of the airfoil. In the AL framework, the body
force is simply moved and the mesh is static.
Having determined the blade position θ at the given timestep, the local wind speed a the
blade position, Vx and Vy, is sampled from the latest computation of the velocity ﬁeld.
The x- and y-components are projected on to the tangential and normal directions as
shown in (36). The coordinate systems are deﬁned in Fig. 14. The tangential velocity
28
==PAGE:33==
Vrel,t experienced by the blade also includes ωR due to the rotational speed of the
turbine. ω is the angular velocity related to the tip-speed-ratio λ through λ = ωR/V∞.
Vrel,t = ωR + Vx cos(θ) + Vy sin(θ)
and
Vrel,n = Vx sin(θ) −Vy cos(θ)
(36)
The inﬂow angle φ between the airfoil and local relative wind is directly computed from
normal and tangential components. Subtracting the blade pitch αp from the inﬂow
angle gives the eﬀective angle of attack α.
φ = arctan
Vrel,n
Vrel,t

,
α = φ −αp
(37)
The lift and drag coeﬃcients Cl(α) and Cd(α) are now interpolated from tabulated
airfoil polars and the resulting lift and drag is computed as shown in (39). The airfoil
polars come from either wind tunnel experiments, high-ﬁdelity CFD simulations or
panel methods.
V 2
rel = V 2
rel,t + V 2
rel,n
(38)
l = 1
2ρ0V 2
relcbCl(α)
and
d = 1
2ρ0V 2
relcbCd(α)
(39)
The lift and drag is now known in the coordinate system of the relative wind. These
forces are now projected on to the normal and tangential directions for post-processing
and on to the xy-coordinate system such that the forces can be applied to the ﬂuid.
Pt = d cos(φ) −l sin(φ)
and
Pn = l cos(φ) + d sin(φ)
(40)
Px = Pt cos(θ) + Pn sin(θ)
and
Py = Pt sin(θ) −Pn cos(θ)
(41)
x
y
t
n
Vrel
α
αp
Figure 14: Geometrical deﬁnitions of the VAWT model.
The computed blade forces pushing back on the ﬂuid, F b = [−Px, −Py], are point
forces in the current form and needs to be spread out as a volumetric force to better
mimic the physical presence of an actual airfoil. This can be achieved in the multiple
ways but in this project an isotropic 2D Gaussian kernel function is used, inspired by
Rullaud et al. [21]. The force F experienced at a grid point due to the presence of a
blade depends on the blade force F b, the distance between the blade position and the
grid point |rb| and a spreading parameter ϵ as shown in (42). The spreading parameter
is set equal to the airfoil chord ϵ = cb.
F =
1
ϵ2πexp
 
−
|rb|
ϵ
2!
F b
(42)
29
==PAGE:34==
5.4
GPU acceleration with PyCuda
The source code for the VAWT simulation takes advantage of GPU acceleration. GPUs
are highly specialized pieces of hardware and GPUs still need a CPU to run the operating
system and to control the general structure and ﬂow of the program. The CPU is
therefore referred to as the host and the GPU is called the device. The expensive but
highly parallel parts of the algorithm can be written as special GPU functions. These
GPU speciﬁc functions known as kernels are called from the host (CPU) and executed
on the device (GPU). Since the host and the device do not share memory, data must
be transferred back and forth between host and device. This memory transfer is slow
and a well-written GPU code attempts to avoid it. In VAWT simulation code, most
steps in the time-marching loop runs on the GPU. The actual predictor step kernel is
provided in Appendix A for quick reference and all the source code is available through
the link provided in section 3.
Figure 15:
The solver setup is performed on the host side and the necessary data is
transferred to the device. The host then sequentially calls the device kernels to march the
problem forward in time. The kernels are marked by a GPU tag in the diagram. Only the
part of time-marching loop concerned with the blade forces are computed on the host side and
it requires a small exchange of data between host and device. Upon reaching the maximum
number of iterations (or convergence criterion), the data is transferred back to the host and
post-processed.
30
==PAGE:35==
A high-level overview of the execution ﬂow is given in Fig. 15. The main program
written in Python starts executing on the host side. In the setup stage, the simulation
parameters are deﬁned, the mesh is created and the initial velocity and density ﬁelds
are generated. Since this code only runs once, it does not have to eﬃcient and can rely
on all convenient in-built functions and modules in Python. The necessary data is then
transferred from the host memory to the device memory. Now the host sequentially
executes the eﬃcient device kernels to march the ﬂow forward in time. This pattern is
repeated for as many iterations as desired. When the iterations are done, the current
state of the simulation can now be copied back from the device to the host. Lastly,
post-processing of the results is performed on the host side.
5.5
VAWT simulation results
This subsection presents the results of the SHSLBM Actuator Line VAWT simulation.
The results shown were obtained with a large 5000 × 2500 grid (12.5 mil. points) and
12 revolutions were completed in 365, 000 iterations. Hence, the angular resolution is
about 0.012deg per timestep. The total wall time on a Nvidia Tesla V100 16GB GPU
was roughly 90 minutes which averages to a respectable 850 million lattice updates per
second. The freestream wind speed V∞was set to 0.01 in order achieve high accuracy
and the kinematic viscosity was adjusted to ensure dynamic similarity for a turbine
diameter equal to 10% of the domain width. The turbine axis is located 1/3 of the
domain length downstream of the inlet boundary.
Two plots giving a qualitative impression of the simulation results are provided in Fig.
16 and Fig. 17. The ﬁrst ﬁgure shows the velocity magnitude ﬁeld normalized by the
free stream velocity V∞. The central axis of the VAWT is located at x/R = y/R = 0.
The wake is seen to extend far downstream until it becomes unstable and brakes down
between x/R ≈10 and x/R ≈15. The vortical structures generated by the blades and
convected downstream are best visualized on the enlarged vorticity plot in Fig. 17.
31
==PAGE:36==
Figure 16: Velocity magnitude plot clearly showing velocity retardation in the wake behind
the turbine. The velocity magnitude has been normalized by the free stream velocity V∞.
This instantaneous velocity ﬁeld was captured after 9 full turbine revolutions.
Figure 17: Vorticity ﬁeld plot clearly showing the vortical wake downstream of the turbine.
The vorticity as been normalized by the maximum vorticity magnitude. The vortical wake
becomes unstable and the counter-rotating vortices combine about 10D downstream of the
turbine.
In order to validate the simulation results, the tangential and normal force coeﬃcients
Ct and Cn as deﬁned in (43) are compared to a vortex model implemented in Fortran
by Martin O. L. Hansen. The vortex model is described in the paper by Bangga et al.
[8] comparing the accuracy of diﬀerent numerical VAWT models.
Ct =
Pt
1/2ρV 2
∞D
and
Cn =
Pn
1/2ρV 2
∞D
(43)
The variation in force coeﬃcients over the 9th rotation for one blade is shown in Fig.
18 and 19. The results of the SHSLBM-AL code agrees very well with the vortex model
32
==PAGE:37==
predictions and the models validate each other. The predictions of the two models diﬀer
by a small phase shift. The SHSLBM-AL model also predicts a slightly higher peak
force at θ ≈90deg.
Figure 18: Tangential force coeﬃcient as a function of the angular position of the blade.
Figure 19: Normal force coeﬃcient as a function of the angular position of the blade.
33
==PAGE:38==
6
Discussion
Now that we have a good grasp of the LBM fundamentals backed up by a few validated
benchmark cases and one fairly advanced simulation, it is time to put this knowledge
in perspective. I’ll ﬁrstly evaluate my self-developed code base and point out the most
relevant extensions. As stated in the introduction, LBM is a viable alternative to N-S
CFD for large scale problems. Therefore, I’ll review some the more interesting both
academic and commercial LBM software packages available today. Software which
goes beyond what is possible to achieve in a master thesis project and which can
compete with the dominating N-S CFD codes. Finally, I’ll argue for the use of LBM
for isothermal incompressible ﬂows, especially within wind energy.
6.1
Evaluation of self-developed code
Though the theory behind LBM is quite abstract and mathematically sophisticated,
the basic algorithm is quite simple and it is fairly straightforward to program a naive
LBM-BGK solver once you understand the fundamentals. My biggest issues with
LBM-BGK when programming the three steady laminar validation cases were boundary
conditions and numerical stability. Boundary conditions happened to be reasonably
easy to code for these simple validation cases with grid-aligned boundaries but I would
imagine it to be quite complicated to make a more generic solver in 3D and it deﬁnitely
requires some clever coding. However, the stability issue cannot be solved by clever
coding alone. The LBM-BGK becomes unstable as τ is brought close to the limit of 0.5.
I personally experienced that simulations would break down for νlu ≈0.01 when using
a lattice velocity of Ulu = 0.1. This means that I can only roughly achieve a Reynolds
number which is 10 times the number of grid points resolving the characteristic length
Llu. This is of course a severe challenge for my serial Python solver but is also a general
problem for fast parallel solvers. It is much preferred to have a robust scheme where
the spatial resolution is dictated by accuracy rather than stability concerns. I therefore
consider LBM-BGK useful for learning LBM CFD but impractical for large scale CFD
simulations at high Reynolds numbers.
To alleviate these problems, people generally tend to apply some more advanced
collision operators. The two most common ones are called two-relaxation-time (TRT)
and multiple-relaxation-time (MRT) [1]. While BGK has one relaxation time τ directly
related to the lattice kinematic viscosity νlu, TRT has two parameters and MRT even
more. These parameters can be tweaked to improve accuracy and stability. Though
TRT and especially MRT are undoubtedly superior to BGK, they also introduce a bit
of mystery as there is no universal way of determining the optimal tweaking of free
parameters. Hence, perfect ﬁne tuning requires trial and error which is just impractical.
Furthermore, especially MRT also comes with an increase in computational cost and
code complexity [1]. In the end, even MRT reportedly still suﬀer from stability issues
at very high Reynolds numbers [9]. One very advanced collision operator which seems
promising is the so-called cumulant collision operator [14]. This operator seems to be
inherently stable and some very interesting wind turbine CFD simulations are currently
being published. I honestly considered implementing this collision operator to escape
34
==PAGE:39==
the stability issues of BGK but was somewhat discouraged by the abstract theory and
complexity of the cumulant method. Therefore, it was a big relief to discover SHSLBM.
SHSLBM drastically increases the stability compared to LBM-BGK while keeping the
general algorithm simple and even simpliﬁed the handling of boundary conditions. The
penalty mainly seems to be an increase in computational cost but as I experienced
myself, LBM is blazing fast when running in parallel on a GPU.
At the time of writing, my code base can simulate time-dependent 2D ﬂows on uniform
grids subject to various common boundary conditions and under the inﬂuence of external
body forces. The most important missing capabilities are: 3D support, local mesh
reﬁnement, turbulence modelling and handling of arbitrary curved boundaries.
Extending from 2D to 3D should be fairly manageable as all the principles are the same.
The main issue with 3D simulations is the signiﬁcant increase in the number of grid
points compared to 2D and local grid reﬁnement would be a great advantage. In fact,
even my 2D VAWT simulation could have used local grid reﬁnement method. In order
to get a high spatial resolution in the vicinity of the turbine and in the wake region,
the resolution had to be ﬁne in the whole domain due to the grid uniformity and the
total number of grid points ends up being unnecessarily high. Within LBM, local grid
reﬁnement is achieved by either multi-domain or multi-block approaches [15]. Many
diﬀerent methods have been explored and validated but practical implementation is by
no means trivial.
In 3D at high Reynolds numbers, turbulence also becomes a challenge.
LBM is
often applied without any explicit turbulence modelling which is called direct numerical
simulation. Proper direct numerical simulation resolves all the ﬂow structures down to
the smallest scales at which ﬂow structures simply dissipate [12]. This is possible in
some ﬂow scenarios due to the impressive speed of LBM but for very turbulent ﬂows in
large domains, the DNS approach is too demanding even with modern HPC resources.
Therefor it is popular to add a sub-grid scale model like the so-called Smagorinsky and
perform large eddy simulation instead. In e.g. the Smagorinsky model, the eﬀect of
turbulence is modelled as an additional viscous contribution computed based on the
local strain-rate tensor [12]. This directly integrates in LBM as a local increase in the
relaxation rate τ [1]. The last essential missing feature is the handling of arbitrary
curved boundaries.
In the speciﬁc case of wind energy, it is common to perform Actuator Line mod-
els [7] of wind turbines where the physical presence of a blade is mimicked by body
forces. However, within CFD in general, there is no way of getting around complex
curved boundaries. In Navier-Stokes based ﬁnite volume method solvers, curved bound-
aries are handled through body-ﬁtted grids. The mesh conforms to the body of the
curved object and this ability is considered one of the advantages of the ﬁnite volume
method opposed to e.g. the ﬁnite diﬀerence method [12]. However, LBM is restricted to
local grid uniformity and curved boundaries generally do not intersect with lattice nodes.
This means that curved surfaces either have to treated with a staircase representation
or some type of inter/extrapolation based method. A popular method is the 2nd order
35
==PAGE:40==
accurate modiﬁed bounce-back scheme by Bouzidi et al. [24]. All the popular curved
boundary approaches for conventional LBM can be found in a recent article from 2018
by Mohammadipour et al. [25]. The development of the Simpliﬁed-Highly-Stable LBM
method used for the turbine simulation in this project is so recent that no articles on
curved boundary treatment exist. The authors behind SHSLBM couple the method
with the so-called immersed boundary method. The immersed boundary method is
convenient for ﬂuid-structure interaction problems but somewhat dubious in its physical
interpretation and only formally 1st order accurate [1]. It will be interesting to see
how curved boundary treatment evolves in conjunction with SHSLBM as the general
boundary handling is much more elegant when working with macroscopic variables.
6.2
Available LBM software
So what is the current state of Lattice Boltzmann Method CFD software? Table 3
provides a list of some of the available professional grade LBM CFD software. The list
can be split by license type as most of the advantages and disadvantages are shared
among the free codes and the commercial codes respectively.
The three open-source codes Palabos, OpenLB and walBerla share the obvious advan-
tage that they are free to use and the source code is available online to modify and extend.
These codes are very advanced codes written in C++. They all lack user-friendliness as
the setup of simulations require some degree of coding and even compilation. Among
these three options, the Palabos package seems to be the most widely used code. It
is well-documented, has forum support and includes all core functionality for general
purpose CFD. The main disadvantage being that Palabos opposed WalBerla does not
run on GPUs yet but it is allegedly on its way.
The last free code on the list is Elbe, however, it is not publicly available and re-
quires an end-user license agreement in collaboration with Hamburg University of
Technology. The most promising wind energy simulations have been performed with
Elbe by Asmuth et al. [9][10]. The articles compare Elbe and the ﬁnite volume code
EllipSys3D [26] for Actuator Line simulations of wind turbines. The two codes show
comparable accuracy. However, Elbe runs much faster when executed on a high-end
(but consumer segment) graphics card than EllipSys3D executed on 1024 cores on
a HPC cluster. I did reach out to H. Asmuth during the project with the intend to
test the capabilities of Elbe in a large scale simulation. However, according to the
Wind Energy Group from Uppsala, it would require the workload of a full master thesis
project to produce a meaningful simulation using Elbe. Though all these free codes are
at the frontline of LBM in terms of numerics, we are now far away from the comfort of
the point-and-click type commercial programs.
At least three high-end commercial codes exist: ProLB, XFlow and Pacefish. These
codes come equipped with all the bells and whistles of a modern CFD software for
easy pre-processing and post-processing. They all appear to be very capable large eddy
simulation solvers though not much academic validation work is available. A recent
article by Chavez et al. [27] demonstrates the abilities of XFlow for complex separated
36
==PAGE:41==
aerodynamic ﬂows. Among the three commercial solvers, both XFlow and Pacefish
run on GPUs. As the commercial codes are proprietary, one can only speculate on the
choice of collision operator. The main advantage of the commercial codes is the ease of
use and the main disadvantage is the signiﬁcant economical cost.
Table 3:
List of some professional grade LBM CFD software.
All codes are in active
development at the time of writing.
Software
Developer
License
Reference
Palabos
University of Geneva
Open-source
[15]
OpenLB
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
Open-source
[28]
waLBerla
University of Erlangen–Nuremberg
Open-source
[29]
Elbe
Hamburg University of Technology
Proprietary
[30]
XFlow
SIMULIA
Commercial
[31]
ProLB
CS Group
Commercial
[32]
Pacefish
Numeric Systems
Commercial
[33]
6.3
Future prospects of LBM
Having dived into the Lattice Boltzmann Method during this project, I would argue
that LBM in its current state is a very capable alternative to N-S solvers. As mentioned
in the introduction, the broader adoption of LBM has perhaps been slowed down by
the fact that the open-source codes are complex to use and the user-friendliness of
commercial codes comes at a signiﬁcant economical cost. However, from the perspective
of research areas dealing with highly turbulent ﬂows, the biggest barrier has surely been
the poor numerical stability in this turbulent ﬂow regime. However, with fairly recent
advances in accuracy and numeral stability provided by the cumulant [14] collision
operator and possibly the novel SHSLBM variant [5], the problematic stability issues
are largely resolved. Most of the software in Table 3 supports the use of the cumulant
collision operator.
Even though LBM is already viable today, I would argue that the future looks even
brighter. GPU manufactures used to mainly target consumers with a demand for
heavy graphical tasks, however, they now also target researchers and industries using
high-performance computing [11]. It is now easier than ever to program GPU hardware
and the computational performance for embarrassingly parallel algorithms is unmatched.
The high demand for HPC GPUs is largely driven by the area of Machine Learning which
greatly beneﬁts from parallel computing just like LBM. In 2021 the joint European
supercomputer LUMI4 will be operational. It will be one of the fastest computers in the
world and it is primarily build upon GPUs.
4https://www.lumi-supercomputer.eu/may-we-introduce-lumi/
37
==PAGE:42==
Considering the current state of LBM and the trends in high-performance computing,
it appears attractive to explore the use of the method in research areas dealing with
costly computations of incompressible isothermal ﬂows.
38
==PAGE:43==
7
Conclusion
In this master thesis project, the fundamentals of the Lattice Boltzmann Method for
CFD simulations of incompressible isothermal ﬂows has been presented. The report
and the accompanying source code provides a compact introduction to LBM relevant
for anyone interested in the method.
Three classic validation cases were coded from scratch in Python using the common
BGK collision operator. The validation cases are Lid Driven Cavity, Backward-Facing
Step and Forced Poiseuille Flow. The results of these three 2D laminar steady-state
benchmark cases were in excellent agreement with reference solutions and validated
the general implementation of LBM-BGK, common boundary conditions and external
body force modelling. The work with LBM-BGK illuminated the algorithmic simplicity
of the Lattice Boltzmann Method. However, LBM using the BGK collision operator
suﬀers from stability issues. In order to remain stable at high Reynolds numbers, an
excessive number of grid points might be needed.
In order to expand to higher Reynolds number regimes, the Simpliﬁed and Highly
Stable (SHSLBM) Lattice Boltzmann Method was investigated. The SHSLBM variant
is a very recent addition to the LBM community. This variant of LBM is a great
leap in stability compared to the LBM-BGK method and even simpliﬁes the boundary
condition handling as the algorithm is expressed directly in terms of the macroscopic
variables u and ρ. Other methods for improving the stability such as the cumulant
collision operator are associated with a signiﬁcant increase in algorithmic complexity.
With the SHSLBM, a H-type vertical axis wind turbine was simulated in 2D un-
der realistic operating conditions using the Actuator Line method. The results were
compared to a free vortex model and the agreement was excellent when comparing
the normal and tangential blade loads at each azimuthal position. The simulation was
coded for a heterogeneous high-performance computing system such that the expensive
subroutines could be executed in parallel on a Nvidia Tesla V100 GPU. This made
it possible to perform a 12 mil. grid point simulation at a respectable computational
speed of 850 mil. lattice updates per second.
The Lattice Boltzmann Method in its current state is a strong alternative to Navier-
Stokes based CFD for large scale transient incompressible isothermal ﬂows. Flows which
are computationally demanding and relevant to many industries including, but not at
all limited to, wind energy. LBM is likely to become even more competitive in the
future as the method is an area of very active research and because of the outstanding
performance on modern high-performance computing systems.
39
==PAGE:44==
References
[1]
Kr¨uger, T., Kusumaatmaja, H., Kuzmin, A., Shardt, O., Silva, G., and Viggen,
E. M. The Lattice Boltzmann Method - Principles and Practice. 2017. isbn:
978-3-319-44647-9. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-44649-3.
[2]
Mohamad, A. A. Fundamentals and Engineering Applications with Computer
Codes. 2019. isbn: 978-1-4471-7422-6. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4471-7423-3.
[3]
Bruneau, C.-H. and Saad, M. “The 2D lid-driven cavity problem revisited”. In:
Computers & Fluids (2006). issn: 0045-7930. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
compfluid.2004.12.004.
[4]
Armaly, B. F., Durst, F., Pereira, J. C. F., and Sch¨onung, B. “Experimental
and theoretical investigation of backward-facing step ﬂow”. In: Journal of Fluid
Mechanics 127 (1983). doi: 10.1017/S0022112083002839.
[5]
Chen, Z., Shu, C., Tan, D., and Wu, C. “On improvements of simpliﬁed and
highly stable lattice Boltzmann method: Formulations, boundary treatment, and
stability analysis”. In: International Journal for Numerical Methods in Fluids
(2018). doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/fld.4485.
[6]
Bhatnagar, P. L., Gross, E. P., and Krook, M. “A Model for Collision Processes
in Gases. I. Small Amplitude Processes in Charged and Neutral One-Component
Systems”. In: Phys. Rev. (1954). doi: 10.1103/PhysRev.94.511.
[7]
Sørensen, J. N. and Shen, W. Z. “Numerical Modeling of Wind Turbine Wakes ”. In:
Journal of Fluids Engineering (2002). issn: 0098-2202. doi: 10.1115/1.1471361.
[8]
Bangga, G., Dessoky, A., Wu, Z., Rogowski, K., and Hansen, M. O. “Accuracy
and consistency of CFD and engineering models for simulating vertical axis wind
turbine loads”. In: Energy (2020). issn: 0360-5442. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.energy.2020.118087.
[9]
Asmuth, H., Olivares-Espinosa, H., Nilsson, K., and Ivanell, S. “The Actuator
Line Model in Lattice Boltzmann Frameworks: Numerical Sensitivity and Com-
putational Performance”. In: Journal of Physics: Conference Series (2019). doi:
10.1088/1742-6596/1256/1/012022.
[10]
Asmuth, H., Olivares-Espinosa, H., and Ivanell, S. “Actuator line simulations
of wind turbine wakes using the lattice Boltzmann method”. In: Wind Energy
Science (2020). doi: 10.5194/wes-5-623-2020.
[11]
Nvidia. GPU supercomputing. (visited on 06/01/2021). url: https : / / www .
nvidia.com/en-us/industries/supercomputing/.
[12]
Ferziger, J. H. and Peric, M. Computational Methods for Fluid Dynamics. 2002.
isbn: 978-3-642-56026-2. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-56026-2.
[13]
Bingham, H. B., Larsen, P. S., and Barker, V. A. Computational Fluid Dynamics.
Polyteknisk Kompendie, 2020. isbn: 9788771250022.
40
==PAGE:45==
[14]
Geier, M., Sch¨onherr, M., Pasquali, A., and Krafczyk, M. “The cumulant lattice
Boltzmann equation in three dimensions: Theory and validation”. In: Computers
& Mathematics with Applications (2015). issn: 0898-1221. doi: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.camwa.2015.05.001.
[15]
Latt, J. et al. “Palabos: Parallel Lattice Boltzmann Solver”. In: Computers
Mathematics with Applications (2020). issn: 0898-1221. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.camwa.2020.03.022.
[16]
White, F. Fluid Mechanics. McGraw-Hill series in mechanical engineering. McGraw-
Hill Education, 2016. isbn: 9789814720175. url: https://books.google.dk/
books?id=7AEzjwEACAAJ.
[17]
McLean, D. Understanding Aerodynamics: Arguing from the Real Physics. 2012.
isbn: 9781119967514. doi: 10.1002/9781118454190.
[18]
Chapman, S. and Cowling, T. G. The mathematical theory of non-uniform gases.
Cambridge, Eng: Cambridge University Press, 1953.
[19]
Nvidia. CUDA C. (visited on 06/01/2021). url: https://docs.nvidia.com/
cuda/cuda-c-programming-guide/index.html.
[20]
Perumal, D. A. and Dass, A. K. “Application of lattice Boltzmann method for
incompressible viscous ﬂows”. In: Applied Mathematical Modelling (2013). issn:
0307-904X. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apm.2012.09.028.
[21]
Rullaud, S., Blondel, F., and Cathelain, M. “Actuator-Line Model in a Lattice
Boltzmann Framework for Wind Turbine Simulations”. In: Journal of Physics:
Conference Series (2018). doi: 10.1088/1742-6596/1037/2/022023.
[22]
Guo, Z., Zheng, C., and Shi, B. “Discrete lattice eﬀects on the forcing term in
the lattice Boltzmann method”. In: Physical review. E, Statistical, nonlinear, and
soft matter physics (2002). doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.65.046308.
[23]
Chen, Z. and Shu, C. Simpliﬁed and Highly Stable Lattice Boltzmann Method:
Theory and Applications. 2020. isbn: 978-981-122-849-0. doi: 10.1142/12047.
[24]
Bouzidi, M., Firdaouss, M., and Lallemand, P. “Momentum transfer of a Boltzmann-
lattice ﬂuid with boundaries”. In: Physics of Fluids (2001). issn: 10897666,
10706631. doi: 10.1063/1.1399290.
[25]
Mohammadipour, O. R., Succi, S., and Niazmand, H. “General curved boundary
treatment for two- and three-dimensional stationary and moving walls in ﬂow
and nonﬂow lattice Boltzmann simulations”. In: Phys. Rev. E (2 2018). doi:
10.1103/PhysRevE.98.023304.
[26]
Sørensen, N. “General purpose ﬂow solver applied to ﬂow over hills”. English.
Published 2003. PhD thesis. 1995.
[27]
Chavez, M., Mart´ınez, J., Cabello, J., and Ferrer, E. “Simulations of Aerodynamic
Separated Flows Using the Lattice Boltzmann Solver XFlow”. In: Energies (2020).
doi: 10.3390/en13195146.
[28]
Krause, M. J. et al. “OpenLB–Open source lattice Boltzmann code”. In: Computers
& Mathematics with Applications (2020). doi: 10.1016/j.camwa.2020.04.033.
41
==PAGE:46==
[29]
Bauer, M. et al. “waLBerla: A block-structured high-performance framework for
multiphysics simulations”. In: Computers Mathematics with Applications (2020).
issn: 0898-1221. doi: 10.1016/j.camwa.2020.01.007.
[30]
Janßen, C., Mierke, D., ¨Uberr¨uck, M., Gralher, S., and Rung, T. “Validation
of the GPU-Accelerated CFD Solver ELBE for Free Surface Flow Problems in
Civil and Environmental Engineering”. In: Computation (2015). issn: 2079-3197.
doi: 10.3390/computation3030354. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/
computation3030354.
[31]
SIMULIA. XFlow. (visited on 06/01/2021). url: https : / / www . 3ds . com /
products-services/simulia/products/xflow/.
[32]
CS. ProLB. (visited on 06/01/2021). url: http://www.prolb-cfd.com/.
[33]
Systems, N. Paceﬁsh. (visited on 06/01/2021). url: https://www.numeric.
systems/pacefish?lang=en.
42
==PAGE:47==
Nomenclature
Abbreviations
2D
Two-dimensional
3D
Three-dimensional
AL
Actuator Line
BGK
Bhatnagar-Gross-Krook
CFD
Computational ﬂuid dynamics
CPU
Central processing unit
GPU
Graphics processing unit
HPC
High-performance computing
LBM
Lattice Boltzmann Method
MRT
Multiple-relaxation-time
N-S
Navier-Stokes (equation)
SHSLBM
Simpliﬁed and Highly Stable Lattice Boltzmann Method
TRT
Two-relaxation-time
VAWT
Vertical axis wind turbine
43
==PAGE:48==
Symbols
Cd
Drag coeﬃcient
Cl
Lift coeﬃcient
Cn
Normal load coeﬃcient
Ct
Tangential load coeﬃcient
cb
Airfoil chord length
ci
Lattice propagation velocity vector
cs
Speed of sound
D
Turbine diameter
d
Airfoil drag
F
External force vector
F b
Blade force vector
Fx
Force in x-direction
f
Particle distribution function (PDF)
fi
Discrete PDF
f ∗
i
Discrete post-collision PDF
f eq
i
Discrete equilibrium PDF
g
Generic scalar function
g(1)
First derivative of g
H
Characteristic length
h
Characteristic length
hhalf
Characteristic length
igrid
grid point index x-direction
jgrid
grid point index y-direction
L
Characteristic length
l
Airfoil lift
Ma
Mach number
Nb
Number of blades
Pn
Normal blade load
Pt
Tangential blade load
Px
x-component blade load
Py
y-component blade load
p
Pressure
p0
Reference pressure
R
Turbine radius
Re
Reynolds number
rb
Distance vector
Si
Guo forcing source term
t
Time
U
Characteristic velocity
¯U
Characteristic mean velocity
u
Velocity vector
u
x-velocity component
uin
Characteristic inlet velocity
umax
Characteristic maximum velocity
Vrel
Relative velocity
Vrel,n
Normal comp. of rel. velocity
Vrel,t
Tangential comp. of rel. velocity
Vx
x-component of sampled velocity
Vy
y-component of sampled velocity
V∞
Free stream velocity
v
y-velocity component
w
z-velocity component
wi
Directional weight
x
Position vector
α
Angle of attack
αp
Blade pitch
∆t
Lattice timestep
∆x
Lattice grid spacing
ϵ
Spreading parameter
θ
Blade (angular) position
λ
Tip-speed-ratio
µ
Kinematic viscosity
ξ
Particle velocity vector
ρ
Fluid density
ρ0
Mean ﬂuid density
τ
BGK relaxation time
φ
Inﬂow angle
Ω
Collision operator
ω
Angular velocity
0
zero vector
44
==PAGE:49==
Appendix
A
Predictor step GPU kernel
__global__ void predict_opt(...)
{
// get thread indices
int ix = blockIdx.x * blockDim.x + threadIdx.x;
int iy = blockIdx.y * blockDim.y + threadIdx.y;
// ensure that position is in the bulk flow
if ((Nx-1) > ix && ix > 0 && (Ny-1) > iy && iy > 0) {
// compute linear index
int i = iy + ix*Ny;
// store old macro. fields for later use in corrector step
ux_old[i] = ux[i];
uy_old[i] = uy[i];
rho_old[i] = rho[i];
// initialize temp. values
float ux_tmp = 0;
float uy_tmp = 0;
float rho_tmp = 0;
// loop over neighbouring grid points
for (int q = 0; q < 9; ++q) {
// find xy-coords. for neighbouring point
int xp = ix - cx[q];
int yp = iy - cy[q];
int ip = yp + xp*Ny; // convert to linear index
// add up prediction contribution from neighbouring point
float cu = 3*(cx[q]*ux[ip] + cy[q]*uy[ip]);
float feq = rho[ip]*w[q]*(1 + cu + 0.5*(cu*cu) - 1.5*(ux[ip]*ux[ip] + uy[ip]*uy[ip]));
ux_tmp += cx[q]*feq;
uy_tmp += cy[q]*feq;
rho_tmp += feq;
}
// assign predictions to destination arrays
rho_s[i] = rho_tmp;
ux_s[i] = ux_tmp/rho_tmp;
uy_s[i] = uy_tmp/rho_tmp;
}
}
45
==PAGE:50==
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399 
2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark 
Telephone  46 77 50 85 
 
info@vindenergi.dtu.dk 
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk 
 
 
