==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
MAGICIAN - MAG simulation for 
investigating criteria for bioinformatic 
analysis 
Master’s Thesis 
17.01.2021 
 
 
Kat Steinke (s190147) 
 
Supervisors​: 
Sünje Johanna Pamp 
Patrick Munk 
Thomas Nordahl Petersen 
Rolf Sommer Kaas 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
 
Abstract
4 
Dansk resumé
5 
Acknowledgements
7 
Background
8 
Metagenomics and MAGs: history and significance
8 
MAGs: state of the art
8 
Simulating MAGs - why and how
9 
Metagenomics and antimicrobial resistance monitoring - a case for MAGs
10 
Genome-based AMR prediction: ResFinder
11 
Objectives
11 
Design and implementation
12 
Workflow
12 
Wrapper script
13 
Input
13 
Running Snakemake
14 
Metagenome read simulation
14 
Sample information: metadata, file locations, and abundances
14 
Configuration file generation
15 
Read simulation
15 
MAG creation
16 
Generation of summary files
16 
Bin and genome quality control measures
16 
General summary table creation
17 
Input
17 
Processing of results
17 
Output
18 
Creation of bin-to-genome comparison table
18 
Input
18 
Comparison of bins to closest sequences
19 
Output
19 
Methods
20 
Settings of tools used in MAGICIAN
20 
CAMISIM
20 
BBDuk2
20 
MetaSPAdes
20 
Scaffold filtering
21 
Read mapping
21 
1 
==PAGE:3==
 
MetaBAT 2
21 
Quality control
21 
FastQC
21 
statswrapper.sh
21 
CheckM
21 
dRep
21 
Genome selection and sources
22 
Baseline community
22 
Additional genomes
22 
Plasmids
25 
Error profiles
26 
Scenarios
27 
Establishing a baseline
27 
Investigation of binning irregularity
29 
Subsequent scenarios
29 
Identification of “matching” bins/source sequences
33 
Evaluation of single-genome tools for MAGs
33 
ResFinder
33 
Processing of ResFinder results
33 
Original summary table
33 
Comparison of source sequences and bins
33 
Statistical analysis
35 
Comparison of MAG reconstruction by scenario
35 
Comparison of ResFinder performance by scenario
35 
Correlation of performance metrics to assembly quality in the baseline
36 
Code availability
36 
Results
37 
MAGICIAN
37 
Simulation of community composition “scenarios”
38 
Establishing a baseline
38 
Impact of differences in relative abundance
43 
Impact of related organisms
44 
Impact of plasmids
49 
Impact of fragment size
52 
Performance of single-genome tools on MAGs - ResFinder
55 
Discussion
63 
MAGICIAN
63 
“Baseline” simulated metagenome
63 
Impact of fluctuations in read simulation
64 
Scenarios
65 
Impact of metagenome composition
65 
Impact of sequencing factors
66 
Use of single-genome tools for MAG analysis
67 
2 
==PAGE:4==
 
General feasibility of using ResFinder on MAGs
67 
Evaluating impact of metagenome composition
68 
Evaluating impact of genome quality
70 
Perspectives
71 
Future development of MAGICIAN
71 
Future experiments
71 
Conclusion
73 
Abbreviations
75 
References
76 
 
 
3 
==PAGE:5==
 
Abstract 
Metagenomics, the sequencing of entire microbial communities, has contributed important
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
insights to a wide range of fields, from environmental science to public health. Increasingly,
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
new insights are gained by assembling metagenomic reads and identifying which of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
resulting
scaffolds
came
from
the
same
genome
(“binning”)
to
create
so-called
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs). This allows for analyzing them in similar ways
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as genomes obtained from single isolates, and ideally even with the same bioinformatic tools
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
if the MAGs’ quality is high enough. This has many potential uses. One example is the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
surveillance of antimicrobial resistance (AMR). Metagenomic methods for the surveillance of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
antimicrobial resistance currently use read-based methods, which can reveal which
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
resistance genes exist in a community. By analyzing high-quality MAGs with existing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
single-genome tools, it may for example be possible to identify whether these genes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
represent a few multiresistant organisms or many with only a few resistances. 
However, whether this is feasible and what quality is necessary is hard to test on real
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
metagenomes, as the underlying sequences are not known. For initial investigations,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
therefore, simulating MAGs from a synthetic metagenome with a known composition may be
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
preferable. Simulating a synthetic metagenome itself is possible with existing tools, but no
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
similarly convenient workflow for simulating MAGs on this basis existed until recently, when
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the
development
of
the
MAGICIAN
(MAG
simulation
for
Investigating
Criteria
for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bioInformatic ANalysis) pipeline was started, and in its initial state, this pipeline had severe
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
limitations.  
This thesis therefore aims to continue the development of MAGICIAN in order to create a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
flexible, user-friendly tool for MAG simulation for a wide range of purposes, to demonstrate
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
its basic function, and to show a potential use of simulated MAGs by using them to test
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ResFinder, a tool originally developed to predict AMR in single-isolate genomes. 
MAGICIAN generates MAGs by simulating reads on the basis of existing genomes and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pooling them. As with real metagenomic reads, they are then assembled into contigs and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
scaffolds, and these scaffolds sorted into bins. Finally, the bins are compared to the original
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
genomes, and results of the comparison are summarized. 
MAGICIAN was first used to simulate MAGs from a diverse “baseline” community, as well as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
several other communities obtained by adding related sequences and plasmids to this and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
changing simulated sequencing methods. Results were then compared to the original
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sequences.  
It was found that MAGs could generally be reconstructed in the baseline community, while in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
the modified communities, the same issues as in reality were seen, suggesting the simulated
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
MAGs were generally realistic. However, some results were strongly affected by small
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
differences in read simulation, which warrants investigation. 
The simulated MAGs were then analyzed with ResFinder, and these results compared to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
those obtained from the original sequences making up the simulated communities.  
Results generally suggested use of ResFinder on MAGs was possible, but also revealed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
possible issues with the binning of horizontally transferred resistance genes, which require
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
further investigation. 
At the same time, some of these issues could only be identified because the underlying
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sequences were known. This underlines the usefulness of simulated MAGs, and suggests
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that further investigation of this question should also be done with MAGICIAN. 
 
4 
==PAGE:6==
 
Dansk resumé 
Metagenomics - genetisk sekventering af hele bakteriesamfund - har ført til vigtige resultater
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
på
mange
forskellige
forskningsområder,
som
for
eksempel
miljø-
eller
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
folkesundhedsvidenskab.
I
stigende grad bliver nye resultater fundet ved at samle
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
metagenomiske reads til contigs og scaffolds og identificere, hvilke af dem der kommer fra
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hvilke genomer, så de kan samles til såkaldte metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Det gør det muligt at analysere dem med metoder, der ligner dem, der bruges til at
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
analysere
enkeltgenomsekvenser,
eller
endda at bruge enkeltgenom-værktøjer til at
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
analysere dem, hvis MAG-kvaliteten er tilstrækkelig. Denne teknik kan bruges på mange
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
forskningsområder, for eksempel til overvågning af antibiotikaresistens. På nuværende
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
tidspunkt baserer metagenomiske metoder til overvågning af antibiotikaresistens sig kun på
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
reads, hvilket kan vise, hvilke resistensgener, der findes i et bakteriesamfund. Ved at bruge
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
eksisterende enkeltgenom-værktøjer til at analysere MAGs kunne det være muligt at
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bestemme, om disse resistensgener stammer fra multiresistente bakterier eller fra mange
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
forskellige bakterier, der til gengæld kun har få resistensgener. 
Det er dog svært at teste, om det er gennemførligt, og hvilken MAG-kvalitet der skal til, hvis
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
man
bruger
data
fra
virkelige
metagenomer,
fordi
man
ikke
kender
bakteriernes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
genomsekvenser. Derfor kunne det være en bedre mulighed at bruge simulerede MAGs, der
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stammer fra et syntetisk metagenom, hvis sammensætning man kender. Der findes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
værktøjer til at simulere syntetiske metagenomer, men der fandtes ingen tilsvarende
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
værktøjer til at simulere MAGs indtil udviklingen af MAGICIAN (MAG simulation for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Investigating Criteria for bioInformatic ANalysis) begyndte i 2020. Den oprindelige version af
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
værktøjet fungerede derudover kun i begrænset omfang. 
Dette speciale har derfor til formål at fortsætte udviklingen af MAGICIAN og dermed skabe
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
et fleksibelt, brugervenligt bioinformatisk værktøj til simulering af MAGs, der kan bruges til en
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
lang række forskellige opgaver. Derudover er formålet at demonstrere MAGICIANs basale
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
funktion og at give et eksempel på, hvordan simulerede MAGs kan bruges, ved at bruge
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dem til at teste ResFinder, et bioinformatisk værktøj, der oprindeligt blev udviklet til at finde
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
resistensgener i enkeltgenomsekvenser.  
MAGICIAN simulerer MAGs ved at bruge eksisterende genomsekvenser som udgangspunkt
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for
simulerede
reads.
Disse
simulerede
reads
bliver
samlet,
så
de
ligner
en
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
metagenom-prøve, og bliver behandlet med assembly- og binning-programmer på den
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
samme måde som reads fra en sådan prøve. Til sidst bliver de simulerede MAGs
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sammenlignet
med
de
oprindelige
genomsekvenser,
der
indgik
i
det
syntetiske
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bakteriesamfund, og resultaterne af sammenligningen bliver sammenfattet.  
I dette speciale blev MAGICIAN først brugt til at simulere MAGs fra et syntetisk
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bakteriesamfund, der bestod af mangfoldige bakterier. Dette syntetiske bakteriesamfund
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dannede så basis for en række forskellige “scenarier”, hvor plasmider og nært beslægtede
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
scenarier blev tilføjet til bakteriesamfundet, eller hvor den simulerede sekventeringsteknik
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
blev varieret. Derefter blev de simulerede MAGs sammenlignet med de oprindelige
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sekvenser. 
Det var generelt muligt at rekonstruere MAGs fra det oprindelige bakteriesamfund. De
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
simulerede MAGs fra de modificerede bakteriesamfund havde derimod nogle problemer,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
men disse problemer lignede dem, der ville opstå i virkeligheden, hvilket tyder på, at de
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
simulerede MAGs er realistiske. Man kunne dog også se, at små forskelle på de simulerede
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reads kunne påvirke resultaterne i høj grad i nogle tilfælde.  
5 
==PAGE:7==
 
Derefter blev de simulerede MAGs analyseret med ResFinder og resultaterne sammenlignet
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
med dem fra en analyse af de oprindelige genomsekvenser.  
Resultaterne tydede på, at det var muligt at bruge ResFinder til at bruge MAGs, men de
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
viste også nogle problemer med genome binning af resistensgener, der blev optaget via
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
horisontal genoverførsel. Det er vigtigt at undersøge disse problemer nærmere. 
Samtidig
kunne
nogle
af
problemerne
kun
blive
identificeret,
fordi
de
oprindelige
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
genomsekvenser var kendte. Det understreger, at simulerede MAGs er et vigtigt redskab til
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
at teste bioinformatiske værktøjer, og tyder på, at MAGICIAN kunne blive brugt til at
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
undersøge disse spørgsmål. 
 
 
6 
==PAGE:8==
 
Acknowledgements 
First and foremost, I would like to thank my supervisors, Prof. Dr. Sünje Johanna Pamp,
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prof. Dr. Thomas Nordahl Petersen, Dr. Patrick Munk, and Senior Researcher Dr. Rolf
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sommer Kaas for their guidance, support and feedback throughout my thesis. I would also
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
like to extend my thanks to Prof. Dr. Mette Voldby Larsen for agreeing to evaluate my thesis. 
I would also like to thank Dr. Søren Fjelstrup (iNANO, Aarhus University) for his feedback on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
statistical questions. 
Finally, I would like to thank my family for their support, even if it had to be from a distance
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
this time. I’d also like to thank my friends, particularly D. K., who’s been there for me virtually
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
through every minute of this and more, and Alex, whose proofreading and feedback was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
invaluable in reminding me that sentences occasionally need to end. 
 
 
7 
==PAGE:9==
 
Background 
Metagenomics and MAGs: history and significance 
In recent years, metagenomic technologies have grown more and more important in a wide
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
range of fields, providing insights in topics ranging from bioremediation of pollutants to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
influence of the human microbiota on health. ​[1]  
By sequencing all microbial genomes in a sample in a non-targeted way, referred to as
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
“shotgun metagenomics”, complex microbial communities can be investigated in a number of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
ways. Metagenomic reads may be mapped to marker genes or entire genomes of known
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
organisms to obtain a taxonomic profile of the community, or to annotated genes, proteins or
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pathways for a metabolic profile. However, this approach is limited to organisms for which
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
close relatives exist; truly novel microorganisms cannot be found in this way. Another
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
approach, therefore, is to assemble metagenomic reads using assemblers specialized for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
metagenomic data, and subsequently attempting to identify which of the resulting contigs
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and scaffolds came from the same genome, a process termed “binning”, to yield
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs). Binning may either be based on comparison to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
databases of known organisms (supervised binning), which again is limited to organisms
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
whose close relatives are sequenced, or genome-specific sequence patterns such as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
tetranucleotide composition (unsupervised binning), which does not carry this limitation.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ideally, the MAGs obtained by this method can subsequently be analyzed using tools
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
designed for analysis of genomes from pure isolates. ​[2] 
MAGs: state of the art 
Over the course of the last years, great numbers of MAGs have been retrieved from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
metagenomic datasets; see for instance ​[3–9]​ for examples of such studies.  
Not only the quantity of MAGs reconstructed, but also their quality increases. For instance, in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
the aforementioned study of Pasolli et al. ​[3]​, nearly half of the reconstructed MAGs fulfilled
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the genome completeness and purity standards for “high quality” MAGs described by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bowers et al. ​[10] (over 90% completeness, under 5% contamination by other sequences
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and under 0.5% strain heterogeneity, as identified by the presence or absence of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
taxon-specific marker genes). Manual curation, while time-consuming, can serve to improve
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MAGs further and eliminate assembly and binning errors. Recently, Chen et al. ​[11]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
published a workflow for such curation, and demonstrated it on three draft MAGs.  
Data from studies on MAGs has given a greater overview of microbial diversity and provided
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
important insights into new metabolic pathways. ​[11]
This only scratches the surface,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
however: there are, after all, great numbers of specialized tools originally developed for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sequences from single isolates (for brevity, “single-genome tools”, in contrast to tools
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
developed specifically for metagenomes). Recently, for instance, the “genome mining” tool
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
antiSMASH ​[12]​, which can predict gene clusters for the biosynthesis of a large number of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
chemical classes of natural products, has been used to identify biosynthetic gene clusters in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
MAGs reconstructed from metagenomic samples from a German freshwater lake. ​[13]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, this is far from the only potential application of single-genome tools to MAGs. 
8 
==PAGE:10==
 
Simulating MAGs - why and how 
Any analysis that may be performed on a traditionally obtained genome may theoretically
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
also be performed on a MAG, if the MAG’s quality is sufficient. The core question, then, is
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
what level of quality is sufficient. 
Completed and curated MAGs would of course be ideal for such purposes, since even in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
automatically assembled MAGs of high quality, errors have been identified. ​[11] However,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
given the sheer volume of MAGs reconstructed in the larger studies, manual curation simply
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
is not feasible; thus, it is necessary to evaluate both what quality of MAGs can be obtained
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
under given conditions and with given sequencing techniques, assemblers and binners, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
whether these MAGs yield meaningful results when analyzed with single-genome tools.  
Benchmarking and optimization studies for assemblers and binners have been performed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with “real-world” data, e.g. by Papudeshi et al. ​[14]​. While this of course best reflects the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
complexity of the data such programs are expected to process, it also means the true
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
composition of the underlying community is not known ​[15]​. This poses an even greater
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
issue when evaluating the results of analyzing MAGs with single-genome tools - while in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
some cases, it may be possible to establish some basis for comparison with assembly-free
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
methods, though these of course lack the genomic context, equivalents to more complex or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
context-dependent analyses may not readily be found in all circumstances.  
A potential alternative can be found in the form of synthetic metagenomes. This term covers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
both approaches in which DNA from various organisms is pooled ​in vitro to simulate a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
community and subsequently sequenced, such as the MBARC-26 dataset ​[16]​, and ones in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
which reads are simulated on the basis of existing, complete genomes, such as the data
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
used in the CAMI challenge ​[17]​. 
For synthetic metagenomes, the composition of the community and the underlying “true”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sequences are already known in advance. When testing performance of single-genome tools
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on MAGs, these sequences can therefore simply be analyzed to provide a point of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
comparison for the results obtained from MAGs. Additionally, the approach is highly flexible -
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
community composition may be fine-tuned to suit any specific objective to be tested, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
when using a wholly ​in silico approach, changing to a different sequencing technology may
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
be as easy as changing a line of code.  
Metagenomic reads may be simulated using a number of standalone read simulators
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
emulating different sequences, or with pipelines such as CAMISIM, which was developed to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
provide synthetic communities for the aforementioned CAMI challenge and allows for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
simulation of Illumina, Nanopore, PacBio and error-free reads through the use of multiple
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
such read simulators ​[18]​. 
However, until recently, no similarly flexible tool for the simulation of MAGs specifically had
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
existed. Therefore, development of the MAGICIAN (MAG simulation for Investigating Criteria
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for bioInformatic ANalysis) pipeline was recently started. This pipeline automates the task of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
simulating MAGs from a set of existing genomes by simulating reads ​in silico​, pooling the
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reads created from all genomes, assembling the pooled reads into contigs and scaffolds,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and finally binning the resulting scaffold. Additionally, it provides an overview over various
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
quality parameters such as fragmentation, genome completeness and contamination, as well
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as identifying how closely bins match source genomes ​[19]​. 
Due to limited time for development of the initial version of MAGICIAN, this version had a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
number of limitations - most crucially, it was unable to handle the simulation of MAGs from a
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
synthetic community with ten or more members due to an error in the assembly step.  
9 
==PAGE:11==
 
Without this limitation, this tool would allow for the easy simulation of MAGs, both to evaluate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the influence of metagenome composition, sequencing technology, and assembly and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
binning tools on quality of reconstructed MAGs; and to evaluate the performance of any
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
given single-genome tool on these MAGs in comparison to the genomes they were originally
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
derived from. 
Metagenomics and antimicrobial resistance monitoring - a case
 
 
 
 
   
 
for MAGs 
One field in which MAGs may be of great use is that of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
the surveillance thereof.  
When antibiotics were first used, they appeared to be a “magic bullet” - able to cure
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
infections that previously had left patients only a slim chance of survival. However, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
“magic bullet” soon proved to be only the first shot fired in an arms race with pathogens - for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
every new antibiotic that was developed, it was only a matter of time until resistances arose
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
[20]​. Many “last lines of defense” have fallen, and with resistance to these antibiotics of last
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
resort spreading, surgical procedures that the use of antibiotics has made routine once again
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
may become associated with significant risks, and the rise of multiresistant opportunistic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pathogens endangers immunocompromised patients ​[21]​. 
While new antimicrobials are urgently needed, it is just as important that the spread of
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
antimicrobial resistance is checked. Resistance to antimicrobials may be nearly inevitable,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as the organisms producing them naturally possess some defense to avoid being killed by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their own products ​[22]​, but the speed at which it arises and spreads can be slowed.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Surveillance of antimicrobial resistance plays a key role in guiding interventions here.  
Metagenomic methods may be used here to cast a wider net than traditional approaches
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
focusing only on a narrow range of pathogens, enabling researchers to capture all resistance
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
genes present in a microbial community. To date, such methods have for example been
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
employed in monitoring antimicrobial resistance in pig herds ​[23]​, or the spread of resistance
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
genes through global flights ​[24]​, and most recently, metagenomic analysis of sewage has
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
been proposed as a method to monitor antimicrobial resistance globally, following a large
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
study of metagenomic samples from 60 countries ​[25]​. 
This last study, on the basis of the metagenomic reads, made a number of important
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
observations on the global prevalence and distribution of antimicrobial resistance genes ​[25]​.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, one may imagine that yet more information could be gained in the future if this was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
complemented by assembly-based methods. In addition to identifying which genes were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
found in a sample, MAGs have the potential of providing the additional context of which
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
organism these genes were found in. This may for example show whether the prevalence of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a given resistance gene is due to its occurrence in commensal bacteria or whether it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
represents an outbreak of a resistant pathogen, whether a set of genes occurs in separate
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
organisms or represents one multiresistant “superbug”, and, with further analyses of e.g.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
virulence factors, may serve as a warning system for pathogens of particular concern. This is
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
not necessarily limited to future studies. As has been noted by Hendriksen et al. ​[25]​,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
existing metagenomic data can also be reanalyzed with new technologies, providing a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
historical overview of resistant and multiresistant organisms. 
Thus, it would be valuable to establish whether MAGs, at the current state of development in
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
sequencing, assembly and binning technology, were suitable input for commonly used AMR
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
prediction tools. 
10 
==PAGE:12==
 
Genome-based AMR prediction: ResFinder 
One of the most commonly used tools for genome-based prediction of antimicrobial
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
resistance is ResFinder, introduced in 2012 as the first bioinformatic tool for this purpose
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
targeted at users without specialized bioinformatic expertise ​[26]​. This makes it an especially
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
interesting target for evaluating its suitability for use with MAGs, as it would provide an easy
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
way of obtaining the information described above. 
In its original form, it focused on the detection of acquired antimicrobial resistance genes. It
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
has since been expanded to include databases for the detection of chromosomal mutations
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conferring antimicrobial resistance, the translation of an analyzed organism’s genotype to its
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
resistance phenotype, and the creation of ​in silico antibiograms using species-specific
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
antibiotic panels. Users may also request resistance information for all antimicrobials in all
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
panels ​[27]​. 
The newest version of ResFinder may, in fact, theoretically be capable of processing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
metagenomic data: when given raw reads in FASTQ format, it pursues an assembly-free
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
strategy where reads are aligned against the databases using the k-mer based aligner KMA
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[28]​. This may be able to provide an overview of the resistance genes present in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
metagenome, albeit a limited one given the absence of information about which organism
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
possessed which genes, and the inability to perform any species-specific analyses.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ResFinder is, however, also able to use assemblies in FASTA format, in which case it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
searches for resistance genes and mutated chromosomal genes using BLAST ​[27]​. In the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
context of metagenomic analysis, this may make it possible to analyze MAGs and obtain the
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information absent from assembly-independent results. 
While it may be possible to compare resistance genes predicted on raw reads and MAGs,
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
initial analyses on simulated MAGs are nevertheless necessary to establish whether this is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
sufficient, ​as some issues may only be detected when the original genome is known. 
However, the ​possibility of verifying initial evaluations of the suitability of MAGs with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
real-world data, along with the popularity and user-friendliness of the tool, make ResFinder
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
an ideal candidate for demonstrating the uses of simulated MAGs. 
 
Objectives 
A user-friendly pipeline for the simulation of MAGs from synthetic communities would make it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
vastly easier to obtain simulated MAGs for a wide range of purposes, from playing a part in
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
benchmarking assemblers and binners to exploring the suitability of a given single-genome
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
tool for MAG analysis. The aim of this thesis is therefore to establish such a tool and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
demonstrate the uses of both the tool itself and the MAGs generated. The steps to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
accomplish this are: 
1.
To expand the functionality of the existing MAGICIAN pipeline for MAG simulation in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
order to obtain a versatile tool capable of simulating MAGs from larger synthetic
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
communities 
2.
To demonstrate MAGICIAN’s basic functionality by simulating MAGs from a number
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
of different synthetic communities and evaluating results for biological plausibility and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
potential insights gained 
3.
To demonstrate an application of simulated MAGs by analyzing these MAGs with the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
resistance gene tool ResFinder and evaluating results 
11 
==PAGE:13==
 
Design and implementation 
Workflow 
The full workflow for simulating MAGs from a single sample with MAGICIAN is shown in Fig.
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
1, starting at the creation of configuration files for CAMISIM and ending in the generation of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
tables summarizing various quality control measures. As in the initial version of MAGICIAN,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the workflow was implemented using Snakemake ​[29]​, as this allowed for a great amount of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
flexibility due to Snakemake’s modular approach, the easy incorporation of an existing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
real-world metagenomic assembly and binning workflow already established in Snakemake,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
and the possibility of exploiting the capabilities of running on a compute cluster. Snakemake
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
also allows for multiple samples to be run in parallel, though only one is shown in the figure.  
 
Figure 1​: The complete workflow of MAGICIAN, summarizing all assembly quality reports in both a general
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
summary and a comparison of bins to their closest source genomes, visualized as a directed acyclic graph with
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Snakemake and dot.  
 
As with the version of MAGICIAN presented in a previous work, the pipeline runs on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Computerome, the Danish national supercomputer for life sciences.  
12 
==PAGE:14==
 
In its present state, the tool is heavily tailored to Computerome, making extensive use of its
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
module system to load required programs. However, the current version has also been
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
successfully tested in cluster mode, where jobs are submitted to the queuing system rather
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
than running on a single node. Thus, it makes greater use of the potential of running on a
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
compute cluster than its predecessor. 
 
Additionally, MAGICIAN has gained a number of configuration options for read simulation,
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which will be described in more detail in the section in question. For easier use with these
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
options, a wrapper script was developed which may be used to run the pipeline in place of
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the Snakemake command, though it presently does not allow running MAGICIAN in cluster
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mode. 
 
Wrapper script 
To simplify the use of MAGICIAN, a wrapper script which constructs the Snakemake
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
command, run_magician.py, has been developed. 
Input 
As the aim of the wrapper script is to simplify running MAGICIAN, only one argument is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
required, though configuration options can additionally be specified, and may even be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
required depending on the exact configuration. 
 
The parameter that is required is the desired output file or target rule, as it would be supplied
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
to the Snakemake command. 
 
Optional parameters are: 
●
the type of the error profile to be used by the read simulator ART ​[30] in the read
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
simulation step (see below), from a choice of 
○
“mbarc”: the default, as it is the default of CAMISIM, the metagenome
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
simulator used by MAGICIAN. 
○
“hi” 
○
“mi” 
○
“hi150” 
○
“own”: a user-generated error profile. If this is chosen, further parameters
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
detailing the error profile are required. 
●
the mean fragment size for read simulation (default: 270 bp) 
●
any additional flags to be passed to Snakemake, as a single string enclosed in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
quotes. Note that this may not function for flags related to Snakemake’s cluster
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mode, so that MAGICIAN cannot be run in cluster mode via the wrapper script. 
 
If “own” is selected as the type of error profile, two other parameters become mandatory: 
●
the part of the name (not path!) shared by both of the user’s error profile files (that is,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the name without the number specifying orientation and the extension). Note that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
these files must be located in the directory specified as the location of CAMISIM’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ART error profile files 
●
the read length for the error profile.  
13 
==PAGE:15==
 
Note that if another type of error profile is selected, these parameters cannot be given.  
 
Running Snakemake 
The wrapper script initially checks inputs for invalid characters or values (such as a negative
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
insert size), then constructs a Snakemake command, translating the read simulation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
parameters into config options for the Snakefile, and runs it via Python’s subprocess module. 
 
Metagenome read simulation 
As in the previous version, CAMISIM ​[18] is used for the simulation of metagenomic reads,
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and MAGICIAN contains a number of scripts for generating the required configuration and
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
metadata files. However, to introduce the possibility of using custom error profiles when
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
using the read simulator ART within CAMISIM, a patched version with this functionality
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
(found at ​https://github.com/KatSteinke/CAMISIM​) is employed.  
The scripts involved may be run as standalone versions, but are integrated into the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MAGICIAN workflow through Snakemake, with many inputs hardcoded in the Snakefile. 
Sample information: metadata, file locations, and abundances 
CAMISIM requires the following files and tables concerning the sequences to be used: 
●
the sequences in FASTA format 
●
a tab-separated table mapping the genome ID of each organism to the path of its
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FASTA file 
●
a tab-separated table specifying the following metadata for the sequences: the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
genome ID, an OTU identifier, the NCBI taxonomy ID, and the strain novelty status 
●
and optionally, a file listing the proportion to which each organism’s genome is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
present in the metagenome (in terms of genome copies, not reads). CAMISIM terms
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this “relative abundance”, and this terminology will also be used in the present work
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for brevity. 
 
These are generated by extract_camisim_data.py at the camisim_metafiles step in Fig. 1, on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
the basis of an overview table which lists the absolute paths to the sequence files to be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
used, as well as the desired relative abundance of each genome for each simulated
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
metagenome. Table 2 represents such an overview table. The name of the desired
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
community composition, which must be the name of a column in this overview table, for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
simulated metagenome is also required.  
The sequence files themselves are parsed by the script to extract metadata where possible,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and converted where needed.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 
==PAGE:16==
 
Table 1:​ Example of a table used as input for extract_camisim_data.py. 
 
 
The major change in this version of extract_camisim_data.py is that it now is able to process
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
FASTA files as well. For these files, the NCBI taxonomy ID is set to 2 (“bacteria”), as it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
cannot be extracted from the file as with GenBank files, and since no conversion to FASTA
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is needed, the file is simply copied to the directory containing the FASTAs used as input to
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CAMISIM. 
 
 
Configuration file generation 
CAMISIM is highly versatile, and requires a large number of parameters for read simulation
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to be specified in a configuration file. In MAGICIAN, this configuration file is generated by the
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
generate_camisim_config.py script, at the camisim_configfiles in Fig. 1. 
This script requires the paths to the various input and metadata files to be given to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CAMISIM, paths to both CAMISIM itself and the read simulator used, as well as options
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pertaining to read simulation, and the total size of the metagenomic sample to be simulated
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in Gbp.
This last parameter has been changed from the original version, where it was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
calculated from a desired average level of coverage and the sizes of the included genomes,
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for the sake of clarity and direct control over sample size.  
With MAGICIAN now using a fork of CAMISIM which allows user-defined error profiles for
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ART, options have also been added to the generate_camisim_config.py script to handle
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
specifying such error profiles in the configuration file. The script also ensures such options
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are only used where they are valid: user-defined error profiles, indicated by giving the type of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
error profile as “own” rather than one of the four shipped with CAMISIM by default, can only
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be used with the read simulator ART, and require both the file name of the error profile and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the read length used to be specified. 
While most of the parameters are hardcoded in the Snakefile for MAGICIAN, including the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
choice of read simulator itself (which is set to ART), the new read simulation options can be
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
given when running the workflow either through Snakemake or the wrapper script.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Additionally, it is now possible to change fragment size.  
Read simulation 
Read simulation, at the run_camisim step in Fig. 1, proceeds as in the previous version of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MAGICIAN: forward and reverse reads are generated for each sequence individually
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
according to the parameters specified in the configuration files, and each sequence’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
forward and reverse reads are then concatenated to create two FASTQ files, one containing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
all forward reads from the simulated community and the other containing all reverse reads. 
15 
genomes 
sample1 
sample2 
/path/to/input_genome_1.gb 
1 
2 
/path/to/input_genome_2.fa 
1 
1 
/path/to/input_genome_3.gb 
1 
3 
==PAGE:17==
 
MAG creation 
As in the previous version of MAGICIAN, much of the implementation of assembly and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
binning procedures has been incorporated from a Snakefile implementing a “real-world”
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
workflow
currently in use at the Center for Genomic Epidemiology (Patrick Munk,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
unpublished): 
●
read trimming is done with BBDuk2 ​[31]​ at the trim_bbduk step 
●
trimmed reads are then assembled using metaSPAdes ​[32] at the step labeled
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
asm_metaspades. Here, MAGICIAN diverges from the established workflow, using
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SPAdes version 3.14.0 instead of 3.13.0, as this version fixes an issue with assembly 
●
assembled scaffolds are filtered by size and renamed with the rename.sh script in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BBMap ​[31]​ in the filter_scafs step 
●
in the step labeled map_bbmap, reads are mapped back to the filtered scaffolds with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BBMap ​[31]​; SAMtools ​[33] is then used to convert the mapped reads to BAM format
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and sort them by coordinates, and finally a depth file giving coverage depth of each
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
scaffold is generated with the jgi_summarize_bam_contig_depths tool included with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MetaBAT 2 ​[34] 
●
MetaBAT 2 ​[34] is then used to bin the scaffolds at the metabat2 step in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
workflow. Here, the other divergence occurs, as a fixed seed is set to remove
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
randomness in this step 
Generation of summary files 
Rather than simply outputting a series of files with various bin quality control measures as
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the previous version of MAGICIAN did, the current version produces tables summarizing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
these measures and comparing each bin to the genome it is most similar to.  
Bin and genome quality control measures 
The quality control measures summarized are the same as the ones used in the previous
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
version of MAGICIAN: 
●
contig and scaffold statistics are calculated using the statswrapper.sh script in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BBMap ​[31]​, allowing users to check e.g. degree of fragmentation or discrepancies in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
genome size or GC content 
●
taxonomy, completeness and contamination statistics are obtained using the lineage
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
workflow of CheckM ​[35]​. As in the previous version, this is adapted from an existing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
workflow (Patrick Munk, unpublished) 
●
bins
are
compared
to
the
original
sequences
by
pooling
these
(the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pool_bins_and_refs_per_sample step) and then analyzing all these sequences with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dRep compare ​[36]​, again drawing on a preexisting “real-world” workflow (Patrick
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Munk, unpublished). To compare sequences, they are first clustered into “primary
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
clusters” on the basis of an estimate of their average nucleotide identity (ANI) using
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mash ​[37]​, with more time-consuming true ANI calculations only performed within
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
these clusters rather than all-vs-all. The current version of MAGICIAN, like the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
previous one, uses Mummer ​[38]​. 
 
The previous version performed statswrapper and CheckM analyses only on the simulated
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MAGs (as shown in the steps sample_stats and checkm, respectively). However, to allow a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
16 
==PAGE:18==
 
convenient comparison of the bins and the original genomes, the current version also
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
analyzes the original genomes (in steps reference_stats and checkm_refs, respectively). 
 
General summary table creation 
In the first part of generating files to summarize bin and genome quality measures, shown as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the summarize_result step, quality control results are combined for convenience and ease of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
use. Processing of the results is done by the Python script extract_stats.py. 
Input 
As the script summarizes results for statswrapper, CheckM and dRep analyses for both bins
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and original sequences, it requires a number of inputs: 
●
the path to the statswrapper-generated contig and scaffold statistics for the bins 
●
the path to the statswrapper-generated contig and scaffold statistics for the original
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sequences 
●
the path to the file containing CheckM results for the bins 
●
the path to the file containing CheckM results for the original sequences 
●
the path to dRep compare true ANI calculation results (the Ndb.csv file in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
data_tables directory of dRep’s output) 
 
Optionally, the name of the output file can be given. If none is supplied, it defaults to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
“samplestats.xlsx”. 
Processing of results 
The files are loaded into pandas DataFrames ​[39,40]​ to simplify further processing. 
For later analyses, names of genomes and bins are brought into the same format in each
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
summary DataFrame. 
 
As information on dRep primary clusters is added to the summary table for scaffold statistics
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for ease of comparison, dRep results are processed first. 
These results contain all-vs-all Mummer results for each primary cluster - that is, in a primary
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
cluster consisting of one bin and one original sequence, ANI results for aligning the bin to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
itself, the original sequence to itself, the bin to the original sequence and the original
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sequence to the bin are given. To condense these results and give information on which
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
source sequence matches which bin, all self-comparisons are initially removed, and only
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
those rows where the bin is in the “reference” column and a source sequence in the “query”
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
column are retained. Finally, to retain information on bins or source sequences which did not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
match anything, primary clusters which only consist of one member are re-added to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
table. Since the ANI of a bin or source sequence with itself is not informative, the only value
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
that is given for these “singleton” clusters is the name, under “reference” for a bin and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
“query” for a source sequence. 
 
In the next step, scaffold and contig statistics are extracted. Processing here simply consists
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of extracting a number of key statistics - the amount of scaffolds and contigs, basepairs in
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
scaffolds, N50 and L50 for scaffolds, and average GC content - and rearranging them.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Additionally, as BBTools, contrary to the conventional definitions, uses “N50” to refer to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17 
==PAGE:19==
 
lowest number of scaffolds required to cover at least half of the assembly and “L50” as the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
length of the shortest scaffold in this set ​[41]​, these two labels are swapped to bring them in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
line with the conventional definition. This is done for both the file describing bins and that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
describing source sequences. 
Then, for each bin and source sequence, dRep primary cluster information is added by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
matching bin names to dRep reference names and source sequence names to dRep query
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
names. 
As the last step in processing these statistics, bin and source sequence scaffold statistic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DataFrames are merged, while adding a column identifying whether the sequence is a bin
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
(“synthetic MAG”) or source sequence (“reference”).  
 
Finally, CheckM statistics are processed. Beyond conversion to a DataFrame, this only
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
includes renaming columns of marker amounts for clarity. 
This is also done for both bin and source sequence files, which are subsequently merged as
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
described before. 
 
Output 
The script writes the results to a single file under the previously specified file name, with
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sheets containing: 
●
statswrapper-derived statistics (amount of scaffolds and contigs, basepairs in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
scaffolds, N50 and L50 for scaffolds, and average GC content) for both bins and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
original sequences in a sheet named BB_stats 
●
CheckM results (taxonomic lineage used, marker gene statistics, completeness,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
contamination, and strain heterogeneity) for both bins and original sequences in a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
sheet named CheckM 
●
dRep results (source sequences and matching bins, coverage of the bin by the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
genome and vice versa, average nucleotide identity, and the primary cluster
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
containing the source sequence and/or bin) in a sheet named dRep 
●
and a sheet named “explanations” containing additional information on interpretation
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the data 
Creation of bin-to-genome comparison table 
To compare each bin to the genome matching it more easily and potentially identify bin
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
anomalies,
the
general
summary
file
is
additionally
processed
by
the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
make_comparison_table.py script in the make_bin_summary step. 
Input 
As the script processes the previously generated summary file, its only required parameter is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
the path to this summary file.  
Optionally, a name for the output file can be given. If this is not done, the name defaults to
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
“bin_summary.xlsx”. 
 
 
18 
==PAGE:20==
 
Comparison of bins to closest sequences 
Initially, sheets are converted to DataFrames once again. 
Subsequently, the names of all bins are extracted. For each bin, the source sequence that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
has the highest ANI with it is identified by selecting only those rows from the dRep results
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which have the highest ANI for each bin and matching the bin names in the two DataFrames
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
through a merge operation. The dRep results are trimmed down to only include information
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on the bin’s closest original sequence, coverage of the bin by the original sequence and vice
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
versa, and the ANI value itself, dropping the bin name. 
Scaffold statistics are then temporarily added, first for the bin, then for its closest original
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sequence, by joining the resulting DataFrame to the statswrapper summary DataFrame, first
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on the bin name, then on that of the closest sequence. These temporary columns are used
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to calculate the difference between the bin’s and original sequence’s number of scaffolds
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and contigs, size in basepairs, and GC content, then dropped again. 
A second DataFrame with the difference between the bin’s and original sequence’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
completeness,
as calculated by CheckM, is generated from the CheckM summary
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
analogously. 
Finally, all these DataFrames are combined again. 
 
Output 
The script saves the bin-to-genome comparison in a file with two sheets: 
●
the summary obtained as described above, containing the name of each bin, its
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
closest original sequence and the difference between their amount of contigs and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
scaffolds, size in basepairs, GC content and completeness, in a sheet named
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“summary” 
●
additional information on how to interpret the results given, in a sheet named
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“explanations” 
 
 
 
19 
==PAGE:21==
 
Methods 
Settings of tools used in MAGICIAN 
The majority of tools and settings described in the following sections remained unchanged
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from those used in the initial version of MAGICIAN ​[19]​. Where changes have been made,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this is remarked on.  
CAMISIM 
A key difference between the current version of MAGICIAN and the initial one is that the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
current version employs a patched version of CAMISIM allowing the user to select a custom
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
error profile when simulating reads with ART. However, beyond this option, no changes were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
introduced to CAMISIM, so that the previous version’s CAMISIM settings translate directly to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the current one’s.  
A wide range of synthetic metagenomes were simulated with CAMISIM. A full overview of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
the sequences used and their relative abundances can be found in Supp. Table 1. As in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
previous work establishing the initial version of MAGICIAN, paired-end reads of 150 bp each
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were simulated. By default, a fragment size of 270 bp was used, though it was increased to
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
600 bp in some experiments. 
As using error-free reads was empirically found to cause errors with assembly when working
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with ten or more genomes, the read simulator was changed to ART. Taking advantage of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
patched version of CAMISIM’s ability to accept custom error profiles, an error profile
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
simulating NovaSeq 6000 reads was used; generation of this error profile is described later.  
BBDuk2 
As in the previous version, settings for BBDuk2 were taken from a pre-existing workflow to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
emulate “real-world” assembly as closely as possible. Under the settings used, BBDuk2
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
searched for adapter sequences using k-mers of length 19, or 11 at the tips of reads. Only
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the reads which did not contain adapters were retained, and their right ends were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
subsequently trimmed to remove regions with an average quality below 20. If this resulted in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
a read becoming shorter than 50 bp, it was discarded. However, if the mate of the read still
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
had sufficient length, this mate was collected in a file of singleton reads that was output
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
along with the files containing filtered and trimmed forward and reverse reads. 
MetaSPAdes 
Assembly with metaSPAdes remained largely unchanged from the previous version of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MAGICIAN and the assembly workflow this part of the pipeline draws on. However, to avoid
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a known issue with metaSPAdes freezing during assembly in rare cases, the version of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SPAdes used was upgraded from 3.13.0 to 3.14.0. 
As in the previous version, metaSPAdes used both the filtered and quality-trimmed forward
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and reverse reads and the remaining singleton reads output by BBDuk2, and k-mer lengths
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of 27, 47, 67, 87, 107, and 127 were used. Limitations on memory use remained at 120 GB. 
Unlike for the wgsim reads used in the previous version, however, the Phred offset for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
quality scores of the ART-simulated “NovaSeq 6000” reads was automatically identifiable, so
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
it was no longer necessary to specify this.  
20 
==PAGE:22==
 
Scaffold filtering 
Scaffold filtering remains unchanged from the previous version: BBmap’s rename.sh script
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was used to remove all scaffolds shorter than 1000 bp and prefix the scaffolds’ previous
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
names with that of the sample. Other options remained at default. 
Read mapping 
Reads were mapped to the filtered scaffolds using BBmap, with the same settings as in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
previous workflow, requiring alignment identity between reads and scaffolds to be at least
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
90% for the reads to be mapped.  
Subsequently, samtools view was used to convert results from SAM to BAM format while
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
preserving headers, and samtools sort to sort the converted results by coordinates. 
Finally, jgi_summarize_bam_contig_depths, a part of MetaBAT 2, was used to generate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
depth files. The resulting contig by bam depth matrix was saved to a text file; all other
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
settings remained at the default. 
MetaBAT 2 
As in the previous version, all contigs above 1500 bp were binned using MetaBAT 2, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
contigs that could not be binned were output along with the bins. However, to reduce the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
influence of randomness on the results, MetaBAT 2’s random seed was set to 1 rather than
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
being randomly generated for each run. 
Quality control 
FastQC 
FastQC parameters remained unchanged from the previous version of MAGICIAN: read
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
quality parameters were checked using FastQC 0.11.8 at default parameters. 
statswrapper.sh 
To obtain contig and scaffold statistics, statswrapper.sh (a part of BBMap) was run at default
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
parameters and the output redirected into a file; as this version of MAGICIAN includes a
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
comparison of these statistics for the bins and the original sequences input into CAMISIM,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the script was consequently run on both sets of sequences.  
CheckM 
Completeness and contamination were checked using CheckM’s lineage workflow (as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
checkm lineage_wf), with the extension for the genome files to be checked specified as “fa”.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To enable comparison of these values for both bins and original sequences, CheckM was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
run on both sets of sequences. 
dRep 
Bins were compared to the original sequences input into CAMISIM by running dRep
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
compare on a directory containing FASTA files of both sets of sequences. For primary
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
clustering, Mash sketch size was set to 1000, and for secondary clustering, Mummer 3.23
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was used.  
21 
==PAGE:23==
 
Genome selection and sources 
Sequences used in this thesis were taken from NCBI. chromosome sequences can be found
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in Table 2, and plasmids in Table 3. Some of the chromosomes were used to form a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
simulated “baseline” community, to which the remaining chromosomes and plasmids were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
added depending on which conditions should be simulated. 
Baseline community 
For the simulated microbial community intended to serve as a baseline for later scenarios,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
organisms were in part taken from the original set of sequences used for testing the first
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
version of MAGICIAN, with the remainder added according to a number of different
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
considerations. 
The original set of sequences - the first eleven entries in Table 2 - was selected to prioritize
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
phylogenetic diversity, while including both high-GC and low-GC organisms, ones with very
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
small or very large genome sizes, common laboratory strains, known producers of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
antimicrobials (which are likely to be resistant to their own antimicrobials ​[22]​) and organisms
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which were resistant to antimicrobials.  
To this, further genomes were added. As one of the eventual aims was to test how well
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ResFinder antimicrobial resistance predictions for the MAGs tallied with those for the source
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
genomes,
known
multiresistant
organisms
were
prioritized.
This
included
further
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
representatives
of
the “ESKAPE” pathogens (​Enterococcus faecium, Staphylococcus
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
aureus​, ​Klebsiella pneumoniae​, ​Acinetobacter baumannii​, ​Pseudomonas aeruginosa​, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Enterobacter sp.), as these represent a significant clinical threat ​[42]​. Within these species,
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the priority lay on including both organisms whose antimicrobial resistance stemmed from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the acquisition of a gene, and those for whom it was the result of a single mutation, as well
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
as obtaining both organisms with chromosome-mediated resistance and plasmid-mediated
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
resistance, as all these factors might influence whether antimicrobial resistance could be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
detected in reconstructed MAGs. The organisms selected on the basis of this reasoning
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were
​Enterococcus
faecium
​Ef_aus00233
​[43]​,
​S.
aureus
UA-S391_USA300
​[44]​,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Acinetobacter
baumannii
XH386
​[45]​,
and
​Enterobacter
cloacae
EN3600
​[46]​;
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
representatives of ​K. pneumoniae ​[47]​, and ​P. aeruginosa ​[48] were already present in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
original set. Beyond these, ​Salmonella Typhimurium 8171 ​[49] was added, as ResFinder
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
possesses a point mutation database for ​Salmonella ​[27]​. Finally, ​Bifidobacterium choerinum
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FMB-1 ​[50] was chosen as an example of a microorganism found in the intestinal flora, a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
common subject of metagenomic studies. This particular strain had also been found to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
possess antimicrobial resistance. 
Additional genomes 
To investigate the performance of MAG reconstruction, and that of ResFinder on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
recovered MAGs, when two or more organisms of the same genus or species were involved,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a number of organisms at this level of relation to the baseline community were chosen.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specifically, the organisms picked were ​Klebsiella pneumoniae ​SWU01, as a second ​K.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
pneumoniae strain with resistance mediated by additional genes ​[51]​, to evaluate the impact
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of closely related strains on the identification of such genes, and ​Salmonella Typhimurium
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WW012, which possesses a quinolone resistance mutation ​[52]​, to evaluate the impact of
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
closely related strains on identifying resistance mutations. 
22 
==PAGE:24==
 
Additionally, several ​Bacilli were selected: ​Bacillus subtilis subsp. ​natto CGMCC 2108,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens DSM 7, ​Bacillus amyloliquefaciens ​MT45, and ​Bacillus velezensis
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FZB42. These organisms were chosen due to familiarity with their phylogeny, both to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
investigate MAG reconstruction with multiple closely related organisms, and with a view
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
towards future investigations of e.g. secondary metabolite production, which has been
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
investigated on a strain level for these organisms ​[53]​. 
 
Table 2: Taxonomy, accession numbers, and genome statistics for the bacterial chromosomes used in putting
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
together synthetic metagenomes. Taxonomy and genome size were taken from the respective GenBank file,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
while GC content was taken from reports produced by statswrapper.sh ​[31]​. The first 11 entries of this table have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
previously appeared in a report on the previous version of MAGICIAN ​[19]​ and were directly taken from this. 
23 
Name 
Taxonomy
[phylum;
 
 
class; order; family] 
Accession 
Genome 
size 
GC
content
 
 
[%] 
Escherichia
coli
 
 
K-12
substr.
 
 
MG1655 
Proteobacteria; 
Gammaproteobacteria; 
Enterobacterales; 
Enterobacteriaceae 
NC_000913.3 
4.64 Mbp 
50.8 
Streptomyces 
coelicolor​ A3(2) 
Actinobacteria;
[-];
 
 
Streptomycetales; 
Streptomycetaceae 
NC_003888.3 
8.67 Mbp 
72.1 
Bacillus
subtilis
 
 
168 
Firmicutes;
Bacilli;
 
 
Bacillales; Bacillaceae 
NC_000964.3 
4.22 Mbp 
43.5 
Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa ​B10W 
Proteobacteria; 
Gammaproteobacteria; 
Pseudomonadales; 
Pseudomonadaceae 
NZ_CP017969.1 
6.72 Mbp 
66.2 
Mycoplasma 
pneumoniae 
C267 
Tenericutes;
Mollicutes;
 
 
[-]; Mycoplasmataceae 
NZ_CP014267.1 
0.82 Mbp 
40.0 
Clostridium 
perfringens 
ATCC 13124 
Firmicutes;
Clostridia;
 
 
Clostridiales; 
Clostridiaceae 
NC_008261.1 
3.23 Mbp 
28.4 
Bacteroides 
fragilis
NCTC
 
 
9343 
Bacteroidetes; 
Bacteroidia; 
Bacteroidales; 
Bacteroidaceae 
NC_003228.3 
5.21 Mbp 
43.2 
Fusobacterium 
nucleatum ATCC
 
 
25586 
Fusobacteria;
[-];
 
 
Fusobacteriales; 
Fusobacteriaceae 
AE009951.2 
2.17 Mbp 
27.2 
Salinispora 
tropica​ CNB-440 
Actinobacteria;
[-];
 
 
Micromonosporales; 
Micromonosporaceae 
 
 
NC_009380.1 
5.18 Mbp 
69.5 
 
==PAGE:25==
 
24 
Name 
Taxonomy
[phylum;
 
 
class; order; family] 
Accession 
Genome 
size 
GC
content
 
 
[%] 
Klebsiella 
pneumoniae 
ATCC
43816
 
 
KPPR1 
Proteobacteria; 
Gammaproteobacteria; 
Enterobacterales; 
Enterobacteriaceae 
CP009208.1 
5.37 Mbp 
57.4 
Bacillus
cereus
 
 
ATCC 14579 
Firmicutes;
Bacilli;
 
 
Bacillales; Bacillaceae 
NC_004722.1 
5.41 Mbp 
35.3 
Klebsiella 
pneumoniae 
SWU01 
Proteobacteria; 
Gammaproteobacteria; 
Enterobacterales; 
Enterobacteriaceae 
CP018454.1 
5.54 Mbp 
57.5 
Bacillus 
amyloliquefaciens 
DSM
7/ATCC
 
 
23350 
Firmicutes;
Bacilli;
 
 
Bacillales; Bacillaceae 
NC_014551.1 
3.98 Mbp 
46.1 
Bacillus 
amyloliquefaciens 
MT45 
Firmicutes;
Bacilli;
 
 
Bacillales; Bacillaceae 
NZ_CP011252.1 
3.9 Mbp 
46.1 
Bacillus
subtilis
 
 
subsp.
​natto
 
 
CGMCC 2108 
Firmicutes;
Bacilli;
 
 
Bacillales; Bacillaceae 
NZ_CP014471.1 
4.12 Mbp 
43.5 
Bacillus 
velezensis​ FZB42 
Firmicutes;
Bacilli;
 
 
Bacillales; Bacillaceae 
NC_009725.1 
3.92 Mbp 
46.5 
Salmonella 
Typhimurium 
81741 
Proteobacteria; 
Gammaproteobacteria; 
Enterobacterales; 
Enterobacteriaceae 
 
CP019442.1 
4.97 Mbp 
52.1 
Salmonella 
Typhimurium 
WW012 
Proteobacteria; 
Gammaproteobacteria; 
Enterobacterales; 
Enterobacteriaceae 
CP022168.1 
4.99 Mbp 
52.1 
Bifidobacterium 
choerinum​ FMB-1 
Actinobacteria; 
Bifidobacteriales; 
Bifidobacteriaceae 
CP018044.1 
2.25 Mbp 
65.6 
Enterococcus 
faecium
​isolate
 
 
Ef_aus00233 
Bacteria;
Firmicutes;
 
 
Bacilli;
Lactobacillales;
 
 
Enterococcaceae 
LT598663.1 
2.89 Mbp 
38.1 
 
 
 
==PAGE:26==
 
Plasmids 
To investigate the reconstruction of plasmids from metagenomic sequences, plasmids found
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in the organisms whose chromosomes were used in the baseline community composition
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were used. These are shown in Table 3. 
 
Table 3​: Taxonomy, accession numbers, and genome statistics for the plasmids used in a number of simulated
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
metagenomes. Genome size was taken from GenBank files; note that due to the generally small size of plasmids,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
all sizes are given in basepairs. GC content was taken from reports generated by statswrapper.sh ​[31]​. 
25 
Name 
Taxonomy
[phylum;
 
 
class; order; family] 
Accession 
Genome 
size 
GC
content
 
 
[%] 
Enterobacter 
cloacae​ EN3600 
Proteobacteria; 
Gammaproteobacteria; 
Enterobacterales; 
Enterobacteriaceae 
 
CP035633.1 
4.82 Mbp 
55.8 
Staphylococcus 
aureus 
UA-S391_USA30
0 
Firmicutes;
Bacilli;
 
 
Bacillales; 
Staphylococcaceae 
NZ_CP007690.1 
2.87 Mbp 
32.8 
Name 
Accession 
Genome size [bp] 
GC content [%] 
Acinetobacter 
baumannii
XH386
 
 
plasmid pAB386 
CP010780.1 
112157 
41.6 
Bifidobacterium 
choerinum
​FMB-1
 
 
plasmid pBC 
CP018045.1 
11012 
55.7 
Enterobacter 
cloacae
​EN3600
 
 
plasmid unnamed2 
CP035634.1 
289962 
46.7 
Enterobacter 
cloacae
​EN3600
 
 
plasmid unnamed3 
CP035635.1 
116221 
52.0 
Enterobacter 
cloacae
​EN3600
 
 
plasmid unnamed4 
CP035636.1 
103522 
52.0 
Enterobacter 
cloacae
​EN3600
 
 
plasmid unnamed5 
CP035637.1 
86605 
53.7 
Enterobacter 
cloacae
​EN3600
 
 
plasmid unnamed6 
CP035638.1 
63601 
46.9 
==PAGE:27==
 
Error profiles 
As mentioned above, a custom error profile was used for read simulation with ART. This
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
profile was generated using art_profiler_illumina, a tool for generating ART error profiles
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
from Illumina reads which is included in the full version of ART ​[30]​, specifying “fq.gz” as the
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
extension of files to train on.  
Initially, error profiles for several Illumina sequencers were generated - one simulating newer
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
HiSeq 3000 and 4000 reads, one simulating HiSeq 2500 reads, and one simulating
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NovaSeq 6000 reads - to reflect instrument models commonly used in recent years. These
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
models were identified as frequently used by querying an in-house database cataloguing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sequencing projects recorded in the European Nucleotide Archive (ENA) for all Illumina runs
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with a recorded publication date and counting run accessions for each instrument and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
publication year of the project. 
Each error profile was trained on paired-end reads from 100 randomly selected sequencing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
runs found in the in-house ENA metadata database that were published in 2019, used the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 
Name 
Accession 
Genome size [bp] 
GC content [%] 
Enterococcus 
faecium
​isolate
 
 
Ef_aus00233 
plasmid: 2 
 
LT598664.1 
197153 
35.4 
Enterococcus 
faecium
​isolate
 
 
Ef_aus00233 
plasmid: 3 
LT598665.1 
79293 
33.8 
Enterococcus 
faecium
​isolate
 
 
Ef_aus00233 
plasmid: 4 
LT598666.1 
77977 
35.2 
Enterococcus 
faecium
​isolate
 
 
Ef_aus00233 
plasmid: 5 
LT598667.1 
22080 
35.6 
Enterococcus 
faecium
​isolate
 
 
Ef_aus00233 
plasmid: 6 
LT598668.1 
7837 
33.5 
Salmonella 
Typhimurium 81741
 
 
plasmid unnamed1 
CP019443.1 
233802 
45.7 
Salmonella 
Typhimurium 81741
 
 
plasmid unnamed2 
CP019444.1 
84565 
 
 
53.1 
==PAGE:28==
 
instrument model(s) in question, and had separate files for R1 and R2; the FTP addresses of
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the runs were also extracted and used to download the files using wget. 
After evaluating the quality of the simulated reads with FastQC, it was decided to proceed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
with the NovaSeq 6000 profile, as it represented the greatest improvement over the profiles
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
already included with CAMISIM. 
Scenarios 
In order to investigate the impact of community composition and sequencing factors on MAG
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reconstruction and downstream analysis with single-genome tools, several communities
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were simulated: a “baseline” put together with the aim of reconstructing MAGs from all
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
organisms, and several communities composed in order to examine specific factors
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(“scenarios”), derived from this either by addition of further sequences (chromosomes or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
plasmids) or variation of one or more genomes’ relative amount of copies (“relative
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
abundance” in CAMISIM).  
Establishing a baseline 
In order to investigate the impact of variations of the synthetic metagenome’s composition on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
results, it was first necessary to establish a “clean” baseline. The desired outcome for this
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
baseline was that each source genome had a matching bin, containing at least 90% of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
source genome while not containing significant amounts of another genome, and that this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bin contained at most 100 scaffolds so that meaningful downstream analysis was possible.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Additionally, binning should not result in a bin which did not correspond to any source
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
genome. 
Initially, as in the tests for the previous version of MAGICIAN, a metagenomic sample of 1.5
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Gbp was simulated, in which all baseline genomes had the same relative abundance.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, this led to two genomes having no corresponding bin, while the bins closest to two
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
related genomes were twice as large as the corresponding source genome. It was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
suspected that these bins contained the missing genomes. To test this, the relative
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
abundance of the missing genomes was varied, as this is one of the factors MetaBAT2
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
considers when binning. This indeed led to the “missing” genomes successfully being
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reconstructed. 
Since no meaningful results were possible from entirely identical relative abundance, further
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
tests were primarily conducted with varied relative abundance. 
As a starting point, relative abundance values for each sequence in the baseline community
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
were generated using LibreOffice’s “Fill Random Number” functionality, drawing from a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
uniform distribution between 0.5 and 3. 
However, values under 1 resulted in highly fragmented (>1000 scaffolds) MAGs. Therefore,
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a new starting point was created with values drawn from a uniform distribution with a range
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
of 1-3.5 
This was followed by iterative manual changes, where after each simulation, reconstructed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MAGs were evaluated and individual organisms’ relative abundance values changed in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
response to any issues arising. More specifically, this meant that if no corresponding MAG
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
could be reconstructed for a sequence, its relative abundance was increased. If a bin
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
appeared to be a hybrid of two sequences (or one sequence and part of a second), this was
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
verified by aligning the bin both to its closest sequence and the missing/incomplete
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sequence using Nucmer, generating a tiling plot of the scaffolds and visually inspecting this.
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27 
==PAGE:29==
 
If this showed the bin to be a hybrid of the two sequences, the difference in their relative
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
abundances was increased. 
The different community compositions, termed “baselines” 1-8, are shown in Supp. Table 2.  
However, even after multiple iterations, none of the simulated communities produced bins
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fulfilling all criteria described above. It was therefore suspected that the simulated
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
metagenomic sample’s size in basepairs was too low, leading to some of the sequences not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
being sufficiently covered. This was tested using the baseline designated Baseline 7 in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Supp. Table 2, also shown in Table 4, as it was the last community composition that did not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
lead to additional bins. The sample size was increased in steps of 0.5 Gbp, first to 2 Gbp
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
and then to 2.5 Gbp, at which point MAGs fulfilling quality criteria were recovered for all
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
source sequences. This combination of community composition and sample size was used
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for the remainder of this work. For brevity, this community configuration will therefore simply
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be referred to as the baseline in the remainder of this work. 
Table 4: Organisms making up the basic community used for testing MAGICIAN and their relative abundances in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
the community composition used.  
28 
Organism 
Relative abundance in baseline used 
Acinetobacter
baumannii
strain
XH386,
 
 
 
 
complete genome 
1.749897113706 
Bacillus cereus​ ATCC 14579 
2.45431788166565 
Bacillus subtilis​ subsp. ​subtilis​ str. 168 
3.64479161744278 
Bacteroides fragilis​ NCTC 9343 
2.33525103112854 
Bifidobacterium choerinum​ strain FMB-1  
1.05932082 
Clostridium perfringens​ ATCC 13124 
1.96346530431978 
Enterobacter cloacae​ EN3600 
3.21367715036193 
Enterococcus faecium​ isolate Ef_aus00233  3.3170762748577 
Escherichia coli​ str. K-12 substr. MG1655, 
2.65172455193009 
Fusobacterium
nucleatum
subsp.
 
 
 
nucleatum ATCC 25586 
2.52064468917521 
Klebsiella pneumoniae subsp. ​pneumoniae
 
 
 
 
ATCC 43816 KPPR1 
3.71630013181162 
Mycoplasma pneumoniae​ C267  
2.77868458258153 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa​ B10W 
1.57790114436593 
Salinispora tropica​ CNB-440 
1.89331736460484 
Salmonella enterica subsp. ​enterica serovar
 
 
 
 
 
Typhimurium strain 81741  
3.5538387 
Staphylococcus aureus​ UA-S391_USA300 
2.84262557415421 
Streptomyces coelicolor​ A3(2) 
2.64437994584278 
==PAGE:30==
 
 
Investigation of binning irregularity 
During a later step in the development of MAGICIAN, it was decided to set fixed random
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
seeds for both MetaBAT 2 and CAMISIM for greater reproducibility. However, after a seed
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
for CAMISIM was set, no MAG could be reconstructed for ​Bacillus cereus​ ATCC 14579. 
To investigate whether this was coincidental due to poor seed choice in CAMISIM, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
simulation was repeated several times with a random seed for CAMISIM and results
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
investigated. Investigation of results covered various levels. 
As a first step, the quality of reads from simulations where a MAG for ​B. cereus ATCC 14579
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
could be reconstructed and those where it could not was examined. As CAMISIM saves
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reads for each sequence separately, these reads were simply taken from CAMISIM’s output
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
folder and analyzed with FastQC at default settings. 
Subsequently, it was investigated whether the reads in question covered the entire genome
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the organism. For this purpose, a mapping of the reads to the source genome, output by
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CAMISIM, was inspected using the alignment viewer Tablet ​[54]​ for each of the simulations. 
Finally, the presence of ​B. cereus ATCC 14579 in the assemblies output by metaSPAdes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was investigated. For each simulation, the assembly, after filtering by size with rename.sh,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was mapped to the ​B. cereus ATCC 14579 source genome, using KMA ​[28] and setting a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
flag to output mapped scaffolds in SAM format for ease of inspection in Tablet. Names of the
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
scaffolds matching ​B. cereus ATCC 14579 were extracted from the respective fragment files
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
produced by KMA using shell commands, and the extracted names searched in all bin
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FASTA files in the respective simulation run’s MetaBAT 2 result directory to identify which
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
bin they had been sorted into. 
Subsequent scenarios 
As no clear cause for the arising binning issues could be identified, it was decided to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
proceed upon the assumption that small differences in read simulation - the only variable
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
part of the MAG simulation - could result in substantially different binning behavior in edge
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cases. To compensate for this, each scenario was simulated in triplicate.  
Scenarios were derived from the baseline community composition shown in Table 4 by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
altering
relative
abundance
and/or
adding genomes of interest. Details on relative
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
abundance values in each scenario can be seen in Supp. Table 1. The scenarios
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
themselves and their purpose are described in Table 5. 
 
 
29 
==PAGE:31==
 
 
Table 5​: Description of scenarios used in this thesis, grouped by the general question addressed and specific
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
modifications made. Added sequences are listed, and it is briefly described whether some or all sequences differ
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in relative abundance. 
30 
Group 
Purpose 
Name 
Sequences 
added to baseline 
Variation in 
relative 
abundance
? 
Scenario 1 
Impact of 
relative 
abundance 
Baseline 
genomes with 
even relative 
abundance 
Scenario 
1a 
N/A 
No 
Baseline with 
unequal relative 
abundance, one 
genome 
strongly 
overrepresented 
Scenario 
1b 
N/A 
Yes (all 
baseline 
genomes; 
one >3x 
higher than 
the others) 
Scenario 2 
Impact of 
related 
strains on 
MAG 
recovery 
“worst case”: 
related strains 
with equal 
abundance 
Scenario 
2a 
Bacillus velezensis 
FZB42, ​B. 
amyloliquefaciens 
DSM 7, ​B. 
amyloliquefaciens 
MT45, ​B. subtilis 
subsp. ​natto 
CGMCC 2108 
Only in 
baseline, 
related 
genomes 
have same 
abundance 
impact of varied 
abundance in 
separating 
related strains 
Scenario 
2b 
Bacillus velezensis 
FZB42, ​B. 
amyloliquefaciens 
DSM 7, ​B. 
amyloliquefaciens 
MT45, ​B. subtilis 
subsp. ​natto 
CGMCC 2108 
Yes (all) 
“worst case”: 
low diversity, 
related strains 
with equal 
abundance 
Scenario 
2c 
no baseline 
genomes used 
except for ​B. 
subtilis​ subsp. 
subtilis​ 168; 
added: ​Bacillus 
velezensis ​FZB42, 
B. 
amyloliquefaciens 
DSM 7, ​B. 
amyloliquefaciens 
MT45, ​B. subtilis 
subsp. ​natto 
CGMCC 2108 
 
 
 
No 
==PAGE:32==
 
31 
Group 
Purpose 
Name 
Sequences 
added to baseline 
Variation in 
relative 
abundance
? 
Scenario 2 
Impact of 
related 
strains on 
MAG 
recovery 
Impact of varied 
abundance in 
separating 
related strains 
in low diversity 
situation 
Scenario 
2d 
no baseline 
genomes used 
except for ​B. 
subtilis​ subsp. 
subtilis​ 168; 
added: ​Bacillus 
velezensis ​FZB42, 
B. 
amyloliquefaciens 
DSM 7, ​B. 
amyloliquefaciens 
MT45, ​B. subtilis 
subsp. ​natto 
CGMCC 2108 
Yes 
Impact of 
closely related 
strains on 
detecting 
resistance 
genes; related 
strains at equal 
abundance 
Scenario 
2e 
Klebsiella 
pneumoniae 
SWU01 
Only in 
baseline 
genomes 
Impact of 
closely related 
strains on 
detecting 
resistance 
genes; related 
strains at varied 
abundance 
Scenario 
2f 
Klebsiella 
pneumoniae 
SWU01 
Yes 
Impact of 
closely related 
strains on 
detecting 
resistance 
mutations; 
related strains 
at equal 
abundance 
Scenario 
2g 
Salmonella 
Typhimurium 
WW012 
Only in 
baseline 
genomes 
Impact of 
closely related 
strains on 
detecting 
resistance 
mutations; 
related strains 
at varied 
abundance 
Scenario 
2h 
Salmonella 
Typhimurium 
WW012 
Yes 
==PAGE:33==
 
 
 
 
 
32 
Group 
Purpose 
Name 
Sequences 
added to baseline 
Variation in 
relative 
abundance
? 
Scenario 3 
Impact of 
plasmids 
Recovery of 
low-copy 
plasmids 
Scenario 
3a 
plasmids listed in 2 In baseline 
genomes; 
plasmids’ 
relative 
abundance 
matched that 
of the host’s 
chromosome 
Recovery of 
high-copy 
plasmids 
Scenario 
3b 
plasmids listed in 2 Yes; 
plasmids’ 
relative 
abundance 
was about 
20x that of 
the host’s 
chromosome 
Scenario 4 
Impact of 
increasing 
fragment 
size from 
270 bp to 
600 bp 
Baseline with 
increased 
fragment size 
Scenario 
4a 
N/A 
Yes 
Impact of 
increased 
fragment size 
on plasmid 
recovery 
Scenario 
4b 
plasmids listed in 2 In baseline 
genomes; 
plasmids’ 
relative 
abundance 
matched that 
of the host’s 
chromosome 
Impact of 
increased 
fragment size 
on recovery of 
related 
genomes 
Scenario 
4c 
Bacillus velezensis 
FZB42, ​B. 
amyloliquefaciens 
DSM 7, ​B. 
amyloliquefaciens 
MT45, ​B. subtilis 
subsp. ​natto 
CGMCC 2108 
Yes 
==PAGE:34==
 
Identification of “matching” bins/source sequences 
To compare the simulated MAGs to the sequences they were derived from, each source
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sequence was assigned at most one bin for ease of analysis. As a bin also could match
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
multiple source sequences, it was also necessary to ensure that each bin was only assigned
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to at most one source sequence. A bin was therefore only assigned to a source sequence if
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
a) the bin was the bin with the highest ANI to the source sequence, b) the source sequence
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was the sequence with the highest ANI to the bin, and c) this bin was not simply the one that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
contained all unbinned scaffolds. Throughout this work, when discussing matches between
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bins and source sequences, this was the method applied, unless stated otherwise. For
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
brevity, bins that have been matched to a source sequence in this way will generally be
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
referred to by the source sequence’s name in figures unless explicitly noted otherwise.  
Evaluation of single-genome tools for MAGs 
Performance of single-genome tools with MAGs was examined using the example of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ResFinder. Both the complete source genomes and their corresponding MAGs from each
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
scenario, if present, were analyzed with ResFinder. Subsequently, patterns in resistance and
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
amount of resistance genes detected were compared, and it was evaluated how closely
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
predicted resistance patterns of MAGs matched the original genomes. 
ResFinder 
In order to obtain ResFinder predictions for original genomes and MAGs, ResFinder 4.0 was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
run on FASTA files of the original genomes, as well as the bins output by MetaBAT2 for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
each scenario and baseline using Nextflow. The species was given as “Salmonella”, as this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was the organism where point mutations were of interest. 
Processing of ResFinder results 
Original summary table 
Using an in-house script, results of the ResFinder run were summarized as a table showing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
whether each sequence possessed genes conferring resistance to 84 antimicrobials and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
antimicrobial combinations and if so, which. The script could either generate resistance
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
phenotype overviews for species-specific antimicrobial panels, or for all antimicrobials from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
all panels, depending on the files used as input. The latter was chosen, as a wide range of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
species was examined. 
Comparison of source sequences and bins 
The
general
ResFinder
result
table
was
further
processed
with
a
Python
script,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
process_resfinder.py, which combined the result table with information on which bin matches
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which original sequence from the summary tables output by MAGICIAN.
This script is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
attached as supplementary material. 
For each replicate of each scenario, each source sequence’s matching bin was identified as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
described above. Information about the original sequence each bin was assigned to was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
then inserted into a DataFrame representation of the original result table. It must be noted
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
here that the original result table included information on the quality of the genes’ match to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33 
==PAGE:35==
 
resistance genes in ResFinder’s database encoded in the background color of each cell -
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
dark green for a perfect match, light green for a match with less than 100% identity, and gray
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for a match with less than 100% identity and less than full coverage - which could not be
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
extracted in the conversion to a DataFrame. Therefore, while a copy of the original result
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
table annotated with each bin’s corresponding source sequence was returned as part of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
script’s output, it lacked the information only encoded in background colors.  
For each bin and original sequence, excluding the “bins” containing unbinned scaffolds, a list
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
of all unique resistance genes that were found, again regardless of match quality, was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
extracted. A table giving this list, as well as the amount of unique resistance genes found, for
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
each bin and original sequence formed another part of the script’s output. Additionally, for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
each original sequence, the amount of unique resistance genes in its closest bin in each
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
scenario, alongside with the original sequence’s amount of resistance genes, was output. 
It was also calculated how well ResFinder results for the MAGs matched those of the original
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
organisms. Comparisons were done on the basis of which antimicrobial a MAG or original
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
sequence was resistant to, regardless of which gene conferred the resistance or what quality
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the match had.  
Predictions for the original sequence were taken as the “true” values. Thus: 
●
a
true
positive
was
defined
as ResFinder predicting resistance to a given
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
antimicrobial in both the MAG and the source sequence 
●
a false positive was defined as ResFinder predicting resistance to a given
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
antimicrobial in the MAG, but not the source sequence 
●
a true negative was defined as ResFinder predicting susceptibility to a given
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
antimicrobial in both the MAG and the source sequence 
●
a false negative was defined as ResFinder predicting susceptibility to a given
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
antimicrobial in the MAG, but resistance in the source sequence 
 
On the basis of these values, further metrics were calculated: 
●
the sensitivity, calculated as 
true positives
(true positives+false negatives)  
●
the specificity, calculated as 
true negatives
(false positives+true negatives)  
●
the accuracy, calculated as 
(true negatives + true positives)
(true negatives + false negatives + true positives + false positives)  
●
the precision, calculated as 
true positives
(true positives + false positives)  
●
and the F-score, calculated as 2 *
(precision  sensitivity)
*
(precision + sensitivity)  
 
These values could be calculated both aggregated by scenario and for each original
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sequence individually. The former was calculated for all scenarios, while the latter was only
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
calculated for the replicates of the baseline community. 
 
 
 
Statistical analysis 
Comparison of MAG reconstruction by scenario 
To evaluate MAG reconstruction, bins were first assigned to source sequences as described
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
above for each replicate for each scenario. As a simple proxy for evaluating MAG
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34 
==PAGE:36==
 
reconstruction, the bins’ size in basepairs was examined, as this was commonly affected by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
binning issues such as hybrid bins. Where a sequence had no matching bin, its size was set
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to 0 bp. 
In order to evaluate whether the sizes of the MAGs reconstructed from the baseline
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
community were significantly different from the sizes of the original sequences they were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
assigned to, a paired t-test was performed in R. Data from all simulations of the baseline in
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
which the MetaBAT 2 seed was set to 1 - the initial test with a random CAMISIM seed, the
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
subsequent test with the CAMISIM seed set to 1, and the five replicates simulated to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
examine binning irregularities - was used. 
Subsequently,
it
was
also
evaluated
whether
MAGs’
basepair
difference
to
their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
corresponding original sequences differed between scenarios. To investigate whether a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
parametric test could be performed, normality of residuals was checked by visual inspection
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of a Q-Q plot, and homogeneity of variances by performing Levene’s test (as implemented in
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
the car package in R). Levene’s test showed the assumption of homogeneous variances to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be violated, F(15, 929) = 6.8338, p = 3.245 * 10​-14​; therefore, a Kruskal-Wallis test was
 
 
 
  
   
  
 
  
 
 
 
performed as a nonparametric alternative. This showed statistically significant differences
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
between the groups, H(15) = 82.27, p = 2.679*10​-11​. Subsequently, pairwise comparisons of
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
the
scenarios
were
performed
using
Wilcoxon
rank-sum
tests,
applying
the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Benjamini-Hochberg correction ​[55]​ to the p-values to correct for multiple testing. 
Comparison of ResFinder performance by scenario 
For comparing performance of ResFinder by scenario, the F-score was selected as the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
metric to evaluate since it reflected both the sensitivity (how many of the resistances
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
identified in the original sequence also were found in the corresponding MAG) and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
precision (how many of the resistances identified in the MAG also were present in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
original sequence). As no F-score could be calculated for one replicate of Scenario 2c due to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
it entirely lacking true positives, and the remaining data points from Scenario 2c were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
insufficient for analysis, this scenario was excluded from statistical analysis. 
To evaluate whether a parametric test could be performed on the remaining data, normality
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of residuals was confirmed by visual inspection of a Q-Q plot, and Levene’s test was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
performed to evaluate homogeneity of variances. This showed no departure from the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
assumption of homogeneous variances, F(14, 34) = 0.6063, p = 0.6063. 
Therefore, a one-way ANOVA was performed. This indicated statistically significant
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
differences between the groups, F(14,34) = 9.515, p = 4.89 * 10​-8​. Subsequently, post-hoc
 
 
 
 
  
   
  
 
 
 
comparison of scenarios was done using Tukey’s test. 
All analyses were performed in R. 
 
Correlation of performance metrics to assembly quality in the baseline 
To evaluate whether MAG quality influenced the quality of results obtained with ResFinder,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
F-scores were calculated for MAGs matching each original sequence for all replicates of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
baseline community composition. It was decided not to include results of the other scenarios,
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as those might additionally be influenced by the changes made to the synthetic community in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
question. Organisms which were not predicted to contain any resistance genes in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
original sequences were excluded from the analysis, as no F-score could be calculated. As
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
==PAGE:37==
 
the underlying reads the bins were derived from differed between replicates, it was decided
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
to include all 73 bins for which an F-score could be calculated, rather than averaging
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
F-scores by predicted matching organism across replicates. Data from all simulations of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
baseline in which the MetaBAT 2 seed was set to 1 - the initial test with a random CAMISIM
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
seed, the subsequent test with the CAMISIM seed set to 1, and the five replicates simulated
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to examine binning irregularities - was used 
It was then examined whether there was a correlation between the individual F-score of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
remaining MAGs and three of the measures commonly used to evaluate MAG quality - the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
number of scaffolds, and completeness and contamination percentages calculated by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CheckM.  
As visual inspection of Q-Q plots for these three measures showed a clear departure from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
normality, a nonparametric test for linear correlation was chosen. Due to the presence of tied
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
values in the data, the Kendall rank correlation test was used. Evaluation of effect size was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
based upon converting the values of Kendall’s tau to the corresponding values of the more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
frequently used and thus more readily interpreted Pearson’s r using the method described by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Walker ​[56]​, and evaluating these using categories suggested by Moore et al. ​[57]​. 
All statistical analysis was performed in R. Scatterplots with regression lines were also
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
visualized in R using the ggplot package. 
Code availability 
The code for MAGICIAN can be accessed under ​https://github.com/KatSteinke/magician​. 
The script used to process ResFinder results is included as supplementary material. 
 
 
36 
==PAGE:38==
 
Results 
MAGICIAN 
Central to the results presented in this thesis is the development of MAGICIAN, a pipeline for
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
the generation of synthetic MAGs through simulating reads from a user-defined set of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
organisms, assembling said reads, and binning the resulting scaffolds.  
MAGICIAN’s general approach to these steps remains unaltered. 
However, the version presented in this work contains a substantial number of improvements
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
and additions to the initial version developed in the course of a special project. 
Most importantly, the previous version of MAGICIAN initially appeared limited to simulating
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MAGs from metagenomes consisting of at most 10 genomes, as a higher number of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
genomes caused the version of MetaSPAdes used in this pipeline to freeze under the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conditions in the project, so that assembly never completed. This was later found to be a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
known issue with the version of MetaSPAdes used, though one that occurred more rarely
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with real data.  
During testing of MAGICIAN’s performance in the previous project, error-free reads were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
simulated - this was thought to provide ideal conditions for assembly and binning, and thus
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be suitable for a proof of concept. As the lack of errors was the most obvious deviation from
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
real-world data, the read simulator used for testing was changed from wgsim ​[58]​, which
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
generates reads with a flat error rate across the read (including no errors), to ART ​[30]​,
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which simulates a variety of Illumina reads based on instrument-specific error profiles. 
This indeed greatly reduced the frequency of the issue. However, it was eventually found
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
that it did not entirely eliminate it. Therefore, it was decided to deviate from the real-world
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
workflow MAGICIAN was modeled on (Patrick Munk, unpublished) by using a newer version
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
of SPAdes (3.14.0 rather than 3.13.0). 
This resolved the issue, and the current version of MAGICIAN is now capable of simulating
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
MAGs from larger synthetic communities, successfully running on a community with over 30
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
members. 
 
The pipeline has also generally become more flexible in several aspects.  
Firstly, sequences comprising the synthetic community can now also be in FASTA format. 
Secondly, more aspects of read simulation can now be configured. Specifically, the original
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
version
of
CAMISIM
was
replaced
with
a
patched
fork
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(​https://github.com/KatSteinke/CAMISIM​) which allows for the user to provide their own error
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
profiles when using ART; name of the error profile and read length it was generated for are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
required in this case. Additionally, fragment size can be specified. 
 
As this requires these parameters to be provided to Snakemake as config options, thereby
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
adding further complexity to running MAGICIAN, a wrapper script was created to provide a
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
more user-friendly interface. Currently, this is limited to running MAGICIAN using ART to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
simulate reads. 
As an additional user-friendliness feature, a summary of bin quality control measures (contig
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and scaffold statistics, taxonomy and bin quality estimation, and comparison of simulated
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MAGs to sequences comprising the original community) is provided in the form of a set of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
spreadsheets, as well as a second file directly showing the difference in various quality
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
37 
==PAGE:39==
 
control measures between each simulated MAG and the original sequence it is closest to, if
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
there is such a closest sequence. 
 
Additionally, MAGICIAN has now been tested and found to successfully run in Snakemake’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
cluster mode, where jobs are submitted to the queuing system of the compute cluster it runs
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
on, potentially vastly increasing analysis speed. However, this is not possible when using the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
wrapper script to run MAGICIAN, as the required parameters cannot be passed to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Snakemake.  
 
In summary, the current version of MAGICIAN greatly expands upon and improves the initial
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
version developed in a previous project. 
Simulation of community composition “scenarios” 
To demonstrate the core functionality of MAGICIAN and analyze the impact of metagenome
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
composition and sequencing factors on the MAGs produced by the pipeline, a range of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
microbial communities with various compositions were simulated. Additionally, fragment size
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was varied in some cases. To this end, a “baseline” metagenome composition, with which all
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
sequences could be reconstructed to a satisfactory degree, was established. This baseline
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
was then varied by altering the relative abundance of a single organism, introducing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
organisms that were closely related to others in the community, or adding plasmids.  
Subsequently, MAGICIAN summary files were qualitatively examined to evaluate successful
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reconstruction of source genomes, presence of hybrid bins or presence of bins that did not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
match a source genome. Additionally, the size difference in basepairs between the original
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
genomes and the bins matching them was examined to see whether there were statistically
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
significant differences by performing a Kruskal-Wallis test and subsequently comparing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
groups
with
pairwise
Wilcoxon
rank-sum
tests
and
correcting
p-values
with
the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Benjamini-Hochberg method. Results of particular interest will be discussed in this work. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
full table of comparisons can be found as Supp. Table 3. 
Size in basepairs was used as a metric since it meant both bins that contained only a
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
fraction of the genome and ones that contained multiple genomes would become apparent. 
Establishing a baseline 
The first step in analyzing the impact of metagenome composition and sequencing on ability
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to reconstruct MAGs was to establish a metagenome composition demonstrating what could
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
optimally be achieved. Initially, the goals for this baseline were that, after binning, each of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the source genomes had exactly one bin matching it, that this bin contained at least 90% of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
said source genome without notable cross-contamination from another organism, and that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
there were no bins which did not match any of the source genomes. 
 
At first, the simplest community composition was tested, where all genomes listed in Table 4
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
were present at the same relative abundance. However, this led to binning issues: neither
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Enterobacter cloacae EN3600 nor ​Salmonella Typhimurium 81741 were identified in any of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the bins by dRep, while the bins reported to match ​Klebsiella pneumoniae ATCC 43816
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
KPPR1 and ​Escherichia coli​ K-12 both were around 4 Mbp larger than the original genomes.  
It was suspected that these issues arose due to the affected genomes appearing “similar” to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MetaBAT2. Firstly, the pairs of ​S. Typhimurium 81741 and ​E. coli ​K-12, and ​K. pneumoniae
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
38 
==PAGE:40==
 
ATCC 43816 KPPR1 and ​E. cloacae ​EN3600, respectively possessed similar genome sizes,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which at equal relative abundance resulted in similar numbers of reads for each of the pairs.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This is one of the two factors MetaBAT 2 considers for binning. The other factor MetaBAT 2
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
considers for binning is tetranucleotide frequency ​[34]​, and as the organisms in question
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were all related, belonging to the same family, it was not impossible they exhibited similar
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
tetranucleotide frequencies ​[59]​. 
To test this, the organisms in question were given relative abundances that differed from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
each other, so that they would have different amounts of reads. This indeed led to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
successful reconstruction of MAGs matching all four organisms.  
As this demonstrated it was not feasible to proceed with entirely identical relative
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
abundances, it was decided to establish a baseline metagenome composition where the
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
relative abundance of ​all organisms differed. To find a suitable baseline, relative abundance
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
values were initially randomly generated, and subsequently altered in response to any
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
issues with the MAGs that became apparent. 
For instance, while the effect was not as dramatic as with entirely identical relative
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
abundance values, at times parts of one genome still appeared in a bin otherwise identified
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
as most closely matching another genome. An example of this is illustrated in Fig. 2: with the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
community composition designated baseline 5 in Supp. Table 2, the bin most closely
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
matching ​K. pneumoniae was incomplete, covering only around 75% of the genome and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
missing around 1.29 Mbp, while the bin most closely matching ​E. cloacae contained an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
additional 1.28 Mbp and was reported to have around 41% contamination by CheckM. As
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this pair of organisms had previously caused issues in the initial approach with entirely equal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
relative abundances, it was suspected the “missing” parts of ​K. pneumoniae could be found
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in the bin containing ​E. cloacae​. To confirm this suspicion, a tiling path was constructed in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
MUMMER from the scaffolds contained in both the bin identified as ​K. pneumoniae (Fig. 2 a)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
and the one identified as ​E. cloacae (Fig. 2 b) against the ​K. pneumoniae source genome.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The two images were then manually overlaid, as shown in Fig. 2 c, to examine whether the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
gaps in the ​K. pneumoniae bin were filled by scaffolds found in the ​E. cloacae bin. This was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
indeed the case, suggesting that the bin found to match ​E. cloacae most closely was a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
hybrid, containing both ​E. cloacae​ and ​K. pneumoniae​ scaffolds. 
The issue of hybrid bins appeared to be resolved by increasing the difference in relative
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
abundance between the affected genomes. 
39 
==PAGE:41==
 
 
Figure 2​: ​A​: tiling path created by aligning scaffolds from the bin identified as matching ​K. pneumoniae against
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the ​K. pneumoniae sequence used in the baseline synthetic community, generated with Nucmer and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mummer-plot ​[38]​. Similarity of scaffolds to the source genome is shown on the Y-axis, while the chromosome
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
positions are shown along the X-axis. All matching scaffolds, regardless of similarity, are repeated at the 10%
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mark to illustrate all that is covered ​at all​. Colors reflect read orientation. ​B: tiling path created by aligning
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
scaffolds from the bin identified as matching ​E. cloacae (containing excess sequences) against the ​K.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pneumoniae source genome, generated with Nucmer and mummer-plot. Similarity of scaffolds to the source
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
genome is shown on the Y-axis, while the chromosome positions are shown along the X-axis. All matching
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
scaffolds, regardless of similarity, are repeated at the 10% mark to illustrate all that is covered ​at all​. Colors
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reflect read orientation. ​C: overlay of tiling paths from panels A and B. Colors correspond to the colors used in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
panels A and B. 
 
40 
==PAGE:42==
 
However, modifications to the relative abundance of genomes alone did not yield a satisfying
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
outcome, so that eventually the total basepair size of the simulated sample was increased
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stepwise from 1.5 Gbp until a set of MAGs with the desired characteristics was produced.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This was tested on the last two metagenome composition baselines, baselines 7 and 8 in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
Supp. Table 2 as they both represented an issue with the recovered bins: results from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
baseline 7 lacked a bin matching one source genome, while those of baseline 8 contained a
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
bin which had no matching source genome.  
At a size of 2.5 Gbp, the simulated metagenome with the composition designated baseline 7
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
yielded MAGs fulfilling the desired criteria, and it was decided to proceed with this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
combination of relative abundance values and sample size in Gbp. However, at a later
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
stage, the configuration of both CAMISIM and MetaBAT2 was altered to include setting a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
fixed seed for greater reproducibility.  
When a seed for CAMISIM was set, the results suddenly no longer contained a bin that
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
matched ​B. cereus​. To investigate whether this simply was due to choosing an unsuitable
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
seed, the simulation was repeated several times, retaining the same genomes at the same
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
relative abundances, in a metagenomic sample of the same size in Gbp, keeping the seed
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for MetaBAT2 constant while using a random seed for CAMISIM. 
Subsequently, matching genomes were identified as described above and their sizes in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
basepairs visualized and compared to the original sequences’ size. This can be seen in Fig.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
3. A paired-sample t-test was also conducted to compare whether MAGs and the original
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sequences they matched differed in terms of basepair size. Basepair sizes of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reconstructed MAGs were statistically significantly lower than those of their corresponding
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
source sequences, t(101) = -3.3542, p = 0.001122. 
 
Figure 3: Jitter plot of basepair size of bins representing sequences comprising the baseline synthetic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
community, generated in R using ggplot2. Sequences are arranged alphabetically on the X-axis, while the Y-axis
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
shows bin size in basepairs. Points are colored in three alternating shades of gray to aid in distinguishing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
between neighboring sequences. Horizontal lines mark the size of the original sequence.  
41 
==PAGE:43==
 
 
As the figure shows, in many cases there was no major difference between replicates in how
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
much of a source genome was found in its closest bin, but ​Bacillus cereus ATCC 14579
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sequences could not be binned in four cases (once with the fixed CAMISIM seed, thrice with
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a random seed), and the same issue was encountered with ​Clostridium perfringens ​ATCC
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13124 in one case. This led to large differences in basepairs, which may have affected the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
outcome of the t-test.  
 
As ​B. cereus ATCC 14579 lacked a corresponding bin more frequently, it was decided to
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
examine this genome more closely in order to identify potential causes.  
Initially, the reads generated by CAMISIM were examined.  
There were no visible differences in quality parameters as evaluated by FastQC.  
Therefore, a more detailed investigation was performed, investigating whether reads
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
covered the entire genome in all cases, and whether there were substantial mismatches. As
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CAMISIM by default maps the generated reads back to their source genomes, these
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pre-existing mappings were used for this purpose. The mappings were examined in Tablet.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Scaled-to-fit overviews of the mapping for the entire chromosome can be seen in Fig. 4.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, no difference in average coverage depth or mismatch rate were found, and 100%
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of bases were covered, with no longer stretches of obvious gaps visible. 
 
 
Figure 4: Coverage of ​B. cereus ATCC 14579 chromosome by reads simulated with CAMISIM in the original test
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
of a fixed seed for MetaBAT 2, the test of fixed seeds for both CAMISIM and MetaBAT 2, and five simulations
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with a random CAMISIM seed and fixed MetaBAT 2 seed. Read mappings were taken from CAMISIM output and
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
visualized in the alignment viewer Tablet. Black coordinates on the left show the range of the entire overview, red
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
coordinates on the right show the range selected in the red box.  
 
To verify that the genome was still found in the resulting metaSPAdes assembly, filtered
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
assemblies from the different runs were aligned against the ​B. cereus genome using KMA,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and results again examined in Tablet. In all cases, the genome was almost entirely present.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and no substantial differences in what was and was not covered were visible. In some
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cases, irregularities in assembly did occur, but this appeared not to have any bearing upon
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
binning,
as
identical
irregularities
appeared
both
in
runs where ​B. cereus had a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
corresponding bin and those where it did not. An example comparison of these irregularities
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is shown in Fig. 5. 
42 
==PAGE:44==
 
 
 
Figure 5: Coverage of ​B. cereus ATCC 14579 chromosome by scaffolds assembled by metaSPAdes from reads
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
generated in the first simulation with a fixed MetaBAT 2 seed and random CAMISIM seed to test binning
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
irregularities and in the original test of a fixed seed for MetaBAT 2. Alignments were generated in KMA and
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
visualized in the alignment viewer Tablet. Black coordinates on the left show the range of the entire overview, red
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
coordinates on the right show the range selected in the red box. 
 
With the methods employed, therefore, no clear cause for the differences in binning beyond
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
potential effects of small differences in read simulation was apparent. 
This warrants further investigation. For instance, the mapping of reads to assembly, upon
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which binning is based, has not yet been examined. 
However, such investigations were beyond the scope of this thesis.  
In order to continue with analysis, it was decided to proceed on the assumption that, though
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a majority of the results were not substantially affected, in certain edge cases, small
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(pseudo)random fluctuations in read simulation could lead to large changes in binning
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
outcome (i.e., whether or not sequences derived from a given genome were binned). In
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
order to compensate for this effect, all scenarios were run in triplicate.  
 
Impact of differences in relative abundance 
As detailed above, a setup where multiple somewhat related organisms with similar genome
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sizes were present at equal abundance led to the presence of “hybrid” bins containing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sequences from multiple organisms. These could clearly be seen in Fig. 6 by the extreme
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
increase in bin size in Scenario 1a. Nevertheless, despite these extreme values, a pairwise
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Wilcoxon rank-sum test established that bins in this scenario did not differ from their source
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sequences more or less than bins in the baseline to a degree that would be statistically
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
significant (adjusted p = 0.18193) 
The presence of one somewhat overrepresented sequence, however, appeared not to have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a strong effect, whether on the organism in question (​Pseudomonas aeruginosa B10W) or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on the remaining organisms. This was in accordance with the results of a pairwise Wilcoxon
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
rank-sum test, which showed that bins’ size difference to their original sequence did not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
differ statistically significantly between Scenario 1b and the baseline (adjusted p = 0.39314). 
43 
==PAGE:45==
 
 
Figure 6​: Jitter plot of basepair size of bins representing sequences examined in Scenario 1, examining relative
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
abundance, generated in R using ggplot2. Sequences are arranged alphabetically on the X-axis, while the Y-axis
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
shows size in basepairs. The scenario with equal relative abundance, 1a, is marked by circles, the one with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
varied abundance and one overrepresented organism, 1b, by triangles. Points are colored in three alternating
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
shades of gray to aid in distinguishing between neighboring sequences. Horizontal lines mark the size of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
original sequence.  
Impact of related organisms 
The presence of closely related organisms poses a number of potential issues for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reconstruction and analysis of MAGs: assemblers may either produce very short contigs due
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to small variations between related strains, or attempt to create composite sequences at the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
risk of generating chimeric open reading frames ​[11]​. The composition of the initial
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
community was already designed to test the ability to separate organisms with different
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
degrees of relatedness: it deliberately contained genomes of the same order, family and
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
genus (though in the case of the latter, two organisms which still possessed considerable
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
distance to each other). With insufficient difference in relative abundance, this could already
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
lead to hybrid bins containing organisms from the same family. However, at larger
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
differences in relative abundance, this was able to be resolved. 
To examine the ability to separate more closely related species within the same genus, as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
well as different strains of the same species, a set of communities that additionally contained
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
one or a few closely related isolates (shown in Table 5 under Scenario 2) were simulated, as
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
well as two “worst case” scenarios where a community ​solely consisted of closely related
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
isolates (scenarios 2c and 2d in Table 5).  
This predictably resulted in bins which resembled all of the related genomes somewhat,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
though they often differed in size. As demonstrated with the ​Bacilli in Fig. 7 and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Klebsiella pneumoniae genomes in
Fig. 8, some were larger than their closest source
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
genomes, while others were smaller. The ​S. ​Typhimurium strains shown in the lower half of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 8 form the exception - their size did not differ substantially from the size of the original
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
44 
==PAGE:46==
 
genome they were reported to match. When there was no variation in relative abundance
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
between the isolates, it sometimes varied between replicates which of the organisms such a
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
bin was calculated to most closely resemble; if relative abundance differed, isolates still
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
could not be separated, but now it was the isolate with the higher abundance that was
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
consistently predicted. This may be seen for the ​B. subtilis substrains in Fig. 7, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Salmonella​ Typhimurium in Fig. 8. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7​: Jitter plots showing size of bins matching different ​Bacilli in Scenarios 2a-d, generated in R using
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ggplot2. Panels show the different organisms, with bin size in basepairs on the Y-axis. Note that the scale of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Y-axis varies between organisms. Points are separated by scenario along the X-axis, and each scenario also has
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a different point shape. In the first two scenarios, related organisms have been added to the baseline community,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
while in the last two, a community consisting exclusively of these organisms has been simulated. Related
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
organisms have equal relative abundance in Scenarios 2a and 2c, and varied relative abundance in Scenarios 2b
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
and 2d. The dashed horizontal lines represent the true size of the original sequence. 
 
 
45 
==PAGE:47==
 
 
Figure 8​: Jitter plots showing size of bins matching two different ​Klebsiella pneumoniae strains in Scenarios 2e
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
and 2f, and two different ​Salmonella Typhimurium strains in Scenarios 2g and 2h, generated in R using ggplot2.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
Panels show the different organisms, with bin size in basepairs on the Y-axis. Note that the scale of the Y-axis
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
varies between organisms. Points are separated by scenario along the X-axis, and each scenario also has a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
different point shape. Related organisms have equal relative abundance in Scenarios 2e and 2g, and varied
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
relative abundance in Scenarios 2f and 2h. The dashed horizontal lines represent the true size of the original
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sequence. 
 
In the majority of the “worst case” scenarios - 2a, which contained a number of closely
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
related organisms which had the same relative abundance, and 2c and 2d, which ​only
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
consisted of closely related organisms, with the same relative abundance in the former and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
varied relative abundance in the latter - pairwise Wilcoxon rank-sum tests found a
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
statistically significant difference from the baseline community in how much the bins’ size
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
differed from that of the corresponding source sequences (adjusted p = 0.00289 for 2a,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
adjusted p = 0.00021 for 2c, and adjusted p = 0.003 for 2d). In these scenarios, the drastic
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
size differences caused by hybrid bins dominated. However, when the closely related
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
organisms had different relative abundances, in Scenario 2b, no significant difference in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
bins’ size difference to their source sequences was found (adjusted p = 0.1589).  
Whether the relative abundance of related organisms varied or not generally did not have a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
statistically significant effect on bins’ overall size difference to their source sequences
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(adjusted p = 0.21727 for 2a vs 2b, adjusted p = 0.80336 for 2c vs 2d, adjusted p = 0.07939
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
for 2e vs 2f, and adjusted p = 0.80336 for 2g vs 2h). 
 
The nature of the hybrid bins resulting from closely related organisms differed from those
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
previously demonstrated, as shown in Fig. 9 with the example of ​Bacillus amyloliquefaciens
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
DSM 7 in the second replicate of Scenario 2a. Rather than having long scaffolds which
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
matched the source genomes to 100% and together covered most of it, but were split up
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
across two bins, the bin(s) similar to the source genome contained a mixture of smaller
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
scaffolds, suggesting assembly rather than binning issues. 
46 
==PAGE:48==
 
 
Figure 9​: Nucmer alignment of bin 12 in the second replicate of Scenario 2a against its corresponding source
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sequence, the chromosome of ​B. amyloliquefaciens DSM 7, visualized as a coverage plot with Mummerplot.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Similarity is shown on the Y-axis, while the X-axis shows chromosome positions. All scaffolds, regardless of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
similarity, are repeated at the 10% line to give an overview of how much of the sequence is covered at all.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Scaffolds are colored according to orientation. 
 
Accordingly, most of the bins reconstructed for related organisms consisted of a far higher
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
amount of scaffolds than comparable bins from the baseline, as shown in Fig. 10. Though
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this of course can only be verified conclusively in the case of the organisms present in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
baseline, it seems highly improbable that their close relatives would produce such a vast
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
increase in fragmentation if one of them had instead been used as part of the baseline
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
community. Where organisms were found both in scenarios with equal abundance and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
scenarios with varied abundance, there was a slight tendency, seen in ​B. velezensis FZB42
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
and ​K. pneumoniae ATCC 43816 KPPR1, for those in the scenarios with varied abundance
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to be more fragmented. In the case of ​B. velezensis FZB42, this may simply be due to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
larger bin size (compare Fig. 7), but for ​K. pneumoniae ATCC 43816 KPPR1, bin sizes did
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
not differ substantially, so this cannot explain the question fully.  
47 
==PAGE:49==
 
 
Figure 10: Jitter plots showing the amount of scaffolds in bins matching related ​Bacilli in Scenarios 2a-d, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Klebsiella pneumoniae ATCC 43816 KPPR1 in Scenarios 2e and 2f. Plots were visualized in R using ggplot2.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amount of scaffolds is shown on the Y-axis; note that Y-axis scale may differ between panels. Points are split by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
scenario along the X-axis, and point shapes differ by scenario. If a scenario is shown in multiple panels, its shape
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
 
 
is identical across panels. In Scenarios 2a, 2b, 2e, and 2f, related organisms have been added to the baseline
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
community composition, while in Scenarios 2c and 2d, the community consists only of the related organisms. In
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Scenarios 2a, 2c, and 2e, related organisms have equal relative abundance, while relative abundance is varied in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
Scenarios 2b, 2d, and 2f. For Scenarios 2e and 2f, only bins matching ​K. pneumoniae ATCC 43816 KPPR1 are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
shown because no bins matched the other ​K. pneumoniae​ strain.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
48 
==PAGE:50==
 
The bins assigned to the ​S. ​Typhimurium strains in Scenarios 2g and 2h, shown in Fig. 11,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
form the exception. Here, at most a slight increase over the baseline scaffold count was
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
seen, and no substantial impact of varied abundance was visible.  
 
 
Figure 11: Jitter plots showing the amount of scaffolds in bins matching related ​Salmonella Typhimurium strains
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
in Scenarios 2g and 2h. Plots were visualized in R using ggplot2. Amount of scaffolds is shown on the Y-axis; the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Y-axis scale is identical in both panels. Points are split by scenario along the X-axis, and point shapes differ by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
scenario. Scenario 2g contains related organisms at qual relative abundance, while relative abundance is varied
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
in Scenario 2h. 
 
Impact of plasmids 
It was also attempted to see how well plasmids could be recovered in the simulated
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
communities. For this purpose, the plasmids shown in Table 3 were added to the baseline
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
community, once with the same relative abundance as their host organisms to reflect
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
low-copy plasmids, and once with substantially higher relative abundance to reflect
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
high-copy plasmids. 
As can be seen in Fig. 12, plasmid sequences were only recovered in one replicate of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
scenario involving high-copy plasmids, where a bin most closely matching the ​E. faecium
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ef_aus00233 plasmid unnamed 3 was found. However, the corresponding bin was 125393
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bp
larger
than
the plasmid in question. Accordingly, bins’ size difference to their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
corresponding source sequences did not differ significantly between simulating low-copy and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
high-copy plasmids (adjusted p = 0.58315). 
49 
==PAGE:51==
 
 
Figure 12: Jitter plot of basepair size of bins representing chromosomes and plasmids examined in Scenario 3,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
generated in R with ggplot2. Chromosomes/plasmids are arranged alphabetically on the X-axis, while the Y-axis
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
shows size in basepairs. The low-copy scenario, 3a, is marked by circles, the high-copy scenario, 3b, by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
triangles. Points are colored in three alternating shades of gray to aid in distinguishing between neighboring
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sequences. Horizontal lines mark the size of the original sequence.  
 
Beyond this, however, it is also noticeable that in this particular replicate, the previously
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
described hybrid bin issue reoccurs: as seen in Fig. 12, one bin designated ​K. pneumoniae
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ATCC 43816 KPPR1 was smaller than both the original genome and bins from other
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
replicates, while a bin matching ​E. cloacae EN3600 was larger than the original and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
corresponding bins from other replicates. On examining results in detail, it was indeed found
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
that the ​E. cloacae bin possessed around 22% contamination as calculated by CheckM. A
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Mummer alignment, shown in Fig. 13 confirmed that part of ​K. pneumoniae​’s sequence was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
found in the bin designated ​E. cloacae​.  
50 
==PAGE:52==
 
 
Figure 13: ​A​: coverage plot created by aligning scaffolds from the bin identified as matching ​K. pneumoniae
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ATCC 43816 KPPR1 in replicate 3 of Scenario 3b against the original ​K. pneumoniae ATCC 43816 KPPR1
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sequence, generated with Nucmer and mummer-plot. Similarity of scaffolds to the source genome is shown on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the Y-axis, while the chromosome positions are shown along the X-axis. All matching scaffolds, regardless of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
similarity, are repeated at the 10% mark to illustrate all that is covered ​at all​. Colors reflect read orientation. ​B​:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
coverage plot created by aligning scaffolds from the bin identified as matching ​E. cloacae (containing excess
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sequences) against the ​K. pneumoniae source genome, generated with Nucmer and mummer-plot. Similarity of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
scaffolds to the source genome is shown on the Y-axis, while the chromosome positions are shown along the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X-axis. All matching scaffolds, regardless of similarity, are repeated at the 10% mark to illustrate all that is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
covered ​at all​. Colors reflect read orientation. ​C​: overlay of coverage plots from panels A and B. Colors
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
correspond to the colors used in panels A and B. Where a segment of the chromosome was covered by scaffolds
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from both bins, scaffolds from the bin matching ​K. pneumoniae ATCC 43816 KPPR1 were given precedence in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
the total coverage plotted at 10%.  
51 
==PAGE:53==
 
Impact of fragment size 
Besides investigating the impact of factors inherent to the microbial community being
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sampled, sequencing factors were also considered. Specifically, the fragment size was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
increased; however, it must be noted that due to lack of a corresponding error profile, read
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
length could not be increased along with it. Thus, in this setup, only the distance between
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the reads was increased, without increasing the amount of sequence information per read. 
Selected community compositions - the baseline, the scenario examining plasmids with low
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
copy numbers, and scenario 2b in Table 5 (multiple related organisms, varied relative
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
abundance) - were repeated with a fragment size of 600 bp rather than the default of 270 bp.  
At the baseline metagenome composition, there seemed to be a potential advantage to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
increased fragment size: as Fig. 14 shows, entirely unbinned genomes were far less
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
frequent with a higher fragment size, only occurring in one out of three replicates, compared
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
to four out of six with the default fragment size. Nevertheless, in general, increasing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fragment size with the baseline community composition had no statistically significant effect
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on the bins’ size difference to the corresponding source genomes, as shown in a paired
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Wilcoxon rank-sum test (adjusted p = 0.41533). 
 
Figure 14: Jitter plot of basepair sizes of bins representing sequences in the baseline community, once from a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
simulated metagenome sequencing run with a fragment size of 270 bp (“baseline”, round points) and once from
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
one with a fragment size of 600 bp (Scenario 4a, upwards pointing triangles). Sequences are arranged
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
alphabetically on the X-axis, while size in basepairs is shown on the Y-axis. Points are colored in three
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
alternating shades of gray to aid in distinguishing between neighboring genomes. Horizontal lines mark the size
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the original sequence. The plot was visualized in R using ggplot2.  
 
 
 
52 
==PAGE:54==
 
As shown in Fig. 15, fragment size alone had no impact on recovery of low-copy plasmids -
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
none were recovered in either of the scenarios. Consequently, a Wilcoxon rank-sum test
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
found no statistically significant difference in how bins’ size differed from that of their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
corresponding source sequences between these two scenarios (adjusted p = 0.49976). 
 
 
Figure 15​: Jitter plot of basepair size of bins representing chromosomes and plasmids examined in Scenario 3a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
and 4b, generated in R with ggplot2. Chromosomes/plasmids are arranged alphabetically on the X-axis, while the
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Y-axis shows size in basepairs. The scenario with the default fragment size of 270bp, 3a, is marked by circles,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the one with the fragment size of 600 bp, 4b, by triangles. Points are colored in three alternating shades of gray
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
to aid in distinguishing between neighboring sequences. Horizontal lines mark the size of the original sequence. 
 
When it comes to the resolution of closely related organisms, Fig. 17 shows no substantial
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
difference in the size of the bins matching any of the set of related organisms examined with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this scenario, except that the size of the bins matching ​B. velezensis ​FZB42 appeared to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
exceed that of the source genome even further with increased fragment size. Additionally, as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
seen in Fig. 16, the only case of a non-related organism, ​Bacteroides fragilis NCTC 9343,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
being unable to be binned occurred with the higher fragment size. In general, however, a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Wilcoxon rank-sum test found increased fragment size not to have a statistically significant
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
effect on the difference between bins and their corresponding source sequences in the case
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
of related organisms (adjusted p = 0.51358). 
 
53 
==PAGE:55==
 
 
Figure 16​: Jitter plot of basepair size of bins representing sequences examined in Scenario 2b and 4c, generated
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
in R with ggplot2. Sequences are arranged alphabetically on the X-axis, while the Y-axis shows size in basepairs.
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
The scenario with the default fragment size of 270bp, 2b, is marked by circles, the one with the fragment size of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
600 bp, 4c, by triangles. Points are colored in three alternating shades of gray to aid in distinguishing between
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
neighboring genomes. Horizontal lines mark the size of the original sequence. 
 
Figure 17​: Jitter plots showing size of bins matching different related ​Bacilli in Scenarios 2b and 4c, generated in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
R using ggplot2. Panels show the different organisms, with bin size in basepairs on the Y-axis. Note that the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
scale of the Y-axis varies between organisms. Points are separated by scenario along the X-axis. Scenario 2b,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with the default fragment size of 270 bp, is represented by circles, while Scenario 4c, with a fragment size of 600
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
bp, is represented by triangles. The dashed horizontal lines represent the true size of the original sequence. 
54 
==PAGE:56==
 
 
Taken together, these results suggest that fragment size ​alone may not have a substantial
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
effect on the ability to reconstruct MAGs. However, this must be seen in the light of technical
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
limitations preventing the simultaneous increase of read length. 
 
In summary, while MAGs could be reconstructed from the simulated metagenomes, their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sizes differed from the original sequences they corresponded to, and small fluctuations in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
read simulation occasionally led to a sequence not being binned correctly. Plasmids could
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
generally not be reconstructed, and the presence of related organisms could lead to “hybrid”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bins. For closely related organisms, these likely arose due to assembly issues, as the bins
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
contained many small fragments that often did not match the original sequences precisely.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For somewhat more distantly related organisms (i.e. in the same family in the cases
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
observed here), if they had similar genome sizes and were present at a similar relative
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
abundance, hybrid bins likely arose during the binning step, as they were composed of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
larger scaffolds that were perfect matches to the organisms in question. 
Performance of single-genome tools on MAGs - ResFinder 
To demonstrate a potential use of simulated MAGs, MAGs reconstructed from the different
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
scenarios were subsequently used to evaluate the performance of ResFinder, a tool for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
prediction of antimicrobial resistance.  
ResFinder was used to predict resistance in both the original sequences and the MAGs from
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the scenarios. Resistance predictions for the full panel of 84 antimicrobials and antimicrobial
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
combinations were obtained and compared.  
To evaluate how well results from the MAGs matched that of their corresponding source
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sequences, several metrics were calculated for each scenario: sensitivity, specificity,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
accuracy, precision and the F-score. True and false positives and negatives here only
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reflected whether predicted resistance or susceptibility to an antimicrobial for a MAG
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
matched the prediction for the MAG’s matching source genome, not whether either of these
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
matched the organism’s true resistance profile. 
For comparison of scenarios, focus lay upon the F-score. This score reflected both how
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
many of the original sequences’ resistances were predicted in the corresponding MAGs, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
thus whether any were lost in MAG reconstruction, as well as whether there were any
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
resistances predicted in the MAGs that did not occur in the corresponding original
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sequences, suggesting some form of misassembly. The remaining values can be seen in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Supp. Table 4. 
 
For the baseline, the average F-score was 0.83, and as a series of boxplots showing the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
ranges of F-scores in Fig. Fig. 18 shows, for most scenarios, the F-score lay somewhere
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
between 0.7 and 0.85, where a F-score of 1 would indicate perfect precision and sensitivity.
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, Scenario 2c, which was meant to simulate a “worst case” where the community
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
consisted exclusively of related organisms that all were present at the same relative
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
abundance, clearly differs from these, with F-scores in the range from 0.15-0.53. It was,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
however, not possible to test statistically whether the F-scores of Scenario 2c differed from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the F-scores of the other scenarios, as one of the three replicates contained no true
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
positives whatsoever, making it impossible to calculate an F-score. Too few replicates
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
remained for a meaningful statistical test, so that Scenario 2c was excluded from statistical
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
analysis. 
55 
==PAGE:57==
 
 
 
 
Figure 18​: Boxplot generated with ggplot2 in R, showing how well ResFinder results obtained with MAGs from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
different scenarios matched those of the corresponding source sequences, as measured by F-score. Values for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the F-score are shown on the Y-axis. Scenarios are separated along the X-axis. Boxplots are colored by which
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
factor was altered from the baseline in the scenario in question.  
 
 
There was a statistically significant difference found between F-scores of the remaining
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
scenarios using one-way ANOVA (F(14,34) = 9.515, p = 4.89 * 10​-8​). Thus, post-hoc
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
comparisons with Tukey’s test were performed to identify which of the scenarios differed in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
terms of F-score. The full table of comparisons can be found in Supp. Table 5. Here, focus
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will be placed on a number of comparisons of particular interest. 
Despite the hybrid bin issues apparent in Scenario 1a, F-scores in this scenario did not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
statistically significantly differ from those of the baseline (adjusted p = 1). 
Only two scenarios in which related organisms were introduced differed statistically
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
significantly from the baseline’s F-scores: Scenario 2a (adjusted p = 0.0001862), in which a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
  
group of related ​Bacilli were introduced into the simulated community at equal relative
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
abundance, and Scenario 2d (adjusted p = 2.1 * 10​-6​), where ​only these ​Bacilli remained,
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
although at a varied relative abundance. None of the scenarios involving added plasmids
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
differed statistically significantly from the baseline, with adjusted p-values ranging from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.1349063 to 0.9546341. Simulating the baseline metagenomic composition with a higher
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
fragment size, as done in Scenario 4a, did not lead to a statistically significant difference
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
from the baseline’s F-score either (adjusted p = 0.9896274).  
Among scenarios involving the introduction of related organisms, one comparison of interest
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was the difference between simulated metagenomes where the related organisms in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
question were present at equal relative abundance, and those where their relative
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
abundance differed. However, of the scenarios that could be investigated, a statistically
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
significant difference could only be found when multiple related organisms were introduced,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
comparing scenarios 2a and 2b (adjusted p = 0.000812). In the case of the latter, Scenario
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2b, using a higher fragment size, as done in Scenario 4c, had no statistically significant
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
effect (adjusted p = 1). For plasmids, no statistically significant difference could be found
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
56 
==PAGE:58==
 
between Scenario 3a, simulating low-copy plasmids, and Scenario 3b, simulating high-copy
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
plasmids (adjusted p = 0.9999971). For low-copy plasmids, increasing the fragment size
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
when simulating reads did not lead to a statistically significant difference in F-score either
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(adjusted p = 0.9999719). 
 
However, while using simulated MAGs generally appeared to give results that did not differ
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
drastically from those obtained with the original sequences, this could differ substantially
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
when examining individual organisms. The heatmap of average resistance gene counts per
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
scenario shown in Fig. 19 demonstrates this: for instance, ​Acinetobacter baumannii XH386
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was found to possess 18 resistance genes conferring resistance to 33 antimicrobials. In the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MAGs reconstructed from the baseline community, only six of these genes, conferring
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
resistance to only three antimicrobials, were found, and in some cases this number dropped
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
even lower. Generally, the amount of resistance genes found in MAGs seemed to vary
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
between organisms as well as scenarios. Noticeably, while no resistance genes were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
predicted for ​Escherichia coli ​K-12, MAGs matching this organism in Scenario 3a were found
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
to possess the ​bla​CTX-M-3 gene, coding for an extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL) ​[60]​.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Examining resistance predictions for the original sequences revealed that this gene was only
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
found in the ​Enterobacter cloacae EN3600 plasmid unnamed6, suggesting this was the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
source of the gene. While examining this, it was also noticed that, although this only
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
occurred in one out of three replicates each and therefore resulted in an average gene count
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
that was too low to be visible in the heatmap, the plasmid-derived beta-lactamase was also
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
found in ​Escherichia coli K-12 in Scenario 4b, which tested the impact of fragment size on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
plasmid reconstruction, and another gene, ​aac(6')-Iaa​, was found in Scenario 1a, where all
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sequences had equal relative abundances. As the latter gene was originally found in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Salmonella ​Typhimurium 81741, which formed hybrid bins with ​Escherichia coli K-12 under
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this circumstance, this likely was caused by such a hybrid bin.  
 
 
57 
==PAGE:59==
 
 
Figure 19​: Heatmap showing the absolute amount of AMR genes in each organism or its matching bin by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
scenario, averaged across replicates. Scenarios are shown along the X-axis, organisms along the Y-axis. Gene
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
counts in the original sequences are shown in the leftmost column. Only chromosomal sequences were included
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as plasmids were too rarely recovered to add meaningful information. The plot was created in R using gplots. 
 
As the high number of AMR genes in ​A. baumannii XH386 distorted visualization
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
considerably, it was decided to create a second heatmap visualizing what ​proportion of the
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
original sequence’s resistance genes were found in corresponding MAGs. This heatmap is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
shown in Fig. 20.
While this visualization meant organisms whose original sequences
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
contained no resistance genes had to be omitted, since no proportion could be calculated for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
them, this only affected ​Escherichia coli ​K-12, which has already been discussed.  
In this visualization, it can clearly be seen that MAGs tended to contain fewer resistance
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
genes than the source sequences they matched. Noticeable exceptions are the hybrid bins
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
designated
​K.
pneumoniae in Scenario 1a, presumably containing the genes from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Enterobacter faecium as well, and the bins matching ​Bacillus velezensis FZB42 in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
scenarios including the related ​Bacilli​. It was therefore decided to examine the latter more
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
closely. 
58 
==PAGE:60==
 
 
Figure 20​: Heatmap showing the amount of AMR genes in each organism or its matching bin relative to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
amount of AMR genes in the original sequence by scenario, averaged across replicates. Scenarios are shown
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
along the X-axis, organisms along the Y-axis. Only chromosomal sequences were included as plasmids were too
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
rarely recovered to add meaningful information. Organisms whose original sequence contained no resistance
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
genes were omitted. The plot was created in R using gplots. 
 
When examining the related ​Bacilli​, it can be seen in Fig. 20 that bins matching ​B. subtilis
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
subsp. ​subtilis 168 were missing some resistance genes, while those matching ​B. velezensis
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FZB42 contained an additional resistance gene in scenarios 2b, c and d as well as 4c. It
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
would be tempting to assume, due to the phylogenetic closeness of the strains, that some of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the resistance genes from the former were to be found in the latter. However, this was not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
generally the case. Only once, in a replicate of Scenario 2b, the additional resistance gene in
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
the ​B. velezensis FZB42 bin contained a resistance gene that could potentially be derived
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from a related organism: the tetracycline resistance gene ​tet(L)​, only found in both ​B.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
amyloliquefaciens strains and ​B. subtilis subsp. ​subtilis 168. In the remaining cases, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
resistance genes in question were the vanHBX cluster. The only organism originally
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
containing this was ​Enterococcus faecium Ef_aus00233, though it could not be found in any
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
bin matching ​E. faecium​. Aside from the cases where it was found in ​B. velezensis​, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
once in ​B. subtilis ​subsp. ​subtilis 168 in Scenario 4c, it was generally found either in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
unbinned scaffolds or in a bin with no matching genome. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
59 
==PAGE:61==
 
Due to the aforementioned variance in resistance genes found in reconstructed MAGs, it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
was also examined whether the quality of predictions for an organism depended on various
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MAG quality factors. Thus, for all MAGs that matched the original sequences in replicates of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
the baseline simulation, F-scores were calculated individually. Only data from the baseline
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
simulation was used to exclude any potential additional effect from the factors altered in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
different scenarios. To estimate the impact of genome quality on the quality of ResFinder
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
predictions,
correlation
between
MAGs’
F-scores
and
their
amount
of
scaffolds,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
completeness and contamination was examined. 
To determine the relationships between these factors and the F-score in the 73 bins from all
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
replicates of the baseline, a Kendall’s tau correlation was calculated for each of the factors.  
A weak, but statistically significant negative correlation was found between the amount of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
scaffolds and the F-score, shown in Fig. 21 (τ​b​=-0.246742, p = 0.005031). 
 
 
 
Figure 21: Scatterplot showing the relation between the individual F-score of bins from replicates of the baseline
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for which an F-score could be calculated, and their amount of scaffolds, visualized with R using ggplot2. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
F-score is shown on the Y-axis, the amount of scaffolds on the X-axis. A linear regression line has been added in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
blue, and the 95% confidence interval for the line is shown in gray.  
 
 
 
60 
==PAGE:62==
 
There was also a very weak, but statistically significant negative correlation between
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CheckM-predicted completeness and the F-score, as can be seen in Fig. 22 (τ​b​=-0.1825617,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
p = 0.04102).  
 
 
 
Figure 22​: Scatterplot showing the relation between the individual F-score of bins from replicates of the baseline
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for which an F-score could be calculated, and their completeness as calculated by CheckM, visualized with R
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
using ggplot2. The F-score is shown on the Y-axis, the completeness in percent on the X-axis. A linear
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
regression line has been added in blue, and the 95% confidence interval for the line is shown in gray. 
 
Finally, a weak, statistically significant negative correlation between contamination and the
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
F-score was found as well, visualized in Fig. 23 (τ​b​=-0.2238575, p = 0.01271). 
 
 
Figure 23​: Scatterplot showing the relation between the individual F-score of bins from replicates of the baseline
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for which an F-score could be calculated, and their contamination as calculated by CheckM, visualized with R
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
using ggplot2. The F-score is shown on the Y-axis, the contamination in percent on the X-axis. A linear
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
regression line has been added in blue, and the 95% confidence interval for the line is shown in gray. 
 
61 
==PAGE:63==
 
 
However, the figures also demonstrate there are a number of outliers.  
 
In summary, while resistance phenotypes of MAGs generally matched those of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
corresponding source organisms well, there was some amount of individual variation, which
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
may also be linked to the bins’ quality measures. It was rare for a MAG to contain a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
resistance gene the corresponding source sequence did not have, but genes not being
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
found occurred somewhat more commonly. 
 
 
62 
==PAGE:64==
 
Discussion 
MAGICIAN 
The current version of MAGICIAN represents a considerable expansion and improvement of
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
the initial pipeline. A substantial error that greatly limited the applicability of the pipeline has
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
been fixed. The program is now more flexible both in terms of genome formats accepted and
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
ability to configure read simulation. User-friendliness features such as a wrapper script and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
summaries of quality control features have been introduced, and the pipeline has been
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
shown to function with Snakemake’s cluster mode. 
Thus, MAGICIAN has become a tool that is capable of simulating metagenomic data - from
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
reads to MAGs - for a variety of purposes. In the present work, MAGs created by MAGICIAN
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have been used to evaluate the performance of a single-genome tool on MAGs and to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
investigate the impact of metagenome composition and MAG quality on said tool. In the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
future, this can be investigated for further single-genome tools, and simulated MAGs may be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
used to develop and/or test tools specifically designed to work with MAGs. However, this is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
not the only application of MAGICIAN that can be envisioned.  
Even the original version worked as a convenient wrapper script for using CAMISIM to
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
simulate a series of simple metagenomic samples of a defined, known composition, e.g. as
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
exercise material in a course. With the introduction of a wrapper handling construction of the
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
snakemake command used to run the pipeline, this has become even more convenient, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
read simulation is now more flexible than in the original version of CAMISIM due to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
introduction of a patch making it possible to use custom error profiles. 
It has also previously been noted that the modular nature of MAGICIAN allows it to be used
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
for testing the performance of assembly and binning tools by exchanging them. Such testing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
could either be done using simulated reads only, or, by adding another step to the pipeline, a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
mixture of real and simulated reads or even a real metagenome spiked with simulated reads
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
from only a few known genomes. Especially in the last two cases, the added option to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
provide custom error profiles for read simulation is useful - users can supply an error profile
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
trained on their real reads for simulation of the artificial ones, so that there is no difference in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
quality between these sets. 
In its current form, MAGICIAN therefore fulfils the aim it was developed for by allowing users
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
to easily simulate MAGs under a range of different sequencing conditions and on the basis
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of different synthetic communities. 
“Baseline” simulated metagenome 
While attempting to establish a “baseline” metagenome composition that could serve as a
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
basis for further scenarios, a number of observations were made. Firstly, in a community
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
where all organisms had the same abundance, some organisms from the same family that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
had similar genome sizes were repeatedly found forming “hybrid” bins where both
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
organisms’ scaffolds shared one bin. Secondly, with varied relative abundances, this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
appeared to recur in a lesser degree when the difference in relative abundance between the
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
organisms in questions was relatively low. In these cases, scaffolds that matched one of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
organisms were found in a bin that otherwise matched the other. As the scaffolds from both
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bins were 100% matches to the organism in question, this was suspected to be an issue
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
arising with binning, with the genomes presumably possessing similar tetranucleotide
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
63 
==PAGE:65==
 
frequencies, which are one factor considered by MetaBAT 2. As a similar amount of copies
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
for genomes with a similar size led to a similar amount of reads and hence a similar
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
coverage depth, the genomes in this case also resembled each other with regards to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
other factor considered by MetaBAT 2, leading to (some) scaffolds of the one organism
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
being placed into the same bin as those of the other. 
Regarding MAG simulation with MAGICIAN, the immediate consequence is that, when the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
aim is to avoid hybrid bins, it is generally recommended that source genomes are given
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
different relative abundances. When equal relative abundances are desired, source
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
genomes of similar size should be examined for similar tetranucleotide frequencies.  
In a natural situation, it is of course not possible to control the relative abundance of
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
members of a metagenome. However, the possibility of such hybrid bins arising not only
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from very closely related strains, but also from more distantly related organisms that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“resemble” each other in the factors considered by one’s binner of choice, remains a caveat
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
to keep in mind. Though CheckM indicated a high degree of contamination in the present
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cases, this may not always occur or be considered, so that these bins may be misleading, as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
discussed for example in ​[11]​. 
Impact of fluctuations in read simulation 
Another observation that occurred in the process of developing the baseline was that small
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fluctuations in the simulated reads - when simulating reads from the same sequences at the
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
same relative abundance, but with a different random seed for the read simulator - in some
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
cases could lead to vast differences in reconstruction of MAGs. After the first occurrence of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this issue, simulations were repeated with all parameters except for the seed for read
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
simulation remaining identical. Specifically, scaffolds from both ​Bacillus cereus (four times)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and ​Clostridium perfringens ​(once) failed to be binned in these situations. To investigate this,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
reads generated from ​B. cereus, both in replicates where a matching bin was recovered and
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
those where it was not, were examined. No differences in read quality were evident using
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FastQC, and when examining mappings of the generated reads to the source genome, no
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
obvious anomalies occurring only in one of the two groups were evident. The presence of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
scaffolds belonging to ​B. cereus in the assemblies produced by metaSPAdes was also
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
verified. No anomalies were apparent.  
As further investigations would have rapidly exceeded the scope of the present work,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
analyses here proceeded on the basis of the assumption that the issue occurred randomly,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and scenarios were run repeatedly to compensate for this.  
However, further avenues for investigation remain: for instance, the results of the read
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mapping step have not been investigated in depth, and it is unclear whether there are any
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
differences in the reads or assemblies of the other 16 genomes that may, on their own or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
together, have influenced the result.  
Finally, it would be of interest to investigate whether this is an artefact of metagenome
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
simulation, or whether this issue may also affect real-world data in certain edge cases. To
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
investigate this, laboratory experiments using synthetic microbial communities, where DNA
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the organisms in question is pooled ​in vitro in the proportions used here and subsequently
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
sequenced with an Illumina NovaSeq 6000 sequencer, may be carried out.  
64 
==PAGE:66==
 
Scenarios 
MAGICIAN’s basic functionality was demonstrated by simulating a number of synthetic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
communities with different compositions, some of them under two different sequencing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conditions: once with a simulated fragment size of 270 bp, and once with a simulated
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
fragment size of 600 bp.  
To evaluate results, bins were matched to their corresponding source sequences and their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
size in basepairs compared. While most variations did not affect the entire community
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
strongly enough that bins’ average size difference from their corresponding source
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sequences differed significantly from that observed with the baseline community, effects on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the sequences “targeted” with the different community composition were visible, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
generally biologically plausible, suggesting MAGICIAN is indeed suitable for its purpose.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, for future evaluations of MAGs simulated with MAGICIAN, a more sophisticated
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
measure than simple comparisons of basepair size may be employed. 
Impact of metagenome composition 
Simulating the reconstruction of MAGs from microbial communities containing related
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
organisms or plasmids with MAGICIAN gave results that generally matched what was to be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
expected: closely related organisms and plasmids both posed challenges to assembly and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
binning, as they do in reality ​[11,61]​. 
In the case of closely related strains, one key issue is assembly. Most metagenomic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
assemblers, including metaSPAdes, use an approach based on de Bruin graphs. In short,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reads are “cut” into overlapping k-mers. The nodes of the graph are formed by obtaining all
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
possible (k-1)-mers from these k-mers, and the k-mers form the edges. An edge then
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
connects two nodes if the first node’s (k-1)-mer matches the k-1 first characters of the edge’s
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
k-mer, and the second node’s (k-1)-mer matches the k-1 last characters of the edge’s k-mer.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For assembly of a single genome, one looks for a single path that only visits each once ​[62]​.
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For metagenomics, one looks for multiple paths which together fulfill this condition. However,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
multiple paths are possible, so it is possible to arrive at incorrect sequences. When such
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ambiguous situations cannot be resolved, assemblers introduce a break in the path instead.
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
Sequencing errors or highly similar related strains which may only differ by a few nucleotides
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
in a given read make the graph more complex by introducing multiple alternative paths
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
between the same nodes, so ambiguities are harder to resolve. This can lead to highly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fragmented assemblies ​[32,63]​. These fragmented assemblies may then even worsen the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
problem, as in short scaffolds, the tetranucleotide signature may be less clear. To combat
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this, metaSPAdes aims for creating longer sequences by obtaining “consensus assemblies”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of similar strains. This can avoid excessive fragmentation, but may result in chimeric open
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reading frames ​[11,32]​. 
In the MAGICIAN simulations, issues also manifested primarily in the form of “hybrid bins”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that contained many small scaffolds and were similar to multiple original sequences. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
majority of these differed obviously from the sequences they were predicted to match most
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
closely, being much larger or smaller than the source sequence. However, scenarios 2g and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
h, which involved the presence of an additional ​Salmonella ​Typhimurium strain, featured
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
presumable hybrid bins whose size roughly equaled that of the ​S. Typhimurium genome they
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were predicted to match. It must be noted that the two ​S. ​Typhimurium strains likely were the
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
most closely related strains in this work, with both belonging to the same sequence type
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[49,52]​; this may have been the reason. 
65 
==PAGE:67==
 
The bins matching these two strains may therefore demonstrate metaSPAdes’ merging of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
two closely related strains, at the cost of producing potential hybrid genes. The fact that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
these bins have a similar amount of scaffolds also supports this suspicion. Meanwhile, bins
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
assigned to closely related organisms in the other scenarios examining these all were highly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fragmented, having up to 50-70 times as many scaffolds as equivalent bins from the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
baseline in some cases, which demonstrates the other issue common to metagenomes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
containing closely related organisms. Thus, MAGICIAN results here appear biologically
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
plausible, as they represent both common issues discussed by Chen et al. ​[11]​. 
Plasmids also cause issues with assembly. In the first place, it is difficult to find a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
computational definition of plasmids that distinguishes them from chromosomes, as there is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
a large variation in size and structure, and they may exchange genetic material with the host
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
organism’s chromosome. In the de Bruijn assembly graph described before, circular
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
plasmids form cycles with relatively uniform coverage. However, as these cycles are a part
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
of a larger assembly graph with edges from both bacterial chromosomes and plasmids, they
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are difficult to find. Further complicating the matter, plasmids can contain repeats which are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
shared with other plasmids or a chromosome. When sequencing a single organism with a
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
high-copy plasmid, the difference in coverage may be used to resolve this issue, but this is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
not possible in a metagenomic sample with a wide range of different chromosomes and
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
plasmids with different coverage. Therefore, plasmids are rarely recovered ​[64]​. 
This issue could likewise be seen in MAGICIAN simulations of communities containing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
plasmids. Only in one replicate of one scenario involving high-copy plasmids, a bin having
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
>90% ANI with one of the plasmid sequences used was reconstructed, and even in this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
case, the bin was far larger than the plasmid in question, suggesting assembly and/or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
binning issues. 
While plasmids generally failed to be reconstructed in MAGICIAN simulations, therefore, this
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
only reflected issues seen in reality, and may be seen as expected behavior. 
However, these simulations also showed a number of “off-target effects” affecting the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reconstruction of MAGs from genomes unrelated to those directly targeted by the scenarios.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For example, simulating the presence of high-copy plasmids in a microbial community led to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
a hybrid bin containing both ​Enterobacter cloacae and a fragment of ​Klebsiella pneumoniae
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
in one replicate. It is, however, currently unclear whether this simply is an artefact of the
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
metagenome simulation method employed, or whether this may possess relevance for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
analysis of real metagenomes. More simulations, and perhaps further investigation with ​in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
vitro​ synthetic communities both with and without plasmids, are needed to determine this.  
 
Impact of sequencing factors 
In this work, increasing fragment size led to fewer cases where a genome could not be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
binned when examining the baseline community composition.  
Meanwhile, no clear effect of increasing fragment size ​alone on the recovery of MAGs from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
closely related organisms or the reconstruction of plasmids from metagenomic sequences
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
could be shown. This is likely due to the inability to increase read length along with it, so that
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
no additional sequence information per read was gained; however, there may have been an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
effect on fragmentation, as contigs could be connected across larger distances. 
Additionally, though CAMISIM does not account for it in its settings, higher fragment size has
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
been observed to affect the error rates of R2 reads in Illumina paired-end sequencing ​[65]​;
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
66 
==PAGE:68==
 
thus, the results obtained here may not model reality fully, and should be repeated with an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
error profile specific for higher fragment sizes. 
Nevertheless, as factors related to sequencing, unlike the composition of the metagenome
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
one is sequencing, may actually be influenced, this should be investigated further. A first
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
step may be to establish performance while simulating longer reads with an appropriate error
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
profile, or simulating reads with error profiles matching that of other Illumina machines.  
Additionally, the impact of other sequencing factors such as changing sequencers entirely or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
combining long and short reads may be investigated with a future version of MAGICIAN that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
allows for such a workflow.  
 
Use of single-genome tools for MAG analysis 
To demonstrate one of the potential applications of MAGs generated by MAGICIAN, they
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were used to test the performance of ResFinder, a tool for the prediction of antimicrobial
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
resistance originally designed to work with genomes derived from single isolates. This test
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
had two key findings. Firstly, performance of ResFinder on MAGs was intriguing and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
warranted further investigation. Secondly, simulated MAGs show promise as a tool for such
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
investigations, as they were able to identify issues for which it was crucial to know which
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
gene originally was found in which organism.  
General feasibility of using ResFinder on MAGs 
ResFinder was run on simulated MAGs from all scenarios, and performance for predicting
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
resistance phenotypes compared to predictions on the original sequences was evaluated by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
calculating the F-score, which takes into account both the sensitivity and precision. Results
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
seemed to generally indicate acceptable sensitivity and precision, with F-scores ranging
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from 0.7 to 0.85 for most scenarios, with the exception of one scenario, representing the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“worst case” for MAG reconstruction, in which F-scores were as low as 0.15.  
While using ResFinder on MAGs thus may appear promising, the results warrant further
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
investigation. For one, it appears the MAGs do not contain all resistance genes in many
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cases, and this appears to depend on the organism in question to some degree. This is, of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
course, undesirable when attempting to use MAGs for AMR surveillance, especially when
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this occurs with clinically relevant organisms such as ​Acinetobacter baumannii ​XH386,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
where two thirds of the organism’s predicted resistance genes could not be found in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
corresponding MAGs under optimal conditions. Depending on how frequent and how severe
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the issue generally is, this may mean that analyzing MAGs with ResFinder potentially only
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
could serve as a supplement to assembly-free methods at the present time. Therefore,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
further investigation of the issues is necessary. As they seem to partially depend on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
organism reconstructed and analyzed, more simulated MAGs may be of use here, since with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
these, it is possible to know which gene was originally found in which organism. 
At some point, one may also move on to evaluating the performance of ResFinder on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
real-world MAGs. As mentioned earlier, ResFinder’s assembly-free workflow for reads would
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
provide a partial point of comparison here. For this, however, it may be useful to first
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
compare the results of an assembly-free approach to those of the MAG-based strategy ​and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the results obtained with the original sequences from the MAGICIAN-generated datasets, in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
order to establish whether data was already lost during “sequencing”. It must also be noted
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
that the simulated MAGs used here specifically were based on short reads simulated to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
67 
==PAGE:69==
 
match the error profile of an Illumina NovaSeq 6000 sequencer, which then were assembled
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
using metaSPAdes and binned using MetaBAT 2. Other methods of sequencing, assembly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and binning may have other strengths and weaknesses; it would therefore be advisable to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
begin with real-world MAGs that have been obtained with the same methods. In the future,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as MAGICIAN grows more versatile, it may be tested how ResFinder performs on MAGs
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
obtained with other methods. 
Finally,
it
must
be
remarked
that
these results are specific for ResFinder. Other
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
single-genome tools may prioritize other requirements, or examine genomic features that are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
more or less heavily affected by assembly or binning issues, so that MAGs may generally be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
more or less suitable for them. 
 
Evaluating impact of metagenome composition 
When comparing F-scores between different scenarios, a statistically significant impact of
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
community composition compared to the baseline community was only seen when
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
introducing a larger number of related organisms, as seen in Scenario 2a, or outright
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
replacing this community with the related organisms, as seen in Scenario 2d. However, in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the former case, this applied only when related organisms were added at equal relative
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
abundance. When the relative abundance of these organisms was varied, in Scenario 2b,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this led to a statistically significant improvement in the F-score over Scenario 2a, and the
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
scenario’s F-scores did not differ statistically significantly from the baseline.  
While no statistical analysis could be done on the F-scores of Scenario 2c, visual inspection
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of Fig. 18 strongly suggests poorer precision and sensitivity when attempting to predict
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
antimicrobial resistance genes with MAGs reconstructed from communities containing only
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
related organisms at equal or similar relative abundance. Furthermore, statistical analysis
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was not possible because the total absence of true positives in one of the replicates of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Scenario 2c made calculating its F-score impossible, which additionally may suggest poor
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sensitivity under these circumstances. 
This group of closely related organisms also led to most of the cases of MAGs containing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
resistance genes not found in their corresponding source sequences. Specifically, these
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
occurred in ​Bacillus velezensis FZB42 in Scenarios 2b, c, and d, as well as Scenario 4c,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which examined the reconstruction of related organisms with a higher fragment size in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sequencing. Interestingly, only in Scenario 2b, this additional gene, ​tet(L) in that case, was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
likely to be derived from a related organism, either ​Bacillus subtilis subsp. ​subtilis ​168 or one
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the two ​Bacillus amyloliquefaciens strains, as they normally carry it but were lacking it in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
the replicate in question. In the remaining cases, the resistance gene detected was a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
vanHBX cluster found in the original sequence of ​Enterococcus faecium Ef_aus00233, which
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
otherwise was only found in bins containing unbinned scaffolds, or bins that did not have a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
matching source sequence. It is possible the genetic surroundings of this particular AMR
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cluster may have been difficult to bin, as ​Enterococcus faecium Ef_aus00233 obtained the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cluster through horizontal gene transfer - it is harbored by the transposon Tn​1549 ​[43]​. As
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
horizontal gene transfer plays an important role in the spread of antimicrobial resistance ​[66]​,
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
this may be an important limitation, which needs to be investigated further before moving on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to real-world data.  
While adding plasmids to the community had no statistically significant impact on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
respective scenarios’ F-scores in comparison to the baseline, it did cause more cases in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
which a resistance gene was found in a MAG whose corresponding original sequence did
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
68 
==PAGE:70==
 
not contain this. Specifically, both in Scenario 3a and 4b, which concerned the addition of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
low-copy plasmids, MAGs matching ​Escherichia coli K-12 were found to possess the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bla​CTX-M-3 ​gene, which codes for an extended-spectrum beta-lactamase. This gene was found
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to likely be derived from the ​Enterobacter cloacae EN3600 plasmid unnamed6, the only
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
other sequence to contain this gene. It is not clear why sequences from this plasmid should
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be binned with those from ​Escherichia coli K-12. However, this gene is commonly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
associated with plasmids found in ​Escherichia coli ​[60]​, and some plasmids have been found
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to resemble their hosts in terms of tetranucleotide signature ​[59]​, making it possible that at
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
least part of the plasmid’s sequence resembled ​Escherichia coli K-12 in terms of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
tetranucleotide frequency. 
For the sake of completeness, it must also be noted that the hybrid bins that occurred when
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
simulating a synthetic community in which all members had equal abundance also contained
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
additional resistance genes. This, though, is far easier to explain, since a bin containing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
sequences from two different organisms naturally would contain resistance genes from both
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of them. It is also far easier to identify, as the bins were twice as large as the sequences
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
they were predicted to match.  
The remaining cases provided more substantial challenges, which might not entirely be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
solved in the absence of knowledge about the original sequences making up the synthetic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
community. The bins matching ​Bacillus velezensis FZB42 were easily identified as flawed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
due to their high fragmentation, and, knowing which organisms they were meant to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
represent, their atypical size. Only knowledge of the sequences comprising the synthetic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
community, however, made it equally easy to ascertain the origin of the additional genes
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
found in these bins. In particular, it was the repeated binning of the ​vanHBX cluster together
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with sequences from ​Bacillus velezensis FZB42 that made the difficulty in binning this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
horizontally transferred AMR cluster stand out. 
Finally, in the case of bins that matched ​Escherichia coli K-12 containing the ​bla​CTX-M-3 ​gene,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
no obvious issues were apparent at first glance, as the bins were not unusually fragmented.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Even with the knowledge of which organism they were predicted to match, they did not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
attract attention, as their size did not substantially deviate from that of the ​Escherichia coli
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
K-12 chromosome. Presented with the ResFinder predictions, and CheckM placing the bins
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
within Enterobacteriaceae, without knowing the composition of the synthetic community the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MAG was derived from, a researcher here would likely turn towards their knowledge of
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
resistance genes in order to discover any irregularities such as atypical resistance genes or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
acquired resistance to an antimicrobial the organism in question is intrinsically resistant to.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Unfortunately, in this case, the results would still appear plausible, as the ​bla​CTX-M-3 ​gene
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
indeed is found in Enterobacteriaceae and ​Escherichia coli specifically ​[60]​. While it ​is a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
plasmid-borne resistance gene, the aforementioned potential similarity in tetranucleotide
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
frequency between some plasmids and their hosts could provide a potential explanation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
without necessarily arousing suspicion. Thus, lacking the information about the underlying
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sequences, the researcher might accept ResFinder’s prediction and misidentify a common
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
laboratory strain of ​Escherichia coli as a potential ESBL-carrying pathogen. Though it is of
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
course not possible to know the “true” sequences of MAGs reconstructed from microbial
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
communities found in nature, knowledge of potential issues obtained through preliminary
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
testing on simulations at least may lead to awareness of said issues when interpreting
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
real-world results. 
These examples clearly demonstrate the importance of initially testing the performance of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
single-genome tools on MAGs by using MAGs derived from synthetic communities of known
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
composition,
as
well as the importance of easily varying the composition of said
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
69 
==PAGE:71==
 
communities, since the issues only became apparent under certain conditions. Simulation of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MAGs derived from ​in silico synthetic communities, which can be done with MAGICIAN,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
allows for both of these things. 
Evaluating impact of genome quality 
For evaluating the impact of genome quality, focus lay specifically on the baseline
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
community composition, to avoid any influence from the factors altered in the various
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
scenarios, which had been shown to affect results. Specifically, the F-score was individually
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
calculated for each bin that matched a source sequence in all replicates of the baseline. It
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
was then investigated whether a bin’s F-score was correlated to its amount of scaffolds, or
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the completeness and contamination estimates calculated by CheckM, as these were three
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
commonly used measures of MAG quality (compare e.g. ​[10]​). 
The negative correlation between the amount of scaffolds in a bin and the F-score was to be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
expected, as higher fragmentation may be an indicator of assembly issues or contamination,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and also carries the risk of information being lost.  
Likewise, the negative correlation between contamination as calculated by CheckM and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
F-score was unsurprising, as the incorrectly binned scaffolds in a contaminated bin may
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
carry resistance genes.  
On the other hand, the negative correlation between CheckM-predicted completeness and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
F-score was unexpected, as it would suggest that ​less complete MAGs tend to have better
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
precision and sensitivity. This is the weakest correlation, however, and that with the highest
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
p-value. When visualized, it also seems to depend almost entirely on one outlier.  
Therefore, more experiments and simulations are necessary to gain a more complete
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
understanding of how genome quality correlates with ResFinder performance. While the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
data obtained during the course of this work do not suffice, with more sophisticated models
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and more data, it may be possible to establish which quality parameters may indicate
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
potential issues affecting the performance of ResFinder.  
Beyond more sophisticated models, different measures may also be considered. Evaluating
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the F-score per scenario gives rather broad results, while for individual organisms, results
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
may range from a majority of predicted resistances being missed to perfect prediction of the
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
resistance phenotype. At the same time, examining the F-score per organism is not always
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
possible, as it depends on the presence of true positives, so that if none were detected, or
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
the organism lacks resistances in the first place, it cannot be calculated. This poses an issue
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
both if, for example, scaffolds with resistance genes are incorrectly placed in a bin matching
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
an organism whose original sequence is not predicted to be resistant to any antimicrobials,
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and if an organism’s original sequence contains genes conferring resistance to multiple
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
antimicrobials but none of them are found in its corresponding MAG. 
The choice of how to measure performance is also dependent on the tool that is examined
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
and its purpose. For a tool used for monitoring antimicrobial resistance, false negatives may
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have the more significant consequences, as this could mean missing a clinically significant
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
multiresistant organism, while in other tools, false positives may be the more important
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
issue. Thus, it may be necessary to consider which measure to use for evaluating
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
performance depending on the tool investigated. Additionally, as successfully applied in this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
work, other methods of analysis independent of the F-score may be employed. 
70 
==PAGE:72==
 
Perspectives 
Future development of MAGICIAN 
The current version of MAGICIAN is vastly improved compared to the original. However,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
some limitations that were present in the initial version of MAGICIAN remain, and others
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have become more apparent. 
Most crucially, the pipeline currently remains limited to Computerome, as it makes extensive
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
use of the compute cluster’s module system, which manages loading of software installed on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Computerome ​[67]​. For wider applicability, it is necessary to either provide an overview of
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
requirements, or ideally to provide these in a Docker container ​[68]​ for maximum portability.  
Further, it has been shown that minor fluctuations in read simulation by CAMISIM have the
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
potential to greatly affect downstream steps. In the present work, this was mitigated by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
running each scenario in triplicate. In the future, however, it may be investigated whether
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
these fluctuations can successfully be eliminated or mitigated by other measures if they do
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
not reflect reality.  
Additionally, while the MAGICIAN pipeline “realistically” struggles with the reconstruction of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
plasmids, a metaSPAdes-derived assembler that specifically focuses on reconstructing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
plasmids, metaplasmidSPAdes, has recently been developed ​[64]​. This may at some point
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be introduced as an option in MAGICIAN, either as an alternative or an addition to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
metaSPAdes.  
However, the pipeline’s versatility is far from exhausted at this point. Future changes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
introducing more flexibility may range from simple user-friendliness features such as the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ability to specify the read simulator used by CAMISIM in the wrapper or the Snakemake call
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
to more advanced options such as an easy way to swap out assemblers or binners, different
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
processing of reads depending on the sequencing method simulated, or the ability to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
combine short and long reads. 
 
Future experiments 
Even with the limitations that remain, MAGICIAN has shown that it likely generates
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
biologically plausible MAGs.  
Thus, it may be worthwhile to examine whether the patterns in MAG reconstruction and
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
quality uncovered through simulating various metagenomic compositions could be replicated
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
by creating ​in vitro versions of the ​in silico synthetic communities examined here, or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
potentially of ​in silico synthetic communities assembled explicitly with the aim of easily
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
replicating them ​in vitro​, and processing these in the same way as their ​in silico​ equivalents. 
The results of analyzing the simulated MAGs with ResFinder also suggest that it may be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
feasible to investigate antimicrobial resistance using MAGs and ResFinder. However, more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
data is clearly required in order to evaluate the influence of MAG quality on ResFinder result
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
quality, as the present results were heavily influenced by outliers. Furthermore, it is crucial to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
investigate whether horizontally transferred AMR genes are disproportionately missed in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MAGs due to binning issues, and if so, whether there is a way of mitigating this either during
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
sequencing or analysis or through manual curation of “suspicious” bins. For this, it is of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
course necessary to know whether and how a gene has been horizontally transferred.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Simulating MAGs from synthetic communities specifically composed to examine this issue
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
71 
==PAGE:73==
 
using MAGICIAN, as well as a reanalysis of the present dataset with focus on the genes
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
generally not found in the simulated MAGs, are a potential solution to this question. 
Once this is established, the performance of ResFinder on “real-world” MAGs may be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
examined, as these both reflect the complexity of real data and avoid any simulation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
artefacts that potentially influenced the real-world MAGs. While the “true” genomes are not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
known in this case, an assembly-independent overview of the resistance genes present in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the sample may nevertheless provide some point of comparison. As previously mentioned,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this may only provide an indication of which genes were missed, rather than whether any of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
these were found in a bin matching the wrong organism, but this appeared to be a rare
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
occurrence with the present dataset. Further testing with simulated MAGs from a synthetic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
community designed to resemble the one the real-world MAGs were reconstructed from may
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be necessary to elucidate whether this pattern generally holds. 
It must also be noted that the results for ResFinder are to some degree dependent on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sequencing, assembly and binning strategy simulated, so that similar real-world MAGs
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
should be investigated in the beginning, and further development of MAGICIAN may be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
necessary to compare the performance of ResFinder on MAGs obtained with different
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
strategies. If successful, however, this may even provide some insights about what
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
strategies to pursue in metagenomic AMR surveillance projects.  
At the same time, as previously noted, the results from ResFinder cannot simply be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
transferred to every single-genome tool, as both quality requirements and the importance of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
different quality parameters such as completeness or fragmentation vary. Therefore, to gain
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a broader overview of the subject, it may be of interest to investigate other single-genome
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
tools with simulated MAGs. An obvious target for such an investigation would be the genome
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mining tool antiSMASH, as its requirements differ considerably from ResFinder, with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
importance being placed on low fragmentation ​[69]​. An earlier version has in fact previously
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
been applied to a set of MAGs, though without reporting degree of fragmentation ​[13]​,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
providing an opportunity for comparison of results. 
 
 
72 
==PAGE:74==
 
Conclusion 
The aim of this work was to establish a versatile, easy to use pipeline for the simulation of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs) by expanding on an initial version of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MAGICIAN pipeline, which was designed for this purpose but possessed some key
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
limitations.
Subsequently,
the
thesis
aimed
to
demonstrate
both MAGICIAN’s core
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
functionality of simulating MAGs and a potential use of these simulated MAGs for evaluating
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the performance of single-genome tools on MAGs, using the example of the antibiotic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
resistance prediction tool ResFinder. 
Though some limitations remain, most crucially MAGICIAN’s continued reliance on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
compute cluster it was originally developed to run on, the current version accomplishes the
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
main goal behind the development of MAGICIAN. The pipeline provides a convenient,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
flexible way of simulating MAGs on the basis of user-defined ​in silico synthetic communities,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
currently simulating sequencing with any Illumina instrument type for which the user can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
supply error profiles. 
To demonstrate the core functionality of MAGICIAN, MAGs from a range of synthetic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
communities obtained by systematically varying an initial “baseline” community composition
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
through introduction of related organisms and plasmids, as well as varying sequencing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
parameters, were simulated. It was subsequently evaluated how well MAGs could be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
recovered under the specific conditions, and whether this was biologically plausible. Results
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
generally resembled what could be expected from reality: plasmids could generally not be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
recovered, and reconstructing closely related organisms was challenging. MAGs simulated
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in this work in fact demonstrated two common issues occurring with closely related
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
organisms: in most cases, bins containing sequences from the related organisms were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
highly
fragmented,
but
when
using
a
pair
of
highly similar strains of ​Salmonella
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Typhimurium, metaSPAdes instead was able to create longer scaffolds based on combining
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the two, avoiding excessive fragmentation but potentially creating chimeric open reading
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
frames. 
In light of this, unexpected findings made while simulating MAGs may warrant further
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
investigation. Firstly, though assembly issues with closely related organisms leading to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hybrid bins were to be expected, hybrid bins also occurred with organisms that only shared
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the same family due to binning issues if these organisms had similar genome sizes and were
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
present in similar amounts. Secondly, in certain edge cases, two samples simulated from the
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
same underlying community composition, with the same read simulator with the same
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
settings may result in substantially different results after binning, with one of the members of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the synthetic community being unable to be reconstructed in one sample while being found
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
without issues in the other, even though there were only slight differences in read simulation.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
This may warrant further investigation ​in vitro​, as it either represents a substantial issue with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
the read simulator used, or an issue in assembly or binning that may occur with real-world
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
data.  
With the data generally appearing plausible, the simulated MAGs were then used to test the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
single-genome tool ResFinder in order to both evaluate the potential of analyzing MAGs with
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
such tools and demonstrate a potential use of simulated MAGs for evaluating this. The
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
results
suggest ResFinder may generally be usable with MAGs obtained with the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sequencing, assembly and binning strategies used here, and first indications of how MAG
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
quality parameters related to the performance of ResFinder have been obtained, though
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
more data is needed on this. However, further investigation is clearly needed before using
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
73 
==PAGE:75==
 
ResFinder on real-world MAGs, as tests also showed cases of horizontally transferred
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
resistance genes being wrongly binned or not binned at all. In some cases, these issues
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
could only be identified because the sequences of the underlying community were known.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Further investigation of whether this is a widespread issue and how severely it affects
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
ResFinder results is necessary, and the findings also underline that this should initially be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conducted using simulated MAGs, as information about the “true” sequences of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
community they were reconstructed from is important to identify this. 
In summary, this work both provides a user-friendly, flexible tool for the simulation of MAGs
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for a wide range of uses, and demonstrates that it brings considerable advantages to one
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
potential application, while also showing that it may be worthwhile to investigate to which
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
degree and under which conditions single-genome tools could be used for the analysis of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MAGs. 
 
 
 
74 
==PAGE:76==
 
Abbreviations 
AMR
antimicrobial resistance 
ANI
average nucleotide identity 
bp
basepairs 
ESBL
extended-spectrum beta-lactamase 
Gbp
gigabasepairs 
MAG
metagenome-assembled genome 
OTU
operational taxonomic unit 
 
 
75 
==PAGE:77==
 
References 
 
1. 
Laudadio I, Fulci V, Stronati L, Carissimi C. Next-Generation Metagenomics: 
Methodological Challenges and Opportunities. OMICS. 2019;23: 327–333. 
2. 
Quince C, Walker AW, Simpson JT, Loman NJ, Segata N. Shotgun metagenomics, from 
sampling to analysis. Nat Biotechnol. 2017;35: 833–844. 
3. 
Pasolli E, Asnicar F, Manara S, Zolfo M, Karcher N, Armanini F, et al. Extensive 
Unexplored Human Microbiome Diversity Revealed by Over 150,000 Genomes from 
Metagenomes Spanning Age, Geography, and Lifestyle. Cell. 2019;176: 649–662.e20. 
4. 
Parks DH, Rinke C, Chuvochina M, Chaumeil P-A, Woodcroft BJ, Evans PN, et al. 
Recovery of nearly 8,000 metagenome-assembled genomes substantially expands the 
tree of life. Nat Microbiol. 2017;2: 1533–1542. 
5. 
Almeida A, Nayfach S, Boland M, Strozzi F, Beracochea M, Shi ZJ, et al. A unified 
catalog of 204,938 reference genomes from the human gut microbiome. Nat Biotechnol. 
2020. doi:​10.1038/s41587-020-0603-3 
6. 
Almeida A, Mitchell AL, Boland M, Forster SC, Gloor GB, Tarkowska A, et al. A new 
genomic blueprint of the human gut microbiota. Nature. 2019;568: 499–504. 
7. 
Tully BJ, Graham ED, Heidelberg JF. The reconstruction of 2,631 draft 
metagenome-assembled genomes from the global oceans. Sci Data. 2018;5: 170203. 
8. 
Stewart RD, Auffret MD, Warr A, Walker AW, Roehe R, Watson M. Compendium of 
4,941 rumen metagenome-assembled genomes for rumen microbiome biology and 
enzyme discovery. Nat Biotechnol. 2019;37: 953–961. 
9. 
Nayfach S, Shi ZJ, Seshadri R, Pollard KS, Kyrpides NC. New insights from uncultivated 
genomes of the global human gut microbiome. Nature. 2019;568: 505–510. 
10. Bowers RM, Kyrpides NC, Stepanauskas R, Harmon-Smith M, Doud D, Reddy TBK, et 
al. Minimum information about a single amplified genome (MISAG) and a 
metagenome-assembled genome (MIMAG) of bacteria and archaea. Nat Biotechnol. 
2017;35: 725–731. 
11. Chen L-X, Anantharaman K, Shaiber A, Eren AM, Banfield JF. Accurate and complete 
genomes from metagenomes. Genome Res. 2020;30: 315–333. 
12. Weber T, Blin K, Duddela S, Krug D, Kim HU, Bruccoleri R, et al. antiSMASH 3.0-a 
comprehensive resource for the genome mining of biosynthetic gene clusters. Nucleic 
Acids Res. 2015;43: W237–43. 
13. Cuadrat RRC, Ionescu D, Dávila AMR, Grossart H-P. Recovering Genomics Clusters of 
Secondary Metabolites from Lakes Using Genome-Resolved Metagenomics. Front 
Microbiol. 2018;9: 251. 
14. Papudeshi B, Haggerty JM, Doane M, Morris MM, Walsh K, Beattie DT, et al. Optimizing 
and evaluating the reconstruction of Metagenome-assembled microbial genomes. BMC 
Genomics. 2017;18: 915. 
15. Mavromatis K, Ivanova N, Barry K, Shapiro H, Goltsman E, McHardy AC, et al. Use of 
76 
==PAGE:78==
 
simulated data sets to evaluate the fidelity of metagenomic processing methods. Nat 
Methods. 2007;4: 495–500. 
16. Singer E, Andreopoulos B, Bowers RM, Lee J, Deshpande S, Chiniquy J, et al. Next 
generation sequencing data of a defined microbial mock community. Sci Data. 2016;3: 
160081. 
17. Sczyrba A, Hofmann P, Belmann P, Koslicki D, Janssen S, Dröge J, et al. Critical 
Assessment of Metagenome Interpretation-a benchmark of metagenomics software. Nat 
Methods. 2017;14: 1063–1071. 
18. Fritz A, Hofmann P, Majda S, Dahms E, Dröge J, Fiedler J, et al. CAMISIM: simulating 
metagenomes and microbial communities. Microbiome. 2019;7: 17. 
19. Steinke K. Generation and evaluation of a pipeline for the creation of simulated MAGs. 
2020. Available: 
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1LnpvVCnG6kos-2e1ht2KUMGqT7iFs6WA/view?usp=sh
aring 
20. Alanis AJ. Resistance to antibiotics: are we in the post-antibiotic era? Arch Med Res. 
2005;36: 697–705. 
21. Antimicrobial resistance. 13 Oct 2020 [cited 12 Jan 2021]. Available: 
https://www.who.int/en/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/antimicrobial-resistance 
22. Perry J, Waglechner N, Wright G. The Prehistory of Antibiotic Resistance. Cold Spring 
Harb Perspect Med. 2016;6. doi:​10.1101/cshperspect.a025197 
23. Munk P, Andersen VD, de Knegt L, Jensen MS, Knudsen BE, Lukjancenko O, et al. A 
sampling and metagenomic sequencing-based methodology for monitoring antimicrobial 
resistance in swine herds. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2017;72: 385–392. 
24. Nordahl Petersen T, Rasmussen S, Hasman H, Carøe C, Bælum J, Schultz AC, et al. 
Meta-genomic analysis of toilet waste from long distance flights; a step towards global 
surveillance of infectious diseases and antimicrobial resistance. Sci Rep. 2015;5: 
11444. 
25. Hendriksen RS, Munk P, Njage P, van Bunnik B, McNally L, Lukjancenko O, et al. 
Global monitoring of antimicrobial resistance based on metagenomics analyses of urban 
sewage. Nat Commun. 2019;10: 1124. 
26. Zankari E, Hasman H, Cosentino S, Vestergaard M, Rasmussen S, Lund O, et al. 
Identification of acquired antimicrobial resistance genes. J Antimicrob Chemother. 
2012;67: 2640–2644. 
27. Bortolaia V, Kaas RS, Ruppe E, Roberts MC, Schwarz S, Cattoir V, et al. ResFinder 4.0 
for predictions of phenotypes from genotypes. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2020;75: 
3491–3500. 
28. Clausen PTLC, Aarestrup FM, Lund O. Rapid and precise alignment of raw reads 
against redundant databases with KMA. BMC Bioinformatics. 2018;19: 307. 
29. Köster J, Rahmann S. Snakemake--a scalable bioinformatics workflow engine. 
Bioinformatics. 2012;28: 2520–2522. 
30. Huang W, Li L, Myers JR, Marth GT. ART: a next-generation sequencing read simulator. 
Bioinformatics. 2012;28: 593–594. 
77 
==PAGE:79==
 
31. Bushnell B. BBMap. Available: ​https://sourceforge.net/projects/bbmap/ 
32. Nurk S, Meleshko D, Korobeynikov A, Pevzner PA. metaSPAdes: a new versatile 
metagenomic assembler. Genome Res. 2017;27: 824–834. 
33. Li H, Handsaker B, Wysoker A, Fennell T, Ruan J, Homer N, et al. The Sequence 
Alignment/Map format and SAMtools. Bioinformatics. 2009;25: 2078–2079. 
34. Kang DD, Li F, Kirton E, Thomas A, Egan R, An H, et al. MetaBAT 2: an adaptive 
binning algorithm for robust and efficient genome reconstruction from metagenome 
assemblies. PeerJ. 2019;7: e7359. 
35. Parks DH, Imelfort M, Skennerton CT, Hugenholtz P, Tyson GW. CheckM: assessing 
the quality of microbial genomes recovered from isolates, single cells, and 
metagenomes. Genome Res. 2015;25: 1043–1055. 
36. Olm MR, Brown CT, Brooks B, Banfield JF. dRep: a tool for fast and accurate genomic 
comparisons that enables improved genome recovery from metagenomes through 
de-replication. ISME J. 2017;11: 2864–2868. 
37. Ondov BD, Treangen TJ, Melsted P, Mallonee AB, Bergman NH, Koren S, et al. Mash: 
fast genome and metagenome distance estimation using MinHash. Genome Biol. 
2016;17: 132. 
38. Kurtz S, Phillippy A, Delcher AL, Smoot M, Shumway M, Antonescu C, et al. Versatile 
and open software for comparing large genomes. Genome Biol. 2004;5: R12. 
39. Reback J, McKinney W, jbrockmendel, Van den Bossche J, Augspurger T, Cloud P, et 
al. pandas-dev/pandas: Pandas 1.0.3. 2020. doi:​10.5281/zenodo.3715232 
40. McKinney W. Data Structures for Statistical Computing in Python. In: van der Walt S, 
Millman J, editors. Proceedings of the 9th Python in Science Conference. 2010. pp. 
56–61. 
41. Bushnell B. SEQanswers - N50 explained - Post #17. In: SEQanswers [Internet]. 11 
May 2015 [cited 24 Jul 2020]. Available: 
http://seqanswers.com/forums/showpost.php?p=172170&postcount=17 
42. Rice LB. Federal funding for the study of antimicrobial resistance in nosocomial 
pathogens: no ESKAPE. The Journal of infectious diseases. 2008. pp. 1079–1081. 
43. Buultjens AH, Lam MMC, Ballard S, Monk IR, Mahony AA, Grabsch EA, et al. 
Evolutionary origins of the emergent ST796 clone of vancomycin resistant Enterococcus 
faecium. PeerJ. 2017;5: e2916. 
44. Sabirova JS, Xavier BB, Hernalsteens J-P, De Greve H, Ieven M, Goossens H, et al. 
Complete Genome Sequences of Two Prolific Biofilm-Forming Staphylococcus aureus 
Isolates Belonging to USA300 and EMRSA-15 Clonal Lineages. Genome Announc. 
2014;2. doi:​10.1128/genomeA.00610-14 
45. Fang Y, Quan J, Hua X, Feng Y, Li X, Wang J, et al. Complete genome sequence of 
Acinetobacter baumannii XH386 (ST208), a multi-drug resistant bacteria isolated from 
pediatric hospital in China. Genom Data. 2016;7: 269–274. 
46. Yuan S, Wu G, Zheng B. Complete genome sequence of an IMP-8, CTX-M-14, 
CTX-M-3 and QnrS1 co-producing Enterobacter asburiae isolate from a patient with 
wound infection. J Glob Antimicrob Resist. 2019;18: 52–54. 
78 
==PAGE:80==
 
47. Broberg CA, Wu W, Cavalcoli JD, Miller VL, Bachman MA. Complete Genome 
Sequence of Klebsiella pneumoniae Strain ATCC 43816 KPPR1, a Rifampin-Resistant 
Mutant Commonly Used in Animal, Genetic, and Molecular Biology Studies. Genome 
Announc. 2014;2. doi:​10.1128/genomeA.00924-14 
48. Zhong C, Nelson M, Cao G, Sadowsky MJ, Yan T. Complete Genome Sequence of the 
Triclosan- and Multidrug-Resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa Strain B10W Isolated from 
Municipal Wastewater. Genome Announc. 2017;5. doi:​10.1128/genomeA.01489-16 
49. Li X, Jiang Y, Wu K, Zhou Y, Liu R, Cao Y, et al. Whole-genome sequencing 
identification of a multidrug-resistant Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium strain 
carrying blaNDM-5 from Guangdong, China. Infect Genet Evol. 2017;55: 195–198. 
50. Jung D-H, Chung W-H, Seo D-H, Nam Y-D, Yoon S, Park C-S. Complete genome 
sequence of Bifidobacterium choerinum FMB-1, a resistant starch-degrading bacterium. 
J Biotechnol. 2018;274: 28–32. 
51. Zhang L, Li Y, Shen W, Wang SM, Wang G, Zhou Y. Whole-genome sequence of a 
carbapenem-resistant hypermucoviscous Klebsiella pneumoniae isolate SWU01 with 
capsular serotype K47 belonging to ST11 from a patient in China. J Glob Antimicrob 
Resist. 2017;11: 87–89. 
52. Wang W, Baloch Z, Zou M, Dong Y, Peng Z, Hu Y, et al. Complete Genomic Analysis of 
a Salmonella enterica Serovar Typhimurium Isolate Cultured From Ready-to-Eat Pork in 
China Carrying One Large Plasmid Containing mcr-1. Front Microbiol. 2018;9: 616. 
53. Steinke K, Mohite OS, Weber T, Kovács ÁT. Phylogenetic distribution of secondary 
metabolites in the Bacillus subtilis species complex. 2020. p. 2020.10.28.358507. 
doi:​10.1101/2020.10.28.358507 
54. Milne I, Stephen G, Bayer M, Cock PJA, Pritchard L, Cardle L, et al. Using Tablet for 
visual exploration of second-generation sequencing data. Brief Bioinform. 2013;14: 
193–202. 
55. Benjamini Y, Hochberg Y. Controlling the False Discovery Rate: A Practical and 
Powerful Approach to Multiple Testing. J R Stat Soc Series B Stat Methodol. 1995;57: 
289–300. 
56. Walker DA. JMASM9: Converting Kendall’s tau for correlational or meta-analytic 
analyses. J Mod Appl Stat Methods. 2003;2: 525–530. 
57. Moore DS, Notz WI, Fligner MA. The basic practice of statistics. Macmillan Higher 
Education; 2015. 
58. Li H. wgsim. Github; Available: ​https://github.com/lh3/wgsim 
59. Pride DT, Meinersmann RJ, Wassenaar TM, Blaser MJ. Evolutionary implications of 
microbial genome tetranucleotide frequency biases. Genome Res. 2003;13: 145–158. 
60. Bradford PA. Extended-spectrum beta-lactamases in the 21st century: characterization, 
epidemiology, and detection of this important resistance threat. Clin Microbiol Rev. 
2001;14: 933–51, table of contents. 
61. Maguire F, Jia B, Gray KL, Lau WYV, Beiko RG, Brinkman FSL. 
Metagenome-assembled genome binning methods with short reads disproportionately 
fail for plasmids and genomic Islands. Microb Genom. 2020;6. 
79 
==PAGE:81==
 
doi:​10.1099/mgen.0.000436 
62. Langmead B. De Bruijn Graph assembly. Available: 
https://www.cs.jhu.edu/~langmea/resources/lecture_notes/assembly_dbg.pdf 
63. Olson ND, Treangen TJ, Hill CM, Cepeda-Espinoza V, Ghurye J, Koren S, et al. 
Metagenomic assembly through the lens of validation: recent advances in assessing 
and improving the quality of genomes assembled from metagenomes. Brief Bioinform. 
2019;20: 1140–1150. 
64. Antipov D, Raiko M, Lapidus A, Pevzner PA. Plasmid detection and assembly in 
genomic and metagenomic data sets. Genome Res. 2019;29: 961–968. 
65. Tan G, Opitz L, Schlapbach R, Rehrauer H. Long fragments achieve lower base quality 
in Illumina paired-end sequencing. Sci Rep. 2019;9: 2856. 
66. Partridge SR, Kwong SM, Firth N, Jensen SO. Mobile Genetic Elements Associated with 
Antimicrobial Resistance. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2018;31. doi:​10.1128/CMR.00088-17 
67. Using modules - Computerome Wiki - Computerome. [cited 23 Jul 2020]. Available: 
https://www.computerome.dk/display/CW/Using+modules 
68. Merkel D. Docker: lightweight Linux containers for consistent development and 
deployment. Linux J. 2014;2014: 2. 
69. Blin K, Kim HU, Medema MH, Weber T. Recent development of antiSMASH and other 
computational approaches to mine secondary metabolite biosynthetic gene clusters. 
Brief Bioinform. 2019;20: 1103–1113. 
 
80 
