==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Master Thesis
CoaST, Chemical Engineering Department
Design and Development of Silane – Epoxy
hybrid resin system for HPHT conditions
Authors:
Mads Olsen (s153379)
Toke S. Larsen (s154049)
03/01-2021
Supervisors:
Søren Kiil, Professor
Claus Erik Weinell, Senior Executive Oﬃcer
Narayanan Rajagopalan, Post. doc
==PAGE:2==
Preface
This study is submitted as a fulﬁllment of the requirements for the Masters degree in Chem-
ical and Biochemical Engineering.
The study was carried out at the CoaST research centre at the Technical University of Den-
mark, from August 2020 to January 2021 under the supervision of Professor Søren Kiil,
Senior Executive Oﬃcer Claus Erik Weinell and Post. doc Narayanan Rajagopalan. We
would like to thank our supervisors, who have been great advisers throughout the entire
thesis.
Furthermore we would like to thank our Paint Formulation Specialist, Alicia Gutierrez Gar-
cia and laboratory responsible Johan Scholl, who introduced us to the laboratory and advised
us through the experimental phase.
Each member contributed equally to the master thesis, however, the responsibility has been
divided into diﬀerent chapters as shown below.
Mads Olsen (s153379): 2,4,6,8,9
Toke S. Larsen (s154049): 1,3,4,5,7,9
The remaining chapters has been handled with collaboratively responsibility.
Mads Olsen (s153379)
Toke S. Larsen (s154049)
i
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Renewable energy is the imminent alternative for fossil fuels; however, the primary energy
source will remain oil and gas for decades to supply the globally increasing energy require-
ments. The enlarged demand has forced the oil and gas industry to exploit more extreme
environments of high pressure and high temperatures (HPHT) in search of new reservoirs.
This study has investigated the protectability and the degradation of silicon derivative/epoxy
hybrid coatings under HPHT conditions. Firstly, the incorporation of long-chained siloxanes
was investigated. Secondly, the addition of an adhesion promoter (AP) to the long-chained
siloxane/epoxy system and thirdly the addition of two diﬀerent silanes to the epoxy sys-
tem to examine the diﬀerences. A closed batch reactor system comprised of three distinct
phases (gas phase of CO2 and N2, hydrocarbon zone of para-xylene, and a seawater zone)
was utilized to simulate the HPHT environment for the exposure. The characterization of
the coating degradation was concluded with Digital Microscopy (DM), Scanning Electron
Microscopy (SEM) combined with Energy-Dispersive X-ray analysis (EDX), attenuated total
reﬂection-Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (ATR-FTIR), and Diﬀerential Scanning
Calorimetry (DSC). Comparing the siloxane/epoxy systems with neat bisphenol-F (BPF)
and epoxy novolac (EN), the addition of siloxane to a BPF system showed no improvement
as severe degradation signs were present in the form of complete loss of adhesion, underﬁlm
corrosion, and blisters. On the other hand, the performance of siloxane/EN was signiﬁcantly
enhanced compared to neat EN. The hydrocarbon interactions and the underﬁlm corrosion
was reduced signiﬁcantly; however, large blisters was prominent in the seawater phase due
to three general issues: the ﬂexible nature of the long Si-O-Si backbone, the non-polar na-
ture of the siloxanes backbone structure aﬀecting resin incompatibility, and entanglement
of the long chained siloxane. Introduction of the AP to the above-performing siloxanes sig-
niﬁcantly enhanced the three HPHT exposure zone. The improvements were designated to
the versatile incorporation ability of the short-chained silanes and the promoted adhesion
between substrate and resin resulting in a greater cross-link density restraining the chain
motion of the system. Additionally, the elimination of hydroxyl groups from the adhesion
promotion mechanism yielded better water resistance properties; however, the issues con-
cerning ﬂexibility, entanglement, and incompatibility had still manifested in the seawater
zone as blisters and underﬁlm corrosion in the HC-SW interface. In conclusion to the silox-
anes, a new formulation was prepared to contain two diﬀerent silanes. The silane/EN hybrid
coating exhibited superior performance as the HPHT exposure zones remained intact with
ii
==PAGE:4==
only trace elements of iron oxide and salt were conﬁrmed on the coating’s surface, delaying
the underﬁlm corrosion signiﬁcantly. Regardless of these observations, the combination of
two diﬀerent silanes signiﬁcantly enhanced the integration mechanisms’ versatility in both
the adhesion promotion and direct integration to the resin matrix. These attributes en-
hance cross-link density, thermal, chemical, hydrophobic, and solvent resistance properties
due to the Si-O-Si networks concluding in a superior performing hybrid coating for HPHT
conditions.
iii
==PAGE:5==
List of Abbreviations
AP: Adhesion promoter
API: American Petroleum Institute
APTES: 3-Aminopropyl-triethoxysilane
ATR-FTIR: Attenuated Total Reﬂectance -
Fourier Transform Infrared
BPF: Amine-cured epoxy bisphenol F resin
system
CFR: Code of Federal Regulations
DEAPA: 3-(Diethylamino)propylamine
DGEBA: Diglycidyl ether of bisphenol A
DGEBF: glycidyl ether of bisphenol F
DICY: Dicyandiamide
DM: Digital Microscopy
DMS-EC17: Epoxy-cyclo-hexyl-ethyl termi-
nated polydimethyl siloxane
DSC: Diﬀerential Scanning Calorimetry
ECH: Epichlorohydrin
ECMS-227: Epoxy-cyclo-hexyl-ethyl)methyl-
siloxane]-Dimethyl siloxane copolymer
EDX: Energy Dispersive X-Ray
EEW: Epoxy equivalent weight
EN: Amine-cured epoxy novolac resin system
E-PDMS: Poly(dimethylsiloxane), diglycidyl
ether terminated
f: Functionality
GDP: Gross domestic product
GPTMS: γ-glycidoxypropyltrimethoxysilane
HC: Hydrocarbon
HEW: Hydrogen equivalent weight
HPHT: High pressure and high temperature
LGC-MS:
Liquid/Gas
Chromatography-
Mass Spectrometry
MDA: methylenedianiline
MPDA: m-phenylenediamine
MXDA: m-Xylylenediamine
n: Repeating unit
NMA: Nadic methylanhydride
OEM: Original equipment manufacture
PACM: 4,4-Diaminodicyclohexylmethane
PDMS: Polydimethylsiloxane
pH: Potential of hydrogen
PX: Para-xylene
RGD: Rapid gas decompression
SEM: Scanning electron microscopy
S.R.: Stoichiometric ratio
SW: Seawater
TETA: triethylenetetramine
Tg: Glass transition temperature
UV: Ultraviolet
W: Weight
wt%: Weight percent
iv
==PAGE:6==
Problem Description
Although renewable energy is the way forward, the continuing demand for fossil fuels has
forced oil and gas technology to investigate and exploit more extreme environments namely
the conditions of high pressures and high temperatures (HPHT). The HPHT environment are
accompanied by highly corrosive species, which comprise the HPHT wells’ conditions. Com-
bining pervasive, corrosive species with the HPHT serves as a substantial risk for oﬀshore
installments and process equipment to preserve their structural eﬃciency. The intensiﬁed
conditions substantiate the requirements for a high performing coating with anti-corrosive
properties. The commonly used coating system is high-performance epoxy-based; notably
epoxy novolacs and the glycidyl ether of bisphenol F (DGEBF) are suggested as essential
candidates for mitigating corrosion issues under HPHT owing to their superior resistance
characteristics towards water permeation and solvent ingress. However, strong para-xylene-
resin interactions for the epoxy novolacs are suggested as an initiation point for coating
degradation, whereas the DGEBF tends to be vulnerable towards seawater permeation. To
improve the resistance and aging under HPHT conditions of the existing technologies, in-
corporation of silanes and siloxanes into the epoxy-based coatings is theorized. The theory
leading to the incorporation is connected to the multi-functional properties in regards to
withstanding the numerous corrosive phases existing to form the HPHT condition. The
particular properties are associated with the work as adhesion promoters, the inertness to
hydrocarbons due to the very strong Si-O bonds, hydrophobic nature of the dimethyl side
groups and the possibility of improved cross-linking, which in combination qualiﬁes silanes
and siloxanes as possible participants in preventing material degradation under HPHT con-
ditions. This study focuses on the formulation of hybrid epoxy coating systems with diﬀerent
silicon derivatives both as a curing agent and as a co-binder. Further application areas for
high-performance silicon derivative-epoxy hybrid coatings might be i.e., combustion cham-
bers, heat exchanger tubes, incinerators for organics waste, and in general, any surface
application dealing with HPHT conditions. The relevancy in HPHT will be tested using
both the HPHT pilot batch reactor fabricated at DTU KT, which allows a simulation of
the HPHT conditions, and diﬀerent characterizations. Following the HPHT exposure sev-
eral characterization techniques will be employed. Optical analysis techniques, SEM-EDX
and Digital Microscopy, spectroscopic study, ATR-FTIR, and thermal analysis, DSC, will
all be included in the characterization. The characterization methods should lead to an
identiﬁcation of the structure/property relationship and reveal the degradation pathway.
v
==PAGE:7==
Timeline
• Literature Study: 28/8/2020
• First Progress Report: 20/10/2020
• Second Progress Report: 18/12/2020
• MSc Thesis Submission: 03/01/2021
vi
==PAGE:8==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Fundamentals of Coating Technology
3
2.1
Components of Coating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Protection Mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.1
Classiﬁcation of Anti-corrosive Coatings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
HPHT Conditions
7
3.1
HPHT Deﬁnition and Environments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4
Coatings for HPHT conditions
10
4.1
Epoxy Novolac Synthesis and Chemistry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.2
Curing Agents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.3
Curing of Novolac Epoxy Resin with Amines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5
Coating Degradations under HPHT
19
5.1
Degradation Mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.1.1
Temperature Eﬀects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.1.2
Pressure Eﬀects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.1.3
Salinity Eﬀects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.1.4
Gas Phase Eﬀects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.1.5
Hydrocarbon Eﬀects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.2
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6
Hybrid Coating Systems for HPHT
25
6.1
Modiﬁcations of Epoxy Resins with Silane & Siloxanes
. . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6.1.1
Silane
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6.1.2
Siloxane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6.2
Types of Silicon Derivatives Used: Structural Deﬁnitions . . . . . . . . . . .
29
vii
==PAGE:9==
6.3
Demand for Siloxanes Chemistry in HPHT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.3.1
Improved Barrier Properties by Si-O Bonds
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.3.2
Chemical & Thermal Resistance of Silicon Derivatives . . . . . . . . .
32
6.3.3
Solvent Interaction of Silicon Derivatives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
7
Absorption Kinetics of hybrid Silane-Epoxy Resins under HPHT
34
7.1
Water Absorption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
7.2
Solvent Absorption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
8
Characterization Techniques
39
8.1
Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
8.2
Diﬀerential Scanning Calorimetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
8.3
Scanning Electron Microscope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
8.4
Liquid/Gas Chromatography Mass Spectrometry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
9
Summary of the Literature Survey
43
10 Objective and Strategy
44
10.1 Hypotheses
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
11 Experimental
47
11.1 Conclusions from previous studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
11.2 Raw Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
11.2.1 Epoxy Base Systems and Curing Agents
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
11.2.2 Siloxanes and Silanes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
11.2.3 The Applied Siloxanes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
11.2.4 The Applied Silane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
11.3 Coating Formulation and Application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
11.4 General Description of the HPHT Setup at DTU
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
11.5 Characterization Instruments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
11.5.1 Surface Characterization Techniques
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
11.5.2 Attenuated total reﬂection-Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (ATR-
FTIR) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
11.5.3 Diﬀerential scanning calorimetry (DSC)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
12 Results and Discussion
59
12.1 Preliminary Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
viii
==PAGE:10==
12.2 Phase 1: Experimental Screening Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
12.2.1 Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
12.2.2 Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
12.3 Phase 2: Optimization and Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
12.4 Results and Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
12.4.1 Visual Inspection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
12.4.2 Digital Microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
12.4.3 SEM-EDX Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
12.4.4 ATR-FTIR Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
12.4.5 DSC Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
12.4.6 Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
13 Conclusion
92
14 Future Work
94
15 References
95
A Appendix: Phase Interactions
102
B Appendix: Screening Process
105
B.1 EN base . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
105
B.2 BPF base
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
109
C Appendix: Phase 2: SEM-EDX
113
D Appendix: Phase 2: ATR-FTIR
115
ix
==PAGE:11==
1
|
Introduction
Fossil fuels will remain the primary energy resource for decades to accommodate the in-
creasing global energy demand, contrasting to the focus directed towards renewable energy
resources. However, the vast exploitation of fossil reservoirs has pushed many of the existing
oil and gas ﬁelds towards gradual depletion, forcing the oil and gas industry to change its
emphasis towards more extreme environments in the search for new potential fossil reser-
voirs. Unlike conventional oil wells, the extremity of the high pressure and high temperature
(HPHT) environment along with highly corrosive species constitutes the prerequisite for the
HPHT wells [1]. The hostility attributed to the conditions of HPHT is of great concern as
such environments make corrosion a pervasive issue across the oil and gas industry. Process
equipment and oﬀshore contractions exposed to HPHT conditions face a crucial challenge to
withstand the environment and maintain structural integrity, as the extreme HPHT condi-
tions tend to intensify and accelerate material degradation, forcing early and costly replace-
ments. For this reason, the process equipment is often coated with high cross-linking and
anti-corrosive epoxy coatings, which is the most prevalent method of preventing corrosion.
However, assessments of the durability and degradability of these high-performance epoxy-
based coatings exposed to HPHT conditions are very limited in the open literature, and
a thorough understanding of the underlying degradation pathways remains predominantly
unresolved. In contrast, an increasing emphasis is directed towards the formulation of hybrid
coating systems to improve the resistance features of the promising high-performance epoxy-
based anti-corrosive coatings. The incorporation of silanes and siloxanes into epoxy-based
coatings is suggested to exhibit superior performance in withstanding HPHT conditions due
to their multi-functional properties. In particular, the suitable characteristics of silanes and
siloxanes involves the ability to work as adhesion and cross-linking promoters, nominating
them as qualiﬁed candidates for mitigating material degradation under conditions of HPHT
[2, 3].
This study intends to illuminate the current trends subjecting the area of HPHT within
the academic society of coating science. Moreover, the examination and applicability of the
1
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 1. Introduction
high-performance silicon derivative-epoxy hybrid coatings under HPHT conditions will be in-
vestigated. The durability and degradability are to be assessed by diﬀerent characterization
techniques, which in theory could lead to the determination of interactions being chemical
rather than physical between solvent and the coating systems.
2
==PAGE:13==
2
|
Fundamentals of Coating Technology
Coatings have been functioning as the ﬁrst line of defense on objects for a long time. The
modern age has developed a coating technology demand, which has required the products
to expand and evolve to the versatile level seen today.
The functionalities of a coating
are diverse; however, the attributes serve to protect substrates and provide the aesthetics
qualities to achieve the desired substrate appearance [4]. Coatings are generally a thin layer
applied to an object. The expanding application areas of coating technology has increased
the demand, which inevitably escalated the research, yielding a minimum of newly developed
products absent of coating. The aesthetics provided by coating are commonly related to the
desired sheen and color. The protective qualities revolve around the surface, which protects
from corrosion, UV radiation, and environmental damages [5].
The general content of liquid coatings is build of complex mixtures. The mixture can be
divided into groups: binder/resin, solvent, pigments, extenders, and additives.
2.1
Components of Coating
Coatings are made of volatile and non-volatile parts. The ﬁlm-forming component is a non-
volatile part in the coating medium and is commonly called the binder or resin. The resin
enables cohesion within the coating and adhesion to the substrate. The continuous ﬁlm is
formed as a result of the adhesive and cohesive properties, allowing the hard surface of the
coating to be created. The binder type is the essential constituent in the coating system con-
cerning the physical and chemical attributes present. Conventional binders are polyurethane,
acrylic, and epoxy [5]. The pigment often provides the aesthetics of the coating. The very
ﬁne powder generally yields the color and sheen. Further, it oﬀers additional anti-corrosive
properties, antifouling, and intumescent coatings. The volatile component is the solvent.
The solvents serve to obtain the desired viscosity and evaporation time. The viscosity and
evaporation time play a key role in applying the coating and the speed of ﬁlm formation.
Commonly used solvents are aromatics, aliphatics, and xylene [4]. Fillers are like binders a
3
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 2. Fundamentals of Coating Technology
part of the non-volatile element. The typical application of ﬁllers is to increase the volume
and increase physical barrier eﬀects. An increase in volume generally increases mechanical
strength, reduces cracking, and is likely to reduce the overall cost of the coating system. The
last component is the additives. Additives have diﬀerent properties and are selected to obtain
the desired characteristics. Commonly, additives are added in small quantities to improve
the lifetime through the improvement of UV-resistance or suppressing degradation caused
by oxidation. Wetting agents are a common additive aiding in the dispersion of solids (ﬁller,
pigments) in the resin, which improves the contact and improves the ﬂowability, yielding the
desired surface structure rougher or smoother.
2.2
Protection Mechanisms
As mentioned, coatings can facilitate in both decoration and protection purposes. However,
the functionalities of coatings are highly dependent on the application, where other applica-
tion measures include: reﬂective coating for mirrors or high-temperature areas, intumescent
coating and blade coating. Architectural coatings, OEM coatings (original equipment man-
ufacture), and special-purpose coatings are three categories that consume a large part of the
manufactured coating. Architectural coatings are mainly for buildings, OEM coatings more
product based such as automobiles. The special-purpose coating is the basis of industrial
coatings, especially marine coatings, storage tanks, and chemical factories, which require
higher durability and increased protection [4].
One of the biggest problems the modern industrial age has encountered is the corrosion
of steel structures. The structural damages enforced by corrosion dramatically increases
the risk for the environment, surroundings, and not least employees. Further, the ﬁnancial
aspect is of the high cost. Corrosion is estimated to cost 3% of the US gross domestic prod-
uct (GDP) by the American Coatings Association [4]. The maturing and improvement of
corrosion-resistant coatings has enabled the industry to place facilities in immensely corro-
sive environments, e.g., oﬀshore storage tanks, oil platforms, and windmills. The increasing
demand for high-performance anti-corrosive coatings is substantiated by highlighting the
recently occurred oil spill in Santa Barbara. The Refugio oil spill, which occurred mid may
2015 in Santa Barbara, can be seen in ﬁgure 2.1, where the oil has leaked from an onshore
pipeline into the ocean. The pipeline rupture materialized as under-ﬁlm corrosion transpired
in the coating system. It was esteemed that water had penetrated the insulation, which in-
dicated that the integrity of the system had been compromised [6]. The external corrosion
aided by the climate in Santa Barbara, which has a fast changing wet/dry cycle. The rup-
4
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2. Fundamentals of Coating Technology
ture resulted in a leak of over 100,000 gallons of oil [6], which had an immense impact on
the environment and the aquatic ecosystem, emphasizing the signiﬁcance of implementing
anti-corrosive coatings in constructions.
Figure 2.1: Over 100,000 gallons of oil spilled north of Refugio State Beach [7].
To guarantee the coating eﬃciency in relation to anti-corrosive properties for oﬀshore appli-
cations, the coating commonly consists of multiple layers: a topcoat, intermediate coats, and
a primer. Improved adhesion between the layers enhances the coating abilities, as nonadhe-
sive behavior can initiate coating failure leading to direct exposure of the substrate [8]. The
primer’s functionality is to provide and maintain adequate adhesion to the substrate while
protecting the substrate from corrosion. The intermediate coats facilitate in the obstruction
of transport of aggressive species, such as sodium chloride present in seawater, by ensuring
suﬃcient thickness. The intermediate layers should also secure eﬃcient adhesion between
topcoat and primer. Finally, The topcoat is the ﬁrst contact with the environment; hence, it
has to resist collision while avoiding pitting, blistering, and retaining the desired appearance.
2.2.1
Classiﬁcation of Anti-corrosive Coatings
Anti-corrosive coatings can be divided into classes concerning the mechanism materializing
when the protection is happening. Three common mechanisms can be seen in the ﬁgure 2.2.
The barrier eﬀect revolves around lowering the permeability of liquid, gases and ions. A low
5
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 2. Fundamentals of Coating Technology
Figure 2.2: Classiﬁcations of protective mechanisms of anticorrosive coatings [8].
permeability reduces the transport of aggressive species into the substrate, which hinders
corrosion. Inhibitive coatings revolve around the paciﬁcation of the substrate. The sub-
strate is covered in a layer of insoluble metallic complexes, which functions as a protection
mechanism like the barrier eﬀect that restricts the transport of aggressive species. The third
mechanism is the galvanic eﬀect. Galvanic protection features the sacriﬁce of a more elec-
trochemical active metal, which is in contact with the substrate [8].
The physical and chemical attributes accessible in highly cross-linked epoxy resins show
great potential in anti-corrosive properties. The application of epoxy coatings in the oil
and gas industry will be studied to better understand the eﬀects and interactions present
under high pressure and high temperature (HPHT) conditions. The HPHT conditions will
be exploited in the next section.
6
==PAGE:17==
3
|
HPHT Conditions
The interest towards renewable energy sources has grown signiﬁcantly in the past ten years;
however, the existing reservoirs of fossil fuels will inevitably remain the predominant energy
source for decades to accommodate the increasing energy demand seen in the global perspec-
tive. Over the last century, the extensive exploitation of fossil fuels has pushed the existing
reservoirs towards gradual depletion. Thus, the emphasis in the oil and gas industry has been
forced towards conditions with increasing extremity in the exploration of new potential fossil
fuel reservoirs [9]. In contrast to the conventional oil wells, extremely high pressures and
temperatures are encountered combined with highly corrosive components for the so-called
HPHT wells. Such extreme and harsh environments establish the prerequisite and necessity
for a technology that enables the oil and gas industry to extract crude oil and natural gas at
HPHT conditions eﬃciently. An issue of major concern associated with HPHT conditions is
corrosion as illustrated in ﬁgure 3.1.
(a) Internal corrosion in a transporta-
tion pipeline used for crude oil [10].
(b) Internal corrosion in a transportation
pipeline for curde oil [10]
Figure 3.1: Severe internal corrosion of transportation pipelines from the oil and gas industry
[10].
Corrosion of any designed structures/equipment in such hostile environments faces a massive
challenge to withstand and maintain structural integrity. In particular severe corrosion of
the inside of transportation-pipelines is an issue of concern for the oil and gas industry. The
harsh environment encountered under HPHT conditions combined with highly corrosive
7
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 3. HPHT Conditions
species tends to accelerate the diﬀerent degrading mechanisms of the involved materials that
force early and costly replacements. The most prevalent method to prevent corrosion of
process equipment under HPHT conditions is by applications of high-performance epoxy-
based anti-corrosive coatings on the substrate’s inner linings [1].
3.1
HPHT Deﬁnition and Environments
The classiﬁcation HPHT is designated to oil wells that exhibit extremely hostile conditions
(high pressure and high temperature) to service companies. However, wells that only exhibit
high pressure or high temperature may be designated HPHT, as only a few wells exhibit both
characteristics, but regardless of the designation, the HPHT wells entail challenges which
have to be illuminated and resolved to extract crude oil and natural gas under HPHT con-
ditions eﬃciently. The challenges associated with HPHT conditions constitute all aspects
from production eﬃciency to the well construction. They require service companies to take
approaches that can be signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from those applied for the ordinary non-HPHT
wells [11]. However, the oil and gas industry has been challenged with elevated temperatures
and pressure for years. For this reason, an increasing emphasis has been directed towards
HPHT environments, despite the ongoing comprehensive shift where fossil fuels are replaced
with renewable energy sources, and the relatively small number of existing HPHT wells.
An oil study from 2012 reported an estimated existence of 100,000 drilled wells globally,
and only 1.5% should be designated as wells exhibiting HPHT conditions [11]. Despite the
limited number of HPHT wells, their importance should not be undervalued because these
wells often represent signiﬁcant resource potentials, and the location is often in areas where
exploration in new horizons is ongoing [11].
For years, HPHT conditions were attributed to any pressures or temperatures above atmo-
spheric conditions, but this inadequate and inaccurate deﬁnition has changed over time [9].
Depending on the engineering purposes, several deﬁnitions of HPHT environments exist,
but no industry has deﬁned any universal standards to this subject yet, as the complexity
of registering a universal standard is associated with the variations in geological formations,
which depends on the geographical location. Contrarily, the most common HPHT deﬁni-
tion used is when pressures exceed 10,000 psi (690 bar) and/or temperatures exceed 300 ◦F
(149℃) [9]. Analogous ratings for the pressure and temperature have been established by
the American Petroleum Institute (API), and the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) to
classify the conditions as HPHT [12, 13]. Besides the commonly applied HPHT deﬁnition,
other classiﬁcations for high pressure and temperature conditions do exists. Accordingly, to
8
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 3. HPHT Conditions
ﬁgure 3.2, these classiﬁcations are segmented into tiers (Tier I, Tier II, Tier III).
Figure 3.2: Schlumberger HPHT classiﬁcation system. Tier I (yellow) - Tier II (orange) -
Tier III (red) [11].
Even more severe and extreme conditions are classiﬁed by the Schlumberger HPHT classiﬁca-
tion system than the stated HPHT conditions. The classiﬁcation Ultra-HPHT is encountered
when the pressure and temperature exceed 20,000 psi (1380 bar) and 400 ◦F (205℃). In
contrast, the most extreme classiﬁcation, namely the HPHT-hc, is encountered if the pres-
sure and temperature exceed 35,000 psi (2410 bar) and 500 ◦F (260℃) [9, 11]. However,
the emphasis in this present work is only directed towards HPHT conditions. The increas-
ing extremity of the two classiﬁcations Ultra-HPHT and HPHT-hc are beyond the intended
application boundaries for the highly cross-linked anti-corrosive epoxy coating systems.
The current sourcing of crude oil and natural gas under HPHT conditions is widely dis-
tributed in the world. The oil ﬁelds’ locations are, e.g., the Gulf of Mexico, the North Sea,
Southeast Asia, Northern Africa, and the middle east. The latter location exhibits the ﬁve
most promising oil ﬁelds for the future [9]. When crude oil and natural gas are extracted from
the underground, the HPHT wells are often located deeply under the sea. Despite the ex-
tremity of the hostile HPHT environment, the deep-water location increases the complexity
signiﬁcantly. To withstand and maintain structural integrity under such hostile conditions
is a massive challenge, and many aspects of the complex problem remain unresolved. The
most prevalent method to protect the oil wells is by applications of highly cross-linked anti-
corrosive epoxy coating systems. The exact properties of the high-performance epoxy-based
coating systems are discussed in detail in the following chapter.
9
==PAGE:20==
4
|
Coatings for HPHT conditions
The high demands of oil and gas make conditions of HPHT of signiﬁcant concern, as the
process equipment has to be protected against corrosion. The extremely hostile conditions,
along with highly corrosive components, makes corrosion a pervasive issue across the oil and
gas industry. The most promising and prevalent method to prevent corrosion and maintain
the structural integrity of the process equipment is to apply high cross-linking and anti-
corrosive epoxy coating systems [1]. These organic epoxy-based coatings are characterized
by some very suitable properties to prevent corrosion. Such properties include outstanding
chemical and corrosion resistance, exceptional adhesion, excellent mechanical properties,
good heat resistance, high strength, and toughness [14, 15].
Epoxy resins are classiﬁed as a thermosetting resin, often abbreviated a thermoset, and it
is known as one of the most versatile classes of thermosets. Thus, the application area of
epoxy resins across diﬀerent industries is very diverse. In general, epoxy resins are used
for applications in three main categories: adhesives, construction materials, and coatings
[16]. The coating industry counts for more than a third of the epoxy market [17], and the
emphasis of this study is directed towards coating science.
The chemical structure of epoxy resins are characterized by the existence of one or multiple
highly strained three-membered rings, as illuminated in ﬁgure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: The chemical structure of the functional epoxy group. R and R’ denotes diﬀerent
components depending on the type of epoxy resin. For cycloaliphatic epoxy resins R and
R’ denotes carbon atoms in a six-membered ring, whereas for glycidated epoxy resins R is
hydrogen and R’ can be a polyhydroxyphenol, a polybasic acid or a polyol [18].
The ring structure has variously been abbreviated epoxy, oxirane, epoxide, or ethoxyline
10
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 4. Coatings for HPHT conditions
group. The intramolecular positioning of the epoxide groups may lie within the molecule’s
backbone structure, but it is usually terminal. The backbone of epoxy resins are either
aliphatic, cycloaliphatic, or aromatic structured [19]. The reactivity of epoxy resins is at-
tributed to the highly strained epoxy group, which tends to react with many diﬀerent chem-
ical species, especially proton donors [17]. Such epoxy groups are enabled to form highly
cross-linked structures if diﬀerent curing agents or hardeners are present. This reaction is
formally known as curing and results in a thermoset resin; however, heat may be required
for completion. Other constituents may be included, e.g., diluents and ﬁllers, to facilitate
processing and modify the properties of the ﬁnal thermoset [19]. Moreover, epoxies can poly-
merize and form dense cross-linked structures by themselves if a suitable catalyst is present,
i.e., a tertiary amine. This phenomenon is known as post-curing [17].
Epoxy resins can be synthesized in several ways, and the molecular structure of each epoxy
resin might be diﬀerent depending on the engineering purpose. Thus, the epoxy resins are
classiﬁed into diﬀerent categories based on the chemical structure, as illustrated in ﬁgure
4.2.
Figure 4.2: Classiﬁcation scheme of epoxy resins [20].
Accordingly, two main categories of epoxy resins exist, the glycidyl epoxy and the non-
glycidyl epoxy. Those two main categories are further reﬁned into diﬀerent segments. How-
ever, the high-performance epoxy-based coatings, currently exhibiting promising applica-
bility under HPHT conditions, are classiﬁed as the segment glycidyl ethers.
Hence, the
emphasis is directed towards epoxy resins of this classiﬁcation throughout this present work.
However, the chemical structures of epoxy resins representing both the glycidyl ether and
the non-glycidyl ether are provided in ﬁgure 4.5.
Many of the commercialized epoxy resins today are classiﬁed as glycidyl ethers. Two types of
signiﬁcant interest concerning the HPHT environment are the bisphenol and novolac epoxy
resins. The ﬁrst commercialized and still most commonly utilized epoxy resin is the digly-
cidyl ether of bisphenol A (DGEBA). The synthetic preparation of DGEBA is illustrated in
11
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 4. Coatings for HPHT conditions
ﬁgure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: The synthetic pathway for the production of diglycedyl ether of bisphenol A [19].
Accordingly, the DGEBA epoxy resin is synthesized by the reaction of bisphenol A and ex-
cess amounts of epichlorohydrin (ECH) in an alkaline environment where sodium hydroxide
is present as a catalyst [19]. The polymerization degree is regulated by adjusting the ratio
of the reactants in the synthesis, in that way, a range of commercial resins is available with
n ranging up to 25. However, when the degree of polymerization n increases above 1, the
epoxy resins become brittle solids [19]. For this reason, many of the commercial products
reside commonly in the range n=0-1 where low molecular weight liquids are obtained [14, 19].
Moreover, there are many other epoxy resins on the commercial market, including glycidyl
ethers based on bisphenol F (DGEBF), aminophenols, and diamines, e.g., methylenediani-
line (MDA). The latter two epoxy resins are designated as tri- and tetrafunctional resins. In
general, multi-functional resins provide outstanding heat resistance when cured with a suit-
able hardener due to increased cross-link density in the polymer network [19]. This feature
of the multi-functional epoxy resins emphasizes the applicability concerning the HPHT con-
ditions. Another type of multi-functional epoxy resins is the novolacs. Novolacs are highly
viscous or sometimes deﬁned as solids at room temperature [19]. The novolac resins provide
higher functionality than resin-based on bisphenol derivatives (DGEBA, DGEBF), which
enhances the cross-linkages in the polymer network. Usually, epoxy functionalities for epoxy
novolacs range from 2-8, whereas standard epoxy functionality of bisphenol derivatives is
signiﬁcantly lower around 2 [14]. Thus, epoxy novolacs are reported to be applicable under
conditions where high-temperature and resistance to chemical attack are highly important
[19].
However, publications from recent years state that thorough knowledge about the
durability and degradability of the high-performance epoxy coatings persists predominantly
undetermined. Despite the inadequate knowledge and limited studies subjecting evaluations
of high-performance epoxy-based coatings exposed to HPHT conditions, a research group
from the Technical University of Denmark at the department abbreviated CoaST has recently
12
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 4. Coatings for HPHT conditions
conducted experimental work assessing the impact of HPHT exposure on two epoxy-based
resins [21]. The research aimed to assess two fundamental issues. One was to understand
the degradation mechanisms under HPHT conditions of the epoxy resins, two to assess the
interaction of three diﬀerent phases (Gas, hydrocarbon, Saline liquid) of the epoxy resins.
The two formulated and examined epoxy resins were a bisphenol F epoxy resin and an epoxy
novolac resin. The study strongly indicated that better resistance performances were main-
tained for the formulated novolac resin. Accordingly, the focus is directed at a complete
study of the epoxy novolacs in the remaining part of this chapter.
4.1
Epoxy Novolac Synthesis and Chemistry
The synthesis of Epoxy novolacs is based on the interaction of phenol or the alkyl-substituted
derivatives, i.g., cresol, and formaldehyde, under acidic conditions. Thus, random ortho- and
para-methylene bridges are formed between the aromatic ring structures as illuminated in
the synthetic pathway in ﬁgure 4.4 [19].
Subsequently, the intermediate linked phenolic
Figure 4.4: The synthetic production route of epoxy novolac resins [19].
ring structures are reacted with epichlorohydrin (ECH) catalyzed by sodium hydroxide for
completion. The degree of polymerization n is adjusted by altering the ratio between phe-
nol/cresol and formaldehyde, such that a suitable epoxy functionality and molecular weight
can be obtained. Epoxy novolac resins are multi-functional resins, and these are rich in aro-
matic structures, as illustrated in ﬁgure 4.4, which emphasizes the high epoxy functionality
13
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 4. Coatings for HPHT conditions
and reactive chemistry. The high epoxy functionality enables the novolacs resins to form
highly cross-linked structures, which results in a denser and less ﬂexible network conﬁgu-
rations [15, 22]. Furthermore, aromatics’ presence adds rigidity to the molecular structure,
which enhances the high-temperature performance of the resin [19]. Due to the superior
characteristics, the epoxy novolac resins possess features that emphasize them as promi-
nent candidates to withstand the phenomena, i.e., chemical attack, solvent ingress, water
permeation, and ionic permeation encountered under HPHT conditions.
4.2
Curing Agents
Epoxy resins can be classiﬁed as oligomeric materials which function as reactive intermediates
containing at least one epoxide per molecule [14]. In order to functionalize the epoxy resin
is has to be cross-linked and cured, which further converts it to a three-dimensional polymer
network, which results in a stable, insoluble, and infusible coating. The curing reaction
materializes through the epoxides, and the curing can be enhanced by introducing curing
agents. Three well-known classes of curing mechanisms are: addition reactions, catalytic
reactions, and polyfunctional cross-linkers, which link the epoxy resin molecules [17, 23].
However, in some cases, the cross-linking mechanisms from addition/catalytic reactions and
internal reactions can coincide. The glycidyl ether structure, shown in ﬁgure 4.5, is present
in the three standard epoxy coatings: BPA, BPF, and novolac epoxy resin. The presence of
ether improves the reactivity of the epoxide and reinforces the curing.
(a) The general chemical structure of
the glycidyl ether specie found in BPA,
BPF and novolac epoxy resins [16].
(b) Chemical structure of the commer-
cial cyclic aliphatic Vinyl cyclohexene
dioxide classiﬁed as a non-glycidyl ether
epoxy resin [20].
Figure 4.5: Chemical structures of the two main classiﬁcation groups of epoxy resins.
The curing agent’s selection is of utmost importance as the thermosetting structure is highly
dependent on the agent. The molecular structure of the epoxy resin and the curing agent
14
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 4. Coatings for HPHT conditions
determines the kinetics of the curing, the glass transition temperature, Tg, and the formation
of chemical bonds, which have a signiﬁcant eﬀect on the attributes of the thermoset [24].
The coating industry research has progressed extensively, which shows in the broad and
diverse ﬁeld of relatively newly developed curing agents. The curing agents are classiﬁed
in relation to their structure, alkali curing agents, anhydrides, catalytic curing agents, and
amine-type curing agents. Among the several existing curing agent systems, the relevancy
for the alkali curing agents and anhydrides agents is at a minimum for HPHT conditions.
The curing reaction with epoxy and these two compounds form carbonyl groups, as shown
by Shigeng Yan at DTU CoaST, which decomposes under these extreme conditions yielding
a reduction in the coating integrity. In conclusion to the instability of the speciﬁed curing
agents, amine-type curing agents will be utilized for epoxy resins in HPHT. Subsequently, for
further classiﬁcation, the amine type curing agents can be subdivided into several categories,
with three major ones: aliphatic, aromatic, or cycloaliphatic amines. The interactions with
the epoxy, diﬀerent curing agent structures, and properties will be elaborated and presented
in the next section.
4.3
Curing of Novolac Epoxy Resin with Amines
The utilization of amines in the curing process of epoxy resin is paramount. Primary and
secondary amines are directly utilized in the cross-linking, while tertiary amines provide a
catalyzing eﬀect for the former two along with enhanced post curing of free epoxy sites. The
nitrogen and epoxide react as an addition reaction, which yields the epoxy ring to be opened.
The mechanism of the curing can be described in three steps.
• Linear coupling of the oligomer
• Formation of a branched structure
• Cross-linking
The reaction of primary and secondary amines with the epoxide group is shown in ﬁgure 4.6.
Following ﬁgure 4.6, the ring-opening has occurred for both reactions. The ﬁrst reaction
displaying the primary amine and the epoxide yield the formation of a secondary amine. In
contrast, the second reaction demonstrates the secondary amine with an epoxide resulting in
a tertiary amine. The tertiary amine can facilitate parallel reactions because of the catalytic
eﬀect.
Primary amines tend to be more reactive due to the steric hindrance present in
secondary and tertiary amines. Further, the tertiary amines have an absence of exchangeable
15
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 4. Coatings for HPHT conditions
Figure 4.6: The chemical reactions occurring between epoxide, primary amine and secondary
amine [25].
protons, making it less reactive [26, 4].
The selection of an amine provides a series of
possibilities, as the structure of the amine can be aliphatic, aromatic, and cycloaliphatic.
The commonly used amine compounds for curing can be seen in ﬁgure 4.7 and 4.8.
(a) Aliphatic nitrogens
(b) Cycloaliphatic nitrogens
Figure 4.7: Aliphatic nitrogen compunds for curing [25].
The curing agents are classiﬁed concerning the non-amine part, as these substituents inﬂu-
16
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 4. Coatings for HPHT conditions
Figure 4.8: Aromatic nitrogen compounds for curing [25].
ence the functionality and reactivity, and a general reactivity order can be established.
aliphatic > cycloaliphatic > aromatic.
(4.1)
The high reactivity of aliphatics is a result of the structure where the steric hindering is at a
minimum. In contrast, the large aromatics and cyclic substituents in cycloaliphatic/aromatic
amines exhibit steric hindrance. The temperature during curing is dependent on the curing
agent utilized. Room temperature is suﬃcient when aliphatic and cycloaliphatic amines are
applied; however, to counteract the steric hindrance from aromatic amines, the temperature
must be increased [4]. The curing reaction’s stoichiometry is very important as a full conver-
sion is improbable, and excess amine compounds in the polymer matrix have a detrimental
eﬀect on the durability [27]. Epoxy novolac is not a complete thermoset after room tem-
perature curing, and post-curing has to be allowed for completion. Post-curing is enabled
at elevated temperatures extending the cross-linking of the polymer matrix. The elevated
temperature facilitates the cross-linking between free epoxides resulting in better attributes
for the coating both chemically and physically. The curing mechanism is adjusted due to the
depletion of amines and the higher temperature which accommodates the reaction between
phenolic hydroxyl groups and residual epoxides, which can be seen in ﬁgure 4.9
The post-curing mechanism eﬃciency is optimized by adjusting the temperature close to Tg.
Allowing the curing temperature to get close to Tg increases the thermoset polymers Tg, re-
sulting in heat resistance, greater chemical resistance, higher tensile strength, and outgassing
17
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 4. Coatings for HPHT conditions
Figure 4.9: Chemical interaction of an epoxide and hydroxyl group [25].
[24, 28]. The post-curing duration must be precise to obtain a robust structure as degra-
dation of the polymer matrix is possible when the ambient temperature is elevated over time.
HPHT conditions require a durable and robust coating making the curing and post-curing
processes necessary. Both the physical and chemical properties require improvement from
curing to prevent degradation under extreme conditions. The HPHT degradation mechanism
will be emphasized in the next section.
18
==PAGE:29==
5
|
Coating Degradations under HPHT
Understanding the degrading pathways of epoxy resins under HPHT conditions is neces-
sary to formulate and develop the promising high-performance anti-corrosive epoxy coat-
ings. However, thorough knowledge assessing the durability and degradability of the high-
performance epoxy coatings under HPHT conditions is still largely unresolved across the
academic society. Despite the limited studies, this chapter intends to address some parame-
ters that are supposed to be of predominant inﬂuence on the degrading mechanisms.
5.1
Degradation Mechanisms
The epoxy-based high-performance coatings exhibit superior resistance characteristics, i.e.,
corrosion, chemical, heat, and exceptional mechanical strength and toughness, which advo-
cate them as essential candidates for mitigating corrosion issues under HPHT exposure [14].
However, the extremity of the HPHT environment can substantially aﬀect and potentially
accelerate the degradation mechanisms. Moreover, when crude oil and gas are extracted
from the underground, the process equipment is exposed to highly corrosive components
present in diﬀerent phases, i.e., gaseous species, hydrocarbons, and saline liquids [8]. How-
ever, recent studies state that the synergistic eﬀects of the three phases (gas, hydrocarbons,
saline liquids) on epoxy resin coatings at HPHT conditions remain primarily unexplored. In
contrast, investigations discovering the eﬀects of each of the individual HPHT phases are
abundant at atmospheric conditions. The following sections present the eﬀects of each of
the individual HPHT phases to understand the degradation mechanisms and illuminate the
current perspectives of the research within this area.
5.1.1
Temperature Eﬀects
Coating systems’ durability and degradability are profoundly aﬀected by the exposed tem-
perature. Thermal degradation is closely associated with the change of mechanical properties
of the coatings. The glass transition temperature Tg is a parameter that is utilized in the as-
19
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 5. Coating Degradations under HPHT
sessment of the mechanical properties, and it is considered as one of the essential properties
of any epoxy-based coating system [29]. Exposure to ambient temperatures close to or at
Tg provides suﬃcient thermal energy to the polymer molecules such as the segments along
the backbone of the polymer freely begin to rotate with respect to the chain axis [4], which
consequently modiﬁes the mechanical properties. Epoxy-based coatings are designated as
thermosetting materials that are highly cross-linked. For this reason, epoxy-based coatings
do not melt or re-ﬂow when Tg is approached but undergo a slight softening transition from
the initial hard glassy material to a soft rubbery material [29]. In general, when epoxy-
based materials are exposed to environments where Tg is exceeded, the promising resistance
features are massively diminished and phenomena such as solvent ingress and water perme-
ation is signiﬁcantly accelerated resulting in shortened durability under HPHT conditions.
The theoretical aspects of the glass transition temperature are illustrated and emphasized
in ﬁgure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Speciﬁc volume of an amorphous material (epoxy resin) as a function of the
temperature [4].
When Tg is approached the slope of the line increases. This is due to the increase in rota-
tions and vibrations occurring for the segments and molecules in the polymer. Along with
increased molecular motions, the speciﬁc volume increases as well. In contrast, the amount of
material stays the same despite the increased volume, meaning the same amount of material
occupies more space. However, the increase in speciﬁc volume is not attributed to anything
new entering the polymer structure, but it is simply free space obtained due to the thermal
expansion of the material [4]. Another very important concept to highlight about Tg is that
it is not a discrete thermodynamic transition as emphasized in ﬁgure 5.1 but rather a tem-
20
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 5. Coating Degradations under HPHT
perature range over which the mechanical properties gradually changes [29]. Multiple factors
aﬀects the glass transition temperature i.e., the chemical structure of the epoxy-based resin,
the type of curing agent, and the degree of cure [29]. Notably, the rigidity and degree of
cross-linkage of the polymer network are discovered to contribute to an increase in Tg. The
enhanced cross-linkage in the polymer network diminishes the molecular motions of the seg-
ments along the polymer chain. By merely reducing the cross-link distances, less free volume
is maintained in the structure resulting in a tighter and less ﬂexible network conﬁguration,
ultimately enhancing the resistance towards solvent ingress and water permeation [15, 22].
Thermal degradation studies of many diﬀerent epoxy-based resins are published in the open
literature. The temperature eﬀects on epoxy-amine networks are signiﬁcant, as one study
highlighted the degrading pathways were mostly due to oxidative degradation in the vicin-
ity of tertiary amines [30]. In other examinations, the durability of polydicyclopentadiene
has been assessed under HPHT conditions. The study conﬁrmed that the only degradation
proceeded via oxidation for temperatures below Tg, whereas for elevated temperature above
Tg secondary polymerization processes were observed [31]. Lastly, a study evaluated the
thermal degradation of two DGEBA epoxy networks. The study revealed the thermal oxi-
dation led to a decrease in Tg due to the formation of amides, carbonyl, and chain scission
in both systems [32]. However, generalized degradation mechanisms of epoxy-based resins
attributed to thermal exposure are complicated to state as it depends on the application
conditions. In contrast, it should be highlighted that the temperature in which coating sys-
tems are exposed is of great concern as the temperature signiﬁcantly aﬀects the durability
and resistance features.
5.1.2
Pressure Eﬀects
Studies addressing the eﬀects of high-pressure conditions on epoxy-based coatings remain
mostly unexplored in the open literature. Despite the incomplete insight, the general percep-
tion is that the high pressures encountered under HPHT conditions expose the epoxy-based
coatings to large external forces, which might shorten the durability. Moreover, the corrosive
properties of the ﬂuids are intensiﬁed as a result of the extreme pressure conditions which
govern the solubility of corrosive species [8]. Although the detailed understanding of this
subject is incomplete, a few studies have been conducted and published assessing the eﬀects
of high pressures on epoxy-based coatings. One study evaluated an epoxy-based coating
system’s performance at low and high pressures, where de-ionized water was used as the
medium. The study conﬁrmed, the coating protectiveness was deteriorated due to acceler-
21
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 5. Coating Degradations under HPHT
ated water absorption at the high-pressure condition. More importantly, the formation of
blisters and corrosion products led to loss of wet adhesion, which became the main reason for
the coating failure. However, the observed degradation of the coatings occurred due to the
increased water absorption rather than the high pressure alone [33]. Another study exposed
an amine-cured epoxy and an epoxy novolac to HPHT conditions, and discovered that pre-
liminary tests conducted at conditions corresponding to low temperature and high pressure
indicated that the high-pressure condition might not signiﬁcantly aﬀect the degradation on
the tested coating systems [34].
Studies assessing the eﬀects of high pressure on coatings are minimal and remain predomi-
nantly unexplored. Thus, more emphasis has to be directed towards this subject to illumi-
nate and understand the speciﬁc degradation pathways of epoxy coatings exposed to high
pressures.
5.1.3
Salinity Eﬀects
Conditions of HPHT are encountered at oﬀshore constructions immersed in seawater. For
this reason, the eﬀects of saline liquids on high-performance epoxy-based coatings are of
signiﬁcant importance since seawater is attributed the ability to anticipate strong corrosion
primarily due to the presence of chloride ions [8]. Studies investigating the eﬀects of saline
liquids on epoxy-based coatings under atmospheric conditions are abundant in the open lit-
erature. In contrast, literature assessing the material degradation of epoxy-based coatings
under seawater exposure at HPHT conditions is limited. However, one investigation con-
ducted at the Technical University of Denmark evaluated the eﬀect of salinity on epoxy-based
coating systems under HPHT conditions. The study conﬁrmed that the degradation of the
epoxy-based coatings were prior to osmotic blisters which over time seemed to intensify [34].
Moreover, corrosion products were present after HPHT exposure indicating the occurrence
of underﬁlm corrosion caused by severe permeation of the seawater [34].
5.1.4
Gas Phase Eﬀects
The process equipment applied for crude oil extraction under HPHT environments is in-
evitably exposed to diﬀerent gaseous species, i.e., CO2 and H2S. The presence of gasses is a
substantial concern as previous studies have observed detrimental eﬀects on coating systems,
including epoxy resins. One study observed accelerated corrosion due to the presence of CO2
under high-pressure conditions [35]. Another investigation exposed epoxy-based coatings to
a medium containing CO2 and NaCl for varying temperatures to study the anti-corrosive
22
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 5. Coating Degradations under HPHT
properties of the coatings. The study conﬁrmed that higher diﬀusion rates of water were
observed due to the presence of CO2, which signiﬁcantly increased the material degradation
of the epoxy-based coatings. Moreover, blistering and corrosion products were maintained
and the most severe loss of adhesion [36]. The extremity of the HPHT environment intensi-
ﬁes the corrosive properties of the encountered gasses. Thus, CO2 is expected to be present
in its supercritical state due to the low critical pressure and temperature [37]. The tran-
sitioning of CO2 to its supercritical state signiﬁcantly changes the properties and corrosive
ability. CO2 as a supercritical ﬂuid has the density of a liquid while maintaining the ﬂow
properties of a gas [37]. Due to these characteristics, an enhanced barrier penetration ability
is obtained, which can signiﬁcantly reduce the glass transition temperature of highly cross-
linked epoxy networks [22]. In addition to the detrimental ﬂuid dynamics, CO2 can undergo
simple equilibria reactions in the presence of water to form carbonic acid establishing an
acidic environment [38]. Presenting acidic components to epoxy-based coatings can enhance
the permeation of ions, water, and solvent, resulting in the formation of corrosion products
and, ultimately, loss of adhesion.
5.1.5
Hydrocarbon Eﬀects
HPHT conditions are typically associated with the oil and gas industry; for this reason,
an increasing interest has been directed towards the eﬀects of hydrocarbons on the high-
performance epoxy-based coatings. Previous studies conﬁrmed the sensitive dependence of
the glass transition temperature to solvent ingress through solvent permeability and sorption
studies of epoxy networks [39, 40]. Additionally, another study investigated the eﬀects of
n-paraﬃn and para-xylene on two epoxy resins under HPHT conditions. The investigation
highlighted that the aromatic hydrocarbon (para-xylene) was observed to interact stronger
with the epoxy resins compared to the aliphatic hydrocarbon (n-paraﬃn). Further, small
blisters and corrosion products were observed, indicating the occurrence of underﬁlm degra-
dation [34]. However, studies revealing the detailed degradation mechanisms of epoxy-based
coatings caused by hydrocarbon interactions at HPHT conditions are rarely reported.
5.2
Summary
The understanding of the degrading mechanisms of high-performance epoxy-based coatings
at HPHT conditions remains predominantly unresolved as outlined. Although a few inves-
tigations have been published subjecting material degradation of such epoxy-based resins
23
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 5. Coating Degradations under HPHT
under HPHT exposure, the knowledge within this ﬁeld of coating science remains inade-
quate.
In order to formulate coatings which applicability is to withstand the extremity
encountered under HPHT conditions, comprehensive research distinctly assessing the under-
lying degradation mechanisms is needed. For future perspectives, more attention has to be
directed towards the severe HPHT environments to get a complete evaluation of the pro-
tective high-performance epoxy coatings. In particular, the eﬀects of seawater, supercritical
CO2, and aromatic solvents should be illuminated as solvent ingress, and water permeation
is suggested chief detrimental parameters for the durability of the epoxy-based coatings at
HPHT conditions.
Additionally, it is considered to modify the high-performance epoxy-based coatings by in-
corporating silanes and silicones to improve the suitable resistance features towards HPHT
conditions across the academic society. The incorporation of silanes and silicones are sug-
gested to provide better chemical, thermal, and solvent resistance, and in particular, better
adhesion properties. For this reason, the following chapter’s emphasis is to illuminate the
usage and chemical interactions associated with the incorporation of silanes and silicones
into the highly cross-linked epoxy resins.
24
==PAGE:35==
6
|
Hybrid Coating Systems for HPHT
The modern industry’s continuing development has pushed the science of coating technol-
ogy to broaden its emphasis in formulating high-performing coatings to accommodate the
increasing demand. High-performance polymeric materials have to be adapted to the adverse
environments where coatings can be utilized. HPHT conditions entail thermal resistance,
barrier properties towards water permeation, ionic permeations, gas diﬀusions, and superior
mechanical properties.
One of the most eﬀective research areas aiming to enhance cur-
rent coating technologies has been concentrated on organic-inorganic hybrid polymers [41].
Combining organic and inorganic functional groups in polymers have oﬀered an extensive
range of feasible enhancements: good processibility, improved toughness, ﬂexibility, chemical
resistance, improved weatherability, UV resistance, and thermo-oxidative stability. The ap-
plication of epoxy resins has a variety of desired properties. However, it also features some
vulnerabilities: low fracture energy [42], incomplete wetting of solids, inferior dispersion
characteristics of pigments, poor hydrophobicity [43], weathering, and impact strength [41].
Formulating a hybrid coating system can widen the application areas and further improve
mechanical properties and corrosion resistance of the existing epoxy coatings. Current re-
search shows rubber, polyurethane, and silicone as possible introduced components, whereas
this section brings attention to the addition of silicon derivatives in epoxy-based systems.
6.1
Modiﬁcations of Epoxy Resins with Silane & Silox-
anes
The hydrophobicity of siloxane is improved due to the Si-O linkage, as the Si atom (1,9) has
a lower electronegativity compared to C atom (2,55) enhancing the bonding properties with
oxygen. The bond dissociation energy is much higher for Si-O bonds (443.7 kJ/mol) com-
pared to C-O bonds (357.9 kJ/mol), which promotes thermo-oxidative properties [41]. The
low surface energy of siloxane also contributes the hydrophobicity. In addition, the presence
of methyl groups (Si-CH3) might also supply the low surface energy. The low surface energy
25
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 6. Hybrid Coating Systems for HPHT
induces a slight penetration in wet conditions even in the presence of contamination [43].
The primary functionality of silanes is that, it is used as an adhesion promoter. Adhesion
promoters improve adhesion between the substrate and the polymer matrix by cross-linking,
either with the epoxy or themselves.
Formulating the hybrid system can be accomplished in a variety of ways determined by the
component used. The addition can be as a co-binder, in the base, or after curing. The
groups can be seen below.
• Added in Epoxy base ⇒Epoxy modiﬁed silanes
• Added in polymerization ⇒Siloxanes
• Added in hardener ⇒Amine modiﬁed silanes
The eﬀects of the diﬀerent synthetic pathways are not fully understood in detail, however,
it might be possible that similar physical properties of the silicon derivative-epoxy hybrid
resins are obtained irrespective of the pathway.
6.1.1
Silane
When a silicon derivative is used as an adhesion promoter, it is commonly in the form of
silane. Silane is a general term referring to a silicon atom with four substituents attached,
including an organosilicon compound.
General structure : RxSi(OR′)y
x + y = 4
In the general structural formula shown above the OR’ denotes a methoxy or ethoxy, while
the R denotes an organofunctional group, an alkyl, or an aryl. The organic group, R, can be
either reactive or non-reactive. The x denotes the number of organic groups, the y constitutes
the number of methoxy or ethoxy groups and the summation of x and y should always be
equal to 4 as the stable form of silicon is bonded to four substituents analogously to carbon
atoms. The primary focal point of this study is the reactive organic groups namely amino
or epoxy attached to the silicon atom. The superior electropositivity of silicon compared to
carbon results in the formation of a chemical reaction that can promote adhesion, and not
form stable double-bonds [3]. Amine, methoxy, or ethoxy as the reactive groups commence
reactions with inorganic materials after hydrolysis with the incorporated hydroxyl groups,
[-Si-OH], [metal-OH], which is found in glass, minerals and metals [3]. The formed silanols,
26
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 6. Hybrid Coating Systems for HPHT
[-Si-OH], is not stable and will form siloxane through a condensation reaction, [-Si-O-Si-].
The full reaction pathway of silanes as adhesion promoters comprises four steps: Hydrolysis,
Condensation, Hydrogen bonding, and bond formation. These steps are visualized in ﬁgure
6.1. The initial step featuring hydrolysis is crucial to forming the unstable intermediate
entity, silanols.
The reactivity of the intermediate is very high due to the electrophilic
nature of the hydrogen in silanols. The electropositive atomic structure of silicon forms these
characteristics, further generating a high dipole moment for the silanol group, thus improving
the formation of hydrogen bonds [2]. The unstable intermediate self condensate to form a
stable siloxane structure, which can be adjusted by managing the pH cautiously. Silanetriols
are formed at slightly acidic conditions, pH 3-6. Rapid condensation demands minor alkaline
conditions, pH 7-9 [2]. Eventually, the siloxane forms hydrogen bonds through the hydroxyl
groups on the substrate. The ﬁnal bond formation occurs during curing. Covalent bonds are
subsequently formed during this time between the siloxane and the substrate by the release
of water [2].
(a) Step 1 and 2.
(b) Step 3 and 4.
Figure 6.1: The adhesion promoter mechanism for silanes [2]. Step 1) Hydrolysis, Step 2)
Condensation, Step 3) Hydrogen Bonding, Step 4) Bond Formation.
Silanes, as an adhesion promoter (also known as coupling agents), proceed in the interphase
region. This region refers to the space between the substrate, ﬁller, inorganics, and the
polymer matrix. Utilizing the silane, bonds can be formed linking the organics and inor-
ganics, causing an increase of the adhesion. The bond between the two distinct materials is
illustrated in ﬁgure 6.2.
27
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 6. Hybrid Coating Systems for HPHT
Figure 6.2: Silane as an adhesion promoter [3].
The presence of most heavy metals in the substrate can toughen the bonding; however,
further, improvement requires an understanding of the silane’s reactive organic group [3].
Utilizing silanes in the curing mechanism or directly in the polymer matrix enhances the
adhesion. The epoxy functional silanes or the amino functional silanes can participate in
the curing process, by adding the amino functional silanes into the hardener and the epoxy
functional into the primer. The curing containing an amino functional silane is illustrated
in ﬁgure 6.3, where the silane reacts with an epoxide ring. The amino functional silane
is 3-Aminopropyl-triethoxysilane (APTES) corresponding to the second compound in the
reaction.
Figure 6.3: 2 Epoxides reacting with APTES [43].
If silanes further react, a backbone of multimolecular siloxane will be formed. The adhe-
sion promoters are added to improve existing coating technologies and obtain the desired
properties to suﬃce in HPHT conditions. The desired features will be emphasized in section
6.3.
6.1.2
Siloxane
As mentioned, silicon derivatives can be introduced directly as a co-binder in the form of
siloxanes.
Polysiloxanes refers to a polymer with repeating units of [−[Si(R)2 −O]−] in
regards to the backbone. Synthetically polysiloxane is commonly generated through hy-
28
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 6. Hybrid Coating Systems for HPHT
drolysis of chlorosilane monomers. Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) is one example that is
commercially used as a co-binder. Utilizing PDMS as a co-binder with epoxy can result
in a cross-linking between the two polymers. The possible reaction is shown in ﬁgure 6.4
employing phosphoric acid as a catalyst.
Figure 6.4: Epoxy interaction with PMDS [41].
As a result of the ring-opening, the hydroxyl group can interact with epoxy or another
siloxane to obtain cross-linking. The idea of adding siloxane as a co-binder is to ensure
the bulk is used for cross-linking, reducing the interaction with the substrate or ﬁller, while
increasing the resin interaction by enhanced cross-linking. The reasoning for the idea is to
reduce expenses, as silane/siloxane are expensive, and commonly only 2% is added to the
coating [3].
6.2
Types of Silicon Derivatives Used: Structural Def-
initions
The chemical industry has a variety of silanes and siloxanes available; however, to optimize
silanes as adhesion promoters, an epoxide ring or an amine group in the component is
29
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 6. Hybrid Coating Systems for HPHT
important to engage in the curing. A very common applied and examined epoxy functional
silane is the γ-glycidoxypropyltrimethoxysilane (GPTMS), which is shown in ﬁgure 6.5 [44].
Figure 6.5: γ-glycidoxypropyltrimethoxysilane structure (GPTMS) [45].
A more complex epoxy siloxane is also shown in ﬁgure 6.6.
The cycloaliphatic epoxide
structure might imply some advantages for the protective properties compared to aliphatic
epoxides.
Figure 6.6: [(Epoxycyclohexylethyl)methylsiloxane]-dimethylsiloxane copolymer [46].
APTES, which is shown in ﬁgure 6.7, is a common monoamine, that can be used in the
hardener.
Both monoamines and diamines can be utilized depending on the properties
needed; a typically available diamine is diaminopropyltrimethoxysilane.
A signiﬁcant structure of siloxane is polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS). PDMS plays a notable
role in the silicone industry but can also function as a co-binder in epoxy systems. An epoxy
terminated PDMS is shown in ﬁgure 6.8, where the diglycidyl ether has been terminated.
It is used to modify the properties of epoxy-based resins.
PDMS is a crucial specie of
30
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 6. Hybrid Coating Systems for HPHT
Figure 6.7: (3-Aminopropyl)triethoxysilane structure (APTES) [47].
siloxane as the content of methyl groups reduces the polarity, resulting in an increase of the
hydrophobicity and the possibility of a denser cross-linking network.
Figure 6.8: An epoxy terminated polydimethylsiloxane structure (PDMS) [48].
6.3
Demand for Siloxanes Chemistry in HPHT
The accelerated degradation of coatings utilized in HPHT conditions exposes the requirement
of higher-performing protection coatings. Formulating a hybrid coating system composed of
epoxy and silanes or siloxanes ought to ameliorate existing coating technologies. The proper-
ties connected to the incorporation of silanes in the epoxy-based coating will be highlighted
in the next part.
6.3.1
Improved Barrier Properties by Si-O Bonds
A hydrophobic coating is paramount in the ﬁeld of anti-corrosive characteristics. An increase
in hydrophobicity reduces the penetration of water, thus limiting the initiation of corrosion
and common defects like blisters. The polarity of water creates a highly reactive system with
the presence of hydroxyl groups on the substrate and ﬁllers. Pure epoxy-based coatings are
reduced to only being able to physically wet the substrate, emanating in insuﬃcient wetting,
and the risk of inhomogeneity. The incorporation of silanes can supply the coating system
with superior wetting and the desired hydrophobicity. These attributes are present due to
the organic and inorganic bonds illustrated in ﬁgure 6.2. Hydrolyzed silanes, are highly
unstable and can react at the substrate surface through the pathway shown in ﬁgure 6.9.
31
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 6. Hybrid Coating Systems for HPHT
Figure 6.9: The three reaction steps of alkoxy silanes [44].
The addition of silanes can contribute to improved wetting, which then facilitates chemically
and physically wetting, causing an enhancement in the dispersion of solids in a polymer
matrix. The hydrophilic nature of the hydroxyl group will be eliminated by substitution with
Si-O bonds, resulting in a more hydrophobic surface. The barrier properties related to the
water permeation will be signiﬁcantly improved due to the change in surface hydrophobicity.
Subsequently, the siloxane backbone has the possibility of cross-linking internally or with the
epoxy matrix, resulting in an increased cross-link density and improved adhesion, further
enhancing the anti-corrosive properties.
6.3.2
Chemical & Thermal Resistance of Silicon Derivatives
Thermal resistance is a necessity when ambient conditions are at HPHT. The incorporated
siloxane backbone improves thermal resistance contributed by the increased dissociation
energy associated with the Si-O bonds. Further, additional cross-linking ensured by the
silanes introduces enlarged cross-link density, thus a denser packing resulting in further
optimization of the thermal resistance. Subsequently, a combination of the properties: higher
cross-linking, denser packing, and increased hydrophobicity, enhances the barrier properties,
which stabilizes the coating in case of chemical interactions.
6.3.3
Solvent Interaction of Silicon Derivatives
Diﬀerent solvents are present under HPHT conditions in the oil and gas industry. Para-
xylene is one of the more damaging solutions and can aﬀect the epoxy cross-linking through
softening. Softening is often accompanied by a lowering of the glass transition temperature,
increasing the free volume and enabling access for aggressive external components penetrat-
32
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 6. Hybrid Coating Systems for HPHT
ing the coating. The strong bonding properties of Si-O impede the interaction between the
non-polar site of the solvent and the resin. Reducing the interactions between the solvent
and polymer matrix results in a decrease of softening, which inevitably leads to a lessened
of Tg depression. Subsequently, the additional cross-linking mitigates the free volume, thus
diminishing solvent interaction. The solvent has to diﬀuse or be absorbed through the sur-
face of the coating for the bonds and cross-linking to be aﬀected. Hence the understanding
of these processes is essential and will be elaborated in the following section.
33
==PAGE:44==
7
|
Absorption Kinetics of hybrid Silane-Epoxy
Resins under HPHT
The behavior of water diﬀusion and solvent ingress in epoxy networks is a topic that scien-
tists have been signiﬁcantly exploring for a long time, as these phenomena are designated
as chief detrimental parameters for the durability of epoxy systems under HPHT. For years,
the most prevalent method of preventing corrosion at HPHT environments is applying high-
performance epoxy-based coatings. However, protection failures have been reported caused
by diﬀerent phenomena such as poor adhesion to the metal substrate, and increased water
uptake [49]. For this reason, studies assessing the extent of water and solvent absorption
under HPHT conditions are highly signiﬁcant in decoding whether the interactions are only
physical or if chemical reactions occur, diminishing the protective features of the protec-
tive epoxy coatings. Moreover, increasing emphasis is directed towards the formulation of
hybrid silicon derivative-epoxy systems to improve the ability to prevent water permeation
and solvent ingress, owing to the superior resistance characteristics of the silicon deriva-
tives. However, studies evaluating the absorption kinetics of silicon derivative-epoxy hybrid
coatings at HPHT conditions rarely exist in the open literature, despite the increasing fo-
cus on high-performance coatings seen in the scientiﬁc community.
In contrast, studies
investigating the behavior of water and solvent absorption on neat epoxy resins and silicon
derivative-epoxy hybrids are abundant at moderate conditions.
This chapter intends to illuminate the absorption kinetics of water and diﬀerent solvents
on the hybrid silicon derivative-epoxy networks and the inﬂuence at which the physical
properties of such silicon derivative-epoxy hybrids are aﬀected.
In addition to this, the
chapter is aimed at assessing two essential issues. Firstly, to evaluate the extent of water
and solvent absorption in the high-performance silane-epoxy hybrid systems. Secondly, to
distinguish whether the interactions occurring between the water/solvent and the silicon
derivative-epoxy resins are physical or chemical.
34
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 7. Absorption Kinetics of hybrid Silane-Epoxy Resins under HPHT
7.1
Water Absorption
Water permeation in epoxy resins is suggested as a chief detrimental parameter for the
durability under HPHT environments. For this reason, thorough knowledge about this phe-
nomenon is necessary to improve the existing epoxy-based formulations to withstand the
hostile conditions of HPHT.
Previous studies have investigated the eﬀects of water absorption on neat epoxy resins and
silicon derivative-epoxy hybrids. Wang et al. [49] examined a pure epoxy novolac and a
hybrid silane-epoxy novolac system. The degree of water diﬀusion and eﬀect of silanes was
assessed by exposure to various aqueous environments at room temperature.
The work
concluded that the incorporation of silanes into the epoxy novolac network signiﬁcantly
enhanced the hydrophobic properties. Although water still penetrated the structures, the
water fraction within the silane-epoxy network was crucially reduced compared to the neat
epoxy novolac. Moreover, better adhesion properties were maintained for the hybrid system,
and the investigation emphasized that the water uptake was physically absorbed. In addi-
tion, two key mechanisms of the silane enhanced protection was suggested, 1) the silanes are
enriched near the resin-substrate interface forming the strong substrate-O-Si bonds which
establish the formation of a dense hydrophobic layer providing better adhesion, 2) the silanes
promotes the cross-link density resulting in a denser a less hydrophilic bulk ﬁlm compared
to the neat epoxy novolac.
Furthermore, Kaplan [39] examined the diﬀusion behavior of seven diﬀerent solvents, in-
cluding water, by conducting sorption studies on a DGEBA epoxy resin by immersion.
The DGEBA epoxy resin was cured with four diﬀerent hardeners, each resulting in dif-
ferent epoxy materials, as illustrated in ﬁgure 7.1.
The applied curing agents included
triethylenetetramine (TETA), nadic methylanhydride (NMA), dicyandiamide (DICY) and
m-phenylenediamine (MPDA) all commonly used substances.
The solvents’ sorption was followed over a period of 500 hours at three temperatures (22℃,
40℃, 50℃), and the resulting water absorption proﬁles at 40℃of the four epoxy materials
are provided in ﬁgure 7.2.
Accordingly, the diﬀerent epoxy materials exhibit considerable variation in the amount of
water absorbed, and the DGEBA cured with NMA showed the best resistance towards water
permeation.
However, a justiﬁcation of whether the absorption of the diﬀerent solvents
and water caused any structural changes of the epoxy-resin system remains unassigned. In
general, the conclusions and the emphasis in the investigation were primarily focused on the
35
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 7. Absorption Kinetics of hybrid Silane-Epoxy Resins under HPHT
Figure 7.1: The expected chemical structures of the cure of DGEBA with the four diﬀerent
curing agents [39].
Figure 7.2: Water absorption proﬁles of the four epoxy materials at a temperature of 40℃.
The absorption curves is present in format as the weight percent of penetrant absorbed (MS)
vs t1/2 [39].
distinct diﬀusion characteristics of the diﬀerent solvents into the epoxy materials. However,
it was found that the sorption behavior and diﬀusion characteristics appeared to be solvent
and epoxy dependent [39].
36
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 7. Absorption Kinetics of hybrid Silane-Epoxy Resins under HPHT
7.2
Solvent Absorption
Strong resin-solvent interactions have been suggested as an initiation point for the highly
cross-linked epoxy networks’ degrading pathways under HPHT conditions heavily aﬀecting
the durability of the high-performance epoxy coatings [21]. Moreover, the resin-solvent in-
teractions are suggested to diminish the superior features of the cross-linking ability leading
to increased free volume in the polymer conﬁguration, which ultimately implies easier access
for solvents and other external aggressive species for penetrating the coating system. Thus,
a detailed understanding of the eﬀects of solvent ingress should be assessed to address the
degradation pathways and, more importantly, whether the strong interactions are physical
or chemical.
Previous investigations have aimed to explore the eﬀects of diﬀerent solvents on neat epoxy
systems and silane-epoxy hybrids under moderate conditions. In contrast, studies addressing
the resin-solvent interactions under conditions of HPHT rarely exist in the open literature.
However, results obtained from studies conducted under moderate conditions are still highly
signiﬁcant in relation to the HPHT environment, as the observed absorption behavior can
be anticipated to be far more severe under HPHT due to the environment’s hostility.
An investigation conducted by Kaplan [39] studied the diﬀusion behavior of seven diﬀerent
solvents on DGEBA epoxy resins as outlined under the previous section 7.1 water absorption.
The epoxy materials were exposed to the organic solvents methanol, acetone, isopropanol,
ethyl acetate, 1,2-dichloroethane, and toluene in addition to water. Among these solvents,
owing to the non-polar nature and hydrocarbon backbone of 1,2-dichloroethane, and in par-
ticular toluene, are suggested to be the interesting solvents in relation to the hydrocarbons,
i.e., para-xylene encountered at HPHT conditions. For this reason, only absorption proﬁles
for 1,2.dichloroethane and toluene will be present in ﬁgure 7.3.
Following the results published by Kaplan [39], the absorption behavior of 1,2-dichloroethane
and toluene are very diﬀerent for the four epoxy materials. However, the DGEBA epoxy
resin cured with MPDA exhibits the best performance in resisting the solvent uptake in both
cases. A postulate for the better performance is possible due to the great extent of hydroxyl
groups in the DGEBA-MDPA structure which might result in a decreased aﬃnity towards
interaction with the non-polar solvents. However, the investigation primarily focused on the
diﬀusion kinetics, and no evaluations of whether the epoxy materials served any physical or
chemical degradations due to the solvent ingress were assessed. In contrast, it was concluded
that the absorption behavior and diﬀusion characteristics were both epoxy and solvent de-
37
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 7. Absorption Kinetics of hybrid Silane-Epoxy Resins under HPHT
(a) Absorption proﬁle for 1,2-dichloroethane.
(b) Absorption proﬁle for toluene.
Figure 7.3: Solvent absorption proﬁles for the four epoxy materials at 40℃. The proﬁles are
provided as the weight percent of penetrants absorbed (MS) vs t1/2 [39].
.
pendent [39].
The studies of absorption of solvent suggest a degree of degradation of the coating system.
The absorption leads to an increase in the coating’s internal stress, enabling the access for
aggressive external components, subsequently aiding in the corrosion process. To acquire
knowledge of whether the absorption and diﬀusion only result in physical or chemical inter-
actions several characterizations techniques will be elaborated in the next chapter.
38
==PAGE:49==
8
|
Characterization Techniques
Characterization and analytical techniques have been developed to identify, isolate, or quan-
tify chemicals or materials, or distinguish the physical properties.
Several methods are
applicable in the coating industry to acquire information on morphology, structure, features,
or even degradation. In the forthcoming section, diﬀerent characterization techniques will be
introduced relevant for the present study to understand the physical and chemical changes
occurring in the epoxy hybrid systems due to HPHT interactions.
8.1
Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy
The absorption of varying frequencies of electromagnetic radiation in the infrared region of
the electromagnetic spectrum is occurring in practically all compounds containing covalent
bonds. The infrared spectrum, the patterns of absorption, will never be identical for diﬀerent
compounds, causing them to have the same functionality as a ﬁngerprint [50]. Subsequently,
the cardinal feature of infrared spectroscopy is the possibility of obtaining structural infor-
mation regarding a compound. Each bond (N-H, C-H, O-H, C-X, C=O, C-C, C=C, C≡C,
C≡N, etc.) has an individual absorption frequency unveiling a functional group; however,
it is unable to determine the combination of the functional groups and the entire structure
of the compound. Concerning the coating technology, the most common technique is the
Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR). It creates a spectrum , which for example,
can be used to illustrate the curing process or distinguish the functional groups before and
after exposure to the environment, possibly revealing some information of changes in the
polymer network.
A representative FTIR spectrum is shown in ﬁgure 8.1 of an epoxy coating.
39
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 8. Characterization Techniques
Figure 8.1:
FTIR spectrum of 3,4-Epoxycyclohexyl-3,4-epoxycyclohexane carboxylate
(ECC) in the near range [51].
8.2
Diﬀerential Scanning Calorimetry
Diﬀerential scanning calorimetry (DSC) is an analyzing instrument for determining the tem-
perature interval of phase transitions. The thermoanalytical tool measures the diﬀerence in
the amount of heat necessary to increase the sample temperature as a function of time by
comparison to a reference sample [52]. The technique’s fundamental principle is to obtain
the required heat for the sample to undergo the physical transformation during the phase
transition. Additional or reduced energy has to be implemented to increase the temperature
during a phase transition. When a solid transforms into a liquid, more energy is required
to increase the temperature at the same rate as the reference sample. The DSC utilizes
the diﬀerence in heat ﬂow between the sample and reference, subsequently measuring the
amount absorbed or released energy during transitions. The instrument can be employed to
obtain even more faint changes. It is widely used in the coating industry, as it can illustrate
and get the glass transition, crystallization, and melting point of a coating. Its applicability
in the coating is mainly related to the study of the curing and identifying the Tg [52].
Figure 8.2 shows a typical curve of curing materializing. From the curve, the starting point
of the curing, the solder melting point, and ﬁnally, the curing endpoint can be obtained.
40
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 8. Characterization Techniques
Figure 8.2: DSC curve of control epoxy compared to a hybrid epoxy containing GPTMS and
TEOS (tetraethoxysilane) [53].
8.3
Scanning Electron Microscope
The general principle of the scanning electron microscope (SEM) is the utilization of a
highly focused beam of high-energy electrons, generating various signals at the sample sur-
face. Deriving the signals obtained from the electron-sample interactions exposes knowledge
regarding the sample by revealing, external morphology, chemical composition, crystalline
structure, and orientation of materials in the sample. Subsequently, SEM can execute analy-
ses that qualitatively/semi-quantitatively determine the composition of the speciﬁc sample.
Further, SEM is capable of producing images of the surface through the focused beams. The
photos are highly beneﬁcial in coating technology, as the technique is impressive to portray
the microstructure of the coating surface. The instrument is very convenient in detection of
application ﬂaws, performance, and degradation, as blisters, cracks, holes, and voids become
visible.
Figure 8.3: SEM micrograph of untreated epoxy [54].
41
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 8. Characterization Techniques
Figure 8.3 shows a micrograph of tensile fractured untreated epoxy, it displays several failures
on the coating surface.
8.4
Liquid/Gas Chromatography Mass Spectrometry
The general use of Liquid/Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry (LGC-MS) is for rela-
tively small and volatile components. Initially, the sample is volatized, where the sample is
vaporized, resulting in separation of the components through a capillary column ﬁlled with
a solid phase. The gas-phase compounds are carried by inerts eluting from the column at
individual times equal to the speciﬁc compounds retention time [55]. After the chromatog-
raphy, the components are ionized by the mass spectrometer. The components are advanced
through the mass analyzer, where the ions are separated regarding their discrete mass-to-
charge ratio. Ion detection and analysis combined with peaks as a function of the m/z ratios
will conclude in a mass spectrum for the sample. The clear advantage of LGC-MS is the
functionality of separating complex mixtures with a minimum level of contamination, which
can prove essential in determining leaching parts of a coating.
Figure 8.4: GC–MS chromatographic proﬁle of a bisphenol A diglycidyl ether [56].
Figure 8.4 shows a standard GC-MS chromatographic proﬁle of an epoxy. In the present
work, GC-MS can be used to determine if any leaching occurs in coatings exposed in solvents.
42
==PAGE:53==
9
|
Summary of the Literature Survey
The literature survey focused on the applicability of silicon derivative-epoxy hybrid coatings
in relation to the hostile HPHT conditions. The gradual depletion of the existing fossil fuel
reservoirs has forced the oil and gas industry to shift its emphasis towards more extreme
conditions in search of new oil and gas reservoirs. The extremity of the encountered HPHT
conditions makes corrosion a pervasive challenge for oil and gas companies. A promising
method of protection against corrosion and diminish material degradation under conditions
of HPHT is by applications highly cross-linked anti-corrosive epoxy coatings. However, the
durability and degradability under HPHT exposure of these high-performance epoxy-based
coatings remain predominantly unexplored. Contrarily, previous studies at CoaST, DTU,
have decoded the degradation pathway of epoxy resin systems to some extent. Those inves-
tigations suggest solvent ingress and water permeation as chief detrimental parameters for
the durability of epoxy resin systems at HPHT environments. Moreover, the presence of su-
percritical ﬂuids (CO2), aromatic solvents, and saline liquids are also designated to aﬀect the
degradation of the high-performance epoxy-based coatings profoundly. To improve the exist-
ing high-performance epoxy coatings, an increasing interest in the ﬁeld of coating science has
been directed towards silicon derivative-epoxy hybrid systems. The introduction of silanes
and siloxanes into the protective epoxy-based coatings emerges to be a solution for mitigat-
ing the material degradation under HPHT conditions owing to superior chemical, thermal,
and solvent resistance attributes. Moreover, silanes and siloxanes are very multi-functional,
as they possess the ability to promote cross-linking, enhance resin-substrate interactions by
improving the adhesion, and direct incorporation into a cross-link chain by various reaction
mechanisms. For this reason, silanes and siloxanes are qualiﬁed candidates for mitigating
the corrosion issues encountered for HPHT conditions.
Besides, the applicability for oil
and gas companies, such protective silicon derivative-epoxy coating systems might also be
applied for other industrial purposes within the chemical industry. Interesting application
areas might be, i.e., combustion chambers, heat exchanger tubes, organic waste incinerators,
and generally, any surface application dealing with HPHT conditions.
43
==PAGE:54==
10
|
Objective and Strategy
The present work is aimed at two essential issues in relation to the HPHT environment.
• Firstly, it intends to decode and understand the degradation pathway in detail of
epoxy-silane hybrid coatings exposed to HPHT conditions.
• Secondly, to identify and validate the exact functioning of the silanes in the high-
performance epoxy coatings.
In order to assess the mentioned two objectives, the investigation strategy is dependent on
evaluations of the silicon derivative-epoxy hybrid coating systems before and after exposure
to HPHT conditions to interpret the individual systems’ degradation mechanisms. To de-
code the degradation pathways, diﬀerent coating characterization techniques are applied.
The purpose of the diﬀerent characterization techniques can roughly be divided into three
categories
• Detection of surface imperfections and defects.
• Analysis for chemical degradation.
• Evaluation of the mechanical properties.
Initially, visual inspections are conducted by the use of Digital Microscopy (DM) to illumi-
nate severe surface defects or surface imperfections. For a more detailed examination of the
possible surface imperfections and defects, Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) combined
with Energy Dispersive X-Ray (EDX) is applied to image the surface topography and to
discover the elemental composition of the defected areas. In addition to these characteri-
zation techniques, Total Reﬂectance – Fourier Transform Infrared (ATR-FTIR) analysis is
applied to investigate the conversion of functional groups in the crosslinked resins and the
possibility of chemical degradation corresponding to actual bond breakage in the coatings.
Lastly, applications of Diﬀerential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC) is applied to investigate the
change in mechanical properties associated with Tg depressions for the coating systems.
44
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 10. Objective and Strategy
For simulation purposes of the extreme HPHT environment, an enclosed batch reactor is
applied. The simulated HPHT environment comprises three distinct phases corresponding
to realistic environments when extracting crude oil in the oil and gas industry. The phases
consist of a gas mixture of nitrogen and carbon dioxide (10% CO2 to 90% N2), a hydrocarbon
phase consisting of the aromatic solvent para-xylene, and an artiﬁcial seawater phase (3.5
wt% NaCl solution). The attention is directed towards the interactions occurring between
the coating interface and the diﬀerent phases. These interactions become essential in decod-
ing the degradation partway and distinctly assess each of the individual phases’ impact and
the synergistic eﬀects.
Although the most common deﬁnition of high-pressure conditions concerning HPHT envi-
ronments states a pressure up to 10,000 psi (690 bars), the applied lab-scale batch reactor
does not allow such high-pressure regulations. For this reason, the pressure is maintained at
130 bars for the conducted experiments in this study, considering safety protocols.
In accordance with the objectives and strategy of the investigation, the following hypotheses
have been stated.
10.1
Hypotheses
Hypothesis 1: Epoxy resin systems with incorporated silanes exhibit improved
adhesion properties.
The enhanced adhesion is attributed the bond formations of Si-O occurring between the
substrate and the silane. The ability to form hydrogen bonding between the hydroxyl sites
on the substrate and hydrolyzed silane constitutes the prerequisite for the covalent bond
formation, resulting in superior cross-linking.
Hypothesis 2: The addition of silanes and siloxanes improves barrier eﬀect of
the novolac and BPF epoxy coatings by reducing water permeation.
Reactions will occur between the hydrophilic surface of the substrate and the silanes which
forms a cross-linked siloxane backbone which further interacts and cross-link with the epoxy
matrix. Hydrophobic properties are ensured due the non-polar nature of the formed Si-O
bonds which reduces the water permeation and therefore enhances the barrier eﬀect.
Hypothesis 3: The introduction of silanes and siloxanes diminishes the solvent
interactions between the epoxy resin and para-xylene.
The high non-polarity of solvents and the epoxy matrix enhances the strong interactions
45
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 10. Objective and Strategy
occurring. The free volume in the epoxy resin increases due to the interactions leading to
softening of the cross-linking which further enhances easier access for external aggressive
compounds to penetrate the epoxy resin. The introduction of silanes and siloxanes into the
epoxy resin, and thereby the strong bond formation of Si-O bonds can inhibit the non-polar
interactions.
Hypothesis 4: Chemical interactions occurring between the hydrocarbon phase
and the epoxy resin system due to similarities in the aromatic content.
By application of DSC and ATR-FTIR on exposed and unexposed epoxy resins, a possibil-
ity of a detailed degradation mechanism can be decoded, and more importantly distinguish
whether the interactions proceed via physical or chemical interactions.
46
==PAGE:57==
11
|
Experimental
Important perspectives such as: conclusions from previous studies related to the HPHT
environment, the experimental procedure, the applied raw materials, and the experimental
setup is presented throughout this chapter.
11.1
Conclusions from previous studies
Previous investigations conducted by Rajagopalan et al. [21] in 2019 for the CoaST research
group at DTU provided the initial knowledge towards an understanding of the possible
degradation mechanisms of neat epoxy novolac (EN) and diglycidyl ether of bisphenol F
(BPF) coatings under HPHT conditions. The coated steel panels were exposed to three
distinct HPHT phases (gas, Hydrocarbon, seawater) described in detail in the following
section.
Accordingly, the presence of supercritical CO2 and para-xylene was designated
to be chief detrimental parameters for the studied coatings’ durability. The para-xylene
interactions were suggested to physically soften the coatings due to the aromatic content
by increasing chain motions and thereby the free volume resulting in unwanted depressions
for the Tg. These solvent-resin interactions leading to softening of the EN and BPF epoxy
coatings were suggested as a possible initiation point for the supercritical CO2 and seawater
permeation in the interfacial zone between the seawater phase and the hydrocarbon phase. In
this sub-zone, underﬁlm corrosion was observed, possibly caused by synergistic eﬀects of the
three HPHT zones. The softening of the coating due to the para-xylene interactions combined
with the extreme external pressure allowed the diﬀusion of supercritical CO2 and seawater
to reach the metal coating interface and thereby corrode the substrate by the formation of
ferrous oxide. The anodic oxidation of iron resulted in the release of electrons required for
the hydrogen evolution of cathodic reactions of the partly acidic environment consisted of
H2CO3, and H2O. However, a discrete layer of ferrous oxide was observed on the coating
surface only in the mentioned sub-zone (the interfacial zone between the hydrocarbon phase
and the seawater phase), which is ascribed to the rapid gas decompression when releasing
47
==PAGE:58==
Chapter 11. Experimental
the pressure to ambient conditions. These ﬁndings can be seen in ﬁgure 11.1.
Figure 11.1: Exposed neat EN system and BPF system by Rajagopalan et al. [21].
Moreover, the ﬁndings obtained by Rajagopalan et al. in 2019 were directly extended by
Li et al. [57] in 2020, also under the CoaST research group’s supervision at DTU. This
study highlighted that incorporating high-performance ﬁllers into the EN and BPF epoxy
networks exposed to the mentioned HPHT phases increased the protective barrier eﬀect of
the coatings signiﬁcantly, and more importantly, no underﬁlm corrosion was observed. This
result is signiﬁcant and exciting; however, it might not be of any relevance for this present
study as the scope of this project is to formulate a high-performance clear coat consisting of
an epoxy-silicon derivative hybrid coating.
For clarity, this work intends to improve and, if possible, eliminate the observed defects on
the EN and BPF epoxy coatings obtained by Rajagopalan et al. in 2019 by the formulation
of epoxy-silicon derivative hybrid coatings owing to the excellent resistance characteristics
of the Si-O bonds. The applied raw materials used to formulate the diﬀerent epoxy/silicon
derivative hybrid coatings are presented in the following sections.
11.2
Raw Materials
11.2.1
Epoxy Base Systems and Curing Agents
The essential constituent in coatings is the base resin, which is carefully selected due to its
speciﬁc properties of interest. For this present study, an epoxy novolac (EN) resin and a
48
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 11. Experimental
diglycidyl ether of bisphenol F (BPF) resin were chosen as the bases. This selection was based
on the high epoxy functionality (f) attributed the EN and BPF resins promoting the ability
to form very dense cross-linked networks and feature excellent resistance properties towards
ions and solvent permeation. The novolac base used for the formulations is commercially
abbreviated DEN 438-X80 and has a functionality of (f)=3.6, whereas in the case of the BPF
systems, the commercial EPON 862 with a functionality (f)=2.1 was applied. In addition,
three polyamines were selected as the curing agents: m-xylenediamine (MXDA) adducted
with DGEBA, 3-(Diethylamino)propylamine) (DEAPA) adducted with DGEBA, and 4,4’-
Methylenedicyclohexanamine (Amicure PACM). The base resins and polyamines’ molecular
structures are provided in ﬁgure 11.2 and ﬁgure 11.3, and chemical speciﬁc properties such
as epoxy equivalent weight (EEW), hydrogen equivalent weight (HEW), speciﬁc gravity
attributed the epoxy bases and polyamines are tabulated in table 11.1.
(a) Chemical structure of the commercial epoxy
novolac: DEN 438-X80.
(b) Chemical structure of the commercial BPF: EPON 862.
Figure 11.2: Chemical structures of the applied epoxy bases in the coating formulations.
A mixture of the MXDA and DEAPA adducts were used for the hardening of the EN systems.
In contrast, the amicure PACM cycloaliphatic amine was used for the BPF systems. The
adduction of MXDA and DEAPA with DGEBA was conducted to increase the compatibility
with the EN resin hence evading homogeneity concerns. Besides, the functioning of the
MXDA and DEAPA adducts are very distinctive in the EN system’s curing process due to
the presence of the primary amine in the MXDA adduct and the tertiary amine in the DEAPA
49
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 11. Experimental
(a) Chemical structure of the hardener
Amicure PACM used to cure the BPF
epoxy (EPON 862).
(b) Chemical structure of DEAPA adduct.
(c) Chemical structure of MXDA adduct.
Figure 11.3: Chemical structures of the applied curing agents applied in the coating formu-
lations.
Table 11.1: Chemical properties of the applied base resins and curing agents.
Epoxies
Epoxy Equivalent
Weight [g/eq]
Speciﬁc Gravity
DEN 438-X80
176-181
1.1
EPON 862
169
1.174
Polyamines
H-amine Equivalent
Weight [g/eq]
Speciﬁc Gravity
MXDA adduct
82
1.039
DEAPA adduct
119
0.869
Amicure PACM
54
0.995
adduct. Consequently, the MXDA adduct initiates the relatively fast reaction between the
amine and the epoxy groups in the EN resin, forming the dense cross-linking structure
under room temperature conditions.
Conversely, the DEAPA adduct ﬁnalizes the cross-
linking network by catalyzing the slower epoxy-epoxy and epoxy-hydroxide reactions of the
50
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 11. Experimental
unreacted epoxy groups. However, this is dependent on the stoichiometric ratio between
the epoxy and amine content, which is addressed in the following section 11.3 Coating
Formulation and Application.
11.2.2
Siloxanes and Silanes
The raw materials obtained can be divided into two subcategories: siloxanes and silanes. The
idea of the raw materials is to reduce the aromatic content and improve the hydrophobic
properties of the base resins to diminish seawater permeation and solvent ingress. These
resistance characteristics are anticipated to be signiﬁcantly improved by incorporating the
siloxane backbone structure into the dense cross-linking network of the EN and BPF binder
systems. In addition, features such as thermal and chemical stability are attributed the
siloxanes owing to the strong bonding properties associated the Si-O bonds.
11.2.3
The Applied Siloxanes
The siloxanes were chosen through a combination of functionality and availability. Four silox-
ane compounds were used for the experiments and their chemical structures are illustrated
in ﬁgure 11.4.
(a)
Epoxy-cyclo-hexyl-ethyl
terminated
poly-
dimethyl siloxane (DMS-EC17) [58].
(b) Poly(dimethylsiloxane), diglycidyl ether ter-
minated (E-PDMS) [48].
(c) [2-3% (Epoxy-cyclo-hexyl-ethyl)methyl-
siloxane] – Dimethyl siloxane copolymer
(ECMS-227) [46].
(d)
A
representative
structure
of
the
DOWSIL 3074 intermediate [59].
Figure 11.4: Chemical structures of the silicone derivatives applied with the novolac and
diglycidyl ether of bisphenol A.
51
==PAGE:62==
Chapter 11. Experimental
The selection process was centralized around similarities between the raw materials to obtain
knowledge regarding 1) the inﬂuence of the functional group’s position and 2) the applicabil-
ity of the functional groups in relation to the HPHT environment. The correlation between
the raw materials is the substructure consisting of PDMS. The PDMS backbone structure
generally has a lower surface tension compared to epoxy, generating a more repellent sur-
face towards p-xylene and water [60]. The long chain of free methyl groups is proposed to
increase the hydrophobicity yielding a better resistance towards seawater permeation due to
the increased non-polarity when integrated into the cross-linking structures of the EN and
BPF coatings. Also, thermal, chemical, and solvent resistance characteristics are anticipated
to be enhanced owing to the backbone structure consisting of the long-chain Si-O-Si linkage.
Moreover, the bulkiness of the functional groups and side-chains of the siloxane polymers
is suggested to slightly improve the coating system’s barrier properties by reducing the free
volume in the polymer matrix [61]. Subsequently, three of the structures have epoxy groups,
enhancing the possibility of the siloxane being implemented in the resin matrix due to the
amine curing agents utilized at both curing and post-curing. The similarities between ﬁgure
11.4 (a) and (b) is present at the terminated functional groups. They both contain epoxy
groups; however, ﬁgure 11.4 (a) contains a cycloaliphatic epoxy, which should increase the
thermal stability and further increase the non-polar integrity of the resin matrix, increasing
the resistance towards the aromatic hydrocarbons. Structure (c) in ﬁgure 11.4 was chosen to
evaluate the diﬀerence between having the cycloaliphatic epoxy as a repeating unit instead
of a terminated functional group in comparison to ﬁgure 11.4 (a).
The ﬁnal raw material ﬁgure 11.4 (d) is only shown as a representative structure, as the
supplier could not provide further information concerning the exact structure; however, the
methoxy content was provided to be 15-18 wt%. It is suggested to function as an adhesion
promoter following the reaction steps: hydrolysis of the methoxy groups, condensation,
hydrogen bonding, bond formation with the substrate. This should allow the formation
of a dense layer consisting of the long hydrophobic chains which are chemically bonded
to the substrate similar to ﬁgure 6.9 yielding decreased seawater permeation towards the
substrate. However, the possibility of a reaction with the hydroxyl groups present in the
resin due to the curing reactions could occur, resulting in a direct implementation within
the resin matrix. The information provided concerning the repeating units and the chain
lengths of the presented siloxanes were minimal; however, the available chemical properties
are provided in table 11.2.
In accordance with table 11.2 the epoxy equivalent weight is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent for the
three epoxy containing materials and generally much higher than the neat EN and BPF
52
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 11. Experimental
Table 11.2: Chemical properties of the applied siloxanes.
Epoxies
Epoxy Equilvilent
Weight [g/eq]
Speciﬁc gravity
DMS-EC17
20000
0.98
E-PDMS
490
0.993
ECMS-227
760000
0.98
Dowsil 3074
—-
1.16
resins. The high epoxy equivalent weight (EEW) for DMS-EC17 and ECMS-227 could be
problematic concerning the incorporation mechanisms into the resin matrix as the epoxy
content is very low, inhibiting the possibility of reactions with available amino or epoxy
groups of the resin.
11.2.4
The Applied Silane
In the exhibition of silanes, only two raw materials have been acquired. The chosen silanes
are similar in the sense of the methoxy bonded to the silicon.
The functional group of
both the materials has been chosen to be placed in the γ position [62]. The propyl group
is relatively obtainable through synthesis and exhibits more excellent thermal stability in
contrast to the shorter chains. Subsequently, choosing a comparatively long linker length
provides the functional group with improved mobility and less steric hindrance, as it is
achievable to extend from the substrate. Choosing methoxy bonded to silicon instead of
ethoxy is reasoned by the desirability of locating the reactive center directly adjacent to the
substrate [62]. The ﬁrst silane was chosen due to the present amino groups’ functionality in
the structure, as seen in ﬁgure 11.5.
Figure 11.5: N-(2-aminoethyl)-3-aminopropyl-trimethoxysilane) (Silanil 176) [63].
This silane was chosen as an adhesion promoter. As shown in the following ﬁgure 11.5,
the amount of methoxy groups is signiﬁcantly higher in comparison to Dowsil 3074 per
silicon atom. The increased availability of methoxy groups should lead to a higher homo-
geneity of the material chemically bonding with the substrate signiﬁcantly enhancing the
53
==PAGE:64==
Chapter 11. Experimental
adhesion following the adhesion promoter mechanism shown in ﬁgure 6.9. Besides, the sec-
ondary amine present should increase the reaction rate between the silane and the epoxy
base aiding in the adhesion promotion between substrate and resin.
The second silane
is the γ-glycidoxypropyltrimethoxysilane (GPTMS). This silane was chosen to display the
functionality of a silane with a epoxy group present in the immediate structure. The full
structure is shown in ﬁgure 11.6.
Figure 11.6: γ-glycidoxypropyltrimethoxysilane structure (GPTMS) [45].
This raw material can function as both a cross-linker and as an adhesion promoter. The
similarities to the Silanil 176 is present as the amino functionality has been substituted with
a glycidyl ether, while the methoxy groups remain identical. The reasoning for the selection
of GPTMS is to examine the performance of a short chain silane compared to a long chained
siloxane. In contrast to the siloxanes, the silane is a short chained molecule which results
in less steric hindrance and the possibility of avoiding incompatibility between the silicon
derivative and the epoxy novolac.
11.3
Coating Formulation and Application
Each coating system consists of an epoxy base, a siloxane, and a curing agent. The exclusion
of the other conventional constituents in coatings, i.g. ﬁllers, extenders, pigments, is intended
to provide a more accurate and detailed description and interpretation of the degradation
mechanisms.
The formulated epoxy-siloxane hybrid coatings consist of either EN or BPF as the base resin
combined with one of the previous sections’ siloxanes. Thus, four diﬀerent epoxy-siloxane
materials are obtained for each base system. The amount of added siloxane to the base resin
54
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 11. Experimental
is chosen to vary to investigate how the amount of siloxane in the epoxy resin inﬂuences
the performance under HPHT conditions. The desired amounts of the siloxanes are 5 wt%,
10 wt%, 15 wt%, 20 wt%, respectively. In that way, four coating formulations are obtained
for each siloxane applied in the respective base resin. This procedure produces 32 coated
panels that are exposed to the artiﬁcial HPHT environment. Moreover, three out of the four
applied siloxanes contain epoxy functional groups. Thus, the epoxy equivalent weight (EEW)
changes when the siloxane/epoxy mixture is obtained, ultimately aﬀecting the stoichiometric
ratio (S.R.) between the epoxide and amine content. However, the increasing epoxide content
attributed to the siloxanes is considered in the stoichiometric ratio of functional groups
accordingly to equation (11.1) and (11.2), where W denotes the weight.
For EN S.R. =
WDEAPA
HEWDEAPA
+
WMXDA
HEWMXDA
WEN
EEWEN
+
Wsilane
EEWsilane
(11.1)
For BPF S.R. =
WAmicurePACM
HEWAmicurePACM
WBPF
EEWBPF
+
Wsilane
EEWsilane
(11.2)
The stoichiometric ratio is selected based on the structure and functionality of the epoxy
resins. In this study, the high functional EN systems’ stoichiometric ratio is chosen sig-
niﬁcantly lower than in the BPF systems. This selected stoichiometry in the EN systems
allows free epoxy groups to be present after room temperature curing. As a consequence,
post-curing is required for the completion of the hardening process of the EN systems. The
elevated post-curing promotes further cross-linking among the unreacted epoxy groups, in-
creasing the cross-linking density due to the DEAPA adduct’s presence, which catalyzes this
reaction. In contrast, the stoichiometry is selected signiﬁcantly higher for the lower func-
tionality systems of BPF which restricts post-curing since no surplus of epoxide groups is
present and accessible for further cross-linking reactions.
In the EN coating formulations, the stoichiometric ratio was selected to be in the range of
0.2-0.4, whereas for the BPF systems, a signiﬁcantly higher stoichiometry of 0.85-0.95 was
preferred.
The substrates used in this present work was mild steel panels with the dimensions (5mm x
70mm x 120mm), and the applied coating covered every surface (front, back, edges) of the
substrate. The mixing and application of the diﬀerent coating systems was handled manually
with a wooden stick and a paintbrush. However, the substrate’s front and back could not be
coated the same day as the ﬁlm formation, and curing of the coating systems had to occur.
55
==PAGE:66==
Chapter 11. Experimental
For this reason, a re-coating interval of 24 hours was found suﬃcient. Subsequently, all
coated samples were allowed to room temperature cure for ﬁve days, and in the case of the
EN systems, these samples were post-cured for ﬁve hours at a temperature of 120 ℃. The
experimental work conducted in this study was divided in to two phases. The scope of phase
one was to localize an optimum siloxane concentration in the coating formulations, whereas
phase two aimed at optimization aspects of the best coating formulations from phase one.
11.4
General Description of the HPHT Setup at DTU
To assess the performance and degradation of the epoxy based systems at HPHT conditions,
an experimental setup is required to simulate the environment. The specialized equipment
has to have high durability to cope with the extreme conditions combined with a decom-
position resistance preventing contamination of the experimental results. A 4621 HPHT
reactor model from Parr Instruments is utilized to simulate the conditions in the present
study.
The reactor is non-stirred, constructed to withstand 350 °C, 200 bar, and is re-
sistant to extremely corrosive environments due to the reaction chamber’s construction of
nickel-chromium-molybdenum alloy. The whole setup revolves around the reactor, heater,
controller, and the gas lines, aiming to obtain the desired environment.
Figure 11.7: Schematic illustration of the setup and photo of the actual setup.
The reactor’s locking mechanism consists of split rings fastened by compression bolts to
maintain the high pressure through adequate sealing. The heating system is obtained by
utilizing a resistance furnace, which encloses the reactor chamber. The heating jacket is
connected to a controller, which ensures the correct ramp up and maintaining the desired
temperature throughout the whole experiment. The gas lines provide the gas ﬂows, which de-
termines the pressure in combination with temperature control. Subsequently, the controller
records the data every minute from the experiment in pressure data points and temperature
56
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 11. Experimental
data points. The mechanical properties and the limitations of the setup are shown in the
table 11.3.
Table 11.3: Mechanical properties and limitations of the test
Reactor Chamber
Heating Jacket
Material
Hastelloy C-276
Model
4911
Max Temperature
350\degree C
Heater Type
Calrod Heater
Max Pressure
200 bar
Insulation
Included in Jacket
Volume
1 L
Electric Potential
230 V
The batch reactor can contain four panels. For the experiments, completely coated and cured
panels were used. Subsequently, the simulated environment consists of 3 distinct phases,
corresponding to the surroundings when extracting crude oil. The gas-phase consists of a
gas mixture of nitrogen and carbon dioxide (10% CO2 to 90% N2), the hydrocarbon phase
consisting of the aromatic solvent para-xylene, and an artiﬁcial seawater phase (3.5wt% NaCl
solution). The para-xylene was chosen as the hydrocarbon phase representative due to the
ﬁndings of previous studies conducted at CoaST DTU KT, which designated para-xylene
as the most detrimental solvent on epoxy coatings. Figure 11.8 shows a schematic of the
insides of the batch reactor while illustrating the three distinct HPHT phases.
Figure 11.8: Schematic illustration of the insides of the batch reactor.
After ﬁnalizing the closing mechanism and ensuring the chamber is an entirely closed system,
ﬂushing with high pressurized N2 is necessary to diminish oxygen from inside the chamber.
Afterward, a mixture of high pressurized N2 and CO2 was used to get the desired ratio and
the desired operating pressure at room temperature, approximately 110 bars. When reaching
the pressure of 110 bars, the heater is employed to heat the pressurized chamber at a rate of
5 °C/min to 180 °C resulting in a pressure of 130 bars approximately. The setup was kept
under these conditions for 12 hours, whereas the program was terminated, and the chamber
57
==PAGE:68==
Chapter 11. Experimental
was cooled to room temperature. The ﬁnal step before removing the exposed panels is to
release the pressure. The pressure release followed a release rate of 300 bars/min to simulate
rapid shutdown procedure in HPHT wells, commonly known as rapid gas decompression
(RGD) in the HPHT domain. The setup described in this section was used in the present
work to simulate HPHT conditions to obtain knowledge regarding the degradation pathways
of the high-performance anti-corrosive coatings.
11.5
Characterization Instruments
11.5.1
Surface Characterization Techniques
The technology applied to investigate the morphology of the coatings both prior and after
exposure was a digital microscope (VHX-6000, KEYENCE) equipped with a lens (VH-
Z20T) capable of magnifying 200 times, and a scanning electron microscope (Inspect S,
manufacturer FEI company, Netherlands) conducted with an accelerating voltage of 20 kV.
Using the energy-dispersive X-ray incorporated in the SEM the elemental compositing can
be quantiﬁed. A purely visual inspection was performed on photos taken before and after
exposure.
11.5.2
Attenuated total reﬂection-Fourier transform infrared spec-
troscopy (ATR-FTIR)
An assessment of the degradation of the various coatings was conducted utilizing the ATR-
FTIR before and after exposure.
The thermoset coating was examined with an IFS 48
ATR-FTIR (BRUKER Ettlingen, Germany) in the wave-number range of 400-4000 cm−1
and with a resolution of 4 cm−1. Two measurements have been conducted on each zone to
ensure repeatability.
11.5.3
Diﬀerential scanning calorimetry (DSC)
The DSC analysis was conducted utilizing a ‘Polymer Laboratory’ Model PL DSC apparatus
(Mettler Toledo, Greifensee, Switzerland). The average dynamic Tg was measured before and
after exposure, by scraping a few milligrams of thermoset coating, placing the powder/ﬂakes
in DSC aluminum pans and record the spectrum from room temperature to 350°C at a
heating rate of 10°C/min. To minimize errors, the sample is initially heated from 20°C to
230°C, aiming to remove uncured areas and reducing inaccuracies.
58
==PAGE:69==
12
|
Results and Discussion
12.1
Preliminary Experiments
The degradation mechanisms of the neat EN and BPF epoxy coatings provided by Ra-
jagopalan et al. [21] in 2019 indicated the occurrence of underﬁlm corrosion of the steel
substrate in the sub-zone between the seawater phase and the hydrocarbon phase. Since the
iron deposition was only localized in that particular sub-zone, it was considered to investigate
the possibility of having any unassessed phase interactions between the three HPHT phases
that could inﬂuence the degradation rate of epoxy coatings. For this reason, a series of ex-
periments were conducted in the simulated HPHT environment without any coated samples
to get a conﬁrmation on this point. All possible combinations of the three HPHT phases
(gas, hydrocarbon, seawater) with respect to para-xylene were simulated, as illustrated in
table 12.1.
Table 12.1: Schematic illustration of the simulated HPHT environments.
Environment
HPHT phases
present
Species
present
E1
Pure para-xylene
PX
E2
(gas without CO2, hydrocarbon)
N2, PX
E3
(gas, hydrocarbon)
N2, CO2, PX
E4
(gas, hydrocarbon, seawater)
N2, CO2, PX, SW
E5
(gas without CO2, hydrocarbon, seawater)
N2, PX, SW
The essential focal point of these experiments was to investigate if any oxidation could occur
to the para-xylene due to the presence of supercritical CO2 combined with the extreme
conditions, and in that way increase the extremity of the HPHT environment. For validation
and characterization purposes, LGC-MS was applied on the exposed para-xylene samples
and compared with a pure unexposed para-xylene sample. The comparison between the two
deﬁned environments E1 and E4 are emphasized through the resulting mass spectra and
chromatograms provided in ﬁgure 12.1 and ﬁgure 12.2, whereas the LGC-MS results for the
remaining environments (E2, E3, E5) are provided in Appendix A Phase interaction.
59
==PAGE:70==
Chapter 12. Results and Discussion
(a) Mass spectrum for the unexposed pure para-xylene sample (E1).
(b) Mass spectrum for the para-xylene sample exposed to the two other HPHT phases (gas, sea-
water) (E4). This particular HPHT environment consisted of all the three HPHT phases meaning
the following species were present: N2, CO2, SW, PX.
Figure 12.1: Mass spectra from the LGC-MS analysis conducted on the para-xylene samples.
Accordingly, the obtained mass spectra for the two environments E1 and E4 are completely
identical, conﬁrming that no unfavorable phase interactions occur between the three HPHT
phases (gas, hydrocarbon, seawater). The exact same trend is observed for the remaining
60
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 12. Results and Discussion
environments (E2, E3, E5) shown in Appendix A Phase interaction.
(a) Chromatogram for the two deﬁned environments E1 and E4.
(b) Magniﬁcation of the above chromatogram for the two deﬁned environments E1 and E4 to
compare the observed peak.
Figure 12.2: Resulting chromatograms from the LGC-MS analysis.
Following the obtained chromatograms provided in ﬁgure 12.2, the abundance curve as a
function of the measuring time of the LCG-MS auto-sampler provides almost the same pro-
gression for the two environments E1 and E4 as seen in ﬁgure 12.2a. However, a slight
inconsistency or peak is observed between the curves after approximately 8 min. This tiny
peak is present in a much more convenient format in ﬁgure 12.2b. The observed peak corre-
sponds to the chemical 4-methylbenzaldehyde, which contains a carbonyl group positioned
at one of the methyl groups, as shown in ﬁgure 12.3.
61
==PAGE:72==
Chapter 12. Results and Discussion
Figure
12.3:
Reaction
scheme
for
the
partial
oxidation
of
para-xylene
to
4-
methylbenzaldehyde [64].
The presence of this compound conﬁrms that a very small quantity of the para-xylene has
been oxidized; however, it should be emphasized that this compound does already exist in
the pure para-xylene as an impurity as shown in ﬁgure 12.2b. Moreover, the intensity of
the observed peak is minimal for this compound in environment E4 meaning the oxidation
of para-xylene might have occurred due to insuﬃcient ﬂushing of the reaction chamber or
when transferring the para-xylene from the container to the reactor.
Using LGC-MS as the characterization tool, the HPHT environment’s complex nature, and
the possibility of having any oxidation reactions occurring between the HPHT zones (gas,
hydrocarbon, seawater) have been investigated. The ﬁndings indicated that insigniﬁcant
small quantities of the exposed para-xylene were oxidized to 4-methylbenzaldehyde, which
might be due to insuﬃcient ﬂushing of the reactor rather than chemical oxidation of CO2.
Thus, it is conﬁrmed that no oxidation products of para-xylene are formed due to phase
interactions of the HPHT phases.
12.2
Phase 1: Experimental Screening Process
12.2.1
Results
As mentioned in the section 11.3 Coating Formulation and Application each siloxane
has been added in four diﬀerent amounts for each respective epoxy base, 5 wt%, 10 wt%, 15
wt%, and 20 wt% producing 32 coated panels. These panels were used as a screening process,
aiming to deduce the performance in relation to the amount of siloxane in the formulation
and quantifying an approximated optimum of siloxane in the mixture. The panels were
exposed in the simulated HPHT environment, and a purely visual inspection of the defects
were conducted to determine the highest quality sample, which is used for further research.
62
==PAGE:73==
Chapter 12. Results and Discussion
All of the coated samples before and after HPHT exposure can be seen in Appendix B
Screening Process. However, as the performance of all the samples with a siloxane content
of over 5 wt% is deemed insuﬃcient, the focal point is centralized around samples with 5
wt%, as these samples exhibit the most promising results for EN and BPF as illustrated
in the ﬁgures 12.4 and 12.5 respectively. Exposure to the simulated HPHT environment
resulted in three distinct surface zones corresponding to each of the three HPHT phases
present in the HPHT environment. In order to describe the observed defects corresponding
to a speciﬁc zone, the following abbreviations is used: Gas for the gas zone, HC for the
hydrocarbon zone (para-xylene), and SW corresponding to the seawater zone. Besides, an
interfacial sub-zone between the HC and SW zones are also obtained after exposure to the
conditions of HPHT. This particular sub-zone is abbreviated HC-SW.
(a) Unexposed EN base with 5 wt% silicon derivative.
(b) Exposed EN base with 5 wt% silicon derivative.
Figure 12.4: The unexposed and exposed EN base panels. Note the indication of the three
HPHT zones, and the interfacial sub-zone.
The results of exposed EN and BPF coatings provided by Rajagopalan et al. [21] in 2019
showed similar defects for the two epoxy bases; however, the degree of degradation was
63
==PAGE:74==
Chapter 12. Results and Discussion
distinct. Neat EN showed no sign of degradation in the gas zone’s surface, whereas distinct
degradation was visible in the HC and SW exposed zones. Similar degradation tendencies
are observed for the EN samples containing Dowsil 3074 and ECMS-227. The HC exposed
zone shows an inferior performance in withstanding the para-xylene phase, as small blisters
are present, possibly due to the softening of the resin. Besides, inadequate performance is
observed for the SW exposed area as large blisters are prominent for the ECMS-227 sample
and distinct underﬁlm corrosion for the Dowsil 3074 sample.
In contrast, both E-PDMS and DMS-EC17 exhibits signiﬁcantly diminished deﬁciencies in
the HC and SW exposed zones.
However, slight underﬁlm corrosion and formations of
blisters are still prominent in the HC-SW subzone and the SW exposed area. In comparison
to the study of neat EN systems conducted by Rajagopalan [21], signiﬁcant enhancements
are conﬁrmed in the HC exposed zone for the E-PDMS and DMS-EC17 samples; however,
the slight occurrence of blisters in the SW exposed zone appeared to be an additional type
of defect.
Conversely to the EN/siloxane formulations, the BPF/siloxane coatings exhibited a com-
pletely inadequate performance in withstanding the extreme HPHT environment as illus-
trated in ﬁgure 12.5. In all the formulations, a complete loss of adhesion along with underﬁlm
corrosion was observed for the SW exposed zone. Moreover, the Dowsil 3074 and E-PDMS
showed severe degradation by the presence of blisters in the HC exposed zone, despite the
anticipated improved resistance properties of BPF resins towards aromatic solvents proposed
by Rajagopalan et al. [21]. Contrarily, the ECMS-227 and DMS-EC17 samples showed a
slightly enhanced performance, as the HC exposed zone remained intact to a varying degree
as a mild discoloration was visible; however, it should be emphasized that none of the for-
mulated BPF/siloxane hybrid coatings exhibited superior performance in comparison to the
neat BPF system.
For all the samples, both the EN base and BPF base, a red iron oxide deposit zone has man-
ifested as conﬁrmed by Rajagopalan et al. [21], meaning further alteration and development
has to be conducted to eliminate the red iron deposit and every other defect present. An
overview of the diﬀerent coating systems and their performance with respect to the distinct
HPHT phases (gas, HC, SW) are tabulated in table 12.2 and 12.3.
64
==PAGE:75==
Chapter 12. Results and Discussion
(a) Unexposed BPF base with 5 wt% silicon derivative.
(b) Exposed BPF base with 5 wt% silicon derivative.
Figure 12.5: The unexposed and exposed BPF based panels. Note the indication of the three
HPHT zones, and the interfacial sub-zone.
Table 12.2: Overview of the EN systems performances with respect to the distinct phases of
the HPHT environment.
Epoxy Siloxane
System
Gas Phase
Zone
Hydrocarbon Phase
Zone
Seawater Phase
Zone
EN + ECMS 5 wt%
Intact
Slight occurrence of
small blisters
Formation of
large blisters +
Iron deposition
EN + Dowsil 5 wt%
Intact
Formation of small
blisters uniformly distributed
Slight occurrance of
small blisters + iron
deposition
EN + E-PDMS 5 wt%
Intact
Slight occurrence of
small blisters
Formation of
large blisters + iron
deposition
EN + DMS-EC17 5 wt%
Intact
Intact
Slight occurrence of
large blisters + iron
deposition
65
==PAGE:76==
Chapter 12. Results and Discussion
Table 12.3: Overview of the BPF systems performances with respect to the distinct phases
of the HPHT environment.
Epoxy Siloxane
System
Gas Phase
Zone
Hydrocarbon Phase
Zone
Seawater Phase
Zone
BPF + ECMS 5 wt%
Intact
Intact
Complete loss of adhesion +
Iron deposition
BPF + Dowsil 5 wt%
Intact
Slight occurrence of
very small blisters
Complete loss of adhesion +
Iron deposition
BPF + E-PDMS 5 wt%
Formation of
large blisters
Formation of very
large blisters all over
the zone.
Complete loss of adhesion +
Slight Iron
deposition
BPF + DMS-EC17 5 wt%
Intact
Intact
Complete loss of adhesion +
Iron deposition
12.2.2
Discussion
The fundamental objective of implementing the long-chained siloxanes into the epoxy resin
systems is designated speciﬁc resistance properties towards solvents attributed to the strong
Si-O bonds and reducing the aromaticity of the binder resin. In conformity with the obtained
results, the EN/siloxane hybrid systems imply signiﬁcantly enhanced resistance properties
towards the hydrocarbon zone when compared with the ﬁndings of Rajagopalan et al. [21]
in 2019. These observations might be ascribed to the presence and integration of the long-
chained Si-O-Si backbone into the resin matrix, reducing the binder resin’s aromatic content
and thereby reducing the possibility of having pi interactions occurring between the resin and
the hostile para-xylene. Reduction of pi stacking, which refers to the attractive non-covalent
interactions occurring between aromatic rings owing to the pi bonds’ properties, dimin-
ishes the physically softening of the coating system, enhancing the resistance characteristics
towards aromatic solvents ultimately prolonging the durability of the coating. Although
improvements are observed, additional defects in the presence of blisters are present in the
seawater zone, indicating inferior performance for that distinct zone in comparison to the
ﬁndings of Rajagopalan et al. [21] in 2019.
Compatibility, Flexibility and Entanglement concerns
Several factors might have caused the observed defects for the epoxy/siloxane systems. How-
ever, three parameters are anticipated to signiﬁcantly impact all the diﬀerent epoxy/siloxane
hybrid systems’ performance in the simulated HPHT environment. First, the compatibility
of the base resin and the applied siloxane is considered to inﬂuence the performance. Second
entanglement concerns related to the long-chain Si-O-Si backbone present in the applied
siloxanes. Third, the ﬂexibility of the siloxane backbone in the hybrid system. For tough-
66
==PAGE:77==
Chapter 12. Results and Discussion
ening modiﬁcations of epoxy resins, elastomers such as polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) has
widely been used due to their ﬂexible molecular chain. However, the symmetric structure
of the methyl groups bonded to the silicon atom exhibits a strong non-polar nature, typ-
ically leading to thermodynamically and mechanically incompatible blends systems. This
tendency is reﬂected in the low solubility parameter of siloxanes (15.3 [J1/2 · cm−3/2]) when
compared to that of epoxy resins (22 [J1/2 · cm−3/2]) [65]. Therefore, when considering the
diﬀerence in polarity of these two constituents, it should to some extent be challenging
to integrate siloxanes having PDMS as the backbone structure into epoxy resins, however,
due to relatively small concentrations (5 wt%) it was anticipated to obtain a homogeneous
resin to a varying degree. The compatibility concerns arose when partly incomplete mixing
was observed for several tested epoxy/siloxane mixtures. This in-homogeneity results in a
slight separation of the epoxy resin and the siloxane phases [65]. Consequently, a two-phase
system is formulated, which is only partly miscible. Such in-compatibility issues are unfa-
vorable and suggested to aﬀect the siloxanes’ intended incorporation into the epoxy resins
and the intended functioning concerning the suitable resistance characteristics. In other
terms, the siloxanes are not evenly distributed and integrated into the dense cross-linking
network providing thermal stability, hydrophobicity, and chemical resistance as intended.
Besides, the entanglement of the Si-O-Si long chain backbone of the siloxanes might be an
issue to consider. Increasing concentrations of siloxane possibly enhance the intra-molecular
and inter-molecular entanglement of the long-chained siloxanes resulting in an adverse in-
homogeneous packing of the siloxanes into the epoxy resin. This entanglement might, in
principle, embed unreacted epoxy groups or amines, which severely inﬂuences the resistance
characteristics of the coating system towards HPHT conditions [65]. A graphical represen-
tation of the embedding of a crosslinking point due to entanglement is presented in ﬁgure
12.6.
Further, the cured coating systems’ ﬂexibility is aﬀected by the presence of the long-chained
Si-O-Si polymers found in each of the applied raw materials, as neat epoxies generally tend
to be brittle. Commonly, PDMS has been used for toughening epoxy resins due to the Si-
O-Si linkage’s ﬂexible molecular chain structure of the Si-O-Si linkage [65]. However, the
applicability of the protective coatings used in HPHT environments is largely dependent on
the degree of ﬂexibility. Although ﬂexibility is a useful feature for the prevention of crack-
ing, too much ﬂexibility might enhance corrosive species’ permeation under the extreme
pressure conditions found in HPHT. In contrast, the coating system’s brittleness is of equal
importance as too brittle coating formulations tend to crack during rapid gas decompression.
Hence, it is a trade-oﬀbetween ﬂexibility and brittleness in developing epoxy/siloxane hy-
67
==PAGE:78==
Chapter 12. Results and Discussion
Figure 12.6: Embedded crosslinking point due to entanglement.
brid coatings applicable for HPHT purposes. The blisters observed in the four EN/siloxane
samples were formed slowly after the samples were removed from the simulated HPHT envi-
ronment conﬁrming the permeation of seawater and supercritical CO2 into the resin matrix.
However, the formed blisters were fairly large in the seawater zone for the epoxy/siloxane
hybrid systems compared to previous reported by Rajagopalan et al.[21] for the neat EN
system. The formation and swelling of the large blisters are suggested to be related to the
emphasized ﬂexibility concerns attributed to the long-chained Si-O-Si polymer’s presence.
The ﬂexible molecular chain structure of the Si-O-Si linkage might allow and intensify the
permeation of seawater and supercritical CO2 under high pressure conditions resulting in
higher concentrations of captured seawater and CO2 after the decompression. However, the
blisters’ formation and swelling occur in the complete absence of cracks in the coating, pos-
sibly due to the siloxanes’ ﬂexible Si-O-Si backbone. For this reason, the ﬂexibility of the
formulated epoxy/siloxane hybrid coatings is suggested to inﬂuence the performance under
conditions of HPHT signiﬁcantly.
Gas diﬀusion
Beyond the incompatibility, ﬂexibility and entanglement issues, the presence of supercritical
CO2 is also suggested as a critical parameter inﬂuencing the formulated hybrid coatings’
performance. The ﬂuid dynamics of supercritical CO2 is signiﬁcantly altered compared to
its gas phase. Supercritical CO2 possess the density of a liquid while the ﬂow properties of a
gas are maintained [37]. Besides, the supercritical state also implies increased mass transfer
properties, which enhance the penetrating properties of CO2 possibly impacting seawater
permeation as well [66]. However, the bulkiness of side groups and functional groups of the
siloxane polymers is reported to aﬀect the solubility of CO2 due to denser cross-linking and
68
==PAGE:79==
Chapter 12. Results and Discussion
less free volume in the polymer network [61]. This suggests better resistance characteristics
for the formulations containing ECMS-227 and DMS-EC17 with respect CO2 diﬀusion due
to the presence of the cycloaliphatic structures.
Evaluation of the individual siloxane formulations
Furthermore, all coating formulations showed deﬁciencies in the seawater zone. The forma-
tion of blisters was observed for the EN systems, and complete adhesion loss was maintained
for the BPF coatings. The complete loss of adhesion observed for all the BPF formulations
conﬁrmed critical water permeation through the relatively weak cross-linked network. The
inferior performances observed for all the BPF formulations are possibly designated the in-
hibitory lower cross-linking ability attributed to the base resin’s relatively low functionality.
Conversely, the EN formulations performed signiﬁcantly better, possibly due to the base
resin’s higher functionality, enhancing a stronger cross-linking network acting as a resisting
membrane restricting seawater permeation, however, blisters were still present. The incom-
patibility and entanglement issues are general deﬁciencies and inadequacies of implementing
silicone derivatives in the EN systems; however, the individual diﬀerences show a signiﬁcant
distinction in performance. The ECMS-227, DOWSIL 3074, and E-PDMS will all be dis-
cussed in comparison to the visually top-performing coating, DMS-EC17. The diﬀerences
between the raw materials yield diﬀerent properties, resulting in contrasting performances.
Both ECMS-227 and DMS-EC17 are comprised of a cycloaliphatic epoxy attached in the
PMDS structure; however, the EEW diﬀers signiﬁcantly. The EEW of ECMS-227 is 38
times larger than that of DMS-EC17 following table 11.2. A large EEW corresponds to a
lesser content of epoxy groups, which inevitably results in less integration and cross-linking
between the EN resin and the siloxane, as a limited amount of amine can react with the
inconsiderable number of epoxy sites on the siloxane. In addition to the fewer epoxy groups,
the cycloaliphatic content is also minor in the ECMS-227. The reduction of bulky groups
diminishes the thermal stability and the chemical resistance towards hydrocarbons and sea-
water. The two siloxanes are very similar in structure and properties; however, the minor
diﬀerentiation shown above is deﬁnitive, displayed by the outperforming material DMS-
EC17.
In contrast to DMS-EC17, the siloxane E-PDMS include terminated epoxy groups contrarily
to the terminated cycloaliphatic epoxy groups in DMS-EC17. In this comparison, two pa-
rameters have to be highlighted: ﬁrst, the terminated functional groups’ bulkiness. Second,
69
==PAGE:80==
Chapter 12. Results and Discussion
the value of EEW attributed the two siloxanes. In this case, the performance diﬀerence is not
too distinctive; however, slightly better performance is maintained for the EN/DMS-EC17
formulation. This might be ascribed to the bulky nature of the cycloaliphatic epoxy groups
in DMS-EC17. As previously emphasized, the side chains and functional groups’ bulkiness
is suggested to aﬀect the epoxy/siloxane hybrid coatings’ performance, as a denser resin
matrix with less free volume is obtained. Also, the presence of aliphatic rings is suggested
to provide thermal stability and increase the non-polar integrity of the resin matrix, possi-
bly enhancing the resistance towards seawater permeation. However, the EEW of E-PDMS
is signiﬁcantly lower in comparison to DMS-EC17. The lower EEW of E-PDMS suggests
considerably enhanced integration ability of the siloxane into the resin matrix due to the
large content of epoxy groups increasing the possibility of reacting with the amines. De-
spite the larger epoxy content of E-PDMS, a better performance is still observed for the
EN/DMS-EC17 formulation, which might be designated the presence of the cyclo aliphatic
epoxy groups providing a denser packing of the resin matrix restricting solvent ingress and
seawater permeation. However, underﬁlm corrosion and blisters are still observed in both
formulations.
The ﬁnal sample is Dowsil 3074, which presents the most inferior performance in conjunc-
tion with the sample with the most distinctive diﬀerence, as the sample does not contain
epoxy groups. Subsequently, 15% of the methyl groups have been replaced with methoxy,
which facilitates the suggestion of the methoxy groups remaining unreacted in the network.
The possibility of unreacted methoxy groups is plausible as entanglement, incompatibility,
and steric hindrance reduces the reaction rate and availability of the reactive sites (hydroxyl
groups) on the substrate and in the epoxy network. The unreacted methoxy groups have the
potential to diminish the thermal resistance in conjointment with reducing the Tg [67]. The
instability of methoxy is far greater than methyl groups, and the higher polarity suggests a
faster reaction rate concerning the hydrocarbon and the siloxane. Furthermore, the absence
of epoxy sites in Dowsil 3074 decreases the cross-linking compared to the remaining three
samples, which issues the reduction of barrier resistance regarding seawater permeation. The
EN/Dowsil 3074 is the sample exhibiting the most detrimental eﬀect from the hydrocarbon
interactions, as blistering and discoloration is prominent in the hydrocarbon phase suggest-
ing an interaction between the unreacted methoxy groups and the para-xylene. The seawater
phase’s performance showed similarities to the performances of DMS-EC17 and E-PDMS,
as small blisters are present and the underﬁlm corrosion with the red iron deposition has
emerged.
70
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 12. Results and Discussion
The culmination of phase 1 exhibited the requirement for further improvement and alter-
ation to remove the red iron deposit, eliminate the blisters and discoloration; however, three
samples displayed similar performances with almost no present defects in the hydrocarbon
phase. The three samples are designated after leading performance in the following manner.
DMS −EC17 > E −PDMS > ECMS −227
The additional work will progress with DMS-EC17 and the E-PDMS. As DMS-EC17 and
ECMS-227 share approximately the same features and structure, conclude in the preferred
selection of DMS-EC17 as the highest performing raw material. The further investigation of
E-PDMS is transpiring from the comparison between the bulkiness of the terminated groups
concerning the performance relating the signiﬁcance of the cycloaliphatic structure in the
sense of thermal stability, less free volume, and increasing the non-polar integrity of the
matrix.
12.3
Phase 2: Optimization and Development
The resistance properties towards aromatic solvents were enhanced for the EN/siloxane
hybrid systems compared to the investigation by Rajagopalan et al. [21] where a neat epoxy
novolac resin system was exposed to conditions of HPHT. Conversely, the integration of long-
chained siloxanes into the EN resin aﬀected the systems ability to withstand permeation of
seawater and supercritical CO2 in the seawater exposed zone similar to that of the neat EN
resin [21] but with larger blisters. For this reason the next stage of the experimental work
concerns optimization, alteration, and further development of the proposed formulations to
prevent and if possible eliminate the observed large blister formation and underﬁlm corrosion.
The following experimental work will be based on the groundwork from phase 1 with the base
formulation being the EN system and a mixture of MXDA and DEAPA adducts as the curing
agents again. This base formulation is combined with the high performing cycloaliphatic
epoxy terminated siloxane DMS-EC17 and the epoxy terminated siloxane E-PDMS. In order
to diminish or even eliminate the distinct degradation observed in the seawater exposed
zone of the EN/DMS-EC17 and EN/E-PDMS samples from phase 1, it is suggested to
include a short-chained amino functional silane. The introduction of the short-chained silane
should provide and enhance the adhesion between the substrate and the EN/siloxane hybrid
coating following the typical adhesion promotion mechanism illustrated previously in ﬁgure
71
==PAGE:82==
Chapter 12. Results and Discussion
6.1. Besides, the short-chain implies the ability of direct integration into the resin matrix,
promoting cross-linking and an even distribution of the silane within the polymer network.
The applied adhesion promoter in the new formulations is the already presented amino silane
abbreviated silanil 176. In the following chapters this constituent will be referred to as AP.
Subsequently, the three general concerns described for the long-chained siloxane in the form
of incompatibility, entanglement, and high ﬂexibility encouraged a new formulation with
the substitution of the long-chained siloxane species with a short-chained epoxy functional
silane (GPTMS) exhibiting similar properties when incorporated into the resin matrix. The
implementation of GPTMS should provide both cross-linking internally in the base system
and accommodate adhesion with the substrate due to the functional groups. Consequently,
the new formulation would display the contrast between long-chained and short-chained
silicon-derivatives. In accordance with Appendix B Screening Process the increasing
content of siloxane showed a deteriorating performance, indicating that the addition of a
silane would exceed the optimum amount of silicon derivative in the formulation.
As a
result the content of raw material is reduced to 2wt% to achieve even higher performance
capacity. The addition of an adhesion promoter has been applied extensively for toughening
coatings and is reported to be used in the range of 0.01-2wt% [44].
The optimized phase 2 coating formulations for the three raw materials are provided in table
12.4.
Table 12.4: 2. Phase formulations with the Epoxy novolac base system
Base resin
Curing Agent
Adhesion Promoter
Silicon Derivative
Epoxy Novolac
MXDA+DEAPA
2 wt% Silanil 176
2wt% E-PDMS
2 wt% DMS-EC17
2 wt% GPTMS
12.4
Results and Discussion
The results and ﬁndings from phase 2, which is now presented, originate from the conducted
characterization techniques:
• Optical inspections assessing the surface characteristics and topography is presented
through the application of DM and SEM-EDX.
• The analysis of ATR-FTIR provides examinations of changes in the functional groups
in the cross-linked resins.
72
==PAGE:83==
Chapter 12. Results and Discussion
• The mechanical properties are assessed by evaluations of Tg depressions for each of the
distinct HPHT exposure zones by application of DSC.
However, a purely visual inspection is presented to provide an overview of the defects seen
from the formulations of phase 2.
12.4.1
Visual Inspection
The simulated HPHT environment’s exposure resulted in three distinct zones corresponding
to the three HPHT phases equal to the outcome for phase 1 as shown in ﬁgure 12.7; however,
the formulation EN/GPTMS/AP is an exception.
Similar to the results of phase 1, the type of defects for the two binder systems EN/E-
PDMS/AP and EN/DMS-EC17/AP is equivalent; however, it should be emphasized that
the severity of the degradation is signiﬁcantly diminished. No surface changes were observed
for either system in the zone exposed to the gas phase, whereas a slight discoloration is noted
for the HC exposed zone. Lastly, when considering the SW zone, the two formulations EN/E-
PDMS/AP and EN/DMS-EC17/AP exhibit dissimilar performances. The EN/E-PDMS/AP
displays no defects as such; however, a distinct degradation is observed in the interfacial
sub-zone HC-SW between the HC and SW exposed zones by the prominent formation of
relatively large blisters. On the other hand, the coating sample EN/DMS-EC17/AP exhibits
only minor defects in the SW exposed zone by the presence of a few small blisters arbitrarily
placed. Besides, both of the two considered samples exhibit a very discrete red particulate
layer only deposited in the interfacial sub-zone HC-SW. In contrast, the new formulation
EN/GPTMS/AP containing both an amino and an epoxy functional silane exhibited an
outstanding performance in maintaining the structural integrity and withstanding the hostile
HPHT conditions. All the exposed zones remain intact and defect free; the only defect of
signiﬁcance is the minor discoloration observed in the interfacial subzone HC-SW. More
importantly, the underﬁlm corrosion at HC-SW subzone is eliminated following the visual
inspection.
73
==PAGE:84==
Chapter 12. Results and Discussion
(a) Unexposed EN/siloxane/AP and EN/silane/AP hybrid systems.
(b) Exposed EN/siloxane/AP and EN/silane/AP hybrid systems.
Figure 12.7: The formulated phase 2 hybrid coatings before and after exposure to the sim-
ulated HPHT conditions. Note the indication of the three HPHT zones, and the interfacial
sub-zone.
12.4.2
Digital Microscopy
Using the digital microscope it is possible to obtain high quality micrographs for the exposed
coating surfaces provided in the following ﬁgures 12.8, 12.9, 12.10.
The EN/E-PDMS/AP sample showed no degradation signs of signiﬁcance in the three HPHT
exposed zones disregarding micropores and surface defects designated to the manual appli-
cation step. However, the discussed microphase separation appears to be visible as evident
74
==PAGE:85==
Chapter 12. Results and Discussion
Figure 12.8: Digital micrographs for the three exposure zones after exposure to HPHT
conditions of the EN/E-PDMS/AP hybrid system.
microstructures and in-homogeneity is observed. Besides, in the interfacial sub-zone HC-
SW, the surface is partly covered by tiny red particulates conﬁrmed by Rajagopalan et al.
[21] to be iron oxide only in this sub-zone.
Figure 12.9: Digital micrographs for the three exposure zones after exposure to HPHT
conditions of the EN/DMS-EC17/AP hybrid system.
For the EN/DMS-EC17/AP hybrid system, the observed degradation is slightly similar.
However, some very small micropores and pinholes are present in the HC exposed zone.
75
==PAGE:86==
Chapter 12. Results and Discussion
Also, in the interfacial sub-zone HC-SW, red particulate depositions of iron oxide is present
at the surface in this particular sub-zone. Besides, the microphase separation is even more
distinct for this sample, despite the visually very smooth surface.
Figure 12.10: Digital micrographs for the three exposure zones after exposure to HPHT
conditions of the EN/GPTMS/AP hybrid system.
Conversely, the sample EN/GPTMS/AP exhibits superior performance in withstanding the
simulated HPHT environment in comparison to the two mentioned systems. All exposure
zones remain close to intact, disregarding some micropores. However, a mild discoloration
and a very discrete white/grey (conﬁrmed to be crystals of NaCl) layer is observed at the
coating surface in the interfacial sub-zone HC-SW. Besides, slight microphase separation
is visible for this formulated epoxy silane blend compared to the EN/DMS-EC17/AP and
EN/E-PDMS/AP systems.
For the purpose of conﬁrming of the elemental composition of the red colored particulates
observed in the interfacial subzones of the HPHT exposed samples elemental mapping was
utilized through application of the SEM-EDX characterization.
12.4.3
SEM-EDX Analysis
The observed surface imperfections and defects after HPHT exposure of the formulated
coatings were additionally analyzed and substantiated by application of SEM. Following
the SEM micrographs provided in ﬁgure 12.11, 12.13, and 12.15 the microphase separation
appear to be the predominant surface imperfection. Each of the HPHT exposure zones,
including the interfacial subzone HC-SW, for the EN/E-PDMS/AP sample are provided in
76
==PAGE:87==
Chapter 12. Results and Discussion
ﬁgure 12.11.
(a) Gas zone
(b) HC zone
(c) HC-SW subzone
(d) SW zone
Figure 12.11: SEM micrographs of each of the individual HPHT exposure zones including
the HC-SW subzone for the EN/E-PDMS/AP sample.
Accordingly, no degradation signs of signiﬁcance are present for the three HPHT exposure
zones; however, traces of the red particulates observed already in the digital micrographs
are present in the HC-SW subzone marked with a red circle. Conversely, the mentioned
microphase separation is distinct for each of the illustrated HPHT zones complementing
the DM results. In particular, the microphase separation appears to be dominant in the
boundary layers between the visually distinct pattern observed at the coating surface. This
tendency is particularly emphasized in the SEM micrographs 12.11a, 12.11b, 12.11d display-
ing a gradual reduction of the in-homogeneous microphase separation when approaching
the circular smooth homogeneous area of the coating completely intact. Beyond the SEM
micrographs, the elemental composition in the HC-SW subzone has been investigated using
EDX mapping as shown in ﬁgure 12.12.
In compliance with the elemental mapping, the red particulate discretely deposited on the
coating surface in the interfacial subzone is conﬁrmed to be iron oxide as expected accordingly
77
==PAGE:88==
Chapter 12. Results and Discussion
Figure 12.12: Elemental mapping (EDX) of the elements (Fe, C, O) in the interfacial subzone
HC-SW of EN/E-PDMS/AP hybrid system.
to the investigation of Rajagopalan et al. [21]. The red particulate is not visually seen,
however, trace elements of iron (Fe) were detected when the EDX analysis was performed
in the HC-SW subzone. The only iron source present under the described experimental
conditions is the steel substrate. This substantiates that underﬁlm corrosion has occurred,
conﬁrming penetration of seawater and CO2 towards the metal-coating interface facilitating
the anodic oxidation of iron to ferrous ions. However, the quantity of elemental iron present
at the coating surface is considered as trace elements emphasizing a substantially decelerated
degradation compared to the examination of neat EN resins [21].
Subsequently, the EN/DMS-EC17/AP system is considered as shown in ﬁgure 12.13.
Contrarily, to the E-PDMS siloxane sample, a few degrading tendencies are displayed in the
HC zone and the HC-SW subzone for the EN/DMS-EC17/AP resin. In the HC exposed
zone a few micropores and pinholes are distinctively present in the boundary layers between
the microphase separated bulk resin marked with blue circles. Moreover, the severity of
these micropores and pinholes is signiﬁcantly increased in the HC-SW interfacial subzone as
substantiated in ﬁgure 12.13c, conﬁrming the occurrence of a slightly accelerated degrada-
tion due to the synergistic eﬀects of the three HPHT phase combined with the extremity of
the environment. In contrast, the Gas and SW exposed zones remained completely intact
after HPHT exposure. Besides the observed degradation, the microphase separation is even
more distinct for this formulation complementary to the provided digital micrographs. To
substantiate the observed defects in the interfacial HC-SW subzone provided in the SEM mi-
78
==PAGE:89==
Chapter 12. Results and Discussion
(a) Gas zone
(b) HC zone
(c) HC-SW subzone
(d) SW zone
Figure 12.13: SEM micrographs of each of the individual HPHT exposure zones including
the HC-SW subzone for the EN/DMS-EC17/AP sample.
crographs, application of the EDX mapping was utilized again. The corresponding elemental
mappings are illustrated in ﬁgure 12.14.
Accordingly, the elemental mapping conﬁrms the presence of iron oxide at the coating surface
substantiating the occurrence of underﬁlm corrosion. Conversely, to the E-PDMS siloxane
coating, the severity of the iron oxide formation in this case is slightly increased verifying an
accelerated degradation and susceptibility of the synergistic eﬀects of the HPHT phases.
Lastly, SEM micrographs are provided for the EN/GPTMS/AP formulation as shown in
ﬁgure 12.15.
In conformity with the results, all of the examined HPHT exposure zones remained close
to intact. However, surface imperfections are present in the interfacial subzone HC-SW, as
shown in ﬁgure 12.15c. In contrast to the siloxane containing resin systems, a signiﬁcantly
better homogeneity is observed for this coating systems as no considerable microphase sepa-
ration is distinct. Likewise, elemental mapping was conducted to get a conﬁrmation on the
elemental composition of the interfacial HC-SW subzone. The EDX ﬁndings are illustrated
79
==PAGE:90==
Chapter 12. Results and Discussion
Figure 12.14: Elemental mapping (EDX) of the elements (Fe, C, O) in the interfacial subzone
HC-SW of EN/DMS-EC17/AP hybrid system.
in ﬁgure 12.16.
In compliance with the elemental mapping, traces of iron oxide are present at the coating sur-
face, conﬁrming that underﬁlm corrosion has occurred to a certain extent, contrarily to the
visual inspection. However, the amount of elemental iron is insigniﬁcantly small, which sub-
stantiates this coating system’s superior performance contrasted to the long-chained siloxane
coatings.
Conclusively the application of SEM-EDX highlighted and conﬁrmed the presence of under
ﬁlm corrosion by the formation of iron oxide present at the surface of the coatings in accor-
dance with the proposed degradation mechanism of Rajagopalan et al. [21]. In contrast, it
should be emphasized that the severity of the degradation observed in the distinctive HPHT
zones for the three silicon containing coatings is signiﬁcantly diminished compared to neat
EN and BPF systems.
In addition to the provided elemental mappings, the elements silicon and chlorine were also
detected in the interfacial HC-SW subzones. However, these remaining EDX results are
provided in Appendix C Phase 2: SEM-EDX.
80
==PAGE:91==
Chapter 12. Results and Discussion
(a) Gas zone
(b) HC zone
(c) HC-SW subzone
(d) SW zone
Figure 12.15: SEM micrographs of each of the individual HPHT exposure zones including
the HC-SW subzone for the EN/GPTMS/AP sample.
Figure 12.16: Elemental mapping (EDX) of the elements (Fe, C, O) in the interfacial subzone
HC-SW of EN/GPTMS/AP hybrid system.
81
==PAGE:92==
Chapter 12. Results and Discussion
12.4.4
ATR-FTIR Analysis
Diﬀerent ATR-FTIR analysis was conducted to investigate two diﬀerent interactions in the
silicon derivative and the modiﬁed epoxy network. Firstly, the aim is to conﬁrm the cross-
linking between the silicon derivative and the epoxy and display the substrate reaction with
the adhesion promoter. Secondly, unveil if chemical changes occur by analyzing an unexposed
sample to compare with each of the three distinct HPHT zones. Aiming to determine the
silicon derivative’s implementation, the spectra of an unexposed neat Novolac sample is
compared to the unexposed EN/GPTMS/AP sample as shown in ﬁgure 12.17.
Figure 12.17: Spectra of unexposed neat Novolac and unexposed EN/GPTMS/AP
Notably, the spectra are almost identical; however, the absorbance intensity diﬀers in four
distinct areas. Firstly, a slight increase is visible at 3350cm−1, due to the increase of amine
present in the AP. The observed increase at 2915-2850cm−1 is designated the increase of CH2
groups provided by the AP. However, the signiﬁcant diﬀerence originates from the Si-O-Si
bonds, which is the focal point of AP’s addition. The siloxane structure show one or more
powerful infrared bands in the region of 1130-1000 cm−1, which could be corresponding to the
increased intensity seen in this area. A similar tendency is shown with the increased intensity
in 1030 and 877cm−1, which is suggested to represent the strong peaks obtained from the
82
==PAGE:93==
Chapter 12. Results and Discussion
Si-O-Metal stretch related to the adhesion promotion mechanism [68]. However, it has to be
considered that the absorption bands for Si-alkoxy overlap the Si-O-Si absorption, resulting
in the concealment of the peak. These overlaps emphasize the diﬃculty of determining if
silicon derivative integration is in the epoxy matrix and as an adhesion promoter in the
thermoset.
The FTIR spectra of the EN/GPTMS/AP for all the exposed HPHT zones
are shown in ﬁgure 12.18 and a summarization of the distinct functional groups with the
respective absorption bands is shown in table 12.5. The majority of the bands transpire
from the EN cross-linked network.
It displays a broad stretching vibration of N–H and
O–H bonds ranging from 3600-3100 cm−1. CH3, CH2, and CH stretching originating from
the aromatic structure, the cycloaliphatic and the oxirane ring-opening corresponds to the
vibrations just under 3000 cm−1. The absorption peaks 1507 cm−1 and 1605cm−1 visible
are accredited to the double bonds from C=C stretches present in the benzene rings. The
absorption present at 1230cm−1 is allocated as a stretching vibration caused by the in-
plane deformation of C-O in phenolic groups.
The aliphatic C-O functional groups are
assigned to the band at 1033cm−1. The strong band at 810cm−1 were attributed to CH
bending occurring in the aromatic rings in the epoxy’s repeating unit. Concerning the curing
agents utilized, MXDA is represented by the band at 877cm−1 due to the CH stretching of
aromatic amine. Subsequently, a visible peak transpires after post-curing at 1740cm−1, which
is contributed from C=O stretching emerged as a terminated functional group in the EN
system under elevated temperatures due to thermal oxidation. Following the EN system’s
spectrum, no signiﬁcant change was observed associated with the three HPHT exposed zones
apart from an increase in the OH peak’s intensity at 3447cm−1 in the exposed zone containing
seawater. The increase of OH peak in the seawater zone was designated to the penetration
of seawater into the resin matrix. Except for the increased intensity associated with the
seawater penetration, no substantial change was discovered in the exposed sample implying
the coating has not sustained any substantial chemical degradation or changes, indicating
the predominant degradation is related to physical interactions. The three samples showed
the same tendencies with no signiﬁcant change in the exposed zones, except the OH group’s
increased absorbance intensity in the seawater zone. The two remaining IR spectra can be
seen in Appendix D Phase 2: ATR-FTIR.
83
==PAGE:94==
Chapter 12. Results and Discussion
Figure 12.18: FTIR spectrum of EN+GPTMS+AP system both unexposed and the three
distinct exposed zones
Table 12.5: Characteristic bands of the EN/GPTMS/AP system for both the unexposed
and exposed zones.
Resin System
Band (cm−1)
Assignment
Epoxy Novolac
DEAPA Curing Agent
MXDA Curing Agent
GPTMS
3600-3100
N-H stretching & O-H stretching
2915-2850
C-H stretching of CH2 and CH3 oxirane ring opening
1740
C-O stretching
1507, 1605
C=C stretching from the aromatic ring
1445
Ar-C=C-H vibrations
1235
C-O stretching
1110
C-N stretching, Si-O-Si stretching
1030
C-O-C stretching from ethers, Si-O-Si stretching, Si-O-Metal stretching
877
C-H stretching from aromatic amine, Si-O-Metal stretching
810
C-H bending vibration of aromatic ring
84
==PAGE:95==
Chapter 12. Results and Discussion
12.4.5
DSC Analysis
The DSC analysis was utilized, aiming to investigate the repercussions in the three distinct
exposed zones by measuring the heat ﬂow as a function of temperature. Through the DSC-
curve interpretation, the average Tg can be obtained. The three samples’ measured values
can be seen in the bar plot 12.19 with the error interval.
Figure 12.19: The average glass transition temperatures, Tg
, for the three systems.
Observing the bar plot, the average Tg for the unexposed samples were obtained to be 157,
158, and 145±3°C for GPTMS, E-PDMS, and DMS-EC17 respectively. The Tg values for
all the exposed samples remained very close to the initial values. The Tg values for the
gas phase exposed zone follows the same tendency obtained from the research conducted by
Rajagopalan et al. [21]. However, in contrast to that study, no signiﬁcant change is found in
the remaining zones, where great Tg depression was previously obtained. This preservation of
Tg indicates the diﬀusion of para-xylene has been limited, yielding a better resistance towards
softening and restricts the increase of free volume. The reduced diﬀusion is a veriﬁcation
that the small substitution of aromatic compounds is reducing the interaction between the
hydrocarbon and the epoxy network, resulting in a more stable and solvent resistant coating.
Subsequently, AP’s introduction has increased the cross-link density of the resin, which
further decreases the free volume, corresponding to more energy necessary to initiate the
chain motion. The Tg for the SW exposed zone is also maintained close to the initial. The
addition of silicon derivatives increases the more substantial barrier eﬀect related to seawater
permeation. Firstly, the initiation point has been limited due to the increased hydrocarbon
85
==PAGE:96==
Chapter 12. Results and Discussion
resistance. Further, the hydrophobicity and barrier eﬀect has been enhanced through several
attributes contributed by the Si-O bonds and the increased cross-link density concerning all
three samples. The backbone structure of PDMS is commonly used as a surfactant, which
suggests a reduction of the coating’s overall surface tension, thus creating a more water
repellent surface. Subsequently, the methyl groups are hydrophobic due to the non-polar
functionality. The Si-O provides a very stable and almost chemically inert bond due to the
large diﬀerence in electronegativity between Si and O. All the systems show minor reductions
in Tg for the exposed SW zone and EN/E-PDMS/AP and EN/DMS/AP show visual defects
in the SW zone, due to water penetration. The water penetration combined with FTIR
and the Tg analysis suggests that the degradation is primarily physical as no signiﬁcant Tg
depressions is obtained contrasted to the results of Rajagopalan et al. [21]. Furthermore,
the unexposed Tg values are comparatively larger for the silicon containing epoxy coatings
proposing a greater thermal stability. It has to be noted that the DSC analysis conducted is
on the unexposed and exposed samples and not a dynamic measurement illustrating the Tg
behavior throughout the exposure time. A dynamic measurement could visualize if the Tg
values decrease during exposure, revealing a downgrade of the coating during the extreme
conditions. If Tg increases again after exposure, the coating integrity will remain intact;
however, the durability may be aﬀected.
12.4.6
Discussion
In conformity with the results and ﬁnding of the conducted experimental work of phase 2,
the observed degradation of the three developed formulations is signiﬁcantly diminished if
compared to the results of phase 1. However, distinct defects such as blister formation and
underﬁlm corrosion are still present for the coating formulations containing the long-chained
siloxanes.
The EN/Siloxane Hybrid Coatings
For the EN/E-PDMS/AP resin, all the individual HPHT exposure zones are to a varying
degree intact, disregarding the mild discoloration observed in the hydrocarbon exposed area
due to slight resin para-xylene interactions.
On the other hand, a distinct formation of
blisters is present along with underﬁlm corrosion in the interfacial sub-zone HC-SW, as a
discrete layer of iron oxide is present on the surface of the coating, conﬁrming the penetration
of water and supercritical CO2 to the metal coating interface. The same tendency is observed
for the resin system EN/DMS-EC17/AP; however, blisters small in size has developed in the
86
==PAGE:97==
Chapter 12. Results and Discussion
seawater exposed zone contrary to EN/E-PDMS/AP resin. Moreover, the severity of the
degradation is signiﬁcantly diminished for the EN/DMS-EC17/AP resin when considering
the blister formation, which is to be discussed by assessing diﬀerent parameters. Firstly,
underﬁlm corrosion and iron oxide formation are distinct for both systems following the
mentioned degradation mechanisms proposed by Rajagopalan et al. [21]. The synergistic
eﬀects of the three HPHT phases degrade the coating systems in the interfacial sub-zone
HC-SW resulting in observed defects. Further, it might be anticipated that an increased
concentration of the supercritical CO2 is present in the interfacial sub-zone HC-SW due to
the diﬀusion diﬀerence CO2 in the two media. The high-pressure condition makes diﬀusion of
the supercritical CO2 into the hydrocarbon and seawater phases an inevitable phenomenon.
However, the higher diﬀusion resistance assigned the seawater phase enhances the possibil-
ity of building up a concentration gradient of supercritical CO2 in the interfacial sub-zone
HC-SW resulting in a more aggressive sub-environment creating ideal conditions for the un-
derﬁlm corrosion to occur [69]. The observed degradation is suggested physically rather than
chemically emphasized through the ATR-FTIR and DSC results, which strongly indicate no
change of the functional groups in the resins and no distinctive Tg depressions after exposure
to conditions of HPHT. Secondly, a signiﬁcant diﬀerence is observed concerning the blister
formation and positioning of the two siloxane containing resins. This is possibly ascribed to
the distinction of the functional groups in the two siloxanes, as the bulkiness of the polymer
segments/functional groups might inﬂuence the diﬀusion of the supercritical CO2 due to
less free volume in the resin matrix favoring DMS-EC17 to exhibit a better performance
owing to the cycloaliphatic epoxy groups [61]. Besides, the polymer segments and functional
groups’ bulkiness is expected to provide enhanced thermal stability, as the free volume is
less in the resin matrix, resulting in denser cross-linking density restricting chain motions of
the polymer side groups. Irrespective of the long-chained siloxanes and the implied features
of these, both of the considered formulations contain the amino-functional silane silanil 176
(AP) to further improve the resistance properties by the mechanism of adhesion promotion.
The introduction of the amino-functional silanil 176 is suggested to migrate towards the
substrate and follow the reactions: conversion of the alkoxysilane to silanol, condensation
forming the Si-O-Si linkage, hydrogen bonding with hydroxy groups of the substrate, and
ﬁnally the formation of covalent bonds between the substrate and the Si-O-Si linkage by the
liberation of water [2]. As a result, a dense Si-O-Si backbone is chemically bonded to the
substrate, enhancing the adhesion between the resin and substrate along with an increased
hydrophobicity due to the reduction of available hydroxy groups present on the substrate sur-
face. Hence, the seawater penetration’s driving force is anticipated to decrease substantially,
87
==PAGE:98==
Chapter 12. Results and Discussion
disregarding the high-pressure condition’s external inﬂuence. Beyond the adhesion promo-
tion aspects of the silanes, these short-chained constituents include the ability to strengthen
the already excellent cross-linking features attributed to high functionality epoxies by direct
integration into the resin matrix. Accordingly, an even distribution of Si-O-Si networks is
suggested to appear in the highly cross-linked resin providing the intended resistance char-
acteristics contrary to the presence of only an interfacial layer between the resin and the
substrate. Although incorporation mechanisms of silanes into resin systems are suggested
to proceed via a simple integration of linear chains, the condensation reaction enables the
possibility of obtaining branching reactions facilitating the formation of Si-O-Si networks,
enhancing the cross-linking density even more. However, scientiﬁc evidence conﬁrming the
existence of the adhesion promotion mechanism and direct integration into the bulk resin of
the silane silanil 176 (AP) have been complicated to substantiate, as emphasized through
the ATR-FTIR results. The absorption bands expected to distinguish the diﬀerent bond
formations occurring for the silicon atom conﬁrming the anticipated mechanisms are all ex-
pected in the absorption spectre 900-1200cm−1, with Si-O-Si being the prominent absorption
masking the other peaks of signiﬁcance Si-O-Metal and Si-O-C. Therefore, applications of
Si-NMR or C-NMR might be a prerequisite to evidently verify the existence of the expected
bond formations originating from the silicon atoms, indicating limitations of the ATR-FTIR
characterization for the intended purposes. The general ﬁndings for the siloxane containing
samples, was a signiﬁcant improvement for the hydrocarbon interaction and the underﬁlm
corrosion in relation to the discoveries obtained by Rajagopalan et al. [21] of a neat EN
system.
The EN/Silane hybrid coating
Conversely to the developed siloxane coating formulations, the new coating formulation
of phase 2 consisting of an amino-functional silane (AP) and an epoxy-functional silane
(GPTMS) exhibited superior performance in withstanding the HPHT environment in the
three distinctive exposure zones. Following the results of the conducted characterization
techniques, neither of these pinpoint any degradation signs of signiﬁcance, except the SEM-
EDX analysis.
This superior performance is assigned to the combined eﬀect of the two
applied multi-functional silanes. Considering the chemical structure of GPTMS, this short-
chained silane is epoxy-functional contrasted to the amino-functional silane (AP); however,
both of these silanes exhibit identical resistance characteristics when integrated into the bulk
resin despite the variation of the incorporation mechanisms. The functional group of the two
88
==PAGE:99==
Chapter 12. Results and Discussion
silanes is the prominent distinction point, as the epoxy functionality of the GPTMS silane
enables the property of reacting with the amine curing agents along with the free epoxy
groups of the novolac resin during post-curing, which is suggested to signiﬁcantly reinforce
the cross-linking density of the resin. In contrast, the amino functionality of silanil 176
(AP) implies the conventional amine epoxy cross-linking reactions facilitating the integration
into the resin’s bulk. Besides the ability of direct incorporation into the resin, the applied
silanes include the ability to function as an adhesion promoter following the mentioned
mechanism. Irrespective of the silanes’ possible reaction pathways, it should be emphasized
that the reaction kinetics of the proposed mechanisms remain unassessed, meaning this
aspect has to be evaluated to a certain extent to evidently substantiate the exact functioning
of functional silanes in amine cured epoxy resins. However, the multi-functional features
conjoined with the distinction of the two silanes’ epoxy and amino functionality is suggested
to be a key parameter for the superior performance of the EN/GPTMS/AP formulation. The
presence of these two silanes assigned two distinctive functionalities signiﬁcantly enhances
the incorporation and adhesion promotion mechanisms’ versatility. Thereby, an even and
more homogeneous distribution of the strong Si-O-Si network is anticipated to substantially
improving the cross-linking density and the resistance characteristics towards the HPHT
environment.
Short-chain vs long-chain
Following the results of phase 2, the formulation EN/GPTMS/AP performs superior in con-
trast to the two formulations containing the long-chained siloxanes. The key distinction
parameter in the comparative evaluation of the developed formulations is the chain length of
the silanes and the siloxanes. Accordingly, the most detrimental concern when considering
the performance in withstanding the extreme HPHT conditions is designated the ﬂexibility of
the long Si-O-Si backbone structure of the siloxanes. The high pressure condition constantly
acting as an external force on the coating system is suggested to be the decisive parameter
for the ﬂexible coatings durability as the pressure receptibility is considerably higher. The
synergistic eﬀects of the three HPHT phases combined with the high pressure condition dis-
plays the limitations of the ﬂexible properties associated with the long-chained siloxanes by
the formation of large blisters and underﬁlm corrosion in the interfacial subzone HC-SW and
seawater exposed zone for the two tested samples. Besides, the long-chained backbone of the
siloxanes restricts the adhesion promoter mechanisms owing to steric hindrance, entrapment
and the exclusion of alkoxy groups. Additionally, the cross-linking properties of the siloxanes
89
==PAGE:100==
Chapter 12. Results and Discussion
is suggested inferior contrasted to the application of silanes due to a diminished content of
functional groups limiting the possibility of enhancing the density of the cross-linking net-
work. A graphical illustration of the ﬂexibility issues designated the long-chained siloxanes
is provided in ﬁgure 12.20.
Figure 12.20: (a) Graphical illustration of the ﬂexibility issues assigned the siloxanes. (b)
Graphical illustration of the EN/GPTMS/AP sample.
Accordingly, to ﬁgure 12.20 (a), the siloxane containing coatings behave as a permeable mem-
brane due to the ﬂexible nature of the long molecular Si-O-Si chain allowing the diﬀusion of
seawater and supercritical CO2. After HPHT exposure and rapid gas decompression, small
seawater concentrations and CO2 are entrapped within the resin’s bulk, initiating the blister
formation. The release of pressure towards ambient conditions is the driving force for the
embedded seawater and CO2 for the reverse permeation; however, the long siloxane chains’
ﬂexibility facilitates the formation of blisters due to an increased swelling property. On the
other hand, a graphical illustration (b) of the epoxy silane hybrid is provided. Conversely,
to the siloxane coatings, the cross-linking and incorporation ability is signiﬁcantly enhanced
due to the versatile reaction mechanisms designated the silane yielding a much denser pack-
ing structure of the cross-linking network along with the capability of promoting adhesion.
Thereby, a close to impermeable cross-linking network is formed restricting the diﬀusion of
seawater and supercritical CO2 exhibiting superior performance in maintaining structural
integrity and withstanding the extreme HPHT conditions. This appoints the cross-linking
and integration ability to be principal parameters when considering silicon derivatives for
90
==PAGE:101==
Chapter 12. Results and Discussion
application under HPHT conditions.
Final Remarks
In essence, the two siloxane coatings exhibited improved performances in withstanding the
hydrocarbon interactions in the simulated HPHT environment in comparison to the inves-
tigation conducted by Rajagopalan et al. [21]; however, underﬁlm corrosion and formation
of blisters were prominent in the abbreviated subzone HC-SW due to the synergistic eﬀect
of the three HPHT phases combined with the extreme conditions of the environment. This
observed degradation behavior of the long-chained siloxane coatings is predominantly ap-
pointed to the long-chained Si-O-Si backbone’s ﬂexible nature, conﬁrming the limited appli-
cability of the long-chained and low functionality siloxanes for HPHT purposes. Conversely,
the formulated coating sample EN/GPTMS/AP exhibited superior performance in resisting
the individual HPHT phases contrasted the siloxane samples, and the study of Rajagopalan
et al. [21]. All HPHT exposure zones were intact, and the observed formation of blisters
were completely eliminated, however, traces of iron oxide was still observed conﬁrming the
occurrence of a signiﬁcantly decelerated underﬁlm corrosion. The excellent performance is
mainly designated the presence of two multi-functional silanes, signiﬁcantly increasing the
cross-linked network due to the versatile integration pathways attributed to the functional
groups’ distinction. Consequently, such a performance substantiates functional silanes’ ap-
plicability in protective coatings, which application area is within HPHT environments. In
relation to the results of phase 2, it is noteworthy how unpredictable the system is, due
to the complexity of the multiphased HPHT setup combined with silicon derivatives being
unexampled in HPHT conditions. Further, the RGD occurring after exposure promotes the
unpredictability of the system as the mechanical strength is highly challenged in this period
demanding additional accommodation. Further, the multiphased system requires contra-
dicting measures, as all variables are interlinked and pinpointing the critical parameter is
impossible. For instance hydrocarbon resistance is obtained by increasing polar groups and
seawater permeation is reduced by decreasing polar groups. These discrepancies complicates
the modiﬁcation process considering each alteration will be a compromise.
91
==PAGE:102==
13
|
Conclusion
This study has been conducted aiming to improve the corrosion resistance of amine cured
EN and BPF cross-linked networks towards HPHT conditions by modiﬁcation of the resin
system by incorporation of silicon derivatives. The ﬁrst phase of modiﬁcation was performed
by implementing four distinct siloxanes with varying concentrations into the EN and BPF
base systems, intending to deduce an optimum siloxane concentration. After HPHT expo-
sure, the EN- and BPF-siloxane hybrid coatings showed three distinct degradation zones,
corresponding to the three HPHT phases. Considering the BPF/siloxane hybrid coatings,
all the samples showed severe degradation signs in the SW and HC exposed zones as blisters,
underﬁlm corrosion, along with complete loss of adhesion was observed. The inferior perfor-
mance was designated to the low functionality of the BPF resin, aﬀecting the cross-linking
density. On the other hand, the EN/siloxane hybrid coatings exhibited signiﬁcantly better
performances; however, a clear distinction point was observed for siloxane content exceed-
ing 5 wt% showing signiﬁcantly worse performance. Moreover, the chemical structure and
distinction in functional groups evidently inﬂuenced the performance. Among the exam-
ined siloxanes, the formulations containing the epoxy terminated E-PDMS and the bulkier
cycloaliphatic epoxy siloxane DMS-EC17 was designated the top-performing coatings, irre-
spective of the observed defects, including slight underﬁlm corrosion and blister formation.
Contrary, the formulations, including the siloxanes ECMS-227 and the methoxy functional
Dowsil 3074, performed signiﬁcantly worse as the severity of defects was distinct. Following
the ﬁrst phase results, three general issues were anticipated to inﬂuence siloxanes’ appli-
cability for HPHT purposes. First, the ﬂexible nature of the long Si-O-Si chains, second,
the non-polar nature of the PDMS backbone aﬀecting incompatibility of the epoxy/siloxane
blends, third, the possibility of chemical entanglement of the long-chained Si-O-Si backbone.
Consequently, the second phase experiments revolved around the optimization aspects by ap-
plication of the short-chained silane silanil 176 (AP) into the two top-performing EN/siloxane
hybrid coatings (DMS-EC17 and E-PDMS) along with an entirely new formulation where
the silicon content originates only from the two short-chained silanes (AP and GPTMS). In
92
==PAGE:103==
Chapter 13. Conclusion
compliance with the results, the performance in resisting each of the three HPHT exposure
zones was signiﬁcantly enhanced for the EN/siloxane/AP coatings; however, degradation
was still prominent in the interfacial subzone HC-SW as slight underﬁlm corrosion, and blis-
ters formation was present. This inadequate performance was predominantly designated the
ﬂexibility properties attributed to the long-chained Si-O-Si backbone of the siloxanes sub-
stantiating the vulnerability towards the environment’s high-pressure condition. Conversely,
the new formulation, including two silanes, exhibited superior performance in withstanding
HPHT conditions. The individual HPHT exposure zones remained intact after exposure;
however, an insigniﬁcant discoloration was observed in the interfacial subzone HC-SW. In
this subzone, trace elements of iron were conﬁrmed at the coating’s surface, validating the
occurrence of slight underﬁlm corrosion. Irrespective of this observation, this formulation’s
superior performance was designated by the presence of two diﬀerent silanes. The distinc-
tion of the silanes functional groups was suggested to signiﬁcantly enhance the resin system’s
versatility with respect to integration mechanisms facilitating a denser packing structure of
the cross-linked network. Moreover, the short-chained structure combined with the alkoxy
functionality enabled the possibility of promoting adhesion and branching reactions, further
enhancing the resin’s cross-linking density. The silanes’ capability to enhance the resin’s
cross-linking density and the thermal, chemical, hydrophobic and solvent resistance features
of Si-O-Si networks were emphasized to be the principal justiﬁcation for the decelerated
degradation of the resin matrix. Conclusively, the silanes’ versatile integration abilities were
appointed to be a key parameter for the superior performance and durability obtained for
the developed EN/GPTMS/AP coating. Besides, it should be addressed that the conducted
characterizations and, in particular, the ATR-FTIR and DSC substantiated the observed
degradation to be physically controlled rather than chemical for the coating formulations of
the second phase. Lastly, to this end, this study’s results and ﬁndings evidently conﬁrmed
the applicability of functional silanes for HPHT purposes.
93
==PAGE:104==
14
|
Future Work
This study has provided knowledge and inspiration, contributing to future research and
laboratory modiﬁcation of silane/epoxy hybrid coatings for HPHT conditions. Several areas
are worth investigating; however, the most signiﬁcant areas concerning the present study are
presented below.
• One area for future work would be to test diﬀerent silane adhesion promoters. In-
vestigating both the functional group and the linker length of the raw material is of
interest. Substitution of the functional group or extending the chain length with a
cycloaliphatic epoxy could increase thermal stability. A varying linker length could
change the mobility and increase the compatibility in oriented applications.
• Another area for future research is implementing ﬁllers to provide enhanced physical
barrier properties. Furthermore, surface modiﬁcation by a suitable adhesion promoter
of the ﬁllers would decrease the hydrophilic surface while also improving the incorpo-
ration of Si-O-Si bonds in the bulk of the epoxy matrix.
• Implementation of the conventional constituents to obtain a full formulation of a
silane/epoxy hybrid coating and compare it to a commercially available product.
• Investigate a two coat system instead of a hybrid. The adhesion promotion property
of silane can be utilized and is applicable as a primer. After curing the primer, the
neat EN system can be applied as the topcoat to diminish the microphase separation
and have a more homogeneous two coat system.
94
==PAGE:105==
15
|
References
[1] Narayanan Rajagopalan, Claus E. Weinell, Kim Dam-Johansen, and Søren Kiil. Eﬀects
of HPHT Conditions on the Rate of Degradation of High Performance Epoxy Coatings.
AIChE, In AIChE Annual Meeting, 2019.
[2] Gerald L. Witucki. A Silane Primer: Chemistry and Applications of Alkoxy Silanes.
Federation Soc Coating TECH, In Journal of Coatings Technology, 65 (822) 57-60,
1993.
[3] Sina Ebnesajjad. Handbook of Adhesives and Surface Preparation. Elsevier inc., 2nd
edition, Chapter 15, pp. 369-386, 2011.
[4] Frank N. Jones, Mark E. Nichols, and Socrates Peter Pappas. Organic Coatings: Science
and Technology. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 4th edition, 2017.
[5] A. Goldschmidt and H. Streitberger. BASF Handbook on Basics of Coating Technology.
Vincentz Network, Chapter 2, 2003.
[6] Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration,
visited 6th November.
https://www.phmsa.dot.gov/sites/phmsa.dot.gov/files/docs/PHMSA_Failure_
Investigation_Report_Plains_Pipeline_LP_Line_901_Public.pdf.
[7] Big Oil Spill Along Refugio Coast, visited 6th November. https://www.independent.
com/2015/05/19/big-oil-spill-along-refugio-coast/.
[8] P. A. Sørensen, K. Dam-Johansen S. Kiil, and C. E. Weinell. Anticorrosive coatings: a
review. Springer New York LLC, In Jct Research, 6 (2) 135-176, 2009.
[9] Arash Shadravan and Mahmood Amani. HPHT 101: What Every Engineer or Geo-
scientist Should Know about High Pressure HighTemperature Wells. SPE Kuwait In-
ternational Petroleum Conference and Exhibition, Kuwait, December 10-12, Society of
Petroleum Engineers, 2012.
95
==PAGE:106==
Chapter 15. References
[10] M. Asakari, M. Aliofkhazraei, and S. Afroukhteh. A comprehensive review on internal
corrosion and cracking of oil and gas pipelines. Elsevier B.V., In Journal of Natural
Gas Science and Engineering, 71 102971, 2019.
[11] Tony Smithson. HPHT Wells. In Oilﬁelds Review, Schlumberger, 2016.
[12] H. B. Skeels. API 17TR8 - HPHT Design Guideline for Subsea Equipment. Oﬀshore
Technology Conference, Houston, Texas, US, May 5-8, Oﬀshore Technology Conference,
2014.
[13] Shell Appomattox, Gulf of Mexico’s ﬁrst HPHT program, receives BSEE approval, Vis-
ited June 9th.
https://www.worldoil.com/news/2019/7/30/shell-appomattox-gulf-of-
mexico-s-ﬁrst-hpht-program-receives-bsee-approval.
[14] G. Sward and J. V. Koleske. Paint and Coating Testing Manual - Fifteenth Edition
of the Gardner-Sward Handbook. ASTM International West Conshohocken PA, 15th
edition, Chapter 10, 2012.
[15] John S. Nakka. Tailoring of epoxy material properties. Ph.D Thesis, Mechanical, Mar-
itime and Materials Engineering, Technical University of Delft, 2010.
[16] Michael Dornbusch, Ulrich Christ, and Rob Rasing. Epoxy Resins. Vincentz Network,
Hanover, Germany, Chapter 1 and 2, 2016.
[17] Marianne Gilbert. Brydson’s Plastics Materials. Elsevier Inc., 8th edition, Chapter 27,
pp. 773-797, 2017.
[18] Clara D. Craver and Charles E. Carraher.
Applied Polymer Science 21st Century.
Elsevier, 1st edition, Chapter 21, pp. 393-425, 2000.
[19] Brahmadeo Dewprashad and E. J. Eisenbraun. Fundamentals of Epoxy Formulation.
Amer. Chemical Soc., In Journal of Chemical Education, 71 (4) 290-294, 1994.
[20] Sukanya Pradhan, Priyanka Pandey, Smita Mohanty, and Sanjay Kumar Nayak. In-
sight on the Chemistry of Epoxy and Its Curing for Coating Applications: A Detailed
Investigation and Future Perspectives.
Taylor and Francis Inc., In Polymer-Plastics
Technology and Engineering, 55 (8) 862-877, 2015.
[21] Narayanan Rajagopalan, Claus Erik Weinell, Kim-Dam Johansen, and Søren Kiil.
Degradation mechanisms of amine-cured epoxy novolac and bisphenol F resins under
96
==PAGE:107==
Chapter 15. References
conditions of high pressures and high temperatures. Technical University of Denmark,
Manuscript in progress, 2020.
[22] Matthew Jackson, Mukul Kaushik, Sergei Nazarenko, Steve Ward, Rob Maskell, and
Jeﬀrey Wiggins. Eﬀect of free volume hole-size onﬂuid ingress of glassy epoxy networks.
Polymer, 52 (20) 4528-4535, 2011.
[23] Joseph C. Salamone. The polymeric Materials Encyclopedia. CRC Press, Inc., 3 2233-
2238, US, 1996.
[24] Fan-Long Jin, Xiang Li, and Soo-Jin Park. Synthesis and application of epoxy resins:
A review. Elsevier, In Journal of Industrial and Engineering Chemistry, 29 1-11, 2015.
[25] Johannes Karl Fink. Reactive Polymers Fundamentals and Applications. Elsevier Inc.,
2nd edition, Chapter 3, pp. 139-199, 2013.
[26] Jonathan Clayden, Nick Greeves, and Warren Stuart.
Organic Chemistry.
Oxford
University Press, 2nd edition, 2012.
[27] Bruce L. Burton. Amine curing of epoxy resins: Options and key formulation consid-
erations. Huntsman Corp., In Paint and Coatings Industry, 22 (6) 68-77, 2006.
[28] James C. Moller, Rajiv J. Berrym, and Heather A. Foster. On the Nature of Epoxy
Resin Post-Curing. MDPI, In Polymers, 12 (2) 466, 2020.
[29] Epoxy Technology, Visited 16th August. http://www.epotek.com/site/ﬁles/Techtips/pdfs/tip23.pdf
[30] C. Gallant, B. Fayolle, and J. Verdu. Thermal and radio-oxidation of epoxy coatings.
Elsevier Science SA, In Progress in Organic Coatings, 69 (4) 322-329, 2010.
[31] P.Y. Le Gac, D. Choqueuse, M. Paris, G. Recher, C. Zimmer, and D. Melot. Durability
of polydicyclopentadiene under high temperature, highpressure and seawater (oﬀshore
oil production conditions). Elsevier SCI LTD, In Polymer Degradation and Stability,
98 (3) 809-817, 2013.
[32] Y. Zahra, F. Djouani, B. Fayolle, M. Kuntz, and J. Verdu. Thermo-oxidative aging of
epoxy coating systems. Elsevier Science SA, In Progress in Organic Coatings, 77 (2)
380-387, 2014.
[33] Ying Liu, Jiangwei Wang, Li Liu, Ying Li, and Fuhui Wang. Study of the failure mech-
anism of an epoxy coating system under highhydrostatic pressure. Pergamon-Elsevier
Science LTD, In Corrosion Science, 74 59-70, 2013.
97
==PAGE:108==
Chapter 15. References
[34] Srinath Subramaniant, Clara Pérez Hornero, Lars Thorslund Pedersen, and Søren Kiil.
Industrial Coatings at Extreme Conditions. 13th Coatings Science International Con-
ference, Conference paper, 2017.
[35] Jiabin Han, J. William Carey, and Jinsuo Zhang.
Eﬀect of debonded interfaces on
corrosion of mild steel composites in supercritical C02-saturated brines. National Assoc.
of Corrosion Engineers International, Corrosion 2011, Conference paper, 2011.
[36] Yuhua Dong and Datao Yu. Eﬀect of CO2 on Property of Anti-Corrosion of Epoxy
Coating. American Society of Civil Engineers, International Conference on Pipelines
and Trenchless Technology, 361 1561-1567, Conference paper, 2009.
[37] Brandi N. Clark, J. David McColskey, Ross Rentz, and Jeﬀrey W. Sowards. Preliminary
Results from the NIST Supercritical Carbon Dioxide Corrosion Test Facility. National
Assoc. of Corrosion Engineers International, In Nace - International Corrosion Confer-
ence Series, 4 2761-2772, 2017.
[38] Pierre R. Roberge. Corrosion Engineering Principles and Practice. McGraw-Hill Com-
panies, Inc., Chapter 2, 2008.
[39] Martin L. Kaplan. Solvent Penetration in Cured Epoxy Networks. SOC Plastics eng
inc., In Polymer Engineering and Science, 31 (10) 689-698, 1991.
[40] Yu-Shun Luo, Chiu-Ya Wang, Kuo-Chung Cheng, Tsu-Hwang Chuang, and Wenjeng
Guo. Permeabilities of solvents through epoxy membranes prepared via chemically in-
duced phase separation. In Desalination and Water Treatment, 34 (1-3) 272-276, 2011.
[41] Sharif Ahmad, A.P. Gupta, Eram Sharmin, Manawwer Alam, and S.K. Pandey. Syn-
thesis, characterization and development of high performance siloxane-modiﬁed epoxy
paints. Elsevier Science SA, In Progress in Organics Coatings, 54 (3) 248-255, 2005.
[42] Sharif Ahmad, S.M. Ashraf, Abul Hasnat, and Azeem Noor.
Studies on epoxidised
oil and its blend with polystyrene and poly(methyl methacrylate). NATL INST Science
Communication-NISCAIR, In Indian Journal of Chemical Technology, 8 (3) 176-180,
2001.
[43] T.V.
Thanikai
Velan
and
I.
Mohammed
Bilal.
Aliphatic
amine
cured
PDMS–epoxy interpenetrating network system for high performance engineering appli-
cations—Development and characterization. Indian Academy of Sciences, In Bulletin of
Materials Science, 23 (5) 425-429, 2000.
98
==PAGE:109==
Chapter 15. References
[44] Edward M. Petrie. Silanes as Primers and Adhesion Promoters for Metal Substrates.
Elsevier USA, In Metal Finishing, 105 (7-8) 85-93, 2007.
[45] Structure for the 3(3- GLYCIDOXYPROPYL)TRIMETHOXYSILANE, Visited 20th
October. https://www.gelest.com/product/SIG5840.0/.
[46] Gelest, Visited 24th August. https://www.gelest.com/product/ECMS-227/.
[47] Structure of (3-Aminopropyl)triethoxysilane, Visited 28th August.
https://www.
sigmaaldrich.com/catalog/product/aldrich/440140?lang=en&region=DK.
[48] Structure of PDMS, Visited 24th August. https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/catalog/
product/aldrich/480282?lang=en&region=DK.
[49] Peng Wang and Dale W. Schaefer. Why does Silane Enhance the Protective Properties
of Epoxy Films? American Chemical Society, In Langmuir, 24 (23) 13496-13501, 2008.
[50] Donald L. Pavia, Gary M. Lampman, George S. Kriz, and James R. Vyvyan. Introduc-
tion to Spectroscopy. Cengage Learning, 5th edition edition, Chapter 2 and 5, 2009.
[51] Theophile Theophanides. Infrared Spectroscopy - Materials Science, Engineering and
Technology. InTech, Chapter 13, Rijeka, Croatia, 2012.
[52] DSC Analysis – Fundamentals and Applications, Visited 26th August. https://www.mt.
com/int/en/home/library/on-demand-webinars/lab-analytical-instruments/
DSC_TA.html.
[53] Mariaenrica Frigione, Mariateresa Lettieri, Francesca Lionetto, and Leno Mascia. Ex-
perimental Cold-Cured Nanostructured Epoxy-Based Hybrid Formulations: Properties
and Durability Performance. MDPI, In Polymers, 12 (2) 476, 2020.
[54] Anidha Selvaraj, Latha Nachimuthu, and Muthukkumar Manickam.
Eﬀect of pol-
yaramid reinforced with sisal epoxy composites: Tensile, impact, ﬂexural and morpho-
logical properties. Elsevier, In Journal of Materials Research and Technology, 9 (4)
7947-7954, 2020.
[55] Gas
Chromatography
Mass
Spectrometry
(GC/MS)
Information,
Vis-
ited
26th
August.
https://www.thermofisher.com/dk/en/home/
industrial/mass-spectrometry/mass-spectrometry-learning-center/
gas-chromatography-mass-spectrometry-gc-ms-information.html.
99
==PAGE:110==
Chapter 15. References
[56] J. Romero, F. Ventura, and M. Gómez.
Characterization of paint samples used in
drinking water reservoirs: Identiﬁcation of endocrine disruptor compounds. Preston
Publications, In Journal of Chromatographic Science, 40 (4) 191-197, 2002.
[57] Rong Li. Barrier properties of epoxy coating systems under HPHT conditions. Technical
University of Denmark, Master Thesis, 2020.
[58] Structure for the Epoxy-cyclo-hexyl-ethyl terminated poly-dimethyl-siloxane, Visited 7th
October. https://www.gelest.com/product/DMS-EC17/.
[59] Represensative of the structure of the DOWSIL 3074 intermediate, Visited 7th October.
https://www.gelest.com/product/DMS-XM11/.
[60] R.M Hill. Specialist Surfactants: Chapter 6 - Siloxane Surfactant. Blackie Academic
and Professional in London, 1st edition, 1997.
[61] V. M. Shah, B. J. Hardy, and S. A. Stern. Solubility of Carbon Dioxide, Methane, and
Propane in Silicone Polymers: Eﬀect of Polymer Side Chains. In Journal of Polymer
Science Part B: Polymer Physics, 30 (10) 1185-1185, 1992.
[62] Barry Arkles.
Silanes and Surfaces:
Hydrophobicity, Hydrophilicity and Coupling
Agents. Gelest Inc., In Paint and Coating Industry, 22 (10) 114-135, 2006.
[63] Structure for the (N-(2-aminoethyl)-3-aminopropyl-trimethoxysilane),
Visited 30th
October.
https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/catalog/product/mm/819172?lang=en&
region=DK.
[64] Dae Sung kim, Young Ho Shin, and Youn-Woo Lee. Synthesis of terephthalic acid by
catalytic partial oxidation of p-xylene in supercritical carbon dioxide. Taylor and Francis
Ltd., In Chemical Engineering Communications, 202 (1) 78-84, 2015.
[65] Bo Li, Qianping Ran, Dewen Sun, Hao Yin, Yun Wan, Yuting Liu, Yonglin Mao,
and Jiaping Liu. Self-synthesized epoxy terminated polydimethylsiloxane with various
molecular weights toughening epoxy resin.
John Wiley and Sons Ltd, In Journal of
Vinyl and Additive Technology, 24 (3) 268-274, 2018.
[66] Pablo G. Debenedetti and R. C. Reid.
Diﬀusion and mass transfer in supercritical
ﬂuids. AMER INST CHEMICAL ENGINEERS, In Aiche Journal, 32 (12) 2034-2046,
1986.
100
==PAGE:111==
Chapter 15. References
[67] John J. La Scala, Greg Yandek, Jason Lamb, Craig M. Paquette, William S. Eck,
Valerie Adams, Dominika Lastovickova, and Joshua M. Sadler. The eﬀect of methyl
and methoxy substituents on dianilines for a thermosetting polyimide system. SAGE
Publications Ltd, In High Performance Polymers, 32 (7) 801-822, 2020.
[68] INFRARED
ANALYSIS
OF
ORGANOSILICON
COMPOUNDS,
Visited
27th
November.
https://www.gelest.com/wp-content/uploads/5000A_Section1_
InfraredAnalysis.pdf?fbclid=IwAR2B8YG0-MTrBhVTLQ1UdHSBIBA2DcvhKYxtTqLu_
zysXjEqPSELpHnDOL8.
[69] Narayanan Rajagopalan, Claus Erik Weinell, Kim-Dam Johansen, and Søren Kiil.
Degradation pathways of an amine-cured novolac resin under conditions of high-pressure
and high-temperature: The inﬂuence of supercritical CO2. Technical University of Den-
mark, Manuscript in progress, 2020.
101
==PAGE:112==
A
|
Appendix: Phase Interactions
Figure A.1: Mass spectrum for the para-xylene sample exposed to HPHT environment (E2).
102
==PAGE:113==
Appendix A. Appendix: Phase Interactions
Figure A.2: Mass spectrum for the para-xylene sample exposed to HPHT environment (E3).
Figure A.3: Mass spectrum for the para-xylene sample exposed to HPHT environment (E5).
103
==PAGE:114==
Appendix A. Appendix: Phase Interactions
Figure A.4: Chromatogram for the remaining environments E2, E3, and E5.
104
==PAGE:115==
B
|
Appendix: Screening Process
B.1
EN base
(a) Unexposed Epoxy Novolac with 5wt%, 10wt%, 15wt% and, 20wt% ECMS-227 from left to
right.
(b) Exposed Epoxy Novolac with 5wt%, 10wt%, 15wt% and, 20wt% ECMS-227 from left to right.
Figure B.1
105
==PAGE:116==
Appendix B. Appendix: Screening Process
(a) Unexposed Epoxy Novolac with 5wt%, 10wt%, 15wt% and, 20wt% Dowsil 3074 from left to
right.
(b) Exposed Epoxy Novolac with 5wt%, 10wt%, 15wt% and, 20wt% Dowsil 3074 from left to right.
Figure B.2
106
==PAGE:117==
Appendix B. Appendix: Screening Process
(a) Unexposed Epoxy Novolac with 5wt%, 10wt%, 15wt% and, 20wt% E-PDMS from left to right.
(b) Exposed Epoxy Novolac with 5wt%, 10wt%, 15wt% and, 20wt% E-PDMS from left to right.
Figure B.3
107
==PAGE:118==
Appendix B. Appendix: Screening Process
(a) Unexposed Epoxy Novolac with 5wt%, 10wt%, 15wt% and, 20wt% DMS-EC17 from left to
right.
(b) Exposed Epoxy Novolac with 5wt%, 10wt%, 15wt% and, 20wt% DMS-EC17 from left to right.
Figure B.4
108
==PAGE:119==
Appendix B. Appendix: Screening Process
B.2
BPF base
(a) Unexposed BPF with 5wt%, 10wt%, 15wt% and, 20wt% ECMS-227 from left to right.
(b) Exposed BPF with 5wt%, 10wt%, 15wt% and, 20wt% ECMS-227 from left to right.
Figure B.5
109
==PAGE:120==
Appendix B. Appendix: Screening Process
(a) Unexposed BPF with 5wt%, 10wt%, 15wt% and, 20wt% Dowsil 3074 from left to right.
(b) Exposed BPF with 5wt%, 10wt%, 15wt% and, 20wt% Dowsil 3074 from left to right.
Figure B.6
110
==PAGE:121==
Appendix B. Appendix: Screening Process
(a) Unexposed BPF with 5wt%, 10wt%, 15wt% and, 20wt% E-PDMS from left to right.
(b) Exposed BPF with 5wt%, 10wt%, 15wt% and, 20wt% E-PDMS from left to right.
Figure B.7
111
==PAGE:122==
Appendix B. Appendix: Screening Process
(a) Unexposed BPF with 5wt%, 10wt%, 15wt% and, 20wt% DMS-EC17 from left to right.
(b) Exposed BPF with 5wt%, 10wt%, 15wt% and, 20wt% DMS-EC17 from left to right.
Figure B.8
112
==PAGE:123==
C
|
Appendix: Phase 2: SEM-EDX
Figure C.1: Elemental mapping (EDX) of the elements (Fe, C, O, Si, Cl) in the interfacial
subzone HC-SW of EN/E-PDMS/AP hybrid system.
113
==PAGE:124==
Appendix C. Appendix: Phase 2: SEM-EDX
Figure C.2: Elemental mapping (EDX) of the elements (Fe, C, O, Si, Cl) in the interfacial
subzone HC-SW of EN/DMS-EC17/AP hybrid system.
Figure C.3: Elemental mapping (EDX) of the elements (Fe, C, O, Si) in the interfacial
subzone HC-SW of EN/GPTMS/AP hybrid system.
114
==PAGE:125==
D
|
Appendix: Phase 2: ATR-FTIR
Figure D.1
115
==PAGE:126==
Appendix D. Appendix: Phase 2: ATR-FTIR
Figure D.2
116
