==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Superconducting Screening Currents and
the Eﬀect of Multi-Filamentization
by
John J´akup Christensen - s154157
Supervisors:
Anders C. Wulﬀ(DTU Energy)
Andrea R. Insinga (DTU Energy)
Asger B. Abrahamsen (DTU Wind Energy)
Technical University of Denmark
MSc Thesis
Winter 2021
==PAGE:2==
1
ABSTRACT
1
Abstract
Superconducting magnet systems consisting of Rare-Earth Barium Copper Oxide (REBCO) coils
are being developed for use in the ultra-high ﬁeld range, with the largest ever direct-current magnet
of 45.5 T developed at National High Magnetic Field Lab (NHMFL) in 2019. However, screening
currents in coated conductors (CC) give rise to non-uniform Lorentz forces on the cables, resulting
in a twisting of the CC, yielding an excessive hoop stress. The result is signiﬁcant damage on the
CC manifesting as a wavy deformation along the tape edges. In this thesis, the eﬀect of multi-
ﬁlamentization of the superconducting layer in individual, uncoupled ﬁlaments is studied, in an
eﬀort to reduce the forces arising from the screening currents. By splitting the screening currents in
smaller loops, the forces are split in smaller segments as well, thus reducing the torque on the CC.
The study will be done by ﬁnite element analysis, where an electromagnetic model is developed to
obtain the screening currents and the Lorentz forces, and a mechanical model is developed in order
to calculate the stresses and strains experienced by the CC. Pancake stacks of 244 CC windings
are modeled, and the calculations are performed when ﬁlamentizing the superconducting layer in
up to 40 ﬁlaments, corresponding to a ﬁlament size of 100 µm. The electromagnetic model is built
on the T -A-formulation of electromagnetism, where the superconducting layer is modeled as an
inﬁnitely thin sheet. This eliminates a large number of degrees of freedom in the problem, thus
yielding fast simulations. The mechanical model is based on modeling the superconducting coils
as homogeneous bulks, where individual windings may not slip or separate from each other. Two
main conclusions were found in this study: 1) The superconducting screening currents and the
Lorentz forces arising from them can be modeled and calculated by using the T -A-formulation
of electromagnetism. The REBCO coil was modeled in an ultra-high magnetic ﬁeld setting, and
the results were continually veriﬁed against other analytical and numerical studies, which showed
similar results. 2) The maximum strain levels found in the REBCO coils were not reduced when
introducing multi-ﬁlamentization in the CC. The largest strain levels were found in the REBCO
pancake stack closest to the center plane, and these strain levels were not reduced when ﬁlamentizing.
The maximum strain levels found in the outer pancake stacks were not as large, and showed a slight
reduction when multi-ﬁlamentization was introduced. It is suspected that the mechanical model is
too simple to capture the eﬀect of multi-ﬁlamentization on the resulting maximum strain. For future
studies, a more elaborate mechanical model should be developed, which properly captures the eﬀect
of multi-ﬁlamentization.
Page 1 of 53
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Abstract
1
2
Introduction
2
3
Theory
5
3.1
Electromagnetism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Superconductivity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2.1
Properties of superconductors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2.1.1
Critical surface of superconductors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2.1.2
Modeling the critical current density of superconductors . . . . . . .
8
3.2.1.3
The superconducting E-J relation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2.2
Superconducting REBCO coils . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Structural mechanics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3.1
Mechanical stability in superconducting REBCO magnets . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4
Methodology
13
4.1
T-A formulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.2
Finite element modeling using the T-A formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.3
Mechanical model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.3.1
Material properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.4
Other modeling speciﬁcations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.5
Convergence tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.5.1
Mesh convergence
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.5.2
Boundary convergence test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5
Model veriﬁcation
22
5.1
Analytical solution for thin sheet superconductor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.1.1
Externally applied magnetic ﬁeld . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.1.2
Transport current
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.1.3
Eﬀect of exponent in E-J relation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.2
Comparing results with other simulation studies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6
Results and discussion
33
6.1
Electromagnetic proﬁles of ﬁlamentized REBCO coil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.2
Strain in small-scale ﬁlamentized system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.3
Strain in large-scale ﬁlamentized magnet system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.4
Detailed analysis of hoop strain and the eﬀect of multi-ﬁlamentization . . . . . . . .
39
==PAGE:4==
7
Conclusion
45
7.1
Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7.2
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
A Tensor calculus
51
B Modeling of critical current density
52
==PAGE:5==
2
INTRODUCTION
2
Introduction
Ultra high-ﬁeld (UHF) magnets have use in a variety of applications, such as nuclear magnetic res-
onance (NMR), mass spectrometers, particle accelerators, and fusion reactors. The magnets are
electromagnets, consisting either of resistive conductors or superconductors, depending on appli-
cation. With the on-going improvements in the development and fabrication of superconductors,
the strongest direct-current electromagnet ever was developed at the National High Magnetic Field
Lab (NHMFL) in Tallahassee, US in 2019 [1]. This record-breaking magnet consists of a 31.1 T
background ﬁeld created by resistive coils, with a 14.4 T insert coil consisting of high-temperature
superconducting (HTS) Rare-Earth Barium Copper Oxide (REBCO) material. The superconductor
used is a coated conductor (CC), which is a layered structure with a tape geometry. The record-
breaking magnet experienced a quench, which is when the superconductors abruptly transition to
a normal conducting state, due to a variety of reasons. In a post-mortem analysis of the magnet,
it was found that there was signiﬁcant damage on the superconductors. This has sparked interest
in detailed analyses of forces and strain experienced by the superconductors, speciﬁcally the forces
originating from the screening currents that are induced in superconductors. In a study by Hu et
al [2] the damages on high ﬁeld CC magnets were analyzed. The upper part of ﬁgure 1 shows the
plastic, wavy deformation on CC when the pancake coils are unwound after magnet testing. The
damage occurs especially on the edges of the CC, and the bottom part of ﬁgure 1 shows SEM images
of the damage on the REBCO layer of the CC. In the study by Hu et al it was concluded that the
key cause of these deformations were due to the overstress caused by screening currents.
REBCO
76.57 μm
Figure 1: Top) Wavy deformations of coated conductors (CC) used in REBCO magnet coils. Figure
from Hu et al [2]. Bottom) SEM image of the damage on the edges of the REBCO layer of CC.
Figure from Hahn et al [1].
The screening currents in superconducting tapes arise from the radial ﬁeld component, which is
stronger towards the edges of the magnet system. The CCs will shield against the radial ﬁeld, which
causes, in addition to the transport current, a current loop to form, where current is ﬂowing in one
direction at the top side of the tape, and the opposite direction at the bottom side of the tape. The
forces originating from these screening currents are illustrated in ﬁgure 2. On the left is the case
without screening currents, and the classical way of treating the hoop stress is σφ = JφBzr [3], where
Jφ is the circumferential current density, Bz is the axial magnetic ﬁeld, and r is the radius. However,
as shown on the right ﬁgure, the Lorentz forces originating from the shielding currents will act in
opposite directions, thus twisting the superconducting tape. The twisting will make the top side of
the tape deform even further radially outwards, which increases the hoop stress, and may lead to
damage as shown in ﬁgure 1.
A 2019 study by Xia et al [4] showed that neglecting the shielding current behavior results in a
signiﬁcant underestimation of local hoop stress in the superconductor. Another 2019 study by Li et
al [5] found that the non-uniform current distribution resulting from screening currents may introduce
a risk of overstressing the superconductor, and this may become an important issue for UHF NMR
magnets consisting of REBCO superconductors. Furthermore, a study by Kolb-Bond et al in 2020 [6]
concludes that it is necessary to include screening current strains in the design of all future high ﬁeld
Page 2 of 53
==PAGE:6==
2
INTRODUCTION
σϕ
x
x
ISC
FL
FL
-FL
IT
ISC
B
x
FL
IT
σϕ
Without screening currents
With screening currents
B
Figure 2: A sketch of the deformation of a REBCO coil with and without shielding currents. Without
shielding currents the CC is uniformly deformed, while with shielding currents, the top side of the
CC has a greater deformation, and thus a larger hoop stress.
REBCO coils. There are ways to reduce the screening currents in a REBCO coil. It has been shown
that multi-ﬁlamentizing the tapes, i.e. splitting them into uncoupled ﬁlaments, results in a reduced
eﬀect of screening current induced magnetic ﬁeld (SCIF) [7, 8, 9], and this study will investigate the
feasibility of using the same procedure to reduce the strain on the superconductors. The procedure
is shown in ﬁgure 3. The axially outer parts of a coil are subject to a radial ﬁeld, which causes
twisting of the CC. However, by ﬁlamentizing the superconductor, the forces acting on them, too,
are split into smaller pieces, which may eﬀectively cancel each other. A 2020 study by Yan et al
[10] showed that when considering a single winding of superconducting tape, the hoop strain on the
material was reduced when using multi-ﬁlamentized tape. To my knowledge, multi-ﬁlamentization
of a complete REBCO pancake stack consisting of many windings has not yet been studied.
In this study ﬁnite element modeling (FEM) will be used to model a superconducting magnet
systems. Modeling of superconductors using the commercial FEM software COMSOL Multiphysics
was done for the ﬁrst time by Hong et al in 2006 [11]. This was done using the H-formulation of
electromagnetism, where the magnetic ﬁeld, H, is the dependent variable. Since then, many other
formulations have been developed, among others the T -A formulation [12], which uses the current
vector potential, T , and the magnetic vector potential, A, as dependent variables. It simpliﬁes the
calculations by modeling the superconducting layer of CC as an inﬁnitely thin sheet, thereby solving
the issue of the very large aspect ratio of CC, and reduces the degrees of freedom of the problem.
This method has gained popularity, owing to its eﬃciency when solving large HTS systems, and has
been used extensively to analyse screening currents and the forces acting on large REBCO magnets
[6, 9, 10, 13]. In this study a simpliﬁed version of a fully superconducting 32 T magnet developed at
NHMFL will be modeled [14, 15]. The simpliﬁed magnet system consists of a single REBCO insert
coil and two low-temperature superconductor (LTS) outsert coils, providing a total ﬁeld of 26 T.
The T -A formulation will be employed to make eﬃcient calculations of individual CC windings in
order to obtain the magnetic ﬁeld, current proﬁles (screening current and transport current), and
the resulting Lorentz forces on the CC. A mechanical model will be employed in order to ﬁnd the
subsequent stresses and strains on the superconductors and the following hypotheses will be tested:
1. The superconducting screening currents and the forces that act on a REBCO coil operating
in ultra-high magnetic ﬁelds, can be modeled and calculated by use of the T -A formulation of
electromagnetism.
2. The maximum strain levels in superconducting REBCO coils can be reduced by introducing
ﬁlamentization of the coated conductors.
Page 3 of 53
==PAGE:7==
2
INTRODUCTION
z
x
non-filamentized
filamentized
B
Br
Bz
Shielding currents
B
f
f
f
x
f
x
f
x
f
x
f
x
f
x
f
f
f
f
f
x
f
x
f
x
f
x
f
x
f
x
Figure 3: A CC in a REBCO coil will experience a radial ﬁeld which induces shielding currents
running in opposite directions at either side of the CC. This will create a Lorentz force which twists
the tape. By ﬁlamenting the CC (splitting the superconductor in smaller ﬁlaments), the forces will
be more evenly distributed, thus reducing the torque.
In order to test these hypotheses, it is important that the model is continually tested and veriﬁed
against reference studies. First, the electromagnetic properties of a thin superconducting sheet will
be compared to the analytical results found by Zeldov et al [16]. The magnetic ﬁeld, current proﬁles
and Lorentz forces in the modeled REBCO coil system are then compared to the results found by
Xia et al [4], and lastly the local hoop strain in a single CC winding is compared to the results found
by Yan et al [10].
This study will not include a discussion regarding the ﬁlamentization process, and it will be assumed
that the overall performance of a CC will not be aﬀected by multi-ﬁlamentization. Furthermore, it
is assumed that the ﬁlaments are decoupled, such that there will not be induced currents between
ﬁlaments.
A simple built-in COMSOL Multiphysics mechanical model is used, which treats the
CCs as a bulk material, and does not take separation of windings into account. The CC will be
modeled as an isotropic material, with a Young’s modulus obtained from uniaxial tensile tests made
on REBCO CC [15]. Lastly, a stainless steel co-winding is included in this isotropic material, and
the Young’s modulus will be increased correspondingly per a weighted average.
Page 4 of 53
==PAGE:8==
3
THEORY
3
Theory
Modeling the mechanical stresses and strains in superconducting magnet systems requires a theoret-
ical understanding in the ﬁelds of electromagnetism, superconductivity, and structural mechanics.
This section will cover the theory needed to implement the models that will be developed in this
study.
3.1
Electromagnetism
The theory of electromagnetism is deﬁned by Maxwell’s equations [17]:
∇· E
=
ρ
ϵ0
,
(Gauss’ Law)
∇× E
=
−∂B
∂t ,
(Faraday’s Law)
∇· B
=
0,
(Gauss’ Law for magnetism)
∇× H
=
J + ϵ0
∂E
∂t ,
(Amp`ere’s Law)
(1)
where E is the electric ﬁeld, ρ is electric charge density, B is the magnetic ﬂux density, H is the
magnetic ﬁeld, J is the current density, and ϵ0 = 8.854·10−12 F/m is the vacuum permittivity. Bold
symbols represent vector quantities. For the purpose of this study the electric polarization, P , does
not need to be included. The magnetic ﬂux density and magnetic ﬁeld are related by
H = 1
µ0
B −M,
(2)
where M is the magnetization, and µ0 = 4π · 10−7 Tm/A is the vacuum permeability. The force
acting on a medium carrying a current in a magnetic ﬁeld is the Lorentz force,
f = J × B,
(3)
where f is a body force in units [N/m3].
3.2
Superconductivity
Superconductivity was ﬁrst observed in mercury in 1911 by the low-temperature physics pioneer
Heike Kamerlingh Onnes [18, 19], who also was the ﬁrst to liquefy helium, enabling him to investi-
gate the electric conductivity of metals at close to the zero-point temperature. He observed that the
electrical resistivity of mercury suddenly vanished in the space of some hundredths of a degree. This
transition temperature is called the critical temperature, and is a deﬁning feature of a superconduc-
tor. Later on, in 1933, a second deﬁning feature of a superconductor was discovered by Meissner and
Ochsenfeld [20], which was the expulsion of the internal magnetic ﬁeld in the medium, even though
the magnetic ﬁeld existed before the medium passed below the critical temperature. This means
that a superconductor has perfect diamagnetism, i.e. the magnetic susceptibility χ = −1. It was not
until 1957, with the development of BCS theory, named after its developers, Bardeen, Cooper, and
Schrieﬀer [21], that a theoretical understanding of superconductivity was obtained. BCS theory is a
quantum mechanical theory based on a coupling between electrons which makes them condense into
bosonic pairs called Cooper pairs, which allows them to travel through the medium without loss.
Explaining this theory, however, is beyond the scope of this report, and will not be covered further.
In 1986 the ﬁrst HTS was discovered in ceramic Ba-La-Cu-O, where a critical temperature of 30
K was observed [22]. The following years many new HTS were discovered, and notably, in 1987,
Page 5 of 53
==PAGE:9==
3
THEORY
superconductivity was observed in Y-Ba-Cu-O, with a transition temperature of 93 K [23]. This
meant that superconductivity could now be observed in materials cooled by liquid nitrogen, which
is more easily achievable than using e.g.
liquid helium.
A full theoretical understanding of the
mechanisms behind HTS is not yet developed, as BCS theory does not predict superconductivity in
ceramic cuprates, such as REBCO.
3.2.1
Properties of superconductors
Superconductivity can be looked at as a ground-state for many materials, since it is the state that
they are found to be in at low temperatures. In many of the materials that exhibit superconductivity,
the state breaks down too easily for technological applications. Research in superconductivity and
the search for new superconducting materials has led to many superconductors that are ﬁt for a wide
range of technological applications. The performance of a superconductor can be characterized by
three parameters:
• The maximum magnetic ﬁeld, Bc, that can be applied while the material maintains supercon-
ductivity.
• The transition temperature, Tc, below which the material is superconducting.
• The maximum current density, Jc, that can pass through the medium.
In reality there is not a single value for each of these parameters, but instead they are a function
of the other parameters. Here follows an overview of the mechanics behind these parameters, and
what they mean.
3.2.1.1
Critical surface of superconductors
Superconductors are grouped in two types, with the diﬀerence being how they respond to an applied
magnetic ﬁeld [19, 24]. When a magnetic ﬁeld is applied to a superconductor, the medium will form
supercurrents which repel the outside ﬁeld. The result is a superconductor with zero ﬁeld inside of
it. This is called the Meissner eﬀect. The superconductor is in the Meissner phase, and will remain
in this phase in suﬃciently low applied ﬁelds. As the ﬁeld increases, so do the currents inside the
superconductor, which maintain the Meissner phase. At a certain point the applied ﬁeld will reach a
critical ﬁeld Bc1, where the superconductor no longer can expel all of it. In a type-I superconductor,
superconductivity will break down at this critical ﬁeld, but in type-II superconductors, a discrete
amount of magnetic ﬂux will be allowed to penetrate the medium deﬁned as
Φ0 = h
2e,
(4)
where h is Planck’s constant and e is the electronic charge. These ﬂux quanta appear as ﬂux vortices
in the superconductor, which result in a local break-down of superconductivity, but on a larger scale
superconductivity is maintained, albeit in a diminished manner. This is called the mixed phase of
the material. At an upper critical applied magnetic ﬁeld, Bc2, the whole medium will be occupied
with penetrating ﬂux quanta, and superconductivity will break down fully. Figure 4(a) shows a
critical surface formed by the critical magnetic ﬁeld, Bc2, as well as critical temperature and current
density, under which superconductivity is maintained.
Another critical parameter in ﬁgure 4(a) is the temperature. At low temperatures electrons will
bond together in pairs, which gives rise to superconductivity. As the thermal energy in the medium
increases, thermal ﬂuctuations will begin to break up these electron pairs, which will suppress su-
perconductivity. There is therefore a critical transition temperature, Tc, above which the thermal
excitations are too strong for superconductivity to form.
Page 6 of 53
==PAGE:10==
3
THEORY
(a)
Jc
E0
J
E
(b)
Figure 4: a) The critical surface for a superconductor. The medium is in the superconducting state
given that the temperature, current density, and magnetic ﬁeld are below the critical parameters,
given by the surface. b) A sketch of the E-J characteristics of a superconductor. E0 is a criterion
deﬁned as 1 µV/cm, which deﬁnes where the critical current density is found. Figure recreated from
[24].
The last critical parameter is the critical current density, Jc, above which superconductivity breaks
down. Type-II superconductors in the mixed phase (i.e. the existence of penetrating ﬂux vortices
in the medium) will experience a dissipation of energy if the force from the supercurrents makes the
vortices move. The Lorentz force on a vortex can be expressed per unit length as
f = Js × Φ0,
(5)
and if not negated, will start to move the ﬂux vortices sideways, which will cause a dissipation
of energy, since the superconductor eﬀectively will behave as a normally conducting material. In
order to stop the ﬂux vortices from being moved, ﬂux pinning sites are introduced as defects in
the material. A defect will have a reduced density (or none at all) of superconducting electrons,
such that less energy is required to penetrate the material at that location. The defects may be
nano-particles, or nano-rods, which allow the ﬂux quantum to penetrate the material at the cost
of as few superconducting electrons as possible. If the ﬂux pinning force is larger than the Lorentz
force working on the ﬂux quantum, the ﬂux vortex will remain in place. Superconductors with these
pinning sites are referred to as hard superconductors, and the development of more advanced pinning
sites, allowing for greater critical currents, are of great interest in high magnetic ﬁeld physics [25].
For some superconductors, the critical current density depends not only on the applied magnetic ﬁeld,
but also the orientation of the ﬁeld. One such material is YBCO, which consists of an orthorhombic
layered crystal structure where superconductivity lives in thin CuO2 layers. This is a very anisotropic
material with eﬀective masses depending on crystallographic direction, meaning the critical magnetic
ﬁeld will be diﬀerent for parallel and perpendicular directions, where parallel (perpendicular) is the
crystallographic a, b (c)-directions.
Page 7 of 53
==PAGE:11==
3
THEORY
-W/2
B(x)
+Jc
Ba
W/2
-Jc
(a)
x
x
x
x
x
x
-W/2
B(x)
Ba = B*
W/2
+Jc
-Jc
(b)
-W/2
B(x)
W/2
+Jc
-Jc
(c)
Ba > B*
Figure 5: Bean model describing the magnetic ﬁeld and current ﬂowing in a superconducting slab.
Figure recreated from [24].
3.2.1.2
Modeling the critical current density of superconductors
The critical current density of a superconductor depends on the applied magnetic ﬁeld and tempera-
ture. When using superconductors for e.g. electromagnets, the ﬁelds will often not be homogeneous,
and additionally eﬀects like ﬁeld ﬂuctuations and ﬁeld distortions due to screening currents make
the applied ﬁeld diﬃcult to include precisely. This, combined with a possible changing local tem-
perature, makes the critical current density a diﬃcult quantity to model. A simpliﬁed model for the
current density was developed by Bean in 1962, where the current running in a superconductor is
either equal to Jc or zero [24, 26]. When considering an inﬁnite superconducting slab in an applied
magnetic ﬁeld, the ﬁeld decreases linearly into the superconductor, with Jc =
∂H
∂x . The current
and magnetic ﬁelds from the Bean model are shown in ﬁgure 5 for three cases: (a) a small applied
magnetic ﬁeld, Ba, (b) a fully penetrating magnetic ﬁeld, Ba = B∗, and (c) an applied ﬁeld larger
than the fully penetrating ﬁeld, Ba > B∗. For case (a) a constant current, Jc, will run in opposite
directions at the edges of the superconductor in the region where the magnetic ﬁeld is penetrating.
For case (b) the magnetic ﬁeld has penetrated all the way to the center of the superconductor, and
the current will run throughout the superconductor, with opposite signs on either half. In case (c)
the fully penetrating ﬁeld B∗is exceeded. In this case, the magnetic ﬁeld inside the superconductor
will uniformly grow, but the current proﬁle will remain unchanged.
While the Bean model is a simple model, it does give insight in how and where the currents are
running inside a superconductor in an applied ﬁeld.
An extension of Bean’s model is the Kim-
Anderson model, which models the ﬁeld dependence of the critical current as [24]
Jc(B) =
Jc0
1 + B/B0
.
(6)
This simple extension captures the reduction of the critical current as a function of the ﬁeld. In this
study a modiﬁcation of the Kim-Anderson model is used, where the directional components of the
Page 8 of 53
==PAGE:12==
3
THEORY
magnetic ﬁeld penalize the critical current density diﬀerently [13]
Jc(B) =
Jc0

1 +
√
k2B2
z+B2
r
B0
α .
(7)
It captures an angular dependency through the ﬁtting parameter, k, assuming a constant dependency
ratio between the components of the magnetic ﬁeld. The rate of drop-oﬀof the critical current density
for increasing ﬁeld is characterized by the ﬁtting parameters B0 and α. A temperature scaling is
not implemented as the ﬁtting parameters are based on experimental data at 4.2 K, and the system
which will be modeled in this study is also assumed to be running at 4.2 K.
3.2.1.3
The superconducting E-J relation
A useful and well-known method for modeling superconductivity is through the electric ﬁeld-current
density (E-J) relation,
E = E0
J
Jc
|J|
Jc
n−1
,
(8)
where E0 = 1µV/cm is an electric ﬁeld criterion and n is a parameter determining the non-linearity of
the superconductor-normal conductor transition. For n = 1, this relation becomes the linear Ohm’s
law, and for n →∞the E-J relation gives Bean’s model, i.e. the current is either zero or running
in a critical state. A superconductor E-J behavior is shown in ﬁgure 4(b), where the curve initially
is ﬂat, indicating low resistivity, but becomes very steep around Jc, where the superconducting-
normal conducting transition occurs.
After this the curve becomes linear again indicating that
superconductivity has broken down, and thus the medium has returned to the linear ohmic E-J
relation. However, this is not included in the E-J relation, equation (8), which only described the
superconducting region.
3.2.2
Superconducting REBCO coils
A primary use of superconductivity is in cables for superconducting electromagnets. Magnets used in
particle accelerators, NMR/MRI, fusion reactors, etc, may consist of kilometers of superconducting
cables, wound up in a coil to produce strong magnetic ﬁelds inside the bore of the coil. Traditionally
these magnets have consisted (and still do) of LTS cable such as NbTi or Nb3Sn. These are the
only materials that have so far reached a stage of industrially produced commercial product and
are cheap to fabricate compared to other HTS materials [27].
However these LTS are not very
suitable for magnetic ﬁelds above 10 T for NbTi and 20 T for Nb3Sn, due to the sharp drop-oﬀin
the critical current density for increasing ﬁelds [24, 28]. Above these magnetic ﬁelds REBCO CC
are promising owing to the advances in performance and fabrication technology, enabling very high
operating magnetic ﬁelds at reduced costs [27].
A challenge with CC lies in their tape geometry, which is shown in ﬁgure 6. Note that the speciﬁc CC
dimensions shown in the ﬁgure are not the same as is used in this study. The total thickness of the CC
used in this study is 155 µm, with the superconducting REBCO layer being only about 1 µm thick.
The geometry is central to the fabrication of CC, since the REBCO layer is a thin crystal structure
grown on top of a series of buﬀer-layers, which again are grown on top of a Hastelloy substrate. The
challenge is that a magnetic ﬁeld perpendicular to the wide face of the superconductor will have the
superconductor generating a shielding current which expels the ﬁeld. When combining the shielding
currents with the transport current running through the superconductor, this gives rise to Lorentz
forces pushing the tape in opposite directions at either end, resulting in a twisting of the tape, as
was illustrated in ﬁgure 2. This scenario is the case in REBCO coils, where the ends of the coil are
subject to a large radial component of the magnetic ﬁeld. The classical hoop stress is obtained by
considering each turn in the coil as acting independently, and it is given locally by σφ = JφBzr [3].
Page 9 of 53
==PAGE:13==
3
THEORY
This, however, may result in a signiﬁcant underestimation of the stresses experienced by the magnet
for reasons explained above [4].
Figure 6: 2G CC from SuperPower, inc. [29]. A layered structure is used in order to grow a very
well-aligned crystal layer of REBCO superconductor.
3.3
Structural mechanics
In order to model how a CC used in an electromagnet will respond to the magnetic forces it ex-
periences, the stress/strain relationship of the CC will be investigated. A force acting on a body
will make that body undergo stress. There are nine diﬀerent components of stress, which make
up a geometric object called the stress tensor [30, 31]. The stress tensor consists of stress in three
directions for every face of the body. The stress tensor in cylindrical coordinates can be written in
form of a matrix
σ =



σrr
σrφ
σrz
σφr
σφφ
σφz
σzr
σzφ
σzz


,
(9)
while the inﬁnitesimal force, dF, on a surface element with normal vector, n, ndS = dS can be
written
dF = σ · dS.
(10)
When materials undergo stress, it will become deformed, with the deformation deﬁned through the
displacement ﬁeld, u. The way materials respond to deformation depends on the kind of material,
as well as the magnitude of the deformation. Elastic deformations will return back to their previous
setting after a force has been removed, while plastic deformations will remain even after the force
has been removed. The relative deformation of the material is called strain. The strain tensor, ϵ, is
deﬁned through the displacement ﬁeld as
ϵ = 1
2
 ∇u + ∇uT 
,
(11)
where u is the displacement ﬁeld consisting of the radial and axial displacements, u and w. The T
signiﬁes the transposed gradient of the displacement ﬁeld.
For small applied forces, the deformation is well approximated as linear, and will be governed by
Hooke’s law, which states that a force, F, will yield a deformation, r, with the proportionality
Page 10 of 53
==PAGE:14==
3
THEORY
constant, k, also known as the spring constant. In 1D Hooke’s Law reads
F = kr.
(12)
When the applied forces become larger, the deformation may become plastic, and the relationship will
divert from the linear regime. Assuming an isotropic, homogeneous material, i.e. all orientations of
the materials are equivalent, Hooke’s Law may be expressed in terms of the stress and strain tensors
as
σij = 2µϵij + λδij
X
k
ϵkk,
(13)
where i, j, k ∈r, φ, z. λ and µ are Lam´e coeﬃcients related to the Young’s modulus, E, and Poisson’s
ratio, ν, through
E = µ3λ + 2µ
λ + µ ,
ν =
λ
2(λ + µ).
(14)
Young’s modulus expresses how resistant a material is towards deformation under an applied force,
and Poisson’s ratio expresses how the material is contracted or expanded in directions transverse
to an applied force.
Forces that compress a material are referred to as compressive forces, and
conversely, tensile forces are the forces that stretch a material.
Equations (11), (13), together with the equilibrium equations,
∇· σ + f = 0,
(15)
form the governing equations for the linear elastic problem. Taking the divergence in equation (15),
the equations in cylindrical coordinates become
∂σrr
∂r
+ 1
r
∂σrφ
∂φ
+ ∂σrz
∂z
+ 1
r (σrr −σφφ) + fr = 0,
∂σφr
∂r
+ 1
r
∂σφφ
∂φ
+ ∂σφz
∂z
+ 1
r (σrφ + σφr) + fφ = 0,
∂σzr
∂r
+ 1
r
∂σzφ
∂φ
+ ∂σzz
∂z
+ 1
r σzr + fz = 0.
(16)
A note on tensor divergences and gradients in cylindrical coordinates is found in Appendix A. For
a system with cylindrical symmetry, there will be no forces in the φ direction, meaning the second
equation disappears, and all derivatives w.r.t φ are zero,
∂σrr
∂r
+ ∂σrz
∂z
+ 1
r (σrr −σφφ) + fr = 0,
∂σzr
∂r
+ ∂σzz
∂z
+ 1
r σzr + fz = 0.
(17)
Furthermore, equation (11) becomes in cylindrical symmetry (all terms related to deformations in φ
directions, and derivatives w.r.t φ yield zero)
ϵrr = ∂u
∂r ,
ϵφφ = u
r ,
ϵzz = ∂w
∂z ,
ϵzr = ∂u
∂z + ∂w
∂r ,
(18)
The four strain components are sketched in ﬁgure 7 and are called radial, hoop, axial, and the zr
component. The last one is a shear strain, resulting from radial forces on the z-face of the material.
When dealing with CCs, which is a very anisotropic, non-homogeneous material, one would ex-
pect that stresses would behave diﬀerently in diﬀerent directions. However, a detailed model of
the mechanics of a layered structure like the CC is not the purpose of this study. Therefore the
assumption is made that CCs behave as isotropic, homogeneous material. It is also assumed that a
linear stress/strain relation is suﬃcient to describe the mechanical behavior of CC in UHF magnet
coils. This is justiﬁed by the fact that the REBCO coil system being modeled in this study has a
design limit of 400 MPa/0.4%, in which range the stress/strain relationship still is linear [15].
Page 11 of 53
==PAGE:15==
3
THEORY
ϕ
r
z
εϕϕ
εrr
εzr
εzz
Figure 7: The four non-zero strain components in a cylindrically symmetric system.
3.3.1
Mechanical stability in superconducting REBCO magnets
There are many design considerations to be made when constructing a REBCO magnet system.
The magnet systems usually consist of pancake stacks [1, 14, 15], where CCs are wound into densely
packed pancake-shaped coils, which then are stacked on top of each other to make the magnet system.
Even without considering the eﬀects of screening currents, the classical hoop stress in these pancake
stacks is considerable. Following σφ = JφBzr, assuming a transport current of 180 A in a ﬁeld
of 15 T, the outer radius of a pancake stack will experience a stress on the order of 230 MPa. In
order to mechanically support the CC and prevent movement of the windings, epoxy may be used,
which causes the loads to distribute more evenly [32]. Another approach is to do a dry co-winding
of the CC and a stainless steel band. In this way the stainless steel supplies additional stability
to the CC [14, 15]. As an additional measure of improving stability, an overband consisting of e.g.
stainless steel can be wound around the outer radius of the pancake stack, where the hoop stress is
expected to be largest [33]. In this study, only co-winding of the CC with a stainless steel band will
be considered, which results in an eﬀective increased Young’s modulus of the superconducting tape.
The implementation of this will be covered in the next chapter.
Page 12 of 53
==PAGE:16==
4
METHODOLOGY
4
Methodology
The modeling in this study is performed using the commercially available ﬁnite element modeling
software, COMSOL Multiphysics. The properties and dynamics of physical systems are analytically
solvable in select cases, but when the geometries get too complicated, analytic solutions are practi-
cally impossible to obtain. In these cases the ﬁnite element method is an important tool, since it is
an easy way to get approximate solutions to complex systems.
The system that will be modeled in this study is a simpliﬁed version of the 32 T fully superconducting
magnet developed at NHFML [14, 15]. The 32 T magnet consists of two HTS REBCO insert coils
producing 17 T magnetic ﬁeld, with three LTS outsert coil producing a background ﬁeld of 15 T.
The simpliﬁed version is the same as is used in the study by Xia et al [4], and consists of a single
REBCO insert coil producing 11 T, with two LTS outsert coils producing around 15 T, producing
a total of around 26 T. The 32 T magnet and simpliﬁed model are shown in ﬁgure 8. The design
parameters of the REBCO coil are summarized in table 1, where LTS 1 and LTS 2 are the innermost
and outermost LTS coils, respectively.
Figure 8: On the left is the 32 T REBCO insert, LTS outsert coils developed at NHMFL [14, 15].
To the right is a simpliﬁed version modeled in the reference study by Xia et al [4]. Figures are taken
from W. D. Markiewicz et al [34] and Xia et al [4], respectively.
There are many diﬀerent numerical methods of solving Maxwell’s equations numerically. The H-
formulation is one of them, where the equations are solved using the magnetic ﬁeld, H, as the
dependent variable. It was ﬁrst implemented in COMSOL Multiphysics in 2006 [11], and has to-
day at least 45 diﬀerent research groups using it [35], with several studies using the method in
the last year [5, 6, 13, 36]. The T -A formulation uses the current vector potential, T , and the
magnetic vector potential, A, as the dependent variables. This formulation is much more eﬃcient
than the H-formulation when simulating large scale CC systems [12], and the eﬃciency comes from
approximating the REBCO layer as an inﬁnitely thin sheet, thus signiﬁcantly reducing the degrees
of freedom in the system.
Page 13 of 53
==PAGE:17==
4
METHODOLOGY
Parameter
Value
Unit
HTS inner radius
20
[mm]
HTS outer radius
65.6
[mm]
HTS coil height
178
[mm]
Number of pancake stacks
40
Number of tape windings per pancake stack
244
CC length per pancake stack
65.6
[m]
CC tape width
4
[mm]
Gap between adjacent pancake stacks
0.45
[mm]
LTS 1 inner radius
135
[mm]
LTS 1 outer radius
190
[mm]
LTS 1 height
250
[mm]
LTS 1 current density
130
[A/mm2]
LTS 2 inner radius
214
[mm]
LTS 2 outer radius
310
[mm]
LTS 2 height
310
[mm]
LTS 2 current density
81
[A/mm2]
Table 1: Parameters for the coil system modeled in this study.
4.1
T-A formulation
The T -A formulation is used to obtain the magnetic ﬁelds and current density in the whole system,
which allows for the calculation of the Lorentz forces on the REBCO coils. The T -A formulation
splits the solving region in two parts. The superconductors are solved using the T -formulation, while
the surrounding region (air, copper, etc.) are solved using the A-formulation. Assuming the charge
relaxation time for superconductors is very small (inversely related to conductivity), the current
vector ﬁeld will be solenoidal (divergence-less). In this case, the ﬁeld may be expressed as a rotation
of a vector potential, T ,
J = ∇× T .
(19)
By using Ohm’s law, E = ρJ, Faraday’s law becomes
∇× (ρ∇× T ) = −∂B
∂t ,
(20)
where a non-linear ρ is used, derived from the E-J relation, equation (8). Equations (19) and (20)
form the governing relations of the T-part of the T -A formulation [5, 36, 37]. By using the thin-ﬁlm
approximation, where the superconducting layer of an HTS is approximated as an inﬁnitely thin
sheet lying in the φ-z plane of a cylindrical coordinate system, the current is constrained to run
only in the φ-z plane, such that Jr = 0. Additionally, the system has cylindrical symmetry, such
that Jz = 0. This constrains the current density calculations to a one dimensional problem, and the
current vector potential becomes a scalar value, T = Tr, with
Jφ = ∂T
∂z .
(21)
In this case the material will only respond to magnetic ﬁelds perpendicular to the plane, i.e. radial
ﬁelds, and equation (20) becomes
∂
∂z

ρ∂T
∂z

= −∂Br
∂t .
(22)
The governing equations for the A-formulation is found by inserting the magnetic vector potential
into Amp`ere’s law through the rotation of the B-ﬁeld.
B = ∇× A,
∇× B = µJ.
(23)
Page 14 of 53
==PAGE:18==
4
METHODOLOGY
Combining the two equations yields
∇× (∇× A) = µJ ⇒
∇(∇· A) −∇2A = µJ,
(24)
which, by using the Coulomb gauge (∇· A = 0) becomes
−∇2A = µJ,
(25)
which is the governing equation for the A-formulation part of the T -A formulation.
4.2
Finite element modeling using the T-A formulation
In order to save time, the electromagnetic model used in this study has not been created from
scratch. Instead, the model developed by Liang et al [37] has been adopted and modiﬁed1. The
ﬁnite element model solves simultaneously the T - and A-formulations outlined above, which in
COMSOL Multiphysics corresponds to a Coeﬃcient Form Boundary PDE (cb) and magnetic ﬁelds
(mf) physics module, respectively. The governing equation of the cb module is
−∇· γ = −µrµ0
∂Hr
∂t ,
(26)
where γ = γz = Eφnr. This governing equation corresponds to Faraday’s law, equation (20), and
the sign diﬀerence originates from the direction of the normal vector, nr, which in the simulated
system is pointing against the ﬁeld direction. The initial values of T and ˙T are zero, but a transport
current can be applied to the superconductor by applying Dirichlet boundary conditions to the ends
of the superconductor. The transport current is calculated as
I =
ZZ
S
JdS =
ZZ
S
∇× T dS =
I
L
T dl = (T1 −T2)δ,
(27)
where δ is the thickness of the superconducting layer. Green’s theorem has been used to transform
this integral. The double integral over S indicates an integral of the cross section of the super-
conductor, while the closed integral over L indicates a line integral across the boundary of the
superconductor. Thus a diﬀerence in current vector potential T is used to apply a transport current.
Later on, when the superconducting layer is to be ﬁlamentized, a series of prescribed values for T
will be deﬁned at speciﬁc points, such that the layer is split in sections. The T values will then be
deﬁned so each section, or ﬁlament, carries a factor 1/N of the transport current, where N is the
number of ﬁlaments. The electric ﬁeld entering in the governing equation, (26), is obtained through
the nonlinear superconducting E-J relation, equation (8),
Eφ = E0

Jφ
Jc(B)
n
,
(28)
where n in this study will be set to 30. In reality this value varies from CC batch to batch, and
diﬀerent values ranging from 20-30 are used in diﬀerent studies [4, 14, 37, 38]. The Jc(B) relation is
deﬁned from equation (7),
Jc(B) =
Jc0

1 +
√
k2B2
z+B2
r
B0
α ,
(29)
where Jc0 = 7.24 · 1011 A/m2, k = 9.13 · 10−3 and B0 = 0.4674 T, and α = 0.7518 are ﬁtting
parameters, based on Ic measurements performed at 4 K, obtained from [13]. In the models the
CC are simulated as wide, narrow domains, with only the boundary facing radially inwards being
1The model has been obtained from www.htsmodelling.com.
Page 15 of 53
==PAGE:19==
4
METHODOLOGY
superconductive. In this way the superconducting layer is inﬁnitely thin, but a bulk medium is still
deﬁned for mechanical purposes.
The governing equations in the mf physics module are
∇× H = J,
B = ∇× A,
E = −∂A
∂t ,
J = σE,
(30)
which corresponds to the governing equations outlined for the A-formulation in the previous section.
The initial value for A in this module is zero. The outer boundaries of the simulated region serve as
magnetic isolation, such that n × A = 0 at the boundary. Depending on which system is modeled,
the z = 0 plane may serve as a symmetry plane. In this study only the top-half (the ﬁrst quadrant of
the full plane) needs to be modeled. This is implemented by having a boundary condition of perfect
magnetic conduction, n × H = 0, deﬁned along the z = 0 plane. This halves the solved space, thus
signiﬁcantly reducing the computational resources required to run the model.
Figure 9: A ﬂowchart of the COMSOL model calculations. The T - and A-formulations are coupled,
and the equations are solved in parallel until a self-consistent solution is obtained. Blue and or-
ange boxes are equations from the T - and A-formulations, respectively. Black boxes are additional
equations/contributions, that are not a part of the formulations.
A ﬂowchart of the numerical simulations is outlined in ﬁgure 9. Both formulations are solved simulta-
neously and iterated until a self-consistent solution has been achieved. The T -formulation is used to
solve only the HTS domain, while the A-formulation is used everywhere. The ﬁgure shows how the
A-formulation is used to obtain the right-hand-side of equation (26), as well as obtaining the electric
ﬁeld which is used in the E-J relation, equation (28). The T -formulation is used to obtain the current
density inside the HTS sheet, which is needed in order to obtain the magnetic vector potential. The
current vector potential, T, enters in equation (26) through the electric ﬁeld Eφ, which depends on
the current density, Jφ. In the A-formulation, the current density is obtained diﬀerently depending
on the domain. Inside the HTS domain the current is obtained through the T -formulation, but
Page 16 of 53
==PAGE:20==
4
METHODOLOGY
everywhere else the current density is obtained through Ohm’s law and the electrical conductivity
assigned to the material (e.g. σair = 100 S/m).
4.3
Mechanical model
Once the magnetic ﬁelds and current density are obtained, the Lorentz forces in the system can
be calculated. These forces are then entered in a mechanical model, which calculates the stresses
and strains on the superconductors. A simple mechanical model will be used, where the individual
windings of the coil cannot separate, nor can they slip w.r.t. each other. Physically this represents
a case where there is inﬁnite friction between windings. This model puts a large constraint on the
deformations of the windings, but it is a trade-oﬀbetween physical accuracy and simplicity. The
mechanical model uses the built-in COMSOL Solid Mechanics (solid) module. The solving region,
which is a stack of superconductors, is modeled as a linear elastic material. The dependent variables
are the radial and axial deformations, u and w. The governing equations are the strain tensor, stated
previously in equation (11),
ϵ = 1
2(∇u + ∇uT ),
(31)
Hooke’s law, deﬁned through the rank four elasticity tensor, C (equivalent to equation (13)),
σ = C : ϵ,
(32)
and the equilibrium condition, (15),
∇· σ + f = 0,
(33)
where the right hand side is zero, meaning a stationary solution will be obtained. For Hooke’s law
the double dot product, :, signiﬁes a product between rank four and rank two tensor.
In the T -A formulation the current density of the superconductor was deﬁned only on the boundary
of each domain. This means the Lorentz force also is deﬁned only on the boundary, and as such the
applied loads in the solid module are applied as boundary loads, deﬁned through
fr = JφBzδ,
fz = −JφBrδ,
(34)
This yields a force per area, applied to the boundary of every superconducting domain. On the
outer radius a precompression may be deﬁned as a boundary load in the negative radial direction, to
capture the eﬀect of compressing the HTS stacks before charging of the REBCO coil, but this will
not be used in this study. As boundary conditions an axially ﬁxed boundary is needed. To reﬂect
that the HTS pancake stacks are pressed together in the axial directions by neighboring stacks, the
entire lower boundary of the stack has an axially prescribed displacement of zero. No radially ﬁxed
point is needed, since a radial force will be counteracted by a hoop stress, which is captured in the
axisymmetry. All other boundaries, the inner radius, outer radius, and the top, are free to move.
4.3.1
Material properties
The numerical model obtains material properties from the materials deﬁned in the model.
The
materials used are CC and steel, and their properties are listed in table 2. The coil consists of CC
provided by SuperPower. The CC is 4 mm wide, 155 µm thick, consisting of 100 µm copper stabi-
lizers, 50 µm Hastelloy substrate, 4 µm Ag and buﬀer substrate, and 1 µm REBCO superconductor
[4]. The CC is co-wound with a steel band of thickness 32 µm, in order to improve stability and
strength. For simplicity, the co-winding of the two materials will be treated as a single material,
with the mechanical properties being a weighted average between the CC material and stainless steel.
Young’s modulus for the CC is based on a linear relationship in the stress/strain relationship up to
400 MPa/0.4%, based on uniaxial tensile tests [15]. This yields a Young’s modulus of 100 GPa. The
Page 17 of 53
==PAGE:21==
4
METHODOLOGY
32 µm steel includes a sol-gel coating of 3.5 µm on either side, so the steel Young’s modulus of 206
GPa [39] will be scaled by 25/32. This yields a weighted average of 110.4 GPa for the CC and steel
co-winding. Poisson’s ratio for both materials is 0.3.
Parameter
Thickness [µm]
Young’s modulus [GPa]
Poisson’s ratio
CC
155
100
0.3
Steel
32
206∗
0.3
Co-winding
187
110.4
0.3
Table 2: Mechanical parameters for the REBCO-steel co-winding. ∗Young’s modulus for steel was
scaled by 25/32 to account for sol-gel coating.
4.4
Other modeling speciﬁcations
The procedure of the simulations is to ﬁrst ramp up the current in the background magnets. The
operating current density of the two LTS coils are 130 A/mm2 and 81 A/mm2 for the inner and outer
LTS coil, respectively. They are ramped up to this current in the span of 100 seconds, corresponding
to 0.15 T/s. In order to make sure that the ﬁeld is stable before ramping up the REBCO coils, this
current is held for 50 seconds before ramping the inner HTS coils. The HTS coils are ramped up
to an operating current of 180 A per winding at a rate of 1 A/s, corresponding to 0.06 T/s. The
current ramping scenario is outlined in table 3.
t= [0;100] s
Ramping of outer LTS coils
t= [100;150] s
Stabilizing ﬁeld (no ramping)
t= [150; 330] s
Ramping of HTS coil
Table 3: Ramping procedure of the coil system.
The simulations for a single pancake stack takes around 1-2 hours to run. Solving the entire coil
with 20 pancake stacks would take a lot more than 20 times the time it takes to solve a single stack,
due to the close to quadratic scaling of simulation time as function of degrees of freedom for direct
solvers [40]. Because of this a simpliﬁcation is made. Only a single pancake stack is simulated with
individual CC windings, with all others being modeled as homogenized bulk coils with prescribed and
uniform current density. This simpliﬁcation is justiﬁed by the fact that the macroscopic magnetic
ﬁeld produced by a CC stack with individual windings and a homogenized stack is similar, and the
deviations are only apparent close to the coil. To test this, a small reference system was modeled
using two approaches. First, ﬁve pancake stacks consisting of 100 windings of CC were modeled
as homogenized stacks and the magnetic ﬁeld was obtained. Secondly, the top pancake stack was
replaced by a superconducting CC stack with individual windings. Figure 10 shows the magnetic
ﬁeld along three diﬀerent lines lying parallel to the axial direction, within the bore of the magnet
coil and inside the coil. As shown in the top-right subﬁgure, the lines are placed at r1 = 12.5 mm,
r2 = 17.5 mm, and r3 = 27.5 mm, where the last line lies inside the coil itself. The top-left subﬁgure
shows the radial magnetic ﬁeld along the three lines, when the coil is modeled as a homogenized
bulk (‘Coil’, dashed curves), and as a superconducting CC stack (‘HTS stack’, solid curves). Vertical
gray lines indicate the locations of the pancake stacks. For the red line, there is good agreement
between the two models, but a slight discrepancy can be observed around z = 20 mm, which is the
location of the top pancake. For the blue line, this discrepancy becomes larger, and for the black
line, which is evaluated inside the coil itself, the ﬁeld goes to zero for the superconducting model.
This is expected, since the superconductor will shield against an applied radial ﬁeld, such that the
ﬁeld is zero inside. The bottom subﬁgure shows the norm of the ﬁeld, and here the discrepancy is
smaller. This is as expected, since the superconductors do not respond as strongly to axial ﬁelds,
Page 18 of 53
==PAGE:22==
4
METHODOLOGY
12.5 mm
17.5 mm
27.5 mm
Figure 10: Top-left) the radial and bottom) the norm magnetic ﬁeld evaluated at axial intersects at
r = 12.5, 17.5, 27.5 mm of a simulated REBCO coil. The intersect lines are shown in an overview in
the top-right subﬁgure. The magnetic ﬁelds are modeled using homogeneous current carrying coils
(dashed lines) and a stack of HTS tapes (solid lines). The vertical gray lines indicate the positions
of the pancake stacks.
which are parallel to the superconducting planes. The discrepancy between the two models at the
top edge of the fourth coil (z = 18 mm), for the r = 27.5 mm line, is 16.5%. In order to make the
simulations more tractable, the error by using this approach is deemed to be suﬃciently small. In
the case a larger accuracy is needed, one could model the neighboring stacks as superconducting as
well, in order to decrease the error on the stack of interest.
By modeling all other stacks as homogenized stacks, only the superconducting behavior of a single
pancake stack can be obtained for a given simulation. Therefore, the simulations are run several
times for diﬀerent pancake stacks. This approach might seem cumbersome, but it is eﬀective when
the properties of the whole magnet system are not required, and only a select few pancake stacks
are of interest. This might be the case when looking at maximum stresses, since it may be known
before-hand in which pancake stacks these are observed.
4.5
Convergence tests
4.5.1
Mesh convergence
In order to verify that a suitable mesh grid is used for numerical studies, a mesh convergence test
must be performed.
If the mesh is too coarse, some physical phenomena might be lost or the
Page 19 of 53
==PAGE:23==
4
METHODOLOGY
calculations might have large errors. Conversely a very ﬁne mesh might not be required for the given
problem, and will thus only increase computation time. The expected behavior is that increasing the
number of mesh points (decreasing mesh size) will make an evaluated physical quantity tend towards
a converged value. The coarsest mesh setting for which the quantity has converged should then be
used, in order to have a good balance between accuracy and speed. In this study the current density
on the superconducting boundaries is a quantity of great interest, and thus it will be evaluated in
the mesh convergence test. In order to not have the screening currents canceling each other, the
squared φ component of the current density will be integrated along all superconducting boundaries.
The expression is given as
Z
CC
J2
φ dl =
Z
CC
∂T
∂z
2
dl.
(35)
The mesh convergence is performed for number of mesh elements along the wide face of the supercon-
ductor going from 15 to 150. Since the analytical value is not known for this quantity, the results for
all mesh settings will be compared to the value obtained for 150 mesh elements, and thus a relative
‘error’ is evaluated. The mesh convergence test is shown in ﬁgure 11(a). It is observed that the
relative error initially is around 2-3%, but quickly goes below 0.5%, where it stays somewhat stable.
Based on this analysis, the number of mesh elements used along the wide face of the superconductor
is 60.
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
no. of mesh elements
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
Relative error [%]
(a)
0.48
0.67
0.86
1.06
1.25
1.44
r [m]
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
RMSE [T]
(b)
Figure 11: a) Mesh convergence test where the squared current density is integrated along all super-
conducting boundaries, at diﬀerent mesh settings. The relative deviation from the squared current
density at the densest mesh settings (150 mesh elements) is then calculated and shown. b) Boundary
convergence test where the RMSE between the model with a given outer boundary and a reference
solution with an outer boundary of 2.4 m.
4.5.2
Boundary convergence test
Numerical simulations need to be bounded by some outer boundary. In reality the magnetic ﬁeld
strength from a magnetic dipole decays spatially following 1/r3 [17], and in simulations this is
modeled by having a boundary suﬃciently far away where the magnetic ﬁeld strength is set to zero.
It does this by making the boundary perfect magnetic insulation, where n × A = 0, where n is
the normal vector of the boundary, pointing into the solving region, and A is the magnetic vector
potential. This condition makes it so that the magnetic ﬁeld will be parallel to the boundary.
If the outer boundary is too close to the modeled system, the magnetic ﬁeld will be squeezed inwards,
resulting in a too strong, distorted ﬁeld. Conversely, if the boundary is too far away, computational
Page 20 of 53
==PAGE:24==
4
METHODOLOGY
resources are wasted. A boundary convergence test is performed similarly to the mesh convergence
test, where a physical quantity is evaluated for a series of radii of the outer boundary, ranging
from 0.48 m to 1.44 m. For reference, the outer radius of the outer LTS coil is 0.31 m. The physical
quantity that is evaluated is the magnetic ﬂux density along the z = 0 line in the segment r = [0; 310]
mm. The reference ‘true’ value is the magnetic ﬂux density calculated with the outer radius of 2.4
m. The root-mean-squared error is calculated between each boundary setting and the true value,
RMSE =
s
1
N
X
n
(B(r, n) −Btrue(r, n))2,
(36)
where n is a data point and N is the number of data points. The RMSE is plotted as a function of
the radius of the outer boundary in ﬁgure 11(b). Based on this convergence test an outer boundary
radius of 1.25 m is chosen for the simulations.
Page 21 of 53
==PAGE:25==
5
MODEL VERIFICATION
5
Model veriﬁcation
A central part of building dependable numerical models is verifying the models. One way to do
this is to consider a system of which the analytic solution is known. The simulation results are then
compared to the analytic solution, in order to establish agreement between the models. Another way
is to compare the results of a simulation with numerical results from other studies. In this section,
the model results of a single thin superconducting sheet will be compared to analytical expressions
for magnetic ﬁeld and current density proﬁle behavior. The model results for the whole coil system
will then be compared to other studies, where the electromagnetic and mechanical results will be
compared.
5.1
Analytical solution for thin sheet superconductor
The analytical model used are the results derived by Zeldov et al [16]. The system considered is
a thin superconducting ﬁlm of width 2W = 4 mm, thickness δ = 1 µm, which is inﬁnite in the
z-direction. The set-up is shown in ﬁgure 12, and two cases will be considered: An external applied
magnetic ﬁeld transverse to the thin ﬁlm, and a transport current in the z-direction, in the absence
of an applied ﬁeld.
Figure 12: Sketch of the HTS thin ﬁlm of width 2W. The ﬁlm is inﬁnite in the z-direction, and the
magnetic ﬁeld is applied in the positive y-direction.
5.1.1
Externally applied magnetic ﬁeld
The externally applied magnetic ﬁeld is applied in the in the y-direction. This will induce a shielding
current, which attempts to cancel the applied magnetic ﬁeld.
The analytical expression for the
transverse component of the magnetic ﬂux density on the surface of the thin ﬁlm is given by
By(x) =



0,
−a ≤x ≤a,
Bf ln

|x|
√
W 2−a2+W
√
x2−a2
a√
|x2−W 2|

,
|x| > a,
(37)
where Bf is a characteristic magnetic ﬂux density and a is the ﬁeld-invariant region of the ﬁlm,
deﬁned as
a =
W
cosh(B/Bf).
(38)
Page 22 of 53
==PAGE:26==
5
MODEL VERIFICATION
The current density proﬁle on the sheet in an applied ﬁeld is given by
Jy(x) =







Jc,
−W < x ≤−a,
−2 Jc
π arctan

x
W
q
W 2−a2
a2−x2

,
−a < x < a,
−Jc,
a ≤x < W.
(39)
In the numerical model a critical current of Ic = 60 A is chosen, corresponding to Jc = 1.5·1010A/m2.
The characteristic magnetic ﬁeld density is deﬁned as Bf = Jcδµ0 ≈20 mT, and the ﬁeld is ramped
from 0 to 2.5Bf in a time span of 50 s, corresponding to a ﬁeld ramping rate is about 1 mT/s.
The magnetic ﬁelds and current density proﬁles are calculated following the analytic model and
calculated in COMSOL, and the results are shown in ﬁgure 13. Figure 13(a) shows the magnetic
ﬁeld proﬁle on the surface of the tape for ﬁve diﬀerent applied ﬁelds. The applied ﬁeld strengths are
indicated by the solid, black, horizontal lines, and the COMSOL and analytical models are shown
in blue and red, respectively. Inside the thin ﬁlm there is a region where the ﬁeld is uniformly zero,
which becomes smaller when the applied ﬁeld increases. Because of the way the analytic model is
implemented, there are no data-points for this zero-ﬁeld, however, as is seen from equation (37), the
ﬁeld is indeed zero in this region. Figure 13(b) shows the current proﬁle inside the thin ﬁlm for a
series of ﬁeld strengths. Compared to the Bean model which is for a slab geometry (ﬁgure 5), the
ﬁeld goes to zero in the middle of the sheet, even for high ﬁelds. The ﬁeld decay is also not linear, as
it is for the slab geometry. The COMSOL and analytical models are in good agreement. As for the
current density proﬁle, there is some resemblance to the Bean model for slab geometry, where the
current is running in opposite directions at either side of the superconductor. The COMSOL model
for the current density distribution shows a more smooth behavior than the analytic model, which
has a ﬁrst derivative discontinuity as it reaches Jc. The reason for this discrepancy may be due to
the ﬁnite n value of the simulations, compared to the inﬁnite n value in the Bean model, which is
used in the analytical study. Overall there is good agreement between the numerical and analytic
results, for both the magnetic ﬁeld and current density behaviors of the superconducting tape.
5.1.2
Transport current
For a transport current it is expected from the Bean model that the current will initially ﬂow at
the edges of the superconductor, but will gradually ﬂow deeper inside the material. The self-ﬁeld
will point in opposite directions at either side, where the current is ﬂowing, and also penetrate
further and further into the material. The analytical expression for the current ﬂowing inside the
superconductor is given as
Jz(x) =
(
2Jc
π arctan
q
W 2−a2
a2−x2

,
−a < x < a,
Jc,
a ≤|x| < W,
(40)
where the ﬁeld-free region, a, now is deﬁned as
a = W
p
1 −(IT /Ic)2.
(41)
This expression continually approaches zero for the transport current approaching Ic. The analytical
expression for the transverse component of the magnetic ﬂux density is given as
By(x) =







0,
−a ≤x < a,
±Bf ln

√
W 2−x2
√
W 2−a2−
√
x2−a2

,
a < |x| < W,
±Bf ln

√
x2−W 2
√
x2−a2−
√
W 2−a2

,
|x| > W,
(42)
where the positive (negative) is taken when x < 0 (x > 0).
The analytic results are shown
alongside the numerical model results in ﬁgure 14 for ﬁve diﬀerent levels of transport current:
Page 23 of 53
==PAGE:27==
5
MODEL VERIFICATION
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
x/W
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
By(x) / Bf
Comsol Model
Analytic Model
Applied Field
(a)
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
x/W
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
J(x) / Jc
0.05 Bf
0.5 Bf
1.0 Bf
Comsol Model
Analytic Model
(b)
Figure 13: Magnetic ﬁeld and current density proﬁles of the superconductor subject to an external
applied ﬁeld. Blue data is the COMSOL numerical model, and red data is the analytic model. a)
The transverse magnetic ﬁeld proﬁle at six diﬀerent applied magnetic ﬁeld strengths, indicated by
the black lines. b) Current density distribution for three diﬀerent magnetic ﬁeld strengths.
IT = [0.2 Ic, 0.4 Ic, 0.6 Ic, 0.8 Ic, 1.0 Ic]. For the magnetic ﬁeld there is good agreement between
the models, however there is a discrepancy in the extent of the ﬁeld-free region, where the analytic
model has a larger ﬁeld-free region than the numerical model in the intermediate transport current
levels (IT = 0.4-0.8 Ic).
As for the current proﬁles, there is a good agreement between the models, however the current density
in the numerical model does not reach Jc towards the edges, as expected. The numerical model does
also not have the ﬁrst-derivative discontinuity as the current proﬁle ﬂattens out towards the edges,
similar to what was observed in the applied ﬁeld case. Again, this might be due to the exponent,
n, not being large enough in the simulations, which causes a smoothing of the transition between
non-critical and critical states of the superconductor. Lastly, for the current levels IT = 0.6-0.8 Ic,
the numeric model has a larger current density towards the middle of the superconductor than the
analytic model. Overall there is good agreement between the models for low and high applied ﬁelds,
but in the intermediate range, there is a discrepancy, which may be due to the ﬁnite n value used in
the simulations, which does not capture the eﬀect of the inﬁnite n value in the Bean model.
5.1.3
Eﬀect of exponent in E-J relation
To test the hypothesis that the discrepancy between the analytical and numerical model is due to
the numerical model using a ﬁnite exponent in the E-J relation, n, the behavior when increasing the
n value is investigated. A transport current Itot = 0.8 Ic is chosen, with the exponent varying in the
interval n = [15; 50]. The qualitative behavior is investigated, as well as the root-mean-squared-error
(RMSE) between the analytical and numerical curves, deﬁned as
RMSE(n) = 1
W
Z
dx
sJ(x, n) −Janalytic(x, n)
Jc
2
,
(43)
Page 24 of 53
==PAGE:28==
5
MODEL VERIFICATION
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
x/W
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
By(x) / Bf
1.0 Ic
0.8 Ic
0.6 Ic
0.4 Ic
0.2 Ic
Comsol Model
Analytic Model
(a)
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
x/W
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
J(x) / Jc
0.2 Ic
0.4 Ic
0.6 Ic
0.8 Ic
1.0 Ic
Comsol Model
Analytic Model
(b)
Figure 14: Magnetic ﬁeld and current density proﬁles of the superconductor carrying ﬁve transport
currents. Blue data is the COMSOL numerical model, and red data is the analytic model. a) The
transverse magnetic ﬁeld proﬁle and b) current density distribution.
where J(x, n) is the model current density across the tape, Janalytic(x, n) is the analytic current
density, and Jc is used for normalization. The results are shown in ﬁgure 15, and it is observed that
the RMSE is signiﬁcantly decreased when increasing n. This behavior is also observed qualitatively
in the current density proﬁles, where the curves approach the analytic curve for increasing n. While
this conﬁrms that a large n provides for a better model, this will not be investigated further, and
n = 30 will be used for the rest of the study. This decision is based on the time it takes to run the
model. For n = 50, the model takes about 60% longer to run than for n = 30. Also, n describes the
non-linearity of the problem, and when it become too large, the model may experience convergence
issues.
5.2
Comparing results with other simulation studies
In order to verify the electromagnetic model in the setting of a large magnet system, the results of the
simulations will be compared to the results of a reference study by Xia et al [4]. This study uses the
same simpliﬁed magnet system as in this study. The reference study uses the H-formulation together
with an anisotropic bulk model, where the individual windings of a pancake stack are merged into
larger engineering windings, on the basis of the current proﬁles being similar in neighboring windings
[41]. This simpliﬁes and speeds up the calculations, but the behavior of individual windings are lost.
As described in section 4.4, only a single stack of windings is modeled as superconducting at a
time. However, to test the simulation times, a fully superconducting model was simulated. This
took around a week of simulation time, and these are the results that are presented in this section.
Therefore all pancake stacks are included in the results of this section, and the approximation
described in 4.4 is not used.
The electromagnetic simulations are performed, with a ramping procedure shown in table 3. The
physical parameters that will be compared are the radial and axial components of the magnetic ﬁeld,
the current density distribution, and the radial Lorentz forces on the coil. Lastly the mechanical
Page 25 of 53
==PAGE:29==
5
MODEL VERIFICATION
(a)
(b)
Figure 15: The behavior of the transport current on a thin ﬁlm with varying E-J relation exponent,
n. For increasing n the RMSE decreases, and the numeric current proﬁle approaches the analytic
one.
Page 26 of 53
==PAGE:30==
5
MODEL VERIFICATION
Figure 16: Comparing the radial component of magnetic ﬁeld obtained in this study with the refer-
ence study by Xia et al [4].
model will be evaluated, and the radial and hoop stresses will be compared. Figures 16 and 17 show
the radial and axial magnetic ﬁelds, respectively, inside the coil. The pancake stacks on the left are
the results of this study, and on the right are the results of the reference study. There is excellent
agreement between the two models, qualitatively, and quantitatively.
The current density distributions and radial force distributions on the pancake stacks are also inves-
tigated. The current density distributions are shown for this and the reference study in ﬁgure 18.
Note that in this study the current density is only deﬁned on the boundary of each CC winding,
with a modeled thickness of the REBCO layer of 1 µm. Because the reference model uses a homog-
enized bulk model, the current density is deﬁned everywhere. Therefore the current density in this
study has been reduced by a factor 1/187, corresponding to the ratio between superconducting layer
thickness and total thickness of the CC and steel co-winding.
Again there is good agreement between the models. The screening behavior is more clearly observed
when looking at the upper part of the coil, where the radial part of the magnetic ﬁeld is larger.
A small discrepancy between the models is that for pancake stack #19, towards the inner radius
of the stack, there is a region in the middle of the CC where no current is running. This means
that the magnetic ﬁeld has not fully penetrated the superconductor. Interestingly, stack #19 in the
reference study shows the same kind of behavior, and if the stacks in this study would be shifted
one stack downwards, there would be an even better agreement between the coils. This may be due
to the critical current density being larger in this study than in the reference study. The no-ﬁeld
critical current densities are Jc0 = 7.24·1011 A/m2 and Jc0 = 6.24·1011 A/m2 for this study and the
reference study, respectively. This means that the relative load level of the reference study is larger,
and thus it makes sense that the superconductors will be fully penetrated by the magnetic ﬁeld at
an earlier stage. This is supported by the fact that the scales of the two models are diﬀerent, with
Page 27 of 53
==PAGE:31==
5
MODEL VERIFICATION
Figure 17: Comparing the axial component of magnetic ﬁeld obtained in this study with the reference
study by Xia et al [4].
the currents going up to 2.5·103 A/mm2 and 1.5·103 A/mm2 for this study and the reference study,
respectively, indicating that the critical current density is diﬀerent for the two models. In appendix
B there is a further analysis of the two diﬀerent Jc(B) relations, and in ﬁgure 35 the critical current
density of the two models as function of magnetic ﬁeld at diﬀerent ﬁeld angles, is plotted.
The radial force density is given as fr = JφBz, and given that the axial magnetic ﬁelds are very
similar in the two models, the radial force distribution qualitatively resembles the current density
distribution.
The radial force distributions are shown for this study and the reference study in
ﬁgure 19. Because the force distribution is qualitatively very similar to the current distribution, the
similarity and discrepancy between the models is the same as for the aforementioned current density
distributions.
Lastly, the stresses on the pancake stacks are evaluated and compared to the reference study. In the
reference study, there are two separate mechanical models: The discrete contacts model, where the
individual CC windings may separate from each other, and the bulk model, where the whole stack is
modeled as a transversely isotropic bulk medium. The boundary conditions for both models is that
the axial displacement of the bottom layer of the stack is kept ﬁxed at zero. For this investigation,
only pancake stack #20 is modeled, which is where the stresses are expected to be largest. The
radial and hoop stresses are shown in ﬁgure 20.
It is observed that the data from this study is in good agreement with the bulk model of the reference
study. Qualitatively the stress proﬁles look very alike, but quantitatively the extrema in this study
are larger. It is as expected that the results in this study are similar to the bulk model, since both
models treat the pancake stack as a homogeneous bulk.
As a last veriﬁcation, the behavior of a single winding of CC when performing multi-ﬁlamentization
will be compared to a reference study by Yan et al [10]. In the reference study, a single winding of
10 mm CC is placed below a REBCO coil, such that it experiences a radial ﬁeld. The hoop strain
is then evaluated for the non-ﬁlamented tape, and the tape ﬁlamented in ﬁve and ten ﬁlaments.
Page 28 of 53
==PAGE:32==
5
MODEL VERIFICATION
Figure 18: Comparing the current density obtained in this study with the reference study by Xia et
al [4].
Page 29 of 53
==PAGE:33==
5
MODEL VERIFICATION
Figure 19: Comparing the radial force distribution obtained in this study with the reference study
by Xia et al [4].
Page 30 of 53
==PAGE:34==
5
MODEL VERIFICATION
(a)
(b)
Figure 20: a) Radial and b) hoop stress of pancake stack #20. Top) results from this study, middle)
and bottom) results from the reference study for a discrete and bulk model, respectively. Reference
study by Xia et al [4].
The results of this model and the reference model are shown in ﬁgure 21. It was not possible to
reproduce the exact physical set-up, due to lack of information. However, the results are in good
agreement, and the change in behavior when ﬁlamenting the tape is similar in the two studies: The
overall hoop strain is reduced, with the maximum located towards the edges of the tapes. According
to this study, the maximum hoop strain on the tape is reduced by 55% when using the 5 ﬁlaments
tape, corresponding to a ﬁlament size of 800 µm, and by 73% when using the 10 ﬁlaments tape,
corresponding to a ﬁlament size of 400 µm.
Page 31 of 53
==PAGE:35==
5
MODEL VERIFICATION
Reference Study
This Study
Figure 21: Hoop strain for a non-ﬁlamented CC, and CCs ﬁlamented in ﬁve, and ten ﬁlaments, in
the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld. Top ﬁgure is from a reference model by Yan et al [10] and bottom
ﬁgure are results from this study.
Page 32 of 53
==PAGE:36==
6
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
6
Results and discussion
6.1
Electromagnetic proﬁles of ﬁlamentized REBCO coil
In this ﬁrst part the electromagnetic proﬁles, i.e. the current density and magnetic ﬁeld proﬁles
of CC will be investigated for non-ﬁlamentized and multi-ﬁlamentized tapes.
When performing
the ﬁlamentization, the simulations need to be run anew for each ﬁlamentization geometry. These
simulations take around 1-2 hrs to run, meaning ﬁlamentization in 1, 5, 10, and 40 ﬁlaments take a
total of 4-8 hrs of simulations. Throughout the study, the ﬁnite element analysis has been performed
using linear shape functions for the T -formulation, such that the current, which is the derivative of
the dependent variable becomes a piecewise constant. For illustration purposes, the ﬁgures in this
section have been produced by using quadratic shape functions in the analysis, such that the current
becomes piecewise linear. This did not aﬀect the results of the study.
500
250
0
250
500
J [kA/mm2]
t = 30s
t = 90s
t = 180s
t = 270s
t = 330s
0
1
2
3
4
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Br [T]
Jc(B)
J
Br
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
z [mm]
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
Figure 22: Electromagnetic behavior of the innermost REBCO winding of pancake stack #20. Top:
The critical current density, Jc(B) and the current density Jφ and bottom: The radial magnetic ﬁeld
on the tape surface, Br.
First, the electromagnetic behavior of a single winding of a pancake stack will be investigated. The
winding of interest is the radially innermost tape winding in pancake stack #20. The coil is charged
according to the ramping process shown in table 3, and the current density and magnetic ﬁeld proﬁles
are evaluated at diﬀerent times, corresponding to diﬀerent external magnetic ﬁelds (background coils)
and transport current levels. The results are shown in ﬁgure 22, where the top row of the ﬁgure shows
the critical current density, Jc(B), and the current density, Jφ. The bottom row shows the radial
component of the magnetic ﬁeld, Br, on the tape surface. It is observed that the critical current
density initially drops sharply oﬀtowards the edges, and as time progresses, and the magnetic ﬁeld
becomes larger, the drop-oﬀregion penetrates further into the tape. This behavior is connected to
Br, which also initially is zero inside the material, with a sharp rise towards the edges. A growing Br
makes Jc(B) drop oﬀ, following equation (7), and it is seen that the region where Br has penetrated
the tape is the same as the region where the Jc(B) has dropped oﬀ. The overall Jc(B) becomes
lower as the ﬁelds become larger. This reduction is likely related to the growing axial component of
the magnetic ﬁeld, Bz, which also follows from equation (7). Bz is very homogeneous across a single
Page 33 of 53
==PAGE:37==
6
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
tape winding (see ﬁgure 17), which is why the Jc(B) is uniformly lowered. The current density, Jφ,
initially grows sharply towards the edges, similar to Br, but in opposite directions at either side.
This is the screening currents, which forms a loop to repel the radial magnetic ﬁeld. This screening
current also expands into the tape winding as the radial ﬁeld becomes larger. When the transport
current is applied, at t = 150 s, the curve begins to become asymmetric across the middle of the
tape. This is due to the transport current being positive, so a bias appears towards the region with
positive current. There is a region in the middle where the current goes through zero, corresponding
to the ﬁeld free region of Br. As the ﬁelds and transport current become larger, the region of no
current disappears, and there is a sharp transition between negative and positive currents. The
current running in the tape is very close to Jc(B), which is expected from the Bean model, where
the current is modeled as being zero or running at the critical current. The reason this is not exactly
reproduced is likely due to the ﬁnite n value, as previously discussed in section 5, which results in a
smoothening of the transitions between zero and critical state. The way the critical current density
and radial magnetic ﬁeld is lowered towards the edges of the superconductor also resembles the Bean
model, with a Kim-like critical current density relation. Note that the Jφ line is in some regions
very thick for t = 30s and t = 90s, which is due to numerical noise, which causes ﬂuctuating current
values.
0
1
2
3
4
z  [mm]
400
200
0
200
400
J [kA/mm2]
1 filament
5 filaments
40 filaments
Figure 23: The current density, Jφ, for diﬀerent number of ﬁlaments used in a CC tape. The data
is from the innermost winding of pancake stack #20.
Next the electromagnetic properties are investigated when the REBCO layer of the CC is ﬁlamen-
tized in uncoupled segments.
Again, only a single tape winding is analyzed, being the radially
innermost winding of pancake stack #20. The current density, Jφ, along the tape width of a non-
ﬁlamented tape, and a tape ﬁlamented in 5 and 40 pieces is shown in ﬁgure 23. The time-step of
the simulation results is t = 330 s, meaning the background magnets and the tape windings are
fully ramped. It is noted that the 10 ﬁlaments geometry is not included, since the last time-steps
of the simulations became unstable for this exact pancake stack and ﬁlamentization geometry. It is
observed that the screening current behavior, which was observed in ﬁgure 22, is still apparent in
both the non-ﬁlamentized and the ﬁlamentized tapes. The current loops that the screening current
makes become smaller as more ﬁlaments are introduced. The magnitude of the current becomes
smaller for increasing number of ﬁlaments, as well as for increasing z. In order to understand this
behavior, the radial magnetic ﬁeld, Br, is shown in ﬁgure 24 for the same tape and in the same
conditions as for ﬁgure 23. It is observed that for the non-ﬁlamented tape, there is still a very small
Page 34 of 53
==PAGE:38==
6
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
0
1
2
3
4
z  [mm]
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Br [T]
1 filament
5 filaments
40 filaments
Figure 24: The radial magnetic ﬁeld, Br, for diﬀerent number of ﬁlaments used in a CC tape. The
data is from the innermost winding of pancake stack #20.
ﬁeld-free region, but for the ﬁlamented cases, the magnetic ﬁeld has penetrated all the way through
the superconductor, and has started to increase uniformly, according to the Bean model, ﬁgure 5.
Because the ﬁeld is overall larger for smaller ﬁlament sizes, the current is reduced, as observed in
ﬁgure 23.
It is also observed that Br increases towards the top (positive z) of the tape, which
explains why the current density is reduced towards positive z in ﬁgure 23.
6.2
Strain in small-scale ﬁlamentized system
In order to illustrate how the ﬁlamentization aﬀects the strain in the material, a small mechanical
‘toy model’ is made, where 20 domains in the shape of CC windings in a coil are subject to a
radially directed boundary load. The loads are not obtained from electromagnetic simulations, but
instead idealized load distributions are given as input to the model, that mimic the loads arising
from screening currents. The boundary conditions are the same as for the large-scale mechanical
simulations, i.e. the bottom boundary is ﬁxed in the axial direction. Each domain is split in eight
pieces, corresponding to four ﬁlaments. Two diﬀerent boundary load scenarios are then applied to
the system: First, the upper four pieces have a positive load, and the bottom four boundaries have
a negative load. This scenario corresponds to a non-ﬁlamentized tape, where a positive Lorentz
force pushes on the top, and a negative on the bottom. The second case is an alternating positive
and negative load on each domain, where one positive and one negative load corresponds to one
ﬁlament. This system corresponds to a ﬁlamentized case with four ﬁlaments, where the Lorentz
force alternates along the tape width. The hoop, radial, axial, and zr components of strain are then
calculated for both cases, and shown in ﬁgures 25 and 26. The boundary loads are indicated by
vertical lines throughout the geometry, with red and blue being a boundary load of ±1 N/m2. The
deformation on all subﬁgures is ampliﬁed by 109. Generally it can be said that the strain in all
four cases goes from being geometrically large features, with large maximum values of strain in the
non-ﬁlamented case, to becoming smaller features, with more uniform and smaller strain levels in
the multi-ﬁlamentized case. The maximas of the strain is an interesting quantity, since it is where
the strain is largest that the coil is likely to become damaged. The maximum strain before and after
ﬁlamentization is shown in table 4. It is assumed that negative and positive strains have the same
Page 35 of 53
==PAGE:39==
6
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 25: Hoop and axial strain in a non-ﬁlamentized and ﬁlamentized stack of twenty CC-like
domains.
ϵφ
ϵz
ϵr
ϵzr
Non-ﬁlamented
1.45 · 10−10
1.1 · 10−10
4.78 · 10−11
4.33 · 10−11
Filamented
4.29 · 10−11
4.07 · 10−11
1.73 · 10−11
1.48 · 10−11
Reduction
70.4%
63.0%
63.8%
65.8%
Table 4: Maximum values of the strains in the small-scale system shown in ﬁgures 25 and 26. It
is assumed that the positive and negative strains have the same impact on the material, thus the
numerical value of the strains is shown.
impact on the material, thus the numerical value of the strain is shown in the table. Firstly, it is
observed that the hoop and axial strains are the largest strain components in this system, being
around a factor 2-3 larger than the radial and zr strain components. Secondly, the strain in the
ﬁlamentized case is reduced by 60-70% w.r.t. the strain in the non-ﬁlamentized case, in all four
components.
While these results are likely not representative of the behavior of ﬁlamentization of a large-scale
magnet system, due to the larger forces, increased number of ﬁlaments, and the Lorentz force proﬁle
being more complicated, this does give an overview of the behavior of materials as the boundary
loads are split in regions with alternating direction. This also gives a basis of what is expected from
the strain, when performing the ﬁlamentization on the large-scale system.
6.3
Strain in large-scale ﬁlamentized magnet system
The full-scale magnet system is now ready to be modeled. The system is the simpliﬁed version of
the 32 T fully superconducting magnet, with design parameters listed in table 1. The model consists
Page 36 of 53
==PAGE:40==
6
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 26: Radial and zr component of strain in a non-ﬁlamentized and ﬁlamentized stack of twenty
CC-like domains.
of 20 pancake stacks (40 total, but reduced due to the z = 0 plane symmetry), and every stack
needs to be modeled separately. For brevity, only pancake stacks numbers #1, #10, #15, #18,
and #20 will be modeled. These are chosen based on a trade-oﬀbetween obtaining an overview
of the whole coil and the desire to model the axially outer stacks, where the radial magnetic ﬁeld
is largest. By ﬁrst running the electromagnetic simulations and obtaining the Lorentz forces, they
can be put in the mechanical model as boundary forces on the windings. The mechanical model
solves the displacement ﬁeld, and from it, by use of equation (18), all non-zero components of strain
are calculated. For simplicity the strain components, as well as compressive and tensile strain, will
be treated equally, such that only the numerical value of strain will be considered. To obtain an
overview of the strain on the pancake stacks and the eﬀect of ﬁlamentization, surface plots of the
strain components for non-ﬁlamentized tape and tapes with 40 ﬁlaments (ﬁlament size 100 µm) are
shown in ﬁgures 27, 28, 29, and 30, for hoop, radial, axial, and zr strain, respectively. Note that the
ﬁlamentized version of the zr component includes only 5 ﬁlaments, (ﬁlament size 800 µm), because
the zr component shows a distinct pattern for each ﬁlament, making it diﬃcult to discern when 40
ﬁlaments are included.
It is observed in ﬁgure 27 that the hoop strain is the numerically largest strain component of the
four, and it has a uniformly growing strain towards the inner radius (IR) of the pancake stack.
The strain is largest towards the center of the magnet, pancake stack #1, and seems to be reduced
towards the outer pancake stacks. For the non-ﬁlamentized stack, the proﬁle has a slight diagonal
proﬁle, where the upper left corner has the largest strain, while the lower right corner has the lowest
strain. When the ﬁlamentization is performed, this diagonal proﬁle is evened out, and the hoop
strain proﬁle becomes vertically uniform. According to this preliminary analysis, the hoop strain
has not been reduced notably by ﬁlamentization.
The radial strain, ﬁgure 28, has a similar, but reversed tendency, with a large negative strain towards
the IR, which becomes (numerically) smaller towards the middle. The diagonal proﬁle is even more
Page 37 of 53
==PAGE:41==
6
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
εϕ [%]
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.10
#20
#18
#15
#10
#1
εϕ [%], filamentized
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.10
#20
#18
#15
#10
#1
Figure 27: Hoop strain for non-ﬁlamentized and ﬁlamentized (100 µm ﬁlament size) pancake stacks
no. #1, #10, #15, #18, and #20.
εr [%]
-0.12
-0.10
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
#20
#18
#15
#10
#1
εr [%], filamentized
#20
#18
#15
#10
#1
-0.10
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
Figure 28: Radial strain for non-ﬁlamentized and ﬁlamentized (100 µm ﬁlament size) pancake stacks
no. #1, #10, #15, #18, and #20.
prevalent for the radial strain, but becomes evened out when ﬁlamentization is performed. The
strain levels are slightly reduced in the ﬁlamentized case, compared to the non-ﬁlamentized case.
Apart from some small, local strain features, the axial strain uniformly (numerically) increases
towards the IR. The numerically largest strain is towards the IR, but in the lower corner, a small
patch with near zero strain appears for pancake stacks #15, #18, #20. Similarly, towards the outer
radius (OR), where the strain is small, there is a small region in the lower corner with a numerically
large strain, also for coil #10. In the ﬁlamentized case, these patches have disappeared, and the
strain proﬁles have evened out vertically. The strain levels in the two geometries are generally very
similar.
For the zr component, ﬁgure 30, the shear strain is almost uniformly zero for pancake stacks no. #1
and #10. The inside of the pancake stacks #15, #18, and #20 shows some strain, while towards the
boundaries the strain goes to zero. For the ﬁlamentized pancake stacks, a similar behavior is seen in
each individual ﬁlament, where there is a small positive strain inside each ﬁlament, but towards the
ﬁlament edges it becomes negative. Overall the strain is reduced when ﬁlamentization is performed.
All in all, according to this preliminary study of the strain by use of surface ﬁgures, the ﬁlamentization
has the eﬀect of vertically evening out the strain proﬁles. The overall strain levels do not seem to
be reduced notably when ﬁlamentization is performed, and the largest strains seem to be found in
pancake #1, which is unexpected when considering the results from Hahn et al [1], where the radially
outer part of the outermost coil was damaged. However, the purpose of this preliminary study was
to gain an overview of the behavior of the strain in the pancake stacks, and the strain behavior will
be investigated in more detail. For brevity not all of the components will be analyzed further, and
based on these results further analysis will be done on the hoop strain, due to it being the largest
strain component. The eﬀect of other ﬁlament sizes on the hoop strain will be considered, too.
Page 38 of 53
==PAGE:42==
6
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
εz [%]
-0.10
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
#20
#18
#15
#10
#1
εz [%], filamentized
-0.10
-0.09
-0.08
-0.07
-0.06
-0.05
-0.04
-0.03
#20
#18
#15
#10
#1
Figure 29: Axial strain for non-ﬁlamentized and ﬁlamentized (100 µm ﬁlament size) pancake stacks
no. #1, #10, #15, #18, and #20.
εzr [%], filamentized
0.01
0
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
εzr [%]
#20
#18
#15
#10
#1
#20
#18
#15
#10
#1
-5
-15
0
5
10
15
-10
x10-3
Figure 30: zr strain component for non-ﬁlamentized and ﬁlamentized (800 µm ﬁlament size) pancake
stacks no. #1, #10, #15, #18, and #20.
6.4
Detailed analysis of hoop strain and the eﬀect of multi-ﬁlamentization
In order to get a better view of what happens to the hoop strain throughout a pancake stack as
multi-ﬁlamentization is performed, the hoop strain will be calculated along lines through the pancake
stacks. First, three lines in the radial direction, lying on the top and bottom boundary, as well as
going through the middle of stack #20 are investigated. The hoop strain is evaluated along these
lines and plotted as curves in ﬁgure 31 for non-ﬁlamented tape and 5 and 40 ﬁlaments, corresponding
to 800 µm and 100 µm ﬁlament sizes, respectively. It is observed that there is almost no change in
the curves as ﬁlamentization is introduced. This means there is no notable change along axial slices
of pancake stack #20 as multi-ﬁlamentization is performed. Looking at ﬁgure 27, it is assumed that
the other pancake stacks show the same behavior, thus this will not be investigated further.
Instead, hoop strain will be evaluated along radial slices of pancake stacks #1, #10, #15, #20 (stack
#18 is excluded for brevity). Three cut lines are made parallel to the z-axis along the inner and
OR boundary, and a middle line, along tape winding no. 123. The hoop strain is evaluated for
non-ﬁlamentized tape and ﬁlamentized tape with 5, 10, and 40 ﬁlaments, corresponding to ﬁlament
sizes 800 µm, 400 µm, and 100 µm, and the results are shown in ﬁgures 32 and 33. It is important
to note that the strains in diﬀerent pancakes and positions are shown in diﬀerent scales. For the
non-ﬁlamentized tape (green curves), it is observed that strain increases from the lower edge (z = 0)
to the top edge (z = 4 mm), and that the strain for ﬁlamented tapes generally lies in between the
edge strain values of the non-ﬁlamentized tape. This is true for pancake stacks #20, #15, #10. For
stack #1 the non-ﬁlamentized strain has a diﬀerent proﬁle. For the IR and OR, the strain is largest
towards the edges of the tape width, and decrease in the middle. For the middle radius there is a
uniformly decreasing strain from the lower edge to the top edge.
When the ﬁlamentization is performed, pancake stacks #20 and #15 have similar behavior. The
strain curves become more ﬂat, with strain values lying in between the edge values of the non-
Page 39 of 53
==PAGE:43==
6
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
0.1
0.2
0.3
Tape top
1 filament
5 filaments
40 filaments
0.1
0.2
0.3
[%]
Tape middle
1 filament
5 filaments
40 filaments
20
30
40
50
60
r [mm]
0.1
0.2
0.3
Tape bottom
1 filament
5 filaments
40 filaments
33
34
35
36
37
0.16
0.18
Figure 31: Hoop strain along the top, middle, and bottom of pancake stack #20, for non-ﬁlamentized
tape, and tape ﬁlamented in 5 and 40 ﬁlaments, corresponding to 800 µm and 100 µm ﬁlament sizes,
respectively.
Page 40 of 53
==PAGE:44==
6
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
0.300
0.305
0.310
0.315
Inner radius
[%], Pancake stack #20
1 filament
5 filaments
40 filaments
0.130
0.131
0.132
Middle radius
0
1
2
3
4
z [mm]
0.081
0.082
0.083
Outer radius
(a)
0.325
0.330
0.335
0.340
Inner radius
[%], Pancake stack #15
0.140
0.142
Middle radius
1 filament
5 filaments
10 filaments
40 filaments
0
1
2
3
4
z [mm]
0.086
0.087
0.088
Outer radius
(b)
Figure 32: Hoop strain along radial slices at the inner, middle, and outer radius of pancake stacks #20
and #15, for non-ﬁlamentized tape, and tape ﬁlamented in 5, 10, and 40 ﬁlaments, corresponding
to 800 µm, 200 µm, and 100 µm ﬁlament sizes, respectively. For pancake #20, the 10 ﬁlaments
geometry is not included, because of a non-converging simulation. Note that the strains in diﬀerent
locations and pancakes are shown in diﬀerent scales.
ﬁlamentized tape.
This means that the maximum value of strain on the tape is larger for the
non-ﬁlamentized tape than the ﬁlamentized tapes, even though the average strain values for the
ﬁlamentized tapes are generally larger than the non-ﬁlamentized tape. The largest change in the
curve is between the non-ﬁlamentized and the 5 ﬁlament tapes. Introducing more ﬁlaments in some
cases leads to a lower strain, and sometimes it leads to a greater overall strain.
Pancake stack #10 has a similar behavior to stacks #20 and #15 w.r.t. the non-ﬁlamentized tapes,
where the maximum strain value is on the top edge of the tape. For the IR, the maximum strain
is reduced continually as more ﬁlaments are introduced. For the middle and outer radii, the lowest
maximum strain value is found for the 5 ﬁlaments tape, with the other two tape geometries following
closely.
For pancake stack #1, the behavior is diﬀerent. The strain is largest overall on the lower boundary,
and reduces further into the tape. For the middle radius, all four tape geometries have a similar
reduction in strain towards the upper edge of the tape width. For the inner and outer radii, the
strain begins to grow towards the upper edge, with the non-ﬁlamentized tape growing the most, and
the 40 ﬁlaments tape growing just a little for the IR, and not at all for the OR.
Apart from pancake stack #1, the maximum hoop strain is overall reduced slightly when multi-
ﬁlamentization is performed. The largest hoop strain is found along the top edge of the pancake
stacks, and by the ’smoothening’ of the strain proﬁle, the average strain becomes larger, but with a
lower maximum on the upper edge. For pancake stack #1, the maximum strain becomes progressively
larger the more ﬁlaments are introduced, which is opposite to the behavior of the other stacks. In
Page 41 of 53
==PAGE:45==
6
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
0.3425
0.3450
0.3475
0.3500
Inner radius
[%], Pancake stack #10
0.145
0.146
Middle radius
1 filament
5 filaments
10 filaments
40 filaments
0
1
2
3
4
z [mm]
0.089
0.090
0.091
Outer radius
(a)
0.3526
0.3528
Inner radius
[%], Pancake stack #1
0.1487
0.1488
0.1489
Middle radius
1 filament
5 filaments
10 filaments
40 filaments
0
1
2
3
4
z [mm]
0.09172
0.09174
0.09176
Outer radius
(b)
Figure 33: Hoop strain along radial slices at the inner, middle, and outer radius of pancake stacks
#10 and #1, for non-ﬁlamentized tape, and tape ﬁlamented in 5, 10, and 40 ﬁlaments, corresponding
to 800 µm, 200 µm, and 100 µm ﬁlament sizes, respectively.
order to more clearly quantify the reduction of hoop strain, the maximum values of hoop strain for
all pancake stacks in all the diﬀerent ﬁlamentization geometries are shown in ﬁgure 34. Note that in
this ﬁgure the vertical axis is broken in three segments, and the scales of the three axes are diﬀerent.
The uppermost has a tick spacing of 0.02%, the middle one has a spacing of 0.01%, and the lower
one has a tick spacing of 0.005%.
It is observed that the hoop strain becomes larger the further one goes to the center of the magnet,
with the largest strain being in pancake stack #1. The general trend for the IR is that the ﬁlamenti-
zation reduces the maximum strain, with the strain becoming lower the more ﬁlaments are included.
It is also observed that for stack #1, ﬁlamentization has almost no eﬀect. This could also be seen
in ﬁgure 33(b), where the vertical axis was in a very narrow band.
For the middle radial slice (Mid), the strain levels are around 40% lower than for the IR. The
ﬁlamentization does not as clearly reduce the strain, but overall the 5 ﬁlaments geometry has the
lowest strain levels. Lastly, for the OR the strain levels are around 70% lower than for the IR,
with the non-ﬁlamentized tape having the largest strain. Again the geometry with 5 ﬁlaments has
the lowest overall strain.
In table 5 the absolute and relative reduction of strain are given for
each pancake stack and for each radial slice position, when comparing the non-ﬁlamentized and
the optimal ﬁlament geometry. The diﬀerence in strain for pancake stack #1 is on the order of
10−5 % (absolute diﬀerence), and those values have not been included. It is noted, however, that
ﬁlamentization did not improve on the maximum strain in pancake stack #1, as is observed in ﬁgure
33(b). Overall the reduction in strain when choosing the optimal ﬁlamentization geometry is less
than 0.01% (absolute value). For the IR the average reduction is 0.0057%, corresponding to a stress
reduction 6 MPa. For the middle radial slice the average reduction is 0.0011%, corresponding to a
stress reduction of 1 MPa. Lastly for the OR, the average reduction is 0.0016%, corresponding to
Page 42 of 53
==PAGE:46==
6
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
0.320
0.340
0.360
1 filament
5 filaments
10 filaments
40 filaments
0.130
0.140
0.150
[%]
IR
Mid
OR
IR
Mid
OR
IR
Mid
OR
IR
Mid
OR
0.085
0.090
#20
#15
#10
#1
Figure 34: Maximum hoop strain found in various pancake stacks, for diﬀerent ﬁlamentization
geometries. IR, Mid, and OR stand for inner radius, middle radius, and outer radius, respectively.
a reduction of 2 MPa. These stress reductions are very low, and it is unlikely that they will have a
signiﬁcant eﬀect on any magnet design.
It is interesting to note that the largest strain is for the inner radius, and it gets progressively lower
towards the outer radius. This is opposite of what is expected from the classical hoop stress, σφ =
JφBzr. The reduction in strain also does not resemble what was observed for the single tape analysis
shown in ﬁgure 21, where the reduction of maximum strain was 55% and 73% when going from non-
ﬁlamentized to 5 and 10 ﬁlaments, respectively. Neither is the reduction in strain comparable to the
reduction in SCIF observed in the study by Yanagisawa et al [7], when ﬁlamentization is introduced.
In that study the SCIF was also found to be reduced monotonically as more ﬁlaments were used,
which is not what is observed regarding the reduction of strain for increasing number of ﬁlaments.
The damage from the quench of the 45.5 T NHMFL magnet [1] was observed in the top pancake
stack, towards the radially outer windings. This does not correspond well with what is observed in
the results of this study. The largest hoop strain is found towards the IR of the coil, with pancake
stack #1 having the largest hoop strain, which gradually decreases the further towards the outer
pancake one goes.
In the study by Xia et al [4] it is concluded that a continuum bulk mechanical model, similar to
what is used in this study, is not adequate for modeling dry-wound, high-ﬁeld REBCO magnets, and
it underestimates the hoop stresses and overestimates the radial stresses. Also they ﬁnd that the
non-uniform radial deformation in the tape width direction due to screening currents is not captured
in the bulk model. In short, the results for the hoop strain are not as expected for non-ﬁlamentized
nor multi-ﬁlamentized CC, based on preliminary studies and studies performed by other authors.
Page 43 of 53
==PAGE:47==
6
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Pancake stack
IR
Mid
OR
rel.
abs.
rel.
abs.
rel.
abs.
#20
1.6%
0.0052%
0.6%
0.0009%
1.9%
0.0016%
#15
2.2%
0.0074%
1.1%
0.0015%
2.0%
0.0018%
#10
1.3%
0.0045%
0.6%
0.0009%
1.5%
0.0014%
#1
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
Optimal geometry
40 ﬁlaments
5 ﬁlaments
5 ﬁlaments
Table 5: Relative (rel) and absolute (abs) improvement between the non-ﬁlamentized and ﬁlament
geometry with the lowest strain for the pancake stacks in 34. Note that for pancake stack #1, the
diﬀerence between the diﬀerent ﬁlament geometries was so small, that it has been written simply as
0.0%.
Page 44 of 53
==PAGE:48==
7
CONCLUSION
7
Conclusion
An electromagnetic model based on the T -A formulation has been developed for simulating REBCO
superconductors in a large magnet coil system setting. Single pancake stacks have been modeled
one at a time, consisting of 244 windings each, with simulation times of 1-2 hours. The supercon-
ductor physics (current distribution, magnetic ﬁelds) has been veriﬁed by comparing to analytical
models for thin sheet superconductors, as well as by comparison to other state-of-the-art simulation
studies. Multi-ﬁlamentization of the superconductor has been performed, and the eﬀect of ﬁlamen-
tization has been investigated, for ﬁlamentization geometries consisting of 1, 5, 10, and 40 ﬁlaments,
corresponding to ﬁlament sizes of 4 mm, 800 µm, 400 µm, and 100 µm, respectively.
A mechanical model has been developed based on an isotropic bulk approximation and inﬁnite friction
between individual windings, resulting in a no-slip, no separation mechanical model. The four non-
zero strain components resulting from a system with cylindrical symmetry have been investigated
for a REBCO coil magnet system, where the strain distribution has been evaluated for a series of
pancake stacks.
The eﬀect of multi-ﬁlamentization on the qualitative strain distributions of the
pancake stacks was found to be small. Due to the hoop strain being the largest strain component,
and reports of large hoop stresses due to non-uniform deformation of CC windings, the hoop strain
was investigated further. The eﬀect of multi-ﬁlamentization of the superconductor on the hoop strain
was evaluated, and it showed a slight reduction of maximum hoop strain when ﬁlamentization was
performed in pancake stacks #10, #15, and #20. However, for pancake stack #1, where the strain
was found to be the largest, no reduction in maximum hoop strain was observed when ﬁlamentization
was performed. The optimal ﬁlamentization geometry depends on which part of the pancake stack
is investigated. At the inner radius, the optimal ﬁlamentization geometry is 40 ﬁlaments (100 µm),
while for the middle and outer radius, the optimal ﬁlamentization geometry is 5 ﬁlaments (800 µm).
The reduction in hoop strain is overall less than 0.01%, which is much lower than expected, based
on: 1) Preliminary simulations of a single 10 mm winding, which showed a reduction of 55% and
73% for 5 (2 mm) and 10 ﬁlaments (1 mm), respectively, and 2) reports of signiﬁcant reduction of
SCIF when ﬁlamentizing the CC.
The unexpected results for the strain reduction is likely due to the mechanical model that is used
in this study, which is too limited. The pancake stacks have been treated as isotropic bulks, where
the individual windings have not been able to slip or separate from each other. This may be too
strong a constraint to put on the system, which results in the true eﬀect of multi-ﬁlamentization not
being captured by the model. The behavior resulting from a non-uniform load proﬁle on individual
ﬁlaments, may not be captured when the windings are glued together, since the windings are not
able to deform separately. According to the study by Xia et al [4], a continuum bulk mechanical
model, similar to what is used in this study, is not adequate for the given magnet system. This
supports the conclusion, that the mechanical model used in this study is too limited for the analysis
of multi-ﬁlamentization of CC.
Although the strain results were not as expected, hypothesis 1 can be conﬁrmed. A model based on
the T -A formulation has been developed, and thoroughly tested w.r.t. the screening currents and
forces that are acting on a REBCO coil, and the results are in agreement with other state-of-the-art
models. Hypothesis 2 regarding the reduction of strain levels can not be conﬁrmed. The maximum
strain levels were found at the inner radius of pancake #1, and at this speciﬁc location, the strain
was not reduced when multi-ﬁlamentization was performed. However, for other pancake stacks, the
hoop strain was reduced only slightly when ﬁlamentization was performed.
7.1
Outlook
In this study the central focus has been on the electromagnetic model. Although the electromagnetic
model shows good results, hypothesis 2 of the study could not be conﬁrmed, due to an inadequate
mechanical model. In order to test hypothesis 2 further, an improved mechanical model should be
Page 45 of 53
==PAGE:49==
7
CONCLUSION
developed. Such a model could include discrete contacts between windings, as suggested by Xia et
al [4], which allows for sliding and separation of windings. This would not constrain the movement
and deformation of the windings as much, and give a more accurate physical picture.
Throughout the study a series of assumptions have been made. The mechanical model has been
based on the assumption that the CC could be treated as an isotropic bulk. This could be improved
by the lighter assumption of a transversely isotropic medium, with an anisotropic normal direction.
Also the co-wound steel had been absorbed into the CC, with the approximation that a weighted
average of Young’s modulus could be used. A more advanced mechanical model could model the
steel co-winding as separate domains that also can slip and separate.
In the electromagnetic model it was assumed that the ﬁlaments were uncoupled, meaning no trans-
verse currents could run between ﬁlaments.
In a further study, this could be included, e.g.
by
deﬁning a transverse conductivity between ﬁlaments, which allows for coupling currents to ﬂow.
Lastly, the ﬁlamentization process has not been discussed in this thesis. Assuming that a more
elaborate mechanical model shows a decrease in strain when multi-ﬁlamentization is performed, a
feasibility study could be done, where the negative impact of ﬁlamentization on the performance of
the CC should be weighted up against the reduction in strain on the magnet system.
7.2
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors, Anders C. Wulﬀ, Andrea R. Insinga, and Asger B. Abrahamsen,
for the aid and insightful discussions provided throughout this project. Also a thanks to Henrik Lund
Frandsen for a discussion regarding the development of the mechanical model.
Page 46 of 53
==PAGE:50==
REFERENCES
References
[1] Seungyong Hahn, Kwanglok Kim, Kwangmin Kim, Xinbo Hu, Thomas Painter, Iain Dixon,
Seokho Kim, Kabindra Bhattarai, So Noguchi, Jan Jaroszynski, and D. Larbalestier.
45.5-
tesla direct-current magnetic ﬁeld generated with a high-temperature superconducting magnet.
Nature, 570, 06 2019.
[2] Xinbo Hu, Michael Small, Kwanglok Kim, Kwangmin Kim, Kabindra Bhattarai, Anatolii
Polyanskii, Kyle Radcliﬀ, Jan Jaroszynski, Uijong Bong, Jeong Hwan Park, Seungyong Hahn,
and David Larbalestier. Analyses of the plastic deformation of coated conductors deconstructed
from ultra-high ﬁeld test coils. Superconductor Science and Technology, 33(9):095012, aug 2020.
[3] Martin Wilson. Superconducting Magnets. Clarendon Press, 1987.
[4] Jing Xia, Hongyu Bai, Huadong Yong, Hubertus W Weijers, Thomas A Painter, and Mark D
Bird. Stress and strain analysis of a REBCO high ﬁeld coil based on the distribution of shielding
current. Superconductor Science and Technology, 32(9):095005, jul 2019.
[5] Yi Li, Dongkeun Park, Yufan Yan, Yoonhyuck Choi, Jiho Lee, Philip C Michael, Siwei Chen,
Timing Qu, Juan Bascu˜n´an, and Yukikazu Iwasa. Magnetization and screening current in an
800 MHz (18.8 t) REBCO nuclear magnetic resonance insert magnet: experimental results and
numerical analysis. Superconductor Science and Technology, 32(10):105007, aug 2019.
[6] D. J. Kolb-Bond, E. Berrospe-Juarez, M. Bird, I. R. Dixon, H. W. Weijers, F. Trillaud, V. M. R.
Zermeno, and F. Grilli. Computing strains due to screening currents in rebco magnets. IEEE
Transactions on Applied Superconductivity, 30(4):1–5, 2020.
[7] Y. Yanagisawa, Y. Xu, X. Jin, H. Nakagome, and H. Maeda. Reduction of screening current-
induced magnetic ﬁeld of rebco coils by the use of multi-ﬁlamentary tapes. IEEE Transactions
on Applied Superconductivity, 25(3):1–5, 2015.
[8] Naoyuki Amemiya, Yusuke Sogabe, Satoshi Yamano, and Hisaki Sakamoto. Shielding current
in a copper-plated multiﬁlament coated conductor wound into a single pancake coil and exposed
to a normal magnetic ﬁeld. Superconductor Science and Technology, 32(11):115008, oct 2019.
[9] Edgar Berrospe-Juarez, Frederic Trillaud, V´ıctor M R Zerme˜no, and Francesco Grilli. Screening
current-induced ﬁeld and ﬁeld drift study in hts coils using t-a homogenous model. Journal of
Physics: Conference Series, 1559:012128, Jun 2020.
[10] Yufan Yan, Canjie Xin, Mingzhi Guan, Huajun Liu, Yunfei Tan, and Timing Qu. Screening
current eﬀect on the stress and strain distribution in REBCO high-ﬁeld magnets: experimental
veriﬁcation and numerical analysis. Superconductor Science and Technology, 33(5):05LT02, mar
2020.
[11] Z Hong, A M Campbell, and T A Coombs. Numerical solution of critical state in supercon-
ductivity by ﬁnite element software. Superconductor Science and Technology, 19(12):1246–1252,
oct 2006.
[12] Huiming Zhang, Min Zhang, and Weijia Yuan. An eﬃcient 3d ﬁnite element method model
based on the t–a formulation for superconducting coated conductors. Superconductor Science
and Technology, 30(2):024005, dec 2016.
[13] E. Berrospe-Juarez, F. Trillaud, V. M. R. Zerme˜no, F. Grilli, H. W. Weijers, and M. D. Bird.
Screening currents and hysteresis losses in the rebco insert of the 32 t all-superconducting magnet
using t-a homogenous model. IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity, 30(4):1–5, 2020.
Page 47 of 53
==PAGE:51==
REFERENCES
[14] H. W. Weijers, W. D. Markiewicz, A. J. Voran, S. R. Gundlach, W. R. Sheppard, B. Jarvis,
Z. L. Johnson, P. D. Noyes, J. Lu, H. Kandel, H. Bai, A. V. Gavrilin, Y. L. Viouchkov, D. C.
Larbalestier, and D. V. Abraimov.
Progress in the development of a superconducting 32 t
magnet with rebco high ﬁeld coils. IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity, 24(3):1–5,
2014.
[15] H. W. Weijers, W. D. Markiewicz, A. V. Gavrilin, A. J. Voran, Y. L. Viouchkov, S. R. Gundlach,
P. D. Noyes, D. V. Abraimov, H. Bai, S. T. Hannahs, and T. P. Murphy. Progress in the
development and construction of a 32-t superconducting magnet. IEEE Transactions on Applied
Superconductivity, 26(4):1–7, 2016.
[16] E. Zeldov, John R. Clem, M. McElfresh, and M. Darwin. Magnetization and transport currents
in thin superconducting ﬁlms. Phys. Rev. B, 1994.
[17] David J. Griﬃths. Electromagnetism for Physicists. Pearson, fourth edition, 2013.
[18] H. Kamerlingh Onnes. Further experiments with liquid helium. c. on the change of electric
resistance of pure metals at very low temperatures etc. iv. the resistance of pure mercury at
helium temperatures. Comm. Leiden, 220b, april 1911.
[19] Reinhold Kleiner and Werner Buckel. Superconductivity: An Introduction. Wiley, third edition,
2015.
[20] W. Meissner and R. Ochsenfeld. Ein neuer eﬀekt bei eintritt der supraleitf¨ahigkeit. Naturwis-
senschaften, 21:787–788, Nov 1933.
[21] J. Bardeen, L. N. Cooper, and J. R. Schrieﬀer.
Theory of superconductivity.
Phys. Rev.,
108:1175–1204, Dec 1957.
[22] J.G. Bednorz and K.A. M¨uller. Possible high tc superconductivity in the ba-la-cu-o system.
Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik B., 64:189–193, Apr 1986.
[23] M. K. Wu, J. R. Ashburn, C. J. Torng, P. H. Hor, R. L. Meng, L. Gao, Z. J. Huang, Y. Q.
Wang, and C. W. Chu. Superconductivity at 93 k in a new mixed-phase y-ba-cu-o compound
system at ambient pressure. Phys. Rev. Lett., 58:908–910, Mar 1987.
[24] Kristian Fossheim and Asle Sudbø. Superconductivity Physics and Applications. John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd, ﬁrst edition, 2004.
[25] Vil´em Bart˚unˇek, Jan Luxa, David Sedmidubsk´y, Tom´aˇs Hl´asek, and Ondˇrej Jankovsk´y. Mi-
croscale and nanoscale pinning centres in single-domain rebco superconductors. J. Mater. Chem.
C, 7:13010–13019, 2019.
[26] C. P. Bean. Magnetization of hard superconductors. Phys. Rev. Lett., 8:250–253, Mar 1962.
[27] D Uglietti. A review of commercial high temperature superconducting materials for large mag-
nets: from wires and tapes to cables and conductors. Superconductor Science and Technology,
32(5):053001, apr 2019.
[28] D. C. Larbalestier, J. Jiang, U. P. Trociewitz, F. Kametani, C. Scheuerlein, M. Dalban-Canassy,
M. Matras, P. Chen, N. C. Craig, P. J. Lee, and E. E. Hellstrom. A transformative supercon-
ducting magnet technology for ﬁelds well above 30 t using isotropic round wire multiﬁlament
bi2sr2cacu2o8-x conductor, 2013.
[29] SuperPower Inc.
2g hts wire, dec 2020.
http://www.superpower-inc.com/content/
2g-hts-wire.
[30] William S. Slaughter. The Linearized Theory of Elasticity. Springer Science+Business Media,
LLC, 2002.
Page 48 of 53
==PAGE:52==
REFERENCES
[31] B Lautrup. Physics of Continuous Matter: Exotic and Everyday Phenomena in the Macroscopic
World. CRC Press, 2011.
[32] C Barth, N Bagrets, K-P Weiss, C M Bayer, and T Bast. Degradation free epoxy impregnation
of REBCO coils and cables. Superconductor Science and Technology, 26(5):055007, mar 2013.
[33] M. Guan, S. Hahn, J. Bascu˜n´an, X. Wang, P. Gao, Y. Zhou, and Y. Iwasa. A parametric study
on overband radial build for a rebco 800-mhz insert of a 1.3-ghz lts/hts nmr magnet. IEEE
Transactions on Applied Superconductivity, 26(4):1–5, 2016.
[34] W. D. Markiewicz, D. C. Larbalestier, H. W. Weijers, A. J. Voran, K. W. Pickard, W. R.
Sheppard, J. Jaroszynski, A. Xu, R. P. Walsh, J. Lu, A. V. Gavrilin, and P. D. Noyes. Design
of a superconducting 32 t magnet with rebco high ﬁeld coils. IEEE Transactions on Applied
Superconductivity, 22(3):4300704–4300704, June 2012.
[35] Boyang Shen, Francesco Grilli, and Timothy Coombs. Overview of h -formulation: A versatile
tool for modeling electromagnetics in high-temperature superconductor applications.
IEEE
Access, PP:1–1, 05 2020.
[36] Y. Yang, H. Yong, X. Zhang, and Y. Zhou. Numerical simulation of superconducting generator
based on the t–a formulation. IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity, 30(8):1–11,
2020.
[37] Fei Liang, Sriharsha Venuturumilli, Huiming Zhang, Min Zhang, Jozef Kvitkovic, Sastry Pamidi,
Yawei Wang, and Weijia Yuan. A ﬁnite element model for simulating second generation high
temperature superconducting coils/stacks with large number of turns.
Journal of Applied
Physics, 122(4):043903, 2017.
[38] Naoyuki Amemiya, Naoki Tominaga, Ryuki Toyomoto, Takuma Nishimoto, Yusuke Sogabe,
Satoshi Yamano, and Hisaki Sakamoto. Coupling time constants of striated and copper-plated
coated conductors and the potential of striation to reduce shielding-current-induced ﬁelds in
pancake coils. Superconductor Science and Technology, 31(2):025007, jan 2018.
[39] H. M. Ledbetter.
Stainless-steel elastic constants at low temperatures.
Journal of Applied
Physics, 52(3):1587–1589, 1981.
[40] Walter Frei. Comsol blog: How much memory is needed to solve large comsol models?, oct 2014.
https://www.comsol.com/blogs/much-memory-needed-solve-large-comsol-models/.
[41] Jing Xia, Hongyu Bai, Jun Lu, Andrew V Gavrilin, Youhe Zhou, and Hubertus W Weijers.
Electromagnetic modeling of REBCO high ﬁeld coils by theH-formulation.
Superconductor
Science and Technology, 28(12):125004, oct 2015.
[42] Michael Tinkham. Introduction to Superconductivity. McGraw-Hill, Inc, second edition, 1996.
[43] Emanuel Maxwell. Isotope eﬀect in the superconductivity of mercury. Phys. Rev., 78:477–477,
May 1950.
[44] R. Brambilla, F. Grilli, L. Martini, M. Bocchi, and G. Angeli. A ﬁnite-element method frame-
work for modeling rotating machines with superconducting windings. IEEE Transactions on
Applied Superconductivity, 28(5):1–11, 2018.
[45] X Zhang, Z Zhong, H S Ruiz, J Geng, and T A Coombs. General approach for the determi-
nation of the magneto-angular dependence of the critical current of YBCO coated conductors.
Superconductor Science and Technology, 30(2):025010, dec 2016.
[46] Carmine Senatore, Christian Barth, Marco Bonura, Miloslav Kulich, and Giorgio Mondonico.
Field and temperature scaling of the critical current density in commercial REBCO coated
conductors. Superconductor Science and Technology, 29(1):014002, dec 2015.
Page 49 of 53
==PAGE:53==
REFERENCES
[47] Yoshinori Yanagisawa, Yasuaki Kominato, Hideki Nakagome, Tatsuhiko Fukuda, Takuya Take-
matsu, Tomoaki Takao, Masato Takahashi, and Hideaki Maeda. Eﬀect of coil current sweep
cycle and temperature change cycle on the screening current-induced magnetic ﬁeld for ybco-
coated conductor coils. AIP Conference Proceedings, 1434(1):1373–1380, 2012.
[48] Wulﬀet al. 2021 to be submitted. SUST.
Page 50 of 53
==PAGE:54==
A
TENSOR CALCULUS
A
Tensor calculus
The divergence of a second rank tensor in cylindrical coordinates is deﬁned as [30]
∇· S =
∂Srr
∂r
+ 1
r
∂Srφ
∂φ
+ ∂Srz
∂z
+ 1
r (Srr −Sφφ)

ˆer
+
∂Sφr
∂r
+ 1
r
∂Sφφ
∂φ
+ ∂Sφz
∂z
+ 1
r (Srφ + Sφr)

eφ
+
∂Szr
∂r
+ 1
r
∂Szφ
∂φ
+ ∂Szz
∂z
+ 1
r Szr

ez.
(44)
The gradient of a ﬁrst rank tensor in cylindrical coordinates is deﬁned as
∇u =∂ur
∂r ˆerˆer + 1
r
∂ur
∂φ −uφ

ˆerˆeφ + ∂ur
∂z ˆerˆez
+∂uφ
∂r ˆeφˆer + 1
r
∂uφ
∂φ + ur

ˆeφˆeφ + ∂uφ
∂z ˆeφˆez
+∂uz
∂r ˆezˆer + 1
r
∂uz
∂φ ˆezˆeφ + ∂uz
∂z ˆezˆez.
(45)
Page 51 of 53
==PAGE:55==
B
MODELING OF CRITICAL CURRENT DENSITY
B
Modeling of critical current density
The critical current densities are investigated for a Kim-like model and a practical ﬁt function for
coated conductors at low temperature and high magnetic ﬁelds. The Kim-like expression is given by
Jc(B, T) =
Jc0

1 +
√
k2B2z+B2r
B0
α ,
(46)
where Jc0 = 7.24 · 1011 A/m2, k = 9.13 · 10−3 and B0 = 0.4674 T, and α = 0.7518 are ﬁtting
parameters. The practical ﬁt function is given by
Jc(B, θ) =
k0
(B + β0)α0 +
k1
(B + β1)α1 × [ω2
1(B) cos2(θ −φ1) + sin2(θ −φ1)]−1/2,
(47)
ω1(B) = c1
 
B +
 1
c1
1/ϵ1!ϵ1
,
(48)
where k0, k1, α0, α1, β0, β1, φ1, c1, ϵ1 are ﬁtting parameters. The two expressions are evaluated for
magnetic ﬁelds ranging from 0 to 30 T and for ﬁeld angles of θ = [0◦, 30◦, 60◦, 90◦], where θ = 0◦
and θ = 90◦correspond to ﬁelds perpendicular and parallel to the wide face of the coated conductor,
respectively. The data is shown in ﬁgure 35. It is observed that for parallel ﬁelds the Kim-like
current density is larger overall. For the other ﬁeld orientations, the Kim-like model current density
is larger at low ﬁelds (< 1 T) and for very high ﬁelds (> 20 T), but for intermediate ﬁeld strengths,
around 3 T - 15 T, the practical ﬁt function is marginally larger. Alongside the model curves are
data points from CC by SuperPower Inc. [48], which is data for 4 K measurements with θ = 90◦. It
is observed that both Jc(B, θ) models underestimate the experimental critical current density.
Page 52 of 53
==PAGE:56==
B
MODELING OF CRITICAL CURRENT DENSITY
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
B
5 1010
1 1011
5 1011
Jc(B) [A/m2]
Solid = Kim-like model, dashed = reference study
= 0
= 0
= 45
= 45
= 90
= 90
SuperPower Inc
Figure 35: Critical current density as function of magnetic ﬁeld and angles for a Kim-like model and
a practical ﬁt function.
Page 53 of 53
