==PAGE:1==
Generalization in
Visual Reinforcement Learning
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Generalization in
Visual Reinforcement Learning
Master Thesis
January, 2021
By
Nicklas Hansen
Supervisors:
Ole Winther, Professor, PhD, Technical University of Denmark
Xiaolong Wang, Assistant Professor, PhD, UC San Diego
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Rokas Medonis
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Cognitive Systems,
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University
of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering,
MSc Eng.
Nicklas Hansen (s153077)
Signature
Date
ii
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In most real world scenarios, a policy trained by Reinforcement Learning (RL) in one en­
vironment needs to be deployed in another, potentially quite different environment. How­
ever, generalization across different environments is known to be hard, and the problem
is only exacerbated by high­dimensional inputs such as images. A natural solution would
be to keep training after deployment, but this cannot be done if the new environment
offers no reward signal, as is often the case in real world deployments. Previous work
addresses the problem of generalization by learning policies that are invariant to factors
of variation that are expected to be present during deployment; this is commonly achieved
through domain randomization or data augmentation. While these techniques are easily
applicable in supervised learning, in RL they are not. As more factors of variation are intro­
duced during training, policy optimization becomes increasingly more difficult, leading to
poor sample efficiency and unstable training, which may prevent the policy from learning
altogether. In this thesis, we explore alternative methods for generalization in RL, and pro­
pose two distinct frameworks: Policy Adaptation during Deployment (PAD) and Soft Data
Augmentation (SODA). PAD is a novel policy adaptation method that uses self­supervision
to continue learning even after deployment, without any rewards or human supervision.
While previous methods explicitly anticipate changes in the environment, PAD assumes
no knowledge of those changes, and adapts only using observations collected during de­
ployment. SODA addresses the scalability issues of data augmentation techniques by de­
coupling augmentation from policy learning. Specifically, SODA imposes a soft constraint
on the encoder that aims to maximize the mutual information between latent represen­
tations of augmented and non­augmented data, while the RL optimization process uses
strictly non­augmented data. We perform an extensive empirical evaluation of our meth­
ods on a diverse set of novel benchmarks for generalization, including deployments on a
real robot, and we show that both methods compare favorably to state­of­the­art methods
for visual RL. Implementations of our methods and benchmarks are available at https://
github.com/nicklashansen/dmcontrol-generalization-benchmark, and video results are avail­
able at https://nicklashansen.github.io/PAD and https://nicklashansen.github.io/SODA.
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my primary supervisor, Prof. Xiaolong Wang, for his brilliant support
and feedback throughout the preparation of this thesis and the work that surrounds it.
I additionally thank Prof. Ole Winther for his great supervision and academic support
throughout my studies and during thesis work, and my collaborators Rishabh Jangir, Yu
Sun, Prof. Guillem Alenya, Prof. Pieter Abbeel, Prof. Alexei (Aloysha) A. Efros, and
Prof. Lerrel Pinto for their tremendous support, input, and lengthy discussions during
our work on the project entitled Self­Supervised Policy Adaptation during Deployment. In
this context, I would like to especially thank Rishabh Jangir and Prof. Guillem Alenya
for making the real robot experiments possible during a global pandemic. I also extend
my thanks to Fenglu Hong, Joey Hejna, Ruihan Yang, Mohit Jain, Yueh­Hua (Kris) Wu,
Peter E. Christensen, and Frederik Mathiesen for helpful discussions surrounding our
work; Denis Yarats, Ilya Kostrikov, Michael (Misha) Laskin, Aravind Srinivas, Kimin Lee,
Vincenzo Lomonaco, and the dm_control team for their open­source contributions that
this thesis builds upon, as well as Alexander R. Johansen and Ali Mohebbi for their moral
support.
Part of the work described in this thesis was conducted as an individual study in Prof.
Alexei A. Efros’ group at the Berkeley Artificial Intelligence Lab (BAIR) during a stay at
UC Berkeley. Work on ideation, implementation, and initial results for the PAD method
presented in Chapter 5 were carried out at UC Berkeley, whereas our continued efforts
in further developing the method and project has been conducted as part of this thesis,
along with the proposed DMControl­GB and robotic manipulation benchmarks introduced
in Chapter 4, as well as the SODA method presented in Chapter 6, which were developed
during a stay in Prof. Xiaolong Wang’s lab at the ECE Department of UC San Diego.
This work has been supported, in part, by grants from DARPA, NSF 1730158 CI­New:
Cognitive Hardware and Software Ecosystem Community Infrastructure (CHASE­CI), NSF
ACI­1541349 CC*DNI Pacific Research Platform, a research grant from Qualcomm, and
a gift from TuSimple. This work was also funded, in part, by grants from Berkeley Deep­
Drive, SAP, and the European Research Council (ERC) from the European Union Horizon
2020 Programme under grant agreement no. 741930.
iv
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
5
2.1
Reinforcement Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Self­Supervised Representation Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3
Related Work
19
3.1
Learning Visual Invariances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.2
Self­Supervised Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.3
Test­Time Adaptation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.4
Visual Representations in Reinforcement Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.5
Reinforcement Learning in the Real World . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.6
Summary and Open Problems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4
Benchmarks for Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
27
4.1
DMControl Generalization Benchmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.2
Generalization in Navigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.3
From Simulations to Real Robots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5
Policy Adaptation during Deployment
33
5.1
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.2
Experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5.3
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
6
Soft Data Augmentation
49
6.1
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
6.2
Experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
6.3
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
7
Discussion and Future Perspectives
65
7.1
Towards Broadly Intelligent Behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
7.2
Policy Adaptation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
7.3
On the Importance of Benchmarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
8
Conclusion
69
A DMControl­GB Usage and Implementation Details
85
B Algorithm Implementations
91
C Pre­print: Self­Supervised Policy Adaptation during Deployment
95
D Pre­print: Generalization in Reinforcement Learning by Soft Data Augmen­
tation
113
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Deep Reinforcement Learning (RL) combines classical RL methods with the expressive­
ness of strong function approximators such as neural networks, which have enjoyed rapid
development over the past decade, and has gained great interest from especially the ar­
tificial intelligence community over its numerous success stories. Notable applications of
deep RL include game playing (Mnih et al., 2013; Silver et al., 2016; Pathak et al., 2017;
Berner et al., 2019; Cobbe et al., 2019b), robotic manipulation (Pinto & Gupta, 2016;
Levine et al., 2016; Nair et al., 2018; Peng et al., 2018; Quillen et al., 2018; Zhu et al.,
2019), autonomous vehicles (Gandhi et al., 2017; Siam et al., 2017; Sallab et al., 2017;
Zhu et al., 2017; Pan et al., 2018; Kiran et al., 2020), and natural language processing
(Grissom et al., 2014; Li et al., 2016; Johnson et al., 2017; Paulus et al., 2018), but the
true scope and potential of RL reaches far beyond these applications.
The success of these works can to a large extend be attributed to joint learning of percep­
tion and decision­making, both parameterized by deep neural networks and trained by
gradient descent in end­to­end optimization frameworks. By leveraging recent advances
in machine learning, policies can presently be optimized to perform complex decision­
making directly from image observations, without access to any state information, which
we in this work shall denote visual reinforcement learning, or simply visual RL. Learning
from raw sensory inputs such as images and depth sensors is desirable due to their flexi­
bility and accessibility, but also pose difficult perception and generalization problems due
to their high dimensionality. Since these problems are not unique to visual RL, it can be
helpful to consider literature in related fields.
Although neural networks are wildly popular and successful in supervised learning, they
are commonly understood to be prone to distributional shift between the finite dataset
used during training and the often far more diverse collection of samples encountered
in the wild, which is a major obstacle for deployment of reliable machine learning sys­
tems in the real world. In the field of computer vision, neural networks have been shown
to be prone to catastrophical misclassification on adversarially selected samples, both
synthetic (Goodfellow et al., 2015; Sharif et al., 2016; Brown et al., 2017) and naturally
occurring (Kurakin et al., 2017; Hendrycks et al., 2019c), that – for the human eye – are
indistinguishable to other samples. Despite a decade of architectural improvements and
sophisticated optimization methods, neural networks with millions of parameters trained
on large­scale image datasets such as ImageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015) still are prone
to such seemingly trivial generalization errors.
While one may argue that these adversarially selected samples are isolated events, other
works paint a more dire picture. Recht et al. (2019) collects new test sets for two com­
monly used image recognition benchmarks, CIFAR10 (Krizhevsky, 2009) and ImageNet,
closely following the procedure of the original data collections, and evaluate a variety of
state­of­the­art convolutional neural networks trained on the original datasets. Perhaps
surprisingly, the authors discover a consistent 3%­15% drop in accuracy on the CIFAR10
dataset across all considered models, and a shocking 11%­14% accuracy drop on Ima­
geNet. An explanation for this could be that almost a decade of algorithmic development
commonly benchmarked on these two datasets might have led to indirect overfitting to
the test sets. However, Recht et al. (2019) finds that the models that perform better on
the original test set also generalize better to the new test sets, which effectively invali­
dates this hypothesis. What, then, could the explanation be? The authors conjecture that
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
1
==PAGE:10==
the reason for this substantial performance drop may lie in minutiae of the data clean­
ing process, which is supported by related work on model robustness to perturbations
(Hendrycks & Dietterich, 2019; Shankar et al., 2019; Zhang, 2019). These works find
that a classifier trained on ImageNet often fails to generalize to even subtle perturbations
of the ImageNet test set, such as JPEG­compression and the passing of time in natural
videos. Even worse, a model trained to be invariant to e.g. Gaussian noise through data
augmentation performs no better than the baseline on test images with speckle noise.
Although these findings are indeed discouraging, stochastic data augmentation and other
types of randomization are still highly valuable tools for regularization of neural networks
across a multitude of fields. In visual RL, researchers have shown that randomization of
visuals and dynamics in a simulated training environment can transfer visio­motor poli­
cies trained by deep RL to the real world (Tobin et al., 2017; Sadeghi & Levine, 2017;
Peng et al., 2018; Ramos et al., 2019). By randomizing elements such as texture, color,
light, camera, and physical properties, the training distribution covers sufficient factors of
variation for the policy to generalize to a replica of the simulation constructed in the real
world. This technique is commonly referred to as domain randomization. While it can be
an effective way to build models robust to visual diversity, it still assumes that the target
environment is covered by the training distribution, and it therefore simply elevates the
problem to a generalization problem across distributions of environments.
Unlike in supervised learning, the policy that we optimize is also commonly used to col­
lect training data. Therefore, the harder the learning problem, the harder it is to generate
meaningful training data. Since domain randomization relies on injecting additional fac­
tors of variation into the training environment, increasing the size of the training distribution
also negatively impacts the sample efficiency of learning algorithms. Consequently, if the
training distribution becomes too wide, policy optimization becomes unstable and as a
result the policy may never improve. On the other hand, it has also been shown that, just
like in the field of computer vision, policies trained by domain randomization generalize no
better than their fixed­environment baselines to test environments outside of the random­
ized training distribution (Packer et al., 2018). For those reasons, practitioners cannot
indiscriminately add factors of variation, and can only afford to randomize elements that
are deemed likely to vary during policy deployment. To do this effectively, practitioners
rely on their own intuition, experimentation, and privileged information about test environ­
ments, which is hardly a scalable solution to broadly intelligent behavior in machines.
Another solution to the problem of generalization, albeit naïve, is to simply continue train­
ing the policy in the new environment that it is deployed in (Julian et al., 2020). However,
this cannot be done if the new environment offers no reward signal. Even if a reward sig­
nal can be engineered for each environment that the policy is deployed in, it may require
prohibitively many trials to achieve satisfactory behavior, and the approach cannot scale
to the endless amount of variability that may be encountered during deployment.
In this work, we explore new methods for generalization in visual RL that are not detrimen­
tal to the sample efficiency and stability of the policy optimization, do not rely on privileged
information about the test environments, and do not require explicit human supervision for
adaptation to their deployment environments. To satisfy these properties, we draw inspi­
ration from the literature of self­supervised learning, a sub­field of representation learning
concerning methods that learn expressive representations without explicit supervision or
semantic categories. Instead, self­supervised methods derive meaningful training sig­
nals from the data itself, and is thus capable of learning powerful representations from
vast amounts of unlabelled data. Joint optimization of auxiliary self­supervised objectives
2
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:11==
together with the primary RL objective(s) can therefore be a useful tool for improving the
representational expressiveness in policies parameterized by neural networks. It can both
act as a regularization method since the joint optimization imposes a soft constraint on the
learned latent space, and simultaneously also be an effective way to derive a complemen­
tary training signal in instances where the RL training signal is unreliable or perhaps en­
tirely absent. Concretely, this work discusses two distinct applications of self­supervised
learning for improving the generalization in visual RL, both of which prove highly effective
in part because image observations contain rich and structured information that can be
exploited for self­supervised learning.
The first method, Policy Adaptation during Deployment (PAD), explores the use of auxil­
iary self­supervised learning methods for adaptation of policies to unseen environments.
During deployment, a reward signal may be unavailable if the agent is deployed e.g. in the
real world, and adaptation using the RL objective is therefore not possible. We propose
to instead adapt policies by optimizing a self­supervised objective during deployment, us­
ing only raw sensory observations collected during interaction with the new environment.
PAD proves to be a simple and intuitive, yet powerful method for adaptation to diverse en­
vironmental changes, including both visuals and dynamics. By adapting to environments
in an online manner rather than randomizing during training, PAD does not affect the sam­
ple efficiency of the learning algorithm, and requires no privileged knowledge about the
environment in which it is deployed, which is of importance in e.g. sim2real problems
where the environment variations can be difficult to specify formally.
The second method, Soft Data Augmentation (SODA), addresses two of the major obsta­
cles in training robust policies by domain randomization and data augmentation methods:
sample efficiency and stability of the RL optimization process. While previous work at­
tempts to learn policies directly from augmented observations (either by domain random­
ization or by data augmentation), SODA uses strictly non­augmented observations for
policy learning, and instead performs auxiliary representation learning using augmented
observations. Through its auxiliary task, SODA learns to generalize visually by max­
imizing the mutual information between latent representations of augmented and non­
augmented observations. The proposed auxiliary task shares a learned encoder with the
policy, and SODA therefore imposes a soft constraint on the learned representation. As
the policy is learned only from non­augmented observations, the difficulty of RL optimiza­
tion is greatly reduced, while SODA still benefits substantially from data augmentation
through its representation learning, hence we refer to it as a soft data augmentation.
The proposed methods, as well as a collection of strong baselines from recent literature,
are extensively evaluated empirically in simulation on novel benchmarks for generaliza­
tion in visual RL, and are shown to transfer successfully to robotic manipulation tasks on
a real robotic arm under both stationary and non­stationary conditions. To systematically
evaluate the proposed methods, we propose the novel DMControl Generalization Bench­
mark (DMControl­GB), a benchmark for visual generalization in continuous control by RL,
based on the DeepMind Control suite (DMControl) Tassa et al. (2018). DMControl is a
collection of challenging and diverse continuous control tasks with both dense and sparse
reward signals, and the controls are operated either from ground­truth states or from im­
age observations. We benchmark algorithms on a subset of tasks from DMControl, where
both baselines and the individual tasks are selected on the basis of recent advances
in RL from image observations Yarats et al. (2019); Laskin et al. (2020b;a); Kostrikov
et al. (2020); Stooke et al. (2020); Sekar et al. (2020); Lee et al. (2020a). Whereas prior
work only considers sample efficiency and end­performance of RL methods, the proposed
DMControl­GB benchmark evaluates generalization to a variety of visually diverse test en­
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
3
==PAGE:12==
vironments. The test environments are designed to mimic distribution shifts that can be
expected in real­world deployment of policies, and serve to provide a common benchmark
for visual RL research. To encourage further research in this direction, both PAD, SODA,
DMControl­GB, and baselines are open­sourced.
This thesis aims to provide a modern perspective on the challenges of generalization in
RL from visual observations, and offers novel approaches to the problem that serve as
initial steps towards new directions of research in visual RL. The main body of the thesis
is divided into 7 chapters and covers three stand­alone products of our work. Chapter 2
presents the reader to relevant background, Chapter 3 discusses related work, Chapter
4 introduces the proposed benchmarks and procedures for systematic evaluation of gen­
eralization ability, Chapter 5 proposes the PAD method for self­supervised policy adapta­
tion, Chapter 6 proposes SODA as a self­supervised alternative to domain randomization,
Chapter 7 offers a holistic discussion of the proposed methods as well as our perspective
on the future of visual RL, and Chapter 8 concludes the thesis.
4
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:13==
2
Background
The main contributions of this thesis are at the intersection of reinforcement learning,
computer vision, and robotics. This section aims to provide the unfamiliar reader with
the necessary background to better appreciate our work. Section 2.1 introduces core RL
concepts and algorithms, and Section 2.2 presents the reader to self­supervised learn­
ing methods related to our work. Content presented in this chapter is to be considered
self­contained, but assumes a background in deep learning, probability, and optimization,
which are all fundamental to our work.
2.1
Reinforcement Learning
Reinforcement Learning (RL) is an area of machine learning that is generally concerned
with the learning of sequential decision­making from a sequence of observations. In RL,
the goal is to learn a policy – a mapping from states to immediately executable actions
– that maximizes a potentially unknown but observable numerical reward signal. Unlike
supervised learning, the learner is not told which actions to take in which state, and instead
have to iteratively interact with its environment to learn which behavior is more favorable
in terms of the cumulative reward that it receives. The learner that executes a policy within
an environment is called an agent, and the state of the environment as observed by the
agent is formally referred to as an observation. The reward signal can be thought of as a
numerical measure for how well an agent is performing, and the objective in RL problems
is to achieve some goal by maximizing the cumulative reward.
A goal can be a concrete state of a dynamical system as in classical control theory, it can
be a numerical threshold (e.g. obtaining a specific score in a video game) or it can be a
more abstract and temporally spaced­out behavior, such as driving a car without crashing.
The purpose of the reward signal is to reward an agent for performing a desired behavior
and/or punish an agent for performing undesired behavior, similar to operant conditioning
as popularized by the work of Skinner (1938) on animal learning from a psychological
perspective. Some of the key challenges in RL include partial observability of states, high­
dimensional and potentially infinite state, observation and action spaces, and delayed
rewards which make credit assignment difficult. In this thesis, we address the problem
of high­dimensional observation spaces. This section aims to provide the reader with the
necessary background in RL to appreciate our work.
2.1.1
Markov Decision Processes
A Markov Decision Process (MDP) is a classical formulation of sequential decision­making
problems, and can be considered a mathematically idealized form of reinforcement learn­
ing for which precise theoretical statements can be made. In an MDP, the agent contin­
uously interacts with an environment specified by the MDP over a sequence of discrete
time steps that may or may not be of finite length. Each interaction can be considered a
transition between two states of the MDP. In the finite time horizon MDPs that we consider
in this work, a sequence of interactions is called an episode, and the sequence of state­
action pairs observed at each time step by following some policy is called a trajectory. In
the following, we formally define an MDP in the context of RL.
Let S and A denote the state and action spaces, respectively, let p(st+1|st, at) denote the
transition probability distribution, i.e. the probability distribution over possible next states
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
5
==PAGE:14==
from being in a state s and taking action a at a given time step t ∈T, and let R(st, at) be a
reward function. Starting in an initial state s0 sampled from some fixed distribution p(s0),
at each time step t an agent takes an action at ∈A which takes the agent from a state st
to a new state st+1 ∼p(·|st, at). One of the key assumptions made in an MDP is that the
conditional probability p(st+1|st, at) depends only on the current state and action, i.e. the
state of the system is fully expressed by st; systems fulfilling this property are said to be
Markovian. Whenever an agent is in a state and follows a transition by taking an action,
it simultaneously receives a reward rt = R(st, at),
rt ∈R. In the MDP framework that
we consider, there are generally made very few assumptions about the reward function
R(·); it can be dense or sparse, deterministic or stochastic, and is not even expected to be
differentiable nor even known (Sutton & Barto, 2018). In practice, the exact specification
of the reward function can however play a key role to the success of RL even though it
may not necessarily be something that practitioners have any control over; we will return
to this discussion later.
We generally distinguish between MDPs with discrete and continuous state­action spaces
S × A. In the case of a discrete space, we refer to the process as a finite MDP since the
state­action space contains a finite number of states and actions, e.g. the number of
board configurations and moves, respectively, of a game of chess. In the more general
case of continuous state­action spaces, the number of states and/or actions are infinite,
which makes modeling challenging. Another common distinction is whether an agent
observes the full state of the system or only has access to imperfect or partial information
about the state – this class of MDPs are commonly referred to as Partially Observable
MDPs (POMDPs) and were originally introduced by Åström (1965). In a POMDP, rather
than observing a state s upon a transition, the agent instead observes an observation
ot ∈O, where O is the observation space. While the system is still assumed to be
fully determined by an MDP, the agent only receives observations that contain incomplete
information about the underlying state, and therefore needs to learn a policy that acts in
the presence of partial information (Kaelbling et al., 1998). In the context of visual RL
where POMDPs are most prevalent, the state st at time t may for example contain all the
physical information such as the current joint positions, velocities, accelerations, as well
as any physical property that may describe the world and fully distinguish two states of the
environment from each other, e.g. the random access memory of a computer program
running a simulation. Conversely, the corresponding observation ot may then be the raw
output of a sensory signal, e.g. a camera, depth sensor, or screen rendering. Many
real world applications of RL in e.g. robotics – including the applications that we will
discuss in this thesis – can be described as both continuous and partially observable
MDPs with high­dimensional observations, and finding an optimal policy can therefore be
very challenging.
2.1.2
The Reinforcement Learning Objective
We will now turn to a formal definition of the RL objective, followed by the derivation of
an intuitive algorithm that can be used to solve real problems. As previously described,
the objective in RL is to learn a policy that maximizes the cumulative reward (also known
as return) an agent receives by following a trajectory generated by a policy in an environ­
ment described by an MDP. Since both reward function and transition dynamics may be
stochastic, we generally try to learn policies that simply maximize the return in expectation
over some finite number of steps T, which can be formalized as
T
∑
t=1
Eτ∼p(τ) [rt]
(2.1)
6
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:15==
for some trajectory τ obtained by following a policy π; this formalization is known as the
reinforcement learning objective. There are many ways to optimize the RL objective, but
in the following we consider a practical algorithm that emerges by direct differentiation of
(2.1). Policy gradient methods are a class of methods that optimize a policy πθ parame­
terized by a neural network with parameters θ by differentiation of the RL objective:
∇θLPG(θ) = ∇θ
T
∑
t=1
Eτ∼p(τ) [rt]
(2.2)
= ∇θEτ∼p(τ)
[ T
∑
t=1
rt
]
(2.3)
=
∫
∇θp(τ)
( T
∑
t=1
rt
)
dτ
(2.4)
=
∫
p(τ)∇θ log p(τ)
( T
∑
t=1
rt
)
dτ
(2.5)
= Eτ∼p(τ)
[
∇θ log p(τ)
T
∑
t=1
rt
]
(2.6)
= Eτ∼p(τ)
[
∇θ
( T
∑
t=1
log πθ(st, at)
)
T
∑
t=1
rt
]
(2.7)
= Eτ∼p(τ)
[
∇θ
T
∑
t=1
rt log πθ(st, at)
]
.
(2.8)
The resulting expectation in (2.8) is known as the (direct) Policy Gradient (PG), and is
central to the REINFORCE algorithm originally proposed by Williams (1992); Sutton et al.
(1999). REINFORCE optimizes the RL objective directly by gradient ascent using Monte
Carlo estimates of the expected gradient w.r.t. parameters θ, i.e. it solves the problem
θ∗= arg max
θ
LPG(θ)
(2.9)
by sampling trajectories from the policy πθ. This comes from the realization that, although
πθ(·) is a distribution over actions for a current state st, it can be extended to trajectories
by letting p(τ) = πθ(τ) = p (s0) ∏
t πθ (at | st) p (st+1 | st, at). Note that, while only πθ
depends on θ, both reward function, policy, and transitions may be stochastic, so there
can be great uncertainty in trajectories. Further, note that because (2.8) is an expectation
over the entire trajectory τ, this stochastic gradient estimator is prone to high variance, and
much of the PG literature is therefore concerned with variance reduction techniques such
as baseline subtraction, advantage estimation, and reward normalization (Greensmith
et al., 2002; Kakade & Langford, 2002; Schulman et al., 2016; Mnih et al., 2016; Chung
et al., 2020).
Because of the direct policy optimization, PG methods are classified as on­policy algo­
rithms, i.e. they optimize using transitions collected using the current policy πθ. To obtain
meaningful gradient estimates, on­policy methods need to average over a large number
of trajectories. Since they cannot readily reuse trajectories collected by previous versions
of the policy, PG methods exhibit poor sample efficiency in practice. While this may not
be a problem for applications for which trajectories are easily generated, the sample inef­
ficiency of (current) PG methods make them unsuitable for applications that rely on real
world interaction or costly simulations, such as simulators for e.g. computational fluid
dynamics or high­fidelity renderings.
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
7
==PAGE:16==
2.1.3
Approximate Dynamic Programming
In this work, we will primarily focus our attention on off­policy algorithms that (in principle)
can learn from trajectories collected by any policy. In practice, this allows for sample
reuse and dataset aggregation over the course of training of an agent (and potentially
even across agents), and such a dataset is in the RL literature known as a replay buffer
and denoted B. By learning not only from trajectories collected by the current policy, but
also trajectories collected by past versions of the policy, sample efficiency can be greatly
improved. Since past trajectories cannot be used for reliable gradient estimation of the
current policy in the on­policy regime from (2.8), we now turn to a class of algorithms that
instead rely on (approximate) dynamic programming.
Central to approximate dynamic programming in RL is the concept of a state­action value
function Q(st, at), which we shall denote the Q­function. A Q­function is a learned map­
ping Q : S × A →R that estimates the future cumulative reward attainable by taking ac­
tion at in state st, and is typically parameterized by a neural network. While a Q­function
can be implemented as a tabular method in finite MDPs with relatively small state­action
spaces, it is infeasible for continuous state­action spaces (and large finite spaces) since
a state might never be visited twice and the memory requirements for storing such a ta­
ble may be prohibitively high. We therefore rely on approximate methods implemented
as neural networks, which in principle can scale to arbitrarily large problems. Before ad­
dressing the approximate methods, however, we first introduce central concepts in the
tabular case. By learning the expected Q­value of transitions in a finite MDP, the Q­
function can be used to identify an optimal policy π∗by always taking the maximum value
(in expectation) action in a given state st:
a∗
t (st) = arg max
at
Q∗(st, at) ,
(2.10)
assuming an optimal Q­function Q∗(·). To learn the Q­function, we iteratively apply value
iteration updates
Qn+1(st, at) ←Qn(st, at) + α · δ ,
(2.11)
where n is the iteration count, α is a learning rate (step size), and δ is known as the
temporal difference (TD) error. The TD error is a measure for the error between our
current Q­estimate for (st, at) and a target Q­value based on the observed reward rt,
and (2.11) can be directly applied as update rule for an iterative algorithm. Since the Q­
function is a measure for the maximum attainable reward (in expectation) from the current
state to the end of an episode, we can define the TD(0)­error (one­step) as a relationship
known as the Bellman equation:
δ = rt + γ · max
at
Q(st+1, at) −Q(st, at) ,
(2.12)
where γ ∈(0, 1) is a discount factor that serves to weight near­future rewards more than
rewards obtained far into the future. This class of algorithms is known as TD­learning
algorithms, more specifically Q­learning, and related ideas will play a central role in this
thesis. One of the great advantages of Q­learning is that, by bootstrapping the future
return using the Q­function itself, we only need to estimate the single­step error, whereas
policy gradient methods require entire trajectories that naturally have high variance. As
we shall see, this bootstrapping procedure is not without issues when used along with
strong function approximators for Q, but in the tabular case (i.e. discrete state and action
spaces, no function approximation), the Q­function is provably convergent to Q∗as n →∞
(Watkins & Dayan, 1992). We provide the tabular Q­learning method as proposed by
8
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:17==
Algorithm 1 Tabular Q­learning
α, γ: hyper­parameters
1: for each iteration do
2:
for each environment step do
3:
at = arg maxat Q(st, at)
▷Select action using policy
4:
(st+1, rt) ∼p(st+1 | st, at)
▷Take environment step
5:
δ = rt + γ · maxat Q(st+1, at) −Qθ(st, at)
▷Compute TD­error
6:
Q(st, at) ←Q(st, at) + α · δ
▷Update Q­function
Watkins & Dayan (1992) in Algorithm 1, and delay presentation of a concrete algorithm
using strong function approximators to Section 2.1.4.
We will now turn to the arguably more general case where S and A are continuous spaces.
Since continuous spaces yield infinitely many states, the Q­function cannot be repre­
sented as a discrete map unless the state­action space is quantized. Instead, we turn to
strong function approximators such as neural networks to learn an approximate Q­function
mapping continuous states and actions onto expected returns. We shall assume that the
reader is familiar with neural networks as well as fundamental deep learning theory and
practices, and instead shift our attention to its implications on Q­learning. Although strong
function approximators such as neural networks naturally extend to continuous maps, the
Q­learning algorithm itself is not provably convergent in this case, and may lead to severe
instability and divergence if not treated carefully. In the following, we will discuss some of
the algorithmic challenges in continuous­space Q­learning, and delay discussion of other
sources of instability to Chapter 3, Chapter 5, and Chapter 6.
With strong function approximation of the target Q­value used as bootstrapping in the
(approximate) dynamic programming of Q­learning, we rely on the neural network’s abil­
ity to extrapolate to states that may be previously unseen and possibly generated by an
unknown behavior policy. Since this extrapolated estimate is used directly in the com­
putation of the TD­error, inaccurate estimates can cause the learning process to diverge
(Maei et al., 2009; Kumar et al., 2019). To make matters worse, recall that we in Q­learning
rely on these Q­value estimates for policy inference; incorrect estimates therefore lead to
sub­optimal policies, and we might never be able to recover from such updates since we
typically rely on the inferred policy for data generation. This problem is often referred to
as the deadly triad of reinforcement learning: function approximation, bootstrapping, and
off­policy learning (Sutton & Barto, 2018). Although this paints a somewhat dire picture
on the scalability of Q­learning, it turns out that algorithms can be carefully developed and
tuned to mitigate these effects, which is covered in more detail in Section 2.1.4.
Another challenge faced in Q­learning from continuous state­action spaces is the arg maxat
and maxat from (2.10) and (2.12), respectively, that are intractable operators for continu­
ous functions. To circumvent this issue, practitioners often opt to also approximate these
operators. Since the application of function approximation is distinct in the two cases, we
treat them separately in the following.
Policy Learning
A continuous policy that maximizes the Q­function (in expectation) can
be learned simultaneously with the Q­function itself in a sequence of iterative updates. In
the simplest case, we can learn a deterministic policy π(st), that outputs an action at
approximately maximizing the Q­function. If we assume both π and Q to be differentiable,
parameterized functions, then the parameters of π can be optimized by gradient ascent
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
9
==PAGE:18==
(treating parameters of Q as constants) using the simple objective
max
θ
E
st∼B [Qϕ (st, πθ(st))] ,
(2.13)
where θ, ϕ are parameters of π and Q, respectively.
Target Q­value
As in the previous case, we approximate the max operation using a
strong function approximator. We are interested in estimating the Q­value of the maximum
value action for a given state st, which is in fact a readily available estimate in the form of
Q (st, π(st)) from (2.13). While this is a reasonable estimate, it is impractical to apply as
a target in the TD­error: because π and Q are iteratively updated, (2.11) becomes a non­
stationary, rapidly changing objective susceptible to high variance. A simple mitigation is
to instead define a target policy (and a corresponding target Q­function) with a separate
set of parameters ¯θ (and ¯ψ), and use those parameters for the target Q­value estimation.
While this solves the problem of non­stationarity in the target, we ultimately need to select
appropriate parameters for ¯θ, ¯ψ for the target to be of any value. A middle­ground between
constant target networks and the iteratively updated target from (2.11) is to update targets
using the update rule
¯θ ←θ
(2.14)
¯ψ ←ψ ,
(2.15)
but only update targets every N­th iteration, e.g. N = 10. While (2.14) renders the target
of (2.11) stationary in N −1 out of every N steps, it turns out that the sudden changes
in ¯θ, ¯ψ can still lead to instability (Lillicrap et al., 2016). A better way to update target
parameters is by using a slow­moving Exponential Moving Average (EMA) of parameters
of the online (updated by gradient ascent) policy (and Q­function):
¯θn+1 ←(1 −τ)¯θn + τθn ,
(2.16)
where τ is a momentum coefficient controlling the rate of parameter change. This so­
lution ensures that the target is sufficiently slow­moving to reduce variance in updates,
while the target parameters are still updated by an equal amount at every iteration. As
we shall see in later discussions, EMAs can help stabilize a variety of target networks in
different applications, similar to how they in the optimization literature have emerged as
powerful techniques for variance reduction in the step direction of stochastic gradient de­
scent methods (Qian, 1999; Robbins, 2007; Sutskever et al., 2013; Ruder, 2016; Kingma
& Ba, 2015).
Together, policy learning and target Q­functions enable deep Q­learning methods to solve
high­dimensional continuous control tasks directly from raw pixel inputs.
This is first
shown by Lillicrap et al. (2016) where it was originally proposed as a Deep Determin­
istic Policy Gradient (DDPG) method for continuous action spaces, inspired by earlier
work from Silver et al. (2014). The discrete variant of DDPG, Deep Q­Network (DQN) is
the neural network equivalent to the Q­learning algorithm as previously described (Mnih
et al., 2015). Central to both algorithms is the use of a replay buffer for dataset aggre­
gation, which has become the standard method for data sampling (as opposed to e.g.
Monte Carlo sampling) for off­policy RL since it relaxes the assumptions made for data
collection. However, since their action selection is deterministic, both methods explic­
itly add randomization to the optimization process to encourage exploration of the state
space during learning. As DQN operates in a discrete action space, a natural way to in­
ject stochasticity is to enforce a random action selection with some probability ϵ, and act
10
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:19==
greedily in accordance to the Q­function with probability 1 −ϵ; this exploration scheme
is commonly known as ϵ­greedy exploration. In the continuous case, one may also be
tempted to simply sample an action uniformly from the action space, but this can lead
to instability and inefficient exploration since error scales quadratically in time. A better
solution is to instead apply additive noise sampled from some noise source, e.g. a unit
Gaussian distribution (or an Ornstein–Uhlenbeck stochastic process as proposed by Lill­
icrap et al. (2016)), scaled by some (constant) factor, which still ensures action variability
but only explores a neighborhood around the current policy in state­action space; this is
known as the reparameterization trick.
The joint learning of policy and value function has become a prevalent class of deep
reinforcement learning algorithms often referred to as Actor­Critic (AC) methods. Its name
is derived from the idea that the policy learns to act, and the purpose of the value function
is to criticize actions taken by a behavior policy. In the following section, a brief overview
of a widely adopted AC method is given, which serves as base algorithm for the majority
of work presented in this thesis.
2.1.4
Soft Actor­Critic
Despite the celebrated success of AC methods like DDPG, these algorithms still suffer
from poor sample complexity, largely fail to generalize, and are extremely brittle to selec­
tion of hyper­parameters (Duan et al., 2016), which makes them of limited practical use.
In this section, we introduce Soft Actor­Critic (SAC), a recent AC algorithm that aims to
address these concerns through a number of algorithmic improvements (Haarnoja et al.,
2018a). We will give a brief overview of the SAC method in comparison to DDPG, and
broadly discuss the implications of the algorithmic improvements. This will serve as a
theoretical foundation for our experiments in Chapter 5 and Chapter 6, although the main
contributions of this thesis are independent of the choice of RL algorithm.
Entropy Maximization
One of the key components of SAC is its unification of maximum
entropy RL (Bagnell & Ziebart, 2010) and off­policy RL. In maximum entropy RL, the
conventional RL objective from (2.8) is modified to include an auxiliary entropy term
Eτ∼p(τ)
[ T
∑
t=1
rt log πθ(st, at) + αH (π (· | st))
]
,
(2.17)
where α ≥0 is the temperature, a scalar constant that weights the entropy term relative
to the reward term, and H is (in the continuous case) the differential entropy defined as
H (πθ (· | st)) = Eat [−log πθ (at | st)] .
(2.18)
By jointly maximizing both rewards and the entropy of the policy π, the temperature α
effectively determines the relative importance of maximizing returns and maintaining a
stochastic policy, such that for α = 0 we recover the conventional RL objective and for
α →∞we maintain an approximately uniform action distribution across all states. While
entropy maximization clearly aids in exploration (Schulman et al., 2017a;b), it also results
in policies that are more robust to e.g. sensor or state estimation errors as minor devia­
tions from the perceived optimal trajectory are less likely to be out­of­distribution. To make
the maximum entropy framework compatible with off­policy RL, Haarnoja et al. (2018b)
propose an alternative policy objective
Jπ(θ) = Est∼B
[
Eat∼πθ(st) [α log (πθ (at | st)) −Qψ (st, at)]
]
,
(2.19)
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
11
==PAGE:20==
which is the one­step Bellman backup operator (Sutton & Barto, 2018) equivalent of (2.17).
Since the SAC algorithm itself is not central to our work, we refer the reader to Haarnoja
et al. (2018a) and Haarnoja et al. (2018b) for the derivation of this objective. The gradient
of the expectation over st is estimated by sampling transitions from the replay buffer B,
and there are several (reasonable) choices of gradient estimators for the expectation over
at. The simplest choice would be the direct policy gradient estimator that we derived in
(2.8), but it is known to have high variance even in the one­step case. However, since the
target (our Q­function) of (2.19) is differentiable (unlike the reward function in (2.8)), we
can instead apply the reparameterization trick as in DDPG.
Automatic Entropy Tuning
Although entropy maximization can greatly improve learn­
ing, it introduces the temperature as an extra hyper­parameter. Because the scaling of
rewards are not consistent across different tasks (and not even over the course of training
in a single task due to non­stationarity), inappropriate selection of α can be detrimental to
the success of SAC. Haarnoja et al. (2018b) proposes a convenient method for automatic
tuning of the temperature by reformulating the entropy maximization as a constrained op­
timization problem. Concretely, the authors propose to make α a learnable parameter,
optimized by minimizing the difference between the estimated policy entropy H and a
target entropy ¯H:
Jα(θ) = Est
[
α
(
H (π (· | st)) −¯H
)]
.
(2.20)
Because H is constrained to be close to ¯H only in expectation across visited states, this
gives some flexibility for the algorithm to assign more entropy to regions in state space
where the policy is uncertain of the optimal action, while allowing the policy to be approx­
imately deterministic in regions where there is a clear distinction between the outcome of
actions. While the automatic tuning introduces a new hyper­parameter ¯H in the process
of eliminating the reliance on a task­dependent temperature selection, the target entropy
is empirically found to be far less of a brittle hyper­parameter than the constant α.
Soft Q­function
It is desirable to learn a stochastic policy π since it is more expressive
than its deterministic counterpart, and naturally extends off­policy AC algorithms to be
compatible with maximum entropy RL. Rather than minimizing the TD­error as formulated
in (2.12), Haarnoja et al. (2018a;b) instead propose to minimize a soft formulation of the
Bellman residual:
JQ(ψ) = E(st,at)∼B
[1
2
(
Qψ (st, at) −
(
rt + γEst+1∼p(st+1|st,at)
[
V ¯ψ (st+1)
]))2
]
(2.21)
where
V ¯ψ (st) = Eat∼πθ(st)
[
Q ¯ψ (st, at) −α log πθ (at | st)
]
(2.22)
is the state­value function, an estimator for the expected cumulative reward from following
a policy π from state st, and ¯ψ are parameters of a target Q­function (an EMA of ψ) as
previously discussed. By insertion of (2.22) into (2.21) and taking the gradient of JQ(ψ), it
is easy to see that the objective can be directly optimized by stochastic gradient descent
w.r.t. Q­function parameters ψ:
∇ψJQ(ψ) =∇ψ [Qψ (st, at) (Qψ (st, at)
(2.23)
−
[
rt + γ
(
Q ¯ψ (st+1, at+1) −α log (πθ (at+1 | st+1))
]))]
.
(2.24)
The reader is referred to Haarnoja et al. (2018a;b) for a derivation of the objective.
12
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:21==
Double Q­learning
To reduce overestimation of learned Q­values, SAC adopts a double
Q­learning formulation from Hasselt (2010); Hasselt et al. (2016). Instead of learning a
single Q­function, Hasselt et al. (2016) propose to learn two independent Q­functions,
Q1, Q2, as well as their corresponding target Q­functions, and simply use the minimum
value prediction in policy learning, which has been shown empirically to be a great way
to mitigate the consequences of overestimation.
We conclude the overview of SAC with a summary of the algorithm provided as pseudo­
code in Algorithm 2. Structurally, the SAC algorithm (and most other off­policy algorithms)
resembles the tabular Q­learning algorithm presented in Algorithm 1, but with the addition
of a replay buffer and a policy parameterized by neural networks. For each iteration of
the algorithm, the policy is first used to collect new transitions from the environment which
are added to the replay buffer, and each of the individual objectives are then optimized
using transitions sampled (uniformly) from the replay buffer.
Algorithm 2 Soft Actor­Critic (SAC)
θ, ψ: randomly initialized network parameters
B: empty replay buffer
1: for each iteration do
2:
for each environment step do
3:
at ∼πθ(st)
▷Sample action from policy
4:
(st+1, rt) ∼p(st+1 | st, at)
▷Take environment step
5:
B ←B ∪{st, at, rt, st+1}
▷Store transition in replay buffer
6:
for each update do
7:
ν ∼B
▷Sample transitions from replay buffer
8:
Optimize JQ1(ν; ψ) + JQ2(ν; ψ)
▷Update Q­functions
9:
Optimize Jπ(ν; θ)
▷Update policy
10:
Optimize Jα(ν; θ)
▷Update entropy temperature
11:
Q
¯ψ
1 ←(1 −τ)Q
¯ψ
1 + τQψ
1
▷Update target Q1­function
12:
Q
¯ψ
2 ←(1 −τ)Q
¯ψ
2 + τQψ
2
▷Update target Q2­function
For further description of RL algorithms and their practical applications, the reader is re­
ferred to the relevant literature. We will now conclude the chapter with Section 2.2, which
provides a brief and non­exhaustive overview of representation learning methods using
self­supervised objectives.
2.2
Self­Supervised Representation Learning
Self­supervision is the art of deriving meaningful supervisory training signal from raw data,
without the need for semantic labels (as is commonplace in supervised learning) or re­
wards (as in RL). High­dimensional data sources and modalities such as RGB images are
rich in information and have inherent structure even without labels, which we can exploit
to generate a multitude of supervisory signals directly from the data itself. Figure 2.1 il­
lustrates a non­exhaustive list of self­supervisory signals that often can be derived from
raw data sources, irrespective of the application area.
As an illustrative example, consider an RGB image: by masking a region in the image
and learning to predict pixel values in the masked region (Pathak et al., 2016), the model
implicitly learns to leverage structure in the image. Another supervisory signal can be
derived by masking one of the color channels and predicting color intensities from the
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.1:
Self­supervised learning.
Illustration of the self­supervised learning
paradigm. Training signal is derived directly from input data. Source: LeCun (2018).
remaining two color channels (Zhang et al., 2017), and a third example could be to predict
whether two RGB images were sampled from the same distribution or not. While there
are countless opportunities to derive training signal from raw data, in reality not all training
signals are created equal; the representational expressiveness of a model trained by self­
supervision is largely governed by the design of the self­supervised task, and it is therefore
crucial for practitioners to design self­supervised tasks that capture information from the
data that will be useful for downstream tasks in their desired application area.
In this work, we will focus on two avenues of research in self­supervised representation
learning: (1) dynamics modeling, which is central to reinforcement learning applications
such as robotics; and (2) contrastive representation learning, a collection of methods
that seek to map similar samples (by some metric derived from the context) to similar
points in a potentially high­dimensional embedding space. We treat each of the two top­
ics separately, and delay discussion on their individual relevance in the context of visual
reinforcement learning to Chapter 3, Chapter 5, and Chapter 6.
2.2.1
Dynamics Modeling
In many real life problems, planning, control, and decision­making relies on the construc­
tion of a model that captures information about the state and dynamics of the system,
e.g. Linear­Qaudratic­Gaussian Control (Söderström, 2002) and Model Predictive Con­
trol (Alba, 1999). In Markovian systems that can be modeled as MDPs, a dynamics model
can be interpreted as a predictive model that, given some information about a state or tran­
sition, can predict presently unavailable or uncertain information by levering prior knowl­
edge about the structure of the MDP. By learning a model of the MDP, the model can be
utilized in planning and control to simulate agent­environment interactions, which allows
for e.g. sample­efficient learning and long­horizon control.
Because of the Markov property, the dynamics of a system are fully expressed by their
transition probabilities p(st+1 | st, at), and it is therefore reasonable to learn an approx­
imation of the transition probabilities; such a model is called a forward dynamics model.
Although the true transition probabilities are usually unknown, we can estimate p(st+1 |
st, at) by sampling transitions from the environment, i.e. through agent­environment in­
teraction. In states where the agent has no control over the environment, the transition
probability can in principle be conditioned solely on the current state. On the other end of
the spectrum are systems in which the transition can be conditioned only on the current
action; such problems are known as (multi­armed) bandit problems, a class of problems
concerning single­state systems. In the general case, future states of a system depend
on both the current state and action, and learning a model of p(st+1 | st, at) can therefore
14
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:23==
Forward Dynamics Model
Inverse Dynamics Model
effect
cause
Figure 2.2: Dynamics modeling. Illustration of the forward and inverse dynamics mod­
els. Conceptually, the forward dynamics model the effect of an action (resulting observa­
tion), and the inverse dynamics model the cause of a transition (the action taken).
be very valuable for planning. Since the ground­truth st+1, at and st+1 are available at
every transition, learning a forward dynamics model can be considered a self­supervised
learning problem, where p(st+1) is predicted from (st+1, at).
Another modeling approach is to learn an inverse dynamics model: predicting at from
(st, st+1), e.g. predicting forces based on the kinematics and properties of a body. In
robotics, this can be useful for estimating how much force should be applied to move a
joint from one position to another. We illustrate both the forward dynamics and the inverse
dynamics in Figure 2.2. Like the forward dynamics model, learning the inverse dynamics
can also be framed as a self­supervised learning problem; in both cases, however, learn­
ing the dynamics of a system with potentially high­dimensional states such as images can
be challenging.
The forward dynamics model in particular poses a difficult prediction problem, because
the dimensionality of an image observation can be in the order of 1 × 106. Furthermore,
it should be noted that we are generally not interested in assigning equal importance to
all pixels in an image observation, since it often has a poor signal­to­noise ratio and only
a small part of the image is relevant to the task. For such high­dimensional problems, it
can therefore be useful to instead learn the dynamics in a lower­dimensional latent space
that we will denote K. By splitting a forward dynamics model
f(·) = f(g(·), ·), f : K × A →K, g : S →K, K ≪S
(2.25)
implemented by e.g. a neural network, and simply performing dynamics modeling on the
output of g while treating g as an observation encoder (a learned mapping from a high­
dimensional space S into a lower­dimensional space K), the dimensionality of the problem
is significantly reduced (Hafner et al., 2019). However, if f and g are jointly optimized to
reduce the expected prediction error of f in latent space, the forward dynamics model
yields trivial solutions. As an example, consider the mean squared error objective
min
θ
E(st,at,st+1)∼B
[
∥fθ(gθ(st), at) −gθ(st+1)∥2
2
]
,
(2.26)
where θ denotes the collection of learnable parameters in a neural network. While the
error indeed decreases as the predictive power of f increases, there exists an infinite
number of trivial solutions of the form f(c, ·) = c, g(·) = c where c is a constant feature
vector, e.g. 0, which yield an error of 0 for all inputs and f can then simply be the identity
mapping. When learning dynamics in latent space, it is therefore often desirable to learn
an inverse dynamics model rather than the forward dynamics (or a combination of the two),
as it has no such trivial solutions. An additional benefit of learning an inverse dynamics
model is that the dimensionality of an action space is typically low­dimensional, and the
inverse dynamics can therefore learn to predict directly in the action space.
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
15
==PAGE:24==
In either case, a dynamics model generally learns representations that are good predic­
tors for the dynamics of the system, while information that yield no predictive power is
discarded. This can be problematic if the learned representation is to be deployed out­
side its original environment and/or is used in downstream tasks that would benefit from
the discarded information. Depending on the problem, it can therefore sometimes be
useful to consider representation learning tasks that are generally useful, i.e. make few
assumptions about the downstream task. In the following section, we discuss one such
class of methods.
2.2.2
Contrastive Representation Learning
Learning generally useful representations without explicit supervision is a long­standing
problem. Many prior works (Vincent et al., 2008; Doersch et al., 2015; Wang & Gupta,
2015; Jayaraman & Grauman, 2015; Pathak et al., 2016; Noroozi & Favaro, 2016; Zhang
et al., 2017; Gidaris et al., 2018) in representation learning rely on self­supervised tasks
that are well­aligned with the intended downstream tasks. The learned representations
therefore lack generality and empirically do not transfer effectively to new tasks. In the
context of visual representation learning, generative models (Ballard, 1987; Kingma &
Welling, 2014; Bengio et al., 2014; Goodfellow et al., 2014b) have enjoyed great suc­
cess in lossy data compression and novel image generation, but they are computationally
expensive and typically penalizes error in each pixel independently (as in the forward dy­
namics model in observation space). Although generative models have their own merit,
it is yet unclear whether pixel­level image generation is really necessary for expressive
representation learning.
Contrastive learning methods (Mikolov et al., 2013; Sermanet et al., 2017; Oord et al.,
2018; Wu et al., 2018; Bachman et al., 2019; Tian et al., 2020a; He et al., 2020; Hé­
naff et al., 2020; Khosla et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020b; Grill et al., 2020) have recently
emerged as a promising alternative class of representation learning methods that con­
trast samples and measure their similarity by some metric formulated as a score function.
Intuitively, contrastive methods can be thought of as learning to map samples onto an
embedding space based on inter­sample similarity, i.e. mapping similar (as measured by
the score function) samples to similar points in embedding space, while simultaneously
maximizing the latent distance between samples that are deemed dissimilar. Figure 2.3
illustrates the conceptual differences between contrastive learning and predictive learn­
ing (e.g. image reconstruction and other self­supervised prediction tasks). Because the
embedding space generally is much smaller than the source domain (e.g. image space),
contrastive methods learn lower­dimensional representations that encode information rel­
evant for instance discrimination rather than for e.g. image reconstruction as in predictive
learning, which is arguably more aligned with how humans are thought to learn.
There are currently a multitude of different frameworks for contrastive learning, and it is
yet unclear which approach(es) will prevail. In the following, we will give an overview of
ideas in contrastive learning that are similar in spirit to the methods that we discuss in
Chapter 3, Chapter 5, and Chapter 6, but emphasize that it is not to be considered an
exhaustive overview of contrastive methods as a paradigm.
There are a number of open questions regarding the design of contrastive learning meth­
ods. What should be compared? How should the comparison be made? How is similarity
measured? While there are no conclusive answers to these questions, we aim to discuss
a number of recent methods that have proven successful in the computer vision literature.
In a recent work, Tian et al. (2020a), the authors learn to map different views of the same
instance to similar points in latent space, framed as a prediction problem. Given two views
16
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:25==
f
g
(a) Predictive learning.
f
g
(b) Contrastive learning.
Figure 2.3: Predictive learning versus contrastive learning. Conceptual difference
between predictive representation learning and contrastive representation learning. (a)
Predictive learning learns a latent representation that allows for prediction in the output
space. (b) Contrastive learning learns a latent representation by contrasting extracted
features of congruent and incongruent views. In contrastive learning, f and g may or may
not be the same function. The red dashed outline illustrates at which component the loss
is applied. Best viewed in color.
vx
1, vx
2 of a sample x, a discriminating score function f(·) is trained to correctly select vx
2
(the positive view) from a set S = {vx
2, vy1
2 , vy2
2 , · · · , vyn
2 } given an anchor view vx
1 using a
contrastive objective
Lcontrast(vx
1, vx
2) = −ES
[
log
f(vx
1, vx
2)
f(vx
1, vx
2) + ∑n
j=1 f
(
vx
1, vyj
2
)
]
,
(2.27)
which can be interpreted as the log­loss of a multi­way softmax classification with vx
2 as
the label for vx
1. Here, the positive pair x is sampled from the joint distribution p(v1, v2),
whereas the n negative views in S come from samples y1, . . . , yn sampled from the prod­
uct of marginals p(v1)p(v2). The objective in (2.27) is often referred to as an InfoNCE
loss as originally proposed by Oord et al. (2018). It can trivially be symmetrized by also
considering the opposite scenario where vx
1 is the positive view for the anchor view vx
2,
and can even be generalized to a symmetric loss between M views of a sample x:
Lmulti­contrast(vx
1, . . . , vx
M) =
∑
1≤i<j≤M
Lcontrast(vx
i , vx
j ), i ̸= j .
(2.28)
The score function f(·) can be implemented in a number of ways. Tian et al. (2020a)
and Chen et al. (2020b) propose to implement f(·) as a cosine similarity between latent
representations of the two views encoded by some parameterized function g(·), optionally
scaled by a constant β:
f (v1, v2) = exp
(
g (v1) · g (v2)
∥g (v1)∥· ∥g (v2)∥· 1
β
)
.
(2.29)
Other choices of score function include the dot product g(v1)T g(v2) (Sutton, 1990; He
et al., 2020), a bilinear model g(v1)T Wg(v2) with parameters W (Oord et al., 2018; Hénaff
et al., 2020; Laskin et al., 2020b), or euclidean distance (Wang & Gupta, 2015; Grill et al.,
2020). In Appendix B, we provide pseudo­code for Laskin et al. (2020b), a contrastive
method that uses the objective from (2.27) and implements f(·) as a bilinear model.
Although Tian et al. (2020a) consider views as different data modalities of a sample (e.g.
RGB image, depth map, image segmentation), views can in principle be arbitrarily ab­
stract concepts that relate two parts of a sample to each other, such as color channels
or random perturbations of the sample image (Chen et al., 2020b), but views can also
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 2.4: Linear evaluation benchmark.
ImageNet top­1 accuracy of contrastive
methods under a linear evaluation. Networks are pre­trained on ImageNet without labels,
and a linear classifier is then trained on features extracted from the networks with their
weights frozen. Supervised learning on ImageNet is marked with a cross for comparison.
InstDisc corresponds to Wu et al. (2018), Rotation corresponds to Gidaris et al. (2018),
MoCo corresponds to He et al. (2020), CMC corresponds to Tian et al. (2020a), SimCLR
corresponds to Chen et al. (2020b), and SwAV corresponds to Caron et al. (2020).
be two different samples that share some property, e.g. contents, meta­data, or even
a category­level semantic label as in supervised learning (Khosla et al., 2020). In any
instance, the set S is constructed by a single positive view vx
2 as well as a number of
negative views vy1
2 , vy2
2 , · · · , vyn
2 that are incongruent to the anchor view vx
1, e.g. unrelated
images sampled uniformly from a dataset.
Design choices such as the selection of views, negative samples, and score function is
crucial to the success of contrastive learning methods, and a large body of recent literature
studies how to design an effective and generalized framework for contrastive learning. A
standard benchmark for representation learning is linear evaluation of methods on Ima­
geNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015): networks are pre­trained on ImageNet without labels,
and a linear classifier is then trained on features extracted from the networks with their
weights frozen. Figure 2.4 reports ImageNet top­1 accuracy under the linear evaluation.
One of the major obstacles in the adoption of contrastive learning has historically been
the enormous amount of compute and negative samples required to produce useful repre­
sentations. For example, Tian et al. (2020a) use 4096 negative samples for each gradient
step and Chen et al. (2020b) use as much as 16382 negative samples. In standard com­
puter vision pipelines for representation learning on ImageNet, this roughly translates to
7,5 GB of memory usage solely for the set S (after pre­processing), which is prohibitively
large for the majority of the machine learning community. Therefore, researchers are
actively developing new contrastive methods that yield effective representations without
the need for specialized infrastructure. Wu et al. (2018) propose to sample features of
negative samples from a memory bank, He et al. (2020) use a momentum encoder as in
Section 2.1.4 and maintains a queue of recently encoded negative samples, and Grill et al.
(2020) propose an alternative objective that abolishes negative samples altogether. Fur­
ther discussion on design choices and their implications on visual reinforcement learning
is delayed to Chapter 3 and Chapter 6.
18
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:27==
3
Related Work
The work presented in this thesis relates to a number of different topics from the deep
learning, computer vision, and reinforcement learning literature. This chapter aims to ex­
pand upon the discussions in Chapter 2, and summarize recent work that most closely
relates to our contributions. The chapter has been divided into 4 sections, providing in­
sights into recent work on representations, self­supervision, and generalization, as well
as their applications in RL, which helps the reader put our work into the context of a larger,
ongoing research effort on building intelligent systems that function in the real world.
3.1
Learning Visual Invariances
Reinforcement learning from visual observations is an increasingly popular avenue of
research, because it holds the promise of enabling agents to more easily interact with un­
structured environments where agents with proprioceptive inputs fail. Training RL agents
directly in the real world can however be costly. Therefore, practitioners leverage simu­
lated environments during training with the hope of agents being able to generalize their
knowledge to the real world. Building simulations that accurately replicate the real world is
however challenging, and outside ideal lab environments the visual and dynamical diver­
sity that agents encounter is much greater than what can feasibly be built in a simulation.
A convenient method for improving generalization of agents is to randomize elements of
the simulation that can be expected to vary during deployment; this approach is broadly
referred to as domain randomization (Tobin et al., 2017; Sadeghi & Levine, 2017; Peng
et al., 2018; Tremblay et al., 2018; Ramos et al., 2019). Randomized elements may in­
clude visuals such as color, lighting, and texture, or dynamics such as object morphology,
physical properties, and environmental layout. Generally, determining which elements to
randomize – and to which degree – remains an engineering challenge, since RL optimiza­
tion becomes increasingly difficult as more factors of variation are added to the distribution
of training environments. Unlike in supervised learning, RL algorithms optimize on data
generated by the algorithm itself, and increasing the difficulty of policy optimization can
therefore prevent the policy from ever improving. Even worse, studies find that agents
trained by domain randomization perform no better than their simple baselines when eval­
uated on environments outside of the training domain (Packer et al., 2018), consistent with
findings in computer vision (Hendrycks & Dietterich, 2019; Shankar et al., 2019).
A recent line of work (Lee et al., 2019; Laskin et al., 2020a; Kostrikov et al., 2020; Raileanu
et al., 2020b) show that simple data augmentations can improve sample efficiency and
generalization of RL agents substantially, without assuming access to the simulation it­
self. However, (Laskin et al., 2020a) find that, while RL agents can benefit from data
augmentation, the choice of augmentation is task­dependent and non­trivial. Further,
their experiments show that a sub­optimal choice of data augmentation can be severely
detrimental to the end­performance of trained agents, and with bad selections of data aug­
mentation, agents may even fail to learn at all. Selecting appropriate data augmentations
for learning invariances in RL therefore easily becomes a tedious engineering challenge,
and ultimately suffers from the same problems as domain randomization. In this thesis,
we investigate alternative methods for generalization in visual RL that require no signifi­
cant engineering, and scale to test environments that differ substantially from the training
environment, with no prior knowledge about the nature of the changes.
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
19
==PAGE:28==
3.2
Self­Supervised Learning
Learning visual representations from unlabelled data has been of increasingly bigger inter­
est in recent years, both for pre­training of computer vision models as good initializations
for future downstream tasks (Noroozi & Favaro, 2016; Pathak et al., 2016; Zhang et al.,
2017; Gidaris et al., 2018; Zamir et al., 2018; Hendrycks et al., 2019a; Tian et al., 2020a;
He et al., 2020; Khosla et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020b; Grill et al., 2020), and as auxiliary
tasks with the purpose of increasing representational expressiveness and robustness to
aid the main task in its objective (Hendrycks et al., 2019b; Sun et al., 2020; Chen et al.,
2020a; Zamir et al., 2020).
For example, Gidaris et al. (2018) show that simply rotating images by 0, 90, 180, or 270
degrees at random and formulating a self­supervised task as predicting how an image was
rotated is a surprisingly effective method for pre­training image classifiers. Hendrycks
et al. (2019b) further show that jointly learning a self­supervised auxiliary task together
with a classifier on ImageNet improves classification performance on out­of­distribution
samples, and Carmon et al. (2019); Kim et al. (2020) show that self­supervision also im­
proves robustness to adversarially selected samples. The common conjecture in works
on auxiliary self­supervision is that auxiliary tasks help regularize the shared represen­
tation of deep neural networks. Zamir et al. (2018) show that additional modalities and
self­supervised pre­training tasks improve transfer learning capabilities of neural networks
in computer vision, which would suggest that it may indeed be true.
Section 2.3 introduces the concept of contrastive representation learning as an alternative
to predictive self­supervised tasks. A significant drawback of contrastive learning meth­
ods have been their immense compute and data requirements. Recent work (Grill et al.,
2020) propose a framework for contrastive learning without negative samples, which al­
leviates one of the most pressing concerns in contrastive learning: the large batch sizes.
Additionally, they show that their self­supervised pre­training can learn representations
for image classification that are on par with models trained with ImageNet labels in a
supervised fashion, demonstrating that semantic labels are not necessary for meaningful
representations. The method proposed by Grill et al. (2020), denoted BYOL, uses stochas­
tic data augmentations t, t′ ∼T to produce two different views v = t(x), v′ = t′(x) from
an input image x. An online network encodes and projects v into a lower­dimensional
feature vector z, and an offline network defined as an EMA of the online network similarly
encodes and projects v′ into a vector z′. BYOL then trains a prediction network to predict z′
from z, using the (normalized) mean squared error between the predicted feature vector
and z′ as training objective. The authors show that BYOL can learn surprisingly expressive
representations through careful selection of data augmentations, and additionally find that
their method is comparably more stable than previous contrastive learning methods when
training with small batch sizes, which makes BYOL a viable self­supervised learning task
in application domains that historically have used much smaller batch sizes, such as RL.
In this thesis, we propose a framework for generalization in RL that optimizes for invari­
ance through strong data augmentation and an auxiliary self­supervised objective similar
to that of BYOL, which we introduce in Chapter 6. However, rather than learning to align
representations of two augmented views of the same instance, we learn to map the fea­
tures of augmented views onto their non­augmented counterparts in latent space. We
also propose to perform reinforcement learning together with other self­supervised tasks,
including rotation prediction as proposed by Gidaris et al. (2018), and inverse dynamics
models as introduced in Chapter 2.2.1. In the following section, we discuss the role of
self­supervision in unsupervised adaptation.
20
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:29==
3.3
Test­Time Adaptation
Deep domain adaptation is the practice of adapting a deep network pre­trained on one
data distribution (the source domain) to perform well on a different distribution (the target
domain). Some approaches to domain adaptation rely on labeled data in the target domain
and propose methods for supervised fine­tuning (Hoffman et al., 2015; Hu et al., 2015;
Peng et al., 2016; 2019b) without catastrophic forgetting (Goodfellow et al., 2014a), while
others only assume access to unlabelled data in the target domain (Ganin & Lempitsky,
2015; Long et al., 2016; Sun et al., 2019). For example, Sun et al. (2019) propose to jointly
learn a set of auxiliary self­supervised tasks using data from both the source and target
domain, which serves to bring the learned representation closer to the target domain.
Common to these works on domain adaptation is the assumption that one has access to
a substantial amount of samples from the target domain, which makes them of limited use
in the general case of adaptation to unseen distributions.
Recent work in computer vision explores the possibility of mitigating distributional shift
by adaptation of deep learning models at test­time, with access only to a limited number
of test samples (e.g. one) and no previous data from the target domain (Shocher et al.,
2017; 2018; Bau et al., 2019; Mullapudi et al., 2019; Wortsman et al., 2019; Sun et al.,
2020; Zhou & Levine, 2020; Zhang et al., 2020a; Alet et al., 2020). For example, Shocher
et al. (2018) show that it is possible to train a network – from scratch – to perform image
super­resolution using only a single test image, simply by learning to upsample artificially
downsampled versions of the image. Bau et al. (2019) show that adapting the prior of a
Generative Adversarial Network to the image statistics of individual test images improves
photo manipulation tasks, and Zhang et al. (2020a) propose a meta­learning task that
exploits statistics of a batch of test samples to adapt to individual samples in the batch.
The adaptive mechanism in this thesis work more closely resembles that of Sun et al.
(2020), as well as concurrent works Zhou & Levine (2020); Alet et al. (2020); Raileanu
et al. (2020a). As evident from the literature on self­supervised domain adaptation, aux­
iliary tasks are helpful for adaptation to new domains. In Sun et al. (2020), the authors
propose to optimize an auxiliary self­supervised task jointly together with the main super­
vised objective during training, and opt for rotation prediction (Gidaris et al., 2018) in their
experiments. They show that performing self­supervised updates on randomly perturbed
versions of individual test images before main task prediction improves the performance
of the main task under various distribution shifts. Similarly, Zhou & Levine (2020) propose
self­supervised test­time adaptation as a method for improved uncertainty estimates, and
Alet et al. (2020) reformulates the test­time adaptation framework as a meta­learning prob­
lem. The primary benefit of adaptation through self­supervision is its flexibility; while other
works rely on stationarity in the test environment (Yang et al., 2020a) or access to the test
environment prior to deployment (Hanna & Stone, 2017; Desai et al., 2020; Karnan et al.,
2020), self­supervision allows an agent to continuously adapt to an environment through
interaction.
With empirical evidence that self­supervision can be used for adaptation to distribution
shifts encountered only at test­time, it is natural to ask whether self­supervision can be
used for adaptation in reinforcement learning, where an agent continuously collects new
data from the test environment through interaction. In this thesis, we explore a novel
approach to generalization that continuously adapts using observations received at test­
time. Through interaction with an environment, we can extract information about dis­
crepancies in both visuals and dynamics, and we propose to optimize a self­supervised
objective at test­time to better align an agent’s representation with its new environment.
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
21
==PAGE:30==
3.4
Visual Representations in Reinforcement Learning
Reinforcement learning is hard. In many cases, reward signals are sparse, and the re­
wards may even be delayed in time which makes credit assignment challenging. It is not
uncommon for an agent to only receive a single bit of feedback for an entire trajectory’s
worth of experience, which leaves the agent with very little training signal. To aid the pro­
cess of policy learning, it can be useful to employ auxiliary tasks to increase the density
of training signal and to produce immediate feedback for the agent. For instance, Jader­
berg et al. (2017) introduce a number of novel self­supervised tasks for visual RL, e.g.
predicting whether the agent will be rewarded, penalized, or neither within a short time
horizon, and they find each additional training signal to improve sample efficiency and
end­performance of the agent on a diverse set of tasks when optimized jointly together
with a sparse reward signal. Shelhamer et al. (2017) extends this work by providing an
extensive study on auxiliary tasks for RL in Atari games. They find that it is highly task­
dependent whether an auxiliary task is helpful or not to a particular RL task, but that auxil­
iary tasks generally do not hurt the end­performance, similar to the findings of Hendrycks
et al. (2019b); Sun et al. (2020) in computer vision.
A vast amount of work in RL focuses on the learning of environment dynamics through
forward and inverse dynamics models. Model­based RL methods (Deisenroth & Ras­
mussen, 2011; Chua et al., 2018; Janner et al., 2019; Hafner et al., 2019; Yan et al.,
2020; Yu et al., 2020b) learn a model of the environment and use the learned model for
trajectory planning, whereas model­free algorithms may simply learn a dynamics model
as an auxiliary objective to provide additional training signal (Nguyen­Tuong & Peters,
2010; Stadie et al., 2015; Baranes & Oudeyer, 2013; Agrawal et al., 2016; Pathak et al.,
2017; Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018; Sekar et al., 2020); in this work, we shift our attention to
model­free RL algorithms.
World models are a promising direction of research. Originally proposed by Ha & Schmid­
huber (2018), this class of algorithms learn a low­complexity model of the environment
using a generative self­supervised objective, and afterwards learn a compact policy using
the world model representation as input. Furthermore, the authors show that, given a
powerful enough world model, it is possible to train a policy solely on generated data, and
that the learned policies successfully transfer back to the original environment that was
used to train the world model.
Another interesting direction of research is curiosity­based exploration using dynamics
models (Pathak et al., 2017), which has been found to learn complex navigation skills
without any reward signal. The authors train both a forward dynamics model and an
inverse dynamics model jointly, and simultaneously train a policy for environment inter­
action using the loss of the dynamics models as reward signal. Concretely, the received
reward is high when the dynamics losses are high, and vice versa. Although this may
seem counter­intuitive at first, it can be motivated as follows: since the dynamics loss
will be high for out­of­distribution data, the loss is a good indication of whether the policy
is exploring new parts of the environment or not. While both of these works are inter­
esting applications of dynamics models, they are not directly applicable to the problem
of generalization. We propose a novel application of dynamics models to improve the
generalization of RL agents by optimizing a self­supervised objective at test­time.
Aside from learning the environment dynamics, visual RL also requires the ability to per­
ceive and act based on those perceptions. With high­dimensional inputs such as images,
perception is a non­trivial task to learn, and the difficulty is only exacerbated by the simul­
22
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:31==
taneous policy learning. It is therefore natural to ask whether one can draw inspiration
from computer vision literature to improve the perception of agents. Yen­Chen et al. (2020)
shows that visual pre­training on large datasets such as ImageNet can provide good visual
priors for certain robotics applications, and they find that robots can learn to manipulate
objects with just a small amount of interaction when pre­trained visually, which is more
in line with how humans learn new skills. A recent line of research investigates the use
of self­supervised tasks from computer vision literature for joint visual learning together
with RL optimization (Yarats et al., 2019; Laskin et al., 2020b; Lee et al., 2020a; Stooke
et al., 2020; Zhan et al., 2020). For example, Yarats et al. (2019) show that learning an
auxiliary autoencoder improves both sample efficiency and end­performance of policies
for continuous control from images. Laskin et al. (2020b) builds upon this work and find
that a simple contrastive learning objective similar to Chen et al. (2020b) further improves
policy learning, and nearly closes the gap in sample efficiency between learning from pro­
prioceptive states and image observations; an encouraging result for the future of visual
reinforcement learning.
3.5
Reinforcement Learning in the Real World
A common problem setting for generalization and adaptation in RL is sim2real; training
a policy in simulation with the intent to deploy it in the real world. Learning in simulation
is attractive in part because training in the real world can be both costly and outright
unsafe, and in part because simulations offer a lot more flexibility during experimentation.
However, building an accurate replica of the real world in a simulation is challenging, and
even minutiae discrepancies between the simulation and the real world can be devastating
to the transfer of agents. In this section, we explore recent work on sim2real, which can be
considered a special case of the general transfer problem where the target environment
is either partially or fully known, and can possibly be queried during training.
A number of prominent works have shown that it is possible for agents to learn deep
visuomotor policies directly in the real world (Levine et al., 2016; Pinto et al., 2016; Pinto
& Gupta, 2016; Finn & Levine, 2017; Gu et al., 2017; Levine et al., 2018; Ebert et al., 2018;
Gupta et al., 2018; Kalashnikov et al., 2018; Zhan et al., 2020). The common approach
in these works is to collect large real­world robot interaction datasets and then use that
data for off­policy Q­learning to produce a policy. For example, Pinto & Gupta (2016)
learns robotic grasping of various objects from 700 robot hours worth of grasping attempts
(corresponding to more than 500,000 attempts), where a sparse reward signal is derived
from a tactile sensor, and Kalashnikov et al. (2018) similarly collects a dataset consisting
of approximately 800 robot hours. In all of these works, the policy is learned and deployed
in the same environment, though some studies consider generalization across grasping
objects (Pinto & Gupta, 2016; Kalashnikov et al., 2018; Zhan et al., 2020).
The research community has recently started to address generalization across environ­
ments. Julian et al. (2020) show that visuomotor policies for robotic grasping can be
trained on pre­collected data from Kalashnikov et al. (2018) and then fine­tuned in a select
number of robot environments that differ both in visuals, objects, and robot morphology.
The authors find that a naïve fine­tuning strategy works surprisingly well when trained on
data collected from 700 trials in the new environment. While 700 trials from each individ­
ual environment that we wish to deploy to is still a lot, it shows that policies can indeed
adapt to both the visuals and dynamics of their new environments, even in the real world.
Concurrent to our work, Zhan et al. (2020) show that, by application of techniques similar
to those proposed in this thesis, diverse robotic manipulation skills can be learned from
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
23
==PAGE:32==
just 10 human demonstrations and less than one hour of robot interaction. Specifically,
the authors propose to pre­train the encoder of a Soft Actor­Critic (Haarnoja et al., 2018b)
agent using a contrastive loss similar to that of Laskin et al. (2020b) and a dataset col­
lected from human demonstrations. After pre­training, both policy and encoder is jointly
trained through robot interaction and data augmentation. In our work, we employ similar
techniques but require no demonstrations nor robot interaction in the real world. Instead,
we train policies entirely in simulation and only subsequently transfer to a real robot. While
learning tasks from scratch in the real world with little data is a remarkable feat, we argue
that future robots will also need to leverage prior experiences to learn more complex and
compositional behaviors in just a few interactions.
To minimize real­world interaction during training, related works aim to learn a policy in
simulation and then iteratively align either the policy or the simulation itself with the real
world (James et al., 2019; Karnan et al., 2020; Desai et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020b). For
instance, James et al. (2019) learns to transform the visuals of randomized simulations to
a canonical view before inputting it into the policy, and (Karnan et al., 2020; Desai et al.,
2020) learns to transform the dynamics of a simulation to its real­world deployment by
iteratively collecting data in both domains. Concurrent to our work, Zhang et al. (2020b)
learns dynamics correspondence between two domains using unpaired data, and uses
the learned correspondence to transfer a policy from simulation to a real robot without any
fine­tuning. While these are encouraging steps towards scalable real­world robot learning,
in this thesis we consider the general case of policy transfer without prior knowledge about
the target environment. To address this, we investigate how to adapt learned policies
during deployment, and the discussed methods are therefore not directly applicable to
our problem setting.
3.6
Summary and Open Problems
In recent years, increasingly powerful RL algorithms have rapidly improved the capabili­
ties of agents, as well as the rate at which they can acquire new skills. However, many
successes have stemmed from policy learning directly from low­dimensional propriocep­
tive states, which can be difficult to obtain reliably outside ideal conditions, e.g. when
deployed in the real world. In pursuit of learning systems that better reflect how humans
perceive and interact with the world, RL from visual observations have attracted interest.
When an agent’s environment is unstructured and may contain unanticipated elements,
visual perception can aid the agent in its decision­making and allow it to dynamically adjust
its behavior to better reflect the environment it interacts with.
Learning to perceive, however, has by itself proven challenging, and it is therefore worth
considering techniques for visual perception that have brought success in the field of com­
puter vision, such as randomization, data augmentation, and self­supervised representa­
tion learning. Although the adoption of randomization and data augmentation techniques
have contributed to remarkable improvements in both sample efficiency and generaliza­
tion ability of agents trained by RL, policy learning on increasingly large training distribu­
tions leads to optimization difficulties and may prevent learning entirely. At the same time,
it also remains non­trivial to design appropriate randomization for each task, and training
policies that generalize therefore becomes a major engineering hurdle. As a result, prac­
titioners are forced to manually balance the generalization versus convergence trade­offs
that emerge with current methods. To improve generalization, recent works have pro­
posed to learn mappings of visuals and dynamics between two domains; these mappings
are however equally prone to distributional shift, and the problem of generalization across
24
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:33==
environments therefore becomes a meta­problem of generalization between distributions
of environments as in domain randomization and data augmentation approaches.
To address these challenges, we need to rethink how agents learn and represent their
knowledge. A promising direction of research is the application of self­supervised repre­
sentation learning together with policy optimization. Depending on the formulation of the
self­supervised task(s), previous work has individually shown that auxiliary tasks can im­
prove both sample efficiency, generalization, and end­performance. While the majority of
recent work on visual representation learning in RL train and evaluate on the same envi­
ronment, generalization to unseen, but similarly structured, environments is arguably just
as crucial to more widespread deployment of visual RL algorithms, which has been ac­
knowledged by a number of recent works. In this thesis, we investigate novel approaches
to generalization that seek to address the problems of scalability of current learning al­
gorithms. To benchmark generalization ability of the developed methods against recent
state­of­the­art methods for visual RL, we systematically evaluate our methods and base­
lines on a number of new benchmarks for generalization in RL from images, which we
introduce in Chapter 4.
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
25
==PAGE:34==
26
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:35==
4
Benchmarks for Generalization in
Visual Reinforcement Learning
To accurately measure advances in algorithmic design, standardized benchmarks are a
necessity. For the past decade, ImageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015) has served as a
large­scale benchmark for computer vision research, enabling practitioners to compare
algorithms and neural network designs, and continuously push the field of computer vision
forward in measurable increments. Benchmarks such as GLUE (Wang et al., 2018; 2019)
and SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2016) have played a similar role in the field of natural lan­
guage processing, and likewise in RL and robotics research other such benchmarks have
been proposed (Bellemare et al., 2015; Dosovitskiy et al., 2017; Wydmuch et al., 2018;
Lomonaco et al., 2019; Juliani et al., 2019; Tassa et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2020; Cobbe
et al., 2020). The Arcade Learning Environment (ALE) (Bellemare et al., 2015) has been
of particular significance to the field due to its accessibility, diversity in environments (55
Atari games, optionally visual observations), and right level of difficulty (easy enough for
– at that time – state­of­the­art algorithms to achieve non­trivial results, but still leaving
a substantial gap between algorithms and humans), which has made it a long­standing
challenge to achieve superhuman performance on the benchmark.
More recently, DeepMind Control Suite (DMControl) (Tassa et al., 2018) has been pro­
posed as a benchmark for continuous control, featuring challenging and diverse tasks
that reflect real robotic tasks such as locomotion, manipulation, and grasping, offering
both proprioceptive states and image renderings as observations for RL. Figure 4.1 shows
a number of tasks proposed in DMControl. Like ALE, DMControl has been adopted by
the community as a benchmark for algorithmic improvements, and has been used in a
number of related works on sample efficient reinforcement learning from visual observa­
tions (Hafner et al., 2019; Yarats et al., 2019; Laskin et al., 2020b; Kostrikov et al., 2020;
Laskin et al., 2020a; Stooke et al., 2020). DMControl is particularly well­suited for algo­
rithmic benchmarks in visual RL because of its standardized interfacing and task design,
while still offering tasks that are technically challenging (e.g. large action spaces, precise
control, random initializations, sparse rewards) and require a diverse set of skills. While
both ALE and DMControl are excellent benchmarks for measuring algorithmic progress
in visuomotor control, as per their original proposals they do not consider generalization
across distributions of related environments.
Figure 4.1: DMControl environments. Visualization of common tasks from the DMCon­
trol environments for benchmark of continuous control. Source: Tassa et al. (2018).
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
27
==PAGE:36==
video backgrounds
random colors
training
test
Figure 4.2: DMControl­GB evaluation. Agents are trained in a fixed environment and
evaluated on a wide range of unseen and visually diverse test environments, including en­
vironments with randomized colors and video backgrounds. Sample images correspond
to actual observations.
Machado et al. (2018); Dubey et al. (2018) propose variants of the ALE environment
for evaluating generalization to held­out game modes, and Packer et al. (2018) evaluates
generalization to modified dynamics in continuous control tasks from proprioceptive states
similar to those of DMControl. Common to these works is their focus on generalization to
changes in environment dynamics. Related work, Song et al. (2020), studies the concept
of observational overfitting in a video game played directly from pixels, and find that deep
RL algorithms rely heavily on spurious correlations in the rendered environment, demon­
strating the need for benchmarks to also consider the challenge of perceptual general­
ization when training in small, visually homogeneous environments that do not represent
real world deployments of agents trained by RL.
In this work, we propose a new benchmark for generalization in continuous control from
images, based on the DMControl environments. It systematically benchmarks visual gen­
eralization of RL agents trained in a single, fixed environment, and evaluated on a variety
of challenging and visually diverse environments. Section 4.1 introduces the proposed
benchmark, Section 4.2 present an additional benchmark for visual RL, and Section 4.3
concludes the chapter by proposing a systematic evaluation of generalization when de­
ploying agents trained in simulation onto real robots perceiving and interacting in unstruc­
tured environments.
4.1
DMControl Generalization Benchmark
The DMControl Generalization Benchmark (DMControl­GB) (Hansen & Wang, 2020) is a
benchmark for perceptual generalization in continuous control from visual observations,
based on DMControl (Tassa et al., 2018). It features a variety of challenging and diverse
tasks reflecting real applications such as robotic locomotion, manipulation, and grasp­
ing, and measures generalization to diverse visual changes of incremental difficulty. In
DMControl­GB, agents are trained in a single, fixed environment and their generalization
is evaluated on a wide variety of test environments. Evaluation is designed to mimic real
world deployment of RL agents, and include visual changes such as color randomization
and non­stationary video backgrounds.
To develop RL agents that successfully navigate and operate in the real, unstructured
world, agents need to perceive and interpret an ever­changing environment that may not
have been previously seen during training. For example, imagine a cooking robot that is
trained to cook meals for the elderly in their own homes. If the aim is to learn a general
policy with satisfactory behavior in any kitchen that is it deployed in, it will inevitably be
necessary to extrapolate and generalize learnings from a finite set of training environ­
ments to the kitchen that it eventually is expected to act in, since it is infeasible to train a
robot on every possible kitchen. Even within a single kitchen the agent can be exposed to
28
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:37==
(a) color_easy
(b) color_hard
(c) video_easy
(d) video_hard
Figure 4.3: Samples from DMControl­GB test environments. Agents are trained in a
fixed environment, and the generalization ability of agents is evaluated on the test distri­
butions shown in (a­d). Environments (a­b) randomize the color of background, floor, and
the agent itself, while (c­d) replaces the background with natural videos. In (c), only the
skybox is replaced, whereas the entirety of the background is replaced in (d).
a multitude of environmental changes, such as those caused by its own interactions, but
also external factors such as humans, other robots, and natural changes such as lighting
conditions and tear on tools and the robot’s joints. While true generalization is a long­term
goal of the artificial intelligence community, DMControl­GB aims to provide a test­bed for
visual generalization that is achievable in the near future.
We systematically evaluate performance under distributional shift: agents are trained in
the environments proposed by Tassa et al. (2018) and evaluated in two distinct categories
of environments: (i) randomized colors, where the colors of the floor, background, and
the agent itself is randomized; and (ii) video backgrounds, where the static background
of DMControl is replaced by continuously changing backgrounds collected from natural
videos. The evaluation procedure is visualized in Figure 4.2, and samples from the test
environments are shown in Figure 4.3. Each of the two distribution shifts (colors and
videos) are offered in two varieties: easy and hard. For the randomized color environ­
ments, the two varieties differ in color diversity with hard being significantly more difficult.
In the video background environments, the easy variant features natural videos with di­
verse colors and textures, but limited non­stationarity, and only the skybox is replaced by
video. In the hard variant, both floor and skybox is replaced by video, and videos are
highly non­stationary, i.e. significant changes in scene and camera pose over the course
of an episode. Each set of randomized color environments feature 100 unique environ­
ments, while the video sets contain a total of 100 videos; easy videos are collected in the
wild, and hard videos are a subset of the RealEstate10K (Zhou et al., 2018) dataset.
As a whole, DMControl­GB poses a significant generalization challenge since agents
are only trained on a single environment with no visual diversity, and are expected to
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.4: Samples from the modified CRLMaze environments. Agents are trained
in a fixed environment (left) and evaluated in environments with unseen textures of floor,
walls, and ceiling, as well as changing light conditions (right). Sample images correspond
to actual observations.
test
video backgrounds
random colors
training
Figure 4.5: Robotic manipulation evaluation. Agents are trained in a fixed environ­
ment and evaluated on a wide range of unseen and visually diverse test environments,
including environments with randomized colors and video backgrounds. Sample images
correspond to actual observations.
generalize to a diverse set of environments with visual characteristics that differ signifi­
cantly from the training environment, unlike e.g. the recently proposed ProcGen bench­
mark (Cobbe et al., 2019b) that both trains and evaluates on a large set of procedu­
rally generated video games. We therefore believe that DMControl­GB fills an important
gap in visual RL, and envision it as a generally useful benchmark for future research
on generalization. Documentation and open­sourced implementation of DMControl­GB
is available at https://github.com/nicklashansen/dmcontrol-generalization-benchmark, and
the DMControl­GB tasks and implementation is discussed in detail in Appendix A.
4.2
Generalization in Navigation
While DMControl and DMControl­GB make great benchmarks for measuring sample­
efficiency and generalization in continuous control tasks, their tasks inherently require
limited scene understanding. To better evaluate generalization in tasks that require scene
understanding, we propose an additional generalization benchmark based on CRLMaze
(Lomonaco et al., 2019), a 3D navigation task based on the ViZDoom platform (Wydmuch
et al., 2018).
In CRLMaze, agents are to navigate a maze and collect objects; there is a positive reward
associated with green columns, and a penalty associated with red lanterns. The task is
time­constrained and the agent receives a small penalty at each time step. At each step,
the agent can move either forward, backward, left, or right, and the initial position of the
agent is sampled from a set of 20 fixed points. As in DMControl, agents are by default
trained and evaluated in the same fixed environment. We therefore propose a new set of
test environments that differ visually from the training environment, and choose to evaluate
generalization to environments with unseen textures of the floor, walls, and ceiling, as well
as changing light conditions. The set of variations have been selected on the basis of
visual diversity and to replicate some of the distribution shifts that are likely to be relevant
for real­world deployment of embodied agents for navigation. Samples from the training
and test environment of the modified CRLMaze task are shown in Figure 4.2.
30
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:39==
(a) Simulation.
(b) Default transfer.
(c) Table cloth.
(d) Disco lights.
Figure 4.6: Push: robotic manipulation in real world. Samples from the push robotic
manipulation task. The task is to position the gripper of the robotic arm at the location
of a physical red disc. Agents are trained in setting (a) and evaluated in settings (b­d).
Sample images correspond to actual observations. In the real world, the agent receives
observations from an uncalibrated camera. Samples from the reach task are shown in
Figure 4.7.
4.3
From Simulations to Real Robots
Evaluation of the generalization ability of agents under artificial distribution shifts in sim­
ulated environments is a highly accessible and inexpensive benchmark for measuring
algorithmic improvements. However, we are ultimately interested in developing agents
that solve real­world problems with vision­based RL. Therefore, it is natural to consider
simulations as a test­bed for the development of algorithms, with the purpose of even­
tually transferring trained agents to the real world – commonly referred to as sim2real.
To allow for successful transfers, simulations are generally designed to closely mimic the
intended deployment environment, both in terms of visuals and the underlying dynamics.
In the context of robotics, MuJoCo (Todorov et al., 2012) is a popular and highly modular
physics engine for training agents in simulation. Using MuJoCo and a simulated Kinova
Gen 3 robotic arm, we develop an environment for robotic manipulation tasks from visual
observations, and consider the following two tasks: (i) reach, a simple control task in which
the robotic arm needs to position its gripper at the location of a physical red disc; and (ii)
push, an object manipulation task in which the robotic arm needs to push a yellow cube
to the location of the red disc. In both tasks, the robot is controlled using end­effector
movement only, the action space is restricted to the plane, i.e. no vertical movement,
and we randomize the initial configuration of robotic arm, goal, and cube at each reset.
At each step, the agent receives a penalty proportional to the distance between gripper
and goal in the reach task, and between cube and goal in the push task. When the goal
position of the task is reached, the agent receives a positive reward at each step until
the episode terminates. We use an episode length of 50 for each of the two tasks. As
in DMControl, we train in a fixed environment and evaluate generalization to test envi­
ronments with randomized colors and video backgrounds. To simulate deployment on a
real robot, we additionally perform random perturbations of camera, lighting, and texture
during evaluation only. The evaluation protocol is visualized in Figure 4.5.
Besides evaluating agents in simulation, we also transfer trained policies to the real world,
and deploy on a physical Kinova Gen 3 robotic arm with communication handled through
a custom­built ROS interface. Samples from the two robotic manipulation tasks in sim­
ulation and the real world are shown in Figure 4.6 and Figure 4.7. We first consider a
direct policy transfer, where we deploy in a real environment that approximately resem­
bles the simulation, which we shall denote the default transfer. In the sim2real setting,
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
31
==PAGE:40==
(a) Simulation.
(b) Default transfer.
(c) Table cloth.
(d) Disco lights.
Figure 4.7: Reach: robotic manipulation in the real world. Samples from the reach
robotic manipulation task. The task is to push the yellow cube to the location of the red
disc. Agents are trained in setting (a) and evaluated in settings (b­d). Sample images
correspond to actual observations. In the real world, the agent receives observations
from an uncalibrated camera. Samples from the push task are shown in Figure 4.6.
a policy needs to generalize to subtle visual differences between simulation and the real
world, such as camera pose, object dimensionality, lighting, and texture. Deployment also
presents further challenges in terms of dynamics, since the simulation is often a coarse
and inaccurate model of the real environment. In our evaluations, we make no attempt
to address disparities in dynamics such as action calibration, object dimensionality and
mass, as well as friction and subtle inconsistencies in the movement of the robotic arm,
and the policy takes observations directly from an uncalibrated camera.
For a policy to truly generalize to the real setting, it should function in unstructured envi­
ronments without extensive engineering efforts. Therefore, we also propose to evaluate
policy transfer to two other real settings: (i) a table cloth that increases friction substan­
tially and has a pattern that distracts visually; and (ii) continuously moving disco lights that
serve to provide distraction and environmental non­stationarity. In each test environment,
we benchmark generalization to 5 distinct initial configurations, and repeat each evalu­
ation 5 times for a total of 75 real­world evaluations per algorithm that we benchmark.
Videos of the reach and push tasks, both in simulation and the real world, are available
at https://nicklashansen.github.io/PAD and https://nicklashansen.github.io/SODA.
The following two chapters describe our proposed methods and provide extensive exper­
imental results that demonstrate their effectiveness. Chapter 5 describes Policy Adapta­
tion during Deployment, and Chapter 6 describes Soft Data Augmentation. In Chapter 7,
we discuss the implications of our work more broadly, and provide our perspective on the
future of visual RL.
32
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:41==
5
Policy Adaptation during Deployment
In most practical applications of reinforcement learning, a policy learned in one environ­
ment needs to be deployed in another, potentially quite different environment. It may be
that a policy trained in simulation needs to be deployed on a real robot, or it may be that an
agent trained to perform a task under a finite number of environmental conditions needs to
generalize to a set of unseen conditions. In either scenario, generalization across differ­
ent environments is known to be challenging. A natural solution could be to naïvely train a
policy from scratch in each new environment, but this is extremely inefficient considering
that the new environment likely contains elements of what the agent has seen previously.
A less naïve solution could be to fine­tune a learned policy in each of the encountered
environments, but this cannot be done if the new environment offers no reward signal
(e.g. the real world), and constructing a new reward signal can be difficult.
In this chapter, we tackle the problem of generalization and policy transfer in visual RL
from a novel perspective: adapting a policy pre­trained in one environment to an unknown
environment without any reward signal nor previous experience in that environment. We
do this by leveraging self­supervision as an intrinsic training signal during deployment,
and rapidly adapt policies to their new environments through interaction within a single
episode. We propose our method for policy adaptation during deployment in Section 5.1,
and present our experimental results in simulation and on a real robot in Section 5.2.
5.1
Method
In this section, we describe our proposed Policy Adaptation during Deployment (PAD)
method for generalization in visual RL (Hansen et al., 2020). PAD is a general framework
for self­supervised policy transfer and can be implemented on top of any policy network
and standard deep RL algorithm (both on­policy and off­policy) that can be described by
minimizing an RL objective LRL(θ) using gradient descent and optimizing w.r.t. a collec­
tion of network parameters θ that parameterize the policy. We here describe PAD as an
algorithm­agnostic framework, and delay discussion of implementation details specific to
our experiments to Section 5.2.
Training
Replay Buffer
Observation
Reinforcement 
Learning
Self-Supervised 
Learning
Policy Adaptation during Deployment
Environment
Observation
Reinforcement 
Learning
Self-Supervised 
Learning
Figure 5.1: Overview of method. Left: Training before deployment. Observations are
sampled from a replay buffer for off­policy methods and are collected during roll­outs for
on­policy methods. We optimize the RL and self­supervised objectives jointly. Right: Pol­
icy adaptation during deployment. Observations are collected from the test environment
online, and we optimize only the self­supervised objective.
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
33
==PAGE:42==
0°
90°
180°
270°
0°
Figure 5.2: Self­supervised tasks. Left: Inverse dynamics modeling. Given two con­
secutive observations the action taken in between them is predicted. Right: Rotation
prediction as proposed by Gidaris et al. (2018) and discussed in Section 2.2. An observa­
tion is randomly rotated by one of 0, 90, 180, or 270 degrees and the task is to determine
which one of these four ways the observation was rotated.
5.1.1
Network Architecture
A core design choice of PAD is to let a self­supervised prediction network share param­
eters with the policy network for RL. For a given policy network π parameterized by a
collection of parameters θ, we split the network architecture sequentially into two parts
θ = (θe, θa); we denote θe as parameters of the encoder and denote θa as parameters of
the policy task head that outputs e.g. a distribution over actions as well as any algorithm­
specific values. Given this split of network parameters, we define πe as the encoder and
πa as the policy task head, such that π(ot) = πa(πe(ot)) for an image observation ot, and
π(ot) = at is a distribution over actions for a finite MDP and continuous action values in
the continuous case. In the general case, both ot and at may be high­dimensional, but
we will in the following drop the bold notation introduced in Chapter 2 to simplify notation.
To provide intuition into the network architecture, one can think of πe as a feature extrac­
tor that takes an image observation as input and outputs a feature vector, while πa is a
controller that instead takes a feature vector extracted by the encoder as input and then
outputs a probability distribution over actions.
We then let πs be the self­supervised prediction head with its own collection of parameters
θs, and we let the output of πe be the input of πs, such that πa and πs share an encoder
πe. The encoder is generally implemented as a convolutional neural network, but can in
principle consist of any parameterized neural network layers. The goal of our method is to
update the shared encoder πe at test­time using gradients from the self­supervised task,
such that πe extracts feature representations that are better aligned with the new envi­
ronment. Since πe is shared between the two tasks, we can expect the self­supervised
updates to influence the decision­making of πa through the finetuned representation. Fig­
ure 5.1 provides an overview of our method and architecture.
5.1.2
Self­Supervised Tasks
While our proposed framework makes no assumptions about the choice of self­supervised
task, in this thesis we primarily consider adaptation using one of two distinct self­supervised
tasks: (i) inverse dynamics modeling; and (ii) rotation prediction as proposed by Gidaris
et al. (2018). Figure 5.2 illustrates the two tasks. The inverse dynamics are modeled as
a simple prediction task in feature space: two consecutive observations ot and ot+1 are
encoded by πe, and the task is then for πs to predict at given a concatenation of features
34
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:43==
from the two observations. We can formally define the inverse dynamics objective as
Lidm
ss (θs, θe) = ℓ
(
at, πs (πe(ot), πe(ot+1))
)
.
(5.1)
For continuous actions, ℓis the mean squared error between prediction action and ground­
truth action, whereas in the discrete case ℓis a cross­entropy loss between the predicted
action distribution and the one­hot encoded ground­truth action. Rotation prediction is
implemented as in Gidaris et al. (2018); an input image is randomly rotated by one of 0,
90, 180, or 270 degrees, and the task is then for πs to predict the ground­truth rotation
from the features extracted by πe, which we model as a classification problem that can be
optimized using a cross­entropy loss. The rotation prediction objective can similarly be
defined as
Lrot
ss (θe, θs) = ℓ
(
ωt, πs (πe(rotate(ot, ωt)))
)
, ωt ∼W ,
(5.2)
where W is a uniform distribution over possible rotations, ωt denotes a rotation, and rotate
is a function that rotates an input observation ot by ωt. We optimize πs and πe jointly
by propagating errors from the self­supervised task through both parts of the network.
Empirically, we find that inverse dynamics modeling works well for motor control tasks
where there is a close relationship between observations and actions, while we find that
rotation prediction works better for navigation tasks that require scene understanding,
which is in line with previous work (Hendrycks et al., 2019b; Doersch & Zisserman, 2017).
5.1.3
Training and Deployment
Our method consists of the following two phases: initial policy learning in a fixed envi­
ronment (denoted the training phase), and self­supervised policy adaptation during de­
ployment in a previously unseen environment (denoted the deployment or test phase).
During training, we learn a policy jointly together with the self­supervised task such that
both tasks share an encoder, similar to other works on multi­task learning (Baxter, 1996;
Argyriou et al., 2006; Pathak et al., 2016; Jaderberg et al., 2017; Doersch & Zisserman,
2017; Zamir et al., 2018; Hendrycks et al., 2019b; Yarats et al., 2019; Sun et al., 2020;
Laskin et al., 2020b; Stooke et al., 2020). Training signals are trivial to obtain for the
self­supervised task, and it is assumed that the reward signal is well­defined in the train­
ing environment, e.g. a simulation. The training phase then corresponds to the following
optimization problem:
min
θe,θa,θs LRL(θa, θe) + αLss(θs, θe) ,
(5.3)
where α > 0 is a hyper­parameter that controls the auxiliary task weighting.
During deployment, we can no longer assume access to a reward signal, since the agent
may be deployed e.g. in the real world. We can however still update both θe and θs by
optimizing the self­supervised objective Lss using observations collected through interac­
tion in the new environment. Empirically, we only find negligible difference with keeping θs
fixed at test­time, so we update both since gradients have to be computed regardless. As
new observations are obtained at each step in the environment, we make one gradient
step (using the self­supervised objective) per environment step until the episode termi­
nates. We find it sufficient to make self­supervised updates using only the most recently
arriving observation, i.e. we maintain no replay buffer and update purely in an online man­
ner. To reduce variance in updates made during deployment, one can dynamically obtain
a batch of training data by copying the current observation and applying a stochastic data
augmentation. While PAD has no explicit mechanism for preventing catastrophical forget­
ting during deployment, we do not find it problematic in our experiments; we discuss this
further in Chapter 7. Finally, we summarize the deployment phase of PAD in Algorithm 3,
and in the following section we discuss our experimental setup and results extensively.
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
35
==PAGE:44==
Algorithm 3 Policy Adaptation during Deployment (PAD) – Deployment Phase
θ: network parameters pre­trained in source environment
α: auxiliary task weight
T : stochastic data augmentation
1: for each environment step do
2:
at ∼πt
θ(ot), θt = (θt
e, θt
s)
▷Sample action from current policy
3:
ot+1 ∼p(ot+1 | ot, at)
▷Take environment step
4:
o′
t, o′
t+1 = t(ot), t(ot+1), t ∼T
▷Optionally augment observations
5:
θt+1
e
= θt
e −α∇Lss(o′
t, at, o′
t+1; θt
e, θt
s)
▷Update shared encoder
6:
θt+1
s
= θt
s −α∇Lss(o′
t, at, o′
t+1; θt
e, θt
s)
▷Update self­supervised task head
5.2
Experiments
In this thesis, we investigate how well an agent trained directly from image observations in
one environment generalizes to a variety of unseen, but similar, test environments. During
evaluation, agents have no access to a reward signal and are expected to generalize
without previous trials or privileged information about the test environments that they are
to be deployed in; it can therefore be considered a zero­shot generalization problem.
We evaluate PAD and a number of strong baselines extensively on (i) continuous control
tasks from DMControl Generalization Benchmark, our proposed benchmark based on
DeepMind Control suite (Tassa et al., 2018); (ii) a novel navigation benchmark based on
CRLMaze (Lomonaco et al., 2019) and ViZDoom (Wydmuch et al., 2018); and (iii) robotic
manipulation tasks both in simulation and on a real robotic arm. We evaluate performance
on the environments in which the agents are trained, and systematically benchmark gen­
eralization to a number of environmental changes, including both stationary changes
(e.g.
colors, objects, textures, lighting, dynamics) and non­stationary changes (natu­
ral videos backgrounds). An open­sourced implementation of PAD is made available at
https://github.com/nicklashansen/dmcontrol-generalization-benchmark and a webpage with
video results from our experiments are available at https://nicklashansen.github.io/PAD.
5.2.1
Implementation Details
We opt for a similar experimental setup for each of the three benchmarks, and adopt
hyper­parameters from previous work whenever applicable. In this section, we first de­
scribe the implementation details that relate to our DMControl­GB experiments, and then
proceed to describe the modifications we make to adapt our implementation to the two
additional benchmarks.
We implement PAD using a Soft Actor­Critic (SAC) (Haarnoja et al., 2018b) agent as base
algorithm, and we adopt both network architecture and hyper­parameters from Yarats
et al. (2019) with minor modifications. The network architecture is illustrated in Figure
5.3, and hyper­parameters are detailed in Table 5.1. Our network consists of an en­
coder πe with 8 convolutional layers shared between the self­supervised task πs and the
actor­critic πa of SAC. Each branch consists of 3 non­shared convolutional layers, a linear
projection, and a layer normalization, followed by task heads modeled as multilayer per­
ceptrons (MLP) with 3 fully­connected layers. By task head, we refer to the self­supervised
prediction head, as well as task­specific prediction heads of SAC, e.g. policy and value
functions. Observations are stacks of the k most recent frames (k = 3 for DMControl­
GB), where each frame is a 100×100 RGB image rendering. Network outputs depend on
the task and learning algorithm. As the action space of DMControl­GB is continuous, the
36
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:45==
Figure 5.3: Network architecture. Architecture for the DMControl­GB, CRLMaze, and
robotic manipulation experiments. πs and πa use a shared encoder πe. Observations are
stacks of 100 × 100 colored frames. Implementation of policy and value function depends
on the choice of learning algorithm.
policy learned by SAC outputs the mean and variance of a Gaussian distribution over ac­
tions. For details on the SAC algorithm, the reader is referred to Section 2.1.4, Haarnoja
et al. (2018a), and Haarnoja et al. (2018b).
As in previous work (Laskin et al., 2020b;a), we apply a time­consistent random crop to
observations. Random cropping is data augmentation that is commonly used in computer
vision systems (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Szegedy et al., 2015), but has only recently gained
interest as a stochastic regularization technique in the RL literature. We randomly crop
observations to dimensions 84 × 84 (down from 100 × 100), and apply the same crop to
each frame in a stack to preserve spatio­temporal information in the observation, whereas
different crops are applied to each observation in a batch. When learning an inverse
dynamics model, we apply two different crops to the consecutive observations (ot, ot+1)
used to predict the ground­truth action at. During deployment, we create a batch of 32
copies of the most recent observation, and apply random cropping to produce a batch
of augmented samples, which we then use to make a single gradient step with the self­
supervised objective per step in the environment. When using the policy for inference, we
simply apply a 84 × 84 center­crop to observations before passing it into the network. We
provide pseudo­code and further implementation details in Appendix A and Appendix B.
In the robotic manipulation experiments, we employ a similar experimental setup as in
DMControl­GB, but opt for observations that instead are a stack of k = 1 frames (down
from k = 3) to improve transfer to environments with different dynamics than the train­
ing environment. In the CRLMaze experiments, we use Advantage Actor­Critic (A2C),
a synchronous variant of the A3C algorithm proposed by Mnih et al. (2016), as base al­
gorithm, and we apply the same network architecture as for DMControl­GB, but use a
smaller encoder πe that consists of just 6 convolutional layers. In all of our experiments,
each convolutional layer uses 32 learnable filters. Like DMControl­GB, our robotic ma­
nipulation experiments use a continuous action space. CRLMaze has a discrete action
space and the policy learned by A2C thus learns a softmax distribution over actions. By
default, we use an inverse dynamics model (which we abbreviate as IDM for clarity) as
self­supervised task for DMControl­GB and robotic manipulation, and rotation prediction
(which we abbreviate as Rot) for CRLMaze. Table 5.1 details hyper­parameters used for
our DMControl­GB and robotic manipulation experiments, and Table 5.2 details hyper­
parameters used for CRLMaze.
We discuss our empirical evaluations in the following. Section 5.2.2 describes our eval­
uations on DMControl­GB, while Section 5.2.3 and Section 5.2.4 discuss our CRLMaze
and robotic manipulation evaluations, respectively.
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
37
==PAGE:46==
Table 5.1: DMControl­GB and robotic
manipulation.
Hyper­parameters for
PAD and baselines in the DMControl­GB
and robotic manipulation experiments.
Hyper­parameter
Value
Frame rendering
3 × 100 × 100
Frame after crop
3 × 84 × 84
Stacked frames
3
Action repeat
2 (finger)
8 (cartpole)
4 (otherwise)
Discount factor γ
0.99
Episode length
1,000
Learning algorithm
Soft Actor­Critic
Self­supervised task
Inverse Dynamics Model
Number of training steps
500,000
Replay buffer size
500,000
Optimizer (πe, πa, πs)
Adam (β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999)
Optimizer (α)
Adam (β1 = 0.5, β2 = 0.999)
Learning rate (πe, πa, πs)
3e­4 (cheetah)
1e­3 (otherwise)
Learning rate (α)
1e­4
Batch size
128
Batch size (test­time)
32
πe, πs update freq.
2
πe, πs update freq. (test­time)
1
Table 5.2: CRLMaze. Hyper­parameters for
PAD and baselines in the CRLMaze exper­
iments; uses hyper­parameters from Table
5.1 whenever applicable. We employ rota­
tion prediction as default auxiliary task.
Hyper­parameter
Value
Frame rendering
3 × 100 × 100
Frame after crop
3 × 84 × 84
Stacked frames
3
Action repeat
4
Discount factor γ
0.99
Episode length
1,000
Learning algorithm
Advantage Actor­Critic
Self­supervised task
Rotation Prediction
Number of training episodes
1,000 (dom. rand.)
500 (otherwise)
Number of processes
20
Optimizer
Adam (β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999)
Learning rate
1e­4
Learning rate (test­time)
1e­5
Batch size
20
Batch size (test­time)
32
πe, πs loss coefficient
0.5
πe, πs loss coefficient (test­time)
1
πe, πs update freq.
1
πe, πs update freq. (test­time)
1
Figure 5.4: DMControl Environments. Training and test environments of the PAD exper­
iments on DMControl­GB and the additional visual distractor experiments. Left: training
environment. Right: samples from each of the three considered test distributions.
5.2.2
DMControl­GB
DMControl­GB is our proposed benchmark for generalization in continuous control from
images. It is a collection of tasks that represent diverse real­world tasks for motor control,
and consist of training and test environments that differ visually.
We experiment with a total of 9 tasks from DMControl­GB and measure generalization to
four types of test environments: (i) randomized colors, corresponding to the color_hard
benchmark; (ii) natural videos, corresponding to the video_easy benchmark; (iii) visual
distractors placed in the scene, an additional benchmark proposed specifically for the
PAD experiments; and (iv) the unmodified training environment to benchmark algorithmic
performance when trained and evaluation on the same environment. Samples from each
of the test environments are shown in Figure 5.4. In all evaluations, methods are evalu­
ated on 100 random initial configurations and we report results across 10 random seeds
because RL experiments are susceptible to high variance. If a given test environment is
not applicable to certain tasks, e.g. if a task has no background for the video background
setting, they are excluded from the benchmark. We select tasks for the benchmark on the
basis of task diversity as well as the success of previous work on RL from image inputs
in DMControl (Yarats et al., 2019; Laskin et al., 2020b;a; Kostrikov et al., 2020; Stooke
et al., 2020).
38
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:47==
Table 5.3: Randomized colors. Episodic return in test environments from DMControl­GB
with randomized colors, mean and standard deviation of 10 random seeds. Best method
on each task is in bold font, and best method in a comparison between +IDM with and
without PAD is highlighted in blue. PAD improves generalization in 15 out of 16 instances.
10x episode length
color_hard
SAC
+DR
+IDM
+IDM (PAD)
+IDM
+IDM (PAD)
Walker, walk
414±74
594±104
406±29
468±47
3830±547
5505±592
Walker, stand
719±74
715±96
743±37
797±46
7832±209
8566±121
Cartpole, swingup
592±50
647±48
585±73
630±63
6528±539
7093±592
Cartpole, balance
857±60
867±37
835±40
848±29
7746±526
7670±293
Ball in cup, catch
411±183
470±252
471±75
563±50
–
–
Finger, spin
626±163
465±314
757±62
803±72
7249±642
7496±655
Finger, turn_easy
270±43
167±26
283±51
304±46
–
–
Cheetah, run
154±41
145±29
121±38
159±28
1117±530
1208±487
Reacher, easy
163±45
105±37
201±32
214±44
1788±441
2152±506
PAD is implemented using an IDM as self­supervised task, as we find that learning a
model of the environment dynamics works well for continuous control tasks that rely on
fine­grained motor control; for completeness, the choice of self­supervision is ablated. In
our main results, we compare PAD to a number of strong baselines from recent literature
on vision­based RL: (i) SAC with no algorithmic changes, which we will denote SAC;
(ii) SAC trained with domain randomization on the color_easy environment distribution,
denoted SAC+DR for brevity; (iii) PAD trained jointly with the IDM self­supervised task but
without any test­time adaptation, denoted SAC+IDM. Our proposed method, PAD, trains
an IDM jointly and adapts the representation at test­time; we will denote this method
as SAC+IDM (PAD) in the following. We apply a random cropping data augmentation
to PAD and baselines, since we find methods to not converge on all tasks without it.
Hence, the unmodified SAC baseline is in fact equivalent to RAD (Laskin et al., 2020a) that
applies random cropping to SAC. We further emphasize that the domain randomization
(DR) baseline is trained on the easier color_easy distribution as we find the method to
not converge on harder training distributions in a majority of environments. Hence, the
DR baseline is trained on a distribution similar to that of the color_hard test benchmark,
but with a lower variance in colors. Refer to Appendix A for more details.
Randomized colors.
To reliably deploy agents trained by visual RL in an environment
that differs from their training environment, the agents need to be robust to subtle and
superficial changes in visuals such as color and lighting conditions. While colors are rela­
tively easy to randomize during training, it can make the RL optimization difficult and even
result in an agent failing to learn at all. As such, it is natural to ask whether robustness to
shifts in an environment’s colors can be achieved without domain randomization. We sys­
tematically evaluate the generalization of agents to environments with randomized colors
from the color_hard distribution of DMControl­GB, and report the results in Table 5.3 (first
four columns). We find that PAD consistently improves generalization of the SAC+IDM
baseline in all environments considered, and exceeds the performance of domain ran­
domization in a majority of environments. It is observed that, despite training the domain
randomization baseline on a distribution of colors that are similar to those seen at test­time
(but with lower variance), it performs no better than the vanilla SAC baseline in a major­
ity of tasks. These findings are in line with previous work on generalization in visual RL
(Packer et al., 2018), where the authors also find domain randomization to be ineffective
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.5: Relative improvement over time. Relative improvement in instantaneous
reward over time for PAD versus the non­adaptive SAC+IDM baseline on the color_hard
test distribution of DMControl­GB. Average of 5 seeds and 100 initial configurations. Note
that baseline performance is already near­optimal on the cartpole_balance task.
outside its training distribution. We additionally investigate the rate at which our proposed
method adapts to its new environment; Figure 5.5 shows the relative improvement of PAD
as compared to the non­adaptive SAC+IDM baseline on four tasks from DMControl­GB
on the color_hard test distribution. In three of the tasks, most of the improvement from
PAD occurs within the first 200 episode steps, which is equivalent to 25­50 frames using
appropriate action repeats as defined in the DMControl­GB benchmark and reported in
Table 5.1. We see no significant improvement on the cartpole_balance task, but we also
find that the SAC+IDM baseline is near­optimal before adaptation, so there is little room
for improvement.
Long­term stability of PAD.
The DMControl and DMControl­GB benchmarks by default
consider episodes of 1000 steps (excluding action repeat), but real­world deployment of
RL agents can potentially consist of longer duration episodes or even infinite time hori­
zon deployment scenarios. While the relative improvement shown in Figure 5.5 indicates
stability of the adaptation process around episode durations that are of similar length as
the training episodes, this result may not generalize to long­horizon deployments. There­
fore, we further evaluate the long­term stability and behavior of PAD on a set of tasks with
10x episode length (10,000 steps), and report the results in Table 5.3 (last two columns).
We have excluded two goal oriented tasks from the evaluation, since their long­term per­
formance is solely determined by whether the agent succeeds or not. We find PAD to
consistently improve generalization over the SAC+IDM baseline in all tasks considered
in the 10x episode length experiments, which suggests that the adaptation process of
PAD remains stable in the long term. Perhaps surprisingly, we even find the long­term
performance of PAD to exceed that of the default episode length on the walker_walk
task, yielding a relative improvement of 44% on average, which we conjecture may be
because it is a complex locomotion task and subtle inconsistency in representation and
observations thus has greater impact on the long­term return. While PAD has no compo­
nent that explicitly enforces long­term stability of the adaptation process, we find that the
self­supervised task gradients are negligible once the representation has been adapted
to any changes there might be in the test environment, and no catastrophical forgetting is
therefore observed; we elaborate on this phenomenon in Chapter 7.
40
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:49==
Table 5.4: Video backgrounds. Episodic return in test environments from DMControl­GB
with video backgrounds, mean and standard deviation of 10 random seeds. Best method
on each task is in bold font, and best method in a comparison between SAC+IDM with
and without PAD is highlighted in blue. PAD improves in 7 out of 8 instances.
video_easy
SAC
+DR
+IDM
+IDM (PAD)
Walker, walk
616±80
655±55
694±85
717±79
Walker, stand
899±53
869±60
902±51
935±20
Cartpole, swingup
375±90
485±67
487±90
521±76
Cartpole, balance
693±109
766±92
691±76
687±58
Ball in cup, catch
393±175
271±189
362±69
436±55
Finger, spin
447±102
338±207
605±61
691±80
Finger, turn_easy
355±108
223±91
355±110
362±101
Cheetah, run
194±30
150±34
164 ±42
206±34
Table 5.5: Visual distractors. Episodic return in test environments with visual distrac­
tors, mean and standard deviation of 10 random seeds. Best method on each task is
in bold font, and best method in a comparison between SAC+IDM with and without PAD
is highlighted in blue. PAD improves in 3 out of 5 tasks, where the SAC+IDM baseline
already has optimal or near­optimal performance in the remaining two tasks.
Visual distractors
SAC
+DR
+IDM
+IDM (PAD)
Cartpole, swingup
815±60
809±24
776±58
771±64
Cartpole, balance
969±20
938±35
964±26
960±29
Ball in cup, catch
177±111
331±189
482±128
545±173
Finger, spin
652±184
564±288
836±62
867±72
Finger, turn_easy
302±68
165±12
326±101
347±48
Video backgrounds.
Environments with natural videos as background pose a particu­
larly difficult adaptation challenge since the environment visuals become non­stationary.
While video frames that arrive sequentially are highly correlated, it requires an agent to
continuously adapt its representation to pixel­level changes in the video background. We
evaluate the generalization of PAD and baselines on the video_easy test distribution of
DMControl­GB, which features 10 natural non­repeating video backgrounds of various
color patterns and textures that are incongruent with the training environment. Results
from the experiments are shown in Table 5.4. We find PAD to improve generalization of
the SAC+IDM baseline and outperform all other methods in 7 out of 8 tasks. It is worth
emphasizing that PAD improves generalization by up to 20% on ball_in_cup_catch, and
outperforms domain randomization by as much as 60% on the same task and 104% on the
finger_spin task. We observe that domain randomization performs comparably worse
on video backgrounds than color backgrounds, which we conjecture is not because the
test environment is non­stationary since there is no adaptation involved, but rather be­
cause video backgrounds have image statistics that are considerably different from what
was seen during training (randomized colors). Our observation is similar to the conclusion
of Packer et al. (2018) that find domain randomization to be ineffective beyond its training
distribution, and we do in fact find that domain randomization performs no better than (and
is often outperformed by) vanilla SAC on the proposed video_easy benchmark.
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
41
==PAGE:50==
Table 5.6: Self­supervised tasks. Ablation on the choice of self­supervised task for PAD
on the color_hard test distribution of DMControl­GB. All methods use SAC as base algo­
rithm. We compare IDM to CURL (Laskin et al., 2020b) and rotation prediction (Rot) (Gi­
daris et al., 2018). Best method on each task is in bold font, and best method in a com­
parison between SAC+IDM with and without PAD is highlighted in blue.
color_hard
CURL
CURL (PAD)
Rot
Rot (PAD)
IDM
IDM (PAD)
Walker, walk
445±99
495±70
335±7
330±30
406±29
468±47
Walker, stand
662±54
753±49
673±4
653±27
743±37
797±46
Cartpole, swingup
454±110
413±67
493±52
477±38
585±73
630±63
Cartpole, balance
782±13
763±5
710±72
734±81
835±40
848±29
Ball in cup, catch
231±92
332±78
291±54
314±60
471±75
563±50
Finger, spin
691±12
588±22
695±36
689±20
757±62
803±72
Finger, turn_easy
202±32
186±2
283±68
230±53
283±51
304±46
Cheetah, run
202±22
211±20
127±3
135±12
121±38
159±28
Reacher, easy
325±32
378±62
99±29
120±7
241±24
214±44
Visual distractors.
When deploying agents in the real world, it is not unreasonable to
expect the agent to encounter objects that were not present in the training environment.
Even though the agent may not need to interact with such alien objects, they can still
be visually distracting. Therefore – aside from the DMControl­GB experiments – we also
consider an additional test setting for PAD: visually distracting objects placed in the scene.
Samples of the visual distractors are shown in Figure 5.4, and results are shown in Table
5.5. We find PAD to improve generalization in 3 out of 5 tasks, and observe that the
SAC+IDM baseline already has optimal or near­optimal performance in the remaining two
tasks, cartpole_swingup and cartpole_balance. We additionally find that SAC+IDM
both with and without PAD generalizes significantly better to visual distractors compared
to vanilla SAC and SAC trained with domain randomization. We conjecture that this is
because the shared encoder is jointly optimized together with an IDM, and IDMs only
encode information that is predictive of actions taken, whereas SAC and SAC+DR more
easily overfit to spurious correlations in the environment.
Self­supervised tasks.
We explore how much the choice of self­supervised auxiliary
task contributes to the overall success of PAD in each of the 9 continuous control tasks
from DMControl­GB that we consider. We compare an IDM with two alternative sources
of self­supervision: CURL (Laskin et al., 2020b), a recently proposed framework for con­
trastive representation learning in RL from images, and rotation prediction (abbreviated as
Rot in the following) as proposed by Gidaris et al. (2018) and described in Section 5.1.2.
Generalization results for each of the three self­supervised tasks on the color_hard test
distribution are shown in Table 5.6. We find self­supervised adaptation using CURL in our
proposed PAD framework to improve generalization in 5 out of 9 tasks, outperforming PAD
with an IDM in a total of three tasks. It is however also observed that adaptation using
CURL actually decreases the generalization ability in some tasks, and the non­adaptive
CURL baseline is inferior to SAC+IDM in many instances, which would suggest that the
representations produced by CURL do not generalize as well as those of an IDM. PAD
generally does not improve generalization when using the Rot self­supervised task, but
also does not hurt performance significantly. We therefore conclude that PAD is most suc­
cessful with an IDM on the DMControl­GB benchmark, which we conjecture is because
an IDM explicitly learns the relation between observations and actions – a relation that is
of particular importance in the fine­grained motor control tasks of DMControl.
42
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:51==
Table 5.7: Learning offline versus learning online. Ablation on the online learning for­
mulation of PAD on the color_hard test distribution of DMControl­GB, mean and standard
deviation of 10 random seeds. All methods use SAC as base algorithm. Best method on
each task is in bold font. Offline PAD only adapts to individual observations, whereas
online PAD is the proposed variant of PAD that does not forget previous updates.
color_hard
IDM
IDM (PAD)
IDM (PAD)
offline
online
Walker, walk
406±29
441±16
468±47
Walker, stand
743±37
727±21
797±46
Cartpole, swingup
585±73
578±69
630±63
Cartpole, balance
835±40
796±37
848±29
Ball in cup, catch
471±75
490±16
563±50
Finger, spin
757±62
767±43
803±72
Finger, turn_easy
283±51
321±10
304±46
Cheetah, run
121±38
112±35
159±28
Reacher, easy
201±32
241±24
214±44
Table 5.8: Keeping θs fixed during deployment. Ablation on keeping θs fixed at test­
time on the color_hard test distribution of DMControl­GB, mean and standard deviation
of 10 random seeds. All methods use SAC. IDM (PAD, fixed θs) considers a variant of
PAD where θs is fixed at test­time, whereas IDM (PAD) denotes the default usage of PAD
in which both θe and θs are adapted at test­time using the self­supervised objective.
color_hard
IDM
IDM (PAD, fixed θs)
IDM (PAD)
Walker, walk
406±29
452±38
468±47
Walker, stand
743±37
802±41
797±46
Cartpole, swingup
585±73
623±57
630±63
Learning offline versus learning online.
We hypothesize that one of the main reasons
for why PAD successfully adapts to changes in the test environments – even when the
environments are non­stationary – is because input frames arrive sequentially in a stream
of highly correlated observations. Because of this sequential arrival of frames, adapting
the representation of the agent to a sequence of consecutive observations inevitably also
adapts the representation to observations arriving in the immediate future, at least to
some degree. While it is difficult to formally quantify this effect, we can measure the
benefit of the online learning formulation of PAD empirically. To do this, we consider
an additional ablation: a variant of PAD that instead learns offline, i.e. adapts to each
observation individually and resets network parameters to the pre­trained weights after
each environment step. Intuitively, this offline variant of PAD can be interpreted as an
algorithm that ”forgets” any information about the test environment it has acquired prior
to receiving the most­recent observation. We report the results of this ablation in Table
5.7. We find that PAD benefits substantially from learning from the sequentially arriving
observations, outperforming the offline variant of PAD in 7 out of 9 tasks. Adapting to
just a single observation at each step does however still improve generalization over the
SAC+IDM baseline on a number of tasks.
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
43
==PAGE:52==
Table 5.9: Training environment. Episodic return in the training environment, mean
and standard deviation of 10 random seeds. The domain randomization baseline is also
evaluated on the fixed training environment in which other methods were trained. Blind is
an additional baseline that does not have access to visual observations nor proprioceptive
states; it only observes its k previous actions. Best method on each task is in bold font,
and best method in a comparison between +IDM with and without PAD is highlighted in
blue. It is shown that PAD hurts minimally when the environment is unchanged.
Training env.
Blind
SAC
+DR
+IDM
+IDM (PAD)
Walker, walk
235±17
847±71
756±71
911±24
895±28
Walker, stand
388±10
959±11
928±36
966±8
956±20
Cartpole, swingup
132±41
850±28
807±36
849±30
845±34
Cartpole, balance
646±131
978±22
971±30
982±20
979±21
Ball in cup, catch
150±96
725±355
469±339
919±118
910±129
Finger, spin
3±2
809±138
686±295
928±45
927±45
Finger, turn_easy
172±27
462±146
243±124
462±152
455±160
Cheetah, run
264±75
387±74
195±46
384±88
380±91
Reacher, easy
107±11
264±113
92±45
390±126
365±114
Keeping θs fixed during deployment.
Another design choice of PAD is to continuously
adapt both θe and θs to the test environment, even though the self­supervised task head πs
is not used by the policy. We now consider a variant of PAD where θs is fixed at test­time
such that the gradient of the self­supervised objective Lss as proposed in Section 5.1.3 is
only taken w.r.t. θe; this variant is equivalent to Algorithm 3 where line 6 is not executed.
Generalization results for three tasks on the color_hard test distribution of DMControl­
GB are shown in Table 5.8. Empirically, we find a negligible difference between updating
θs and keeping it fixed, and we therefore choose to update both θe and θs in our proposed
variant of PAD since ∇θsLss needs to be computed by back­propagation regardless.
Performance on the training environment.
In a majority of prior work on visual RL,
agents are trained and evaluated on the same environment, and generalization is there­
fore not considered in those works. Although such evaluations do not consider general­
ization, they are still very valuable for benchmarking performance, stability, and sample
efficiency of RL algorithms, and for completeness we therefore also evaluate PAD and
baselines in this setting. We consider the fixed training environment from DMControl,
i.e. the left­most environment shown in Figure 5.4, and report the results in Table 5.9. In
addition to the baselines that we provide in previous ablations, we consider an additional
baseline as well: a blind agent that does not have access to visual observations nor propri­
oceptive states, and only observes its k previous actions. Although it is a strikingly naïve
baseline, it provides insight into how much visual perception contributes to the success
of RL agents in each of the 9 tasks from DMControl. In tasks where the blind agent per­
forms poorly, we expect visual perception to be of particular importance, and likewise if the
blind agent achieves a high episodic return on a task, e.g. cartpole_balance, then we do
not expect visual perception (and consequently PAD) to be that impactful. We find that,
while PAD improves the generalization ability of RL agents in novel test environments,
performance is virtually unchanged when deployed in the fixed training environment. We
conjecture that this is because the representation is already aligned with the environment,
and any additional training using the self­supervised task is thus of little impact, which is
in line with our findings in the long­horizon experiments shown in Table 5.3. We further
44
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:53==
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Number of frames (M)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Episode reward
Cartpole, swingup
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Number of frames (M)
Walker, stand
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Number of frames (M)
Walker, walk
SAC
SAC (DR)
SAC+IDM
Figure 5.6: Learning curves. Learning curves for SAC, SAC trained with domain ran­
domization (denoted SAC (DR)), and SAC+IDM on three tasks from DMControl using
image observations. Episodic return on the training environment is averaged across 10
random seeds and the 95% confidence intervals are visualized as shaded regions.
report the learning curves for three tasks from DMControl in Figure 5.6. We find SAC
and SAC+IDM to exhibit similar sample efficiency and end­performance, whereas SAC
trained with domain randomization consistently displays worse sample efficiency, larger
variation between random seeds, and converges to sub­optimal performance in some
tasks, demonstrating the difficulty of scaling domain randomization.
5.2.3
Modified CRLMaze
CRLMaze (Lomonaco et al., 2019) is a 3D navigation task for ViZDoom (Wydmuch et al.,
2018), where an agent is to navigate a maze and collect objects associated with positive
and negative rewards (penalties). Readers are referred to Section 4.2 for a description
of the CRLMaze environment. We propose a number of modified CRLMaze test en­
vironments that differ visually, with changes such as novel textures of the floor, walls,
and ceiling, as well as lighting conditions. As in the DMControl­GB benchmark, we train
agents in a fixed environment and measure their generalization ability to unseen test en­
vironments by episodic return. Concretely, we experiment with the original CRLMaze
navigation task and report performance on five distinct types of test environments: (i)
unseen wall textures; (ii) unseen floor textures; (iii) unseen ceiling textures; (iv) unseen
lighting conditions, where the illumination of the scene is adjusted upwards/downwards;
and finally (v) the unmodified training environment as originally proposed by Lomonaco
et al. (2019). Samples from each of the test environments are shown in Figure 4.4. In
all evaluations, we follow the evaluation procedure of Lomonaco et al. (2019): we evalu­
ate methods on 20 predefined starting positions and measure the mean episodic return
across all starting positions, and repeat our experiments with 10 random seeds because
the CRLMaze environment is susceptible to high variance.
We implement PAD using rotation prediction (abbreviated as Rot in the following) as self­
supervised task, as it has been shown to capture scene understanding in previous work
(Hendrycks et al., 2019b; Doersch & Zisserman, 2017), which we find to be especially
useful for navigation tasks. In line with the DMControl­GB experiments, we compare our
method to the following baselines: (i) the A2C base algorithm with no modifications, but
using random cropping; (ii) A2C trained with domain randomization (denoted A2C+DR;
(iii) A2C trained with an IDM as auxiliary task (denoted A2C+IDM); (iv) A2C trained with
rotation prediction as auxiliary task (denoted A2C+Rot); and we additionally compare to
(v) a random agent, i.e. a policy with a randomly initialized policy network, which we
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
45
==PAGE:54==
Table 5.10: Modified CRLMaze. Episodic return of PAD and baselines in the modified
CRLMaze environments. All methods use A2C as base algorithm. Random uses a ran­
domly initialized policy network. We report mean and standard error of 10 random seeds.
Best method on each task is in bold font, and best method in a comparison between
+IDM with and without PAD is highlighted in blue. PAD with rotation prediction improves
generalization in all considered test environments and outperforms both A2C and domain
randomization by a large margin, while also hurting minimally in the training environment.
CRLMaze
Random
A2C
+DR
+IDM
+IDM (PAD)
+Rot
+Rot (PAD)
Training
−868±34
371±198
−355±93
585±246
−416±135
729±148
681±99
Walls
−870±30
−380±145
−260±137
−302±150
−428±135
−206±166
−74±116
Floor
−868±23
−320±167
−438±59
−47±198
−530±106
−294±123
−209±94
Ceiling
−872±30
−171±175
−400±74
166±215
−508±104
128±196
281±83
Lighting
−900±29
−30±213
−310±106
239±270
−460±114
−84±53
312±104
denote Random. While the random agent is a very naïve baseline, it serves well as a
reference point for readers unfamiliar with the CRLMaze task. The domain randomization
baseline is trained on a distribution of 56 combinations of textures with diverse colors and
patterns, and its training distribution partially overlaps with the test environments to make
transfer easier. We additionally find it necessary to train the A2C+DR baseline for twice
as many episodes as all other methods in order to converge to a satisfactory policy.
Results.
Generalization results from the modified CRLMaze environments are shown
in Table 5.10. While all methods perform much better than random regardless of the test
environment, we do find PAD with rotation prediction to improve generalization to all con­
sidered test environments, outperforming both A2C and the A2C+DR (domain randomiza­
tion) baselines by a large margin. We find PAD to be especially powerful for adaptation to
superficial changes such as novel lighting conditions, where the mean episodic return is
increased from −84 to 312. As in the DMControl­GB experiments, we find PAD to hurt min­
imally on the training environment when using an appropriately selected self­supervised
auxiliary task, and we find sub­optimal choices of self­supervision to be unsuitable for
PAD. Our results thus show that the success of PAD is highly dependent on the self­
supervised task, but it remains non­trivial to select appropriate self­supervision for new
tasks that practitioners may encounter. So while PAD largely removes the need for trial­
and­error in the design of domain randomization, practitioners still have to rely on their
intuition for which self­supervised task works better for a given RL task. We leave the act
of automating the choice of self­supervision for future work, but discuss possible avenues
for research on automation in Chapter 7.
5.2.4
Robotic Manipulation
DMControl­GB and the modified CRLMaze benchmarks offer great ways to empirically
study the effectiveness of PAD under a diverse set of visual distributional shifts. However,
we are ultimately interested in developing algorithms for generalization that provide real
benefits to the deployment of agents trained by RL. To benchmark the effectiveness of
PAD in real­world deployments, we consider the sim2real problem setting and transfer
our method and baselines from a simulated environment to a real Kinova Gen3 robotic
arm. The sim2real problem setting is of particular interest since the real world not only
differs visually, but also has different dynamics than the training simulation. We consider
the two tasks, reach and push, described in Section 4.3, and use an IDM as the self­
46
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:55==
Table 5.11: Real robot deployment. Success rate of PAD and baselines when deployed
on a real robotic arm. Best method on each task is in bold font, and best method in a
comparison between +IDM with and without PAD is highlighted in blue.
Real robot
SAC
+DR
+IDM
+IDM (PAD)
Reach (default)
100%
100%
100%
100%
Reach (cloth)
48%
80%
56%
80%
Reach (disco)
72%
76%
88%
92%
Push (default)
88%
88%
92%
100%
Push (cloth)
60%
64%
64%
88%
Push (disco)
60%
68%
72%
84%
supervised task. We compare PAD to the same baselines as in the previous experiments:
(i) the unmodified SAC base algorithm, but with random cropping; (ii) SAC trained with
domain randomization; and (iii) SAC trained jointly with an IDM but without PAD. The
domain randomization baseline only randomizes color of table and background, as we find
it to otherwise not converge for the push task. During deployment on the real robot, we
evaluate each method for 25 trials (episodes) across 5 pre­defined initial configurations,
and we reset the robotic arm after each trial. We further evaluate generalization only
to changes in dynamics by considering a variant of the simulated environment in which
object mass, dimensions, and friction, as well as robotic arm mount position and end­
effector velocity is modified. We consider each dynamics change both individually and
jointly, and evaluate the success rate across 50 unique initial configurations with the robot
reset after each trial.
Real robot deployment.
Results from the real robot experiments are shown in Table
5.11. It is observed that all methods achieve a 100% success rate on the default transfer
setting of reach. We find the random cropping data augmentation to be a big contrib­
utor to the transfer success, and conjecture that the translation invariance that random
cropping provides is especially helpful because we do not calibrate the camera in our
experiments. In the remainder of the settings, PAD improves the success rate of the
non­adaptive SAC+IDM baseline and outperforms both vanilla SAC and SAC trained with
domain randomization in all but one instance. We find agents to benefit the most in chal­
lenging transfer settings such as changes in dynamics and disco lights, which is also the
settings in which the non­adaptive baselines are impacted the most.
Simulated robot deployment.
To better isolate the impact that dynamics mismatches
have on transfer success, we consider an additional experiment in the simulated envi­
ronment for robotic manipulation; results are shown in Table 5.12. PAD improves gen­
eralization to both changes in object dynamics as well as end­effector velocity, and both
SAC+IDM and consequently PAD are relatively unaffected by changes in the mount po­
sition whereas the SAC and SAC+DR baselines degrade substantially. Consistent with
the real robot experiments, PAD is found to be most effective under non­trivial changes in
dynamics. In the hardest simulated setting, Push (all), we find PAD to nearly recover the
success rate of the individual settings, improving over the SAC+IDM baseline by as much
as 28%. Our simulated dynamics experiments would therefore suggest that PAD can be
an effective adaptation mechanism for changes in both visuals and dynamics, which are
commonly encountered in the sim2real problem setting.
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
47
==PAGE:56==
Table 5.12: Simulated robot deployment. Success rate of PAD and baselines for the
push task on a simulated robotic arm in test environments with changes to dynamics.
Changes include object mass, size, and friction, as well as robotic arm mount position
and end­effector velocity. Best method on each task is in bold font, and best method in a
comparison between +IDM with and without PAD is highlighted in blue.
Simulated robot
SAC
+DR
+IDM
+IDM (PAD)
Push (object)
66%
64%
72%
82%
Push (mount)
68%
58%
86%
84%
Push (velocity)
70%
68%
70%
78%
Push (all)
56%
50%
48%
76%
5.3
Summary
In many real applications of RL, a policy trained in one environment (e.g. a simulation)
needs to be deployed in another, potentially quite different environment. Generalization
across environments is known to be hard, and the problem is only exacerbated by high­
dimensional inputs such as images that are increasingly common in RL applications. It is
tempting to tackle the problem of generalization as a domain adaptation problem, where
we continue training the policy in the new environment until it reaches satisfactory perfor­
mance, but this cannot be done if the new environment offers no reward signal, and the
fine­tuning process itself can be both costly and outright unsafe.
In this chapter, we proposed PAD, a novel approach to generalization in visual RL. While
previous work addresses the problem of generalization by learning policies that are in­
variant to any environment changes that can be anticipated, we formulate an alternative
problem setting in visual RL: can we instead adapt a pre­trained policy to a new envi­
ronment without any rewards or human supervision. To this end, we explore the use of
self­supervision to continue fine­tuning the policy during deployment. Our method makes
no assumptions about prior knowledge of environmental changes, and PAD adapts to new
environments without any trials or pre­collected data.
We perform an extensive empirical evaluation of our method, and demonstrate that PAD
can adapt to a wide variety of test environments using simple self­supervised tasks and
observations collected from the environment in an online manner. We find that an inverse
dynamics model works well for adaptation in motor control tasks from DMControl­GB and
robotic manipulation tasks both in simulation and on a real robot, while rotation prediction
works better for the CRLMaze discrete navigation task. In total, our method is shown to
improve generalization in 31 out of 36 distinct types of environments, and outperforms
domain randomization in a majority of environments. While the current framework relies
on prior knowledge on selecting an appropriate self­supervised task for policy adaptation,
we see our work as an initial but encouraging step in addressing the problem of adapt­
ing policies with visual inputs to unknown environments only through interaction. In the
following chapter, Chapter 6, we present Soft Data Augmentation SODA), an alternative
direction of research for generalization in visual RL.
48
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:57==
6
Soft Data Augmentation
Domain randomization, and most recently data augmentation as well, are powerful tech­
niques for learning policies that are invariant to pre­defined factors of variation, such as
color, texture, and lighting. The assumption made in these approaches is that the prac­
titioners who are to deploy robust policies can preemptively identify which elements will
vary during deployment, and then implement appropriate randomization during training.
In practice, it can be difficult to correctly specify all relevant factors of variation, espe­
cially when the agent is to be deployed in the real, unstructured world. While it may be
tempting to just randomize every element that conceivably could vary during deployment,
randomization has been found to greatly decrease sample efficiency, stability, and even
end­performance of the learned policy, as previously discussed in Chapter 5, and pre­
vious methods based on domain randomization and data augmentation therefore do not
scale well to real applications of visual RL where the target environment may be unknown.
Policy Adaptation during Deployment (PAD) is a promising direction for adaptation and
generalization in visual RL that does not rely on domain randomization. However, de­
pending on the nature of changes in the test environment, PAD may not adapt perfectly to
its new setting, and even then the added computational cost of continuously adapting can
be prohibitive for certain real world applications of RL. It is therefore natural to ask whether
there are other ways to learn robust policies, which do not rely solely on domain random­
ization nor solely on policy adaptation. In this chapter, we explore an alternative direction
of research that can be considered orthogonal to adaptive methods such as PAD. We
identify the primary culprit for instability and difficulty of RL optimization in previous works
that rely on domain randomization and data augmentation, and propose a new method
that alleviates the problem while still providing strong generalization results to a number
of challenging test environments. We propose our alternative approach to generalization
in visual RL in Section 6.1, and present our experimental results in Section 6.2.
6.1
Method
Extensive efforts have been made to improve the generalization ability of RL methods via
domain randomization and data augmentation. However, as more factors of variation are
introduced during training, the optimization process becomes increasingly more difficult,
leading to low sample efficiency and unstable training. Instead of learning policies directly
from augmented data, we propose Soft Data Augmentation (SODA), a method that de­
couples augmentation and generalization from the policy learning itself (Hansen & Wang,
2020). SODA aims to learn representations that effectively encode information shared
between an observation and its augmented counterpart, while interfering minimally with
the RL objective. The main intuition behind SODA is that by maximizing the mutual in­
formation between augmented and non­augmented views of the same observation, the
encoder will learn to extract meaningful features from observations regardless of their vi­
sual variations. With strong and varied data augmentation, SODA learns policies that are
invariant to high noise levels and is shown to generalize to a visually diverse set of envi­
ronments. In this section, we describe our proposed SODA approach to generalization in
visual RL. Section 6.1.1 provides an architectural overview of SODA, and Section 6.1.2
then introduces the proposed SODA representation learning task and algorithm.
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
49
==PAGE:58==
encoder
predictor
encoder
policy
ema
feature space
= stop-gradient
consistency
representation learning on augmented data
reinforcement learning on non-augmented data
ema
projection
Figure 6.1: SODA architecture. Left: an observation o is augmented to produce a view
o′, which is then encoded and projected into z′ = gθ(fθ(o′)). Likewise, o is encoded by
fψ(·) and projected by gψ(·) to produce features z⋆. The SODA objective is then to predict
z⋆from z′ by hθ(·) formulated as a consistency loss. Right: Reinforcement Learning in
SODA. The RL task and objective remains unchanged and the policy is learned directly
from the non­augmented observations o. ema denotes an exponential moving average.
6.1.1
Architectural Overview
Before describing the SODA algorithm in detail, we first outline its architectural design.
SODA is implemented as a self­supervised auxiliary task that shares a common encoder
f(·) with an RL policy π(·), similar to the architecture of PAD as introduced in Section 5.1.
We reiterate the formal description of the architecture as follows: for a given policy network
parameterized by a collection of parameters θ, we split the network and corresponding
parameters sequentially into an encoder fθ(·) and a policy πθ(·) such that a = πθ(fθ(o))
outputs a distribution over actions (and any other algorithm­specific values) for a given
input observation o. This is illustrated in Figure 6.1 (right). Note that both a and o may
be high­dimensional, but we omit the bold notation introduced in Chapter 2 to preserve
clarity in our following discussions.
With these definitions in mind, SODA then consists of an additional two architectural
components: a projection gθ(·), and a prediction head hθ(·) that jointly implement the
self­supervised task proposed in SODA. Aside from these two components, we define an
architecturally identical encoder fψ(·) and projection gψ(·), where ψ denotes a collection
of parameters separate from θ. Then, let fθ, gθ be denoted as the online encoder and
projection, respectively, and similarly let fψ, gψ be denoted as the target encoder (and
projection). Similar to the definition of the target Q­functions discussed in Section 2.1.3,
we then define the collection of parameters ψ as an exponential moving average (EMA)
of θ, and update ψ with every iteration of SODA using a Polyak averaging update rule
ψt+1 ←(1 −τ)ψt + τθt
(6.1)
for an iteration step t and a momentum coefficient τ ∈(0, 1], which may or may not be
a constant. As such, only parameters θ are optimized by gradient descent. In previ­
ous work on Q­learning (Lillicrap et al., 2016; Haarnoja et al., 2018b) and optimization
(Kingma & Ba, 2015), EMAs are typically implemented with a constant momentum co­
efficient, whereas previous work on representation learning (Grill et al., 2020) utilizes a
monotonically decreasing momentum coefficient. Empirically, we do not find a monotoni­
cally decreasing coefficient to offer any advantages over a constant coefficient in SODA,
and we therefore opt for the simpler constant coefficient in this work. Figure 6.1 (left)
provides an overview of the architecture for self­supervised learning in SODA, and the
proposed representation learning task is detailed in the following section.
50
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:59==
6.1.2
Representation Learning
In this section, we first describe the SODA representation learning task, and then seek to
provide intuition for the task afterwards. Given an observation o ∈RC×H×W , we sample
a data augmentation t ∼T and apply it to produce an augmented observation o′ ≜t(o).
As such, o and o′ can be considered different views of the same observation, where o is
the original observation and o′ is corrupted by some noise source; this is in contrast to
previous work on contrastive learning such as Laskin et al. (2020b); Chen et al. (2020b);
Grill et al. (2020); Stooke et al. (2020) that produce two different augmented views. If we
assume f : RC×H×W →RC′×H′×W ′ such that H′ × W ′ is a feature map down­sampled
from H × W, then both projections gθ, gψ are learned mappings g : RC′×H′×W ′ →RK
where K ≪C′ × H′ × W ′. Given a feature vector z′ ≜gθ(fθ(o′)), the proposed SODA
task is then to learn a differential mapping hθ : RK →RK that predicts the target projection
z⋆≜gψ(fψ(o)) of the non­augmented observation o, as shown in Figure 6.1 (left). We
optimize projection gθ, predictor hθ, and shared encoder fθ jointly together with the RL
task(s), and employ a simple consistency loss defined as
LSODA (ˆz, z⋆; θ) = Et∼T
[
∥ˆz◦−z⋆
◦∥2
2
]
(6.2)
where ˆz ≜hθ(z′), and ˆz◦≜ˆz/∥ˆz∥2, z⋆
◦≜z⋆/∥z⋆∥2 are ℓ2­normalizations of ˆz and z⋆,
respectively.
Because we only use data augmentation to enforce a representational
constraint through an auxiliary consistency objective, we refer to our method as a soft
data augmentation. Without the ℓ2­normalizations, (6.2) would be equivalent to the Mean
Squared Error (MSE) between ˆz and z⋆. While the MSE in principle can be used in place
of the proposed objective, we find it too restrictive: whereas an MSE objective explicitly
optimizes for similarity, LSODA instead optimizes for topological equivalence between the
prediction space and feature space. Empirically, we find this relaxation of the consistency
constraint imposed by MSE to produce more generalized representations.
We motivate the use of both projections gθ, gψ and predictor hθ following a similar argu­
ment. Although we in principle could drop these components and simply optimize for
consistency between feature maps outputted by encoders fθ and fψ, we find it to be too
strong of a representational constraint, which ultimately decreases expressiveness of the
joint representation learned by SODA and the RL task. Concurrent to our work, Lee et al.
(2020b) imposes such a representational constraint to improve robustness to sensory er­
rors in a multi­modal setting. The authors conclude that, while their proposed framework
improves robustness, it simultaneously decreases expressiveness, i.e. any information
that is not shared between views is forcibly discarded, which is found to be detrimental to
policy learning and therefore suffers from the same scalability issues as e.g. domain ran­
domization and data augmentation techniques. Our proposed formulation of the SODA
task is designed to produce robust policies without negatively impacting policy learning.
Since target features z⋆are encoded using a slow­moving encoder fψ and projection gψ,
learning to map z′ directly to z⋆may also be too strict of a (soft) constraint, because the
non­stationarity of the RL task is known to gradually change encodings over the course of
training. While this is also true for purely (self­)supervised learning, it is only exacerbated
by jointly performing RL optimization. The introduced predictor hθ learns a mapping from
the online projections to the target projections, which extends the representation learning
temporally as θ and ψ are updated at different rates, ultimately easing the representational
constraint further. We empirically find the addition of a predictor to improve expressive­
ness in the learned representations, which is consistent with both prior work Chen et al.
(2020b); Grill et al. (2020) and concurrent work (Schwarzer et al., 2020; Dabney et al.,
2020) on representation learning.
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
51
==PAGE:60==
Algorithm 4 Soft Data Augmentation (SODA)
θ, ψ: randomly initialized network parameters
ω: RL updates per iteration
τ: momentum coefficient
1: for every iteration do
2:
for update = 1, 2, ..., ω do
3:
Sample batch of transitions ν ∼B
4:
Optimize LRL (ν) w.r.t. θ
5:
Sample batch of observations o ∼B
6:
Augment observations o′ = t(o), t ∼T
7:
Compute online predictions ˆz = hθ(gθ(fθ(o′)))
8:
Compute target projections z⋆= gψ(fψ(o))
9:
Optimize LSODA (ˆz, z⋆) w.r.t. θ
10:
Update ψ ←(1 −τ)ψ + τθ
The policy πθ (including any algorithm­specific task heads) uses fθ to extract features and
is optimized with no modifications to architecture nor inputs, i.e. we optimize an algorithm­
specific RL objective LRL directly on non­augmented observations o and update fθ, πθ by
gradient descent, as shown in Figure 6.1 (right). This corresponds exactly to policy learn­
ing in any common base algorithm, e.g. DDPG (Lillicrap et al., 2016) or SAC (Haarnoja
et al., 2018b) as discussed in Section 2.1.3. During training, the proposed SODA algo­
rithm continuously alternates between optimizing LRL and LSODA, such that the shared
representation used for policy learning simultaneously is constrained by the SODA repre­
sentation learning task. Whereas direct application of data augmentation in policy learning
is shown to destabilize the RL optimization process, the soft data augmentation employed
by SODA only affects the policy indirectly. The complete training procedure is summa­
rized in Algorithm 4; lines 3­4 can be substituted by any standard RL algorithm.
We now seek to further motivate the SODA algorithm from the perspective of mutual
information. In its essence, SODA reformulates the problem of generalization as a rep­
resentational consistency learning problem: the encoder f should learn to map different
views of the same underlying state to related feature vectors. This encourages the en­
coder to learn features that are shared across views, e.g. physical quantities and object
interactions, and discard information that yield no predictive power such as background,
lighting, and high­frequency noise. Given an observation o and a data augmentation t,
we seek to encode o and o′ = t(o) into compact feature vectors z′, z⋆∈RK, respectively,
by learned mappings fθ, gθ and fψ, gψ such that the mutual information I between o and
o′ is maximally preserved. The mutual information between z⋆and z′ is then given by
I(z⋆; z′) =
∑
z′
∑
z⋆
p(z⋆, z′) log p(z⋆|z′)
p(z⋆)
(6.3)
and is naturally bounded by the mutual information between o and o′, i.e. I(z⋆; z′) ≤
I(o; o′). As I(z⋆; z′) is impractical to optimize directly, we approximate I as a simple con­
sistency loss defined in (6.2) by the following intuition. If we assume fψ, gψ to maximally
preserve information in o, then I(z⋆; z′) ∝I(o; o′), and minimizing LSODA thus maximizes
I(z⋆; z′|o′). In other words, by learning a mapping from z′ to z⋆, we maximally preserve
information in o by learning to discard noise added by the data augmentation t(·). With
strong and varied data augmentation, fθ learns to ignore factors of variation that are ir­
relevant to the RL task, and reduces observational overfitting Song et al. (2020); Packer
52
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:61==
et al. (2018). While the assumption of maximally preserved information may not hold in
practice due to ease of constraints, we find (6.2) to be a good enough approximation for
expressive representation learning.
It should furthermore be emphasized that although the SODA objective does not explicitly
prevent trivial solutions, e.g. gθ(·) = gψ(·) = hθ(·) = 0 as in the latent forward dynamics
model discussed in Section 2.2.1, such behavior is implicitly discouraged in SODA through
a number of design choices. Firstly, we note that the collection of online parameters θ are
updated by stochastic gradient descent in the direction of ∇θLSODA, whereas the target
parameters ψ are not updated in this direction, but rather in the direction of the EMA.
While this dynamic does not prevent trivial equilibria per se, we conjecture that it makes
such equilibria unstable; in fact, the dynamics of the SODA objective and previous work
on contrastive learning without negative samples (Grill et al., 2020) can be considered
similar to that of the minimax objective of GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2014b). Secondly,
we implement both the projector g and predictor h as MLPs with normalization layers,
e.g. batch normalization (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015), which we discuss further in Section
6.2.1. The immediate implication of using normalization layers, however, is that it helps
mitigate improper weight initialization which may otherwise lead to these trivial equilibria
as shown by concurrent work Richemond et al. (2020), and other concurrent work further
hypothesize that batch normalization specifically prevents trivial equilibria through gradi­
ent dependence on batch elements, resulting in an implicit contrastive term where other
elements in a batch act as negative samples (Fetterman & Albrecht, 2020; Tian et al.,
2020c). Lastly, fθ is jointly optimized between SODA and the RL objective(s), and trivial
equilibria in fθ are therefore in direct conflict with the RL objective since they entail that
fθ would preserve no information in o. While this argument only applies to fθ, it inevitably
contributes to the overall stability of the optimization process, and we empirically find it
sufficient to avoid trivial equilibria in fθ, fψ, without the need for normalization layers or
careful initialization schemes in fθ as otherwise proposed by Richemond et al. (2020). In
the following section, we discuss our empirical evaluation of SODA.
6.2
Experiments
In this section, we provide empirical evidence for the generalization, sample­efficiency
and stability of SODA, and compare to a number of recent state­of­the­art methods for
representation learning and generalization in visual RL, including PAD as presented in
Chapter 5. We follow a similar experimental setup as in Chapter 5, and investigate how
well an agent trained exclusively from image observations in a fixed training environment
generalizes to a variety of visually challenging test environments in 5 continuous control
tasks from DMControl­GB, and additionally benchmark SODA on two novel sets of chal­
lenging test environments for the proposed push robotic manipulation task introduced in
Chapter 4. Our novel test sets for robotic manipulation include changes such as colors
and video backgrounds, as well as random perturbations of camera, lighting, and texture
to simulate real­world conditions during testing.
While our experiments primarily aim to demonstrate the effectiveness of SODA, we also
provide useful insights into the mechanisms involved in representation learning through
soft data augmentation, and our comparison to strong baselines from recent literature
seek to foster a broader discussion on generalization in RL which we resume in Chapter
7. An open­sourced implementation of SODA and baselines is made available at https:
//github.com/nicklashansen/dmcontrol-generalization-benchmark and a webpage with video
results from our experiments is available at https://nicklashansen.github.io/SODA.
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
53
==PAGE:62==
Table 6.1: Hyper­parameters. A complete overview of hyper­parameters for SODA and
all baselines in experiments on DMControl­GB and robotic manipulation.
Hyper­parameter
Value
Frame rendering
3 × 100 × 100
Frame after crop
3 × 84 × 84
Stacked frames
3 (DMControl­GB)
1 (robotic manipulation)
Number of conv. layers
11
Number of filters in conv.
32
Action repeat
2 (finger_spin)
8 (cartpole_swingup)
4 (otherwise)
Discount factor γ
0.99
Episode time steps
1,000
Learning algorithm
Soft Actor­Critic
Number of training steps
500,000
Replay buffer size
500,000
Optimizer (RL/aux.)
Adam (β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999)
Optimizer (α)
Adam (β1 = 0.5, β2 = 0.999)
Learning rate (RL)
1e­3
Learning rate (α)
1e­4
Learning rate (SODA)
3e­4
Batch size (RL)
128
Batch size (SODA)
256
Actor update freq.
2
Critic update freq.
1
Auxiliary update freq.
1 (CURL)
2 (PAD/SODA)
N/A (otherwise)
Momentum coef. τ (SODA)
0.005
6.2.1
Implementation Details
SODA is a general framework that can be implemented on top of any standard RL algo­
rithm using parameterized policies. To make comparison between methods easier, we
apply a similar experimental setup as in Chapter 5, and adopt both the network architec­
ture and hyper­parameters from our PAD experiments. In each of the two benchmarks –
DMControl­GB and robotic manipulation – SODA is implemented using Soft Actor­Critic
(SAC) (Haarnoja et al., 2018b) as base algorithm, and observations are stacks of k col­
ored frames of dimensions 100 × 100, where k = 3 in DMControl­GB and k = 1 in robotic
manipulation as in Chapter 5. Whereas PAD implements separate convolutional branches
for the RL task(s) and the self­supervised task, SODA simplifies the architecture by only
implementing the RL branch. We denote all 11 convolutional layers as fθ, and the policy
and any algorithm­specific task heads (e.g. the Q­value functions of SAC) are jointly re­
ferred to as πθ. We implement both g(·) and h(·) as MLPs with batch normalization (Ioffe
& Szegedy, 2015) as in previous work on contrastive learning without negative samples
(Grill et al., 2020), and use a batch size of 256 for the SODA representation learning task.
Projections are of dimension K = 100, and the target components fψ, gψ are updated
using an EMA of fθ, gθ with a momentum coefficient τ = 0.005. The two objectives LRL
and LSODA are optimized using Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015), and in practice we find it suf­
ficient to only make a SODA update after every second RL update, i.e. ω = 2 as defined
in Algorithm 4. The reader is referred to Appendix A and Appendix B for more details.
54
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:63==
unmodified
random 
convolution
random
overlay
Figure 6.2: Data augmentation. We consider the following two data augmentations:
random convolution (as proposed by Lee et al. (2019); Laskin et al. (2020a)) and random
overlay (novel). Refer to Figure 6.3 for additional data augmentation samples.
6.2.2
Data Augmentation
The value proposition of SODA is to improve generalization of RL agents without nega­
tively impacting stability and sample efficiency. As evident from previous work (Kostrikov
et al., 2020; Laskin et al., 2020a) and the PAD experiments, not all data augmentations are
detrimental to policy learning. Augmentations such as random cropping has in fact been
shown to improve policy learning, but it also provides no obvious benefit in terms of gen­
eralization. While SODA makes no assumptions about the data augmentation(s) used,
we argue that it is useful to distinguish between weak augmentations that may improve
sample efficiency but contribute minimally to generalization, and strong augmentations
that improve generalization at the cost of sample efficiency (Tian et al., 2020b; Xiao et al.,
2020). An example of the former is the random cropping, whereas examples of the latter
are domain randomization (Tobin et al., 2017; Pinto et al., 2017) and random convolution
(Lee et al., 2019; Laskin et al., 2020a). As in previous work (Laskin et al., 2020b;a) and
the PAD experiments, we apply temporally consistent random cropping (from 100 × 100
down to 84×84) by default in SODA and all baselines, and we refer to the cropped images
as non­augmented observations.
In this thesis, we seek to stabilize training with strong augmentations that are designed to
improve generalization. To demonstrate the effectiveness of SODA, we first consider the
random convolution data augmentation which was initially proposed by Lee et al. (2019)
and has been shown to cause instabilities in policy learning on DMControl tasks (Laskin
et al., 2020a). The proposed data augmentation applies a randomly initialized convolu­
tional layer to an observation, producing an augmented observation with structured color
changes and local texture distortions. We apply padding to preserve original image di­
mensionality and additionally apply a hyperbolic tangent non­linearity to squash pixel in­
tensities of the random convolution output to match the original [0, 1) range of values. We
hypothesize that SODA benefits further from data augmentation with even more diversity
and many factors of variation. To test this hypothesis, we propose a novel random overlay
data augmentation that linearly interpolates between an observation o and an image ε to
produce an augmented view
toverlay(o) = (1 −α)o + αε, ε ∼D
(6.4)
where α ∈[0, 1) is the interpolation coefficient and D is an unrelated dataset. In practice,
we use α = 0.5 and sample images from Places (Zhou et al., 2017), a dataset containing
1.8M diverse scenes, which produces very diverse data augmentations. Both data aug­
mentations are applied in a temporally consistent manner to preserve spatio­temporal
information in the observations. Samples from each of the two data augmentations are
shown in Figure 6.2, and additional samples are provided in Figure 6.3. We provide
pseudo­code for each of the considered data augmentations in Appendix A.
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
55
==PAGE:64==
(a) Random convolution data augmentation.
(b) Random overlay data augmentation.
Figure 6.3: Additional data augmentation samples. In this work, we consider the ran­
dom convolution data augmentation (Lee et al., 2019; Laskin et al., 2020a) shown in (a),
as well as a novel random overlay data augmentation shown in (b).
0
200
400
600
800
1000
average return
walker_walk (training)
walker_stand (training)
cartpole_swingup (training)
ball_in_cup_catch (training)
finger_spin (training)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
number of frames (M)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
average return
walker_walk (evaluation)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
number of frames (M)
walker_stand (evaluation)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
number of frames (M)
cartpole_swingup (evaluation)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
number of frames (M)
ball_in_cup_catch (evaluation)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
number of frames (M)
finger_spin (evaluation)
SAC
SAC (DR)
SAC (conv)
SODA (conv)
Figure 6.4: Random convolution. Top: average return on the training environment dur­
ing training. Bottom: periodic evaluation of generalization ability measured by average
return on the color_hard test distribution. SODA exhibits sample efficiency and con­
vergence similar to SAC but improves generalization significantly. Average of 5 random
seeds, shaded area is standard deviation.
6.2.3
DMControl­GB
We train agents in a fixed training environment and continuously evaluate generalization
to visually diverse test environments throughout training. We consider five diverse contin­
uous control tasks from the proposed DMControl­GB benchmark for generalization, and
compare SODA to the following baselines: (i) a baseline SAC that is functionally equiv­
alent to RAD (Laskin et al., 2020a) since we apply random cropping to all methods; (ii)
SAC trained with domain randomization on the color_hard test distribution (denoted SAC
(DR)); (iii) SAC using random convolution as data augmentation (denoted SAC (conv);
and (iv) SAC using random overlay as data augmentation (denoted SAC (overlay)). Like­
wise, our method is denoted SODA (conv) and SODA (overlay), depending on the choice
of data augmentation. Each of the data augmentation baselines perform RL on aug­
mented observations and use no auxiliary tasks, whereas SODA performs RL strictly on
non­augmented observations and instead apply data augmentation in its auxiliary repre­
sentation learning task. Note that the distribution of environments used for the domain
randomization baseline considered in this section (color_hard) differs from that of the
PAD experiments (color_easy).
56
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:65==
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
number of frames (M)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
average return
walker_walk (training)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
number of frames (M)
walker_stand (training)
Augment RL
Augment both
Augment SODA
Figure 6.5: Soft data augmentation. Average return on the fixed training environment for
the walker_walk and walker_stand tasks. Augment RL corresponds to the SAC (conv)
baseline, Augment both applies random convolution in both SODA representation learning
and RL, and Augment SODA is the proposed formulation of SODA. Average of 5 random
seeds, shaded area is standard deviation.
Stability under strong data augmentation.
Domain randomization and data augmen­
tation is known to decrease sample efficiency and can destabilize policy learning. Figure
6.4 shows the training performance (top row) and generalization ability (bottom row) of
baselines and SODA using a random convolution data augmentation, and Figure 6.6 sim­
ilarly shows results for SODA with the novel random overlay data augmentation. While
SAC converges to (approximately) optimal performance in the training environment in
each of the five tasks, its generalization remains poor, resulting in a substantial drop in
performance on the color_hard test distribution. Interestingly, we find the generalization
ability of SAC to remain approximately constant once the policy learning has converged
in the training environment, which is in contrast to the common issue of overfitting known
from e.g. supervised learning. As previously mentioned, the domain randomization base­
line is trained directly on the test distribution, and it therefore achieves similar performance
during training and evaluation. However, it evidently exhibits poor sample efficiency and
converges to sub­par policies in all tasks considered, and the data augmentation base­
lines (without SODA) display similar behavior. We find SODA to improve generalization
substantially using either of the two data augmentations, recovering optimal behavior in
test environments in 4 out of 5 tasks. SODA additionally exhibits stable learning and a
sample efficiency similar to that of the SAC baseline, clearly demonstrating the benefits of
our soft data augmentation proposal as opposed to other approaches to generalization.
Soft data augmentation.
To gain more insight into the effect of soft data augmentation,
we consider a variant of SODA in which random convolution augmentation is applied in
both representation learning and RL. The empirical findings are summarized for two tasks,
walker_walk and walker_stand, in Figure 6.5. While the variant of SODA that applies
data augmentation in both the RL objective and the auxiliary SODA task (Augment both)
improves significantly over only applying data augmentation in RL (Augment RL), we find
the proposed formulation of SODA (Augment SODA) superior in both sample efficiency
and end­performance. We find that, although performing auxiliary representation learning
improves performance of the data augmentation baseline, avoiding data augmentation
altogether in policy learning allows SODA to sustain the same training performance as
SAC. Our findings are supported by recent work on data augmentation in RL (Laskin et al.,
2020a; Raileanu et al., 2020b) that extensively evaluate data augmentations on tasks
from both DMControl (Tassa et al., 2018) and ProcGen (Cobbe et al., 2019b), and the
authors find that a majority of data augmentations do in fact destabilize the RL optimization
process, resulting in agents that fail to solve the task entirely.
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
57
==PAGE:66==
0
200
400
600
800
1000
average return
walker_walk (training)
walker_stand (training)
cartpole_swingup (training)
ball_in_cup_catch (training)
finger_spin (training)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
number of frames (M)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
average return
walker_walk (evaluation)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
number of frames (M)
walker_stand (evaluation)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
number of frames (M)
cartpole_swingup (evaluation)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
number of frames (M)
ball_in_cup_catch (evaluation)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
number of frames (M)
finger_spin (evaluation)
SAC
SAC (DR)
SAC (overlay)
SODA (overlay)
Figure 6.6: Random overlay. Top: average return on the training environment during
training. Bottom: periodic evaluation of generalization ability measured by average return
on the color_hard test distribution. SODA offers better sample­efficiency than the novel
SAC (overlay) baseline and similar generalization to SODA (conv). Average of 5 random
seeds, shaded area is standard deviation.
Choice of data augmentation.
SODA is a general framework for generalization in vi­
sual RL by data augmentation, and can in principle be implemented with any augmenta­
tion. While SODA is designed to stabilize policy learning, an agent’s generalization ability
is directly impacted by the choice of data augmentation. In this thesis, we consider two
data augmentations, random convolution and the novel random overlay, and evaluate
their generalization to both environments with randomized colors and environments with
video backgrounds. Empirical evaluations on the video_easy test distribution is shown
in Table 6.2, and evaluations on the color_hard test distribution are shown in Figure 6.4
and Figure 6.6. While SODA with random convolution data augmentation generalizes
well to the color_hard test distribution, it generalizes comparably worse to videos. We
conjecture that this is because convolution captures less factors of variation than over­
lay (e.g. textures and local color changes), which is in line with the findings of Packer
et al. (2018); Cobbe et al. (2019a) and our experiments from Chapter 5. SAC with ran­
dom overlay data augmentation displays stable behavior and near­optimal policy learning
despite its strong augmentation, but we still find SODA to improve sample efficiency and
end­performance over the random overlay baseline. We additionally argue that, although
random overlays do not cause any significant instability in our experiments in DMControl,
they may still do so in other environments, and SODA is therefore preferred; we discuss
this further in Section 6.2.4. SODA (overlay) is found to generalize well to both test distri­
butions even though there is no significant visual similarity between random overlays and
the color_hard test distribution. These results suggest that SODA indeed does benefit
from strong and varied data augmentation, and we leave it to future work to explore the
effectiveness of additional (soft) data augmentations for generalization in visual RL.
Comparison to state­of­the­art methods.
We now aim to provide a complete overview
of the generalization ability of recent methods for visual RL. We evaluate the generaliza­
tion ability of SODA on the full DMControl­GB benchmark and compare to a number of
recent state­of­the­art methods: (i) CURL Laskin et al. (2020b), a contrastive representa­
tion learning RL method; (ii) RAD Laskin et al. (2020a), a study on data augmentation for
RL that uses random cropping and is functionally equivalent to the SAC baseline in our
previous experiments; and (iii) PAD (Hansen et al., 2020), a method for self­supervised
58
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:67==
Table 6.2: Video backgrounds. Average return of SODA and baselines trained in a fixed
environment and evaluated on the video_easy test distribution from DMControl­GB. The
domain randomization baseline is trained on color_hard. Mean and standard deviation
of 5 random seeds. ∗Laskin et al. (2020b). † Laskin et al. (2020a). ‡ Chapter 5.
DMControl­GB
CURL
RAD
PAD
SAC
SAC
SODA
SAC
SODA
(video_easy)
∗
†
‡
(DR)
(conv)
(conv)
(overlay)
(overlay)
walker,
556
606
717
520
169
635
718
768
walk
±133
±63
±79
±107
±124
±48
±47
±38
walker,
852
745
935
839
435
903
960
955
stand
±75
±146
±20
±58
±100
±56
±2
±13
cartpole,
404
373
521
524
176
474
718
758
swingup
±67
±72
±76
±184
±62
±143
±30
±62
ball_in_cup,
316
481
436
232
249
539
713
875
catch
±119
±26
±55
±135
±190
±111
±125
±56
finger,
502
400
691
402
355
363
607
695
spin
±19
±64
±80
±208
±88
±185
±68
±97
policy adaptation that was introduced in Chapter 5. Results are shown in Table 6.3; em­
pirical evaluations on the video_easy test distribution are duplicated from Table 6.2. We
find SODA to outperform all other methods in 18 out of 20 instances, and often by a large
margin. Although PAD improves the generalization ability of RAD in nearly all instances,
SODA improves over PAD by as much as 310% and 439% on the extremely challenging
video_hard test distribution (shown in Figure 4.3 (d)) in walker_walk and finger_spin,
respectively.
Discussion on representation learning.
From the results in Table 6.3 we further find
that, while both PAD and SODA improve over the RAD baseline using a random cropping,
the additional contrastive learning proposed in CURL does not appear to improve gener­
alization. In fact, it appears that CURL decreases the generalization ability of agents in
certain tasks, e.g. cartpole_swingup and ball_in_cup_catch on the two color bench­
marks. This is particularly noteworthy because all four methods employ the same archi­
tecture, hyper­parameters, and random cropping mechanism. Whether the disparity in
improvements between CURL and SODA can be attributed solely to the choice of data
augmentation (being that CURL only applies random crop, whereas SODA additionally
applies a stronger data augmentation), or the design of representation learning task also
contributes to the success of SODA remains unclear and would be an interesting direction
for future research. Concurrent work Stooke et al. (2020) build upon the CURL method
and show empirically that a better design of auxiliary contrastive learning does indeed im­
prove the quality of representations. While the authors do not consider generalization in
their experiments, we conjecture that both a good representation learning task and choice
of data augmentation will be necessary in future work on generalization in visual RL.
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
59
==PAGE:68==
Table 6.3: Comparison to state­of­the­art methods. Average return of SODA and state­
of­the­art methods on each of the four test distributions from DMControl­GB. Mean and
standard deviation of 5 random seeds. SODA outperforms all other methods in 18 out
of 20 instances, and often by a large margin. Although PAD improves the generalization
ability of RAD in nearly all instances, SODA improves over PAD by as much as 310%
and 439% on the extremely challenging video_hard test distribution in walker_walk and
finger_spin, respectively. ∗Laskin et al. (2020b). † Laskin et al. (2020a). ‡ Chapter 5.
color_easy
color_hard
DMControl­GB
CURL
RAD
PAD
SODA
CURL
RAD
PAD
SODA
(colors)
∗
†
‡
(overlay)
∗
†
‡
(overlay)
walker,
645
636
687
811
445
400
468
692
walk
±55
±33
±119
±41
±99
±61
±47
±68
walker,
866
807
894
960
662
644
797
893
stand
±46
±67
±39
±4
±54
±88
±46
±12
cartpole,
668
763
812
859
454
590
630
805
swingup
±74
±29
±20
±15
±110
±53
±63
±28
ball_in_cup,
565
727
775
969
231
541
563
949
catch
±168
±87
±159
±3
±92
±29
±50
±19
finger,
781
789
870
855
691
667
803
793
spin
±139
±160
±54
±93
±12
±154
±72
±128
video_easy
video_hard
DMControl­GB
CURL
RAD
PAD
SODA
CURL
RAD
PAD
SODA
(videos)
∗
†
‡
(overlay)
∗
†
‡
(overlay)
walker,
556
606
717
768
58
56
93
381
walk
±133
±63
±79
±38
±18
±9
±29
±72
walker,
852
745
935
955
45
231
278
771
stand
±75
±146
±20
±13
±5
±39
±72
±83
cartpole,
404
373
521
758
114
110
123
429
swingup
±67
±72
±76
±62
±15
±16
±24
±64
ball_in_cup,
316
481
436
875
115
97
66
327
catch
±119
±26
±55
±56
±33
±29
±61
±100
finger,
502
400
691
695
27
34
56
302
spin
±19
±64
±80
±97
±21
±11
±18
±41
60
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:69==
Table 6.4: Generalization in robotic manipulation. Average return of SODA and base­
lines trained in a fixed environment and evaluated on the proposed test distributions for
robotic manipulation. The domain randomization baseline is trained on randomized col­
ors. Mean and standard deviation of 5 random seeds.
robot,
SAC
SAC
SAC
SODA
SAC
SODA
push
(DR)
(conv)
(conv)
(overlay)
(overlay)
training
14.5
9.3
0.2
14.4
15.8
21.3
env.
±5.2
±7.5
±1.7
±4.6
±7.3
±5.0
random
7.2
7.8
−3.1
1.4
13.5
18.0
colors
±3.4
±7.0
±1.4
±3.4
±4.4
±3.7
video
0.9
7.0
−4.9
−4.5
7.6
13.9
bg.
±6.0
±7.4
±1.9
±1.1
±7.1
±2.6
6.2.4
Robotic manipulation
While DMControl­GB provides a good platform for benchmarking algorithms, we are ul­
timately interested in developing algorithms that solve real­world problems with vision­
based RL. To better emulate real­world deployment scenarios, we also consider the push
robotic manipulation task from Section 4.3 on a robotic arm (in simulation). As in DMControl­
GB, agents are trained in a fixed environment and evaluated on environments with ran­
domized colors and video backgrounds, and we additionally perform random perturba­
tions of camera, lighting, and texture to simulate real­world conditions during testing. In
our empirical evaluation, we will denote these test distributions as random colors and
video backgrounds, and we additionally report performance on the fixed training environ­
ment. Samples from the robotic manipulation environments that we consider are shown
in Figure 4.5.
We follow the evaluation procedure of both our DMControl­GB experiments and the robotic
simulation experiments from Chapter 5, but choose to report mean episodic return instead
of success rate since experiments are in simulation where a dense reward signal is avail­
able. Episodes consist of 50 time steps, and at each time there is a positive reward of 1
for having the cube at the goal location (red disc), and a small penalty (negative reward)
proportional to the distance between the cube and goal. Therefore, an average return
of 25 means that the cube is successfully relocated to the goal location fore more than
half of all time steps. Due to the formulation of the dense reward signal, our evaluation
considers not only a binary success criteria, but also rewards the agent for solving the
task faster and penalizes less if the agent fails but nearly solves the task.
Agents are evaluated for 100 initial configurations, and we report the mean episodic return
across 5 random seeds. As in Section 6.2.3, we compare SODA to the following base­
lines: (i) a baseline SAC that is functionally equivalent to RAD (Laskin et al., 2020a) since
we apply random cropping to all methods; (ii) SAC trained with domain randomization on
the randomized colors test distribution (denoted SAC (DR)); (iii) SAC using random con­
volution as data augmentation (denoted SAC (conv); and (iv) SAC using random overlay
as data augmentation (denoted SAC (overlay)). Likewise, our method is denoted SODA
(conv) and SODA (overlay), depending on the choice of data augmentation. Each of the
data augmentation baselines perform RL on augmented observations and use no auxiliary
tasks, whereas SODA performs RL strictly on non­augmented observations and instead
apply data augmentation in its auxiliary representation learning task.
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
61
==PAGE:70==
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
number of frames (M)
10
5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
average return
robot_push (training)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
number of frames (M)
robot_push (evaluation)
SAC
SAC (DR)
SAC (overlay)
SODA (overlay)
Figure 6.7: Robotic manipulation. Left: average return on the training environment
during training. Right: periodic evaluation of generalization measured by average return
on the test distribution with randomized colors. SODA outperforms all baselines in both
sample efficiency and generalization, and reduces variance. Average of 5 random seeds,
shaded area is standard deviation.
Sample efficiency in robotic manipulation.
Training and generalization curves for the
push task are shown in Figure 6.7. It is observed that both the domain randomization
baseline and the SAC (overlay) baseline achieve a positive mean episodic return in the
training environment, i.e. the task is solved in some instances, but they exhibit a sam­
ple efficiency that is significantly worse than the vanilla SAC baseline. SODA (overlay)
is found to have a better sample efficiency than the SAC baseline, achieving a mean
episodic return of 15 in half as many steps (frames). At the end of training (after 500k
steps), SODA achieves a mean episodic return of 21.3 versus 14.5 for the SAC baseline.
This would suggest that agents benefit from the additional training signal of auxiliary rep­
resentation learning in robotic manipulation tasks – even when considering only a single
environment – which is supported by the experiments of Yen­Chen et al. (2020); Zhan
et al. (2020) that come to a similar conclusion when learning policies from visual obser­
vations directly in the real world.
Generalization in robotic manipulation.
Table 6.4 shows our empirical evaluation of
the generalization of SODA and baselines to the two test distributions, as well as their
end­performance in the training environment. As in our DMControl­GB experiments from
Section 6.2.3, the generalization ability of the SAC baseline remains poor to both of the two
test distributions, while domain randomization and data augmentation is found to improve
generalization at the cost of sample efficiency and ultimately end­performance (see Fig­
ure 6.7). SODA outperforms all other methods in each of the three environments shown in
Table 6.4, and we observe that SODA is comparably more robust to the challenging ran­
domized colors and video backgrounds test distributions. Whereas the performance of
SODA drops by 34.7% when transferred from the training environment to the video back­
grounds environment, SAC (overlay) drops by 51.9% and the unmodified SAC baseline
drops by 93.7%. We find the SAC (DR) baseline to be surprisingly robust, only experi­
encing a drop of 24.7%, but the numerical difference between the mean episodic return of
SODA and the domain randomization baseline is significant. Given enough training time
and network capacity (i.e. number of trainable parameters), we can expect SAC (DR)
to eventually outperform the current returns of SODA, but we argue that SODA is desir­
able since it does not have the issues of sample efficiency and scalability that domain
randomization techniques suffer from.
62
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:71==
6.3
Summary
Extensive efforts have been made to improve the generalization ability of RL methods
via domain randomization and data augmentation, and they remain the most prominent
techniques amongst practitioners. However, as more factors of variation are introduced
during training with domain randomization, the optimization process becomes increas­
ingly more difficult, leading to poor sample efficiency, unstable learning, and ultimately a
decrease in end­performance. But if we on the other hand constrain the randomization to
be small, the distribution is unlikely to cover variations in the test environments. Finding
the right balance between sample efficiency and generalization therefore requires sig­
nificant engineering efforts. Similarly, recent studies show that both sample efficiency
and generalization can be improved by using the right kinds of data augmentation, but
determining which data augmentations to use – and to which degree – is found to be
task­dependent and a naïve application of augmentation may lead to unstable training
and poor performance, just like domain randomization.
In this chapter, we revisit the use data augmentation, and question whether we can ob­
tain the benefits of augmentation while at the same time interfering minimally with the
RL optimization process. We propose Soft Data Augmentation (SODA), a method that
stabilizes training by decoupling data augmentation from policy learning. While previ­
ous work attempts to learn policies directly from augmented data, SODA uses strictly
non­augmented data for policy learning, and instead performs auxiliary representation
learning using augmented data. Our empirical evaluations are performed on the novel
DMControl­GB benchmark, as well as a robotic manipulation task. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of SODA in stabilizing policy learning with augmented data, and show that
SODA improves generalization over recent state­of­the­art methods for visual RL, while
maintaining a sample efficiency that is competitive with a non­augmented SAC baseline.
We show that SODA can stabilize a random convolution augmentation proposed in previ­
ous work, and develop a novel random overlay data augmentation that we find to further
improve generalization across all benchmarks. We additionally ablate the formulation of
SODA, and find that our proposed decoupling of data augmentation from policy learning
is crucial to sample efficient RL, but the policy still benefits substantially from auxiliary
representation learning even when augmenting data in both SODA and RL optimization.
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
63
==PAGE:72==
64
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:73==
7
Discussion and Future Perspectives
In this thesis, we have explored two distinct approaches to generalization in visual RL.
PAD uses a self­supervised mechanism to continuously adapt to changes in the environ­
ment that it is deployed in, and SODA learns strong invariances by improving the sta­
bility and sample­efficiency of data augmentation techniques for RL through its soft data
augmentation formulation. To systematically evaluate the generalization ability of agents
trained by visual RL, we additionally develop the DMControl­GB and robotic manipulation
benchmarks, and successfully transfer policies learned in simulation to a real robot.
While our experimental results are encouraging, we acknowledge that our proposed meth­
ods are only initial steps towards broadly intelligent agents. We ultimately envision em­
bodied agents in the future to be learning all the time, with the flexibility to learn both with
and without rewards, before and during deployment, and from multiple modalities. In this
chapter, we aim to provide a holistic view on the current state of visual RL, the implications
of our work, and finally our perspective on the future of visual RL. To this end, we address
both concurrent work, opportunities for future research surrounding our methods, as well
as recent studies that extend our work.
7.1
Towards Broadly Intelligent Behavior
Before starting to address concrete opportunities for future work, we first discuss our
long­term research goal. Today’s agents require vast amounts of interactions to learn vi­
suomotor skills, largely fail to generalize beyond their simplistic training environment, and
generally do not have any mechanisms for learning once deployed. We ultimately envi­
sion a future in which we can teach personalized agents new skills only from a few natural
interactions in unstructured environments. For instance, imagine a motor­impaired per­
son instruct a robot how to fetch and operate items in their household. How would they
communicate their knowledge and intentions to the robot, and how would the robot con­
solidate its new experiences when a reward signal is not given explicitly? A natural way
for embodied agents to interact with the real, unstructured world is by visual and auditory
perception. Humans are excellent at learning and quickly adapt to new surroundings after
a few interactions, and can largely learn by experimentation without any explicit supervi­
sion. Yet, real­world adoption of agents trained by reinforcement learning is hindered by
their fragility and notoriously poor generalization ability, which is only exacerbated by the
high­dimensional nature of visual and auditory perception problems. Machine learning
systems today are largely trained to be invariant to certain factors of variation through
techniques like domain randomization and data augmentation, and are typically trained
and deployed in similar environments. This approach is problematic because (i) it does
not scale well; and (ii) it does not address the desire for continual knowledge acquisition
– something that comes naturally to humans.
To address these challenges, we need to rethink how agents learn and represent knowl­
edge. As a research community, we will need to explore more flexible learning frameworks
in which perception and skills can be learned both independently and jointly, from vari­
ous sources and modalities, and be continuously adapted over an agent’s lifetime. This
thesis takes small but important steps towards addressing these challenges. SODA di­
rectly addresses the problem of scalability of data augmentation in RL methods (problem
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
65
==PAGE:74==
(i) stated above), and PAD addresses the desire for continual knowledge acquisition and
adaptation in RL without explicit supervision (problem (ii) stated above).
More generally, it can be useful to formulate a set of properties that we believe will be
useful (but not necessarily sufficient) for broadly intelligent agents. We believe that such
agents will be equipped with learning frameworks that (1) represent knowledge in a way
that allows for adaptive behavior and life­long learning; (2) learn from both direct and
indirect supervision; and (3) leverage its understanding of the world to intelligently obtain
new experiences. To this end, it is natural to consider how data sources external to the
agent can be fused with its own experiences, in part to address generalization concerns
(e.g. ”learning to see before learning to act” (Yen­Chen et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2020b;
Hansen & Wang, 2020)), but also in the context of continual knowledge acquisition (e.g.
fine­tuning and adaptation (Lomonaco et al., 2019; Julian et al., 2020; Hansen et al.,
2020)), since real environments are seldom stationary, and in some application areas it
can be prohibitively expensive to retrain an agent from scratch.
A recent direction of research, offline RL, seek to learn useful policies without any environ­
ment interactions prior to deployment, which is achieved by leveraging prior experiences
collected from data sources external to the agent itself. In principle, off­policy methods like
DQN (Mnih et al., 2015), DDPG (Lillicrap et al., 2016) and SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018a;b)
can be trained entirely offline in this regime through pre­population of their replay buffers,
but this approach appears to work poorly in practice (Agarwal et al., 2020). The reasons
for that are multitude, but generalization under distributional shift is a core challenge in RL
that is only exacerbated by the offline RL problem setting (Levine et al., 2020). SODA im­
proves the observational generalization of RL methods by learning invariances through its
self­supervised representation learning framework, and an interesting avenue for future
research could be to explore application of similar representation learning techniques for
the offline RL regime as a means for reducing distributional shift. In the offline RL problem
setting, however, agents not only experience distributional shift in observations, but also
in the trajectories and transitions that were taken during generation of the pre­collected
experiences. While recent work on offline RL attempts to mitigate this shift by e.g. im­
portance weighted sampling (Kumar et al., 2019; Peng et al., 2019a; Mahmood et al.,
2014), it may also be an interesting problem setting for adaptive methods such as PAD
that attempt to address the distributional shift only at test­time. To achieve more broadly
intelligent behavior in machines, we argue that a combination of techniques that address
the problems of generalization and distributional shift both before and during deployment
will likely be necessary.
7.2
Policy Adaptation
Adapting a policy for a deployment environment that differs from where the policy is trained
is not a new idea. However, concurrent work on policy adaptation primarily considers
the problem of domain adaptation, where the policy is to be deployed in a single tar­
get environment that is known and to some extent accessible during the training phase
(Julian et al., 2020; Karnan et al., 2020; Desai et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020b). The
self­supervised policy adaptation mechanism of PAD adapts to environments in an online
manner during deployment, without any prior knowledge about the target environment,
and is conceptually similar to the ideas proposed in both previous work (Sun et al., 2020)
and concurrent work (Zhang et al., 2020a; Raileanu et al., 2020a; Alet et al., 2020).
Our experiments in Chapter 5 show that the proposed framework for adaptation in PAD
does not hurt performance of the policy when fine­tuning to an environment that is indis­
66
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:75==
tinct to its original training environment, and it generally does not degrade performance
even in long­horizon deployment scenarios. However, we also find that the success of
PAD depends (to some extent) on the choice of self­supervised task. Since selecting
an appropriate self­supervised task for PAD remains non­trivial, successful application
of PAD may still require some domain knowledge and experimentation. An interesting
opportunity for future research is to explore methods that automate this experimentation
and selection of self­supervised tasks for policy adaptation. We hypothesize that auxil­
iary objectives whose gradients are aligned with those of the RL objective(s) are better
proxies for adapting the policy directly using supervision, which is supported by related
findings in computer vision literature (Sun et al., 2020). A natural solution could be to ini­
tially optimize a set of auxiliary tasks together with the RL objective(s) during training, and
then exploit their gradient information to continually prune the set of tasks until only the
most gradient­aligned auxiliary task remains. Similarly, a softer task selection could be
to simply use gradient information to assign adaptive weights to each task, such that the
auxiliary objective may consist of more than one task with individual influences (weights)
that may or may not sum to 1 (Lin et al., 2019; Shi et al., 2020; Verboven et al., 2020; Yang
et al., 2020b). Another solution may be to apply alternative methods from multi­task learn­
ing and auxiliary learning to the RL problem setting. Yu et al. (2020a) propose a method
for reducing task interference in the multi­task setting by artificially realigning task gradi­
ents that are deemed problematic from an optimization point­of­view, and Wortsman et al.
(2019) propose to leverage meta­learning techniques to learn a self­supervised objective
with the desired properties.
A different opportunity for future work in policy adaptation is to revisit the adaptation al­
gorithm of PAD. Empirically, PAD is not found to be detrimental to the performance of the
policy at test­time, but we conjecture that a policy adapted to a new environment may
need to be re­adapted to its original environment if it is later re­deployed there. A recent
study (Bodnar et al., 2020) shows that the adaptation mechanism of PAD indeed does
decrease performance in the original environment after adaptation to a different environ­
ment, which is a problem setting distinct from the single­episode deployment considered
in Chapter 5. The authors empirically study the changes in feature space that occur dur­
ing adaptation, and propose a mechanism for bounding the change in representation from
the original environment to a given target environment. Concretely, they propose to add
a behavioral cloning (Pomerleau, 1988; Ross et al., 2011) term to the test­time objec­
tive of PAD that aims to mitigate catastrophical forgetting by keeping the representation
close to the pre­trained network from the original environment. The additional behavioral
cloning term is shown to improve consecutive environment transfers of PAD on a number
of benchmarks, including the color_hard test distribution of DMControl­GB proposed in
Section 4.1. This is an encouraging result for self­supervised policy adaptation methods
in the truly life­long learning problem setting, where a single policy may continually learn
and adapt to new environments without any significant degradation in performance on
previously experienced environments.
There is also ample opportunity to apply a PAD­like adaptation mechanism in other RL
components. A promising, concurrent line of research (Hanna & Stone, 2017; Karnan
et al., 2020; Desai et al., 2020) learns a differentiable action transformation that actively
transforms actions taken by a policy trained in simulation into a re­calibrated action space
for real­world deployment. In these works, the action transformation is fitted by iteratively
collecting data both in simulation and the real world during learning of the policy until
the policy behavior is satisfactory in both environments. However, this iterative training
process can be both expensive and time consuming when an agent is not easily evaluated
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
67
==PAGE:76==
in the real world. We hypothesize that an online adaptation mechanism such as PAD
could potentially aid such action transformations in continuously adapting to discrepancies
in action spaces even after deployment, e.g. to correct minutiae inconsistencies in the
learned transformation or adapt to changes over time stemming from tear.
A yet more ambitious direction for future research is to further explore variants of the
flexible learning frameworks proposed in PAD and Bodnar et al. (2020) that potentially
could extend PAD to also include continual acquisition of related skills, rather than only
adapting to changes in the environment. To achieve this objective, it may be necessary
to revisit the interaction at test­time, and develop new methods that explore the target
environment both efficiently and safely during deployment. For example, it may be useful
to learn a policy for probing the environment (Yang et al., 2020a) of a real robot deploy­
ment in a way that is safe (e.g. avoids damaging the robot nor its environment by acting
conservatively) and sample efficient (e.g. by collecting as diverse data as possible in
a given time­frame). While it is unclear exactly how future adaptive agents should be
implemented, self­supervised policy adaptation remains a promising step towards more
broadly intelligent behavior in agents trained by RL, and we remain optimistic about the
future of visual RL.
7.3
On the Importance of Benchmarks
As a final remark, we would like to emphasize the importance of good benchmarks. DM­
Control is an excellent benchmark for measuring advances in sample efficiency and com­
plexity in continuous control tasks solved by (visual) RL algorithms, but only considers
tasks where the agent is trained and deployed in the same environment. Our proposed
benchmark, DMControl­GB, extends the tasks in DMControl to include a systematic eval­
uation of generalization to visually diverse environments, which will enable future research
on the topic to accurately measure algorithmic improvements in generalization.
Recent work, Grigsby & Qi (2020), conducts an empirical study on generalization in vi­
sual RL based on DMControl tasks and similar test environments as in DMControl­GB.
Specifically, they propose to benchmark the same methods as in our empirical analysis,
and find that data augmentation techniques (Kostrikov et al., 2020; Laskin et al., 2020a)
generally are more effective tools for generalization than auxiliary self­supervised tasks
such as CURL (Yarats et al., 2019; Laskin et al., 2020b). While their results are in line
with the findings that we discuss in Chapter 6, their study cannot be readily reproduced
due to lack of description and open­sourced implementation of test environments. We
argue that, while it is important for the community to confirm results independently, we as
a community ultimately need diverse, open­sourced, and accessible benchmarks, as well
as reproducible implementations of algorithms, to consistently advance the field. Another
recent study, Stone et al. (2021), extends our work by proposing and open­sourcing the
Distracting Control Suite, a new benchmark for visual generalization, also built on DMCon­
trol. They propose to both train and test agents in highly configurable environments with
randomized colors, video backgrounds, and dynamically changing camera poses, and
benchmark recent algorithms based on SAC (Kostrikov et al., 2020; Laskin et al., 2020a)
as in Grigsby & Qi (2020) and our work. In this thesis, we release an open­sourced gen­
eralization benchmark along with our two proposed methods, as well as implementations
of a number of strong baselines from recent literature, including those of other recent
benchmarks. We hope that our work will help foster more research on generalization in
visual RL, and see the recent interest (Bodnar et al., 2020; Grigsby & Qi, 2020; Stone
et al., 2021) in this topic as an encouraging sign for the future of visual RL.
68
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:77==
8
Conclusion
Deep RL combines classical RL methods with the expressiveness of deep neural net­
works, and has been used with tremendous success in a number of application areas
of visuomotor control, including game playing, robotic manipulation from visual inputs,
and autonomous vehicles. These methods largely rely on joint learning of perception and
decision­making in end­to­end optimization frameworks. One of the core challenges in
RL is generalization across distributions of related environments: generalizing knowledge
learned in a finite set of training environments to a potentially infinite number of related
test environments that differ slightly from the training distribution. The problem of gener­
alization is especially important to the field of robotics, where training an agent directly in
the real world can be both time consuming and costly. Therefore, practitioners often learn
policies in a simulated environment and subsequently deploy the policy in the real world on
e.g. a robotic arm or vehicle. This approach is prone to distributional shift from potentially
minutiae differences in visuals and dynamics between the simulation and the real world,
which is often shown to be catastrophic. In this thesis, we extensively discuss related
work that aim to tackle the problem of generalization in RL from visual observations, and
we propose a suite of novel benchmarks for systematically evaluating the generalization
ability of agents trained by RL. We furthermore identify limitations of current work and in
that context propose two distinct frameworks for improving the generalization of current
RL algorithms: PAD and SODA.
A natural solution to the problem of environment changes is to keep training after de­
ployment in the new environment, but this cannot be done if the new environment offers
no reward signal, as is common in many application areas that deploy agents in the real
world. Our proposed PAD method explores the use of self­supervision to allow the policy
to continue learning even after deployment, without using any rewards. While previous
methods explicitly anticipate changes in the new environment, we assume no prior knowl­
edge of those changes yet still obtain significant improvements. We do so by optimizing
a self­supervised objective during deployment using observations collected directly from
the new environment in an online manner. We show that PAD can adapt to a diverse
set of environment changes, including a transfer from a simulated environment to a real
robotic arm.
Our second method, SODA, addresses the problem of scalability that previous methods
based on domain randomization and data augmentation suffer from. As more factors of
variation are introduced during training through these techniques, the optimization pro­
cess becomes increasingly more difficult, leading to poor sample efficiency and unstable
learning. Rather than learning policies directly from augmented data, SODA decouples
augmentation from policy learning, and instead imposes a soft constraint on the encoder
that aims to maximize mutual information between latent representations of augmented
and non­augmented data, while the RL optimization process uses strictly non­augmented
data. We show that this alternative application of data augmentation improves both sam­
ple efficiency, stability, and generalization of recent methods for visual RL.
While our proposed learning frameworks are only initial steps towards general­purpose
agents, we ultimately envision general­purpose frameworks in which future agents are
learning all the time, with the flexibility to learn both with and without rewards through
e.g. self­supervised representation learning methods, and learning both from experience
collected by interaction, as well as data sources external to the agent.
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
69
==PAGE:78==
Bibliography
Rishabh Agarwal, Dale Schuurmans, and Mohammad Norouzi. An optimistic perspective
on offline reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
2020. 66
Pulkit Agrawal, Ashvin Nair, P. Abbeel, Jitendra Malik, and S. Levine. Learning to poke
by poking: Experiential learning of intuitive physics. ArXiv, abs/1606.07419, 2016. 22
Carlos Bordons Alba. Springer, 1999. ISBN 978­3­540­76241­6. 14
Ferran Alet, Kenji Kawaguchi, Tomas Lozano­Perez, and L. Kaelbling. Tailoring: encod­
ing inductive biases by optimizing unsupervised objectives at prediction time. ArXiv,
abs/2009.10623, 2020. 21, 66
Andreas Argyriou, Theodoros Evgeniou, and Massimiliano Pontil. Multi­task feature learn­
ing. 2006. 35
Jimmy Ba, J. Kiros, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. Layer normalization. ArXiv, abs/1607.06450,
2016. 91
Philip Bachman, R. Devon Hjelm, and William Buchwalter. Learning representations by
maximizing mutual information across views. In NeurIPS, 2019. 16
J. Bagnell and Brian D. Ziebart. Modeling purposeful adaptive behavior with the principle
of maximum causal entropy. 2010. 11
D. Ballard. Modular learning in neural networks. In AAAI, 1987. 16
Adrien Baranes and Pierre­Yves Oudeyer. Active learning of inverse models with intrin­
sically motivated goal exploration in robots. Robotics Auton. Syst., 61:49–73, 2013.
22
David Bau, Hendrik Strobelt, W. Peebles, J. Wulff, B. Zhou, Jun­Yan Zhu, and A. Tor­
ralba. Semantic photo manipulation with a generative image prior. ACM Transactions
on Graphics (TOG), 38:1 – 11, 2019. 21
J. Baxter. A bayesian/information theoretic model of bias learning. ArXiv, abs/1911.06129,
1996. 35
Marc G. Bellemare, Yavar Naddaf, J. Veness, and Michael Bowling. The arcade learning
environment: An evaluation platform for general agents (extended abstract). J. Artif.
Intell. Res., 47:253–279, 2015. 27
Yoshua Bengio, Eric Thibodeau­Laufer, G. Alain, and J. Yosinski.
Deep generative
stochastic networks trainable by backprop. ArXiv, abs/1306.1091, 2014. 16
Christopher Berner, G. Brockman, Brooke Chan, Vicki Cheung, Przemyslaw Debiak,
Christy Dennison, D. Farhi, Quirin Fischer, Shariq Hashme, Chris Hesse, R. Józe­
fowicz, Scott Gray, C. Olsson, Jakub W. Pachocki, M. Petrov, Henrique Pond’e
de Oliveira Pinto, Jonathan Raiman, Tim Salimans, Jeremy Schlatter, J. Schneider,
S. Sidor, Ilya Sutskever, Jie Tang, F. Wolski, and Susan Zhang. Dota 2 with large scale
deep reinforcement learning. ArXiv, abs/1912.06680, 2019. 1
70
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:79==
Cristian Bodnar, Karol Hausman, Gabriel Dulac­Arnold, and Rico Jonschkowski. A geo­
metric perspective on self­supervised policy adaptation. ArXiv, abs/2011.07318, 2020.
67, 68
T. Brown, Dandelion Mané, Aurko Roy, M. Abadi, and J. Gilmer. Adversarial patch. ArXiv,
abs/1712.09665, 2017. 1
Y. Carmon, Aditi Raghunathan, L. Schmidt, Percy Liang, and John C. Duchi. Unlabeled
data improves adversarial robustness. ArXiv, abs/1905.13736, 2019. 20
M. Caron, I. Misra, J. Mairal, Priya Goyal, P. Bojanowski, and Armand Joulin.
Un­
supervised learning of visual features by contrasting cluster assignments.
ArXiv,
abs/2006.09882, 2020. 18
Tianlong Chen, Sijia Liu, S. Chang, Y. Cheng, L. Amini, and Zhangyang Wang.
Ad­
versarial robustness: From self­supervised pre­training to fine­tuning. 2020 IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 696–705, 2020a.
20
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey E. Hinton.
A simple
framework for contrastive learning of visual representations. ArXiv, abs/2002.05709,
2020b. 16, 17, 18, 20, 23, 51
K. Chua, R. Calandra, Rowan McAllister, and S. Levine. Deep reinforcement learning in
a handful of trials using probabilistic dynamics models. In NeurIPS, 2018. 22
Wesley Chung, V. Thomas, Marlos C. Machado, and Nicolas Le Roux. Beyond variance
reduction: Understanding the true impact of baselines on policy optimization. ArXiv,
abs/2008.13773, 2020. 7
K. Cobbe, O. Klimov, Christopher Hesse, Taehoon Kim, and John Schulman. Quantifying
generalization in reinforcement learning. In ICML, 2019a. 58
K. Cobbe, Christopher Hesse, J. Hilton, and John Schulman.
Leveraging procedural
generation to benchmark reinforcement learning. In ICML, 2020. 27
Karl Cobbe, Christopher Hesse, Jacob Hilton, and John Schulman. Leveraging procedu­
ral generation to benchmark reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.01588,
2019b. 1, 30, 57
Will Dabney, A. Barreto, M. Rowland, Robert Dadashi, John Quan, Marc G. Bellemare,
and D. Silver. The value­improvement path: Towards better representations for rein­
forcement learning. ArXiv, abs/2006.02243, 2020. 51
Marc Deisenroth and Carl Rasmussen. Pilco: A model­based and data­efficient approach
to policy search. pp. 465–472, 01 2011. 22
Siddharth Desai, Haresh Karnan, Josiah P. Hanna, Garrett Warnell, and Peter Stone.
Stochastic grounded action transformation for robot learning in simulation, 2020. 21,
24, 66, 67
C. Doersch and Andrew Zisserman. Multi­task self­supervised visual learning. 2017 IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 2070–2079, 2017. 35, 45
C. Doersch, A. Gupta, and Alexei A. Efros. Unsupervised visual representation learning
by context prediction. 2015 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV),
pp. 1422–1430, 2015. 16
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
71
==PAGE:80==
Alexey Dosovitskiy, German Ros, Felipe Codevilla, Antonio Lopez, and Vladlen Koltun.
Carla: An open urban driving simulator. In Proceedings of the 1st Annual Conference
on Robot Learning, pp. 1–16, 2017. 27
Yan Duan, Xi Chen, Rein Houthooft, John Schulman, and P. Abbeel. Benchmarking deep
reinforcement learning for continuous control. ArXiv, abs/1604.06778, 2016. 11
Rachit Dubey, Pulkit Agrawal, Deepak Pathak, Thomas L. Griffiths, and Alexei A. Efros.
Investigating human priors for playing video games. In ICML, 2018. 28
Frederik Ebert, Chelsea Finn, Sudeep Dasari, Annie Xie, Alex X. Lee, and S. Levine. Vi­
sual foresight: Model­based deep reinforcement learning for vision­based robotic con­
trol. ArXiv, abs/1812.00568, 2018. 23
Abe Fetterman and Josh Albrecht. Understanding self­supervised and contrastive learn­
ing withbootstrap your own latent (byol).
2020.
URL https://untitled-ai.github.io/
understanding-self-supervised-contrastive-learning.html. 53
Chelsea Finn and S. Levine. Deep visual foresight for planning robot motion. 2017 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 2786–2793, 2017.
23
Dhiraj Gandhi, Lerrel Pinto, and A. Gupta. Learning to fly by crashing. 2017 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 3948–3955,
2017. 1
Yaroslav Ganin and V. Lempitsky. Unsupervised domain adaptation by backpropagation.
ArXiv, abs/1409.7495, 2015. 21
Spyros Gidaris, Praveer Singh, and Nikos Komodakis.
Unsupervised representation
learning by predicting image rotations. ArXiv, abs/1803.07728, 2018. 16, 18, 20, 21,
34, 35, 42
Ian J. Goodfellow, M. Mirza, Xia Da, Aaron C. Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. An empir­
ical investigation of catastrophic forgeting in gradient­based neural networks. CoRR,
abs/1312.6211, 2014a. 21
Ian J. Goodfellow, Jean Pouget­Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu, David Warde­Farley, Sherjil
Ozair, Aaron C. Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial networks. ArXiv,
abs/1406.2661, 2014b. 16, 53
Ian J. Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing
adversarial examples. CoRR, abs/1412.6572, 2015. 1
Evan Greensmith, Peter Bartlett, and Jonathan Baxter. Variance reduction techniques for
gradient estimates in reinforcement learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
5, 04 2002. 7
Jake Grigsby and Yanjun Qi. Measuring visual generalization in continuous control from
pixels. ArXiv, abs/2010.06740, 2020. 68
Jean­Bastien Grill, Florian Strub, Florent Altché, C. Tallec, Pierre H. Richemond, Elena
Buchatskaya, C. Doersch, Bernardo Avila Pires, Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Moham­
mad Gheshlaghi Azar, B. Piot, K. Kavukcuoglu, Rémi Munos, and Michal Valko.
Bootstrap your own latent:
A new approach to self­supervised learning.
ArXiv,
abs/2006.07733, 2020. 16, 17, 18, 20, 50, 51, 53, 54
72
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:81==
Alvin Grissom, He He, Jordan L. Boyd­Graber, J. W. Morgan, and Hal Daumé. Don’t until
the final verb wait: Reinforcement learning for simultaneous machine translation. In
EMNLP, 2014. 1
Shixiang Gu, Ethan Holly, T. Lillicrap, and S. Levine. Deep reinforcement learning for
robotic manipulation with asynchronous off­policy updates. 2017 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 3389–3396, 2017. 23
A. Gupta, Adithyavairavan Murali, Dhiraj Gandhi, and Lerrel Pinto.
Robot learning in
homes: Improving generalization and reducing dataset bias. ArXiv, abs/1807.07049,
2018. 23
David R Ha and J. Schmidhuber. World models. ArXiv, abs/1803.10122, 2018. 22
T. Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine. Soft actor­critic: Off­policy maximum
entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In ICML, 2018a. 11, 12,
37, 66
T. Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Kristian Hartikainen, G. Tucker, Sehoon Ha, J. Tan, V. Kumar,
H. Zhu, A. Gupta, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine. Soft actor­critic algorithms and applications.
ArXiv, abs/1812.05905, 2018b. 11, 12, 24, 36, 37, 50, 52, 54, 66, 88, 91
Danijar Hafner, T. Lillicrap, Ian S. Fischer, R. Villegas, David R Ha, H. Lee, and J. David­
son. Learning latent dynamics for planning from pixels. ArXiv, abs/1811.04551, 2019.
15, 22, 27
Josiah Hanna and Peter Stone.
Grounded action transformation for robot learning in
simulation. In Proceedings of the 31st AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI),
February 2017. 21, 67
Nicklas Hansen and Xiaolong Wang. Generalization in reinforcement learning by soft data
augmentation. 2020. 28, 49, 66, 85, 88
Nicklas Hansen, Rishabh Jangir, Yu Sun, Guillem Alenyà, Pieter Abbeel, Alexei A. Efros,
Lerrel Pinto, and Xiaolong Wang. Self­supervised policy adaptation during deployment.
2020. 33, 58, 66, 88
H. V. Hasselt. Double q­learning. In NIPS, 2010. 13
H. V. Hasselt, A. Guez, and D. Silver. Deep reinforcement learning with double q­learning.
In AAAI, 2016. 13
Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross B. Girshick. Momentum con­
trast for unsupervised visual representation learning. 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 9726–9735, 2020. 16, 17, 18,
20
Olivier J. Hénaff, A. Srinivas, J. Fauw, Ali Razavi, C. Doersch, S. Eslami, and A. Oord.
Data­efficient image recognition with contrastive predictive coding. In ICML, 2020. 16,
17
Dan Hendrycks and Thomas G. Dietterich. Benchmarking neural network robustness to
common corruptions and perturbations. ArXiv, abs/1903.12261, 2019. 2, 19
Dan Hendrycks, Kimin Lee, and Mantas Mazeika. Using pre­training can improve model
robustness and uncertainty. In ICML, 2019a. 20
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
73
==PAGE:82==
Dan Hendrycks, Mantas Mazeika, Saurav Kadavath, and D. Song. Using self­supervised
learning can improve model robustness and uncertainty.
ArXiv, abs/1906.12340,
2019b. 20, 22, 35, 45
Dan Hendrycks, K. Zhao, Steven Basart, J. Steinhardt, and D. Song. Natural adversarial
examples. ArXiv, abs/1907.07174, 2019c. 1
Judy Hoffman, E. Tzeng, Trevor Darrell, and Kate Saenko. Simultaneous deep transfer
across domains and tasks. 2015 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision
(ICCV), pp. 4068–4076, 2015. 21
Junlin Hu, Jiwen Lu, and Yap­Peng Tan. Deep transfer metric learning. pp. 325–333, 06
2015. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2015.7298629. 21
S. Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training
by reducing internal covariate shift. ArXiv, abs/1502.03167, 2015. 53, 54
Max Jaderberg, V. Mnih, W. Czarnecki, T. Schaul, Joel Z. Leibo, D. Silver, and
K. Kavukcuoglu.
Reinforcement learning with unsupervised auxiliary tasks.
ArXiv,
abs/1611.05397, 2017. 22, 35
Stephen James, Paul Wohlhart, Mrinal Kalakrishnan, D. Kalashnikov, A. Irpan, J. Ibarz,
S. Levine, Raia Hadsell, and Konstantinos Bousmalis.
Sim­to­real via sim­to­sim:
Data­efficient robotic grasping via randomized­to­canonical adaptation networks. 2019
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp.
12619–12629, 2019. 24
Michael Janner, Justin Fu, Marvin Zhang, and S. Levine.
When to trust your model:
Model­based policy optimization. ArXiv, abs/1906.08253, 2019. 22
Dinesh Jayaraman and K. Grauman. Learning image representations tied to ego­motion.
2015 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 1413–1421, 2015.
16
J. Johnson, B. Hariharan, L. V. D. Maaten, Judy Hoffman, Li Fei­Fei, C. L. Zitnick, and
Ross B. Girshick. Inferring and executing programs for visual reasoning. 2017 IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 3008–3017, 2017. 1
R. Julian, B. Swanson, G. Sukhatme, Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn, and Karol Hausman.
Never stop learning: The effectiveness of fine­tuning in robotic reinforcement learning.
arXiv: Learning, 2020. 2, 23, 66
Arthur Juliani, Ahmed Khalifa, Vincent­Pierre Berges, J. Harper, Hunter Henry, Adam
Crespi, J. Togelius, and D. Lange. Obstacle tower: A generalization challenge in vision,
control, and planning. ArXiv, abs/1902.01378, 2019. 27
Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Michael L. Littman, and Anthony R. Cassandra.
Planning and
acting in partially observable stochastic domains. Artificial Intelligence, 101(1):99 –
134, 1998. ISSN 0004­3702. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0004­3702(98)00023­X. 6
Sham M. Kakade and J. Langford.
Approximately optimal approximate reinforcement
learning. In ICML, 2002. 7
D. Kalashnikov, A. Irpan, P. Pastor, J. Ibarz, A. Herzog, Eric Jang, Deirdre Quillen, Ethan
Holly, Mrinal Kalakrishnan, V. Vanhoucke, and S. Levine. Qt­opt: Scalable deep rein­
forcement learning for vision­based robotic manipulation. ArXiv, abs/1806.10293, 2018.
23
74
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:83==
Haresh Karnan, Siddharth Desai, Josiah P. Hanna, Garrett Warnell, and Peter Stone.
Reinforced grounded action transformation for sim­to­real transfer, 2020. 21, 24, 66,
67
Prannay Khosla, Piotr Teterwak, Chen Wang, Aaron Sarna, Yonglong Tian, Phillip Isola,
A. Maschinot, Ce Liu, and Dilip Krishnan.
Supervised contrastive learning.
ArXiv,
abs/2004.11362, 2020. 16, 18, 20
Minseon Kim, Jihoon Tack, and Sung Ju Hwang. Adversarial self­supervised contrastive
learning. ArXiv, abs/2006.07589, 2020. 20
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. CoRR,
abs/1412.6980, 2015. 10, 50, 54
Diederik P. Kingma and M. Welling.
Auto­encoding variational bayes.
CoRR,
abs/1312.6114, 2014. 16
B. R. Kiran, Ibrahim Sobh, V. Talpaert, Patrick Mannion, A. A. Sallab, S. Yogamani, and
P. Pérez.
Deep reinforcement learning for autonomous driving: A survey.
ArXiv,
abs/2002.00444, 2020. 1
Ilya Kostrikov, Denis Yarats, and Rob Fergus. Image augmentation is all you need: Reg­
ularizing deep reinforcement learning from pixels. 2020. 3, 19, 27, 38, 55, 68
A. Krizhevsky. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009. 1
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep
convolutional neural networks. In NIPS, 2012. 37
A. Kumar, Justin Fu, G. Tucker, and S. Levine. Stabilizing off­policy q­learning via boot­
strapping error reduction. In NeurIPS, 2019. 9, 66
A. Kurakin, Ian J. Goodfellow, and S. Bengio. Adversarial examples in the physical world.
ArXiv, abs/1607.02533, 2017. 1
Michael Laskin, Kimin Lee, Adam Stooke, Lerrel Pinto, Pieter Abbeel, and Aravind Srini­
vas. Reinforcement learning with augmented data. arXiv:2004.14990, 2020a. 3, 19,
27, 37, 38, 39, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 68, 88, 94
Michael Laskin, Aravind Srinivas, and Pieter Abbeel.
Curl: Contrastive unsupervised
representations for reinforcement learning. Proceedings of the 37th International Con­
ference on Machine Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020b. arXiv:2004.04136.
3, 17, 23, 24, 27, 35, 37, 38, 42, 51, 55, 58, 59, 60, 68, 88, 94
Yann LeCun. Self­supervised learning: Could machines learn like humans?, 2018. 14
Kimin Lee, Kibok Lee, Jinwoo Shin, and H. Lee. A simple randomization technique for
generalization in deep reinforcement learning. ArXiv, abs/1910.05396, 2019. 19, 55,
56
Kimin Lee, M. Laskin, A. Srinivas, and P. Abbeel. Sunrise: A simple unified framework
for ensemble learning in deep reinforcement learning. ArXiv, abs/2007.04938, 2020a.
3, 23
M. Lee, Matthew Tan, Yuke Zhu, and Jeannette Bohg. Detect, reject, correct: Crossmodal
compensation of corrupted sensors. ArXiv, abs/2012.00201, 2020b. 51
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
75
==PAGE:84==
S. Levine, P. Pastor, A. Krizhevsky, and Deirdre Quillen. Learning hand­eye coordination
for robotic grasping with deep learning and large­scale data collection. The International
Journal of Robotics Research, 37:421 – 436, 2018. 23
Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn, Trevor Darrell, and Pieter Abbeel. End­to­end training of
deep visuomotor policies. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(1):1334–
1373, 2016. 1, 23
Sergey Levine, Aviral Kumar, G. Tucker, and Justin Fu. Offline reinforcement learning:
Tutorial, review, and perspectives on open problems. ArXiv, abs/2005.01643, 2020. 66
J. Li, Will Monroe, Alan Ritter, Dan Jurafsky, Michel Galley, and Jianfeng Gao. Deep
reinforcement learning for dialogue generation. ArXiv, abs/1606.01541, 2016. 1
T. Lillicrap, J. Hunt, A. Pritzel, N. Heess, T. Erez, Y. Tassa, D. Silver, and Daan Wierstra.
Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/1509.02971, 2016.
10, 11, 50, 52, 66
X. Lin, H. S. Baweja, G. Kantor, and David Held. Adaptive auxiliary task weighting for
reinforcement learning. In NeurIPS, 2019. 67
Vincenzo Lomonaco, Karen Desai, Eugenio Culurciello, and Davide Maltoni.
Con­
tinual reinforcement learning in 3d non­stationary environments.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1905.10112, 2019. 27, 30, 36, 45, 66
Mingsheng Long, Han Zhu, J. Wang, and Michael I. Jordan. Unsupervised domain adap­
tation with residual transfer networks. In NIPS, 2016. 21
Marlos C. Machado, Marc G. Bellemare, Erik Talvitie, J. Veness, Matthew J. Hausknecht,
and Michael H. Bowling. Revisiting the arcade learning environment: Evaluation pro­
tocols and open problems for general agents. ArXiv, abs/1709.06009, 2018. 27
H. Maei, Csaba Szepesvari, S. Bhatnagar, Doina Precup, D. Silver, and R. Sutton. Con­
vergent temporal­difference learning with arbitrary smooth function approximation. In
NIPS, 2009. 9
Rupam Mahmood, Hado Van Hasselt, and Richard Sutton. Weighted importance sam­
pling for off­policy learning with linear function approximation. volume 4, pp. 3014–3022,
01 2014. 66
Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, G. S. Corrado, and J. Dean. Efficient estimation of word rep­
resentations in vector space. CoRR, abs/1301.3781, 2013. 16
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou,
Daan Wierstra, and Martin Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.5602, 2013. 1
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A. Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G.
Bellemare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K. Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, Stig
Petersen, Charles Beattie, Amir Sadik, Ioannis Antonoglou, Helen King, Dharshan Ku­
maran, Daan Wierstra, Shane Legg, and Demis Hassabis. Human­level control through
deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 2015. 10, 66
Volodymyr Mnih, Adrià Puigdomènech Badia, Mehdi Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy P. Lil­
licrap, Tim Harley, David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous methods for
deep reinforcement learning, 2016. 7, 37
76
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:85==
R. T. Mullapudi, S. Chen, Keyi Zhang, D. Ramanan, and K. Fatahalian. Online model
distillation for efficient video inference. 2019 IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 3572–3581, 2019. 21
Ashvin V Nair, Vitchyr Pong, Murtaza Dalal, Shikhar Bahl, Steven Lin, and Sergey Levine.
Visual reinforcement learning with imagined goals. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, pp. 9191–9200, 2018. 1
D. Nguyen­Tuong and Jan Peters. Using model knowledge for learning inverse dynam­
ics. 2010 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, pp. 2677–2682,
2010. 22
M. Noroozi and P. Favaro. Unsupervised learning of visual representations by solving
jigsaw puzzles. In ECCV, 2016. 16, 20
A. Oord, Y. Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predictive cod­
ing. ArXiv, abs/1807.03748, 2018. 16, 17
C. Packer, Katelyn Gao, J. Kos, Philipp Krähenbühl, V. Koltun, and D. Song. Assessing
generalization in deep reinforcement learning. ArXiv, abs/1810.12282, 2018. 2, 19, 28,
39, 41, 52, 58
Yunpeng Pan, Ching­An Cheng, Kamil Saigol, Keuntaek Lee, Xinyan Yan, E. Theodorou,
and B. Boots. Agile autonomous driving using end­to­end deep imitation learning. In
Robotics: Science and Systems, 2018. 1
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory
Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Des­
maison, Andreas Kopf, Edward Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Te­
jani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala.
Pytorch: An imperative style, high­performance deep learning library. In H. Wallach,
H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché­Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems 32, pp. 8024–8035. Curran Associates, Inc.,
2019. 85
Deepak Pathak, Philipp Krähenbühl, J. Donahue, Trevor Darrell, and Alexei A. Efros.
Context encoders: Feature learning by inpainting. 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 2536–2544, 2016. 13, 16, 20, 35
Deepak Pathak, Pulkit Agrawal, Alexei A. Efros, and Trevor Darrell. Curiosity­driven ex­
ploration by self­supervised prediction. In ICML, 2017. 1, 22
Romain Paulus, Caiming Xiong, and R. Socher. A deep reinforced model for abstractive
summarization. ArXiv, abs/1705.04304, 2018. 1
X. Peng, Marcin Andrychowicz, W. Zaremba, and P. Abbeel. Sim­to­real transfer of robotic
control with dynamics randomization. 2018 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation (ICRA), pp. 1–8, 2018. 1, 2, 19
X. Peng, A. Kumar, Grace Zhang, and S. Levine. Advantage­weighted regression: Simple
and scalable off­policy reinforcement learning. ArXiv, abs/1910.00177, 2019a. 66
Xingchao Peng, Judy Hoffman, S. Yu, and Kate Saenko. Fine­to­coarse knowledge trans­
fer for low­res image classification. 2016 IEEE International Conference on Image Pro­
cessing (ICIP), pp. 3683–3687, 2016. 21
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
77
==PAGE:86==
Xingchao Peng, Qinxun Bai, Xide Xia, Zijun Huang, Kate Saenko, and Bo Wang. Moment
matching for multi­source domain adaptation. 2019 IEEE/CVF International Conference
on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 1406–1415, 2019b. 21
Lerrel Pinto and A. Gupta. Supersizing self­supervision: Learning to grasp from 50k tries
and 700 robot hours. 2016 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA), pp. 3406–3413, 2016. 1, 23
Lerrel Pinto, Dhiraj Gandhi, Yuanfeng Han, Yong­Lae Park, and A. Gupta. The curious
robot: Learning visual representations via physical interactions. In ECCV, 2016. 23
Lerrel Pinto, Marcin Andrychowicz, Peter Welinder, Wojciech Zaremba, and Pieter
Abbeel.
Asymmetric actor critic for image­based robot learning.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1710.06542, 2017. 55
D. Pomerleau. Alvinn: An autonomous land vehicle in a neural network. In NIPS, 1988.
67
N. Qian. On the momentum term in gradient descent learning algorithms. Neural networks
: the official journal of the International Neural Network Society, 12 1:145–151, 1999.
10
Deirdre Quillen, Eric Jang, Ofir Nachum, Chelsea Finn, J. Ibarz, and S. Levine. Deep re­
inforcement learning for vision­based robotic grasping: A simulated comparative eval­
uation of off­policy methods.
2018 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), pp. 6284–6291, 2018. 1
Roberta Raileanu, M. Goldstein, Arthur Szlam, and R. Fergus. Fast adaptation via policy­
dynamics value functions. ArXiv, abs/2007.02879, 2020a. 21, 66
Roberta Raileanu, M. Goldstein, Denis Yarats, Ilya Kostrikov, and R. Fergus.
Auto­
matic data augmentation for generalization in deep reinforcement learning.
ArXiv,
abs/2006.12862, 2020b. 19, 57
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and Percy Liang. Squad: 100, 000+
questions for machine comprehension of text. In EMNLP, 2016. 27
F. Ramos, Rafael Possas, and D. Fox. Bayessim: adaptive domain randomization via
probabilistic inference for robotics simulators. ArXiv, abs/1906.01728, 2019. 2, 19
B. Recht, Rebecca Roelofs, L. Schmidt, and V. Shankar. Do imagenet classifiers gener­
alize to imagenet? ArXiv, abs/1902.10811, 2019. 1
Pierre H. Richemond, Jean­Bastien Grill, Florent Altché, C. Tallec, Florian Strub, A. Brock,
S. Smith, Soham De, Razvan Pascanu, B. Piot, and Michal Valko. Byol works even
without batch statistics. ArXiv, abs/2010.10241, 2020. 53
H. Robbins. A stochastic approximation method. Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 22:
400–407, 2007. 10
S. Ross, G. Gordon, and J. Bagnell.
A reduction of imitation learning and structured
prediction to no­regret online learning. In AISTATS, 2011. 67
Sebastian Ruder.
An overview of gradient descent optimization algorithms.
ArXiv,
abs/1609.04747, 2016. 10
Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma,
Zhiheng Huang, Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, Alexander C. Berg,
78
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:87==
and Li Fei­Fei.
ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge.
International
Journal of Computer Vision (IJCV), 115(3):211–252, 2015. doi: 10.1007/s11263­015­
0816­y. 1, 18, 27
F. Sadeghi and S. Levine. Cad2rl: Real single­image flight without a single real image.
ArXiv, abs/1611.04201, 2017. 2, 19
Ahmad El Sallab, M. Abdou, E. Perot, and S. Yogamani. Deep reinforcement learning
framework for autonomous driving. ArXiv, abs/1704.02532, 2017. 1
Andrew M. Saxe, James L. McClelland, and S. Ganguli. Exact solutions to the nonlinear
dynamics of learning in deep linear neural networks. CoRR, abs/1312.6120, 2014. 92
John Schulman, P. Moritz, S. Levine, Michael I. Jordan, and P. Abbeel. High­dimensional
continuous control using generalized advantage estimation. CoRR, abs/1506.02438,
2016. 7
John Schulman, P. Abbeel, and Xi Chen. Equivalence between policy gradients and soft
q­learning. ArXiv, abs/1704.06440, 2017a. 11
John Schulman, F. Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov. Proximal policy
optimization algorithms. ArXiv, abs/1707.06347, 2017b. 11
Max Schwarzer, Ankesh Anand, Rishab Goel, R Devon Hjelm, Aaron Courville, and Philip
Bachman. Data­efficient reinforcement learning with momentum predictive representa­
tions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.05929, 2020. 51
Ramanan Sekar, Oleh Rybkin, Kostas Daniilidis, Pieter Abbeel, Danijar Hafner, and
Deepak Pathak. Planning to explore via self­supervised world models. In ICML, 2020.
3, 22
Pierre Sermanet, Corey Lynch, Yevgen Chebotar, Jasmine Hsu, Eric Jang, S. Schaal,
and S. Levine. Time­contrastive networks : Self­supervised learning from pixels. 2017.
16
V. Shankar, Achal Dave, Rebecca Roelofs, D. Ramanan, B. Recht, and L. Schmidt. A
systematic framework for natural perturbations from videos. ArXiv, abs/1906.02168,
2019. 2, 19
Mahmood Sharif, Sruti Bhagavatula, L. Bauer, and M. Reiter. Accessorize to a crime:
Real and stealthy attacks on state­of­the­art face recognition. Proceedings of the 2016
ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, 2016. 1
Evan Shelhamer, Parsa Mahmoudieh, Max Argus, and Trevor Darrell. Loss is its own
reward: Self­supervision for reinforcement learning. ArXiv, abs/1612.07307, 2017. 22
Baifeng Shi, Judy Hoffman, Kate Saenko, Trevor Darrell, and Huijuan Xu. Auxiliary task
reweighting for minimum­data learning. ArXiv, abs/2010.08244, 2020. 67
Assaf Shocher, Nadav Cohen, and Michal Irani. ”zero­shot” super­resolution using deep
internal learning, 2017. 21
Assaf Shocher, S. Bagon, Phillip Isola, and M. Irani. Ingan: Capturing and remapping the
”dna” of a natural image. arXiv: Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2018. 21
M. Siam, Sara Elkerdawy, Martin Jägersand, and S. Yogamani. Deep semantic segmen­
tation for automated driving: Taxonomy, roadmap and challenges. 2017 IEEE 20th
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
79
==PAGE:88==
International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC), pp. 1–8, 2017.
1
D. Silver, G. Lever, N. Heess, T. Degris, Daan Wierstra, and Martin A. Riedmiller. Deter­
ministic policy gradient algorithms. In ICML, 2014. 10
D. Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J. Maddison, A. Guez, L. Sifre, George van den Driessche,
Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Vedavyas Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot,
S. Dieleman, Dominik Grewe, John Nham, Nal Kalchbrenner, Ilya Sutskever, T. Lillicrap,
M. Leach, K. Kavukcuoglu, T. Graepel, and Demis Hassabis. Mastering the game of
go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature, 529:484–489, 2016. 1
B.F. Skinner. The behavior of organisms: An experimental analysis. New York, London:
D. Appleton­Century Company, Incorporated, 1938. 5
T. Söderström. Linear Quadratic Gaussian Control, pp. 319–365. Springer, 2002. ISBN
978­1­4471­0101­7. 14
Xingyou Song, Yiding Jiang, Stephen Tu, Yilun Du, and Behnam Neyshabur. Observa­
tional overfitting in reinforcement learning. arXiv, abs/1912.02975, 2020. 28, 52
Bradly C. Stadie, S. Levine, and P. Abbeel. Incentivizing exploration in reinforcement
learning with deep predictive models. ArXiv, abs/1507.00814, 2015. 22
Austin Stone, Oscar Ramirez, Kurt Konolige, and Rico Jonschkowski. The distracting
control suite – a challenging benchmark for reinforcement learning from pixels. ArXiv,
abs/2101.02722, 2021. 68
Adam Stooke, Kimin Lee, Pieter Abbeel, and Michael Laskin. Decoupling representation
learning from reinforcement learning. arXiv:2004.14990, 2020. 3, 23, 27, 35, 38, 51,
59
Y. Sun, E. Tzeng, Trevor Darrell, and Alexei A. Efros. Unsupervised domain adaptation
through self­supervision. ArXiv, abs/1909.11825, 2019. 21
Y. Sun, X. Wang, Zhuang Liu, J. Miller, Alexei A. Efros, and M. Hardt. Test­time training
with self­supervision for generalization under distribution shifts. In ICML, 2020. 20, 21,
22, 35, 66, 67
Ilya Sutskever, J. Martens, G. Dahl, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. On the importance of initial­
ization and momentum in deep learning. In ICML, 2013. 10
R. Sutton. Integrated architectures for learning, planning, and reacting based on approx­
imating dynamic programming. In ML, 1990. 17
R. Sutton, David A. McAllester, Satinder Singh, and Y. Mansour. Policy gradient methods
for reinforcement learning with function approximation. In NIPS, 1999. 7
Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. The
MIT Press, second edition, 2018. 6, 9, 12
Christian Szegedy, Wei Liu, Yangqing Jia, Pierre Sermanet, Scott Reed, Dragomir
Anguelov, Dumitru Erhan, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Andrew Rabinovich. Going deeper
with convolutions. 2015 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), pp. 1–9, 2015. 37
Yuval Tassa, Yotam Doron, Alistair Muldal, Tom Erez, Yazhe Li, Diego de Las Casas,
David Budden, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Josh Merel, Andrew Lefrancq, Timothy Lillicrap,
80
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:89==
and Martin Riedmiller. DeepMind control suite. Technical report, DeepMind, January
2018. 3, 27, 28, 29, 36, 57, 85, 87
Yuval Tassa, Saran Tunyasuvunakool, Alistair Muldal, Yotam Doron, Siqi Liu, Steven Bo­
hez, Josh Merel, Tom Erez, Timothy Lillicrap, and Nicolas Heess. dm_control: Software
and tasks for continuous control, 2020. 27
Yonglong Tian, Dilip Krishnan, and Phillip Isola. Contrastive multiview coding. In ECCV,
2020a. 16, 17, 18, 20, 94
Yonglong Tian, C. Sun, Ben Poole, Dilip Krishnan, C. Schmid, and Phillip Isola. What
makes for good views for contrastive learning. ArXiv, abs/2005.10243, 2020b. 55
Yuandong Tian, Lantao Yu, Xinlei Chen, and S. Ganguli. Understanding self­supervised
learning with dual deep networks. ArXiv, abs/2010.00578, 2020c. 53
J. Tobin, Rachel H Fong, Alex Ray, J. Schneider, W. Zaremba, and P. Abbeel. Domain
randomization for transferring deep neural networks from simulation to the real world.
2017 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS),
pp. 23–30, 2017. 2, 19, 55
E. Todorov, T. Erez, and Y. Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model­based control.
In 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp.
5026–5033, 2012. doi: 10.1109/IROS.2012.6386109. 31, 85
J. Tremblay, Aayush Prakash, David Acuna, M. Brophy, V. Jampani, C. Anil, T. To, Eric
Cameracci, Shaad Boochoon, and Stan Birchfield. Training deep networks with syn­
thetic data: Bridging the reality gap by domain randomization. 2018 IEEE/CVF Con­
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops (CVPRW), pp. 1082–
10828, 2018. 19
Sam Verboven, M. H. Chaudhary, Jeroen Berrevoets, and W. Verbeke.
Hydalearn:
Highly dynamic task weighting for multi­task learning with auxiliary tasks.
ArXiv,
abs/2008.11643, 2020. 67
Pascal Vincent, H. Larochelle, Yoshua Bengio, and Pierre­Antoine Manzagol. Extracting
and composing robust features with denoising autoencoders. In ICML ’08, 2008. 16
Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel R. Bow­
man. Glue: A multi­task benchmark and analysis platform for natural language under­
standing. In BlackboxNLP@EMNLP, 2018. 27
Alex Wang, Yada Pruksachatkun, Nikita Nangia, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix
Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel R. Bowman. Superglue: A stickier benchmark for general­
purpose language understanding systems. ArXiv, abs/1905.00537, 2019. 27
Xiaolong Wang and Abhinav Gupta. Unsupervised learning of visual representations us­
ing videos. In ICCV, 2015. 16, 17
Christopher Watkins and Peter Dayan. Technical note: Q­learning. Machine Learning, 8:
279–292, 05 1992. doi: 10.1007/BF00992698. 8, 9
Ronald J. Williams. Simple statistical gradient­following algorithms for connectionist rein­
forcement learning. Mach. Learn., 1992. 7
Mitchell Wortsman, Kiana Ehsani, M. Rastegari, Ali Farhadi, and R. Mottaghi. Learn­
ing to learn how to learn: Self­adaptive visual navigation using meta­learning. 2019
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
81
==PAGE:90==
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 6743–
6752, 2019. 21, 67
Zhirong Wu, Yuanjun Xiong, S. Yu, and D. Lin. Unsupervised feature learning via non­
parametric instance­level discrimination. ArXiv, abs/1805.01978, 2018. 16, 18
Marek Wydmuch, Michał Kempka, and Wojciech Jaśkowski. Vizdoom competitions: Play­
ing doom from pixels. IEEE Transactions on Games, 2018. 27, 30, 36, 45
L. Xiao, Y. Bahri, Jascha Sohl­Dickstein, S. Schoenholz, and Jeffrey Pennington. Dy­
namical isometry and a mean field theory of cnns: How to train 10, 000­layer vanilla
convolutional neural networks. ArXiv, abs/1806.05393, 2018. 92
Tete Xiao, Xiaolong Wang, Alexei A. Efros, and Trevor Darrell. What should not be con­
trastive in contrastive learning. ArXiv, abs/2008.05659, 2020. 55
W. Yan, Ashwin Vangipuram, P. Abbeel, and Lerrel Pinto. Learning predictive represen­
tations for deformable objects using contrastive estimation. ArXiv, abs/2003.05436,
2020. 22
Jiachen Yang, Brenden K. Petersen, H. Zha, and D. Faissol. Single episode policy transfer
in reinforcement learning. ArXiv, abs/1910.07719, 2020a. 21, 68
Ruihan Yang, Huazhe Xu, Yi Wu, and Xiaolong Wang. Multi­task reinforcement learning
with soft modularization. ArXiv, abs/2003.13661, 2020b. 67
Denis Yarats, Amy Zhang, Ilya Kostrikov, Brandon Amos, Joelle Pineau, and Rob Fergus.
Improving sample efficiency in model­free reinforcement learning from images. 2019.
3, 23, 27, 35, 36, 38, 68, 88
L. Yen­Chen, A. Zeng, S. Song, P. Isola, and T. Y. Lin. Learning to see before learning
to act: Visual pre­training for manipulation.
In 2020 IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 7286–7293, 2020. doi: 10.1109/ICRA40945.
2020.9197331. 23, 62, 66
Tianhe Yu, Saurabh Kumar, A. Gupta, Sergey Levine, Karol Hausman, and Chelsea Finn.
Gradient surgery for multi­task learning. ArXiv, abs/2001.06782, 2020a. 67
Tianhe Yu, G. Thomas, Lantao Yu, S. Ermon, J. Zou, Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn, and
Tengyu Ma. Mopo: Model­based offline policy optimization. ArXiv, abs/2005.13239,
2020b. 22, 66
A. Zamir, Alexander Sax, Bokui Shen, L. Guibas, Jitendra Malik, and S. Savarese.
Taskonomy: Disentangling task transfer learning. 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Com­
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3712–3722, 2018. 20, 35
A. Zamir, Alexander Sax, Teresa Yeo, O. Kar, Nikhil Cheerla, Rohan Suri, Zhangjie
Cao, J. Malik, and L. Guibas. Robust learning through cross­task consistency. 2020
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp.
11194–11203, 2020. 20
Albert Zhan, P. Zhao, Lerrel Pinto, P. Abbeel, and Michael Laskin. A framework for efficient
robotic manipulation. 2020. 23, 62
Marvin Zhang, Henrik Marklund, Abhishek Gupta, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn.
Adaptive risk minimization: A meta­learning approach for tackling group shift. ArXiv,
abs/2007.02931, 2020a. 21, 66
82
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:91==
Q. Zhang, Tete Xiao, Alexei A. Efros, Lerrel Pinto, and Xiaolong Wang. Learning cross­
domain correspondence for control with dynamics cycle­consistency. 2020b. 24, 66
Richard Zhang. Making convolutional networks shift­invariant again. In ICML, 2019. 2
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, and Alexei A. Efros. Split­brain autoencoders: Unsupervised
learning by cross­channel prediction. 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 645–654, 2017. 14, 16, 20
Aurick Zhou and Sergey Levine. Amortized conditional normalized maximum likelihood.
ArXiv, abs/2011.02696, 2020. 21
Bolei Zhou, Agata Lapedriza, Aditya Khosla, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. Places: A
10 million image database for scene recognition. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence, 2017. 55, 86, 89
Tinghui Zhou, Richard Tucker, John Flynn, Graham Fyffe, and Noah Snavely. Stereo
magnification: Learning view synthesis using multiplane images. ACM Trans. Graph.
(Proc. SIGGRAPH), 37, 2018. 29, 85, 86, 90
H. Zhu, A. Gupta, A. Rajeswaran, S. Levine, and V. Kumar.
Dexterous manipulation
with deep reinforcement learning: Efficient, general, and low­cost. 2019 International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 3651–3657, 2019. 1
Yuke Zhu, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Eric Kolve, Joseph J Lim, Abhinav Gupta, Li Fei­Fei, and
Ali Farhadi. Target­driven visual navigation in indoor scenes using deep reinforcement
learning. In ICRA, pp. 3357–3364. IEEE, 2017. 1
Yuke Zhu, Josiah Wong, Ajay Mandlekar, and Roberto Martín­Martín.
robosuite: A
modular simulation framework and benchmark for robot learning.
In arXiv preprint
arXiv:2009.12293, 2020. 27
Karl Johan Åström. Optimal control of markov processes with incomplete state information
i. 10:174–205, 1965. ISSN 0022­247X. doi: 10.1016/0022­247X(65)90154­X. 6
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
83
==PAGE:92==
84
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:93==
A
DMControl­GB Usage and
Implementation Details
The DMControl Generalization Benchmark (DMControl­GB) (Hansen & Wang, 2020) is a
benchmark for perceptual generalization in continuous control from visual observations,
based on DMControl (Tassa et al., 2018). It features a variety of challenging and diverse
tasks reflecting real applications such as robotic locomotion, manipulation, and grasp­
ing, and measures generalization to diverse visual changes of incremental difficulty. In
DMControl­GB, agents are trained in a single, fixed environment and their generaliza­
tion is evaluated on a wide variety of test environments. DMControl­GB features two
distinct test distributions, randomized colors and video backgrounds, and each distribu­
tion comes in easy and hard variants. The randomized colors distributions are sets of
100 environments with distinct colors of background, floor, and the agent itself, sam­
pled from a truncated Gaussian distribution centered at the original color values. The
video distributions consist of 10 (easy) and 100 (hard) unique video backgrounds; easy
videos are collected in the wild, and hard videos are a subset of the RealEstate10K (Zhou
et al., 2018) dataset. Samples from each of the test distributions are shown in Figure 4.3,
while the documentation and open­sourced implementation of DMControl­GB is available
at https://github.com/nicklashansen/dmcontrol-generalization-benchmark. In this appendix,
we aim to provide more insight into the usage and design of DMControl­GB.
Dependencies.
DMControl­GB is a generalization benchmark for the continuous control
tasks proposed in DMControl (Tassa et al., 2018). DMControl itself is built with MuJoCo
(Todorov et al., 2012), a proprietary physics engine commonly used in robotics and rein­
forcement learning research, and a local MuJoCo installation and accompanying license
is therefore required in order to use DMControl­GB. All of provided algorithms are imple­
mented in PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) and require at least one GPU with CUDA version
≥9.2 for policy learning and hardware­accelerated environment rendering. While DM­
Control and DMControl­GB allow for off­screen software rendering through mesa APIs, we
strongly advise to use hardware­accelerated rendering tools such as GLFW or EGL in visual
RL, as rendering may otherwise become a significant bottleneck. DMControl­GB addi­
tionally support environment monitoring tools that can export renderings to MP4­videos;
our monitoring tools require ffmpeg. DMControl­GB by default uses the dcm2gym Ope­
nAI Gym­like wrapper for DMControl, which is available at https://github.com/denisyarats/
dmc2gym.
Setup.
Assuming valid local installations of Git, Anaconda and MuJoCo (including li­
cense), all dependencies can be installed with the following UNIX commands:
$ git clone https://github.com/nicklashansen/ \
dmcontrol-generalization-benchmark.git
$ cd dmcontrol-generalization-benchmark
$ conda env create -f setup/conda.yml
$ conda activate dmcgen
$ sh setup/install_envs.sh
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
85
==PAGE:94==
Datasets.
Part of DMControl­GB and its provided algorithms rely on external datasets.
SODA uses the Places (Zhou et al., 2017) dataset for data augmentation, which can be
downloaded by running
$ wget http://data.csail.mit.edu/places/places365/ \
places365standard_easyformat.tar
You should familiarize yourself with their terms before downloading. You can access their
terms of usage here: http://places2.csail.mit.edu/download.html.
After downloading and extracting the data, add the dataset directory to the data_dirs list
found in src/augmentations.py. All video files required for running the video background
experiments of DMControl­GB are included in the repository, namely in the src/env/
directory. The video_hard environment uses a subset of the RealEstate10K (Zhou et al.,
2018) dataset for background rendering.
Training and evaluation.
The scripts directory contains training and evaluation bash
scripts for all the included algorithms. Alternatively, the python training and evaluation
scripts can be called directly, e.g. for training a policy using SODA on the walker_walk
task with default hyper­parameters call
$ python3 src/train.py \
--domain walker \
--task walk \
--algorithm soda \
--aux_lr 3e-4 \
--seed 0
Note that both the training script and test script require an integer seed argument. In our
experiments, we use seeds [0, 9] when evaluating across 10 seeds (e.g. in Chapter 5),
and seeds [0, 4] when evaluating across 5 seeds (e.g. in Chapter 6). Running the training
script should give an output of the form:
Working directory: logs/walker_walk/soda/0
Evaluating: logs/walker_walk/soda/0
| eval | S: 0 | ER: 26.2285 | ERTEST: 25.3730
| train | E: 1 | S: 250 | D: 70.1 s | R: 0.0000 | ALOSS: 0.0000 | \
CLOSS: 0.0000 | AUXLOSS: 0.0000
where ER and ERTEST correspond to the mean episodic return in the training and test envi­
ronments, respectively. By default, the test environment used for continuous evaluation is
the color_hard distribution. Other distributions can be selected with the eval_mode argu­
ment, which accepts one of {train, color_easy, color_hard, video_easy, video_hard}.
Training or evaluation can be executed on a specific GPU by providing the identifier for
the GPU, e.g.
$ CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES=0 python3 src/eval.py \
--algorithm soda \
--eval_episodes 100 \
--seed 0
to run evaluation on a GPU with the identifier 0.
86
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:95==
Tasks.
DMControl­GB is based on DMControl (Tassa et al., 2018) and provides the
same tasks. In this thesis work we consider a total of 9 tasks from DMControl, which we
describe as follows:
• walker, walk (a ∈R6). A planar walker that is rewarded for walking at a constant
pace.
• walker, stand (a ∈R6). A planar walker that is rewarded for standing with an
upright torso at a constant minimum height.
• cartpole, swingup (a ∈R). Swing up and balance an unactuated pole by applying
forces to a cart at its base. The agent is rewarded for balancing the pole within some
threshold angle.
• cartpole, balance (a ∈R). Balance an unactuated pole by applying forces to a
cart at its base. The agent is rewarded for balancing the pole within some threshold
angle.
• ball in cup, catch (a ∈R2). An actuated planar receptacle is to swing and catch
a ball attached by a string to its bottom. The reward signal is sparse: 1 when the
ball is in the cup and 0 otherwise.
• finger, spin (a ∈R2). A toy manipulation problem with a planar 3 degrees­of­
freedom finger. The task is to continually spin a free body. The reward signal is
sparse: 1 when the finger is rotating and 0 otherwise.
• finger, turn_easy (a ∈R2). A toy manipulation problem with a planar 3 degrees­
of­freedom finger. The task is to turn a body to a target rotation indicated by a red
target. The reward signal is sparse: 1 when the body is in its target position and 0
otherwise.
• reacher, easy (a ∈R2). A two­link planar reaching task with a randomized target
location indicated by a red target. The reward signal is sparse: 1 when the end­
effector is at the target location and 0 otherwise.
• cheetah_run (a ∈R6). A planar running biped that is rewarded proportionally to its
forward velocity.
Videos of all considered DMControl tasks are available on YouTube at https://www.youtube.
com/watch?v=rAai4QzcYbs, and we provide additional videos of DMControl­GB bench­
marks at https://nicklashansen.github.io/PAD and https://nicklashansen.github.io/SODA.
Compute requirements.
Reinforcement learning from visual observations is compu­
tationally costly. Exact training times and memory requirements depend on the specific
hardware, algorithm, environment, task, and hyper­parameters. However, one can rea­
sonably expect a training time of 16­48 hours per run (random seed) on most tasks from
DMControl­GB using recent hardware and default hyper­parameters for any of the pro­
vided algorithms. In general, algorithms that optimize auxiliary objectives during training
take longer than those that do not, e.g. SAC and RAD. Additionally, domain randomiza­
tion baselines are generally slow due to periodic re­initialization of the simulation at the
beginning of each episode. Tasks that use a higher frame skip (action repeat) are also
faster than those skipping few frames. Because all of the provided algorithms utilize a re­
play buffer, storing increasingly many image observations throughout training requires a
large computer memory, even when storing observations as 8­bit integers (UINT8). SODA
requires approximately 132 GB of RAM for training and the remaining algorithms require
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
87
==PAGE:96==
approximately 96 GB of RAM. Although the replay buffer is gradually filled with obser­
vations over time, DMControl­GB automatically pre­allocates all required memory to the
training process to decrease chance of interference with other running processes and to
signal requirements to any system tools that may monitor usage. Evaluation requires ap­
proximately 6 GB of RAM, and GPUs used for training and evaluation require at least 4
GB of VRAM.
Algorithms.
DMControl­GB provides official implementations of the algorithms proposed
in this thesis, PAD and SODA, as well as recent methods for data augmentation, gener­
alization, and representation learning in RL. All algorithms are implemented in a unified
framework that uses SAC as base algorithm and a standardized architecture and set of
hyper­parameters as shown in Table 6.1. We list the provided algorithms as follows:
• SODA (Hansen & Wang, 2020)
• PAD (Hansen et al., 2020)
• RAD (Laskin et al., 2020a)
• CURL (Laskin et al., 2020b)
• SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018b)
Implementations of SODA and PAD are provided as results of our thesis work. RAD
is implemented using a hardware­accelerated random cropping implementation devel­
oped for PAD and SODA, and the CURL implementation is based on the official imple­
mentation available at https://github.com/MishaLaskin/curl. The SAC base algorithm that
all methods are built off of is based on the implementation of SAC provided by the au­
thors of SAC+AE (Yarats et al., 2019) which is available at https://github.com/denisyarats/
pytorch_sac_ae. Implementations of all algorithms are available in DMControl­GB under
the src/algorithms directory, and we discuss them in detail in Appendix B.
Data augmentations.
DMControl­GB provides hardware­accelerated implementations
of random cropping and the novel random overlay data augmentation using PyTorch.
Pseudo­code for the random cropping data augmentation is as follows:
def random_crop_cuda(x, size=84):
"""Vectorized CUDA implementation of random crop"""
assert isinstance(x, torch.Tensor) and x.is_cuda, \
'input must be CUDA tensor'
n = x.shape[0]
img_size = x.shape[-1]
crop_max = img_size - size
if crop_max <= 0:
return x
x = x.permute(0, 2, 3, 1)
w1 = torch.LongTensor(n).random_(0, crop_max)
h1 = torch.LongTensor(n).random_(0, crop_max)
windows = view_as_windows_cuda(x, (1, size, size, 1))[..., 0,:,:, 0]
cropped = windows[torch.arange(n), w1, h1]
return cropped
88
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:97==
where view_as_windows_cuda is a function that can be written in pseudo­code as
def view_as_windows_cuda(x, window_shape):
"""PyTorch CUDA-enabled implementation of view_as_windows"""
assert isinstance(window_shape, tuple) and \
len(window_shape) == len(x.shape), \
'window_shape must be a tuple with same number of dimensions as x'
slices = tuple(slice(None, None, st) for st in torch.ones(4).long())
win_indices_shape = [
x.size(0),
x.size(1)-int(window_shape[1]),
x.size(2)-int(window_shape[2]),
x.size(3)
]
new_shape = tuple(list(win_indices_shape) + list(window_shape))
strides = tuple(list(x[slices].stride()) + list(x.stride()))
return x.as_strided(new_shape, strides)
Likewise, PyTorch­like pseudo­code for the random overlay data augmentation using the
Places (Zhou et al., 2017) dataset is as follows:
def random_overlay(x):
"""Randomly overlay an image from Places"""
alpha = 0.5
if places_dataloader is None:
_load_places(batch_size=x.size(0), image_size=x.size(-1))
imgs = _get_places_batch(batch_size=x.size(0)) \
.repeat(1, x.size(1)//3, 1, 1)
return ((1-alpha)*(x/255.) + (alpha)*imgs)*255.
PAD additionally creates batches of augmented observations for self­supervised learning
at test­time. PyTorch­like pseudo­code for this functionality is as follows:
def prepare_pad_batch(obs, next_obs, action, batch_size=32):
"""Prepare batch for self-supervised policy adaptation at test-time"""
batch_obs = batch_from_obs(torch.from_numpy(obs) \
.cuda(), batch_size)
batch_next_obs = batch_from_obs(torch.from_numpy(next_obs) \
.cuda(), batch_size)
batch_action = torch.from_numpy(action) \
.cuda().unsqueeze(0).repeat(batch_size, 1)
return random_crop_cuda(batch_obs), \
random_crop_cuda(batch_next_obs), \
batch_action
where random_crop_cuda is the random cropping function that we previously provided
pseudo­code for. Our implementations of SAC, PAD, and SODA are discussed in more
detail in Appendix B.
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
89
==PAGE:98==
Randomized colors.
We implement both the randomized colors and video background
environments as OpenAI Gym wrappers. We aim to briefly discuss the implementation of
the randomized color wrapper in the following. A complete implementation is available in
the src/env/wrappers.py file of the repository; the randomized color wrapper is named
ColorWrapper. We have generated two data files, color_easy.pt and color_hard.pt,
that are both located in the src/env/data subdirectory, each of which contain a fixed set
of 100 colors sampled from a Gaussian distribution centered at the colors of the original
environment. At each environment reset, we reinitialize the simulator with modified as­
sets, i.e. the original colors have been replaced with a set of colors sampled uniformly
from the corresponding color variant set (i.e. easy or hard). Because DMControl does
not readily support modification of assets, our repository provides custom builds of both
DMControl and dmc2gym that enables control over assets from within the wrapper. Lastly,
we would like to emphasize that the environment sampling is seeded, which ensures re­
producibility of test results across different runs and algorithms.
Video backgrounds.
As in the randomized color environments, we similarly imple­
ment the video background environments as a OpenAI Gym wrapper which we name
VideoWrapper. We refer the reader to src/env/wrappers.py for a complete implemen­
tation but briefly discuss the implementation in the following. Because video assets are
not native to DMControl nor the underlying MuJoCo physics simulator, we choose to first
render observations of the environment and then subsequently manipulate the render­
ing with a video overlay. To reliably manipulate renderings, we use our color wrapper to
initialize the simulation with green screen­esque colors on the elements that we wish to
replace by video, e.g. the skybox and floor. We perform image manipulation on each
frame individually and apply our video overlay on all pixels above a (100, 80, 70) threshold
in HSV color space to threshold color and luminance individually, as is common in image
processing applications. The color_easy set includes 10 videos that we have sourced in­
dependently, whereas the color_hard set uses a 100­video subset of the RealEstate10K
(Zhou et al., 2018) dataset. We include all 110 videos used in our benchmark (located in
src/env/data/video_easy and src/env/data/video_hard, respectively), but only pro­
vide them in a pre­processed format to maintain a lightweight repository. As in the ran­
domized color wrapper, our video sampling is seeded to ensure reproducibility.
90
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:99==
B
Algorithm Implementations
We here aim to provide more insight into the implementation of our proposed algorithms.
Specifically, we discuss the implementations that we have made available at https://
github.com/nicklashansen/dmcontrol-generalization-benchmark under the src/algorithms
directory. All methods are implemented using a Soft Actor­Critic (SAC) (Haarnoja et al.,
2018b) as base algorithm, which is given in sac.py. We implement all network architec­
tures using a common structure of components that we provide in modules.py and refer
to with the shorthand m in the following. Our network architectures can be summarized as
the following set of building blocks:
• m.SharedCNN: a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) with parameters shared be­
tween the actor­critic and optionally and self­supervised task. By default, it contains
8 convolutional layers in PAD and 11 layers in all other methods.
• m.HeadCNN: a CNN that may share parameters between the actor and the critic, but
does not share parameters with any self­supervised task. By default, HeadCNN is
simply the identity function, but in PAD it contains 3 convolutional layers such that
each network branch has 11 convolutional layers in total.
• m.RLProjection: a projection layer that maps extracted feature maps of previous
CNN layers onto a smaller­dimensional latent space. By default, RLProjection
contains a single linear layer followed by a LayerNorm (Ba et al., 2016) normalization
layer that does not use batch statistics for normalization.
• m.Encoder: a collection of encoder components that defines the SharedCNN, HeadCNN,
and RLProjection of a network branch.
• m.Actor: the actor (policy) of the actor­critic architecture. It is implemented as an
MLP and uses a specified Encoder to extract features.
• m.Critic: the critic (value functions) of the actor­critic architecture. It is imple­
mented as an MLP and uses a specified Encoder to extract features.
Aside from the common components listed above, we additionally provide modules for
algorithm­specific components such as m.InverseDynamics, m.CURLHead, m.SODAMLP, and
m.SODAProjection. We refer readers to the repository for the full source­code, but pro­
vide PyTorch­like pseudo­code for the implementation of the m.Critic component:
class Critic(nn.Module):
def __init__(self, encoder, action_shape, hidden_dim):
super().__init__()
self.encoder = encoder
self.Q1 = QFunction(
self.encoder.out_dim, action_shape[0], hidden_dim
)
self.Q2 = QFunction(
self.encoder.out_dim, action_shape[0], hidden_dim
)
self.apply(weight_init)
def forward(self, x, action, detach=False):
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
91
==PAGE:100==
x = self.encoder(x, detach)
return self.Q1(x, action), self.Q2(x, action)
where QFunction is also an m sub­component defined as
class QFunction(nn.Module):
def __init__(self, obs_dim, action_dim, hidden_dim):
super().__init__()
self.trunk = nn.Sequential(
nn.Linear(obs_dim + action_dim, hidden_dim), nn.ReLU(),
nn.Linear(hidden_dim, hidden_dim), nn.ReLU(),
nn.Linear(hidden_dim, 1)
)
self.apply(weight_init)
def forward(self, obs, action):
assert obs.size(0) == action.size(0)
return self.trunk(torch.cat([obs, action], dim=1))
for a weight initialization function weight_init. By default, we apply an orthogonal initial­
ization to all network parameters (Saxe et al., 2014; Xiao et al., 2018). Algorithm­specific
update rules are implemented by extending the update rule of SAC given in pseudo­code:
def update(self, replay_buffer):
obs, action, reward, next_obs, not_done = replay_buffer.sample()
self.update_critic(obs, action, reward, next_obs, not_done)
if step % self.actor_update_freq == 0:
self.update_actor_and_alpha(obs)
if step % self.critic_target_update_freq == 0:
self.soft_update_critic_target()
which corresponds exactly to Algorithm 2 from Section 2.1.3. The function update_critic
optimizes JQ1(ν; θ) + JQ2(ν; θ) for a batch of transitions ν sampled from a replay buffer
B, update_actor_and_alpha optimizes Jπ(ν; θ) and Jα(ν; θ) sequentially, and finally the
function soft_update_critic_target then updates the target Q­function parameters ¯θ1, ¯θ2
using exponential moving averages (EMA) of θ1, θ2, respectively. Readers are referred
to sac.py for the complete implementation of SAC. We now aim to provide PyTorch­like
pseudo­code for the algorithm­specific update rules of PAD and SODA.
For an inverse dynamics model implemented as a module
class InverseDynamics(nn.Module):
def __init__(self, encoder, action_shape, hidden_dim):
super().__init__()
self.encoder = encoder
self.mlp = nn.Sequential(
nn.Linear(2*encoder.out_dim, hidden_dim), nn.ReLU(),
nn.Linear(hidden_dim, hidden_dim), nn.ReLU(),
nn.Linear(hidden_dim, action_shape[0])
)
self.apply(weight_init)
92
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:101==
def forward(self, x, x_next):
h = self.encoder(x)
h_next = self.encoder(x_next)
joint_h = torch.cat([h, h_next], dim=1)
return self.mlp(joint_h)
we define the PAD update rule as
def update_inverse_dynamics(self, obs, obs_next, action):
pred_action = self.pad_head(obs, obs_next)
pad_loss = F.mse_loss(pred_action, action)
self.pad_optimizer.zero_grad()
pad_loss.backward()
self.pad_optimizer.step()
where pad_head is an instance of m.InverseDynamics and update_inverse_dynamics
is called at every iteration of the PAD algorithm as specified in Algorithm 3. SODA can
similarly be written as the PyTorch­like pseudo­code update rule
def update_soda(self, replay_buffer):
x = replay_buffer.sample_soda(self.soda_batch_size)
aug_x = x.clone()
x = augmentations.random_crop(x)
aug_x = augmentations.random_crop(aug_x)
aug_x = augmentations.random_overlay(aug_x)
soda_loss = self.compute_soda_loss(aug_x, x)
self.soda_optimizer.zero_grad()
soda_loss.backward()
self.soda_optimizer.step()
utils.soft_update_params(
self.predictor, self.predictor_target,
self.soda_tau
)
where compute_soda_loss is the LSODA defined in Equation 6.2. In pseudo­code, Equa­
tion 6.2 can be defined as
def compute_soda_loss(self, x0, x1):
h0 = self.predictor(x0)
with torch.no_grad():
h1 = self.predictor_target.encoder(x1)
h0 = F.normalize(h0, p=2, dim=1)
h1 = F.normalize(h1, p=2, dim=1)
return F.mse_loss(h0, h1)
where predictor is an instance of m.SODAPredictor and predictor_target is an EMA of
predictor updated using the update rule from Equation 6.1. Note that the stop­gradient
operation torch.no_grad stops gradients from flowing back into the target network during
back­propagation, i.e. only the online network defined in predictor is updated through
gradient descent. The SODA update rule here corresponds exactly to that of Algorithm 4.
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
93
==PAGE:102==
Although not explicitly part of our work, we also provide implementations of CURL (Laskin
et al., 2020b) and RAD (Laskin et al., 2020a). Our implementation of CURL is based
on the official implementation available at https://github.com/MishaLaskin/curl, and our
implementation of RAD uses the hardware­accelerated random cropping that we discuss
in Appendix A. The instance­based contrastive learning objective that CURL employs is
defined in Equation 2.27 and can be implemented efficiently using a multi­class cross­
entropy loss with the identity matrix as labels. The authors however ablate the choice of
similarity measure f and find a simple bilinear model f(v1, v2) = g(v1) W g(v2) (using the
notation introduced in Section 2.2.2) with learnable parameters W to be more effective
than the cosine similarity from Equation 2.29 that Tian et al. (2020a) employs. The CURL
update rule can therefore be written as follows in a PyTorch­like pseudo­code:
def update_curl(self, x, x_pos):
z_a = self.curl_head.encoder(x)
with torch.no_grad():
z_pos = self.critic_target.encoder(x_pos)
logits = self.curl_head.compute_logits(z_a, z_pos)
labels = torch.arange(logits.shape[0]).long().cuda()
curl_loss = F.cross_entropy(logits, labels)
self.curl_optimizer.zero_grad()
curl_loss.backward()
self.curl_optimizer.step()
where logits correspond to the output of the bilinear model f as previously described,
curl_head is an instance of m.CURLHead, and critic_target.encoder is an EMA of the
critic’s encoder. Note that CURL uses the same projection parameters for the CURL
latent space and the critic latent space, whereas our implementation of SODA uses sep­
arate projections for self­supervision and for the actor­critic network. We empirically find
separate projections to work better since the projection is a tight bottleneck, but we here
implement CURL as proposed in the original implementation. To generate the two views
v1, v2 that we denote as x, x_pos in the above pseudo­code, we apply the same tempo­
rally consistent random cropping as in RAD to two copies of an observation, which gives
us two views with different crops.
We provide a common API for all the implemented algorithms, where each algorithm can
be instantiated through the command­line argument algorithm:
algorithm = {
'sac': SAC,
'rad': RAD,
'curl': CURL,
'pad': PAD,
'soda': SODA
}
def make_agent(obs_shape, action_shape, args):
return algorithm[args.algorithm](obs_shape, action_shape, args)
The reader is referred to src/arguments.py for a full list of arguments.
94
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:103==
C
Pre­print: Self­Supervised Policy
Adaptation during Deployment
In this appendix, we provide a pre­print of the paper surrounding our PAD method pro­
posed in Chapter 5. The authors and their affiliations are listed below in their entirety.
Affiliations are separated by semi­colons.
• Nicklas Hansen (UC San Diego; Technical University of Denmark)
• Rishabh Jangir (UC San Diego)
• Yu Sun (UC Berkeley)
• Guillem Alenya (IRI, CSIC­UPC)
• Pieter Abbeel (UC Berkeley)
• Alexei A. Efros (UC Berkeley)
• Lerrel Pinto (NYU)
• Xiaolong Wang (UC San Diego)
The provided pre­print is dated December 10, 2020, and contains a total of 17 pages
including its own references and appendices. Work on this paper was initiated during
Nicklas Hansen’s stay at UC Berkeley and the Berkeley Artificial Intelligence Research
(BAIR) Lab, and was completed as part of this thesis.
We additionally provide supplementary material on the official project webpage: https://
nicklashansen.github.io/PAD, and an open­sourced implementation of PAD as well as the
complete DMControl­GB benchmark is made available here: https://github.com/nicklashansen/
dmcontrol-generalization-benchmark.
Our paper can be cited as follows:
@article{hansen2020deployment,
title={Self-Supervised Policy Adaptation during Deployment},
author={Nicklas Hansen and Rishabh Jangir and Yu Sun
and Guillem Alenyà and Pieter Abbeel and Alexei A. Efros
and Lerrel Pinto and Xiaolong Wang},
year={2020},
eprint={2007.04309},
archivePrefix={arXiv},
primaryClass={cs.LG}
}
Correspondence regarding the pre­print should be directed to Nicklas Hansen.
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
95
==PAGE:104==
Preprint. Under review.
SELF-SUPERVISED POLICY ADAPTATION
DURING DEPLOYMENT
Nicklas Hansen12, Rishabh Jangir13, Yu Sun4, Guillem Aleny`a3,
Pieter Abbeel4, Alexei A Efros4, Lerrel Pinto5, Xiaolong Wang1
1UC San Diego
2Technical University of Denmark
3IRI, CSIC-UPC
4UC Berkeley
5NYU
ABSTRACT
In most real world scenarios, a policy trained by reinforcement learning in one en-
vironment needs to be deployed in another, potentially quite different environment.
However, generalization across different environments is known to be hard. A
natural solution would be to keep training after deployment in the new environment,
but this cannot be done if the new environment offers no reward signal. Our work
explores the use of self-supervision to allow the policy to continue training after de-
ployment without using any rewards. While previous methods explicitly anticipate
changes in the new environment, we assume no prior knowledge of those changes
yet still obtain signiﬁcant improvements. Empirical evaluations are performed on
diverse simulation environments from DeepMind Control suite and ViZDoom, as
well as real robotic manipulation tasks in continuously changing environments,
taking observations from an uncalibrated camera. Our method improves general-
ization in 31 out of 36 environments across various tasks and outperforms domain
randomization on a majority of environments.1
1
INTRODUCTION
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved considerable success when combined with convolu-
tional neural networks for deriving actions from image pixels (Mnih et al., 2013; Levine et al., 2016;
Nair et al., 2018; Yan et al., 2020; Andrychowicz et al., 2020). However, one signiﬁcant challenge
for real-world deployment of vision-based RL remains: a policy trained in one environment might
not generalize to other new environments not seen during training. Already hard for RL alone, the
challenge is exacerbated when a policy faces high-dimensional visual inputs.
A well explored class of solutions is to learn robust policies that are simply invariant to changes in
the environment (Rajeswaran et al., 2016; Tobin et al., 2017; Sadeghi & Levine, 2016; Pinto et al.,
2017b; Lee et al., 2019). For example, domain randomization (Tobin et al., 2017; Peng et al., 2018;
Pinto et al., 2017a; Yang et al., 2019) applies data augmentation in a simulated environment to train a
single robust policy, with the hope that the augmented environment covers enough factors of variation
in the test environment. However, this hope may be difﬁcult to realize when the test environment
is truly unknown. With too much randomization, training a policy that can simultaneously ﬁt
numerous augmented environments requires much larger model and sample complexity. With too
little randomization, the actual changes in the test environment might not be covered, and domain
randomization may do more harm than good since the randomized factors are now irrelevant. Both
phenomena have been observed in our experiments. In all cases, this class of solutions requires
human experts to anticipate the changes before the test environment is seen. This cannot scale as
more test environments are added with more diverse changes.
Instead of learning a robust policy invariant to all possible environmental changes, we argue that it is
better for a policy to keep learning during deployment and adapt to its actual new environment. A
naive way to implement this in RL is to ﬁne-tune the policy in the new environment using rewards
as supervision (Rusu et al., 2016; Kalashnikov et al., 2018; Julian et al., 2020). However, while it
is relatively easy to craft a dense reward function during training (Gu et al., 2017; Pinto & Gupta,
2016), during deployment it is often impractical and may require substantial engineering efforts.
1Project page with code: https://nicklashansen.github.io/PAD/
1
arXiv:2007.04309v2  [cs.LG]  10 Dec 2020
==PAGE:105==
Preprint. Under review.
In this paper, we tackle an alternative problem setting in vision-based RL: adapting a pre-trained
policy to an unknown environment without any reward. We do this by introducing self-supervision
to obtain “free” training signal during deployment. Standard self-supervised learning employs
auxiliary tasks designed to automatically create training labels using only the input data (see section 2
for details). Inspired by this, our policy is jointly trained with two objectives: a standard RL
objective and, additionally, a self-supervised objective applied on an intermediate representation of
the policy network. During training, both objectives are active, maximizing expected reward and
simultaneously constraining the intermediate representation through self-supervision. During testing /
deployment, only the self-supervised objective (on the raw observational data) remains active, forcing
the intermediate representation to adapt to the new environment.
We perform experiments both in simulation and with a real robot. In simulation, we evaluate
on two sets of environments: DeepMind Control suite (Tassa et al., 2018) and the CRLMaze
ViZDoom (Lomonaco et al., 2019; Wydmuch et al., 2018) navigation task. We evaluate generalization
by testing in new environments with visual changes unknown during training. Our method improves
generalization in 19 out of 22 test environments across various tasks in DeepMind Control suite, and
in all considered test environments on CRLMaze. Besides simulations, we also perform Sim2Real
transfer on both reaching and pushing tasks with a Kinova Gen3 robot. After training in simulation, we
successfully transfer and adapt policies to 6 different environments, including continuously changing
disco lights, on a real robot operating solely from an uncalibrated camera. In both simulation and real
experiments, our approach outperforms domain randomization in most environments.
2
RELATED WORK
Self-supervised learning is a powerful way to learn visual representations from unlabeled data (Vin-
cent et al., 2008; Doersch et al., 2015; Wang & Gupta, 2015; Zhang et al., 2016; Pathak et al., 2016;
Noroozi & Favaro, 2016; Zhang et al., 2017; Gidaris et al., 2018). Researchers have proposed to
use auxiliary data prediction tasks, such as undoing rotation (Gidaris et al., 2018), solving a jigsaw
puzzle (Noroozi & Favaro, 2016), tracking (Wang et al., 2019), etc. to provide supervision in lieu of
labels. In RL, the idea of learning visual representations and action at the same time has been investi-
gated (Lange & Riedmiller, 2010; Jaderberg et al., 2016; Pathak et al., 2017; Ha & Schmidhuber,
2018; Yarats et al., 2019; Srinivas et al., 2020; Laskin et al., 2020; Yan et al., 2020). For example,
Srinivas et al. (2020) use self-supervised contrastive learning techniques (Chen et al., 2020; H´enaff
et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2018; He et al., 2020) to improve sample efﬁciency in RL by jointly training
the self-supervised objective and RL objective. However, this has not been shown to generalize to
unseen environments. Other works have applied self-supervision for better generalization across envi-
ronments (Pathak et al., 2017; Ebert et al., 2018; Sekar et al., 2020). For example, Pathak et al. (2017)
use a self-supervised prediction task to provide dense rewards for exploration in novel environments.
While results on environment exploration from scratch are encouraging, how to transfer a trained
policy (with extrinsic reward) to a novel environment remains unclear. Hence, these methods are not
directly applicable to the proposed problem in our paper.
Generalization across different distributions is a central challenge in machine learning. In domain
adaptation, target domain data is assumed to be accessible (Geirhos et al., 2018; Tzeng et al., 2017;
Ganin et al., 2016; Gong et al., 2012; Long et al., 2016; Sun et al., 2019; Julian et al., 2020). For
example, Tzeng et al. (2017) use adversarial learning to align the feature representations in both the
source and target domain during training. Similarly, the setting of domain generalization (Ghifary
et al., 2015; Li et al., 2018; Matsuura & Harada, 2019) assumes that all domains are sampled from
the same meta distribution, but the same challenge remains and now becomes generalization across
meta-distributions. Our work focuses instead on the setting of generalizing to truly unseen changes in
the environment which cannot be anticipated at training time.
There have been several recent benchmarks in our setting for image recognition (Hendrycks &
Dietterich, 2018; Recht et al., 2018; 2019; Shankar et al., 2019). For example, in Hendrycks
& Dietterich (2018), a classiﬁer trained on regular images is tested on corrupted images, with
corruption types unknown during training; the method of Hendrycks et al. (2019) is proposed to
improve robustness on this benchmark. Following similar spirit, in the context of RL, domain
randomization (Tobin et al., 2017; Pinto et al., 2017a; Peng et al., 2018; Ramos et al., 2019; Yang
et al., 2019; James et al., 2019) helps a policy trained in simulation to generalize to real robots. For
example, Tobin et al. (2017); Sadeghi & Levine (2016) propose to render the simulation environment
with random textures and train the policy on top. The learned policy is shown to generalize to real
2
==PAGE:106==
Preprint. Under review.
Training
Replay Buffer
Observation
Reinforcement 
Learning
Self-Supervised 
Learning
Policy Adaptation during Deployment
Environment
Observation
Reinforcement 
Learning
Self-Supervised 
Learning
Figure 1. Left: Training before deployment. Observations are sampled from a replay buffer for
off-policy methods and are collected during roll-outs for on-policy methods. We optimize the RL and
self-supervised objectives jointly. Right: Policy adaptation during deployment. Observations are
collected from the test environment online, and we optimize only the self-supervised objective.
robot manipulation tasks. Instead of deploying a ﬁxed policy, we train and adapt the policy to the
new environment with observational data that is naturally revealed during deployment.
Test-time adaptation for deep learning is starting to be used in computer vision (Shocher et al.,
2017; 2018; Bau et al., 2019; Mullapudi et al., 2019; Sun et al., 2020; Wortsman et al., 2018). For
example, Shocher et al. (2018) shows that image super-resolution can be learned at test time (from
scratch) simply by trying to upsample a downsampled version of the input image. Bau et al. (2019)
show that adapting the prior of a generative adversarial network to the statistics of the test image
improves photo manipulation tasks. Our work is closely related to the test-time training method of
Sun et al. (2020), which performs joint optimization of image recognition and self-supervised learning
with rotation prediction (Gidaris et al., 2018), then uses the self-supervised objective to adapt the
representation of individual images during testing. Instead of image recognition, we perform test-time
adaptation for RL with visual inputs in an online fashion. As the agent interacts with an environment,
we keep obtaining new observational data in a stream for training the visual representations.
3
METHOD
In this section, we describe our proposed Policy Adaptation during Deployment (PAD) approach.
It can be implemented on top of any policy network and standard RL algorithm (both on-policy
and off-policy) that can be described by minimizing some RL objective J(θ) w.r.t. the collection of
parameters θ using stochastic gradient descent.
3.1
NETWORK ARCHITECTURE
We design the network architecture to allow the policy and the self-supervised prediction to share
features. For the collection of parameters θ of a given policy network π, we split it sequentially into
θ = (θe, θa), where θe collects the parameters of the feature extractor, and θa is the head that outputs
a distribution over actions. We deﬁne networks πe with parameters θe and πa with parameters θa
such that π(s; θ) = πa(πe(s)), where s represents an image observation. Intuitively, one can think of
πe as a feature extractor, and πa as a controller based on these features. The goal of our method is to
update πe at test-time using gradients from a self-supervised task, such that πe (and consequently πθ)
can generalize. Let πs with parameters θs be the self-supervised prediction head and its collection
of parameters, and the input to πs be the output of πe (as illustrated in Figure 1). In this work, the
self-supervised task is inverse dynamics prediction for control, and rotation prediction for navigation.
3.2
INVERSE DYNAMICS PREDICTION AND ROTATION PREDICTION
At each time step, we always observe a transition sequence in the form of (st, at, st+1), during both
training and testing. Naturally, self-supervision can be derived from taking parts of the sequence
and predicting the rest. An inverse dynamics model takes the states before and after transition, and
predicts the action in between. In this work, the inverse dynamics model πs operates on the feature
space extracted by πe. We can write the inverse dynamics prediction objective formally as
L(θs, θe) = ℓ
 at, πs (πe(st), πe(st+1))

.
(1)
For continuous actions, ℓis the mean squared error between the ground truth and the model output.
For discrete actions, the output is a soft-max distribution over the action space, and ℓis the cross-
3
==PAGE:107==
Preprint. Under review.
entropy loss. Empirically, we ﬁnd this self-supervised task to be most effective with continuous
actions, possibly because inverse dynamics prediction in a small space of discrete actions is not as
challenging. Note that we predict the inverse dynamics instead of the forward dynamics, because
when operating in feature space, the latter can produce trivial solutions such as the constant zero
feature for every state1. If we instead performed prediction with forward dynamics in pixel space, the
task would be extremely challenging given the large uncertainty in pixel prediction.
As an alternative self-supervised task, we use rotation prediction (Gidaris et al., 2018). We rotate
an image by one of 0, 90, 180 and 270 degrees as input to the network, and cast this as a four-way
classiﬁcation problem to determine which one of these four ways the image has been rotated. This
task is shown to be effective for learning representations for object conﬁguration and scene structure,
which is beneﬁcial for visual recognition (Hendrycks et al., 2019; Doersch & Zisserman, 2017).
3.3
TRAINING AND TESTING
Before deployment of the policy, because we have signals from both the reward and self-supervised
auxiliary task, we can train with both in the fashion of multi-task learning. This corresponds to the
following optimization problem during training minθa,θs,θe J(θa, θe) + αL(θs, θe), where α > 0 is
a trade-off hyper-parameter. During deployment, we cannot optimize J anymore since the reward
is unavailable, but we can still optimize L to update both θs and θe. Empirically, we ﬁnd only
negligible difference with keeping θs ﬁxed at test-time, so we update both since the gradients have
to be computed regardless; we ablate this decision in appendix C. As we obtain new images from
the stream of visual inputs in the environment, θ keeps being updated until the episode ends. This
corresponds to, for each iteration t = 1...T:
st ∼p(st|at−1, st−1)
(2)
θs(t) = θs(t −1) −∇θsL(st; θs(t −1), θe(t −1))
(3)
θe(t) = θe(t −1) −∇θeL(st; θs(t −1), θe(t −1))
(4)
at = π(st; θ(t)) with θ(t) = (θe(t), θa),
(5)
where θs(0) = θs, θe(0) = θe, s0 is the initial condition given by the environment, a0 = πθ(s0), p is
the unknown environment transition, and L is the self-supervised objective as previously introduced.
4
EXPERIMENTS
In this work, we investigate how well an agent trained in one environment (denoted the training
environment) generalizes to unseen and diverse test environments. During evaluation, agents have
no access to reward signals and are expected to generalize without trials nor prior knowledge about
the test environments. In simulation, we evaluate our method (PAD) and baselines extensively
on continuous control tasks from DeepMind Control (DMC) suite (Tassa et al., 2018) as well
as the CRLMaze (Lomonaco et al., 2019) navigation task, and experiment with both stationary
(colors, objects, textures, lighting) and non-stationary (videos) environment changes. We further
show that PAD transfers from simulation to a real robot and successfully adapts to environmental
differences during deployment in two robotic manipulation tasks. Samples from DMC and CRLMaze
environments are shown in Figure 2, and samples from the robot experiments are shown in Figure 4.
Code is available at https://nicklashansen.github.io/PAD/.
Network details. For DMC and the robotic manipulation tasks we implement PAD on top of Soft
Actor-Critic (SAC) (Haarnoja et al., 2018), and adopt both network architecture and hyper-parameters
from Yarats et al. (2019), with minor modiﬁcations: the feature extractor πe has 8 convolutional
layers shared between the RL head πa and self-supervised head πs, and we split the network into
architecturally identical heads following πe. Each head consists of 3 convolutional layers followed
by 4 fully connected layers. For CRLMaze, we use Advantage Actor-Critic (A2C) as base algorithm
(Mnih et al., 2016) and apply the same architecture as for the other experiments, but implement πe
with only 6 convolutional layers. Observations are stacks of k colored frames (k = 3 on DMC and
CRLMaze; k = 1 in robotic manipulation) of size 100 × 100 and time-consistent random crop is
applied as in Srinivas et al. (2020). During deployment, we optimize the self-supervised objective
online w.r.t. θe, θs for one gradient step per time iteration. See appendix E for implementation details.
1A forward dynamics model operating in feature space can trivially achieve a loss of 0 by learning to map
every state to a constant vector, e.g. 0. An inverse dynamics model, however, does not have such trivial solutions.
4
==PAGE:108==
Preprint. Under review.
Figure 2. Left: Training environments of DMC (top) and CRLMaze (bottom). Right: Test environ-
ments of DMC (top) and CRLMaze (bottom). Changes to DMC include: randomized colors, video
backgrounds, and distracting objects. Changes to CRLMaze include textures and lighting.
Table 1. Cumulative reward in test environments with randomized colors, mean and std. dev. for 10
seeds. Best method on each task is in bold and brown compares +IDM with and without PAD.
10x episode length
Random colors
SAC
+DR
+IDM
+IDM (PAD)
+IDM
+IDM (PAD)
Walker, walk
414±74
594±104
406±29
468±47
3830±547
5505±592
Walker, stand
719±74
715±96
743±37
797±46
7832±209
8566±121
Cartpole, swingup
592±50
647±48
585±73
630±63
6528±539
7093±592
Cartpole, balance
857±60
867±37
835±40
848±29
7746±526
7670±293
Ball in cup, catch
411±183
470±252
471±75
563±50
–
–
Finger, spin
626±163
465±314
757±62
803±72
7249±642
7496±655
Finger, turn easy
270±43
167±26
283±51
304±46
–
–
Cheetah, run
154±41
145±29
121±38
159±28
1117±530
1208±487
Reacher, easy
163±45
105±37
201±32
214±44
1788±441
2152±506
4.1
DEEPMIND CONTROL
DeepMind Control (DMC) (Tassa et al., 2018) is a collection of continuous control tasks where
agents only observe raw pixels. Generalization benchmarks on DMC represent diverse real-world
tasks for motor control, and contain distracting surroundings not correlated with the reward signals.
Figure 3. Relative improvement in
instantaneous reward over time for
PAD on the random color env.
Experimental setup. We experiment with 9 tasks from DMC
and measure generalization to four types of test environments:
(i) randomized colors; (ii) natural videos as background; (iii)
distracting objects placed in the scene; and (iv) the unmodiﬁed
training environment. For each test environment, we evaluate
methods across 10 seeds and 100 random initializations. If a
given test environment is not applicable to certain tasks, e.g.
if a task has no background for the video background setting,
they are excluded. Tasks are selected on the basis of diversity,
as well as the success of vision-based RL in prior work (Yarats
et al., 2019; Srinivas et al., 2020; Laskin et al., 2020; Kostrikov
et al., 2020). We implement PAD on top of SAC and use
an Inverse Dynamics Model (IDM) for self-supervision, as
we ﬁnd that learning a model of the dynamics works well
for motor control. For completeness, we ablate the choice of
self-supervision. Learning curves are provided in appendix
section B. We compare our method to the following baselines: (i) SAC with no changes (denoted
SAC); (ii) SAC trained with domain randomization on a ﬁxed set of 100 colors (denoted +DR); and
(iii) SAC trained jointly with an IDM but without PAD (denoted +IDM). Our method using an IDM
with PAD is denoted by +IDM (PAD). For domain randomization, colors are sampled from the same
distribution as in evaluation, but with lower variance, as we ﬁnd that training directly on the test
distribution does not converge.
Random perturbation of color. Robustness to subtle changes such as color is essential to real-
world deployment of RL policies. We evaluate generalization on a ﬁxed set of 100 colors of
foreground, background and the agent itself, and report the results in Table 1 (ﬁrst 4 columns). We
ﬁnd PAD to improve generalization in all tasks considered, outperforming SAC trained with domain
5
==PAGE:109==
Preprint. Under review.
randomization in 6 out of 9 tasks. Surprisingly, despite a substantial overlap between training and test
domains of domain randomization, it generalizes no better than vanilla SAC on a majority of tasks.
Long-term stability. We ﬁnd the relative improvement of PAD to improve over time, as shown in
Figure 3. To examine the long-term stability of PAD, we further evaluate on 10x episode lengths and
summarize the results in the last two columns in Table 1 (goal-oriented tasks excluded). While we do
not explicitly prevent the embedding from drifting away from the RL task, we ﬁnd empirically that
PAD does not degrade the performance of the policy, even over long horizons, and when PAD does
not improve, we ﬁnd it to hurt minimally. We conjecture this is because we are not learning a new
task, but simply continue to optimize the same (self-supervised) objective as during joint training,
where both two tasks are compatible. In this setting, PAD still improves generalization in 6 out of 7
tasks, and thus naturally extends beyond episodic deployment. For completeness, we also evaluate
methods in the environment in which they were trained, and report the results in appendix section A.
We ﬁnd that, while PAD improves generalization to novel environments, performance is virtually
unchanged on the training environment. We conjecture this is because the self-supervised task is
already fully learned and any continued training on the same data distribution thus has little impact.
Table 2. Cumulative reward in test environments with video back-
grounds (top) and distracting objects (bottom), mean and std. dev.
for 10 seeds. Best method on each task is in bold and brown
compares SAC+IDM with and without PAD.
Video backgrounds
SAC
+DR
+IDM
+IDM (PAD)
Walker, walk
616±80
655±55
694±85
717±79
Walker, stand
899±53
869±60
902±51
935±20
Cartpole, swingup
375±90
485±67
487±90
521±76
Cartpole, balance
693±109
766±92
691±76
687±58
Ball in cup, catch
393±175
271±189
362±69
436±55
Finger, spin
447±102
338±207
605±61
691±80
Finger, turn easy
355±108
223±91
355±110
362±101
Cheetah, run
194±30
150±34
164 ±42
206±34
Distracting objects
SAC
+DR
+IDM
+IDM (PAD)
Cartpole, swingup
815±60
809±24
776±58
771±64
Cartpole, balance
969±20
938±35
964±26
960±29
Ball in cup, catch
177±111
331±189
482±128
545±173
Finger, spin
652±184
564±288
836±62
867±72
Finger, turn easy
302±68
165±12
326±101
347±48
Non-stationary environments.
To investigate whether PAD can
adapt in non-stationary envi-
ronments, we evaluate general-
ization to diverse video back-
grounds (refer to Figure 2). We
ﬁnd PAD to outperform all base-
lines on 7 out of 8 tasks, as
shown in Table 2, by as much
as 104% over domain random-
ization on Finger, spin. Domain
randomization generalizes com-
parably worse to videos, which
we conjecture is not because the
environments are non-stationary,
but rather because the image
statistics of videos are not cov-
ered by its training domain of
randomized colors. In fact, do-
main randomization is outper-
formed by the vanilla SAC in
most tasks with video back-
grounds, which is in line with the ﬁndings of Packer et al. (2018).
Scene content. We hypothesize that: (i) an agent trained with an IDM is comparably less distracted
by scene content since objects uncorrelated to actions yield no predictive power; and (ii) that PAD
can adapt to unexpected objects in the scene. We test these hypotheses by measuring robustness
to colored shapes at a variety of positions in both the foreground and background of the scene (no
physical interaction). Results are summarized in Table 2. PAD outperforms all baselines in 3 out of 5
tasks, with a relative improvement of 208% over SAC on Ball in cup, catch. In the two cartpole tasks
in which PAD does not improve, all methods are already relatively unaffected by the distractors.
Choice of self-supervised task. We investigate how much the choice of self-supervised task con-
tributes to the overall success of our method, and consider the following ablations: (i) replacing
inverse dynamics with the rotation prediction task described in section 3.2; and (ii) replacing it with
the recently proposed CURL (Srinivas et al., 2020) contrastive learning algorithm for RL. As shown
in Table 3, PAD improves generalization of CURL in a majority of tasks on the randomized color
benchmark, and in 4 out of 9 tasks using rotation prediction. However, inverse dynamics as auxiliary
task produces more consistent results and offers better generalization overall. We argue that learning
an IDM produces better representations for motor control since it connects observations directly to
actions, whereas CURL and rotation prediction operates purely on observations. In general, we ﬁnd
the improvement of PAD to be bigger in tasks that beneﬁt signiﬁcantly from visual information (see
appendix section A), and conjecture that selecting a self-supervised task that learns features useful to
the RL task is crucial to the success of PAD, which we discuss further in section 4.2.
6
==PAGE:110==
Preprint. Under review.
Table 3. Ablations on the randomized color domain of DMC. All methods use SAC. CURL represents
RL with a contrastive learning task (Srinivas et al., 2020) and Rot represents the rotation predic-
tion (Gidaris et al., 2018). Ofﬂine PAD is here denoted O-PAD for brevity, whereas the default usage
of PAD is in an online setting. Best method is in bold and brown compares +IDM w/ and w/o PAD.
Random colors
CURL
CURL (PAD)
Rot
Rot (PAD)
IDM
IDM (O-PAD)
IDM (PAD)
Walker, walk
445±99
495±70
335±7
330±30
406±29
441±16
468±47
Walker, stand
662±54
753±49
673±4
653±27
743±37
727±21
797±46
Cartpole, swingup
454±110
413±67
493±52
477±38
585±73
578±69
630±63
Cartpole, balance
782±13
763±5
710±72
734±81
835±40
796±37
848±29
Ball in cup, catch
231±92
332±78
291±54
314±60
471±75
490±16
563±50
Finger, spin
691±12
588±22
695±36
689±20
757±62
767±43
803±72
Finger, turn easy
202±32
186±2
283±68
230±53
283±51
321±10
304±46
Cheetah, run
202±22
211±20
127±3
135±12
121±38
112±35
159±28
Reacher, easy
325±32
378±62
99±29
120±7
201±32
241±24
214±44
Table 4. Cumulative reward of PAD and baselines in CRLMaze environments. PAD improves
generalization in all considered environments and outperforms both A2C and domain randomization
by a large margin. All methods use A2C. We report mean and std. error of 10 seeds. Best method in
each environment is in bold and brown compares rotation prediction with and without PAD.
CRLMaze
Random
A2C
+DR
+IDM
+IDM (PAD)
+Rot
+Rot (PAD)
Walls
−870±30
−380±145
−260±137
−302±150
−428±135
−206±166
−74±116
Floor
−868±23
−320±167
−438±59
−47±198
−530±106
−294±123
−209±94
Ceiling
−872±30
−171±175
−400±74
166±215
−508±104
128±196
281±83
Lights
−900±29
−30±213
−310±106
239±270
−460±114
−84±53
312±104
Ofﬂine versus online learning. Observations that arrive sequentially are highly correlated, and we
thus hypothesize that our method beneﬁts signiﬁcantly from learning online. To test this hypothesis,
we run an ofﬂine variant of our method in which network updates are forgotten after each step. In
this setting, our method can only adapt to single observations and does not beneﬁt from learning
over time. Results are shown in Table 3. We ﬁnd that our method beneﬁts substantially from online
learning, but learning ofﬂine still improves generalization on select tasks.
4.2
CRLMAZE
CRLMaze (Lomonaco et al., 2019) is a time-constrained, discrete-action 3D navigation task for
ViZDoom (Wydmuch et al., 2018), in which an agent is to navigate a maze and collect objects. There
is a positive reward associated with green columns, and a negative reward for lanterns as well as for
living. Readers are referred to the respective papers for details on the task and environment.
Experimental setup. We train agents on a single environment and measure generalization to
environments with novel textures for walls, ﬂoor, and ceiling, as well as lighting, as shown in Figure 2.
We implement PAD on top of A2C (Mnih et al., 2016) and use rotation prediction (see section 3.2) as
self-supervised task. Learning to navigate novel scenes requires a generalized scene understanding,
and we ﬁnd that rotation prediction facilitates that more so than an IDM. We compare to the following
baselines: (i) a random agent (denoted Random); (ii) A2C with no changes (denoted A2C); (iii)
A2C trained with domain randomization (denoted +DR); (iv) A2C with an IDM as auxiliary task
(denoted +IDM); and (v) A2C with rotation prediction as auxiliary task (denoted +Rot). We denote
Rot with PAD as +Rot (PAD). Domain randomization uses 56 combinations of diverse textures,
partially overlapping with the test distribution, and we ﬁnd it necessary to train domain randomization
for twice as many episodes in order to converge. We closely follow the evaluation procedure of
(Lomonaco et al., 2019) and evaluate methods across 20 starting positions and 10 random seeds.
Results. We report performance on the CRLMaze environments in Table 4. PAD improves gener-
alization in all considered test environments, outperforming both A2C and domain randomization
by a large margin. Domain randomization performs consistently across all environments but is less
successful overall. We further examine the importance of selecting appropriate auxiliary tasks by a
simple ablation: replacing rotation prediction with an IDM for the navigation task. We conjecture
that, while an auxiliary task can enforce structure in the learned representations, its features (and
consequently gradients) need to be sufﬁciently correlated with the primary RL task for PAD to be
7
==PAGE:111==
Preprint. Under review.
(a) Simulation.
(b) Default transfer.
(c) Table cloth.
(d) Disco lights.
Figure 4. Samples from the push robotic manipulation task. The task is to push the yellow cube to
the location of the red disc. Agents are trained in setting (a) and evaluated in settings (b-d).
successful during deployment. While PAD with rotation prediction improves generalization across all
test environments considered, IDM does not, which suggests that rotation prediction is more suitable
for tasks that require scene understanding, whereas IDM is useful for tasks that require motor control.
We leave it to future work to automate the process of selecting appropriate auxiliary tasks.
4.3
ROBOTIC MANIPULATION TASKS
Table 5. Success rate of PAD and baselines on a real
robotic arm. Best method in each environment is in bold
and brown compares +IDM with and without PAD.
Real robot
SAC
+DR
+IDM
+IDM (PAD)
Reach (default)
100%
100%
100%
100%
Reach (cloth)
48%
80%
56%
80%
Reach (disco)
72%
76%
88%
92%
Push (default)
88%
88%
92%
100%
Push (cloth)
60%
64%
64%
88%
Push (disco)
60%
68%
72%
84%
We deploy our method and baselines on
a real Kinova Gen3 robot and evaluate on
two manipulation tasks: (i) reach, a task in
which the robot reaches for a goal marked
by a red disc; and (ii) push, a task in which
the robot pushes a cube to the location of
the red disc. Both tasks use an XY action
space, where the Z position of the actua-
tor is ﬁxed. Agents operate purely from
pixel observations with no access to state
information. During deployment, we make
no effort to calibrate camera, lighting, or
physical properties such as dimensions, mass, and friction, and policies are expected to generalize
with no prior knowledge of the test environment. Samples from the push task are shown in Figure 4,
and samples from reach are shown in appendix D.
Table 6. Success rate of PAD and baselines for the push
task on a simulated robotic arm in test environments
with changes to dynamics. Changes include object mass,
size, and friction, arm mount position, and end effector
velocity. Best method in each environment is in bold
and brown compares +IDM with and without PAD.
Simulated robot
SAC
+DR
+IDM
+IDM (PAD)
Push (object)
66%
64%
72%
82%
Push (mount)
68%
58%
86%
84%
Push (velocity)
70%
68%
70%
78%
Push (all)
56%
50%
48%
76%
Experimental setup. We implement PAD
on top of SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018) and
apply the same experimental setup as in sec-
tion 4.1 using an Inverse Dynamics Model
(IDM) for self-supervision, but without
frame-stacking (i.e. k = 1). Agents are
trained in simulation with dense rewards
and randomized initial conﬁgurations of
arm, goal, and box, and we measure gen-
eralization to 3 novel environments in the
real-world: (i) default environment with
pixel observations that roughly mimic the
simulation; (ii) a patterned table cloth that
distracts visually and greatly increases friction; and (iii) disco, an environment with non-stationary
visual disco light distractions. Notably, all 3 environments also feature subtle differences in dynamics
compared to the training environment, such as object dimensions, mass, friction, and uncalibrated
actions. In each setting, we evaluate the success rate across 25 test runs spanning across 5 pre-deﬁned
goal locations throughout the table. The goal locations vary between the two tasks, and the robot
is reset after each run. We perform comparison against direct transfer and domain randomization
baselines as in section 4.1. We further evaluate generalization to changes in dynamics by considering
a variant of the simulated environment in which object mass, size, and friction, arm mount position,
and end effector velocity is modiﬁed. We consider each setting both individually and jointly, and
evaluate success rate across 50 unique conﬁgurations with the robot reset after each run.
Results. We report transfer results in Table 5. While all methods transfer successfully to reach
(default), we observe PAD to improve generalization in all settings in which the baselines show
8
==PAGE:112==
Preprint. Under review.
sub-optimal performance. We ﬁnd PAD to be especially powerful for the push task that involves
dynamics, improving by as much as 24% in push (cloth). While domain randomization proves highly
effective in reach (cloth), we observe no signiﬁcant beneﬁt in the other settings, which suggests that
PAD can be more suitable in challenging tasks like push. To isolate the effect of dynamics, we further
evaluate generalization to a number of simulated changes in dynamics on the push task. Results are
shown in Table 6. We ﬁnd PAD to improve generalization to changes in the physical properties of the
object and end effector, whereas both SAC+IDM and PAD are relatively unaffected by changes to the
mount position. Consistent with the real robot results in table 5, PAD is found to be most effective
when changes in dynamics are non-trivial, improving by as much as 28% in the push (all) setting,
where all 3 environmental changes are considered jointly. These results suggest that PAD can be
a simple, yet effective method for generalization to diverse, unseen environments that vary in both
visuals and dynamics.
5
CONCLUSION
While previous work addresses generalization in RL by learning policies that are invariant to any
environment changes that can be anticipated, we formulate an alternative problem setting in vision-
based RL: can we instead adapt a pretrained-policy to new environments without any reward. We
propose Policy Adaptation during Deployment, a self-supervised framework for online adaptation
at test-time, and show empirically that our method improves generalization of policies to diverse
simulated and real-world environmental changes across a variety of tasks. We ﬁnd our approach
beneﬁts greatly from learning online, and we systematically evaluate how the choice of self-supervised
task impacts performance. While the current framework relies on prior knowledge on selecting self-
supervised tasks for policy adaptation, we see our work as the initial step in addressing the problem
of adapting vision-based policies to unknown environments. We ultimately envision embodied agents
in the future to be learning all the time, with the ﬂexibility to learn both with and without rewards,
before and during deployment.
Acknowledgements.
This work was supported, in part, by grants from DARPA, NSF 1730158
CI-New: Cognitive Hardware and Software Ecosystem Community Infrastructure (CHASE-CI), NSF
ACI-1541349 CC*DNI Paciﬁc Research Platform, a research grant from Qualcomm, and a gift from
TuSimple. This work was also funded, in part, by grants from Berkeley DeepDrive, SAP, and Euro-
pean Research Council (ERC) from the European Union Horizon 2020 Programme under grant agree-
ment no. 741930 (CLOTHILDE). We would like to thank Fenglu Hong and Joey Hejna for helpful dis-
cussions.
REFERENCES
OpenAI: Marcin Andrychowicz, Bowen Baker, Maciek Chociej, Rafal Jozefowicz, Bob McGrew,
Jakub Pachocki, Arthur Petron, Matthias Plappert, Glenn Powell, Alex Ray, et al. Learning
dexterous in-hand manipulation. The International Journal of Robotics Research, 39(1):3–20,
2020. 1
David Bau, Hendrik Strobelt, William Peebles, Jonas Wulff, Bolei Zhou, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Antonio
Torralba. Semantic photo manipulation with a generative image prior. ACM Trans. Graph., 38(4),
2019. ISSN 0730-0301. 3
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
contrastive learning of visual representations, 2020. 2
Carl Doersch and Andrew Zisserman. Multi-task self-supervised visual learning. In Proceedings of
the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 2051–2060, 2017. 4
Carl Doersch, Abhinav Gupta, and Alexei A Efros. Unsupervised visual representation learning by
context prediction. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
1422–1430, 2015. 2
Frederik Ebert, Chelsea Finn, Sudeep Dasari, Annie Xie, Alex Lee, and Sergey Levine. Visual
foresight: Model-based deep reinforcement learning for vision-based robotic control, 2018. 2
9
==PAGE:113==
Preprint. Under review.
Yaroslav Ganin, Evgeniya Ustinova, Hana Ajakan, Pascal Germain, Hugo Larochelle, Franc¸ois
Laviolette, Mario Marchand, and Victor Lempitsky. Domain-adversarial training of neural networks.
The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(1):2096–2030, 2016. 2
Robert Geirhos, Carlos R. Medina Temme, Jonas Rauber, Heiko H. Sch¨utt, Matthias Bethge, and
Felix A. Wichmann. Generalisation in humans and deep neural networks. In NeurIPS, 2018. 2
Muhammad Ghifary, W. Bastiaan Kleijn, Mengjie Zhang, and David Balduzzi. Domain generalization
for object recognition with multi-task autoencoders. In Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE International
Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), ICCV ’15, pp. 2551–2559. IEEE Computer Society, 2015.
ISBN 9781467383912. 2
Spyros Gidaris, Praveer Singh, and Nikos Komodakis. Unsupervised representation learning by
predicting image rotations, 2018. 2, 3, 4, 7
Boqing Gong, Yuan Shi, Fei Sha, and Kristen Grauman. Geodesic ﬂow kernel for unsupervised
domain adaptation. In 2012 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
2066–2073. IEEE, 2012. 2
Shixiang Gu, Ethan Holly, Timothy Lillicrap, and Sergey Levine. Deep reinforcement learning for
robotic manipulation with asynchronous off-policy updates. In 2017 IEEE international conference
on robotics and automation (ICRA), pp. 3389–3396. IEEE, 2017. 1
David Ha and J¨urgen Schmidhuber. Recurrent world models facilitate policy evolution. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems 31, pp. 2451–2463. Curran Associates, Inc., 2018. 2
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Kristian Hartikainen, George Tucker, Sehoon Ha, Jie Tan, Vikash
Kumar, Henry Zhu, Abhishek Gupta, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic algorithms
and applications, 2018. 4, 8, 16
Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum contrast for
unsupervised visual representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2020. 2
Dan Hendrycks and Thomas G. Dietterich. Benchmarking neural network robustness to common
corruptions and surface variations. arXiv: Learning, 2018. 2
Dan Hendrycks, Mantas Mazeika, Saurav Kadavath, and Dawn Song. Using self-supervised learning
can improve model robustness and uncertainty. ArXiv, abs/1906.12340, 2019. 2, 4
Olivier J. H´enaff, Aravind Srinivas, Jeffrey De Fauw, Ali Razavi, Carl Doersch, S. M. Ali Eslami, and
Aaron van den Oord. Data-efﬁcient image recognition with contrastive predictive coding, 2019. 2
Max Jaderberg, Volodymyr Mnih, Wojciech Marian Czarnecki, Tom Schaul, Joel Z Leibo, David
Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Reinforcement learning with unsupervised auxiliary tasks, 2016.
2
Stephen James, Paul Wohlhart, Mrinal Kalakrishnan, D. Kalashnikov, A. Irpan, J. Ibarz, S. Levine,
Raia Hadsell, and Konstantinos Bousmalis. Sim-to-real via sim-to-sim: Data-efﬁcient robotic
grasping via randomized-to-canonical adaptation networks. 2019 IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 12619–12629, 2019. 2
R. Julian, B. Swanson, G. Sukhatme, Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn, and Karol Hausman. Never stop
learning: The effectiveness of ﬁne-tuning in robotic reinforcement learning. arXiv: Learning,
2020. 1, 2
D. Kalashnikov, A. Irpan, P. Pastor, J. Ibarz, A. Herzog, Eric Jang, Deirdre Quillen, Ethan Holly,
Mrinal Kalakrishnan, V. Vanhoucke, and S. Levine. Qt-opt: Scalable deep reinforcement learning
for vision-based robotic manipulation. ArXiv, abs/1806.10293, 2018. 1
Ilya Kostrikov, Denis Yarats, and Rob Fergus. Image augmentation is all you need: Regularizing
deep reinforcement learning from pixels. 2020. 5, 16
10
==PAGE:114==
Preprint. Under review.
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. Imagenet classiﬁcation with deep convolu-
tional neural networks. In NIPS, 2012. 16
Sascha Lange and Martin A. Riedmiller. Deep auto-encoder neural networks in reinforcement
learning. In The 2010 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), pp. 1–8, 2010.
2
Michael Laskin, Kimin Lee, Adam Stooke, Lerrel Pinto, Pieter Abbeel, and Aravind Srinivas.
Reinforcement learning with augmented data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.14990, 2020. 2, 5, 16
Kimin Lee, Kibok Lee, Jinwoo Shin, and Honglak Lee. A simple randomization technique for
generalization in deep reinforcement learning. ArXiv, abs/1910.05396, 2019. 1
Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn, Trevor Darrell, and Pieter Abbeel. End-to-end training of deep
visuomotor policies. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(1):1334–1373, 2016. 1
Ya Feng Li, Mingming Gong, Xinmei Tian, Tongliang Liu, and Dacheng Tao. Domain generalization
via conditional invariant representations. In AAAI, 2018. 2
Vincenzo Lomonaco, Karen Desai, Eugenio Culurciello, and Davide Maltoni. Continual reinforce-
ment learning in 3d non-stationary environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.10112, 2019. 2, 4, 7,
15, 16
Mingsheng Long, Han Zhu, Jianmin Wang, and Michael I Jordan. Unsupervised domain adaptation
with residual transfer networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp.
136–144, 2016. 2
Toshihiko Matsuura and Tatsuya Harada. Domain generalization using a mixture of multiple latent
domains, 2019. 2
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan
Wierstra, and Martin Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1312.5602, 2013. 1
Volodymyr Mnih, Adri`a Puigdom`enech Badia, Mehdi Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy P. Lillicrap, Tim
Harley, David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement
learning, 2016. 4, 7, 16
Ravi Teja Mullapudi, Steven Chen, Keyi Zhang, Deva Ramanan, and Kayvon Fatahalian. Online
model distillation for efﬁcient video inference. 2019 IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision (ICCV), Oct 2019. doi: 10.1109/iccv.2019.00367. 3
Ashvin V Nair, Vitchyr Pong, Murtaza Dalal, Shikhar Bahl, Steven Lin, and Sergey Levine. Visual
reinforcement learning with imagined goals. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, pp. 9191–9200, 2018. 1
Mehdi Noroozi and Paolo Favaro. Unsupervised learning of visual representations by solving jigsaw
puzzles. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 69–84. Springer, 2016. 2
Charles Packer, Katelyn Gao, Jernej Kos, Philipp Kr¨ahenb¨uhl, Vladlen Koltun, and Dawn Song.
Assessing generalization in deep reinforcement learning, 2018. 6
Deepak Pathak, Philipp Krahenbuhl, Jeff Donahue, Trevor Darrell, and Alexei A Efros. Context
encoders: Feature learning by inpainting. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, pp. 2536–2544, 2016. 2
Deepak Pathak, Pulkit Agrawal, Alexei A. Efros, and Trevor Darrell. Curiosity-driven exploration by
self-supervised prediction. In ICML, 2017. 2
Xue Bin Peng, Marcin Andrychowicz, Wojciech Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Sim-to-real transfer of
robotic control with dynamics randomization. 2018 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation (ICRA), May 2018. 1, 2
11
==PAGE:115==
Preprint. Under review.
Lerrel Pinto and Abhinav Gupta. Supersizing self-supervision: Learning to grasp from 50k tries and
700 robot hours. In 2016 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA), pp.
3406–3413. IEEE, 2016. 1
Lerrel Pinto, Marcin Andrychowicz, Peter Welinder, Wojciech Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Asym-
metric actor critic for image-based robot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.06542, 2017a. 1,
2
Lerrel Pinto, James Davidson, Rahul Sukthankar, and Abhinav Gupta. Robust adversarial reinforce-
ment learning. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning-Volume
70, pp. 2817–2826. JMLR. org, 2017b. 1
Aravind Rajeswaran, Sarvjeet Ghotra, Balaraman Ravindran, and Sergey Levine. Epopt: Learning
robust neural network policies using model ensembles. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.01283, 2016. 1
Fabio Ramos, Rafael Possas, and Dieter Fox. Bayessim: Adaptive domain randomization via
probabilistic inference for robotics simulators. Robotics: Science and Systems XV, Jun 2019. 2
Benjamin Recht, Rebecca Roelofs, Ludwig Schmidt, and Vaishaal Shankar. Do cifar-10 classiﬁers
generalize to cifar-10? arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.00451, 2018. 2
Benjamin Recht, Rebecca Roelofs, Ludwig Schmidt, and Vaishaal Shankar. Do imagenet classiﬁers
generalize to imagenet? arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.10811, 2019. 2
Andrei A Rusu, Neil C Rabinowitz, Guillaume Desjardins, Hubert Soyer, James Kirkpatrick, Koray
Kavukcuoglu, Razvan Pascanu, and Raia Hadsell. Progressive neural networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1606.04671, 2016. 1
Fereshteh Sadeghi and Sergey Levine. Cad2rl: Real single-image ﬂight without a single real image.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.04201, 2016. 1, 2
Ramanan Sekar, Oleh Rybkin, Kostas Daniilidis, Pieter Abbeel, Danijar Hafner, and Deepak Pathak.
Planning to explore via self-supervised world models, 2020. 2
Vaishaal Shankar, Achal Dave, Rebecca Roelofs, Deva Ramanan, Benjamin Recht, and Lud-
wig Schmidt. A systematic framework for natural perturbations from videos. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1906.02168, 2019. 2
Assaf Shocher, Nadav Cohen, and Michal Irani. Zero-shot super-resolution using deep internal
learning, 2017. 3
Assaf Shocher, Shai Bagon, Phillip Isola, and Michal Irani. Ingan: Capturing and remapping the
”dna” of a natural image, 2018. 3
Aravind Srinivas, Michael Laskin, and Pieter Abbeel. Curl: Contrastive unsupervised representations
for reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.04136, 2020. 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 16
Yu Sun, Eric Tzeng, Trevor Darrell, and Alexei A Efros. Unsupervised domain adaptation through
self-supervision. arXiv preprint, 2019. 2
Yu Sun, Xiaolong Wang, Zhuang Liu, John Miller, Alexei A. Efros, and Moritz Hardt. Test-time
training with self-supervision for generalization under distribution shifts. ICML, 2020. 3
Christian Szegedy, Wei Liu, Yangqing Jia, Pierre Sermanet, Scott Reed, Dragomir Anguelov, Dumitru
Erhan, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Andrew Rabinovich. Going deeper with convolutions. 2015 IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 1–9, 2015. 16
Yuval Tassa, Yotam Doron, Alistair Muldal, Tom Erez, Yazhe Li, Diego de Las Casas, David Budden,
Abbas Abdolmaleki, Josh Merel, Andrew Lefrancq, Timothy Lillicrap, and Martin Riedmiller.
DeepMind control suite. Technical report, DeepMind, January 2018. 2, 4, 5, 15
Josh Tobin, Rachel Fong, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Wojciech Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Domain
randomization for transferring deep neural networks from simulation to the real world. 2017
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), Sep 2017. 1, 2
12
==PAGE:116==
Preprint. Under review.
Eric Tzeng, Judy Hoffman, Kate Saenko, and Trevor Darrell. Adversarial discriminative domain
adaptation. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
pp. 7167–7176, 2017. 2
Pascal Vincent, Hugo Larochelle, Yoshua Bengio, and Pierre-Antoine Manzagol. Extracting and
composing robust features with denoising autoencoders. In Proceedings of the 25th international
conference on Machine learning, pp. 1096–1103. ACM, 2008. 2
Xiaolong Wang and Abhinav Gupta. Unsupervised learning of visual representations using videos.
In ICCV, 2015. 2
Xiaolong Wang, Allan Jabri, and Alexei A. Efros.
Learning correspondence from the cycle-
consistency of time. In CVPR, 2019. 2
Mitchell Wortsman, Kiana Ehsani, Mohammad Rastegari, Ali Farhadi, and Roozbeh Mottaghi.
Learning to learn how to learn: Self-adaptive visual navigation using meta-learning, 2018. 3
Zhirong Wu, Yuanjun Xiong, Stella X Yu, and Dahua Lin. Unsupervised feature learning via non-
parametric instance discrimination. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3733–3742, 2018. 2
Marek Wydmuch, Michał Kempka, and Wojciech Ja´skowski. Vizdoom competitions: Playing doom
from pixels. IEEE Transactions on Games, 2018. 2, 7, 15
Wilson Yan, Ashwin Vangipuram, Pieter Abbeel, and Lerrel Pinto. Learning predictive representations
for deformable objects using contrastive estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.05436, 2020. 1, 2
Jiachen Yang, Brenden Petersen, Hongyuan Zha, and Daniel Faissol. Single episode policy transfer
in reinforcement learning, 2019. 1, 2
Denis Yarats, Amy Zhang, Ilya Kostrikov, Brandon Amos, Joelle Pineau, and Rob Fergus. Improving
sample efﬁciency in model-free reinforcement learning from images, 2019. 2, 4, 5, 16
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, and Alexei A Efros. Colorful image colorization. In European
conference on computer vision, pp. 649–666. Springer, 2016. 2
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, and Alexei A Efros. Split-brain autoencoders: Unsupervised learning
by cross-channel prediction. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pp. 1058–1067, 2017. 2
13
==PAGE:117==
Preprint. Under review.
A
PERFORMANCE ON THE TRAINING ENVIRONMENT
Historically, agents have commonly been trained and evaluated in the same environment when
benchmarking RL algorithms exclusively in simulation. Although such an evaluation procedure does
not consider generalization, it is still a useful metric for comparison of sample efﬁciency and stability
of algorithms. For completeness, we also evaluate our method and baselines in this setting on both
DMC and CRLMaze. DMC results are reported in Table 7 and results on the CRLMaze environment
are shown in Table 8. In this setting, we also compare to an additional baseline on DMC: a blind
SAC agent that operates purely on its previous actions. The performance of a blind agent indicates
to which degree a given task beneﬁts from visual information. We ﬁnd that, while PAD improves
generalization to novel environments, performance is virtually unchanged when evaluated on the
same environment as in training. We conjecture that this is because the algorithm already is adapted
to the training environment and any continued training on the same data distribution thus has little
inﬂuence. We further emphasize that, even when evaluated on the training environment, PAD still
outperforms baselines on most tasks. For example, we observe a 15% relative improvement over SAC
on the Finger, spin task. We hypothesize that this gain in performance is because the self-supervised
objective improves learning by constraining the intermediate representation of policies. A blind agent
is no better than random on this particular task, which would suggest that agents beneﬁt substantially
from visual information in Finger, spin. Therefore, learning a good intermediate representation of
that information is highly beneﬁcial to the RL objective, which we ﬁnd PAD to facilitate through its
self-supervised learning framework. Likewise, the SAC baseline only achieves a 51% improvement
over the blind agent on Cartpole, balance, which indicates that extracting visual information from
observations is not as crucial on this task. Consequently, both PAD and baselines achieve similar
performance on this task.
Table 7. Cumulative reward on the training environment for each of the 9 tasks considered in DMC,
mean and std. dev. for 10 seeds. Best method on each task is in bold and brown compares +IDM
with and without PAD. It is shown that PAD hurts minimally when the environment is unchanged.
Training env.
Blind
SAC
+DR
+IDM
+IDM (PAD)
Walker, walk
235±17
847±71
756±71
911±24
895±28
Walker, stand
388±10
959±11
928±36
966±8
956±20
Cartpole, swingup
132±41
850±28
807±36
849±30
845±34
Cartpole, balance
646±131
978±22
971±30
982±20
979±21
Ball in cup, catch
150±96
725±355
469±339
919±118
910±129
Finger, spin
3±2
809±138
686±295
928±45
927±45
Finger, turn easy
172±27
462±146
243±124
462±152
455±160
Cheetah, run
264±75
387±74
195±46
384±88
380±91
Reacher, easy
107±11
264±113
92±45
390±126
365±114
Table 8. Cumulative reward of PAD and baselines in the CRLMaze training environment. All methods
use A2C. We report mean and std. error of 10 seeds. Best method is in bold and brown compares
rotation prediction with and without PAD.
CRLMaze
Random
A2C
+DR
+IDM
+IDM (PAD)
+Rot
+Rot (PAD)
Training env.
−868±34
371±198
−355±93
585±246
−416±135
729±148
681±99
B
LEARNING CURVES ON DEEPMIND CONTROL
All methods are trained until convergence (500,000 frames) on DMC. While we do not consider
the sample efﬁciency of our method and baselines in this study, we report learning curves for SAC,
SAC+IDM and SAC trained with domain randomization on three tasks in Figure 5 for completeness.
SAC trained with and without an IDM are similar in terms of sample efﬁciency and ﬁnal performance,
whereas domain randomization consistently displays worse sample efﬁciency, larger variation between
seeds, and converges to sub-optimal performance in two out of the three tasks shown.
14
==PAGE:118==
Preprint. Under review.
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Number of frames (M)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Episode reward
Cartpole, swingup
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Number of frames (M)
Walker, stand
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Number of frames (M)
Walker, walk
SAC
SAC (DR)
SAC+IDM
Figure 5. Learning curves for SAC, SAC trained with domain randomization (denoted SAC (DR) here),
and SAC+IDM on three tasks from the DeepMind Control suite. Episode reward is averaged across 10
seeds and the 95% conﬁdence intervals are visualized as shaded regions. SAC and SAC+IDM exhibit
similar sample efﬁciency and ﬁnal performance, whereas domain randomization consistently displays
worse sample efﬁciency, larger variation between seeds, and converges to sub-optimal performance
in two out of the three tasks shown.
C
KEEPING πs FIXED DURING POLICY ADAPTATION
We now consider a variant of PAD where the self-supervised task head πs is ﬁxed at test-time such
that the self-supervised objective L is optimized only wrt πe, as discussed in section 3.3. We measure
generalization to test environments with randomized colors and report the results in Table 9 for three
tasks from the DeepMind Control suite. Empirically we ﬁnd the difference between updating πs and
keeping it ﬁxed negligible, and we choose to update πs by default since its gradients are computed by
back-propagation regardless.
Table 9. Cumulative reward in test environments with randomized colors, mean and std. dev. for
10 seeds. All methods use SAC. IDM (PAD, ﬁxed πs) considers a variant of PAD where πs is ﬁxed
at test-time, whereas IDM (PAD) denotes the default usage of PAD in which both πe and πs are
optimized at test-time using the self-supervised objective.
Random colors
IDM
IDM (PAD, ﬁxed πs)
IDM (PAD)
Walker, walk
406±29
452±38
468±47
Walker, stand
743±37
802±41
797±46
Cartpole, swingup
585±73
623±57
630±63
D
ADDITIONAL ROBOTIC MANIPULATION SAMPLES
Figure 6 provides samples from the training and test environments for the reach robotic manipulation
task. Agents are trained in simulation and deployed on a real robot. Samples from the push task are
shown in Figure 4.
E
IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
In this section, we elaborate on implementation details for our experiments on DeepMind Control
(DMC) suite (Tassa et al., 2018) and CRLMaze (Lomonaco et al., 2019) for ViZDoom (Wydmuch
et al., 2018). Our implementation for the robotic manipulation experiments closely follows that of
DMC. Code is available at https://nicklashansen.github.io/PAD/.
Architecture.
Our network architecture is illustrated in Figure 7. Observations are stacked frames
(k = 3) rendered at 100 × 100 and cropped to 84 × 84, i.e. inputs to the network are of dimensions
9×84×84, where the ﬁrst dimension indicates the channel numbers and the following ones represent
15
==PAGE:119==
Preprint. Under review.
(a) Simulation.
(b) Default transfer.
(c) Table cloth.
(d) Disco.
Figure 6. Samples from the reach robotic manipulation task. The task is to move the robot gripper to
the location of the red disc. Agents are trained in setting (a) and evaluated in settings (b-d) on a real
robot, taking observations from an uncalibrated camera.
Figure 7. Network architecture for the DMC, CRLMaze, and robotic manipulation experiments. πs
and πa uses a shared feature extractor πe. Observations are stacks of 100 × 100 colored frames.
Implementation of policy and value function depends on the learning algorithm.
spatial dimensions. The same crop is applied to all frames in a stack. The shared feature extractor πe
consists of 8 (DMC, robotic manipulation) or 6 (CRLMaze) convolutional layers and outputs features
of size 32 × 21 × 21 in DMC and robotic manipulation, and size 32 × 25 × 25 in CRLMaze. The
output from πe is used as input to both the self-supervised head πs and RL head πa, both of which
consist of 3 convolutional layers followed by 3 fully-connected layers. All convolutional layers use
32 ﬁlters and all fully connected layers use a hidden size of 1024, as in Yarats et al. (2019).
Learning algorithm.
We use Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) (Haarnoja et al., 2018) for DMC and robotic
manipulation, and Advantage Actor-Critic (A2C) for CRLMaze. Network outputs depend on the
task and learning algorithm. As the action spaces of both DMC and robotic manipulation are
continuous, the policy learned by SAC outputs the mean and variance of a Gaussian distribution over
actions. CRLMaze has a discrete action space and the policy learned by A2C thus learns a soft-max
distribution over actions. For details on the critics learned by SAC and A2C, the reader is referred to
Haarnoja et al. (2018) and Mnih et al. (2016), respectively.
Hyper-parameters.
When applicable, we adopt our hyper-parameters from Yarats et al. (2019)
(DMC, robotic manipulation) and Lomonaco et al. (2019) (CRLMaze). For the robotic manipulation
experiments, our implementation closely follows that of DMC, only differing by number of frames
in an observation. We use a frame stack of k = 3 frames for DMC and CRLMaze, and only k = 1
frame for robotic manipulation. For completeness, we detail all hyper-parameters used for the DMC
and CRLMaze environments in Table 10 and Table 11.
Data augmentation.
Random cropping is a commonly used data augmentation used in computer
vision systems (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Szegedy et al., 2015) but has only recently gained interest
as a stochastic regularization technique in the RL literature (Srinivas et al., 2020; Kostrikov et al.,
2020; Laskin et al., 2020). We adopt the random crop proposed in Srinivas et al. (2020): crop
rendered observations of size 100 × 100 to 84 × 84, applying the same crop to all frames in a stacked
observation. This has the added beneﬁts of regularization while still preserving spatio-temporal
patterns between frames. When learning an Inverse Dynamics Model, we apply the same crop to all
16
==PAGE:120==
Preprint. Under review.
Table 10. Hyper-parameters for the DMC tasks.
Hyper-parameter
Value
Frame rendering
3 × 100 × 100
Frame after crop
3 × 84 × 84
Stacked frames
3
Action repeat
2 (ﬁnger)
8 (cartpole)
4 (otherwise)
Discount factor γ
0.99
Episode length
1,000
Learning algorithm
Soft Actor-Critic
Self-supervised task
Inverse Dynamics Model
Number of training steps
500,000
Replay buffer size
500,000
Optimizer (πe, πa, πs)
Adam (β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999)
Optimizer (α)
Adam (β1 = 0.5, β2 = 0.999)
Learning rate (πe, πa, πs)
3e-4 (cheetah)
1e-3 (otherwise)
Learning rate (α)
1e-4
Batch size
128
Batch size (test-time)
32
πe, πs update freq.
2
πe, πs update freq. (test-time)
1
Table 11. Hyper-parameters for the CRLMaze
task.
Hyper-parameter
Value
Frame rendering
3 × 100 × 100
Frame after crop
3 × 84 × 84
Stacked frames
3
Action repeat
4
Discount factor γ
0.99
Episode length
1,000
Learning algorithm
Advantage Actor-Critic
Self-supervised task
Rotation Prediction
Number of training episodes
1,000 (dom. rand.)
500 (otherwise)
Number of processes
20
Optimizer
Adam (β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999)
Learning rate
1e-4
Learning rate (test-time)
1e-5
Batch size
20
Batch size (test-time)
32
πe, πs loss coefﬁcient
0.5
πe, πs loss coefﬁcient (test-time)
1
πe, πs update freq.
1
πe, πs update freq. (test-time)
1
frames of a given observation but apply two different crops to the consecutive observations (st, st+1)
used to predict action at.
Policy Adaptation during Deployment.
We evaluate our method and baselines with episodic
cumulative reward of an agent trained in a single environment and tested in a collection of test
environments, each with distinct changes from the training environment. We assume no reward
signal at test-time and agents are expected to generalize without pre-training or resetting in the new
environment. Therefore, we make updates to the policy using a self-supervised objective, and we
train using observations from the environment in an online manner without memory, i.e. we make
one update per step using the most-recent observation.
Empirically, we ﬁnd that: (i) the random crop data augmentation used during training helps regularize
learning at test-time; and (ii) our algorithm beneﬁts from learning from a batch of randomly cropped
observations rather than single observations, even when all observations in the batch are augmented
copies of the most-recent observation. As such, we apply both of these techniques when performing
Policy Adaptation during Deployment and use a batch size of 32. When using the policy to take
actions, however, inputs to the policy are simply center-cropped.
17
==PAGE:121==
D
Pre­print: Generalization in
Reinforcement Learning by Soft Data
Augmentation
In this appendix, we provide a pre­print of the paper surrounding our SODA method pro­
posed in Chapter 6. The authors and their affiliations are listed below in their entirety.
Affiliations are separated by semi­colons.
• Nicklas Hansen (UC San Diego; Technical University of Denmark)
• Xiaolong Wang (UC San Diego)
The provided pre­print is dated November 26, 2020, and contains a total of 9 pages includ­
ing its own references and appendices. Work on this paper was initiated and completed
in full as part of this thesis.
We additionally provide supplementary material on the official project webpage: https:
//nicklashansen.github.io/SODA, and an open­sourced implementation of SODA as well
as the complete DMControl­GB benchmark is made available here: https://github.com/
nicklashansen/dmcontrol-generalization-benchmark.
Our paper can be cited as follows:
@article{hansen2020softda,
title={Generalization in Reinforcement Learning by
Soft Data Augmentation},
author={Nicklas Hansen and Xiaolong Wang},
year={2020},
eprint={2011.13389},
archivePrefix={arXiv},
primaryClass={cs.LG}
}
Correspondence regarding the pre­print should be directed to Nicklas Hansen.
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
113
==PAGE:122==
Generalization in Reinforcement Learning by Soft Data Augmentation
Nicklas Hansen∗, Xiaolong Wang†
Abstract— Extensive efforts have been made to improve the
generalization ability of Reinforcement Learning (RL) methods
via domain randomization and data augmentation. However,
as more factors of variation are introduced during training,
the optimization process becomes increasingly more difﬁcult,
leading to low sample efﬁciency and unstable training. Instead
of learning policies directly from augmented data, we propose
SOft Data Augmentation (SODA), a method that decouples
augmentation from policy learning. Speciﬁcally, SODA imposes
a soft constraint on the encoder that aims to maximize the mu-
tual information between latent representations of augmented
and non-augmented data, while the RL optimization process
uses strictly non-augmented data. Empirical evaluations are
performed on diverse tasks from DeepMind Control suite as
well as a robotic manipulation task, and we ﬁnd SODA to signif-
icantly advance sample efﬁciency, generalization, and stability
in training over state-of-the-art vision-based RL methods.1
I. INTRODUCTION
Reinforcement Learning (RL) from visual observations
has achieved tremendous success in many areas, including
game-playing [1], robotic manipulation [2]–[4], and navi-
gation tasks [5], [6]. While this combination of learning
both representation and decision-making jointly with RL has
led to great success, numerous studies have shown that RL
agents fail to generalize to new environments [7]–[11], which
is only exacerbated by the high-dimensional nature of images
in practical applications.
To improve generalization in RL, domain randomiza-
tion [12]–[15] has been widely applied to learn robust repre-
sentations invariant to visual changes. The assumption made
in these approaches is that the distribution of randomized
environments sufﬁciently cover factors of variation encoun-
tered at test-time. However, as more factors of variation are
introduced during training, the optimization process becomes
increasingly more difﬁcult, leading to low sample efﬁciency,
unstable training, and ultimately decrease in performance. If
we constrain the randomization to be small, the distribution is
unlikely to cover variations in the test environment. Finding
the right balance between sample efﬁciency and generaliza-
tion therefore requires extensive engineering efforts.
Similarly, recent studies also show that by using the right
kinds of data augmentation, both sample efﬁciency and gen-
eralization of RL policies can be improved substantially [9],
[16], [17]. Determining which data augmentations to use (and
to which degree) is however found to be task-dependent,
and a na¨ıve application of data augmentation may lead
to unstable training and poor performance [9], [17]. It is
∗Technical University of Denmark, Denmark
†University of California, San Diego, CA, USA
1Project page: https://nicklashansen.github.io/SODA/
video backgrounds
random colors
training
test
(a) Environments for DeepMind Control tasks. We consider
5 challenging continuous control tasks from this benchmark.
test
video backgrounds
random colors
training
(b) Environments for robotic manipulation. The task is to
push the yellow cube to the location of the red disc.
Fig. 1. Generalization in RL. Agents are trained in a ﬁxed
environment (denoted the training environment) and we mea-
sure generalization to unseen environments with (i) random
colors and (ii) video backgrounds. To simulate real-world
deployment, we additionally randomize camera, lighting, and
texture during evaluation in the robotic manipulation task.
Additional samples are shown in appendix I.
therefore natural to ask whether we can obtain the beneﬁts
of data augmentation while interfering minimally with the
RL optimization process.
In this paper, we propose SOft Data Augmentation
(SODA), a method that stabilizes training by decoupling data
augmentation from policy learning. While previous work
attempts to learn policies directly from augmented data,
SODA uses strictly non-augmented data for policy learning,
and instead performs auxiliary representation learning using
augmented data. Through its auxiliary task, SODA learns to
generalize by maximizing the mutual information between
latent representations of augmented and non-augmented data.
The proposed auxiliary task shares a learned encoder with
the policy, and SODA therefore imposes a soft constraint
on the learned representation. As the policy is learned only
from non-augmented data, the difﬁculty of RL optimization
is greatly reduced, while SODA still beneﬁts substantially
from data augmentation through representation learning.
We perform visual representation learning by projecting
augmented observations into a compact latent space using
the shared encoder and a learned projection, and similarly
projecting non-augmented observations using a moving av-
erage of the learned network. The SODA objective is then
to learn a mapping from latent features of the augmented
observation to those of the original observation. With strong
and varied data augmentation, SODA learns to ignore factors
arXiv:2011.13389v1  [cs.LG]  26 Nov 2020
==PAGE:123==
of variation that are irrelevant to the RL task, which greatly
reduces observational overﬁtting [10]. Our visual represen-
tation learning task is a self-supervised learning task. Our
approach is related to recent work on joint learning with self-
supervision and RL [18]–[20], where two tasks are trained
jointly on the same augmented observations. However, our
method is fundamentally different. We decouple the training
data ﬂow by using non-augmented data for RL and using
augmented data only for representation learning. Besides,
instead of learning invariance by contrasting two augmented
instances of the same image to a batch of negative sam-
ples [19], [21], [22], SODA learns to map augmented images
to their non-augmented counterparts in latent space, without
the need for negative samples. Because we strictly use data
augmentation for representation learning and instead impose
a soft constraint on the shared encoder through joint training,
we call it soft data augmentation.
Empirical evaluations are performed on the novel DM-
Control Generalization Benchmark (DMControl-GB) based
on continuous control tasks from DeepMind Control suite
(DMControl) [23], as well as a robotic manipulation task.
We train in a ﬁxed environment and evaluate generalization
to environments that are unseen during training. As shown in
Figure 1, agents are trained in a ﬁxed environment, and eval-
uated on environments with random colors and video back-
grounds. Our method improves both sample efﬁciency and
generalization over state-of-the-art vision-based RL methods
in 9 out of 10 environments from DMControl-GB and all 3
types of test environments in robotic manipulation.
We highlight our main contributions as follows:
• We present SODA, a stable and efﬁcient representation
learning method for vision-based RL.
• We propose the DMControl Generalization Benchmark,
a new benchmark for generalization in vision-based RL.
• We show that SODA outperforms prior state-of-the-
art methods signiﬁcantly in test-time generalization to
unseen and visually diverse environments.
II. RELATED WORK
Learning Visual Invariance with Self-Supervision. Self-
supervision for visual representation learning has proven
highly successful in computer vision [24]–[28]. Recently,
contrastive learning for self-supervised pre-training has
achieved very compelling results for many downstream vi-
sual recognition tasks [21], [22], [29]–[32]. For example,
Chen et al. [21] perform an extensive study on different
augmentations (e.g. random cropping, color distortion, rota-
tion) and show that learned representations invariant to these
transformations can make good initializations for down-
stream tasks. Instead of learning with a contrastive objective,
Grill et al. [33] show that invariance can also be learned
via a prediction error without using any negative samples.
Our method also learns invariant feature representations, but
rather than aligning two different augmented views of the
same instance as in previous work, we instead learn to align
the representation of augmented and non-augmented views.
As in Grill et al., SODA does not require negative samples.
Self-Supervised Visual Learning for RL. Inspired by
the success of self-supervised visual representation learning,
researchers have proposed to perform joint learning with
self-supervision and RL to improve sample efﬁciency and
performance [18], [19], [34]. For example, Yarats et al. [18]
show that jointly training an auto-encoder together with RL
improves the sample efﬁciency of model-free RL. Srinivas
et al. [19] further extent this idea by performing auxiliary
contrastive learning together with RL, and nearly match
state-based RL in sample efﬁciency. While the proposed
contrastive learning task uses data augmentation in training,
the same augmented data is used for RL as well. In contrast
to these approaches, we separate the training data into two
data streams and strictly use the non-augmented data for
RL, which helps stabilize training, decrease sensitivity to the
choice of data augmentation, and allows us to beneﬁt from
stronger data augmentation in the self-supervised learning.
Data Augmentation and Randomization. Our work is
inspired by research on generalization by domain random-
ization [12]–[15], [35]. For example, Tobin et al. [13] render
scenes with random textures for object localization in simu-
lation, and show that the learned networks transfer to the real
world. Similar generalization across environments have been
shown in recent work on RL with data augmentation [9],
[16], [17], [36]. In these works, policies are trained to be
invariant to certain visual perturbations by augmenting obser-
vations. However, it is unpredictable and task-dependent how
much randomization can be applied. Instead of training RL
policies directly on augmented observations, we propose soft
data augmentation that decouples training into two objectives
with separate data streams.
III. METHOD
We propose SOft Data Augmentation (SODA), a novel
approach to data augmentation in RL that exhibits signiﬁcant
improvements in sample efﬁciency and stability over prior
work. SODA is a general framework for data augmenta-
tion that can be implemented on top of any standard RL
algorithm. It aims to learn representations that effectively
encode information shared between an observation and its
augmented counterpart, while interfering minimally with the
RL objective. In the following, we present the individual
components of SODA in detail.
A. Architectural Overview
SODA is implemented as a self-supervised auxiliary task
that shares a common encoder f with an RL policy. For
a given policy network parameterized by a collection of
parameters θ, we split the network and corresponding param-
eters sequentially into an encoder fθ and a policy πθ such
that a = πθ(fθ(o)) outputs a distribution over actions (and
any other algorithm-speciﬁc values) for an input observation
o. SODA then consists of the following three components:
the shared encoder fθ, a projection gθ, and a prediction
head hθ. We additionally consider an architecturally identical
encoder fψ and projection gψ where ψ denotes a collection
of parameters separate from θ. We denote fθ as the online
==PAGE:124==
encoder
predictor
encoder
policy
ema
feature space
= stop-gradient
consistency
representation learning on augmented data
reinforcement learning on non-augmented data
ema
projection
Fig. 2. SODA architecture. Left: an observation o is augmented to produce a view o′, which is then encoded and projected
into z′ = gθ(fθ(o′)). Likewise, o is encoded by fψ and projected by gψ to produce features z⋆. The SODA objective is then
to predict z⋆from z′ by hθ formulated as a consistency loss. Right: Reinforcement Learning in SODA. The RL task remains
unchanged and is trained directly on the non-augmented observations o. ema denotes an exponential moving average.
encoder and fψ as the target encoder, and similarly for
projections gθ, gψ. We then deﬁne the parameters ψ as an
exponential moving average (EMA) of θ, and update ψ with
every iteration of SODA using the update rule,
ψn+1 ←−(1 −τ)ψn + τθn
(1)
for an iteration step n and a momentum coefﬁcient τ ∈
(0, 1], such that only parameters θ are updated by gradient
descent [22], [33], [37]. Figure 2 provides an overview of the
architecture, and the SODA task is detailed in the following.
B. Representation Learning by SODA
Given an observation o ∈RC×H×W , we sample a data
augmentation t ∼T
and apply it to produce an aug-
mented observation o′ ≜t(o). As such, o and o′ can be
considered different views of the same observation, where
o is the original observation and o′ is corrupted by some
noise source. If we assume f : RC×H×W →RC′×H′×W ′
such that H′ × W ′ is a feature map down-sampled from
H × W, then both projections gθ, gψ are learned mappings
g : RC′×H′×W ′ →RK where K ≪C′ × H′ × W ′. Given
a feature vector z′ ≜gθ(fθ(o′)), the proposed SODA task
is then to learn a mapping hθ : RK →RK that predicts
the target projection z⋆≜gψ(fψ(o)) of the non-augmented
observation o, as shown in Figure 2 (left). We optimize
projection gθ, predictor hθ, and shared encoder fθ jointly
together with the RL task(s), and employ a consistency loss
LSODA (ˆz, z⋆; θ) = Et∼T
h
∥ˆz◦−z⋆
◦∥2
2
i
(2)
where ˆz ≜hθ(z′), and ˆz◦≜ˆz/∥ˆz∥2, z⋆
◦≜z⋆/∥z⋆∥2 are ℓ2-
normalizations of ˆz and z⋆, respectively. We use a predictor
hθ rather than mapping z′ directly to z⋆as we ﬁnd it to
improve expressiveness in the learned representations, which
is consistent with prior work [21], [33], [34].
The policy πθ (including any algorithm-speciﬁc task
heads) uses fθ to extract features and is optimized with no
modiﬁcations to architecture nor inputs, i.e. we optimize the
RL objective LRL directly on non-augmented observations o
and update πθ, fθ by gradient descent, as shown in Figure 2
(right). During training, we continuously alternate between
optimizing LRL and LSODA. The training procedure is
summarized in Algorithm 1, and the algorithmic design is
further motivated in section III-C.
Algorithm 1 Soft Data Augmentation (SODA)
θ, ψ: randomly initialized network parameters
ω: RL updates per iteration
τ: momentum coefﬁcient
1: for every iteration do
2:
for update = 1, 2, ..., ω do
3:
Sample batch of transitions ν ∼B
4:
Optimize LRL (ν) wrt θ
5:
Sample batch of observations o ∼B
6:
Augment observations o′ = t(o), t ∼T
7:
Compute online predictions ˆz = hθ(gθ(fθ(o′)))
8:
Compute target projections z⋆= gψ(fψ(o))
9:
Optimize LSODA (ˆz, z⋆) wrt θ
10:
Update ψ ←(1 −τ)ψ + τθ
C. Data Augmentation as a Mutual Information Problem
SODA reformulates the problem of generalization as a
representational consistency learning problem: the encoder f
should learn to map different views of the same underlying
state to similar feature vectors. This encourages the encoder
to learn features that are shared across views, e.g. physical
quantities and object interactions, and discard information
that yields no predictive power such as background, lighting,
and high-frequency noise. Given an observation o and a data
augmentation t, we seek to encode o and o′ = t(o) into
compact feature vectors z′, z⋆∈RK, respectively, by learned
mappings fθ, gθ and fψ, gψ such that the mutual information
I between o and o′ is maximally preserved. The mutual
information between z⋆and z′ is then given by
I(z⋆; z′) =
X
z′
X
z⋆
p(z⋆, z′) log p(z⋆|z′)
p(z⋆)
(3)
and is naturally bounded by the mutual information between
==PAGE:125==
0
200
400
600
800
1000
average return
walker_walk (training)
walker_stand (training)
cartpole_swingup (training)
ball_in_cup_catch (training)
finger_spin (training)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
number of frames (M)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
average return
walker_walk (evaluation)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
number of frames (M)
walker_stand (evaluation)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
number of frames (M)
cartpole_swingup (evaluation)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
number of frames (M)
ball_in_cup_catch (evaluation)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
number of frames (M)
finger_spin (evaluation)
SAC
SAC (DR)
SAC (conv)
SODA (conv)
Fig. 3. Random convolution. Top: average return on the training environment during training. Bottom: periodic evaluation
of generalization ability measured by average return on the random color environment. SODA exhibits sample efﬁciency
and convergence similar to SAC but improves generalization signiﬁcantly. Average of 5 runs, shaded area is std. deviation.
unmodified
random 
convolution
random
overlay
Fig. 4. Data augmentation. We consider the following two
data augmentations: random convolution (as proposed by
[9], [16]) and random overlay (novel). See appendix III for
additional data augmentation samples.
o and o′, i.e. I(z⋆; z′) ≤I(o; o′). As I(z⋆; z′) is impractical
to optimize directly, we approximate I as a simple consis-
tency loss deﬁned in (2) by the following intuition. If we
assume fψ, gψ to maximally preserve information in o, then
I(z⋆; z′) ∝I(o; o′), and minimizing LSODA thus maximizes
I(z⋆; z′|o′). In other words, by learning a mapping from z′
to z⋆, we maximally preserve information in o by learning
to discard noise added by the data augmentation t(·). With
strong and varied data augmentation, fθ learns to ignore fac-
tors of variation that are irrelevant to the RL task, and reduces
observational overﬁtting [10], [38]. While the assumption of
maximally preserved information may not hold in practice,
we ﬁnd Equation 2 to be a good enough approximation
for expressive representation learning. Although the SODA
objective does not explicitly prevent trivial solutions, e.g.
fθ(·) = 0, such behavior is implicitly discouraged, and the
reason for that is two-fold: (i) trivial equilibria in LSODA
are shown to be unstable due to updates in the targets fψ, gψ
[33]; and (ii) fθ is jointly optimized between SODA and the
RL objective(s), and trivial equilibria are in direct conﬂict
with the RL objective since they entail that fθ then would
preserve no information in o.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
We evaluate SODA on 5 tasks from DeepMind control
suite (DMControl) [23], as well as in robotic manipulation.
DMControl is comprised of diverse and challenging con-
tinuous control tasks and is a widely used benchmark for
vision-based RL [9], [18], [19], [36], [39]. To quantify the
generalization ability of SODA, we propose DMControl Gen-
eralization Benchmark (DMControl-GB)2, a new benchmark
for generalization in vision-based RL, based on DMControl.
Agents are trained in a ﬁxed environment (denoted the
training environment), and we measure generalization to two
distinct test distributions: (1) environments with random-
ized colors; and (2) environments with natural videos as
background, ﬁrst proposed by [39]. These test distributions
correspond to the color hard and video easy bench-
marks from DMControl-GB; we provide results for the full
DMControl-GB benchmark in appendix I.
While DMControl-GB provides a good platform for
benchmarking algorithms, we are ultimately interested in
developing algorithms that solve real-world problems with
vision-based RL. To better emulate real-world deployment
scenarios, we also consider a robotic manipulation task on a
robotic arm (in simulation). As in DMControl-GB, agents are
trained in a ﬁxed environment and evaluated on environments
with randomized colors and video backgrounds, and we ad-
ditionally perform random perturbations of camera, lighting,
and texture to simulate real-world conditions during testing.
Samples from DMControl-GB and robotic manipulation are
shown in Figure 1, and additional samples are shown in
appendix I.
A. Implementation Details
SODA is a general framework that can be implemented
on top of any standard RL algorithm using parameterized
policies. In this work we implement SODA using Soft
Actor-Critic (SAC) [40] as the base algorithm. We adopt
network architecture and hyperparameters from [39], which
2SODA and benchmark is open-sourced at: https://github.com/
nicklashansen/dmcontrol-generalization-benchmark
==PAGE:126==
implements fθ as 11 convolutional layers and πθ as a multi-
layer perceptron (MLP). Both gθ, hθ are implemented as
MLPs with batch normalization [41] and we use a batch
size of 256 for the SODA task. Projections are of dimension
K = 100, and the target components fψ, gψ are updated
with a momentum coefﬁcient τ = 0.005. LRL and LSODA
are optimized using Adam [42], and in practice we ﬁnd it
sufﬁcient to only make a SODA update after every second
RL update, i.e. ω = 2. In all tasks considered, observations
are stacks of k consecutive frames (k = 3 for DMControl-
GB and k = 1 for robotic manipulation) of size 100 × 100
and with no access to state information. See appendix II for
further implementation details and a list of hyper-parameters.
B. Data Augmentation
While SODA makes no assumptions about the data aug-
mentation used, it is useful to distinguish between weak aug-
mentations that may improve sample efﬁciency but contribute
minimally to generalization, and strong augmentations that
improve generalization at the cost of sample efﬁciency [43].
An example of the former is random cropping [9], [36],
whereas examples of the latter are domain randomization
[12], [13] and random convolution [9], [16]. Consistent with
previous work [9], [19], [39], we apply temporally consistent
random cropping (down to 84×84) by default in SODA and
all baselines, and we refer to the cropped images as non-
augmented observations.
We additionally seek to stabilize training with strong aug-
mentations for generalization, and consider the following two
data augmentations: random convolution, where a randomly
initialized convolutional layer is applied; and a novel random
overlay that linearly interpolates between an observation o
and an image ε to produce an augmented view
toverlay(o) = (1 −α)o + αε, ε ∼D
(4)
where α ∈[0, 1) is the interpolation coefﬁcient and D is an
unrelated dataset. In practice, we use α = 0.5 and sample
images from Places [44], a dataset containing 1.8M diverse
scenes. Both data augmentations are shown in Figure 4.
C. Baselines
We compare SODA to the following baselines: (i) a
baseline SAC that is equivalent to RAD [9] as we apply
random cropping to all baselines (ii) SAC trained with
domain randomization on the random colors test distribution
(denoted SAC (DR)); (iii) SAC using random convolution
as data augmentation (denoted SAC (conv); and (iv) SAC
using random overlay as data augmentation (denoted SAC
(overlay)). Likewise, our method is denoted SODA (conv)
and SODA (overlay). Data augmentation baselines perform
RL on augmented observations, whereas SODA does not; we
ablate this decision in section IV-D.
D. Stability under Strong Data Augmentation
Domain randomization and data augmentation is known to
decrease sample efﬁciency and can destabilize the RL train-
ing. Figure 3 shows training performance and generalization
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
number of frames (M)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
average return
walker_walk (training)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
number of frames (M)
walker_stand (training)
Augment RL
Augment both
Augment SODA
Fig. 5. Soft data augmentation. Average return on the train-
ing environment for walker walk and walker stand
tasks. Augment RL corresponds to the SAC (conv) baseline,
Augment both applies random convolution in both SODA
and RL, and Augment SODA is the proposed formulation of
SODA. Average of 5 runs, shaded area is std. deviation.
of baselines and SODA using random convolution. While
SAC converges in training, its generalization remains poor.
SODA improves generalization substantially without desta-
bilizing the RL training, and exhibits a sample efﬁciency
similar to the SAC baseline. Both SAC trained with domain
randomization and SAC (conv) either fail to solve the tasks
or converge to sub-optimal policies.
To further investigate the effect of soft data augmentation,
we consider a variant of SODA in which random convolution
augmentation is applied in both representation learning and
RL, and we summarize our ﬁndings in Figure 5. While
using data augmentation in both objectives (Augment both)
improves signiﬁcantly over only applying data augmentation
in RL (Augment RL), we ﬁnd the proposed formulation of
SODA (Augment SODA) superior in both sample efﬁciency
and end-performance.
E. Generalization to Unseen Environments
We evaluate the generalization ability of SODA on
the challenging random colors and video backgrounds
benchmarks
from
DMControl-GB
(color hard
and
video easy, respectively), and additionally compare to a
number of recent state-of-the-art methods: (i) CURL [19],
a contrastive representation learning method; (ii) RAD [9],
a study on data augmentation for RL that uses random
cropping and is equivalent to the SAC baseline in section IV-
C; and (iii) PAD [39], a method for self-supervised policy
adaptation. Results are shown in Table I. We ﬁnd SODA
to outperform previous methods in 9 out of 10 instances,
and by as much as 81% on ball in cup catch (video
backgrounds). Further, SODA also outperforms the baselines
from section IV-C in all tasks except walker stand on
video backgrounds.
While SODA with random convolution data augmentation
generalizes well to the random colors distribution, it gener-
alizes comparably worse to videos. We conjecture that this is
because random convolution captures less factors of variation
than overlay (e.g. textures and local color changes), which
is in line with the ﬁndings of [8], [39]. SODA (overlay) is
found to generalize well to both test distributions even though
==PAGE:127==
TABLE I. Generalization. Average return of methods trained in a ﬁxed environment and evaluated on: (left) DMControl-GB
with natural videos as background; and (right) DMControl-GB with random colors. Mean and std. deviation of 5 runs.
video backgrounds
random colors
DMControl-GB
CURL
RAD
PAD
SAC
SAC
SODA
SAC
SODA
CURL
RAD
PAD
SODA
(generalization)
[19]
[9]
[39]
(DR)
(conv)
(conv)
(overlay)
(overlay)
[19]
[9]
[39]
(overlay)
walker,
556
606
717
520
169
635
718
768
445
400
468
692
walk
±133
±63
±79
±107
±124
±48
±47
±38
±99
±61
±47
±68
walker,
852
745
935
839
435
903
960
955
662
644
797
893
stand
±75
±146
±20
±58
±100
±56
±2
±13
±54
±88
±46
±12
cartpole,
404
373
521
524
176
474
718
758
454
590
630
805
swingup
±67
±72
±76
±184
±62
±143
±30
±62
±110
±53
±63
±28
ball in cup,
316
481
436
232
249
539
713
875
231
541
563
949
catch
±119
±26
±55
±135
±190
±111
±125
±56
±92
±29
±50
±19
finger,
502
400
691
402
355
363
607
695
691
667
803
793
spin
±19
±64
±80
±208
±88
±185
±68
±97
±12
±154
±72
±128
0
200
400
600
800
1000
average return
walker_walk (training)
walker_stand (training)
cartpole_swingup (training)
ball_in_cup_catch (training)
finger_spin (training)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
number of frames (M)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
average return
walker_walk (evaluation)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
number of frames (M)
walker_stand (evaluation)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
number of frames (M)
cartpole_swingup (evaluation)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
number of frames (M)
ball_in_cup_catch (evaluation)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
number of frames (M)
finger_spin (evaluation)
SAC
SAC (DR)
SAC (overlay)
SODA (overlay)
Fig. 6. Random overlay. Top: average return on the training environment during training. Bottom: periodic evaluation of
generalization ability measured by average return on the random color environment. SODA offers better sample-efﬁciency
than the novel SAC (overlay) baseline and similar generalization to SODA (conv) even though there is minimal visual
similarity between random overlays and the random color environment. Average of 5 runs, shaded area is std. deviation.
there is minimal visual similarity between random overlays
and the random color environment. This shows that SODA
beneﬁts from strong and varied data augmentation, and we
leave it to future work to explore additional (soft) data
augmentations. For completeness, training and generalization
curves for the random overlay data augmentation are shown
in Figure 6, and we provide results and comparisons on two
additional benchmarks, color easy and video hard,
from DMControl-GB in appendix I.
F. Robotic manipulation
We additionally consider a robotic manipulation task in
which the goal is for a robotic arm to push a yellow cube
to the location of a red disc (as illustrated in Figure 1).
Observations are 100 × 100 images and agents are trained
using dense rewards. Episodes consist of 50 time steps, and
at each time step there is a positive reward of 1 for having
the cube at the goal location (disc), and a small penalty
proportional to the distance between the cube and goal. An
average return of 25 therefore means that the cube is in goal
position for more than half of all time steps.
TABLE II. Generalization in robotic manipulation. Aver-
age return of SODA and baselines in the training and test
environments. Mean and std. deviation of 5 runs.
robot,
SAC
SAC
SAC
SODA
SAC
SODA
push
(DR)
(conv)
(conv)
(overlay)
(overlay)
training
14.5
9.3
0.2
14.4
15.8
21.3
±5.2
±7.5
±1.7
±4.6
±7.3
±5.0
random
7.2
7.8
−3.1
1.4
13.5
18.0
colors
±3.4
±7.0
±1.4
±3.4
±4.4
±3.7
video
0.9
7.0
−4.9
−4.5
7.6
13.9
bg.
±6.0
±7.4
±1.9
±1.1
±7.1
±2.6
As in DMControl-GB, we consider generalization to envi-
ronments with (i) random colors; and (ii) video backgrounds.
To simulate real-world deployment, we also randomize cam-
era, lighting, and texture during testing. Training and gener-
alization curves are shown in Figure 7, and results are sum-
marized in Table II. We ﬁnd SODA to outperform baselines
in both sample efﬁciency and generalization to all considered
test environments, which suggests that SODA may be a
suitable method for reducing observational overﬁtting in real-
world deployment of policies for robotic manipulation.
==PAGE:128==
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
number of frames (M)
10
5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
average return
robot_push (training)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
number of frames (M)
robot_push (evaluation)
SAC
SAC (DR)
SAC (overlay)
SODA (overlay)
Fig. 7. Robotic manipulation. Left: average return on the
training environment during training. Right: periodic evalu-
ation of generalization measured by average return on the
random color environment. SODA outperforms all baselines
in both sample efﬁciency and generalization, and reduces
variance. Average of 5 runs, shaded area is std. deviation.
V. CONCLUSION
We show empirically that SODA improves stability, sam-
ple efﬁciency, and generalization signiﬁcantly over previous
methods and a set of strong baselines. We dissect the
success of SODA and ﬁnd that it beneﬁts substantially
from (i) not learning policies on augmented data; (ii) its
representational consistency learning formulation; and (iii)
strong and varied data augmentation for representation learn-
ing.
REFERENCES
[1] V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. Graves, I. Antonoglou,
D. Wierstra, and M. Riedmiller, “Playing atari with deep reinforcement
learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.5602, 2013. 1
[2] S. Levine, C. Finn, T. Darrell, and P. Abbeel, “End-to-end training
of deep visuomotor policies,” The Journal of Machine Learning
Research, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 1334–1373, 2016. 1
[3] A. V. Nair, V. Pong, M. Dalal, S. Bahl, S. Lin, and S. Levine, “Visual
reinforcement learning with imagined goals,” in Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2018, pp. 9191–9200. 1
[4] D. Kalashnikov, A. Irpan, P. Pastor, J. Ibarz, A. Herzog, E. Jang,
D. Quillen, E. Holly, M. Kalakrishnan, V. Vanhoucke, and S. Levine,
“Qt-opt: Scalable deep reinforcement learning for vision-based robotic
manipulation,” ArXiv, vol. abs/1806.10293, 2018. 1
[5] Y. Zhu, R. Mottaghi, E. Kolve, J. J. Lim, A. Gupta, L. Fei-Fei, and
A. Farhadi, “Target-driven visual navigation in indoor scenes using
deep reinforcement learning,” in ICRA.
IEEE, 2017, pp. 3357–3364.
1
[6] W. Yang, X. Wang, A. Farhadi, A. Gupta, and R. Mottaghi, “Visual
semantic navigation using scene priors,” in ICLR, 2019. 1
[7] S. Gamrian and Y. Goldberg, “Transfer learning for related rein-
forcement learning tasks via image-to-image translation,” ArXiv, vol.
abs/1806.07377, 2019. 1
[8] K. Cobbe, O. Klimov, C. Hesse, T. Kim, and J. Schulman, “Quanti-
fying generalization in reinforcement learning,” 2018. 1, 5
[9] M. Laskin, K. Lee, A. Stooke, L. Pinto, P. Abbeel, and A. Srini-
vas, “Reinforcement learning with augmented data,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.14990, 2020. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9
[10] X. Song, Y. Jiang, S. Tu, Y. Du, and B. Neyshabur, “Observational
overﬁtting in reinforcement learning,” 2019. 1, 2, 4, 8
[11] K. Cobbe, C. Hesse, J. Hilton, and J. Schulman, “Leveraging pro-
cedural generation to benchmark reinforcement learning,” ArXiv, vol.
abs/1912.01588, 2019. 1
[12] L. Pinto, M. Andrychowicz, P. Welinder, W. Zaremba, and P. Abbeel,
“Asymmetric actor critic for image-based robot learning,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1710.06542, 2017. 1, 2, 5
[13] J. Tobin, R. Fong, A. Ray, J. Schneider, W. Zaremba, and P. Abbeel,
“Domain randomization for transferring deep neural networks from
simulation to the real world,” 2017 IEEE/RSJ International Conference
on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), Sep 2017. 1, 2, 5
[14] X. B. Peng, M. Andrychowicz, W. Zaremba, and P. Abbeel, “Sim-to-
real transfer of robotic control with dynamics randomization,” 2018
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
May 2018. 1, 2
[15] J. Yang, B. Petersen, H. Zha, and D. Faissol, “Single episode policy
transfer in reinforcement learning,” 2019. 1, 2
[16] K. Lee, K. Lee, J. Shin, and H. Lee, “A simple randomization
technique for generalization in deep reinforcement learning,” ArXiv,
vol. abs/1910.05396, 2019. 1, 2, 4, 5, 9
[17] R. Raileanu, M. Goldstein, D. Yarats, I. Kostrikov, and R. Fergus,
“Automatic data augmentation for generalization in deep reinforcement
learning,” ArXiv, vol. abs/2006.12862, 2020. 1, 2
[18] D. Yarats, A. Zhang, I. Kostrikov, B. Amos, J. Pineau, and R. Fergus,
“Improving sample efﬁciency in model-free reinforcement learning
from images,” 2019. 2, 4
[19] A. Srinivas, M. Laskin, and P. Abbeel, “Curl: Contrastive unsu-
pervised representations for reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.04136, 2020. 2, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9
[20] A. Stooke, K. Lee, P. Abbeel, and M. Laskin, “Decoupling represen-
tation learning from reinforcement learning,” arXiv:2004.14990. 2
[21] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple frame-
work for contrastive learning of visual representations,” 2020. 2, 3
[22] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. B. Girshick, “Momentum contrast
for unsupervised visual representation learning,” 2020 IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp.
9726–9735, 2020. 2, 3
[23] Y. Tassa, Y. Doron, A. Muldal, T. Erez, Y. Li, D. de Las Casas, D. Bud-
den, A. Abdolmaleki, J. Merel, A. Lefrancq, T. Lillicrap, and M. Ried-
miller, “DeepMind control suite,” https://arxiv.org/abs/1801.00690,
DeepMind, Tech. Rep., Jan. 2018. 2, 4, 8
[24] X. Wang and A. Gupta, “Unsupervised learning of visual repre-
sentations using videos,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Computer Vision, 2015, pp. 2794–2802. 2
[25] C. Doersch, A. Gupta, and A. A. Efros, “Unsupervised visual repre-
sentation learning by context prediction,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision, 2015, pp. 1422–1430.
2
[26] D. Pathak, P. Krahenbuhl, J. Donahue, T. Darrell, and A. A. Efros,
“Context encoders: Feature learning by inpainting,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
2016, pp. 2536–2544. 2
[27] M. Noroozi and P. Favaro, “Unsupervised learning of visual repre-
sentations by solving jigsaw puzzles,” in European Conference on
Computer Vision.
Springer, 2016, pp. 69–84. 2
[28] R. Zhang, P. Isola, and A. A. Efros, “Colorful image colorization,”
in European conference on computer vision.
Springer, 2016, pp.
649–666. 2
[29] Z. Wu, Y. Xiong, S. X. Yu, and D. Lin, “Unsupervised feature learning
via non-parametric instance discrimination,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2018,
pp. 3733–3742. 2
[30] A. van den Oord, Y. Li, and O. Vinyals, “Representation learning with
contrastive predictive coding,” 2018. 2
[31] Y. Tian, D. Krishnan, and P. Isola, “Contrastive multiview coding,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.05849, 2019. 2
[32] I. Misra and L. van der Maaten, “Self-supervised learning of pretext-
invariant representations,” in CVPR, 2020. 2
[33] J.-B. Grill, F. Strub, F. Altch´e, C. Tallec, P. H. Richemond,
E. Buchatskaya, C. Doersch, B. A. Pires, Z. D. Guo, M. G. Azar,
B. Piot, K. Kavukcuoglu, R. Munos, and M. Valko, “Bootstrap your
own latent: A new approach to self-supervised learning,” ArXiv, vol.
abs/2006.07733, 2020. 2, 3, 4
[34] M. Schwarzer, A. Anand, R. Goel, R. D. Hjelm, A. Courville, and
P. Bachman, “Data-efﬁcient reinforcement learning with momentum
predictive representations,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.05929, 2020. 2,
3
[35] F. Ramos, R. Possas, and D. Fox, “Bayessim: Adaptive domain
randomization via probabilistic inference for robotics simulators,”
Robotics: Science and Systems XV, Jun 2019. 2
[36] I. Kostrikov, D. Yarats, and R. Fergus, “Image augmentation is all you
==PAGE:129==
need: Regularizing deep reinforcement learning from pixels,” 2020. 2,
4, 5
[37] T. Lillicrap, J. Hunt, A. Pritzel, N. Heess, T. Erez, Y. Tassa, D. Sil-
ver, and D. Wierstra, “Continuous control with deep reinforcement
learning,” CoRR, vol. abs/1509.02971, 2016. 3
[38] C. Packer, K. Gao, J. Kos, P. Kr¨ahenb¨uhl, V. Koltun, and D. Song,
“Assessing generalization in deep reinforcement learning,” 2018. 4
[39] N. Hansen, Y. Sun, P. Abbeel, A. A. Efros, L. Pinto, and X. Wang,
“Self-supervised policy adaptation during deployment,” 2020. 4, 5, 6,
8, 9
[40] T. Haarnoja, A. Zhou, K. Hartikainen, G. Tucker, S. Ha, J. Tan,
V. Kumar, H. Zhu, A. Gupta, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Soft actor-
critic algorithms and applications,” 2018. 4, 9
[41] S. Ioffe and C. Szegedy, “Batch normalization: Accelerating deep
network training by reducing internal covariate shift,” ArXiv, vol.
abs/1502.03167, 2015. 5, 9
[42] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimiza-
tion,” CoRR, vol. abs/1412.6980, 2015. 5, 9
[43] Y. Tian, C. Sun, B. Poole, D. Krishnan, C. Schmid, and P. Isola,
“What makes for good views for contrastive learning,” ArXiv, vol.
abs/2005.10243, 2020. 5
[44] B. Zhou, A. Lapedriza, A. Khosla, A. Oliva, and A. Torralba, “Places:
A 10 million image database for scene recognition,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2017. 5, 9
APPENDIX I
DMCONTROL GENERALIZATION BENCHMARK
We open-source DMControl Generalization Benchmark
(DMControl-GB), a benchmark for generalization in vision-
based RL, based on the DeepMind Control suite [23]. In
DMControl-GB, agents are trained in a ﬁxed environment
(denoted the training environment), and the generalization
ability of agents is evaluated on unseen, visually diverse test
distributions. Samples from each of the proposed benchmarks
are shown in Figure 8. We benchmark a number of recent,
state-of-the-art methods for sample-efﬁciency and general-
ization: (i) CURL [19], a contrastive representation learning
method; (ii) RAD [9], a study on data augmentation for RL
that uses random cropping; and (iii) PAD [39], a method for
self-supervised policy adaptation. All algorithms are imple-
mented in a uniﬁed framework using standardized architec-
ture and hyper-parameters, wherever applicable. DMControl-
GB, SODA, and implementations of the baselines are open-
sourced at https://github.com/nicklashansen/
dmcontrol-generalization-benchmark.
A. Additional results on DMControl-GB
Our main results, Figure 3, Figure 6, and Table I,
consider the color hard and video easy benchmarks
of DMControl-GB. Results from our experiments on two
additional benchmarks from DMControl-GB are shown in
Table III. SODA outperforms all previous state-of-the-art
methods in 9 out of 10 environments and achieves near-
optimal generalization on the color easy benchmark. On
the extremely challenging video hard benchmark, SODA
shows substantial improvements over baselines, but there is
still room for improvement on the majority of tasks. We
conjecture that the considerable performance gap between
the training environment and video hard is due to obser-
vational overﬁtting [10], and in our experiments we ﬁnd that
our baseline methods tend to rely on visual features such as
shadows that may be correlated with the reward signal, but
are not necessarily present at test-time.
(a) color easy
(b) color hard
(c) video easy
(d) video hard
Fig. 8. Samples from DMControl-GB. Agents are trained in
a ﬁxed environment (denoted the training environment), and
the generalization ability of agents is evaluated on the test
distributions shown in (a-d). Environments (a-b) randomize
the color of background, ﬂoor, and the agent itself, while
(c-d) replaces the background with natural videos. In (c),
only the skybox is replaced, whereas the entirety of the
background is replaced in (d). Our main results, Figure
3, Figure 6, and Table I, consider the color hard and
video easy benchmarks of DMControl-GB.
TABLE III. Average return of SODA and state-of-the-art
methods on the color easy and video hard environ-
ments from DMControl-GB. Mean and std. deviation of 5
runs. Results for color hard and video easy are shown
in Table I.
DMControl-GB
CURL
RAD
PAD
SODA
(color easy)
[19]
[9]
[39]
(overlay)
walker,
645
636
687
811
walk
±55
±33
±119
±41
walker,
866
807
894
960
stand
±46
±67
±39
±4
cartpole,
668
763
812
859
swingup
±74
±29
±20
±15
ball in cup,
565
727
775
969
catch
±168
±87
±159
±3
finger,
781
789
870
855
spin
±139
±160
±54
±93
DMControl-GB
CURL
RAD
PAD
SODA
(video hard)
[19]
[9]
[39]
(overlay)
walker,
58
56
93
381
walk
±18
±9
±29
±72
walker,
45
231
278
771
stand
±5
±39
±72
±83
cartpole,
114
110
123
429
swingup
±15
±16
±24
±64
ball in cup,
115
97
66
327
catch
±33
±29
±61
±100
finger,
27
34
56
302
spin
±21
±11
±18
±41
==PAGE:130==
TABLE IV. Hyper-parameters for the DMControl-GB tasks.
Hyperparameter
Value
Frame rendering
3 × 100 × 100
Frame after crop
3 × 84 × 84
Stacked frames
3
Number of conv. layers
11
Number of ﬁlters in conv.
32
Action repeat
2 (finger spin)
8 (cartpole swingup)
4 (otherwise)
Discount factor γ
0.99
Episode time steps
1,000
Learning algorithm
Soft Actor-Critic
Number of training steps
500,000
Replay buffer size
500,000
Optimizer (RL/aux.)
Adam (β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999)
Optimizer (α)
Adam (β1 = 0.5, β2 = 0.999)
Learning rate (RL)
1e-3
Learning rate (α)
1e-4
Learning rate (SODA)
3e-4
Batch size (RL)
128
Batch size (SODA)
256
Actor update freq.
2
Critic update freq.
1
Auxiliary update freq.
1 (CURL)
2 (PAD/SODA)
N/A (otherwise)
Momentum coef. τ (SODA)
0.005
APPENDIX II
IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
Table IV summarizes the hyper-parameters of SODA and
baselines used in our DMControl-GB experiments. We use
identical algorithms, architectures, and hyper-parameters for
robotic manipulation, but opt for observations as stacks of
k = 3 frames in DMControl-GB and k = 1 in robotic
manipulation. We implement SODA and baselines using
Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) [40] as the base algorithm, and
adopt network architecture and hyperparameters from [39].
We apply the same architecture and hyperparameters in
all methods, wherever applicable. As the action spaces of
both DMControl-GB and the robotic manipulation task are
continuous, the policy learned by SAC outputs the mean and
variance of a Gaussian distribution over actions. Frames are
RGB images rendered at 100 × 100 and cropped to 84 × 84
as in [9], [19], [39], such that inputs to the network are
of size 3k × 84 × 84, where the ﬁrst dimension indicates
the color channels and the following dimensions represent
spatial dimensions. The same crop is applied to all frames
in a stack. The shared encoder consists of 11 convolutional
layers and outputs features of size 32×21×21. In our SODA
implementation, both gθ, hθ are implemented as MLPs with
batch normalization [41] and we use a batch size of 256 for
the SODA task. Projections are of dimension K = 100, and
the target components fψ, gψ are updated with a momentum
coefﬁcient τ = 0.005. LRL and LSODA are optimized using
Adam [42], and in practice we ﬁnd it sufﬁcient to only make
a SODA update after every second RL update, i.e. ω = 2.
(a) Random convolution data augmentation.
(b) Random overlay data augmentation.
Fig. 9. Samples from data augmentation. In this work, we
consider the random convolution data augmentation shown
in (a), as well as the novel random overlay shown in (b).
APPENDIX III
DATA AUGMENTATIONS
Section IV-B discusses two data augmentations that we
consider in this work: (1) random convolution [9], [16],
where a randomly initialized convolutional layer is applied;
and (2) random overlay, where we linearly interpolate be-
tween an observation o and an image ε to produce an
augmented view o′ = toverlay(o), as formalized in Equation
4. In practice, we use an interpolation coefﬁcient of α = 0.5
and sample images from Places [44], a dataset containing
1.8M diverse scenes. Samples from the two data augmenta-
tions are shown in Figure 9.
==PAGE:131==
Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning
123
==PAGE:132==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
