==PAGE:1==
Experimental and Theoretical Investigation
of Knocking Sounds in Journal Bearings
Master Thesis
Kristian Flensborg Dahl
DTU Mechanical Engineering
January 2021
==PAGE:2==
Authors:
Kristian Flensborg Dahl
Title:
Experimental and theoretical
investigation of knocking sounds in
journal bearings
Project Period:
August 2020 - January 2021
ECTS:
30
Supervisers:
Casper Schousboe Andreasen
Peder Klit
==PAGE:3==
Preface
First and foremost thanks to supervisors Peder Klit and Casper Schousboe An-
dreasen for valuable answers, help and feedback throughout the project.
Thanks to Anders Vølund and MAN Energy solutions for providing insight and
valuable sparring.
Thanks to Benny Edelsten for being very helpful lending out and installing ac-
celerometers and force transducer as well as troubleshooting when the data acquisi-
tion system crashed and for his advice in general.
Thanks to the workshop in building 413 and special thanks to Per Bo Nielsen for
assembling the test rig and for modifying and measuring the bearing.
1
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Abstract
1
2
Problem Statement
2
3
Motivation
2
4
Hydrodynamic Journal Bearings
3
5
The Knocking Phenomenon
3
5.1
Description of the knocking phenomenon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
5.2
Previous studies on knocking noise in oil ﬁlms. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
6
Cavitation in Oil Films
9
6.1
Gas cavitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
6.2
Vapor cavitation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
6.3
Estimation of vapor cavitation formation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
7
Test Rig and Modiﬁcations
13
7.1
Test rig
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
7.2
Control and monitoring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
7.3
Misalignment between shaft and bearing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
7.4
Modiﬁed bearing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
8
Calibration
17
8.1
Distance transducers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
9
Estimation of Journal Position
18
10 Test Method
21
11 Hydraulic System
22
11.1 Experimental estimation of oil viscosity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
11.2 Hydraulic simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
12 Experiments
26
12.1 Initial experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
12.2 Steady state experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
12.3 Knocking sound experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
12.4 Parameter study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
13 Comsol Model
38
13.1 Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
13.2 Comparison to other experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
Page 2
==PAGE:5==
13.3 Parameter study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
14 Conclusion
48
15 Future work
49
A Appendix: Test rig data treatment
51
B Appendix: Numerical model of hydraulic system
53
C Appendix: Technical drawing of bearing
59
D Appendix: Figure from DCV data sheet
59
E Appendix: Calculations - Hertzian contact pressure and journal
bearing deﬂection
60
F Appendix: Calculations - Short bearing theory
62
G Appendix: Calculations - System response time
64
Page 3
==PAGE:6==
1
Abstract
This master thesis describes the experimental and numerical investigation of knock-
ing sounds in dynamically loaded journal bearings. The scope of the project was
to replicate the knocking sounds on a journal bearing test rig in order to carry out
an experimental parameter study of the knocking phenomenon. The experimental
observations were compared against numerical simulations of the journal bearing to
evaluate if numerical simulations can be used to predict the knocking phenomenon.
After modiﬁcations and calibration of the journal bearing test rig, the knocking phe-
nomenon was successfully replicated and documented. The experimental parameter
study found that the knocking phenomenon depends on multiple operational and
geometrical parameters such as RPM, shaft center velocity, oil temperature and lo-
cation of the oil inlet. By comparing the numerical simulations to the experimental
observations it was found that the minimum oil ﬁlm pressure is an indicator for
knocking in plain journal bearings. Based on that observation, the inﬂuence of di-
mensional and geometrical changes of the bearing on the minimum ﬁlm pressure was
investigated. Besides the minimum ﬁlm pressure, the distance from the low pressure
zone in the oil ﬁlm to the bearing edges is also an important indicator for knocking.
It was found that increasing the load carrying capacity of the journal bearing or
introducing grooves near the bearing edges prevents knocking.
Page 1
==PAGE:7==
2
Problem Statement
The combustion engine industry occasionally experiences unwanted knocking sounds
from engine journal bearings. This knocking phenomenon is caused by cavitation in
the oil ﬁlm. But when does it occur and how can it be prevented? The purpose of
this project is to replicate the phenomenon experimentally on a journal bearing test
rig in order to investigate the phenomenon and perform a parameter study. The
experimental results will be compared and evaluated against numerical simulations.
3
Motivation
Knocking sounds from the main bearings are occasionally observed in certain car
engines and large marine diesel engines, see Figure 3.1a.
The knocking noise is
annoying and the phenomenon may increase the wear of the bearing surface conse-
quently deteriorating the performance and reducing bearing lifetime. Investigation
of the knocking phenomenon has therefore been of great interest in the combustion
engine industry and it has been investigated in multiple papers. This project aims
to build upon previous research in order to gain more knowledge on why and when
the phenomenon occurs and how it can be prevented. This is achieved through
experimental work on an existing journal bearing test rig located at the Technical
University of Denmark, see Figure 3.1b, together with numerical simulations.
(a) Location of main bearings in a
marine diesel engine.
(b) Picture of the test rig. a) journal bearing,
b) supporting roller bearings, c) mounting table,
d) journal bearing support structure, f) hydraulic
piston, e) electric motor.
Figure 3.1
Page 2
==PAGE:8==
4
Hydrodynamic Journal Bearings
The knocking phenomenon is observed in hydrodynamic journal bearings. The work-
ing principle of a hydrodynamic journal bearing is illustrated in Figure 4.1. Initially
the shaft is resting on the bearing surface. The diameter of the shaft is smaller
than the inner diameter of the bearing and the clearance between the shaft and the
bearing is ﬁlled with oil. As the shaft begins to rotate the oil is drawn in between
the shaft and the bearing. In this process the oil is compressed and pressurized.
The pressurized oil generates a lift on the shaft so that the shaft and the bearing are
completely separated by an oil ﬁlm. Journal bearings are therefore characterized by
low friction and low wear while running.
Figure 4.1: Conceptual sketch of a hydrodynamic journal bearing.
5
The Knocking Phenomenon
5.1
Description of the knocking phenomenon
The knocking phenomenon can be described as a hearable knocking sound caused
by cavitation. The knocking noise in journal bearings sounds like a metallic impact.
The noise seems to vary from bearing to bearing. In small bearings, like a camshaft
bearing, the sound has been described as a high frequency, above 10 kHz, ticking
noise. For car engine main bearings knocking noises above 5 kHz have been reported
while for large marine diesel engine main bearings the knocking noises are deeper
and sound more like heavy impacts, as if the bearing was hit with a big hammer.
The knocking sound generated on the journal bearing cavitation test rig (will be re-
ferred to as the CTR) can be heard on the link [1]. Due to the nature of the sound,
the knocking phenomenon can be confused with metal to metal contact inside the
journal bearing.
Page 3
==PAGE:9==
The phenomenon occurs in dynamically loaded bearings like main bearings and cam
shaft bearings in combustion engines which experience highly ﬂuctuating loads. The
knocking sound observed in industry is described as un-periodically as it typically
does not appear at every load cycle.
The knocking phenomenon process is illustrated in Figure 5.1. As the shaft is moved
rapidly relative to the bearing the oil ﬁlm experiences a squeeze, see Figure 5.2. In
the part of the journal bearing where shaft and bearing are separating, the squeeze
causes a pressure drop which results in cavitation. When the shaft slows down,
the oil pressure in the cavitating region increases which causes the cavitation to
collapse.
If the rapidly collapsing cavity gets in contact with the atmosphere a
knocking sound is generated. This process and the knocking phenomenon in general
will be described in further detail in the following subsection.
Figure 5.1: Conceptual sketch of knocking phenomenon.
Figure 5.2: Illustration of the normal squeeze mechanism. wa and wb are the velocities
of the two surfaces, respectively. If wa ̸= wb a non constant pressure distribution, p, is
generated in the oil ﬁlm. If wa > wb the pressure in the oil ﬁlm drops.
Page 4
==PAGE:10==
5.2
Previous studies on knocking noise in oil ﬁlms.
A number of previous studies have investigated why the knocking phenomenon oc-
curs and what parameters inﬂuence the phenomenon. These results will now be
presented.
Toyota experienced knocking sounds from the main bearings in one of their engines
and they investigated the phenomenon [2]. They found that the knocking only oc-
curred at a narrow speciﬁc rotational speed range. When they cut the fuel supply to
the near by cylinder, changed the clearance or increased the oil viscosity the knock-
ing sound stopped. They found that there was no metal to metal contact in the
bearing but cavitation erosion was found. They concluded that three parameters
should be present for the noise to happen: cavitation in the oil, instability of the
journal bearing system and a ﬂuctuating load.
The same problem was experienced and investigated by Isuzu motors [3] regarding
a knocking noise from one of the bearings supporting a camshaft. They investigated
several parameters and their relation to the knocking phenomenon. They compared
the load, oil ﬁlm thickness, journal center velocity and oil ﬁlm pressure in the journal
bearings supporting the cam shaft. They found that the bearing where the knocking
was observed had a signiﬁcantly smaller minimum ﬁlm thickness, higher maximum
ﬁlm pressure and approximately the same maximum journal center velocity com-
pared to the other bearings. They found that the noise occurred when the shaft
reached its maximum velocity while moving away from the bearing surface just af-
ter reaching the minimum ﬁlm thickness. They also found that the knocking noise
did not occur when lowering the oil temperature below 100◦C or when the engine
speed was increased above 1500 RPM.
Figure 5.3: Sketch of experimental setup in principle experiment[4].
Simpliﬁed experiments have also been carried out to investigate the phenomenon.
In one paper [4] (will be reﬀered to as Experiment 1) two plane and circular plates
Page 5
==PAGE:11==
were placed above and parallel to each other in an oil bath, see Figure 5.3. The
upper plate was oscillated relative to the lower plate using a vibrator while ﬁlming
the oil ﬁlm. They found that cavitation occurred when the clearance increased and
collapsed when it decreased. They found that the noise occurred when air from
the atmosphere got sucked into the cavitation and then blown out again when the
cavitation collapsed. This process can be seen in Figure 5.4. In picture (b) the two
discs are separating. In the middle of the disc cavitation can be observed. At the
same time an atmospheric air bubble is being sucked in from the edge of the upper
disc. In picture (c) the air bubble reaches the cavitation. In picture (d) and (e) the
discs are converging again and the air is blown out of the cavitation and thereby
creating the knocking sound. They found that the knocking sound occurred more
frequently and became louder when they increased the oscillary frequency, reduced
the amount of oil in the bath or when applying a square wave signal to the vibrator
instead of a sine signal. At some of the experiments it was observed that during
the oscillation the maximum clearance between the plates would gradually increase
from cycle to cycle until the knocking occurred followed by cycles with signiﬁcantly
smaller clearance and no noise. This might indicate an accumulation of air bubbles
in the oil ﬁlm which are then blown out at once at the time of the knocking. How-
ever, this was not evaluated in the paper. At higher oscillation frequencies the noise
became more frequent and powerfull and the cavitation increased as can be seen in
Figure 5.5. Above a certain frequency the sound would happen at every load cycle,
creating a seemingly continuous noise.
Figure 5.4: Development and collapse of cavitation which results in a knocking sound.[4].
Page 6
==PAGE:12==
Figure 5.5: Shape of cavitation at higher squeeze frequencies. a) single noise. b) contin-
uous noise.[4].
Similar observations were found in another experiment [5](will be reﬀered to as Ex-
periment 2) on a similar test setup. They found that the noise only occurred when
the collapsing cavitation reached the atmosphere. They did not report if air was
sucked into the cavitation prior to the knocking. This indicates that the knocking
can occur if the collapsing cavitation bubble reaches the outer edge of the oil ﬁlm
even without containing air sucked in from the atmosphere. Further, a very inter-
esting observation was made. The noise occurred while the parrallel plates were still
separating. This means that the oil ﬁlm does not need to be compressed in order
for the cavitation to collapse. They also suggested a preventive design to avoid the
knocking sound by cutting grooves near the edge of one of the discs which signiﬁ-
cantly reduced the knocking noise.
From the above investigation of previous studies it is concluded that an increased
squeeze velocity, reduced minimum ﬁlm thickness prior to the squeeze, reduced shaft
angular velocity, increased oil temperature and reduced oil viscosity all promote the
occurrence of the knocking phenomenon. By increasing the distance between the
cavitation and the atmosphere by submerging the bearing into an oil bath or by cut-
ting grooves along the bearing edges the knocking phenomenon can be prevented.
It was also concluded that the knocking sound occurres when the collapsing cavita-
tion gets in contact with the atmosphere. This can seemingly happen both from air
being sucked into the cavitation prior to the knocking or just from the collapsing
cavitation itself reaching the outer edge of the oil ﬁlm. Multiple papers found that
the knocking noise can occur while the surfaces are still separating.
The knocking phenomenon appears to be a complex phenomenon that depends on
a lot of parameters. As the CTR is a lot diﬀerent from the test rigs in Experiment
1 and Experiment 2 it is necessary to deﬁne some parameters that allow for direct
comparison between experiments on the diﬀerent test rigs despite the geometrical
and conceptual diﬀerences. From the above analysis it was decided that minimum
ﬁlm thickness prior to the oil ﬁlm squeeze, hmin, average squeeze velocity, V , the
distance travelled during the squeeze relative to hmin, s (will be referred to as the
strain of the oil ﬁlm), and the squeeze velocity relative to hmin, ds/dt (will be re-
Page 7
==PAGE:13==
ferred to as the strain rate of the oil ﬁlm), are relevant parameters of comparison,
see illustration in Figure 5.6. These parameters were calculated from the papers and
presented in Table 5.1 along with the absolute oil viscosity, µ.
Figure 5.6: Illustration of the parameters used for comparison of the knocking experi-
ments.
Parameter
Experiment 1 [4]
Experiment 2 [5]
µ [pa s]
0.09
0.15
hmin [µm]
100
15
V [m/s]
0.008
0.0018
s
4
1
ds/dt [1/s]
80
120
Table 5.1: Parameter values resulting in knocking sound in previous experiments.
Prior to the experiments on the CTR it was assumed that by achieving similar pa-
rameter values on the CTR, the knocking phenomenon could be replicated. The
speciﬁed parameter values are deﬁned as the target parameter values. It should be
kept in mind that multiple other parameters than the target parameters like geom-
etry, dimensions, operational parameters and oil properties inﬂuence the knocking
phenomenon. Looking at the target parameters alone is therefore a crude simpliﬁ-
cation. However, these are the controllable parameters that can be compared across
the diﬀerent experiments. As the knocking phenomenon is caused by cavitation in
the oil ﬁlm the following section is devoted to the study of cavitation in journal
bearings.
Page 8
==PAGE:14==
6
Cavitation in Oil Films
The knocking phenomenon is caused by cavitation in the oil ﬁlm. When considering
cavitation in ﬂuid ﬁlm bearings, two types of cavitation are mainly considered: gas
cavitation and vapor cavitation. These cavitation types can be present in almost
pure form or as a combination of the two.
6.1
Gas cavitation
Gas cavitation is the formation of gas bubbles in the oil. Mineral oil contains dis-
solved air and if the pressure of the oil ﬁlm falls below the saturation pressure of
the oil, air bubbles will begin to form[6]. Another way that gas cavitation forms
is through air entrainment. This occurs when atmospheric air from the external
environment gets sucked into the oil ﬁlm due to low pressures in the oil ﬁlm.
Gas cavitation is found in both statically and dynamically loaded journal bearings[7].
During steady state load conditions, the ﬂuid ﬁlm in the divergent zone of the
journal bearing takes the approximate shape presented in Figure 6.1[8]. Note that
the number and relative size of the gas streamlets depend on bearing dimensions
and operational parameters.
Figure 6.1: Sketch of ﬂuid ﬁlm geometry in divergent zone in a journal bearing under
steady state conditions. Presented is a top view (left) and cross sectional view (right).[8]
Cavitation in journal bearings under steady state load conditions are typically
gaseous. One paper[9] describes the experimental investigation of a submerged and
statically loaded journal bearing. It was found that the created cavitation consisted
primarily of dissolved gas. In journal bearings that are not submerged it is expected
that the cavitation will also consist of entrained air.
Page 9
==PAGE:15==
6.2
Vapor cavitation
Vapor cavitation is the formation of oil vapor bubbles within the oil.
It occurs
when the pressure in the oil ﬁlm falls below the vapor pressure of the oil[6]. The
formation of vapor cavitation is sometimes referred to as fracture of the oil. Va-
por cavitation is mainly associated with journal bearings exposed to dynamic load
conditions [8]. Under dynamic load conditions the oil ﬁlm is squeezed due to the
translational movement of the shaft which may result in oil pressures low enough
for vapor cavitation to form.
Figure 6.2: Development and collapse of vapor cavitation bubble in a journal bearing.[7]
The formation and collapse of vapor cavitation is shown in Figure 6.2. Initially
the shaft is in one end of the bearing. As the shaft rapidly moves away from the
bearing surface, vapor cavitation is initiated in the low pressure zone of the journal
bearing. As the shaft continues to move away from its inital position, the cavitation
grows. When the shaft slows down, the pressure in the divergent zone increases
which causes the vapor to condense and the cavitation collapses. The whole process
happens in a few milliseconds. In the pictures it is seen that the cavitation moves
upwards with the rotation of the shaft.
As mentioned, cavitation in dynamically loaded bearings are typically vaporous.
Two papers[7][10] describe the experimental investigation of a submerged journal
bearing subjected to dynamic loads. They both found that the generated cavitation
was vaporous based on the temperature and pressure within the cavitation. Another
observation from the experiments is that the vapor cavitation appears in the form
Page 10
==PAGE:16==
of a large bubble encompassing fractured residual ﬁlaments of the fractured oil ﬁlm
as can also be seen in Figure 6.2.
Vapor cavitation forms and collapses a lot faster than gas cavitation[11]. The for-
mation of gas cavitation by precipitation is typically way too slow to ﬁll out the
cavitation generated in dynamically loaded journal bearings in common machinery.
In these cases the cavitation consist of vapor cavitation or gas cavitation by air
entrainment. The rapid collapse of vapor cavitation releases a lot of energy which is
also the reason why surface damage due to cavitation is primarily associated with
vapor cavitation.
6.3
Estimation of vapor cavitation formation
Vapor cavitation typically forms under dynamic load conditions and it forms and
collapses a lot faster than gas cavitation. The knocking phenomenon is only ob-
served in dynamically loaded bearings and the powerfull knocking sound indicates a
violent collapse of the cavitation. It therefore seems reasonable to investigate if the
knocking phenomenon is related to vapor cavitation. In the following it is investi-
gated under which circumstances vapor cavitation occurs.
Multiple studies have been carried out investigating the parameters inﬂuencing the
formation of vapor cavitation. One paper[12] (will be referred to as Experiment
3) did a thorough experimental investigating on the parameters. They concluded
that higher dynamic eccentricity ratio, lower minimum ﬁlm thickness, lower journal
angular velocity and higher oil squeeze velocity increased the formation of vapor
cavitation. They observed that the fracture of the ﬁlm will occur at the binding
between the ﬁlm and the bearing surface or in the ﬁlm itself depending on what
has the lowest binding energy. Based on theory and experimental observations they
came up with a criteria for when vapor cavitation occurs. It says, that for small
minimum ﬁlm thickness, hmin < 0.1c (c is the radial journal bearing clearance),
vapor cavitation will occur if:
ϵd > ωs
2ωd
(6.1)
where ϵd is the dynamic eccentricity ratio, ωs is the angular velocity of the journal
and ωd frequency of the ﬂuctuating eccentricity.
Another study [7] (will be referred to as Experiment 4) found that the clearance
ratio, R/c, and the bearing length, L, inﬂuence the formation of vapor cavitation.
They also found that the presence of nuclei, in the form of dirt particles or air
bubbles, played a crucial role in when the cavitation forms. This means that the
presence of gas cavitation can initiate vapor cavitation.
Page 11
==PAGE:17==
From the above analysis it is found that the formation of vapor cavitation depends on
both journal bearing geometry, operational parameters and the presence of nucleis
in the oil. Higher squeeze velocity, higher dynamic eccentricity, lower minimum ﬁlm
thickness and lower shaft rotational velocity all promotes vapor cavitation. From
this it is seen that vapor cavitation depends on some of the same parameters, and in
the same manner, as the knocking phenomenon. The parameter values calculated for
the knocking experiments are also calculated for the vapor cavitation experiments
and presented in Table 6.1 along with oil viscosity, RPM and bearing dimensions.
Note that a lot of experiments with diﬀerent parameter values were carried out in
the papers. The chosen parameter values represent experiments where clear and
consistent vapor cavitation was generated.
The dimensions of the CTR journal
bearing and the dimensions of the journal bearings used in the vapor cavitation
experiments are fairly similar. It is therefore expected that by achieving the same
parameter values on the CTR, vapor cavitation will be generated in the CTR journal
bearing.
Parameter
Experiment 3 [12]
Experiment 4 [7]
µ [pa s]
0.066
0.08
D [mm]
84
84.58
R/c
90
201
D/L
2
2
RPM
186
300
hmin [µm]
50
21
V [m/s]
0.0058
0.0025
s
13.2
12
ds/dt [1/s]
117.4
120
Table 6.1: Parameter values resulting in vapor cavitation in Experiment 3 and Experi-
ment 4.
Neither Experiment 3 nor Experiment 4 reported any knocking sounds in their stud-
ies. That may be because they did the experiments on submerged journal bearings
which makes it impossible for the cavitation to get in contact with the atmosphere.
By comparing Table 5.1 and Table 6.1 it can be seen that the parameter values of
Experiment 1 and 3 and Experiment 2 and 4, respectively, are quite similar. Further
the strain rate is very similar for all the experiments. The remaining sections of the
paper will focus on the CTR, the CTR experiments and the numerical simulations.
Page 12
==PAGE:18==
7
Test Rig and Modiﬁcations
The main purpose of this project is to replicate the knocking phenomenon on the
CTR. In this section the CTR and its recent modiﬁcations are described.
7.1
Test rig
A drawing of the CTR is presented in Figure 7.1. An electric motor(8) is connected
to the shaft(7) via a membrane coupling. The shaft runs through the test bear-
ing(5) which is mounted in a support structure (6) bolted to the ﬂoor. The shaft
is supported by two roller bearings(3) bolted to the mounting table(1). The table
is connected to the table legs and the table legs to the ﬂoor by hinge joints. A hy-
draulic cylinder(10) is mounted between the ﬂoor and the mounting table. When the
hydraulic cylinder contract or extract the mounting table rotates about the hinge
joints and loads the bearing.
Figure 7.1: The CTR [13]
The CTR journal bearing dimensions are presented in Table 7.1.
R [mm]
L [mm]
c [mm]
50
50
83
Table 7.1: CTR journal bearing dimensions
Page 13
==PAGE:19==
The hydraulic cylinder is connected to a hydraulic system which will be presented
in Section 11. A lubrication system is supplying oil to the journal bearing. The
lubrication system consists of two gear pumps (one for inlet pressure and one for
outlet suction) and an oﬄine oil ﬁlter unit.
7.2
Control and monitoring
The system is controlled and monitored using a setup consisting various sensors, see
Table 7.2, and a control valve, all connected in a NI cDAQ unit. The setup is con-
nected to a stationary computer and it is controlled using the software LABVIEW.
The hydraulic load is controlled by a proportinal directional control valve (DCV).
Sensors
Measuring
Force transducer
Hydraulic force
2 x Thermocouples
Oil temperature in inlet and outlet of bearing
Pressure transducer
Hydraulic pump pressure
4 x Distance probes
Vertical and horizontal shaft position
2 x Accelerometers
Bearing vibrations
Microphone
Sound
Table 7.2: Sensors in the CTR
7.2.1
Distance probes
The distance probes are mounted as illustrated in Figure 7.2a and Figure 7.2b at
each side of the bearing. The distance probes nearest the free end of the shaft are
named X1 and Y1 while the distance probes nearest the motor end are named X2
and Y2.
(a) Orientation of the distance probes.
(b) Position of distance probes.
Figure 7.2
Page 14
==PAGE:20==
7.2.2
Accelerometers and microphone
Two accelerometers are used to detect vibrations in the bearing. One is mounted
at the top of the bearing and one is mounted in the bottom of the bearing. These
are useful when evaluating the intensity of the knocking and when locating where in
the bearing the knocking comes from. Both are connected to the NI cDAQ chassis.
The accelerometers are of diﬀerent types. One is a PCB 3741E122G accelerometer
(will be referred to as red accelerometer) and the other is a Monitran MTN 1800
S/N 439091 (will be referred to as black accelerometer). Both are mounted to the
bearing using bee wax.
A microphone was used to document the knocking sound and evaluate the sound
against the measured vibrations.
A simple in ear HTC headset were used as a
microphone and connected through the computer line-in connection.
7.3
Misalignment between shaft and bearing
In the test rig there is some misalignment between shaft and bearing as illustrated
in Figure 7.3. Misalignment between the shaft and the bearing causes a variation in
oil ﬁlm thickness along the axial direction of the journal bearing. The misalignment
may be problematic if the misalignment is large compared to the bearing clearance.
Figure 7.3: Illustratin of journal bearing misalignment.
A transparent bearing previously used in the test rig had clear damages in one side
of the bearing which indicates misalignment, see Figure 7.4a. However, the current
bronze bearing, see Figure 7.4b, did not show any signs of uneven wear.
Page 15
==PAGE:21==
(a) Surface damage in transparent bearing.
(b) Bronze bearing.
Figure 7.4
The cause of the misalignment was investigated. Tilting of the mounting table was
measured using dial indicators as illustrated in Figure 7.5. By alternately extracting
and contracting the hydraulic cylinder while simultaneously measuring the travel of
the mounting table corners, the tilting was quantiﬁed. The results are presented in
Table 7.3. It can be seen that the travel in vertical direction is larger in the free end.
The diﬀerences in travel in the vertical direction corresponds to an axial variation in
ﬁlm thickness of 11 µm inside the bearing. However, these observations only describe
misalignment due to clearance tolerances in the hinges. The clearance tolerances
in the supporting bearings, cylindricity tolerances of the shaft and the bearing and
tolerances of the other components also contribute to misalignment. Whether these
correct or worsen the misalignment caused by the hinges is impossible to say using
the described method.
Free end
Motor end
Diﬀerence
Vertical travel [µm]
350
200
150
Horizontal travel [µm]
275
360
75
Table 7.3: Vertical and horizontal travel of the mounting table corners.
Figure 7.5: Measuring the tilting of the table.[13]
Page 16
==PAGE:22==
Even though there are clear indications of misalignment in the CTR, the experi-
mental steady state results are similar to what can be expected from theory and it
was possible to replicate the knocking phenomenon. It was therefore decided not to
engage further in the journal bearing alignment in this project.
7.4
Modiﬁed bearing
The shaft and hole tolerances of the previous bronze bearing were speciﬁed as h6/H7,
allowing a clearance between 0 µm and 57 µm at room temperature. The clearance in
the journal bearing is expected to be approximately the same at higher temperatures
because the bronze bearing is constrained by a steel housing. This ﬁt allows for a
very small clearance and does not leave much room for the shaft to travel inside
the bearing. After disassembling the test rig the bearing and shaft dimensions were
measured and the actual clearance was ≈75 µm which is a lot bigger than what
the tolerances allow. This might be do to wear of the bearing. It was decided to
machine the bearing further to reach a clearance of about 150 µm. New tolerances
were decided for the journal bearing.
A tolerance for the inner diameter of D8
was added to the bearing. This allows for a clearance between 125 −180 µm (as
the exact shaft diameter was known). The inner diameter of the modiﬁed bearing
was measured and the resulting diametrical clearance is 166 µm. The other change
to the bearing dimensions was the addition of a geometric tolerance of 0.01 mm
on cylindricity on the inner diameter. By introducing this tolerance the possible
misalignment due to bearing tolerances is theoretically reduced from 0.035 mm to
0.02 mm. The technical drawing of the modiﬁed bearing is presented in Appendix
C.
8
Calibration
8.1
Distance transducers
The distance probes were calibrated using a digital height gauge, as illustrated in
Figure 8.1. The probes were calibrated against the shaft as the probe signals are
sensitive to material type. The working range of the distance probes is 0.2−2.2 mm
and the operational range of the probes for the experiment is approximately 0.33 −
0.5 mm. The distance probes were lowered until the probes touched the shaft surface.
The probes were then lifted in ﬁve steps until a height of 0.6 mm was reached. It
was decided to do ﬁve measurements for each probe, as signal reading errors and
the sensitivity of the height gauge introduced some uncertainties in the results.
For each step the received signal was noted. The data yielded linear relations and
approximating linear regressions could be made for each distance probe to estimate
the relation between signal and distance. The results are presented in Figure 8.2.
The probes were then mounted with an approximate distance of 500 µm from the
Page 17
==PAGE:23==
the surface of the shaft while the shaft was resting in the bottom of the bearing.
Figure 8.1: Calibration setup
Figure 8.2: Calibration results
9
Estimation of Journal Position
Accurately estimating the journal position relative to the bearing is important in
order to get any meaningful results regarding oil ﬁlm thickness and attitude angle.
9.0.1
Minimum ﬁlm thickness
The minimum ﬁlm thickness in the CTR is determined as follows. First the distance
probe signals were read when the shaft was in the bottom and at the top of the bear-
ing, respectively. From the readings, the clearance, ⃗Cvec, and the neutral position,
⃗0vec, of the shaft can be determined as illustrated in Figure 9.1. ⃗Vt is the vector
Page 18
==PAGE:24==
describing the top position of the journal and ⃗Vb describes the bottom position. For
any position vector, ⃗Pvec, the minimum ﬁlm thickness in a rigid journal bearing can
be estimated from Equation 9.1.
Figure 9.1: Estimating clearance and neutral position of shaft from the distance probe
readings.
hmin = c −|⃗0vec −⃗Pvec|
(9.1)
However, the CTR journal bearing is not rigid. The hydraulic force and the distance
between the vertical distance probes and the shaft, measured during the above pro-
cedure, are presented in Figure 9.2 (left and middle respectively). It is seen that
when the hydraulic piston starts pushing (positive force readings) , the shaft moves
upwards (distance between shaft and probes decreases) and towards the distance
probes. Initially the shaft rises fast which can be seen from the steep slope in the
distance probe signals. The slope decreases drastically as the shaft makes contact
with the bearing. However, as the load continues to increase, the shaft continues to
get closer to the distance probes. This is due to the elastic deﬂection of the shaft
and bearing. The deﬂection is large compared to the expected minimum ﬁlm thick-
ness, so the elasticity has to be accounted for when calculating the minimum ﬁlm
thickness. It can be seen that the deﬂection increases linearly with the increase in
load. The stiﬀness coeﬃcient, k, can therefore be estimated from the two slopes and
the elastic deﬂection can be estimated. The minimum thickness is then calculated
from Equation 9.2.
Page 19
==PAGE:25==
Figure 9.2: Test procedure where the shaft is moved from the bottom to the top of
the bearing. Hydraulic load(left), distance between vertical distance probes and the shaft
(middle) and the minimum ﬁlm thickness(right). Note how the minimum ﬁlm thickness
is zero when shaft is either in the bottom or in the top of the bearing.
hmin = c −|⃗0vec −⃗Pvec| + |Fhyd k|
(9.2)
In Figure 9.2 (right) the minimum ﬁlm thickness is plotted after accounting for elas-
tic deﬂection. Initially the ﬁlm thickness is approximately zero as the shaft rests
in the bottom of the bearing. The load is then applied and the shaft travels to
the top of the bearing and the minimum ﬁlm thickness becomes zero again. As the
load and deﬂection continues to increase, the minimum ﬁlm thickness stays zero as
intended. From this method the deﬂection at maximum hydraulic force is estimated
to ≈30 µm. This was compared to analytical calculations of the deﬂection of bear-
ing and shaft which also predicted a deﬂection of ≈30 µm, see Appendix E. This
indicates that the deﬂection has been accounted for in a reasonable way.
The same test was carried out while pulling the shaft downwards instead of pushing
it upwards. In this case a slightly diﬀerent stiﬀness coeﬃcient was calculated. This
may be due to the misalignment between shaft and bearing. In the calculations, the
stiﬀness coeﬃcient is therefore depending on the direction of the load, see Appendix
A.
Another parameter inﬂuencing the estimation of the minimum ﬁlm thickness is the
temperature. It was observed that the distance probe measurements changed with
temperature. This is probably due to variations in material and temperature in the
diﬀerent CTR components which leads to diﬀerences in thermal expansion. The
above test was therefore carried out at 25 ◦C and 40 ◦C which are the two opera-
tional temperatures in the experiments.
Page 20
==PAGE:26==
9.0.2
Attitude angle
The attitude angle is calculated from Equation 9.3.
φ = atan
 ⃗Pvec,y −⃗0vec,y
⃗Pvec,x −⃗0vec,x
!
(9.3)
where the y and x indeces indicate y and x readings, respectively.
10
Test Method
To create the knocking phenomenon the following procedure is applied:
• The shaft is pulled towards the bottom of the bearing and hold in position for
a couple of seconds.
• The shaft is then pushed upwards as fast as possible till it reaches the top of
the bearing.
The procedure is sketched in Figure 10.1. The initial target parameter values for
the knocking experiment are presented in Table 10.1. These target parameter values
are based on Table 5.1. Note that for the CTR experiments, the squeeze velocity
and the journal center velocity is the same and they are therefore both represented
by the symbol V .
Parameter
V
s
ds/dt
Target value
0.0018-0.008 [ m/s]
1-4
80-120 [ 1/s]
Table 10.1: Target parameter values for experiment.
Figure 10.1: Sketch of knocking sound experiment procedure.
Page 21
==PAGE:27==
11
Hydraulic System
In the previous sections the target squeeze velocity was deﬁned.
The hydraulic
system was simulated to verify if the hydraulic system in the CTR can deliver the
desired squeeze velocity.
In order to simulate the system, the properties of the
hydraulic oil and hydraulic components was determined.
11.1
Experimental estimation of oil viscosity
In order to simulate the hydraulic system and the journal bearing, the oil viscosities
of the hydraulic oil and lubrication oil were estimated experimentally. The experi-
ments were carried out using capillary viscosi-meters. The test setup is illustrated
in Figure 11.1. The viscosimeters containing the oil samples were placed in a water
bath. The water was heated to speciﬁc temperatures and the viscosities were then
measured. This was done for diﬀerent temperatures covering the expected oper-
ational temperature ranges. The relation between oil temperature and kinematic
viscosity can be expressed from the Walter-ASTM relation presented in Equation
11.1 [14]. From the collected temperature-kinematic viscosity data points, the two
constants of Equation 11.1, m and c, can be can be estimated. With these constants
the theoretical relation can be plotted and compared with the experimental data
points. The data points and the approximating regression for the hydraulic oil is
presented in Figure 11.2a and for the lubrication oil in Figure 11.2b. It can be seen
that the theory agrees well with the experimental data. From these results, the
hydraulic oil could be identiﬁed as an oil of grade ISO VG 46. The lubrication oil
used for the journal bearing was identiﬁed as a SAE-30 oil (ISO VG 100).
ln(ln(ν + 0.8)) = mln(T) + c
(11.1)
where ν is kinematic viscocity in centi-Stokes, T is absolute oil temperature in Kelvin
and m and c are constants.
Figure 11.1: Oil viscosity experiment setup.
Page 22
==PAGE:28==
(a) Viscosity of hydraulic oil.
(b) Viscosity of oil used in journal bearing.
Figure 11.2
11.2
Hydraulic simulation
Figure 11.3: Hydraulic diagram and control volumes
The hydraulic system consists of a constant ﬂow pump, a gas accumulator, a safety
relief valve, a 3/4 way proportinal directional control valve (DCV) and a hydraulic
cylinder. The hydraulic diagram is presented in Figure 11.3. For the simulation
the hydraulic system is divided into three control volumes as can also be seen in
Figure 11.3. It is assumed that the pressure is constant within each control vol-
ume and the inertia and gravitation on the oil is neglected. The pressure in the
lines connected to the tank are assumed to always be zero. The state variables are
X = [p1 p2 p3 Vf x1 ˙x1], being the pressures of each control volume, the accumula-
tor ﬂuid volume and piston position and velocity. The general pressure build up
equations for each control volume are presented in equation 11.2 [15] where β is the
equivalent bulk modulus, Q is the resultant oil ﬂow into the control volume and Vi
is the volume of the control volume. The change in accumulator ﬂuid volume is
determined from Equation 11.3 where n is a constant and Vg is the gas volume in
the accumulator.
Page 23
==PAGE:29==
˙pi = β Q −˙Vi
Vi
(11.2)
˙Vf = Vg
p1 n ˙p1
(11.3)
Figure 11.4: a) Mounting table force diagram, b) Simpliﬁed force diagram used for the
simulation
A force diagram for the mounting table is presented in Figure 11.4 a).
For the
simulation an even more simpliﬁed force diagram is used, see Figure 11.4 b). Note
that the bearing forces are not included in the force diagram. The objective of the
simulation is to evaluate if the hydraulic system can accelerate the shaft to target
velocity in a single upstroke before the shaft has travelled the bearing clearance.
Initially the ﬂuid forces will help push the shaft upwards. At some point the oil
below the shaft will be squeezed and it will experience a tensile force. This tensile
force is assumed to be negligible due to the formation of cavitation. It is desired that
the target velocity is reached at this point. It is therefore considered conservative
to neglect the inﬂuence of the oil ﬁlm forces on the shaft center velocity.
The
force equilibrium on the piston is presented in Equation 11.4, where A and Ar are
piston areas, Mhyd(=M/2) is the mass on the piston and Fgravity is the load from
the weight of the table and shaft on the piston. The loss due to friction in the oil,
losspipe, is determined from Darcy’s friction factor formula[15]. η is the eﬃciency of
the hydraulic cylinder. The governing diﬀerential equations for the control volumes
are solved using the numerical solver ode15s in Matlab. The entire script is presented
in Appendix B.
¨x1 =
1
Mhyd
(−(p2 Ar −p3 A) η −Fgravity −losspipe)
(11.4)
The oil ﬂow through the pressure relief valve, Qprv, is determined from Equation
11.5, where pcr is the cracking pressure.
The constant Kprv is determined from
the data sheet of the pressure relief valve (Swagelok R3A-B yellow spring rated at
approximately 24.1 bar) where a linear relation between pressure above cracking
Page 24
==PAGE:30==
pressure and oil ﬂow is observed, see Appendix D. The oil ﬂow through the direc-
tional control valve, Qdcv, can generally be determined from Equation 11.6. From
the valve type (Parker D1FP E50F) and the rating (12 L/min at ∆p = 35 bar) the
constant, Kv, was determined from Equation 11.6.
Qprv = (p1 −pcr) Kprv
(11.5)
Qdcv =
p
∆p Kv
(11.6)
The pre-load of the accumulator was determined by observing the manometer next
to the accumulator while pressurizing the system. Until the pre-load pressure of the
accumulator, p0, is reached, the pressure of the system rises rapidly as the volume of
the system is kept almost constant. As the pre-load pressure is reached, the pressure
increases slowly due to the compression of the gas bladder which increases the oil
volume in the system. From the accumulator volume and the pre-load pressure, the
gas and oil volume in the accumulator at maximum working pressure, pmax, can be
estimated using Equation 11.7, where Vg.0 and Vg.min is the accumulator gas volume
at pre-load pressure and maximum working pressure, respectively. As the system is
operating, the change in oil volume in the accumulator is estimated from Equation
11.3.
p0 Vg.0 = pmax Vg.min
(11.7)
The numerical model is used to simulate an upstroke. The results are presented
in Figure 11.5. Note that the position and velocity plot are for the journal which
equals half the travel and velocity of the piston. As can be seen, a journal cen-
ter velocity of approximately 0.012 m/s (way above the minimum target value of
0.0018 m/s) is achieved as maximum velocity and it is reached way before the jour-
nal has travelled the radial clearance.
Based on the simulation it was therefore
expected that the hydraulic system would be suﬃcient for replicating the knocking
sound. Later experimental results showed that the maximum squeeze velocity was
typically ≈0.02 m/s. The estimated velocity is 40% lower than the observed max-
imum velocity. This indicates that the hydraulic simulation is rather conservative.
The velocity is very dependent on the oil friction losses which are very sensitive to
the oil viscosity. For a more accurate simulation it would be necessary to know the
operational temperature of the hydraulic oil more precisely. For the simulation the
temperature is assumed to be 25 ◦C which is a conservative estimate. Also the oil
ﬁlm forces are not included which initially works in the same direction as the hy-
draulic force. However, the hydraulic system proved to be suﬃcient for the knocking
experiments, as predicted in the numerical simulation, and no further modiﬁcations
were done to the hydraulic system.
Page 25
==PAGE:31==
Figure 11.5: Simulation of a step-input upstroke.
12
Experiments
12.1
Initial experiments
Prior to the steady state experiments and knocking experiments some initial exper-
iments were carried out in order to evaluate if target parameters could be achieved
on the CTR and to investigate unexpected observations.
The focus of the investigation in the initial experiments were the hydraulic force
and the vertical distance probe readings, X1 and X2, as these are used to evaluate
the hydraulic system performance, the squeeze velocity and the oil ﬁlm thickness.
12.1.1
General comments on experimental observations
When plotting the hydraulic force, a negative force indicates a downward pull while
a positive force indicates an upward push. The distance probe readings show the
distance between the vertical distance probes and the shaft. So when the distance
probe readings decrease, the shaft moves upwards and when they increase, the shaft
moves downwards.
There are diﬀerences in the radial mounting position of the
probes which is the reason for the displacement between the X1 and X2 readings,
see Figure 12.1. It can also be seen that the probe readings ﬂuctuate a lot. That
is because of the ovality of the shaft. When switching the DCV, electrical noise is
observed in the distance probe readings which is illustrated in Figure 12.3.
Page 26
==PAGE:32==
The squeeze velocity is deﬁned as the average travel velocity read by X1 an X2. The
squeeze velocity is evaluated in a time interval that covers the steep part of both
probe readings as illustrated in Figure 12.3. The maximum squeeze velocity is a
lot higer than the average squeeze velocity. It was decided to focus on the average
velocity as this parameter can be compared to the previous experiments and it is
assumed that the average travel velocity is a better indicator for knocking than the
maximum squeeze velocity.
12.1.2
Before deaeration of hydraulic oil
In Figure 12.1 it is seen, that when switching the valve position (from pull to push)
the force rapidly rises from −6000 N to −400 N. Simultaneously, the shaft moves
upward about 40 µm. The shaft moves upwards even when the hydraulic piston is
still pulling due to the oil ﬁlm forces. It takes about 0.8 seconds for the hydraulic
force to turn positive from switching the valve position. The slow response of the
hydraulic system was caused by air bubbles in the hydraulic oil. Air bubbles in
the oil drastically reduce the stiﬀness of the hydraulic system which leads to slow
responses. It was also observed that the accumulator was completely drained during
the load cycle which also indicates air in the system. The achieved upwards shaft
center velocity was ≈0.0007 m/s which is a lot below the minimum target value of
0.0018 m/s.
Figure 12.1: Hydraulic force and vertical distance probe readings before the hydraulic
system was deaerated.
12.1.3
After deaeration of hydraulic oil
To increase the shaft center velocity the hydraulic piston was deaerated. This was
done by dismounting the cylinder, orienting it horizontally with the pipe connections
pointing upwards, see Figure 12.2, and then fully extent and contract the hydraulic
piston continuously at a low frequency for a couple of hours. At full extension and
contraction the pressure increases to 27 bar which increase the solubility of air by
a factor of about 27 [16]. The dissolved air is then ﬂushed out with the oil as the
Page 27
==PAGE:33==
piston moves in the other direction. The orientation of the cylinder also allows for
air bubbles to leave the cylinder as the air bubbles will move upwards out of the
cylinder through the hoses due to the low density of the air.
Figure 12.2: De-aeration of the hydraulic cylinder.
The deaeration improved the system response a lot as is seen from Figure 12.3. It
can be seen that the force turns positive in less than two hundreds of a second which
should be compared to the 0.8 seconds before the deaeration. There will always be a
small delay due to the ﬁnite pressure wave speed in the system, see Appendix G, and
due to the inertia of the DCV. As a result of the deaeration the shaft center velocity
increased as well. In Figure 12.3 the average shaft center velocity is 0.0029 m/s
which is four times the velocity before the deaeration. This velocity is well above
the minimum target velocity. The maximum squeeze velocity was 0.02 m/s.
Figure 12.3: Hydraulic force and vertical shaft position after deaeration of hydraulic
system.
From these results it is concluded, that the hydraulic system can deliver suﬃcient
squeeze velocity to the shaft, to reach target values. The oil ﬁlm strain and strain
rate can be controlled relatively easy by adjusting the RPM. Reducing the RPM
reduces the ﬁlm thickness which increases strain and strain rate . The knocking
sound was not generated in the initial experiment, probably due to relatively high
RPM of 600 (this will be evaluated in the parameter analysis).
Page 28
==PAGE:34==
12.2
Steady state experiments
In this section the experimental static load case results are compared against the-
oretical and numerical static load case results. In Figure 12.14 the short and long
bearing theory locus curves as well as the numerical locus curves (with and without
cavitation) are compared against the experimental locus curve. The results show
that the movement of the journal within in bearing is quite similar to what is ex-
pected from theory. The numerical and short bearing theory results are very similar
which is expected as the test rig bearing falls under the short bearing categorization
with L/D = 1/2. The experimental locus curve is almost identical to the numer-
cal (with cavitation) locus curve. The upper half of the experimental locus curve
agrees really well with theory. The lower haft is a bit more straightened out which
might indicate that the shaft can not move as freely in the lower half of the bearing.
It is expected that this is due to the misalignment between the shaft and the bearing.
Figure 12.4: Experimental and theoretical locus curves.
The locus curve only describes the relation between eccentricity ratio and attitude
angle. Therefore the eccentricity ratio under diﬀerent static loads are also com-
pared in order to evaluate the agreement between the experimental and theoretical
results, see Table 12.1. The analytical calculations are presented in Appendix F.
The experiments were done by varying the load while keeping the other operational
parameters constant. It is seen that at these operational parameters the experi-
mental and theoretical results agrees reasonably well. When the load (pull or push)
is above 3000 N the experimental results agrees really well with theory. When the
eccentricity ratio becomes small the relative deviations increase.
Page 29
==PAGE:35==
Static load [N]
-13522
-5522
-3522
-1522
2477
4478
13877
Experimental ϵ
0.7
0.59
0.51
0.41
0.59
0.66
0.77
Short bearing theory ϵ
0.75
0.64
0.58
0.46
0.53
0.61
0.75
Numerical ϵ
0.78
0.64
0.55
0.35
0.45
0.58
0.78
Numerical w. cavitation ϵ
0.77
0.61
0.52
0.33
0.43
0.56
0.77
Deviation of numerical
results w. cav. relative to
experimental results [%]
10.0
3.4
1.9
-19.5
-27.1
-15.2
0.0
Table 12.1: Comparison of experimental and theoretical eccentricity ratios at diﬀerent
static loads. 200 RPM, T = 25 ◦C
The results indicate that the shaft can move somewhat freely within the bearing
without being constrained too much by the support structure. It also suggests that
the distance probes are calibrated satisfactory and that the calculations regarding
ﬁlm thickness and attitude angle seems to be appropriate.
Based on the static
analysis it is concluded that the CTR bearing functions as intended and it is therefore
comparable to the journal bearings used in real industrial machinery.
12.3
Knocking sound experiments
The operational parameter values used in the knocking experiments are presented
in Table 12.2. The parameter analysis experiments are carried out by changing one
parameter while keeping the other parameters constant.
Oil
Temperature
RPM
Rotational
direction
supply
pressure
hydraulic force
(pull/push)
DCV input
signal type
25 ◦C
200
CCW
1.5 bar
6000/8000 N
step input
Table 12.2: Standard operational parameter values
The knocking phenomenon was successfully generated and documented using ac-
celerometers and a microphone. In Figure 12.5 the accelerometer values are plotted
together with the minimum ﬁlm thickness around the time of the knocking. Initially
the shaft is pulled against the bottom of the bearing and vibrations and hmin are
stable. Then the DCV position is switched and the shaft starts to travel upwards.
First hmin increases and then it falls as the shaft approaches the top of the bearing.
Before the minimum hmin is reached, high vibrational levels are measured. This
indicates that the knocking sound occurs as the shaft is travelling from one side
of the bearing to the other and not as a result of impact within the bearing. The
vibrations and ﬁlm thickness then stabilizes before the shaft is pulled downwards
again without causing any signiﬁcant vibrations or sound. The minimum ﬁlm thick-
ness never reaches zero which also indicates that there is no metallic contact while
Page 30
==PAGE:36==
running the experiments. The same can be seen from Figure 12.6 where the point
marks the time of peak vibrations. It can be seen that the vibrations occur when
the shaft reaches the maximum velocity. This agrees with observations in previ-
ous papers. This again indicates that the knocking sound is generated in the oil
ﬁlm and not due to contact. As the shaft travels upwards, an average velocity of
0.0028 m/s is reached while when travelling downwards a velocity of 0.0019 m/s is
reached. This might explain why the knocking occurs when the shaft travels up-
wards but not when it travels downwards. However, this will investigated in the
parameter analysis section.
Figure 12.5:
Documentation of the knocking phenomenon.
hmin and accelerometer
values at the time of the knocking.
Figure 12.6: Vertical distance probe readings at the time of the knocking.
Page 31
==PAGE:37==
12.3.1
Evaluation of target parameters
The achieved parameter values at the time of the knocking are presented in Table
12.3. The maximum squeeze velocity was 0.02 m/s. It is seen that the squeeze veloc-
ity and strain falls within the target interval while the strain rate is lower than the
target interval. In other experiments the knocking was achieved at a strain below 0.3.
These observations indicate that it is very likely that knocking occurs in plain jour-
nal bearings if the speciﬁed target parameter values are reached but the knocking
phenomenon may also occur at parameter values way below the target parameter
values. It should be kept in mind that multiple other parameters like geometry,
dimensions and oil properties inﬂuence the phenomenon.
Parameter
V
s
ds/dt
Target value
0.0018-0.008 [ m/s]
1-4
80-120 [ 1/s]
Achieved value
0.0028 [ m/s]
≈1
≈65 [ 1/s]
Table 12.3: Target parameter values for experiment.
12.3.2
Locating the origin of the knocking
If the knocking sound is caused by cavitation it is expected that the cavitation
will occur in the low pressure side of the bearing.
In the applied load case the
shaft is rapidly moved upwards within the bearing which generates a low pressure
zone below the shaft.
According to this logic, the bottom accelerometer should
experience the vibrations before the top accelerometer. The two accelerometers,
red and black, are not of the same type and they have diﬀerent speciﬁcations. It
was therefore tested if there is a delay between the two accelerometers. This was
done by mounting the accelrometers right next to each other. The knocking sound
was then generated and the signals measured. In this case the black accelerometer
received the signal 0.00018 s before the red accelerometer. This delay has to be
accounted for when comparing the time of the signals. From Figure 12.7 it can be
seen that the accelerometer placed at the bottom of the bearing receives the signal
before the top accelerometer independent of which accelerometer type is placed at
the bottom (the red colour represents the red accelerometer and the black color
the black accelerometer). It is therefore concluded that the vibrations start in the
bottom of the bearing which indicates that the noise is caused by cavitation. It
should be noted that the signal time diﬀerence between the accelerometers is not
constant as can also be seen from the ﬁgure. This may be because the cavitation
does not occur at the exact same location at each knock.
Page 32
==PAGE:38==
Figure 12.7: Comparison of time of signal between the two accelerometers when the red
acc. is top and black acc. is bottom (left) and vice versa (right).
12.3.3
Comparing sound and vibration measurements
The vibrations are also compared with sound measurements in Figure 12.8. The
sound peaks occur at the same time as the vibrational peaks. When knocking occurs
in both travel directions, two following vibration and sound peaks are observed. It
is also seen that when the vibrational peaks increase, the sound peaks also tend to
increase. It was also observed that when there is no knocking sound, both vibration
peaks and sound peaks become very small.
Figure 12.8: Comparison of vibrations and sound measurements.
All together the presented results prove that the knocking phenomenon was gener-
ated on the CTR. The results strongly indicate that the phenomenon occurs when
the maximum shaft center velocity is reached and that the knocking phenomenon is
generated in the low pressure zone of the oil ﬁlm.
Page 33
==PAGE:39==
12.4
Parameter study
In this section the operational parameters are investigated in relation to the knocking
phenomenon.
The following parameters can be controlled directly: RPM, DCV
signal (controlling hydraulic force), rotational direction, supply pressure and oil
temperature. The standard operational parameter values are presented in Table
12.2. The tests are carried out by changing one parameter while keeping the other
parameters constant.
12.4.1
RPM
First the inﬂuence of RPM is investigated and the results are presented in Figure
12.15. It can be seen that increasing the RPM reduces the amplitude of the vibra-
tions and the knocking sounds. At 300 RPM and below there are clear knocking
sounds and large vibrations. Above 300 RPM the vibrations become very small and
there is no longer any knocking sound. It should be noted that when the RPM
increases, the minimum ﬁlm thickness also increases which may partly explain why
the knocking is reduced. For the presented RPM values the resulting minimum ﬁlm
thicknesses are 24 µm, 28 µm, 30 µm and 32 µm, respectively.
Figure 12.9: Vibrations versus RPM
12.4.2
Shaft center velocity
In Figure 12.10 the vibrations are compared with the shaft center velocity. The
shaft center velocity is varied by controlling the oriﬁce area of the DCV when the
hydraulic cylinder is pushing upwards. It is observed that an increase in the shaft
velocity promotes the knocking phenomenon. Somewhere between 0.0020 m/s and
0.0028 m/s the vibrations become small and there is no clear knocking sound.
Page 34
==PAGE:40==
Figure 12.10: Vibrations versus shaft center velocity
12.4.3
Oil temperature
In Figure 12.11 the knocking phenomenon is compared against the oil ﬁlm temper-
ature. An increased oil temperature reduces the oil vicosity and the minimum ﬁlm
thickness. In the temperature experiment hmin drops from 23 µm to 12 µm with the
increase in temperature. It can be seen that when the oil temperature increases the
vibrations increases and the knocking sound increases aswell.
Figure 12.11: Vibrations versus temperature
12.4.4
Rotational direction
In Figure 12.12 the knocking phenomenon is compared against the rotational direc-
tion of the shaft. In this experiment the RPM is 300 in order to reduce the intensity
of the knocking and thereby make the experiment more sensitive to other changes
Page 35
==PAGE:41==
of operational parameters. It is observed that at clock wise rotation the knocking
sound disappears and the vibrations are reduced drastically. This indicates that
the location of the oil feed relative to the shaft inﬂuence whether the knocking phe-
nomenon occurs or not. In Figure 12.13 the vibrations are measured at CW rotation
at diﬀerent RPM. It can be seen that at all the investigated RPM, the vibrations
are reduced compared to the results in Figure 12.15.
Figure 12.12: Vibrations versus rotational direction
Figure 12.13: Vibrations versus RPM in opposite direction
One explanation can be that when the shaft is pulled towards the bottom of the
bearing with CW rotation the shaft moves closer to the oil inlet compared to when
rotating CCW, see Figure 12.14. When the oil ﬁlm is then squeezed due to the shaft
moving upwards, oil is fed directly from the oil inlet into the low pressure zone of the
oil ﬁlm which might reduce the strain of the oil and thereby increase the pressure
and reduce the cavitation.
Page 36
==PAGE:42==
Figure 12.14: Locus curves at CW and CCW rotation relative to the oil inlet.
12.4.5
Oil supply pressure
The inﬂuence of oil feed pressure was also investigated. From the results it seems
that there might be a small reduction of the knocking when the oil feed pressure
was increased.
Figure 12.15: Vibrations versus oil supply pressure
12.4.6
Overview
Some of the experience gained from the experiments is presented in Table 12.4. Fur-
ther it was observed that the position of the oil inlet relative to low pressure zone
of the oil ﬁlm at the squeeze has great inﬂuence on the knocking. When the shaft
is closer to the oil inlet prior to the squeeze, the knocking is reduced signiﬁcantly.
The results also indicate that the knocking intensiﬁes with a smaller minimum ﬁlm
thickness prior to the squeeze.
Page 37
==PAGE:43==
Increasing
RPM
Shaft center velocity
Temperature
Supply pressure
Eﬀect on knocking
decrease
increase
increase
decrease
Table 12.4: Parameters inﬂuencing knocking phenomenon and if they promote the knock-
ing or not.
The results agree well with what has been observed in previous papers. The knocking
phenomenon seems to depend on a complex interaction of many parameters. How-
ever, the experimental results give some indications on how to reduce the knocking
by adjusting some of the operational parameters and the position of the oil inlet/s.
It seems that a criterion for when the knocking occurs should be made for the speciﬁc
bearing and the speciﬁc operational conditions.
It is believed that the squeeze
velocity and minimum ﬁlm thickness prior to the squeeze are the two most important
parameters when the geometrical and operational parameters are ﬁxed.
13
Comsol Model
The CTR bearing is analyzed numerically using the program Comsol Multiphysics
5.5. Both steady state load cases and dynamic load cases similar to the experimental
load cases are simulated and the numerical results are compared to the experimental
results.
13.1
Theory
The following assumptions are made for the numerical model:
• The oil is newtonian.
• The oil ﬂow is laminar.
• The pressure is constant across the ﬁlm thickness.
• Gravitation and inertia of the oil is neglected.
• There is no slip at the boundaries.
• The bearing and journal are considered rigid.
• The oil temperature is considered constant in the entire oil ﬁlm.
The thin ﬁlm ﬂuid analysis in Comsol is based on Reynolds equation. The static
analysis is based on the simpliﬁed form presented in Equation 13.1, taking into ac-
count the Poiseulle and Coutte terms. The time dependent analysis is based on the
simpliﬁed version of Reynolds equation presented in Equation 13.2, which takes into
Page 38
==PAGE:44==
account the Poiseulle, Coutte and squeeze terms.
−∇t
ρ h3
12 µ∇tpf + ∇t
ρ h (va + vb)
2
= 0
(13.1)
d
dt ρ h −∇t
ρ h3
12 µ∇tpf + ∇t
ρ h (va + vb)
2
= 0
(13.2)
ρ is the oil density, µ the absolute viscosity, pf the ﬁlm pressure, h ﬁlm thickness
and va and vb are the sliding velocities of the surfaces.
The dynamic load case results are based on the full Sommersfeld solution, which in
a journal bearing results in a skew symmetric pressure distribution. This implies
negative pressures which are purely theoretical. It is assumed that a lower minimum
pressure in the numerical model indicates more cavitation in the physical bearing.
Cavitation is introduced in the static analysis in order to get more realistic steady
state results. By activating the cavitation feature in Comsol, the program sets a
pressure limit, pc, below which cavitation is taken into account by decreasing the oil
density and thereby keeping the pressure constant in the cavitating region. When
the pressure gets below zero the pressure is kept at zero while the oil density is
calculated from Equation 13.3[17].
ρ = ρc e
pf −pc
β
(13.3)
where ρc is the oil density at the cavitation pressure, pc, and β is the compresibillity
of the oil.
In Comsol the ﬁlm thickness is deﬁned from the distance between two plane surfaces
called the wall and the base. In the journal bearing simulation the wall is considered
the journal surface and the base is considered the bearing surface. The oil ﬁlm
thickness is then deﬁned from the eccentricities in the x and y directions, ex and ey
respectively, by Equation 13.4 where θ is the angle along the circumferential of the
bearing.
hﬁlm = c −ex cos (θ) −ey sin (θ)
(13.4)
13.1.1
Model
Based on a convergence analysis the ﬂuid ﬁlm is meshed as seen in Figure 13.1. At
the outer edges the boundary conditions are pf = 0. The groove is modelled by
deﬁning the area of the groove as seen in Figure 13.2. At the edges of the groove
the pressure is set to the oil supply pressure. This results in the pressure being
Page 39
==PAGE:45==
approximately constant in the entire groove. The depth of the groove is modelled
by adding a constant depth to the ﬁlm thickness in the groove area.
Figure 13.1: Mesh of CTR bearing.
Figure 13.2: Modelling of the oil inlet.
13.1.2
Steady state
The force equilibrium in the steady state analysis in the x and y direction is pre-
sented in Equation 13.5 and 13.6 respectively. Fdyn is the hydraulic load, Fw is
the gravitational load and Fx and Fy are the resulting ﬂuid ﬁlm loads in the x and
y direction. The attitude angle and eccentricity ratio are calculated from the ec-
centricities. The steady state results were presented in the steady state section in
Figure 12.14 and Table 12.1. The numerical results were very similar to the analyt-
ical short bearing theory and the experimental results. In Figure 13.3 the surface
pressure is plotted for the bearing under a steady state load case without cavitation.
The pressure distribution in tangential and axial direction is seemingly as expected
from theory.
Fdyn −FW −Fx = 0
(13.5)
Fy = 0
(13.6)
Figure 13.3: Surface pressure at steady state load case.
Page 40
==PAGE:46==
13.1.3
Dynamic analysis
In the dynamic analysis the inertia has to be accounted for in the force equilibrium.
The force equilibrium in the dynamic analysis in the x and y direction is presented
in Equation 13.7 and 13.8 respectively, where extt and eytt are the accelerations in x
and y direction. The time dependent analysis is solved using a BDF algorithm.
Fdyn −FW −Fx −Mextt = 0
(13.7)
Fpy + Meytt = 0
(13.8)
13.2
Comparison to other experiments
Numerical models were generated for the bearings in Experiment 1, 2, 3 and 4. In
these simulations the full Sommersfeld solution is applied. From these papers the
ﬁlm thicknesses as a function of time can be estimated while the forces are un-
known. For the comparison analysis, all the bearings, including the CTR bearing,
are therefore simulated by controlling the ﬁlm thickness as a function of time and
not by controlling the load directly. For the principle experiments, where a disc
was moved up and down relative to another disc, the simulated load cases are close
to the experimental load cases. For the journal bearing experiments the load cases
are simulated by moving the journal vertically up and down relative to the bearing
based on the calculated and measured ﬁlm thicknesses and squeeze velocities. This
is a crude simpliﬁcation of the real load cases, however, it is believed that the sim-
ulations still provide general and valuable insight.
The minimum ﬁlm pressure in the CTR bearing is compared to the minimum ﬁlm
pressures in the other experiments in Table 13.1. Experiment 3 and 4 are the vapor
cavitation experiments. The minimum ﬁlm pressure in experiment 3 shows that
vapor cavitation may occur at minimum pressures of −3.3 MPa. As the minimum
pressure is a lot lower in the CTR, bearing it seems likely that vapor cavitation is
present.
Experiment
CTR
Experiment 3
Experiment 4
Experiment 1
Experiment 2
Min. pressure [Mpa]
-60.3
-3.3
-231
-2.1
-275
Table 13.1: Comparison of minimum pressures
Experiment 1 and 2 are the simpliﬁed knocking experiments. In experiment 1 knock-
ing is generated even though the minimum ﬁlm pressure is only −2.1 MPa. In general
it can not be expected that knocking occurs just because the minimum ﬁlm pressure
is below −2.1 MPa as the distance from the cavitation zone to the atmosphere is
expected to be an important parameter aswell. It is therefore also interesting to
Page 41
==PAGE:47==
compare the extension of the low pressure zone. In Figure 13.4b the pressure might
not be very low but the low pressure zone ﬁlls out most of the disc area. Due to
relatively high conformity in the CTR bearing, the low pressure zone is large, see
Figure 13.5, compared to the bearing in Figure 13.4a. A larger low pressure zone
indicates more cavitation. It can also be seen that the low pressure zone is very
close to the edges of the CTR bearing. When the cavitation zone gets closer to the
edges, and thereby the atmosphere, the chance of knocking increases.
One thing that catches the eye is the huge diﬀerences in the minimum pressure from
bearing to bearing even though the strain rates and squeeze velocities are similar.
This illustrates the inﬂuence of geometry, dimensions and oil properties. The results
indicate that the minimum ﬁlm pressure alone might not be a good indicator of
knocking in general. However, for a ﬁxed bearing under ﬁxed operational parameters
it might be a good indicator. This will be evaluated in the parameter study.
(a) Minimum pressure in Experiment 3
(b) Minimum pressure in Experiment 1
Figure 13.4
Figure 13.5: Minimum pressure in CTR bearing
Page 42
==PAGE:48==
13.3
Parameter study
The operational parameters investigated in the experiments are analyzed in the
numerical model aswell. This indicates if looking at the minimum ﬁlm pressure is a
good indicator for the knocking phenomenon in the CTR bearing. In this analysis
the dynamic load is controlled instead of the ﬁlm thickness, which should imitate
the experimental load cases more accurately.
13.3.1
RPM
In Table 13.2 it is seen that increasing the RPM raises the minimum ﬁlm pressure.
It is assumed that a higher minimum pressure indicates less cavitation and therefore
less chance of knocking. This agrees well with what was observed in the experiments.
RPM
200
400
600
pmin [MPa]
-122
-45.2
-18.3
Table 13.2: pmin versus RPM.
13.3.2
Shaft center velocity
In Table 13.3 it is seen that increasing the shaft center velocity lowers the minimum
ﬁlm pressure which indicates more cavitation and therefore more knocking. This
agrees with the experimental observations.
V [m/s]
0.0018
0.0029
0.004
pmin [MPa]
-38.8
-82.9
-122
Table 13.3: pmin versus shaft center velocity.
13.3.3
Viscosity
In Table 13.4 the the minimum ﬁlm pressure is calculated at two diﬀerent oil viscos-
itys corresponding to the viscoities at the investigated operational temperatures. A
lower viscosity results in lower minimum pressures and more cavitation and knock-
ing. This again agrees with the experimental observations.
ν [pa s]
0.26
0.1
pmin [MPa]
-122
-171
Table 13.4: pmin versus oil viscosity.
13.3.4
Rotational direction and supply pressure
In Table 13.5 the inﬂuence of supply pressure at diﬀerent rotational directions and
RPM is presented. First it is noted that the pressures are a lot lower for the CCW
Page 43
==PAGE:49==
rotation compared to the CW rotation which agrees with the experimental results.
The relative diﬀerence increases as the RPM increases. This is because the attitude
angle increase with the RPM and as the attitude angle increases the low pressure
zone at CW rotation moves towards the oil inlet, as seen in Figure 13.6.
This
suggests that the minimum pressure is raised when the low pressure zone gets closer
to the oil supply, exactly like what was observed in the experiments. The oil supply
pressure also has a small inﬂuence on the minimum oil pressure and generally it
seems to raise the minimum ﬁlm pressure. It seems to be most inﬂuential at CCW
rotation.
RPM
300
600
Rotational direction
CCW
CW
CCW
CW
ps [bar]
1
6
1
6
1
6
1
6
pmin [MPa]
-63.6
-62.2
-53.6
-53.1
-18.3
-16.3
-12.0
-12.0
Table 13.5: pmin versus RPM, supply pressure and rotational direction.
Figure 13.6: Minimum pressure in CTR bearing at CW rotation. Note how the low
pressure zone is aﬀected by the oil inlet.
By comparing the minimum ﬁlm pressure from the numerical analysis with the
knocking in the experiments it seems that the minimum ﬁlm pressure is a decent
indicator for the knocking phenomenon in the CTR bearing. When knocking be-
comes more frequent and powerful in the experiments from changing a parameter,
the minimum ﬁlm pressure becomes lower in the simulation. By comparing the ex-
perimental results with the minimum ﬁlm pressures it seems that when the minimum
ﬁlm pressure is ≈−60 MPa or below in the simulation, knocking is experienced in
the CTR.
Page 44
==PAGE:50==
13.3.5
Geometry
In the following, the minimum ﬁlm pressure is evaluated against changes in geome-
try and dimensions of the bearing.
In Table 13.6 it is seen that increasing the width of the bearing drastically raises the
minimum ﬁlm pressure. Similar is seen when the clearance is decreased, as presented
in Table 13.7. The results indicate that knocking phenomenon is very dependent on
the journal bearing dimensions, which was also observed in in comparison analysis.
By increasing the load carrying capacity of the journal bearing, the minimum ﬁlm
thickness prior to the squeeze increases which raises the minimum pressure at the
squeeze. It is expected that this will reduce the cavitation and thereby the knocking.
L [m]
0.05
0.07
pmin [MPa]
-122
-34.4
Table 13.6: pmin versus bearing width.
c [µm]
83
50
pmin [MPa]
-122
-43.5
Table 13.7: pmin versus bearing clearance.
In previous papers it was observed that the knocking phenomenon could be reduced
by introducing grooves in the bearings. It is investigated how grooves inﬂuence the
minimum ﬁlm pressure using the numerical model. A model with side grooves and
a model with middle groove was generated. The total groove width is the same in
both models and the bearing width is increased corresponding to the total groove
width so that the load carrying surface area is the same for all the CTR models.
The bearing geometries and results are presented in Figure 13.7.
Page 45
==PAGE:51==
(a) Side grooves.
(b) Mid groove.
Figure 13.7: Minimum pressure in bearings with grooves
In both cases the minimum pressure is a lot lower, −328 MPa and −297 MPa respec-
tively, than for the bearing with no grooves. This is because the change in bearing
geometry changes the pressure distribution in the oil. In the case for the bearings
with grooves the load carrying capacity is reduced. This results in lower minimum
ﬁlm thickness and therefore lower minimum pressures. These results proves that the
minimum ﬁlm pressure is a limited indicator of knocking, at least for bearings with
grooves. The low pressures in the bearings indicate that there is vapor cavitation
in the bearings. However, the knocking only occurs when the cavitation reaches
the atmosphere. With the side grooves the distance between the cavitation and the
atmosphere is increased drastically. This corresponds to a submerged bearing. It
is therefore likely that the cavitation never reaches the atmosphere. In the case
with the mid groove the cavitation comes closer to the edges and it is expected that
knocking will occur. It can not be concluded if the knocking increase or decrease
compared to the plain bearing.
For the investigated cases the numerical results suggests that grooves does not reduce
vapor cavitation unless the bearing width is increased. However, if the grooves are
located in the sides of the bearing the cavitation is distanced from the atmosphere
which is likely to prevent knocking.
13.3.6
Overview
From numerical comparison of the CTR bearing with the other experiments it seems
very likely that vapor cavitation is present in the CTR bearing. The results from
the parameter analysis suggests that the minimum ﬁlm pressure is an indicator of
the knocking phenomenon in plain bearings. Some of the results from the parameter
analysis is presented in Table 13.8. Further it was observed that when the cavitation
Page 46
==PAGE:52==
zone gets closer to the oil inlet, the minimum pressure is raised. The results agree
with the experimental results and previous studies.
Increasing
Eﬀect on min. ﬁlm pressure
Estimated eﬀect on knocking
RPM
raise
reduce
V
lower
promote
ν
raise
reduce
ps
raise
reduce
hmin
raise
reduce
Table 13.8: Numerical parameter analysis results
The results indicate that when the minimum ﬁlm pressure is ≈−60 MPa or below
in the simulation, knocking is experienced in the CTR. It should be noted that this
value is very dependend on the speciﬁc bearing geometry and dimensions. It was also
found that side grooves distances the cavitation from the atmosphere and thereby
reduce knocking while middle grooves does not seem to help avoid knocking.
Page 47
==PAGE:53==
14
Conclusion
The DTU cavitation test rig (CTR) has been further modiﬁed and calibrated.
Steady state experiments were carried out on the test rig and the results agree well
with analytical and numerical predictions. The knocking phenomenon was success-
fully replicated on the CTR and documented with distance probes, accelerometers
and a microphone.
The observations on the CTR conﬁrm that the knocking originates from the low
pressure region in the oil ﬁlm when the translational velocity of the journal causes
a tensile squeeze of the oil ﬁlm. The knocking occurs at the time of maximum shaft
center velocity.
Based on literature study and numerical simulations it seems likely that the knock-
ing phenomenon is caused by vapor cavitation or gas cavitation by air entrainment.
The knocking sound is generated if the cavitation is or gets in contact with the
atmosphere when it collapses.
From the experimental parameter study it was found that lower RPM, lower oil
viscosity, higher shaft center velocity and lower minimum ﬁlm thickness prior to the
oil ﬁlm squeeze all promote the knocking phenomenon. The investigation also found
that when the oil inlet is located closer to the cavitating zone of the oil ﬁlm at the
time of the squeeze, the knocking is reduced. The oil supply pressure may also have
a small inﬂuence on the knocking.
The CTR bearing was investigated numerically in COMSOL Multiphysics.
The
minimum oil pressures achieved from the full Sommerfeld solution was compared
against the experimental parameter study. The results indicate that the minimum
ﬁlm pressure is an indicator for knocking in plain journal bearings. The simulations
showed that increasing the load carrying capacity of the bearing by changing the
dimensions raises the minimum ﬁlm pressure and it therefore may be a way of pre-
venting knocking. The simulations also found that cutting grooves in the bearing
does not reduce the cavitation but if the grooves are located near the bearing edges
the cavitation is distanced from the atmosphere which is expected to prevent knock-
ing.
Overall the experimental and numerical results agree well with previous studies on
the phenomenon. The phenomenon depends on a complex interaction of geometrical,
operational and lubrication parameters.
It is therefore believed that a criterion
for when the knocking phenomenon occurs should be made for the speciﬁc journal
bearing under speciﬁc operational conditions and the criterion should be based on
minimum ﬁlm thickness and squeeze velocity.
Page 48
==PAGE:54==
15
Future work
It would be interesting to evaluate bearings with diﬀerent groove and oil inlet conﬁg-
urations experimentally in the CTR and compare them with numerical simulations.
It would also be interesting to look into if the knocking phenomenon can be simulated
numerically.
Page 49
==PAGE:55==
References
[1] https://1drv.ms/v/s!AnRiJ26gU848xgKCSq1wF76F0xa4?e=dHdBmA.
[2] T. Noda T. Ozasa T. Kato Y. Murai T. Ito A. Kawamoto, T. Aoyama. Analysis
of noise occurrence by cavitation in the main bearing of diesel engine. 2002.
[3] S. Saitoh A. Yamamoto, A. Kasai. Analysis of ticking noise from cam bearing
of a diesel engine. 2012.
[4] X. Liu X. Shen B. Ni P. Wang, X. Chen. Principle Experiments Research of
Noise in Engine Main Bearing. 2018.
[5] T. Noda T. Ozasa T. Kato S. Suzuki T. Ito A. Kawamoto, T. Aoyama. Pre-
ventive Design and Analysis of Cavitation Noise on Diesel Engine.
[6] W. M. Hannon. M. J. Braun. Cavitation formation and modelling for ﬂuid ﬁlm
bearings: a review. SAGE Publications, 2010.
[7] D. E. Brewe. D. C. Sun. A High Speed Photography Study of a Dynamically
Loaded Journal Bearing. 1991.
[8] M. M. Khonsari D. E. Brew, J. H. Ball. Current research in cavitating ﬂuid
ﬁlms. 1990.
[9] R. C. Hendricks. M. J. Braun. Experimental Investigation of the Vaporous/-
Gaseous Cavity Charateristics of an Eccentric Journal Bearing. 1982.
[10] P B Abel. D. C. Sun, D. E. Brewe. Simultaneous pressure measurement and high
speed photography study of cavitation in dynamically loaded journal bearings.
1993.
[11] D. E. Brewe. D. C. Sun. Two Time Frames for Studying the Dynamic Cavitation
of Liquid Films. 1992.
[12] B.O. Jacobson. H. J. Hamrock. Vapor cavitation in dynamically loaded journal
bearings. 1983.
[13] A. S. Jensen A. Knudsen.
Theoretical and Experimental Investigation of a
Hydrodynamic Bearing. 2018.
[14] B. O. Jacobson B. J. Hamrock, S. R. Schmid. Fundementals of Fluid Film
Lubrication, Second edition. 1994.
[15] T. O. Andersen M. R. Hansen. Hydraulic Components and Systems.
[16] C. S. Andreasen P. Klit. Hydraulic Fluids. 2019.
[17] H.G. Elrod. A Cavitation Algorithm. 1981.
==PAGE:56==
A
Appendix: Test rig data treatment
1
clear all;close all;
2
3
%Reading the data
4
T = readtable('upstroke.csv ');
5
T=table2array(T(2:end,:));
6
7
%Time
8
r_s =1600; %sampling
rate
9
t=linspace (0,size(T,1)/r_s ,size(T,1));
10
t_step=t(2)-t(1);
11
%Force
12
F=T(: ,1);
13
%Journal
position
14
X1=T(: ,3);
15
Y1=T(: ,4);
16
X2=T(: ,5);
17
Y2=T(: ,6);
18
% accelerometers
19
acc_bottom=T(: ,10);
20
acc_top=T(: ,11);
21
22
23
%Stiffness
coeficients
24
k_push =228;
25
k_pull =360;
26
27
%%%%% Minimum
film
thickness
28
%40 deg celsius
29
%
h_min_1 =74 .0359 -sqrt ((X1 -403 .0359).^2+(Y1 -606 .65).^2);
30
%
h_min_2 =95 .6106 -sqrt ((X2 -437 .7106).^2+(Y2 -706 .3).^2);
31
%Room
temperature
32
h_min_1 =73 .2932 -sqrt ((X1 -410 .9632).^2+(Y1 -604 .85).^2);
33
h_min_2 =93.004 -sqrt ((X2 -443 .4365).^2+(Y2 -719 .75).^2);
34
35
F_g =750; %gravitational
load on bearing
36
37
h_min =( h_min_1+h_min_2)./2;
38
h_min=h_min +(F>F_g).*(abs(F)-F_g)./k_push +(F<F_g).*(-F+F_g)./k_pull
;
39
40
%%% Attitude
angle
41
phi_1=atan(abs (( -604 .85+Y1))./abs (( -410 .9632+X1)));
42
phi_2=atan(abs (( -719 .75+Y2))./abs (( -443 .4365+X2)));
43
phi=( phi_1+phi_2)/2;
44
phi=phi./pi *180;
45
46
% %Upstroke , zooming in on knocking
Page 51
==PAGE:57==
47
% F=F (263571:266773) ;
48
% t=t(1:266773 -263571+1);
49
% X1=X1 (263571:266773) ;
50
% X2=X2 (263571:266773) ;
51
% h_min=h_min (263571:266773) ;
52
% phi =(263571:266773) ;
53
% Y1=Y1 (263571:266773) ;
54
% Y2=Y2 (263571:266773) ;
55
% acc_bottom=acc_bottom (263571:266773) ;
56
% acc_top=acc_top (263571:266773) ;
57
58
59
%Plotting force , position
and
velocity
60
figure (1)
61
subplot (1,2,1)
62
plot(t,F,'LineWidth ' ,2)
63
xlabel('Time
[s]')
64
ylabel('Transducer
Force [N]')
65
xlim ([min(t),max(t)]);
66
ylim ([min(F),max(F)]);
67
%yyaxis
right
68
%plot(S(:,1),S(:,2) ,'r')
69
%ylabel('Signal [mA]')
70
grid on
71
grid
minor
72
%title('Pulse
frequency =1')
73
%set(findall(gcf ,'-property ','FontSize ') ,'FontSize ',10)
74
75
76
subplot (1,2,2)
77
plot(t,X1 ,'b')
78
xlabel('Time
[s]')
79
ylabel('Postion [\mu m]')
80
hold on
81
plot(t,X2 ,'g')
82
legend ({'X1','X2'},'Location ','southwest ')
83
xlim ([min(t),max(t)]);
84
ylim ([min(X1),max(X2)]);
85
grid on
86
grid
minor
87
set(findall(gcf ,'-property ','FontSize '),'FontSize ' ,14)
88
89
figure (2)
90
plot(t,Y1 ,'b')
91
xlabel('Time
[s]')
92
ylabel('Postion [\mu m]')
93
hold on
94
plot(t,Y2 ,'g')
95
xlim ([min(t),max(t)]);
96
ylim ([min(Y1),max(Y2)]);
97
hold on
Page 52
==PAGE:58==
98
yyaxis
right
99
plot(t,h_min ,'r')
100
legend ({'Y1','Y2','h_min '},'Location ','southwest ')
101
grid on
102
grid
minor
103
set(findall(gcf ,'-property ','FontSize '),'FontSize ' ,14)
104
105
figure (3)
106
plot(t,h_min ,'k')
107
xlim ([min(t),max(t)]);
108
ylim ([-10,max(h_min)]);
109
xlabel('Time
[s]')
110
ylabel('Minimum
film
thickness [\mu m]')
111
hold on
112
yyaxis
right
113
plot(t,phi ,'r')
114
ylabel('Attitude
angle [deg]')
115
legend ({'h_min ','phi'},'Location ','southwest ')
116
grid on
117
grid
minor
118
set(findall(gcf ,'-property ','FontSize '),'FontSize ' ,14)
119
120
121
figure (4)
122
plot(t,acc_bottom ,'k')
123
xlim ([min(t),max(t)]);
124
ylim ([min(acc_bottom),max(acc_bottom)]);
125
xlabel('Time
[s]')
126
ylabel('Accelerometer ')
127
hold on
128
plot(t,acc_top ,'r')
129
hold on
130
yyaxis
right
131
plot(t,h_min ,'b')
132
ylabel('Minimum
film
thickness [\mu m]')
133
legend ({'acc_{bottom}','acc_{top}','h_{min}'},'Location ','southwest
')
134
grid on
135
grid
minor
136
set(findall(gcf ,'-property ','FontSize '),'FontSize ' ,14)
B
Appendix: Numerical model of hydraulic sys-
tem
1
clear all
2
close all
3
clc
4
Page 53
==PAGE:59==
5
% Definition of the global
parameters
6
global par
7
8
%pump
9
par.Q_p =1.26 /60000;
10
11
%%accumulator
12
par.acc='gas';
13
%par.acc =0;
14
par.n =1.4;
15
par.Va = 0.5 /1000;
16
p0_a =15*10^5;
17
18
%oil
19
par.beta = 1e9;
20
par.rho =860;
21
par.nu =100*10^( -6);
22
23
%piston
24
par.A_r = 0.0024;
25
par.A = 0.0031;
26
par.eta =0.9;
27
par.stroke = 50*10^( -3);
28
29
%pressure
relief
valve
30
par.dQ_prv = (7.5 /60000) /(6*10^5);
31
par.pcr =27e5;
32
33
%Hoses
34
par.L_h_1 =1.4;
35
par.L_h_2 =1.5;
36
par.L_h_3 =2;
37
par.L_h_4=par.L_h_1;
38
par.L_h_tot =( par.L_h_1+par.L_h_2+par.L_h_3+par.L_h_4);
39
par.d_h =5*10^( -3);
40
41
%mass on piston
42
%par.M = 77.5;
43
par.M = 77.5;
44
45
%gravity
46
par.g = 9.81;
47
48
%Volume in pipes
49
par.V0_1 = par.d_h ^2/4* pi*par.L_h_1;
50
par.V0_2 = par.d_h ^2/4* pi*par.L_h_2;
51
par.V0_3 = par.d_h ^2/4* pi*par.L_h_3;
52
53
%DCV
54
par.K_v =(40/60000)/sqrt (35*10^5);
55
Page 54
==PAGE:60==
56
%initial
conditions
57
par.p1_0=par.pcr;
58
par.p2_0 =0;
59
par.p3_0 =0;
60
par.Vf0=par.Va -( p0_a*par.Va)/par.pcr;
61
par.x0 = 0.025;
62
63
64
% Parameters
for
timestepping
65
tend =0.01;
66
67
% Set initial
conditions
68
X (1
,:)=[ par.p1_0
par.p2_0
par.p3_0
par.Vf0
par.x0 0];
69
70
% Solve
using
solver for stiff
systems.
71
[t , X ]= ode15s(@msd
,[0 tend],X(1
,:));
72
73
figure (1)
74
hold on
75
subplot (2,2,1)
76
plot(t(:,1),X(:,1),'r','LineWidth ' ,2);
77
hold on
78
plot(t(:,1),X(:,2),'b','LineWidth ' ,2);
79
hold on
80
plot(t(:,1),X(:,3),'g','LineWidth ' ,2);
81
set(gcf , 'Position ', [200 500 400 300]);
82
legend ({'p1','p2','p3'},'Location ','northeast ','fontweight ','bold ',
'FontSize ' ,15)
83
xlabel('Time [s]','fontweight ','bold ','FontSize ' ,15)
84
ylabel('Pressure [Pa]','fontweight ','bold ','FontSize ' ,15)
85
grid on
86
hold on
87
subplot (2,2,2)
88
plot(t(:,1),X(:,4) *1000 ,'LineWidth ' ,2);
89
set(gcf , 'Position ', [200 500 400 300]);
90
xlabel('Time [s]','fontweight ','bold ','FontSize ' ,15)
91
ylabel('Accumulator
volume [L]','fontweight ','bold ','FontSize ' ,15)
92
grid on
93
hold on
94
subplot (2,2,3)
95
plot(t(:,1) ,-(X(:,5).*10^(6) -par.x0 *10^(6))./2,'LineWidth ' ,2);
96
set(gcf , 'Position ', [200 500 400 300]);
97
xlabel('Time [s]','fontweight ','bold ','FontSize ' ,15)
98
ylabel('Journal
position [\mu m]','fontweight ','bold ','FontSize '
,15)
99
grid
minor
100
hold on
101
subplot (2,2,4)
102
plot(t(:,1) ,-X(:,6)./2,'LineWidth ' ,2);
103
set(gcf , 'Position ', [200 500 400 300]);
104
xlabel('Time [s]','fontweight ','bold ','FontSize ' ,15)
Page 55
==PAGE:61==
105
ylabel('Journal
velocity [m/s]','fontweight ','bold ','FontSize ' ,15)
106
grid
minor
1
function dX = msd (t ,X)
2
% Uses
global
parameters
3
global par
4
5
% Vector is expanded
into
state
variables
6
p1 = X (1);
7
p2 = X (2);
8
p3 = X (3);
9
Vf = X (4);
10
x1 = X (5);
11
dx1 = X (6);
12
13
%Calculating
flow
through
pressure
relief
valve
14
Q_prv=prv(p1 ,par);
15
16
17
%Valve
signal
18
%xs=sin (2*pi *180*t);
19
%xs=stepfunction(t-1,0.1)-stepfunction(t-2,0.1);
20
xs=-1;
21
22
%Calculating
flow
through DCV
23
[Q12 , Q13 , Q24 , Q34]=dcv(p1 ,0,p2 ,p3 ,xs ,par);
24
25
%%%%% CV1
26
switch
par.acc
27
case 0
28
dp1=( par.Q_p -Q12 -Q13 -Q_prv)/( par.V0_1)*par.beta;
29
dVf =0;
30
case 'gas'
31
if Vf <0;
32
Vf=0;
33
end
34
% Accumulator
gas volume
35
36
Vg=par.Va -Vf;
37
% The
pressure
difference
for CV1
38
dp1=( par.Q_p -Q12 -Q13 -Q_prv)/(Vg/( par.n*p1)+(Vf+par.V0_1)/
par.beta);
39
40
%Calculating
fluid
flow from
accumulator
41
dVf = dp1*Vg/( par.n*p1);
42
43
end
44
45
%%%% The
pressure
difference
for CV2
46
dp2=(Q12 -Q24 -dx1*par.A_r)/(x1*par.A_r+par.V0_2)*par.beta;
Page 56
==PAGE:62==
47
48
%%%% The
pressure
difference
for CV3
49
dp3=(dx1*par.A+Q13 -Q34)/(( par.stroke -x1)*par.A+par.V0_3)*par.beta;
50
51
%Calculating
gravity
forces
52
Fg=par.M*par.g;
53
54
55
%Calculating
pipe loss - rod side
56
A_h=par.d_h ^2/4* pi;
57
v_h=(dx1*par.A_r)/A_h;
58
Re=abs(v_h*par.d_h/par.nu);
59
60
if Re >2300
61
lambda =0 .3164 *1/( Re^(0 .25));
62
loss_pipe_r=lambda *( par.L_h_tot /2)/par.d_h*par.rho*v_h ^2/2;
63
else
64
lambda =64/ Re;
65
loss_pipe_r=lambda *( par.L_h_tot /2)/par.d_h*par.rho*v_h ^2/2;
66
end
67
68
% %Calculating
pipe loss - piston
side
69
A_h=par.d_h ^2/4* pi;
70
v_h=(dx1*par.A)/A_h;
71
Re=abs(v_h*par.d_h/par.nu);
72
73
if Re >2300
74
lambda =0 .3164 *1/( Re^(0 .25));
75
loss_pipe_p=lambda *( par.L_h_tot /2)/par.d_h*par.rho*v_h ^2/2;
76
else
77
lambda =64/ Re;
78
loss_pipe_p=lambda *( par.L_h_tot /2)/par.d_h*par.rho*v_h ^2/2;
79
end
80
81
if dx1 ==0
82
loss_pipe_r =0;
83
loss_pipe_p =0;
84
end
85
86
loss_pipe = sign(dx1)*abs(par.A_r*loss_pipe_r+par.A*loss_pipe_p);
87
88
% The
derivative of the
velocity is calculated.
With
damping
included
89
ddx1 = 1/ par.M *((p2*par.A_r -p3*par.A)*par.eta+Fg -loss_pipe);
90
91
% derivative
vector ( column ) is generated
92
dX = [ dp1 dp2 dp3 dVf dx1 ddx1 ]';
93
94
end
Page 57
==PAGE:63==
1
function [QPA , QPB , QAT , QBT]=dcv(p1 ,pt ,p2 ,p3 ,x,par)
2
% This is a directional
controlvalve
3
if x>0
4
QPA=abs(x)*sign(p1 -p2)*par.K_v*sqrt(abs(p1 -p2));
5
QBT=abs(x)*sign(p3)*par.K_v*sqrt(abs(p3));
6
QPB =0;
7
QAT =0;
8
else
9
QPA =0;
10
QPB=abs(x)*sign(p1 -p3)*par.K_v*sqrt(abs(p1 -p3));
11
QAT=abs(x)*sign(p2)*par.K_v*sqrt(abs(p2));
12
QBT =0;
13
end
1
% Pressure
relief
valve
2
3
function [Q]=prv(p1 ,par)
4
% Deflate
parameters
5
Q=(p1 -par.pcr)*par.dQ_prv;
6
Q=Q*(p1 >par.pcr);
Page 58
==PAGE:64==
C
Appendix: Technical drawing of bearing
 
100 D8 
 
120 r6 
 
30 
 38 
A
A
0,05
0,01
 50 ±0,05 
 
10 H8 
A
1,00 X 45°
DETAIL A
SCALE 2 : 1
 10 
 30 
SECTION A-A
Ra  0,2
Ra  0,2
Skarpe kanter brækkes
Ikke-tolerancesatte mål efter DS/ISO 2768-1 f og DS/ISO 2768-2 K
Indersiden og ydersiden poleres.
Tlf: 22 92 24 11
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:2
SHEET 1 OF 1
A3
Lejebronze
WEIGHT: 
s147282
Part1
D
Appendix: Figure from DCV data sheet
Page 59
==PAGE:65==
E
Appendix: Calculations - Hertzian contact pres-
sure and journal bearing deﬂection
(3)
(3)
> 
> 
> 
> 
(5)
(5)
> 
> 
(4)
(4)
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
(2)
(2)
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
(1)
(1)
> 
> 
> 
> 
Caculating max Hertzian contact stress and deflection in bearing and journal. 
All units are in SI unless else is specified.
Material properties
Elastic modulus and poisson ratio
Yield stresses
Dimensions
Radial clearance
Radius of shaft and bearing respectively and bearing width.
Load in bearing resulting from maximum hydraulic cylinder force
Calculations
The contact zone is considered rectangular. The equivalent radius of curvature is calculated in the 
"rolling" direction.
33.38333333
Equivalent elastic modulus.
The dimensionless load is calculated.
Maximum Hertizian pressure is calculated.
Page 60
==PAGE:66==
(6)
(6)
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
(7)
(7)
(9)
(9)
(8)
(8)
> 
> 
> 
> 
It can be seen that the maximum Hertzian pressure is much smaller than the yield stress of the bearing 
material. 
Plastic deformation is therefore not of concern.
Elastic deformation
23.37568118
Deflection of journal
Beam data
Max deflection from Bernoulli Euler theory
Total deflection
28.42825870
Max deflection from observations
30.76923077
Page 61
==PAGE:67==
F
Appendix: Calculations - Short bearing theory
(5)
(5)
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
(1)
(1)
(4)
(4)
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
(3)
(3)
(2)
(2)
> 
> 
> 
> 
Calculating minimum film thickness
All units are SI unless else is specified
The short width bearing theory is applied
Bearing dimensions:
Operational data:
Load on bearing
Angular velocity of shaft
20.94395103
Oil data:
Density
Absolute viscosity
Eccentricity ratio
Calculated from radial load
Calculated from vertical load
0.748
Minimum film thickness
Attitude angle.
Page 62
==PAGE:68==
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
(7)
(7)
(6)
(6)
> 
> 
Maximum pressure
Page 63
==PAGE:69==
G
Appendix: Calculations - System response time
> 
> 
> 
> 
(2)
(2)
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
(3)
(3)
(1)
(1)
> 
> 
(4)
(4)
> 
> 
> 
> 
Hydraulic system response time
All units are SI units unless else is specified
Length of pipe from DCV to cylinder
Elastic modulus of steel pipes.
Bulk modulus of oil
Bulk modulus of air at atmospheric pressure
Equivalent bullk modulus of pipes
Equivalent bulk modulus of system when 1 percent of entrained air
Density of oil
Speed of sound in the hydraulic system
126.6924831
Time it takes for pressure wave to travel from DCV to piston
Page 64
==PAGE:70==
