==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
January 10, 2021
Master Thesis
Supervisors
Isuru A. Udugama, Carina L. Gargalo, Krist V. Gernaey
GFP producing bioreactor
Ole Laustsen Lave s153452
==PAGE:2==
Contents
1
Abstract
2
2
Introduction
3
3
Model formulation
4
3.1
Post Induction model changes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4
Data presentation
6
5
Parameter inﬂuence
8
6
Simple model runs
9
7
Monte Carlo parameter validation
10
7.1
Parameter selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
7.2
Monte Carlo results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
7.3
Monte Carlo conclussions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
8
Particle swarm optimization parameter estimation
17
8.1
Model output with literature parameter values
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
8.2
Objective function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
8.3
Boundaries and results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
9
Incorporation of agitation process data
21
10 Discussion
23
11 Future Work
24
12 Conclusion
24
13 Acknowledgements
25
14 References
26
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Page 2 of 26
1
Abstract
This study try to further the construction of a digital model of a pilot scale bioreactor producing
Green Flourescent Protein (GFP) to obtain process eﬃciencies through improved plant oper-
ations. with the overall goal of creating a digital twin to be used for educational purposes in
association with the AIM-bio project. The bioreactor, which are being modelled, are only used
occasionally which limit the data to base the model of. This study try to show a possible solution
to very data limited modeling.
==PAGE:4==
Introduction
Page 3 of 26
2
Introduction
In Process System engineering, the development of mathematical/process models has been a
standard practice for decades. There are remarkable examples of benchmark simulations such as
the MIT-Novartis Continuous pharmaceutical production process (Benyahia, Lakerveld, Barton,
2012) and the Benchmark Simulation Model (BSM) for wastewater treatment plants (Rosen,
Vrecko, Gernaey, Pons,
Jeppsson, 2006) being amongst a countless number of mathematical
models. A further this digitization towards complete digital copies of the plants furthering the
digital modeling is still needed, to better reﬂect or incorporate a wide array of eﬀects.
The Accelerated Innovation in Manufacturing Biologics (AIM-Bio) project is a joint initiative
between North Carolina State University and the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). As
a part of this initiative, the Process and Systems Engineering Center (PROSYS) at DTU col-
laborates with BTEC at North Carolina State University to develop digital models of their pilot
scale bio-manufacturing facility. The goal of this study is to develop a validated digital model
that can be used to move closer to a digital twin of the bio-manufacturing facility.
As in many bio-manufacturing processes, fermentation is a central part of the pilot scale bio-
manufacturing operations. BTEC produces GFP through an E. coli based fermentation process.
More speciﬁcally, the process employs an induced fermentation batch using E. coli (BL21(DE3))
with a plasmid pET17-b to produce GFPuv with a T7 promoter (IPTG) in a Sartorius Stedim
300-L Bioreactor. This bioreactor is equipped with a standard set of sensors such as Temperature,
Pressure, pH, and oﬀ-gas measurements.
An industrial distributed control system (DCS) is
used to operate the reactor, while a process historian is used for logging the available process
data. Moreover, advanced analytical equipment is used for oﬀ-line monitoring of the batch’s
progression, similar to standard industrial practice.
within the research group the modeling of GFP production including the induction mechanism
was handled by Frederik Nikolaj Seehausen Knudsen and Andreas skovhøj Henriksen. Within
this study only a simpliﬁed bare bone model structure of those parts of the model was included.
was used with the main focus being on the biomass and substrate modeling.
==PAGE:5==
Model formulation
Page 4 of 26
3
Model formulation
As an initial push towards developing a fully-ﬂedged digital model, a macro-kinetic process
model that accounts for overﬂow metabolism and the associated acetate excretion and substrate
consumption inhibition was set up in Matlab Simulink. The ordinary diﬀerential equations de-
scribing the mass balances were set up in accordance with earlier models reported by Xu et al.
(Xu, Jahic, Enfors, 1999), Anane et al. (Anane, López C, Neubauer, Cruz Bournazou, 2017),
and Pham et al. (Pham, Larsson, Enfors, 1998).
The set of ordinary diﬀerential equations uses ﬁve inputs and a set of auxiliary algebraic equations
describing the intracellular kinetics: biomass formation and oxygen consumption, substrate, and
acetate consumption. There are six output/state variables, which are: volume, biomass concen-
tration, extracellular substrate concentration, acetate concentration, dissolved oxygen, and mass
of GFP produced.
The inputs used in the model were chosen due to the fact that they are important and ma-
nipulatable physical process variables: feed ﬂow rate (L/h), feed glucose concentration (g/L),
temperature (C), headspace pressure (atm), volumetric mass transfer coeﬃcient. The MatLab
model developed by Anane et al., (2017) was used as the starting point for developing a Digital
Model.
The total glucose uptake rate is assumed to follow Monod kinetics with noncompetitive inhibition
by acetate and a lag phase term, Xu et al., 1999. Pham et al., 1998.
qS = qSmax
1 +
A
Kia
S
S + KS

1 −exp

−t
tL

(1)
In which S and A are the substrate and acetate concentrations while Kia and KS are the acetate
inhibition constant and substrate aﬃnity constant respectively. The substrate consumption is
split into two metabolic path ways, the overﬂow path which transform it into acetate or the
oxidation path through the TCA (tricarboxylic acid cycle). The rate of substrate consumption is
calculated using the maximum speciﬁc acetate production rate and a Monod saturation constant.
qSof = pAmax
qS
qS + Kap
(2)
The Substrate consumption for the oxidation path is given as the leftover substrate consumption
limited by dissolved oxygen available in the media.
qSox = (qS −qSof)
DO
DO + KO
(3)
The substrate from the oxidation path used for anabolismis obtained as
qSan = (qSox −qm)Yem
cx
cs
(4)
==PAGE:6==
Model formulation
Page 5 of 26
Where qm the substrate needed for maintenance, Yem the aerobic yield coeﬃcient exclusive of
maintenance, cx and cS are the carbon content of cells and substrate respectively. The acetate
production is modeled with a yield coeﬃcient and the substrate consumption in the overﬂow path,
while acetate consumption rate is modeled by Monod kinetics using Ksa, with noncompetitive
inhibition by substrate with an inhibitions constant of Kis
pA = qSofYas
(5)
qsA = qAmax
1 + qS
Kis
A
A + Ksa
(6)
The total oxygen uptake rate is described by a combination of the oxygen used for aerobic energy
metabolism of both substrate and acetate.
qO = (qSox −qSan)Yos + qsAYoa
(7)
Yos and Yoa are yield coeﬃcients of oxygen consumption based on substrate and acetate metabolism.
The Ordinary diﬀerential equations for the growth phase are mostly mass balance equation us-
ing the calculated consumption and production rates while taking possible dilution into account.
The biomass growth in the growth phase is modeled with a Monod-type speciﬁc growth rate.
dX
dt = X

µ −F
V

(8)
The speciﬁc growth rate at a given time is determined by the auxiliary algebraic equations
describing the speciﬁc metabolic ﬂuxes by combining substrate and acetate consumption in the
diﬀerent metabolic pathways with their associated yield coeﬃcients.
µ = (qSox −qm)Yem + qsAYxa + qSofYxsof
(9)
The substrate concentration incorporates the feed concentration combined in a possible feed.
dS
dt = F
V (Si −S) −qSX
(10)
Acetate production and consumption is combined and possible delusion by feeding is accounted
for.
dA
dt = (pA −qsA)X −AF
V
(11)
The dissolved oxygen state is desired as a percentile of saturation and is calculated by using the
volumetric mass transfer coeﬃcient as driving force for the media oxygen uptake
dDO
dt
= kLa(1 −DO) −qOX
DOsat
(12)
==PAGE:7==
3.1
Post Induction model changes
Page 6 of 26
Here DOsat is the saturation value of oxygen in the media at the given temperature and overhead
pressure. In the growth phase the GFP production is assumed to be 0.
dGFP
dt
= 0
(13)
The volume is assumed to only change in case of feed and change the corresponding amount.
dV
dt = F
(14)
While the model changes slightly when the induction with IPTG happen the model are still able
to be simulated continuously by reducing the time step around the induction time signiﬁcantly.
3.1
Post Induction model changes
Post induction the model changes slightly to introduce GFP production. It is assumed that only
induced cells are producing GFP and that induced cells do not grow. To separate the cells into
induced and non-induced, an induction percentile, xi, is calculated in auxiliary equations, based
on equations (7.40, 7.44, 7.46) in Villandsen et al., 2011, combined with a transfer function.
With this calculation setup the induction percentile increase to 0.99 within 6 minutes which
is comparable with the mixing time of the BTEC reactors. The modeled GFP production is
done similar to the acetate production with a metabolic ﬂux combined with a yield coeﬃcient
to obtain a the production rate. The metabolic ﬂux towards GFP production is assumed to be
qS −qm in induced cells. This gives the following speciﬁc GFP production rate.
pGF P = (qS −qm)Yps
(15)
The diﬀerential equation for GFP are created using the speciﬁc GFP production rate and the
assumption that only induced cells produce GFP.
dGFP
dt
= X xi pGF P −GFP F
V
(16)
The diﬀerential equation for biomass is modiﬁed based on the assumption that only non-induced
cells contribute to the growth.
dX
dt = (X(1 −xi)µ −F
V + X xi min(mu, 0)
(17)
The last term of the equation keeps the models estimate of biomass growth intact in a starvation
scenario when substrate uptake becomes less than the maintenance need.
While starvation
scenarios are on the outskirts of the models working domain.
4
Data presentation
BTEC have supplied online process data from 9 batch runs using the two 300 L bioreactors of
which one batch run have associated oﬄine data on glucose and biomass concentrations dur-
ing the batch run. This data set with associated substrate and biomass concentrations are the
==PAGE:8==
Data presentation
Page 7 of 26
basis used to compare with the model. A batch run is about 24 hours from incubation to harvest.
BTEC also supplied 8 data sets for batch runs on 4 diﬀerent smaller 30 L reactors with associated
substrate and biomass measurements performed by students. One of the data sets was discarded
due to mistakes made in the data collection of biomass concentrations. The other 7 data sets of
30 L data was used to estimate parameters.
Figure 1: Substrate and biomass data from the 300 L data set with induction time as dashed
vertical lines
In ﬁgure 1 the 300 L data set are plotted with time of induction. For both the 300 L and the 30
L batch runs the process data gathered in real time consist of Vessel Temp, Jacket Temp, pH,
Dissolved oxygen, Agitation, sparge Air, overhead pressure and Weight.
Figure 2: Substrate and biomass data from the seven 30 L data sets with induction time as
dashed vertical lines
==PAGE:9==
Parameter inﬂuence
Page 8 of 26
In ﬁgure 2 the seven usable 30 L data sets are plotted with time of induction. With the small
amount of datapoints it is hard to tell if there is any lag phase in the glucose uptake, or if the
slow glucose uptake in the start is just due to a small amount of biomass. Most of the process
variables are controlled at a set point by PI controller and are nearly constant for the runs. The
two interesting process variables are dissolved oxygen content and agitation. To keep a high
productivity of the biomass the oxygen is tried to kept above 30 %. This is done by increasing
agitation, which is also performed by a PI controller. In the model, agitation is incorporated into
the volumetric mass transfer coeﬃcient, kLa, which is an input in the model, that have direct
inﬂuence on the dissolved oxygen in the medium.
5
Parameter inﬂuence
The model include 18 kinetic parameters which deﬁne the biomass culture. The majority of the
values used for the parameter is from Anane et al., 2017. Below is a table with the parameters
and associated values used in the basic simulations and the source of the values.
Table 1: Literature parameter values
parameter
value
σ
origin ∖source
Kap (g/L)
0.5052
0.0768
Anane et al.,2017
Ksa (g/L)
0.0134
0.0029
Anane et al.,2017
Ko (g/L)
0.0059
NA
Based on data from Phue and Shiloach, 2005.
Ks (g/L)
0.0370
0.0033
Anane et al.,2017
Kia (g/L)
1.2399
0.119
Anane et al.,2017
Kis (g/L)
2.1231
0.5796
Anane et al.,2017
pAmax (g/g/h)
0.15
0.049
Xu et al., 1999
qAmax (g/g/h)
0.1148
0.007
Anane et al.,2017
qm(g/g/h)
0.0129
0.0009
Anane et al.,2017
qSmax (g/g/h)
1.35
0.2694
Xu et al., 1999
Yas (g/g)
0.9097
0.0409
Anane et al.,2017
Yoa (g/g)
0.5440
0.0517
Anane et al.,2017
Yxa (g/g)
0.5718
0.0566
Anane et al.,2017
Yem (g/g)
0.52
0.049
Xu et al., 1999
Yos (g/g)
1.5620
0.0843
Anane et al.,2017
Yxsof (g/g)
0.2268
0.0272
Anane et al.,2017
Yps (g/g)
0.05
NA
NA
tL (h)
0.001
NA
NA
==PAGE:10==
Simple model runs
Page 9 of 26
The Lag phase in glucose uptake is set to be very small since the data from the BTEC reactors
show no indication of a lag phase. It is kept in the model to make it more compatible with other
reactor set ups. The yield coeﬃcient of GFP on substrate was set to 0.1 based on similar values
seen in Lara et at., 2007.
When focusing on the models ability to correctly estimate biomass growth and substrate con-
sumption the parameter values are of great importance, so determining or estimating these are
a major point in getting a working model of a bioreactor. In the model seven diﬀerent yield
coeﬃcients are used as constants over the run of a simulation. Yield coeﬃcients combine a large
amount of inter cellular mechanisms which strictly causes them to be inﬂuenced by multiple
process variables which changes over the run of a batch simulation. An exsample of this is pH,
temperature, and dissolved oxygen content. The yield coeﬃcients are also greatly inﬂuenced by
the strain of the biomass. They are to some degree inﬂuenced by substrate concentration as
shown in Lara et al., 2007. The possible inﬂuence of process variables on the parameters, which
are assumed to be constant, makes the model less universal. Tuning the parameters to a speciﬁc
reactor, under speciﬁc conditions, could increase its precision. Moving from those conditions
would reduce its precision like a linearized model around its linearization point. The same is
applicable to the diﬀerent maximum speciﬁc production and consumption rates.
6
Simple model runs
Using the data point at incubation of the 300 liter batch run as initial glucose and biomass for
the model result in the biomass and substrate concentrations shown in ﬁgure 3. This run is done
with constant inputs for kLa, temperature and overhead pressure.
==PAGE:11==
Monte Carlo parameter validation
Page 10 of 26
Figure 3: 300 L model output
The model is able to predict the glucose concentration, but overshoots the biomass at 4 hours
and undershoot the biomass in the last two data points.
7
Monte Carlo parameter validation
With the parameters found in literature the model was compared to the set of 300 L reactor data
supplied by BTEC, using the ﬁrst substrate and biomass measurements as initial conditions for
the model. To better assess how the data ﬁt to the model, Monte Carlo simulation was used
varying certain parameters in correspondences with their standard deviation. The parameters
chosen to be focused on in this study was the maximum speciﬁc acetate production rate, pAmax,
the maximum speciﬁc glucose uptake, qSmax, and the yield of biomass on substrate consumption
exclusive maintenance, Y em.
7.1
Parameter selection
The maximum speciﬁc glucose uptake and the yield of biomass on substrate consumption are
the two most inﬂuential parameters on the substrate consumption and biomass growth which
are the main variables used to compare the model with the data. The maximum speciﬁc acetate
production was chosen based on it being heavily inﬂuenced by the strain of biomass where
BTEC uses E. coli. BL31(DE3) while Anane et Al., 2017, uses W3110M and Xu et al., 1999
==PAGE:12==
7.2
Monte Carlo results
Page 11 of 26
uses W3110. The pAmax parameter inﬂuences the biomass production in two ways. First it
increases the amount of substrate used to produce acetate thereby decreasing the amount in
the anabolic metabolism, and secondly by the produced acetate inhibiting the substrate uptake
further reduces biomass production.
7.2
Monte Carlo results
The simulations were performed with 2500 incidents, ﬁrst varying the 3 chosen parameters indi-
vidually, and then varying them all at the same time while increasing the incident count. Biomass
and substrate plot are used to evaluate the parameters.
Varying maximum speciﬁc substrate uptake
The ﬁrst simulation was done with varying qSmax in accordance with the standard deviation
from table 1. In ﬁgure 4 a histogram of the values are shown and in ﬁgure 5 the model output
of the substrate and biomass values are plotted.
Figure 4: Histogram of the qSmax values in the Monte Carlo simulation. total 2500 incidents.
The histogram shows an adequate normal distribution indicating that 2500 incidents is enough
for this simulation.
==PAGE:13==
7.2
Monte Carlo results
Page 12 of 26
Figure 5: Monte Carlo result with 2500 incidents varying qSmax. Red dots: Data from BTEC,
blue line: mean parameter value, Black lines: most extreme parameter values, black dashed line:
90% conﬁdence interval, opaque lines: individual incident results, vertical dashed line: time of
induction.
The Data is within the 90% conﬁdence interval except for the ﬁnal biomass point. It is also made
clear that by only varying qSmax it is impossible to reach the ﬁnal biomass data point since
the substrate is used up before reaching it. The standard operating procedure for the BTEC
production determine when to induce based on oﬄine biomass measurements so in cases where
biomass is produced faster they would induce at an earlier time, which makes the substrate
reaching 0 before induction a simulation artifact. The Blue line follows the substrate data well
which indicate that the literature value of this parameter is a plausible ﬁt for the 300 L bio
reactor.
Varying yield coeﬃcient of biomass on substrate exclusive maintenance
Changing the yield coeﬃcient should have a major impact on the biomass growth rate while
only a minor impact on the substrate consumption. In the Monte Carlo simulation the yield
coeﬃcient is varied according to the standard deviation from table 1.
==PAGE:14==
7.2
Monte Carlo results
Page 13 of 26
Figure 6: Histogram of the Y em values in the Monte Carlo simulation. total 2500 incidents.
The histogram shows an adequate normal distribution indicating that 2500 incidents is enough
for this simulation.
Figure 7: Monte Carlo result with 2500 incidents varying Y em. Red dots: Data from BTEC,
blue line: mean parameter value, Black lines: most extreme parameter values, black dashed line:
90% conﬁdence interval, opaque lines: individual incident results, vertical dashed line: time of
induction.
Here the impact on the biomass is the most prominent thing. All data points is here encapsulated
==PAGE:15==
7.2
Monte Carlo results
Page 14 of 26
by the most extreme outcomes and with all but the measurement taken after 4 hours are inside
the 90% conﬁdence interval. This show that the yield coeﬃcient have major inﬂuence on the
model outputs. Especially the amount it increases the biomass in the most extreme event is
noteworthy.
Varying maximum speciﬁc acetate production rate
The last parameter chosen is the maximum speciﬁc acetate production rate, pAmax.
Figure 8: Histogram of the pAmax values in the Monte Carlo simulation. total 2500 incidents.
The histogram shows an adequate normal distribution indicating that 2500 incidents is enough for
this simulation. It is also noted that with this amount of incidents, with the standard deviation
in table 1, the parameter take negative values in the most extreme outcome, which is not physical
feasible since it results in negative acetate concentrations.
==PAGE:16==
7.2
Monte Carlo results
Page 15 of 26
Figure 9: Monte Carlo result with 2500 incidents varying pAmax. Red dots: Data from BTEC,
blue line: mean parameter value, Black lines: most extreme parameter values, black dashed line:
90% conﬁdence interval, opaque lines: individual incident results, vertical dashed line: time of
induction.
This parameter show minor impact on the model output compared to the other two tested
parameters with the precision determined in the literature. The incident where the parameter
took a negative values does not break the model and does not impact the biomass and substrate
outputs in a major way.
==PAGE:17==
7.3
Monte Carlo conclussions
Page 16 of 26
Varying all chosen parameters
Figure 10 show the results of the ﬁnal Monte Carlo simulation. When trying to vary all the 3
chosen parameters simultaneously, while increasing the incident count to 5000, more extremes
where found, but also a clear tendency to stay close to the mean. This is seen from the opaque
lines (the individual incident results) creating a gray region around the Blue line and containing
all the data point.
Figure 10: Monte Carlo result with 2500 incidents varying all chosen parameters. Red dots:
Data from BTEC, blue line: mean parameter value, Black lines: most extreme parameter values,
black dashed line: 90% conﬁdence interval, opaque lines: individual incident results, vertical
dashed line: time of induction.
7.3
Monte Carlo conclussions
The Monte Carlo evaluation showed that the model output is inﬂuenced by qSmax and Y em to
a larger degree than by pAmax. It also indicated that the literature parameter values with the
given precision ﬁts the data to certain degree and is a good starting point. However the studies
also showed that with constant parameters the model seems to be unable to reach both the data
point after 4 and the one after 6 hours. This could be improved on by studying physical and
model variables impact on the yield coeﬃcients for instance but not limited to pH, temperature,
acetate, substrate or biomass concentration. As indicated by Lara et al.,2007, these variables
==PAGE:18==
Particle swarm optimization parameter estimation
Page 17 of 26
can inﬂuence the yield coeﬃcients which are assumed to be constants in the model. This could
be done by doing more calculations into the auxiliary equations or add blocks to the Simulink
model to calculate/estimate certain parameters in real time.
The model does not incorporated pH into the model since the reactor setup BTEC used for the
GFP production include pH control. As the pH for the batch run that supplied the data point
used in this Monte Carlo section only varied between 6.7 and 6 during the 24 hour run time as
shown in ﬁgure 11.
Figure 11: pH during the 300 L batch run
8
Particle swarm optimization parameter esti-
mation
Another approach to the apparent parameter importance and needed tuning for the speciﬁc re-
actor and bacteria strain was trying to use the data from the 30 L batch runs to reverse engineer
parameter values within certain lower and upper bounds. Here a Particle swarm optimization
approach was employed upon a gradient-based nonlinear program solver to estimate the param-
eters. Doing a particle swarm optimization was chosen to overcome or "brute force" a possible
convexity problem within the parameter value region.
8.1
Model output with literature parameter values
Running the model on the 30 L setups used to produce the seven data sets produce the model
outputs shown on ﬁgure 12. The model undershoots the biomass production in all cases. Which
again shows that the model need to have tuned parameters for an individual reactor and possibly
process conditions. The data was created on 4 diﬀerent reactor setups (1330,1340,1341 and 1350)
==PAGE:19==
8.2
Objective function
Page 18 of 26
Figure 12: Model output with literature parameter values for the 7 batch runs performed on the
30 L reactors. Red dots: data points from Btec, blue line: model output, dashed vertical line:
time of induction
8.2
Objective function
The objective function for the optimization was set to be a sum of the percentage error squares
of the model output in regards to the substrate and biomass data from the seven 30 L batch
runs. Disregarding the ﬁrst and last data point in each data set. Removing the ﬁrst data point
was because it is already assumed to be without error, since it is used as the initial substrate
and biomass content. Removing the last data point was becaurse in a lot of the data sets the
substrate level was zero or very close to zero which is problematic when using percentage error
squares. Using percentage error between the model output and the data points was done to
distribute the weight as evenly as possible over all the data points even when they vary greatly
in absolute value.
8.3
Boundaries and results
The optimisation was carried out with pAmax, qSmax and Y em as the inputs. The upper and
lower bounds of the estimated parameters are shown in the table below:
Table 2: Parameter bounds
parameter
literature value
lower bound
upper bound
pAmax (g/g/h)
0.15
0.10
0.25
qSmax (g/g/h)
1.35
1.1
1.5
Yem (g/g)
0.64
0.4
0.7
==PAGE:20==
8.3
Boundaries and results
Page 19 of 26
The particle swarm was done with 1000 particles evenly distributed within the parameter value
region. In ﬁgure 13 the result of the particle swarm optimisation is shown in red while the initial
inputs are shown in black. Each point indicate a speciﬁc combination of values for the three
parameters.
Figure 13: Particle swarm optimisation with 1000 particles, Red being the end values of the
estimations and black being the initial values of the parameters.
It is clear that the optimisation converges at nearly the same point with all the diﬀerent initial
condition. There is no pattern with the initial values and the end values of the parameters in each
optimisation. Below is table 3 showing the mean values and corresponding standard deviations
of the estimated parameters.
Table 3: Estimated parameters
parameter
estimated mean value
σ
pAmax (g/g/h)
0.1095
0.0069
qSmax (g/g/h)
1.2362
0.0085
Yem (g/g)
0.6655
0.0029
Comparing these to the literature values in table 1 the biggest changes are in pAmax which is
reduced by a signiﬁcant amount. This parameter is heavily associated to which strain of E. coli
==PAGE:21==
8.3
Boundaries and results
Page 20 of 26
and since the strain used in Anane et al., 2017, and Xu et al.,1999, is not the same as the one
used at BTEC this result could easily be plausible. It might be possible to do experiments at
BTEC to verify this parameter.
The Monte Carlo study also showed that pAmax has a smaller inﬂuence on the two output
variables that is measured. The Y em is also increased by quite a bit, which when looking at the
300 L Monte Carlo results might be speciﬁc to the 30 L reactors. Below the estimated parameters
is used in the model on the 30 L batch runs.
Figure 14: Model output with the parameter values estimated with the particle swarm optimi-
sation for the 7 batch runs performed on the 30 L reactors. Red dots: data points from Btec,
blue line: model output, dashed vertical line: time of induction
It is clear that the estimated parameters ﬁt much better to the data compared to the literature
parameters. There are still similarities with the individual reactor setups. For the 1330 reactor
setup the model undershoots the biomass with a tiny amount in both batch runs. And that
there is only one data set from the 1350 reactor gives it less weight in the optimization algorithm
since there is a lesser amount of data points from that reactor. This might be the reason why
this is clearly the data set where the estimated parameter model is least successful. If there had
been another data set from the 1350 reactor the error might have been more evenly distributed.
This indicate that the model could be further improved with a larger amount of data and having
unique parameters for each reactor setup.
==PAGE:22==
Incorporation of agitation process data
Page 21 of 26
9
Incorporation of agitation process data
To better estimate the biomass the agitation process data was used to improve the kLa estima-
tion. This was done following the assumption that kLa is directly proportional to the agitation
data from BTEC. This was done by using equation 18.
kla = A Agitation
Agitationt=0
(18)
In which A is the constant kla value used in earlier simulations set at 200 based on iformation
from BTEC. This was done with the data from the 300 L reactor.
Figure 15: 300 L Dissolved oxygen model output with (black) and without (blue) agitation data
implemented. Agitation data (orange) and oxygen data (red).
On ﬁgure 15 it is clear that incorporating the agitation data make the model better at estimating
the dissolved oxygen concentration as the black line does not drop close to 0 for an extend period
of time like the blue does. When the agitation data becomes less steady around the ﬁfth hour
the model becomes less precise, this could be helped by a noise dampening ﬁlter on the data or
by introducing an better estimation of kLa.
==PAGE:23==
Incorporation of agitation process data
Page 22 of 26
Figure 16: 300 L model biomass and substrate estimation with (black) and without (blue)
agitation data incorporated. BTEC data (red)
Since the agitation is nearly constant the ﬁrst 4 hours there are no change before that point,
after which the increased oxygen concentration improve the estimated productivity of biomass
which result in it estimating the last 2 biomass data points better. Making the model ﬁt rather
well with all but the 4 hour data points. Incorporating the agitation data slowed down the model
execution time signiﬁcantly. This should not be a problem in real time use, but for large scale
data handling and parameter estimation it could be problematic, due to the shear amount of
process time it need to model. A better estimation of kLa could improve the model further with
inclusion of sparge air data.
==PAGE:24==
Discussion
Page 23 of 26
10
Discussion
The biggest problem with the model is the amount of data it has to be compared with. It is
clear that the general structure of the model is able to predict substrate and biomass level, but
to improve the precision more data is needed to have something to compare it to and reduce the
uncertainties of the parameters. BTEC performs the 300 L batch run once every 2nd months,
which is the frequency more data can be acquired. BTEC gathers some crucial data including
biomass, substrate and GFP concentrations manually with manual operator intervention of the
the process, which greatly limits the amount of data points for each run signiﬁcantly complicat-
ing determining outliers and accessing the general data precision.
The Monte Carlo simulations of Y em and qSmax showed that they have a profound impact
on the estimations of the model to an extend where the precision of the literature values are a
potential problem. This could be reduced by using data from BTEC to improve the parameters,
while the limited amount of data complicates this. More data to test the model on would also
show whether problem is relevant.
While the particle swarm optimisation showed that there were a reasonable diﬀerence on the 30
L reactors and the 300 L reactor. This was interesting due to how well the model ﬁtted the 300
L reactor data with the literature parameter values, which are from a 15 L reactor in the case of
Xu et al., 1999, and 2 L in the case of Anane et al,m 2017.
The oxygen data in ﬁgure 15 showed another interesting thing. When the model deplete the
glucose supply the oxygen consumption only consists of what is used for acetate consumption
which signiﬁcant less than substrate consumption. When both acetate and glucose has been
consumed the medium goes toward saturation is regards to oxygen. In the data from BTEC the
oxygen does not make the same increase back to saturation, this indicate that the biomass keep
consuming oxygen for something. This could be a problem with the model which is based on
fed batch reactors, which doesn’t really experience starvation or it could be possible that glucose
measurement does not represent the total substrate in the medium.
Loading in the full agitation data with data gathered every 30 seconds into the Simulink model
a signiﬁcant slowdown of the simulations occurred in the magnitude of ﬁve times. This shows
that if multiple other process variables are introduced in the same fashion it could require a
optimization to the code or could limit the possibility for larger scale simulations as the particle
swarm optimization.
==PAGE:25==
Future Work
Page 24 of 26
11
Future Work
As stated in the intrduction the GFP production and induction mechanism of the model in this
study is only a placeholder since other people in the research group are developing a module
of the complete model which implement this based on intercellular and extracellular IPTG con-
centrations. Combining the model and the induction mechanism is the most important step to
complete to further the work towards a precise model for the GFP bioreactor.
In association with the biomass and substrate estimation part of the model a better and more
complete implementation and usage of the process data in the form of pH, temperature, sparge air
and agitation to estimate kLa and the possibility for changing some of the constant parameters
into variables of process conditions. All yield coeﬃcients are parameters which uses the cell as
a black box and would therefor be aﬀected by certain changes in the conditions the cells are in.
Such as temperature, ph and oxygen availability. This could be done preliminary on lab scale or
based on literature.
To further the usefulness of the model, especially for BTEC, incorporating a GUI for the model.
This would give the students a possibility to explore how the reactor is aﬀected by certain changes,
which you would not allow physically due to a risk of material loss. An example could be turning
agitation oﬀafter the ﬁrst 2 hours, or how changing the induction time might inﬂuence the overall
yield of GFP. Obtaining a model which could help improve induction time would be a massive
step. Right now induction is done based on the manually gathered biomass measurement, which
when doing a very limited amount of measurements is far from optimal. The eﬀects of when
induction happen is major especially when induction happen close to the depletion of substrate.
This being the case is indicated by the glucose measurements.
To turn the model into a complete digital twin, if this is desired, capturing eﬀect such as ﬂuid
dynamics and pH gradients would be needed. This requires a larger commitment by both the
modeling team and the pilot plant. Since multiple modiﬁcations need to be made to the reactor
setup. The model could easily be useful to both parties without these eﬀect incorporated.
12
Conclusion
A digital mathematical model has been developed for estimating substrate and biomass concen-
trations for the GFP producing bioreactor based on prior validated model. Due to limitation on
data amount from the actual reactor an approach based on Monte Carlo simulations was used to
indicate the importance of high precision parameters. This study showed that for certain param-
eters high precision is needed. Indicated by large spreads of the 90 % conﬁdence intervals. This
was the case for both the qSmax and Y em parameters. The last tested parameter pAmax did
not show the same importance for the output of the model, this could change upon incorporating
pH into the model, but this is not anticipated since the reactor have a pH controller. Generally
==PAGE:26==
Acknowledgements
Page 25 of 26
the reactors pH controller complicates the modeling of acetates impact on pH.
Parameter tuning showed to be important for individual reactors, but the basic model con-
structed could be used to a certain degree for other bioreactors by tuning the parameters with
data from the particular reactor This was shown on the 30 L reactors and could be extrapolated
from the model foundation in Pham et al., 1998. The particle swarm optimization showed that
simple parameter estimation techniques could be used with the model to yield parameters which
greatly improved the models ﬁt to available data.
13
Acknowledgements
The assistance provided by Isuru A Udugama on a daily basis was greatly appreciated, same goes
for Carina L. Gargalo with important inside on Monte Carlo simulations and Krist V. Gernaey
for overviewing the project. I would like to acknowledge the collaboration with Ryan Barton
from BTEC for reactor and data supply and clariﬁcations. And the AIM-BIO project for making
the collaboration possible.
==PAGE:27==
References
Page 26 of 26
14
References
Anane, E., López C, D. C., Neubauer, P., Cruz Bournazou, M. N. (2017).
Modelling overﬂow metabolism in Escherichia coli by acetate cycling. Biochemical Engi-
neering Journal, 125, 23–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bej.2017.05.013
Pham, H. T. B., Larsson, G., Enfors, S.-O. (1998).
Growth and energy metabolism in aerobic fed-batch cultures of Saccharomyces cerevisiae:
Simulation and model veriﬁcation.
Biotechnology and Bioengineering, 60(4), 474–482.
https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0290(19981120)60:4<474::AID-BIT9>3.0.CO;2-J
Xu, B., Jahic, M., Enfors, S.-O. (1999).
Modeling of Overﬂow Metabolism in Batch and Fed-Batch Cultures of Escherichia coli.
Biotechnology Progress, 15(1), 81–90. https://doi.org/10.1021/bp9801087
Villadsen J., Nielsen J., Lidén G. (2011).
Bioreaction Engineering Principles, Third Edition. ISBN 978-1-4419-9687-9
Lara R. A. Caspeta L., Gosset G., Bolívar F., Ramírez T. O. (2008).
Utility of an Escherichia coli strain engineered in the substrate uptake system for improved
culture performance at high glucose and cell concentrations: an alternative to fed-batch
cultures. https://doi.org/10.1002/bit.21664
Benyahia, B., Lakerveld, R., Barton, P. I. (2012).
A Plant-Wide Dynamic Model of a Continuous Pharmaceutical Process. Industrial Engi-
neering Chemistry Research, 51(47), 15393–15412. https://doi.org/10.1021/ie3006319
Rosen, C., Vrecko, D., Gernaey, K. V., Pons, M. N., Jeppsson, U. (2006).
Implementing ADM1 for plant-wide benchmark simulations in Matlab/Simulink. Water
Science and Technology, 54(4),11–19. https://doi.org/10.2166/wst.2006.521
Phue J-N., Shiloach J. (2005)
Impact of dissolved oxygen concentration on acetate accumulation and physiology of
E. coli BL21, evaluating transcription levels of key genes at diﬀerent dissolved oxygen
conditions https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2005.06.003
