==PAGE:1==
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark
by using car sensor information
Kalman Filtering and Markov hidden model
Master Thesis
DTU Computational and Mathematical Modeling
Machine learning and signal processing
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
Kalman Filtering and Markov hidden model
Master Thesis
Date, year
By
Daniel Alejandro Campos Rivera
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Machine learning and signal processing, Brovej, Building 118, 2800
Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Machine learning and
signal processing, Department of Mathematical Modelling and Computation, at the Tech-
nical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in
Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a normal knowledge in the areas of statistics and prob-
ability.
Daniel Alejandro Campos Rivera - s180014
Signature
Date
ii
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
GIS and python are tools used to study GPS Map matching by hidden Markov models
and Kalman Filtering.
Map Matching is a powerful method used to locate GPS point in a digital map. The models
associated with Kalman filtering and Hidden Markov Models use open street map data set
and GPS track. The models’ idea is to reduce the noise and uncertainty of the GPS data
applying the Kalman filtering method and match the GPS points with Hidden Markov Mod-
els to a digital road map obtained from the Open Street Map. The algorithm can estimate
the noise reduction of uncertainty by predicting the future value given other information
(velocity, acceleration, yaw angle). The expected result is compared and contrasting
with a standard map matching model using Hidden Markov Models without Kalman Filter
against one applying Kalman Filtering.
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Daniel Alejandro Campos Rivera, MSc Computational and Mathematical Modelling En-
gineering, DTU
Creator of this thesis template.
[Tommy Sonne Alstrøm], [lektor], [Institute for Matematik og Computation]
[assessor]
[Shahrzad M. Pour], [Post Doc], [Institute for Matematik og Computation]
[co-assessor]
[Milena Bajic], [Post Doc], [Institute for Matematik og Computation]
[co-assessor]
iv
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Project General Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem Specific Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.5
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5.1
Geometrical Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.5.2
Topological Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.5.3
Probabilistic Map-Matching Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
1.5.4
Advanced Methods Map-Matching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
1.5.4.1
Kalman Filter Map-Matching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
1.5.4.2
Extended Kalman Filter Map-Matching
. . . . . . . . . . . 13
1.5.4.3
Fuzzy Methods and Particle Filter Map-Matching . . . . . . 15
1.6
Contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2
Data processing for GPS Map Matching
17
2.1
Denmark Road Geo-spatial database
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.1.1
OMS Denmark Data visualization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.1.2
OMS Denmark Data content
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.1.3
OMS Denmark edit and filter the ways database
. . . . . . . . . . . 21
2.1.4
LiRa DataBase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
2.1.5
LiRa DataBase handling anomalies and outliers for position variable
25
2.1.6
Merging LiRa database and Open Street Map database . . . . . . . 28
2.2
Kalman Filtering and Theory data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
2.2.1
Kalman Filter Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
2.2.2
Coordinates System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
2.2.3
Kinematics equations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
2.2.4
Kalman Filtering multivariate form
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
2.2.5
Design of the Process Noise Matrix
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
2.2.6
Designing Kalman Filters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
2.2.7
Designing Extend Kalman Filters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
2.3
Hidden Markov Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
2.3.1
Hidden Markov Model for GPS map Matching . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
2.3.2
OMS and K-Nearest Neighbours . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
2.3.3
Dijkstra Algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
2.3.4
Viterbi Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
3
Applying Machine Learning Methods
52
3.1
Data Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
3.2
Kalman Filtering 1D Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
3.3
Kalman Filtering 2D Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
3.4
Hidden Markov Model Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
3.4.1
OMS and K-Nearest Neighbours Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
3.5
Dijkstra Algorithm result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
v
==PAGE:8==
3.6
Viterbi Algorithm result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
4
Conclusion and Future Research
68
4.1
Future Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
5
Appendix A
72
5.1
Listings (Python code) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
Bibliography
99
vi
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
system technology and his accuracy is mostly a prerequisite in the functions in the vehicle
positioning system. Nevertheless, due to the use of different kinds of sensors on the cars
such as global positioning system GPS, GPS / INS and GPS /Dead Reckoning DR is quite
common to find errors and mistakes during the measures. The techniques and algorithms
in map matching help to decrease the mistakes and redefined the vehicle’s position.
As it was mentioned by Robert Kruger[Rob15] in geo-analytics, a lot of record trajectories
need to be processed. That spatiotemporal will reflect the movement of the person or
vehicles. This ability to track the GPS sensor’s courses gives the industry and the society
itself many opportunities in terms of security, control, management of operation, traffic,
and localization of their GPS devices. However, the measurement of the Global Naviga-
tion Satellite Systems (GNSS) devices (e.g., GPS) records carries with a lot of underlying
errors and uncertainties owing to the GPS gaps losing signals.
Map Matching and GPS tracking are used nowadays in a lot of technological fields with
different purposes. It is possible to obtain information on traffic situations, measure real-
time data for traffic analysis and forecast, analyze mobility behaviour, online traffic source
apps such as google maps or algorithms with advanced optimization techniques for de-
livering services. Map matching is in the field of study for autonomous car mobilization
and robotics. Hence, for any of these situations, map matching algorithms’ accuracy and
speed become fundamental for the applications’ success.
It is essential to mention that map matching problems are not only related to offline or
online issues but also is strongly correlated with the map database. GIS databases around
the world are incomplete for match mapping purposes. There are missing roads, networks
in cities and towns that are not yet developed as a GIS database, without considering the
new infrastructure growing around the country or the area that creates some uncertainty
during the map matching process. That is why having an intelligent way of processing
the historical GPS record will give inferences where the need to be made digitally the
road, usually used as transit. In this direction, it is possible not only to complete or create
the database but also to actualize old databases with relatively accurate information or
generate a signal of the anomaly to detect the missing link in the database. Although
missing information has a strong relation with map matching problems, this is not covered.
Still, it is essential to talked about to give the reader a more significant scope of the map
matching problems.
1.1
Project General Overview
The project’s general overview aims to be an informative case of LiRA project (Live Road
Assessment) [LiRa] in Denmark. LiRA project involves stakeholders such as The Danish
Road Directorate (State institution), Green Mobility (Company which possesses the data),
Technical University of Denmark, and SWECO.
The data obtained by GreenMobility’s car fleet will be analyzed using DTU software or
app that provides states of information that the Danish Road Directorate and Sweco use
in their asset management systems. The project’s overall objective is to deliver a road
pavements survey by using conventional sensors installed in modern vehicles. The main
goal of the Lira Project is that it will be able to detect and identify any damage in the
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
1
==PAGE:10==
asphalt layer and pavement, reducing in this sense conventional state measurements in
exchange for digitizing and automatized quantitative models taking into account machine
learning knowledge and parameters detected by the sensor such as roughness (IRI), rut-
ting depth, texture depth, noise, friction, rolling resistance, cracked surface and potholes
among others facts.
Although the LiRA project’s scope is significant in developing sensors, calibrate sensors,
analyze Hybrid Models and physical models, develop APIs, develop databases, validate
and evaluate models to produce an asset management software. The master thesis and
project work will only focus on the Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark using the
green mobility car sensor. In this order of ideas, the master project will not use a lot of the
sensors’ data on the GPS (rutting depth, texture depth, noise, friction, rolling resistance,
etc..). Still, the project will need other kinds of data like latitude, longitude, speed and
braking time. The topic studied in this thesis is an essential part of the LiRA project
because it will help determine and localize the car’s position and later the positioning of the
damage on the road with the GPS data taken by the vehicle. It is essential to mention that
although exist GPS of precision GPS where the error is relative ± centimetres, the Green
Mobility car or any conventional GPS will have a mistake relative± meters. This error will
affect the measure of the correct position. Using map matching traditional algorithms in
GPS (cheapest option) will reduce the cost and digitize the LiRA project’s information.
1.2
Problem Specific Overview
This thesis aims to develop an algorithm which permits Map-matching GPS data to roads
in Denmark by using car sensor, data and information obtained with conventional GPS.
Hence, the GPS information represents an observable position (± meters) taken by green
mobility cars, but not a real position measure with precision GPS (data used to validate
the model P79 vehicle). The overall idea is to develop a model in which the observable
positions determine the possible real status based on the data taken by the car sensors.
To be able to develop this method is necessary to take into account the context of the
project, therefore there are two main algorithms the Online Map Matching(traffic sens-
ing,traffic incident detection, travel time prediction for apps) and Offline Map Matching
[Rot20], LiRa project and consequently the master thesis project is develop in the world
of offline map matching and although some methods are similar the accuracy and hence
the computational cost change depending in which environment is working the algorithm,
thus in online map matching we expected a fast but a relatively inaccurate and imprecise
result, different from offline map matching scenario where the algorithm can learn from the
data set historically, process more information and develop inference model, enhancing
their performance during the process but this come with a high computational cost (time),
however the result is expected to be better and more informative since helps to correct
errors and analyze higher volume of information.
According to the author, Ting Liu [Tin19] there are different map matching procedures
offline four different algorithms to solve the problem: geometry-based, the topological
relation-based, the probability and statistic-based and advanced methods based. The
first category (geometry-based) are algorithms point to point (match GPS point to the
nearest node), point to the curve (match the GPS point to the segment of the road) and
curve to the curve(match a series of GPS points with the nearest curve of a line segment
of a road). The biggest problem on this algorithm is that the miss matching depends
2
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:11==
on density and distribution. The road network nodes, complex road sections (circles or
curve), and abnormal points in a group of GPS points will lead a lousy map matching due
to the abnormality or anomaly. The second category (the topological) of map matching
represents algorithms in which you can stretch compress, rotate, and translate the ge-
ometry but never cut or divide. The algorithm uses GPS position points (time, heading
angle, etc.) and the road section’s characteristics to correct the error. The problem of this
algorithm rise in the complexity of the geometry and the road section.
The principal used algorithms in the industry are the probability and statistic algorithms
based on Hidden Markov model (HMM) [sem20][NK19][Han] and the algorithm related
with Kalman Filter which is used mostly in advanced map matching techniques. The HMM
algorithm’s realization mainly implies developing two probabilities: emission probability
and the transition probability. The defect of this algorithm is that it can quickly fail on dense
road sections. The last algorithm used commonly is the Kalman filter [Pin16][NB05], the
algorithm improves GPS points on terms of metric aspects which depends on the position
and variables such velocity, acceleration or other variables to predict and correct the GPS
point. The algorithm’s problem is that it is affected by the network’s complexity, sampling
rate, and other parameters.
The algorithm itself has been applied successfully in industry and reality. However, the
project’s idea is to improve the accuracy of the map matching of the GPS that considers the
network road of Denmark plus kinematics parameters of the vehicle. Hence, to develop
the algorithm is necessary to use different kinds of tools such Open Street Map (Database
OSM) [joc19] that permits to improve the future application in relation with maps(Lines,
nodes, poly-lines, relations between geometries etc.) and Lira Database that illustrates
the trips of the cars. Therefore, it is necessary to use math tools and programmatic tools to
handle the data related to the map with the data linked to the GPS data of Green Mobility
Cars (historical data with a Float of 400 cars).
Figure 1.1: LiRA data pipeline and Specific contribution
The illustration ?? shows the steps on LiRA project. First is a data collection made by
sensors organized and filtered by a web interface. Second, there is a data distribution
step whose main work relies on how the software will communicate the information.
The third step Data Pre-processing is where the master thesis will influence more in the
Lira project. Therefore, there is cleaning, filtering, Map Matching process and saving the
analysis in LiRA Database. The Four-step is LiRA data storage all this analysis is made
by one trip and for a one-time window but if it is applying for the whole fleet of cars over
the entire week, month or year is necessary to think in how to build the database. The fifth
and last step is data usage with machine learning and data analytic. The main task is to
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
3
==PAGE:12==
correlate the sensors’ values with the map matching data to identify the possible damages
in Denmark’s road network.
Since this thesis will focus mainly on map matching research using the Open Street Map
database (OSM), the deliverable will be an interdisciplinary research for the data process-
ing in the LiRA project, combining software engineering and machine learning tools.
1.3
Research Questions
1. How the relationship between Open Street Map(OSM) database and LiRA project
helps develop the GPS Map Matching Algorithm?
2. How can be improved the accuracy during the GPS Map Matching Process?
3. What are the benefits and assumptions behind the Kalman Filtering Method during
the GPS map matching process?
4. How Hidden Markov Models(HMM) will be useful in map-matching sparse and noisy
GPS trajectories to road networks (OSM)?
5. What kind of different approach should be needed to implement or modify the algo-
rithm in real life (LiRa Project)?
The thesis will answer multiples question. Hence the question one will answer in chapter
2 in the section (Denmark Road Geo-spatial data) and question two, three and four are
responded in chapter 2 in the section (Machine Learning Algorithms ) the lasts question
will solve in the final chapter (conclusions).
1.4
Methodology
As it was stated by [Pau14] Johannesson the contribution for a routine design is traduced
as an incremental innovation that addresses a well-known problem by making minor mod-
ifications to an existing solution. As a result, the thesis developed an artefact as a practical
solution for the issue that addresses LiRa project with the possibility of increasing their
performance, making small modifications on it.
For the construction of this artefact, it was necessary to understand and determine the
relation of the multiples databases, methods, algorithms, and tools to build an application
for GPS map matching. Therefore, the understanding of Open street map component,
relations and Geo-localization was a critical step because the database is the one which
will build a real road network map of Denmark.
To achieve this objective was necessary to use python as a software platform, SQL to
read, filter and organize the data and understand the parameters and Qgis to repre-
sent and the Geo-localize the points in a map. Starting to understand and research the
LiRa database, it was possible to determine many the suppositions, assumptions and the
scope of the project. Throw the visualization of the GPS trajectories of different trips and
database in the LiRA project was easy to observe and establish the anomalies, outliers,
and the assumptions of normality of the Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark
using the car sensor information and the representation of points in the map.
Measure data, understand the data’s bias, and how these assumptions violate the use of a
conventional algorithm (Kalman Filter) in the real uncontrolled environment was determi-
nant for the thesis research. However, by simulations, the program validated the benefits
of Kalman Filtering in a controlled simulated environment. The idea behind these simu-
lations is to develop an artefact that works in this environment initially. That can increase
4
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:13==
their complexity depending on the real uncontrolled settings or, consequently, study the
chance that the uncontrolled environment becomes controlled as the simulation.
Merging the information of Open Street Map and the Lira project and making uses of
dictionaries, arrays and list saved the data, capture and proceed in posterior methods to
develop a better level accuracy on map matching process.
Kalman Filter as Kinematic equations in 1D and 2D dimensions were designed and imple-
mented in a class to scale the project and understand the procedure behind the methods.
By running iterative and debugging the code, the results become more relevant when
implementing the known solution (Kalman Filtering).
The Hidden Markov Model leads successfully the process of map matching in a geograph-
ical zone for an open street map. However, this leads to using the known algorithm as a
local search with K nearest neighbours [Tin19], Dijkstra algorithm [Gee20] for finding the
shortest route and Viterbi algorithm [Mar19], the Hidden Markov Model algorithm. All this
process was done for one simulation route in a controlled environment and are the base
for a future advanced research project in GPS offline map matching algorithm where the
program can enhance accuracy with the correct procedures.
To end this work finish by reflecting on the procedure of implemented their strong assump-
tions and how it is possible to add or apply new methodologies where the algorithm will
get more information to make it better for future decisions. There is still a lot of research
in particle filtering, Bayesian filtering and smoothing without mention the field of Hidden
Markov Models and OSM SQL.
1.5
Related work
Previously there has been work related to GPS car map matching offline. It is also impor-
tant to mention that the previous work is somehow connected. Therefore each algorithm
can be used more than once as part of the other algorithm, making it more complicated
but more accurate.
As it, state [Moh07], match matching methods are into four main categories, illustrated in
?? some methods or algorithms depend on one from another one. In general words, the
procedures are mutually inclusive. However, there are exceptions(Topological Analysis)
that work with similarity search and don’t affect the other methods’ performance. It is
crucially to say that each practice has a different overview. In the following chapters, it
will be possible to observe each method’s advantages and disadvantages in the GPS Map
Matching process.
The complexity of each method and the indicator of accuracy start to vary from case to
case, then the disadvantages can be studied and analyzed in different points of view.
Consequently, methods can explain the penalties on terms of accuracy from selecting
the right point, precision for choosing the correct direction (double roads ways case),
the accuracy of selecting the corresponding geometrical shape (curve, Roundabout) and
accuracy selecting the correct link dense road network among other problems. However,
the precision varies depending on the task project on the map matching problems.
It is necessary to remark the road’s location component, which means where the car
is across the road’s segment speaking on longitudinal terms and not width. This is not
explained in detail in this master’s thesis. The segment’s assumption doesn’t have width
is a strong assumption, and the matching happens across the longitudinal components,
which means which abscissa on the road has match the car the algorithm.
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 1.2: Map Matching common algorithms observed in the literature review
The methods described in 1.2 show how, according to the literature review, their improve-
ment in the accuracy process of map matching makes a better estimation and having an
observable value of GPS point. Nevertheless, this accuracy comes with a trade-off that
is the computational cost. It is essential to mention always in which context is develop-
ing the map matching and how crucial the computational cost of analyzing information is
compared with accuracy.
An application such as matching an autonomous car to a GIS system will need a power
algorithm of accuracy in a short time window or improve GPS devices. The speed of
decision and the purposes of the map matching procedure depend a lot on which methods,
algorithms, and devices are needed to determine the car’s position. Another application
commonly used is for delivering service. In this context, the courier localizes his position
in an OSM and localizes the deliver place. Using a standard GPS and a Hidden Markov
model algorithm, the program will provide enough information to the courier to deliver the
product. The expected computational cost decrease since is used for online purposes but
the accuracy decrease (Case when the courier are in a street but the software is showing
that is in parallel street).
Then map matching problems are in many different fields and for many different prob-
lems. It is essential to remember that we are thinking of a two-dimensional perspective
for this specific thesis and various reasons. Still, it is possible to do the analyze for a
three-dimensional case if it is wanted to localize the position of a submarine, aeroplane
or projectile.
In this sense, the map matching algorithm increases their complexity depending on the
case of use and the case’s dimension. However, in LiRA project, the computational cost
is a variable that might not affect much the decision. The slack of time is significant
(days, weeks or months) to analyze the road’s damage and the car localization in the two-
dimensional map. LiRA should report the wholes’ recent damages, taking into account
6
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:15==
compressible time windows where software can execute the algorithm.
Figure 1.3: Matrix algorithms observed in terms of accuracy and computational cost
It is possible to observe in figure 1.3, the different kind of methods founded in the literature
and used in map matching. It is vital to discuss that the processes with high accuracy and
low computational cost are methods used in online applications. The techniques with
high computational cost are used in offline problems. The important thing to comment on
about the graph is that practices such as fuzzy Kalman filter and deep learning among
other Bayesian methods require many computational costs.
However, techniques as deep learning (Neuronal Network) still in research and literature
review supports that a neuronal network has better performance among other methods,
but this still solving a local trip problem. For this approach, no evidence supports how
configured the neuronal network will work in different paths, trips or routes or apply in
another global context. Different from Bayesian Kalman filter methods that will work in a
general context with a good performance.
It is important to emphasize that choosing between a deep neuronal network and the other
methods depends on whether one is interested in studying a specific route or specific
case. Neuronal networks will perform better in a particular context or circumstances, but
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
7
==PAGE:16==
Hidden Markov Models, Kalman Filtering and other methods work for general issues.
1.5.1
Geometrical Analysis
The Geometrical analysis Figure 1.4 is based in point to point, point to curve and curve
to curve, nonetheless, we have to remember a curve is a series of points joined by a line,
thus what it is essential about the algorithm is the ability to develop a search arithmetically
with setting the desired radius and finding the wanted points nearest to the GPS point.
Consequently, it is intuitive to assign that GPS point to a specific segment line or point
in the road map network in an Open Street Map. After all, although this calculation is
relatively fast and helpful to develop local search matching it has big drawbacks of terms
of accuracy and precision finding the valid points given an observable GPS point.
Figure 1.4: Point to point, point to curve, curve to curve examples
The geometrical analysis presents many impressions, as illustrated in Figure 1.5. It is
possible to analyze a different kind of errors in the geometrical analysis. That is why
it is possible to show the methods’ main weakness in terms of node selections. Notice
something interested in Figures 1.5a and 1.5b, the map information database (nodes,lines
and polygon) are different from the both data set. Therefore, in one hand, Figure 1.5a have
all the nodes as the intersection between link represented only the vertex, this means
that there is no step intermediate along the line or link making azimuth measurement
complicated. On the other hand, the data set is more complicated in 1.5b where it is
possible to measure the azimuth of the road.
(a) Error Point to Curve Geometry Algorithm
(b) Error Point to Point Geometry Algorithm
Figure 1.5: Common Error In Geometry Algorithm
8
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:17==
As it states by Jaiteg [Jai19] in his article, he arrives at two main conclusion first, in the
geometrical point to point and point to curve matching does not work well in an ambigu-
ous environment, and second, the method can improve the performance by incorporating
topological information in the algorithm. The point to point algorithm will have problems
identified the nearest node given a path in dense areas figure 1.5b. The search for k
radius nearest algorithm is susceptible to the size of the radius in the search area. The
small radius will no find near neighbourhood. The algorithm will experience problems with
anomalies and outliers. The decided path will differ as is shown in Figure 1.5a depending
on the objective of the algorithm curve to curve or point to point. For this specific problem,
the algorithm must identify the entire segment and the path made by the observable GPS
point and OSM node in the course.
The geometrical analysis has many weaknesses and defects to identify a real point with
good accuracy. Nevertheless, the power of algorithms reminds in developing search in
a GIS(Geographical Information System) data set given a geometrical distance. In these
orders of ideas, it is possible to identify the nearest node, nearest curve or link, and the
most relative nodes with different attributes such as polygons, lakes, forests, or buildings.
All that geographic information close to the GPS observable point is used to identify the
actual value of GPS point.
1.5.2
Topological Analysis
According to the author, Jaiteg [Jai19], the topological analysis refers to the analysis of
map matching techniques that studied the relation between identities, defined as a point,
lines, close polygons and open polygons. That relation can define metrics as an ad-
jacency, connectivity or containment. Based on those relationships, the topological al-
gorithm will build the geometric information, and from that geometric information, it is
possible to know the direction, area and referral point.
Figure 1.6: Contrast between Topological and Geometrical Algorithms
As it is illustrated in figure 1.6 the path selected by a geometrical algorithm is different than
from topological. Efstratios [Efs19] explain in their article that the topological algorithm
uses a concept of Force-Directed Graph Methods. He defined as ”Methods modelled as
a system of particles with forces acting between them and a compelling visual result is
achieved when the particles are placed in such a way as to achieve a force equilibrium”.
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
9
==PAGE:18==
In simple words, the topological algorithm can measure a point’s force direction given the
adjacent polygons’ geometrical form. However, their still ambiguity and doubt of which
path is the real path in a trip or route are shown in figure 1.6.
Figure 1.7: Errors in topological analysis map matching algorithm
In figure 1.7 is possible to observe one of the errors of the topological algorithm states by
Efstratios [Efs19],the concept of force miss match the true route when there are round-
abouts making the algorithm inaccurate for the purpose of lira project and offline map
matching. In addition this algorithm is very sensible to outliers and anomalies in the data,
if data is not pre-proceed the expected outcome will be more inaccurate, although it solves
problems of direction still being weak algorithm in dense areas.
1.5.3
Probabilistic Map-Matching Algorithms
The probabilistic map-matching techniques work with metrics that use the probability that a
trajectory may actually go through a certain route to measure the matching quality. Owing
to measurement exactitude, the actual location of each GPS sample point is restricted to
an ellipse confidence area. Hidden Markov Model (HMM) are the process which better
explain phenomena and is considering a model which take into account a discrete state.
As it is explained by the author Jagadeesh [JS17] is an probabilistic graphical algorithm
that give a better accuracy in matching the points to a corresponded segment.
Figure 1.8: Hidden Markov Model raw location measurements and the states correspond-
ing to them
10
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:19==
Figure 1.9: HMM representation of the above example with arrows indicating the condi-
tional dependencies.
In the illustrations 1.8 and 1.9 the schematic representation of HMM is explained. Analyz-
ing and understanding the picture the method of HMM measure a probability depending
on the geometrical distance to the link or road and the past GPS observation behaviour
given a time step. In this sense, it provides a larger range of decision of where assign the
corresponding node compared with the past algorithms.
Nonetheless, in this algorithm, The location observations are subject to measurement
noise. Therefore the real location point on-road locations corresponding to match are
unknown. This algorithm came with map matching problems the algorithm back on the
noise observations, the density of the link, segments or road and the sensibility to detect
anomalies in the noise GPS observation. This means you need to filter the data before
applying the algorithm and detect the anomalies.
(a) Error HMM model Following a route
(b) Error HMM miss-matching a Link
Figure 1.10: Common Error in Probabilistic Algorithm HMM
In Figure 1.10 is shown the most common errors, Figure 1.10a illustrating how the HMM
choose the wrong path given the noise of the observation and in Figure 1.10b how this
miss matches activate a link that it should be inactivated, errors commonly in the junctions
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
11
==PAGE:20==
of two or more links in the network of the roads, but the performance still be better or more
accurate that the geometrical or topological method.
1.5.4
Advanced Methods Map-Matching
1.5.4.1
Kalman Filter Map-Matching
For avoiding problems with noise in the observation variable (GPS point) and reduce the
uncertainty related with this measure, it is used Kalman Filter Map-Matching techniques
as a method that helps to correct and improve the estimation of the observable variable.
Kalman filters are great for dealing with sensor noise and signal processing. Therefore
the data given by GPS, speedometer and a wheel speed sensor(WSS) can be interpreted,
analyzed and actualized given the relationship among variables. It works for systems that
are continuously changing and have the advantage that they are light on memory.
In the specific case of car localization, Kalman Filter uses kinematics equations to correct
the point. Consequently having a vector position, velocity and intrinsically direction it is
possible to predict or forecast the new position and update the Kalman gain constant used
for the next prediction taking into account the correlation among the variables.
(a) Kalman Filter Method Kinematics predict
(b) Kalman Filter Method noise predict
Figure 1.11: Kalman Filter Method predict
The predict Kalman process Figure 1.11a and 1.11b helps to understand which are the
main parameters that affect the forecast [bza], mainly an F transformation Matrix that is
strong compromised with kinematics process and the noise part, that depend from the
instrument or sensor used to get the data of position, speed, and turning angle.
Figure 1.12: Kalman Filter Method desired output
12
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:21==
The image 1.12 displays the desired output after using the Kalman filter and notices the
importance of reducing the volatility or uncertainty of the GPS observable points. Thus,
the method is robust against noise and more important anomalies and outliers, and this
is because inside each steps the method calculates the constant Kalman gain.
Figure 1.13: Kalman Filter update process
The figure 1.13 reflects better this update in one of the Kalman filter steps. The first
estimation has a given mean and variance representing the predicting state with some
uncertainty (purple). The second estimation represents the sensor reading of what we
observe with corresponding uncertainty. Then it is possible to overlap these two estimates
and therefore find the best guess. This probability is finding first the likelihood that the
sensor is reading the position (x, y) correctly and then secondly, the possibility that the
previous estimates ( ˙x, ˙y) is the want we should see or the real one. That new co-variance
of the further distribution is affected by the constant Kalman Gain and in each time step
that information is updated.
Kalman Filter method has two big suppositions:
• the dynamic systems will be linear, thus in this specific case the kinematics equa-
tions or the Fk matrix represent a linear expression.
• The primary sources are assumed to be independent Gaussian random processes
with zero mean(Noises normally distributed with µ = 0).
1.5.4.2
Extended Kalman Filter Map-Matching
Extend Kalman Filter is based in the same idea of Kalman Filter(KF), but this extension of
Kalman Filter is trying to solve the problem for no linear signals. For achieving this goal,
it is necessary to understand that the program can not update the prediction directly due
to the non-linear nature with the variables and the covariance matrix in the prediction.
Therefore, using the matrix of partial derivatives (the Jacobian) is computed better to
estimate the covariance matrix and a first-order Taylor expression to linearize the non-
linear part’s expressions.
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
13
==PAGE:22==
(a) Kalman Filter suppositions
(b) Extended Kalman Filter suppositions
Figure 1.14: Kalman Filter(KM) vs Extender Kalman Filter(EKF)
As it was stated by Singh Chadha 1.14b when we use the extended version, it assumes
a non-linear function to develop the prediction. However, taking into account a Gaussian
input noise the expected out in process will behave has a non-Gaussian different from the
Kalman Filter where the expected result is Gaussian Figure 1.14a and 1.14b.
Figure 1.15: Truck parameter for the kinematic equation
In the specific case of GPS car map matching and Lira Project, the component of odometry
Figure 1.15 should be taking into account to improve the measure, the element that is not
linear and affects the measurements especially in roundabouts or curves where the angle
change is less abrupt, consequently, the estimation of the prediction can be enhanced and
with it the accuracy of expected real value as it stated by Gomez-Gil [JG13] in where he
took into account parameters as steering angle of the handlebars and velocity to localize
a truck for agricultural purposes.
The results obtained by Pink [Oli08] in the illustration 1.16, help to understand the main
problems that have the Extended Kalman Filter Method. Thus, the author develops a map
matching procedure where the blue line represents the optimum path, and the red points
represent the GPS Kalman filter output.
14
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:23==
Figure 1.16: Output from Extended Kalman Filter Method
First, it is outstanding to mention that the noise between measure it has been reduced
significantly due to the prediction’s effects. Second, the estimation for curve and round
bound is more accurate. This is essential because it is when presented the odometer part
in the Extended Kalman Filter. Nevertheless, just the Extended Kalman Filter will not be
enough to develop the map matching procedure to the segment.
1.5.4.3
Fuzzy Methods and Particle Filter Map-Matching
The power to correct the noise and the uncertainty in the observation point given the
information of other parameters such as speed, acceleration, or handlebar turn shows
Kalman Filter’s success. Although exist yet problems with the affirmation that errors are
behaving has a Gaussian distribution since the methods described before are all deter-
ministic. Particle Filter and Fuzzy methods study the stochastic part of Kalman Filter
methods looking at how the error is behaving in terms of probability distribution and quan-
tity. Consequently, determinate the noise behaviour fitting an likelihood function this can
be made with statistical analysis or Bayesian inference methods.
Figure 1.17: Variables which affect the measure of the position in a GPS
Krakiwsky [Won88] explain the behaviour of these errors during the measure of the po-
sition Figure 1.17. Each point record by a GPS and, consequently, the observation po-
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
15
==PAGE:24==
sition’s estimate is affected by the buildings’ density and height, the number of satellites
able at that hour, the climatology conditions and other restrictions as tunnels or topogra-
phy. Thus, not in all cases, the noise is distributed normally and the inferences of which
variables affect the real value input in a Bayesian or statistical model.
Figure 1.18: Particle Filter assuming Normality and Bayesian Inference with Markov Mod-
els Map Matching, green data given by the GPS/DR observable(Higher quality device
compared with the GPS reduce noise and uncertainty)
Figure [Dav10] made by Pavel shows his results after doing a sequential Monte Carlo
analysis. It is feasible to detect how the distribution change depending on the car’s geo-
metrical movement this is due to Pavel use a Bayesian HMM to match the points to the
map and this method(HMM) it has a high degree of relation with the geometry of the road.
1.6
Contribution
The contribution planed for the master thesis is to deliver a program which fulfils the
function of map matching, which contains a hybrid model, especially taking into account
Kalman filtering and Hidden Markov Models. Although there have been hybrid models,
usually the literature is used for different contexts as robotics, autonomous cars, and other
problems. There haven’t been developed research using the Open Street Map (SQL). The
plan is to use the SQL to generate, create and make work different Hybrid Models and
support the map matching and LiRA project research areas.
The hybrid Methods is the combination, and the extension among the methods discussed
previously. The model’s complexity starts to increase depending on simulations and data
analyzed given to increase the time of analysis and the computational cost. Therefore, to
create these models, the user has to consider functionality, assumptions, and the model’s
advantages and disadvantages. This research plan to study all these components in the
program proposes solutions for the algorithm’s disadvantage and opens a debate for its
correct execution.
The idea is to contribute to the building a first artefact or prototype of a map Matching
program for the LiRA project and establish reliable components for future research in the
map matching area.
16
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:25==
2
Data processing for GPS Map Matching
2.1
Denmark Road Geo-spatial database
The Geo-spatial data of roads of Denmark [Geo20] is downloaded by free database
sources call Open Street Map (OSM). This database is compressed in an osm.pbf file and
osm.shp file containing the geometrical layer and Denmark’s database maps (buildings,
roads, rivers, lakes, boundaries, highways, etc.). OpenStreetMap (OSM) is a collabora-
tive project that helps create a free editable map of the world. It has been used recently
for research projects in the manual survey, GPS devices, aerial photography, and other
Geodata sources.
2.1.1
OMS Denmark Data visualization
The Geodata is parsed or read with Osm2pgsql included in WS4W Shell the application
helps to read osm.pbf files and decompress into a SQL’s database. Although this ap-
plication needs to be downloaded and executed with special commands, it is necessary
to obtain the readable data set that can be easily handled for the research project with a
SQL software. This application and explicitly the WS4W shell are included in the software
Gateway Geomatics [Gat20].
The Geodata is extracted from the oms.pbf with MS4W and store in the corresponding
database in the computer (SQL). For this research and this case is used a free software
database call postgresql [Gro20], The program will save all the tables and geometry tables
in a database. In this sense, all the filters, selections, creation, and eliminations of the
database features will be handled by the postgresql software. Nevertheless, for graphical
uses and localization of the roads and nodes, the software QGIS helps to observe the
data and the shape files. This application can connect with the postgresql database and
subsequently any changes in the database can be uploaded to QGIS manually by SQL,
shapely files or GeoJson data file.
Figure 2.1: process of how it is possible to parse and read an osm.pbf file and how it is
decompressed in tables and geometries files
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
17
==PAGE:26==
As shown in the Figure 2.1 the process illustrates the output of the osm.pbf file of Denmark.
It is essential to mention that there are tables in the database as planet osm node, planet
osm ways, and planet osm rels that reflect the database’s primary information. Nonethe-
less, there is information possible to illustrate in QGIS that resume some database char-
acteristics in a general context (nodes, segments, polygons). Hence links, correlation and
relations in the database can be lost. This loss of information is happing in files planet
osm points and planet osm roads files obtained from the osm. pbf file.
(a) planet osm roads shape file
(b) planet osm points shape file
Figure 2.2: planet open street map for geometry of Denmark
The problem that faces the files from roads in the research project is that it is too general
information, and doesn’t have the elements needed for map matching. In the case of the
shapefile roads Figure 2.2a there are no nodes, a feature required for the algorithm of
map matching and the case of shapefile points although there are nodes the nodes are
not filtered. Consequently, all the points shown in figure Figure 2.2b are points that reflect
roads, ways, rivers, polygons of buildings, polygons of lakes, forest etc. In this way, the
information illustrated is too big and too general that it is necessary to filter, edit and handle
the database of planet osm nodes, plane osm ways and planet osm rels. Furthermore,
there is no way to filter the roads in terms of road type (primary, secondary, tertiary), it is
crucial to consider this for the future purpose of the research project. In order to make a
digital program able to estimate the cost of fixing and maintaining the road, it is necessary
to save the attribute of type of road and the size of the damage (size of the whole) given by
the sensors inference of the car. The cost of fixing the damage will be affected by the kind
of layer of asphalt, pavement or granular layers, which will vary depending on the type of
road, the type of loads and frequency with which the road loads. Depending on the kind
of road, it is possible to may assumptions of how dense the place is if there is forest if
there are houses, establishments of 5 to 10 floors or higher buildings. The algorithm can
use this information to determine and improve the model for map matching purposes.
2.1.2
OMS Denmark Data content
To edit and filter the files planet osm nodes, planet osm way and planet osm rels it is
necessary to understand the parameters and their relations. This relation is explained
by the author Jochen Topf [Top19] the Open Street Map creator, in syntheses, the tables
are described as a relational database represented by the Figure 2.3. It is essential to
mention how the files are connected between them in this sense we can observe that
the file way will contain a series of nodes and a series of tags (which will give attributes
to the element in terms of key and value). It is possible to observe how the relation file
have complex definitions useful in future research. The relation file can have a series of
18
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:27==
ways, nodes and relations attributes. The relations atrributes are defined as elements in
the open street map such as lakes, forest, and buildings.
Figure 2.3: Relation Database of the Open street map of Denmark
The attributes in the osm files have different types of values and hence meaning. The
types of attributes are text, integer, numeric, date or geometry, among other variables.
The type variable geometry is the kind of attribute that gives Open Street Map the power
to represent and evaluate geodata. The geometry class also has their special definition
to illustrate a point, a line, or a polygon in a map. Accordingly, the class geometry has
an attributes point, linestring and polygon to define a specific geometry Figure 2.4. It is
outstanding to mention that for this particular research of map matching the GPS with cars
sensor, it is necessary to study and understand the road component in terms of geometry
(nodes and linestrings).
Figure 2.4: Geometry class parameter
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
19
==PAGE:28==
Now although in Figure 2.3 exist the component Tag(key:value) is not explicitly in a file
oms, but it is implicitly defined in the files planet oms ways and planet oms rels. The
attribute Tag is different in both files but somehow connected or linked by ids of the rela-
tions, ways and nodes. Opening the three files (oms planet nodes, oms planet ways, oms
planet rels) it is possible to obtain the attributes and analyze the files’ relationship. 2.5.
Figure 2.5: SQL data for osm file
The parameter id is the one which defines each unique node, each unique way(groups of
nodes) and each unique rel (groups of ways, or nodes, or other relations). The attributes
for lat and long gives the localization of the node in the Denmark map. These two attributes
will be essential in the gps map matching localization, for the database ways, the attribute
nodes are compound by a group of nodes that conforms to a specific segment of way or
road. The attribute tags give a lot of information about the type of way, max speed, name
and other keys with their corresponding value.
The last file planet rels shows the number of ways activated and the number of relations
triggered in a specific id relation. The attribute ”parts” define the ids of the ways, nodes
and rels involved. The members that classify the ids and the tags that help understand
the relations’ attributes if it is a polygon, or multi polygon if it is a river or lake or other
important and complex information.
(a) ID 213 planet osm rel showing a lake
(b) planet osm ways showing a road
Figure 2.6: differences from tags filter from table planet osm rels vs planet osm ways
20
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:29==
It is possible to note how in Figure 2.6 there are different kinds of outputs composed by
ways, groups of ways and groups of nodes. In the case of Figure 2.6a it makes refer-
ences about one id rels (213) in the SQL rel, the relation shows two different ways(the
yellow one and the red one) that are composed by nodes. This kind of ways make a poly-
gon and define a lake. Hence this database it is not needed 100% in our road research
study. However, it is possible to keep in mind the information related to the planet oms
rel database and the ways classified as a road in the planet’s database. The Figure 2.6b
shows a way that currently is a road in the map of Denmark composed by nodes, but there
are in this database different kind of ways that are not defined as a road.
2.1.3
OMS Denmark edit and filter the ways database
It is possible to manipulate the database and use some standard algorithms of a SQL
language such as delete, creates tables, joins, filter, count, etc . Nonetheless, we are
interested in developing an automatic and digital tool that allows the program to work not
only in Denmark but also with other roads of different countries. It is necessary to use
other kinds of language different from SQL, which allows the user to handle the database,
make the calculation, make decisions, and develop graphs and estimation automatically.
Consequently and as it was described before python can be a useful solution tool. It
possible to connect to the database, graph the map and the route of a car, and develop
the corresponding analysis of GPS map matching algorithms need in the study plus other
software advantages.
The program can edit the data, but it is necessary to export some package that allows the
software to connect with the PostgreSQL, build a geometry and create a shape that helps
export shapes files to QGIS. It is necessary to remember to install some packages [Goh20]
such as psycopg2, Python-Levenshtein, shapely, Fiona and OSGeo no conventional in
the pip line. It is valuable to mention that it is possible to install predefined packages
for analysis or develop classes or methods for study or research in the map matching
program. The python platform can use these methods to map matching problems as the
K-nearest neighbours or Dijistra algorithm.
Figure 2.7: copy and filtering of SQL data for osm file
The 2.7 illustrates how was created the code (Appendix A) to develop a filtered database
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
21
==PAGE:30==
depending on roads, that database will contain elements and features of the osm planet
files (nodes,ways and rels) in a SQL file. Moreover, the database will only have information
corresponding with ways that contain roads. The program can do this filter thanks for the
classification of attribute tags. Hence, the code’s shapefile corresponds to ways that
have highway: motorway, trunk, primary, secondary, tertiary, unclassified and residential
features.
(a) Motorway road Denmark
(b) Trunk road Denmark
(c) Primary road Denmark
(d) Secondary road Denmark
(e) Tertiary road Denmark
Figure 2.8: different types of roads in Denmark map varying the type
The previous figures show the different kinds of roads in Denmark and hence the kind
of traffic that has the roads, these roads are differentiated by colour and layers to show
how it is built the database. The nodes and the series of nodes correspond to a whole
network of roads. The objective of this research is to activate the nodes corresponding to
the route of a car sensor.
22
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:31==
Figure 2.9: Primary and secondary roads Copenhagen
Figure 2.10: Primary, secondary, Tertiary roads map Copenhagen
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 2.11: primary, secondary, Tertiary ,Residential roads Norreport
Figure 2.12: primary, secondary, Tertiary ,Residential,unclassified roads Norreport
24
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:33==
Therefore, to develop a map matching algorithm, it necessary to have the nodes maps
of the street and roads with the GPS coordinates of the cars’ trips. The classification will
have an essential influence on the cost or estimation of resources for fixing a road. As
previously mentioned, not all the roads have to be activated, and not all the map have to
be used to develop the map-matching algorithm.
2.1.4
LiRa DataBase
LiRA (Live Road Assessment) project is used as an input multiples database. This data
Base collects information manly for two main sources: Green Mobility’s Cars Data and
Danish Road Directorate P79 car data Figure 2.13.
(a) Danish Road Directorate P79 car datar
(b) Green Mobility car sensor
Figure 2.13: Danish Road Directorate vs Green Mobility
The Danish Road Directorate P79 (DRD Data) is Data collected by institution Danish
Road. It has a profilometer with 25 lasers that measure distances and is equipped in
front of a Mercedes van. The profilometer can measure the transverse slope, defining the
road’s horizontal geometry, GPS coordinates, Vertical curvature, and gradient (camber).
Acceleration and velocity of the measurement beam averaged over a ten-meter section
and IRI (international roughness index) among other variables. The critical thing to star-
tle is that the equipment (profilometer) measures many variables in the road that help
to understand and inform the road’s condition with relatively good accuracy. The prob-
lem underlies in the cost of the equipment and the number of few statistical samples of
Denmark’s road network.
Therefore, it is necessary to use the 400 float cars of green mobility and their sensors
to establish the cheapest way and a good sample measure of the network road of Den-
mark. However, they are not equipment with profilometer but with CAN technology, GPS
smartphones and AutoPi that is a multi-master broadcast serial bus standard capable of
measure the conditions of the car such as: Vehicle Speed, Rpm Rear Right, Rpm Rear
left, Speed, Odometer, Local Time among other variables which help to determinate the
position and the conditions of the road as Friction, cracking density, patched area, texture
depth and Rolling Resistance. It is value to highlight that green mobility data is not too
accurate compared with the DRD data, this is because the Green Mobility float uses con-
vectional sensors thereupon. It is necessary to validate and correlate the data with DRD
data and profilometer and compare and contrast the two data sets to ensure the Data’s
performance. The model developed with then Green Mobility should be precise and exact
since it represents the real environment.
2.1.5
LiRa DataBase handling anomalies and outliers for position variable
Like many databases, the different kind of measuring can have anomalies and outliers.
The phenomenon can be presented in other kinds of variables as: velocity, acceleration,
position or odometer, among others. The decision to delete or leave the outliers data
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
25
==PAGE:34==
depends on many facts such as: analysis of sensibility in the model or the statistical
techniques used to measure variability. Nevertheless, for the case of the position (latitude,
longitude) to have big anomalies in the differences of the ∆Xs and ∆Ys coordinates it will
have a big impact in the model of map matching, these difference should be studied and
handled for software production purposes. Nonetheless, for this research project, they
are identified manually and without any lookup algorithm. This concept can be explained
better comparing the two data set DRD (P79) and Green Mobility (GM) data in terms of
position.
(a) DRD data P79 Long Route Example
(b) DRD data P79 curve Route Example
(c) DRD data P79 position of the car in the road
right
(d) DRD data P79 position of the car in the cen-
ter
Figure 2.14: DRD dataBase P79 Example Long Route copenhagen
The illustration 2.14 shows how the Danish Road Directorate database on the P79 car
behaves. It is outstanding to mention that the data always are inside in the road when
it is overlapping with the Open Street Map in this order the ideas the only problem is
to identify the point of the damage of the road in the route given the data of profilometer.
The illustration 2.14b and 2.14c shows this in a segment curve and in an normal segment.
Even though the DRD data is good in precision, the program can not use it in the LIRA
project to validate the Green Mobility data model.
The visualization used the Green Mobility data sample for one long trip, and a short trip to
Copenhagen is shown in 2.15 . The data differ from DRD database in terms of precision,
accuracy and anomalies. The problem with anomalies is that it will affect the model in
terms of the data variance if there are not handled on time. It will be harder to identify the
nearest segment and ergo estimate the best map matching decision on the model. The
figure 2.15 illustrates how it is acting the raw data and how it looks after a manually filtering.
In other words, without doing this filtering manually or with an automatic algorithm, the
methods for Hidden Markov Models or Kalman Filter will be affected by the outlier point
given in this a bad performance. However, this is not studied in depth in this research
is necessary to recognize when should be considered points as an outlier or not in the
26
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:35==
software LiRa production phase.
(a)
Green
Mobility
short
trip
out
handling
database
(b) Green Mobility long trip out handling database
(c) Green Mobility short trip handling database
(d) Green Mobility long trip handling database
Figure 2.15: Green Mobility Database Long and Short trips example
The figure 2.15 just is showing the out given by a manually filtering the points that are in
2.15a and 2.15b are point not desired for the map matching algorithm that is why they are
deleted from the database given a result the 2.15c and 2.15d. Now it possible to study
the Green Mobility database and the given long trip and short trip furthermore.
(a) Green Mobility Short Trip GPS data problem
1
(b) Green Mobility Short Trip GPS data problem
2
Figure 2.16: Green Mobility position data behavior common problems short trip
In the figure 2.16a it is possible to observe how the raw GPS points taken by green mobility
are not in the route or road street Vesterbrogade and H.C. Andersens Boulevard, this is
the main challenge that present LiRa project and similar project related to map matching
algorithms, points are near but not inside the road. In addition in figure 2.16b is viable to
think that point are between Vesterbrogade and Mathæusgade but knowing the nature of
the trip before the points are in Vesterbrogade, but this decisions should be taken by the
algorithm automatically.
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
27
==PAGE:36==
(a) Green Mobility Long Trip GPS data problem
1
(b) Green Mobility Long Trip GPS data problem
2
Figure 2.17: Green Mobility position data behavior common problems long Trip
Figure 2.18: Green Mobility position data behavior common problems long Trip long GPS
disconnection
2.17 and 2.18 it is possible to observe in 2.17a the GPS route points, although it takes a
good shape of the curvature of the road the data is rotated. Consequently the data or trip
looks like if they were crossing the sea without bridge, for the second problem presented
in the database 2.17b it is feasible to analyse the typical problem of map matching roads
but also there is a discontinuity in the measure data, so It can assume that software
disconnected from GPS signals this behaviour is most strongly evidenced in figure 2.18,
where it is tough to infer which route was taken because there are many possibilities to
go from point A to point B.
The momentary disconnection of the GPS can lead to data interpretation problems and
loss of information, (damages on the road that were detected but not located), or map
matching problems. This kind of events is essential because the outputs from the database
can help lead to better rigour data collection from Green Mobility in measuring the data,
the quality of the equipment used and the improvement of a map-matching algorithm. In
better words, it is desired to obtain a database with few anomalies or outliers from the
disconnection and connection of GPS data and reduce the disconnection rate from GPS,
smartphones or other electronic devices.
2.1.6
Merging LiRa database and Open Street Map database
The last step of preparing the data for the algorithm, the Open Street Map database of
Denmark of the road network, is built for the Lira project. Nevertheless, it has too much
information for upload in an algorithm. Thus, it is necessary to filter that database to
reduce the computer’s amount of spatial memory. The Hidden Markov Models (HMM)
algorithms and Kalman Filter are interested in information near the trip taken by Green
28
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:37==
Mobility car GPS and not the whole city, town or country.
In this Order of ideas, the filter finished with zooming a square taking into account the
maximum longitude point, minimum longitude point, maximum latitude point and mini-
mum latitude point. It is a critical step because if the step is executed without considering
the outliers or anomalies of the GPS records points. The ”Zoom” on the OMS database
will be big because the anomaly position is too far of the route uploading all the possible
points, increasing unnecessary information and rising memory of the computer for han-
dling information and operations, this is traducing in increasing the computational cost
unnecessary.
(a) Open Street Map Zooming data base short
trip
(b) Open Street Map Zooming data base long trip
Figure 2.19: Open Street Map Zooming
Figure 2.20: Open Street Map Zooming data base long and short trip
The figure 2.19 and 2.20 illustrates the result of the select Open Map Street, all the nodes
reflect in the database has longitude, latitude attributes, id point, id street and type of road
(primary, secondary, tertiary among others) the important to mention here is that OMS is
filtered depending on their features and the localization of the trip of the GPS, and this
zooming in square 2.19b and 2.19a although is not the most efficient (keep uploading
unnecessary data) works as a filter and as a database for the map matching algorithm. In
figure 2.20 shows how the size of the zooming database square changed depending on
the length of the trip if it is a short or a long Green Mobility car trip.
In resume, the Open Street Map is filtered depending on the trip of the Green Mobility car.
However still missing the links of the roads between points remembering the relational
figure of the OMS database 2.3 and attributes of the built database for LiRa project 2.7 it
can be built the segments and the links.
It is crucial to remind that a node as a unique ID, where it was at least one or unique street
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
29
==PAGE:38==
ID, means that a node can have more than one street ID and be an intersection between
two or more street. It is also essential to say that a segment has a group of nodes, and this
segment is identified as a Street ID. Still, the whole road is a group of Streets IDs (Groups
of segments) which relation parameter and the OMS database provides the information.
Consequently, handling the database and taking into account the relation it was built a
code for made stringlines and segments. Observe Appendix the algorithm created the
segments from the ”Zoom” database.
(a) Open Street Map segments built with short
GM trip
(b) Open Street Map segments built with long GM
trip
Figure 2.21: Open Street Map building segment database
Figure 2.22: Open Street Map selecting one segment from the database
Finally, the segments are built and with them a database of segments. It is meaningful
to remember that this is one input of our map-matching algorithm model, the whole seg-
ments are not needed, but the ones nearest to the GPS points should be essential for the
research algorithm. It is important to say that as for figure 2.21a and 2.21b show, the illus-
trations help identify which segments should be created and should be eliminated which
segments are missing in this sense reiterating in SQL. Filtering again and rebuilding the
routes produce a better and more accurate OMS database.
In addition to this last point, the segments are building as a unique unit. This means that
in the previous database existed nodes id, and streets id, which is made by nodes. Still,
there is no segment id, which is important because it helps identify and search the nearest
segment near a point. Therefore the street can be made by groups of nodes and groups of
segments built it by the groups of nodes in the street. By building the segments’ database,
it is possible to determine the nearest segments and the perpendicular distance between
the segment and the GPS point.
30
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:39==
2.2
Kalman Filtering and Theory data analysis
The following section is studied in detail how it works the method and the algorithm for the
map matching process. Therefore, the Kalman filter procedures, the Extended Kalman
filter, and the Hidden Markov Model are explained explicitly, their main contribution and
main weakness are exposure. The algorithm’s assumptions, the cycle kinematics model
and the pseudo-code developed for each method are presented. However, the specif
code and outputs can be founded in Appendix chapter.
It is important to mention that it is assumed that the reader has ordinary knowledge of
physics, algebra, calculus and statistics owing the fact that is handling the data and give
sense to the model are represented mainly in matrices. The deterministic component is
related to how the model is represented kinematically with physics. The stochastically
component corresponds with statistics and probabilities due to errors, correlations and
uncertainties among the variables measured.
2.2.1
Kalman Filter Method
The algorithm Kalman Filter was developed by Rudolf E. Kálmán. In 1960, the algorithm
used data taken over time by sensors that incorporate inaccurate data, errors, and noise
due to the sensors’ nature. Kalman Filter has been used in industry multiple times in sec-
tors such as: spacecraft orbit, positioning of GPS, integrated navigation and dynamic po-
sitioning, sensor data fusion, microeconomics, and digital image processing especially in
pattern recognition and image processing. This algorithm provides reasonable estimates
of some unknown variables taken into account the measurements observed over time.
It requires small computation cost and minimises the mean square error of the model.
Kalman filter (KF) is the root for more advanced algorithms that are complex derivations
as Extended Kalman Filter(EKF), Unscented Kalman Filter (UKF) or particle filtering.
Specifically, in terms of the thesis project and Lira project, the Kalman filter method is
used to improve the accuracy of the position GPS with sensor data fusion taken electron-
ically by devices that measure the speed, acceleration, and yaw angle variables. Also, it
is essential to mention that the algorithm’s complexity and his accuracy starts to increase
depending on the level of dimensional space developed. Then a 1 dimensional Kalman
filter (1D) considers the distance travelled longitudinal in XY axis the velocity and acceler-
ation to develop a model that helps correct the measures. This approach is similar to the
Kalman filter (2D), which considers the distance between X and Y, the yaw angle, speed,
acceleration, and inclusive pitch angle. The difference lies in the nonlinear component
of the problem. Finally, there is a Kalman filter (3D). Although it has no linear compo-
nent, it has one dimension more in the z-axis. The algorithm can study this approach for
aeroplanes, submarines, and rockets, among other moving bodies XYZ axis.
The Kalman Filter works in two main steps process, predict step where the algorithm es-
timates the current value of the states variables with their uncertainties and inaccuracies.
The prediction is updated with an average weight process once it comes to the new ob-
servable value (corrupted and with noise)known as the Kalman gain factor, the algorithm
is recursive. It can work in real-time. It doesn’t need historical data or no additional past
information, just the present input measurements(GPS position, velocity, acceleration and
yaw angle) and the previously calculated state.
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 2.23: Kalman Filter Figure Algorithm
The illustration 2.23 develop by Petteri Aimonen summaries the process described before.
The process is iterative in each time step k, consequently for map matching purposes
and correction the measurements of the GPS data of green mobility it is known. The prior
state vector ˆxk−1|k−1 that is the value of the position, velocity and acceleration prior the
prediction in case of 1D Kalman Filter. It is known or at least logically initialized the values
with the co-variance matrix Pk−1|k−1 among the state variables prior to the prediction. It
is important to mention that the notation k −1|k −1 means the value of P or ˆx in the time
step k-1 given the time step k-1, this is important because it helps to have a track to the
prior and posterior states variables in each step of the algorithm.
The prediction step is based many times on physical models in this specific case Kinemat-
ics and the Kinematic bicycle Model. The idea is that given information of the velocity and
the acceleration you can predict the next values of the vector ˆx and matrix co-variance P in
a given ∆time or k step, therefore the new values are given by the expression ˆxk|k−1 and
Pk|k−1. New information of the measurement instruments yk arrives in step k with their
corresponding uncertainty. The update process has to be developed with the Kalman
Gain to have the ˆxk|k and Pk|k as the output of the model in the step k and as the input
of the model for the next iteration. It is important to understand the Kalman Gain concept
that is just relative weight average given to the new measurements yk and current state
estimates ˆxk|k−1. If the Kalman Gain is high the filter will give more weight to the values
of the most recent measurements and thus with a low gain will give more weigh to the
prediction of the current state.
2.2.2
Coordinates System
Before entering to understand Kalman Filter’s process in quantitative terms, it is necessary
first to remember small Kinematics concepts, which will give the model the power to predict
relatively accurate the future position. Achieve the goal, it is necessary to transform the
global latitude and longitude coordinates to normal Cartesian coordinates.
Generally, the hand-held GPS units measure the WGS84 coordinates systems’ position
in terms of latitude and longitude. In this system of references, the Earth is a spheroid and
utilizes angular units (degrees). Consequently, the differences of latitude and longitude
will not be in meters representing a problem for kinematics equations, Kalman Filter and
Hidden Markov Model. The plots develop and shown in the Open Map Street chapter are
in WGS84 coordinates, but for the algorithms to work efficiently, it is necessary to change
32
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:41==
from the WGS84 system to Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM). It is projected to coor-
dinate systems based on a plane (the spheroid projected onto a 2D surface) and utilize
linear units (meters). This is a needed step for constructing the program’s digital seg-
ments because the segments network done with OMS is based on WGS84 coordinates.
Remembering to change the coordinate system to UTM reduces the sources of error to
detect the nearest segments by distance and avoid transformation units problems.
(a) World Map WGS84 coordinates
(b) World Map UTM coordinates
Figure 2.24: Coordinates WGS84 VS UTM
2.2.3
Kinematics equations
The understanding of how well it is working the developing of the prediction step depends
highly of how is performing the kinematics equations. This equations are the ones that
provides the 1D, 2D, 3D analysis in the Kalman filter. In this chapter it going to be analyzed
for 1D and 2D case the error gives by the third component Z is small, however if it is desired
the analysis can be extended to 3D level but it was mentioned before the Kalman filter
in 3D works better in other cases variables such as superelevation in each section of the
route.
Mainly kinematic equations are eq. (2.11) and eq. (2.19) assuming acceleration constant:
∆d = Vi∆t + 1
2a∆t2
(2.1)
d f = di + ∆d
(2.2)
v f = Vi + a∆t
(2.3)
D is the longitudinal distance in meters, V is velocity or speed (m/s), a is acceleration, and
∆t is the difference of time in each step k. Nevertheless, although in LiRa database, there
is information in each step about velocity, acceleration and longitudinal distance every
10 meters. Also, there is information about GPS points position measured as UTMx and
UTMy in meters. As additional information provides the yaw angle, it is possible to express
the kinematics equation as a Kinematic Bicycle Model. The Bicycle Model is the classic
model that does very well at capturing vehicle motion in normal conditions.
The Bicycle Model is named because it helps to summarize car model motion as a system
of two axes and two wheels. Nevertheless, in reality, and the real world, the car has two
axes but four main wheels with different speeds in each wheel and steering wheel angle
that are not the same as the yaw angle. Although we have the data yaw and steering
wheel angle for simplicity, it is going to be used the yaw angle and the Bicycle Model.
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
33
==PAGE:42==
(a) Car Model summarized as Bicycle Model
(b) Bicycle Model Variables
Figure 2.25: Bicycle Model description
As it was explained by Yan Ding [Din20] in figure 2.25b for developing the Kinematic
Model it is necessary to take into account the θ heading angle and the δ yaw angle. This
to discompose the longitudinal velocity and longitudinal acceleration in the X-axis and
Y-axis and calculate the ∆s of Xs and Ys coordinates.
This kinematic model is a crucial step because the way the system is modelled depends
on the Kalman filter result. In reality, the sensors capture the position, the longitudinal
velocity and acceleration, and the car’s yaw angle (δ). With the kinematics, it is possi-
ble to discompose these elements in 2 dimensions (X-axis and Y-axis) the variables of
velocity and acceleration and predict the heading angle (θ) taking into account the longi-
tudinal velocity and the yaw angle(δ) for the angular velocity. The problem with this model
is the non-linearity component. Hence it needs to use Extended or Unscented Kalman
filter. Nevertheless, it is possible to assume or simulate that the sensors read velocity in
Cartesian plane coordinates (m/s) and acceleration in m
s2 for coordinate x and y, but this
is not verdict owing that in reality, the sensor reads longitudinal acceleration and veloc-
ities. The power on this assumption is possible to avoid the problem of no-linearity, but
with a trade-off of losing statistical information given by the odometer component, which
is traduced on uncertainty on the result. The following expressions represent the result of
the analysis.
Kinematic model without taking into account the yaw angle(δ) and the prediction step for
Kalman filter in 2 dimensions:
∆dx = v f ∆t · cos(θ) + 1
2a f · cos(θ)∆t2
(2.4)
∆dy = v f ∆t · sin(θ) + 1
2a f · sin(θ)∆t2
(2.5)
dx f = dxi + ∆dx
(2.6)
dx f = dxi + ∆dy
(2.7)
v f = vi + a∆t
(2.8)
˙a = a
(2.9)
It is essential to evidence how we use θ to discompose the longitudinal velocities and
extended the longitudinal analysis to a 2D analysis. However, we keep missing the in-
formation given by the yaw angle δ that will help to estimate and predict the next future
34
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:43==
step of θ given the angular velocity. By taking in to account this variable the context of
the problem changes to non-linear, and Kalman filtering’s assumptions begin to be vio-
lated. That is why it is necessary to use the extended version, or the unscented version
of Kalman Filtering that assumes the normality in the noise process co-variance matrices
and the non-linearity component. Consequently, the algorithm can determine the predic-
tion and the kinematic problem. The statistical information obtained by the yaw angle δ
can be taken into account:
∆dx = v f ∆t · cos(θ + δ) + 1
2a f · cos(θ + δ)∆t2
(2.10)
∆dy = v f ∆t · sin(θ + δ) + 1
2a f · sin(θ + δ)∆t2
(2.11)
dx f = dxi + ∆dx
(2.12)
dx f = dxi + ∆dy
(2.13)
v f = vi + a∆t
(2.14)
˙a = a
(2.15)
˙d = δ
(2.16)
∆θ = vi
L · ∆t · tan(δ)
(2.17)
˙θ = θi + ∆θ
(2.18)
The big difference between predicting the next step with kinematic equations for the 2D
is that it is estimated the θ.In the first case using normal Kalman filtering and assuming
linearity θ can be estimated based on the real precision GPS coordinates data obtained
by the P79 car, hence the theta for each time step can be obtained as:
θ = arctan δy
δx
(2.19)
δy and δx depends on the difference between two UTM coordinates measured by the
precision GPS in-car p79. Therefore the data obtained by green mobility car can’t use this
assumption and for estimating the value of θ it is necessary to use the kinematic equations.
Extended Kalman filtering or unscented Kalman filtering will update and predict in each
step the value of θ with the parameters δ and L where L is the length between the two
axes of the car.
2.2.4
Kalman Filtering multivariate form
As mentioned before, the Kalman filtering is divided into two main steps the prediction
and the update process. The prediction process as the main objective to looks of how de-
terminate the states in this specific case location of the cars in terms of a linear dynamical
system in state-space format, determining the evolution of the state from time k-1 to time
k as:
xk = Fxk−1 + Buk−1 + wk−1
(2.20)
where F is the transition matrix applied to the previous state xk−1, B is an control-input
matrix applied to the control vector uk −1 and wk −1 is the process noise vector that has
as zero-mean Gaussian with co-variance Q, therefore wk−1 ∼N(0,Q).
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
35
==PAGE:44==
The process is updated with a measurement model that describes the relationship be-
tween states and the measurements at the time step k:
zk = Hxk + νk
(2.21)
where zk is the measurement vector, H is the measurement matrix, and νk is the mea-
surement noise vector that is assumed to be zero-mean Gaussian with co-variance R.
νk ∼N(0, R). It is important to mention that although the co-variance matrices suppose
to reflect statistics of the noise. The true statistics of the noise is not Gaussian or un-
known that is why Q, R are tuning parameters that user can adapt to search the desired
performance.
Steps
Equations
Predicted state estimate
¯x = Fx + Bu
Predicted co-variance
¯P¯P¯P = FPFT + Q
Measurement residual
y = z −H ¯x
Kalman gain
K = ¯P¯P¯PHT(H ¯P¯P¯PHt + R)−1
Updated state estimate
x = ¯x + Ky
Updated error co-variance
P = (I −KH) ¯P¯P¯P
Table 2.1: predict and update process Kalman Filter
The table illustrates 2.1 the Kalman Filter process’s main steps and expression. The
process is iterative depending on the length of the chain of measured data, the process is
continuously changing systems, and it is saved in the Kalman Gain Factor K. The Kalman
gain is a relative weight given to the measurements, and current state estimate, high gains
the filter give more weight to the most recent measurements and low gain, the filter give
more weight to the model predictions.
Figure 2.26: Kalman Filter Co-variance effect in the update step
The figure 2.26 from [bza] shows how the covariance matrices from the prediction step
and the measuring step get reduced during the update step showing in 2.1. The Kalman
Filtering property reduces the uncertainty of the measures given the behaviour of the
co-variances matrices. In this sense, in each step, the Kalman filtering reduces their
uncertainty due to the multiplication of two Gaussian process during the update process.
2.2.5
Design of the Process Noise Matrix
As illustrated in [Jr18] the Q matrix and the R matrices can be estimated depending on
the case, particularly R. Labber determinate the Q and R matrices for a one dimensional
Kalman filtering for kinematics equations for newton.
36
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:45==
In this order of ideas, the R. Labber mention that the Q matrices can be modelled as white
noise that assumes a higher-order term acceleration. The author mentions explicitly in
his document that the acceleration is constant in the duration of each time step but differs
from each period. These values are uncorrelated between periods, and the algorithm can
model this as:
f (x) = Fx + Γw
(2.22)
where Γ is the noise gain of the system and w is the constant acceleration(velocity or etc)
F =
"
1
∆t
0
1
#
(2.23)
for one time period or lapse the change of velocity and acceleration will be w(t) = ∆t and
w(t) = (∆t)2
2
as a result we have:
Γ =


1
2∆t2
∆t


(2.24)
the co-variance process can be expressed as:
Q = E[Γw(t)w(t)ΓT] = Γσ2
vΓT
(2.25)
as a result of the operation it is obtained:
Q =


∆t4
4
∆t3
2
∆t3
2
∆t2

σ2
v
(2.26)
the second order system works with the same math consequently:
F =


1
∆t
∆t2
2
0
1
∆t
0
0
1


Γ =


1
2∆t2
∆t
1


(2.27)
as a result was obtained the following process noise matrix:
Q =


∆t4
4
∆t3
2
∆t2
2
∆t3
2
∆t2
∆t
∆t2
∆t
1


σ2
v
(2.28)
It is important to notice that for 2.26 and 2.28 change owing the the fact that the transfer
function is different, this important to mention because in the Kalman Filtering modelling
develop for data of car p79 it is analysed in one dimension or two dimensions, and it it used
a different F function corresponding the case if it is one dimension or two dimension and
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
37
==PAGE:46==
consequently the Q matrix will change depending on the behaviour of the F transforming
function. Nevertheless the differences between the F function realize on it is desired
to predict the velocity variable on terms on the acceleration for the next step. Also it
is outstanding to mention that result depends on two main parameters the time lapse
between each data and the variance of the data of the velocity.
In order to modelled the R matrix , measurement noise matrix it can be taken empirical
values, or measure the error among the real values and the observable values and get the
variance of the error or the uncertainty of the instruments GPS, speedometer, accelerom-
eter or odometer instruments this mean the level of imprecision in each measurement.
The shape of the matrix, the size depend exclusive of how is formulate the problem con-
sequently for R matrix in 2 dimensional Kalman Filtering (general case) it is defined as:
R =


GPSx
GPSy
speedox
speedoy
accelox
acceloy
GPSx
σ2
Gpsx
0
0
0
0
0
GPSy
0
σ2
Gpsy
0
0
0
0
speedox
0
0
σ2
speedox
0
0
0
speedoy
0
0
0
σ2
speedoy
0
0
accelox
0
0
0
0
σ2
accelox
0
acceloy
0
0
0
0
0
σ2
acceloy


(2.29)
R =


GPSx
GPSy
speedox
speedoy
accelox
acceloy
GPSx
25
0
0
0
0
0
GPSy
0
9
0
0
0
0
speedox
0
0
1
0
0
0
speedoy
0
0
0
1
0
0
accelox
0
0
0
0
.5
0
acceloy
0
0
0
0
0
.5


(2.30)
In the matrix 2.30 it is shown how it initialized the matrix during the Kalman Filtering Pro-
cess. It is vital to notice that the noise measurement matrix is independent among the
variables (no correlation between instruments). This independence is assumed as if sen-
sors measured the experiment with different devices all the data. Nevertheless, in reality,
the GPS, the speedometer and the odometer measure one attribute. There is no guar-
antee that a longitudinal error of ± meters will affect the measure proportionally in X, Y
distance and the same observation can be done with the speedometer means that can
exist some correlation between the measure of the value for each dimension. Although
the values are assumed somehow subjectively, it is keeping in mind the order of magni-
tude of the variable that can be studied further with the true and the observable position
in an experiment. It is also important to underline that the matrix R constantly reminds in
all the Kalman Filter process’s iteration.
2.2.6
Designing Kalman Filters
The P79 car data measured the longitudinal distance and the GPS position of the car;
hence, the studied can be applied to one dimension as a two-dimension Kalman filtering
process. The algorithm will define this chapter the one dimensional and two dimensional
Kalman filtering, understand which parameters were introduced in the model matrices
F,B,H and how the algorithm can upgrade the model to the no-linearity case extended
Kalman Filtering.
38
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:47==
The 1D dimensional Kalman filtering determines the longitudinal distance done by the car
and is the most basic example to understand the Kalman Filtering process.
The process should define the Q matrix and the F matrix in 2.26 and 2.23 the research
established the R matrix known as the noise measurement matrix as:
R =
" Dist
Velocity
Dist
σ2
d
0
Velocity
0
σ2
v
#
R =
" Dist
Velocity
Dist
5
0
Velocity
0
0
#
(2.31)
The B matrix used in table 2.1 is defined as in equation 2.24. Finally, it is necessary to
define the values of the H matrix. The H matrix is the matrix used to scale, change of
units or change of dimension the vector received for the predicted state Kalman filtering
to measure and be operable with the measured values. In the case of lira project if data,
were not transformed by UTM, coordinates applying the equations the correct equations
for the transform matrix F (kinematics taking into account ellipsoid circumferences) can
be scale to scale Cartesian or polar coordinates with the matrix H.
H =
"
1
0
0
1
#
H =
h
1
0
i
(2.32)
The important to understand about this matrices H is how is affecting the result of the
residual measurement y from the table 2.1. It is possible to only activate or work with
the distances values, or the distances and the velocities values, this residual will affect
the update of the state estimate. Consequently, the H matrix will affect the Kalman Gain
Factor in terms of weight and dimensions.
The 2D dimensional Kalman filtering is determined with the GPS position done by the P79
car. Therefore, it was necessary to add a standard value random noise to create simulated
data and have observable measurements. It is essential to say that the matrices B, H, R
and Q have to be congruent of how it is built or introduced the matrix F, therefore for 2D
dimensional filtering the matrices are:
F =


UTMx
UTMy
Velx
Vely
accx
accy
UTMx
1
0
∆t
0
0
0
UTMy
0
1
0
∆t
0
0
Velx
0
0
1
0
0
0
Vely
0
0
0
1
0
0
accx
0
0
0
0
0
0
accy
0
0
0
0
0
0


x =


Posx
Posy
vx
vy
ax
ay


(2.33)
It is important to remember that the vector x, is the data obtained with the sensors in the k
step of the Kalman filtering process and t he matrix F which change their value depending
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
39
==PAGE:48==
on the length of the ∆tk.
B =


accx
accy
UTMx
∆t2/2
0
UTMy
0
∆t2/2
Velx
∆t
0
Vely
0
∆t
accx
1
0
accy
0
1


u =
"
ax
ay
#
(2.34)
The equation 2.34 illustrates our control variables that are the acceleration in axis x and
y. An essential assumption since the model was thought to have data from sensors which
measure the acceleration in ax and ay. Nevertheless, as the model told it before the real
case, it has a non-linearity component where ’u’ vector is the longitudinal acceleration and
the yaw angle δ. Finally, it is defined the matrices Q,R and H taking into account how was
built it the x’s vector.
H =


UTMx
UTMy
Velx
Vely
accx
accy
UTMx
1
0
0
0
0
0
UTMy
0
1
0
0
0
0
Velx
0
0
1
0
0
0
Vely
0
0
0
1
0
0
accx
0
0
0
0
1
0
accy
0
0
0
0
0
1


(2.35)
Q =


UTMx
UTMy
Velx
Vely
accx
accy
UTMx
∆t4
4 σ2
vx
0
∆t2
2 σ2
vx
0
∆t4
4 σ2
vx
0
UTMy
0
∆t4
4 σ2
vy
0
∆t2
2 σ2
vy
0
∆t4
4 σ2
vy
Velx
∆t3
2 σ2
vx
0
∆t2σ2
vx
0
∆tσ2
vx
0
Vely
0
∆t3
2 σ2
vy
0
∆t2σ2
vy
0
∆tσ2
vy
accx
∆t2σ2
vx
0
∆tσ2
vx
0
σ2
vx
0
accy
0
∆t2σ2
vy
0
∆tσ2
vy
0
σ2
vy


(2.36)
The equation 2.36 it’s based on 2.28 and reflect the process noise for a 2D Kalman filter-
ing. On the other hand, the R matrices are the same as 2.30 considering this parameter.
The Kalman filtering process was made iterative for the 854 steps in the data set for one
route simulated of the p79 car data set.
2.2.7
Designing Extend Kalman Filters
The Extended Kalman Filter algorithm is not applied in this research, but it is essential
to mention how different is from the normal version of Kalman Filtering. This algorithm
solves non-linearity with the transform function F. It assumes the normality assumption
for the noise process matrix, noise measured matrix and the measured values. This
method uses the data of the variable δ yaw to predict in each step accurate the value of
Θ parameter essential to discompose the speed and the acceleration and determinate a
better position of x and y.
As mentioned before in [Jr18], the extended method uses the Jacobian to linearize the no
linear terms of the f and h function. Therefore, the new formulation is based on:
40
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:49==
Steps
Equations
Predicted state estimate
¯x = f (x,u)
Jacobian of the f function
F = δ f (xt,ut)
δx

xt,ut
Predicted co-variance
¯P¯P¯P = FPFT + Q
Measurement residual
y = z −h( ¯x)
Jacobian of the h function
H = δh( ¯xt)
δx

¯xt
Kalman gain
K = ¯P¯P¯PHT(H ¯P¯P¯PHt + R)−1
Updated state estimate
x = ¯x + Ky
Updated error co-variance
P = (I −KH) ¯P¯P¯P
Table 2.2: predict and update Extended Kalman Filtering
As illustrated in the table 2.2, the process is similar to the normal Kalman filtering and
developing the Jacobian. It is possible to linearize the function, increasing the computa-
tional cost. Then the only problem it’s to determine the Q process noise matrix, the author
mention that the author can determine the predicted co-variance matrix as:
P = FPFT + VMV T
(2.37)
where the V = δ f (x, y)
δu
,it is important to remember that we are deriving concerning the
variable of control that in our case is the acceleration and the yaw angle δ, the matrix M
can be considered as:
M =
" yaw(δ)
acclong
yaw(δ)
σ2
yaw
0
acclong
0
σ2
acclong
#
(2.38)
Finally, and taking into account the function f as:
f (x,u) =


∆t2
2 a · cos(δ + Θ) + v∆t cos(δ + Θ) + x
∆t2
2 a · sin(δ + Θ) + v∆t sin(δ + Θ) + y
a∆t + v
a
Θ + v∆ttan(δ)
L
δ


(2.39)
and the jacobian F and V calculated before has the following result:
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
41
==PAGE:50==
F =


1
0
∆t cos(δ + Θ)
−∆t2
2
a · sin(δ + Θ) −v∆t sin(δ + Θ)
0
1
∆t sin(δ + Θ)
∆t2
2 a · cos(δ + Θ) + v∆t cos(δ + Θ)
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
∆t tan(δ)
L
1
0
0
0
0


(2.40)
V =


∆t2
2 cos(δ + Θ)
−∆t2
2 a · sin(δ + Θ) −v∆t sin(δ + Θ)
∆t2
2 sin(δ + Θ)
∆t2
2 a · cos(δ + Θ) + v∆t cos(δ + Θ)
∆t
0
1
0
0
∆v tan2((δ) + 1)
L
0
1


(2.41)
Applying 2.41 and 2.40, assuming function h as identity matrix of size 6 and R with their
corresponding uncertainties per variable. the extended Kalman filtering is possible to
obtain better results than the Kalman filter procedure, taking into account normality as-
sumptions of the noises process matrix and the noise measured matrix. If the noise is not
behaving normally, then it is necessary to study other methods such as particle filtering.
2.3
Hidden Markov Model
The Markov model is based on a Markov chain. The Markov chain is a model that tells
about the probabilities sequences on random variables. As it is stated by Jurafsky [Mar19]
Markov chain makes a strong assumption in which if we want to predict the future of a
sequence what matter is the current state, the states that are before the current states
have no impact on the future except by the current state.
The following components express Markov Chains:
Q = q1, q2, ..., qN
Set of N states
(2.42)
A = a11, a12, ..., an1...anm
Transition probability matrix A, each aij
(2.43)
representing the probability of moving from state i to state j
n
∑
j=i
aij = 1
∀i
ß = π1, π2, ..., πN
an initial probability distribution over states
(2.44)
Nevertheless, when the events are hidden, it can’t be observed directly. Hidden Markov
Models works for both the observed events and the hidden events, which are thought of
as causal factors in our probabilistic model. Then the components taken into account the
ones described above can be determinate as:
O = O1, O2, ..., OT
a sequence of T observations, each one point
(2.45)
from a GPS observations
G = G1, G2, ..., GV
42
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:51==
B = bi(ot)
a sequence of observation likelihoods, also called emission probabilities
(2.46)
each expressing the probability of an observation ot being generated from a state i
As it states Jurafsky [Mar19] The first-order Markov model has two simplifying assump-
tions, a first-order Markov chain, the probability of a particular state depends only on the
previous state:
MarkovAssumption : = P(qi|q1...qi−1) = P(qi|qi−1)
(2.47)
Second, the probability of an output observation oi that depends only on the state that
produced the observation qi and not on any other states or any other observations:
OutputIndependence : = P(Oi|q1...qi, ...qT, O1, ...Oi, ...OT) = P(Oi|qi)
(2.48)
The Hidden Markov Models are characterize three fundamental problems:
• Problem 1 (Likelihood): Given a Hidden Markov Model λ = (A, B) and an ob-
servation sequence O, determinate the Loglikehood P(0|λ), that in simple words
means what is the probability that a particular sequence O is produced by a particu-
lar model λ in order to address the solution it is used the backwards and the forward
algorithm.
• Problem 2 (Decoding): Given an observation sequence O and an HMM λ =(A,B),
discover the best-hidden state sequence Q or most likely sequence of states that
produced the sequence, it is used the Viterbi algorithm for decoding problems.
• Problem 3 (Learning):Given an observation sequence O and the set of states in the
HMM, learn the HMM parameters A and B. With a given structure and sequences
the problem address to find the model that best fits the data. It uses MLE (max-
imum likelihood estimation), Viterbi training algorithm (Unlike Viterbi Decoding) or
Baum Welch = forward-backward algorithm to find the best solution, usually used in
prediction tasks.
The algorithm used to address the problem in map matching cases is Viterbi(Decoding),
then the next step that follows before apply the algorithm is to def fine the Hidden Markov
Model for GPS map matching.
2.3.1
Hidden Markov Model for GPS map Matching
The Hidden Markov Model HMM has been used before in map matching process as shown
by Newson and Krumm [NK09], The new about the formulation of Newson and Krumm is
the approach to the problem simultaneously the algorithm robust to the location data and
both geometrically noisy and temporally sparse.
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 2.27: Hidden Markov Model configuration Map matching example
In general words, the configuration of a Hidden Markov Model has multiples parameters.
The observations described in the above formulation are the GPS signals points but in
the specific case, the Kalman Filtering GPS signal points. Then, there are the road seg-
ments that reflect the projection of the observation on the road segment, notice that one
observation can have different road segments and one road segment can have various
projected observations (more than two states), the relation of which probability depends
on observation to a road segment it is called the emission probability, and the probability
of changing from one segment or staying in the same segment but with another projected
point it is called the transition probability.
Figure 2.28: Hidden Markov Model Road Map
The concept mentioned before is shown figure 2.28 The GPS points, and their projection
on the road segment are illustrated. It is also outstanding to say that the distance between
the points and the segment represents an important parameter in the HMM model. A GPS
near a segment should have more probability to be part of the segment since it is more
close than if it is far. This concept can be verified in the emission and transition probability
equations.
44
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:53==
p(zt|ri) =
1
√
2πσz
e
−.5
∥Zt −xt,i∥Great−Circle
σz
2
(2.49)
The emission probability depends on σz as a standard deviation or GPS measurements
and ZT is our measurement or observation in the step T, the XT,i is our projection on the
different segments on time step T. The emission probability matrix size depends on the
number of different candidates ID streets that the algorithm detects.
Figure 2.29: Hidden Markov Model Distance between observation and candidates roads
projections
The figure 2.30 it is possible to see the distance among the projected points and the GPS
observations, taking in mind that it is possible to determinate the transition Matrix. Also,
it is important to mention that to determine this distance between coordinates inside a
network, it is needed to use the Dijkstra Algorithm, which helps to determine the shortest
path between two points in a network.
p(dt) = 1
βe
−dt
β
(2.50)
dt =
∥Zt −Zt+1∥GreaterCircle −∥Xt,i∗−Xt+1,j∗∥route

(2.51)
Each measurement Zt has a list of possible road matches, as does the next measurement
Zt+1. Transition probabilities give the probability of a vehicle moving between the candi-
dates’ road matches at these two times (t and t+1). This matrix will have the shape of size
# Number of candidates roads per time t in observation t (Zt) by # Number of candidates
roads per time t+1 in observation t+1 (Zt + 1). The next step is to determinate the values
of σz and β, which are defined as:
σt = 1.4826mediant∥Xt,i∗−Xt+1,j∗∥route
(2.52)
β =
1
ln(2)mediant
∥Zt −Zt+1∥Greatecircle −∥Xt,i∗−Xt+1,j∗∥route


(2.53)
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
45
==PAGE:54==
The problem finishes with founding the optimal and most probable path of selected seg-
ments with Viterbi Algorithm.
2.3.2
OMS and K-Nearest Neighbours
The K-Nearest Neighbours is an algorithm used for many purposes, such as regression,
classification, or search. The algorithm is easy to implement and is versatile, but the algo-
rithm gets significantly slower as the number of examples increases. For Map Matching
purposes, we used a tool of searching and combining OMS data, the GPS Kalman Filter,
and the Hidden Markov Model.
Figure 2.30: K nearest neighbours with K=3 radial search
It is setting a radius search (200m,500m,1000m) and take into account a centroid of the
GPS True observable point (Kalman Paint) we search all the nodes that are part of a
road segment, and it calculates the distance between two points (Kalman Point and OMS
Node). This is to select K nearest Neighbour with lower distance near to road segments
but does not share the same road segment ID. This is important to make emphasis, owing
to that for posterior methods the node can have other attributes as a polygon ID, or relation
ID then you have other elements with different attributes but share the feature of ’node’,
also the number of K nearest nodes are subjectively, but for the case of this project, it is
set as 4. The other important factor to consider is that in the selection of Nodes, we want
to be sure we have not selected two times the same segment in a group of nodes(A node
can have different ID streets values).
By having the K number of candidates nodes, it is built it our K number of candidates roads
segment, finding somehow the K-Nearest segments to the GPS Kalman Filter point. With
the K nearest neighbours, it is easy to merge Open Map Street and the Kalman Filter
data. The last step is to develop a function that will help determine the projection of GPS
observation point Zt (Kalman Point) to the segment and obtain the Xt,i needed for the
HMM model. This step is determined by candidates of the GPS Kalman Filter’s projection
also points are getting the distance between Zt −Xt,1. Then it is used in equation 2.49
emission probability. This distance is calculated between the point projection over the
segment and the GPS observable point.
46
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:55==
Figure 2.31: Cases projections on segments
In figure 2.31 shown the cases of projection between a point and a line, ideally the case 1
it is the one desired, but the projection of the point may finish outside the segment line that
are the cases 2 and 3. The distance will not be between the GPS point and the projected
point as for case 1, but it will be between the GPS point (Zt) and the begging or end of
the segment (Nodes OMS) or P1, P2 in figure 2.31.
The equation used to determine the projection and the distance between two points is
used the terminology of x, y is our GPS or Kalman point, and x1, y1 to x2, y2 is our line
candidate segment.
Then the method can easily obtain the length of A,B,C and D as:
A = x −x1
(2.54)
B = y −y1
(2.55)
C = x2 −x1
(2.56)
D = y2 −y1
(2.57)
In order to calculate the parameter to see in which case it is our projection, it is obtained
by the following expression:
Parameter = A ˙C + B ˙D
C ˙C + D ˙D
(2.58)
depending on the value of the parameter and as it is shown in figure 2.31 if the parameter
is between 0 and 1 is the case, if it is less than 0 is case 2 and if it is above 1 is case
3, finally and taking into account in which case it is the projection we determinate the
distance between the GPS corrected point with Kalman Filter and the projected point,
starting point of the segment or the ending point, with the following equation:
Distance =
q
(X1 −X2)2 + (Y1 −Y2)2
(2.59)
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
47
==PAGE:56==
2.3.3
Dijkstra Algorithm
Dijkstra Algorithm works to find the shortest path between two nodes given a graph or
a network (Road Network), in this chapter, it is not discussed the pseudo-code since it
is used the method class of Dijkstra algorithm for a road network that by default it has
QGIS. With the help of python libraries, it was possible to implement the projected points
Xt,itoXt+1,i to determine the value in equation 3.50 of the emission probability and the
parameter β. The Dijkstra method will create the graph depending on our area of work
of the Denmark road network and determine the distance, as the list of nodes where the
shortest route passes.
The Dijkstra algorithm has multiples variations in their method one of those is to find the
shortest path from a single source vertex to all other vertices in the given graph. Although
not the direct function used in the map-matching problem is somehow strongly related
to the problem, this example calculates the distance between nodes or vertices in the
graph. This Map matching LiRA case creates new vertices depending on their candidate’s
projections, and the shortest distance is determined with those new vertices or nodes. The
algorithm works as follows:
1. Create a set or array (shortest path tree set) that keeps track of vertices included in
the shortest-path tree, i.e., whose minimum distance from the source is calculated
and finalized. Initially, this array is empty.
2. Assign a distance value to all vertices in the input graph. Initialize all distance values
as INFINITE. Assign distance value as 0 for the source vertex then it going to be
picked first.
3. While the set doesn’t include all vertices do:
A Pick a vertex Vu which is not there in set or array and has minimum distance
value.
B Include the vertex Vu in the set or array.
C Update distance value of all adjacent vertices of Vu. To update the distance
values, iterate through all adjacent vertices. For every adjacent vertex Vv, if
the sum of a distance value of Vu (from source) and weight of edge u-v, is less
than the distance value of Vv, then update the distance value of Vv.
A graphical explanation with the following graph example is:
Figure 2.32: Dijkstra graph Example
The figure 2.32 shows one base graph or network with their corresponding nodes example
48
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:57==
and explanation taken from the reference [Gee20].
It is possible to observe that algorithm initialized the
array with distance 0 for the first element and infinite
to all the rest vertex. The initialization takes the first
element saved in the set or arrays. Subsequently, it
calculates the distance values of 1 and 7 that are up-
dated as 4 and 8 owing to the fact that is the next
vertex of 0. the sub-graph is shown in green colour
the elements saved in the array (of shorts distance)
and the finite distance.
As it is possible to observe the next graph the next
vertex added to the set or array of the shortest path is
the vertex 1 and once again is updated the distance
of subsequent vertex in this case vertex 2 with 12 of
distance, and now the array becomes 0, 1.
The next graph illustrates the next iteration it selects
the next vertex with the shortest distance in this iter-
ation 7. The new set or array become 0,1,7 and the
next Update the distance values of adjacent vertices
of 7. The distance value of vertex 6 and 8 becomes
finite (15 and 9, respectively).
Once more, the iteration becomes repetitive, and the
patron becomes easy to understand, select the min-
imum distance red nodes, and pick Vertex 6. So the
array is 0, 1, 7, 6. Update the distance values of adja-
cent vertices of 6. The distance value of vertex 5 and
8 are updated, and the distance of vertex 5 becomes
finite.
The above it is repeating iterative until the set or the
array includes all vertices or given graph. Finally, we
get the Shortest Path Tree (SPT).
This Shortest Path Tree is the output thrown by the Dijkstra algorithm. Our method re-
turns all the list of nodes in the shortest path of a network and summing all the distance
between the nodes it is possible to total determinate the total distance (a distance of the
shortest path). This is one of the input of Transition Matrix and the coefficient β and at the
end what the method is trying to determinate is ∥Xt,i∗−Xt+1,j∗∥route expression obtained
from equation 3.50 and the figure 2.30 , this is the main input of the HMM model and
consequently the Viterbi Algorithm. In order to be able to obtain all matrices and used
all the data in an offline application for map matching the uses of the Dijkstra algorithm,
OMS data and Kalman filter will be helpful for automation purposes.
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
49
==PAGE:58==
2.3.4
Viterbi Algorithm
Viterbi algorithm is a dynamical algorithm program for finding the most likely sequence
of hidden states. It is used in different fields of study as speech recognition, speech
synthesis, bioinformatics and now map matching. Viterbi algorithm is the one which solves
the Hidden Markov Model given a set of parameters described above.
In order to address this, it is necessary to Compute the Likelihood of a given HMM with
λ = (A,B) and an observation sequence O and determine the likelihood P(O|λ). The first
step is to determinate the likelihood.
Then a particular hidden state sequence Q = q0, q1, q2, ..., qT and an observation sequence
O = o1, o2, ..., oT , it is possible to determinate the most probable sequence Q.
Figure 2.33: Viterbi Algorithm
As illustrated in figure 2.33 develop by Jurafsky [Mar19] an example of Viterbi algorithm,
it is illustrated and, consequently, the procedure definition will be easier to understand.
The author states that to process and the observation sequence is going from left to right,
filling out the cells vt(j) which represents the probability that the HMM is in state j. After
looking at the first t observations and passing through the most probable state sequence
Q and parameters λ that is the emission and transition probability of each step. Then the
algorithm computed recursively taking the most probable path that could lead to the cell.
Formally, each cell-expressed by their probability as:
vt(j) = max
q1,...,qt−1 P(q1...qt−1, o1, o2...ot, qt = j|λ)
(2.60)
It is important to notice that the path is determinate by taking the maximum over all possi-
ble previous state sequences, as many other dynamical programs viterbi it fills each cell
and given that had already computed the probability of being in every state at time t−1.
Now the value vt(j) is computed as:
vt(j) =
N
max
i=1 vt−1(i)aijbj(ot))
(2.61)
where vt−1(i) is the e previous Viterbi path probability from the previous time step, aij)
is the transition probability from previous state qi to current state qj and bj(ot) that is
the state observation likelihood of the observation symbol ot given the current state j
(calculated with the emission probability).
50
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:59==
The Viterbi pseudo-code it is presented, however Appendix section can find the complete
version of the Viterbi algorithm code for map matching purposes.
Algorithm 1 Viterbi Algorithm
Require: o, Q, a, b, π
create a path probability matrix viterbi[N,T]
for r each state s =1 to N do
viterbi[s,1]←πs · bs(o1)
backpointer[s,1]←0
end for{Initialization step}
for each time step t=2 to T do
for each time step s=1 to N do
viterbi[s,1]←maxN
s′=1 viterbi[s′, t −1] ∗as′,s ∗bs(ot)
backpointer[s,t]←argmaxN
s′=1viterbi[s′, t −1] ∗as′,s ∗bs(ot)
end for
end for{Recursion step}
bestpathprob ←maxN
s′=1 viterbi[s, t] {Termination step}
bestpathpointer←argmaxN
s′=1viterbi[s, t] {Termination step}
bestpath←the path starting at state bestpathpointer, that follows backpointer[] to states
back in time
return bestpath,bestpathprob
A formal definition of the Viterbi recursion shown in the algorithm 1 is presented below:
1. Initialization:
v1(j) = πjbj(o1)
1 ≤j ≤N
bt1(j) = 0
1 ≤j ≤N
2. Recursion:
vt(j) =
N
max
i=1 vt−1(i)aijbj(ot))
1 ≤j ≤N, 1 < t ≤T
btt(j) = argmaxN
i=1vt−1(i)aijbj(ot))
1 ≤j ≤N, 1 < t ≤T
3. Termination:
The
best
score :
P∗=
N
max
i=1 vT(i)
The
start
o f
backtrace :
qT∗= argmaxN
i=1vT(i)
The Viterbi algorithm presented before works in their general form, however the Viterbi
apply for map matching purposes it is possible to see in the appendix section. Since the
states are changing over the time and that the number of observations or steps are high
864 or more points it is necessary to apply the log Viterbi to the probability function or,
hence, we have a number too small to work in terms of computational cost. All these
modifications and adaptations of the Viterbi algorithm are reflected in the Appendix. It is
essential to mention that this HMM has different states in each step and consequently,
different transitions probabilities and emission probabilities.
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
51
==PAGE:60==
3
Applying Machine Learning Methods
3.1
Data Simulation
The p79 car data set has a high variate of trips, measured with GPS of precision (True
Points).In order to use the Kalman Filtering algorithm, it is necessary first to run the model
in controlled environments to check the validity and integrity of the output thrown by the
algorithm and to simulate the normality condition that demands the Kalman filtering algo-
rithm.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Time (s)
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
Distance (m)
Distance vs Time
Simulated Position
Real Position
Zoom 110:110
Zoom 520:530
Zoom 820:830
Figure 3.1: 1D simulation (Distance) for P79 car data set
708500
709000
709500
710000
710500
711000
711500
Position_x (m)
6173000
6174000
6175000
6176000
6177000
6178000
6179000
6180000
Position vs Time
Simulated Position
Position real
Zoom 110:110
Zoom 520:530
Zoom 820:830
Figure 3.2: 2D simulation (Position) for P79 car data set
52
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:61==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Time (s)
708500
709000
709500
710000
710500
711000
711500
Position_x (m)
Position vs Time
Simulated Position
Position real
Zoom 110:110
Zoom 520:530
Zoom 820:830
(a) 2D simulation X axis vs Time
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Time (s)
6173000
6174000
6175000
6176000
6177000
6178000
6179000
6180000
Position vs Time
Simulated Position
Position real
Zoom 110:110
Zoom 520:530
Zoom 820:830
(b) 2D simulation Y axis vs Time
Figure 3.3: 2D Simulation X and Y axis over time
The figure 3.1 and 3.2 the simulation (observable points- blue colour) and the trip of the
P79 data set (true points- red color) are represented for the one dimensional and two-
dimensional case. The P79 data set has the latitude, longitude, and distance recover by
the car, as shown in table 4.1. For this specific route (ID:P79201907020001) the GPS of
precision had record 854 points (# Number of k steps) that are the ones illustrated in the
graphs described above.
Tid [s]
Latitude
Longitude
Distance [m]
Hastighed [m/s]
Acceleration [m/s²]
28.02467
55.656870
12.319788
0.0
27.303578
-0.125773
28.39464
55.656942
12.319690
10.0
27.255928
-0.120413
28.76135
55.657013
12.319592
20.0
27.214673
-0.107774
29.12875
55.657085
12.319495
30.0
27.178512
-0.112690
29.49680
55.657157
12.319399
40.0
27.133263
-0.125825
Table 3.1: sample data-set p79 first 5 rows
It is important to mention that based on table 3.1 , many parameters had been transformed
or estimated. Hence, the change of coordinates systems from Latitude, Longitude to
UTMx, UTMy, the determination of angles, accelerations and ∆Time as the distance
between two coordinates can be feasible determinate thanks to the complete measure of
accurate parameters. These parameters are the main input of the model.
3.2
Kalman Filtering 1D Results
In this step and as a way of research, it is used Kalman Filtering assuming different con-
figurations. In this way, it is possible to understand or develop an analysis in which it
measures some variables’ impact under some assumptions in the Kalman filter process.
The configuration tested are Kalman Filtering without noise process matrix Q and speed
and acceleration information, the noise process matrix Q without acceleration but with
speed information and Kalman Filtering with noise matrix Q and acceleration and speed,
then it is possible to evaluate the performance of the model and apply the complete result
for the two dimensional Kalman Filtering.
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 3.4: 1D simulation (Distance) for P79 car Kalman Filtering with out Q matrix
In the figure 3.4 it is possible to observe how using the Kalman Filter process without
taking into account the Q matrix (Noise process variance matrix) the result are near the
real position and there are not a lot of volatility.
Figure 3.5: 1D Co-variance Matrix Kalman without Q
In the illustration 3.5 it is possible to contrast the co-variance prediction (blue ellipses) and
update the covariance matrices pink circle. The variability is reduced in each iteration,
and a positive correlation trend(biased covariance) is observed. Also, it is important to
mention how the prediction covariance gets reduced in each update in Kalman filtering
an important behaviour during the Kalman filtering process (Noise reduction).
The next model was to run the Kalman Filtering matrix with a noise Q matrix, and speed
prediction and information the result obtained are shown below:
54
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:63==
Figure 3.6: 1D simulation (Distance) for P79 car Kalman Filtering with Q matrix
It is possible to understand figure 3.6 how the Kalman filter fluctuated more than other
models. This owing to the Kalman gain factor’s updated value is affecting the speed and
distance prediction.
Figure 3.7: Kalman Gain Factor with Q matrix
The graph 3.7 shows how the value of the Kalman gain decreases abruptly at the be-
ginning of the method and reminds relatively flat during the iterations. It is important to
mention that the Kalman is low at around 0.42 for the distance and 0.37 for the speed.
The low values mean that the filter in each update follows the prediction more closely than
the new measurement.
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure 3.8: Co-variance Matrix prediction and update with Q matrix
The illustration 3.8 is possible to the argument that although the covariance matrix had
decreased their size compare from the first model owing to the information of velocity
data. The behaviour or shape, including the size of matrix P, the covariance matrix, had
not changed significantly.
Figure 3.9: 1D simulation (Distance) for P79 car Kalman Filtering with Q matrix and ac-
celeration
The figure 3.9 is possible to see fluctuation higher than the first case(Kalman without
Q and speed information) but lower compared to the second case(Kalman with Q and
speed) due two the acceleration information component. It is important to remember that
56
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:65==
the acceleration component is added as a control variable in Kalman Filter’s model.
Figure 3.10: 1D simulation Kalman gain with Q matrix and acceleration
In the figure 3.10it is possible to evidence the Kalman gain position is higher than the
velocity. Nevertheless, overall, compared with the second model, it has a lower Kalman
gain of 0.17 for the position and a 0.04 for velocity. Meaning that the acceleration value’s
data is making the prediction more accurate and the measured value more correct and
truthful.
Figure 3.11: 1D simulation co-variance with Q matrix and acceleration
Finally, the 1-dimensional simulation concluded looking at how the covariance matrix
evolved. In this aspect, there was a significant difference. The covariance matrix had
decreased their size due to the acceleration signal’s information reducing the variable’s
noise. Which means that our predict position is becoming more accurate in the estimation
of the value.
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
57
==PAGE:66==
3.3
Kalman Filtering 2D Results
The two dimensional Kalman Filtering represent the simulation of a real case GPS noise.
The idea behind this is to find the real value given a series of data in the latitude and
longitude Cartesian coordinates. The results obtained by Kalman Filtering are explained
below:
Figure 3.12: 2D simulation and Kalman Filter
(a) 2D Kalman Filter X axis vs Time
(b) 2D Kalman Filter Y axis vs Time
Figure 3.13: 2D Kalman Filter X and Y axis over time
The illustration 3.12 and 3.13 is possible to analyse and observe the results of the Kalman
filter. However, the Kalman points are not the same as the real the expected result reflects
how the method enhance the GPS observations given the predictions and the update of
the Kalman Filter 2D.
58
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:67==
Figure 3.14: 2D Kalman Gain Results
It is outstanding to mention how the Kalman gain factor depends on the variables speed,
acceleration, and position depending on the sensibility in the prediction equation. There-
fore the acceleration which prediction reminds on the measured value of acceleration has
higher Kalman Gain. The velocity or speed which prediction depends on the measure
and the variable acceleration has a Kalman gain of 0.24. The position which values de-
pend on acceleration and velocity and position has the lower Kalman Gain of 0.05 for both
axes. This means that the Filter is giving more importance to the prediction than to the
measure. It is important to remember that the objective is to determine the most probable
true position given an observation and with the data obtained by velocity and acceleration
a better result in that estimation.
(a) 2D co-variance for 864 iterations
(b) 2D co-variance x axis for 30 iterations
Figure 3.15: 2D co-variance x axis Matrix
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
59
==PAGE:68==
The covariance matrix 6x6 has many variables. However, it is interesting to graph the
relationship between position in coordinates x and velocity in x and reciprocally with the
y-axis velocity and position in this specific case. The result is shown in figure 3.15 the
direction in each step is the car’s geometrical influence by taking a curve. However, the
important to mention here is that the covariance matrix is becoming smaller due to the
reduction of the Kalman filter’s noise effect. There is no great difference in the update
process between the covariances P (predict step, and update step). As it was observed
before, it tends to have a positive covariance relation between the variables. The be-
haviour of the covariance matrix (shape and size) still the same in each iteration.
(a) 2D co-variance y axis for 864 iterations
(b) 2D co-variance y axis for 30 iterations
Figure 3.16: 2D co-variance Matrix y axis
Lastly, it was expected the covariance matrix for axis y(position in y and velocity in y) to be
determinate. The displacement speaks in terms of the values of prediction y and velocity
y, but the covariance matrix’s behaviour is similar than in the case of axis x.
3.4
Hidden Markov Model Results
To illustrate the Hidden Markov Model and observed Kalman Filter’s benefits, the research
ran two models, one with the simulated data and the Kalman Filtering. To obtain such
results was necessary to use OMS data and P79 data, build and search our ID street
segments.
Figure 3.17: P79 geometry Data
60
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:69==
In the figure P79 the graph illustrates the shape and the behaviour of the data (no outliers
or anomalies to treat). It is possible to build the graph or networks of the road searching
the corrects nodes.
(a) Points Zoom P79 nodes
(b) Points Zoom p79 nodes and roads
Figure 3.18: Points Zoom p79 roads nodes
The illustration 3.18 shows how the algorithm selected the nodes and how the algorithm
built the street segments from the nodes and the oms data.
3.4.1
OMS and K-Nearest Neighbours Results
In this specific context, the data-set works on 864 different points(The program works for
different amounts of points). It’s made in a radius of 1000 meters of search(the algorithm
can modify radius depending on the search).
(a) Radius KNN 1
(b) Radius KNN 2
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
61
==PAGE:70==
(a) Radius KNN 3
(b) Radius KNN examples points
Figure 3.20: Radius K nearest Neighbours (KNN) Filter by distance KNN points
The figure 3.20 shows the algorithm iteratively, the idea behind this to find the nodes and
the ID street and search the k nearest Nodes neighbours and the street segment their
corresponding projection (states of the HMM).
(a) Segment Projection Kalman sample 1
(b) Segment Projection Kalman sample 2
(c) Segment Projection Kalman sample 3
(d) Segment Projection Kalman sample 4
62
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:71==
(a) Segment Projection Kalman sample 5
(b) Segment Projection Kalman sample 6
(c) Segment Projection Kalman sample 7
(d) Segment Projection Kalman sample 8
Figure 3.22: Segment Projection of Kalman
The graphs 3.22 shows different cases for K=4. The yellow point represents the Kalman
Point. The other four selected segments vary by position, translation, and rotation. The
colours represent how close the segment is to the Kalman point being the order blue,
yellow, green and red the order of closeness. Also, it is possible to notice the projections
on the segments green points. Each projection on the segment represents a possible
state in the Hidden Markov Model. In each iteration, the HMM has different states with a
different probability matrix (emission and transition).
3.5
Dijkstra Algorithm result
(a) Dijkstra on Transition Matrix Projection
(b) Dijkstra on OMS data
Figure 3.23: Dijkstra on OMS data
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
63
==PAGE:72==
The algorithm Dijkstra is represented on figure 3.23, the outstanding to mention is that
the algorithm searches the shortest route from point A to point B road network or graph
iteratively for each point. It is computationally expensive since each step calculates the
Dijkstra 16 times for projection combinations in step t (KNN=4) to projection in sept t+1
(KNN=4) this is repeating iterative 864 times. Taking the accumulated distance between
points in the Dijkstra algorithm it is possible to determinate all the parameters and calcu-
lation for the transition matrix to then used in the HMM (Viterbi Algorithm)
3.6
Viterbi Algorithm result
The whole procedure developed before was to develop a better map matching process
with the Hidden Markov Model. The model was made for ran two times for simulated data
and another for correct points determined by Kalman Filtering.
(a) Segment Projection Kalman sample 1
(b) Segment Projection Kalman sample 2
(c) Segment Projection Kalman sample 2
(d) Segment Projection Kalman sample 4
64
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:73==
(a) Segment Projection Kalman sample 5
(b) Segment Projection Kalman sample 6
Figure 3.25: Segment Projection Kalman samples
It is possible to observe on figure 3.25 how the Simulation (Purple Points) and the Kalman
Points (Teal points) move near a route and the OMS line segments. This image shows
the two scenarios where the HMM was run and how it will compare and contrast the two
scenarios. The whole procedure finish with the following results:
(a) HMM simulated vs Kalman
(b) HMM simulated vs Kalman 1
(c) HMM simulated vs Kalman 2
(d) HMM simulated vs Kalman 3
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
65
==PAGE:74==
(a) HMM simulated vs Kalman 4
(b) HMM simulated vs Kalman 5
(c) HMM simulated vs Kalman 6
(d) HMM simulated vs Kalman 7
(e) HMM simulated vs Kalman 8
(f) HMM simulated vs Kalman 9
Figure 3.27: HMM simulated vs Kalman
The Image 3.27 illustrates a good performance in the HMM Markov model. It is possible
to appreciate how the nodes change their position to be assigned in the segment road
network. The yellow points illustrate the Hidden Markov Model’s result for the simulated
data, and the red point is the result of the Kalman Filtering. It is also important to mention
that the real position (P79 data) are not set near the segment but are in a road trip, in the
HMM model as it is appreciated there are mismatches, but in general words the result is
robust.
average −dist = ∑N
i=1 distancereal−obs
N
To be able to determinate an indicator and have a level of accuracy it is used the equation
66
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:75==
described above the result taking into account observation data for the simulated data a
taken into account 864 points was of 12.088 meters in average. The mismatch for Kalman
Filtering method data was 5.659. It can appreciate the final output for the Hidden Markov
Model’s final output in the Appendix section.
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
67
==PAGE:76==
4
Conclusion and Future Research
GPS Map Matching procedure using Hidden Markov Models and Kalman Filtering have
developed with success. For this context, the formula proved that with an indicator of
5.659 meters of error in average, the Kalman Filter algorithm’s mismatch would enhance
the result compared with scenarios where it is not used the Kalman Filter (12.088 meters
of mismatch). However, although the objective of map matching is fulfilled with the meth-
ods described above there still exist, ways to improve, enhance and develop research
for make better decisions in the map matching process when the program is running in
the Lira project or reality case. In this order of ideas, some comments, advice, and ob-
servations should be taken into account when implementing the developed algorithm of
accuracy, efficiency, and time-consuming.
• The work developed until now was in a simulated environment, but the real data
Green Mobility GPS present a different behaviour that should be studied. In other
words, the method implemented is a previous step before implementation in the real
world.
• It is necessary to study an algorithm before the use of Kalman Filter, which helps
to handle and manage the anomalies and outliers of the Green Mobility data. The
program’s class or method should measure the volatility in axis y and axis x and
decide when to delete or eliminate anomalies or outliers. Also, there is the possibility
of studying which kind of GPS it is used and how it handled the experiment, how
it should be managed to avoid anomalies and outliers and make the experiment or
the real situation more controlled and handled on terms of how the data behaves.
• The Green Mobility data can be biased, although it fulfils the assumption of noise
normality. It is important to study this bias component in an algorithm for real-world
environments. Although the GPS has a normal noise component, they have a bias
error constant in all the route due to how it is positioned the GPS in the car or how it
is working internally. The component of bias is worth studying and correcting before
it is to apply the Kalman Filtering method. It is too important to mention that this
bias can change for a device to device and car to car, as the anomalies, all these
methods have to be thought para-metrically for each case.
• The Open Map Street data base is complete and robust, but it has its errors. That
is why the database should revise its terms of what elements are being localized
on the map. Sometimes in the database, an Id street is classified as a residential
or tertiary road. Still, in reality, it is not an automobile road. This can be a problem
for specific Hidden Markov Model cases, especially when this miss classification is
parallel to the route or real road segment.
• OMS data handling, as described before handling the whole Open street map of
Denmark, is unnecessary, so it is selected only the nodes near the route (rectangle
zoom). This filter has its problem and can perform better because it will still load
unnecessary information instead of developing a square filter. It can be ellipsoidal
search or parametric filtering of nodes depending on the form of the route.
• Properly explodes the database, and this is important the used the GPS position,
velocity and acceleration it hasn’t be exploded correctly. The yaw angle is an im-
portant parameter in Kalman Filtering method. It’s more realistic because of the
68
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:77==
development of the simulated data of the p79 and the position and direction ob-
tained with the real points (GPS of precision). But this can’t be applied in the Green
Mobility data owing there are no actual points then the algorithm will badly estimate
the direction. Using an Extend Kalman Filtering and the data of yaw angle will fix
the problem, solving a more realistic problem with a realistic environment.
• K-nearest Neighbours fulfils its function, but it can perform better. A Node can have
more than two ID streets; hence, it is not necessarily choosing the nearest Segment
corresponding to an ID street. Then it is necessary to verify this condition or develop
the K-nearest Neighbours between point and lines and not between point to point.
• The Hidden Markov Model select multiple times the segment ID. As it was appreci-
ated in the results of the Hidden Markov Model, the matching has its mistakes. This
is owing to of the volatility of points (simulated data) that is corrected somehow with
the new estimation using Kalman Points, or the way it is estimated the emission or
transition probabilities in that step. Therefore, it is necessary to take into account
how is behaving those matrices in those steps. It is also possible to apply Hidden
Markov models with higher-order two, three or four, which contains additional in-
formation about previous activity that leads to better accuracy results. Finally, it
is possible to work in selected segments and revise if there is the direction of ID
street (right and left) and reduce the probability of being selected if the segments
are parallel each other and have information of direction or type of segment.
• To finalize the time consuming and the computational cost is high. However, this kind
of application works for the offline procedure it is taking around 3 hours to analyze
a trip of 1000 points (especially for Dijkstra Algorithm). In real environments, the
program should analyze daily trips of the Green Mobility car gang. It is necessary to
study how to efficiently run the algorithm to determine the damage of the road in the
road network of Denmark. This computational cost can be even higher if it started
to develop new approaches as particle filtering or deep learning techniques.
4.1
Future Research
There are still techniques that can enhance the result. The assumption for normal noise
in the co-variance matrix and the measurement data and the non linearly algorithm can
solve particle filtering components. In order to solve this, it is needed to use Bayesian
filtering with their Maximum likelihood estimation (Higher computational cost), by using
and applied thousands of particles, where each particle represents a possible state for the
system. It is extracted and estimated from thousands of particles (Montecarlo Simulation)
using weighted statistics of the particles.
The particle filtering creates several thousand particles, and each particle has a posi-
tion that represents a possible belief of where the car is in time T or step K. It is desired
to scatter the particles uniformly over the entire scene. All of the particles representing
the probability distribution, locations with more particles representing a higher belief, and
fewer particles represent a lower belief. Each particle is assigned a weight. The proba-
bility of the car is in the true position. A combination of particles and weights forms the
probability distribution for our problem we finish by resampling the particles for the most
probable and computing the estimated parameters.
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
69
==PAGE:78==
Figure 4.1: Particle Filtering steps
The particle filtering has multiples steps before solving the non-linearity and non-Gaussian’s
problems such as:
• Randomly generate a bunch of particles Produce particles which has a weight
(probability) indicating how likely it matches the actual state of the system. Initialize
each with the same weight.
• Predict next state of the particles Move particles based of how it is believed the
system behaves
• Update Update the particles depending of the measurement particles that are close
to the measurements are weighted higher compared with particles that are far from
the measurement
• Re-sample resample the particles given the news weights
• Compute compute the weighted mean and covariance of the set of particles to get
a state estimate.
In this order of ideas, it is also possible to exploit the OMS data on Polygons’ (Lakes,
Buildings, Forest) to develop an accurate prediction in which all particles should be outside
the polygon as is illustrated by A. peker [A P].
70
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:79==
Figure 4.2: Particle Filtering steps
To obtain a similar output, it is necessary to keep working in the OMS database, the
filtering and selection of features in the Open Map Street, and building polygons feature
and streets segment. It is also possible to develop an HMM model that will match all
points to the streets segment or road, obtaining a more realistic and statistical behaviour
in the map matching process. Apart from the topology, the distribution in particle filtering
can be affected by assumptions of time, place, and number of satellites.
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
71
==PAGE:80==
5
Appendix A
5.1
Listings (Python code)
Listing 5.1 is a nicely formatted block of code. Many different programming languages
can be highlighted.
Code Open Map Street Filter
1
2
import psycopg2
3
4
connection = psycopg2.connect(user = "postgres",
5
password = "*********",
6
port = "5432",
7
database = "postgres")
8
9
db_cursor = connection.cursor()
10
# Print PostgreSQL Connection properties
11
12
db_cursor.execute("""CREATE TABLE osm_copy_way AS (SELECT * FROM
planet_osm_ways);""")
13
14
db_cursor.execute("""SELECT table_name FROM information_schema.tables
15
WHERE table_schema = 'public'""")
16
17
for table in db_cursor.fetchall():
18
print(table)
19
20
db_cursor.execute("""SELECT id, nodes, tags FROM osm_copy_way ORDER BY id
FETCH FIRST 1000 ROW ONLY;""")
21
print("Selecting rows from ways table using cursor.fetchall")
22
way_records = db_cursor.fetchall()
23
24
print("Print each row and it's columns values")
25
for row in way_records:
26
print("Id = ", row[0], )
27
print("Nodes = ", row[1])
28
print("Tags
= ", row[2], "\n")
29
30
db_cursor.execute("""SELECT count(*) FROM osm_copy_way;""")
31
Num_rows=db_cursor.fetchall()
32
print("Num Rows Table Ways is:",Num_rows)
33
highway=['motorway','trunk', 'primary','secondary','tertiary','unclassified','
residential']
34
35
list_highway=list()
36
for idx in highway:
37
print(idx)
38
db_cursor.execute("""CREATE TABLE highway_"""+idx+"""
39
AS (SELECT *FROM osm_copy_way WHERE tags::varchar LIKE '%"""+idx+"""%');
""")
40
db_cursor.execute("""SELECT count(*) FROM highway_"""+idx+""";""")
41
Num_rows=db_cursor.fetchall()
42
print("Num Rows Table "+idx+" Ways is:",Num_rows)
43
44
db_cursor.execute("""CREATE TABLE highway_"""+idx+"""_nodes
45
AS(SELECT r.*
46
, (ARRAY (
47
SELECT CAST(n.lat AS FLOAT)/10000000
72
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:81==
48
FROM
unnest(r.nodes) WITH ORDINALITY AS a( id,
ord)
49
JOIN
planet_osm_nodes n ON n.id = a.id
50
ORDER
BY a.ord
51
)
52
) AS lat
53
, (ARRAY (
54
SELECT CAST(n.lon AS FLOAT)/10000000
55
FROM
unnest(r.nodes) WITH ORDINALITY AS a( id,
ord)
56
JOIN
planet_osm_nodes n ON n.id = a.id
57
ORDER
BY a.ord
58
)
59
) AS lon
60
FROM highway_"""+idx+""" r);""")
61
62
db_cursor.execute("""DROP TABLE highway_"""+idx+""";""")
63
64
db_cursor.execute("""SELECT id, nodes, tags,lat,lon FROM highway_"""+idx+
"""_nodes ORDER BY id;""")
65
way_records = db_cursor.fetchall()
66
ArrayWay=list()
67
for row in way_records:
68
69
ArrayCorr=list()
70
71
for index in range(len(row[3])):
72
nodes=row[1]
73
lat=row[3]
74
lon=row[4]
75
Var=[nodes[index],lon[index],lat[index]]
76
ArrayCorr.append(Var)
77
ArrayWay.append(ArrayCorr)
78
list_highway.append(ArrayWay)
79
80
db_cursor.close()
81
connection.close()
82
print("PostgreSQL connection is closed")
83
84
from osgeo import
ogr, osr
85
import os
86
from shapely.geometry import MultiPoint , mapping
87
import shapefile
88
import shapely.wkt
89
import geopandas as gpd
90
import pandas as pd
91
from sys import argv
92
import csv
93
import osgeo.ogr, osgeo.osr #we will need some packages
94
from osgeo import ogr #and one more for the creation of a new field
95
import fiona
96
from fiona.crs import from_epsg
97
98
features = list()
99
cont=0
100
for Arraway in list_highway:
101
102
print(highway[cont])
103
for feature in ArrayWay:
104
# Create a Multipoint object based on the array of points
105
# Append to the list of Multipoint objects
106
multipoint = ogr.Geometry(ogr.wkbMultiPoint)
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
73
==PAGE:82==
107
point=[]
108
cont=0
109
for coords in feature:
110
point = ogr.Geometry(ogr.wkbPoint)
111
point.AddPoint(*coords[1:3])
112
multipoint.AddGeometry(point)
113
114
features.append(multipoint)
115
116
print('funciona geometry')
117
shape= list()
118
for idx in range(len(features)):
119
shape.append(shapely.wkt.loads(features[idx].ExportToWkt()))
120
new_pol =shapely.ops.cascaded_union(shape)
121
new_pol
122
123
print('funciona shapely')
124
125
# Define a polygon feature geometry with one attribute
126
schema = {
127
'geometry': 'MultiPoint',
128
'properties': {'id': 'int'},
129
}
130
# Write a new Shapefile
131
with fiona.open('Layer'+highway[cont]+'.shp', 'w',crs=from_epsg(4326),
driver='ESRI Shapefile',schema=schema) as c:
132
## If there are multiple geometries , put the "for" loop here
133
c.write({
134
'geometry': mapping(new_pol),
135
'properties': {'id': 123},
136
})
137
print('funciona fiona')
138
new_pol=None
139
140
cont+=1
Listing 5.1: edit and filtering code of the oms file with an sql database
Code Kalman Filter analysis and P79 simulation
1
2
#Access to Data Base
3
import pandas as pd
4
import numpy as np
5
data1 = pd.read_csv(r'C:\Users\daniel\Documents\Data\P79201907020001.dist.
gpsimp.txt', sep="|", header='infer')
6
data1 = data1.iloc[:, 1:4]
7
data1 = data1.rename(columns={data1.columns[1]:'Latitude',data1.columns[2]:'
Longitude'})
8
data2 = pd.read_csv(r'C:\Users\daniel\Documents\Data\P79201907020001.dist.vm.
txt', sep="|", header='infer')
9
10
#Mergin Data bases
11
result = pd.concat([data1, data2], axis=1, sort=False)
12
Datas=result
13
result.columns
14
15
#Increase or calculate parameters Database
16
result[u'Δt (s)'] =result[' Tid [s]'].diff()
17
delta=result[u'Δt (s)']
18
delta=delta.fillna(0)
19
result['Time']=delta.cumsum()
74
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:83==
20
delta = pd.DataFrame(data=delta)
21
delta=delta.apply(np.roll, shift=-1)
22
result[u'Δt (s)']=delta
23
res=result.head()
24
print(res.to_latex(index=False))
25
result['DiffVel_[m/s]']=result[' Hastighed [m/s]'].diff()
26
result['Acceleration_[m/s²]']= result['DiffVel_[m/s]']/result[u'Δt (s)']
27
accelere=result['Acceleration_[m/s²]']
28
accelere = pd.DataFrame(data=accelere)
29
accelere=accelere.apply(np.roll, shift=-1)
30
accelere=accelere.fillna(0)
31
result['Acceleration_[m/s²]']=accelere
32
result.head
33
34
# Importating Packages
35
result['Acceleration_[m/s²]'].iloc[-2]=0
36
import pandas as pd
37
import geojson
38
import json
39
from pandas.io.json import json_normalize
40
41
#Function that save data to geojson file
42
def data2geojson(df):
43
features = []
44
insert_features = lambda X: features.append(
45
geojson.Feature(geometry=geojson.Point((X["Longitude"],X["Latitude
"])),
46
properties=dict(Time=X[' Tid [s]'],Distance =X["
Distance [m]"],Speed=X[" Hastighed [m/s]"],Lat
=X[" Acceleration [m/s²]"])))
47
df.apply(insert_features , axis=1)
48
with open(r"C:\OSGeo4W64\Master_Python\Kalman_Filter.geojson", 'w',
encoding='utf8') as fp:
49
geojson.dump(geojson.FeatureCollection(features), fp, sort_keys=True,
ensure_ascii=False)
50
51
data2geojson(result)
52
53
#Adding noise and making simulation
54
measurement_noise=100
55
from numpy.random import randn
56
result['Distancia_simulation[m/s]']=""
57
58
for i in range(len(result['Distance [m]'])):
59
result['Distancia_simulation[m/s]'][i]=result['Distance [m]'][i]+randn()*
np.sqrt(measurement_noise)
60
61
#Plotting Simulation
62
car = CarSimulation(measurement_variance=0.0)
63
Xs= list()
64
for idx, val in enumerate(result[' Tid [s]']):
65
Xs.append(car.move_and_sense())
66
67
Position = [x[0] for x in Xs]
68
fig = plt.figure(num=None, figsize=(14,4 ), dpi=80, facecolor='w', edgecolor='
k')
69
plt.plot(result['Distance [m]'], "-b", label="Simulated Position")
70
# Add title and axis names
71
plt.title('Position vs Time')
72
plt.xlabel('Time (s)')
73
plt.ylabel('Position (m)')
74
plt.legend(loc="upper left")
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
75
==PAGE:84==
75
76
plt.grid()
77
plt.show()
78
select=result[['Distance [m]','Time',u'Δt (s)',' Hastighed [m/s]']]
79
Xs=list()
80
Xs.append((1,0))
81
Xs[0][0]
82
83
Position = [x[0] for x in Xs]
84
print(len(Position))
85
fig = plt.figure(num=None, figsize=(14,4 ), dpi=80, facecolor='w', edgecolor='
k')
86
plt.plot(select['Time'],result['Distancia_simulation[m/s]'],'ob', label="
Simulated Position")
87
plt.plot(select['Time'],select['Distance [m]'], "-r", label="Real Position")
88
# Add title and axis names
89
plt.title('Position vs Time')
90
plt.xlabel('Time (s)')
91
plt.ylabel('Position (m)')
92
plt.legend(loc="upper left")
93
plt.grid()
94
plt.show()
95
96
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
97
import numpy as np
98
99
# the main axes is subplot(111) by default
100
plt.plot(select['Time'],result['Distancia_simulation[m/s]'],'ob', label="
Simulated Position")
101
plt.plot(select['Time'],select['Distance [m]'], "-r", label="Real Position")
102
plt.xlabel('Time (s)')
103
plt.ylabel('Distance (m)')
104
plt.legend(loc="upper left")
105
plt.grid()
106
plt.title('Distance vs Time')
107
108
109
# this is an inset axes over the main axes
110
a = plt.axes([.6, .55, .2, .2], facecolor='y')
111
plt.scatter(select['Time'][100:110],result['Distancia_simulation[m/s]'
][100:110],s=30)
112
plt.scatter(select['Time'][100:110],select['Distance [m]'][100:110],s=10)
113
114
115
plt.title('Zoom 110:110')
116
plt.xticks([])
117
plt.yticks([])
118
119
# this is another inset axes over the main axes
120
a = plt.axes([0.6, 0.2, .2, .2], facecolor='y')
121
plt.scatter(select['Time'][520:530],result['Distancia_simulation[m/s]'
][520:530],s=30)
122
plt.scatter(select['Time'][520:530],select['Distance [m]'][520:530],s=10)
123
plt.title('Zoom 520:530')
124
plt.xticks([])
125
plt.yticks([])
126
127
# this is another inset axes over the main axes
128
a = plt.axes([0.2, 0.4, .2, .2], facecolor='y')
129
plt.scatter(select['Time'][820:830],result['Distancia_simulation[m/s]'
][820:830],s=30)
130
plt.scatter(select['Time'][820:830],select['Distance [m]'][820:830],s=10)
76
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:85==
131
plt.title('Zoom 820:830')
132
plt.xticks([])
133
plt.yticks([])
134
plt.savefig('my_pgf_plot_1.pdf')
135
plt.show()
136
137
def test_sensor(measurement_var , process_var):
138
Xs=list()
139
Xs.append((0,0))
140
time_delta=0
141
Time=[0]
142
for idx,dist,time,delta,vel in select.itertuples(index=True):
143
car = CarSimulation(measurement_variance=measurement_var , velocity=vel
,x0=Xs[idx][0],dt=delta,process_variance=process_var)
144
Xs.append(car.move_and_sense())
145
time_delta+=delta
146
Time.append(time_delta)
147
148
return Xs, Time
149
150
#test_sensor(measurement_var=500,process_var=100)
151
152
#First class KalmanFilter1D
153
class KalmanFilter1D:
154
def __init__(self, x0, P, R, Q):
155
self.x = x0
156
self.P = P
157
self.R = R
158
self.Q = Q
159
160
def update(self, z):
161
self.x = (self.P * z + self.x * self.R) / (self.P + self.R)
162
self.P = 1. / (1./self.P + 1./self.R)
163
164
def predict(self, u=0.0):
165
self.x += u
166
self.P += self.Q
167
#First Kalman Filter Simulation
168
process_variance=.8
169
variance=40
170
kf = KalmanFilter1D(x0=0,
# initial state
171
P=100,
# initial variance
172
# large says 'who knows?'
173
R=variance ,
# sensor noise
174
Q=process_variance)
# error in prediction
175
Pos, Time=test_sensor(measurement_var=30,process_var=0)
176
desvest_simul=np.full((len(Pos[1:])), np.sqrt(500))
177
178
positions , variance = [], []
179
180
for i in range(len(Pos[1:])):
181
kf.predict(result[' Hastighed [m/s]'].loc[0]*result[[u'Δt (s)']].loc
[0][0])
182
kf.update(result['Distancia_simulation[m/s]'][i])
183
184
# save for latter plotting
185
positions.append(kf.x)
186
variance.append(kf.P)
187
188
#Plooting first Kalman Filter Simulation
189
Position = [x[0] for x in Pos]
190
plt.plot(select['Time'],result['Distancia_simulation[m/s]'],'ob', label="
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
77
==PAGE:86==
Simulated Position",markersize=2)
191
plt.plot(select['Time'],positions ,'or', label="Kalman Filter",markersize=4)
192
plt.plot(select['Time'],select['Distance [m]'], "-g", label="Real Position")
193
194
# Add title and axis names
195
plt.title('Distance vs Time')
196
plt.xlabel('Time (s)')
197
plt.ylabel('Distance (m)')
198
plt.legend(loc="upper left")
199
plt.fill_between(select['Time'], (select['Distance [m]']-desvest_simul), (
select['Distance [m]']+desvest_simul), color='y', alpha=.5)
200
plt.grid()
201
202
# this is an inset axes over the main axes
203
a = plt.axes([.6, .55, .2, .2], facecolor='beige')
204
plt.scatter(select['Time'][100:110],result['Distancia_simulation[m/s]'
][100:110],s=30)
205
plt.scatter(select['Time'][100:110],positions[100:110],s=20)
206
plt.scatter(select['Time'][100:110],select['Distance [m]'][100:110],s=10)
207
plt.title('Zoom 110:110')
208
plt.xticks([])
209
plt.yticks([])
210
211
# this is another inset axes over the main axes
212
a = plt.axes([0.6, 0.2, .2, .2], facecolor='beige')
213
plt.scatter(select['Time'][520:530],result['Distancia_simulation[m/s]'
][520:530],s=30)
214
plt.scatter(select['Time'][520:530],positions[520:530],s=20)
215
plt.scatter(select['Time'][520:530],select['Distance [m]'][520:530],s=10)
216
plt.title('Zoom 520:530')
217
plt.xticks([])
218
plt.yticks([])
219
220
# this is another inset axes over the main axes
221
a = plt.axes([0.2, 0.4, .2, .2], facecolor='beige')
222
plt.scatter(select['Time'][820:830],result['Distancia_simulation[m/s]'
][820:830],s=30)
223
plt.scatter(select['Time'][820:830],positions[820:830],s=20)
224
plt.scatter(select['Time'][820:830],select['Distance [m]'][820:830],s=10)
225
plt.title('Zoom 820:830')
226
plt.xticks([])
227
plt.yticks([])
228
plt.savefig('my_pgf_plot_1.pdf')
229
plt.show()
230
231
plt.show()
232
233
#Final Kalman Filter Class works for general cases is Matricial
234
class KalmanFilter:
235
236
from numpy import dot
237
#Define Parameters
238
def __init__(self, x0, P, F, R, Q, B, U):
239
self.x = x0
240
self.P = P
241
self.R = R
242
self.Q = Q
243
self.F= F
244
self.B= B
245
self.U= U
246
self.Pbefore=P
247
78
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:87==
248
def predict(self,F):
249
#Predict the mean of the Next Position
250
251
self.x = dot(F, self.x) + dot(self.B, self.U)
252
253
#Predict the
Covariance Matrix of the next position
254
self.P = dot(F, dot(self.P, F.T)) + self.Q
255
self.Pbefore= self.P
256
257
258
259
def update(self,z,H):
260
from numpy.linalg import inv
261
#Residual y from the prediction and the new observed value
262
263
y = z-dot(H, self.x)
264
265
#Change or Normalize with matriz H the matrix P and R
266
IS = self.R + dot(H, dot(self.P, H.T))
267
IS=IS.astype(float)
268
269
# Calculate the Kalman Gain
270
self.K = dot(self.P, dot(H.T, inv(IS)))
271
272
#Update Position and Velocity
273
self.x = self.x + dot(self.K, y)
274
275
#Update covariance Matrix
276
self.P = dot((np.identity(len(P))
- dot(self.K, H)),self.P)
277
278
from numpy import dot
279
import numpy
280
H = np.array([[1., 0],[ 0, 1.]])
281
x=np.array([[Pos[0+1][0],result[[' Hastighed [m/s]']].loc[10][0]]]).T
282
lenM = numpy.shape(H)
283
print (lenM)
284
lenM = numpy.shape(x)
285
print (lenM)
286
z=np.array([[Pos[i+1][0],result[[' Hastighed [m/s]']].loc[i][0]]]).T
287
z=np.array([[Pos[i+1][0],result[[' Hastighed [m/s]']].loc[i][0]]])
288
z.T
289
result[[u'Δt (s)']].loc[0][0]
290
dot(H, x)
291
292
#Second Kalman Filter
293
dt=result[[u'Δt (s)']].loc[0][0]
294
x = np.array([result[['Distance [m]']].loc[0][0], result[[' Hastighed [m/s]'
]].loc[0][0]])
295
P = np.diag([500, 49])
296
F = np.array([[1, dt], [0, 1]])
297
from filterpy.common import Q_discrete_white_noise
298
Q = Q_discrete_white_noise(dim=2, dt=1., var=2.35)
299
H = np.array([[1., 0.]])
300
R = np.array([[5.]])
301
302
303
states, covariance , prev = [], [], []
304
for i in range(len(Pos[1:])):
305
306
if i==0:
307
dt=result[[u'Δt (s)']].loc[i][0]
308
F = np.array([[1, dt], [0, 1]])
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
79
==PAGE:88==
309
kf=KalmanFilter(x0=x,P=P,F=F,R=R,Q=Q,B=0,U=0)
310
kf.predict(F=F)
311
kf.update(result['Distancia_simulation[m/s]'][i], H)
312
# save for latter plotting
313
states.append(kf.x)
314
covariance.append(kf.P)
315
prev.append(kf.Pbefore)
316
317
else:
318
dt=result[[u'Δt (s)']].loc[i][0]
319
F = np.array([[1, dt], [0, 1]])
320
321
kf.predict(F=F)
322
kf.update(result['Distancia_simulation[m/s]'][i], H)
323
# save for latter plotting
324
states.append(kf.x)
325
covariance.append(kf.P)
326
prev.append(kf.Pbefore)
327
328
def get_correlated_dataset(n, dependency , mu, scale):
329
latent = np.random.randn(n, 2)
330
dependent = latent.dot(dependency)
331
scaled = dependent * scale
332
scaled_with_offset = scaled + mu
333
# return x and y of the new, correlated dataset
334
return scaled_with_offset[:, 0],
335
scaled_with_offset[:, 1]
336
337
from matplotlib.patches import Ellipse
338
import matplotlib.transforms as transforms
339
def confidence_ellipse(x, y, ax, n_std=3.0, facecolor='none', **kwargs):
340
"""
341
Create a plot of the covariance confidence ellipse of *x* and *y*.
342
343
Parameters
344
----------
345
x, y : array-like, shape (n, )
346
Input data.
347
348
ax : matplotlib.axes.Axes
349
The axes object to draw the ellipse into.
350
351
n_std : float
352
The number of standard deviations to determine the ellipse's radiuses.
353
354
**kwargs
355
Forwarded to `~matplotlib.patches.Ellipse `
356
357
Returns
358
-------
359
matplotlib.patches.Ellipse
360
"""
361
if x.size != y.size:
362
raise ValueError("x and y must be the same size")
363
364
cov = np.cov(x, y)
365
pearson = cov[0, 1]/np.sqrt(cov[0, 0] * cov[1, 1])
366
# Using a special case to obtain the eigenvalues of this
367
# two-dimensionl dataset.
368
ell_radius_x = np.sqrt(1 + pearson)
369
ell_radius_y = np.sqrt(1 - pearson)
370
ellipse = Ellipse((0, 0), width=ell_radius_x * 2, height=ell_radius_y * 2,
80
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:89==
371
facecolor=facecolor , **kwargs)
372
373
# Calculating the stdandard deviation of x from
374
# the squareroot of the variance and multiplying
375
# with the given number of standard deviations.
376
scale_x = np.sqrt(cov[0, 0]) * n_std
377
mean_x = np.mean(x)
378
379
# calculating the stdandard deviation of y ...
380
scale_y = np.sqrt(cov[1, 1]) * n_std
381
mean_y = np.mean(y)
382
383
transf = transforms.Affine2D() \
384
.rotate_deg(45) \
385
.scale(scale_x , scale_y) \
386
.translate(mean_x, mean_y)
387
388
ellipse.set_transform(transf + ax.transData)
389
return ax.add_patch(ellipse)
390
391
fig, ax_kwargs = plt.subplots(figsize=(10, 10))
392
393
for i in range(15):
394
395
dependency_kwargs = covariance[i]
396
Covariances_Prev=prev[i+1]
397
mu = states['dist'][i], states['vel'][i]
398
scale = 1, 1
399
400
ax_kwargs.axvline(c='grey', lw=1)
401
ax_kwargs.axhline(c='grey', lw=1)
402
403
404
x, y = get_correlated_dataset(500, dependency_kwargs , mu, scale)
405
x1, y1 = get_correlated_dataset(500, Covariances_Prev , mu, scale)
406
# Plot the ellipse with zorder=0 in order to demonstrate
407
# its transparency (caused by the use of alpha).
408
confidence_ellipse(x, y, ax_kwargs ,
409
alpha=0.5, facecolor='pink', edgecolor='purple', zorder
=0)
410
411
confidence_ellipse(x1, y1, ax_kwargs ,
412
alpha=0.5, facecolor='blue', edgecolor='green', zorder
=0)
413
414
ax_kwargs.scatter(x, y, s=0.5)
415
ax_kwargs.scatter(mu[0], mu[1], c='red', s=3)
416
417
ax_kwargs.set_title('Covariance Distance vs Vel')
418
ax_kwargs.grid()
419
plt.xlabel('Distance (m)')
420
plt.ylabel('velocity (m/s)')
421
422
423
fig.subplots_adjust(hspace=0.25)
424
plt.show()
425
426
kf.U=2
427
kf.U
428
dt=result[[u'Δt (s)']].loc[0][0]
429
x = np.array([result[['Distance [m]']].loc[0][0], result[[' Hastighed [m/s]'
]].loc[0][0]])
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
81
==PAGE:90==
430
P = np.diag([500, 49])
431
F = np.array([[1, dt], [0, 1]])
432
H = np.array([[1., 0]])
433
R = np.array([[5.]])
434
435
436
437
states, covariance , prev, K = [], [], [], []
438
for i in range(len(Pos[1:])):
439
440
if i==0:
441
dt=result[[u'Δt (s)']].loc[i][0]
442
F = np.array([[1, dt], [0, 1]])
443
Q = np.array([[1/3*dt**3, 1/2*dt**2], [1/2*dt**2, dt]])*np.var(result
[[' Hastighed [m/s]']])[0]
444
kf=KalmanFilter(x0=x,P=P,F=F,R=R,Q=Q,B=0,U=0)
445
kf.predict(F=F)
446
447
kf.update(result['Distancia_simulation[m/s]'][i], H)
448
# save for latter plotting
449
states.append(kf.x)
450
covariance.append(kf.P)
451
prev.append(kf.Pbefore)
452
K.append(kf.K)
453
454
else:
455
dt=result[[u'Δt (s)']].loc[i][0]
456
F = np.array([[1, dt], [0, 1]])
457
Q = np.array([[1/3*dt**3, 1/2*dt**2], [1/2*dt**2, dt]])*np.var(result
[[' Hastighed [m/s]']])[0]
458
kf.Q=Q
459
kf.predict(F=F)
460
461
kf.update(result['Distancia_simulation[m/s]'][i], H)
462
463
# save for latter plotting
464
states.append(kf.x)
465
covariance.append(kf.P)
466
prev.append(kf.Pbefore)
467
K.append(kf.K)
468
469
K1=list()
470
K2=list()
471
for i in range(len(K)):
472
K1.append(K[i][0][0])
473
K2.append(K[i][1][0])
474
475
plt.plot(K1, 'ob', label="Kalman Gain Position",markersize=2)
476
plt.plot(K2[1:], 'or', label="Kalman Gain Speed",markersize=2)
477
plt.title('Kalman Gain Distance vs time')
478
plt.xlabel('Time (s)')
479
plt.ylabel('Kalman Value')
480
plt.legend()
481
plt.grid()
482
plt.show()
483
484
Position = [x[0] for x in Pos]
485
Data1= pd.DataFrame(data=Position ,columns=['Position m'])
486
Data2= pd.DataFrame(data=Time,columns=['Time (secs)'])
487
Simulation = pd.concat([Data1, Data2], axis=1, sort=False)
488
Simulation
489
82
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:91==
490
plt.plot(select['Time'],result['Distancia_simulation[m/s]'],'ob', label="
Simulated Position",markersize=6)
491
plt.plot(select['Time'],states['dist'],'or', label="Kalman Filter",markersize
=4)
492
plt.plot(select['Time'],select['Distance [m]'], "-g", label="Real Position")
493
494
# Add title and axis names
495
plt.title('Position vs Time, Simulation 1D with Q')
496
plt.xlabel('Time (s)')
497
plt.ylabel('Position (m)')
498
plt.legend(loc="upper left")
499
plt.fill_between(select['Time'], (select['Distance [m]']-desvest_simul), (
select['Distance [m]']+desvest_simul), color='y', alpha=.5)
500
501
plt.grid()
502
# this is an inset axes over the main axes
503
a = plt.axes([.6, .55, .2, .2], facecolor='beige')
504
plt.scatter(select['Time'][100:110],result['Distancia_simulation[m/s]'
][100:110],s=30)
505
plt.scatter(select['Time'][100:110],states['dist'][100:110],s=20)
506
plt.scatter(select['Time'][100:110],select['Distance [m]'][100:110],s=10)
507
plt.title('Zoom 110:110')
508
plt.xticks([])
509
plt.yticks([])
510
511
# this is another inset axes over the main axes
512
a = plt.axes([0.6, 0.2, .2, .2], facecolor='beige')
513
plt.scatter(select['Time'][520:530],result['Distancia_simulation[m/s]'
][520:530],s=30)
514
plt.scatter(select['Time'][520:530],states['dist'][520:530],s=20)
515
plt.scatter(select['Time'][520:530],select['Distance [m]'][520:530],s=10)
516
plt.title('Zoom 520:530')
517
plt.xticks([])
518
plt.yticks([])
519
520
# this is another inset axes over the main axes
521
a = plt.axes([0.2, 0.4, .2, .2], facecolor='beige')
522
plt.scatter(select['Time'][820:830],result['Distancia_simulation[m/s]'
][820:830],s=30)
523
plt.scatter(select['Time'][820:830],states['dist'][820:830],s=20)
524
plt.scatter(select['Time'][820:830],select['Distance [m]'][820:830],s=10)
525
plt.title('Zoom 820:830')
526
plt.xticks([])
527
plt.yticks([])
528
plt.savefig('my_pgf_plot_7.pdf')
529
plt.show()
530
531
plt.show()
532
533
fig, ax_kwargs = plt.subplots(figsize=(10, 10))
534
535
for i in range(15):
536
537
dependency_kwargs = covariance[i]
538
Covariances_Prev=prev[i+1]
539
mu = states['dist'][i], states['vel'][i]
540
scale = 1, 1
541
542
ax_kwargs.axvline(c='grey', lw=1)
543
ax_kwargs.axhline(c='grey', lw=1)
544
545
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
83
==PAGE:92==
546
x, y = get_correlated_dataset(500, dependency_kwargs , mu, scale)
547
x1, y1 = get_correlated_dataset(500, Covariances_Prev , mu, scale)
548
# Plot the ellipse with zorder=0 in order to demonstrate
549
# its transparency (caused by the use of alpha).
550
confidence_ellipse(x, y, ax_kwargs ,
551
alpha=0.5, facecolor='pink', edgecolor='purple', zorder
=0, label = 1)
552
553
confidence_ellipse(x1, y1, ax_kwargs ,
554
alpha=0.5, facecolor='blue', edgecolor='green', zorder
=0)
555
556
ax_kwargs.scatter(x, y, s=0.5)
557
ax_kwargs.scatter(mu[0], mu[1], c='red', s=3)
558
559
ax_kwargs.set_title('Covariance Distance vs Vel with Q')
560
ax_kwargs.grid()
561
plt.xlabel('Distance (m)')
562
plt.ylabel('velocity (m/s)')
563
564
565
fig.subplots_adjust(hspace=0.25)
566
plt.show()
567
568
#Plot the Data 2 Dimensions
569
car = CarSimulation(measurement_variance=0.0)
570
Xs= list()
571
for idx, val in enumerate(result[' Tid [s]']):
572
Xs.append(car.move_and_sense())
573
574
fig = plt.figure(num=None, figsize=(14,4 ), dpi=80, facecolor='w', edgecolor='
k')
575
plt.plot(result.Longitude ,result.Latitude ,"-ob", label="Position",markersize
=0.5)
576
# Add title and axis names
577
plt.title('Position 2D')
578
plt.xlabel('Longitude (°)')
579
plt.ylabel('Latitude (°)')
580
plt.legend(loc="upper left")
581
582
plt.grid()
583
plt.show()
584
585
#Proyecting lat, long function to UTM
586
from pyproj import Proj
587
myProj = Proj("+proj=utm +zone=32N, +south +ellps=WGS84 +datum=WGS84 +units=m
+no_defs")
588
result['UTM_X']=""
589
result['UTM_Y']=""
590
result['Dist(m)']=""
591
592
#Distance between two points
593
def distance(x1,x2,y1,y2):
594
sq1 = (x1-x2)*(x1-x2)
595
sq2 = (y1-y2)*(y1-y2)
596
return math.sqrt(sq1 + sq2)
597
598
599
for contador in range(len(result)):
600
UTMx, UTMy = myProj(result['Longitude'].iloc[contador], result['Latitude'
].iloc[contador])
601
result['UTM_X'].iloc[contador]= UTMx
84
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:93==
602
result['UTM_Y'].iloc[contador]= UTMy
603
result[u'Δt (s)'].iloc[contador]=result[u'Δt (s)'].iloc[contador]
604
605
import requests
606
import pandas as pd
607
result['UTM_X']= result['UTM_X']
608
result['UTM_Y']= result['UTM_Y']
609
result.head()
610
611
#Getting the Angle and velicity functions
612
def angle(delta_x ,delta_y):
613
myradians = math.atan2(delta_y , delta_x)
614
mydegrees = math.degrees(myradians)
615
return myradians
616
def vel_x(vel,angle_rad):
617
velx=vel*math.cos(angle_rad)
618
return velx
619
def vel_y(vel,angle_rad):
620
vely=vel*math.sin(angle_rad)
621
return vely
622
result[u'Angle'] = result.apply(lambda x: angle(xΔ.UTM_X, xΔ.UTM_Y), axis=1)
623
result['Velocity']= result[' Hastighed [m/s]']
624
result[u'Velocity_X'] = result.apply(lambda x: vel_x(x.Velocity , x.Angle),
axis=1)
625
result[u'Velocity_Y'] = result.apply(lambda x: vel_y(x.Velocity , x.Angle),
axis=1)
626
627
result[u'Acc_x'] =result['Velocity_X'].diff()
628
result[u'Acc_y'] =result['Velocity_Y'].diff()
629
result[u'Acc_y']=result[u'Acc_y']/result[u'Δt (s)']
630
result[u'Acc_x']=result[u'Acc_x']/result[u'Δt (s)']
631
accelerex=result[u'Acc_x']
632
accelerey=result[u'Acc_y']
633
accelerex = pd.DataFrame(data=accelerex)
634
accelerey = pd.DataFrame(data=accelerey)
635
accelerex=accelerex.apply(np.roll, shift=-1)
636
accelerex=accelerex.fillna(0)
637
accelerey=accelerey.apply(np.roll, shift=-1)
638
accelerey=accelerey.fillna(0)
639
result[u'Acc_x']=accelerex
640
result[u'Acc_y']=accelerey
641
result[u'Acc_x'].iloc[-2]=0
642
result[u'Acc_y'].iloc[-2]=0
643
result
644
645
car = CarSimulation(measurement_variance=0.0)
646
Xs= list()
647
for idx, val in enumerate(result[' Tid [s]']):
648
Xs.append(car.move_and_sense())
649
650
fig = plt.figure(num=None, figsize=(14,4 ), dpi=80, facecolor='w', edgecolor='
k')
651
plt.plot(result['UTM_X'],result['UTM_Y'] ,"-ob", label="Position",markersize
=0.5)
652
# Add title and axis names
653
plt.title('Position 2D')
654
plt.xlabel('Distancia X (m)')
655
plt.ylabel('Distancia Y (m)')
656
plt.legend(loc="upper left")
657
658
plt.grid()
659
plt.show()
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
85
==PAGE:94==
660
661
select2=result[['UTM_X','UTM_Y','Time',u'Δt (s)',u'Velocity_X',u'Velocity_Y']]
662
measurement_noisex=100
663
measurement_noisy=81
664
result['UtmX_simulation[m/s]']=""
665
result['UtmY_simulation[m/s]']=""
666
667
for i in range(len(result['Distance [m]'])):
668
result['UtmX_simulation[m/s]'][i]=result['UTM_X'][i]+randn()*np.sqrt(
measurement_noisex)
669
result['UtmY_simulation[m/s]'][i]=result['UTM_Y'][i]+randn()*np.sqrt(
measurement_noisy)
670
671
fig = plt.figure(num=None, figsize=(14,4 ), dpi=80, facecolor='w', edgecolor='
k')
672
plt.plot(result['UtmX_simulation[m/s]'],result['UtmY_simulation[m/s]'],'ob',
label="Simulated Position")
673
plt.plot(result['UTM_X'],result['UTM_Y'] ,"-or", label="Position real",
markersize=0.5)
674
675
# Add title and axis names
676
plt.title('Position vs Time')
677
plt.xlabel('Position_x (m)')
678
plt.ylabel('Position_y (m)')
679
plt.legend(loc="upper left")
680
681
plt.grid()
682
plt.show()
683
684
plt.plot(select['Time'],result['UtmX_simulation[m/s]'],'ob', label="Simulated
Position")
685
plt.plot(select['Time'],result['UTM_X'],"-or", label="Position real",
markersize=0.5)
686
plt.xlabel('Time (s)')
687
plt.ylabel('Position_x (m)')
688
plt.legend(loc="upper left")
689
plt.grid()
690
plt.title('Position vs Time')
691
692
# this is an inset axes over the main axes
693
a = plt.axes([.6, .55, .2, .2], facecolor='y')
694
plt.scatter(select['Time'][100:110],result['UtmX_simulation[m/s]'][100:110],s
=30)
695
plt.scatter(select['Time'][100:110],result['UTM_X'][100:110],s=10)
696
plt.title('Zoom 110:110')
697
plt.xticks([])
698
plt.yticks([])
699
700
#Kalman Filter 2D
701
dt=result[[u'Δt (s)']].loc[0][0]
702
x_t = np.array([[result[['UTM_X']].loc[0][0],result[['UTM_Y']].loc[0][0],
result[['Velocity_X']].loc[0][0],result[['Velocity_Y']].loc[0][0],result[[
u'Acc_x']].loc[0][0],result[[u'Acc_y']].loc[0][0]]]).T
703
P = np.diag([150, 200,50,40,5,5])
704
B = np.array([[dt**2/2,0,dt,0,1,0],[0,dt**2/2,0,dt,0,1]]).T
705
R =np.array([[25,0,0,0,0,0],
[0,9,0,0,0,0],[0,0,1,0,0,0],[0,0,0,1,0,0],[0,0,0,0,0.5,0],[0,0,0,0,0,0.5]])
706
H = np.identity(6)
707
C = np.identity(6)
708
ytm=np.array([[result[['UtmX_simulation[m/s]']].loc[1][0],result[['
UtmY_simulation[m/s]']].loc[1][0], result[['Velocity_X']].loc[1][0],result
86
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:95==
[['Velocity_Y']].loc[1][0],result[[u'Acc_x']].loc[1][0],result[[u'Acc_y'
]].loc[1][0]]]).T
709
y= dot(C, ytm)
710
var_acc= np.var(result[['Acceleration_[m/s²]']])
711
var_velx= np.var(result[['Velocity_X']])
712
var_vely= np.var(result[['Velocity_Y']])
713
import sympy as sy
714
v1 = sy.Symbol('x')
715
v2 = sy.Symbol('y')
716
717
states, covariance , prev, K = [], [], [], []
718
for i in range(len(result['Distancia_simulation[m/s]'])):
719
print(i)
720
721
dt=result[[u'Δt (s)']].loc[i][0]
722
F = np.array([[1,0,dt,0,0,0],[0,1,0,dt,0,0],
[0,0,1,0,0,0],[0,0,0,1,0,0],[0,0,0,0,0,0],[0,0,0,0,0,0]])
723
724
v = Matrix([[dt**2 / 2], [dt], [1]])
725
Q1 = v * v1 * v.T
726
Q2 = v * v2 * v.T
727
Q=Matrix(np.zeros((6, 6)))
728
Q[0,0]=Q1[0,0]
729
Q[0,2]=Q1[0,1]
730
Q[0,4]=Q1[0,2]
731
Q[2,0]=Q1[1,0]
732
Q[2,2]=Q1[1,1]
733
Q[2,4]=Q1[1,2]
734
Q[4,0]=Q1[2,0]
735
Q[4,2]=Q1[2,1]
736
Q[4,4]=Q1[2,2]
737
Q[1,1]=Q2[0,0]
738
Q[1,3]=Q2[0,1]
739
Q[1,5]=Q2[0,2]
740
Q[3,1]=Q2[1,0]
741
Q[3,3]=Q2[1,1]
742
Q[3,5]=Q2[1,2]
743
Q[5,1]=Q2[2,0]
744
Q[5,3]=Q2[2,1]
745
Q[5,5]=Q2[2,2]
746
747
748
Q=Q.evalf(subs=dict(x=var_velx ,y=var_vely))
749
750
u_t = np.array([[result[[u'Acc_x']].loc[i][0],result[[u'Acc_y']].loc[i
][0]]]).T
751
752
if i==0:
753
kf=KalmanFilter(x0=x_t,P=P,F=F,R=R,Q=Q,B=B,U=u_t)
754
kf.predict(F=F)
755
756
kf.update(y, H)
757
758
# save for latter plotting
759
states.append(kf.x)
760
covariance.append(kf.P)
761
prev.append(kf.Pbefore)
762
K.append(kf.K)
763
764
else:
765
ytm=np.array([[result[['UtmX_simulation[m/s]']].loc[i][0],result[['
UtmY_simulation[m/s]']].loc[i][0], result[['Velocity_X']].loc[i
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
87
==PAGE:96==
][0],result[['Velocity_Y']].loc[i][0],result[[u'Acc_x']].loc[i
][0],result[[u'Acc_y']].loc[i][0]]]).T
766
y= dot(C, ytm)
767
kf.Q=Q
768
kf.U=u_t
769
kf.predict(F=F)
770
771
kf.update(y, H)
772
# save for latter plotting
773
states.append(kf.x)
774
covariance.append(kf.P)
775
prev.append(kf.Pbefore)
776
K.append(kf.K)
777
778
posx=[]
779
posy=[]
780
velx=[]
781
vely=[]
782
for i in range(len(result['Distancia_simulation[m/s]'])):
783
posx.append(states[i][0][0])
784
posy.append(states[i][1][0])
785
velx.append(states[i][2][0])
786
vely.append(states[i][3][0])
787
plt.plot(posx,posy,'og', label="Kalman Filter",markersize=6)
788
plt.plot(result['UtmX_simulation[m/s]'],result['UtmY_simulation[m/s]'],'ob',
label="Simulated Position")
789
plt.plot(result['UTM_X'],result['UTM_Y'] ,"-or", label="Position real",
markersize=0.5)
790
791
# Add title and axis names
792
plt.title('Position vs Time')
793
plt.xlabel('Position_x (m)')
794
plt.ylabel('Position_y (m)')
795
plt.legend(loc="upper left")
796
797
plt.grid()
Listing 5.2: Kalman Filter code 1D and 2D simulations
Hidden Markov Model analysis P79 and simulation
1
2
%run ExtendedKalmanFilter.ipynb
3
4
result.head()
5
points_Kalman=list()
6
for i in range(len(result)):
7
P=(result['UtmX_simulation[m/s]'][i],result['UtmY_simulation[m/s]'][i])
8
points_Kalman.append(P)
9
import json
10
from pandas.io.json import json_normalize
11
with open(r"C:\OSGeo4W64\Master_Python\\mapa_coordinates.geojson") as f:
12
geojson = json.load(f)
13
14
features = geojson['features']
15
16
dataf = pd.DataFrame(points_Kalman , columns=['Coordinates_X','Coordinates_Y'])
17
18
Max_UTMX=dataf['Coordinates_X'].max()
19
Min_UTMX=dataf['Coordinates_X'].min()
20
Max_UTMY=dataf['Coordinates_Y'].max()
21
Min_UTMY=dataf['Coordinates_Y'].min()
88
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:97==
22
print(Max_UTMX ,Min_UTMX ,Max_UTMY ,Min_UTMY)
23
Max_N=Max_UTMY+1000
24
Max_S=Min_UTMY -1000
25
Max_E=Max_UTMX+1000
26
Max_O=Min_UTMX -1000
27
28
Zoom=list()
29
cont=0
30
for elem in features:
31
if elem['properties']['UTMx']<Max_E and elem['properties']['UTMx']> Max_O
and elem['properties']['UTMy']< Max_N and elem['properties']['UTMy']>
Max_S:
32
Zoom.append(elem)
33
34
Zoom=list()
35
cont=0
36
for elem in features:
37
if elem['properties']['UTMx']<Max_E and elem['properties']['UTMx']> Max_O
and elem['properties']['UTMy']< Max_N and elem['properties']['UTMy']>
Max_S:
38
Zoom.append(elem)
39
40
def release_list(a):
41
del a[:]
42
del a
43
release_list(features)
44
45
import geojson
46
with open(r"C:\OSGeo4W64\Master_Python\zoom.geojson", 'w', encoding='utf8') as
fp:
47
geojson.dump(geojson.FeatureCollection(Zoom), fp, sort_keys=True,
ensure_ascii=False)
48
49
#Initialzing Arrays
50
unique_ids= set()
51
Routes_fetaures=list()
52
for elem in Zoom:
53
Id_Street=elem['properties']['Id_Street']
54
unique_ids.add(Id_Street)
55
ids=list(unique_ids)
56
Route_Road=DataFrame(ids,columns=['Id_Street'])
57
Route_Road['Dic_Road'] =""
58
Route_Road['Dic_Road'] = Route_Road['Dic_Road'].apply(list)
59
Route_Road.set_index(['Id_Street'],inplace=True)
60
61
#Initialzing Arrays
62
unique_ids= set()
63
Routes_fetaures=list()
64
for elem in Zoom:
65
Id_Street=elem['properties']['Id_Street']
66
unique_ids.add(Id_Street)
67
ids=list(unique_ids)
68
Route_Road=DataFrame(ids,columns=['Id_Street'])
69
Route_Road['Dic_Road'] =""
70
Route_Road['Dic_Road'] = Route_Road['Dic_Road'].apply(list)
71
Route_Road.set_index(['Id_Street'],inplace=True)
72
73
for elem in Zoom:
74
for idx,val in enumerate(ids):
75
if elem['properties']['Id_Street'] == val:
76
Route_Road.at[val, 'Dic_Road'].append(elem)
77
for val in ids:
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
89
==PAGE:98==
78
Route_Road.at[val, 'Dic_Road']=resp=[i for n, i in enumerate(Route_Road['
Dic_Road'][val]) if i not in Route_Road['Dic_Road'][val][n + 1:]]
79
#Definination for circle search
80
def isInside(circle_x , circle_y , rad,
x,
y):
81
82
if ((x - circle_x) * (x - circle_x) +
83
(y - circle_y) * (y - circle_y) <= rad * rad):
84
return True;
85
else:
86
return False;
87
# List of points inside the circle
88
def listadepuntos_radiales(points_Kalman ,points_UTM):
89
List_of_Points=[]
90
for j in range(len(points_Kalman)):
91
if j%50==0:
92
print(j)
93
radius_list=[]
94
radio=500
95
for i in range(len(points_UTM)):
96
if isInside(points_Kalman[j][0],points_Kalman[j][1],radio,
points_UTM[i][0],points_UTM[i][1])==True:
97
radius_list.append(points_UTM[i])
98
else:
99
None
100
List_of_Points.append(radius_list)
101
return List_of_Points
102
103
def route_to_feature(idx, route):
104
return {
105
'type': 'Feature',
106
'geometry': {
107
"TYPE": "Point",
108
"coordinates": route},
109
'properties': {
110
'name': f'Route #{idx}'
111
}
112
}
113
with open(r"C:\OSGeo4W64\Master_Python\Circle11.geojson", 'w', encoding='utf8'
) as fp:
114
geojson.dump(geojson.FeatureCollection([route_to_feature(idx, route)
for idx, route in enumerate(List_Points[1])]), fp, sort_keys=True,
ensure_ascii=False)
115
116
import geojson
117
with open(r"C:\OSGeo4W64\Master_Python\Circle1.geojson", 'w', encoding='utf8')
as fp:
118
geojson.dump(geojson.FeatureCollection(List_Points[0]), fp, sort_keys=True,
ensure_ascii=False)
119
120
def list_ID_STREETS(List_Points):
121
from collections import OrderedDict
122
Id_list=[]
123
for i in range(len(List_Points)):
124
if i%50==0:
125
print(i)
126
ID_STREET=[]
127
for j in range(len(List_Points[i])):
128
for k in range(len(Zoom)):
129
if Zoom[k]['properties']['UTMx']==List_Points[i][j][0] and
Zoom[k]['properties']['UTMy']==List_Points[i][j][1]:
130
ID_STREET.append(Zoom[k]['properties']['Id_Street'])
131
ID_STREET = OrderedDict.fromkeys(ID_STREET)
90
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:99==
132
ID_STREET =list(ID_STREET)
133
Id_list.append(ID_STREET)
134
return Id_list
135
136
Route_Road['UTM'][lista_IDs[0][0]]
137
138
139
def pDistance(Line1, Line2, x, y):
140
141
A = x - Line1[0]
142
B = y - Line1[1]
143
C = Line2[0] - Line1[0]
144
D = Line2[1] - Line1[1]
145
146
dot = A * C + B * D
147
148
len_sq = C * C + D * D
149
param = -1
150
if len_sq != 0:
151
param = dot / len_sq;
152
153
154
if param < 0:
155
xx = Line1[0]
156
yy = Line1[1]
157
158
if param > 1:
159
xx = Line2[0]
160
yy = Line2[1]
161
162
else:
163
xx = Line1[0] + param * C
164
yy = Line1[1] + param * D
165
166
167
dx = x - xx
168
dy = y - yy
169
170
171
if param < 0:
172
resp=distance(x,Line1[0],y,Line1[1])
173
174
elif param > 1:
175
resp=distance(x,Line2[0],y,Line2[1])
176
177
else:
178
resp=math.sqrt(dx * dx + dy * dy)
179
180
return resp,param
181
182
import math
183
def distanceLinetoPoint(Line1,Line2,x0,y0):
184
dist=abs((Line2[1]-Line1[1])*x0-(Line2[0]-Line1[0])*y0+Line2[0]*Line1[1]-
Line2[1]*Line1[0])/math.sqrt((Line2[1]-Line1[1])**2+(Line2[0]-Line1
[0])**2)
185
return dist
186
187
K_NEAREST=4
188
Result_Per_Point_Street=[]
189
for i in range(len(lista_IDs)):
190
list_min_street=[]
191
list_street=[]
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
91
==PAGE:100==
192
for j in range(len(lista_IDs[i])):
193
194
dic_dist={"Distance": [],"Coordinates" : [],"Param" : []}
195
dic_street={}
196
for k in range(len(Route_Road['UTM'][lista_IDs[i][j]])):
197
198
if k+1<=len(Route_Road['UTM'][lista_IDs[i][j]])-1:
199
dist,param= pDistance(Route_Road['UTM'][lista_IDs[i][j]][k],
Route_Road['UTM'][lista_IDs[i][j]][k+1],points_Kalman[i
][0],points_Kalman[i][1])
200
dic_dist["Distance"].append(dist)
201
dic_dist["Param"].append(param)
202
dic_dist["Coordinates"].append(Route_Road['UTM'][lista_IDs[i][
j]][k])
203
dic_street={"Distance_min": min(dic_dist['Distance']),"Coordinates_min
" : dic_dist['Coordinates'][np.argmin(dic_dist['Distance'])],"
Parameter" : dic_dist['Param'][np.argmin(dic_dist['Distance'])]}
204
dic_street['Id_street']= lista_IDs[i][j]
205
list_street.append(dic_street)
206
207
if len(lista_IDs[i])<K_NEAREST:
208
K=len(lista_IDs[i])
209
else:
210
K=K_NEAREST
211
212
for r in range(K):
213
min_k_neighbour= min(list_street , key=lambda x:x['Distance_min'])
214
for n in range(len(list_street)):
215
if list_street[n]==min_k_neighbour:
216
arg=n
217
del list_street[arg]
218
list_min_street.append(min_k_neighbour)
219
220
Result_Per_Point_Street.append(list_min_street)
221
222
from qgis.analysis import *
223
import processing
224
def route_to_layer(idx, route):
225
capa.startEditing()
226
feat = QgsFeature(capa.fields()) # Create the feature
227
feat.setAttribute("Street_ID", idx) # set attributes
228
# Create HERE the line you want with the 2 xy coordinates
229
for i in range(len(route)):
230
if i < len(route)-1:
231
feat.setGeometry(QgsGeometry.fromPolylineXY([QgsPointXY(route[i
][0], route[i][1]),
232
QgsPointXY(route[i+1][0], route[i+1][1])]))
233
capa.addFeature(feat) # add the feature to the layer
234
capa.endEditCommand() # Stop editing
235
236
# Your code
237
from qgis.core import *
238
from qgis.PyQt.QtCore import QVariant
239
240
crsSrc = QgsCoordinateReferenceSystem(4326)
# WGS 84
241
crsDest= QgsCoordinateReferenceSystem(32632)
# WGS 84 / UTM zone 33N
242
xform
= QgsCoordinateTransform(crsDest ,crsSrc, QgsProject.instance())
243
244
#create test layers
245
uri1 = "linestring?crs=epsg:4326&field=id:integer"
246
scratchLayer1 = QgsVectorLayer(uri1, "Scratch point layer1",
"memory")
247
92
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:101==
248
capa = QgsVectorLayer("LineString?crs=epsg:32632", "NetRoad_UTM", "memory")
249
250
pr = capa.dataProvider()
251
pr.addAttributes([
252
QgsField("Street_ID",
QVariant.Int)])
253
capa.updateFields()
254
255
# Add the layer in QGIS project
256
QgsProject.instance().addMapLayer(capa)
257
258
[route_to_layer(idx, route) for idx, route in zip(row_index , Route_Road['UTM'
])]
259
capa.commitChanges() # Save changes
260
261
def distance(x1,x2,y1,y2):
262
sq1 = (x1-x2)*(x1-x2)
263
sq2 = (y1-y2)*(y1-y2)
264
return math.sqrt(sq1 + sq2)
265
266
distancias=np.zeros((len(lista_IDs),len(Result_Per_Point_Street[PUNTO])))
267
coordenas_proyectadas=[]
268
for punto in range(len(lista_IDs)):
269
print(punto)
270
PUNTO=punto
271
xs=[]
272
ys=[]
273
274
for i in range(len(Result_Per_Point_Street[PUNTO])):
275
xs.append(Result_Per_Point_Street[PUNTO][i]['Coordinates_min'][0])
276
ys.append(Result_Per_Point_Street[PUNTO][i]['Coordinates_min'][1])
277
278
Pointx1=[]
279
Pointx2=[]
280
281
for ids in range(len(Result_Per_Point_Street[PUNTO])):
282
for i in range(len(Route_Road['UTM'][Result_Per_Point_Street[PUNTO][
ids]['Id_street']])):
283
if Route_Road['UTM'][Result_Per_Point_Street[PUNTO][ids]['
Id_street']][i]== Result_Per_Point_Street[PUNTO][ids]['
Coordinates_min']:
284
Pointx1.append(Route_Road['UTM'][Result_Per_Point_Street[PUNTO
][ids]['Id_street']][i])
285
Pointx2.append(Route_Road['UTM'][Result_Per_Point_Street[PUNTO
][ids]['Id_street']][i+1])
286
287
distanceperpoint=[]
288
proyecc=[]
289
for i in range(len(Pointx1)):
290
291
a = np.array(Pointx2[i])
292
b = np.array(Pointx1[i])
293
c = np.array(points_Kalman[PUNTO])
294
295
ba = a - b
296
bc = c - b
297
298
cosine_angle = np.dot(ba, bc) / (np.linalg.norm(ba) * np.linalg.norm(
bc))
299
angle = np.arccos(cosine_angle)
300
angles_rad.append(angle)
301
d = np.linalg.norm(np.cross(b-a, a-c))/np.linalg.norm(b-a)
302
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
93
==PAGE:102==
303
dinstance_proyeccion=
np.linalg.norm(bc)*np.cos(angle)
304
305
point = Point(points_Kalman[PUNTO][0], points_Kalman[PUNTO][1])
306
line = LineString([tuple(Pointx1[i]), tuple(Pointx2[i])])
307
308
x = np.array(point.coords[0])
309
310
u = np.array(line.coords[0])
311
v = np.array(line.coords[len(line.coords)-1])
312
313
n = v - u
314
n /= np.linalg.norm(n, 2)
315
316
P = u + n*np.dot(x - u, n)
317
318
dist, param=pDistance(Pointx1[i], Pointx2[i], points_Kalman[PUNTO][0],
points_Kalman[PUNTO][1])
319
320
if param <0:
321
d=dist
322
P=Pointx1[i]
323
elif param >1:
324
d=dist
325
P=Pointx2[i]
326
else:
327
d=d
328
P=P
329
330
distancias[PUNTO][i]=d
331
proyecc.append(list(P))
332
333
coordenas_proyectadas.append(proyecc)
334
335
fig, ax = plt.subplots()
336
ax.scatter(xs, ys)
337
ax.scatter(points_Kalman[PUNTO][0], points_Kalman[PUNTO][1])
338
ax.scatter(*zip(*proyecc))
339
340
for m, txt in enumerate(xs):
341
ax.annotate(m, (xs[m], ys[m]))
342
343
for n in range(len(Pointx1)):
344
plt.plot([Pointx1[n][0],Pointx2[n][0]], [Pointx1[n][1],Pointx2[n][1]])
345
ax.grid()
346
347
dijkstra=[]
348
for j in range(len(coordenas_proyectadas)):
349
if j < len(coordenas_proyectadas)-1:
350
print(j)
351
distancias_per=np.zeros((len(coordenas_proyectadas[j]),len(
coordenas_proyectadas[j+1])))
352
for k in range(len(coordenas_proyectadas[j])):
353
for l in range(len(coordenas_proyectadas[j+1])):
354
director = QgsVectorLayerDirector(capa, -1, '', '', '',
QgsVectorLayerDirector.DirectionBoth)
355
strategy = QgsNetworkDistanceStrategy()
356
director.addStrategy(strategy)
357
358
builder = QgsGraphBuilder(capa.sourceCrs())
359
360
361
startPoint = QgsPointXY(coordenas_proyectadas[j][k][0],
94
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:103==
coordenas_proyectadas[j][k][1])
362
endPoint = QgsPointXY(coordenas_proyectadas[j+1][l][0],
coordenas_proyectadas[j+1][l][1])
363
364
if startPoint==endPoint:
365
distancias_per[k][l]=0
366
367
else:
368
tiedPoints = director.makeGraph(builder , [startPoint ,
endPoint])
369
tStart, tStop = tiedPoints
370
371
graph = builder.graph()
372
idxStart = graph.findVertex(tStart)
373
idxEnd = graph.findVertex(tStop)
374
375
(tree, costs) = QgsGraphAnalyzer.dijkstra(graph, idxStart ,
0)
376
377
if tree[idxEnd] == -1:
378
raise Exception('No route!')
379
380
# Total cost
381
cost = costs[idxEnd]
382
383
# Add last point
384
routes = [graph.vertex(idxEnd).point()]
385
386
# Iterate the graph
387
while idxEnd != idxStart:
388
idxEnd = graph.edge(tree[idxEnd]).fromVertex()
389
routes.insert(0, graph.vertex(idxEnd).point())
390
391
dist=0
392
for i in range(len(routes)):
393
if i<len(routes)-1:
394
distancia_per_node=distance(routes[i][0],routes[i
+1][0],routes[i][1],routes[i+1][1])
395
dist+=distancia_per_node
396
distancias_per[k][l]=dist
397
dijkstra.append(distancias_per)
398
399
def createMatrix(rowCount , colCount , dataM):
400
matrix=np.array(dataM)
401
for i in range(rowCount):
402
for j in range(colCount):
403
print(dataM[i][j])
404
matrix[i][j]=dataM[i][j]
405
print(matrix[i][j])
406
return matrix
407
408
opt, opt1=viterbi(obs, states , start_p , trans_p , emit_p)
409
410
def log_viterbi(obs, states, start_p , emit_p ,trans_p):
411
"""Viterbi algorithm (log variant) for solving the uncovering problem
412
413
Notebook: C5/C5S3_Viterbi.ipynb
414
415
Args:
416
A: State transition probability matrix of dimension I x I
417
C: Initial state distribution
of dimension I
418
B: Output probability matrix of dimension I x K
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
95
==PAGE:104==
419
O: Observation sequence of length N
420
421
Returns:
422
S_opt: Optimal state sequence of length N
423
D_log: Accumulated log probability matrix
424
E: Backtracking matrix
425
"""
426
np.set_printoptions(precision=3)
427
428
O = np.array(obs)
429
N = len(obs)
# Length of observation sequence
430
I = np.shape(states[0])[1]
# Number of states
431
tiny = np.finfo(0.).tiny
432
A_log = np.log(trans_p + tiny)
433
C_log = np.log(start_p + tiny)
434
B_log = np.log(emit_p + tiny)
435
# Initialize D and E matrices
436
D_log = np.zeros((I, N))
437
E = np.zeros((I, N-1)).astype(np.int32)
438
D_log[:, 0] = C_log + B_log[0]
439
ID_STREET_PER_POINT=[]
440
441
# Compute D and E in a nested loop
442
for t in range(1, N):
443
for idx2,st2 in enumerate(states[t][0]):
444
temp_sum = A_log[t-1][:, idx2] + D_log[:, t-1]
445
D_log[idx2, t] = np.max(temp_sum) +
B_log[t].T[idx2]
446
E[idx2, t-1] = np.argmax(temp_sum)
447
ID_STREET_PER_POINT.append(states[t-1].T[np.argmax(temp_sum)])
448
449
# Backtracking
450
S_opt = np.zeros(N).astype(np.int32)
451
S_opt[-1] = np.argmax(D_log[:, -1])
452
for n in range(N-2, 0, -1):
453
S_opt[n] = E[int(S_opt[n+1]), n]
454
455
456
return S_opt, D_log, E
457
458
S_opt, D_log, E=log_viterbi(obs, states_HMM , start_p ,M_emission , M_transition)
459
460
461
print('Observation sequence:
O = ', O)
462
print('Optimal state sequence: S = ', S_opt)
463
np.set_printoptions(formatter={'float': "{: 7.2f}".format})
464
print('D_log =', D_log, sep='\n')
465
np.set_printoptions(formatter={'float': "{: 7.4f}".format})
466
print('exp(D_log) =', np.exp(D_log), sep='\n')
467
np.set_printoptions(formatter={'float': "{: 7.0f}".format})
468
print('E =', E, sep='\n')
469
470
def route_to_point(idx, point):
471
return {
472
'type': 'Feature',
473
'geometry': {
474
"type": "Point",
475
"coordinates": list(point)},
476
'properties': {
477
'name': f'Route #{idx}'
478
}
479
}
480
with open(r"C:\OSGeo4W64\Master_Python\Kalman_points1.geojson", 'w', encoding=
96
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:105==
'utf8') as fp:
481
geojson.dump(geojson.FeatureCollection([route_to_point(idx, kalman)for
idx, kalman in enumerate(points_Kalman)]), fp, sort_keys=True,
ensure_ascii=False)
Listing 5.3: Hidden Markov Model analysis P79 and simulation
1
2
Observation sequence:
O =
[[207233517
10151849
38701810 129891119]]
3
Optimal state sequence: S =
[0 0 1 0 1 1 1 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 0 0 1 2 2
0 0 2 2 2 0 0 0 0 1 0 2 1
4
1 3 0 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 3 3 2 0 1 0 1 0 2 2 2 1 0 0 0 0 0
5
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
6
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
7
1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 3 1 1 1 1 1 1
8
1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1
9
1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 1 1 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0
10
1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 3 3 0 3 3 3 3 2 0 2 2 0 1 1 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 0 1
11
1 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 2 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0
12
1 0 1 1 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 0 1 0 0 1 0
13
1 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 1
14
1 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
15
0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
16
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1
17
0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
18
0 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 0 1 1 1 0 1 3 3 3 3 1 3 2 3 2 2 0 0 0 0 1
19
2 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 1 0 1 2 0 1 1
20
0 0 1 0 1 0 0 1 1 0 1 2 0 0 0 1 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 1 0 2 1 1 1 2 0
21
0 2 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 0 2 1 0 0 2 0 2 2 3 0 1 0 1 0 2 2 2
22
0 2 0 2 3 3 3 3 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 3 0 0 3 0 0
23
0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 3 1 0 0 2 1 2 2 2 0 1 1 1 0 1 0 1 1 1 0 1 1
24
0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 0 0 0
25
0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 2 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 2 2
26
0 2 2 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 2]
27
D_log =
28
[[
-2.54
-4.57
-6.66 ... -1602.03 -1604.17 -1606.93]
29
[
-2.60
-4.58
-6.69 ... -1603.07 -1604.87 -1607.22]
30
[
-2.94
-5.39
-7.79 ... -1602.48 -1604.45 -1606.52]
31
[
-3.13
-5.88
-8.00 ... -1604.65 -1605.66 -1606.52]]
32
exp(D_log) =
33
[[ 0.0792
0.0104
0.0013 ...
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000]
34
[ 0.0741
0.0103
0.0012 ...
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000]
35
[ 0.0530
0.0046
0.0004 ...
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000]
36
[ 0.0437
0.0028
0.0003 ...
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000]]
37
E =
38
[[1 1 1 ... 1 0 1]
39
[0 0 0 ... 1 1 1]
40
[2 2 2 ... 1 0 0]
41
[2 2 2 ... 1 0 0]]
Listing 5.4: Output Hidden Markov Model LogViterbi Alogirthm
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
97
==PAGE:106==
98
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:107==
Bibliography
[Rob15]
Fabian Beck Robert Kruger Georgi Simeonov. Visual Interactive Map Matching.
2015. URL: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/323446630_Visual_
Interactive_Map_Matching.
[Rot20]
Jörg Roth. “The Offline Map Matching Problem and its Efficient Solution”. In:
Faculty of computer science,Nuremberg Institute of Technology (Reading, Copen-
hagen , 2020.).
[Tin19]
Chuan Che Ting Liu Zhe Chen. “A Dynamic K-nearest Neighbor Map Matching
Method Combined with Neural Network”. In: On 2019 IEEE Intelligent Trans-
portation System Conference (ITSC) (Auckland,NZ, October 27-30, 2019.).
[sem20]
semanticscholar. AGH University of Science and Technology: An Incremental
map-matching algorithm based on Hidden Markov Model, accessed 03/09/2020.
2020. URL: https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/An- Incremental- Map-
Matching-Algorithm-Based-on-Szwed-Pekala/c7aa1bf499455b98b10a14dcc7037d09012e14a3.
[NK19]
Paul Newson and John Krumm. “Hidden Markov Map Matching Through Noise
and Sparseness”. In: On 2019 IEEE Intelligent Transportation System Confer-
ence (ITSC), Microsoft Research, Microsoft Corporation, One Microsoft Way
,Redmond, WA 98052 USA (2019).
[Han]
Peter Widhalm Hannes Koller. Fast Hidden Markov Model Map-Matching for
Sparse and Noisy Trajectories. URL: file:///C:/Users/s180014/Downloads/
FINAL%5C_%5C_FastHMMMapmatching.pdf.
[Pin16]
Jie Wang Pinxuan Dai Zhen Li. “Research on Map-matching Algorithm Using
Kaman Filter to Improve Localization Accuracy from Baidu Map Based on An-
droid”. In: 2016 6th International Conference on Information Technology for
Manufacturing Systems (ITMS 2016) (2016).
[NB05]
MAAN E. EL NAJJAR and PHILIPPE BONNIFAIT. “A Road-Matching Method
for Precise Vehicle Localization Using Belief Theory and Kalman Filtering”. In:
Robots 19, 173–191, 2005,2005 Springer Science + Business Media, Inc. Man-
ufactured in The Netherlands (2005).
[joc19]
jochentopf.com. SM Data Processing with PostgreSQL / PostGIS. 2019. URL:
https://media.jochentopf.com/media/2019-09-22-talk-sotm2019-osm-postgresql-
postgis-en-slides.pdf.
[Gee20]
Geeks for Geeks. Dijkstra’s shortest path algorithm | Greedy Algo-7. 30-09-
2020. URL: https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/dijkstras-shortest-path-algorithm-
greedy-algo-7/.
[Mar19]
Daniel Jurafsky James H. Martin. Speech and Language Processing. Hidden
Markov Models. https://web.stanford.edu/ jurafsky/slp3/A.pdf: stanford, Octo-
ber 2, 2019.
[Moh07]
Robert B. Noland Mohammed A. Quddus Washington Y. Ochieng. “Current
map-matching algorithms for transport applications: State-of-the art and fu-
ture research directions”. In: Science Direct Transportation Research Part C
15 (Apr. 2007), pp. 312–328.
[Jai19]
Sukhjit.Su Hardeep. H Jaiteg.J Saravjeet.S. “Evaluating the performance of
map matching algorithms for navigation systems: an empirical study”. In: Cross-
Mark 27,1 pages:63–74 (Sept. 2019).
[Efs19]
Philippe Cudré-Mauroux . P Efstratios Rappos. E Stephan Robert. R. “A Force-
Directed Approach for Offline GPS Trajectory Map Matching”. In: (Mar. 2019).
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
99
==PAGE:108==
[JS17]
George R. Jagadeesh and Thambipillai Srikanthan. “Online Map-Matching of
Noisy and Sparse Location Data with Hidden Markov and Route Choice Mod-
els”. In: IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation System 18 (Jan. 2017).
[bza]
bzarg. How a Kalman filter works, in pictures. https://www.bzarg.com/p/how-
a-kalman-filter-works-in-pictures/. Accessed: 2020-30-09.
[JG13]
Sergio Alonso-Garcia Jaime Gomez-Gil Ruben Ruiz-Gonzalez and Francisco
Javier Gomez-Gil. “A Kalman Filter Implementation for Precision Improvement
in Low-Cost GPS Positioning of Tractors”. In: Sensors (Nov. 2013).
[Oli08]
Britta Hummel Oliver Pink. “A statistical approach to map matching using road
network geometry,topology and vehicular motion constraints”. In: Proceedings
of the 11th International IEEE (Oct. 2008).
[Won88]
E.J. Krakiwsky ; C.B. Harris ; R.V.C. Wong. “A Kalman filter for integrating dead
reckoning, map matching and GPS positioning”. In: International IEEE (Dec.
1988).
[Dav10]
Takala Jarmo Davidson Pavel Collin Jussi. “Application of particle filters to
map-matching algorithm”. In: International Conference on Integrated Naviga-
tion Systems (2010).
[Geo20]
Geofabric. Download OpenStreetMap data for this region. 2020. URL: https:
//download.geofabrik.de/europe/denmark.html.
[Gat20]
GatewayGeomatics. MapServer for Windows (MS4W). 2020. URL: https://
ms4w.com/.
[Gro20]
The PostgreSQL Global Development Group. The PostgreSQL 13. 2020. URL:
https://www.postgresql.org/download/windows/.
[Top19]
Jochen Topf. OSM Data Processing with PostgreSQL / PostGIS. 2019. URL:
https://media.jochentopf.com/media/2019-09-22-talk-sotm2019-osm-postgresql-
postgis-en-slides.pdf.
[Goh20]
Christoph Gohlke. Unofficial Windows Binaries for Python Extension Pack-
ages. 2020. URL: https://www.lfd.uci.edu/~gohlke/pythonlibs/.
[Din20]
Yan Ding. Simple Understanding of Kinematic Bicycle Model. 2020. URL: https:
//dingyan89.medium.com/simple- understanding- of- kinematic- bicycle- model-
81cac6420357.
[Jr18]
Roger R Labbe Jr. Kalman and Bayesian Filters in Python. Reading, Mas-
sachusetts: The MIT License (MIT), August 29, 2018.
[NK09]
Paul Newson and John Krumm. “Hidden Markov Map Matching,Through Noise
and Sparseness”. In: Microsoft Research ,Microsoft Corporation One Microsoft
Way (2009).
[A P]
T. Acarman A. Peker O. Tosun. “Particle filter vehicle localization and map-
matching using map topology”. In: (). URL: https : / / www . semanticscholar .
org/paper/Particle- filter- vehicle- localization- and- using- map- Peker- Tosun/
2818e74c24127f5955d808609e8eea5b73633f67.
100
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
==PAGE:109==
Map-matching GPS data to roads in Denmark by using car sensor information
101
==PAGE:110==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
